The Winnebago Tribe (Paul Radin, 1923)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive (archive.org/details/annualreportofbu37smit). Radin's great Winnebago monograph - the medicine rite, the night-spirits society, and the autobiographies of native thinkers (37th BAE Annual Report, extracted).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE 

PAUL RADIN 

35 

CONTENTS 

Page 

Preface 47 

Part I 

Chapter I. — History 49 

General remarks 49 

The Tale of Tcap'o'sgaga 59 

How the Winnebago first came into contact with the French and the 

origin of the Decora family 65 

What the Shawnee prophet told the Winnebago 69 

Winnebago names of other tribes and peoples 75 

Chapter II. — Winnebago archeology 76 

General problems 76 

Implements of stone and other materials 87 

Copper implements 87 

Earthworks and mounds 88 

Intaglio mounds 90 

Conical mounds 90 

Linear mounds 92 

Effigy mounds 98 

Description of Lake Koshkonong mounds 100 

The conical mounds 100 

Combinations of conical and linear forms 100 

Linear mounds 101 

Effigies 101 

Bird effigies 101 

Mammal effigies 101 

Turtle and allied forms 101 

The grouping 102 

The man mound 102 

Miscellaneous structures 103 

Chapter III. — Material culture 104 

Habitations 104 

Clothing and adornment 109 

Hunting 109 

Fishing and agriculture 114 

Games and amusements 120 

Travel and transportation 123 

Musical instruments 123 

Divisions of time 124 

Chapter IV. — General social customs 126 

Male terms of address 128 

Female terms of address 131 

Joking relationship 133 

Mother-indaw and father-indaw taboo 135 

Puberty customs 135 

Marriage 138 

Adoption 139 

37 

38 CONTENTS 

Page. 

Chapter V. — Burial and funeral customs 140 

Description of funeral customs and wake 140 

Generalized description of funeral customs and wake 144 

Funeral customs of the Thunderbird clan (first version) 146 

Death and funeral customs of the Thunderbird clan (second version) 146 

Death and funeral customs of the Bear clan 148 

Funeral customs of the Buffalo clan 154 

Origin myth of the four-nights' wake 154 

Grave-post marks 155 

Chapter VI. — Warfare and the council lodge ., 156 

Warfare 156 

The council lodge 163 

Chapter VII. — System of education 166 

.My father's teaching to his sons and daughters 166 

System of instruction to son 166 

System of instruction to daughter 177 

System of instruction to children 180 

Part II 

Chapter VIII. — .Social organization — General discussion 181 

The twofold grouping 185 

Functions of the twofold division 187 

< Ian organization 190 

Reckoning of descent 192 

Individual names 193 

Attitude toward clan animals " 195 

Relationship to clan animals 196 

The clan tie 198 

Clan functions 199 

The reciprocal relationship of the clans 201 

The specific possessions of the clan 202 

Immaterial possessions of the clan 203 

The clan marks of identification 203 

Influence of the clan upon ceremonial organization 204 

Chapter IX. — Social organization — Specific clans 207 

The Thunderbird clan 207 

Introduction 207 

Clan myths and names 212 

The Warrior clan 218 

Introduction 218 

Origin myth 219 

Clan songs 220 

Eagle and Pigeon clans 220 

Clan names 221 

The Bear clan 225 

Introduction 225 

Origin myths 229 

Clan songs 235 

Clan names 236 

The Wolf clan 238 

Introduction 238 

Origin myths 238 

Clan songs 240 

Clan names 240 

CONTENTS 39 

Chapter IX. — Social organization — Specific clans — Continued. Page. 

The Water-spirit clan 241 

Introduction 241 

Origin myth 242 

Clan names 242 

The Buffalo clan 243 

Introduction 243 

Origin myth 243 

Clan songs 245 

Clan names 246 

The Deer clan 246 

Introduction 246 

Origin myths 247 

Clan song 249 

Clan names 249 

The Elk clan 249 

Introduction 249 

Origin myth 250 

Clan names 250 

Snake and Fish clans 250 

Clan names 250 

Clan names 251 

Chapter X. — Shanianistic and medicinal practices 254 

Introduction 254 

Tales concerning Midjistega 255 

Lincoln's grandfather 258 

The uses of the stench-earth medicine 259 

How an Indian shaman cures his patients ■ 270 

Thundercloud's fasting experience 275 

Chapter XI. — Religion 277 

Introduction 277 

The concept of supernatural power 281 

The concept and nature of the spirits 283 

The power and localization of the spirits 288 

The twofold interpretation of the relation of the spirits to man 289 

The guardian spirits 290 

Personal religious experiences 291 

How Wegi'ceka tried to see Earthmaker 291 

Account of J.'s fasting 293 

R.'s fasting 296 

Aratcge'ka's fasting 296 

Account of X.'s fasting 298 

How Y. fasted and was blessed with a war bundle 299 

What G. obtained in his fast 300 

How a bear blessed a man 301 

How the daughter of Mank'erexka refused a blessing from Disease- 
giver 302 

Fasting experience 304 

J. B.'s fasting experience 308 

How a man defied Disease-giver 309 

Methods of bringing the spirits into relation with man , 310 

The folkloristic concepts 311 

The cosmological ideas 316 

40 CONTENTS 

Part III 

Page. 

Chapter XII. — Ceremonial organization 317 

Introduction 317 

Ceremonies associated with the clans , 318 

The clan feasts 318 

The Thunderbird clan or chief feast 318 

The Bear clan feast (first version) 321 

The Bear clan feast (second version I 324 

The Snake clan feast 325 

Chapter XIII. — Religious societies based on blessings from spirits 329 

Society of those who have received blessings from the Night Spirits 329 

Society of those who have been blessed by the Herok'a 343 

Society of those who have been blessed by the Buffalo spirits 344 

Society of those who have been blessed by the grizzly bear 347 

Chapter XIV. — The Medicine dance 350 

Origin myth 350 

Organization of the bands 359 

Personal accounts of initiation 374 

Chapter XV. — Miscellaneous dances 379 

The Hokixe're dance 379 

The Herucka dance 384 

Watconan k'ewe feast 384 

The Captive's Death dance 384 

The Farewell dance 385 

The Soldier's dance 386 

Ceremony of Uangeru x 387 

Feast to Buffalo Tail 387 

Kikre waci and Tcebokonank dances 387 

Chapter XVI.— The Peyote cult 388 

General description 388 

John Rave's account of the Peyote cult and of his conversion 389 

O. L.'s description of the Peyote cult 394 

J. B.'s account of the leader of the Peyote 396 

Albert Hensley's account of the Peyote 397 

J. B.'s Peyote experiences 400 

J. B.'s account of his conversion 412 

Jesse Clay's account of the Arapaho manner of giving the Peyote cere- 
mony which he introduced among the Winnebago in 1912 415 

Development of the ritualistic complex 419 

Dissemination of the doctrine , 422 

What the converts introduced 424 

The attitude of the conservatives 425 

Chapter XVII. — The clan war-bundle feasts 427 

The war-bundle feast of the Thunderbird clan (first version) 427 

Introductory remarks 427 

Analytical presentation of the ceremony 428 

Analysis of types of action and speeches 432 

The development of the war-bundle feast and its place in the cere- 
monial organization of the Winnebago 432 

Characterization of the spirits mentioned in the war-bundle feast 436 

Description of the war-bundle feast 441 

First division of the ceremony — in honor of the Thunderbirds 447 

Sweat-lodge ritual 447 

CONTENTS 41 

Chapter XVII. — The clan war-bundle feasts — Continued. Page 
The war-bundle feast of the Thunderbird clan (first version) — Continued. 
First division of the ceremony — in honor of the Thunderbirds — Continued. 

The Dog ritual 451 

General placing of the tobacco 451 

The tobacco offering to the spirits 453 

The buckskin offerings to the spirits 465 

Filling of the ceremonial pipe and smoking ritual 469 

Basic ritual 471 

The feast 481 

The fast-eating contest 485 

Continuation of the basic ritual 487 

Second division of the ceremony- — in honor of the Night Spirits 501 

The tobacco offering 501 

Basic ritual 505 

The throwing out of the buckskins 513 

Feast to the Night Spirits 519 

Rite of those who have been crazed by the Night Spirits 519 

Continuation of the basic ritual 521 

Terminal address to the dog 527 

Addenda 529 

The war-bundle feast of the Thunderbird clan (second version) 530 

The war-bundle feast of the Thunderbird clan (third version) 534 

The war-bundle feast of the Bear clan 547 

Index 551 

1S6S230— 22 4 

ILLUSTRATIONS 

PLATES 

Page. 

1. Red Banks, Green Bay, Wis 66 

2. a, Black Wolf, chief of Winnebago. 6, Four Legs, chief of Winnebago. ... 66 

3. Jasper Blowsnake 66 

4. John Fisher 66 

5. a, James Pine, ft, John Rave and family 66 

6. a, ft, John Fireman, c, Whitebreast. </, John Raymond 66 

7. a, Young Winnebago woman and daughter, ft, Old Winnebago and daughter. 66 

8. a, Gray Hair, ft, Red Wing, c, James Ricehill. d, Albert Hensley 

(front view) 66 

9. a, John Baptiste. 6, Hugh Hunter, e, Levi St. Cyr. d, Albert Hensley 

( profile view) 88 

10. Winnebago bone implements 88 

11. Four Legs' village on Doty Island, 1830 88 

12. Aztalan 88 

13. Wisconsin intaglios 90 

14. a, Burial in a mound at Borchers Beach, ft. Conical mound, Cutler Park, 

Waukesha, Wis 90 

15. A series of burial mounds 92 

16. Stone chamber in burial mound, Buffalo Lake, Marquette County, Wis. . . 92 

17. Zahn Mound, Calumet County, Wis 92 

18. a, Lodge made of reed matting. 6, Lodge made of bark with covering of 

reed matting, c, Lodge made of bark 92 

19. a, Lodge of bark. 6, Modern lodge with canvas covering, c Lodge of 

reed matting 104 

20. a, Thomas Mallory . 6, Winnebago in full dress 104 

21. o, Winnebago women in modern dress. 6, Winnebago women in old-style 

dress 104 

22. a, Child in modern dress. 6, Young boy in full warrior's costume 104 

23. a, Group of Winnebago in old-style costumes, ft, Winnebago family 108 

24. Decorated moccasins 108 

25. Decorated moccasins 108 

26. a, Winnebago, showing modern headgear, ft, Winnebago with deer-tail 

headdress 108 

27. Beaded belts 108 

28. Women's hair ornaments and small beaded bag 108 

29. Beaded articles of modern type 108 

30. Miscellaneous objects 108 

31. Bo w and bird arrow 118 

32. Woven bags with old designs 118 

33. Woven bags 118 

34. Varieties of woven bags 118 

35. Woven bags with old designs 118 

36. Woven bags (Peabody Museum ) 118 

37. Openwork woven bags (Peabody Museum) 118 

43 

44 ILLUSTRATIONS 

Page. 

38. a, Wooden dishes, b, Wooden spoons, r, Wooden mortars and pestles. .. . 118 

39. Moccasin game 122 

40. Snowshoes 1 22 

41. a, Winnebago and daughter, b, Old Winnebago woman, c, Woman and 

child, showing cradle board, rf, Woman and child, showing method of 

carrying infant 126 

42. a, Infant with ornamented cradle board. 6, Group of Winnebago 126 

43. a, War clubs of the Upper Division, b, Whips 156 

44. Drums 156 

45. War clubs 156 

46. Facial burial marks 248 

47. Buckskin offerings 248 

48. Buckskin offerings 248 

49. a, Exterior of Medicine dance lodge, b, Interior of Medicine dance lodge. 350 

50. a, Exterior of Medicine dance lodge, b, Interior of Medicine dance lodge. 350 

51. Otter-skin medicine pouches used at Medicine dance 362 

52. Pouches of animal skins used at Medicine dance 362 

53. Skin pouches and feather fans used at Medicine dance 362 

54. a, Peyote leaders, b, Burial huts 388 

55. a, Oliver Lamere. b, John Rave 388 

56. a, Thunderbird war bundle, b, Hawk war bundle 428 

57. Contents of Thunderbird war bundle 428 

58. Contents of Hawk war bundle 428 

TEXT FIGURES 

1. Sectional map of Wisconsin, giving the locations of some of the old villages.. 51 

2. Map of Wisconsin, showing distribution of circular mounds 77 

3. Map of Wisconsin, showing distribution of effigy mounds 78 

4. Effigy mounds (panther or water-spirit type) 90 

5. Bear effigy mound, Madison, Wis 91 

6. Burial mounds, upper Baraboo Valley, Wis 91 

7. Burial mounds in a group at Rice Lake, Rusk County, Wis 92 

8. Effigy and dumb-bell-shaped mounds 93 

9. Linear mounds at Madison, Wis 93 

10. Linear mounds, Clyde Township, Iowa County, Wis 93 

11. Effigy and linear mounds, Pishtaka, Waukesha County, Wis 94 

12. Effigy mounds in the Wingra group, Madison, Wis 94 

13. Bird effigy mounds 95 

14. Man mound, Greenfield Township, Sauk County, Wis . 95 

15. Types of mammal effigy mounds 96 

16. Types of so-called turtle effigy mounds 96 

17. Effigy mound of unknown animal 96 

18. La Valle man mound, Sauk County, Wis 97 

19. Group of mounds of different types, Lake Koshkonong, Wis 97 

20. Archeologic map of Lake Koshkonong 99 

21. Wisconsin garden beds 103 

22. a, Cross section of round lodge. 6, Cross section of gable lodge 105 

23. Pattern of men's buckskin leggings 106 

24. Pattern of women's buckskin shirt 106 

25. Pattern of men's moccasin 107 

26. Pattern of women's moccasin 108 

27. Men's lacrosse 120 

ILLUSTRATIONS 45 

Page. 

28. Grave-post marks 155 

29. Seating arrangement in council lodge according to Thunderbird clan 164 

30. Seating arrangement in council lodge according to Bear clan 164 

31 . Seating arrangement in council lodge according to Thunderbird clan 165 

32. Seating arrangement in council lodge according to Wolf clan 165 

33. Plan of village according to Thundercloud, of the Thunderbird clan 188 

34. Plan of village according to John Rave, of Bear clan 1S9 

35. Diagram of Bear lodge 229 

36. Plan of Bear clan war-bundle feast as given by John Rave 321 

37. Plan of Soldier's dance 386 

38. Plan of Thunderbird clan war-bundle feast 530 

PREFACE 

The information included in this volume was obtained during the 
years 1908-1913 while employed by the Bureau of American Eth- 
nology and on private expeditions. In all cases wherever it was 
possible the author tried to obtain his information in Winnebago, 
although the English version is printed here. Owing to the fact 
that the Winnebago have for some time been accustomed to the use 
of a syllabic alphabet borrowed from the Sauk and Fox, it was a 
comparatively easy task to induce them to write down their mythol- 
ogy and, at times, their ceremonies, and then have an interpreter 
translate them. As the author has a fair command of Winnebago 
grammar, he was able to control these translations and thus insure 
their approximate accuracy. On account of the importance of having 
as accurate a record of the ceremonies as possible, those few cere- 
monies that were obtained in syllabic text were subsequently taken 
down in phonetic text. 

It has been the aim of the author to separate as definitely as possi- 
ble his own comments from the actual data obtained, and for that 
reason every chapter, with the exception of those on history, arche- 
ology, and material culture, is divided into two parts, a discussion 
of the data and the data itself. 

Certain subjects, such as mythology, art, and music, have been 
entirely omitted. In order to discuss the second a comparative 
study of woodland art and design would have been necessary, which 
would have entailed a prolonged study at different museums; and to 
discuss the latter, specific training and knowledge were demanded, 
which the author does not possess. 

The following monograph does not claim to be a comparative 
study, but simply as intensive an investigation as the time spent 
allowed, of an unusually interesting tribe, made under exceptionally 
propitious conditions. It is principally the raw material that is pre- 
sented here. Throughout the work, the Indian has been allowed to 
tell the facts in his own way. For that reason no attempt has been 
made to change the English, except when it was ungrammatical or 
unintelligible. This will explain the simple and at times poor Eng- 
lish of the accounts. 

The work ends rather abruptly because the section on mythology 
and the general conclusion have been reserved for special treatment. 

In conclusion, the author wishes to thank all those Winnebago 
who helped him since he first came among them. In particular does 

47 

48 PEEFACE. 

he wish to thank his interpreter, Oliver Lamere, of Winnebago, 
Nebraska, without whom this work could hardly have been completed, 
and his three main informants, Jasper Blowsnake and Sam Carley, 
both of Black River Falls, Wisconsin, and John Rave, of Winnebago, 
Nebraska. 

To Prof. Franz Boas he is under especial obligations for directing 
him to the Winnebago, for the methods of research inculcated in him 
at Columbia University, and particularly for impressing upon him the 
necessity of obtaining as much information as possible in text. 

His thanks are also due to the following individual and institutions: 
To Mr. C. Brown, of Madison, Wis., for a number of illustrations 
previously published in the Wisconsin Archeologist, and to the 
American Museum of Natural History, the Peabody Museum, and 
the Milwaukee Public Museum for numerous photographs of objects 
in their collections. 

His brother, Dr. Max Radin, he wishes to thank for financing his 
first visit to the Winnebago in 1908. 

The manuscript was finished in 1913. 

Paul Radin. 

Santa Fe, New Mexico, May 11, 1916. 

THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE 

Part I 

CHAPTER I 

HISTORY 
General Remarks 

At what time the Winnebago entered Wisconsin it is impossible 
to say. It seems quite reasonable to suppose that they came from 
the east. If we are right in assuming that they are the builders of 
the effigy mounds, then we are justified in assigning a certain signifi- 
cance to the distribution of the latter. One of the interesting points 
of this distribution is that many are found along the shore of Lake 
Michigan and northward to Two Rivers, that some are found in 
Rock County, and that they gradually decrease in number as one 
proceeds north. This would lead us to assume that the Winnebago 
entered Wisconsin from the south, probably from the southeast. We 
ought, then, to find effigy mounds in Illinois and, in general, on the 
route of their probable journey from the east. This is not the case, 
and it is very difficult to account for their absence unless we assume 
that all traces of them have disappeared; that the Winnebago first 
developed their mound-building habit after they had reached Wis- 
consin; or that the mounds in Illinois are their work (and that 
of kindred tribes), and finally that the type of mound developed 
along different lines after they had definitely settled in Wisconsin. 
It is also possible that since the effigy mounds are undoubtedly 
closely associated with the clan organization this type of social 
organization was adopted by the Winnebago only after they entered 
Wisconsin. 

There can be no doubt but that the Winnebago and the closely 
related tribes like the Missouri, Oto, and Iowa represented the second 
of the Siouan migrations westward. There were probably four of 
these migrations, as G. F. Will and H. J. Spinden claim, succeeding 
each other as follows: 

1. Mandan, Hidatsa, Crow. 

2. Iowa, Oto, Missouri, Winnebago. 

49 

50 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ann. 37 

3. Omaha, Ponca, Osage, Kansa, Quapaw. 

4. Dakota, Assiniboin.1 

The linguistic grouping seems to bear out this theory with the 
exception of the Mandan, who are far more closely related to the 
Winnebago and their kindred than to the Hidatsa. It seems like- 
wise strange that the Hidatsa and Crow, on the one hand, and the 
Dakota and Assiniboin, on the other, belonging to the first and fourth 
'migrations," should nevertheless speak dialects that are closely 
related. One might have expected that Dakota would be more like 
Omaha and its group. 

The Winnebago themselves have no traditions telling of their 
migrations from the east. The majority of the people questioned 
asserted that the tribe had originated at Green Bay. This is, how- 
ever, merely the origin myth of the Thunderbird clan, which appa- 
rently has displaced other origin accounts. While, in a few instances, 
other places were mentioned, the localities to which they referred 
were all in Wisconsin. There may be some significance in the origin 
legends of some of the clans which claim that they came from over 
the sea (the lake), but it is utterly impossible to determine whether 
we are here dealing with a myth pure and simple or with a vague 
memory of some historical happening. 

The Winnebago have, however, some recollection of their separa- 
tion from their kindred Siouan tribes. The accounts collected are 
short and fragmentary, but this may be due largely to the fact that 
no systematic attempt was made by the author to obtain detailed 
information on this point. The following fragmentary accounts 
will give some idea of the value of these recollections. 

a. In the early days the Winnebago often went out hunting after 
they had finished hoeing their corn and other crops. During one of 
these travels they killed an elk and every lodge received a piece of the 
animal except one lodge in which a man, his wife, and six daughters 
with their husbands lived. Thinking that they were disliked by the 
rest of the tribe, these remained behind the next day when the others 
continued their journey. They have never been heard from since. 
It is said that the Quapaws do not know where they come from and we 
think that they may be descended from this family. 

b. When the Winnebago lived on Lake Michigan the tribe was so 
large that each clan had its own chief and a general chief presided 
over the whole tribe. After a while it became so hard to obtain food 
that a band of Winnebago went south. They never returned. These 
are now in the Southwest. Some of them are the Missouri and some 
the Iowa. Band after band kept moving away until only one was 
left — the present Winnebago. 

1 The Mandans, Papers of the Peabody Museum. Vol. m, no. 4, pp. 97-98, Cambridge, 1906. 

ti.U'IN I 

HISTORY 

51 

c. Four lodges once left the main tribe at Prairie du Chien or Mac- 
Gregor, Wisconsin, and never returned. This happened after all the 
other tribes had leagued together against the Winnebago. The reason 
these four lodges left the Winnebago was because they were afraid 
that war might break out again. Some people believe that the Oto 

Fig. 1.— SECTIONAL MAP OF WISCONSIN, GIVING THE LOCATIONS OF SOME OF THE 

OLD VILLAGES. 

EXPLANATION OF MAP. 

[The numbers on the map indicate the locations of some of the Wisconson Winnebago villages.] 

1. Doty Island village, 1634-1832. 

2. Pesheu s village, '1797-1*33. 

3. Black Wolf s village, 1828. 

4. Smoker's village, 1816. 

5. Sarrochau's\illage, 1788. 

6. Rush Lake village. 

7. Yellow Thunder s village, 1S28-32. 

8. Sarcel's village, 1827. 

9. Old Gray-headed Decorah's village, 1793. 

10. Big Fox's village, 1832. 

11. Watertown village. 

12. Iron Walker s village. 

13. Little Priest s village, 1832. 

Whirling Thunder s village, 1836. 

14. Karraymaunee's village, 1832. 

15. Spotted Arm s village. 

16. Davton village. 

17. Wliite Crow s village, 1832. 

18. Choukeka's village, 1816. 

White Ox's village, 1832. 

19. Old Gray-headed Decorah s village, 1793-1836. 

20. Yellow Thunder's"forty." 

21. Karravmaunee's village, 1832-42. 

22. Sarcel's village, 1827. 

23. Washington Decorah's village 1S32. 

24. Buzzard Decorah's village, 1787. 

One-eyed Decorah's village, 1832. 

25. Little Decorah's village, 1857. 

26. Big Hawk's village, Pike Lake. 

are this lost branch, for they speak the same language with but few 
differences and use many old words that the Winnebago employed 
long ago but have now given up. 

d. Some lodges left the tribe never to return. Some say there 
were four, others give different numbers (of long lodges). Some say 
only one lodge. My uncle us^d to say that there were four. "I think 
that it is believed that they went to the east," he said. 

52 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ann. 37 

The other tribes of the second "migration" have semihistorical 
legends telling of their separation from the Winnebago. Major 
Bean told Maximilian that an Oto chief had informed him that origi- 
nally the Winnebago inhabited the lakes and that they subsequently 
migrated to the Southwest, presumably in pursuit of buffalo. At 
Green Bay they divided, the Winnebago remaining there while the 
others continued their journey. 

Dorsey was informed by Iowa chiefs 2 that "their people and the 
Oto, Missouri, Omaha, and Ponca 'once formed part of the Winne- 
bago nation.' According to the traditions of these tribes, at an early 
period they came with the Winnebago from their priscan home north 
of the Great Lakes, but that the Winnebago stopped on the shore of 
a great lake (Lake Michigan), attracted by the abundant fish." 

When the Winnebago were first discovered they were entirely sur- 
rounded by Central Algonquian tribes. To the north of them lay the 
Menominee on the shore of Green Bay, to the southeast the Miami, 
to the south and southwest the Sauk and Fox, and to the west 
the Ojibwa. The nearest of their kindred were in southern Iowa, 
western Wisconsin, and eastern Minnesota. LTnder* these circum- 
stances it is not strange that the Winnebago show marked evidence 
of Central Algonquian influence (fig. 1). 

At what time the Winnebago were isolated from their Siouan kin- 
dred it is impossible to state. We doubt, however, whether this 
occurred before the sixteenth century. The Central Algonquian 
tribes in this region are clearly intruders. The Ojibwa came from the 
northeast and the Fox, Miami, etc., from the south and the south- 
east. It seems clear, to judge from the number of effigy mounds 
found in the territory occupied by the Fox and Miami, that the Win- 
nebago had lived there for a considerable length of time before they 
were pushed westward and northwestward by these tribes. When 
the Menominee arrived, and from what direction, it is difficult to 
determine. On purely linguistic grounds, judging from the close re- 
lationship of Menominee to Fox, we might assume that they, like the 
Fox and the Miami, entered Wisconsin from the south. In that case 
they might either be interpreted as representing the northernmost 
extension of the same migration which carried the Miami northward 
along the shore of Lake Michigan or as representing a prior invasion 
along the same route. If the latter assumption is correct, they may 
have arrived in Wisconsin before the Winnebago. One point seems 
to confirm the thesis of their priority, namely, that they were never 
at war with the Winnebago, and it hardly seems possible that, had 

» Handbook of Amer. Inds., Bur. Amer. Ethn., Bull. 30, part 1, p. 612, Washington, 1907. 

Radin] HISTORY 53 

they forced their way through the country occupied by the Winne- 
bago, war would not have occurred. 

The Winnebago call themselves Hotcarjgara, which has been vari- 
ously interpreted as "people of the parent speech" by James Owen 
Dorsey and as 'big fish people" by other observers. Dorsey's explana- 
tion, which is the one most generally accepted, is most certainly wrong, 
and represents an interpretation read into the word to make it fit the 
legends which claimed that the dialect was the most archaic of all 
the Siouan languages. It is true that ho may mean "speech," but 
tcur/k can only mean one thing, and that is "big, real." It is found 
with a number of animal names, such as ketcurjk, "turtle," and 
cvriktcuyJc, "wolf." It corresponds strictly to the Dakotan tank, 
"large." Ho means "fish" in Winnebago. The name Winnebago, 
as is well known, is of Algonquian origin. 

The Winnebago were first encountered by white men in 1634, when 
Jean Nicolet visited them as agent for Governor Champlain. Where 
he encountered them is not definitely known. The Winnebago as a 
rule claim that it was at Green Bay. Some discussion has arisen of 
late years on this question. No contemporary narrative of the event 
exists, nor have the Winnebago any clearly marked legend that might 
be interpreted as referring to it. 

An excellent description of their history has been given by P. V. 
Lawson 3 and from this we will quote at some length, selecting those 
periods that are of greatest importance in the history of the tribe and 
which can be illustrated by semihistorical legends still known to the 
Winnebago. 

Much of our knowledge of the early history of the Winnebago is 
derived from Baqueville de la Potherie's Histoire de l'Amerique Sep- 
tentrionale. A good deal of his information was obtained from 
Nicholas Perrot. For the period covering the years 1640-1660 we 
have the following information: * 

A few years ago, they numbered possibly 150 warriors. These savages have no 
mutual fellow-feeling; they have caused their own ruin, and have been obliged to 
divide their own forces. They are naturally very impatient of control, and very 
passionate; a little matter excites them; and they are great braggarts. They are, 
however, well-built, and are brave soldiers, who do not know what danger is; and 
they are subtle and crafty in war. Although they are convinced that their ancestors 
drew upon themselves the enmity of all the surrounding Nations, they cannot be 
humble. Their women are extremely laborious; they are neat in their houses, but 
very disgusting about their food. 

3 The Winnebago tribe, in Wisconsin Archeologist, vol. 6, no. 3, Milwaukee, 1907. 
' Quoted in Lawson's paper, p. 90. 

54 THE WINNEBAGO TKIBE [bth. ann. 37 

Perrot also gives an account of the relentless war waged against 
them: 

This nation was a populous one, very redoubtable and spared no one; they violated 
all the laws of nature; they were Sodomites, and even had intercourse with beasts. 
If a stranger came among them, he was cooked in their kettles. The Malhominis 
(Menominees) were the only tribe who maintained relations with them; ihey did not 
dare even to complain of their tyranny. 

Lawson goes on to say: 

So aggressive were the Winnebago that although their only arms "were stone 
hatchets and knives," they declared war on all the other tribes. Envoys sent to 
them by the Ottawa were eaten, which cruel deed so incensed the surrounding tribes 
that they formed an alliance and sent frequent war expeditions against the common 
enemy, and greatly harassed them. As a result of disagreements among themselves 
and the continued troublesome activities of the allied tribes, civil wars broke out 
among the Winnebago. For better protection against the tribes they were finally 
forced "to unite all their forces in one village, where they numbered four or five 
thousand men," but an epidemic occurred which soon reduced their number to 1,500. 

"Despite all these misfortunes, they sent a party of 500 warriors against the Outagamis 
(Fox), who dwelt on the other shore of the lake; but all those men perished, while 
making that journey, by a tempest that arose." 

We suppose that this disaster occurred on Little Lake Butte des Morts, as it has 
been stated that the Winnebago resided on an island, which we suppose was Doty 
Island. The Winnebago being now greatly reduced by despair and famine, the other 
tribes were moved to pity by their condition and ceased to make war, and the Illinois 
sent 500 men, including "50 of the most prominent persons in their nation," to carry 
to them a supply of provisions. These the Winnebago received "with the utmost 
gratitude;" but at the same time meditated sacrificing the Illinois to the shades of 
their dead. A large cabin was erected to lodge their guests, and arrangements made 
for a dance in their honor. While the Illinois were dancing their bowstrings were 
cut, and the Winnebago "flung themselves upon the Illinois, massacred them, not 
sparing one man, and made a general feast of their flesh." 

Reproaching themselves for this dastardly deed, and fearing the vengeance of the 
allied tribes when it should become known to them, the Winnebago "resolved to 
abandon the place which they were occupying," and "took refuge on an island, 
which has since been swept away by ice floes." There they considered themselves 
safe, as the Illinois did not use canoes. The Illinois, finding that their people did 
not return, investigated the place and found only their bones. In order to allow 
a proper period for mourning for the dead: 

"They deferred hostilities until the second year, when they assembled a large body 
of men from all Nations who were interested in the undertaking; and they set out in 
the winter season, in order not to fail therein. Having reached the Island over the 
ice, they found only the cabins in which there still remained some fire, the Puans 
(Winnebago) had gone to their Hunt on the day before, and were traveling in a 
body, that they might not, in an emergency, be surprised by the Illinois." 

They followed the hunters in the dead of winter, coming up to them on the sixth 
day and attacking their camp. 

"So vigorous was their attack that they killed, wounded, or made prisoners all the 
Puans, except a few who escaped, and who reached the Malhouminis' village, but 
severely wounded by arrows." 

He [Perrot] again refers to these traditional events as those of "the ancestors" of 
the tribe as he knew them, and which we judge to refer to ancestors of the Winnebago 

Rapin] HISTORY 55 

of possibly the year 1660. There is no record to say how many years before, though 
it was doubtless several score, for 50 years before La Potherie published his history 
Allouez had told the same story of the destruction of the Winnebago by the Illinois: 

"About 30 years ago all the people of this nation were killed or taken captive by the 
Iliniouek with the exception of a single man, who escaped, shot through the body 
with an arrow." 

This would place the event in about the year 1640. 

He adds that when the captives were permitted to return to their homes this one 
was made a "Captain of his Nation," as having never been a slave. Shea commenting 
on this disastrous defeat of the Winnebago says, "If this strange event took place at 
all, we must ascribe it to an earlier date than 1639 (1634), when visited by Nicolet, 
who "found them prosperous, and we can hardly suppose a tribe almost annihilated 
and then restored to its former numbers in 30 years." . . . Nicolet, it will be remem- 
bered, was sent to this then unknown region for the purpose of "making peace" 
between the Winnebago and the Hurons. As the Winnebago were strong enough 
to command that attention from Governor Champlain, Doctor Shea is quite correct 
in supposing the Winnebago to have been "a prosperous tribe" in 1634. The events 
mentioned in the foregoing accounts are not historical, but traditional, for assuredly 
they did not take place after the coming of Nicolet, as he was followed by other white 
men in such short periods as to make it impossible for the occurrence of these stirring 
events to go unrecorded by others. 

Charlevoix visited the tribe in 1720, and though a historian of note in old Canada, 
records the occurrence as history, though we have shown it to have taken place, if at 
all, more than a century before he went among them. He possibly got the story 
from the records of Allouez, made a half century before, though it may have been a 
riverside or cabin story heard by him at the time of his visit to this frontier of New 
France. He says: 

"The Otchagras, who are commonly called Puans, formerly lived on the shores 
of the bay . . . but they were attacked by the Illinois, who slew great numbers of 
them; the rest took refuge on the river of the Outagamis (Fox River), which empties 
into the end of the bay. They settled upon the shores of a sort of lake (Lake 
Winnebago)." 

Charlevoix . . . adds another disaster not mentioned by the other old writers. 
In this same narrative he records that "sometime after" the Winnebago had settled 
on Lake Winnebago: 

"They undertook to revenge the defeat which they had suffered from the Illinois. 
Six hundred of their best men embarked to seek their enemy; but while they 
were crossing Lake Michigan they were surprised by a furious gale, which caused 
them all to perish."6 

The Winnebago still tell of these events and practically in the 
same words as Perrot obtained them, as can be learned from the 
following versions obtained in 1910. 

a. When the Winnebago first originated, they were holy and 
clever. They were equal to the spirits. In those days there lived a 
Winnebago who could fly like a bird, one who could fly as far as four 
days' journey from the village. There was another Winnebago who 
could scent anything as far away as four days' journey from the 
village. Then there was one man who could talk with the trees. 
They told him many things. Finally there was one who could trans- 
form himself into a buffalo. On account of these four men, it was 

6 Op. cit., pp. 90-93. 

56 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ann. 37 

quite impossible for an enemy to approach near the village without 
the knowledge of the Winnebago, for he who could scent well would 
scent them, he who could fly far would see them, and he who could 
converse with trees would be informed of their approach. The one 
who could transform himself into a buffalo always bore the brunt of 
the fighting. He would transform himself into a buffalo whenever 
he got angry. In consequence the Winnebago were feared by all. 
They could do what they pleased with the other tribes. If the other 
tribes did not make war on them, they would make war on the other 
tribes. 

One day he who could transform himself into a buffalo had the 
sensation which generally preceded a battle. So he told the other 
three. Then the one who could fly went out to make a reconnois- 
sance of the country around them, but returned without having seen 
anything; then the one who could scent well, scented all around, but 
likewise could find nothing; then the tree-converser asked the trees 
and they also told him that they knew of nothing. In spite of it all, 
however, the buffalo-man said that he still had the premonition of 
something happening. Then he who could fly again went out, this 
time going to a distance four days' journey from the village, but he 
saw nothing. Each time that he went out, however, he noticed a 
pile of rocks in a hollow near their village. When he returned he 
said to the people, "Over there, there is a pile of rocks which I never 
noticed before. I wonder what it can beV Then the buffalo- 
man said again, ' ' I really feel that I am going to fight. Look out for 
yourselves therefore." However, they told him that he was worry- 
ing himself unnecessarily, that he ought to go to sleep. 

However, the feuffalo-man stayed awake all that night, and just as 
he had anticipated, the whole village was surrounded by enemies in 
the morning. The other three men were at once awakened and the 
one who could fly made a rush at the enemy, but was killed. Then 
the one who could scent well made a rush at the enemy, but he, too, 
was killed. Up to this time the latter had been absolutely invulnerable. 
Then the one who could converse with trees made a rush, but he, too, 
was killed. Thus all three were killed. Then the people said to 
Buffalo-man, whose real name was Long- Wing, "O Long- Wing, your 
people are being destroyed! Do you try and accomplish something." 
Then Long- Wing answered, "Ho!" and, making a rush for the enemy, 
killed four of them, the holiest of their warriors. Then the enemy 
gave the signal for stopping the battle, which is uGu." This signal 
is held to be sacred both among the Winnebago and other tribes. 
There the battle ended. 

The Winnebago felt terrible about the loss of their three warriors. 
The rocks that the one who could fly had seen in the hollow were 
the enemy. The name of the one who could fly well was Short- Wing ; 

Radin] HISTORY 57 

that of the keen scenter was White-Dog: and that of the tree con- 
verser was Buffalo. 

Shortly after this battle a band of visitors from another tribe came 
over to Long-Wing's lodge, which had been pointed out to them as 
the lodge of the chief. The visitors entered it. In the meantime 
the Winnebago held a hurried council and decided to kill these 
visitors to avenge the death of their three warriors, whose loss they 
were still lamenting. It was decided to scald the visitors to death 
with hot water. The roofs of the lodges, which were gable-lodges, 
could easily be opened. 

When everything was in readiness they called their chief out and 
closed the entrances firmly. The chief, however, begged them not 
to kill the visitors in his lodge (for it was holy). The Winnebago, 
however, paid no attention to him, and as they had already taken 
the weapons from the strangers, they poured hot water through the 
roof upon their heads. They killed all except two, who succeeded 
in making their escape through the roof. One of these changed him- 
self into a turkey and flew away and the other got to the roof and 
kept jumping from one roof to the other until he came to the end of 
the village, where he succeeded in making his escape. However, the 
Winnebago noticed his shell neck ornament which had twisted 
around to the back of his neck and one of them threw a stone hammer 
at him and killed him. In reality, therefore, only one man escaped. 

After they had brought the last body back to the village the chief 
told them that they had not acted rightly, for they had killed people 
in his (the chief's) lodge, and that from then on the lodge was to 
remain as a warrior's lodge. 

That same night an owl came to the top of the lodge and hooted, 
saying, "The Winnebago will have bad luck.'' Then the Winne- 
bago asked, ''What can be the matter with us?" The chief inter- 
preted the owl's meaning and told them that it meant that from 
that time on the Winnebago would lose their power. 

Shortly after all these things happened the Winnebago were 
attacked by a disease that turned their bodies yellow and many died 
of this sickness. 

b. When the Winnebago were in trouble because all the other 
tribes had leagued against them, they were living at a place near 
Red Banks. The enemy had shut off all the water and the only 
way they could get any was to tie their pack straps to their pails 
and let down these pails in a deep canyon. However, this was also 
discovered after a while and the enemy cut the pack straps. 

So terrible were their straits that they finally spread their blankets 
on the ground and offered tobacco to their medicine men and asked 
186S23°— 22 5 

58 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ass. 37 

them to make it rain. Then, after the rain had fallen, they wrung out 
their blankets and drank the water. 

All this time the men of the tribe were being killed off. After a 
while they began to kill the male children too. Whenever they 
saw a child they raised up its dress and if it was a male child, they 
killed it. However, there was a young mother who had a boy, and 
fearing that if the enemy discovered him they would kill him, she 
tied a string to the end of the child's penis and pulled the string back 
under its legs so that the child was given the appearance of a girl. 
From this woman and her child all the pure blood Winnebago living 
to-day are descended. 

The war against the Winnebago was ended by a young Winnebago 
chief painting himself blue and surrendering himself to the other 
tribes. 

The most important events of Winnebago history during the 
eighteenth century were the various alliances into which they were 
drawn with and against the Fox Indians in the wars that the French 
waged against this brave tribe. The Winnebago at first allied them- 
selves with the Fox, but afterwards joined the French. This alliance 
was destined to bring upon them a great disaster. Lawson describes 
this period in their history as follows.7 

In pursuance of their policy to combine all the tribes against the Fox, the French 
in some manner won over the Winnebago, their former friends and allies. Thus we 
learn that in the autumn of 1729 word was brought to Quebec of an attack by the Win- 
nebago, Ottawa, and Menominee on a Fox village, in which there were killed 100 Fox 
warriors and 70 women and children. Among the killed of the assaulting party were 
four Winnebago. . . . Another account gives this assault as on a party of Fox 
returning from a buffalo hunt, and as made by Ottawa, Chippewa, Menominee, and 
Winnebago. The Fox village contained 80 men, all of whom were killed or burned 
except three. The allied Indians burned the cabins and also killed 300 women and 
children. This probably occurred in the winter of 1729, as the reports are of the date 
of May fi, 1730. 

The Winnebago having broken with their neighbors and friends, the Fox, by this 
treacherous and unprovoked slaughter, were now in terror for the consequences of 
their miserable acts. Further attempts against the Fox tribes having been projected 
from Quebec by the fall of 1729, Sieur Captain Marin appeared at the old French fort at 
La Baye (Green Bay), and repaired its fallen roofs. He had with him ten Frenchmen. 
On September 10th the Winnebago returned from their hunt and went to Marin to 
assure him that they still remained faithful to the French, at the same time presenting 
him with three slaves. They were rewarded with gifts of powder, bullets, hatchets, 
guns, and knives. Having ascertained that the Fox were not in their own country, 
the Winnebago took their families and camped on Dendo Island in the Fox River, ad- 
joining their former location on Doty Island. Very soon thereafter the Fox and Sauk 
returned and surprised and killed some Winnebago fishermen. Then began a long 
siege of the Winnebago through the erection by the Fox on the Doty Island waterside 
of two forts to command the water in all directions. 

In order to compensate the Fox for the loss of two of their number through treachery, 
and procure a cessation of hostilities, the Winnebago decapitated two Menominee 

7 Op. cit., pp. 95-97. 

eadin] HISTORY 59 

who were with them, and delivered to them two others. But the Fox refused to be 
satisfied unless they also delivered to them four of their own number. This proposal 
the Winnebago considered an insult, and the siege was resumed. After the fighting 
had continued for about six weeks, ( 'apt. Marin with five Frenchmen and thirty-four 
Menominee, came to the assistance of the besieged. When the treachery of the 
Winnebago in giving up several of their comrades to the Fox became known to the 
Menominee it required all Marin's powers of persuasion to prevent their deserting from 
his small command and leaving the besieged to their fate. After four days of fight- 
ing with the relief party under Marin it was discovered that the Fox had raised the siege 
by decamping in the night. Thus were the Winnebago, who had in the meantime 
been reduced by famine to the eating of boiled bear skins, delivered from the 
enemy. Marin's force thereupon retired, the Winnebago accompanying him to Green 
Bay, "where they established themselves in a fort." 

For a more detailed account of the same events see Wisconsin 
Historical Collections, Vol. XVII, 88-100. The Winnebago have 
preserved a clear recollection of these stirring events in the semi- 
historical tale known as Tcap'o'sgaga. 

THE TALE OF TCAP'o'SGAGA8 

In the early days of their existence the Winnebago were a success- 
ful people. They all fasted and were blessed by the spirits. It is 
for that reason that they were powerful and were called Hota-qgara. 

At one time a Fox Indian, whose nation was about to be destroyed 
by its enemies, came to these much-feared Winnebago and said, 
"Brothers, I have come to you for aid." 

The Winnebago lived on one side of the lake9 and the Fox on the 
other and (because of the appeal) the former made friends of the 
latter, it is said, and the chiefs presented the pipe to one another. 
When chiefs exchange pipes with one another a very sacred bond is 
established. Thus many Winnebago and Foxes became friends, 
and Winnebago men married Fox women and Fox men married 
Winnebago women. 

There was once a very famous warrior among the Winnebago whose 
crops were molested by the Foxes. Tcap'o'sgaga's wife10 thereupon 
said to him, "Why don't you take them (the marauders) to task?" 
Then Tcap'o'sgaga went to the Foxes and said, ''Boys, all the water- 
melons are yours when they are ripe, if you desire to eat them. " "All 
right," they answered. 

On the morning after the second night Tcap'o'sgaga's wife woke 
up very early and went out to inspect the crops. Again they had 
been disturbed, so she immediately went back exclaiming, "How 
terrible: The largest and best of Tcap'o'sgaga's crops have been 

« This has also been published by me with the accompanying Winnebago text in the Proceedings of the 
Wisconsin Historical Society, 1914, pp. 192-207, Madison, 1915. 
9 Probably at the junction of the Fox River with Lake Winnebago, 
i" This name means White-throat. 

60 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE Ieth. ann. 37 

damaged. Indeed, you {Tcap'o'sgaga) should have forbidden 
.them*." Then Tcap'o'sgaga went over and forbad them. 

Early in the morning after the third night the old woman again 
woke up and went to inspect the crops. Again they had damaged 
almost everything. "The nicest of Tcap'o'sgaga's crops they have 
destroyed. He should have forbidden them. Why indeed did you 
not forbid it? They have utterly destroyed your crops." Then 
Tcap'o'sgaga got up and said,'T will go and forbid them." So he 
went over to the Foxes and said, 'Leave my crops alone, I told you. 
Instead of that you have destroyed them. If again to-night you 
dare do this, as I am a man who thinks (of revenge) , beware. Dare 
do it again (and take the consequences)," he said. 

One of the wicked ones among the Foxes who was doing this said, 
"O pshaw: He acts as though he were the only man (i. e., great 
warrior) in creation." 

The next morning Tcap'o'sgaga himself got up early and went to 
inspect his crops, and indeed they had been utterly destroyed. 
What had been left (from previous depredations) had now been 
utterly ruined, and even the vines had been torn up. Tcap'o'sgaga 
felt grieved and said, "Have my attendants go and call my war- 
bundle bearer."" They went and called him and when he (and others) 
had arrived (they asked), "What are we to do?" Tcap'o'sgaga 
said, "Put on the food." Then they prepared the food.12 When 
the food had been cooked they went to invite as the feasters the 
most important (of the people). When the feasters finished, then 
he said, "I am going on the warpath. At the end of the path I see 
my enemy. I am going to have the pleasure of killing the ten men 
that my grandfathers (the spirits), who are in control of war, ob- 
tained for me. For ten chiefs I am going. " 

Near the door he indicated what would be the first stopping place. 
Then he placed the war-bundle across the entrance and jumped over 
it.13 Then he put the war-bundle on his back and walked toward 
his boat, his attendants accompanying him. They had hardly 
pushed off when they were greeted by a "Here! here!" Then they 
saw a very long boat filled with chiefs, all of whom were dressed in 
their best finery; their faces painted blue and medals around their 
'necks.14 They (the Winnebago) permitted the boat to pass and then 
when it was exactly alongside of them, they shot the occupants and 
tipped the boat over. Soon after, a strong wind arose and all the 
people in the village started out to give chase (to the enemy).15 

11 The youths who carry the war-bundle on the warpath. They are generally the nephews of the war 
leaders. 

12 For the war-bundle or winter feast which is always given before a war party starts. 
u It was always customary for the leader to do this. 

11 The boat contained the Fox chiefs who had come to make reparation for the damage inflicted upon 
Tcap'o'sgaga's crops. 
'5 1, e., started on a tribal warpath. 

Radin] HISTORY 61 

The Foxes in their village said, "Say, I believe the chiefs have 
been killed. This is a time of war. Tcap'o'sgaga has been angered. 
When Tcap'o'sgaga gets very angry he generally does what he 
threatens." Then the bad Foxes said, "Perhaps they are eating the 
objects we donated".16 

"The Foxes will not be coming back for some time" (the Winne- 
bago said). (The Foxes) at the same time had gathered together 
and discussed the fate of the chiefs who had gone to give themselves 
up (to the Winnebago) and had never returned. "Very likely they 
are not alive any more, " they said. 

Tcap'o'sgaga returned to the Winnebago village after he killed 
(the chiefs) and then started for the smaller of the two villages in 
which the Foxes lived. It was at the smaller village that the lake 
was narrowest. Toward this one he was going, he said. 

He had again planned a war-party. All those within the village 
who were likely to show any skill in killing men prepared themselves 
for (attacking) the smaller village. They started at dawn, and they 
reached the smaller village at night and ferried themselves across. 
By dawn all had crossed and the village was surrounded. As soon 
as it was broad daylight they gave the war-whoop in four different 
places. Then they rushed on to the small village and destroyed it 
completely. Then they burned up the houses and went home. 

When they got home everyone was happy. They danced the 
victory dance and at night they had the Hok'ixe're dance. So 
happy were the Winnebago. 

Although they thought they had killed all in the smaller village, 
one young girl who was lying on top of a small cliff, near where they 
crossed, fasting, had not been killed. Now the Foxes were living 
also in a large village right across the lake from the Winnebago. To 
this place the young woman who had not been killed went, and when 
she got to the big Fox village she told them the news, namely, "The 
Winnebago have completely destroyed us, I believe. Some of them 
(the enemy) I partially recognized. Go and see, however, whether 
they were Winnebago, for (if it was they) the lodges will be found 
burned to the ground, that being their custom when they go on a 
war-path." 

Then the older Foxes went and when they returned, spies an- 
nounced, "Yes, they were Winnebago, for the lodges have been 
burned down. It is true that the chiefs who had gone to make 
peace have been killed. " Then the Foxes went into mourning for 
them. "There are many of the Winnebago and we will not be able 
to fight them," said the Foxes. Indeed the Foxes were afraid. 
Although a Fox disliked a Winnebago not one could he kill. 

'« I. e., the chiefs who went to make peace. 

62 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ANN. 37 

All the Foxes went into mourning. 

Ten Winnebago youths proud of their tattoos had been out (in 
the woods) before these troubles began. As they were returning 
they said to the one who was their leader, "Let us go around the 
large village and court women. " "Only if you go around the small 
village will you escape unharmed, " said the leader. "We will go 
by the large village even if all of us are killed by the spirits," 
they said. "Well, let us go by way of the small village," the war 
leader said to them. "If you are afraid, as you say, you may go 
alone by way of the smaller village ; we, however, will go by the way 
of the large village." The leader, however, refused and also went 
by way of the large village. That they would die, he knew very 
well, but nevertheless he accompanied them to the edge of the big 
village. When they got there (they said), "Let us paint ourselves." 

Then they painted themselves, and as they were painting them- 
selves an old man in deep mourning appeared and said, "Are you 
returning from your travels ? Stay with us, for our men are giving 
a feast. I will tell them to come after you. " 

Then he went away and soon a young man came (and said) , ' ' You 
are invited. Come right along." "Men, you have seen that all 
are in mourning. Once more, let me tell you something. In the 
feast in which you are now to take part, do not lend your knives to 
anyone. Hold your knife ready," he told them. "All right," said 
they. 

Then they entered the lodge and when all were in they (the Foxes) 
made room for them and they sat down. Then the host arose and 
spoke and pointed to a place that was nearest him, for the leader. 
Then toward another place he pointed for the second and thus each 
one (Winnebago) received a seat. With each Winnebago were placed 
several Foxes, making eight in all. 

Then the host spoke, "As I rise, I will blow upon my flute and 
have a song started. I am anxious to have them start a song," he 
said. Then he rose and blew his flute and as soon as the song was 
started the Winnebago were seized. It was a long time before they 
could seize the war leader, but the others had lent their knives and 
were consequently seized easily. The war leader killed many, but 
finally his knife broke and he was seized. Then they bound him 
and prepared the torture. Ten posts they stuck in the ground. 
Then the war leader said, "I told you of this, but you doubted me. 
Here we are going to die. " 

Then the youths came after them and they began torturing them. 
They applied firebrands to them. They burnt them in those places 
where they would suffer most. Then the war leader said, "Well, 
my boys, we are now courting women." 

Thus they burned them to death and destroyed them utterly. 

KADIX] 

HISTORY 63 

The Foxes now offered tobacco to many different tribes, giving 
them beautifully decorated pipes. They desired to annihilate the 
Winnebago. All the different peoples liked this because they hated 
the Winnebago. They made their plans carefully, but even then 
they could not defeat (the Winnebago) in battle. They (the Winne- 
bago) always kept on moving back as the others tried to overcome 
them. The Winnebago were driven into the water. They crossed 
to an island, taking with them the women and children. Here they 
lived in lodges and ate the crops as they stayed there. All summer 
they were besieged on this island, as the enemy hoped to destroy 
them. 

One night a man wearing a black skin robe inside out, said, "This 
they are going to do to you, we heard. So far only the fleetest 
have come. Soon the slower ones will come, peeling basswood bark 
as they go along with which to bind the people. If some are still 
alive we can then take them home bound." 

Tcap'o'sgaga felt sad and said, "He will die, the one who said 
that." Then he shot at him and tumbled him down. The one 
who had said this was sitting on top of a tree. 

One day (the Foxes) said, "Turn over to us those Menominee 
who have married into your tribe. We are longing for some Me- 
nominee soup. If you give these (men) to us we will let up on you." 
The two Menominee among the Winnebago were great warriors 
and it was for them that (the Foxes) were asking. These Menominee 
talked to one another and the one who spoke first said, "It is a bard 
thing to be a son-in-law in a tribe not your own, my father used to 
say to me. Whenever the members of the tribe are in difficulties 
and they wish to save themselves, they turn (their attention to the 
strangers among them)." "Thus it is" (said the other), "but they 
may sacrifice me." "My friend, I feel the same way about it just 
as my father told me. I spoke to you because I thought that you 
might dread it." 

Then the Winnebago gave the Menominee away, but the Foxes 
did not let up on them. 

After a while the Menominee came to the aid of the Winnebago, 
but the Foxes said, "Wait a little; let us speak to you first." The 
Menominee listened and the Foxes told them, "The Winnebago are 
not to be pitied. There are two Menominee who had married 
among them and they handed them over to us. In this way we 
again drank Menominee soup. For this reason am I speaking to you. 
You may help them now, if you wish to, now that I have told you." 

The Menominee had come to help the Winnebago, but now that 
the two Menominee had been handed over to the Foxes they turned 
back. 

64 THE WINNEBAGO TEIBE [eth. ANN. 37 

Tcap'o'sgaga had been offered tobacco. "Well," he said, "I will 
try it." At night he started out and jumped into the water. Across 
there were enemies, so he turned himself into a goose. In the middle 
of the lake, a lone goose suddenly squawked. Those across shouted, 
"Tcap'o'sgaga is over there." "Yes," was the answer. Then he 
went around the shallow water and crossed over, and as he sat there 
bathing some one went by. They said to him, "Are you cooling 
yourself off with water?" "Yes," he answered. 

Then he got himself ready and went to the French and when he 
arrived among them he said, "Father, different tribes banded 
together are trying to destroy us." "My child, go home, for I will 
come to-morrow." 

When Tcap'o'sgaga returned he went around the other tribes. 
He went across the island. When he was home he said to the 
Winnebago, "Our father is going to come." All therefore expected 
that their father would come. Soon after the French ship came in 
sight. The other tribes went toward the boat as it came in sight. 
The Winnebago saw them go toward it. The Winnebago were 
frightened as they saw the other people go toward the boat, thinking 
that the French might take part against them. 

Then the other tribes spoke to the French. "Father, you know 
very well that the Winnebago are bad people. Just as a big dog 
jumps on to a small dog and would like to kill it, so the Winnebago 
used to do to us. Let us therefore reduce them to ashes." The 
Frenchman agreed with them and said, "You have spoken the truth 
and I will help you. I will let you go on (if you wish) but the result 
will be simply that you will reduce everything to ashes. This is 
what will happen if you continue. You know that the Winnebago 
gets very resourceful when he starves. That is his nature and 
therefore I will take him home with me and fatten him up for you. 
But you must do what I now tell you. From whatever different 
places you come, go back to them. If you don't do it, as long as I 
live, never will I sell any ammunition to you. If you do not let up 
on the Winnebago, I will give them ammunition and lend them my 
own men." "All right," said they. 

Then they scattered and the women and children were taken into 
the boat. The men who could walk fast, walked. As soon as he 
had brought them back near the fort he gave them food with which 
to sustain themselves. When they were strong enough he bade 
them flee and gave them good guns and as much food as they could 
carry in their boats. Coffee, sugar, bread, and all kinds of food 
he provided for them and he said, "Children, as you're about to flee 
(remember this) . Never hunt fish with a spear. You might thus let 
a fish escape and if it dies later on and (the enemy) hook a dead fish 
and inspect it, they will say, 'This fish was speared and got away 

Radin] HISTORY 65 

and died and therefore they (the Winnebago) have passed here.' 
Likewise, if you build a fire, always cover up the embers, for if you 
should throw away any into the water (you would be detected)." 

Then they went away in boats and returned to the lake. When 
they came to the narrow place where the main body of water lies 
there they went ahead along the left branch. Now this is all of this. 

After a while the tribes came to see the Frenchman, for it was 
about the time fixed, and they said, "How have you been getting 
along?" Then he said, "Children, you know what kind of people 
the Winnebago are. We watched them very closely, but they got 
away, in what direction I do not even know. In the morning they 
were gone. I believe they went downstream, although I haven't 
even hunted for them upstream." 

Well, all these different tribes looked for the Winnebago, for they 
wished to trail them and kill them. Now, although the Frenchman 
had expressly forbidden them, sure enough (the Foxes) found a fish 
that had been speared. "They've come past here," they said. 
However, when they came to the fork of the stream they didn't 
know which way (the Winnebago) had gone, but they noticed 
embers in the water. "They've gone by here." As it was impossible 
to go to the end of the stream in boats, all the half-breed Foxes got 
out (and walked) . Soon they saw the oval lodges. ' ' There they are," 
they said. For that reason the Foxes carefully looked them over 
and watched them. They inquired about them and found out 
that they had passed by. 

The road (trail) was visible, so they chased them. Soon a cold 
autumn spell overtook them and they (the enemy) gave up the 
chase and returned home. 

We will not follow the course of Winnebago history through all 
its vicissitudes from their defeat by the Foxes to the British and 
American occupancy, but only indicate important facts. An im- 
portant local event was the coming of the Frenchman Decora among 
them and his marriage to the daughter of the chief of the tribe. 
An account of this has been preserved by the Decora family, although 
it is clearly mixed up with what we believe is an account of the 
first contact of the Winnebago with the French. 

HOW THE WINNEBAGO FIRST CAME INTO CONTACT WITH THE FRENCH 
AND THE ORIGIN OF THE" DECORA FAMILY 

The Winnebago originated at a place called Red Banks (Green 
Bay, Wis.) (pi. 1). They had no tools to work with at that time. All 
they had were bows and arrows and a fire-starter. They had no iron, 
and if they saw a stone that was naturally sharpened in any way it 
was considered sacred and they offered tobacco for it. They had 
tobacco from the beginning. It was their most valued possession. 

66 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [rth.axn*. 37 

They fasted and became holy. The greatest honor was to be a 
brave man, and for that reason they did nothing but go to war. 
They were prepared for war at all times. They tried to obtain war 
honors. They wished to go to war all the time and kill many enemies. 
If a person fasted and went without food for a long time, gave offer- 
ings of tobacco often, and was then blessed by the spirits, then it would 
be very hard to kill such a person in battle. The people knew that 
such powers could be obtained, and that is why they did these things 
all the time. 

They gave many feasts. When a person gives a feast, then he offers 
the spirits tobacco and asks in return that their weapons be sharper 
than those of their enemies (i. e., that he kill an enemy and escape 
unharmed). That is why they used to give so many feasts, that they 
might be victorious in war. They make offerings to the war spirits, 
and if these then bless them they will become great warriors. They 
desired greatly to obtain these blessings. 

Tobacco is the greatest possession they have. After Earthmaker 
created all things he created man. Man was the last of the created 
objects. Those created before were spirits, and he put them all in 
charge of something. Even the smallest insects are able to foresee 
things four days ahead. The human beings were the least of all Earth- 
maker's creations. They were put in charge of nothing, and they could 
not even foresee one day ahead. They were the last created and they 
were the poorest. Then Earthmaker created a weed with a pleasant 
odor and all the spirits wanted it. Some were almost certain that it 
would be given to them. They would each think to themselves, 
"I am going to be put in charge of that, for 1 am one of the greatest 
spirits in the world." Then the Creator said, "To all of jtou (spirits) 
I have given something valuable. Now you all like this weed and 
I myself like it. Now this is the way it is going to be used." Then 
he took one of the leaves and mashed it up. Then making a pipe 
he smoked it and the odor was pleasant to smell. All of the spirits 
longed for it. Then he gave each one of them a puff. "Now, what- 
ever (the human beings) ask from me and for which they offer tobacco, 
I will not be able to refuse it. I myself will not be in control of this 
weed. If they give me a pipefulof this and make a request I will not 
be able to refuse it. This weed will be called tobacco. The human 
beings are the only ones of my creation who are poor. I did not give 
them anything, so therefore this will be their foremost possession and 
from them we will have to obtain it. If a human being gives a pipeful 
and makes a request we will always grant it." Thus spoke Earthmaker. 

For that reason the human beings are in control of tobacco ; it is 
their natural possession. This is the story that was handed down to 
us. The Winnebago made war and made many offerings of tobacco. 
It is said that the Winnebago were the bravest of all the Indians. 

BUREAU OF AMERICAN ETHNOLOGY THIRTY-SEVENTH ANNUAL REPORT PLATE 

a. RED BANKS. NEAR GREEN BAY. WIS., LEGENDARY ORIGIN 
PLACE OF THE WINNEBAGO 

6, RED BANKS, NEAR GREEN BAY, WIS. 

a. 
o 

z 
z 
< 

I 

o 

_1 

o 

z 
I 

BUREAU OF AMERICAN ETHNOLOGY THIRTY-SEVENTH ANNUAL REPORT PLATE 3 

JASPER BLOWSNAKE 

BUREAU OF AMERICAN ETHNOLOGY THIRTY-SEVENTH ANNUAL REPORT PLATE 4 

JOHN FISHER 

BUREAU OF AMERICAN ETHNOLOGY THIRTY-SEVENTH ANNUAL REPORT PLATE 5 

o. JAMES PINE 

6. JOHN RAVE AND FAMILY 

BUREAU OF AMERICAN ETHNOLOGY THIRTY-SEVENTH ANNUAL REPORT PLATE 6 

a. JOHN FIREMAN 
( Front view) 

6. JOHN FIREMAN 

(Profile view) 

c. WHITEBREAST 

d. JOHN RAYMOND 

BUREAU OF AMERICAN ETHNOLOGY TH I RTY-SEVENT H AN NU AL REPORT PLATE 7 

a. YOUNG WINNEBAGO WOMAN AND DAUGHTER 

6. OLD WINNEBAGO AND DAUGHTER 

BUREAU OF AMERICAN ETHNOLOGY THIRTY-SEVENTH ANNUAL REPORT PLATE 

«. GRAY HAIR 

b. RED WING 

c. JAMES RICEHILL </. ALBERT HENSLEY (Front view) 

WINNEBAGO TYPES 

Radin] HISTORY 67 

They say that the tobacco was given to them directly and that 
Earthmaker loves the Winnebago more than any other race. For 
that reason they were very clever. Now this is what the old men 
have said and handed down to us. 

Once something appeared in the middle of the lake (Green Bay). 
They were the French : they were the first to come to the Winnebago. 
The ship came nearer and the Winnebago went to the edge of the lake 
with offerings of tobacco and white deerskins. There they stood. 
When the French were about to come ashore they fired their guns 
off in the air as a salute to the Indians. The Indians said, "They 
are thunderbirds." They had never heard the report of a gun before 
that time and that is why they thought they were thunderbirds. 

Then the French landed their boats and came ashore and extended 
their hands to the Winnebago, and the Indians put tobacco in their 
hands. The French, of course, wanted to shake hands with the 
Indians. They did not know what tobacco was, and therefore did 
not know what to do with it. Some of the Winnebago poured tobacco 
on their heads, asking them for victory in war. The French tried to 
speak to them, but they could not, of course, make themselves under- 
stood. After a while they discovered that they were without tools, 
so they taught the Indians how to use an ax and chop a tree down. 
The Indians, however, were afraid of it, because they thought that 
the ax was holy. Then the French taught the Indians how to use 
guns, but they held aloof for a long time through fear, thinking that 
all these things were holy- 

Suddenly a Frenchman saw an old man smoking and poured water 
on him. They knew nothing about smoking or tobacco. After a 
while they got more accustomed to one another. The Indians 
learned how to shoot the guns and began trading objects for axes. 
They would give furs and things of that nature for the guns, knives, 
and axes of the whites. They still considered them holy, however. 
Finally they learned how to handle guns quite well and they liked 
them very much. They would even build fires at night so that they 
might try their guns, for they could not wait for the day, they were 
so impatient. When they were out of ammunition they would go 
to the traders and tell their people that they would soon return. 
By this time they had learned to make themselves understood by 
various signs. 

The second time they went to visit the French they took with them 
all the various articles that they possessed. There the French 
taught them how to sew, how to use an ax, and how to use a knife. 
Then the leader of the whites took a liking to a Winnebago girl, the 
daughter of the chief, and he asked her parents for permission to 
marry her. They told him that her two brothers had the right to 
give her away in marriage. So he asked them and they consented. 

68 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ass. 37 

Then he married her. He lived there and worked for the Indians 
and stayed with them for many years and he taught them the use 
of many tools. He went home every once in a while and his wife 
went with him, but he always came back again. After a while a 
son was born to him and then another. When the boys were some- 
what grown up he decided to take his oldest son with him to his 
country and bring him up in such a way that he would not be in 
danger, as was the case here in the woods. The Indians consented 
to it and they agreed that the mother was to bring up the youngest 
child. 

So he took Ids oldest boy home with him and when he got home he 
went to live with his parents, as he had not been married in his own 
country. He was a leader of men. The boy was with him all the 
time and everyone took a great liking to him. People would come 
to see him and bring him presents. They gave him many toys. 
However, in spite of all, he got homesick and he would cry every 
night until he fell asleep. He cried all the time and would not eat. 
After a while the people thought it best to bring him back to his 
home, as they were afraid that he would get sick and die. Before 
long they brought him back. The father said: "My sons are men 
and they can remain here and grow up among you. You are to 
bring them up in your own way and they are to live just as you do." 

The Indians made them fast. One morning the oldest one got up 
very early and did not go out fasting. His older uncle, seeing him 
try to eat some corn, took it away from him and, taking a piece of 
charcoal, mashed it, rubbed it over his face, and threw him out of 
doors. He went out into the wilderness and hid himself in a secret 
place. Afterwards the people searched for him everywhere, but 
they could not find him. Then the people told the uncle that he 
had done wrong in throwing the boy out. The latter was sorry, but 
there was nothing to be done any more. In reality the uncle was afraid 
of the boy's father. They looked everywhere but could not find him. 

After a full month the boy came home and brought with him a 
circle of wood (i. e., a drum). He told the people that this is what he 
had received in a dream, and that it was not to be used in war; that 
it was something with which to obtain life. He said that if a feast 
was made to it, this feast would be one to Earthmaker, as Earthmaker 
had blessed him and told him to put his life in the service of the 
Winnebago. 

From this man they received many benefits. He was called to 
take the foremost part in everything. They called him the French- 
man, his younger brother being called Tcap'o'sgaga, White-throat. 
And as they said, so it has always been. A person with French blood 
has always been the chief. Only they could accomplish anything 
among the whites. At the present time there is no clan as numerous 

Radin] HISTORY 69 

as the descendants of that family and the object that he said was 
sacred (the drum) is indeed sacred. It is powerful to the present 
day. His descendants are the most intelligent of all the people and 
they are becoming more intelligent all the time. What they did 
was the best that could be done. The ways of the white man are the 
best. This is the way they were brought up. 
This is the end of the history of the Decoras. 

One of the interesting developments resulting from the Indian con- 
tact with the whites has been the appearance of prophets. In almost 
all cases these prophets were concerned with attempts to so adapt 
the life of their fellow-Indians to the new conditions that they 
would be better able to cope with the invaders who were sweeping 
all before them. Whether prophets sprang up only in response to the 
peculiar conditions resulting from the presence of the whites it is im- 
possible to say, but there seems no reason to believe that such had 
always been the case. It is quite possible that conditions similar to 
those developing from the occupancy of America by Europeans had 
occurred in pre-Columbian times when one tribe was hard pressed 
by another. 

The Winnebago seem to have had their share of prophets, and 
seem likewise to have been influenced by some of the great prophets 
of other tribes, like the Shawnee prophet. An interesting account of 
what he told the Winnebago has been preserved and we will give it at 
length. 

One of the suggestive things about the following account is the way 
in which the informant, who is evidently a devout Peyote follower, 
connects the teachings of the Shawnee prophet with the modern 
Peyote movement, thus evincing a remarkable feeling for historical 
continuity. 

WHAT THE SHAWNEE PROPHET TOLD THE WINNEBAGO 

Now this is what the Winnebago heard from the Shawnee prophet ; 
this is what he said, it is said, by those who heard him: 

"Let the people give up the customs they are now observing and I 
will give them new ones." This is what he said. 

Some of the Winnebago did this and threw away their war bundles. 
But he had meant their bad customs. Some also threw away their 
good medicines. At last they decided to go over to where he was. A 
man named Smoke- Walker led a number of young men over. " We 
will walk as the thunderbirds do," said the leader. Then a great and 
holy man called Dog-Head said that he also was going along. He 
was then an old man. The leader said, ''You had better not come 
along for we are going to walk as the thunderbirds do, and for that 
reason I wish only young men." But Dog- Head said, "I am going 

70 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ann. 37 

along nevertheless, and whenever you wish to walk like the thunder- 
birds and walk above the earth, then I can turn back. I will go 
along." 

There were eleven who went along. When they got to the place 
where the Shawnee prophet was staying they found all the other 
tribes (represented) there except the Winnebago. 

Then the prophet said, "It is good, my younger brothers.-' He 
called the Winnebago younger brothers. "There are many tribes 
here, but I wanted to see you here especially. It is good you have 
come. I want to talk to you, but it is impossible (because I can not 
speak your language)." Now the old man who had come along 
against the wishes of the chief could speak any Indian language, so 
the leader said to Dog-Head, "Older brother, you used to speak 
almost any language; can you still do it?" Then Dog-Head said, 
"My younger brother, I can understand what he is saying, but I 
don't know whether I could talk the language myself. I may or 
may not be able to speak it (enough to make myself understood). 
I don't know." Then the leader said, "It is good, older brother. 
Try to talk to him, and whatever you do will be better than nothing." 
Then Dog-Head said to the Shawnee prophet, "I can understand 
what you are saying, but I am afraid to talk to you because I don't 
know whether I could make myself clear to you." The prophet 
thanked him and said, "It is good. I want to talk to you Winnebago." 

Then they had a long conversation and this is what he said, 
"Younger brothers, we are not doing the right thing and that is 
why we are not getting along very well in life." 

At that time they (the otber tribes) were having their night dances, 
so the Winnebago moved over to them. There they heard the 
prophet speak. He said that he had been sent by the Creator because 
the Indians were wandering away from their old customs. For 
that reason the Creator had sent him to tell them of it. He at first 
forgot all about it, for the devil misrepresented things to him and 
he believed him. The devil had told him that he would go to heaven 
and that he could not be ki'led. He had told him that he had given 
him a holy belt. He was a bad person. Whenever he got angry 
he would throw his belt down on the ground and it would change 
into a yellow rattlesnake and rattle. When he did this the rest of 
the people were afraid of him. He was very mean when drunk. 
They were afraid of him, not only on account of his belt, which he 
could turn into a yellow rattlesnake, but also because of the fact 
that he was very strong. If, when he was drunk, a number of people 
jumped on him, aftei wards he would find out about it and hit them. 
If they would resist he would kill them. 

It was utterly impossible for him to be killed. He was unkind 
to the women. They would go with him not because they liked him 

eadin] HISTORY 71 

but because they were afraid of him. It was a dangerous thing to 
say anything about him. Whenever he wished to drink he would 
take some person's valuables and buy drink with it. These are the 
things he did. The Creator had sent him on a mission to the earth, 
but the devil had misled him. 

On one occasion (when he was drunk) quite a number of people 
jumped on him and nearly killed him. When he awoke the next 
morning he asked his wife who had done it and she told him. "Well, 
they will hear of me soon. However, I want to go and take a bath 
first and cool off and then take my revenge, when I get back. " When 
he was in bathing a man came to him and said, "They have told me 
to come after you, so let us go. " Then he went back with him and he 
took him to the place from which he had originally started. Then 
the Creator said, "How are you getting on with the work which you 
were to do V Then he remembered what he had been doing. Then 
the Creator said, " Is it for this that I created you ?" Then he took 
his mouth and showed it to him and he saw that it was crooked and 
sticking out in all directions. Then he took his understanding (and 
showing it to him), he said, "Did I create you thus?" Then he 
looked into his ears and they were crooked and ragged. Thus he 
made him see all his bad characteristics and his evil mind. Then 
he took out his heart and showed it to him. It was all furrowed up 
and bad to look upon. "Did I create you thus?" said the Creator. 

"Now, then, you will do better the next time," and he sent him 
back. This time, however, he (the prophet) did not come here to 
get revenge. He came to tell of the mysteries, but no one would 
believe him. "He is just getting crazier all the time," they said of 
him. Then he told all to gather in one place and he promised 
to say nothing but the truth. Then he made a small flat war club, 
cleared a piece of ground and laid it there. Then he said to those 
assembled, "If anyone can lift this, then I will not say it (i. e., talk 
about my mission)." 

Now he (the prophet) was one of triplets. The third one was 
teased a good deal and one day he said, "I am getting tired of this 
teasing and am going home." Then he died. They had been teas- 
ing him about his head, which was very narrow. There were thus 
two left. The brother who was left was a powerful man. Bullets 
could not penetrate him, and indeed it was impossible to kill him 
in any way. It was this brother who had told him not to talk (about 
his mission). Then the prophet said to him, "Well, if you can lift 
this war club I will not speak about it any more." Then he tried 
to lift the little war club and failed. After that the brother made 
no more remarks about it. 

Then he had them make a long lodge and they were told to go 
after a number of bears. As many as he told them to get, that many 

72 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. anx. 37 

they would bring home with them. Thus they knew that he was 
telling the truth. All the people in the country listened to him and 
what he prophesied came true, so they believed him holy. 

One day they told him that the whites were coming. After a short 
time they said, "They are still coming. There are very many of 
them." The lookouts were always watching and they saw them 
coming. Then the prophet said, "When they come, listen to them, 
and when they sleep we will attend to them." Now the whites had 
come; they had to cut through the roads to come. When they were 
near one of their number came over to ask where they could camp 
and they were told to camp right there. In the night, when they 
were asleep, they shot at them. They were half asleep and they ran 
away without their weapons. A tribe of Indians was just then 
going down the stream and these shot at the whites, too. Then they 
turned back and the commander had the bugle blow and called them 
to themselves. Then they took their guns and fought. Many 
Indians were killed. The one who had led the Winnebago over was 
killed in this battle. 

Then his son started back home. His name was Small-Snake. 
As they were returning, unprepared for danger, a boat came down the 
stream and passed very close to them. The women (he was the 
only man among them) cried out. He was without any ammunition 
except two shots. Just as he got ready to shoot they were recog- 
nized. The people in the boat were not Americans but Frenchmen 
and they were very hungry. Thus they were saved, and the French- 
men gave them plenty of ammunition. Then they passed safely on. 

The Indians had scattered in every direction and no one knew who 
was alive. Then Dog-Head blessed them with a powerful medicine 
that he possessed. "My son (he was addressing Small-Snake), if I 
were to induce you to join the Medicine Dance, why that honor 
would perish with your death. Now they say that a man named 
Large-Walker had a vision in which he was blessed by a loon. The 
loon blessed him, saying, 'Large-Walker, I also bless you with this 
(medicine). When I work for the chief and when I sweep his lodge, 
I sweep all the bad things outside. It will be the same with this 
medicine. If a person partakes of something bad, he will not die, 
no matter how bad it is, but, on the contrary, he will live. Now 
when you wish to use this medicine, pour some tobacco for me and 
I will smoke it. ' Then he looked at the loon and the loon had some- 
thing growing out of his back. That is what he was referring to. 
Then the loon said again, 'When you want to dig it, don't dig it right 
away (i. e., without performing the proper rites). You must offer a 
white feather, a white deerskin, red feathers, and tobacco. Then 
you can dig it. If you make these offerings, you will never fail in 

badin] HISTORY 73 

anything. With this I bless you (this herb), and no one else in the 
world will know it.'" 

This is what Dog-Head told Small-Snake: "As long as your pos- 
terity lasts, so long can you use this medicine. If I had given you 
clothes, when they were worn out, that would be the end of them. 
Your father spoke to me in your behalf and that is why I am giving 
you this medicine." Dog-Head told the truth, for even to the 
present day this medicine is being used. *It is a purgative and a val- 
uable medicine. 

When the Winnebago returned the possessor of the medicine 
was careless and placed it in a hole in a cliff. When he came back 
for it it could not be found. He looked all over for it but it was 
apparently gone. Then they said, "We should not have done this. 
We should look before acting." Indeed, nowhere did they ever 
find it afterwards. 

Now, it is four generations since the Shawnee prophet prophesied, 
and from that time there have been many prophets among us, as he 
is said to have told the people. Many have prophesied, but none 
have told anything that seemed reasonable. The Shawnee prophet 
was good, but those who have come after him have prophesied so 
that people might praise them, or just for the sake of talking. 

It is said that the Shawnee prophet said that there would come a 
time when a woman would prophesy and that she should be imme- 
diately killed. The end of the world would be near then. Then he 
is said to have said that a little boy would prophesy and that one 
was to give ear to what he said. 

The Peyote people claim that their ceremony is the fulfillment of 
this prophesy and that it is true. The Shawnee prophet had said that 
there would be springs of water in front of the people's lodges and 
it is so at the present time, for the water is at our very doors. His 
prophesy was correct and he told the truth. Then he said that 
trees would travel and this is happening to-day, for trees are loaded 
into trains and are carried all around the country. He told the 
truth and he knew what was going to happen. He said that one day 
we would be able to write our own language and we are doing that 
to-day, for we have a Bible in Winnebago and we are able to write 
to one another in our own language. All these things he was able to 
foretell four generations ago. 

A Winnebago by the name of Noise-Thunder had also prophesied 
that we would be able to write our own language. One thing that 
he said, however, was not correct. He said that the bad thing that 
has come upon us will make us forget our own ways. He meant 
that we should not take up with the white man's ways. "Don't do 
1S6S23°— 22 6 

b> 

74 THE WINNEBAGO TKIBE [bth. anjj. 37 

it, for if you do, we will all die." Now, he was mistaken in that. 
"The Creator has given two plates and they are getting empty. He 
gave the men a plate for them to fill and the women a plate for them 
to fill. The women's plate is empty." He meant that the Creator 
had made men to hunt and the women to dig the soil and raise vege- 
tahles, and that the latter were not doing it. That is what he meant 
hy saying that their plates were empty. Noise-Thunder insisted 
that this was the white man's fault ; he thought that we were being 
weakened by the white man's food. Quite a number of people 
believed him. "The birds eat what was provided for them to eat, 
game and vegetables, and the whites eat what was provided for 
them. Why should we not eat what was provided for us?" He 
was right, but then the Creator also created the food that the whites 
are eating. We are now getting accustomed to it and are getting 
stronger on this food. 

The Winnebago were decreasing in number, so the Creator gave 
them a medicine which would enable them to get accustomed to the 
white man's food ; that, also, they might know the Creator and that 
he is the true bread and food. This they found out by using this 
medicine. They are going into it deeper and deeper all the time, 
they who had been lost, and this has all been accomplished by the 
medicine (the peyote). 

The following notes were also obtained concerning other prophets: 

"There was a prophet among the Winnebago recently named 
George Wilkinson. He claimed that he was the Trickster; that 
there were two worlds ; that he had been to the first and that he was 
now on the second. After a while he was to return to ma! una (Earth- 
maker). He told all the Winnebago to plant their tobacco and corn- 
fields again. (This is what he was ordered to say.) He said that 
the power of the war bundles was entirely exhausted, but that it 
could be restored if a person were to fast for four days. When the 
spirits addressed him by name they called him " He-Who-Stands- 
Blue." This happened fifteen years ago. 

•'Thundercloud claims to be the Hare." 

Another man named Xuga prophesied the same, led them on a 
warpath, and lost a lot of people. 

The most important religious revival of the last century among 
the Winnebago is the Peyote or Mescal religion. It is described in 
detail on page 388. 

RADIN] 

HISTOKY 

75 

Winnebago Names of Other Tribes and Peoples 

At the present time 
for the following tribes 

Omaha, Omanhan. 
Sioux, Canhan. 
Oto, Wadjokdjadja. 
Iowa, Waxotc. 
Pawnee, Pani. 
Menominee, Ka7i. 
Fox, Wacereke. 
Sauk, Zagi. 
Potawatomi, Warax. 

the Winnebago appears to have names only 
and peoples: 

Ojibway, Regatci. 

Kickapoo, JakdJAnagi. 

Osage, Worac. 

French, Djimoxgemena. 

Germans, Daieri. 

English, Zagananc. 

Irish, Hit£e waracicik. 

Whites in general, Manhi xedera. 

CHAPTER II 

WINNEBAGO ARCHEOLOGY 
General Problems 

One of the most interesting and important features of the area oc- 
cupied by the Winnebago is the large number of earth mounds found. 
That these mounds were made by the Winnebago or the Sioux there 
seems to be little doubt. The participation of the Sioux in the con- 
struction of these earth mounds seems, however, to have been con- 
fined entirely to the so-called linear and conical types. The effigy 
mounds seem to have been the work of the Winnebago exclusively1 
(figs. 2, 3). 

The first really serious study of the Wisconsin mounds was made 
by I. A. Lapham in 1850, and his work must be considered of consid- 
erable importance still, by reason of the admirable plats of mounds 
long since leveled. The next discussion is found in Cyrus Thomas's 
Report on the Mound Explorations, 2 but he makes no attempt to 
explain them. Our first accurate knowledge dates from the in- 
ception of the Wisconsin Archeologist in 1901. Any attempt to 
study the archeology of Wisconsin will necessarily have to be based 
on material there published. An extremely useful and suggestive 
summary of the data has been made by A. B. Stout. This little 
pamphlet and that on the Koshkonong region 3 by the same author 
are of prime importance in the study of Winnebago archeology . 

In order to understand the archeology of this region clearly it will 
be best to say a few words about the regions which were the early 
habitations of the Winnebago and the tribes that were their imme- 
diate neighbors. 

The Winnebago, when first found, were inhabiting the southern 
shore of Green Bay, Wis. Whether, at this time, they already ex- 
tended farther south and west, it is impossible to say. The tradi- 

1 C'f. Radin, " Some Aspects of Winnebago Archaeology," Amer. Anthropologist, n. s., vol. 13, no. 4, 1911. 

Prof. Dixon in his articlo on "Some Aspects of North American Archaeology," Amer. Anthropologist, 
n. s., vol. 15, no. 4, 1913, accepts this conclusion. "The association of the effigy mounds of Wisconsin and 
the adjacent area with the Winnebago or other Siouan tribes seems now reasonably certain, and one might 
therefore naturally regard the ?erpent mound and the few others of this effigy type in the Ohio Valley as 
due also to tribes of the same stock," p. 501. 

» Twelfth Annual Report of the Bureau of American Ethnology, pp. 47-49, Washington, 1S94. 

a " Prehistoric Earthworks iu Wisconsin," Ohio Archaeological and Historical Quarterly, vol XX, no. 1, 
Columbus, 1911; and "The \rchseology of the Lake Koshkonong Region," Wisconsin Archeologist, vol. 
7, no. 2, 1908. 
76 

RADIN] 

WINNEBAGO ARCHEOLOGY 

77 

tions speak only of Green Bay as their original habitat. On the other 
shore of Green Bay were the Menominee, who likewise have no recol- 
lection of having lived anywhere else. To the northeast, along Door 
Peninsula, were the Potawatomi, unquestionably intruders, who had 
come by way of Mackinaw. To the southwest lay the Sauk and Fox, 
the closely related Kickapoo, and the enigmatic Mascoutin. Finally, 

Fig. 2.— MAP OF WISCONSIN, SHOWING DISTRIBUTION OF CIRCULAR MOUNDS. 

to the south lay the Miami. Such seems to have been the distribu- 
tion of the tribes around Green Bay and Lake Michigan at the first 
advent of the whites. Within 50 years of the landing of Nicollet the 
places were entirely shifted. Winnebago villages are found scattered 
all along the Fox River and Lake Winnebago, the Sauk and Fox and 
Kickapoo are on their way farther south, and the Potawatomi are in 
possession of the southern shore of Green Bay and the western shore 
of Lake Michigan. Later still we find the Winnebago extending all 

78 

THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE 

[ETH. ANN. 37 

along the Wisconsin River and west of it to the Mississippi, and, at the 
same time, occupying the territory south of Lake Winnebago through 
the region of the Four Lakes, the shores of Lake Koshkonong and 
farther down along the Rock River into Illinois. Their eastern 
boundary was determined by the Potawatomi. 

Let us return now to the distribution of the mounds. Of the three 
kinds of mounds found in Wisconsin, the conical and oval ones are the 

Fig 3.— MAP OF WISCONSIN, SHOWING DISTRIBUTION OF EFFIGY MOUNDS. 

commonest, and they are met with in practically every county of the 
State in which records have been made. They have also been found 
in Minnesota. The so-called effigy mounds, on the other hand, 
have never been found north of a line drawn through the southern 
boundary of Lincoln County. They have, however, been found in 
every area which the Winnebago occupied at one time or another, 

radix] WIXNEBAGO ARCHEOLOGY 79 

with the exception of the eastern shore of Green Bay and the Fox 
River. At the same time they have been discovered in fairly large 
numbers in the counties of Sheboygan, Ozaukee, Washington, Wau- 
kesha, Racine, and Kenosha, which, as far as our historical informa- 
tion extends, had never been occupied by the Winnebago. Flint 
arrow points and pottery shards are found throughout the entire 
State. The distribution of copper implements has not yet been 
thoroughly investigated, but the present status of our knowledge has 
been ably discussed by Charles E. Brown.4 To judge from the papers 
of Brown, implements of copper are found pretty generally dis- 
tributed over the State, although certain objects seem to be found in 
greater abundance in some places than in others. 

There are three types of mounds in Wisconsin and the territory 
immediately adjacent to it — the effigy, the linear, and the intaglio. 
All of these have been subjected to a variety of explanations at the 
hands of archeologists, from Lapham's time to 'our own. The car- 
dinal error in all their attempts at explanation has perhaps been the 
assumption that the mounds were necessarily of great antiquity. 
For a long time it was not considered likely that the present inhabit- 
ants of the region, the Winnebago or their ancestors, had had any- 
thing to do with their erection. As soon, however, as systematic 
inquiries had been made among living Winnebago it was discovered 
that not only were they able to give more or less reasonable explana- 
tions of the uses of most of the mounds, but a number of the older 
people claimed to have distinct recollections of the erection of some 
of them. In obtaining notes on social organization the writer was 
told incidentally that it had been customary not very long ago to 
erect near the habitation of each clan an effigy of their clan animal. 
Subsequently, upon a more systematic inquiry, it was discovered that 
not only were such effigy mounds erected near clan habitations, but 
also on every plantation owned by a certain clan. In other words, 
these effigy mounds were, to all intents and purposes, property marks. 
Similar effigies are found in the porcupine quill work, on the war 
bundles, and on the woven bags still used by the Winnebago in Wis- 
consin. This interpretation has been so fully corroborated that there 
can no longer be any possible doubt about it. The age of the mounds 
thus diminishes considerably. Of course some may have been erected 
long ago, but it is quite evident that the effigy mounds found near the 
Mississippi must have been erected during the eighteenth century, 
as the Winnebago did not reach this region before that time. 

In connection with the effigy mounds two things need explanation — 
namely, why there are no mounds of this type near Red Banks, Green 
Bay, and why there are so niany directly south of this region along 

4 "The Native Copper Implements of Wisconsin," in Wisconsin Arekeologist, vol.3, no. 2; and "The 
Native Copper Ornaments of Wisconsin," ibid., vol. 3, no. 3, 1904. 

80 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. anx. 37 

the eastern shore of Lake Michigan, a territory in which the Winne- 
bago have no recollection of ever having lived. The first question 
is very difficult to answer. There is always the possibility that some 
mounds may yet be discovered and again it is possible that all have 
been leveled considerably. The apparent persistency with which the 
Winnebago held to the custom of mound building during their forced 
migration since the eighteenth century, even when they lived in 
places for only a short time, and" the absence of any mounds in their 
legendary home, suggest the possibility that they never lived per- 
manently near Green Bay.5 This inference has not been drawn from 
a study of the archeological but from a study of the historical sources, 
by Mr. P. V. Lawson.6 In this paper the writer tries to prove that 
all the old sources point to Doty Island situated in Fox River, at the 
foot of Lake Winnebago, as the place where Nicollet first met the 
Winnebago. Whatever the merits of the case may be, it is certain 
that, according to the Winnebago themselves, their original home was 
Green Bay. Into this tradition many legendary details have, of 
course, been woven, and it seems to us that the presumption of evi- 
dence favors Green Bay, although the complete absence of what seems 
to have been such a characteristic feature of Winnebago culture as 
effigy mounds suggests a possibility that the Green Bay settlement 
represented just the northernmost extension of the tribe. The large 
settlements found along Lake Winnebago so soon after Nicollet's land- 
ing make it reasonably certain that the Winnebago had been there 
before his arrival in Wisconsin. 

We will also have to assume that the Winnebago erected the effigy 
mounds along the western shore of Lake Michigan, in an area that, 
since the coming of the whites, has been occupied successively by the 
Miami and Potawatomi. This would indicate that the Winnebago 
originally came in a compact mass from the south. They, however, 
have no recollection of this fact and it must indeed have taken place 
a long time ago. This is, of course, only an hypothesis. 

The effigy mounds are unquestionably supposed to represent the 
eponymous clan animals of the Winnebago. It seems, however, as 
if three clan animals were never represented — namely, the wolf, the 
buffalo, and the fish. It is possible that the mound found near the 
asylum grounds at Madison, Wis., is intended to represent a wolf, but, 
even if this could be established, it would not explain the apparent 
absence of any more examples of one of the most import ant Winnebago 
clans. 

* The absence of any mention of them in early records has no significance, for even in the nineteenth cen- 
tury, in regions where it seems incredible that they should have escaped notice, no mention is ever made 
of them by travelers. 

- « " The Habitat of the Winnebago," in the Proceedings of the State Historical Society of Wisconsin, 1906. 
Mr. A. C Neville in a previous paper published in the Proceedings of 1905, sought to establish the thesis ol 
a Green Bay home from the same data. 

RADIN] WINNEBAGO ARCHEOLOGY 81 

There are a large number of effigies that, for want of a better name, 
most Wisconsin archeologists have called "turtle" mounds. No 
explanations can be offered of these peculiar effigies unless they are 
attempts to picture fish or are altered water-spirit mounds. The 
Winnebago had no turtle clan, but the turtle plays an important part 
in their mythology. 

Perhaps the most peculiar effigy mounds are the famous "Man" 
mounds, of which only two examples are in existence, and the so- 
called "intaglios." Good descriptions of both types have been 
given.1 

The two "Man" mounds have generally been regarded as inex- 
plicable or connected with some prehistoric rite, and it seemed useless 
to attempt any explanation. As there seemed to be no reason why 
these mounds might not fall into the same category as the clan 
mounds, the writer took the opportunity of inquiring about them 
among the older Winnebago. A number of the people asked knew 
nothing about them, but, fortunately, two very old members of the 
tribe interpreted them, as soon as they were described, as represen- 
tations of the Warrior or Hawk clan. As this clan belonged to the 
Bird phratry, no one had ever looked for any but bird emblems. 

No information has been obtained from living Winnebago that 
could throw any light on the " intaglio" mounds. We wish, however, 
to hazard a suggestion as to their possible meaning. "The intaglio 
effigies, " to quote Mr. Brown, " may be described as being the reverse 
of the ordinary effigy mounds. They are excavated out of the soil 
instead of erected upon it, the earth removed from the shallow exca- 
vation being heaped up with care along the edges, giving form and 
prominence to the animal shapes depicted."2 The Winnebago fre- 
quently placed symbols referring to water deities under water, and, as 
10 of the 12 intaglios that have been described belong unquestionably 
to the Water-spirit clan, it may have been customary to keep these 
"intaglios" filled with water. The discovery of two supposedly 
Bear "intaglios" militates against this suggestion. However, ac- 
cording to the Bear clan legends, the ancestors of that clan came 
from the water, as did likewise those of the Wolf and Buffalo clans. 

We now come to the most unsatisfactory problem of our area — 
namely, the nature and significance of the linear mounds. The 
various types have been best described by Mr. A. B. Stout and we 
will do best to quote him in extenso: 

The principal classes of linear mounds are as follows: 

The pure linear type is a straight wall-like mound of uniform width and height. 
They are usually about 2\ feet in height and from 10 to 20 feet in width. Some are so 

1 "The Preservation of the Man Mound," in vol. 7, no. 4, of the Wisconsin Archeologist, and " The 
Intaglio Mounds of Wisconsin/' in vol 9, no. 1, of the same journal; both papers by C. Brown. 
1 Cf. Wisconsin Archeologist, vol. 9, no. 1, p. 6. 

82 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ANN. 37 

short that they approach the oval and platform mound types, while the longest are 
over 900 feet in length. 

The straight pointed linear is usually of considerable length and differs from the 
pure linear as given above in having one end tapering to a long drawn out point. . . . 

Club-shaped linears are frequently found . . . and kidney-shaped linears are 
not wanting. . . . 

The various linear types described above are sometimes modified by an enlargement 
at one end. . . . This ranges from a low, flattened enlargement to a rounded, 
well built conical mound. Various projections or appendages to some of the linear 
forms . . . give figures that shade toward effigies proper. These types of linear 
mounds are mingled in the mound groups as shown in the various group plats. . . . 

Besides the types already discussed there are peculiar combinations and composite 
mounds which do not admit of any rational explanation.3 

Many explanations have been given by investigators and, for that 
matter, by Indians themselves, of the significance of these linear 
mounds. Not only is it necessary to account for the peculiar and 
manifold shapes, but for the equally strange combinations into which 
they have entered. With regard to the latter type, Mr. Stout 
refuses even to suggest an interpretation. He, however, takes a 
determined stand with regard to the linear mounds proper and 
interprets them as having been constructed for the purpose of 
symbolizing inanimate things, and consequently as really conven- 
tionalized effigies. This seems to him the only satisfactory explana- 
tion. " It is evident," he says, " that there are intermediate or transi- 
tional forms between the linears and the pure effigy types with which 
they are mingled."4 He admits the existence of linear mounds ex- 
tending westward into Minnesota and Manitoba, far beyond the 
limits of the effigy type, but he does not believe it necessary either 
to regard these latter as effigies or to change his interpretation of 
the significance of the former. Mr. Stout's interpretation is indeed 
a purely arbitrary one. Whereas his identification of the effigy 
mounds was based upon information obtained directly from some 
Winnebago Indians, that of the linear is based upon what he thought 
was the necessity of the case. • 

Inquiries made among the Winnebago of Wisconsin by the writer 
brought out the fact that the Indians were unanimous in claiming 
their forefathers as the authors of the mounds, but they were not 
at all unanimous as to their significance. By far the largest number 
of individuals, however, insisted that these linears were defensive 
works behind which they dodged during battle. These must not be 
confused with anything in the nature of breastworks or fortifications. 
The Indians claimed that these mounds ought to be found in great 
numbers along Lake Koshkonong, because it was there that a terrific 
struggle had once been waged by the Winnebago against one of 

» Ohio Archaeological and Historical Quarterly, Vol. XX, no. 1, Jan., 1911, pp. 22-23. 
• Ibid., pp. 24-26. 

RADIN] WIKNEBAGO ARCHEOLOGY 83 

their hereditary enemies. As a matter of fact, according to Mr. 
Stout, in the small area of 31 square miles around the lake, no less 
than 48 1 linear mounds have been found, and, if we take into con- 
sideration the fact that but 50 miles to the northwest, in the Sauk 
County area, 734 were found, we have within a radius of 231 square 
miles an enormous number of linear mounds. Whether, however, 
this has anything to do with the statements of the Indians mentioned 
above is very doubtful. When the writer called the Indians' 
attention to the fact that structures that were so low could hardly 
serve as an adequate protection against arrows they retorted by 
saying that the Indians did not stand up when attacked but lay 
stretched on the ground behind the mounds. 

The same two areas that yielded such a large number of linear 
mounds were also rich in effigy and conical mounds, containing 225 
of the former and 646 of the latter. The conclusion is thus forced 
upon us that we have here the seat of a large number of Winnebago 
settlements. The linear mounds may therefore be said to be char- 
acteristic features of certain villages. A similarly large number of 
linear mounds seems to exist in Crawford County, according to the 
investigations of Lapham. It is possible that a continuation of 
thorough and systematic studies like those made by Mr. Stout in 
Sauk County and Lake Koshkonong will bring to light many such 
linear mound areas closely associated with village sites. 

With regard to the Winnebago interpretation given above it 
might be said that we know of numerous battles that occurred both 
along Lake Koshkonong and the Mississippi, and that it would 
require no manipulation of the facts to accept the Indians' explana- 
tion. It might, nevertheless, justifiably be asked why these peculiar 
shapes ? They can hardly have had any importance in warfare. 

As opposed to the view advanced above, various interpretations 
have been given at different times. Peet regarded the linear mounds 
as game drives, but this explanation seems to have been quite 
arbitrary. At least we know of no facts that were brought forth in 
its defense. 

Although the interpretation that we were here dealing with de- 
fensive structures was by far the most common, two other explana- 
tions were obtained, one to the effect that the linear mounds were 
the bases of lodges and the other that some, at least, were snake 
effigies. It is impossible to say anything about the latter conten- 
tion, although there may be more in it than is suspected. The 
other explanation, even though they had a special name for the 
projections that are often found at one end of the linears (natci, or 
wood houses), must be accepted with caution. The enormous 
length of some of the linears hardly seems to support such an assump- 

84 THE WINNEBAGO TKIBE [eth. ann. 37 

tion. The Winnebago themselves claimed that the reason lodges 
were built upon mounds was because they could thus shed water 
most easily. 

The conical mounds were unquestionably used for purposes of 
burial. Whether, however, they were always constructed with that 
particular object in view may be seriously doubted, for in some 
cases the burials seem to represent clear evidences of being intrusive 
in character. A few Indians insisted that some of the conical 
mounds were used as platforms from which to address an audience; 
that some were "stations" in the game of lacrosse, and that some 
were bases of lodges. 

The composite type of mound, characterized by the union of a 
conical and a linear or by the union of a number of each, was inter- 
preted by the Winnebago questioned as lodge bases connected with 
one another, the conical mound being the base of the lodge and the 
"linear" acting as a sort of connecting passageway. 

We mentioned before that Mr. Stout maintains the view that the 
linear are in reality conventionalized effigy mounds. Our main 
objection to such an interpretation would be that conventionaliza- 
tion is a method of artistic expression exceedingly rare among the 
Winnebago. Had it been common it would certainly have been 
found in use in their bead and quill work or in their woven bags. 
There is a possibility that some of the linears may be either very 
crudely constructed effigy mounds or that they may represent effigy 
mounds that have been changed through the influences of weather 
and general climatic conditions, as well as, to a smaller extent, by 
human hands, factors that have been neglected altogether too much 
in this connection, especially in the interpretation of what appear 
to be anomalies. From this point of view, it would be suggestive 
to compare some of the so-called "turtle" effigies with the water- 
spirit or "panther" type, on the one hand, and with the linears on 
the other. It is perhaps such "transitional" forms that have led 
Mr. Stout to postulate that all linears are effigies. 

Summing up, we might say that the linears may be either effigies, 
in part representing a snake, or they may be, in part, altered or 
mutilated or crude effigies ; or they may be the bases of lodges. We 
have the authority of a number of Indians that some are snake effi- 
gies. The interpretation that some are altered or mutilated has 
never been confirmed by the Indians themselves. Finally, that some 
of them are the bases of lodges is the statement of a large number of 
Indians, but it must await further evidence before it can be accepted. 

That some of the mounds found in the Winnebago territory ante- 
date, in part, the coming of the whites, and can consequently be 
regarded as constituting an archeological problem, there can hardly 
be any doubt. Nevertheless, many of them have been erected since 

radin] WINNEBAGO ARCHEOLOGY 85 

Nicollet's time, some even within the recollection of Winnebago still 
living. All were unquestionably erected by the Winnebago, and 
since there is no reason for believing that this tribe entered Wisconsin 
many centuries before the first appearance of Europeans in America, 
it is quite erroneous to state, as Mr. Stout does, that the evidence at 
hand justifies us in dividing the occupancy of Wisconsin into two 
principal periods, the effigy mound-budding era and the time that 
has elapsed since that period. 

The use of copper by the Winnebago prior to their contact with 
Europeans is another of the rather baffling questions connected with 
Winnebago archeology. There are references to its use in the myth 
of the Twins, but the sections of the myth where it is mentioned 
show marked evidences of European influence and can hardly be 
accepted as reflecting the original mode of life of the Winnebago. 
Copper is found in a number of mounds, but we have no way of 
determining whether these mounds are pre-Columbian or not. 

In all likelihood, almost all the copper found in Wisconsin comes 
from the original copper workings at Isle Royale, Keweenaw, Onto- 
nagon, and elsewhere, in the Lake Superior district. "A provisional 
description of the territory in which the greatest number of such 
artifacts have been recovered up to the present time may be given 
as extending from about the middle of MUwaukee County, northward 
along the west shore of Lake Michigan to Door County, thence west- 
ward to the Wisconsin River or slightly beyond, thence southward 
along this stream to Dane Comity and eastward to Milwaukee County, 
the starting point. Embraced within this territory are the extensive 
lake shore village sites, from which thousands of articles have already 
been recovered, and certain well-known sites in Green Lake and 
adjoining counties, the Rush Lake and similarly productive regions."11 

The region thus described embraces the Winnebago territory and 
that subsequently occupied by the Central Algonquian tribes. It does 
not follow the line of Winnebago migrations farther than the Wis- 
consin River to the west or farther than the southern boundary of 
Dane County to the south or southwest. As far as the writer knows 
no one has ever been able to obtain any information from the Winne- 
bago that would in any manner connect them with the authorship 
of the copper implements found associated with their old village 
sites. All Indians questioned denied that their ancestors had ever 
used copper before the arrival of the early French traders. For the 
Winnebago, it seems to the writer, the problem connected with the. 
occurrence of copper implements is not whether the Winnebago made 
them, but how they came to obtain them. The solution of this 
problem would be immensely facflitated if we had accurate knowledge 

11 Brown, in Ihe Wisconsin Archeologist, vol. 3, no. 2, p. 58. 

86 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ann. 37 

of the distribution of copper among the Sauk, Fox, and Kickapoo, 
and if we were in a position to tell whether or not these tribes had 
copper before their arrival in Wisconsin. We might then be in a 
better position to decide whether the Winnebago obtained their cop- 
per from these tribes or from some northern tribe, presumably the 
Potawatomi or Menominee. It is generally supposed that they 
actually did obtain their copper implements through the intermedi- 
ation of these two last-mentioned tribes, although there is no really 
conclusive evidence for it. That opportunities for their trans- 
mission through the Menominee or Potawatomi were plentiful is 
unquestioned, and the only problem is whether the systematic ex- 
change was not conditioned by the appearance of the white traders. 

The last problem connected with Winnebago archeology is the 
authorship of the numerous flint arrowheads. They are found all 
over Wisconsin, in every nook and corner of Winnebago territory, 
in every stage of manufacture, and yet the Winnebago of to-day 
regard them as having been made by some other tribe. The most 
common explanation of their origin is the legendary one that they 
were made by worms. In the few cases where the old men were of 
a different opinion, the writer was assured that they were the " bones" 
of the water-spirits, and consequently holy. Numerous myths 
speak of them in connection with the water-spirit. The Indians ad- 
mit that they had at times used them as arrow points, but insist that 
in every case they were found in the earth ; that in fact people were 
generally blessed with them. Mr. Skinner informs me that the 
Menominee, on the other hand, remember very well how they were 
made. Among the Winnebago, until recently, three kinds of arrow 
points were in use: one, properly not an arrow point at all but simply 
a sharpened arrow, the second consisting of sharpened portions of 
pieces of antlers, and the third consisting of a turtle claw that had 
been softened and straightened. It has generally been maintained 
that the presence of regular "quarries" absolutely clinched the 
hypothesis of a Winnebago origin for the flint arrow points, but it 
seems to us that we would first have to prove that in every case 
where such quarries are found no tribe but the Winnebago had ever 
occupied that territory, because had any Algonquian tribe been there 
they might be held as much responsible for these quarries as the 
Winnebago. That they were not used within the recollection of the 
oldest men among the Winnebago there can be no doubt, because 
this question was repeatedly put to them, with negative results. 

It seems best, therefore, to attach some significance to current 
belief as to the origin of the flint arrow points and to assume for the 
present that they were either the work of the prehistoric ancestors 
of the Winnebago or that of some tribe that had occupied the terri- 

hadin] WINNEBAGO ARCHEOLOGY 87 

tory before them; or — but this is extremely unlikely — that they 
were all of Algonquian origin. 

Implements of Stone and Other Materials 

As pointed out before, we ought not to expect to find much strictly 
archeological data relating to the Winnebago in their Wisconsin habi- 
tat. As, however, they probably reached this habitat before the dis- 
covery of America, some of the archeological finds may easily go back 
that far. Unfortunately we have no way of determining, even 
approximately, the age of the artifacts. 

We will now confine ourselves to a description of the more impor- 
tant types of artifacts and remains found on old Winnebago sites 
without going into the question of their respective age. 

Implements and utensils were made of stone, clay, shell, bone, 
wood, antlers, and turtle claws (pi. 10). According to information ob- 
tained from the present Winnebago, which is supported by the testi- 
mony of the myths and tales, but few objects were made of stone. 
The most important of these was the stone hatchet. It may even be 
questioned whether the Winnebago originally made these, for they 
are given a supernatural origin by those few Winnebago who men- 
tioned their existence, and it has been the author's experience that 
objects to which a supernatural origin is ascribed are generally either 
of recent origin or have been borrowed. None of the myths or tales 
even mention their existence. Nevertheless a large number of stone 
implements, most of them presumably stone hatchets, has been 
found at Doty Island, near Menasha, Wis. (pi. 11), which had at one 
time been one of their principal village sites. It is quite probable that 
the Winnebago obtained most of these from the neighboring Algonquian 
tribes who were well known for their skill in working stone. 

Copper Implements 

The Winnebago are known to have used copper implements in 
fairly great abundance, the only question being whether they were 
the original makers of these objects. We do not think they were, 
and base our opinion on the answers given by present-day Indians 
and the total absence of their mention in the myths. Both iron and 
presumably copper are mentioned in certain myths, but these pas- 
sages are clearly of European origin. 

Practically all of our knowledge of the nature and distribution of 
copper objects in Wisconsin has been conveniently summarized in Mr. 
C. E. Brown's paper entitled " The native copper implements of 
Wisconsin,"12 and all that we mention here is taken from this little 
monograph. 

» The Wisconsin Arcbtsologist, vol. 3, no. 2. 

88 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ANN. 37 

Following Brown's classification, we note the following copper ob- 
jects in Wisconsin: Axes or hatchets (the most common), chisels, 
"spuds," gouges, spiles, spatulas, knives, spear and arrow points, 
harpoon points, pikes and punches, awls and drills, spikes, needles, 
and fishhooks. 

The most important types of axes were the following: Those oblong 
in outline, with edges nearly parallel; those with straight edges and 
tapering, widest toward the cutting edge and becoming narrower 
toward the head. The head itself may be either flattened, rounded, 
or roundly pointed. This is the most common type found. The 
third type, according to Brown, resembles the second, "with the ex- 
ception that the margin at the edges is slightly but distinctly elevated, 
thus giving a slightly depressed or concave surface in the center and 
from end to end on one or both broad faces of the ax. In some ex- 
amples this margin is fully one-half inch in width at or near the 
middle."13 

Three principal types of chisels were found: Those broadest at the 
cutting edge, with edges tapering gradually from this cutting edge 
to the head; those of nearly uniform width with straight parallel 
edges; and those with a more or less prominent median ridge. 

According to Brown there can be no doubt as to their use. "It 
probably included the hollowing out of wooden canoes, troughs, and 
vessels . . ,"u 

Knives are quite common, there being two principal types — one 
with a straight back and oblique, curved, or straight cutting edge; 
and another distinguished from the latter by a greater breadth of its 
broad curved blade and terminating in a broadly rounded point. 

Spear and arrow points are found in great profusion and fall into 
many types: The leaf -shaped, the stemmed and flat, the ridged, the 
beveled, the eyed, the notched, the toothed, the spatula-shaped, the 
short-stemmed, the barbed or pronged, the conical, the rolled 
socketed, and the ridged socketed. 

Earthworks and Mounds 

Aztalan. — Apart from the mounds there is one very famous earth- 
work in Wisoonsin called Aztalan (pi. 12) which has for many decades 
puzzled archeologists. We will not enter into any of the numerous 
explanations given at different times by observers, but will confine 
ourselves exclusively to quoting the rather clear description given 
by Mr. G. A. West:15 

The inclosure and associated earthworks at Aztalan, on the Crawfish River in 
Jefferson County, have long been considered among the most interesting and important 

" The Wisconsin Archeologist, vol. 3, no. 2, p. 61. 

"Ibid., p. 62. 

15 "The Indian authorship of Wisconsin antiquities," Wisconsin Archeologist, vol.6, no. 4, pp. 219-222. 

BUREAU OF AMERICAN ETHNOLOGY THIRTY-SEVENTH ANNUAL REPORT PLATE 9 

a. JOHN BAPTISTE 

6. HUGH HUNTER 

c. LEVI ST. CYR d. ALBERT HENSLEY (Profile view) 

WINNEBAGO TYPES 

3UREAU OF AMERICAN ETHNOLOGY THIRTY-SEVENTH ANNUAL REPORT PLATE 10 

WINNEBAGO BONE IMPLEMENTS 

(From Wisconsin Archeologist) 

Radin] WINNEBAGO ARCHEOLOGY 89 

of the aboriginal monuments of Wisconsin. The inclosure was first noticed by the 
government surveyor. In 1837 a hasty survey was made by N. F. Hyer, who after- 
wards published a brief description. ... In 1850 Lapham made a careful survey of 
Aztalan. . . and in 1855 published a description illustrated with several fine plates 
and figures in his "Antiquities of Wisconsin." . . . 

This interesting inclosure. now almost obliterated by many years of cultivation, 
may be briefly described as being in the shape of an irregular parallelogram, lacking 
one of the long sides which is supplied by the bank of the Crawfish which forms its 
eastern boundary. It is reported to contain 17f acres of land. The length of the 
north wall Lapham gives as 631, the westas 1,419, and the south as 700 feet. The width 
is given as about 22 feet and the height at from 1 to 5 feet. Along the outer edge of its 
entire length, at somewhat regular distances, were rounded projections which have 
been frequently referred to as "buttresses or bastions," but which Lapham deter- 
mined "were never designed for either of the purposes indicated by these names." 

"The distance from one to another varies from 61 to 95 feet, scarcely any two of them 
being exactly alike. Their mean distance apart is 82 feet. On the north wall and 
on most of the west wall they have the same height as the connecting ridge and at a 
little distance resemble a simple row of mounds. 

"On the inner wall, opposite many of these mounds (projections), is a slight de- 
pression or sinus; possibly the remains of a sloping way by which the wall was as- 
cended from within the inclosure." — Lapham, Antiquities, 43. 

Within the wall at the northwest corner of the inclosure was a rectangular truncated 
pyramidal mound, its level top measuring 60 by 65 feet. At its southeast corner was 
a sloping ascent. At the southwest corner, also within the wall, was a square, trun- 
cated mound, the level area on its top being 53 feet wide on the west side, it being 
originally in all probability a square of this size. Lapham's figure shows the sides 
of the mound rising in two terraces to the top. There appeared to be a sloping way' 
leading down from its top toward the east. It was the highest earthwork within the 
wall, which it overlooked. These two mounds he judged to have been the probable 
foundations of buildings or of other structures of perishable materials. From the 
eastern side of the last-mentioned mound a line of wall with a number of projections 
similar to those on the wall of the inclosure extended about two-thirds of the way 
to the river, where it angled and proceeded in a northwesterly direction, being broken 
near its middle to within about 250 feet of the north wall. Beginning near the angle 
and on the east side of and paralleling this wall for its entire length was a second line 
of wall with projections distributed at various distances along its sides. 

Within the inclosure were also a number of excavations, conical mounds, embank- 
ments, and other earthworks, some of which our present knowledge enables-us to iden- 
tify as very probably effigy or emblematic mounds. 

Opposite the southwestern angle of the wall of the inclosure were several embank- 
ments also with projections along their sides. Scattered at intervals along the entire 
front of the west wall were a considerable number of excavations irregular in outline 
and of different sizes from which some of the earth used in the construction of the wall 
was most probably taken. 

A short distance west of these, and also extending along the front of the wall, is a 
long mound of the familiar tapering effigy type, an irregular line of conical mounds, 
and a single linear mound. Several hundred feet northwest of the inclosure on the 
higher ground was a double line of 60 or more conical mounds of different sizes, extend- 
ing from west of the present Aztalan road across the road and in a general northerly 
direction into the present village of Aztalan. A small number of the more prominent 
of these can still be seen along the road. 

On the east bank of the Crawfish opposite the inclosure were two long earthen 
embankments and a group of conical mounds. The larger of the two embankments 
1S6823°— 22 7 

90 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ann. 37 

Lapham's plat shows to have been about 660 feet in length and probably 18 feet in 
width. 

Intaglio Mounds 

The intaglio mounds (pi. 13) are clearly the reverse of effigy 
mounds. They were discovered by Lapham 60 years or more ago 
and since that time no others have been found. Lapham himself 
located nine of them, all associated with earthworks, at Milwaukee, 
Pewaukee, Theresa, and Fort Atkinson. At about the same time 

J' 

X 

1 

Fig. 4.— EFFIGY MOUNDS (PANTHER OR WATER-SPIRIT 
TYPE). FORKS OF THE MANITOWOC RIVER, CALUMET 
COUNTY, WIS. 

Mr. W. H. Canfield" located two near the earthworks at Baraboo. 
Those found by Lapham are undoubtedly intended to represent 
what most Wisconsin archeologists call the "panther," but which 
the Winnebago call the water-spirit (wakdjexi) (fig. 4), while those 
found by Canfield are probably intended to represent the bear (fig. 5). 

BUREAU OF AMERICAN ETHNOLOGY THIRTY-SEVENTH ANNUAL REPORT PLATE 13 

) 

,&*.;*> 

WISCONSIN INTAGLIOS 
(After Laphamj 

BUREAU OF AMERICAN ETHNOLOGY THIRTY-SEVENTH ANNUAL REPORT PLATE 14 

a. BURIAL IN A MOUND AT BORCHER'S BEACH 
(From Wisconsin Archeologist) 

b. CONICAL MOUND, CUTLER PARK, WAUKESHA, WIS. 

BADIN] 

WINNEBAGO ARCHEOLOGY 

91 

The Fort Atkinson intaglio is the only one now in existence. 
"Its greatest depth (at the middle of the hody) is slightly over 2 
feet. The great tail of the animal reaches to within about 25 feet 
of a fine large conical burial mound." 16 

Conical Mounds 

These are found all over the territory once occupied by the Winne- 
bago, but we know definitely that the 
Central Algonquian tribes also erected 
them. In the following section we 
will describe but one group of these 
mounds found on territory formerly 
inhabited by the Winnebago and 
which was never, or only for a very 
short time, occupied by other tribes 
(pi. 14). 

This interesting group was located in Angelo Township, Juneau 
County, and is known as Mound Prairie, West Group (Fig. 6). 
Twelve mounds are preserved there with the following dimensions: 

Fig. 5.— BEAR EFFIGY MOUND. MADI- 
SON, WIS. 

K 

IB 

IM 

ni, 

H/ OH WAY 

Fig. 6.— BURIAL MOUNDS, UPPER BARABOO VALLEY, WIS. 

A 53 feet in diameter. 
B 48 feet in diameter. 
C 48 feet in diameter. 
D 45 feet in diameter. 
E 44 feet in diameter. 
G 48 feet in diameter. 

H 46 feet in diameter. 
I 45 feet in diameter. 
J 42 feet in diameter. 
K 65 by 30 feet. 
L 46 feet in diameter. 
M 38 feet in diameter. 

"C. E. Brown, " The Intaglio Mounds of Wisconsin," Wisconsin Archeologist, vol.9, no. 1, p. 9. 

92 

THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE 

[ETH. ANN. 37 

As a rule, whenever the conical mounds represent the work of the 
Winnebago they are always found accompanied by linear and effigy 
mounds. At Lake Koshkonong, out of a total of 481 mounds 309 
are conical. A similar proportion is found in other groups. Little 
has ever been found in them except burials and there seems little 
doubt that the vast majority of them were always used for this 
purpose. (Pis. 15-17; fig. 7.) 

Fig. 7.— BURIAL MOUNDS IN A GROUP AT RICE LAKE, RUSK COUNTY, WIS. 

In a number of places conical mounds are joined to linear mounds 
or to other structures, often producing irregular figures. Mr. A. B. 
Stout classifies them as belonging in general to three types. The 
commonest of these combinations are those called by Mr. Stout the 
dumb-bell and tadpole type (fig. S). 

Linear Mounds 

Linear mounds, like conical mounds, are found all over the territory 
once occupied by the Winnebago. What purpose they could have 
served is not definitely known, although the modern Winnebago 

< 

z 
z 
< 

> 

<3 
C 

_l 

o 

z 
I 

I 
1- 

> 

\- 

Z 
D 
O 

o 

I- 

UJ 

D 

< 
O 

Q 

Z 
D 
O 

z 
I 
< 

N 

BUR 

EAU OF AMERICAN ETHNOLOGY THIRTY-SEVENTH ANNUAL REPORT PLA l E 18 

V 

■ . 

w 

a. LODGE MADE OF REED MATTING 

6. LODGE MADE OF BARK WITH COVERING OF REED 

MATTING 

c. LODGE MADE OF BARK 

RADIX] 

WINNEBAGO ARCHEOLOGY 

03 

»• ft!!* 

Tig. 8.— EFFIGY AND DUMB-BELL-SHAPED MOUNDS. 

<0 

T 

Q 

JE 

I 

Fig. 9.— LINEAR MOUNDS AT MADISON, WIS. 
n- , s c o -v -5 - ~ " ' v £ * 

Fig. 10.— LINEAR MOUNDS, CLYDE TOWNSHIP, IOWA COUNTY. WIS. 

94 

THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE 

[DTH. ANN. 37 

Fig. 11.— EFFIGY AND LINEAR MOUNDS, PISHTAKA, WAUKESHA COUNTY, WIS. 

Fig. 12.— EFFIGY MOUNDS IN THE WINGRA GROUP, MADISON, WIS. 

KADIN] 

WIXXEBAGO ARCHEOLOGY 

95 

Fig. 13.— BIRD EFFIGY MOUNDS. 

Fig. 14— MAN MOUND, GREENFD2LD TOWNSHIP, SAUK COUNTY, WIS. 

THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE 

[ETH. ANN. 37 

Fig. 16.-TYPES OF SO-CALLED TURTLE EFFIGY MOUNDS. 

FIG. 17.— EFFIGY MOUND OF UNKNOWN ANIMAL. 

BADIN] 

WINNEBAGO ARCHEOLOGY 

97 

FIG. 18.-LA VALLE MAN MOUND, SAUK COUNTY, WIS. 

Sec. Line 

Ji 

ifcy^t-r 

^ 

^ 

Fig. 19.-GROUP OF MOUNDS OF DIFFERENT TYPES, LAKE KOSHKONONC, WIS. 

98 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [bth. ann. 37 

seem to be practically unanimous in explaining them as either the 
base of lodges or as defenses (figs. 9, 10, 11). 

Effigy Mounds 

Effigy mounds (figs. 4, 5, 11-18) are discussed at some length 
in the following pages. The following types are found: The 
bird, the bear, the panther or water-spirit, the deer (uncommon), 
the wolf (uncommon), the turtle, and the so-called man. The 
commonest by far are the bird, bear, and water-spirit, and this 
woidd seem to corroborate the statements of living Winnebago 
that these mounds represent the clan effigies, for these three clans 
were by far the most important and numerous in the tribe. Certain 
of the clans are apparently not represented, particularly the elk, 
the buffalo, the snake, and the fish, while but. isolated examples 
of two fairly important clans, the wolf and the deer, are found. 
If the so-called turtle mounds (fig. 16) were really intended to 
represent that animal, we would have the only instance of a 
large number of mounds that can not possibly be connected with the 
Winnebago clans, for the tribe never had a Turtle clan. However, 
these mounds may not really have been intended to represent turtles. 
On the other hand, it is not absolutely necessary to believe that the 
effigy mounds represented only clan animals. It is possible that 
some were erected for religious purposes. 

Owing to the fact that so many effigy mounds have been destroyed 
in the last two or three centuries, it is quite impossible to be certain 
of the distribution of specific types. Even those still in existence 
have not all been carefully noted and described. Until this is done, 
no even approximately definitive conclusions can be drawn as to the 
reasons for the prevalence of certain types in one area and others in 
other areas. To give some idea of their distribution, however, we 
will describe briefly their distribution in those sections of Wisconsin 
that have been fairly thoroughly studied: 

Lake Mendota. — Two types of bird, bear, water-spirit, and the 
very rare effigy of a frog. 

Lake Koshkonong. — Two types of bird, water-spirit, frog ? mink ( 
and an unknown mammal. 

Fond du Lac. — Water-spirit, one type of bird, turtle. 

Lake Wauiesa. — Water-spirit, three types of bird, bear, turtle, 
and lynx. 

Turtle Creek, Bock County. —Water-spirit, turtle. 

Winnebago County. — Water-spirit, bear, bird. 

Lake Wingra. — Water-spirit, turtle, three types of bird, and bear. 

Mantiowoc County. — Bird, water-spirit, turtle. 

Sauk County. — One type of bird, bear, mink, water-spirit. 

RADIX] 

WINNEBAGO ARCHEOLOGY 

99 

In general it may be said that effigies of the bird type are found 
over the entire region in which effigies are found, although certain 
types seem to have a restricted range — the bear type, westward from 
Lake Waubesa to Sauk County and probably beyond; the water- 
spirit, over the entire region from Milwaukee to Madison and as far 
north as Gills Landing in Waupaca County; the goose, at Lake 

Fig.20.— ARCHEOLOllIC MAP OF LAKE KOSHKONONG. 

INDEX Tj MAP. 

Conch shell cache, 1842. 
Black Hawk's camp, 1832. 
Ogden group. 

Rock River group and village site. 
Tay-e-he-dah group and village site. 
Taylor House group. 
Fulton group. 

Koshkonong group and village sir- 
John Son group. 

Noe Springs group and village site. 
North group. 
Rufus Bingnam group. 
Le Sellier group and village site. 
Goldthorpe burials. 
Messmer Garden beds. 
Kumlien group, 
a-b-c. Koshkonong Creek mounds and village 

site. 
Conch shell cache, 1867. 

19. Draves group. 

20. Skavlem group. 

21. Carcajou mounds and White Orow's village. 

22. Loge Bay mounds and garden beds. 

23. Altpeter group and White Ox's village. 

24. Man Eater's village. 

24 and 25. Gen. Atkinson group. 

26. Hoard group and Kewaskum's camp. 

27. Fun Hunter's Point mound and cornfield. 

28. Lookout group. 

29. Haight's Creek group. 

30. Atkinson's camp. 

31. Indian cornfields. 

32 and 33. Ira Bingham group and village site. 

34 and 35. Thiebeau Point village siteand cornfields. 

36. French trader's cabin sites. 

37. Camp site and cornfield. 

38. Black Hawk Island camp site. 

100 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [ets. ann. 37 

Waubesa and the upper Madison lakes; the lynx type, at Lake 
Waubesa, as far east as Lake Koshkonong, and as far west as Devils 
Lake in Sauk County. 

Description of Lake Koshkonong Mounds 

In order to give an idea of what a carefully planned survey of a 
particular region has yielded we will quote Mr. A. B. Stout's summary 
of his work at Lake Koshkonong (figs. 19, 20) : " 

A total of 481 mounds are here noted. This does not include the mounds entirely 
destroyed at Thiebeau Point, the Koshkonong Groups, and the Kumlien Group. 
There are 157 mounds on the east side and 324 on the west side of the lake. There 
are still well preserved 394 mounds. There is a total of 309 conical mounds of which 
233 are on the west side, but of the 42 effigies 24 are on the east side of the lake. 

In most cases the grouping as given is in no wise arbitrary. All the large and 
important groups are composed of mounds rather compactly arranged. Groups 3, 
4, 6, 11, and 17 are more or less scattered and are considered as groups chiefly for 
convenience in description. 

The largest group is the Koshkonong Group of 78 mounds. Next in rank are the 
General Atkinson Group of 73, the Noe Springs Group of 64, the Hoard Group of 36, 
the Le Sellier Group of 29, the Kumlien Group of 28, the Altpeter Group of 28, and 
the Rufus Bingham Group of 21. In these 8 well-defined groups are found 357 of 
the total of 481 mounds. 

All of these mounds are found in an area of 42 square miles, of which 13 are covered 
with water and at least 5 more occupied by swamp and marsh lands. 

THE CONICAL MOUNDS 

As previously stated, this type is the most abundant. Most are low, many are no 
more than 2 feet in height. In fact, there are but 23 that are 4 or more feet in height. 
The largest of the conical mounds are as follows: ... 60 by 12 feet in diameter; 
... 75 by 10; ... 45 by 8; ... 54 by 7; ... 63 by 6. 

. . . Some conical mounds are built with edges overlapping, forming a sort of 
chain of mounds. There is some evidence of superimposed mounds. . . . 

Nearly all the conical mounds have been opened in a more or less desultory manner. 
The few clues at hand as to the results of such digging confirm the opinion that this 
type of mound was built for burial purposes. 

It will be noted . . . that several mounds are oval in outline. Two others are 
pear-shaped . . . with the larger end built considerably higher. The oval type 
appears to grade into the short linear. This may be noted in the General Atkinson 
and Altpeter groups. 

COMBINATIONS OF CONICAL AND LINEAR FORMS 

The dumb-bell form . — Two mounds of the Altpeter Group are of this form ... In 
these the ends are decidedly conical and may possibly be superimposed upon the 
ends of short linear mounds. 

The tadpole type. — This type of mound consists of a more or less pronounced conical 
mound from which extends a straight pointed linear portion that varies in length . . . 
In No. 4 of the Koshkonong Group the conical part is 40 by 6 with the linear part 
comparatively low and short. In other cases . . . the conical part is wide and 
flattened. In still other cases the linear part is quite long . . . 

Irregular forms. — Nos. 5 and 6 of the Noe Springs Group are unusual combinations 
of conical and linear mounds. The conical mounds are in some cases several feet 

" "The Archaeology of the Lake Koshkonong Region," by A. B. Stout and H. L. Skavlem, Wisconsin 
Archeologift, vol. 7, no. 2, 1908. 

eadin] WINNEBAGO ARCHEOLOGY 101 

higher than the adjoining linear part. The surface examination made at the time 
of this survey gave the opinion that the conical mounds had been built upon the 
linear parts possibly at a later period. 

LINEAR MOUNDS 

The -pure linear type. — This type is shown in . . . [fig. 8]. The mounds thus 
classed are straight and uniform in height and width . Some are so short as to almost 
approach the oval form. 

The straight pointed linear type. — Thi3 form is shown in . . . [fig. 8] and is 
usually of great length, widest at one end and tapering to a point at the other . . . 
Twelve of this type are found. The longest measures 675 and the shortest 120 feet. 

The angular linear type. — In group 9, No. 3 . . . [fig. 8] there is this peculiar 
type which is so abundant along the Wisconsin River in Sauk County. 

The club-shaped linear type. — This form is shown in . . . [fig. 8] and is a slight 
variation of the pure linear type. There are three of this class. 

The curved linear type. — This is a linear form having a slight kidney or- crescent 
shape. There are but two mounds of this type at Lake Koshkonong. 

In the Altpeter Group are three linear-like mounds that might be classed as effigies. 
No. 1 [fig. S] is much like the "mink" type. No. 3 bears some resemblance to the 
same type, and No. 2 to the "tadpole" type. In the latter, however, the head end is 
but little higher than the adjoining linear part and bulges slightly more on one side. 

EFFIGIES 

The forms and sizes of the various effigies can be best understood by a study of the 
[various illustrations] . . . Not including the three mounds just mentioned or any 
of the "tadpole" type, there are 42 mounds that are plainly effigies. Three of these 
are nearly destroyed; the others are well preserved. 

BIRD EFFIGIES 

. . . All of these lie on the east side of the lake in two closely associated groups. 
There are six such effigies in the General Atkinson Group and four in the Hoard 
Group. 

But two have the wings at right angles to the body and both of these are low and 
flattened with heavy broad bodies in marked contrast to splendid mounds of this 
class in other parts of the State. 

Of the class having the wings extremely drooped . . . there are five. Nos. 28 
and 29 in the Hoard Group have a conical-like breast, while those of the General 
Atkinson Group have the surface of the body nearly level. The two small bird effi- 
gies close to the Lake View Hotel . . . have a conical breast and wings half drooping. 

MAMMAL EFFIGIES 

All of the mounds shown in . . . [fig. 15] represent the animal as lying on one side 
with the fore limbs and the hind limbs united. It will be seen that there are several 
splendid examples of the " panther" type. 

Nos. 4 and 31 are of similar form, but represent the animal with the tail raised. 
These two are on opposite sides of the lake and are the only effigies of this precise 
character. 

Of the "mink" type there is an example in the Le Sellier Group. 

Mound No. 1 of the Draves Group and the effigy in the Taylor House Group are 
the only ones of their class existing at the lake. 

Of all the forms and types to be found in this region the mound shown in . . . 
[fig. 17] is perhaps the most . . . complicated, and it will be interesting to learn 
if there exists elsewhere in the State a mound of similar form. 

TURTLE AND ALLIED FORMS 

There are seven short . . . and two . . . long-tailed "turtle" effigies in this region. 

Mound No. 60 of the Atkinson Group differs from the "turtle" effigy in profile as 

well as in outline. The head is considerably higher than the part midway between 

102 

THE WINNEBAGO TEIBE 

[ETH. ANN. 37 

the hind limbs. No. 36 of the Hoard Group is similar, 'but has a truncated tail. 
Mound No. 61 shows still another departure in outline. . . . The four mounds just 
mentioned have no duplicates in the area. All the mounds shown in . . . [fig. 16] 
are similar in that the animal is represented from a dorsal view . . . 

THE GROUPING 

A study of the various groups shows that there was no uniform plan in their con- 
struction. In general they occupy prominent elevations near the lake. There is a 
rather promiscuous mingling of types and arrangement of mounds which suggests that 
a group is the result of several or many years of continuous building during which 
mounds were added as desired and simply grouped to suit the immediate topography.'8 

Stone 

Arrow and spearpoints. 

Perforators and scrapers. 

Hammerstones. 

Clubheads. 

Grinding and polishing stones. 

Gorgets. 

Plummets. 

IHscoidals. 

Stone balls. 

Spearpoints. 

Awls. 

Blanks. 

Rolled copper arrowpoints. 

Beads. 

Pipe, broken, and fragments of others. 
Pottery disks. 

Bone beads, several styles. 
Bone aw 1. 

Columella of large sea shell. 
Valves of fresh-water clamshells. 
Bones of various birds and animals. 

Knives. 

Grooved axes and hammers. 

Celts, numerous, many broken. 

Pipes and fragments of pipes (of catlinite, steatite, 

limestone, sandstone, etc.). 
Sawed pieces of catlinite. 
Flint spalls, chips, flakes, fragments, nodules, and 

rejects. 
Burned stones from fireplaces. 

Copper 

Earring. 

Fishhook. 

Chisel. 

Knives. 

Rings. 

Pottery 

t Potsherds, shell, sand and quartz tempered. 

Bone and shell 

"Jewel stones '' from sheepshead perch. 

Jawbones of pickerel. 

Carapace of mud turtle. 

Shell beads, disk-shaped and cylindrical styles. 

Shell gorget. 

The Max Mound 

What probably constitutes the most interesting type of mound 
found in Wisconsin is the so-called Man mound, two examples of 
which are known, both from Sauk County, one from Greenfield 
Township and the other known as the La Valle Man mound. The 
second of these has long been obliterated, but is known to us from a 
plat made by Mr. Canheld in 1872 (figs. 14, 18.) 

Lapham 19 described the Greenfield township Man mound as 
follows: 

The figure is no less than 214 feet in length, the head 30 feet long, the body 100, and 
the legs 84. The head lies toward the south and the movement [of the body] is west- 

• 18 The following will give an idea of the material collected from one village site in this region. The village 
site is known as the White Crow site. The information is taken from the Wisconsin Areheologist, vol. 
7, no. 2, p. 93. 
19 Quoted by Brown in Wisconsin Areheologist, vol. 7, no. 4, p. 140. 

BADIN] 

WINNEBAGO ARCHEOLOGY 

103 

ward. All of the lines of this most singular effigy are curved gracefully, and much 
care has been bestowed upon its construction. The head is ornamented with two 
projections, or horns, giving a comical expression to the whole figure, [fig. 14.] 

Miscellaneous Structures 

Stone chambers. — These are found in a number of places and were 
apparently always used for burial. According to the present Winne- 
bago, chiefs were often buried in them (pi. 16). 

Garden beds (fig. 21). — These 
were first described by Lapham. 
According to him20 they were "low, 
broad, parallel ridges, as if corn 
had been planted in chills. They 
average 4 feet in width, 25 of them 
having been counted in the space 
of a hundred feet, and the depth 
of the walk between them is about 
6 inches." 

Mr. C. E. Brown also found 
some which he has described in 2l 
his paper on "Wisconsin Garden 
Beds:" 

To the southwest . . . was a remnant of 
a fourth plot of beds with 11 rows. Their 
direction was northeast and southwest, and 
their length then about 52 feet, a portion 
having been obliterated by the plow. On 
another plot of ground, lying to the west 
of that upon which all of the above de- 
scribed are situated, occurred a fifth plot 
of beds, having a northeast and southwest 
direction. The rows numbered 12 and 

were about 48 feet long. A sixth plot of beds, running north and south, numbered 
28 rows, each about 84 feet long. Its dimensions were about the same as those of the 
first plot. 

In summing up, Mr. Brown says:22 

In concluding an examination of the evidence now available upon the subject of 
the age of the Wisconsin garden beds it may be stated that examples have now been 
located in 16 different localities in the State. The area in which these occur may be 
described as being bounded by Green Bay on the north and Racine County on the 
south, and extending from Lake Michigan westward to the Fox- Wisconsin waterway. 
In nearly every instance where garden beds are closely associated with mounds there 
is good reason to believe that their origin and age is identical. Like the mounds, most 
garden beds are prehistoric, but some were constructed in early historic times. Their 
association in some instances with plots of cornhills indicates that in these cases these 
two features of our archeology are also contemporaneous. 

20 Antiquities of Wisconsin. Smithsonian Cont. to Knowledge, vol. vn, p. 19, 1855. 

21 Wisconsin Archeologist, vol. 8, no. 3, p. 100. 

22 Ibid., pp. 104-105. 

Fig. 21— WISCONSIN GARDEN BEDS. 

CHAPTER III 

MATERIAL CULTURE 
Habitations 

In former times the Winnebago seem to have had eight types of 
lodges: The round lodge (tci p'arap'a'ratc), the long lodge (tci 
se'retc), the tipi, the grass lodge, the gable lodge ( nanhaitci p'a'ra-p'- 
aratc), the platform lodge, the ceremonial lodge, and the sweat, 
lodge. Of the round lodge and the long lodge there are three varie- 
ties— one made entirely of bark (pi. 18, c ) ; another made entirely of 
reed mattings (pi. 18, a) ; and still another of bark with a roof cover- 
ing of reed matting (pi. 18, b). The round and long lodges of all 
three types are occasionally seen even now, rarely as habitations, 
however, but as storehouses (pi. 19). Gable lodges are no longer 
found among the Winnebago, but the writer has been informed that 
a few still exist among the Sauk and Fox living near Tama, Iowa. 

The round and the long bark lodges are constructed in a very 
simple manner. These are built of poles of ironwood (tcatco'rm) 
driven into the ground, bent over and lashed to other poles 
which meet them from the opposite direction. The poles are tied 
together with basswood bark (Mnclce'xuntc). The same material 
is used in attaching to these poles the cedar bark that forms the 
walls of the lodge. The walls are supported on the inside by a vary- 
ing number of poles (tcicu' curuleanp) attached to the corresponding 
poles of the other side. In many cases a series of transverse poles 
(tcicu' nanjiy¥ere) are inserted beneath the exterior vertical poles. 
These can be seen in plate 18, a, b, c. The bark roofs are incased 
in frames made of irregularly distributed vertical poles with generally 
one transverse pole (pi. 18, a, b, c). If the roofs are of reed mat- 
ting two or three of the external poles have poles attached to them 
which are arched across the matting (pi. 18 a, b, c). The reed 
matting lodges, as a rule, have no external vertical poles and only 
two transverse poles each, one on the outside and one on the inside 
(pl. 19, e). 

Although considered of Winnebago origin by many Indians, these 

bark and reed matting lodges are in all probability of Central Algon- 

quian origin. They are easily constructed and for that reason were 

generally used for temporary purposes in the olden times. Accord- 

104 

BUREAU OF AMERICAN ETHNOLOGY THIRTY-SEVENTH ANNUAL REPORT PLATE 19 

.*■?*-. 1 

1 

if 

■ 1 . 

B 

I !»<■ I Aii- 

jr*-'*~- 

a. LODGE MADE OF BARK 

6. MODERN LODGE WITH CANVAS COVERING 

LODGE MADE OF REED MATTING 

> 
o 

o 

_l 

o 

z 
I 

H 

LU 

;::-v\. iii/ 

A^H 

P 

^ 

^ 

■ 

ilF L ■'•> :/ j^H 

HIH^Bf '**■ 0 

*' '■' <K « 

3 

'ml 

i1 

«*W\ 

wm*m 

m—- 

H 

^^^^I^^^HSf 

>- 
tr 

o 
_i 
_i 
< 

< 

o 

I 
I- 

I 
z 

> 

z 

DC 

W 
Q 
O 

o 

z 

o 

-LU 

wq 
o 

o 
o 

< 
m 

Lil 

Z 
Z 

> 
a 
o 
_i 
o 
z 
I 

z 
< 

o 

a. 

UJ 

< 

< 

LU 
DC 

"_> 

m 

BADIN] 

MATERIAL CULTURE 

105 

a 

ing to the oldest informants, the earliest type of lodge used by the 
Winnebago was the ten-fire gable lodge, of which there were two 
types, rectangular in form, one built on a platform and the other on 
the ground. Poles of cedar, forked at the top, formed the sides. 
Through the forks transverse poles were laid to which the gable roof 
was attached. Three poles (nanji'¥ere) were arranged in the center 
of the lodge for the better support of the roof. Beds were placed 
along both of the long sides on a platform raised 2 feet (haza'tc). 
Frequently a platform 4 to 5 feet high was 
erected in the rear of the lodge and parti- 
tioned off. Here the favorite child of the 
family lived when he was fasting. In front 
of the lodge a spot was always kept carefully 
cleared ( nowaxi'nera) . There were two door- 
ways to the lodge. Often the entrances were 
shaded with boughs. According to some in- 
formants, this was only done for the chief's 
lodge. According to another description of 
the gable lodge, there were only two centra 
poles, one at each entrance ; these were always 
painted blue to symbolize the day (fig. 22, b). 

As far as can be learned at the present tune, 
the platform lodges were merely gable lodges 
on platforms. What purpose the platform 
served is now difficult to determine, but most 
Winnebago questioned said that it was pro- 
vided as a protection against the dampness 
of the ground and insects. 

Tire ceremonial lodge was merely a large, 
long bark lodge. The grass lodge seems to 
have been a roughly constructed round lodge 
with a covering of grass instead of bark. 
The sweat lodge was a round bark lodge 
having a framework of four poles. The tipi 
was of a simple type provided with a three- 
pole framework. 

All the evidence obtained points to the fact 
that lodges of these types were used synchronously. According to the 
myths and the oldest informants, in ancient times a village occupied for 
a considerable period consisted entirely of gable lodges, but these seem 
to have given way to the round and long type, probably borrowed from 
the Central Algonquian. The gable type seems to have held its own, 
however, among the more western villages of the Winnebago. The 
round bark lodges were used in winter and the reed matting lodges in 
186823"— 22 S 

Fig. 22 — a, CROSS-SECTION 
OF ROUND LODGE. 
b, CROSS-SECTION OF 
GABLE LODGE. 

106 

THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE 

[ETH. ANN. 37 

spring and summer. In the spring those who still lived in bark 
lodges covered the roofs with reed matting, as that material shed 
water more effectually than bark. The tipi was generally used on 
the hunt, the grass lodge merely for a shelter overnight. 

All the duties connected with the construction of the lodge be- 
longed to the woman. These duties do not seem to have been re- 
stricted to any special class of women except in the construction of 
ceremonial lodges, in which only women who had passed their cli- 
macteric could participate. 

Clothing and Adornment 

In discussing the personal adornment of men it must be remem- 
bered that in former times each costume generally had special sig- 
nificance and could be worn only on certain occasions. Moreover, 

Fig. 23.— PATTERN OF MEN'S 
BUCKSKIN LEGOINGS. 

/ srw 

SFW \ 

Fig. 24. 

-PATTERN OF WOMEN'S BUCKSKIN 
SHIRT. 

certain articles of dress, as arm bands and garters, could be worn 
only by certain people. The significance of most of the items com- 
prising a man's costume, as well as the proper occasion for wearing 
them, has long been forgotten and today everything relating to dress 
and adornment is hopelessly confused. Illustrations of the various 
articles of apparel will be found in plates 20-23; figures 23-26. 
The men's clothing is thus described by Skinner:1 

The men's garments obtained in Wisconsin consisted of leggings of ribbon-worked 
cloth, or of plain buckskin . ... Some of the latter are made skin-tight, with a broad 
flap fringed at the edge. The decorated flap of the cloth and the fringe of the buck- 
skin are worn outside. Some are made by folding over a rectangular piece of leather 
and holding the sides together by means of thongs passing through from side to side, 
their ends serving in lieu of a fringe. Some little boys' leggings are skin-tight and 
fringed only at the top. The clout is of three pieces, a strip of plain, cheap material 
to cover the genitals, supported at each end by a belt, and two beaded broadcloth 

i In "Notes Concerning New Collections," Anthr. Papers Amer. Mus. Nat. Hist., vol. rv, part II, pp. 
292-293. 

RADIX] 

MATERIAL CULTURE 

107 

flaps falling over the front and rear, and sometimes merely two ornamented flaps tying 
on like aprons fore and aft and not passing between the legs at all. Shirts of cloth or 
buckskin are beaded about the collar, over the shoulders, and down the front over 
the chest, where the head opening is. Buckskin shirts are often fringed at the junc- 
ture of the sleeves with the trunk at the shoulders, as well as along the seamB of the 
sleeves. Beaded garters are worn outside the leggings below the knees, and beaded, 
or (ierman silver, arm bands may be seen. 

The shirt worn by the women in former times seems to have been 
similar except as to length to that worn by the men, but the leg- 

COLLAH 

FIG. 25— PATTERN OF MEN'S MOCCASIN. 

gings were characteristically different. These consisted of a straight 
piece of buckskin folded around itself so as to leave no free flap. 
The upper part had a cuff. There was no flap at the bottom falling 
over the moccasin, as in the case of men's leggings (figs. 23, 24). 

The skirt is a single piece of broadcloth, the ends of which are handsomely ribbon- 
worked in applique on the outer side. The garment is wrapped around the body, 
the ends meeting in front, bringing the ribbon-worked horizontal bands together, the 
opening being in front. The upper part of the garment is folded outward over the 
woven belt which confines it. A curious shirtwaist, short and beribboned, is worn 
outside the belt. A shawl or blanket of broadcloth, handsomely ribboned, completes 

108 

THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE 

[ETH. ANN. 37 

the costume. This is worn not over the head, but the shoulders. ... It may be 
observed that in the photographs which date back a number of years, the waists Worn 
by the women are very much longer than those now in vogue, falling almost to the 

There is a marked difference between the moccasins worn by 
men and those worn by women (pis. 24, 25). The former are cut 
out as shown in figure 25, a. h. When folded, they have the shape 

Fig. 26. -PATTERN OF WOMEN'S MOCCASIN. 

shown in figure 25, b. There are two seams, one in front and one in 
the back. The women's moccasins are cut in much the same manner, 
but they have a large flap falling over the front (fig. 26, a, b). 
The string used in fastening the moccasins to the feet is always 
attached to the rear end (fig. 25, a, b).- 

Hats. — As a rule no head coverings of any kind were worn, but 
in winter, according to the author's Wisconsin informants, the 
head was protected by a hoodlike covering. 

- Excellent illustrations of Winnebago moccasins may be found also in Anthr. Papers Amer. Mas. Xat. 
Hist., vol. iv, pt. n, p. 291. 

BUREAU OF AMERICAN ETHNOLOGY THIRTY-SEVENTH ANNUAL REPORT PLATE 23 

a. GROUP OF WINNEBAGO IN OLD-STYLE COSTUMES 

b. WINNEBAGO FAMILY 

CO 

z 

CO 

< 
o 

o 
o 

O W 
M.3 

> 

ft 
S3 
1 

<5 € 

< - 

o s 

o *, 

Q 

w 
h 
< 

o 
o 

LU 
Q 

a 

o 

_t 
o 

z 
I 

I 
I- 

> 
a 
o 

_i 
o 

z 
I 

z 
< 

o 

1 

- 

w 

J 

CQ 

Q 

> 

LU 

Q 

< 

LJJ 

O 

m 

M 

I 

'Z 28 

WOMAN'S HAIR ORNAMENTS AND SMALL BEADED BAG 

I 

> 

•Si 
O 
-I 

o 
z 
I 

LU 
D. 

> 
I- 

z 
oc 

LU 

Q 

o 

u_ 
o 

CO 

LU 
-J 
O 

h 

< 

Q 
UJ 

Q 

< 

LU 
CD 

BUREAU OF AMERICAN ETHNOLOGY THIRTY-SEVENTH ANNUAL REPORT PLATE 30 

MISCELLANEOUS OBJECTS 

a. Birch-bark receptacle. 

b. Frame for stringing beads. 

c. Stall with personal markings. 

d. Wooden flute. 

e. Catlinite pipe. 
/. Gourd rattle. 

Radin] MATERIAL CULTURE 109 

Method of wearing the hair. — In former times the men wore their 
hair in two long braids, although some seem to have affected the 
Sauk and Fox roach. The scalp along the parting of the hair was 
always painted, the color varying with individuals. There is no 
indication of any distinctions in the method of wearing the hair 
among the various clans as found among the Osage. 

A variety of coiffures exist among the Winnebago women at the 
present day and the assumption that these are all recent is unwar- 
ranted. It seems probable that in the old days the hair was usually 
worn in one braid, which on festive occasions was inclosed in a case. 
This consisted of two parts — a rectangular piece of broadcloth 
beaded, and long strips of beaded work (pi. 28). 

Earrings and bracelets. — At the present time earrings are fashioned 
either of 10-cent pieces strung together or of various ornaments of 
German silver. Strings of beads also are worn occasionally. Brace- 
lets now are made generally of German silver, while in former times 
beaded or quillwork buckskin was used. 

Arm bands and necklaces. — Arm bands are made either of German 
silver or beaded work. The necklaces consist of long strings of 
various articles, as modern wampum, seeds, and elk teeth. 

Belts, as well as cross belts, are now either beaded or woven, but 
formerly they were always woven from buffalo hair. Shell gorgets 
are generally of the type shown in plates 22, 24, 26, b. Tight 
collars are now made of beaded work. Bandoliers consist of long 
sashes with bags attached; both sash and bag are always gorgeously 
beaded. The bandoliers are worn in three ways, with the bag hang- 
ing on the right side, on the left side, or in front. Often the same 
individual wears two or three bandoliers. Garters are now made 
of beaded work; formerly these were generally made of the skins of 
various animals, preferably the polecat (pis. 27, 28, 29, 30, b). 

Headdress and taildress. — The Winnebago headdress has been well 
described by Skinner (op. cit., p. 293), as follows: 

The typical headdress is a roach or comb-like ornament woven from deer's hair and 
generally dyed red. A carved bone, somewhat like an elongate isosceles triangle in 
shape, spread out this roach and was attached near the front to another tubular bone 
in which an eagle feather was inserted. Often the latter was ornamented with dyed 
horse hair and rattlesnake rattles. . . . The whole was fastened on the crown of the 
head slightly back of the forehead. It was usually pinned to the hair, the scalplock 
serving to hold it on. 

A taildress, consisting of the tail of some animal, was worn only 
at certain dances, particularly the Herucka. 

Hunting 

In their original habitat hunting was the most important means 
of subsistence of the Winnebago. Practically all game available was 

110 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [bth. ann. 37 

hunted, very few animals being tabooed. So far as the author 
knows, the following animals only were not eaten: Skunk, mink, 
marten, otter, horse, the weasel, gophers of all kinds, crows (northern 
ravens?), and eagles. 

Bovj. — The bow and arrow and traps were used in hunting. The 
bow is of a very simple type, having ends more or less pointed by 
rubbing them on stones. In former times the bowstring was made 
of sinew. 

Arrows. — There were five types of arrows, distinguished both by 
the nature of the arrowhead and by their use: Man p'axe'dera, bird 
arrow; ma'nsantc jfaf'u71, rabbit, or small mammal, arrow; ma?1 
Tc'etcUftk cdko'V ere , deer and large mammal arrow; main su'ra, or 
mainso'¥ere, used in battle; and the man p'a'euna, also used in battle. 
The first two and the last were made entirely of wood, generally 
hickory, the last being merely a pointed stick. The third and the 
fourth were the only ones that had separate heads attached. The 
head of the third was, as the name implies, a turtle claw, and that 
of the fourth a fragment of flint. The Winnebago have no recol- 
lection of ever having made flint arrowheads and claim that those 
they used were found in the ground (pi. 31). 

Traps. — One of the principal traps consisted of a heavy timber 
supported very slightly by an upright, to which a piece of wood was 
attached bearing bait at the end. No sooner does the animal — 
wolf, bear, fox, or raccoon — touch the bait than the heavy timber 
falls upon his head, killing him instantly. Another trap commonly 
used for rabbits may be described thus: The head of a post is hol- 
lowed out to receive the knob-shaped end of a long pliable piece of 
wood that fits into it very lightly. To the latter is attached a noose, 
so arranged that it draws away the knob-shaped head at the slightest 
touch. The rabbit must put his head into the noose in order to get 
at the bait; in so doing he invariably moves the lever, which springs 
back, jerking him into the air and strangling him. 

For trapping deer a very ingenious method is used. Taking ad- 
vantage of the animal's habit of following repeatedly the same trail, 
the hunter at some point of a deer trail piles across it a mass of brush 
to a height of about 4 feet. Behind this he plants a pointed stake so 
that it can not be seen by the animal. On encountering the obstruc- 
tion the deer leaps over it and is impaled on the stake. 

Knowledge of the habits of beavers and otters is utilized in the 
following way : Many of these animals live along winding creeks, and 
in proceeding from one place to another, instead of following all 
the meanderings of the streams, they cut across the land. The 
Winnebago hunter digs deep holes in these cut-offs and covers them 
with hay. Into these the animals fall and are unable to get out. 

radix] MATERIAL CULTURE 111 

The bear hunt. — Bears were hunted by individuals or by the tribe. 
Before a man started on a bear hunt he went through the following 
ceremony, known as wanaHce're, literally "concentration of the 
mind." He either built a special lodge or used his own for the cere- 
mony. A kettle containing food was placed on the fireplace; this 
was intended for the particular bear the man wished to kill. The 
food generally consisted of corn or dried fruit; tobacco and red 
feathers also were offered, the former in small bark vessels. All 
these offerings were made not only as sacrifices to the bear but in 
order to make the feast as tempting as possible. When everything 
was in readiness, the host rubbed two sticks having rough surfaces 
against each other, called nai'nearax or nainwaidjo'¥ ere. The host 
never ate. He continued his singing and rubbing until he attracted 
the attention of the bear, as indicated by the appearance of a little 
streak of flame passing from the fire toward the gifts he brought 
for him. 

The same ceremony was performed before starting on a deer or a 
raccoon hunt. In addition to this ceremony, individuals always used 
the special hunting medicines that they obtained during their fasts. 
This was frequently chewed and then rubbed into the arrow (now- 
adays into the gun).3 

There is a time of the year called hiruci'c, when bear break hickory 
or oak branches for the nuts or the acorns. It seems they are then 
very easy to approach. If a man killed a bear he would always 
refer to it in terms of respect. 

The tribal bear hunt always took place in summer. As enemies 
were generally encountered on the way a winter or war feast was 
always given before the party started. This had nothing to do, 
however, with the hunt proper. Following is a fairly close transla- 
tion of an account of a Winnebago bear hunt and buffalo hunt secured 
by the author: 

Description of a bear hunt. — When the Winnebago went on the bear hunt they 
always traveled in large numbers. They would always be able to find bears in the 
groves of red timber-oak, and it would be very easy to kill them. Nevertheless the 
old people considered it a very dangerous affair, especially if the hunters came upon 
breeding bear. If anyone killed a breeding bear he would cause very much trouble. 
The male bear would get very angry and chase the man who had done the killing, 
and if it ever happened that he was out of ammunition, the man surely would be 
killed. The bear would jump upon him and tear him to pieces. It is said that when 
bears kill a human being they always eat him. Another way of getting at the bears 
was to clear away the ground for them. It is very easy to kill them then. This 
generally takes place at the time of the year when the acorns fall to the ground. 
The bears gather in the cleared spaces and lie down there. They lie in the timber 
under the trees. They look like black objects in the distance. It is customary to 
shoot at them from some distance, but care is always taken not to shoot all of them 
nor to shoot when the wind was with them, for then they would scent the hunters 

' Numerous descriptions of the wanantce're are given in the Hare Trickster cycle. 

112 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. a.nn.37 

or hear the noise and run away. For this reason the hunters are very careful about 
these two things — namely, the number of bears shot and the direction of the wind. 
The method of hunting bears when the acornc fall and they come to the open or 
cleared spaces is known as the hiruci'c method. When the bears eat acorns then 
only is it easy to find them and kill them without, much effort. 

Description of a buffalo hunt. — Whenever the Winnebago went buffalo hunjting, 
they always went in large numbers, for the people used to say that on a buffalo hunt, 
they are likely to encounter their enemies and a fight might take place. It is even 
said that some people went purposely for the fighting. They generally went together 
with the Homanna i Missouri ?), Waxotcera, Iowa, and Wadjokdjadjera, the Oto. 
Many women accompanied them. It is said that they could always tell where the buf- 
falo were by the dust they encountered, for the dust raised by the trampling of the 
buffalo rose high in the air. They would always start out for the buffalo early in the 
morning on fast horses and try to ride up along the right side of the female buffalo, 
for they only killed the bulls afterward. They shot the buffalo with bow and arrows. 
When riding horseback, the bow is always drawn back with the right hand. The 
reason they try to kill the female buffalo first is because they always run away while 
the bulls do not. 

While hunting the buffalo they were always bound to meet some of their enemies 
and a fight would ensue, so that when they returned, they would bring back not only 
buffalo but also scalps, and immediately after their return the Victor}' Dance would 
be celebrated. 

A different account of a buffalo hunt was obtained from another 
informant (J. H.) : 4 

Whenever we go on a buffalo hunt we camp in a circle, with the soldiers in front. 
They always carried long poles to be used in the construction of tipis. [This statement 
was made by a number of persons whose information was generally accurate. As 
they were bound for the open prairie where there was a scarcity of wood, buffalo 
manure was always carried for fuel.] 

As soon as the chief decided to go on a hunt he gave a feast [war feast] to which he 
invited everyone. This was generally in June. As soon as the feast was over a hunting 
council was held. Then the chief appointed public criers who went around the 
village announcing the time for starting, etc. Then all went to the lodge of the chief 
of the Bear clan. There the ten best warriors were selected, who were to go ahead 
of the main body and reconnoiter for both buffalo and enemies. These started immedi- 
ately and if they returned with the news that they had found many buffalo and enemy 
at the same time, fights frequently took place. Ten warriors always went ahead and 
the old warriors generally stayed in the rear behind the women in order to protect 
them better. As soon as they came to the place where the buffalo were seen they 
followed their trail and killed them. The flesh was cut up into large chunks, which 
were afterwards dried on the grass. Then when they had enough they all returned 
home, observing, of course, the same order of march as when they started. When 
they reached their home they gave another war feast at which all thanked the spirits 
for their successful return. 

Pigeon hunt. — The pigeons are " chief " 5 birds and they would be hunted when- 
ever the chief decided to give the chief feast. The entire tribe was always invited 
to participate in the meal served, so that many pigeons were needed. The pigeons 
generally make their nests near human habitations. Sometimes there would be 20 

*As his grandfather was a Dakota, J. H. may have confused in his account Dakota customs with those of 
the Winnebago. Apart from this consideration, it should be said that J. H. was an exceedingly unreliable 
informant. 

6 They are called " chief " birds because the pigeon belongs to the same division as does the Thunder- 
bird, or Chief, clan. 

Radin] MATERIAL CULTURE 113 

in one tree, but a really large tree would hold even more. The pigeons were hunted 
in the following manner: Long poles were taken and the pigeons poked out of their 
nests. In this manner many would be killed very easily in one day. They are 
then either broiled or steeped, when they have a delicious taste. Often it is unnec- 
essary to hunt for them after a storm because large quantities die from exposure to 
inclement weather. 

Method of slaughtering animals. — According to most of the author's 
informants, all larger animals were opened by making two long in- 
cisions, one on each side of the chest. This information may be 
accepted as correct with respect to the bear, but there is less certainty 
as to other large animals. There are two considerations, however, 
which seem to make the question of agreement among informants of 
secondary importance: First, the considerable differences in this and 
kindred matters among the settlements of the Winnebago, due to 
the large extent of territory they inhabited and the diverse influences 
potent at various places ; and secondly, the fact that the distribution 
of food was entirely a matter of courtesy between individuals, so that 
considerable variation in custom was both possible and probable. 

According to one informant the man who killed an animal had the 
least to say about its distribution and generally got the poorest share. 
This unquestionably does not give a very accurate impression of the 
custom, because subsequent questioning brought out clearly the fact 
that the mamier of distribution depended entirely on the number of 
individuals present at the killing of the animal, and also on the age of 
these individuals and their social standing. Remembering that there 
is no ' ' typical ' ' division which an Indian thinks of in the abstract, 
but that he always has in mind particular instances of distribution, 
in order to ascertain definite rules it would obviously be necessary to 
obtain an adequate number of representative cases in which all the 
possibilities based on the factors of age, number, and social standing 
would be duly considered. 

From another individual the following information was obtained : 
When two people went hunting the man who killed the animal 
received the head, breast, feet, lungs, and heart; his companion, 
the hide and the rest of the animal. A feast was given afterwards, 
however, at which the bravest warrior received all that was properly 
the share of the man who killed the animal. When four went out, 
the eldest always got the hide; he was granted also the right to 
apportion the animal. This last instance seems significant in view 
of the fact that at the tribal hunt the rights of the individual who 
killed the animal were subservient to many other rights, as those 
pertaining to seniority and social standing, and suggests that only 
when one or two individuals took the rather great risks of hunting by 
themselves was actual killing of the animal deemed of predominating 
importance in the apportionment. 

114 THE WINNEBAGO TEIBE [eth. ann. 37 

Regulation of the tribal hunt. — It can not be said that there were 
many special regulations during the tribal hunt. The rules applying 
to the regulation of war parties held here too. (For a description 
of these, see p. 156.) 

Individuals were strictly prohibited from taking the initiative 
except by permission. For instance, a man was not allowed to 
proceed beyond a certain point, or shoot before a certain time; in 
short, not to do anything by which he might endanger Ms own life, the 
safety of his companions, or the success of the hunt, such as scaring 
away the animals or causing them to stampede. 

It is during the tribal hunts that the power of the Bear clan is at 
its height. For this reason it may perhaps be most appropriate to 
include here a description6 of these powers, although this really 
belongs in the section on Social Organization: 

Whenever the Winnebago are on their tribal hunt or whenever they move from 
one place to another, the soldiers (i. e., the Bear people) take the lead. Whenever 
they decide to stop at some place, the leader of the Bear people places his stick in 
the ground and the other soldiers do the same. The line of sticks is a slanting one. 
The main tribe follows behind at some distance and always camps a little behind 
them. None of the members of the tribe dare pass ahead of these sticks. If, for 
instance, during the fall move the tribe were passing through a country in which 
much game abounded, and if after the tribe had stopped at a certain place anyone 
should take it upon himself to go ahead and kill game on his own initiative, and he 
was discovered, the soldiers would go to his camp and burn it and everything it con- 
tained, destroy any supplies he had, and break his dishes. They would spare only 
his life and the lives of his family. If he resisted he would get a severe whipping. If 
even after that he resisted them and took his gun and attempted to shoot, the soldiers 
would not do anything but stand ready. But the moment he made an attempt to 
shoot, they would kill him and nothing would be said of the matter, for they would 
be putting into effect the law of the tribe. If, on the other hand, the man submitted 
to the action of the soldiers and apologized they would make him a better lodge and 
would give him more and better things than those they had taken away. 

Fishing and Agriculture 

Fishing. — In former times fishing seems to have been done exclu- 
sively by spearing or by shooting. The spear (woca') consisted of 
a long stick provided with a bone or a horn point. Spearing was 
done preferably at night with the aid of torches made of pine pitch. 
In shooting fish a long arrowlike stick (mannuxinixini) with a pointed 
end, whittled and frayed at the base like the ceremonial staff of the 
Bear clan, was discharged from an ordinary bow. 

The most commonly used trap for fishing was a triangular weir 
loaded with a stone at its base and placed at the head of a waterfall 
caused by artificial damming of a stream. 

Very few fish were taboo, the principal ones being the dogfish 
and the eel. 

« By Thunder Cloud. 

RADIN] 

MATERIAL CULTURE 

115 

Names of the principal trees, etc. 

raxgecok'a'wa, resin-weed. 

xandje, moss. 

wax eutc, cedar (red cedar). 

tcatca"na, ironwood. 

witci, flat cornered reed used for lodges. 

sa, round reed used for mats. 

hincge', basswood. 

wazi, pine in general. 

wazi paras, white cedar. 

wacge', poplar. 

tcan tca'wa, birch. 

tcagu, walnut. 

pan dja'gu, hickory, 
tcazu'ke, butternut. 
nan sa'rjk', maple. 
ru7i, willow, 
rak, ash. 
tcacge'gu, oak. 
marjka'rak. elm. 
huksigu, hazel. 
nan p'a'gu, cherry. 
nan ho'cg5, box-elder. 
he7u', Cottonwood. 

Names of the principal vegetables and fruits 

tcera'bera, a water root, 
wokn^gera, root called "awl" root. 
huVkboi'dja, pea vine, 
dora, a sort of artichoke. 
pankxi, root found in lowlands. 
nanp'ak, chokecherries. 
k'antc, plum, 
kce' crabapple. 

tcosa/nwan, fruit of a tree similar to crab- 
apple tree, 
haze'eutegs, raspberry, 
hasda'marjkere, blackberry, 
hasdimrjk', blueberries. 

hascdjek', strawberry, 
hap'u'nup'unuxge, gooseberry, 
hotcjrjke', cranberry. 
k'antc hincek, peaches (fuzzy plums'), 
kce carotc, apple (long and round apple). 
wak'anretcawa. wild currant (snake's na- 
vel), 
doks'wehi, prairie turnip. 
hunn'rjk, bean. 

hunnarjk' nandi. climbing bean. 
hunn'rjk" mink, nonclimbing bean. 
manhintc, milkweed. 

Animals and parts of animals whose flesh is not eaten 

weasel. 

marten. 

no entrails (u'djwoju). 

gopher. 

horse. 

warjkeurjk, dogfish. 

djadja'rjks'k, mink. 

doco'nAnk, otter. 

ho wak'a", eel (holy fish'). 

k'aii, crow (really northern raven). 

tcaxce'p, eagle. 

Agriculture. — In the old days the Winnebago always raised in their 
permanent villages at least corn, squash, and beans. As the villages 
consisted practically of a group of families belonging to different clans, 
each clan apparently living by itself, the question of clan ownership 
of these fields was hardly considered. (This statement is made be- 
cause some Winnebago spoke of clan ownership.) What actually 
occurred was, in the opinion of the author, as follows: Each group of 
families being segregated according to clan, it happened that certain 
family groups had fields in common. This must have happened 
rather frequently, for there seems to have been a tendency — although 
this can not be said with certainty owing to the meagerness of reliable 
information — for related families to hold together in these settlements. 
In general, however, each family owned and cultivated its own field. 

116 THE WINNEBAGO TBIBE [eth. ANN. 37 

In the middle of the field was usually placed an earthen representa- 
tion of the clan animal. As to how squash and beans were planted, 
no reliable information is available. The corn was planted in small 
circular mounds which, to judge from those near Madison, Wis., were 
arranged in remarkably straight rows. 

The author is unable to say what type of implements was used, 
as the Winnebago have been using those of European manufacture 
for many years and have no recollection of any other kind. 

If anyone had more corn planted than he could take care of he 
gave a feast, to which he invited all who had hoes. At this feast 
dried corn was used. On this occasion the people sacrificed tobacco 
to their hoes, so that they might not cut themselves with these im- 
plements or have other accidents. Then they all joined in helping 
their host cultivate his corn. 

In addition to the above-mentioned patches, most Winnebago had 
small fields of tobacco, which were regarded as very sacred. The 
tobacco grown on these was used only for sacrificial purposes. Sacred 
gourds also were planted in these fields. 

Berry picking. — From the earliest times the Winnebago were known 
for their bountiful supply of berries. Every fall parties of men, 
women, and children went out to pick cranberries and whortleberries. 

Customs when berries are ripening. — If a man has a son whom he 
loves very much, he has him fast as soon as the berries and other things 
begin to ripen. If this boy dreams of something good, then he (the 
father) gives a feast with the newly ripened food and the boy eats. 
If the boy does not dream of anything good after four days, the 
father makes him eat and has him try again. 

Rice gathering. — In common with the Central Algonquian tribes, 
with whom they have come in contact, especially the Menominee, the 
Winnebago spent a number of weeks every year gathering wild rice. 
The following description of the manner in which this is done is 
taken from a newspaper article published by Prof. A. E. Jenks of 
the University of Minnesota: 

Fox River from its source to Lake Winnebago was for hundreds of years a very 
productive field for this aquatic cereal, and along this river the Winnebago lived 
in plenty and peace with several wild rice eating tribes of the Algonkin stock. Prob- 
ably a few families still gather their annual crop in that old domain; but most of the 
wild rice which the tribe now gathers is obtained in the sloughs of the Mississippi 
River near Lacrosse, Wis., and on the Iowa side of that river 

The Winnebago gather the grain by running their canoes into the tall standing 
stalks before the grain is ripe. A stick is held in each hand of the harvester, one 
being used to draw the standing stalks over the edge of the canoe, while the other one 
is employed in tapping or striking the heads of the stalks, thus knocking the grain out 
of the fruit head into the canoe. After the canoe is full it is taken to the shore and 
emptied. 

Preparation of foods. — Meats were prepared by broiling, in three 
ways — on stakes, over a rack, or under hot ashes. Only the ribs 

eadix] MATERIAL CULTURE 117 

and the breast of most animals were considered good portions, but 
the head of the deer was included. Other portions were eaten, 
however. For infants the deer's tail was considered a delicacy. 
Now, when they eat meat provided by the white man, rib roast of 
beef is the favorite meat of the Winnebago. 

The Winnebago were very fond of soups of all descriptions. Most 
of these were meat soups with the addition of vegetables or berries. 

Most time was, however, spent in the preparation of vegetable 
foods, especially in the preparation of wild rice and corn. For the 
preparation of rice I will again quote Professor Jenks's article: 

At this stage of the harvest when the Winnebago gather the wild rice, the kernel is 
very like a long oat and has a tenacious hull, which must be removed before the grain 
can be eaten. The necessity of removing this hull and the unripe condition of the 
grain make it necessary to dry it artificially. This is usually done by spreading the 
kernels yet inclosed in the hull upon a rack of lattice work, under which a slow fire is 
kept burning. The grain is cured and the hull made brittle by the heat and smoke. 
The next process is the thrashing. The Winnebago thrashes the grain by the use of a 
most primitive flail. He spreads a blanket, rush mat, or deerskin on the ground, 
upon which he puts the now cured grain. Along three sides of the blanket he erects 
a screen of similar material. At the open side of this screen the man squats on his 
knees, and beats the grain with a straight stick in each hand, thus releasing it from the 
hull. When it has been thrashed the woman gathers up the contents of the blanket 
and winnows the mass by letting it fall from a vessel held high in the air upon a blanket 
or mat laid on the earth, the wind blows away the chaff from the falling grain and leaves 
the clean kernels. 

The Winnebago distinguished a number of different kinds of corn, 
the principal ones being wahi'seretc, yellow-stalked; hiwarakona, sweet 
corn; and waruc'tcJce, red-colored corn. The cornstalk was called 
wahu' , the corn proper, witca'Hvans, and the cob, wosa'W. The corn 
is pounded on a rack (waick£) and then shelled, the grain falling 
through the rack and the cobs remaining on top. After being 
shelled the corn is steamed. Then the stones necessary for cooking 
it are gathered and the corn is picked. When this is finished, a 
hole is dug in the ground and red-hot stones are put in. Over this 
the husks are put and upon these the corn; then another layer of 
husks, etc. The top always is covered with husks. Four holes are 
made through the husks, into which four pails of water are poured 
and the whole is covered with a thick layer of earth and the corn 
left there overnight. The next morning it will be entirely cooked. 

In shelling, the outer part of an oyster shell is used. When the 
shelling is over the corn is spread out and dried. 

Squash is prepared as follows: After the skin has been removed 
the squash is cut into slices and the seeds taken out ; the slices of 
squash are then put on poles to dry. The dried squash is called 
hotca'nwandawus. There are two varieties of this vegetable — 
witca'nwan, Hubbard squash, and witca'nwamik, small-kernel squash. 

Fruit was dried, but by what process the author has not learned. 

118 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE !eth. ann. 37 

In addition to the vegetable foods above referred to, the following 
may be mentioned: Teera'pEra, a plant growing in the water, the root 
of which was eaten boiled with meat; wokniylcEra and huHyle boi'dja, 
awl plant and peavine, respectively, of which only the roots were 
eaten ; and finally the dora, wild potato, a favorite dish. The skin 
was peeled off; then the potato was dried in the sun and afterwards 
boiled. NaPpa'Jc', chokecherries, were eaten raw. P'ankxi' and 
maPhi'ntc, a lowland weed, and the milkweed, respectively, were also 
utilized. Of the former, the boiled root was eaten; of the latter, 
the boiled head. Small quantities of food which required grinding 
were put into a squirrel hide from which the hairs had been re- 
moved, and were pounded with a stone. A mill consisting of a 
dug-out trunk with handles attached was also used. 

Preservation of food. — In former times meat was hung on long 
racks for preservation. Corn was cached iwoxe'). Dried berries 
were kept in bags woven from vegetable fibers. These bags were 
always covered with designs, mostly of geometric patterns, although 
realistic designs, as elk, deer, thunderbirds, and water spirits, ah 
unquestionably property marks, were frequently used. There were 
two types of bags, that closely woven (p'an) (pis. 32-36), just men- 
tioned, and matting bags with fairly large openings in the meshwork 
(pi. 37). Food stored away at home was generally placed in a part 
of the lodge reserved for the purpose. 

A Winnebago menu. — To give an idea of the favorite dishes of the 
Winnebago, the names of several mentioned in one of the myths are 
here appended: Small dried corn boiled with bear's ribs; jerked meat 
with bear's fat; deer's fat; deer's grease frozen in a hole in the 
ground; dried corn boiled with fruit; deer-loin soup. 

Cooking and eating utensils (pi. 38). — With regard to the kind 
of cooking and eating utensils used in the old days there exists 
even among the Indians themselves considerable difference of 
opinion. According to some, their ancestors never used wooden 
utensils, mills, spoons, and plates, but utilized shells of various 
kinds or other natural objects suitable to their needs. Others 
state, on the contrary, that, in early times, in addition to such 
natural objects, wooden vessels of many kinds were fashioned from 
maple knots. These are said to have been burned out, a very 
tedious process, or even to have been cut out with adzes. It is 
quite impossible to decide this question now. Wooden imple- 
ments and utensils in great variety are, of course, found among the 
Winnebago at the present time, but these are supposed by many to 
have been introduced by the neighboring Algonquian tribes and by 
early French traders. The main contention of the present-day 
Winnebago is, however, that their ancestors could never have made 
this woodenware without the aid of European implements, burning 
out being a tedious and unsatisfactory method. 

H 
cr 
O 

z 
z 
< 

5 

o 
en 

< 

0 

Q 
Z 
< 

o 

m 

BUREAU OF AMERICAN ETHNOLOGY THIRTY-SEVENTH ANNUAL REPORT PLATE 32 

WOVEN BAGS WITH OLD DESIGNS 

BUREAU OF AMERICAN ETHNOLOGY THIRTY-SEVENTH ANNUAL REPORT PLATE 33 

'<;'Si''Y'<(" ' << 

*•> 

!v" 

^ If " jm,''- - 

Mk ffiffp fefovflr. Sga^gj- Sgwgaa. *2££§&- «esb. 

J--.U.1 rVV -i'V-'-'A' ."> . •■\\ S \ aV' ay" W .-.'Vtt '362? 

* &•■ 'ij??>''',''"'".'lW''"'" '"■ *•«■ ■'•'■'-'• I-'"/. -^v.1. '. . . y-^.' ■' '•■'' - *.'■*■ 

r ^^ - ■■■«*»- 

WOVEN BAGS 

o. Deer ai;d ttiunderbird designs 6. Thunderbird design 

BUREAU OF AMERICAN ETHNOLOGY THIRTY-SEVENTH ANNUAL REPORT PLATE 34 

&;&;!!:! :<':< '.;: 

i!i;;iin,i;-v 

■ M| 

?.%% 

T^^^^^BF^^w^mp 

VARIETIES OF WOVEN BAGS 

I- 
a. 
O 

> 
H 
a. 

CO 

Z 

o 

co 

UJ 

Q 

Q 

_l 
O 

I 

CO 
C3 
< 

CO 

Z 
LU 
> 

O 

5 

BUREAU OF AMERICAN ETHNOLOGY 

THIRTY-SEVENTH ANNUAL REPORT PLATE 36 

■■ < s% 

- 

■ to ■.- -.-. .'.-'. • . .'.■■ 

> .- 

WOVEN BAGS 
(Peabody Museum) 

BUREAU OF AMERICAN ETHNOLOGY THIRTY-SEVENTH ANNUAL REPORT PLATE 37 

111 J*l/ 

i m 

i,f -Jr. 

«'"iij 

Vt<„ 

..'Hlvftlt.' 

IMWPHMIM!.''!1 

i,i«.A',"''w*»#'ffj 

in ' >«i,S. ''■ fw ^W'." 
'WiV." •<»M'Plr*'< "'■■ •**«'■ W, • 

iaS»w«i«*».»i*M«**«';||i 

1*1 

V#'*:4VI/. 

•l iff 

III1*****"'' 

,i«ir 

OPENWORK WOVEN BAGS 

(Peabody Museum) 

BUREAU OF AMERICAN ETH£ '"'Y THIRTY-SEVENTH ANNUAL REPORT PLATE 38 

h >■ 

n. WOODEN DISHES 

V^^tr** 

6. WOODEN SPOONS 

c. WOODEN MORTARS AND PESTLES 

Radix] MATERIAL CULTURE 119 

It might be said that all recollection ' he making of wooden 
vessels could easily have been lost in th century or two and 

that therefore too much weight should not be given to present igno- 
rance of the subject. There are a number of reasons, however, why 
ignorance in this particular case might be significant. First, many 
indications point to workmanship of a low order among the Winne- 
bago in the manufacture of artifacts; second, there are many sug- 
gestions of two cultural strata in this tribe; third, while the Winne- 
bago in Wisconsin still use wooden vessels, many of them claim that 
these were introduced; and fourth, all the informants who gave this 
information were old people. If the author were to hazard an hy- 
pothesis, it would be the following: In very early times few objects 
were fashioned out of wood, but gradually contact with the Menomi- 
nee led to the introduction of many wooden vessels, and finally the 
acquisition of European axes, knives, and other implements made 
it possible to manufacture such vessels in large numbers. A similar 
explanation was offered by an Indian with regard to the use of 
dugouts. 

Besides wood as a material for dishes and spoons of various kinds 
and sizes, shells were utilized, while sticks served as knives. 

All informants agree that neither bone nor stone were used in the 
manufacture of utensils. 

For cooking, clay pots were used. These vessels, most of which 
were very large, with round bottoms, always hung over the fire. 
The material used in their manufacture was blue clay found at 
Green Bay, on or near the site of St. Paul, Minn., mixed with 
shell shards, glue from sturgeon vetrebra?, and the gelatinous sub- 
stance in the horns of the deer. The addition of these ingredients 
greatly increased the cohesiveness of the clay. The material was 
either molded with the hands or in holes of the desired shape dug in 
the ground and lined with leaves. Finally, the vessels were dried over 
a slow fire in small kilns constructed for the purpose. None of the 
clay vessels were provided with handles. Some were ornamented 
with geometric patterns. The irregular incised designs on some 
Winnebago vessels are the impressions of grass blades with which 
the mold was lined.7 

Fire making. — In former times fire was always made by means of 
a simple fire drill. This method is still used for ceremonial occasions. 

Tanning. — The author never witnessed the process of tanning. 
The description obtained agrees exactly with that of Mr. A. Skinner 
here quoted:8 

After the skin has been removed, the hair is scraped from it. During this process 
the skin is hung over an obliquely inclined log. one end of which has been smoothed 

7 One informant gave a description of pottery making in which a wheel was used, but as no other Winne- 
bago corroborated this statement the author is convinced that it is inaccurate. 
' Anthr. Papers Amer. Mus. Nat. Hist. pi. iv, pt. n, pp. 289-290. 

120 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ANN. 37 

off on the upper surface. The beaming tool is then grasped in both hands and pushed 

away from the user against the grain of the hair over the skin where it lies on the 

smoothed surface of the stick or log. This process is the same as that followed by the 

Northern Ojibway and Eastern Cree. The next step is to stretch the skin on a square, 

upright frame. A fleshing tool is then brought to bear, although the beamer is often 

made to answer this purpose. When the skin has been fleshed, it is soaked in a 

mixture of deer's brains and water. Xo grease is added. This preparation is kept 

in liquid form in a pail and lasts some time. After remaining in the brain fluid for 

a time, the skin is taken out and thoroughly washed. Then it is taken by the tanner — 

who is always a woman — and dried. While the skin is drying, it 

is rubbed with a wooden spatula to make it flexible. It is now 

ready for the last step — smoking. For this process it is first sewed 

up into a cylindrical shape, and the upper end is tied together to 

form a bag. By this closed upper end it is then suspended over a 

r shallow hole from a stick driven obliquely into the ground at an 

angle of about 45 degrees. In the hole a fire is built with dried 

wood. The open lower edge of the skin bag is pegged or fastened 

to the ground about the edge of the hole. 

Games and Amusements 

Lacrosse was the favorite game of the Winnebago. 
d This was generally played on ceremonial occasions. 

j% %^pr" Whenever played, the two divisions of the tribe, the 

WaflgEre'gi and the Mane'gi, were pitted against each 

other. There were two kinds of lacrosse, one played 

by men and the other played by women; these differed 

in a number of particulars. 

B< . Men's lacrosse. — The men's game was called tcabo- 

• • nino'nugis Tiik'isik'. There were either 12 or 22 men 

on each side, placed in the following maimer: Two, 

one of each side, stood in front of the arched sapling 

which constituted one of the goals {wdk'a'rani) ; these 

FlcGroi7e'rI^e,nGSoiaK were called woijfiijgra. There were, of course, two 

ft' wl'flgefegTsId^ goals, each about 10 feet high, one at each end of the 

■ff'm'anegi^fde! held. About midway between the goals a small 

w'hi"hUbaiir0^ mound was made from which the ball was thrown. 

thrown. rpen or twenty meri) as tne case may be, covered the 

ground between the mound and the two men stationed at each 
wak'a'rani. The lacrosse stick was called tcabonadu'gis, and the ball 
used either td-oko' ndnJcra or wanini'nna. The object of the game was 
to put the ball through the goal four times. At the beginning of 
the game the ball was thrown straight into the air from the mound. 
(For plan of the game, see fig. 27.) 

Ceremonial lacrosse. — The following description of a ceremonial 
lacrosse game was given by a member of the Bear clan: 

The WaflgEre'gi and the Mane'gi people were to play lacrosse. So the WaflgEre'gi 
took an invitation stick and attached some tobacco to it and sent it to the Mane'gi 
people. Thus they fixed a day for the contest. The contest was to be in four days. 
In the meantime both sides were to get ready, for some might be without balls or 
sticks, etc. Then the WaflgEre'gi said, "We are the fleeter and will therefore go and 

Radin] MATERIAL CULTURE 121 

look for food." When they returned the leader of the WangEre'gi aaid again, "We 
are the fleeter and will therefore win from our opponents. In addition to that we 
are holy and for that reason we will be strengthened in the coming contest." Then 
the leader of the Mane'gi said, " I will first pour tobacco and then I will arise with the 
blessing of life which was bestowed upon me and through which I know my men will 
be strengthened." Then they arranged the goals, i. e., the wak'a'rani, and arranged 
for the points. Then they took an emetic and went into a vapor-bath in order to 
strengthen themselves. The goals were now standing far apart from each other. Then 
the people who were to play gathered on the field and two men from each side began 
to tell their war exploits. First, one of the WangEre'gi men told how he had cut off 
an enemy's head; how proud his sisters had been at receiving the gifts and how they 
had danced in the Victory Dance. "With such a man you will have to play," he 
shouted to those on the other side. Then a man from the Mane'gi side said, "I also 
am a brave man. I did with the enemy as I pleased. Once when an enemy had been 
killed between the firing lines, I rushed for him and in the midst of bullets I cut off 
his head. With such a man you will have to fight," he shouted to those on the other 
side. Then he gave a whoop and the ball was thrown into the air and they began 
to play lacrosse. Those who first succeeded in putting the ball through the wak'a'rani 
four times would be declared the winners. All day they played and in the evening 
they stopped. Lacrosse was the favorite game among the Winnebago. This is all. 

Women's lacrosse. — The women's game was called naiyaca' 'radji 
unlc'isik'. Ten women took part on each side; they all stood in 
front of the goal, which consisted merely of a line drawn on the sur- 
face of the ground, called wak'a'rani as in the men's game. The 
lacrosse stick (tcabenona) was straight. The "ball" consisted of two 
balls tied together by a string (naiyaca'radjihin waninina). Tins was 
put into play by being thrown from a point midway between the 
goals straight up into the air. The side that hit over the goal four 
times won. 

Football. — Football was played by men. The wak'a'rani was 
merely a line drawn on the surface of the ground. The 16 or 20 
men who took part on each side arranged themselves in front of either 
wak'a'rani. The ball used was a fairly large one made of deer's 
hair, covered with hide from the same animal. It was put in play 
in the middle of the field and the side that kicked the ball over the 
goal four times won the game. 

Hit-ihe-tree game (tcibonnoogis naindjd hai>'a-na'n-i). — This consisted ' 
merely of a test of marksmanship. A tree (nan hadjina) about 8 
feet high and 8 inches in diameter was selected and the one who hit 
it from a certain distance received a prize. Any number of people 
could participate. 

The kicking game. — This was a very rough sport in which men 
only took part. Two men took turns in kicking each other as hard 
as they could, the one who held out the longer being the winner. 

The moccasin gante. — One of the favorite games of the Winnebago. 
Five men took positions directly opposite their five opponents. 
Between the two rows of players, in front of each man was a recep- 
186S23°— 22 9 

122 WINNEBAGO ARCHEOLOGY [bth. ann. 37 

tacle, generally a moccasin, in which a small object was secreted. 
The sides in turn guessed in which moccasin it was secreted. The 
guesser pointed in turn with a long stick to each moccasin, all the 
time carefully scrutinizing the expression on the face of each man 
whose moccasin he touched. The bystanders and the other playeis 
on his side meanwhile sang songs and made all sorts of remarks and 
allusions in an attempt to catch off his guard the man in whose 
moccasin the object was secreted, so that he might disclose the fact 
by some gesture or expression. The person guessing had the right 
to touch each moccasin without forfeiting his chance. As soon as 
he wished to guess he overturned with his stick the moccasin in 
which he thought the object was hidden. The seriousness with 
which a player scrutinized his opponents is well shown in plate 39. 

Women's dire game. — The women's dice game (te'ansu) was played 
with either bone or wooden dice. Eight of these are used. After 
being shaken, they are allowed to fall into a wooden bowl. The dice 
are white on one side and black or blue on the other. One of the 
dice has a mark on each side. The count is as follows: 1 dark, 7 
white, count 2; 2 dark, 6 white, 1; all dark, 0 white, 4; 3 dark, 5 
white, 0; 4 dark, 4 white, 0; marked dice dark, 7 white, 10; marked 
dice white, 7 dark, 10; marked dice white, 1 other white, the rest 
dark, 2 ; all dice white, 4 ; 2 white, 6 dark, 1 ; 1 white, 7 dark, 2. 

The side gaining all the counters, which consist of small sticks, 
wins. 

Cwp-and-ball game. — "A cup-and-ball game is composed of eight 
worked phalangeal bones of the Virginia deer (Odocoilms virginiana). 
It differs from those seen by the writer among the Cree and Ojibway 
in that the topmost phalangeal unit of the game as played among 
those people does not have the joint removed, whereas in the Win- 
nebago specimens all the bones are cut into conical form. The top 
is generally surmounted by a bunch of leather thongs with many 
perforations. The striking pin is of bone. The count is one for 
each unit, five for catching the tails or thongs at the top, and the 
same if all the units are caught together, which occasionally happens. 
The bottom unit nearest the striking pin has four small perforations 
set at equal distances about the lower edge. Above these holes are 
two, three, four, and six dots, respectively, cut in the bone. The 
count gained by catching this bone through any one of the holes 
varies according to the number of these dots. The striking pin may 
be of bone or wood. Sometimes these games are stained with dye or 
paint. The string and pins are short, so that the game is much 
more difficult and clumsy than in the Cree and Ojibway forms." 9 

• A. Skinner, op. cit., pp. 295-296. 

I- 
a. 
o 
a. 
hi 

< 

I 

UJ 

< 

< 
o 
o 
o 

5 

BUREAU OF AMERICAN ETHNOLOGY TH I RTY-SEVENTH AN NU AL REPORT PLATE 40 

SNOWSHOES 

kadin] MATERIAL CULTURE 123 

Tree game. — Two trees are selected about 20 feet apart, one hav- 
ing a branch about 15 feet from the ground. A number of people 
stand ready at the side of this tree and the one whose turn it 
is to play tries to hit the branch. When he succeeds in doing so 
all run toward the other tree. As soon as the player gets the ball 
he tries to hit the runners. If successful in this before the others have 
reached the tree he wins; otherwise they are "safe" and he must 
try again. The Winnebago called this game liahi'bidjil~eeun. 

Travel and Transportation 

Canoes and dugouts. — All the boats found in the early days in the 
territory originally inhabited by the Winnebago were dugouts, yet 
a number of the tribe questioned denied positively that boats of 
this kind were in common use before the coming of the whites. 
According to these informants, in former times the Winnebago 
always had their home in a birch country, and had at hand, there- 
fore, the requisite material for making canoes; moreover, birch- 
bark canoes were much easier to construct than dugouts, for which 
logs had to be hollowed by burning — a process that might consume 
weeks. Only when the whites introduced the ax and the knife did 
it become practicable to make dugouts. These implements became 
available at the time of the southern migration of the tribe into a 
region where birch bark was scarce, and one result of the change 
was the substitution of the dugout for the canoe. The validity of 
this explanation is supported by the same line of argument as in the 
case of the wooden vessels. 

Snowshoes. — The snowshoes of the Winnebago were similar to 
those used by the Menominee, with this difference, that the two 
pieces of wood forming the "handle," instead of being tied together 
for their whole length, as among the latter, were left unfastened for 
about 5 inches at the end. This difference is immediately detected 
(pi. 40) by the present-day Winnebago, who can easily identify, by 
the feature mentioned, snowshoes belonging to the tribe. 

Musical Instruments 

The musical instruments of the Winnebago seem to have been 
restricted to the flute, drum, and gourd. The flute was made of red 
cedar and usually had a range of five or six notes; it was used at 
many ceremonies, and especially by young men when courting. 
The drum consisted of a framework (in later days a wooden pail or 
a barrel served the purpose), over which a skin was drawn very tight. 
A small quantity of water was always kept in the drum so that the 
skin could be wet as often as necessary. Rattles consisted of dried 
gourds filled, in olden times, with seeds, in more modern times with 
buckshot (pi. 30, d,f). 

124 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [bth. axn. 37 

Divisions of Time 

The Winnebago reckoned time from the beginning of each new 
month (wira). There are slight differences in the names of the 
months between the Nebraska and the Wisconsin branch of the 
tribe, as appear below: 

Nebraska — 

1. Hundjwi'ra, month when the bears are born. 

2. Hundjwiro-a'gEnina, last bear month. 

3. Wak'ek' iru'x£, raccoon-breeding month. 

4. Hoi'dogina^na, fish become visible (because of the ice clearing 
away) . 

5. Mai" da'wus, month that dries the earth. 

6. Mank'era, dig-the-earth month (when the crops are sowed). 

7. Wixo'tcera, the month that makes them gray (the month when 
the tassels of corn appear and the fields look gray). 

8. Wida'djox, when the roasted ears of corn burst. 

9. Wiza'zek'e, name of a bird that appears this month. 

10. Pca'mainnavxora, when the deer paws the earth; or Hun- 
wainjukEra, when the elks shout, or whistle. 

11. Tcaik'i'ruxe, deer-breeding month. 

12. Tca'hewakcu", when the deer shed their horns. 
Wisconsin — 

1. Hu'ndjwi tconina, first bear month. 

2. Hu'ndjwiro-aVEnina, last bear month. 

3. Wak'e'k'iruxewiYa, raccoon-breeding month. 

4. Hoi'doginana, fish becoming visible. 

5. MaiDda'wus, drying-of-the-earth month. 

6. Mank'e'ra, digging month. 

7. Mainna? cunna, cultivating month. 

8. Wixo'tcerera, tasseling month. 

9. Hu" waiju'kEra, elk-whistling month. 

10. Tco'mainnavxora, when the deer paw the earth. 

11. Tcaik'iru'xira, deer-breeding month. 

12. Tcahe'yakcu'na, when the deer shed their horns. 
According to a member of the Bear clan, the following were the 

activities throughout the year. The accounts given of these activi- 
ties differed in certain details, depending upon the clan connection 
of the informant, because he naturally associated some months with 
specific activities of Ids clan, such as clan feasts. 

1 . Members of the Bear clan give their feast. 

2. Month in which the various Winter Feasts are given. 

3. Month in which people hunt. 

4. Month in which people begin to fish. 

Radin] MATERIAL CULTURE 125 

5. Month in which people hunt deer. At this time deer are very 
tame and frequent the streams. 

6. Month in which people plant corn, squash, and beans. 

7. Month in which people hunt deer. At this season deer are very 
fat. The hunters return to their homes at the beginning of the 
eighth month. 

8. Month in which people dry corn and store it away. 

9. Month in which people tie the rice stems into bundles and go 
through them with their canoes. 

10. Month in which the people go on their fall move and hunt the 
larger animals. 

1 1 . Month in which the people go on their fall move and dry their 
meat. 

12. Month in which the people return to their winter quarters. 
From this calendar of activities it is apparent that the longest 

period the Winnebago remained at home continuously was three 
months, the twelfth, first, and second. They were at home also 
throughout the sixth and eighth months. Whether they were in 
their villages at intervals during the fourth and fifth months is hard 
to determine. It is probable that the fishing or hunting trips con- 
sumed a considerable portion of, if not the entire, month. During the 
ninth, tenth, and eleventh months the Winnebago were undoubtedly 
away from their villages all the time. 

CHAPTER IV 

GENERAL SOCIAL CUSTOMS 

Birth. — During pregnancy a woman had to observe carefully cer- 
tain restrictions. She was not allowed to roam the woods alone for 
fear of meeting snakes or other animals, the sight of which was 
believed to forebode ill luck to a pregnant woman. She was not 
permitted to have dogs or cats around her nor to sleep during the 
day. Every morning during her pregnancy she had to take a cold 
bath. Among the restrictions may have been food taboos, but no 
information on this phase of the subject was obtained. 

When the time for delivery came, it was the custom for the woman 
to occupy a small lodge erected especially for her use. None of her 
male relatives were permitted to be present and her husband was 
not even permitted to stay at home. He was supposed to travel 
continually until the child was born, in the belief that by his move- 
ments he would help his wife in her delivery. According to one in- 
formant the husband had to hunt game, the supposition being that 
this procedure on his part would cause his wife to have enough milk 
for the child. This traveling of the husband was called, therefore, 
"Looking-for-milk." It was considered improper for a woman to cry 
out during labor pains, and by doing so she subjected herself to the 
jests of her elder female relatives. The cradle-board was always 
made before the child was born (pis. 41, c, 42, a). 

The positions commonly assumed by women in delivery may be 
described thus: Supported by the arms, which were passed over a 
pole held in the crotches of two forked sticks driven into the ground; 
suspended between two stakes; or flat on the back. 

The infant's navel strhig was cut off and sewed into a small bag, 
which was attached to the head of the cradle-board. 

On the birth of a child the sisters of the husband were supposed 
to show his wife especial marks of courtesy. They always gave her 
valuable gifts, such as goods or a pony. They were glad that he had 
offspring, the people said, and even permitted their brother's wife 
to give the presents received from them to her own relatives. The 
presentation of these gifts was called ''Cradling-the-infant." Gifts 
were presented also to the wife's brothers. 

Some time after the birth of a child, if a boy, the father always 
gave a feast to Earthmaker and thanked him. 
126 

BUREAU OF AMERICAN ETHNOLOGY THIRTY-SEVENTH ANNUAL REPORT PLATE 41 

«. WINNEBAGO AND DAUGHTER b. OLD WINNEBAGO WOMAN 

c. WOMAN AND CHILD, SHOWING d. WOMAN AND CHI LD, SHOWI NG 
CRADLE-BOARD METHOD OF CARRYING INFANT 

BUREAU OF AMERICAN ETHNOLOGY THIRTY-SEVENTH ANNUAL REPORT PLATE 42 

a. INFANT WITH ORNAMENTED CRADLE-BOARD 

b. GROUP OF WINNEBAGO 

badin] GENERAL SOCIAL CUSTOMS 127 

Names. — A newborn child received a birth name immediately. 
There were six such names for male children and six for female 
children, which were given according to the order of birth: 
Male Female 

1. K'u'nu. 

2. He'nu. 

3. Ha'ga. 

4. Na'nxi. 

5. Nanxixo'nu. 

6. Nanxixonu'niiik'a. 

1. Hi'nu. 

2. Wi'ha. 

3. Aksi'-a (generally pronounced Aksi). 

4. Hi'nunk'. 

5. A'ksigaxo'nu. 

6. A'ksigax6nu*nirjk'a. 

The meanings of these names are unknown to the present Winnebago, 
who reject the idea that they ever had any meaning apart from 
indicating the order of birth. Originally, of course, these names 
had meanings, but at the present time they resemble no other Winne- 
bago names and baffle all attempts at interpretation. This is not 
surprising, because they represent in all probability archaic names 
which undoubtedly have been considerably modified through long- 
continued use. The Dakota have a similar set of names but only 
four in number. The two additional names among the Winnebago 
indicate by their form that they have been derived from one of the 
other four. In this connection it is interesting to note that the 
fifth of the male names is, as one might expect, merely the fourth 
name of the series with the addition of a diminutive suffix, whereas 
the fifth of the female names is the third of that series with a like 
addition. The sixth name of each series is formed by adding another 
diminutive suffix to the fifth name. 

A few words may not be out of place here with regard to the 
relation of the male to the female series, and to the possible interpre- 
tation of two of the female names. He'nu ' of the male and Hi'nu of 
the female series, it will be noted, differ only in the first vowel. A 
similar phenomenon is found in such relationship terms as Tii'niyk, 
male child of elder brother, and hi'tinuyl-' , female child of elder brother. 
Remembering that in those Siouan languages which distinguish 
between female and male oral stops the difference often consists 
merely in the change of a vowel, this difference between He'nu and 
Hi'nu may be suggestive. The name K'u'nu may be connected with 
Wu'niyTc, "a grandmother," in which lc'u is unquestionably the stem, 
meaning probably "old." In the female series there is a possible re- 
lationship between Hi'nu and Hi'nunk', as ¥ seems to be a very com- 
mon ending in relationship terms. Hi'nunk' itself is identical with 
the word for "woman" and it seems hard to imagine that it is not 
the same, especially since it is also found as the relationship term for 
female child of younger brother. 

1 Hi'nu is also the name for a man's elder sister. 

128 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [bth. ann. 37 

On first thought it might he imagined that the application of the 
same name to so many people would cause great confusion. As a 
matter of fact, however, in a village of, say, 20 families, there could 
have been a maximum of only 40 having the same name. Taking 
into account deaths and departures, the number was greatly dimin- 
ished. Moreover, as in general only relations or close friends were 
addressed in this way, strangers commonly being addressed by their 
nicknames, the seeming danger of confusion is almost entirely obvia- 
ted. In those cases, however, in which confusion might result a 
nickname, or sometimes a clan name, was added to the birth name 
when speaking of an individual. 

Naming feast. — The clan name was generally bestowed on a child 
at a special feast held for the purpose or at any feast that happened 
to be given within a reasonable time after its birth. The bestowal of 
the clan name was not infrequently delayed by a father's inability 
to gather the requisite amount of food to be presented to the old 
man who was to select the name. Occasionally it even happened 
that a father under such conditions permitted the relatives of his 
wife to bestow a name on a child, which of course was a name from 
its mother's clan. The author has personal knowledge of a case in 
which the first child of a man had a name belonging to his mother's 
clan while the other children had names belonging to their father's 
clan. When questioned, the man said that at the time of the birth 
of his eldest child he was too poor to pay for the honor of having his 
child receive a name and that he had allowed his wife's relatives to 
give it a name. When his other children were born, however, as 
he was in better condition financially he had been able to name them 
in the usual way. Although a child, irrespective of his individual 
name, always belonged to his father's clan, there seemed to exist a 
feeling that a person having a name not taken from his own clan 
was more or less incomplete. A person possessing no clan name was 
regarded as having low social standing. 

When a child was adopted it retained its former birth name and 
clan name. 

Relationship terms. — The system of relationship terms used by the 
Winnebago is as follows : 2 

Male Terms of Address 

Tcok'a', p. and m. grandfather (direct address). 
Hi'tcok'd, p. and m. grandfather and father-in-law. 
K'u'nink'a, p. and m. grandmother (direct address). 
Hik'arok'e, p. and m. grandmother and mother-in-law. 
Dja'dji, father (direct address). 

a Abbreviations: p., paternal; m., maternal; br., brother; sr., sister. 

KAP1N] GENERAL SOCIAL CUSTOMS 129 

Hi-a'ntc, father. 

Na'ni, mother (direct address). 

Hi-u'ni, mother. 

Hi'ni, elder brother (direct address?). 

Ni'ni, elder br. (?). 

Hi'surjk', or Hisunkedji", younger br. 

Hi'nu, elder sr. 

Wai'tcke, younger sr.; or (TcMgua'k' (obsolete) (direct address?). 

Hiwange', wife of elder br. 

Hiwange', wife of younger br. 

Hitca'n, husband of elder sr. 

Hitca'n, husband of younger sr. 

Hi'nink', son of elder br. 

Hi'nink", son of yoimger br. 

Hi'niink', daughter of elder br. 

Hi'niink", daughter of younger br. 

Hi'nunktce'k', wife of son of elder br. 

Hi'nunktce'k', wife of son of yuunger br. 

Hitcuncke', son of elder sr. 

Hitcuncke', son of younger sr. 

Hitcunjonk', daughter of elder sr. 

Hitcunj6nk', daughter of younger sr. 

Hinunktce'k', wife of son of elder sr. 

Hinunktce'k', wife of son of younger sr. 

Wadoho'tci, husband of daughter of elder br. 

Wadoho'tci, husband of daughter of younger br. 

Wadoho'tci, husband of daughter of elder sr. 

Wadoho'tci, husband of daughter of younger sr. 

Ningia'k', son (no longer in common use) (direct address). 

Hintnk', son. 

Hirakewa11, stepson. 

Hitca'xa11, stepdaughter. 

Nunguak', daughter (n© longer in common use) (direct address). 

Hinunk', daughter. 

Himurjktce'k', wife of son. 

Watoho'tci, husband of daughter. 

Hitcuncke', son of son. 

Hitcuncke, son of daughter. 

Hitcunj6'nk', daughter of daughter. 

Hitcunjonk', daughter of son. 

Hinunktce'k', wife of grandson 

Wadohto'ci, husband of grand-daughter, 

Hinunga's, p. br. 

Hi-uni'nink', wife of p. br. 

130 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth.ann. 37 

Hi'ni, Hisu'nk', older and younger sons of p. br., respectively. 

Hi'nu, waitcke', older and younger daughters of p. br., respectively. 

Hinunktce'k', wives of sons of p. br. 

Watoho'tci, husbands of daughters of p. br. 

Hinink', sons of sons of p. br. 

Hinunk', daughters of sons of p. br. 

Hitcu'nwin, p. sr. 

Hitca'n, husband of p. sr. 

Hitcuncke', sons of p. sr. 

Hitcunjo'nk', daughters of p. sr. 

Hinunktce'k', wives of sons of p. sr. 

Wadoho'tci, husbands of daughters of p. sr. 

Hiteuncke, sons of sons of p. sr. 

Hitcu'njo'nk', daughters of sons of p. sr. 

Hide'k', m. br. 

Hitcu'nwin, wife of m. br. 

Hide'kenink', sons of m. br. 

Hidcu'nwin, daughters of m. br. 

Hitcuncke', sons of sons of m. br. 

Hitcunjo'nk', daughters of sons of m. br. 

Hitcu'nwin, wives of sons of m. br. 

Hitca'n, husbands of daughters of m. br. 

Hi-uni'ntnk', m. sr. 

Hinunga's, husband of m. sr. 

Hi'ni, Hisu'nk, older and younger sons of m. sr.; respectively. 

Hi'nink, male children of male children of m. sr. 

Hi'nunk, female children of male children of m. sr. 

Hinu, waitcke, daughters of m. sr., respectively. 

Hinunktce'k', wives of sons of m. sr. 

Wadoho'tci, husbands of daughters of m. sr. 

Tcido', elder br. 

Hiteunck§', children of br. 

Hitcunj6i)k', daughters of br. 

Hiciga'n, wife of br. 

Hisu'nk', younger br. 

Hitconk', younger sr. 

Hi'nu, elder sr. 

Hicik£e', husband of sr. 

Hint'nk', sons of sr. 

Hinunk', daughters of sr. 

Hiciga'n, wives of sons of br. 

Hicike£', husbands of daughters of br. 

Hinunktce'k', wives of children of sr. 

Wadoho'tci, husbands of daughters of sr. 

Hicik£e', husband of father's sr. 

Radin] GENERAL SOCIAL CUSTOMS 131 

Hiko'no, husband. 

Hitca'n, brother of wife. 

Hitca'nwin, wife. 

Hiwange', sister of wife. 

After one's grandchild's generation the children of a man whom one 
called either Hi'nink' or HitcCincke', or of a woman whom one called 
either Hi'nunk' or Hitcu"j6'nk', were all called Hitcunck6' or 
Hitcunj6'nk'. 

A special term, Wotcu'nwonk', was used by parents-in-law when 
addressing each other. 

It will be noticed that, taking self as the starting point, the dis- 
tinction between forms — one series to be used in speaking of a person 
and the other in directly addressing one's own blood relative — has 
been developed for only grandfather, grandmother, father, mother, 
son, and daughter. It is probable that in former times brother and 
sister also were included in this double series. 

Female Terms of Address 

As compared with the distinction between male and female terms 
of address found among other Siouan tribes, that existing among 
the Winnebago is very weak and there seems to be no indication 
that it ever was much stronger, although caution must be observed 
in drawing inferences as to past relationship terms, since it is a well- 
known fact that they have a tendency to disappear. At the present 
time there are only four terms used among the Winnebago by women 
specifically; tcito, elder brother; Mtco'yJc', younger sister; hiciga'", 
wife of brother; and hicil^c' , husband of sister. 

A cursory examination shows that the following forms are linguis- 
tically related: 

hini. hinu. 

hinlnk'. hinunk. 

hicike'. hiciga'n. 

hitcuncke'. hitcunjo'i)k' (tcun — giVak, obsolete) hitcu'nwin. 

hitca". hitcanwin. 

hitcu'nk'. 

hitcak'a'ro (friend). 

It is clear that we are dealing here with a change of terminal vowel 
(from i to u; from e to a; from a to u), indicative of sex. In the 
form hitcunwin, win is undoubtedly identical with -win, meaning 
''female," found with all animal female names. Terminal k', Jc'e, 
ga, is a suffix that may be related to the termination Jc'e found with 
so many animal names. We may perhaps say, then, that we have 
here only three stems, hini, hiciJc', and hitch'11. For a complete list 
of stems used in relationship terms there must now be added to 
these the following: Hik'd'ro — Jc'e hitcoJc — Jc'e', hi-a'ntc hi-u'ni, 
histi'y — ¥, waitc — Jc'e', hintingds, hide — Jc' hiwan — ge' , tcido, 

132 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ann. 37 

wadoMtci, and hinti'nlc — tcek' . Hinunga's might be said to be 
divided into hinug and gas, but there is no reason to assume that 
such a division of the word is justifiable, and for that reason it has 
not been included in the enumeration of hinti'n — ¥ stems. The 
form tcido, elder brother, spoken by females, is baffling, all the 
more so if we assume that there never was a form for "younger 
brother" used by women. 

Let us now separate the terms applied to relatives through mar- 
riage from those applied to blood relatives. 

Relatives 
through marriage 

Hitca'" 

Hi-uni'nirjk' 

k', hidekENfrjk' Hinurjga's 

Blood relatives 

neiaiives 

through marriage 

Blood relatives 

Hini 

Hicik£e 

Waitc — k'd' 

Hitcu"cke' 

Hiciga/n 

Hinunga's 

Hik'aro— k'e' 

Hitcu/nwin 

Hide'— k', hid 

Hitco— k'£' 

Tcido' 

Hi-a'ntc 

Wadoho'tci 

Hitcu'nwi" 

Hi-u'ni; hi-unini'rjk 

Hiwarjge' 

Hinink' 

HisQ'n— k' 

Hinunk'tee'k' 

Three terms are applied sometimes to blood relatives and some- 
times to relatives through marriage: IIitc£l'nivi, lii-uni'niylc' , and 
MnHyga's. It is the author's belief that in all these cases the terms 
have been applied to relatives through marriage on account of the 
extremely close relationship the husbands of Mtcu'nwi and hi-uni'niyl~l 
and the wives of Mntiyga' shear to one's parents; that it is really 
an act of courtesy toward people whose children are in one case 
(hitcu"nunn and M-uni' ntyk' ) regarded as one's brothers and sisters 
and in the other case as the same as one's sister's children. There 
never was the slightest confusion as to the position held by the wife 
of one's father's brother (hi-uni'niijl-'), or one's mother's brother's 
wife, or the husband of one's mother's sister; nor is there the slightest 
indication that they ever were considered as identical with any 
blood relatives who bore the same name. 

The foregoing list contains twenty-two terms of relationship 
applied by the Winnebago to all relatives, blood or otherwise, for 
five generations — one's own father's, grandfather's, son's, and grand- 
son's. The two tables following show first, how these terms were 
distributed over the five generations, and second, to how many 
people of these five generations the same name was applied. . 

Generation 

Male 

Female 

1. 

Grandfather's 

Hitcok-6' 

Ili'k'arok'e' 

2. 

Father's 

Hi-a'ntc, hide'k' 

Ili-u'ni, hi-uninirjk' 

Hinunga's, hitca'1' 

Hitca'" win 

3. 

One's 

own 

Hini, hisu'rjk' 
Hitcu11rke', hideke- 
Nink', hitca'", 
Wadoho'tci, hicik£e 

Hinu, waitcke', hinunk' tce'k 
Hitcu°j6'rjk', hitcu^wi", 
Hiwangg', hiciga'" 

4. 

Son's 

Hinink', hitcuncke', 
Hini, hisu'rjk', 
Wadohotci 

Hinu'nk', hinurjk' tce'k', 
Hitcu" jo'rjk', hfnu, 
Waitckfe' 

radin] GENERAL SOCIAL CUSTOMS 133 

Generation Male Female 

5. Grandson's Hitcuncke/, hinink', IIitcunj6/nk', hinunk', 

6. Great-grandson's HitcuDcke/, hinirjk', Hitcunj6'rjk', hi'nurjk', 

(Hitcft-'jS'nk') (Hitcuncke') 

7. Great-great-grandson's (Hitcunj6'nk') (Hitcunckev) 

For the first three generations no term is repeated except Mtcu'awi"; 
for the fourth generation eight terms are repeated and two terms 
are added, JiiniyTc' and hi'nuyk'. After that all the terms are re- 
peated and no new terms are added. Only three sets of terms are 
repeated for more than two generations — hitcuncke', hitcu^jo'yTc 
hinuylc'tce'lc, wadoho'tci, and M'ntyJc', M'nuijlc'. After the fifth gener- 
ation only one set of terms is used. 

Distribution of all relationship terms 3 occurring more than once. — 

Hi-uni'nirjk", wife of p. br. ; m. sr. 

Hi'ni, elder br. ; son of p. br. ; son of m. sr. 

Hisunk', younger br.; son of p. br. ; son of m. sr. 

Hi'nu, elder sr. ; daughter of p. br. ; daughter of m. sr. 

Waitcke', younger sr. ; daughter of p. br. ; daughter of m. sr. 

Hi'ntnk', son of elder br.; son of sr. (sister speaking). 

Hi'nurjk', daughter of elder br. ; daughter of sr. 

Hitcuncke', son of elder br.; son of daughter and son; son of br.; 
son of p. sr. 

Hitcunjo'i)k', daughter of elder br. ; daughter of daughter and son ; 
daughter of p. sr.; daughter of br. 

Hitcu'nwin, p. sr. ; daughter of m. br. ; wife of son of m. sr. 

Hitca'n, husbands of sisters; husband of p. sr. ; husband of daugh- 
ter of m. sr. 

Hiciga'n, wife of br. ; wife of son of br. 

HicikV, husband of p. sr.; husband of daughter of br. 

Joking Relationship4 

A man was not permitted to take even the slightest liberties with 
any of his near relatives or with his mother-in-law or his father-in-law, 
but a curious exception to this rule was permitted for his father's 
sister's children (Mtcuncke' and Mtcdnjo'rj¥); his mother's brother's 
children (hitcuncJce' and Mtcunj6'ylc'); his mother's brothers (hide'lc1); 
and his sisters-in-law and brothers-in-law. In the two cases last 
named not only was a man permitted to joke with those relatives 
but he was supposed to do so whenever he had an opportunity. 
Under no circumstances were any of these individuals supposed to 
take offense. This relationship was of course reciprocal. If a person 

3 A more specific study of these relationship terms is reserved for a special article on Siouan Relation- 
ship Terms. 

< The joking relationship was discovered among the Winnebago by the author. Since then it has 
been found to exist among the Crows and the Creeks, etc. 

134 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ANN. 37 

attempted liberties with people who did not belong in the category 
of the "joking relationship" they would stop him immediately, 
saying, "What joking relation am I to you" (Djagu' niylc' idajitcgad- 

It is impossible to determine the significance of the "joking rela- 
tionship." Two points of interest may be referred to, however: 
First, that it existed between a person and such close relatives as the 
children of his father's sister and his mother's brothers and their 
children, on the one hand, and his relatives by marriage only, as his 
brothers-in-law and sisters-in-law, on the other; and second, that his 
mother's brother was at the same time a person with whom he was 
on particularly intimate terms. With regard to the first point, the 
author suggests the following explanation: Both groups just men- 
tioned had this in common — they did not belong to the man's clan 
and with the exception of their mother's brother they did not belong 
to any individuals but those of their own generation. Now we know 
that the prohibition of marriage into a man's mother's clan extended 
only to members of her generation and that theoretically, at least, 
he could marry her brother's children. In the same way the children 
of a man's father's sister, belonging as they did to the side into which 
he had to marry and not belonging to the generation of his father, 
belonged also to the group into which he theoretically might marry. 
The author has never heard any Winnebago state that a man may 
not marry any of the individuals included in the" joking relationship, " 
with the exception of his sister-in-law, but he feels certain that such 
marriage would be considered improper, although equally certain 
that it would not be regarded as incest, as would be the case if a 
person were to marry the son of his mother's sister or of his father's 
brother. The suggestion is offered, therefore, that the "joking 
relationship" implies, first, close relationship of individuals who 
have different clan membership, and, second, perhaps, the possibility 
of marriage. If there is any explanation for the existence of the 
relationship between a man and his mother's brother I feel that it 
is probably to be sought in the first of these suggestions. The second 
is really advanced merely to suggest some reason for the grouping 
together of blood relations with relations by marriage. 

The "joking relationship" is very peculiar from the point of view 
of a European, and for that reason it is perhaps likely that we exag- 
gerate its importance. In actual practice joking was probably 
indulged in only during the first moments after meeting, except by 
the habitual punster. An important psychological factor may have 
been the opportunity for relaxation it afforded an individual who 
was constantly surrounded by close relatives in intercourse with 
whom he had to observe at all times strict rules of propriety. 

badis] GENERAL SOCIAL CUSTOMS 135 

Mother-in-law and Father-in-law Taboo 

In former times the mother-in-law and father-in-law taboo was in 
full force. No man was allowed to talk directly to his mother-in-law 
or to look at her, and the same rule held with regard to the attitude 
of a woman toward her father-in-law. Even accidental meetings of 
these relatives, as on the road, were attended with great embarrass- 
ment. The author never learned of any way in which either the 
mother-in-law or the father-in-law taboo could be relaxed even 
temporarily, much less done away with entirely. 

Puberty Customs 

From the age of five, children, male and female, were taught the 
customs of their ancestors in a series of talks always delivered by 
an elderly male relative, perhaps the father. The specific training 
differed, of course, for boys and girls and for individuals. Per- 
sonal training ceased at the age of puberty, when all, both boys and 
girls, were sent out to fast. For boys this fasting constituted the 
only puberty rite. After their faces had been blackened with char- 
coal they were sent to some neighboring hill with the injunction not 
to return till dawn. Gradually they would be sent out for two, then 
three, nights; if after that trial they were not blessed they would be 
advised either to desist entirely or exhorted to fast until they were 
blessed, no matter how long the time required to secure the desired 
result. While fasting the boys and girls used the following formula: 

Waxop' inixjiwina hina'djire nandje'je wahadjex. 

Spirits am I likely to be blessed? that is why I am praying. 

One old Indian informed the author that in former times the young 
boys and girls were offered either bread or charcoal for their fast. 
If they took the charcoal, well and good; but if they took the bread, 
they were unceremoniously kicked out of the house and the charcoal 
was thrown after them. From the other statements of this informant 
one might gather that the young boys and girls generally took the 
bread, because, he said, after they had been kicked out, they would 
always resolve to go to the wilderness (in that way running the risk 
of being captured or killed by an enemy), in order to spite their 
parents. My informant was of the opinion that the parents pur- 
posely treated their children roughly, so that they might feel all the 
more miserable while fasting and thus pray all the more intensely. 

A faster is always told to be careful as to what kind of spirits 
bless him, as he might be blessed by a bad spirit. Therefore a 
faster's blessings are always reviewed by the elders. J.'s old grand- 
mother used to call the children in at dusk, as the evil spirits are 
around then. 

136 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [bth.ann.37 

All boys do not seem to have approached the ordeal of fasting with 
the proper religious feeling. One instance in particular showed any- 
thing but a reverent attitude; this is so amusing that it is here 
given in the exact words of the Indian : 

When 1 was a young boy, my folks made me fast together with a boy named 
Modudjeka. We were supposed to go to the hills and cry until the spirits blessed us. 
However, whenever we looked at each other and at our charcoal-blackened faces we 
could not refrain from bursting out laughing, ^"henever we made up our minds to 
cry, something or other would induce us to look at each other and the laughing would 
begin all over again. When the time for our return to the house came, we didn't 
present the slightest indication of having cried, so we took some saliva and made long 
streaks on our faces. 

Young girls and women are also encouraged to fast to obtain the 
war honors. 

Menstrual lodges. — Fasting at puberty by girls was inseparably con- 
nected with their retirement to menstrual lodges. Sometimes there 
was only one girl in each menstrual lodge, sometimes there were as 
many as three. From the time of her first menstrual flow to her 
climacteric a woman retired to a menstrual lodge every month for 
a few days. An excellent account of Winnebago customs in this 
respect was obtained in a text from a male informant, and, although 
somewhat discursive, it is given in full here: 

As soon as a woman begins to have her menstrual flow she has to retire to a menstrual 
lodge and to be careful never to come in contact with any sacred objects. If she did, 
these objects would all lose their power. Everything that is holy would immediately 
lose its power if a menstruating woman came near it. A holy woman or a holy man 
or even a holy child would be affected by the proximity of a menstruating woman. 
Their holy condition would immediately disappear. In a similar way, if food were 
served to a sick person from the same dish used for a menstruating woman the sick 
person would become far more sick. 

The food for a menstruating person is always cooked separately. Special dishes 
are used and special fireplaces are made. 

If a person possessed any medicines, they would lose all their power if a men- 
struating woman came in contact with them. If any person should enter a men- 
strual lodge, in after life, whenever he fasted, he would not be blessed by any spirit. 
However, there is one thing that a menstruating woman is afraid of, and that is the 
war bundle. These war bundles are kept in cedar [leaves?] mixed with medicine to 
prevent danger from just such a source. If a menstruating woman comes near a war 
bundle, her flow would increase and never cease, and after a while she would die,5 
and only if the owner of the war bundle personally attends to her can she be cured. 
For that reason whenever a war-bundle feast is being given a woman is very careful, 
and even if it is a few days before her menstrual flow she will not go. 

■ This explains what puzzled the author for some time — namely, the fact that although contact with a 
menstruating woman destroyed the efficacy of everything holy, in the case of the war bundle the reverse 
was true and the woman was destroyed. Many of the Indians who spoke of this matter also seemed to 
believe it was the war bundle that killed the woman. From this account, however, it is perfectly clear 
that it is not the war bundle at all that killed the woman, but the poison in which the war bundle was 
wrapped. The war bundle is therefore no exception to the general rule, and it is only on account of the 
serious consequences that would accrue to so many people from any impairment of its powers, and the 
care taken to prevent this by surrounding it with special medicines, that it offers externally an exception 
to the fatal effects of contact with a menstruating woman. 

badin] GENERAL SOCIAL CUSTOMS 137 

The menstrual lodge is never far from the lodge in which she lives. Indeed, it is 
within speaking distance, so that the occupants of her parents' lodge can hear her. 
All the utensils she uses are very small. The women stay from 4 to 10 days in the 
menstrual lodges. The older women stay out the shorter time because they are over 
it sooner. 

It is said that if the young girls have any lovers they always come to the men- 
strual lodges at night. This is therefore the time for wooing. It is said that the 
girls cohabit with their lovers in these menstrual lodges. Those girls who have 
parents are attended by watchers, so that no unworthy men may visit them. They 
are especially guarded against ugly men, who are very likely to have love medicines. 
However, generally it is of no avail to struggle against such men, for they are invin- 
cible. 

The women always take their blankets with them when they go to a menstrual 
lodge, for they never lie down but remain in a sitting posture, wrapped in their 
blankets. The women are always watched, so that when their menstrual flow comes 
everything is in readiness and lodge poles are placed around them and a lodge erected 
above their heads just about large enough to fit their body. They are not permitted 
to look upon the daylight nor upon any individual. If they were to look out during 
the day the weather would become very bad, and if they were to look at the blue 
sky it would become cloudy and rain. If they looked at anyone that person would 
become unfortunate. For four days they do not eat or drink anything; not even 
water do they drink. They fast all the time. Not even their own body do they 
touch with their hands. If they ever have any need of touching their bodies they 
use a stick. If they were to use their hands in touching their own body their bones 
would be attacked with fever. If they were to scratch their hands their heads would 
ache. After the fourth day they bathe in sight of their home. Then they return to 
their homes and eat. (This, of course, holds only for those whose menstrual flow 
ceases in four days.) If any women have to stay longer than four days they have to 
fast for that entire period. They always fast during this period and often some spirits 
bless them. When a woman who has stayed in the menstrual lodge for 10 days is 
ready to return to her lodge, she bathes herself and puts on an entirely new suit of 
clothes. Then her home is purified with red-cedar leaves and all the sacred bundles 
and medicines removed. Only then can she enter her parents' lodge. As soon as 
she returns to her parents' lodge after her first menstrual flow she is regarded as ready 
to be wooed and married . 

Thus the teacher of our customs, the Hare, has willed it. At a feast all the young 
girls nearing the age of puberty will be absent, but the old women, who have passed 
their climacteric, sit right next to the men, because they are considered the same as 
men as they have no menstrual flow any more. 

If the Winnebago can be said to be afraid of any one thing it may be said it is this — 
the menstrual flow of women — for even the spirits die of its effects. 

If the above account may be taken as a fairly accurate description 
of the customs connected with the menstrual lodge as they existed 
in former times, then one point must be regarded as of great interest, 
namely, that the women permitted their lovers to meet them there. 
So far as is known to the author, among other tribes having men- 
strual lodges it would have been considered a crime for any man to 
come near them. According to our informant the women were 
indeed guarded while they were in the menstrual lodges, but not so 
much to protect them against the intrusion of all men, as against the 
intrusion of unworthy men. From other information obtained, how- 
186823—22 10 

138 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ann. 37 

ever, it appears that women were married to these same lovers after 

the former left the menstrual lodge, so that the presence of men in 

these lodges may be taken either as a part of the wooing or as one of 

the methods of marriage. Some theorists may be inclined to look 

on this feature of the practices connected with the menstrual lodge 

as a survival of a "women's house." To those the fact may be 

emphasized that it is only a few times in the life of a woman that 

such a feature exists, because she is married shortly after leaving 

the lodge. 6 

Marriage 

Girls were usually married as soon as they reached marriageable 
age, and the same was probably true of men. In most cases marriage 
was arranged by the parents of the young people, and it rarely 
happened that the latter refused to abide by the decision — a fact 
that seems to have been due not so much to implicit obedience as 
to the wise precautions taken by the parents in mating their children. 
If, however, the young people absolutely refused to abide by their 
parents' choice, the latter always yielded. In former times children 
were betrothed to each other at an early age. At the betrothal 
presents were exchanged between the parents of the prospective 
bride and groom. The girl was said to be dohore'nA. 

Generally a man took but one wife, although he was permitted to 
marry more than one if he wished. In polygamous marriages the 
second wife was usually a niece or a sister of the first wife. Accord- 
ing to a very reliable informant it was the wife herself who often 
induced her husband to marry her own niece. This she did if she 
noticed that he was getting tired of her or losing his interest in her.7 

There was no ceremony connected with marriage. As soon as the 
customary presents were exchanged, the man came to the woman's 
lodge and the marriage was consummated. 

A man generally lived with his parents-in-law during the first two 
years after his marriage. During these two years he was practically 
the servant of his father-in-law, hunting, fishing, and performing 
minor services for him. Many Winnebago interpreted these en- 
forced services of a son-in-law as part of his marriage obligations 
toward his father-in-law. After the first two years he returned to 

6 Were it not for the fact that his informant in this case was exceedingly reliable the writer would be 
inclined to regard with suspicion the statement as to the use of the menstrual lodge as a rendezvous for 
lovers. It seems, however, that the very fact that the informant shows so great abhorrence of the menses 
would have prevented him from attributing to menintimacy with women at this time had there been any 
doubt in his mind on the subject. Nevertheless hisstatement on the point under discussionseems peculiar 
and the author would not be surprised i f he had exaggerated greatly the number of men willing to brave the 
bad luck and weakness incident on contact with women during the menstrual period. 

' As one of my informants said, "A man can marry a woman and her niece. If the man is not steady 
and goes around with other women, it is customary for the wife to call her niece, and she would marry 
her aunt's husband. This is done to steady the man. In this way one or the other will always be 
with him. The same is true of sisters." 

tuDiN] GENERAL SOCIAL CUSTOMS 139 

his father's lodge, where his seat had always been kept for him. 
With his own folks he stayed as long as he wished, leaving it generally 
as soon as he decided to live alone — a decision that was usually 
reached as soon as he had one child or a number of children. How- 
ever, he did not always build his own lodge, especially in the olden 
times, when it was customary for those Winnebago who lived in per- 
manent villages to occupy the long gable-roofed lodges, that fre- 
cpjently were large enough to house as many as 40 people. In such 
cases a man and his family generally alternated between his parents- 
in-law and his own parents. 

Adoption 

Adoption of individuals was quite frequent in former times. As 
far as the writer knows, however, it always took the form of replac- 
ing of a deceased child by some other child physically resembling 
the one lost. I do not know whether there were an}7 additional con- 
siderations if the child adopted happened to be a prisoner. As the 
name for adoption {wanatjxe'relc'inaijlc) indicates, it is closely con- 
nected with the common belief in reincarnation, meaning either the 
exchange of one spirit for another or the replacing of the spirit. A 
special feast could be given for adoption or it could be done at one 
of the regular feasts. As the child adopted was often the "friend" 
(hitcak'd'ro) of the deceased and in any case had parents living, 
presents were always given to his parents. 

Perhaps a better idea of the nature of adoption can be obtained 
from the following few words of an informant: 

When a child dies, then the father mourns for many years, and if during that time 
he happens to meet a child that resembles his dead child he asks to be allowed to 
adopt him. The parents of the child can hardly object to such a request.8 

s There is no doubt in my mind that quite a number of parents believe that such a person is really their 
reincarnated child. 

CHAPTER V 

BURIAL AND FUNERAL CUSTOMS 

There appear to have been two distinct methods of burial among 
the Winnebago — simple inhumation and platform burial. Within 
recent times, owing to the influence of their Algonquian neighbors, 
platform burial has entirely disappeared and inhumation alone is 
practiced. It has even become customary to erect a typical Algon- 
quian burial-hut over the grave (see pi. 54, b). 

When the old culture was still intact inhumation was definitely 
associated with the lower phratry and platform burial with the upper 
phratry. Whether this marked difference in burial customs was 
merely another example of that specialization in function so char- 
acteristic of these two divisions of the tribe, or whether it was due 
to distinct historical origins, it is difficult to determine. I am, 
however, inclined to regard the latter interpretation as by far the 
most probable. 

All the customs are described in full detail in the various accounts 
that follow and in Chapters VII and VIII. Each clan seems to have 
had a few details peculiar to itself, but, in the main, the rights were 
identical. They may briefly be divided into the following sections: 

1. Preparation of the body for burial. 2. Rites in the house of 
the deceased, consisting mainly of speeches of consolation to the 
bereaved. 3. Speeches addressed to the deceased and the narration 
of the myth of the journey to spirit land. 4. Rites at the grave. 
5. The recounting of war exploits by specially invited warriors, at 
the grave. 6. The elaborate four nights wake at the home of the 
deceased. 

Description of Funeral Customs and Wake 

Informant, member of the Thunderbird clan : ' When an individual 
dies his relatives get some one to bury him and the chief mourner 
will also invite some person to talk to the corpse before it is buried. 
The person addressing the dead man or woman tells the deceased how 
he is to go (to spirit land) and what he is to do on the way there. 
The body is then dressed by the person who is going to bury it. All 
the relatives come to the lodge and the deceased is dressed in his best 
clothes; beads are put around his neck, bracelets on his wrist, rings 

1 This description is a generalized one. 
140 

badin] BURIAL AND FUNERAL CUSTOMS 141 

on his fingers, and earrings in his ears. The body is then put in the 
casket. 

By the time this is all finished the gravediggers have about com- 
pleted their work. Then the mourners blacken their faces with 
charcoal and the corpse is taken up by the man to whom this duty is 
delegated. The mourners follow behind, weeping. Thus they pro- 
ceed to the grave. When they get there the corpse is laid in the 
grave. Then the chief mourner steps across the center of the grave 
and the others do the same. When they start back, they are told 
under no circumstance to turn around and look in the direction of the 
grave. 

The grave is then filled in. 

Then the overseer goes around to the various people in the village 
and invites them all to come to (the wake). The brave men and war- 
riors are especially welcomed. 

The mourners prepare food and when the sun goes down the chief 
mourner takes a stick made of hard wood and lights it and carries it 
to the grave, placing it at the east end. It is supposed to be still 
burning when placed there. After this is done (the man returns) and 
the overseer gets everything in readiness for the feast. When all is 
ready the chief mourner speaks as follows: 

All my relatives who are sitting here, I greet you. I have done nothing of any con- 
sequence which could justify you to come here and honor me, yet being relatives of 
mine, you have (in the kindness of your hearts ) come to comfort me. I have prepared 
cooked food and boiled water for my child ( the dead person ), and tobacco is also handy, 
all of which the attendant when he is ready will pass around to all and give to whom- 
soever he pleases. That is why I am greeting you. 

Then the attendant takes the water and tobacco and gives it to 
the one who is to speak to the soul of the departed person. This one 
then rises and greets all those present and speaks as follows: 

To-night we are greeting you not for the sake of jollification, but because we are 
afflicted (with grief) . Now, it is the custom to speak to the soul of the departed . It is 
a sacred action, yet even I, they tell me, can do it, provided no worthier person can 
be found. They 2 even tell me that my words will not cause the spirit of the departed 
to lose his way in his journey (to spirit land).3 For that reason I will speak to the 
departed and say the best I can. I greet you all. 

Then he takes some tobacco in one hand and passing it behind him 
through the lodge says: 

Here it is, the tobacco. I am certain that you, O ghost, are not very far away, 
that in fact you are standing right in back of me, waiting for me to reach you the pipe 
and tobacco, that you might take it along with you, that likewise, you are waiting for 
your food to take on your journey. However, four nights you will have to remain 
here. 

2 This and what follows is the customary ceremonial modesty. 

3 It is believed that i f the chief speaker makes a mistake or exaggerates while thus addressing the spirit 
of the deceased, the latter will lose his way in his journey to spirit land. 

142 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [bth. ann. 37 

Now here are these things, and in return we ask you to act as mediator (between 
the spirits and us). You have made us long for you. and therefore do you see to it that 
all those things that belonged to you and that you would have enjoyed had you lived 
longer — such as victories on the warpath, earthly possessions, and life — that all these 
you leave behind for us to enjoy. This do you ask for as you travel along. This also 
I ask of you, do not cause us to follow you soon; do not cause your brothers any fear. 
I have now lit the pipe for you. 

Tli en the pipe is passed on to all those present. After that he 
drinks a little water and passes it around again. It is only after the 
pipe and water have passed all the way around that the people begin 
to eat. When the meal is over, the attendant takes the pipe and 
some tobacco and places it before a warrior and tells him to talk to 
the spirit and tell him the route to take. 

Then the warrior rises and speaks as follows : 

Ho, I greet you all. We are not greeting one another because we are happy (as in 
the case of an ordinary feast), hut because it is the custom to do it. Now I will tell 
the soul of the departed one the route to take and the care he must observe in his 
journey. I shall tell them (the ghosts) over whom I have control to guide him safely 
to his destination. I will not exaggerate when I relate my war exploits, but tell 
only those things that really happened to me. It has been said that if, in talking, I 
tell falsehoods the spirit of the departed would stumble on the road.4 So, therefore, I 
will tell only the truth, and I will tell the chief of the spirits to guide our dead one 
safely over all the obstacles. Now I am not going to speak of anybody else's exploits, 
but only of my own. Only those over whom I have control will I put at the disposal 
of our dead one to guide him. The spirit-tobacco, the spirit-food and fire, they will 
carry for him, and they will lead him by the hand until he reaches his destination. 
I greet you all. 

Then he begins an account of his war exploits. He tells all that 
he did in detail. Sometines the account of a war exploit would last 
two to three hours. When he is through, the people retire for the 
night. 

For three nights they do this and every evening they place a burn- 
ing ember at the grave. This is supposed to be taken by the spirit 
of the dead man on his journey. 

The fourth night they invite all the brave men i'n the neighborhood 
and everybody else. They prepare plenty of food, and the relatives 
of the mourners bring objects for the mourning games and try to 
comfort the mourners as best they can. The fourth night, likewise, 
they place a burning ember at the grave of the dead man. 

As soon as the attendant prepares the food the chief mourner gets 
up and speaks as follows: 

I greet you all. I know that I am not performing any great action in greeting you, 5 
but I was in trouble, and all my relatives have come to comfort me. I feel strength- 
ened by their actions. You all have asked me to live (not to succumb to my sorrows), 

' It is believed that a warrior is in control of the spirits of all the people he has killed. His function at 
the wake is to put these spirits at the disposal of the dead man, to guide him, and to take care of him. 

6 1, e., if I were a great man and this were a ceremony of rejoicing, then a greeting would mean some- 
thing. This is another example of ceremonial modesty. 

radix] BURIAL AND FUNERAL CUSTOMS 143 

and I shall try to overcome my grief and sorrow. I will not forget all the good you 
have done for me. You have been a comfort to me and you have helped me in many 
things. Now this is the last night, and I am glad that it is a good night for the war- 
riors to relate their experiences. If they should say anything funny, I hope that you 
will not hold back your laughter. I, too, will laugh with you. You are free to make 
all the noise you care to, for I will feel all the better if you do it. This is what I 
want you to remember. I greet you all who are present here. 

Then the one who is to address the spirit speaks: 

I greet you all. We have come to this (wake) for a purpose, much as we would wish 
that the occasion for it had never happened . Now I will tell the spirit of the departed 
the route he is to take, nor will I, by my words, cause him to go astray. On an occa- 
sion like this not everyone can talk to spirits (spirits of departed people); not every- 
one can do it. My grandfather obtained the right to speak to them and handed it 
down to my father, and he in turn gave it to me. Now I will tell the spirit of the 
departed the right road to take and I will not cause him to stumble. I shall breathe 
upon the spirit of the departed, and I wish all those present to do the same. It 
is said that for those who do not make this sound it is a sign that they will die soon. 
Now all of you say it. 

Then he says "Tia-a" and "ha-a," and all join with him in repeat- 
ing it. 

Then he speaks again (addressing the spirit of the departed) : 

I suppose you are not far away, that indeed you are right behind me. Here is the 
tobacco and here is the pipe which you must keep in front of you as you go along. 
Here also is the fire and the food which your relatives have prepared for your journey. 
In the morning when the sun rises you are to start. You will not have gone very 
far before you come to a wide road. That is the road you must take. As you go 
along you will notice something on your road. Take your war club and strike it and 
throw it behind you. Then go on without looking back. As you go farther you 
will again come across (some obstacle). Strike it and throw it behind you and do 
not look back. Farther on you will come across some animals, and these also you 
must strike and throw behind you. Then go on and do not look back. The objects 
you throw behind you will come to those relatives whom you have left behind you 
on earth. They will represent victory in war, riches, and animals for food. When 
you have gone but a short distance from the last place where you threw objects behind, 
you will come to a round lodge and there you will find an old woman. She is 
the one who is to give you further information. She will ask you, 'Grandson, what 
is your name?" This you must tell her. Then (you must say), ''Grandmother, when 
I was about to start from the earth I was given the following objects with which I was 
to act as mediator between you and the human beings (i. e., the pipe, tobacco, and 
food)." Then you must put the stem of the pipe in the old woman's mouth and say, 
"Grandmother, I have made all my relatives lonesome, my parents, my brothers, and 
all the others. I would therefore like to have them obtain victory in war and honors. 
That was my desire as I left them downhearted upon the earth. I would that they 
could have all that life which I left behind me on earth.6 This is what they asked. 
This likewise they asked me, that they should not have to travel on this road for some 
time to come. They also asked to be blessed with those things that people are accus- 
tomed to have on earth. All this they wanted me to ask of you when I started from 
the earth. 

6 The deceased had apparently died young, and what he desires is that the difference between his years 
and the normal length of life he distributed among his relatives. He means not only the actual years but 
also whatever he would have accomplished in those years. 

144 THE WINNEBAGO TEIBE [eth. ann. 37 

"They told me to follow the four steps that would be imprinted with blue marks, 
grandmother." 'Well, grandson, you are young but you are wise. It is good. I will 
now boil some food for you. ' ' 

Thus she will speak to you and then put a kettle on the fire and boil some rice for 
you. If you eat it you will have a headache. Then she will say, "Grandson, you 
have a headache, let me cup it for you.'' Then she will break open your skull and 
take out your brains and you will forget all about your people on earth and where 
you came from. You will not worry about your relatives. You will become like a 
holy spirit. Your thoughts will not go as far as the earth, as there will be nothing 
carnal about you. 

Now the rice that the old woman will boil will really be lice. For that reason you 
will be finished with everything evil. Then you will go on stepping in the four 
footsteps mentioned before and that were imprinted with blue earth. You are to 
take the four steps because the road will fork there. All your relatives (who 
died before you) will be there. As you journey on you will come to a fire running 
across the earth from one end to the other. There will be a bridge across it but it 
will be difficult to cross because it is continually swinging. However, you will be 
able to cross it safely, for you have all the guides about whom the warriors spoke to 
you. They will take you over and take care of you. 

Well, we have told you a good road (to take). If anyone tells a falsehood in speaking 
of the spirit road, you will fall off the bridge and be burned. However (you need not 
worry) for you will pass over safely. As you proceed from that place the spirits will 
come to meet you and take you to the village where the chief lives. There you will 
give him the tobacco and ask for those objects of which we spoke to you, the same you 
asked of the old woman. There you will meet all the relatives that died before you. 
They will be living in a large lodge. This you must enter. Ho-o-o, ha-a-a. 

Generalized Description of Funeral Customs and Wake 

Informant, member of Bear clan. When a person died a member 
of his friend (hitcakdro) clan was immediately sent for, who took 
charge of the body and of all the funeral arrangements. The over- 
seer dressed the deceased in his best clothes and all his finery, for it 
was said that he was going on a long journey. Then some clansman 
painted the dead man's face with the clan markings and delivered a 
speech to the corpse. When he concluded the clan songs were sung 
and the body was carried to the grave. All the mourners marched 
in single file. After the body had been buried or placed on a scaffold, 
as the case might be, a post was placed at the head of the grave, and 
the warriors among the mourners counted their coups and drew repre- 
sentations of their victories on the posts. The purpose of the war- 
riors in counting coups at the grave was to put at the disposal of the 
deceased the spirits of all the enemies they had killed, and also to 
give him additional strength for overcoming the obstacles on the road 
to the spirit land. Food was placed on the little shelf in front of 
the window of the grave-house, to be used by the spirit during the 
four days that he hovered around this earth before departing on his 
journey. Then a light was lighted and finally, toward evening, all 
departed for their homes, returning as they had come, in single file, 

eadin] BURIAL AND FUNERAL CUSTOMS 145 

and being very careful not to look back toward the grave after they 
had first started. 

The same evening the four nights' wake began. The overseer, who 
was in full charge, had everything prepared. Before the wake 
formally commenced the chief mourner made a short speech. Then 
the overseer lighted a pipe and passed it around to all, who took a 
puft' each and returned it to him. Then sweetened water was passed 
around, of which all partook. The feast followed. Taking on a 
plate a small portion of all the food to be eaten, the overseer threw it 
outside for the spirit of the deceased. In the case of a nursling the 
mother added a small quantity of milk from her breast to the other 
food on the plate. After the feast the chief mourner made another 
speech, explaining why the rites were performed and how they had 
been handed down for many generations. He concluded by thanking 
the people for all they had done for him. 

There was always an abundance of tobacco at a wake. Most of it 
was given to the warriors, a number of whom were invited, for they 
played a very important role on such an occasion. It was believed 
that every warrior was in control of the spirit of an enemy he had slain 
and he was supposed always to be willing to put the spirit at the 
service of any member of his tribe who had just died, if the proper 
offerings were made. At the proper time tobacco was given to the 
warrior, who, rising, narrated his war exploits, at the conclusion 
of which he ordered the spirit of the enemy he had slain to take 
charge of the deceased. Then tobacco was given to another warrior, 
who followed the same procedure, which was continued until mid- 
night. Then most of the people departed to their homes, but some 
stayed overnight in the lodge in which the wake was held. 

The proceedings of the second and third nights of the wake were 
exactly the same as those of the first, but somewhat longer. The 
beginning of the ceremony on the fourth night was the same as on 
the three preceding nights; after a while, however, it deviated in the 
following manner. 

J. F., rising, tells the spirit of the departed the road he is to take 
in his journey to spirit land, the obstacles he is to meet, and how 
he is to overcome them. After he has finished the warriors begin 
to tell some more war exploits, and this continues generally until 
3 o'clock in the morning, depending entirely upon the amount of 
gifts given to the warriors. The gifts generally consist either 
of 12 pieces of calico each 3 yards, or of beads, or of 12 quarter 
dollars. The warriors always gamble for these gifts and play the 
favorite game of the deceased. If a man had died they generally 
play moccasins; if a woman, Jcansu. When all the presents have 
been exhausted, then the relatives of the deceased comb the 

146 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ann. 37 

mourner's hair, give him presents, and tell him that he is now 
free to cease mourning and to marry if he wishes. 

In former times the period of mourning is supposed to have lasted 
four years. 

When a person is in mourning he always cuts his hair short and 
does not comb his hair. In former times people often mutilated 
themselves by cutting off either entire fingers or finger joints. 

The overseer always takes all the belongings of the deceased, but 
he must give the latter's relatives an equal amount of new material. 

Funeral Customs of the Thunderbird Clan 

(first version) 

Informant, member of the clan. When a member of the clan 
dies they send after a man of the Thunderbird clan who is to speak 
to the corpse, paint it, and give him a war club to take along with 
him (to the land of the spirits). Then they go after a man from the 
lower phratry to bury him, for these clans (of the lower phratry) 
belong on earth and they have the right to dig into the ground and 
bury people. 

When the one who is to be the general overseer arrives and arranges 
everything, he prepares the corpse, putting a sack of tobacco in 
one hand and a war club in the other. Then he paints him. He 
paints the forehead with a red and a black mark and paints the lower 
part of the face to the end of the nose with scattered dots. He paints 
the jaw red and he makes a red mark across the mouth and the 
throat. Then he speaks as follows : 

You have departed at this (young) age. You have taken your relatives by sur- 
prise and have left them a long part of your life (i. e., you have lived but a small part 
of your apportioned share of years). As you go to spirit land, you will find on the 
road many feathers, many good plants, and many good kinds of clay, scattered around, 
the blue clay, the red clay, and the white clay. You will also find the sweet-smelling 
plants and good life. For all these things do you ask. If anything comes across 
your path, throw it behind you without looking around. In four days you will de- 
part and objects with which to mediate between us and the spirits will soon be fur- 
nished you. For four nights your people will tell you what to do and when they hear 
you singing on the road they will know that it is you. There (in spirit land) you 
will go to live and the songs that I will sing you will sing as you travel on your road. 

Then he sings (the four clan songs). 

When the gravediggers are finished they take the body and carry 
it to the grave, the mourners following. They take the body to 
the grave and there lower it. 

Death and Funeral Customs of the Thunderbird Clan 

(second version) 

Informant, member of the clan. When a member of the Thunder- 
bird clan dies, the clansmen discuss what is to be done for the spirit 

Radin] BURIAL AND FUNERAL CUSTOMS 147 

of the deceased. Then they go and call the leader of their band 
and he comes and addresses the body as follows : 

You are about to leave all your relatives. They will remain on earth, objects of pity 
to all. You will proceed on your road, turning to your left after you start until you 
come to him who is in charge of the spirits. Whenever you see him, the following 
request do we wish you to make of him, namely, that he bestow upon us all that 
you fell short of in your life on this earth. The means of offering, the tobacco, which 
Earthmaker gave us, we have given you some to take along. As you go along the 
road you will come to a place where the road branches off. Do not turn to the right, 
for that road leads to the bad spirits. Turn to the left and soon you will come to a 
guard. Point your pipe at him and he will be thankful. This man will have a com- 
plete suit of clothes and he will look terror-inspiring. He will smoke with you and 
then you may speak to him as follows: "Grandfather, before I left the earth, the 
people told me to ask you to point out to me which road I should travel in." Then 
he will tell you and you will pass ahead and after a while you will come to a fire- 
girdle. The man who ia in charge of it will have a complete suit of clothes just like 
the first man. Point the stem of your pipe toward him and he will be very thankful 
and smoke with you. Then make your request, namely, to be permitted to pass, 
and he will grant it. As you go along after that you will come to a round lodge in 
which you will find an old woman. Point your pipe at her and she will be thankful 
and smoke it, and then ask her to let you pass and she will permit you to go ahead. 
Your hair will now be white but you will not be unconscious. On the contrary, 
you will have complete possession of all your senses. Then you will come to where 
he who is in control of spirits sits. Go to him and point your pipe toward him. Then 
when he is smoking it, ask him to show you the road to Earthmaker, our father, 
and he will point it out to you. Then you must proceed until you come to Earth- 
maker. When you get to him, point the stem of your pipe toward him and, if he takes 
it and smokes it, then you must say, "Earthmaker, my father, you know very well 
what kind of a life I have led." And he will answer, "You have done well, my son." 

The informant then skips to the opening night of the four nights' 
wake. The address to the spirit that follows is probably delivered 
by the chief mourner before the formal opening of the wake. 

Address to the spirit.7 — Ha ho-o-o-o, I want you to listen, you who have become 
like a spirit. You have made those of your relatives who remained behind on earth 
miserable and lonely. They have given you much food to take along with you and 
they have given you a pipe and some tobacco so that you may offer them to the spirits 
you meet on your road and make some requests of them. The first request that they 
wish you to make is to ask the spirits to distribute to your clan all the successful 
warpaths which would have fallen to your share had you lived your normal quota 
of years; and that, all the food, etc., that you have not used be bestowed upon those 
whom you left behind on earth. The last request you should make of those on the 
road is to pray that a long time may elapse before any of your relatives traverse this 
road. 

Now follows a description of the obstacles to be met on the road. 

When you reach Earthmaker, offer him your pipe, and if he accepts it speak to 
him as follows: "Grandfather, as I was leaving the earth my relatives asked me to 
request of you humbly that you bestow upon the clansmen that I left behind me 
all that I would have accomplished had I lived longer. Now this is what I wished 
to ask of you, grandfather. " Thus you should speak: "Ha ho-o-o-o. " 

7 Spirit here is waiop'ini, spirit, deity, not naiiyidak', ghost, noncorporeal embodiment. What is 
meant is that the deceased has become like one of the spirits, in that he lives, enjoys consciousness, etc., 
without at the same time having any corporeal existence. 

148 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ANN. 37 

Then all the other people answer ha-ho-o-o-o. Now someone lights 
a pipe and passes it around so that everyone can take a puff. All 
take a puff, children and women as well as men. After that water 
is passed around. Then all eat. A little portion of everything served 
is put aside and thrown out for the spirit to eat. Then a warrior, the 
person who has charge of the wake, speaks: 

I greet you all. 1 first wish to pour some of the tobacco that you have offered me 
for our grandfather who is in control of war-giving powers. (Probably the Thunder- 
birds are meant.) I will tell the spirit as carefully as I can all that I know about 
the road he must travel. My father impressed upon me very earnestly the need of 
being very truthful in speaking to the spirit of one recently deceased, for if I were 
a bad man 1 would cause the spirit to stumble. For that reason I always feel that I 
ought not to speak very much whenever I am called upon to talk. 

Then a warrior was called upon to tell of his war exploits. He 
told as accurately as it was possible how he had killed a man, broken 
his collar bone, and then flayed him; how he had then chopped 
and cut up his body and mutilated him in such a way that he could 
not be identified; and how finally he had stolen his dogs. All night 
he spoke in this strain. He went on to tell how he had killed and 
utterly destroyed an entire village so that no one was left to tell of 
the massacre. All night he told of his war exploits. Thus they 
lighted the road for the spirit (i. e., held the Four Nights' Wake). 

The second and third nights were just the same as the first, only 
that different warriors spoke and different war exploits were told. 
They are very proud of their war exploits and they would try to tell 
of their bravest deeds, those that had been most dangerous and which 
had required the greatest heroism. When the mourners listen to 
the narrative of such an exploit they become strengthened. All 
those people on whom the warrior had counted first coup and all 
those whom he had killed would carry the light for the spirit of the 
deceased. Those on whom he had counted second coup were com- 
manded to clear the road, and a woman whom the warrior had cap- 
tured was ordered to carry along the food. The ceremonies of the 
fourth night are the same as those of the first three nights. 

Death and Funeral Customs op the Bear Clan8 

Informant, member of the clan. Mr. J. M. died in June, 1911. In 
accordance with the old Winnebago customs, the first individual to 
be notified of the death was Mr. J. F., a member of the Wolf clan. 
To Mr. F. fell the lot of taking charge of all the funeral rites — dressing 
the deceased, laying his body in the casket, burying him, and, finally, 
conducting the elaborate funeral wake. 

' This is practically a reprint of "Description of a Winnebago Funeral," by Lamere and Radin, Amer- 
Anthrop., n. s. vol. 13, no. 3, 1911. 

hadin] BURIAL AND FUNERAL, CUSTOMS 149 

One of Mr. F.'s most important duties was to invite the warriors 
to extend invitations to all those who wish to participate in the feast. 
After the body has been buried the overseer goes to the home of the 
deceased and takes away all those things with which the deceased had 
been in daily contact. 

In addition to F., another man was sent for, Mr. A. W., also a 
member of the Bear clan. He went through the Bear clan ceremony, 
which was as follows: When the deceased was fully dressed, just 
before he was to be laid in the casket, A. W. walked up to him and, 
taking some paint from a little bundle he carried, he painted a red 
mark across his forehead, then a black one immediately below this 
one, and finally daubed the whole chin red. When he was through 
with this preliminary work he addressed those present as follows: 

You relatives, all that are seated here, I greet you. This ceremony is not anything 
that we have originated ourselves, but it was known to be the proper thing to do by 
our ancestors. It is for that reason that I have made the markings upon the face of 
my son in order that he may be recognized by his relatives in spirit land; and I have 
also given him the material with which he may talk, i. e., tobacco, that with it he 
may entreat the spirits to bestow all those years that he fell short of upon his relatives 
still living. 

Now, it is said that the members of the Bear clan hold death as a blessing and not 
as anything to mourn about. I do not mean that I do not feel sorry for the children 
of the deceased and that I rejoice in his death, but it is the belief of the members of 
the Bear clan that the same happiness comes to them at death that comes to us during 
life when a bear is killed and brought to the village for food. 

For now, indeed, my son will walk in a road that has been cleared of all obstacles 
and his claws will be sharp, and his teeth will be sharp, and nothing, indeed, will 
cross his path. And in this, his walk to the spirit land, may he tread down upon us 
the life that he has fallen short of on this earth. And he will walk just as the original 
Bear clansmen walked when they originated and when they approached the earth. 
And now I will sing him the songs that they sang as they came on earth, so that he 
may take them along with him on his journey to the spirit land. It is said that 
there is no other place besides this prepared for us in the hereafter. 

Then he sang the four clan songs. 

When the songs had been sung, it was just about noon and, as 
dinner was read}', we all sat down and A. W. filled a pipe and when 
he was ready to smoke it began to speak again to the following effect: 

Relatives, all that are present, I greet you. It is good that this many of you have 
come here, and it is said that the soul of the deceased remains hovering around about 
this place four days and that we should partake of food with him forthat period. It is 
for that reason that we act in this way. And it is good that this many of you have 
come here and have helped us out with food and dress. • 

He then mentioned the things that had been given by different 
individuals. Then he lit a pipe and took a few puffs and sent it 
around to all the others in the lodge. Then a pitcher of water was 
passed around from which we all took a sip. 

150 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ann. 37 

During the morning Mrs. R. came in and combed the hair of the 
deceased's wife and gave her some presents, telling her at the same 
time that she hoped that she would dry her tears as a sign of appre- 
ciation of the gifts. Another person came in in the morning bring- 
ing a pair of leggings and a blanket for the deceased. He also 
brought the casket. While the body of the deceased was being 
prepared this same person spoke as follows: 

Relatives, all that are present. I greet you. If my nephews will come here and 
sit near me, I will talk to them. 

Then the sons of the deceased came and sat near their mother 
and sisters and the man continued : 

My sister, it is said that it is best for a person not to weep; and that a widow should 
not mourn too much, for then the people would make fun of her; as well as for the fact 
that having children she must for their sake look forward to life and live for them. 
And it is also said that we should keep up this mourning for at least four years. Now 
there is nothing amusing about what I am going to say (although it may sound so)— 
namely, that we should not cry on such an occasion as to-day, but, on the contrary, 
keep up a good spirit. I do not mean that I am glad that my brother-in-law is dead. 
But if you were to weep some one might come in and say that it behooves you more 
to show him your teeth than your tears. They mean that you should smile. 

And again it is said that one should not cry. for when a body is laid in the ground 
there is no more hope of its ever returning to this earth again. My nephew, the one 
that had been advising you in your daily affairs, is gone and you are left alone to look 
after yourself, your little brothers, and your mother; and therefore I want you all to 
love ane another and remember your mother. 

While we were eating C. P. came in and spoke as follows: 

Relatives, all that are present, I greet you. It is good that you all have come here 
and are comforting this house of mourning. It is good that J. H. has brought a casket 
and clothing for the deceased and food for the wake. And indeed he has also prom- 
ised a hog for the feast. I know that he did not do this in order to have some one 
speak of it in public, but how can I refrain from expressing my thanks? My brother 
also came with the intention of furnishing some of these things, but inasmuch as 
J. H. has furnished them beforehand he placed ten dollars in the hands of the wife 
of the deceased. He did not, however, tell her for what purpose he gave her the 
money and I therefore take the liberty of telling her that the gift is meant for any- 
thing that she may desire to buy. Now, my relatives, this is no time for happiness, 
but I am glad, nevertheless, that so many have come and I am thankful for what 
you have done. I greet you all. 

Then the casket was put in the spring wagon and taken to the 
Winnebago Cemetery. When we got there the casket was lowered 
into the grave. When this was over, A. W. spoke as foUows: 

Relatives, all that are present, I greet you. This many of you have followed my 
son to his last resting place. Further than this place he will not walk in this life. 
Truly this many of you have felt sorry for him. All the rites that were taught me in 
this connection I have already performed. I have given the deceased the emblem 
(i. e., the whittled stick known as namanxinixini) and the material to talk with (the 
tobacco), so that he may plead for us. his relatives, when he gets to the end of the 
journey, that we may live the life he fell short of upon this earth, and that he may 

Radi.n] BURIAL AND FUNERAL CUSTOMS 151 

tread firmly upon us as he walks to the spirit land. All that I know I have said 
before. I was taught nothing that I was to do or say at this place except that we 
should step over the grave just as our forefathers did when they originated. They 
were holy and they entered this life on a perfect day just as this day to-day, and, 
inasmuch as they were holy, all the ground that they touched was holy. It is for 
that reason that we should step over the grave. 

Then we stepped over the grave. After that we went to our 
homes. 

The same evening the wake began. When all the invited guests 
had arrived and were seated, the feast was spread before them. 
Then A. W. spoke as follows: 

Relatives, all that are seated here. I greet you. It is good that this many of you 
have come to-night. You know that we are not creating any new ceremony, but are 
simply following up what our forefathers have learned to be true and good. And. as 
it is said that we should not weep aloud , therefore you will not hear any of us making 
any utterings of sorrow. And even though we weep silently should anyone come to 
us we will look upon them smiling. We therefore beg of you, should you find us 
happy in mood, not to think the worse of us. And now I am ready to turn over the 
tobacco and water to J. F. Thus I express my thanks to you all that are present. 

Then J. F. took the tobacco and water and spoke as follows: 

Relatives, all that are seated here, I greet you. It is good that so many of you have 
come to our humble affair and, as our ancestors said that this was the proper way to 
do, so I am glad that it was given to me to handle the corpse, as I am certain that I 
will be strengthened by it. I will now pass the tobacco to Mr. X. He is a brave man 
and he will light the pipe and pass the water before we eat and after supper he will 
tell the deceased a route to the spirit land. Now I thank you and I greet you. 

Then the brave man took the tobacco and filled the pipe and after 
taking a few puffs from it, passed it to the left and it thus went 
round, each person taking a puff from the pipe and a sip from the 
pitcher of water. Then the feast began. When it was over and all 
the dishes were cleared away, and everyone was properly seated, then 
the brave man greeted them again: 

Relatives, I greet you. As we are not creating anything new, and as our ancestors 
knew it to be good, and as it is said that if anyone exaggerates a story in a case like 
this it will cause the soul to stumble, therefore I will tell my war exploits to my rela- 
tive (the deceased ) exactly as I remember them. I greet you all. 

He then proceeded to tell his war exploits. When he had finished 
he again spoke as follows: 

Relatives that are present, I greet you. As I said before, I do not wish to cause 
the soul of my recently deceased relative to stumble and I have tried to tell my story 
as accurately as I could. It is said that the souls of the ones killed in a battle are at 
the mercy of the victor, and I therefore command the souls of the ones I have killed 
to lead and guide my relative safely through the spirit land. I greet you all. 

He then passed the tobacco to another brave man present who in 
his turn greeted those present and related his war exploits. After 
two warriors had told their war exploits they stopped for the night, 

152 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ann. 37 

to continue on the second night. The second and third nights were 
the same as the first. About the evening of the fourth night, when 
all the people invited were present, A. W. spoke in the same strain 
as on the first night, and when he had finished he passed the manage- 
ment of the feast to J. F. The latter then passed it to F. F. now 
lit the pipe and passed it around, together with the water. Then all 
partook of the feast. After supper A. W. reported all the donations 
that were made to them, naming each giver and the amount of the 
gift and thanking them and praising them for their generous gifts. 
Then F. told the following story: 

THE JOURNEY OF THE SOUL TO SPIRIT LAND 9 

Ho! Ha! Are you all ready? I am going to speak about the four nights during 
which you listened to your relatives and to the words they had to say. I am placing 
the sacrificial tobacco in the rear part of the lodge for you. As you go home do not 
look back. Before you are far away you will come to a lodge. You may enter this 
lodge. A door faces the rising sun and a door faces the setting sun. As you enter you 
will find a woman on your right. Go and sit down opposite her. Then your great- 
grandmother will say to you, "My great-grandchild, what did they say to you when 
you were leaving, when your life was over?" "My great-grandmother, as I listened 
to my beloved relatives they said very little indeed. They said that I was breaking 
their hearts (in leaving them), and that they hoped that none would follow me soon. 
Then they asked me to make four requests: 

"First. I was to ask for life, that the flames from the lodge fires might go straight 
upward. Yet they were satisfied if at my departure the flames swayed to and fro. 

"Second. Whatever fruit had been predestined for me and that I did not taste, 
my relatives should hereafter not be deprived of. 

"Third. They also mentioned nuts, all manner of herbs, all serviceable hides and 
skins, all medicinal roots and grasses. They commanded me to make a request for 
all things that exist in the earth. 

"Fourth. That if anyone has a friend his weapon might have a keen edge on one 
side. Now, my great-grandmother, this is the number of requests they commanded 
me to make." 

"My great-grandchild, although you are young, you are wise. My great-grandchild, 
my lodge is a place where all who enter must pass an examination. Earthmaker 
looks upon it as a keen-edged instrument. No clouds of ill omen ever pass over it. 
Now, my grandchild, as to those four requests you put to me, it shall be as you say. 
The nuts and herbs you have requested shall be given you. There will be nothing 
of that food predestined for you that your relatives will not taste. The hides and skins, 
the grasses they will possess in plenty. And if they have friends their weapons will 
be keen on one side. All that they have requested through you shall be given them. 
Here is the food set before you in this wooden bowl." 

Then you are to answer to her, "My grandmother, this was what my relatives 
longed for. These are the things I was to leave behind me for those on earth." 

Now, be sure that you only take a taste and push the dish away from you. For 
then the old woman will say, "My great-grandchild, all that you have left behind you 
in that dish represents the vegetable kingdom on this earth. Many who are older 
than you have eaten all that I gave them, my great-grandchild. You have a wise 
head on young shoulders. All that you have left in the dish shall grow on the face of 
the earth. Earthmaker is waiting for you in great expectation. There is the door to 

9 Obtained from Henry Clowd. 

badin] BURIAL AND FUNERAL CUSTOMS 153 

the settingsun. On your way stands the lodge of Herecgu'nina, and his fire. Those 
who have come (the souls of brave men) from the land of the souls to take you back 
will touch you. There the road will branch off toward your right and you will see the 
footprints of the day on the blue sky before you. These footprints represent the foot- 
prints of those who have passed into life again. Step into the places where they 
have stepped and plant your feet into their footprints, but be careful you do not miss 
any. Before you have gone very far, you will come into a forest of wacke'ja11 broken by 
open prairies here and there. Here, in this beautiful country, these souls whose duty 
it is to gather other souls will come to meet you. Walking on each side of you they 
will take you safely home. As you enter the lodge of the Earthmaker you must hand 
to him the sacrificial offerings. Here the inquiry that took place in the first lodge 
will be repeated and answered in the same manner. Then he will say to you, "All 
that your grandmother has told you is true. Your relatives are waiting for you in 
great expectation. Your home is waiting for you. Its door will be facing the mid-day 
sun. Here you will find your relatives gathered. Inasmuch, then, as our ruler will 
nod assent and express his approval by word of mouth, so shall we now dothesame." 

At this word all those assembled at the wake shout, Ho-ha! 

Then a warrior told his war experiences and after thanking the 
people passed the tobacco to the next warrior, who in turn related 
his war experiences. 

The amount of gifts was then figured out and they tried to arrange 
matters so that the warriors were through with their stories about 
midnight. At midnight games were played with the donations as 
prizes. The gifts generally consisted of twelve 3-yard pieces of 
calico or money equal to that amount of calico; twelve strings of 
beads, etc. These were the gifts used as prizes. Other donations 
of food were made for the four nights' feast. A. W. was in charge 
of the games and he likewise designated what games were to be 
played. As they generally play the games the deceased was fond 
of so in this case they played the moccasin game and cards. After 
the donations were exhausted and the games finished a brave man 
was called upon to give a war whoop in thankfulness for the sun, 
and also to all the spirits above and below. Then A. W. greeted and 
thanked the guests again for coming, and the wake was over. 

In olden times the widow was supposed to continue single for 
four years. She is strongly admonished, nevertheless, not to con- 
tinue in low spirits, and to consider herself free to act in any way 
that will make her happy. She is told to play games or dance, or in 
fact do anything that will make her forget her sorrow, and she is 
told that no one will hold her conduct against her as disrespectful to 
the deceased. As this admonition is given to her by the sister or 
aunt of the deceased's husband, the only people who could properly 
reproach her — namely, the members of her husband's clan — it has all 
the more weight. The prohibition of weeping is further strengthened 
by the fact that it is customary to say that any woman who weeps 
too profusely at the death of her husband is in reality thinking, in 
186823—22 11 

154 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth.ann. 37 

the midst of her tears, of the one she is going to marry next. The 
people will then tell one another not to put themselves out too much 
as the widow will soon forget her mourning and show no respect to 
the memory of the dead, but instead look after her own pleasures. 

Funeral Customs op the Buffalo Clan 

Told by a member of the clan.10 If a Buffalo clan man dies some 
members of his clan who are called upon would speak as follows: 

To-day when yon ceased to breathe we were aware of it. Therefore relatives who 
are present, I greet you. Here my brother's life has ended, and for the last time I 
will talk to him about the road he is to take. 

Hanho, my brother, the place at which we originated was called Bad Lake. There 
were four buffaloes there and from the youngest one are we descended. They lived 
holy lives, and we hope you will walk in their path. That you may strike everything 
(you meet on your journey) you must take along with you a war club. You shall 
walk armed with sharp teeth; and it will be impossible for bad spirits to walk back 
and forth across your path. And your sight shall be holy as you walk. 

Then the speaker painted the face of the deceased. On the right 
side of his forehead he painted a rainbow with blue and red paint. 
After that he sang the clan songs. When he was through singing, 
a member of the Water-spirit clan spoke as follows: 

Relatives, I greet you. When one of you passes away and you ask me to work, I 
am always willing to be of sendee. And I shall do it all the more willingly now 
because I am certain that I shall obtain some of the years that the deceased left 
"unlived." I do it with that belief, and furthermore I pray that no bad animals 
abuse the deceased on his journey. It is said that one cheers the soul of the dead in 
thinking thus. Therefore I do it and also that I myself may be strengthened thereby. 
I came back willingly when I was asked to work and I am doing this so that no bad 
animals should abuse the soul of the deceased. 

Then one of the callers would talk to the mourners, saying as 
follows : 

Relatives, I greet you. To-day one of your relatives has disappeared. You must, 
However, keep up your courage and not cry, for Earthmaker above has ordained that 
we should disappear. If a piece of earth c'aves in, it disappears, and when a rock 
crumbles it is disappearing. Thus, it is said, it must be. 

Origin Myth of the Four Nights' Wake 

Two friends went out to cut arrow-sticks, and were surprised by a 
war party and killed. When they were shot they thought they had 
stumbled and went right on (in the spirit). After the enemy had 
killed the first one they chased the second one and kUled him, and so 
their bodies lay apart. Then the war party left and the two spirits 
started to follow them. Soon they came to where their bodies were 
lying. Then they said, "Let us follow the enemy a little." Soon they 
caught up to the war party and one of the spirits pushed one of the 

1° This account is quite fragmentary and was obtained in connection with the clan myth. It is given 
here on account of the speeches. 

badin] BURIAL AND FUNERAL CUSTOMS 155 

men on the back of his head. He immediately became paralyzed 
from the touch. Then they pushed another man and he could not 
walk. So they laughed and turned back in order to return to their 
home. 

They had not yet learned that they were dead. One went to his 
camp and told his wife that he was hungry but she paid no attention 
to him. The other had the same experience. Then each man started 
to go to the other man's lodge and they met midway. The first man 
said, "I came back hungry and asked for food, but they would not 
give me any, so I thought that I would go to your place." The 
second one said the same thing. Then they said, "Let us lie down a 
while." Just then the people began to cry, for they had brought 
back the bodies of the two dead men. Then one of the men said, 
"My friend, we have been killed." The other one began to cry. 

So the people gathered together and had a meal. One of the 
ghosts said, " We must try and get something from the meal that they 
are having, for the people said, ' We are giving this meal in honor of 
the departed." Then the other friend said, "Now we are going to 
eat, for they are cooking for us." 

These two were born again and told about this, and that is how we 
know it. This is the origin of the Four Nights' Wake. It is claimed 
that the spirits of the spirit land have a four nights' feast before they 
start. 

Grave-post Marks 

(DRAWINGS BY INDIANS) 
<Fig.2x) 

Warrior has been on the warpath (homani'na). 

Warrior was a leader of a warpath (sak^i'). 

Warrior was a helper on a warpath (wagLxo'na) (rek£ln/). 

Warrior counted one of the three coup (wa'ngonArjk). 

Warrior had made a captive (wanglni). 

Warrior had killed a horse on the warpath or stolen one from the 
enemy. 

If a person had killed a man and cut off his head, he is allowed to 
paint the top (upper part?) of the grave-post red. 

aV 

/ D P X & >~^ 

12 3 4 5 6 7 

Fig. 28.— Grave-post marks: 1, Has been on the warpath; 2, has been leader on warpath; 3, has been helper 
on warpath; 4, nas counted one of the coup; .5, has made a captive; 6, has killed horse on warpath or stolen 
one from enemy; 7, has killed a man and cut off his head. 

CHAPTER VI 

WARFARE AND THE COUNCIL LODGE 
Warfare 

War was one of the most important elements in the life of the 
Winnebago. The life of the warrior was the ideal toward which all 
men strove. It not only satisfied certain emotional needs but it 
was so inextricably interwoven with social standing in the com- 
munity and with individual prestige that Winnebago life is unthink- 
able without it. It is not surprising, then, that the prayer for 
success on the warpath was the most important prayer that men 
offered up to the spirits and that it was reechoed in almost all the 
ceremonies. (Pis. 43, 44, 45.) 

An element of culture fraught with so much significance to the 
individual and the social group was bound to be surrounded by 
innumerable customs, regulations, and restrictions. It was a life 
that was at stake every time an individual went on the warpath, 
and remembering the value of each life to a small community, it is 
not to be wondered at if there is a definite attempt on the part of the 
social group to restrict individual activity in this particular regard. 
An individual might go on the warpath either alone or in company 
with a few people, but the community, in the person of the chief, 
insisted that he show some warrant for his action. If no warrant of 
any kind could be given, he subjected himself to the only restrictive 
measures the chief and the community could adopt, disapproval, 
jeers, and temporary loss of social standing and prestige. So much, 
as far as his own person was concerned. If his action jeopardized 
the life or lives of other members of the tribe he had then to face 
the relatives of these people, just as any individual who had com- 
mitted some wrong. It is hardly likely that many men would 
willingly run any risks of unnecessarily antagonizing their fellow 
tribesmen when the proper means of preparing for the warpath 
was open to all. A careful perusal of the system of education given 
on page 166 makes it clear that a sufficiently large number of' 
methods for obtaining consent to lead a party were given, and that 
it was possible for every male individual to go on the warpath 
frequently if he so desired. Certain requirements were, however, 
necessary. It was not left to each individual to decide for himself 
whether he possessed these, but the final decision always lay in the 
hands of the chief. 
156 

BUREAU OF AMERICAN ETHNOLOGY THIRTY-SEVENTH ANNUAL REPORT PLATE 43 

a. WAR CLUBS OF THE UPPER DIVISION 

b. WHIPS 

BUREAU OF AMERICAN ETHNOLOGY THIRTY-SEVENTH ANNUAL REPORT PLATE 44 

DRUMS 

H 

O 

> 

03 

CO 

D 
_l 

o 

< 

o 
o 

_1 

c 
z 
i 

badin] WARFARE AND THE COUNCIL LODGE 157 

Any man who has been specially blessed with war powers may 
go on the warpath. Such a man must not merely be blessed with 
those general war powers that individuals obtain during their puberty 
fast, but must likewise be blessed with a definite enemy to kill or 
capture, as the case may be, immediately before he starts out. In 
practice this meant that whenever a person wished to go on the war- 
path he fasted in order to obtain the necessary guarantees of success. 
An account of the powers granted by the spirit or spirits was then 
placed before the chief and if, in his opinion, they justified the under- 
taking, the man was permitted to go. If they were insufficient the 
chief expressed his disapproval and the contemplated undertaking 
had either to be given up or the man would be compelled to fast again 
for increased powers. There were a number of men who were unable 
to obtain the requisite powers. To them one of two alternatives 
was left open : they might either purchase sufficient powers to go on a 
warpath or they might volunteer to join a large warpath. A volun- 
teer needed no special blessing. If he had one, it would certainly 
benefit him, but it was not necessary except as an additional precau- 
tion, for the leader of the war party (dotcanhuyka) was supposed to 
be blessed specifically with every element necessary for a successful 
undertaking. As the Winnebago express it, he was blessed "with a 
complete road." In a war leader's blessing, everything must be 
provided — sufficient food, a definite number of enemies to kill, the 
exact place where they are to be killed, the exact time when they 
are to be killed, the exact manner in which they are to be killed, the 
exact manner in which the participants are to return to their homes, 
the safe return of all participants, and an infinite number of other 
minor points. As a volunteer went at the request of another man, 
the latter, and not he, took upon himself entire responsibility and 
the chief dealt directly with him. The chief would, in such a case, 
be particularly careful to see that every life that was risked was 
amply safeguarded. Otherwise the war party woidd not be permitted 
to start. 

A man may go on the warpath for two reasons : either to revenge 
a slain relative or in a general way because he thinks he has received 
sufficient power and wishes to obtain glory. If the incentive was 
revenge, he might pursue one of two methods. He might go to the 
shaman with offerings of tobacco and presents and tell him about the 
death of his relative and his desire for revenge; or he might take the 
matter in his own hand, fast, and after having stealthily prepared for 
the necessities of the warpath inform a friend and steal out with him 
in the middle of the night. Were he to take the first method, it 
would be the shaman who would fast and who would afterwards 
lead the party, taking along with him as many men as would follow 
him. 

158 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ann. 37 

When a man went on a warpath for the sake of glory he generally 
led a large party and all sorts of special arrangements were made, 
because then a war leader was necessary and volunteers were always 
needed. It is believed that the same holds true for larger war 
parties. 

In discussing the essential requisite for a successful war party we 
have stated that a special blessing was necessary for this purpose. 
There is, however, one noteworthy exception to this ride, if we are 
to accept the statements of members of the upper phratry — all mem- 
bers of the Warrior clan may go on a warpath without fasting and 
without receiving a blessing. This statement was vigorously denied 
by members of the lower phratry. 

When a war party returns, a very interesting ceremony takes place. 
At some distance from the village a victorious war party sends a 
messenger ahead to tell all those at home that the war party has been 
unsuccessful and that all have been killed, and that those at home 
should put on mourning. Secretly, however, the leader tells someone 
to look for a pole for the Victory dance, and shortly after all the 
preparations for mourning have been made the victorious warriors 
rush into the village. Before entering the village that warrior who 
has counted first coup is offered a pipe, from which he always takes 
a few puffs. The same pipe is then handed to the one who counted 
coup second, and so on, until the fourth man is reached. Then the 
prizes (waixewe) are given to the victors, who afterwards give them 
to their sisters. The scalps are not taken into the village, but are 
left outside, and warriors who have remained at home rush out to 
count coup upon them. Then the scalps are carried around the 
village four times. 

The widely-known Plains custom of "counting coup" is also 
practiced among the Winnebago. The individual who strikes the 
dead body of the enemy first obtains the first honor, the one striking 
it second the second honor, the one striking it third the third honor, 
and the one who actually killed the enemy obtaining the fourth and 
least important honor. 

The following are descriptions given in the words of the informants : 

Description of war customs and the manner of conducting a war 
party. — Informant, member of the Thunderbird clan. 

When a man is ready to go on the warpath, he looks around for as many men as he 
wishes to take along and then gives a feast. At the feast he fixes the time at which 
the war partyia to start. The man giving the feast (i. e., the leader of the war party) 
would get up and tell those present that he intended going on a warpath and give his 
reason; then he would say that whosoever so desired could come along. 

Many went along. Indeed, there was quite a crowd. The first stopping place 
(higiyara) was always near the outskirts of the village. There the leader appointed 
four men to go after food and wood for the fire. During their absence two camping 
places would be arranged, one on each side of the war leader. As soon as the four 
men returned with the food the attendants skinned and prepared the animals for 

radin] WARFARE AND THE COUNCIL LODGE 159 

eating. Then the war leader asked for food, and it was brought to him. Now the 
female relatives of the men came to the camp, bringing with them moccasins for the 
journey. After that the chief asked some man to tell stories and some to take care 
of the fireplace, while two brave warriors were put in chargo of the camp. Toward 
morning a number of warriors who had not been asked to join this particular war 
party might stray in (hotcu' ygitEe) . 

Before the war leader enters the higij-ara he places his war bundle crosswise in 
front of the entrance of the higij-ara and sings some songs. When he is finished, his 
attendants place the war bundle on his back, and only then does he really enter the 
higiyara, followed by all the other members of the war party.1 

When they approached the place where they expected to find the enemy, two dis- 
tinguished warriors were appointed to reconnoiter, and they proceeded ahead of the 
war party until they saw the enemy. Then they returned to the camp and reported 
to the war leader. From that time on they would practice their various individual 
powers (waruxA'p naykgigire'je).2 

When the two warriors sent out to reconnoiter return, the attendant offers them 
the pipe that he had prepared for the war leader. They smoke it and say, "Those 
whom we are after are entirely unaware of our presence." Then the members of the 
war party would thank them for their information. All would now start out against 
the enemy. When near the enemy, they practice their powers again and paint 
themselves with their war paints. To those spirits who have bestowed blessings 
upon the various members of the war party offerings are now made. Especially to 
the spirits who are in control of war powers are offerings made. To them they also 
pray for life and for war honors in the coming encounter. They even offer tobacco 
to those spirits from whom they have not received blessings, asking them for aid 
because of their careful observance of all the customs and precepts they were taught. 
Some offered tobacco to a medicine they possessed and asked the m edicine to remem- 
ber them in the coming encounter. Others boiled water (for a spirit) and asked him 
to assist them in obtaining a war honor, while others again offered tobacco to their 
war bundles and prayed that the powers contained therein might be strong and that 
they might kill some of the enemy and obtain war honors. All prayed that the 
enemy might not kill them and that they might finally return home safe. Those 
who had no supernatural powers to fall back upon would get frightened at such a time 
and they would say, "Alas! how will I fare! I should have fasted. I should have 
given feasts. I should have offered good medicines to the spirits and fasted until I 
was blessed, so that I, too, might now have some powerful medicine to use. Had I 
fasted and obtained a blessing from the spirits who are in control of war powers, had I 
given feasts, this all would have been a source of strength to me now and I would 
know positively whether or not I am going to be killed in the coming encounter." 

When everything is in readiness the war leader rises and appoints four warriors to 
give the war whoop. Then, as soon as the war whoop has been given, they would 
rush upon the enemy, imitating as they ran the sounds of the spirits who had blessed 
them. The first four to kill and count coup obtained the corresponding four war 
honors. Those who captured a man also obtained war honors. Beside these principal 
ones there were minor war honors. Those who obtained no honors at all would return 
home crying. After they had killed all those in the village of the euemy they would 
burn it to the ground and then start for their homes in the best of spirits. 

When they were near their home they sent a messenger ahead to inform their rela- 
tives to put on mourning, for all those who had started out on the warpath had been 
killed; that he who had in reality obtained the first war honor had been killed first, 

1 Higiyara is the special arrangement of the camp used on individual warpaths. 

2 When a war party has located the enemy, they prepare for the attack and run about, practicing their 
individual magical powers. "The war-club running" (warum'p naykgigirc'ji) referred to is the practice 
of running about in preparation for the attack upon the enemy so that they may not get tired out too 
easily. 

160 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ann. 37 

etc. Then the war leader would secretly tell some one to select a stake (for the Victory 
Dance) and after a short time all the members of the war party would rush in and march 
around the entire village striking the scalps that they had tied to sticks. Then they 
would all go to the place where the stake had been put up and there they would dis- 
tribute the war prizes to the sisters of the men who had won them and the women 
would walk around proudly with the prizes around their necks. Then, in the daytime 
they would dance the Victory Dance and in the evening they would dance the 
Hok'ixere Dance for four nights. 

Description of a war party. — Informant, member of the Thunder- 
bird clan. 

If a man wishes to go on the warpath he must fast and be blessed by the spirits in a 
specific manner. If a man is thus blessed, he gives a feast and announces his intention 
of leading a war party. The chief always has a representative at such a feast (a mem- 
ber of the Buffalo clan), and as soon as it is over this man goes to the former and reports 
to him. If the chief thinks that the blessing is insufficient and might cause the death 
of many men he takes the war leader's pipe and lays it across his path and the war 
leader is then compelled to abandon his undertaking. This action on the part of the 
chief is sacred and must be accepted as final. The war leader dare not step across 
the pipe. Should the chief, however, not do this, then the war leader knew that there 
was no objection. Usually some members of every clan go along, but especially 
members of the Thunderbird, Warrior, and Bear clans. 

The action of the war leader is controlled by many rules. He must be the one who 
has fasted and been blessed with all that is essential for conducting a war party. He 
must have his food provided for him by the spirits, know the exact location of the 
enemy, their numbers, and their sex. 

After the war party has traveled for about four days, the men offer tobacco to the 
leader and he tells them where he is going, the number of the enemy, etc. If, after 
that, any of the members of the war party do not approve of the undertaking then they 
place a pipe across his path and the war leader is compelled to return. If nothing is 
said, then all is well. The war leader always goes ahead of his party and his attend- 
ants behind him, followed by the other members of the party. Whenever the chief 
stops liis attendants run to his side, take his war bundle and place it in front of him. 
Then the leader sits down, neither turning to the right nor to the left but looking 
straight ahead. The attendants get two poles and place them on each side of him, 
bend the ends over to form an arch, on each side of which are placed small oak sticks 
arranged in a row. Under this structure the war leader stays. Here he sleeps and is 
fed by his attendants. No one is permitted to go ahead of this improvised structure. 
On each side of him two fireplaces are placed, two for the Upper clans and two for the 
Lower clans. If the war party is traveling westward the two fireplaces on the north 
side belong to the Lower clans and the two on the south side to the Upper clans. If a 
man is going on a warpath for the first time, he stays in the rear of the party and has a 
little fire of his own. He remains in the rear in this way until the battle begins. Then 
he joins the others. 

A member of the Warrior clan is selected by the war leader to act as guard and he 
goes back and forth behind him encouraging the men and telling them not to steal 
away alone or go too far ahead of the party, since that always results in the loss of life. 
It is for this reason that it is not considered correct for a man to try and steal away and 
perhaps obtain a war honor in this selfish manner. Whenever the war leader stops he 
tells his companions what they must do in order to obtain food, all this information 
ha-ving been provided for in his blessing. If he tells some one to go to a certain place 
and kill a deer, he is certain to find a deer at the place specified. Whenever the war 
leader gets up and steps over his war bundle the attendants come and place his war 
bundle on his back and he then proceeds on his march, followed by the other members 
of the party. Whenever he comes to a river he takes some of the tobacco which is 

Radin] WARFARE AXD THE COUNCIL LODGE 161 

always kept on hand and offers it to the spirit who controls this particular war party. 
The others do the same. Then he would cross the river. Whenever he drank any 
water the others would also do so, and if he refrained so would the others. If at any 
time during the night when they are camping the war leader should wake up and sing 
some songs, be they grizzly bear, black root paint, or night songs, all those others who 
knew similar songs would likewise begin to sing. 

Miscellaneous war customs. — There were, in former times, many 
miscellaneous customs connected with warfare, most of which have 
now been forgotten. However, in myths and accounts of war parties 
a number of them are still mentioned. 

When a war party surprised a lodge, all the occupants were killed 
or captured and the poles that were spliced together to form the 
arches were released so that they sprang back to either side and 
assumed a vertical position. 

When a war party surprised a lodge in which there were children 
they generally killed them, cut off their heads, pried open their 
mouths so as to give them the appearance of laughing, and then 
placed the heads on their bodies again and arranged them against the 
door, so that when their father came home he would find them greet- 
ing him as usual. A brave warrior would never flinch at such a 
sight, but would prepare a meal as usual and speak to the children as 
if they were alive and offer them something to eat. Only then would 
he bury them. Immediately after they had been buried he would 
go on the warpath to revenge them. 

Frequently the skulls of slain enemies are used as lodge weights and 
their skin is taken off and used as mats, door-flaps, etc. 

War honors. — "It is the ideal of every Winnebago youth," says an 
informant, " to kill an enemy in full sight of his friends and thus to 
gain for himself a headdress and an eagle feather." Most deeds con- 
sidered valorous, according to Winnebago ideas, have associated with 
them certain insignia which are always worn in public, giving evi- 
dence to all that so-and-so has performed such and such a valorous 
deed. 

These insignia consist of the following: 

Headdress and feather. — Denote that an individual has scalped and 
killed a man and torn off his scalp still bleeding. He is entitled to a 
red headdress and eagle feather. This also includes the man who 
has counted first coup (sarinigwahi'na). 

Red headdress. — If he has killed the enemy and not scalped him 
(tcasi 'ntc wale' e' re.) 

Eagle feather. — Worn by one who has counted second coup. 

Hanging eagle feather. — Worn by one who has counted third coup. 

Eagle feather stuck crosswise in hair. — Worn by one who has counted 
fourth coup. 

Wangirusgitc. — Consists of a rope worn around the neck. It is 
worn by the leader of that warpath who has captured an enemy. 

162 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eih. an.w 37 

Ud'ykere. — Arm band worn by the person who did the actual 
capturing. If two enemies are captured he can wear an arm band 
on each arm. 

Red-dyed eagle feather. — A red-dyed eagle feather worn by a war 
leader who has brought a captured enemy to camp and tortured him 
with embers. 

Ankle-hand of skunk or polecat. — An ankle-band of the skin of a 
skunk or polecat worn by one who has seen an enemy dead on the 
battle field and kicked him. If he does it for the second time, he 
may wear skunk skins on both legs below the knee. If the leader 
does it he is allowed to use an otter skin. 

Rope tied to helt. — A rope of any desirable length tied to a belt may 
be worn by an individual who has succeeded in either capturing or 
killing an enemy's horse. At a dance no one would dare step on it. 
If an individual does not want to wear this, he may in its place Wear 
a rope around his body. 

Legs painted white. — An individual who has been on the warpath 
in winter may paint his legs white, from the knee down. 

Gun painted red. — An individual who has killed an enemy with a 
gun may carry this gun at a dance and paint it red. 

Spear. — If a person kills an enemy with a spear, he may carry 
this and tie to it any symbol (eagle feather, etc.) that he has gained. 

Koke're^u^. — An individual who was a well-known warrior and had 
fought in front of his comrades, and one whom the enemy respected, 
was entitled to a long stick with eagle feathers. At a dance he had 
the privilege of dancing with the stick in front of his comrades. 

Hand on face. — Any warrior making all four coups, who did not 
care to wear a dress, might paint a man's hand in black upon his face. 

Raven's skin around neck. — If an individual captured more than 
one woman in war, he was entitled to wear a raven skin around his 
neck. 

Body painted yellow ami wounded spot red. — If a man had been 
wounded on the warpath, he had the right at a dance to paint his 
body yellow and the wounded spots red, with red streaks running 
from the wounds. 

Otter skin around knee and naygisfo. — A great warrior, one who has 
gained all the war honors, can, if he does not wish to wear his separate 
insignia, wear instead an otter skin attached below the knee, whose 
ends are not quite united. He may also wear a naygis-o consisting 
of a stick, whittled and painted red, in his hair. 

Valorous deeds are also perpetuated on the grave posts when the 
warriors who have accompanied the corpse to the grave count coup 
and draw a picture symbolizing their particular deed on the post. 
It should therefore be remembered that the markings on these posts 
do not refer at all to the valorous deeds of the deceased but to those 
of warriors who happened to count coup at the grave. 

Radin] WARFARE AND THE COUNCIL LODGE 163 

The Council Lodge 

The clan in the council lodge. — There is one place where the clan 
finds representation as a political unit, and that is the council lodge. 
No unanimity seems to exist with regard to the positions of the 
various clans in the council lodge, but here again the position of those 
clans with specific governmental functions seems to be far more stable 
than that of the others. The clans are generally so seated as always 
to be opposite their "friend " clan, from which fact a clan frequently 
calls its friend "my opposite." It is, however, interesting to note 
that this seating does not hold for two friend groups, the Water- 
spirit-Buffalo and Elk-Deer. The Water-spirit clan occupies a high 
position in the council lodge, apparently quite out of proportion to 
its present importance in the social organization of the tribe, but 
in consonance with its former importance. 

Councils. — No important undertaking was ever attempted with- 
out the holding of a council. On such occasions the principal mem- 
bers of each clan would assemble in a long lodge and discuss in great 
detail. Nothing comparable to a vote that might express the desire 
of those assembled was taken, but the opinions of those present were 
always presented in their speeches. As a rule the chief, or some 
person especially interested in definite matter, led the discussion. 
Owing to the complete absence of specific examples of councils it is 
very difficult to obtain a very clear idea of their working. The 
numerous councils relating to treaties with the whites are of very 
little interest or significance in this connection. 

There was unquestionably a regular order of entering and seating 
in the council lodge. What this order was it is impossible to deter- 
mine now, for the statements made by different informants were con- 
tradictory. Since, however, the contradictions in the seating ar- 
rangements seemed to be correlated with different clan membership 
the discrepancies may be due, not to lack of knowledge but to 
actual differences. A few examples of the seating arrangements 
follow (figs. 29-32) : 

Description of order of entering the council lodge. — Informant, 
member of Bear clan. The Buffalo clan would always be the last to 
enter the council lodge because the members remained outside 
making announcements until all the others had entered. The 
members of the Thunderbird clan enter first, making a circuit of 
tiie lodge before taking their seats. The members of the Warrior 
clan followed and took their seats just opposite those of the Thunder- 
bird clan. Then the Water-spirit clan follows, and then come the 
rest as indicated in the diagram. This is the only place where the 
Bear clan is not in control of the arrangements. 

164 

THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE 

(ETH. ANN. 37 

Fig. 29.— Seating arrangement in council lodge 
according to Thunderbird clan: a, Warrior clan; 
h, Water-spirit clan; c, Deer clan; d, Elk clan; 
e. Pigeon clan;/, Wolfclan;o, Bear clan; ft , Snake 
clan; i, Buffalo clan; ;', Eagle clan; k, Thunder- 
Dird clan. (The order of importance is from k-a.) 

Fig. 30.— Seating arrangement in council lodge 
according to Bear clan : a , Thunderbird clan ; 
b Bear clan; c, Wolf clan; d, Pigeon clan; t, Eagle 
clan; /, Snake clan; o, Fish clan; ft, Elk clan; 
i , Buffalo clan ; j, Deer clan; k, Water-spirit clan; 
/, Warrior clan. 

RADIN] 

WARFARE AND THE COUNCIL LODGE 

165 

Fig. 31.— Seating arrangement in council lodge ac- 
cording to Thunderbird clan: k, Thunderbird 
clan; ; , Eagle clan; i, Buffalo clan; h. Snake clan ; 
g. Bear clan; /, Wolf clan; e, Pigeon clan; d. Elk 
clan; c, Deer clan; bt Water-spirit clau; a, Warrior 
clan. 

Fig. 32.— Seating arrangement in council lodge ac- 
cordingto Wolf clan; a, Thunderbird clan; 6, Eagle 
clan; c, Buffalo clan; d, Water-spirit clan; e, Bear 
clan;/, Wolf clan. 

CHAPTER VII 

SYSTEM OF EDUCATION1 

The Winnebago seem to have had a more or less formal system of 
instruction. This consisted of a series of precepts on different 
aspects of life, such as the duty of fasting, of being a warrior, of 
behavior to one's parents and relatives, how to treat one's wife 
and women in general, how to bring up children, how to behave to 
strangers, etc. These formal teachings were called Twk'i'TcvP, which 
means "precepts" or "teachings." Doubtless those obtained do 
not constitute all the different types existing, but they seem fairly 
representative. 

My Father's Teaching to His Sons and Daughters 

system of instruction to son 

My son, when you grow up you should see to it that you are of 
some benefit to your fellowmen. There is only one way in which you 
can begin to be of any aid to them, and that is to fast. So, my son, 
see to it that you fast. Our grandfather, the fire, who stands at all 
times in the center of our dwelling, sends forth all kinds of blessings.2 
Be sure that you make an attempt to obtain his blessings. 

My son, do you remember to have our grandfathers, the war chiefs, 
bless you. See to it that they pity you.3 Some day when you go on the 
warpath their blessings will enable you to have specific foreknowledge 
of all that will happen to you on that occasion. This will likewise 
enable you to accomplish what you desire without the danger of 
anything interfering with your plans. Without the slightest trouble 
you will then be able to obtain the prizes of war. Without any trouble 

1 This chapter was originally intended for special publication and the notes prepared for it then have 
been retained. 

2 The fire {p'etc) is regarded as a spirit by the Winnebago. As a spirit he possesses many gifts that are 
of use to human beings in their sojourn on earth, and in order to obtain them, mortals must make offerings 
of tobacco to him. He may also appear to them during their fastings and bless them with a number of 
powers. In addition to his other powers, it is believed that lie is the messenger of Earthmaker and the 
other spirits and that he transmits both the messages, as well as the offerings that mortals make to them, 
by means of the smoke that rises upward. The old man speaks of the fire first, because being always 
around them it is a comparatively easy task to make offerings to it. 

s This is the regular expression used for blessing. The idea seems to be that through fasting and crying 
you are to put yourself in a "pitiable" condition and that then the spirits, seeing your state, will pity you 
and grant you what you have asked. The word "grandfathers" is used in the sense of ancestral spirits, 
the thunderbirds, who are regarded as the dispensers of war power, not only by members of this clan but 
by all Winnebago. 

166 

Radin] SYSTEM OF EDUCATION 167 

you will be able to obtain these and in addition glory and the war 
honors.4 If , in truth, you thirst yourself to death,5 our grandfathers 
who are in control of wars — to whom all the war powers that exist in 
this world belong — they will assuredly bless you. 

My son, if you do not wear out your feet through ceaseless activity 
(in fasting) , if you do not blacken your face for fasting, it will be all 
in vain that you inflict sufferings upon yourself. Blessings are not 
obtained through mere desire alone; they are not obtained without 
making the proper sacrifices or without putting yourself time and 
again in proper mental condition. Indeed, my son, they are not to be 
obtained without effort on your part. So see to it that, of all those 
spirits whom Earthmaker created, one at least has pity upon you 
and blesses you. Whatever such a spirit says to you that will un- 
questionably happen. 

Now, my son, if you do not obtain a spirit to srengthen you, you 
will not amount to anything in the estimation of your fellowmen. 
They will show you little respect. Perhaps they will make fun of you. 

Do not die in the village. It is not good to die there. Whenever a 
person is grown up that is what is told him. Nor is it good, my son, 
to let women journey ahead of you from amidst the village. It is 
not good thus to let women die before you.6 Therefore, in order to 
prevent this, our ancestors encouraged one another to fast. Some 
day you will travel in a difficult road; there will be some crisis in 
your life, and then when it is too late you will begin to reproach your- 
self for not having fasted at the proper time. So that you may not 
have occasion to blame yourself at such a time I counsel you to fast. 
If you do not obtain a blessing when the other women are dividing 
the war prizes brought home from the warpath by their brothers, 
your sisters will stand aside envying them. If, however, you are 
blessed by the spirits in control of war power, and if you then return 
victorious, how proud your sisters will be to receive the war honors 
and to wear them around their necks and participate with them in the 
victory dance ! And in this way your sisters likewise will be strength- 
ened by your war deeds. You will keep well, in health. 

My son, it will indeed be good if you obtain war powers, but our 
ancestors say it is difficult. Especially difficult is it to be leader on 

* There are four war honors, the highest going to the Indian who first touches a dead enemy, the second 
belonging to the one who kills him, and the last two to those who touch him second and third. The 
war prizes generally consisted of necklaces of wampum which were given to those who had obtained the first 
war honors. The victor also would be given the privilege of first smoking the pipe on his return to his 
home. The prize of the wampum necklace was always given by the victor to his elder sisters. 

<■ That is, fast. 

6 That is, obtain war power so that yon can go on the warpath and prevent yourself from dying in the 
village or have women die before you. 

168 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth.axn. 37 

the warpath.7 So they say. If you do not become an individual 
warranted to lead a war party, yet mistaking yourself for one although 
really an ordinary warrior, you "throw away a man/' your act will 
be considered most disgraceful. A mourner might harm you in 
revenge for the fact that you have caused him to mourn, and burn 
you with embers. Your people will all be sad, both on account of 
your disgrace and on account of the pain inflicted upon you. 

My son, not with the blessing of one of the spirits merely, nor with 
the blessing of twenty, for that matter, can you go on the warpath. 
You must have the blessing of all the spirits above the earth, and of 
all those on the earth, and of all those who are pierced through the 
earth;8 of all those under the earth; of all those who are under the 
water; of all those that are on the sides of the earth, i. e., all the four 
winds; of the Disease-giver;9 of the Sun; of the Daylight;10 of the 
Moon; of the Earth; and of all those who are in control of war 
powers — with the blessings of all these deities must you be provided 
before you can lead a successful war party. 

My son, if you cast off dress11 men will be benefited by your deeds. 
You will be an aid to all your people. If your people honor you, it 
will be good. And they will like you even the more if you obtain a 

T Among the Winnebago any individual who has been blessed with the necessary powers to lead a 
warpath may do so, but it is absolutely essential that his blessing directing him be of such a nature that 
every possible contingency is included therein. Such complete blessings are, of course, not common nor 
can they be obtained except through unusual exertions. If you are blessed with just the ordinary or 
incomplete war powers and you nevertheless undertake to lead a war party, you may either be defeated 
or perhaps only partially successful, and, what is worse, you may lose some of the warriors who started 
with you. Your recklessness has thus caused the death of some of your fellow tribesmen. It is under- 
stood that every warrior before starting on the warpath turn his " blessing " over to the chief of the tribe 
for examination, and if the chief considers it complete the warrior is not held responsible for the lack of 
successor loss of life. If the chief docs not consider an individual's blessing sufficient to justify the object 
he has in view and forbids the warrior to go, and if the latter nevertheless goes; or granted the case he does 
not even submit his "blessing " to the chief for scrutiny, and sneaks out, then he is held directly responsible 
for any mishap on the warpath. The relatives of any individual thus killed may hold the war leader 
responsible and demand compensation; or, as is indicated by B. a few lines later, a mourner (i. e.,one who 
has been placed in mourning by the criminal foolhardiness of the war leader) might attack, perhaps kill 
him, without being held guilty of any crime. It must of course be understood that such occurrences wouid 
seldom take place. We must, however, remember throughout these "teachings'1 that one of the objects 
of the old men was to draw the most alluring pictures of the rewards that would fall to the lot of those who 
followed in the footsteps of their ancestors, and, on the other hand, to draw the most lurid pictures of the 
wretchedness that befell those who deviated, no matter in what details, from the customs sanctioned by 
age. 

8 According to the Winnebago creation myth, when Eartbmaker, the creator of the earth, first came to 
consciousness and began creating life the earth on which we were to live was in continual motion, and 
nothing that the former could do seemed to be able to stop it. From above he threw down grass, trees, 
etc., but all was of no avail. Finally he hit upon the happy expedient of pinning the earth down at the 
four corners by means of four enormous snakes, or, as some say, by means of four mythical animals known 
as water spirits. It is to these that the old man is referring here. According to the story, even these were 
of no avail, and it was only when he finally placed four mythical beings known as "Island Weights" at 
the four corners that our planet stopped spinning. These "Island Weights"seem to be identical with 
the spirits of the four cardinal points, but they are not to be confused with the four winds mentioned later. 

s A deity conceived of as dealing out life-giving powers from one half of his body and death-giving powers 
from the other half. He is also supposed to disseminate disease. Disease-giver is a literal translation 
of the Winnebago word, but this probably does not convey the exact meaning. There seems to be no 
parallel to this peculiar deity among the other Siouan tribes or among the Algonquian. 

10 Daylight or light is conceived of as something different and distinct from the sun. 

ii That is, if you give away things frequently, especially to poor people. 

radin] SYSTEM OF EDUCATION 169 

limb.12 They will indeed like you very much if you obtain a limb, 
or, even better, two or three. If you do thus, wherever people boil 
an animal with a head 13 you will always be able to eat. 

If on account of your bravery you are permitted to tell of your 
war exploits during the Four Nights' Wake for the benefit of the 
soul of the deceased, do not try to add to your glory by exaggerat- 
ing any exploit, for by so doing you will cause the soul to stumble 
on its journey to the spirit land.14 If you do this and add an un- 
truth to the account of your war exploit, you wdl die soon after. 
The war spirits always hear you. Tell a little less. The old men 
say it is wise. 

My son, it is good to die in war. If you die in war, your soul will 
not be unconscious. You will have complete disposal of your soul 
and it will always be happy.15 If you should ever desire to return 
to this earth and live here again, you will be able to do so. A second 
life as a human being you may live, or, if you prefer, as an inhabitant 
of the air (a bird) you may live, or you may roam the earth as an 
animal. Thus it is to him who dies in battle. 

My son, fast for an honorable place among your fellowmen. Fast, 
so that when you are married you may have plenty of food; that 
you may be happy and that you may not have to worry about your 
children. If in your fastings you have a vision of your future home, 
the members of your fanuly wdl be lacking in nothing during their 
life. Fast for the food that you may need. If you fast a suffi- 
ciently large number of times, when in after life you have children 
and they cry for food you will be able to offer a piece of deer or 
moose meat without any difficulty. Your children will never be 
hungry. 

IS That is, a war honor, but more specifically if you "count coup " first. The honor of killing an enemy 
and the three honors associated with first touching his dead body are always spoken of as "the four limbs 
of the body." 

13 That is, wherever people give a Winter Feast. At this feast a deer, head and all, is served to the 
invited guests. The head may only be eaten by bra\e warnors. 

" At the death of a clansman au elaborate wake takes place. To this wake, as the principal participants, 
three or four warriors who have counted "coup" are always invited. It is believed that the souls of all 
the enemies one has killed become the slaves of the victor and he may command them to do his bidding 
at any time. If the victor tells his exploit and then commands the enslaved soul to take care of the recently 
departed person in whose honor the wake is being given, the soul of the conquered enemy will be of con- 
siderable aid in overcoming the obstacles that are supposed to infest the path between this earth and the 
land of the spirits. These can not be overcome by the merits of the individual alone. If, however, a 
warrior becomes vainglorious, the soul of the recently departed individual will fall into the abysm of fire 
which surrounds one of the heavenly earths through which he must pass. That is what is meant by 
"stumbling." 

15 It must be remembered that the Winnebago believe that all that constitutes "life,'' "consciousness," 
continues to exist alter death, the only difference being that in the former case an envelope, the body.is 
present and, in the latter case, it is not. Winnebago philosophy does not concern itself with what happens 
when a soul becomes "unconscious" at death, which would, of course, be the case with all those who do 
not die in battle: but it does insist that to him who dies on the warpath the moment of death does not 
even deprive of consciousness. He goes right on living, as if he were still an inhabitant of this earth, the 
only difference being that the corporeal envelope has fallen off his soul and that, although he sees and hears 
human beings, he himself is not visible nor his voice audible. 

186823—22 12 

170 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ass. 37 

My son, never abuse your wife. The women are sacred. If you 
abuse your wife and make her life miserable, you will die early. 
Our grandmother, the earth, is a woman, and in mistreating your 
wife you will be mistreating her. Most assuredly will you be abus- 
ing our grandmother if you act thus. And as it is she that is taking 
care of us you will really be killing yourself by such behavior. 

My son, when you keep house, should anyone enter your house, 
no matter who it is, be sure to offer him whatever you have in the 
house. Any food that you withhold at such a time will most as- 
suredly become a source of death to you. If you are stingy about 
giving food the people will kill you on this account. They will 
poison you. If you hear of a traveler who is visiting your people 
and you wish to see him, prepare your table for him and have him 
sent for. In this manner you will be acting correctly. It is always 
good to act correctly and do good, the old people used to say. 

If you see an old, helpless person, help him with whatever you 
possess. Should you happen to possess a home and you take him 
there, he might suddenly say abusive things about you during the 
middle of the meal. You will be strengthened by such words. 
This same traveler may, on the contrary, give you something that 
he carries under his arms and which he treasures very highly. If it 
is an object without a stem,16 keep it to protect your house. If you 
thus keep it within your house, your home will never be molested 
by any bad spirits. Nothing will be able to enter your house un- 
expectedly. Thus you will live. Witches, instead of entering your 
house, will pass around it. If, in addition to possessing this medi- 
cine, you also fast, your people will be benefited by it greatly. 
Earthmaker made spirits up above and some he made to live on 
this earth; and again some he made to live under the water and 
some to live in the water; and all these he put in charge of some- 
thing. Even the small animals that move about this earth the 
creator put in charge of some power. Thus he created them. After- 
wards he created us human beings and as he had exhausted all the 
powers to be disposed of we were not in control of anything. Then 
he made a weed and placed it in our charge. And he said that no 
matter how powerful are the spirits that exist they would not be 
able to take this weed from us without giving something in return. 
He himself, Earthmaker, would not be able to demand it for nothing. 
So he spoke. This weed was the tobacco plant. Earthmaker said 
that if we would offer a pipeful of tobacco to him, whatever we should 
ask of him he would immediately grant. Not only he, but all the 
spirits created, longed to have some of this tobacco. It is for this 
reason that when we fast and cry piteously for some spirit to take 
pity on us, if we give them tobacco they will bless us with those 

" A plant without a stem, presumably some root, used for warding off danger. 

hadix] SYSTEM OF EDUCATION ' 171 

powers that the creator gave them. So it will be. Earthmaker 
made it thus. 

My son, you must fast. If you breathe upon sick people,17 1 mean 
if you are blessed with that kind of power, you will be able to restore 
people to health. You will be of help to your people. If you can, 
in addition, draw out the pain from within the body of an individual, 
you will indeed be a help to your people. They will respect you. 
You will not even have to work for all your necessities, for those 
whom you treat will cheerfully support you as long as you live. If 
you should die, your name will be held in great respect and people 
will frequently talk about you. Ah, that man he had indeed great 
power ! 

My son, if you are not able to fast,18 try at least to obtain some 
plants that are powerful. There are people who know the qualities 
of the different plants, who have been blessed by the spirits with 
this knowledge. It is pitiable enough that you could obtain nothing 
through fasting, so ask those that are in possession of these plants at 
least to have pity upon you. If they have pity upon you, they will 
bless you with one of the plants they possess, and you will thus have 
something to help you in life and to encourage you. One plant will 
not be enough. Of all the plants that cover the earth and lie like a 
fringe of hair upon the body of our grandmother, try and obtain 
knowledge of these, that you may be strengthened in life. Then 
you will have reason to feel encouraged. A real medicine man has 
even more justification for feeling encouraged than an ordinary one, 
because such a one has been blessed with life by the Water-spirits. 
If, therefore, you wish to obtain the real powers of curing people, 
so that you will have the power of making them arise from their 
sick beds, you must long and patiently wait and labor. If, however, 
you obtain the true powers — that is, if you obtain blessings from the 
Water-spirits — then some day, when your children are in need of 
medicine, you will not have to go and look for a medicine man, but 
you will only have to look into your medicine bundle. Whatever 
trouble your children have you will be able to cure it. Should any- 
thing be the matter with the people of your tribe they will call upon 
you. You can then open your medicine bundle and the individual 
who is wanting in life will be benefited from the stock of medicines 

17 Sickness is due to the presence of some object within the body. Illness can therefore only be cured if 
this object is extracted. This is generally accomplished by the shaman sucking it out through a bone 
tube. Among the Winnebago the shaman before applying the tube squirts some water upon the afflicted 
person and breathes upon him. This is what the "breathing'' relers to. 

18 Not everyone who fasts is blessed with power. For those who are thus unable to obtain blessings 
directly from the spirits there is only one method of protection against evils left— the purchase of plants 
with magical properties from those who have been blessed with them. These can be obtained by any 
individual no matter how unsuccessful he has been in obtaining blessings through personal fasting. All 
that is needed is sufficient riches for purchasing them. Of course it goes without saying that those who 
have been blessed with power may and do also provide themselves with these medicines. 

172 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. axx. 37 

that are in your possession. You will indeed never be embarrassed. 
You will know just wherein his ailment lies. As you have obtained 
your power with great effort, therefore what you say will be so. If 
you say he will live, he will live. If the relatives of the patient 
make you good payments, you may perform what you are accustomed 
to in your treatment of people. Then you can ask your medicine to 
put forth its strength for you and it will do so. If you make good 
offerings of tobacco to the plants and if you make feasts in their 
honor, if, indeed, you make much of your medicine, if you talk to it as 
though it were a human being, then when you ask it to put forth its 
strength it will do so. The payments that you receive you can take 
with a good conscience and your children will wear them and will be 
strengthened thereby. So be very diligent in the care you bestow 
upon them. The medicines were placed here by Earthmaker for a 
good purpose. We are to use them to heal ourselves. For that 
purpose Earthmaker gave them to us. If anyone tries to obtain 
the life sustainers — that is, the medicines — and inflicts suffering upon 
himself in order to obtain them, our grandmother will know about 
it. So whatever you spend upon it, be it in labor or in goods, she 
will know about it. All that you gave in obtaining your medicines 
she will know. They will be returned to you. The people will 
thus be providing themselves with something for the future. The 
people always look forward to the future and for all possible happen- 
ings they will have some medicine provided. You must try to ob- 
tain some of the medicines that most people possess. If you want 
paint-medicine, make yourself pitiable. If your paint-medicine 
overcomes your enemy and you keep it in your home, you will never 
be wanting in wealth. The most valued possessions of the people 
will be given to you. The people will love you and the paint-medi- 
cine will be the cause of it. Whatever you receive will be in conse- 
quence of the possession of the paint-medicine. The paint-medicine 
is made of the blood of the Water-spirits, and therefore it is holy. 
People used to fast and thirst themselves to death and a Water-spirit 
would appear to them and bestow his blessings upon them. What- 
ever he told them would come true. The Earthmaker put the 
Water-spirit in charge of these things so that he would bless the 
people with them. That was his purpose. 

Some people who wished to find good medicines obtained the 
race medicine. Try and learn of it. Others had gambling medicine, 
and still others again had hunting medicine. There are medicines 
for very purpose. 

There is a courting medicine and a medicine to prevent married 
people from wishing to separate, and there is a medicine for making 
one rich. 

radix] SYSTEM OF EDUCATION 173 

If one wishes to make a person crazy, there is a medicine for that 
purpose. 

If some one had made another one sad at heart and he wished to 
revenge himself, he would use a medicine that would make that 
person crazy. Thus he would poison him. 

If a person wished to marry a certain girl and she did not want him, 
he would poison her with a medicine that would make her become a 
harlot. All the men would fall in love with her by reason of the 
medicine he gave her. 

If they wished a man to be continually running after a woman, they 
had a medicine for that purpose. All these medicines they possessed. 
You can obtain any of them you like if you ask for them in the proper 
way. 

Some people have knowledge of plants that will cause a person 
to sleep all the time. Others again have medicines that will cause 
them to stay awake all the time. Some know how to overcome the 
viciousness of dogs that watch over women by means of medicines; 
some again have medicines that will make people single them out 
even in crowds. If this person uses his medicine in a crowd of peo- 
ple, the one on whom it is used will consider him a great man no 
matter how many there should be in the crowd. Some have a 
medicine to be used for preventing an individual from getting tired. 
Others have a medicine to be used when they have dog contests. 

Whatever they did, for that they would have medicines. 

Whenever they plant a field they protect it with medicine tied on 
to a stick. No one will then go through that field without suffering 
for it. If you did not have that protection, people could go through 
your field whenever they wished. In short, try to obtain as many 
medicines as you possibly can, for you will need them all. People 
should always look out for themselves so that they may learn what 
is necessary to make life comfortable and happy. If you try to 
obtain the knowledge of these things you will get along in life well. 
You will need nothing; and whenever you need a certain medicine, 
instead of being compelled to buy it, you will have it in your own 
possession. If you act in this manner and keep on fasting you will 
never be caught offguard during your life. If you have a home, it 
will always look nice and you will be lacking in nothing. So, do 
what I tell you and you will never regret it in after life. Try and 
learn the way in which your ancestors lived and follow in their 
footsteps. 

174 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ANN. 37 

If you thus travel in the road of the good people, it will be good 
and other people will not consider your life a source of amusement." 

If you can not obtain a blessing from the spirits try also to have 
some good plant take pity on you. This I am telling you and if 
you do not do it, you will suffer for it. All that I am saying will be 
of great benefit to you if you pay heed to me, for (you will need 
medicines for) whatever you do in life, if you are not fortunate 
enough to obtain blessings from the spirits. If you are ever on the 
warpath, you will need medicine in order to escape being hit or in 
order to prevent yourself from getting exhausted or from feeling 
famished. If you manage to be fortunate in all these things you 
may be certain that the medicines have caused it. 

My son, help yourself as you go along life's path, for this earth has 
many narrow passages and you can never tell when you will come to 
one. If, however, you have something with which to strengthen 
yourself you will come safely through the passages you meet. 

Let every one think you a desirable person to know. Associate 
with people. If you act in this manner, every one will like you. 
(You will live) a contented life. Never do anything wrong to your 
children. Whatever your children ask you to do, do not hesitate 
to do it for them. If you act thus people will say you are good- 
natured. If you ever lose a friend by death and if you have riciies 
cover20 the expenses of the funeral of the deceased. Help the 
mourners to feed the people at the wake. If you act thus you will 
be acting well. Then you will be truly a helper of the people and 
they will know you as such. Indeed, all of them will know you. 
For the good you do, all will love you. 

My son, do not become a gambler. You might, it is true, become 
rich, but in spite of your wealth all your children will die. No 
gambler ever had children. It is an affair of the bad spirits entirely. 
Now if you do all that I have told you, you will unquestionably lead 
a happy and contented life. 

Thus would the old people speak to a child whom they loved very 
much, that he might obtain the means of warding off what is not 
good. Anyone who acted contrary to these teachings would have 
himself to blame for the consequences. 

'» This dislike of being made fun of, or of being the laughing stock, plays an important role among the 
Winnebago. It is not at all comparable to the same feeling as found at the present day among civilized 
people of Western Europe, for it is infinitely deeper and closely associated with social ostracism. The 
despondency caused by being made fun of. would frequently drive a person away from home or lead him to 
embark on any undertaking that would bring death. Owing to the social consequences coming in its train, 
a man would consequently do most anything in his power to ward it off. Correlated with this negative 
aspect of the use of ' ' fun-poking /'there is a positive one. There are. certain relatives who have the privilege 
of making fun of or playing practical jokes on you. This ' joking-relationship'' exists among many tribes 
in America, but the relatives between whom it is permitted differ in every case. Among the Winnebago 
it exists between uncles and nieces and nephews and between brothers-in-law and sisters-in-law. 

20 That is, buy the funeral apparel for the deceased. 

Radin] SYSTEM OF EDUCATION 175 

If you ever get married, my son, do not make an idol of your wife. 
The more you worship her, the more will she want to be worshipped. 
Thus the old people said. They warned the young men against the 
example of those men who always hearken to what the women say, 
who are the slaves of women. Often they would speak in the fol- 
lowing manner: "You have had many warnings, but it may hap- 
pen that some day you will not pay any attention to them. Then, 
when they call upon you to take part in the Winter Feast you may 
perhaps refuse to go. When a war party is leaving you may listen 
to the voice of your wife and not join them. Thus you will be as 
one who has been brought up as a woman.21 Men of every descrip- 
tion do what is demanded of them, you alone do not act as a man 
should. You never perform a man's deed. If you were to go to a 
Winter Feast, you would be handed a lean piece of meat.22 Why 
should you subject yourself to the danger of being made fun of ? A 
real brave man, when he goes to a Winter Feast, will receive a deer's 
head, while you will only receive a lean piece of meat. That is all 
they will give you to eat. It will stick in your throat."23 

My son, if you keep on listening to your wife, after a while she 
will never let you go to any feast at all. All your relatives will 
scold you and your own sisters will think little of you. They will 
say to one another, "Let us not ever go over to see him. He is of 
no help to anyone." Finally, when you have become a real slave to 
your wife, she might tell you to hit your own relatives, and you 
would do it. For these reasons, my son, I warn you against the 
words of women. Steel yourself against them. For if you do not 
do so you will find yourself different from other men. It is not good 
to be enslaved by a woman. 

My son, this also I will tell you. Women can never be watched. 
If you try to watch them you will merely show your jealousy and 
your female relatives will also be jealous. After a while you will 
become so jealous of your wife that she will leave you and run away. 
First, you worshipped her above everything else, then you became 
jealous and watched her all the time, and the result will be that she 
will run away from you. You yourself will be to blame for this. 
You thought too much of a woman and in worshipping her you 
humbled yourself, and as a consequence she has been taken away 
from you. You are making the woman suffer and making her feel 
unhappy. All the other women will know of this, and no one will 
want to marry you again. Everyone will consider you a very bad 
man. 

21 He may mean a berdash, but it is far more probable that he merely means lo call him a woman, an 
insult sufficiently great. 

22 A man who has distinguished himself as a warrior is always invited to eat the head of the animal, offered 
at the Winter Feast. Those next in distinction are given the fat pieces of meat, and the lean pieces— to 
the Winnebago, the poorest — are given to those who are of no importance. 

23 1, e. , the meat will stick in your throat , because you will feel so much ashamed of yourself. 

176 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ann. 37 

My son, whenever people go on the warpath go along with them. 
It is good to die on the warpath. You may perhaps say so, because 
you are unhappy that your wife has left you. My son, not for such 
reasons, however, must you go on the warpath. You will be merely 
throwing away a human life. If you want to go on the warpath, do so 
because you feel that you are courageous enough, not because you 
are unhappy at the loss of your wife. If you go on the warpath you 
will enjoy yourself. Do not go, however, unless you have fasted, 
and unless you have fasted for that particular warpath. If you 
have not fasted and attempt nevertheless to go on the warpath, a 
bullet will surely seek you out and kill you. This is what will happen 
to you if you do not fast. 

If you exert yourself in fasting you will assuredly perform some 
brave war exploit. You must tell your sisters and sister's children 
and your mother's sisters all about your exploit. Remember, also, 
that the keepers of the war-bundles can give you good advice in 
all that pertains to war. For their deeds they will be given a good 
dish of meat.24 This they will give you to eat. 

Of such things did my ancestors speak, and I would wish you to 
do as they did. That is why I am telling you all these things. I 
myself never asked for any of this instruction, but my father did. 
All human beings ought to ask for it. Never let anybody be in a 
position to puzzle you in regard to what is right. Ask for this 
instruction, my son, for it is not an ordinary thing. In the olden 
times if a person loved his child very much, he would only give him 
instruction after he had begun fasting all day for the first time. 
When a young boy has just matured, those who have been preaching 
to him always ask him one question, namely, whether he had begun 
to fast. And this the young boy must always answer truthfully, 
for if he has begun his fast the instruction would stop. The old 
men do not preach to men, but only to boys. 

(What follows is apparently an illustration of how a young man 
asks his instructor for information of how to conduct himself in life.) 

The young man will go to an old man and say, "Grandfather, I 
would like to know how I am to conduct myself in life. Bless me 
and if you can really give me any information, do so." Then the 
old man was very thankful and said, "It is good; you speak cor- 
rectly." Now the one who was asking something of the old man 
had taken very good care of the old man's body and had led a good 
life. He had no scars of any kind ; that is, he had never done any- 
thing shameful. The young man brought all sorts of food and placed 
it in the lodge of the old man. Then he also brought him a fine 
horse. Only then did he ask him again about the life that his 
ancestors had led, and what kind of a life he ought to live. He asked 

« I. e., you will be given a position at the Winter Feast and offered some of the choice pieces*of meat. 

badin] SYSTEM OF EDUCATION 177 

him what the old people do when they give a child a name, and 
what they say. All these things the old man told him. ' 'It is good," 
he said, "for you to know these things so that if anyone comes to 
you and asks you for information you will be able to tell them some- 
thing and will not have to behave like a fool. If you are asked to 
give a little child a name, this little child will really be a means of 
increasing your power. That is why you ought to give a feast for 
it and smoke the child's tobacco. You must also give the child a 
name for his dog. Give him the name Yellow-Tree for a male dog. 
The name Yellow-Tree is given for the following reason. When the 
Thunderbirds strike at a tree it looks yellow. Just as leaves wither 
so do trees wither when the Thunderbirds strike them. They then 
begin to rot and become very much discolored. That is why they 
give a dog this name. If you ever have to give a dog-name for a 
female child call it She-Who-Stays-In-Her-Own-Place. This is all 
that I wish to tell you." 

SYSTEM OF INSTRUCTION TO DAUGHTER 

This is the way the old men used to speak to the little girls: 

My daughter, as you go along the path of life, always listen to 
your parents. Do not permit your mother to work. Attend to 
your father's wants. All the work in the house belongs to you. 
Never be idle. Chop the wood, carry it home, look after the vege- 
tables and gather them, and cook the food. When in the spring 
of the year you move back to your permanent settlements, plant 
your fields immediately. Never get lazy. Earthmaker created you 
for these tasks. 

When you have your menses, do not ask those in your lodge to 
give you any food, but leave the lodge and fast and do not begin 
eating again until you return to your own lodge. Thus will you 
help yourself. If you always fast, when you marry, even if your 
husband had amounted to nothing before, he will become an excel- 
lent hunter. It will be on account of your fasting that he will have 
changed so much. You will never fail in anything and you will 
always be well and happy. If, on the contrary, you do not do as I 
tell you — that is, if you do not fast — when you marry he will be- 
come very weak, and this will be due to you. Finally he will get 
very sick. 

My daughter, do not use medicine. If you marry a man and 
place medicine on his head he will become very weak and will not 
amount to anything. It may be that you do not want to have your 
husband leave you and this may induce you to use medicine to keep 
him. Do not do that, however, for it is not good. You will be 
ruining a man. It is the same as killing him. Do not do it, for it 
is forbidden. If you marry a man and you want to be certain of 
always retaining him, work for him. With work you will always 

178 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ash. 37 

be able to retain your hold on men. If you do your work to the 
satisfaction of your husband, he will never leave you. I say again. 
it is not proper to use medicine. Above all, do not use medicine 
until you have passed your youth. You will otherwise merely 
make yourself weak. You will lead a weak life. It may even hap- 
pen that you will cause yourself to become foolish. 

Do not use a medicine in order to marry. If you marry remain 
faithful to your husband. Do not act as though you are married to 
a number of men at the same time. Lead a chaste life. If you do 
not listen to what I am telling you and you are unfaithful to your 
husband, all the men will jeer at you. They will say whatever they 
wish to (and no one will interfere"). Every man will treat you as 
though he were on the ''joking relationship" with you. If you do 
not listen to me. therefore, you will injure yourself. 

Thus the old people used to talk to one another. Thus they would 
warn one another against certain actions. They used to instruct 
the young girls as they grew up (just as I am doing to you now"). 
That is why I am telling of these things now. 

My daughter, as you grow older and grow up to be a young woman, 
the young men will begin to court you. Never strike a man, my 
daughter. It is forbidden. If you dislike a man very much, tell 
him gently to go away. If you do not do this and instead strike 
him, remember that it frequently happens that men know of medi- 
cines: or if they themselves have none they may know from whom to 
get them. If you make a man feel bad by striking him, he may use 
this medicine and cause you to run away with him and become a 
bad woman. It is for this reason that the old men used to warn 
the young girls not to strike the men who are courting them, but 
whom they dislike. Pray with all your heart that you do not be- 
come such a woman. 

Do not act haughtily to your husband. Whatever he tells you 
to do, do it. Kindness will be returned to you if you obey your 
husband, for he will treat you in the same manner. 

If you ever have a child, do not strike it. In the olden times 
when a child misbehaved the parents did not strike it, but they 
made it fast. When a child gets hungry, he will soon see the error 
of his ways. If you hit a child, you will be merely knocking the 
wickedness into him. Women should likewise never scold the 
children because children are merely made wicked by' scoldings. If 
your husband scolds the children, do not take their part, for that 
will merely make them bad. In the same way, if a stranger makes 
your children cry. do not say anything to the stranger in the pres- 
ence of the children, nor take their part in his presence. If you 
wish to prevent a stranger from scolding your children, keep them 
home and teach them how to behave by setting them a good ex- 
ample. Do not imagine that you do the best for your children by 

radin] SYSTEM OF EDUCATION 179 

taking their part, or that you love them if you talk merely about 
loving them. Show them that you love them by your actions. 
Let them see that you are generous with donations. In such ac- 
tions they will see your good work and then they will be able to 
judge for themselves whether your actions equal your words. 

My daughter, do not show your love for other children so that 
strangers notice it. You may, of course, love other children, but 
love them with a different love from that which you bestow on your 
own children. The children of other people are different from your 
own children, and if you were to take them to some other place 
after you had been lavishing so much love upon them they woidd 
not act as your children would under the same circumstances. You 
can always depend upon your own children. They are of your own 
body. Love them, therefore. This is what our ancestors taught 
us to do. 

If a wife has no real interest in her husband's welfare and posses- 
sions she will be to him no more than any other woman, and the 
world will ridicule her. If, on the other hand, you pay more atten- 
tion to your husband than to your parents, your parents will leave 
you. Let your husband likewise take care of your parents, for they 
depend on him. Your parents were instrumental in getting you 
your husband, so remember that they expect some recompense for 
it, as likewise for the fact that they raised you. 

My daughter, the old people used to teach us never to hurt the 
feelings of our relatives. If you hurt their feelings, you will cause 
your brothers-in-law to feel ashamed of themselves. Do not ever 
wish for any other man but your husband. It is enough to have 
one husband. Do not let anyone have the right to call you a 
prostitute. 

Do not hit your relatives at any time. For if you did that or if 
you were on bad terms with one of them, it may chance that he will 
die, and then the people will say that you are glad that he is dead. 
Then, indeed, you will feel sad at heart and you will think to your- 
self, "What can I best do" (to make up for my conduct). Even if 
you were to give a Medicine Dance in his honor or donate gifts for 
the Four Nights' Wake, many people will still say, "She used to be 
partial and jealous when he was alive. Now that he is dead she 
loves him. Why does she act this way ? She is wasting her wealth. 
(She really does not love him and therefore), and she ought not to 
spend so much money upon him now." Then, indeed, my daughter, 
will your heart ache; then, indeed, will you get angry. That is 
why the old people would tell their children to love one another. 
If you love a person and that person dies, then you will have a right 
to mourn for him, and everyone will think that your mourning is 
sincere. Not only will your own relatives love you, but everyone 
else will love you likewise. If, then, in the course of your life you 

180 THE WINNEBAGO TBIBE [eth. ANN. 37 

come to a crisis of some kind, all these people will turn their hearts 
toward you. 

My daughter, all that I am trying to tell you relates to your 
behavior (when you grow up). In your own home the women all 
understand the work belonging to the household and that relating to 
camping and hunting. If you understand these and afterwards visit 
your husband's relatives, you will know what to do and not find 
yourself in a dilemma from which you can not extricate yourself. 
When you visit your husband's people do not go around with a 
haughty air or act as if you considered yourself far above them. Try 
to get them to like you. If they like you, they will place you in 
charge of the camp you happen to be visiting. If you are good- 
natured, you will be placed in charge of the home at which you 
happen to be visiting. Then your parents-in-law will tell your 
husband that their daughter-in-law is acting nicely to them. 

SYSTEM OF INSTRUCTION TO CHILDREN 

Informant, member of the Thunderbird clan: I still keep up the 
old system of teaching my children at the camp fire. In the morning 
I wake them up early and start to teach them as follows: 

My children, as you travel along life's road never harm anyone, 
nor cause anyone to feel sad. On the contrary, if at any time you 
can make a person happy, do so. If at any time you meet a woman 
in the wilderness (i. e., away from your village), and if you are alone 
and no one can see you, do not scare her or harm her, but turn off 
to the right and let her pass. Then you will be less tempted to 
molest her. 

My children, if you meet anyone on the road, even though it is 
only a child, speak a cheering word before you pass on. Fast as 
much as you can, so that when you grow up you can benefit your 
fellowmen. If you ever get married you must not sit around your 
lodge near your wife, but try and get game for your wife's people. 
So fast that you may be prepared for your life. 

My daughters, if at any time you get married, never let your 
husband ask for a thing twice. Do it as soon as he asks you. If 
your husband's folks ever ask their children for something when 
you are present, assume that they had asked it of you. If there is 
anything to be done, do not wait till you are asked to do it, but do 
it immediately. If you act in this way, then they will say that your 
parents taught you well. 

My son, if you find nothing else to do, take an ax and chop down a 
tree. It will become useful some day. Then take a gun and go out 
hunting and try to get game for your family. 

As soon as I see that the children are showing signs of restlessness 
then I stop immediately. 

Part II 
CHAPTER VIII 

SOCIAL ORGANIZATION— GENERAL DISCUSSION 

We are justified in assuming that the twofold division of the 
Winnebago and the southern Siouan tribes, Dhegiha and Tciwere, 
had a common historical origin. Our identification is based upon 
the existence in these three tribal units of specific similarities apart 
from those of social organization. Positive proof that the type of 
social organization is historically identical among these tribes is not, 
however, forthcoming. This will become even more apparent when 
we consider the twofold division from the point of view of the names 
they bear, the subdivisions within them, and their specific functions. 

According to our informants, the twofold organization among the 
Dhegiha and Tciwere only existed upon specific occasions, when the 
tribe was on the tribal hunt. We are in complete ignorance as to 
whether in olden times this arrangement was reflected in the village, 
but we know that whether it was or not, the twofold division was 
present in a very definite manner in the consciousness of the people 
themselves; that is, every individual definitely knew to which one of 
the two divisions he belonged and that certain names and functions 
were associated with them. The moment, however, that we stop to 
analyze these names, functions, etc., we realize at once that to-day 
they connote different ideas in the different tribes under discussion. 
The names of the divisions seem particularly significant5 in this con- 
nection. Among the Omaha they are known as Ictacunda and 
Hanga, probably connoting Sky people and Leaders; among the 
Ponca, as Wajaje and Tciju, Earth and Thunder; among the Kansa, 
as Yata and Ictunga, Right side and Left side; among the Osage as 
Tciju and Hanga, Peace and War side. The names for the Kwapa, 
Oto, Missouri, and Iowa are not known. It will be seen at a glance 
that the terms Tciju and Ictacunda are identical, and it will also be 
noticed by reference to the monographs of J. O. Dorsey and Miss 
Alice C. Fletcher and Francis La Flesche, that these names as well 
as the name Hanga are names of subdivisions within these divisions. 
Were these names first used to designate the two divisions or the 
subdivisions? There seems to be no reason for believing that the 

181 

182 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [oth. ANN. 37 

names were first applied to the larger divisions, whereas a number of 
facts speak strongly in favor of the reverse. In no case, for instance, 
can it be shown that the two divisions, per se, have any functions 
except that of regulating marriage. The various political and cere- 
monial functions displayed pertain to the subdivisions composing 
them. Owing to the massing together of a number of such functions 
on each side, we often obtain the impression that these belong to the 
larger unit, as such. And indeed this may be said to be true at the 
present time, in so far as the functions of one subdivision have be- 
come identified with the larger unit. All that we wish to point out 
here is that the names of the two divisions may be different, and that 
they may connote different ideas in the different divisions of an 
historically related culture, due to specific historical development 
within each. Among the Dhegiha there seem to be a number of reasons 
for assuming that the present names of the two divisions are not the 
historically primary ones. 

It is far more difficult to discuss the names of the subdivisions or 
"gentes" within the two larger divisions. From a comparative 
point of view it must be regarded as significant that the names of the 
subdivisions within the Tciwere tribes tally almost exactly with 
those of the Winnebago and that those of the Dhegiha tribes tally 
with the names of many of the two latter, although they possess, in 
addition, a large number not found among them. The Tciwere and 
Winnebago have animal appellations for their clans, the Dhegiha 
have animal appellations plus a type of designation descriptive of 
animal taboo. Which of the two types is the older it is difficult to 
say. This, fact might be noted, however, that the animal names 
have, to a large extent, been forgotten and that the descriptive 
taboo appellations have not; that in a number of cases there is some 
reason for believing that these animal appellations have been re- 
interpreted and in other cases replaced by nonanimal designations; 
that the origin myths of these divisions always explain why a certain 
animal is associated with a subdivision, and rarely the origin of the 
taboo name; and lastly, that the majority of personal names are 
strictly comparable to the clan names of the Winnebago and the 
Tciwere. On the other hand, the descriptive taboo type of name is 
found frequently among the band appellations of the Plains Indians, 
with whom the Omaha had come into intimate contact and by whom 
they had been influenced along definite lines of ceremonial and social 
development. For these reasons we would like to suggest that the 
animal appellations are historically primary and that the taboo type 
became subsequently popular and spread over the whole tribe. 
Examples of changes in the names of subdivisions are by no means 
isolated. The Winnebago exhibit a tendency to substitute names 
indicative of the function of a clan for the old animal names — and this 

kadin] SOCIAL, ORGANIZATION GENERAL DISCUSSION 183 

has gone so far that a large number of individuals would probably 
deny to-day that the Hawk and the Warrior clan are one and the 
same. Again, among the Osage, Kansa, and Quapaw we find Sun 
and Star elans, and, if we were to imagine that for some reason or 
another the latter type of name became popular, it might here become 
dominant within a comparatively short time. 

Like a twofold division, the clan may connote a number of different 
things to the minds of the Indians. The Omaha apparently used 
the term tonwoqgtho71, which means literally "place-of-habitation- 
of-those-related," gthon being the possessive-reflexive pronoun. It 
would thus seem to coincide with a geographical unit. The Quapaw 
use the term enikaciga, evidently meaning "people"; the Kansa, 
the term wayumida, " those-who-sing-together " ; the Osage, the term 
peda, "fireplace"; and the Winnebago, the term JioTcik'a'radjera, 
" those-related-to-one-another." The remarks made about the spe- 
cific names of the twofold divisions apply here. There is no reason 
for assuming that these are historically primary. A possible histori- 
cal hint that they are not will be mentioned later. 

The twofold division apparently regulates nothing but marriage. 
It has at the present time no other function, per se. Nevertheless, 
a number of ethnologists, and for that matter Indians themselves, 
speak of the functions of the two sides. If we consider the Omaha 
"circle," we notice that practically all the ceremonial functions 
are on one side; that among the Osage "war" and "peace" functions 
are found on both sides; and that, as a matter of fact, the functions 
of war and peace apparently relate to a certain reciprocal relation 
existing between the two divisions. Indeed, there is no reason to 
justify the use of these terms. Among the Iowa, J. O. Dorsey quotes 
Hamilton to the effect that the regulation of the hunt and other tribal 
affairs was in the hands of one "phratry" during the autumn and 
winter, and in that of the other in spring and summer. It is. how- 
ever, doubtful whether this was the case. Among the Winnebago, 
as we shall see, the functions o£ war and peace were grouped together 
on one side, the functions of the other side being confined to those 
relating to the policing and regulation of the hunt, But the only 
fact of importance to us here is not whether there appears a balancing 
of functions connected with the social organization, but whether the 
Indian thinks there is; and here the consensus of opinion favors the 
view that no Omaha would, for example, suppose that the Han- 
gacenu division, as such, was the custodian of the real pipes of 
peace. This belonged to the Inkesabe gens, and there is not a 
shred of evidence to support the view that it was delegated to that 
clan by the larger unit. The same reasoning applies to the Hanga 
clan. That the importance of the possessions of the latter clan played 
an important part in the associations of the Omaha, even to the extent 

184 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ann. 37 

of impressing its name upon the whole division, we do not doubt 
for a moment. Other reasons may have led to the designation of 
the other half by the name of one of its component clans. 

Similarly, among the Ponca, the Wajaje half corresponds to the 
Wajaje clan, the keepers of the sacred pipe; and among the Osage, 
the Tciju and the Hanga divisions of one side, and the Wajaje divi- 
sions of the other, correspond to the clans with the same name that 
are associated with important ceremonial-political functions. On 
the other hand, we have the fact that among the Kansa the names 
of the two large divisions are distinct from any of the clans in those 
divisions, and the same is true for the Tciju division of the Ponca. 
If we correlate this last fact with the apparent absence of any 
association of important ceremonial or political functions with specific 
clans, the suggestion might be permitted that no incentive existed 
in the minds of these people for the clan becoming identified with the 
larger divisions. Among the Winnebago the names for the divisions 
are quite different from those of the clans composing them, but at the 
present time the fact that the clan in each division has definite func- 
tions and powers has reacted on the interpretation of the social 
organization, and it is quite customary to refer to one half as huyk 
or "chiefs," and to the other as manap' e or "soldiers," although the 
latter is not common. 

In short, we have a right to see, in all the facts mentioned, indi- 
cations of a possible historical development whose characteristics 
seem to lie in the identification of the name and function of an impor- 
tant clan with that of a much larger division. 

The Winnebago social organization has long since broken down, 
but its details are still so well preserved in the minds of the older 
men, and particularly in the literature of the tribe, that no difficulty 
was experienced in reconstructing it. This reconstruction, however, 
does not enable us to determine the relation of the clan and dichoto- 
mous division to the distribution of the tribe over the large area once 
occupied in Wisconsin. That the 4,000-odd individuals composing the 
tribe at the advent of the whites lived together is extermely doubtful. 
The nature of the woodlands of Wisconsin and the fairly extensive 
territory over which the Winnebago were found scattered not long 
after Nicolet's first visit are facts that practically exclude such a 
hypothesis. The myth that speaks of a village that at one time 
was so long that those living at one end did not know what was 
transpiring at the other contains too many literary touches to justify 
its use as an historical document. 

The question, therefore, of village groups is of considerable impor- 
tance, because there may have been, cutting across the general organi- 
zation, another smaller, perhaps looser social unit, that of "band" or 
village, setting off one group against another. Systematic question- 

badin] SOCIAL ORGANIZATION GENERAL DISCUSSION 185 

ing has elicited from various individuals the information, also corrobo- 
rated by historical records, that the villages were generally known 
according to geographical location or according to names descriptive 
of the haunts of certain animals. Even to-day the group scattered 
over the Nebraska Winnebago reservation are commonly known by 
similar designations. There we find, for instance, the following 
names: Icozo-atcira, "those living on the peninsula"; or Tc'vJianicira, 
"those living below", i. e., in the timber; nivm'hatcira , "those living 
near the dirty water"; hutc x£dgominangera, "where big bear set- 
tles," etc. If we may then suppose this to have been a customary 
association, we may quite properly ask whether the name of the 
village had any influence on the social organization ; whether there is 
even a hint at a genetic relation between these two types of group 
names. All that can be said is the fact that formerly Jioni, "band," 
seems to have been used instead of hoJeiVaradjera for clan; that an 
archaic name of the Wolf clan, regoni or degoni, may mean Lake band; 
and that the villages all had geographical names. All of which, how- 
ever, is, I realize, hardly sufficient evidence. 

No satisfactory demonstration has as yet been made indicating that 
the clan organization was ever associated with an historically simple 
social structure, whereas quite a number of reasons lead us to suspect 
that it was in all cases preceded by other types of organization. In 
North America there is quite considerable evidence tending to show 
that the village group organization often preceded in many places 
the clan, and for that reason the facts brought out above may be of 
more than casual significance. That a system of clan names different 
from that now in use existed is borne out by the archaic names for 
the Bear and Wolf clans. That another system was making headway 
against the animal-name type of change, namely, the substitution for 
animal designation, with correlated associations of descent or con- 
nection with an animal ancestor, of designations indicative of the 
functions of the clan. If the association of the social unit with a com- 
mon animal ancestor was preceded by an association of a social unit 
with geographical location, we would then be able to demonstrate 
what is so rare in ethnology — the historical succession of types of 
naming. 

The Twofold Grouping 

The Winnebago are divided into divisions, one known as the 
waygeregi Tierera, "those who are above," the other as the manegi 
Tierera, "those who are on earth." Descent was reckoned in the 
paternal line. But these appellations refer to the animals after 
whom the clans are named, the term waygeregi covering the birds, 
the term manegi, land and water animals. So firmly has the idea of 
division of animal forms become associated with the two divisions 
180S23— 22 13 

186 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [bth. ANN. 37 

that, as mentioned before, were a new clan introduced now among 
the Winnebago its position would depend exclusively upon the nature 
of the animal associated with it. As similar reasons dictate clan 
groupings among some of the Central Algonquian tribes, a few words 
concerning this type of association will not be amiss. The groupings 
of the fauna into a distinct number of categories is extremely common 
in North America. Among the Winnebago, a number of other 
Siouan, and Central Algonquian tribes, there was a fivefold classifica- 
tion; earth animals, sky animals, empyrean animals, aquatic animals, 
and subaquatic animals. Among the Winnebago the thunderbird 
belongs to the empyrean; the eagle, hawk, and pigeon, to the sky; 
the bear and wolf, to the earth; the fish, to the water; and the water- 
spirit, below the water. This religio-mythological conception has 
unquestionably received a certain amount of sympathetic elabora- 
tion at the hands of shamans, and particularly at the hands of the 
leaders of such ceremonies as the Winter Feast, the Clan Feast, and 
the Clan Wake, as well as at the hands of those who had in their 
keeping the clan origin myths. 

The characteristics of the thunderbird, eagle, bear, and water- 
spirit as clan animals, and as animals connected with a division of 
fauna, are also related to the general conception of these animals 
per se. The eagle and hawk are birds of prey; the thunderbird is 
generally a deity granting long life, and associated with peace, 
although his connection with war is also common. Similarly, the 
bear is supposed to have a "soldier" nature, and the water-spirit is 
intimately associated with rites pertaining to crossing streams, 
calming the sea, and ownership of water property. This correlation 
unquestionably indicates an influence of the religio-mythological con- 
ception of the animal upon the social group with which it is associated. 
How far this can go is abundantly attested by the names and behavior 
of the waygeregi and manegi divisions. 

On the other hand, we may legitimately ask what influence the 
two divisions had in molding the attributes of these animals, or 
upon the behavior of the groups with which their name was asso- 
ciated. The functions of a warrior may have determined, as they 
certainly have accentuated, the "warrior" characteristics of the 
eagle and hawk, nor is there any easily intelligible reason why the 
thunderbird should be associated with peace. From our knowledge 
of the social organization of other Siouan tribes, the political func- 
tions of the clan seem to be the characteristic feature of the organiza- 
tion, and this being the case, the possibility of associations of war- 
like and peaceful attributes with animals may as much be ascribed 
to the influence of the social unit as vice versa. With regard to 
such functions as the exogamy of the two divisions or that of the 
clans, or of the reciprocal burial relationship of the waijgeregi and 

radix] SOCIAL ORGANIZATION — GENERAL DISCUSSION 187 

manegi divisions, we, of course, know that the characteristics of the 
animal in question have nothing to do with the matter. We must 
then realize that we are dealing with reciprocal influences — of the 
religio-mythical conception of animals on the one hand, and of 
political functions of social units on the other. In some cases, such 
as the specific associations with the water-spirit, it is probable that 
the religio-mythologieal conception of the animal is dominant. 
The association of the thunderbird with fire has likewise not been 
due to any activity of the social unit; and thus examples might be 
multiplied. In this connection, the fact that animals with whom 
a multitude of associations have already been established are sub- 
sequently associated with social units is fundamental. From this 
point of view, the animal names of social organization are intrusive 
features, and we will consequently expect to find historical adjust- 
ments. This, we think, is what has taken place here. The animal 
name with its religio-mythologieal conceptions was a remarkably 
strong unit, and as a result reciprocal influences took place. Although 
the religio-mythologieal influence must thus have been marked, it 
appears to have changed none of the marital and other functions 
of the two divisions nor the political functions of the clans. What 
it did change, and change fundamentally, was the interpretation 
of the social organization. 

Functions of the Twofold Division 

The only function that the waijgeregi and manegi divisions seem 
to have had was the regulation of marriage. A waijgeregi man 
had to marry a manegi woman, and vice versa. The only other 
function was, according to some informants, reciprocal burial. 
Here the religio-mythologieal interpretations seem in part to have 
determined this relation, for a manegi man buried a waijgeregi man 
because, as a "land division," it pertained to him to place a corpse 
in the earth. This, however, seems to be a doubtful function, for 
earth burial seems in olden times to have been characteristic only 
of the manegi division, the waijgeregi clans employing scaffold burial. 
In addition, the burial relation was one of the many reciprocal duties 
of the "friend-clan," and if it was ever postulated of the waijgerigi 
and manegi, this was likely due to the fact that the "friendship" 
relation seems also to have existed between two clans belonging 
to the two different divisions. According to one myth, however, 
the four clans of the waijgeregi paired off as "friends" with four 
clans of the manegi. This would then be practically equivalent to 
saying that the manegi buried the waijgeregi. 

Thus far we have spoken only of the socio-political functions. 
The two divisions, however, play a part in a number of social and 

188 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [bth. ann. 37 

ceremonial connections: first, in the organization of the village; 
second, in the arrangement of the clans while on the warpath; third, 
as the basis of organization at the "chief" feast; and lastly, as the 
basis of organization of the ceremonial lacrosse game. 

According to the majority of the older people, when the old social 
organization was still intact, each village was divided into two halves 
by an imaginary line running due northwest and southeast, the 
waygeregi clans dwelling in one half, with the chief's lodge in the 
south, and the manegi clans dwelling in the other half, with the bear 
or soldier lodge in the north (fig. 33). Although this arrangement 
has now become almost legendary, it was corroborated by many 
of the older people. To what extent every village was organized 
on this basis it is impossible to state. When this question was 

s 

Fig. 33.— Plan of village according to Thundercloud, of the Thunderbird clan. 

directly put to individuals, the answer was always in the affirmative. 
Quite a number of old individuals, however, denied vigorously that 
such had ever been the organization of the village, and claimed 
instead that the lodges of the Chief and the Soldier (Bear) clan 
were in the center of the village (fig. 34). 

In looking over the clan affiliations of the informants, we noticed, 
however, that the first arrangement was always given by members 
of the bird clans, and the second arrangement by members of the 
Bear clan and generally also by others on the manegi side. This 
fact, of course, makes the decision as to the relationship of these 
two types of village organization quite difficult. There can be no 
question as to the existence of a twofold division of the tribe as 
far as marital relations were concerned, nor as to the segregation 

RADIX] 

SOCIAL ORGANIZATION — GENERAL DISCUSSION 

189 

of specific clans in different villages. When on the warpath the 
twofold division manifested itself in the arrangement of fireplaces, 
so that the question to be resolved here is whether we can credit 
the statements that this twofold division expressed itself in the 
arrangement of the village, and, if it did, whether this was character- 
istic of the whole tribe or only of parts of the tribe. That this was 
true for part of the tribe can be accepted. Whether it was true 
for the whole tribe, however, can not be definitely answered until 
we know more of the Dhegiha and Tciwere. In the subsequent 
discussion of the clan we will touch on this subject again. 

The twofold organization is reflected in the arrangement of the 
fireplaces when on the warpath, each division having two fireplaces, 

Fig. 34.— Plan of village according to John Rave, of Bear clan. .4 , Lodge of chief of tribe (Thnnderbird 
clan). £, Lodgeofchief of Bearclan. C, Lodge of Warrior clan. D, Lodge of Buffalo clan. 

whose location is determined by the direction in which the party is 
going. When going west, for instance, the two fireplaces for the 
icaijgeregi are on the south, and the two for the manegi on the north 
side. However, when on the tribal move or hunting, no indication 
of the division exists. 

As the basis of ceremonial organization, we find the twofold di- 
vision present only once — at the chief feast Qiuijlc wohq), but as this 
feast is to all intents and purposes a feast given by the bird clans 
in general, there is really nothing surprising about its use. The 
name hutjJc wohq would seem to indicate that we are dealing simply 
with a feast of the Thunderbird clan, and this indeed may have been 
the case historically. Hiujk to-day, however, is frequently used to 
indicate the waygeregi division. 

190 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eih. ann. 37 

As the basis of organization in a game, the twofold division finds 
expression in ceremonial lacrosse. There the waijgeregi are always 
pitted against the manegi. A well-known myth is associated with 
this arrangement, according to which the animal ancestors of the 
waijgeregi and manegi decided their respective rank by playing a 
game in which they were organized on this basis. The waijgeregi 
won and for that reason the chiefs of the tribe have been selected 
from this division. A division into two halves when playing cere- 
monial lacrosse is characteristic not only of the Winnebago but of 
the Omaha, Menominee, Sauk, Fox, and other tribes. Among the 
former two, these sides are identical with the two aforementioned 
political divisions of the tribe, but among the latter two, where no 
such division exists, the tribe seems to divide itself into two halves 
merely on this occasion. 

Up to the present we have treated the two divisions as social units 
per se, but now, before entering on the discussion of the clans, it 
may be well to point out the fact that the waijgeregi people are some- 
times spoken of as the Bird clan (waniyk holcilc'aradjera), and that the 
four clans composing this side are so intimately related, and their 
clan origin myths so similar, that the assumption of the four clans 
representing one clan that subsequently split up into a number of 
divisions is not outside the realm of historical possibility. This is, 
however, quite immaterial, for whether we have one bird clan op- 
posed to eight other animal clans is of little consequence, for his- 
torically it is not the bird clan that is opposing the other clans, but 
one social unit, the division, set off against another. The numerical 
equality that exists between these two sides, in spite of the dis- 
parity in the number of clans, is perhaps another confirmation of 
the fundamental character of the twofold structure. 

Clan Organization 

There are 12 clans among the Winnebago with the following names: 

A. Warigeregi herera (those who are above) : ' 

1. wakandja, thunderbird. 

2. ivonayire uarjlrik, war-people. 

3. tcaxcep, eagle. 

4. rutcge, pigeon (extinct). 

B. manegi herera (those who are on earth) : 

5. huntc, bear. 

6. cuiqlctcurik1 , wolf. 

7. waktcexi, water spirit. 

8. tea, deer. 

9. hunwan, elk. 

1 All the clans of the upper phratry are also called ahuirasara, "Thuse-with-wings." This name is 
found in ceremonies. 

radin] SOCIAL, ORGANIZATION — GENERAL DISCUSSION 191 

10. tee, buffalo. 

11. ho, fish. 

12. wak'an, snake. 

Another list was obtained in which only 10 clans were mentioned, 
the Fish and the Snake being omitted. The clans omitted are, how- 
ever, regarded by all as of recent origin. 

There are two older lists of Winnebago clans obtained by Morgan 2 
and Dorsey.3 Morgan gives the following clans: 

Wolf. Eagle. Snake. 

Bear. Elk. Thunder. 

Buffalo. Deer. 

Dorsey's list is more complete, although owing to the fact that he 
did not know of the existence of the twofold division, he classes the 
four Bird clans as subclans of one larger Bird clan. His list differs 
from the author's only in the absence of the Fish clan and in the fact 
that he was still able to obtain two archaic names for the Wolf and 
Bear clans. Dorsey's list follows: 

Wolf. Bird. Buffalo. 

Bear. a. Eagle. Deer. 

Elk. b. Pigeon. Water-monster. 

Snake. c. Hawk. 

d. Thunderbird. 
Foster gives a grouping of the. clans according to the fauna.4 His 
list hardly was intended as an enumeration of the clans. According 
to Foster, we have the following grouping: 

I. Thunderbird family or invisible Thunderbird people, 
n. The air family, the visible Thunderbird people. 

III. The land or quadruped family. 

IV. The water family. 

An interesting variant of the names of the Thunderbird and Warrior 
clans was given by one informant. He called the Thunderbird the 
good thunders, and the Warrior the bad thunders. This is strikingly 
reminiscent of the Menominee and was perhaps borrowed from them. 

The main differences in the above lists are the order of the clans, 
the position of the Wolf clan, the presence of a general Bird clan 
called vxmiylc by Dorsey, the double names for the Wolf and Bear 
clans, and the absence of a Fish and Warrior clan in Dorsey's and of a 
Hawk clan in the list obtained by the author. 

The position of the Wolf clan, in spite of Morgan's and Dorsey's 
agreement, does not belong in the place assigned to it by them. In 
all probability their main informant was a member of this clan who 
wished to give his clan a greater importance than properly belonged 

2 Ancient Society, p. 157. 

3 Siouan Sociology. Fifteenth Ann. Rept. Bur. Amer. Ethn, pp. 240-241. 

4 Quoted in J. O. Dorsey's MSS. of Winnebago clan names (B. A. E.). 

192 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ann. 37 

to it. There is no doubt but that in older times the Wolf clan played 
a far greater part in the affairs of the tribe than it does to-day, but 
that it ever was the principal clan of the tribe is out of the question. 

With regard to Dorsey's postulation of a Bird (wamifTc) clan, all 
that can be said is that the author obtained nothing confirmatory of 
it. It is just possible that Dorsey, who apparently did not know of 
the existence of the two phratries, misinterpreted a popular grouping 
of the four clans of the upper phratry, as representing a fundamental 
division. Historically it may, indeed, be true that the four clans of 
the upper phratry represent the subdivision of one clan. 

The archaic names for the Wolf and Bear clans can not be trans- 
lated with any degree of certainty any longer. It is barely possible 
that degoni means "lake band" and tconarik means "blue back." 
Whether these are simply a second set of names, or whether they repre- 
sent an historically older set, it is impossible to say to-day. The 
probabilities are that they are terms of respect. 

The absence of the Warrior clan in Dorsey's list and the presence of 
a Hawk clan is rather interesting, for it shows that only 25 years ago 
the bird name for this clan was stUl in use. The Warrior and Hawk 
clans are identical, the latter being, however, the appellation that is 
preferred to-day. 

In addition to the names given above, some of the clans have names 
indicative of respect, such as hung* for the Water-spirit, haga for 
the male members of the Bear clan, and warowirva for the female 
members. It is also possible that the names degoni and tconank, 
mentioned by Dorsey for the Wolf and Bear clans, were terms of 
respect. 

RECKONING OF DESCENT 

Descent is patrilineal and a man's name generally belongs to his 
father's clan. Formerly there never was an exception to the rule 
that the name must belong to the father's clan, but of recent years 
the Winnebago have become very lax in this particlular. The 
irregularities in the giving of names were due to two causes — first, 
the intermarriage of Winnebago women with white men or with 
Indians of other tribes where the clan organization was either 
unknown or where descent was matrilineal, and, secondly, to the 
fact that the wife's parents were often in a better position to pay 
for the naming feast than the parents of the father. When a 
Winnebago woman marries a man who either has no clan or who 
reckons descent in the mother's line, the children are always con- 
sidered as belonging to the mother's clan. This, however, lasts for 
only one generation. As a result the male children of such a mar- 
riage perpetuate the clan of the mother, although they transmit it 
thereafter in the male line. 

radin] SOCIAL ORGANIZATION GENERAL DISCUSSION 193 

Another irregularity that has grown up within recent times is 
the occasional transmission of the clan war-bundle in the female line. 
In olden times it could only be transmitted in the male line, so as to 
prevent its passing out of the clan. It was, however, not always 
passed to the eldest son, but to that one who, by his actions and the 
interest he manifested in learning the legends and songs pertaining 
to the ceremony, showed himself capable of properly providing for 
the bundle. Now it happened occasionally that a man either pos- 
sessed no son or that his son did not show sufficient interest in all 
that pertained to the bundle. In such a case the father had the 
alternative of giving it to some near relative in the male line, and if 
there were none of either giving it to some distant relative in the 
male line or the son of his sister or daughter. This, of course, hap- 
pened very rarely, and in all probability the female line would 
eventually have to return it to the clan to which it originally belonged. 

We have described these two instances of transmission in the 
female line in some detail in order to show how simply they can be 
explained without the intervention of any theory that the Winne- 
bago reckoned descent in the female line originally. Such a claim 
has been made by Morgan and reiterated by Frazer. It seems to be 
based on the fact that Carver found the daughter of a Winnebago 
chief, known to the whites as Glory-of-the-Morning, and her chil- 
dren occupying an exceptional position among the tribe, or at least 
among the division of the Winnebago living at the upper end of 
Lake Winnebago, Wis. Her position and that of her children, one 
of whom has become well known in Winnabago legends, Tcap'osgaga, 
was, however, due to the fact that she married a Frenchman named 
Decora. She was not the chieftainess of the tribe nor were any of 
her children, strictly speaking, chiefs of the tribe. In any case her 
position had nothing to do with female descent and at best but 
illustrates what we have said before about the clan to which chil- 
dren of such a union belong. 

INDIVIDUAL NAMES 

Before turning to the specific study of each clan a few words must 
be said about the individual names. From a purely descriptive 
point of view the names can be arranged in nine classes: 
I. Color. 
II. Physiological characteristics. 

III. Social functions. 

IV. Animal and plant forms. 
V. Animal characteristics. 

VI. Natural phenomena. 
VII. Quality. 

VIII. Episodes of a legendary character. 
IX. Personal achievement. 

194 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE I eth. an.n. 37 

According to the majority of our informants only one of these 
classifications seems to be generally present in the minds of the 
Winnebago to-day — that commemorating incidents relating to the 
origin of each clan. Thus, for instance, because the first thunder- 
bird alit on a tree the name He-who-alights-on-a-tree is given ; because 
a wave swept over the shore as the wolf arrived at Green Bay the 
name Wave is given, etc. However, the most representative names 
of this type are Gives-forth-fruit-as-he-walks, Makes-the-day-tremble, 
He^ivho-comes-singing, Judge-of-the-contest, etc. The vast majority 
of the names, although many of them can doubtless be interpreted 
as referring to incidents that occurred during the various origins of 
the clan, clearly belong to the first seven divisions mentioned above. 
Yet the Winnebago interpret them all in terms of category VIII. 

As an example of the Winnebago viewpoint let me give the follow- 
ing:5 

Four men [the clan eponymous ancestors] Earth-Maker sent here from above; and 
when they came, all their various characteristics were used for making proper names. 
Thus at the present day, the characteristics of the thunder-birds, all of their actions, 
are used as proper names. (At the beginning), four men came from above. And 
from that fact there is a name, He-who-comes-from-Above. . . From above, four men 
Earth-Maker sent down. And since they came like spirits, there is a name, Spirit- 
Man. . . And as there was a drizzling fog when the four men came from above, so 
there are names, Walking-in - Mist , Comes-in - Mist , and a woman they would call, 
Drizzling- Rain- Woman. It is said that when they first came to Derok, they alit 
upon some brushes, and bent them down; and from this fact there is a name, She- 
who-bends-the-Brushes. On the limb of an oak-tree that stood there, they alit; and they 
bent it down as they alit on its branches. From this there is a name, She-who-bends- 
the-Branches-down. And since they alit on the tree, there is a name, He-who-alights-on 
a-Tree; . . . and from the tree itself there is the name, Oak-Woman. . . And be- 
cause they stepped from the oak-tree to the ground, . . . there is a name, He-uho- 
alights-on-the-Groimd. . . And since they came with the thunder-birds, there is a 
name, Thunder-bird . . . and White-Thnnder-bird . . . and Black-Thvnder-bird . . . 
And since the thunder-birds thunder, there is a name, He-nho-thunders . . . And 
since they make the noise ttfawfa, people are called He-who-makes-Tcininiu . . . 
When the thunder-birds walk, rain accompanies them; and from this fact we have a 
name, IIc-who-walks-irith-Rain . . . And since the thunder-birds come walking, we 
have a name, Walking- Thunder; and since the thunder-birds walk with a mighty 
tread when they start out, there is a name, He-who-comes walking-with-a- Mighty- 
Tread; . . . and since the earth shakes when they commence walking, there is a 
name, He-who-shakes-the-earth-u<ith-force . . . And since there is always wind and 
hail when the thunder-birds come, we have a name, He-tvho-comes-mth-Wind-and- 
Eail. Now, since one of the thunder-birds came first, there is a name, He-who-walks- 
First; and since one of them was the leader, therefore, there is the name Thunder- 
bird-Leader . . . Now since the thunder-birds flash (their eyes) in even- direction, 
so we have the name Flashes-in-every-Direction . . . Now, we don't see the thunder- 
birds, but we see their flashes only; and thus there is a female name, Only-a-flash-of- 
Lightning-Woman; and since the thunder-birds (flash) streaks of lightning, there is 
a name, Streak-of-Lightning; and since cloudiness is caused by the thunder-birds 

s "Personal Reminiscences of a Winnebago Indian," by P. Radin, Journal ol American Folklore, vol. 
26, no. CH, pp. 300-303. 

badin] SOCIAL ORGANIZATION GENERAL DISCUSSION 195 

walking in the clouds, there is a name, He-v:ho-walks-in-the-Clouds. Now since the 
thunder-birds have long wings, there is a name, He-who-has- Long- Wings . . . Now 
when the thunder-birds come, they come with terrible thunder-crashes, it is said; 
and as many people as there are on this earth, . . . and as many plants as there are 
on the earth, indeed, everything, the earth itself, they deluge with rain, and thunder- 
crashes (are heard); for all this they have a name; they call him Wnrudjdxega. 

The point at issue in this interpretation of names is, can we accept 
it as historically primary? We do not think so, for the following 
reasons: A large numher of the names are clearly descriptive of 
animal habits, others express the influence of social organization, 
and others refer to personal achievements, etc. Secondly, the in- 
terpretation is of too specific a nature to be regarded as one that 
could possibly have dictated an original system of naming; and, 
thirdly, in spite of its prevalence, other systems of interpretation 
are present. As a matter of fact in the above quotation, our in- 
formant distinctly mentions the fact that the characteristics of 
thunderbirds were used for names, although he insists that the 
names referred specifically to the ancestors of the Thunderbird clan. 
According to J. O. Dorsey the interpretations obtained by him were 
largely symbolical. He makes no mention of the interpretation ob- 
tained by the author, although this may be due to the fact that he 
was but imperfectly acquainted with Winnebago ethnology. It 
seems best, therefore, to regard the ancestor-episode type of name as 
but one, perhaps the last, that developed among the Winnebago.' 

« 

ATTITUDE TOWARD CLAN ANIMALS 

When the animal names became associated with the social groups 
they were accompanied by the specific associations clustering around 
these animals. These associations were probably of the same type, 
if not indeed identical with those grouped around the animals as 
guardian spirits. The clan animals are among the principal guardian 
spirits to-day, and we must expect to find an explanation of the atti- 
tude toward them as clan animals in the attitude exhibited toward 
the guardian spirit. To a certain extent it would be quite correct 
to say that the guardian became the clan animal. This does not, 
however, mean, in the slightest degree, that the guardian spirit of 
the individual became the clan animal, but merely that the concept 
of the guardian spirit became associated with a local group. 

The guardian spirit is at the present time conceived of as an im- 
material being in control of an animal species. The attitude toward 
this spirit is a purely religious one, and exhibits a marked absence of 
taboo of any kind. It is an open question whether a vision must be 
attested by obtaining some part of the animal "embodiment" of 

0 For fuller discussion cf. P. Radin, The Social Organization of the Winnebago Indians, Museum Bulle- 
tin 10, Anthropological Series 5, Geological Survey of Canada, 1915. 

196 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ann. 37 

the spirit, but there is no doubt that every vision is symbolized by 
a special gift from the "spirit." The guardian spirit unit may 
thus be said to consist of a special religious attitude plus a symbol. 

The attitude toward the clan animal differs from that toward the 
guardian spirit in this characteristic respect, that more emphasis is 
laid upon identification with the animal itself than with the "spirit." 
As far as could be determined, the clan animal is the thunderbird 
with his characteristics of lightning and thunder, of the bear who 
likes honey and raisins, etc. The animal is engraved as clan symbol 
and used as a property mark, and he is brought into intimate con- 
tact with the group by the postulation of descent. Naturally, 
descent is not from the "spirit" animal but from the living animal 
species. Nevertheless the clan animal has, at the same time, re- 
tained its place as a guardian spirit, and in a most suggestive way, 
for the blessing of a clan animal is more easily obtained by a member 
of the clan than by an outsider. The clan animal is, in short, a clan 
protector. 

In this change of attitude two considerations seem pertinent: 
first, the possibility of the "spirit" of the guardian spirit being a 
product of the esoteric elaboration connected with religious societies, 
and that its apparent absence in the clan animal represents an 
exoteric conception ; secondly, under the influence of the social func- 
tions of the clan, an originally strong religious conception of the clan 
animal gave place to an identification with the animal species itself. 
It might be objected that there is no inherent correlation between 
social organization and animal species as contrasted with spirit 
animals. It seems certain, however, that descent could only be 
reckoned from the animal, and as long as descent is postulated it 
must be from the animal. With regard to the historical priority of 
the "spirit" conception, little can be definitely said except that the 
systematization it has undergone suggests the influence of esoteric 
societies, and that the visions obtained during fasting appear to 
speak of the guardian " spirit " as an animal. On general psychologi- 
cal considerations we are inclined to believe in the contrast of the 
material and spiritual conception of the animal as a real fact, although 
it would be hazardous to say whether one or the other lies at th^e basis 
of the attitude of the individual toward his clan animal. 

RELATIONSHIP TO CLAN ANIMALS 

The question of descent from the animal brings us to the con- 
sideration of the whole intricate relationship of the individual to the 
clan animal, a subject that has played so prominent a part in dis- 
cussions of totemism. There are two distinct sources for the de- 
termination of this relationship — data obtained in reply to direct 
questioning, and that contained in some miscellaneous myths and in 

RadinJ SOCIAL ORGANIZATION GENERAL DISCUSSION 197 

the origin myths. Part of the oral data is merely a reflex of the origin 
myths, hut part is not. The value of this "unwritten" material lies 
in the fact that it represents the popular, exoteric attitude, the at- 
titude that, on the whole, is not the result of conscious rationaliza- 
tion, and that this exoteric view may very likely have been the 
basis for the priestly esoteric interpretation. 

The prevalent conception of the relationship of the individual to 
his clan animal is that of descent from an animal transformed at 
the origin of the present human race into human beings. This 
view is expressed in some of the origin myths and the general state- 
ments of individuals. Direct descent from an animal was never 
postulated. The definition of the term "animal" is, however, very 
difficult. The Indians themselves seem to make a distinction 
between the animal of to-day and the animal of the heroic age. 
The main characteristics of the animal of the latter was his power 
of transformation into human form and vice versa. Although the 
animals have lost this to-day, they are nevertheless descended from 
this animal. The human beings are, however, descended from 
precisely the same "animals," so that it might be well to bear in 
mind that descent from the transformed animal does not mean 
descent from the animal of to-day. This view is more systematically 
expressed in some places. According to one miscellaneous myth, 
the existing human beings and animals were descended from the 
same being, who once possessed infinite powers of transformation 
now into human and now into animal shape. At one time, presum- 
ably the beginning of our present creation, these "beings" either 
consciously or unconsciously exhausted all their "transforming" 
power, and the form into which they changed themselves, human 
or animal, remained fixed for all time. The existing animals have 
never succeeded in regaining their power of transformation. Among 
human beings this power has only been vouchsafed to those few 
who have obtained it as a special gift from some spirit. Even 
then, however, it is ludicrously incomplete as compared with the 
same powers of primordial "beings." This conception of the 
animal-human archetype must not be regarded as at all flavoring 
of a philosophy developed after contact with Europeans. The 
error that has always been committed in discussions upon the 
nature of descent from the animal lies in confusing our concept of 
animal species with the term "animal" as used by primitive people, 
and in the lack of discrimination between the possible connotations 
of that same term, as applied to animals of to-day and as applied 
to those animals that were brought into intimate contact with the 
clan ancestor. 

There is no reason for- regarding the specific descent from the 
totem as a development of this older Winnebago idea of the origin 

198 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ajn. 37 

of human and animal forms. The latter conception is entirely a 
religious one, the former merely an extension of the genealogical 
tendency prevalent in many types of social organization. Instead 
of being simply descended from an individual in a given social unit, 
the bond of membership within this unit has been strengthened by 
the postulation of blood relationship to the clan animal. The idea 
of descent may thus be looked upon as one of the elements necessary 
for the stability of a political unit and may be far older than its 
specific extension to those clan animals. A very illuminating ex- 
ample of a case in point can be selected from the history of the war 
bundle in the Thunderbird clan. This bundle, like the others, was 
obtained as a gift from the thunderbird in his capacity as a guardian 
spirit. The ceremony connected with it has, however, been markedly 
influenced by the clan organization and as a result we find descent 
from the thunderbird and night-spirit, the two most important 
spirits in the ceremony, postulated of the original owner of the war 
bundle. The same tendency is exhibited in the numerous stories of 
the relation of an individual of the heroic age to a village. Here 
the individual, generally a transformed guardian spirit or animal, 
comes to the aid of the people in their struggle against cannibals, 
defeats the latter and marries into the village, becoming thus the 
eponymous ancestor of the subsequent village group. 

At the same time no strong correlation apparently exists between 
a totemic organization and the extension of descent to include the 
clan animal, this seemingly being a peculiarity of certain cultures 
only. Bonds other than descent from the animal are frequently 
found and must unquestionably be considered as older than the 
latter in a number of cases. On the Northwest coast, among the 
Creek, Iroquois, and other tribes, descent from the totem is not 
found. Among the Winnebago themselves, in addition to the above, 
we find the idea that the Thunderbird clan takes its name from the 
fact of its members imitating the actions of that animal. Some 
versions of the origin myth give no reasons at all for the name, while 
in others an animal is killed, becomes reincarnated as a human 
being in a certain village, and the group takes its name from the 
fact. The descent from the totem, however, where it has not been 
primary, owing to its being a reflex expression of the social organiza- 
tion, quite generally supplants the other interpretation. 

THE CLAN TIE 

In intimate relation with the attitude toward the clan animal is the 
conception of the tie binding one member of the clan to another. 
In no case did an individual regard the tie between him and another 
member of the same clan as based upon descent from the same animal. 
Blood relationship was always given as the reason for exogamy, as is 

kadin] SOCIAL ORGANIZATION — GENERAL DISCUSSION 199 

shown by the very word for clan (holcilc'aradjera) . This concept of 
blood relationship was extended to the mother's clan generation. 
As we have pointed out, there is no reason for assuming that blood 
relationship is the primary explanation. The number of explanations 
for exogamy existing between one clan and another, and between 
the clans of one side as opposed to those of another, indicate clearly 
how readily interpretations of this phenomenon change. The Bear 
does not marry into the Wolf clan because they are friends (hitcalc'oro), 
and does not marry into the Buffalo clan because it belongs to the 
same side, or no reason at all is assigned. Before the question of the 
clan tie can be thoroughly understood, the kind of blood relationship 
that is here meant must be more carefully defined. This is not a very 
general but a very definite notion, and may be said to extend not 
beyond four generations, in fact not beyond the direct knowledge 
of some living individual. This will be brought out more clearly 
by the following tables, based on actual genealogies: 

(F) Thunderbird— Bear (M) 1. or: 

(F) Bear— Eagle (M) 2. (F) Thunderbird— Bear (M) 1. 

(F) Eagle— Wolf (M) 3. (M) Bear— Eagle (F) 2. 

(F) Wolf— Thunderbird (M) 4. (M) Bear— Thunderbird (F) 3. 

(M) Thunderbird— Bear (F) 5. 

All these marriages are permitted. In the first case a man marries 
into his maternal grandmother's maternal grandfather's clan; and 
in the second, a man marries into his paternal grandmother's clan. 
We will consequently have to consider blood relationship as extending 
only to four, sometimes three, generations, and have to regard the 
statement of blood relationship as the tie binding the members of 
the clan together as purely fictitious and secondary. That, neverthe- 
less, this fictitious tie called forth the same feeling as that of real 
relationship, there is abundant evidence to show, and that it was of 
considerable importance in the development of the Winnebago clan- 
unit is borne out by the fact that the clan was called "those-who-are- 
relatives-to-one-another. ' ' 

CLAN FUNCTIONS 

The association of political functions with definite social units is a 
common phenomenon in most cultures where a tendency toward 
socialization exists. It is strictly comparable to the association of 
ceremonial and religious functions with ceremonial units. In this 
connection, the difference between an association with a group unit 
and an association with an individual is of fundamental importance. 
Is the former, for instance, merely an extension of the latter 'i This 
only individual history can demonstrate. Such a genetic relationship 
between the two depends probably as much upon the nature of the 

200 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. anx. 37 

political function as upon anything else. The exact time when this 
socialization took place is of no great import here. Among the 
Winnebago, for instance, some individuals claim that the functions 
of the public crier were inherent in the Buffalo clan, while others 
insist that any person who had counted coup four times was eligible 
for the office. Now, in this case not only is it possible but it is 
extremely probable that the office of public crier was originally con- 
nected with an individual, and that subsequently it became associated 
with the Buffalo clan, probably by reason of a certain relationship 
existing between this clan and the Chief clan. It must, of course, 
be remembered that a grouping had already taken place, because the 
requirement of having counted coup four times made a large number 
of warriors potentially public criers. Its association with mem- 
bership in the Buffalo clan represented, on the one hand, a restriction 
of the number of individuals, and on the other hand, the addition of 
another qualification. Historically, then, the qualification of mem- 
bership in the clan supplanted the other qualifications, at least in 
the eyes of a number of individuals. What has been said of the 
development of the functions of the Buffalo may also be generally 
applied to the Warrior or Hawk clan. 

Political functions may, however, become connected with a group 
unit without the individual playing any role either in directing or in 
developing it. The functions of preserving peace and of acting as 
intermediary, that among the Winnebago are connected with the 
Thunderbird clan, and the police and disciplinary functions con- 
nected with the Bear clan, may represent such types of association. 
In the absence of historical data, no demonstration can be made. It 
will, however, be shown later that association of ceremonial-religious 
functions with a social unit has actually occurred. That the police 
and disciplinary functions of the Bear clan developed from functions 
of individuals, on the basis of requirements similar to those of the 
public crier, is quite improbable, and no indication of that exists. 
Similarly the functions of the Thunderbird clan do not lend themselves 
readily to such an interpretation. But even should we accept the 
necessity for the priority of the one over the other types of associa- 
tion, we must still insist that psychologically the functions are in 
each case associated with a group unit. 

Four of the Winnebago clans have specific political functions the 
details of which are discussed elsewhere. The. Thunderbird, the 
chief clan, and in addition to the fact that the chief of the tribe is 
selected from it, has important functions connected with the preser- 
vation of peace; the Warrior clan has functions connected with war; 
the Bear clan, those relating to policing and discipline, both within 
the village and while on the hunt, etc.; and the Buffalo clan, those 
relating to the office of public crier and intermediary between the 

radix] SOCIAL ORGANIZATION — GENERAL DISCUSSION 201 

chief and his people. The Wolf, Water-spirit, and Elk clans seem 
also to have possessed minor political-social functions. Thus the 
Wolf people are regarded as "minor" soldiers; the Water-spirit 
people are connected with the passage of streams, etc.; and the Elk 
are connected with the care of the fireplaces while on the hunt and 
warpath. This accounts for seven of the twelve clans, and it thus 
seems as if the association of political functions with clans was a type 
that had found great favor among the Winnebago, and was perhaps 
being extended to every clan. Among the Dhegiha, associations of 
ceremonial functions with social units seem to have found corre- 
sponding favor, while among the Central Algonquian neither type 
prevailed. 

Marked political and ceremonial functions of the clan are thus the 
distinguishing characteristics of the Siouan social organization and 
have given an entirely different color to clan structure there. 

THE RECIPROCAL RELATIONSHIP OF THE CLANS 

We have seen that one of the bonds between the clans was the 
fact of belonging to the same side. But there is a special bond be- 
tween certain clans known as "friendship" relation (hitcak'oro). 
This always subsists between two, although it seems occasionally to 
have been extended to three or four clans. Most informants gave 
these groups in such a manner that the "friendship " relation was not 
postulated between clans belonging to different divisions. One in- 
dividual postulated them just on this basis, i. e., Thunderbird-Bear, 
Warrior-Wolf, etc. There can, however, be no doubt that the preva- 
lent arrangement is: Thunderbird-Warrior; Eagle-Pigeon ; Bear- Wolf ; 
Buffalo-Water-spirit ; Elk-Deer ; Snake-Fish. Most informants did not 
claim any pairing for the Snake, while some associated it in a three- 
fold grouping with the Buffalo and Water-spirit. The four clans of 
the Watjgeregi are generally united in a fourfold group of "friend 
clan," although some divide them into Thunderbird-Warrior and 
Eagle-Pigeon. 

Under the term "friend clan " is included the idea of mutual service. 
This becomes especially marked on two occasions: first, when a mem- 
ber of one clan visits his "friend clan," and second, when an injustice 
has been done a member of the "friend clan." On the former oc- 
casion every possible privilege is extended to him, even to his occu- 
pying the seat and bed of the host. There is no indication of "wife- 
borrowing," however. On the latter occasion, the " friend clan " will 
seek to revenge the injustice just as if the wrong had been done one of 
its own members. The respect shown by one clan to its "friend clan " 
is again apparent at the naming-feast. There he may be called upon 
to give the dog names for an individual of the clan with which he is 
associated, and, at times, to lend one of his clan names to the latter. 
1S6823— 22 14 

202 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ann. 37 

The relation ofTiitcak'oro or "friend clan" is thus strictly analogous 
to that which exists between two individuals who are hitcak'oro 
to each other. It is one of the characteristic traits of Siouan cul- 
ture that two individuals often form a strong, inextricable friendship. 
Not only are they always together but the death of one on the war- 
path involves that of the other. The same intimate relationship 
seems to exist between an uncle (hidek1) and his nephew (hitcy,cge). 
There is, however, one fundamental difference between such relation 
as that existing between hidek' and hifcy,cge, the members of the family 
group, and the members of the same clan, on the one hand, and clan 
hitcak'oro, on the other. In the former there is the bond of blood, 
real or fictitious; in the latter, only that of mutual service. On the 
other hand, while the hidek' -hitcycge relation, the individual hitcak'oro 
and the clan hitcalc'oro all may be of different historical origin, they 
are psychologically the same. The postulation of even a fictitious 
blood bond between the different individual hitcak'oro and the clan 
hitcak'oro is not unheard of. For the hitcak'oro relation of individuals 
this is always possible, for if one individual dies, his hitcalc'oro is gen- 
erally adopted to fill his place. On the other hand, the myths seem 
to indicate that no blood bond was regarded as existing between 
them, for they generally married each other's sisters. 

What historical relation the clan hitcak'oro bears to the indi- 
vidual hitcak'oro relation, it is impossible to state, but the remarks 
made before are pertinent here, and no genetic relationship need be 
postulated. 

THE SPECIFIC POSSESSIONS OF THE CLAN 

Among the Omaha a number of clans have in their possession cer- 
tain objects around which not merely the clan but also the tribal 
reverence is centered. Historically, we believe that these were 
originally possessions of an individual clan, which subsequently 
became identified with the entire tribe. Among the Winnebago 
nothing remotely comparable to these clan possessions exists, and 
the few specific objects possessed by the clan have never become of 
real tribal significance. 

The specific material possessions of the clan consist of certain war 
bundles, one in each clan; and two crooks in the possession of the 
Bear clan. There also exist war clubs, of which there are two types, 
one found among the waygeregi, the other among the manegi divi- 
sions. In connection with the clan bundles there are certain cere- 
monials known as clan-bundle or war-bundle feasts, popularly as 
Winter Feasts. The distribution of the clan bundle differentiates 
these from the specific possessions of the Omaha clans, and suggests 
a hint as to their historical associations. To all intents and pur- 
poses, as their individual history shows, these bundles are merely 

Radin] SOCIAL ORGANIZATION — GENERAL DISCISSION 203 

gifts from one spirit, the thunderbird, and a secondarily associated 
night-spirit (hqhe). The Winter Feast might thus be interpreted 
as a society of those who have obtained blessings from the thunder- 
bird. The bundle remains in the possession of a certain family, 
however, and cannot pass out of the clan. The war bundle may 
therefore be said to be primarily the personal possession of a 
family which has become associated with all the members of the clan 
to such an extent that it is almost regarded as a clan possession. 

In the possession of the two crooks by the Bear clan we have an 
example of specific clan property. The crooks are in the nature of 
emblems and are used on the warpath to indicate the extreme line 
of advance. They are thus of tribal significance. When not in use 
they are kept in the lodge of the Bear clan. 

IMMATERIAL POSSESSIONS OF THE CLAN 

Although there are no specific material possessions, each clan 
has certain "immaterial" possessions. They all have the added con- 
notation of sacredness. For the Bird clans, it is the possession of fire; 
for the Bear, the doorway of his lodge; for the Wolf and Water-spirit, 
water. They were not obtained for all the clans. We indicated before 
that these "possessions" may have been primarily connected with the 
animals associated with the clan, upon which an additional socio- 
religious interpretation has been superimposed. The whole subject 
is, however, closely related to that of clan etiquette, for which, of 
course, no explanations can be given now. 

THE CLAN MARKS OF IDENTIFICATION 

As if more fully to set off the social unit of the clan, there have 
come to be associated with it definite marks of identification, such as 
symbols, property marks, facial decorations, and songs. 

The symbols of only two clans were obtained, although a number 
of other clans seem to have possessed them. These were the war 
club (namqtce) of the Thunderbird clan and the peculiarly whittled 
stick (narnaxinixini) of the Bear clan. When a member of the 
Thunderbird clan died a miniature war club was buried with him. 
Whether the narnaxinixini was buried with a member of a Bear 
clan we do not know. 

The property mark consisted of the effigy of the clan animal, and 
was woven on such objects as bags, tobacco pouches, etc. It was 
also frequently engraved on wooden objects. Its most peculiar uses, 
however, were the emblematic earthen effigy mounds, in the shape 
of the clan animal, which were erected near the habitation of each 
clan in the village and in the center of clan squash fields, cornfields, etc. 

204 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ann. 37 

Associated with every clan was also four clan songs. These were 
supposed to be the four songs sung by the ancestors of each clan when 
they came to this earth. They were always sung on the death of an 
individual, and were supposed to serve as a mark of identification in 
the journey of the soul to the land of the spirits. The use of these 
songs was so intimately associated with death that when some 
hardened offender, let us say, some individual who had killed a 
member of the tribe and who refused to make atonement of any 
kind, was pursued, he defiantly sang his clan songs. 

As a last element in the clan complex may be mentioned the 
specific facial decorations existing in each clan. 

We have now completed the discussion of clan organization. As 
we saw, it consisted of a large number of cultural elements of the 
most heterogeneous historical origin. So many indications are there, 
indeed, of interpretations, reinterpretations, and secondary associa- 
tion that it is impossible to form any correct idea of what is histori- 
cally primary, except the self-evident fact that it had grown around 
a strong social-political unit. 

INFLUENCE OF THE CLAN UPON CEREMONIAL ORGANIZATION 

Perhaps the most characteristic trait of Winnebago culture is the 
existence of two strong socialized units, that of the clan and that of 
the secret society. Historically both are old, and even if we are of the 
opinion that the clan is historically younger, the political unit upon 
which it is superimposed is probably an ultimate historical fact. 
From the earliest times one would have supposed reciprocal influences 
to have occurred repeatedly. The nature of these influences, in so 
far as they are not conditioned by chance, would depend upon the 
respective center of gravity in either unit. It is evident that for the 
clan the organization was of paramount importance, and that the 
addition of cultural associations probably tended to strengthen its 
stability in this respect. On the other hand, the absence of political 
or governmental functions in the religious societies, and the cluster- 
ing of the most multitudinous religious and shamanistic ideas within 
them, rendered the emotional unit of the latter the center from which 
influences would radiate. At the same time, the ceremonial unit of 
organization seems to have been so firmly fixed that any influence of 
the clan unit of organization upon it does not seem likely. As a 
matter of fact, in the typical schematic, religious society like the 
Medicine Dance, the Grizzly-Bear Dance, and Night-Spirit Dance, 
no influence is perceptible. However, these religious societies may 
be regarded as presenting no possible points of contact. Where, 
however, the bond of union is supernatural communication with a 
guardian spirit who subsequently became the clan animal, an obvious 
point of contact is given, and this brings to mind a very suggestive 

■eadin] SOCIAL OBGA~SnZAT)OT5=-GENEBAL DISCUSSION 205 

fact of Winnebago culture, namely, that there are, strictly speaking, 
no religious societies based on communication from a clan animal. 
There are, however, clan and clan-bundle (Winter) feasts which, in 
many respects, are absolutely identical with the religious societies, 
and which furnish, it seems to us, an example of just those two kinds 
of influence that we wished to point out, one radiating from the clan 
as an organization, the other from the entire clan unit. 

In the Winter Feasts the unit of organization is the clan. Gen- 
erally all the clans were represented in the person of the owner of 
each specific clan war bundle. The order of invitation was tradi- 
tionally fixed, but it seems that in a number of cases the "friend" 
clan always had the position of honor. The war-bundle owner was 
not, however, supposed to represent the clan at all, but the spirits 
to whom offerings were being made. In every case, although the 
participants were supposed to represent a fairly large number of 
animals, the main blessings that were contained in the war bundle 
were from the thunderbird and night-spirit and the main offerings 
were indeed made to them. There seem thus to have been two 
separate ceremonies involved, one to the thunderbird and the other 
to the night-spirits. 

The question arising with regard to the clan basis of these cere- 
monial organizations is whether we are to imagine that the cere- 
monial unit of organization was displaced by the clan unit, or whether 
we are to suppose that the ceremony is of comparatively recent 
origin, let us say at least long after the clan organization had been 
perfected, and that a number of things combined to determine the ' 
acceptance of the clan as a unit of organization, as opposed to the 
traditional ceremonial one. To the foregoing we must also add the 
fact that the Winter Feast seems to be related to similar ceremonies 
of the Central Algonquian, whose influence on the Winnebago must 
first be determined. If, then, we are not in a position at present to 
suggest the course of development, there can be no doubt that the 
content of the ceremony is strictly comparable to that of the religious 
societies, and that there are hints that the ceremonial unit of organi- 
zation had begun to assert itself. If this could be definitely estab- 
lished, it would indicate that the clan basis of organization is his- 
torically primary. 

The clan unit of organization is found in no other Winnebago cere- 
mony, although the specific clan feasts show marked influences 
radiating from the clan unit. The clan feast is a typical ceremonial 
complex, both in type of organization and in content. The differ- 
ence between it and a society like that of the night-spirit lies in the 
fact that although the five principal participants must have specific 
blessings (bundles), they must at the same time belong to the clan. 
To what extent a member of one clan who has obtained a bundle 

206 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. a.n.n. 37 

from some other clan spirit can take part in the specific clan feast 
of the latter it is difficult to determine, but in the buffalo feast, 
assuming that this is unquestionably the real Buffalo clan feast, any 
person who has obtained a bundle from the buffalo can participate, 
although the leader must always belong to the Buffalo clan. This 
example may be taken as an indication of the historical origin of 
these feasts, namely, that they are really religious societies in which 
the influence of the clan has restricted the number of individuals 
who are ordinarily supposed to occupy the five places of honor. 
That this restrictive influence of the clan was caused by the identity 
of the clan animal with the guardian spirit there can be little doubt. 

CHAPTER IX 

SOCIAL ORGANIZATION— SPECIFIC CLANS 

The Thunderbird Clan 

introduction 

The Thunderbird clan was unquestionably the most important of 
all the Winnebago clans. In numbers it seems to have equaled the 
three other clans of its phratry, and, since the upper phratry had 
about as many individuals as the lower phratry, the Thunderbird 
clan must have comprised about one-fourth of the entire tribe. 
How are we to explain this? Historical data are, of course, missing, 
so that any explanation reached is entirely hypothetical, but still 
it seems justifiable to hazard some interpretation. The most plau- 
sible hypothesis is to assume that the Winnebago were originally 
organized on a village basis and that the largest of these villages 
and the earliest to adopt the clan organization were those that took 
the thunderbird as their totem. 

In the origin myths, the origin of the Thunderbird clan is always 
given as Green Bay, and in contradistinction to the accounts of 
other clans, the ancestors of the clan are supposed to have originated 
at Green Bay and not to have traveled there from some other place. 
How much credence is to be given to such a localization it is hard 
to say, but assuredly it should not be dismissed as entirely worthless. 

The origin myths of the Thunderbird clan possess some inter- 
esting features which deserve a few words of comment. In the 
first version we have an account of the creation of the world which 
is almost identical with that given in the origin myth of the Medicine 
Dance (p. 350). None of the other clan origin myths contain it. 
How are we to explain this ? As a secondary accretion or as an 
original and archaic feature? On internal evidence we suspect that 
it is a secondary accretion and that the original version began with 
the second paragraj>h. There seems to be no intelligible reason 
for having Earthmaker create two sets of individuals. If we sup- 
pose that the original version began with the second paragraph 
and that the general account of the creation was subsequently 
added, we would have a satisfactory explanation of this feature. 
Only one of the three versions obtained contains this general ac- 

207 

208 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [bth. ann. 37 

count of creation, and thus we have another reason for doubting 
its age. 

There are other indications of an assimilation with the general 
origin myth hi our versions, such as the absence of animals on the 
earth and the ascription of certain geographical features to the activity 
of the thunderbirds. Throughout, however, we are always con- 
fronted with the possibility that we may be dealing with an old 
village origin myth. There seems to be no doubt but that the 
episode of the origin of death, so distinct from that given in the general 
origin myth, is archaic. Other features, on the other hand, like 
the description of the origin of fire, are clearly reflections of certain 
possessions always associated with the Thunderbird clan. 

A perusal of the following versions and the versions of the other 
clan origin myths indicates clearly how personal the accounts are. 
The members of the Thunderbird clan, as we shall subsequently 
show for the members of the other clans too, make claims of power 
and importance for their clans that are hardly justified by what 
we know of their actual power. As sources of information, there- 
fore, we must be extremely cautious in our use of these origin myths. 

Before leaving this subject it might be well to point out the num- 
ber of different explanations given in these myths of the relations 
of the members of the clan to their eponymous clan ancestor. If 
a Winnebago were asked what this relation was he would answer 
offhand that the members of the different clans were descended 
from certain spirit-thunderbirds who were transformed into human 
beings at Green Bay. 

In the first version the ancestors of the Thunderbird clan are 
created by Earthmaker and brought down to earth by the four spirit- 
thunderbirds the first Earthmaker had created. They are ap- 
parently human beings and not heroic birds, as most of the members 
of the clan assure you. To complicate the situation we have even 
the mention of the fact that the second set of people who came to 
visit them were members of the Thunderbird clan. 

In the second version we have the customary identification of 
the ancestors of this clan with birds. At the end of this version we 
have the distinct statement, which is, however, clearly not part of 
the myth but an explanation by the informant, that the members 
of the clan call themselves thunderbirds because they, like the 
true thunderbirds, caused a drizzling rain and fog when they went 
about. 

It is only in the myth of the origin of the Warrior clan that we have 
what can be interpreted as an account identical with that given 
offhand by the Winnebago. Here we are told that the warriors 
or hawks when they entered the lodge at Green Bay began to look 
different and that their feathers were worn off. 

RADiN] SOCIAL ORGANIZATION SPECIFIC CLANS 209 

From these facts it is quite clear that, as far as the Thunderbird 
clan is concerned, the prevailing belief as to the relation of the mem- 
bers of the clan to the clan ancestor is but feebly substantiated by 
the origin myths. 

As mentioned before, the chief of the tribe was selected from the 
Thunderbird clan, although the selection was apparently restricted 
to certain families. The functions of the chief of the tribe were con- 
nected with peace. He could not lead a war party, although, accord- 
ing to some, he could accompany one. His lodge stood either in the 
center of the village or at the south end, according to which of the 
two descriptions one cares to accept, and contained a sacred fire- 
place, around which only members of the Thunderbird clan could 
sit. This lodge was an asylum for all wrongdoers. No one could be 
killed there, and a prisoner who succeeded hi making his escape to it 
was spared. Even a dog destined for a sacrifice at the war-bundle 
feast was freed if he took refuge in it. The Thunderbird chief always 
acted as intercessor between wrongdoers and their avengers. Even 
hi so extreme a case as the murder of a clansman, he would always 
attempt a reconciliation by which the life of the murderer might be 
spared. If necessary, the chief would mortify himself, and with 
skewers inserted hi his back have himself led through the village to 
the home of the nearest kinspeople of the murdered person. 

The chief seems to have had some other miscellaneous functions, 
the most important of which was, perhaps, his right to prevent an 
unauthorized war party to depart from the village. If he, as an 
older man and guardian of peace and the best interests of the tribe, 
felt that a war party was taking too many risks, he would take his 
pipe and place it across the path of the one contemplating an unwar- 
ranted expedition and thus signify his disapproval. If then the war 
party chose to go, any mishap was directly chargeable to the leader 
who disobeyed. Should anyone be killed, the leader was regarded 
almost hi the same light as a willful murderer, and the kinsmen of 
the deceased warrior could demand redress. 

Our main informant for the Thunderbird clan summarized the 
functions as follows: 

The chief is chosen from one of the "greater" Thunderbird clans ' and must be a 
man of well-balanced temper, not easily provoked, and of good habits. The one 
sacred object he possesses is his pipe. He must be a peacemaker and love all the 
people in the tribe, the little children included. 

If he saw a man, woman, or child passing by, he was to call them in and give them 
food to eat, for they were his brothers and sisters. All the relatives he has are to look 
after his possessions and keep him well supplied, for he was supposed to give away 
things constantly. If any person came to borrow some object from him, he would tell 

1 He divided the Thunderbird clans into two groups, the real Thunderbird and the Warrior clans. This 
latter he insisted was identical with the thunderbirds who caused the rain and who were quite different 
Ir uni the other thunderbirds. 

210 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ash. 37 

the man that, since he was without this particular thing, to keep it and use it for all 
time. 

The public crier, a member of the Buffalo clan, was supposed to report to the chief 
early every morning and receive instructions. The crier would then go all around the 
village making the chief's desires known. 

The chief had a representative at every council, generally his brother. 

The chief of the village is a peacemaker, and if two members of the tribe ever get 
into difficulties (i. e., quarrel) he is supposed to intercede. If in a quarrel a person 
should be killed, the chief would go to the murderer and tell the latter to permit him- 
self to be tied up — i. e., to give himself up to the relatives of the murdered man. If 
the murderer consents to do so, then his arms are tied behind him and the chief walks 
in front of him carrying his sacred pipe. Thus they would go to the lodge of the 
murdered man's relatives. When they got there the chief would extend the stem of 
the pipe toward them. They might refuse to accept the pipe thus extended, but if 
any member of the family, even if it be a small child, were to take a puff from it, then 
the murderer would be forgiven and turned free. 

This is the capacity of a Winnebago chief. 

Another description of the chief's role as intercessor for a murderer 
is as follows: 

When the Thunderbird chief wishes to save a murderer they take one of their own 
chiefs, one who is well beloved, paint his back blue, and put skewers in his back, to 
which they tie cords. Thus he is taken to the lodge of the murdered person's rela- 
tives. The chief, when he gets there, holds his pipe of tobacco in both hands. Should 
the relations not wish to accept the peace offering they close the door in his face. 
Then he returns. 

The Thunderbird clan possessed a type of war club called a bald- 
headed war club, which was sacred to this clan alone, and a 
miniature of which was always buried with a dead body. The only 
other possessions were the clan war bundles. The Winnebago often 
speak as though each clan had but one of these palladiums, but there 
seems to be little doubt but that there were at least two and probably 
more hi each clan. These war bundles must be regarded as the com- 
mon possession of the clan at the present time, for they can not be 
alienated from the clan.2 For all practical purposes, however, they 
are the private property of certain individuals or families. 

Fire was considered a sacred possession of the Thunderbird clan. 
As mentioned before, an individual was supposed never to ask for a 
firebrand from the fire of any member of the clan and was never 
permitted to sit near such a fireplace. If, nevertheless, anyone 
should be immodest enough to ask for one of these objects, he would 
be refused, but he would be permitted to ask for any conceivable 
thing else. The following incident will serve as an example of the 
definite way hi which this peculiar custom works. An old Winne- 

2 This point was very forcibly impressed upon the author when he tried to obtain the war bundle of a 
man who had become a member of the Peyote cult. The man was perfectly willing to part with it, but 
after repeated requests to those who happened to possess it at that particular time, be admitted that it 
belonged to the clan, although they could not have taken it away from him had he remained a believer in 
the old faith. 

badin] SOCIAL ORGANIZATION SPECIFIC CLANS 211 

bago told the author that long ago a young man wanted to marry a 
girl belonging to his phratry and refused to listen to the entreaties 
of his father and mother. Finally the father, in desperation, went 
over to the lodge of a man belonging to one of the clans into which 
the young man could marry and asked for one of the sacred posses- 
sions. It was, of course, refused, and when the man was asked what 
other requests he wished to make, he asked that the host's daughter 
be allowed to marry his son. This was, of course, granted, and thus 
the boy was compelled to marry into the proper phratry. 

One Winnebago interpreted the custom in an entirely different 
way. Exactly how much importance is to be attached to this 
explanation it is hard to say. According to this informant, the 
insult lay not in going to the fireplace or taking a firebrand, but in 
asking for it. The insult apparently consists in not taking it for 
granted that anyone entering the lodge was permitted to do what 
he wished. In other words, his asking was a breach of etiquette. 

The typical method of burial in the Thunderbird clan was scaffold 
burial. It has long since been discontinued. 

The burial customs seem to have been the same for all the clans. 
It may, however, be that in former times there were slight differ- 
ences. For instance, in the first version of the Thunderbird clan 
origin myth the statement is made that the branch of a tree was 
placed at the grave and a small stick, painted red, attached to it. 
The author has no recollection of ever hearing the same statement 
made in connection with any other of the clans. 

There are four songs associated with the Thunderbird clan. 
These are supposed to have been sung by the clan ancestors when 
they came to this earth, and are now always sung when a member 
of the clan dies, and on a few other occasions. 

According to one informant, members of the Elk, Warrior, Deer, 
and Buffalo clans acted as servants to the Thunderbird clan on 
various occasions. The same informant also claimed that the 
Warrior clansmen took specific orders from the Thunderbird clans- 
men when on the warpath. 

According to another informant, Thunderbird marks at death are 
a half circle on the forehead, mac^e with charcoal. The proper 
marking is, however, that shown in plate 46. 

Two dog names used in the Thunderbird clan are obtained — 
finzakirutcga; ]ea-4wakitcanga. 

The only feast specifically connected with the Thunderbird clan 
was the so-called chief feast, of which a description will be found on 
page 318. One of the divisions of the war-bundle feast is often con- 
sidered as sacred to the thunderbird, but this is always the deity 
thunderbird, not the ancestor of the clan. 

212 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ann. 37 

CLAN MYTHS AND NAMES 
ORIGIN MYTH (TOLD BY A MEMBER OF THE CLAN)3 

In the beginning, Earthinaker was sitting in space when he came 
to consciousness, and there was nothing else anywhere.4 He began 
to think of what he should do, and finally he began to cry and tears 
began to flow from his eyes and fall down below him. After a while 
he looked down below him and saw something bright. The bright 
objects were hidden tears that had flowed below and formed the 
present waters. When the tears flowed below they became the seas 
as they are now. Earthinaker began to think again. He thought, 
"It is thus, if I wish anything; it will become as I wish, just as my 
tears have become seas." Thus he thought. So he wished for light 
and it became light. Then he thought, "It is as I have supposed; 
the things that I wished for have come into existence as I desired." 
Then he again thought and wished for the earth, and this earth 
came into existence. Earthmaker looked on the earth and he liked 
it, but it was not quiet. It moved about as do the waves of the sea. 
Then he made the trees and he saw that they were good, but they 
did not make the earth quiet. Then he made the grass to grow, 
but still the earth was not yet quiet. Then he made the rocks and 
stones, but still the earth was pot quiet. However, it was nearly 
quiet. Then he made the four directions (cardinal points) and the 
four winds. On the four corners of the earth he placed them as 
great and powerful people, to act as island weights. Yet the earth 
was not quiet. Then he made four large beings and threw them 
down toward the earth, and they pierced through the earth with 
their heads eastward. They were snakes. Then the earth became 
very still and quiet. Then he looked upon the earth and he saw that 
it was good. Then he thought again of how things came into 
existence just as he desired. Then he first began to talk. He said, 
"As things are just as I wish them, I shall make one being in my 
own likeness." So he took a piece of clay (earth) and made it like 
himself. Then he talked to what he had created, but it did not 
answer. He looked upon it and saw that it had no mind or thought. 
So he made a mind for it. Again he talked to it, but it did not 
answer. So he looked upon it again and saw that it had no tongue. 
Then he made it a tongue. Then he talked to it again, but it did 
not answer. So he looked upon it again and saw that it had no 
soul. So he made it a soul. He talked to it again, and it very nearly 
said something. But it did not make itself intelligible. So Earth- 
maker breathed into its mouth and talked to it, and it answered. 

» Told in connection with the origin of the Thtmderbird wake. 

< This myth is reprinted from Radin. Winnebago tales, Journal of American Folk-Lore, vol. xxn, no 
lxxxv, 1909. It has apparently been somewhat influenced by the Bible. 

badinI SOCIAL, ORGANIZATION— SPECIFIC CLANS 213 

As the newly created being was in his own likeness, Earthmaker 
felt quite proud of him, so he made three more just like him. lie 
made them powerful so that they might watch over the earth. These 
first four he made chiefs of the Thunderbirds. And he thought, 
' 'Some will I make to live upon the earth of those I have created." So 
he made four more beings in his own likeness. Just like the others 
he made them. They were brothers — Kunuga, Henanga, Hagaga, 
and NarjYiga. He talked to them and said, "Look down upon the 
earth." So saying, he opened the heavens in front of where they sat 
and there they saw the earth (spread out below them). He told 
them that they were to go down there to live. "And this I shall 
send with you," he added, and he gave them a plant. ' T myself 
shall not have any power to take this from you, as I have given it to 
you; but when of your own free will you make me an offering of 
some of it, I shall gladly accept it and give you what you ask. This 
shall you hold foremost in your lives." It was a tobacco plant that 
he had given them. He said, also, "All the spirits that I create will 
not be able to take this from you unless you desire to give it, by calling 
upon them during fasts and offering it to them. Thus only can the 
spirits get any of it. And this also I send with you that you may use 
it in life. When you offer anything it shall be your mediator. It 
shall take care of you through life. It shall stand in the center of 
your dwellings and it shall be your grandfather." Thus he spoke to 
them. What he meant was the fire. And then he gave them the 
earth to live upon. 

So the four Thunder spirits brought the four brothers down to the 
earth. The oldest one, Kunuga, said, while on their way down, 
' 'Brother, when we get to the earth and the first child is born to me I 
shall call him Chief-of-ihe-TJmnders, if it be a boy." On they came 
down toward the earth. When they got near the earth it began to 
get very dark. Then the second brother said, "Brother, when we 
get to the earth and a child is born to me, if it is a girl it shall be 
called Dark." They came to a place called Within Lake5 at Red 
Banks, a lake near Green Bay. On an oak tree south of the lake is 
the place where they alighted. The branch they alighted on bent 
down from their weight. Then said the third brother to his brothers, 
"The first daughter born to me shall be called She-who-weighs-the- 
tree-down-woman." Then they alighted on the earth, but the 
Thunder spirits did not touch the earth. Then said the fourth and 
last brother to his brothers, ' 'Brothers, the first son that is born to 
me shall be called He-who-alights-on-the-earth." The first thing they 
did on earth was to start their fire. 

Then Earthmaker looked down upon them and saw that he had 
not prepared any food for them, so he made the animals that they 

sThis lake is probably Green Bay itself. 

214 THE WINNEBAGO TEIBE [eth. ann. 37 

might have something to eat. The oldest brother said, "What are 
we going to eat?" Then the youngest two took the bow and arrows 
that Earthmaker had given them and started toward the east. 
Not long after the third brother came into view with a young deer 
on his back and the youngest brother also came with a young deer 
;ibout 2 years old on his back. The deer that were killed, and 
those that killed them, were also brothers. They were very much 
delighted that they had obtained food. Then said they, "Let us 
give our grandfather the first taste." Saying thus, they cut off the 
ends of the tongues and the heart and threw them into the fire with 
some fat. The first people to call on them were the War clan people. 
They came from the west. Then came four others. They were the 
thunders. Thus they were called the youngest brothers. Then came 
those of the earth. Then came those of the Deer clan. Then those 
of the Snake clan. Then came those of the Elk clan. Then came 
those of the Bear clan. Then came those of the Fish clan. Then 
came those of the Water-spirit clan and all the other clans that 
exist. Then there appeared on the lake a very white bird — swan they 
called it. And after that, all the other water birds that exist came. 
And they named them in the order of their coming until the lake was 
quite full. Then the people began to chess the deer meat. Suddenly 
something came and alighted on the deer meat. "What is that?" 
they said. Then said Kunuga, the eldest brother, ' 'It is a wasp, 
and the first dog that I possess, if it is black, Wasp I shall call it." 
Thus he spoke. "And as the wasp scented and knew of the deer 
dressing so shall the dog be toward other animals, and wherever the 
dog is, and animals are in the windward, he shall scent them." They 
made a feast with the deer for Earthmaker and threw tobacco into 
the fire and offered it to him. And to the other clans they showed 
how fire was to be made and gave them some, "For," they said, 
' 'each of you must now make fire for yourselves, as we shall not 
always lend you some." There the people made their home. It 
was just the time of the year when the grass comes as far as the knee. 

One day they reported that something very strange was near the 
camp; but they said to themselves, "We will leave it alone." In a 
little while it moved nearer. Thus it moved toward the camp and 
soon it began to eat deer bones. They allowed it to become one of 
their clans and took it into their house. It was the dog or wolf. They 
killed one and made a feast to Earthmaker, telling him all about 
what they had done. 

In the beginning the Thunder clansmen were as powerful as the 
Thunder spirits themselves. It was the Thunder people who made 
the ravines and the valleys. While wandering around the earth the 
Thunder people struck the earth with their clubs and made dents in 
the hills. That is the reason that the upper clans are chiefs of all 
the others and that the least of all are the dog people. So it was. 

badin] SOCIAL, ORGANIZATION SPECIFIC CLANS 215 

One day the oldest of the brothers lay down and did not rise again, 
and he did not breathe and he became cold. "What is the matter 
with our oldest brother?" the three others said. Four days they 
waited for him, but still he did not arise. So the second brother was 
asked by his youngest brother what the trouble was; but he did not 
know anything about it and told him to ask his third brother: but 
this one did not know either. Then the two older brothers asked the 
youngest one, but he did not know either. Then they began to 
mourn for him, not knowing what to do or think. They fasted and 
blackened their faces, as we do now when we are in mourning. They 
made a platform and laid him on it. When the snow fell knee-deep 
the three brothers filled their pipe and went toward the place of the 
coming of daylight — the east. There they came to the first being 
that Earthmaker had placed in the east, the Island-weight, as he was 
called. They came to him weeping and went into his tent, turning 
the stem of the pipe in his mouth. They said, "Grandfather, our 
brother Kunuga has fallen and is not able to rise again. Earthmaker 
made you great and endowed you with all knowledge, and thus you 
know all things." He answered and said, "My dear grandsons, I am 
sorry, but I do not know anything about it; but as you have started 
to find out I would refer you to the one ahead of me (the north). 
Perhaps he can tell you." 

So, weeping, they started for the next one. When they got 
there and told him their troubles, he told them he could not 
help them; "but," he said, "perhaps the one ahead of me 
knows." So they started for the third one (the west), but from him 
likewise they could learn nothing. He also referred them to the one 
ahead (the south). When they reached the fourth and last one, they 
entered the lodge, and behold there sat the three to whom they had 
gone before. Here they asked the last one for help, and not only 
he but the other three also answered them: "Grandsons, thus Earth- 
maker has willed it. Your brother will not rise again. He will be 
with you no more in this world, and as long as this world lasts' so will 
it be with human beings. Whenever one reaches the age of death 
one shall die, and those that wish to live long will have to attain 
that age by good actions. Thus they will live long. Into your 
bodies Earthmaker has placed part of himself. That will return to 
him if you do the proper things. This world will come to an end 
sometime. Your brother shall keep a village in the west for all the 
souls of your clan, and there he shall be in full charge of all of you, 
and when this world is ended your brother shall take all the souls 
back to Earthmaker — at least all those who have acted properly. 
Thus it is. Now you may go home and bury your brother in the 
proper manner." The Thunder people thanked the four spirits and 
left the tent. When they got home they took their brother's body, 

216 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ANN. 37 

dressed him in his best clothes, and painted his face. Then they 
told him where he was to go and buried him with his head toward 
the west and with his war club. They placed the branch of a tree at 
his grave, and painted a little stick red and tied it to the tree, so 
that nothing should cross his path on his journey to the spirit abode. 
If any object or animal should cross his path on that journey, he must 
strike it with his club and throw it behind him, so that those relatives 
he had left behind on earth might derive blessings in war and attain 
long life. He must have his pipe and food along with him on his 
journey, and thus the things that he throws behind him will be a 
blessing for those still remaining on earth. Also the life he leaves 
behind him (i. e., the years that, had he lived to a normal age, are 
still due him) and the victories that he might have gained, all these 
he is to give to his relatives. The riches he might have had or, in 
fact, anything that he could possibly have had, he is asked to give to 
these relatives. Then they will not feel so unhappy and lonesome. 

SECOND VERSION (TOLD BY A MEMBER Ot THE CLAN) 

In the beginning four brothers started from above and came toward 
this world. They came to a country called (ni jahe, cliff place?), and 
there they alighted on a tree. From there they started around the 
world, going from left to right.6 , The first time they went around 
they went through space, but the second time they went along this 
earth, at a place called derok (Within Lake). There they built 
lodges for themselves. While doing this the oldest suddenly became 
quiet, as if stricken. Finally, he asked the second brother what he 
should do, and the second brother said to him, "You are the oldest 
and ought to know what to do. How can I, who am younger, know 
any tiling? Perhaps the third-born brother might know." So he 
asked the third-born, but he said, "You are the older and ought to 
know. How can I, being the younger, know? Perhaps the youngest 
brother will know." So they asked that one and he said, "Yes, I 
know something." The thing about which they did not know any- 
thing was the making of the fire. The younger one, saying he knew 
something, took a piece of an oak tree and began twisting it until it 
began to smoke, and then the fire started. Then he placed it on the 
ground. After the fire began to blaze and seemed well started they 
finished building their lodge. From that time on whenever they saw 
anything new the brothers would give it a name. Animals and all 
the things that exist were thus named. And then they were to pre- 
pare a meal, and the second brother reached out his hand and pro- 
duced the food that they wanted (i. e., he seemingly reached out from 
where he was seated and brought in deer's meat, etc.). Not having 

« The ceremonial manner of passing around a lodge. Supposed to be comparable to the path of the 
sun. 

radin] SOCIAL ORGANIZATION SPECIFIC CLANS 217 

any cooking utensils they broiled their meat on sharp sticks. Then 
the oldest one began making utensils for cooking. He took clay and 
slippery elm bark, mixed them together, and made a pot out of it, 
which was then heated over a fire. 

Within Lake was their main stopping place during their wander- 
ings. Now the members of the other clans began gathering at this 
place and all the other clans got to this place and obtained their fire 
from the Thunderers. From that time on they also began inter- 
marrying. The rule was that the upper clansmen married the 
women of the lower clans and vice versa. The oldest one of the 
brothers made friends with the Water-spirit clan and the second 
brother made friends with the Bear clan. The reason why the 
upper clans and the lower clans intermarried was to prevent their 
marrying their own relatives. The second brother is the ancestor of 
the War clan people. 

The Thunderers do not say that they were descended from the 
Thunderbirds, but they claim that in wandering about there was 
always a drizzling rain and fog which they caused and on account 
of the similarity of this to the actions of the Thunderbirds they 
called themselves the Thunderers.7 

From the gathering at Green Bay the clan names originated. 
The names were taken from incidents of their journey to this place. 
The older brother kept on naming everything; the different parts 
of our body; the different parts of animals, etc. When he finished, 
he suddenly stopped breathing and died. His death occurred at 
dawn. The brothers did not know that he had died. For a long 
time they waited for him to come to life again, but he never came to 
life again. Thus death originated. His body died, but his spirit 
traveled west toward the setting of the sun, making a road for all 
who were to come after him. He was the chief of the village of the 
spirits. 

THIRD VERSION (TOLD BY A MEMBER OF THE CLAN — FRAGMENTARY)8 

''Well, my younger brother, what shall we speak of? Let us 
speak of the Winnebagoes. You are right. Of them we will speak. 
What shall we eat ? If we see an animal let us eat him. I will go 
and look. See I have brought a deer. We will eat him." So they 
built a fire and broiled that deer. They cooked it and then ate it. 
Then they heard something. They listened and two persons came 
into the tent. They took a seat opposite. "Ha, ha, you that sit 
opposite, what relation will you be to me?" "What relation should 
I be to you?" "You shall be my chief." "Listen, some are saying 

7 The word Thunderers is the same as Thunderbirds. One and the same being is meant. 

8 This account seems to begin after the Thunderbirds have reached Green Bay and are sitting in the 
lodge waiting for the other clans to arrive. 

180823— 22 15 

218 THE WINNEBAGO TKIBE [eth. ann. 37 

something. Ha ha, our friends have come. Sit opposite (those 
opposite said). As long as we live we will attend to the fire for 
you." "Listen, our friends, they are speaking." "Ha, ha, sit 
opposite me" (a new clan has entered). They sat down. "You 
Water-spirit clan, what relation, my friend, will you be to me?" 
"What relation shall I be to you? You will be my chief." "Good. 
Now listen, a dog is howling. Let us wait for him" So the Thun- 
derbirds waited for him. "Let us call him." "Ha, ha, my friend, 
we wish to teach the two-legged walkers something. As we say so 
will the Winnebagoes ever be." Again the Thunderbirds spoke, 
' 'Listen, some one has said something. Two people have come. 
We will call them the Buffalo clan." 

The Warrior Clan 

introduction 

There are not many members of this clan left, although it seems 
to have been quite important in the old days, to judge from the 
number of effigy mounds all over Wisconsin. There seems little 
doubt but that those bird effigies with unsplit tail are supposed to 
represent this clan. 

Only one version of the origin myth was obtained. There is little 
to be said about it except that it mentions the fact that it was custo- 
mary to have names for dogs. One statement seems to point toward 
cannibalism. As was pointed out in the preceding discussion, there 
is a boastful claim that they were chiefs. 

Although, at the present time, this clan is known only as the 
wonayire ua'rikeilc (fear-inspiring men), its older name was hawk, 
and as such it was still known to J. O. Dorsey. When the present 
name began to be popular, it is impossible to say, but we feel confi- 
dent that it has been in partial use for a considerable length of time. 
The change is quite in line with the rather common habit of referring 
to the Thunderbird clan as the chief clan and the Bear clan as the 
soldier clan. In other words, we have a name indicative of the func- 
tions of a clan superseding the older animal name. It is only in the 
case of the Warrior clan, however, that this substitution has been 
complete. 

There is no indication in the myth that the Warrior clan was ever 
localized. A number of informants stated that the clan was but 
a division of a general bird phratry. In version 2 of the Thunder- 
bird clan origin myth it is stated that the second of the two brothers 
was the ancestor of the Warrior clan. Dorsey, as we have seen, 
obtained the same information. 

The Warrior clan seems to have had a lodge in the northwest 
corner of the village. In this lodge they claimed that prisoners were 

badin] SOCIAL OBGANIZATION SPECIFIC CLANS 219 

confined and certain tribal regalia deposited. The informants were 
not, however, at all clear about these facts, some even denying that 
there was a Warrior lodge and insisting that prisoners were confined 
in the Bear or Soldier lodge. 

According to one informant the Warrior and Bear clans could give 
each other orders that had to be obeyed. 

The members of the Warrior clan claimed that all the members 
of the clan were warriors and did not have to fast in order to obtain 
the right of starting out on a war party. This was vigorously denied 
by the members of the other clans, who referred to this claim with 
derision. There seems, however, to be no reason for questioning the 
fact that the clan had a special lodge and that it was intimately 
connected with war functions. Exactly what these were it is quite 
impossible to state, as they have not been exercised for a very long 
time. 

The first two clan songs are given on page 220. The clan facial 
decoration, used only at burial, and which were supposed to be 
marks of recognition in the spirit land, are as follows: A red line 
alternating with a black and another red line across the forehead, 
and a red line around the mouth. One informant claimed that only 
the three marks on the forehead were necessary, and that in times 
of war blood was used for the red marks (pi. 4(i). 

According to an informant of the Thunderbird clan, the Warrior 
clan functions were as follows: 

The Warrior clan's position in the tribe is that of general warrior. He can kill an 
enemy at any time "without breaking any of the rules of the tribe. Every other 
clansman who wishes to go on the warpath must fast and be blessed by the spirits 
with specific blessings before he can do this. 

There may have been a special feast associated with the Warrior 
clan, but the author never heard of it. The clan possessed a number 
of war bundles. 

ORIGIN MYTH 

(told by a member op the clan) 

In the beginning, Earthmaker made four men. Then he sent 
them to the earth. Within Lake, there, they landed and they alit 
on the branch of a tree. There were four branches and each one alit 
on one branch. And then on the earth they jumped and started 
walking toward the east. There they erected a camping place. 
There they started the fire. It was the principal fire. Then they 
started to look for food, but they were unable to find any. So the 
second brother was sent, but he was not able to get any animal, but 
he brought a man. Because he brought it, for that reason, the first 
male child we have shall be called He-who-eate-humans. Then the 
second one, him whom they called the warrior, was sent. Thus it 

220 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ajjn. 37 

was. And then all of them went toward the chief's lodge. They 
walked as chiefs, all four of them. The four of them went there. 
The chief's lodge was an oval lodge, and there they entered. 

The Snake clansman was the one appointed to get the food. He 
went after the food. It was an Eagle-people feast. Two fish the 
.Snake clansman brought, and with these the Eagle chief gave a feast. 
The Deer clan acted as attendants. Thus they ate the fish. And 
when they were finished with the eating, on either side, they left 
the head and the tail of the fish. This they left of their meal. "And 
if we have a dog we will call him Leaves-fish-on-both-ends," they 
said. Then they sat down. As they were sitting some one peeped 
in. It was the dog. Only his nose he stuck in. Then they said, 
"Whose nose does it look like?" So the chief spoke. "If we ever 
have a dog and if we wish to keep it permanently, T\>hose-nose-does- 
it-look-like, we will call it. 

Then all of a sudden their bodies began to be different and their 
feathers began to look as if they were worn off. They were about 
to enter the chief's lodge. Then the chief passed the fire to the 
Deer clan and when they were through the lodge was purified with 
the incense of smoking cedar leaves. Then again into the very long 
lodge they entered. This was at Red Banks. Then the upper people 
taught the lower people the things to make them good. Thus Earth- 
maker ordained everything, and as he ordered, so it was. That is 
the way they were. Holy they were. And all (of my clan ?) lived 
as chiefs. This is all that I was taught. 

CLAN SONGS 

First song 

The blue flame they caused to start. 
The blue flame they caused to start. 
The blue flame they caused to start. 
The blue flame they caused to start. 

Second song 

The fire they started. 
The fire they started. 
The fire they started. 
The fire they started. 

Eagle and Pigeon Clans 

No information was obtained about either of these clans. The 
Pigeon clan has been extinct for some time and only a few sur- 
vivors of the Eagle clan are left. Neither of these clans seems ever 
to have been of great importance. They had war bundles and an 
Eagle feast is mentioned. 

radin] SOCIAL ORGANIZATION — SPECIFIC CLANS 221 

Facial paintings of these two clans, it is claimed, were the same as 
those for the Thunderbird clan (pi. 46). This was denied by others. 

According to one informant the Pigeon clan was borrowed from 
another tribe. 

CLAN NAMES 

wanink' hik'ik'a'radjera (the bird clan)9 

Ahugidjinewinga Young bird that sheds its first feathers a? it flaps its wings. 

Ahugip'arawirjga Spreads her wings (said of a young bird just learning to 

fly). 

Ahumanip'aga He who hits the ground with his wings (refers to a cloud) 

Ahup'ahiga Sharp wing (said of a thundercloud). 

Ahuperewirjga Transparently clear wings.10 

Ahuru-anga He who raises his wings (i. f ., the edges of a cloud). 

Ahusak'a Strikes his wings." 

Ahuseretcga Long wings (as a far-extended cloud, clouds Vicing the 

plumage of the thunderbird s I. 

Ahusgawirjga White wing. 

Ahutcowinga Green wing. 

Ahusururewinga Slow wing. 

Adedjirehiga He who sets the prairie grass on fire suddenly (i. e., the 

lightning). 

Codjega He who kindles the (fire?).18 

Hadjare She who has been seen. 

Hadjatcexiwinga Difficult to be seen. 

Hanp' hik'inohiga He who misses the day. 

Hanp'ok' guwinga Owl returning hither. 

Hanptcek'a New day. 

Hicdja Kereredjarjga Hawk-face. 

Hitcaxcepewirjga Eagle woman. 

Hitcaxcepsepga Black eagle. 

Hitcaxceptcoga Green hawk. 

Hiwetcoga Green tail. 

Hiwiteajankega Forked-tailed hawk. 

Hohaup'guga Returning light. 

Hohanbinaniwii)ga Walks in the light. 

Hohanpdjik'ega Light that comes hither regularly. 

Hohanpdjikerega Light flashes suddenly. 

9 The following list ol names is based partly upon the manuscripts of Winnebago personal names pre- 
pared by the late Mr. J. O. Dorsey, and now in the possession of the Bureau of American Ethnology. This 
list has been revised and the phonetics of the Winnebago names corrected and transcribed by the author, 
but the English renderings of the names have been left as Mr. Dorsey obtained them, as the author obtained 
practically the same translations. Many of the names were obtained independently by the author. Por- 
sey's list is itself the amalgamation of two lists, that obtained by Dr. Foster and his own. He sub- 
sequently revised Foster's list, but to those names of the latter's list for which he could not obtain any 
translation he appended Foster's initials. 

>° Dorsey has "thin" wings, adding "as is a transparent fleecy cloud.'' However, the word peres, 
which is the full form for pere, means "clear,'* and is generally used in describing water in a brook. 
The interpretation of this and many other names as referring to clouds necessarily and not to the simple 
characteristics of the wings of the thunderbirds. is not obtained frequently to-day, but there seems to be 
noreason for believing that it was not customary a generation or two ago. For a discussion of the meaning 
of the names in general see the introduction to the section on social organization. 

11 Dorsey's rendering "stiff wings" is most certainly incorrect. 

13 Foster translates "misty" and Dorsey "smoke," but cote means to kindle a fire, literally to cause 
the blue llame that appears just as the flames start up. 

222 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. Ann. 37 

Hokorohiga He who makes a noise by dragging something. 

Hopinga Good voice. 

Horutcerega He who has eaten fish . 

HotcaQt£inwinga Audible voice. 

Hotcuntcunwir)ga Fishes in several places. 

Hunk' nank'awairega Chief whom they are afraid of. 

Idjanikwahiga He who makes them shriek with fright. 

Jibinik'a Short person (common to all clans). 

K'aiihitcank'a Changing crow. 

K'aiijirjk'aga Yellowish crow. 

K'a7inunp'aga Two crows. 

Ki'zahungewinga Fighting chief. 

Ma°cdjanixganwinga Makes an effort in moving. 

Mancunp'inwinga Beautiful quill leather. 

Mancunsepga Black quill feathers. 

Mancunsgawinga White quill feather. 

Mancuntcowirjga Green quill leather. 

Manhinunp'aga Two knives. 

Manihidad jega Strong walker. 

MaDemanik'a Walking storm. 

Mank'iksuntcga He who shakes the earth by striking. 

Nanmantce K'urusga He who has taken his war-club. 

Ma°mantcenank'ikawairega.He of whose war-club they are afraid. 

Manancotega He who raises a dust on the earth. 

Ma°nai) ksuntcga He who makes the earth shake by walking. 

Manxek'iga He who drys the ground. 

Mansuziwinga Yellow arrow point. 

Mandadjehimaniga He who walks on the wind. 

Mantcgunancicga Breaks a bow with his feet. 

Manxicutcga Red cloud. 

Manxik'ok'iwaharetcga Overlapping clouds. 

Manxik'ucinanjink'a He who stands beyond the sky. 

Manxik'ucen&njirjk'a Sky reached standing. 

Manxip'asewirjga Cloud-point. 

Manxipinwinga Beautiful cloud. 

Manxirukanaga" Master of the clouds. 

Manxisepga Black cloud. 

Manxitcopga Four clouds. 

Manxiwiwak'andjarjk'a. . . .Sacred cloud. 

Maindjateinank'a He who sits having come hither to the earth. 

Ma^odjanguwinga Coming back near the ground . 

Nan xiksewahiga He who scares some one. 

Nanisawagicicga He who breaks a treetop by hitting it. 

Nanisawarutcga He who eats a treetop. 

Nannajojopk'ega Swallow. 

Nanodji"winga He who strikes a tree. 

Nanxekiga Withered tree (blasted by lightning). 

Nanwanhuga He who comes singing. 

Nank'awairega He whom they fear to see. 

Nijuga Rain man. 

Nijumaniwinga Walking rain. 

Nijuxotcga Gray rain. 

Ninohanphiga He who makes the water shine. 

Nizihutcgewinga Drizzling woman. 

kadin] SOCIAL ORGANIZATION SPECIFIC CLANS 223 

Notcanpga Lightning in the tree. 

Nuwan k k'iriga He who comes back running. 

P'etcanruhiga Crane rib. 

P'etcawirjga Crane woman. 

P'etcga Fire person. 

Xora cutcewinga Red bald eagle. 

Xora hurjga Bafd eagle chief. 

Xorap'aga Bald eagle head. 

Rae tcant£inwirjga Audible name. 

Rek'uhuhiga South wind. 

Rutcgenirjk'a Little pigeon. 

Sakewarutcga He who eats raw flesh. 

Sandjamaninga Grizzled walking person. 

Si-okuruspinga Leaves good footprints. 

Sincawatcoga Tuil . 

Tcatcga Wind person. 

Tconirajireka He who is the lirst one named. 

Tcanphak'irutcewinga Lightning crossing itself. 

Tcanpjigewinga Lightens again. 

Djanperacanantcant£inv\-irjga .Lightning visible only once. 

Djanphak'iwaresga Forked lightning. 

Dja°pherega He who is? lightning. 

Dja"phaniwirjga He who makes? or accompanies? lightning. 

Djanphik'icganga He who makes? moving lightning. 

Djanpguhiga Lightning that returns. 

Djanberewinga Lightning that goes. 

Djanpdjega Standing lightning. 

Djanpdjikerewirjga Lightning that flashes suddenly. 

Djanpkcankcarjga Zigzag lightning or lightning circling and recoiling. 

Tcaut£inminank'a Sitting in sight. 

Tcexohanphiga Lightens the highland marsh. 

Tci-ohanphiga He who lightens up the lodge. 

Tciwaijega He who makes one abandon lodge and flee. 

T£a-aninanka Kept allying? 

Teanguhiwirjga He who returns flying. 

Wahok'ega The marksman. 

Wak'andja hadjagip'iwinga. Thunderbird that likes to be seen. 

Wak'andja ciciga Bad Thunderbird. 

Wak'andja yungiwirjga Thunder queen. 

Wak'andjagipeniga Young Thunderbird waiting. 

Wak'andjaga Thunderbird. 

Wak'andja giw'inxga Thunderbird whirling. 

Wak'andjaguw'inga Thunderbird returning. 

Wak'andjan'ingen'ink'a Very small Thunderbird. 

Wak'andjap'irjga Good Thunderbird. 

Wak'andjaxega Yellowish Thunderbird. 

Wak'andjaxiguhiga Thunderbird returning smoke. 

Wak'andjaxunuga Thunderbird small. 

Wak'andjasepga Black Thunderbird. 

Wak'andjatconiw'irjga First Thunderbird. 

Wak'andja tcoga Green Thunderbird. 

Waktc'ernaniw'inga He who walks killing. 

Wani-ak'axiga Crow hankering for flesh. 

Wan'nk'tcanw'inga Changing bird. 

224 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ann. 37 

Wap'akonank'maniga The great dreadful one that walks. 

Warutcexiga He who makes (the grass) rusty-yellow by eating. 

Wasuhimaniga Walking hail. 

Watcirukonanga Judge of the contest. 

Wazika Pine. 

Warjgerutcga Man eater. 

Wip'amarjkerew'irjga Rainbow. 

Wiragocgew'inga Star woman. 

Win ^anasega He who pens up ducks. 

Wonarj jirebun ga Warrior chief. 

Wodjinguhiga He who returns and strikes. 

Wodinw'inga She who strikes.13 

Koxmanirjga Walking and making the sound of kox'. 

Ahu-awinga Raise her wing. 

Ahutco Blue wing. 

Na°sgedjawinga Real tree woman. 

Manxisepga Black cloud. 

Maijxisgaxedega Big white cloud. 

Ahu-ijipga Short winged. 

K'eratcosepga Black sky (means properly the firmament). 

Keredj u»sepga Black hawk. 

Manxiruzuga He who makes the clouds have rays before them. 

P'etcda-ehiga Fire starter. 

P'etckerega Has fireplace. 

Hok'awas Darkness. 

Nunik'isumaniga Hails as he walked. 

Tcoraminarj k'a Sits blue. 

Hurjgit'ega Speaks as a chief. 

Noroxoga Scratches tree. 

Nannawahiguga He who brings up a stick in his mouth. 

Manhodjanpga He who flashes on the earth. 

Hana°djadjairewirjga Seen by all. 

Warjgedjarega Belongs to the upper regions. 

Marjxixoruxutcga. Looks at the clouds. 

Mancurjginoga Flapping and shaking his feathers. 

Ahugiciniwirjga Shining wings. 

Heieninga Young swan. 

Mank'uhodjanpga Flashes under the earth. 

Warudjaxega Comes making a noise. 

Wangedjahuga He who comes from above. 

Naninnek'iga Lone tree. 

Wangwaxopniga Holy man. 

Ximaniga Walking in mist. 

Xiguga Comes in mist. 

Xawinananzogiga Bends the brush. 

Tcacgoguga Oak tree. 

Nannazogega Bends the tree down. 

Na"djidjega Comes on the tree. 

MaMjidjega Comes on the ground. 

K'onihega He who thunders. 

Tciwindjikerehiga Makes tciwin in coming. 

Wak'andjamaniga Thunder walker. 

Mancdjanmaniga Mightily walking. 

» This ends Dorsey's list of Bird clan names. Those following were collected by the author. 

radix] SOCIAL ORGANIZATION SPECIFIC CLANS 225 

Marjgiksuntcga Shakes the earth. 

Tconimaniga Walks first. 

Djanpdjirehiga Streak of lightning. 

Manxiwimaniga He who walks in the cloud. 

Ahu-iseretcga Long wings. 

Tile Bear Clan 

introduction 

Seven versions of the Bear clan origin myth were obtained, so that 
for this clan, at least, a fairly intensive study of the variations and 
then significance can be made. Perhaps the most interesting fact 
to point out is the apparent existence of two recognized versions, one 
called the minor or false and the other the true. The complete 
version was only told when the interrogator had paid enough.11 
The minor version is not at all concerned with the origin of the Bear 
clan but appears to be largely an account of the origin of the recip- 
rocal relations of the Bear and Wolf clans. The second is the real 
origin myth. The version obtained does not, however, seem com- 
plete. 

The typical origin myths (excluding the fifth version) are of two 
types, those that speak of Earthmaker creating the ancestors of the 
clan and those that do not mention his name. Undoubtedly those ver- 
sions that dp not mention Earthmaker's name are the older. Those 
that speak of Earthmaker show clearly the influence of the general 
origin myth and of shamanistic systematization. This is particu- 
larly apparent in the sixth version, which was told in connection with 
the bear feast. • 

The subject matter of the myths relates to the manner in which 
the bears came to the great gathering at Green Bay, the older ver- 
sions having them originate from the water and the later versions 
having them created by Earthmaker and sent to the earth. In the 
former they are distinctly heroic animals and in the latter vague 
spirit animals. The nature of the relation of these animals to the 
present clansmen is not clearly stated in the myths, and there is 
not the slightest mention of the present current belief on the subject. 
The myths seem almost entirely concerned with the cmestion of the 
origin of the disciplinary functions of the clan and of its relationship 
to the Wolf and a few of the other clans. 

It is difficult to explain the remarkable differences in the various 
versions. Comparing them with versions of the clan origin myths of 
the other clans, it seems likely that the short accounts represent the 
more archaic versions and the longer accounts those versions that 

14 My informant said, "If a person asked me about the origin of life (i-e-, of my clan) and did not give me 
enough gifts or make enough offerings, I would tell him the minor version. Not until he gave me all that 
was necessary would I tell him the true account." 

226 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ann. 37 

have been subjected to literary and shamanistic remodeling. Only 
the shorter accounts show in their subject matter and presentation 
certain affinities to the origin myths of the other clans, the longer 
ones being entirely different. Another cause for these marked dif- 
ferences may lie in the circumstance that since the longer accounts 
were associated with semi-esoteric ceremonies, the war-bundle feasts, 
they were known to but few individuals in the clan, whereas the 
shorter legends could be learned by anyone who chose to pay for 
them. To this must also be added the fact that presumably some 
of the accounts current were based on hearsay knowledge. 

The Bear clan was, next to the Thunderbird clan, the most im- 
portant in the tribe. Its lodge was either in the center of the vil- 
lage, opposite that of the Thunderbird clan, or at the extreme end, 
depending upon the scheme of village organization accepted as 
correct. In it were confined the prisoners of war and the insignia of 
office possessed by the clan, such as the so-called standards, really 
crooks, and the so-called namaxinixini. Some individuals alsoclaimed 
that unmarried men were allowed to sleep in the lodge, although they 
were not clear as to whether they did this in order to guard the pris- 
oners confined there or simply used it as a club house. 

The clan songs are given on page 235. The same songs are used 
when gathering the clansmen together to select soldiers. 

Apart from the war bundle or war bundles, the Bear clan possessed 
three insignia — a war club of a definite shape, the curiously whittled 
baton of authority called namaxinixini, and the crooks used in battle 
called hoke're'un. Whenever the clan was exercising any of its func- 
tions 4he leader would always hold in his hands the namaxinixini. 

The functions of the clan were probably the most important in 
the tribe and were entirely disciplinary. The author obtained the 
following description from an old Winnebago: 

The Bear clansmen are the soldiers or sergeants-at-arms of the tribe. They have 
complete control of everything concerning discipline. Whenever the Winnebago 
are traveling or moving (i. e., on their various seasonal moves), the Bear clansmen 
lead, and wherever they decide to stop, there the leader would put his stick in the 
ground and the other Bear clansmen would do the same, arranging them all in a row 
pointing toward the direction in which they were going. The main body of the tribe 
would follow at a certain distance. No member of the tribe would dare pass ahead 
of the row of sticks. If, for instance, the tribe was on the fall move and traveling 
toward a country in which there was plenty of game, should any individual go back 
and around the sticks in order to kill game on his own account, the soldiers (Bear 
clansmen) would, as soon as he was detected, go over to his lodge and burn it up with 
all its contents and break all his dishes. The only thing they would spare would be 
his life and that of the other members of his family. I f the one who had transgressed 
the rules made any attempt at resistance he would be severely whipped. If he re- 
fused to submit to this and took up his fire arms to fight, the soldiers would stand there 
calmly, but the moment he made an attempt to shoot they would kill him. In such 
a case nothing would be said either by the rest of the tribe or his relatives about 

eadin] SOCIAL ORGANIZATION SPECIFIC CLANS 227 

the matter. If, on the other hand, he submitted to whatever punishment the Bear 
clansmen inflicted on him without resistance and apologized to them, then they would 
build him a new lodge and supply it with better goods than those which they had been 
compelled to destroy. 

This is the way in which the soldiers act when they are on duty. They never jest 
and their word is a command. If it is not immediately obeyed, their next move is 
to punish. For that reason one generally listens to them and their commands. When 
they are not on duty they are the same as other people. Different members of the 
tribe are on duty at different times, for the leader changes them about frequenth . 

If a field of rice is found in some swamp or lake the Bear clan 
people are informed and they go over and keep watch over it and 
give every person an equal chance at picking it. If a person sneaks 
away and takes advantage of the others, the Bear clan people punish 
him. 

The Bear clansmen guard the village almost all the time. When 
a council is held they guard the council lodge, and when a person is 
tried for some crime, particularly that of murder, a trial which gen- 
erally takes place in the Thunderhird clan lodge, then they care- 
fully guard this lodge, lest the prisoner try to escape or his relatives 
or confederates try to rescue him. 

Certain actions and remarks are not permitted in the Bear clan 
lodge. They are the following : 

To peep into the lodge. 

To make the remark that they live in a nice lodge. 

To sit in the doorway. 

To give a deep sigh or snort inside the lodge. 

Should any person do one of these forbidden things, the Bear 
clansmen would be compelled to give the most valued thing in the 
lodge to the offender. 

If a man seduced a woman, he was brought to the lodge of the 
Bear clan and severely whipped. If the soldier whipped him too 
severely, he in turn was whipped. 

If a murderer was brought to the Bear clan lodge and the chief 
of the tribe asked that the man be freed, the rest of the tribe would 
beg the relatives of the murdered man to relent ; but if the murderer 
was turned over to the soldiers, they would take him to the lodge of 
the murdered man's relatives and let one of them kill him. 

According to one informant, the Deer clansmen acted as servants 
to the Bear clan. 

The Bear and the Wolf clans are friends, and although, as we 
indicated on page 201, each clan is paired off with another, the rela- 
tionship of the Bear and Wolf clans is particularly intimate. It was 
even claimed that a Bear clansman would revenge the death of a 
Wolf clansman. For no other clans did the author hear this state- 
ment made. The women are addressed by the men and by each 
other as "my opposite," referring unquestionably to the positions in 

228 THE WINNEBAGO TEIBE [bih.ann.37 

the council lodge. According to another informant, the Bear clan is 
the Deer's friend, and therefore they bury one another. 

Burial, as was the case for all members of the lower phratry, was 
in the ground. Opinions varied as to what clan was supposed to 
bury a Bear man, some people claiming that it would have to belong 
to the upper phratry, others that it was incumbent upon the Wolf 
clan. It seems that the latter custom is the one followed at the 
present time and one which is considered old, to judge from the 
account of an actual funeral (cf. p. 148). The body was always 
buried with a miniature Bear clan war bundle. According to one 
informant, a bow and arrows were occasionally placed in the hands 
of the corpse, in addition to some tobacco. According to another 
informant, the facial marks were charcoal across the forehead and 
red marks under the lips in direct imitation of the bear. 

The facial decoration for the corpse consisted of two parallel marks 
across the forehead, the upper one red and the lower one black, and 
the painting of the entire chin red (pi. 46). The red paint on the 
chin was interpreted as a smile, for the Bear clansmen were supposed 
to greet death with a smile, as they were returning to their clan 
ancestors. The statement was also made that Bear clansmen should 
not mourn the death of any of their comrades. 

There is a specific Bear clan feast at which no one is permitted to 
laugh or talk, nor is anyone allowed to make any noise while drinking 
soup. The feasters must eat with their left hand. 

One of the most interesting of the ceremonies associated with the 
Bear clan is the so-called bear or soldier dance (rncmWpe wad). It 
was described to the author as follows: 

When sickness comes upon a Winnebago village the people go to the chief and say 
"Sickness has come upon us, O chief! See that your soldiers arise! " And the chief 
goes to the lodge of the leading Bear clansman and, offering him tobacco, speaks as 
follows: "My soldier, I am offering you tobacco, for my people have been smitten 
with disease." Then the latter rises and thanks him. He then informs all his clans- 
men and they give a feast. Then, of those participating, a number of males and 
females are selected, who on the next day, accompanied by the leader, go around 
the village four times. If a dog crosses their path, they kill it. After they have 
made the fourth circuit they enter the village from the east end. They thereupon 
visit the sick individuals one after another, dance in their presence, and lay their 
hands upon them. After they have visited all the sick they go to the chief's lodge, 
where a feast is spread for them by the chief's people. The next day all those who 
had been ill become well. 

It is quite clear that this "healing" function of the clan is inti- 
mately associated with the powers supposed to be bestowed upon 
individuals by Bear spirits. In fact, we are really dealing with a 
society possessing the power of healing disease in which membership, 
however, is restricted to members of the Bear clan. 

SOCIAL ORGANIZATION SPECIFIC CLANS 

229 

The following dog names were obtained: 

A black dog with yellow eyebrows and breast is called hesiga'ruyega, 
Opens-beehives; black female dog, hotelciMga, Picks-acorns; black 
dog with white around the neck, Tiotc Itagawanvga, Runs-for-acorns. 
The chief also had the privilege of calling a dog noruxuga, to show 
his superiority over the other members of the Bear clan. From 
another informant the following were obtained: Tcapiracotcga, Eats- 
everything-except-hide ; tealiorawefai, Pulls-out-deer-liver. 

OKIGIN MYTHS 
FIRST VERSION 15 

Informant, member of the clan: In the beginning a bear came 
walking on the ocean. When he got to the shore he flew off as a 
raven and alit on the shore. The first being he saw was a Dog clans- 
man. Then he entered the lodge and sat opposite him. That is 

Fig. 35. — Diagram of Bear lodge. 

why they call one another friends, or "he who sits opposite me." 
From the fact that he flew off as a raven we have a name (kaxijigaga) . 
The lodge had four doors, one on each end and one on each side 
(fig. 35). They landed at Green Bay, where a great gathering was 
held of all the clans. The other Bear clansmen claim that it was 
water foam that flew from the water, and it is from that fact that 
they obtained so much life. The fact that he (the bear) changed 
himself twice is the reason for his greatness among his fellow clans- 
men. Originally it was the fourth born who was sent from across 
the ocean. 

SECOND VERSION 

Informant, father of above: In the beginning 10 brothers started 
from across the ocean to the great clan meeting. When they got near, 
four waves came ashore and a raven flew from the waves, but when 
it alit (on land) it was a bear that walked. They were the greatest 

>' There are so many versions of the origin of the Bear clan that I think it best to give all I obtained. 
They are all discussed on p. 225. 

230 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ann. 37 

in power, as they had changed themselves twice. There they crossed 
the tracks of the Wolf clan, and they said, "Our friends have gone 
by." Then they went and sat opposite the Wolf people. The Wolf 
and Bear clans must bury one another. 

The 10 men left their father and mother across the ocean. 

The Bears should paint their faces with charcoal from burnt bass- 
wood and red paint. The face should be painted red and black 
alternately crosswise in stripes, or black on the upper half and red on 
the mouth and chin. Women are painted with red markings on each 
cheek and with charcoal markings in the center of the cheek. 

THIRD VERSION 

Informant, member of the Bear clan: It is supposed that Earth- 
maker ordered a meeting of all the animals to take place at Green 
Bay, and that the Soldiers (another name for the Bear clan) were 
also to attend. 

In the beginning Earthmaker created all things in the form of 
animals, but at this gathering they (the originators of the various 
clans?) were to become human. When all was in readiness to start, 
it was decided that the families of those animals who were to become 
the ancestors of the Winnebago clans were each to send one repre- 
sentative, and that the one who was thus chosen, accompanied by 
his wife, was to become transformed on that occasion. Of the sol- 
diers (i. e., the bears) the youngest was sent. He had three brothers, 
of whom the eldest had black hair, the second dark red hair, and the 
third blue or green hair. They were the chiefs of the villages from 
which they had started.16 Only the youngest, however, was sent to 
the earth to attend the meeting. When he emerged at a place to 
the north of Green Bay he came from out the earth. When they 
emerged (the bear and his wife) it was a very fine day. As they were 
coming they heard voices in the distance saying, "The soldiers are 
coming." As they started to walk their footprints seemed imprinted 
with the blue of the sky — i. e., witn daylight. A name has originated 
from this fact (hanbamanina, "He-who-walks-with-the-day"). As 
his wife was with him, he immediately started to hunt. (It seems 
that by this time the bear had some followers, for some would from 
time to time ask whether they were going to eat, and he would answer 
yes and tell them to hunt for food.) 

When the youngest of the brothers started, the brothers who 
remained behind told him "to remember them" with regard to tobacco, 
red feathers, and food, and therefore after he had started he told 
some of his followers to go ahead and bring food of such and such a 
kind, so that when he arrived at certain camping places thpse sent 

16 It must be remembered that all this is taking place in the heavens, in the spirit abode of the bears 
The color translations are only approximate. 

badin] SOCIAL ORGANIZATION SPECIFIC CLANS 231 

ahead would be there before him ready with the food. After the 
first meal they started out again, and soon they came across the track 
of a member of some other clan, and they said, ' 'Our friend has gone 
by." The latter clan had also said in coming, "Our friend must 
have come by." Then they came to the place where a large lodge 
had been constructed. When- all were inside, the animal-beings 
wished to start a camp fire, and they called upon all those present to 
start it; but no one except the Thunderbirds could do it, so they 
made the Thunderbirds chiefs of the tribe. As, however, they were 
to have a number of chiefs, they called upon the Water-spirits to be 
chiefs of the lower division. Of the third division, the soldiers were 
to be the chiefs. The latter were to be in charge of discipline. That 
is the origin of the Bear or Soldier clan. 

FOURTH VERSION 

Informant, member of the clan [so-called "true" version]: Earth- 
maker made all things, and then he created man and woman, and he 
placed them in the south. He gave them charge of some of the day 
or life. All the creatures on the earth and all the birds of the air he 
was in charge of. He was going to start up from below and walk 
toward the north. All the creatures went with him. He walked 
forth with all the creatures. When he arrived on earth all the other 
clans had already gathered at one place. When he arrived they said, 
"Our soldiers have come. Make room for them." So it was said. 
And he said to them, ' 'The things Earthmaker created me for, those 
I will do. Therefore, wherever you live or wherever you gather 
together I will look after your village; even to the edge of the clear- 
ing, that far I will make it sacred for you; and if you are ever over- 
come by sickness and you ask me to arise and help you, your sickness 
will leave you. And while he spoke of his power for four days the 
weather had been good, and no wind blew from any direction. The 
soldier was thus in charge of affairs. And as he spoke thus all birds 
with sharp claws flew above him in a circle. 

On the fourth day all the clans left for their respective homes. 
Now even to this day he, the bear, is still in charge of the people. 

FIFTH VERSION 

Informant, same as of fourth version [so-called "minor" version]: 
In the south, where he emerged and came upon our earth, there was 
a spring which gave forth white water. When he was about to 
come out, the hill in which he was confined shook and the spring 
shook also. He was not the first to come out, for his attendants 
preceded him. Then he came out. There were 1 1 men. The oldest 
one told him to go and look around at the fields. He sent out four 
to look at the fields (the raspberries and all other fruits). The 

232 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ann. 37 

acorns and nuts they called beans. The four that emerged soon 
came upon the footprints of human beings. 

And then they returned from the fields where they had been 
searching for food. "Oh, my; oh, my," they said, "over there we 
came across the foorprints of human beings." So they spoke. "Go 
again," he said, "go around a larger circle." So they went farther 
than before, and there they saw the people who had made the foot- 
prints. "Our friends are going about here," said the ones who had 
made the footprints and who were wolves. "Never shall we disobey 
one another's word, my friends," said the bear. And the wolf 
answered, "It shall be so." 

If one of the Bear clansmen had been killed and it was reported 
to the Wolf clan, the latter would revenge him. The Bear clan 
would act similarly. Then the'bear said to the wolf, "My friend, 
whenever you die I shall put you away so that your soul may not 
be bothered by bad insects." And the wolf answered, "My friend, 
it shall be so, and when you die I will likewise put you away so that 
the bad spirits may not abuse your soul." Then they parted, after 
shaking each other's hands. The bears returned to their home in 
the south. The next time they came, it was to stay. They scattered 
themselves all over the earth, seeking newly ripened fruit of all kinds. 
In this manner they are still living on earth. 

SIXTH VERSION 1T 

Informant, member of the clan: Earthmaker made us and as he 
created us thus the story has come down. The story of our creation 
is told as follows: 

"Get ready. We will converse together over this affair." So 
spoke the one in the south. He was but one of those whom Earth- 
maker had created. There were four brothers. The name of the 
oldest one was Black Person, that of the second Red Person. (Indeed 
he was very red.) The third one was called Blue Person, and the 
fourth one White Person. 

"Younger brother, how is it going to be? I (the oldest), who am 
speaking, not fitted do I feel myself for the task. My temperament 
is indeed not fitted for the task. Perhaps you might have something 
to tell them. Try, therefore, to say something to them. They are 
about to have a gathering and it is time to start. Try to say some- 
thing to them." "Older brother, the truth do you speak. I also 
feel even as you have said; I am not fitted for it. I really don't 
consider myself equal to the task. My younger brother only is the 
one fitted for it. He is clever. Our younger brother, he only must 
be the one." "The truth you have spoken, my brother. Our 
youngest brother only is fitted for the task. The announcement of 
the gathering has already been made, so let us council over it imme- 

" Told as the origin myth of the Bear (east. 

radin] SOCIAL ORGANIZATION — SPECIFIC CLANS 233 

diately. Let us get ready. Our younger brother, he is patient and 
strong-minded. On the earth he must go and we will remain here. 
To take care of the home we will remain here. Whatever he says it 
shall be so. In that wise will we think. Earthmaker has ordained 
that the gathering shall take place and that we are to live our lives 
there (on earth). Our younger brother he will go and live on the 
earth. As he is about to go to the earth, we will ask him to remem- 
ber us. 

"Younger brother, when you arrive on earth, whatever offerings 
you obtain, send them back to us as you walk along. When you 
start out you will appear with life. This you will take with you. 
This will be your task. Be careful that you perform everything 
correctly. When you arrive there, it will be necessary to give 
names to the human beings and to their dogs. 

"Younger brother, when you start out toward the earth you will 
be holy. And when you are on earth and your first boy is born, call 
him He-who-is-very-black, and call the second one (wajiga) Brown- 
bear, the third one Blue-bear, and the fourth one White-bear. And 
if girls are born to you, call the first one Night-walking-woman, the 
second one Daylight-as-she-walks, the third one She-who-thrusts- 
herself-within-a-lodge, and the fourth one Visible-footprint-woman. 
And if your daughters have dogs which they wish to keep let them 
give them the following names (wadogega, untranslatable): Dog- 
pair, Third-born-girl, and Red-female-dog. Thus let it be." 

When they (the bears) started, those at the gathering place listened : 
"Our soldiers have started; their whoops are audible." When the 
bear came on earth, he came across some tracks. "Our friends have 
gone by," he said. Finally the bears (man and woman) arrived at 
the gathering place; there they found all the clans assembled. The 
Water-spirit was the first one to come; then came the birds and 
then the bears. When all were assembled, they began to construct 
a large lodge. When it was finished, the one who had arrived first, 
the Water-spirit, was addressed by some of the other people. "Our 
chief, how are we going to make fire? Had you not better start?" 
"True you speak, but I do not know how. I am unable. Let some 
one else try it." But they all regretted and declined, saying they did 
not know how. So it was decided that he who made a fire would be 
chief. All thereupon tried, but only the Thunderbird succeeded. 
So he became the chief and the others all thanked him. Then the 
fire was distributed and all the clan fireplaces were made. Thus it 
was at the creation council. Now all things were finished and 
arranged. The Thunderbirds were the rulers of the village. The 
other people measured their acts by him. When the chief said do 
so and so, they would obey. Then the chief went out to look for 
food for himself and for his people, and they began to bring back 
186823—22 16 

234 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ann. 37 

food in the form of their relatives — i. e., in the form of the animals 
after whom they were named. Then the Bear people made a rule 
that they were to have a feast at which offerings would he made to 
their clan animal. And it was for him that they placed a shallow 
kettle at the feast. This is all. 

SEVENTH VERSION 

Informant, member of the Thunderbird clan. 

At a large spring sat a male bear. He looked upon his body and it 
was very blue. It was even bluer than the blue of the sky. As the 
blue from the sky illuminated, so he was. He sat as though he was 
part of the day. He was a chief and his name was Blue-chief. 
Toward one side he looked and there stood twelve men. Then the 
earth began to quake and something came out from the spring. 
Because something had come out from under the earth that is why 
the earth quaked. Blue-bear named him Earth-shaker. Then the 
earth began to quake again and now it was worse than before and 
Blue-chief named the one who emerged Earth-quaker. And then for 
the third time the earth began to tremble, even much more than 
before. So much did it tremble that the day itself trembled; and 
those that were not solidly attached to the earth came to the top and 
all manner of fruit was scattered over the earth. When he came out 
Blue-chief named him Gives-forth-fruit-as-he-walks. And again for 
the fourth time the earth began to roar and tremble and even the 
day trembled. Then one came out. So he was named, Makes-the- 
day-tremble. Thus they were all named as. they came out. Then 
Blue-bear was told by Earthmaker, "This is all that remains to be 
done; your friends are waiting for you." There Blue-bear talked 
with Earthmaker, the latter telling him what he was to do. Then 
they started to the place where all the other clans were gathering, at 
Red Banks. As they came, all the leaves that had rough edges 
became human and all the trees that had prickers became human, 
and all the birds that had sharp claws and were able to claw anything, 
they all became human, and the snakes that had sharp fangs became 
human. Thus they went. Those of the air went in the air and those 
of the earth went on the earth, and nothing could cross their path. 
Even the earth trembled as they walked. 

When they got to the gathering place they were told that seats 
were reserved for their friends (meaning them). But, said Blue- 
bear, "We did not come for that purpose, so we will not sit down. 
We were intended for something else by Earthmaker. As long as 
this world exists we will take care of you within the confines of your 
villages. We will not permit any evil spirits to enter these confines. 
The seats you offered us will remain as they are, so that if at any time 
the clans are gathered again our place will be reserved. Then the 

eadin] SOCIAL, ORGANIZATION SPECIFIC CLANS 235 

crowd dispersed and went home. Blue-bear said that he would go 
home but that the rest were to live on this earth and that they would 
be the soldiers of this earth. That is the origin of the Bear clan. 

When a bear is killed on earth, the Bear clansmen do not mind it, 
but they laugh and feel good. When one of the Bear clan dies, 
they say, "Don't cry, for he has gone home." Then they paint 
his jaws red to give him the appearance of laughing. 

When a bear is killed on earth the spirit returns to Blue-bear, and 
so it is with the Bear clansmen. This is the story of the Bear clan. 

All the birds, trees, snakes, and everything of its kind have soldiers. 
The sharp-clawed birds are soldiers of the birds and all the snakes that 
have fangs and all the trees that have prickers are soldiers of their 
kind. All the animals and living things of the earth have soldiers 
among them. The ugliest tempered ones of their kind are soldiers of 
whatever class they belong to. Oftentimes when a person gets angry 
on earth they would say, "The soldier; it is because he has a soldier 
nature. ' ' (Whoever has the power of hurting one of his fellow- 
beings and does it has a soldier nature.) This is the story of the 
Soldier clan. 

If they had said in the beginning, "This or that clan will never do 
anything wrong," then the rest of the clans would never have done so. 
The Soldier clan opens the way for anyone, of any clan, at any 
time, to take up his soldier nature. 

CLAN SONGS 
Song 1 

Winnebagoes, on the road they are coming. 
Winnebagoes, on the road they are coming. 
Winnebagoes, on the road they are coming. 
Winnebagoes, on the road they are coming. 

Song 2 

Speaking Winnebago, they are coming. 
Speaking Winnebago, they are coming. 
Speaking Winnebago, they are coming. 
Speaking Winnebago, they are coming. 

Song 3 

Who can lie behind? 
Who can be behind? 
Who can be behind? 
Who can be behind? 

Who can be above? 
Who can be above? 
Who can be above? 
Who can be above? 

Song 4 

236 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ANN. 87 

CLAN NAMES 
HTTNDJ HIK'lK'ARADJERA (BEAR CLAN)13 

Hagsdja minank'a Sitting opposite. 

Awasarega He who is shut in. 

Cagep'ahiga The one with black claws. 

Cinsasak'a Coarse-grained fat. 

Roguninnega He who is coveted. 

Hahi-atciwirjga Dwelling on a hillside. 

Hak'iridjewirjga Comes back. 

Hak'irutcewinga Crosses each other. 

Hazhoniwirjga Hunts for berries. 

Hanheoratcewinga Travels by night. 

Hanhewinga Night. 

Hanbenink'a Small day. 

Hanpmaniga He who walks by day. 

Himaniwarutcga He who eats as he walks. 

Hiniguhega His little one who is returning. 

Hinurjk'hadjariga He who saw a woman. 

Hinunk' inekiminanka.. .Woman sitting alone. 

Hinunk' djopga Four women. 

Hodihuga He who comes climbing a tree. 

Hundjhurega Black bear who is coming. 

Hundjga The bear. 

Hundjxedega The big bear. 

Hundjxunuga Small bear. 

Hungatcak'iriga He who has come back to see the children. 

Hurjgit£ega Prophet. 

Hunkorohiga He who is the chief's flesh. < 

Hurjk'uniga He who is made chief. 

Inek'inanjinga He who stands alone. 

Inek'iminarjk'a He who sits alone. 

Gis£weminank'a He who sits quiet. 

Man k'axga Dirt. 

Maniwarutcga He who eats as he walks. 

Manok'ipiwinga She for whom the land is large enough. 

Manzitciga Iron lodge. 

Manzananpinga Iron necklace. 

Maazasanwirjga Whitish metal. 

Manzawinga Metal woman. 

Mancgodaniga Three notches. 

Mannanhanpewinga She who throws out the dirt with her paws. 

Mananpega Soldier. 

Manp'ezirehiga Earth thrown up yellow. 

Manrotcanwirjga Straight earth woman. 

Ma^orekega Land cut in strips. 

Mantco-icdjajiripga Grizzly bear with striped eyes. 

Mantcoga Grizzly bear. 

Manwaksuntcga Shakes the ground by his weight. 

Motciwinga She who dwells in the ground. 

Nancgadjewinga She who plays on a tree. 

Nannetcfinsepwinga Black root. 

>8 The following names are from the Dorsey manuscript. 

kapix] SOCIAL ORGANIZATION SPECIFIC CLANS '237 

Nanmizok'iwinga Bends a tree by pulling 

Nansa"nehiga He who makes a tree whitish by scratching off the bark. 

Na"tcgepinga Good heart. 

Nantcgetcexiwirjga She whose heart is difficult. 

Nantcujiwirjga Yellowish red hair. 

Noxtcuxiga Breaks up a tree into small pieces. 

Noruxoga Scrapes a tree. 

Hok'awasmaniwinga Who walks in darkness. 

Hok'awasminarjk'a He who sits in darkness. 

Reziwak'antcarjk'a Holy tongue. 

Rohanminank'a Many sitting. 

Si-asga Foot good to the taste. 

Tciwojuga Fills the lodge. 

Tcuga Ladle. 

Tcugiga Spoon. 

Wajiga Yellowish-red bear. 

Wakizananp'irjga He who has a white spot under his throat. 

Wamaniga Walks on the snow. 

Wamanuk'ega He who steals habitually. 

Wamarj ksgaga With a white breast. 

Wasanhimaniga He who walks on melting snow. 

Wasemqmak'arjga Vermillion. 

Wank'anansewinga Pens up a male. 

Wank'hok'isak'a Half a man. 

Woixdjahiriga Laughing at his antics. 

Wohinkcahirega He at whom they laugh.19 

Mainnukonuga In charge of land. 

Tconarjke hurjk'a First chief. 

Septcoga Real black. 

NaMjudjewirjga Red hair. 

Mananp'e hurjk'a Soldier chief. 

Hokiwaigunwirjga She who retraces her steps. 

Moradjawirjga Earth wanderer. 

Mannusank'n himinank'a . . Sits as the earth alone. 

Monirjga Hunts about the earth. 

Anantcunxedga Big armful. 

Watcoginiwinga Goes ahead of them (common to all clans). 

Manman'winga Walks on the earth. 

Manguwinga Earth coming woman. 

Hotcarjgit'ega. Speaks Winnebago. 

Ha°p' emaniga Walks with the strength of day. 

Hanbominanga .Sits in the day. 

Tcoraminank'a Sits blue. 

Hundjxonuga Small bear. 

Hanbirukonuga In charge of day. 

Morutcanwinga Goes around the earth. 

Motciwirjga Lives in the earth. 

Tci-omantciga Lives in the earth permanently. 

Ni-ananjinga Stands on the water. 

"> The following names were obtained by the author. 

238 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ANN. 37 

The Wolf Clan 
introduction 

Three versions of the origin myth of this clan were obtained. The 
second is the most interesting, for it gives the popular account of 
descent from the clan animal-ancestor, although it claims that he, 
in turn, was created by Earthmaker. One other important char- 
acteristic is the statement that the original clan ancestor married a 
human being and that from them the present members of the clan 
trace their descent. A similar type of descent is mentioned in a 
number of myths that can best be interpreted as village origin myths. 
The ownership of war bundles has also at times been linked up with 
descent from some spirit. 

Very little is known at the present time about the functions of the 
Wolf clan. It is quite clear, however, that the clan once possessed 
powers of considerable importance. From the fact that the Wolf 
people are still occasionally called "minor soldiers" and that they 
are so closely linked with the Bear clansmen it is likely that their 
functions were similar in nature to those of the Bear people. They 
probably assisted the latter. 

Water was sacred to the Wolf clan as it also was to the Water- 
spirit clan. A person was not allowed to tell a Wolf clansman that 
he looked like a wolf nor allowed to sit on a log in a Wolf clan lodge. 
If a man kills a Wolf clansman accidentally and then sits on the log 
in a Wolf lodge, he has to be freed. 

According to one informant, the Wolf clan at one time possessed 
four sticks, which they would use and with which they kept time while 
the drum was beaten. 

According to one informant, the Wolf clansmen were the only 
people who were allowed to intermarry. 

The Wolf clansmen give a feast when a Bear child is born, to show 
respect for their friend. They give the child a name of their own clan. 

The Wolf feast is held in the spring of the year, when the ice melts 
from the creeks and everything begins to grow. At the feast the 
clan origin myth is told and the members of the other clans are 
allowed to- hear it. The food used is boiled rice. 

ORIGIN MYTHS 

FIRST VERSION (TOLD BY A MEMBER OF THE CLAN) 

In the beginning the Wolf clan people came from the water. 
Therefore their bodies are of water — i. e., their sacred possession is 
water. There, were four male wolves and four female wolves, and 
as they came up from the sea and swam toward the shore, one after 
the other, they caused waves to go before them. Therefore one of 

eadin] SOCIAL, ORGANIZATION SPECIFIC CLANS 239 

their clan names is Wave. They first appeared as wolves and later 
on they became humans. After swimming to the shore they lay on 
their backs to dry themselves; and that also is a name, a female 
name, She-who-spreads-herself-out-to-dry, and another name is He- 
who-comfs-up-first. When they became human they built them- 
selves a lodge and lived in it, but they had no fire. Then the Thunders 
came down and alit on a big oak tree that stood near their lodge. 
At first the Thunders were afraid of the Wolf people and they would 
not enter their lodge. That is why we have a name He-who-is-afraid . 
They asked the Thunders to come into their lodge and they had 
great difficulty in persuading them. After they entered the Wolf 
lodge they wanted to go home again immediately, but the Wolf clan 
people asked them to stay over for four days. From that fact a 
name has originated, One-who-is-waited-for-by-the- Thunders. The 
Thunders stayed, but not in the lodge of the Wolf people. They 
built themselves one just outside their door. Then they built a fire 
in it. After the four days were over the Thunders went home. 

When a Wolf clansman dies the relatives paint his forehead blue 
(pi. 46) and the soul of the deceased is supposed to go west, and it 
never looks back as it goes on its journey, as this would be an indi- 
cation of its longing for something in this world, and it should not 
do that. When the soul gets to the spirit home the relatives already 
there would ask the newcomer, "What did our relatives say when you 
were about to come?" And the deceased would answer, "They said 
that they would not come for some time." 

The food that is prepared at the four nights' wake is supposed to 
last them forever. 

This is the end of the story of the creation. 

SECOND VERSION (TOLD BY A MEMBER OF THE CLAN) 

All people claim to have come from some animal, and all are 
supposed to come from Earthmaker. 

Four married wolves had a lodge in the middle of the ocean. They 
had four colors. The wolves all had children. One of them had 10, 
and the youngest one of these 10 is the one that came to this earth. 
When they came to this island, the first thing they saw was the foot- 
print of the bear, and they said, "Our friend has gone by." There 
(at the place of gathering) they saw human beings and they liked 
their ways. Therefore they went home again and asked to come to 
earth and live with the human beings, and they were given permission 
to do so. Wherefore the two (man and wife) came here again the 
second time. When they were about to come everything was calm, 
and there were no waves on the ocean. They started out swimming, 
and they caused two waves to go before them. When they came to 
the humans they both got married. When they came to this land 

240 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ann. 37 

they sang songs, but I do not know them. I was not taught them. 
Finally children were born to both of them, and they gave them 
names. They called one of them Wave on account of the wave 
coming before them on their starting out. Because the four original 
wolves in the middle of the ocean had four different colors, therefore 
they have names White Wolf, Green Hair, Gray Wolf, and Black 
Wolf. When the clan began to get larger they taught their children 
these names. 

When a large number of different clansmen are traveling and they 
have to cross some large stream and the wind is high, they call upon 
some Wolf clansman to calm the wind. This clan holds the water 
very sacred. They do not even die in the water. 

It was at this first meeting that they made friends with the Bear 
clan. Therefore these two clans love one another. 

THIRD VERSION — TOLD BY A MEMBER OF THE CLAN (FRAGMENTARY) 

The original wolf brothers appeared from the bottom of the ocean. 
When they got to the top of the water they started for the shore 
singing. When they got to the shore they saw footprints of bears 
who had just gone by. They said, "Our friends have just gone by." 
That is why they are the friends of the Bear clan. They were going 
to the meeting place. There a black hawk was gathering together 
all the different clans. Finally he finished and he said, "It is done." 
When he said this a wolf howled. They had forgotten him. They 
said, "We have forgotten him. Let some one go after him." So 
some one went after him . . . 

CLAN SONGS 

First song 

This body of mine that I am walking. 
This body of mine that I am walking. 
This body of mine that I am walking. 
On the earth I am speaking. 

Second song 

This body of mine that I am walking. 
This body of mine that I am walking. 
This body of mine that I am walking. 
In the waters am I speaking. 

CLAN NAMES 

cOfJKTCUNK' HIK'IK'ARADJERA (WOLF CLAN)20 

Curjgewaksiga Hunting dog. 

Cunktcank'a Wolf. 

Regoniwinga Wolf (archaic name). 

30 The following names are from the Dorsey Mss. 

Radin] SOCIAL, ORGANIZATION SPECIFIC CLANS 241 

Hicdjasgaga White-faced. 

Hicdjadjopga Four-eyed. 

Hinp'iwirjga Good-haired. 

Hintcoga Blue-furred . 

Hominarjk'a She who sits howling. 

Manidjopga Four walking. 

Manank£oga Throws up the earth (with his hind legs). 

Manok'acutcaminank'a He who sits on the tree banks. 

Niedjahuga Coming from the water. 

Niedjawanik'iriga He who brings them back from the water. 

P'etcoga Green forehead. 

P'e-oegaga He who has a white forehead 

P'(inzakega Big sand person. 

Xe-acaraminarjk'a He who sits on a bare hill. 

Xe-omik'a He who dwells in a hill. 

Xe-oratcega He who travels to the hill. 

Sintcega Bushy tail. 

Tcarawiga He who holds a deer in his mouth . 

Tcasirawiga He who carries deer-feet in his mouth. 

Tconarjkehurjga Chief wolf. 

Tconan ketcowinga First wolf. 

Tconiminank'a Sits as a leader. 

Wanuniniga He from whom nothing is hidden . 

Warawaieinega He who carries something in his mouth. 

Warawaiguga Comes back with something in his mouth. 

Waruxewirjga She who chases. 

Wirap'ega He who lies in wait for them. 

The Water-Spirit Clan 

introduction 

A rather poor version of the Water-spirit clan was obtained. It 
is, however, one of the few clan origin myths that contains the definite 
statement that the clan ancestors changed into human beings when 
they gathered at Green Bay. 

The functions of the Water-spirit clan were, in former times, 
exceedingly important. Almost all the informants were agreed that a 
chief was selected from that clan, but the exact nature of this chieftain- 
ship is not clear. One informant, himself a member of the Bear 
clan, said that the Water-spirit clan was the chief of the lower 
phratry; that the clans were arranged in three groups, one over 
which the Thunderbird clan ruled; another over which the Water- 
spirit clan ruled; and a third over which the Bear clan ruled. He 
insisted, however, that just as the Thunderbird clan rules over the 
whole tribe in a general way, so the Water-spirit clan ruled over the 
clans of the lower phratry. Other informants claimed that the 
Water-spirit clan originally ruled over the entire tribe and that its 
place was subsequently usurped by the Thunderbird clan. It might- 
be best to regard the function of the Water-spirit clan as akin but 
subsidiary to that of the Thunderbird clan. 

242 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ann. 37 

Members of the clan were buried by members of the Thunderbird 
clan. 

Water was sacred to the Water-spirits. It was considered an 
insult for a stranger to peep into a pail standing in one of their lodges. 

One informant explained the custom as follows: 

"If one enters a Water-spirit clan lodge and looks into a pail and 
there should be no water in it, the person will turn away and this 
action of his will be construed as begging. It would be proper to 
take a drink of water if some were there." 

A round spot is painted with blue clay on the forehead of a Water- 
spirit man (pi. 46). 

The Water-spirit feast is held in the fall and spring. Cracked or 
ground com is used. Water-spirit people partake before anyone 
else at this feast. 

ORIGIN MYTH 

(told by a member op the clan) 

In the beginning, when the clans began to form, the Bird clans 
came upon the earth first and alit upon an oak tree at Red Banks; 
and when they alit upon the oak tree they became human as we are 
now. Then the Water-spirit clan was to appear at Within Lake; 
and the waters began to whirl around in the lake and all the bad 
things that inhabited the waters began to appear. Just before the 
Water-spirits appeared some burned embers came up from the waters 
and the whirling became faster and deeper. As all the great things 
began to appear it always seemed as if the Water-spirits were the 
next to appear, but not until the last did they come up. Thereupon 
the waters began to quiet down. Then a white Water-spirit ap- 
peared with its horns curved toward each other, and when it came 
upon the earth it became human and walked. Then the other clans 
said, "Now, then, this is the chief. This is all that we have been 
waiting for. Now we shall divide ourselves" (into groups). Then 
they started for the lodge of the Thunderbird clan and entered it. 
There they named one another and divided one another into clans 
and there they counciled with one another. 

CLAN NAMES 

WAKTCEXI HIK'lK'ARADJERA ( WATER-SPIRIT CLAN) 

He-adaja^jarjk'a Shining horns. 

Hena°pga Two horns. 

Her'^winga Handsome horn. 

Hesatcarj k'a Five-horned 

Hedjopga Four-horned. 

Marjk'anojuga He who plants medicines. 

Mankanhodjanpga He who looks at medicines. 

Maninsinip'inwinga Good cold spring. 

radin] SOCIAL ORGANIZATION SPECIFIC CLANS 243 

Manjiwinga Yellowish-red earth (refers to deposits from iron springs). 

Mannunp'aga Second earth person. 

Ni-acgadjewinga She who plays on the water. 

Ni amaniwirjga She who walks on the water. 

Ni-anp"nwinga She who makes water good. 

Ni-andagewirjga Still water. 

Nicanaga Stream person. 

Nihuga He who discharges water. 

Ni-ot£anpwirjga She who jumps into the water. 

Nidjobega Four streams. 

Niwak'itcanga Selects (?) water. 

Wakdjexicicik'a Bad Water-spirit. 

Wakdjexihunga Chief of the Water-spirits. 

Wakdjeximaniga Walking Water-spirit. 

Wakdjexipirjga Good Water-spirit. 

Wakdjexisanwinga White Water-spirit. 

Hep'irjga Good horn. 

Wadjxedega Big boat. 

Hip'ahiga Sharp tooth. 

Rabawirjga Beaverskin woman. 

Rabewirjga Beaver. 

Hejipga Short horn. 

The Buffalo Clan 
introduction 

The first version of the origin myth of the Buffalo clan is of con- 
siderable interest because it gives us an idea of the manner in which 
a myth had to be bought. It is one of the few origin myths that 
gives a precise location for the origin of a particular clan. What 
lake is meant by de cicik it is impossible to say. Considerable 
importance should be attached, however, to the fact that their 
place of origin differed from that of most of the other clans, because 
it may indicate that the people who came to be known under the 
name Buffalo joined the tribe after the other clans. 

The Buffalo clansmen seem to have had the function of acting as 
the public criers and in general of being an intermediary between the 
chief and the tribe. This, however, has been denied by some in- 
formants, one of them a member of the clan. Their lodge was at 
the southeast corner of the village. Some informants deny that 
they had a special lodge, however. 

The Buffalo and Water-spirit clans are friends and are supposed 
to bury each other's members. 

ORIGIN MYTH21 

Informant, member of the clan: "Listen, my grandson. Those 
who originated from the buffaloes and the way in which they origi- 

*i The following myth is given in the precise manner in which the individual who told it to me obtained 
the information from one of the old men who was privileged to narrate it. Unfortunately it was impos- 
sible to obtain any other clan origin myth in 1 he same way. 

244 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ann. 37 

nated, they have heretofore told one another thus. This it is. 
Whenever one asked about it, they would tell him, but they would 
never tell him unless he brought some present. Even when they 
had a child whom they loved very much (and for whom they were 
accustomed to do everything), even to such a one they would not tell 
it unless he brought them gifts. Thus they would not even say the 
least thing about the story of their origin merely because they 
loved some one. It is really essential to make a gift. And if some 
one came, carrying a gift, the old man would ask him what he wanted 
and what he would like to know, as this was not the only thing 
gifts were made for. Then he would announce his desire. However, 
he would not be told in public but when he was alone. Then the old 
man who had the right to tell the origin myth would announce 
subsequently at some feast that he had told so-and-so the story of 
the origin of their clan and that if anyone wished to be told of the 
same he should in the future, when he himself had died, go to this 
young man and ask him in the proper way. Remember, he would 
add, that before everything else it is the duty of an individual to 
try and learn of the origin of his clan. 

"Father," this I give you, a full suit of clothes. This I am giving 
you." "Thanks, my son. What do you wish? What do you wish 
to hear?" "Father, what did we originate from?" "My son, you 
have done well. My son, he who makes the most gifts obtains life 
therewith." "Well, then, father, you need not tell me now, but 
later, when I have made a sufficient number of gifts, then you may 
tell me." "My son, you have spoken well and if you do as you 
say, you will travel unharmed along the road of life." "Father, 
these also I give you, some beads and a blanket." "Thanks, my 
son, it is good. Now, my son, what I told you was true. I did not 
tell it to you because I coveted anything of yours, but truly because 
it is true — this, that we must make a sufficient number of presents. 
Whoever does as you have done will obtain the possibility of a good 
life for himself." "Now again, father, I give you these gifts. There 
is enough food for you in it." "My son, you have done well, very 
well indeed, for the life that I am to give you is holy; and as you 
know, even if one was loved very much they would not tell him 
this merely because they loved him, as it is holy." "Father, this I 
give you as a gift, a horse, as I desire to know what we originated 
from." "Now, then, my son, you have done well. This is what I 
meant when I said it is holy. Therefore, my son, you have done 
well. Come and sit down here. Listen very carefully so that if 
afterwards anyone should ask you for this story you will be able to 
tell it well." 

23 He is now proceeding to give the dialogue that ensued between the old man and himself when he 
brought the presents. 

badin] SOCIAL ORGANIZATION SPECIFIC CLANS 245 

"My son, we first originated in human form at Bad Lake (de 
cicik).23 From four buffalo spirits who are there, did we originate. 
The youngest one was clever and from him did we originate. The 
buffaloes asked one another what they were to do, and they then 
began to exert their powers, and the youngest one obtained the 
knowledge that there was to be a gathering of all the animals. So 
they all landed at a place called Red Banks. So it is said. And to 
the elk was given the charge of the seating arrangements. 

"Thus did we originate. And then they counciled with one 
another as to how they should travel along the road of life. And as 
they arrived at Red Banks, each one would ask the other to do some 
work. And there they made a sacred (covenant) — that they would 
never fail to grant one another's requests. Likewise they agreed that 
when they died they would bury one another. The Buffalo clan and 
the Water-spirit clan were to bury one another, and they were to ask 
one another to work." 

CLAN SONGS 

Song 1 

Finally you have cried. I heard you. 

Finally you have cried. I heard you. 

Finally you have cried. I heard you. 

Finally you have cried. I heard you. 

Sony .' 

This earth you have made me hear. 
Finally you have cried. 
You have made me hear. 
You have made me hear. 

Song S 

This day you have made me hear. 
Finally you have cried. 
You have made me hear. 
You have made me hear. 

"My son, here is some more information that one in your position 
should seek. This should be the second thing to ask for: 'What 
should one say when one gives a feast?' This you should ask for, 
and you should boil food for the informant and then you will be 
taught the proper speeches. Afterwards, when anyone boils food 
(i. e., gives a winter feast) a kettle should first be put on for Earth- 
maker and one should ask him for life; that the people may live to 
be strong and good. Include tobacco in your offering, for although 
Earthmaker made the tobacco he will not take any of it of his own 
accord. Not until it is offered to him by humans will he take it. 

23 The name dc cicik is applied to-day to Lake Michigan. However, our informant in this case applied 
it to Devils Lake in Sauk County, Wis. 

246 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ass. 37 

Thus he made the tobacco so that humans may ask life with it, and 
he will grant them their desires. This is all." 

CLAN NAMES 
TCE HIK'iK'ARADJERA (BUFFALO CLAN) 

Moratcega He who travels the land. 

Tcanimaniwirjga Sho who walks ahead. 

Tceninksiga Suckling buffalo calf. 

Tcega Buffalo. 

Tcep'anunpga Two buffalo heads. 

Tcetcaniwinga First buffalo. 

Tcedojenink'a Buffalo yearling. 

Tcedonirjka Young buffalo bull. 

Tcewirjxedega Big female buffalo. 

Wirukananga He who is in control. 

Hehekmaniga? Shaggy walker. 

Tcehatcowinga Buffalo hide blue. 

Mangiksuntcga Shakes the earth by striking. 

Tcep'aga Buffalo head. 

Manok'azuhiga Kicking up the earth. 

The Deer Clan 

introduction 

The first version of the origin myth of the Deer clan is in part like 
that of version 6 of the Bear clan origin myth and in part like that of 
version 1 of the Thunderbird origin myth. It is the only myth that 
shares with version 1 of the Thunderbird origin myth the account of 
the origin of death. 

The Deer clan does not seem to have had any important functions, 
although in myth 1, it is stated that they claimed a '"partial" chief- 
tainship, whatever that may mean. 

It was considered an insult to tell a member of this clan that he 
resembled a deer. 

The facial painting is the same as that used for the Elk clan. 
(PL 46.) 

The Deer clan people tell one another not to sing their clan song 
very loudly, and also not to make any sudden movement of their 
limbs, for each movement might cause the death of a human being. 
For the same reason they are told not to weep too loudly, as each 
deer's limb is a symbol of one of the four directions. When, there- 
fore, a Deer clansman moves a limb too hard when he is weeping 
over the decease of a member of his clan, he might be "putting some 
human being in the earth," and the wind would blow hard. 

The dog names obtained were uanlcigohoniga and nannatcgisga. 

RADiN] SOCIAL ORGANIZATION SPECIFIC CLANS 247 

ORIGIN MYTHS 
FIRST VERSION (TOLD BY A MEMBER OF THE CLAN) 

This is the origin story of the Deer people. In the beginning a 
black deer accompanied by an elk appeared in the center of the 
earth, and they went in the direction of the east. There they were 
going. Then the black deer said, "My dear younger brother, I am 
heavy on account of my excessive fatness, go you alone and I will 
remain here." So he remained there and did not go; and then to 
the center of the earth, to the place from which they started, he 
returned. Then he came back to the earth, and again they asked 
him. Four times they asked. There the necklace of money orna- 
ments he recognized, the black deer did.24 Thus the Deer clan beat 
them, and therefore they have the name Blacl-Deer-chief. As they 
went so they returned again. Again the necklace made of money 
he (the black deer)25 recognized. The earth they went around. 
Then again the black deer went to the east. It was a large one who 
went ahead, and as he was going along, to his astonishment, they 
reached the place from which they had started. 

"My younger brother," said Black-deer, "you try to do it." 2e 
And the second-born went ahead and the others followed, and again 
they were drawn back to the place from which they started. Then 
the third-born went first and the others followed and the same thing 
happened. Then they told the fourth-born to go first, and he went 
in front and suddenly he struck his horn, the one on the right, upon 
the earth, and, behold, grass suddenly appeared. It was a very 
white bud that he had caused to appear. Then he struck his left 
horn on the earth, and he made a tree appear and the fruit of this 
tree was meant to be eaten. Then they ate the fruit of the tree. 
The top of the tree there they ate. Thus they said. And they 
call a woman even to-day She-who-eats-the-top-of-the-tree. And then 
they began to walk and the earth trembled from their walking. 
Toward the east side they went. From this fact they have a name, 
He-who-shalces-the-earth. And again as some of the brothers were 
small they have the name Small-deer. They also have the name 
Walking-leader. And they also have names She-who-comes-baclc and 
He-who-comes-back, because in the beginning they always came back 
to the place from which they started. Whatever actions they went 
through, from these they derived their names. 

u The thought is not quite clear here, due to the fact that something has probably been omitted by the 
narrator. 

25 There seems to be a contest between the deer and the elk as to who would be able to see the "money- 
necklace" first. Cnder the term "money-necklace" they evidently mean the medallions distributed by 
the American Government to those whom they recognized as chiefs. The recognition of the "money- 
necklace" is evidently going to decide the chieftainship between the deer and the elk. 

M Some power is evidently drawing them back to the place from which they started. 

248 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ass. 37 

The four cardinal points and the winds that are there, they are in 
control of. If on a very nice day a deer's voice is heard, that day 
will become bad, and if on a very bad day a deer's voice is heard, 
that day will become nice. The deer people are those who are in 
control of the weather. And they also have a name, He^who-plays- 
with-the-unnds, and a woman is called She-wTio-goes-with-tTie-wind. 
The deer would always sit with the wind back of them. Thus they 
roamed all over the earth. Not one place on this earth did they miss. 

Once, when they had come home, their eldest brother suddenly 
fell down (dead). "What is the matter?" they said. And the 
second-born said, ''Our oldest brother is not saying anything; I 
don't know what the matter is." And then they asked their youngest 
brother and he said, "Our oldest brother is dead. That is the way 
Earthmaker arranged things." And then he talked to the dead 
brother and he said, "Earthmaker has made a place for you to go 
to now that you are dead. You have not attained a large share of 
life and you have left us who remain on the earth in a pitiable con- 
dition. But now that you are going home I want to ask you some- 
thing. Those years that are still coming to you, distribute among 
your relatives. This I beg of you. And this is the second request: 
May the warpaths that you did not go on (by reason of your death), 
may the war honors that you did not obtain, may all these things 
be distributed among us. This I ask of you, my dear brother. And 
this is the third request: May the food that you did not eat, the nuts, 
the sweet fruits, etc., all that you liked on earth, may it all be dis- 
tributed among us. This is what I ask of you. And tins is the 
fourth request, my dear older brother: May all the wearing apparel 
that belonged to you as well as all the materials that you stored in 
back of your tent, never to be touched by you, but may we who are 
left behind use it all. This I ask of you. Wherever you are going, 
may these requests of those whom you left here behind on earth be 
before you." 

Then the younger brother took some red paint and he said, " Brother, 
I am going to paint you. Thus they will recognize you at home. 
That is the way we will always do it hereafter. Those who are to 
live after us will paint us in the same way. Now this is the manner 
of painting. The forehead and the corners of the eye are to be 
painted in black and red streaks, respectively, and the chin and the 
front part of the throat are to be painted red." Then he dug a 
grave. Then they buried him. Then they sang the songs and when 
they were finished with this, they traveled around the earth and 
came to the gathering place of the clans. When they came to that 
place they were people — i. e., human beings. They lived their own 
life just as they had as deers. All the incidents of their traveling 
as well as all the characteristics of deers were used in the names 

BUREAU OF AMERICAN ETHNOLOGY 

THIRTY-SEVENTH ANNUAL REPORT PLATE 46 

4. 

cj> 

THUNDERBIRD CLAN 

WARRIOR CLAN 

EAGLE CLAN 

BEAR CLAN 

BEAR CLAN? 

WOLF CLAN 

o o 0 

o o o o 

° o o 

0° 

BUFFALO CLAN 

ELK AND DEER CLANS WATERSPIRIT CLAN 

FACIAL BURIAL MARKS 

8UREAU OF AMERICAN ETHNOLOGY 

THIRTY-SEVENTH ANNUAL REPORT PLATE 47 

TO MOON 

TO TURTLE 

TO EARTH 

TO HEROK'A 

TO NIGHT SPIRITS 

TO MOON 

TO MORNING STAR 

BUCKSKIN OFFERINGS 

BUREAU OF AMERICAN ETHNOLOGY THIRTY-SEVENTH ANNUAL REPORT PLATE 

FOR DISEASE GIVER 

FOR EARTHMAKER 

FOR NIGHT SPIRITS 

FOR THUNDERBIRD 

BUCKSKIN OFFERINGS. 

radix] SOCIAL ORGANIZATION SPECIFIC CLANS 249 

they gave one another. Thus they have the names WMte-Tvair, Fast- 
one, LUtle^white-tertk, Diffident-one, Horn, Pronged-horn, etc.; and for 
dogs they have names also. That is the war the deer people lived 
in the beginning at Red Banks, Within Lake. Bands of people 
gathered together there, and all the clans that exist now originated 
there. 

SECOND VERSION TOLD BY A MEMBER OF THE CLAN I 

The Deer clan people came up at the beginning of the earth. 
Only one is spoken of as appearing at the beginning. He started 
forth but returned again that he might look for a companion. For 
that reason a name exists in the tribe, He-who-comes-back , and another 
is Ilt-iclm-appears-first. After they had appeared on earth the deer 
blew on the original fire, which was only smoldering, and made it 
blaze up. For that reason they claim a partial chieftainship. The 
first one that appeared had a chief's medal around his neck. 

CLAN SONG. 

I use the cries of the four directions. 
I use the cries of the four directions. 
I use the cries of the lour directions. 
I use the cries of the four directions. 

CLAN NAMES 

TCA HIK'IK'ARADJERA I DEER (LAN 

Tcasephunk'a Black deer chief. 

\Vatrizenanp£inga Wears shells around neck. 

TcanurjkcaDp£in^vii)ga Deer vagina. 

Maijk'isaga-vepga Appears in the middle of earth 

Tcatconiwiijga First deer woman. 

The Elk Clan 

lntroductiox 

In the Elk clan origin myth we find the clear statement that Earth- 
maker created the ancestors of the clan, and that they were human 
beings. The myth resembles a village origin myth more than it does 
a clan origin myth. 

The Elk clan seems to have had certain functions relative to the 
distribution of fire through the village and in camp. It was never a 
very large clan. 

The Elk people claim half of the fire, and thus half of the chieftain 
ship. They never hold fire toward any one. 

Elks are buried by the Snake, Water-spirit, and Eagle clans, 
although the first has the preference. 

White clay is used in painting the dead. 

According to another informant, the facial painting consisted of 
white and blue dots on the face (pi. 46 1. 
186S23"— 22 17 

250 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ann. 37 

ORIGIN MYTH 
(TOLD BY A MEMBER OP THE CLAN") 

Earthmaker created all human beings. When he was about to 
create them, then he thought it would be good to see something 
moving. So he made a man and he was very good. But Earth- 
maker thought he ought to have company, so he made a woman. 
Then he thought to himself, "How should they know one another." 
So some one came to life through the water and this one was an 
animal. He made a village in the west for the human beings, and 
he thought about it and then he thought he would ask the humans 
what they would like to live through (i. e., become reincarnated), 
and they said the elk, because the elk never committed any crime. 
The humans were not to commit any crime. So the four elks started 
for the meeting place at Green Bay, Red Banks. They had up to 
that time supposed that they were the only living things, but Earth- 
maker let the oldest of the elks know of the existence of the other 
clans. So there they came and lived as Winnebagos. Thus it is 
said. This is all that they ever tell. 

CLAN NAMES 

hunwan hik'ik'ahadjeba (elk clan) 

Rohanmaniwinga Many walking. 

Rek'uhumaniwirjga She who walks with the wind. 

Tcatchiruxewinga She who pursues the wind. 

Snake and Fish Clans 

No information of any consequence was obtained about these two 
clans. Almost all the informants claimed that they were recent 
additions to the tribe. Only a very few survivors of either clan are 
still living. 

clan names 

wak'an hik'ik'aradjera (snake clan) 

Hankcimink'a Lying snake. 

Hip'ahiga He who has sharp teeth. 

Hirodinga She who has attained her lull growth. 

K'ik'urudiwinga She who crawls. 

K'irixminank'a Sits coiled up. 

Gisewek'inarjka Sits quiet in her (homo. 

Hokciga High snake. 

HO HIK'IK'ARADJERA (FISH CLAN) 

Ilo-apcudjewirjga Red fish scale woman. 

CLAN AFFILIATIONS NOT OBTAINED 

Hanboguwirjga East woman. 

Hun kminarj ka Sitting chief. 

kadin] SOCIAL, ORGANIZATION SPECIFIC CLANS 251 

K'ikarasintcga Licks herself. 

Mankuhoradjega Roams under the earth. 

Mankerewinga 

Ksismainga Sits solidly attached. 

Maiikurudjewinga Her earth she spreads out. 

Tcisgamaniga Walks as a white house. 

Sinihimaniwirjga Cold walking woman. 

Sannaguga Coming white. 

Warjk'inek'iga Lone man. 

Warutca"xonuniga Small attendant. 

Hominankpinga Sits good as she comes. 

Nannawahiguga He who brings something in his mouth . 

K'izahiyurjgiwinga Fighting princess. 

Mogisagominank'a Lies in the middle of the earth. 

Waxurutcmanewirjga Moves along as she walks. 

Warjktcoga Green man. 

Hihina°pga Comes out. 

Pirjk'ikunga Fixes himself. 

Clan Names 
ferst four given in each clan 

Although it has been discontinued for some time, the Winnebago 
claim that in former times it was customary to assign definite names 
to the first four children born in each clan. In all probability this 
custom extended not only to the fourth but even to the sixth child, 
as lists were obtained that gave six names. This would correspond 
to the fixed number of birth names. No significance need be attached 
to the exact number, as it was intended beyond any doubt to cover 
the number of children generally born within one family. Within 
these limits, then, the names were fixed, at least theoretically. 

First four names of Thunderbird clan ; informant, member of clan: 

First. Nanozok'a Bending bough of tree. 

Second. Nodjanpga Lighting the tree. 

Nainsawagicicga Broken tree top. 

HanantenarjXgurjga All heard it. 

First four names of Thunderbird clan; informant, member of 
Warrior clan : 

First. Ilop'iyga Good one. 

Second. Warudjaxiriga Makes noise as he comes? 

Third. Wak'andjamaniga Thunder walker. 

Wak'andjahurjga Thunder chief. 

Informant, member of Thunderbird clan: 

First. Wak'andjahurjga Thunder chief (male). 

Second. Mandjidjega He who alights on the earth (male). 

First. Hok'awas wiijga Darkness (female). 

Second. Nannazogewinga Bends (weighs) the tree down (female). 

252 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ans. 37 

Informant, member of Elk clan: 

First. Wak'andja sepga Black thunderbird. 

Second. Wak'andja-teoga Green thunderbird. 

Third . Wak'andja sgaga White thunderbird. 

Fourth. Wak'andja cutcga Red thunderbird 

Names of Warrior clan: informant, member of the clan: 

First. Wonafire warjkcik'a Warrior man (male). 

or Nanxedega Big tree (male). 

Second. Naninnek'iga Lone tree (male). 

Third. Mancdjanmaniga Walks mightily (male). 

Fourth. Wona7irega War (male). 

Fifth. P'etcda-ehiga Fire-starter (male). 

Sixth. Hfingmaniga Chief walker (male). 

First. Ahugiciniwinga Shining wings (female). 

Second. Ahutcowigga Blue wing (femalei. 

Third. K'izahiyurjgiwirjga Fighting princess (female). 

Fourth. Ahup'inwirjga Good wing (female). 

Fifth. Nijumaniwinga ... . : Rain walker (female). 

First four names of Eagle clan; informant, member of Warrior 
clan : 

First. Narjk'iridjega Returns to the tree. 

Second. Ahusak'a Strikes his wings. 

Third. Tcaxcephurjk'a Eagle chief. 

Fourth. Tcaxcepx'nunik'a Small eagle. 

Bear clan; informant, member of the clan: 

First. Tconankhurjk'a Bear chief (male) 

Second . ? ? (male). 

Third. Wak'iznanp'irjga He who has white spot under his throat 

(male). 

Fourth. Hundjxedega Big bear (male). 

Fifth. Hirocicga (Male). 

Sixth. Noroxuga Scrapes a tree (male). 

First. Hok'iwaigunwinga Retraces her footsteps (female). 

Second. Tconanketcowinga Blue bear (female). 

Third. Nancgadjewinga Plays on wood (female). 

Fourth. Asgawawinga Delicious bear (female). 

Fifth. Hundj hinunk'a Female bear (female). 

Sixth. Sitcant£inwirjga Visible footprints (female). 

Bear clan; informant, member of the Thunderbird clan: 

Mairjxganhiga Shakes the earth. 

Waksurjksuntcga Makes (it) quake. 

Hashiwenimaniga Gives forth fruit as he walks. 

Hanbixganhiga Makes the day tremble. 

Bear clan; informant, member of the clan: 

First. Mank'isakhominarjk'a He who sits in the middle of the earth. 

Second. Hokere'unanimanirjga He who carries the ensign. 

'third. Ha"bidjandjanhiga Makes the day tremble(?) 

Fourth. Nai°sawahicicga Breaks the tree tops. 

radin] SOCIAL ORGANIZATION — SPECIFIC CLANS 253 

Wolf clan: informant, member of Bear clan: 

First. Hi"tcoga Blue hair. 

Second. Keratcoga Blue sky. 

Third. Cufiktcurjk' xotcga Gray wolf. 

Fourth. Cufiktcurjk' sgaga White wolf. 

Wolf clan; informant, member of Thunderbird clan: 

First. Cunktcurjk' xotcga Gray wolf. 

Second. Cuijktcuijk' sepga Black wolf. 

Third. Cuijktcurjk' sgaga White wolf . 

Fourth. Cunktcurjk' cutcga? Red wolf(?) 

Wolf clan; informant, member of tbe clan: 

First. Cur) ktcurj k' sgaga White wolf. 

Second. Curjktcurjk' xotcga Gray wolf. 

Third. HiHcoga Green hair. 

Fourth. Cufiktcurjk' sepga Black wolf. 

Water-spirit clan; informant, member of Eagle clan: 

First. Wakdjexi sgaga White water-spirit. 

Second . Wakdjexi pinga Good water-spirit . 

Third . Wakdjexi tcoga Green water-spirit. 

Fourth. Wakdjexi sepga Black water-spirit. 

Elk clan; informant, member of tbe clan: 

First. Hunwurjga The elk. 

Second. Hezaztcga Prong-horned. 

Third. Hunwurjgapga Black elk. 

Fourth. Hinsgaga White hair. 

Deer clan; informant, member of Elk clan. 

First. Tcaga The deer. 

Second. Tca'innek'iga Lone deer. 

Third. Tcasgaga White deer. 

Fourth. Tcasepga Black deer. 

CHAPTER X 

SHAMANISTIC AND MEDICINAL PEACTICES 
Introduction 

The shamanistic and medicinal practices of the Winnebago differ 
in no respect from those found all over the woodland area and there 
is consequently no need for discussing them at length. The stories 
told about Midjistega and old Lincoln are the famous tricks and 
sleight-of-hand performances known all over America. There does 
not seem to be as much said about the conjuring lodge as is the 
case among the Ojibwa. This apparently is identical with the 
Winnebago warulcA'na, "exerting one's powers." The lack of 
specific information relating to this subject obtained by the author 
may, however, be due to accident. 

The Winnebago make a fourfold classification of their medicines: 
Those that affect a person by direct administration ; those that affect 
him by their odor, like love and racing medicines; those that affect 
him at a distance; and those that are shot at an individual. Most 
of the medicines are obtained by fasting, although they can also be 
bought. The most important of these medicines are those called the 
stench-earth medicine (see p. 259) and the black-earth medicine. 

Medicine may be used in a number of ways, but principally as 
offerings or as means of killing animals or men. It is often chewed. 
In order to make arrows or guns unerring, medicine is frequently 
rubbed upon them. 

Sympathetic magic is of course well known. The procedure is 
the common one. A picture of the man to be harmed is drawn on 
the ground and shot at, stabbed, etc. The man is then certain to 
die a short time after, in the same manner as the figure has been 
mutilated. 

There are two general magical ceremonies. WarulcA'na, to know 
something by exerting one's powers; wanaHcere, to hypnotize in the 
distance. (For description of latter, see p. 111.) 

Example of warulcA'na. — J.'s older brother and a friend had failed 
to return home and so J.'s grandfather went to a man called C. English 
and, offering him some tobacco, asked him to find out something 
about his son — i. e., to exert his powers. English did so and told 
the old man that they were camping and making sugar and that if 
254 

badin] SHAMANISTIC AND MEDICINAL PRACTICES 255 

the old man went to a certain place he would find them. He went 
and found it was so. 

Tales Concerning Mid.jistega 

Recently the Potawatomi were going on the warpath and a num- 
ber of other tribes were going along with them. As they were 
making their preparations they spent the evenings exhibiting the 
various powers they possessed and which they had obtained during 
their fasts. 

One day Robert Lincoln's father heard that a Winnebago was 
going to come and give a grizzly bear dance. Old Lincoln and a 
few other Potawatomi decided to go over and watch him. When 
they arrived at the lodge they were told that the name of the Win- 
nebago was Midjistega. They were also told that this Midjistega 
was going to make some gunpowder (in a magical manner). When 
they heard this, the Potawatomi said that if he could make his 
teeth protrude from his mouth he might be able to make gunpowder, 
but that otherwise he could not. 

In the middle of the lodge where this performance was to be held 
there was a wooden dish filled with charcoal near which Midjistega 
was sitting. He had beautiful hair and he had marks made by 
white clay in the corners of his eyes and mouth. When the singers 
in the lodge began to sing for him he ran around the lodge on all 
fours, four times. Then he took up the dish of charcoal and shook 
it. While doing this he made a noise like a grizzly bear. Then his 
teeth began to protrude. When he had gone around the lodge four 
times the charcoal turned into gunpowder. Then he took a handful 
of it and threw it into the fire and it exploded. The members of 
the different tribes present took some of it and put it in their war- 
bundles. It is only a short time ago that a Winnebago war-bundle 
that was supposed to have some of this gunpowder was stolen. 
It belonged to a man named Buchanan. 

Old man Lincoln had never seen any Winnebago before this, but 
he could understand their language and he interpreted all that 
Midjistega said. The Potawatomi around him asked whether he 
had learned the language from some of his Winnebago relatives but 
he said he had not. 

After showing that he could make gunpowder in this way, 
Midjistega made some plug tobacco. He cut the bark of some 
walnut trees into the shape of plug chewing tobacco and put it in a 
white deerskin on top of which was placed a piece of real plug 
tobacco. Then Midjistega said, " Now since I have made gunpowder 
I will also make some plug tobacco." Then he took the bundle and 
danced around the lodge with it and by the time he had danced 
around the lodge the third time the odor of tobacco became very 

256 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ANN. 37 

strong. After he had danced around for the fourth time he opened 
up his package and there was the tobacco. Then he spoke to the 
people, "You people of different tribes, the one that is dancing 
with me will obtain the first war-honor on the warpath that you 
are planning now, for I am giving him that honor and that power." 

After this he told them that he would make them some paint, as 
they seemed to be short of it then. He took a wooden dish and 
filled it full of ashes and covered it up with a white deerskin. Then 
he danced around the lodge. As he was dancing around for the 
third time, old Lincoln thought he noticed yellow-colored paint. 
The fourth time he danced around, the paint turned into a rod 
color. When, finally. Midjistega took the cover off, there was red 
paint of a very fine quality. Then the members of the different 
tribes distributed it among one another. 

After this he made some axes. He molded some clay into the 
shape of axes and put them into a deerskin. On top of this bundle 
he put a real metal ax. " Then taking this bundle he started to 
dance around the lodge. As he went around the lodge the third 
time, old Lincoln thought he noticed something shining. After he 
had gone around the fourth time he took the cover off and there 
were some real axes. They were all new and bright. 

Then he decided to make some hoes, and then some awls. All of 
these he made of clay. Then he made some needles of deer hair. 
Then, noticing some boys playing with some basswood bark, he asked 
them to give him some, and out of it he made ribbons of four different 
colors, blue, white, red, and black. 

Then he said, "As I have made almost everything, I will now try 
and make some whisky. If I fail there will be no harm done any- 
how." Old Lincoln told his people what Midjistega was saying. 
Then they placed a new pail full of water before him. He took a 
flute and began to dance around the lodge. After he had made the 
first circuit of the lodge he held the flute near the pad, almost sticking 
it into the water. The second time he approached the pad he stuck 
the flute into the water just a little bit. The third time he came near 
it he stuck the flute into the water and stirred it around . By that time 
Old Lincoln could smell the odor of whisky pretty strongly. Then 
Midjistega went around the lodge for the fourth time and finally 
stirred the water with his flute for a long time, and taking a drink 
from the pad said, "It is whisky." Then he passed it around and 
everyone present took a drink. Old Lincoln, however, did not touch 
it. Then his father told him to drink it, as it was holy and had been 
made by a spirit. Then Old Lincoln drank some, and, sure enough, 
it was whisky, although it was colorless. 

After that, all the people went on a warpath. However, the per- 
son to whom Midjistega had promised the first war honor only obtained 

radin] SHAMANISTIC AND MEDICINAL PKACTICES 257 

the second one, Old Lincoln himself obtaining the first. The first 
war honor was a quantity of wampum beads and the second a wam- 
pum belt. Both the one who got the second prize and Old Lincoln 
brought back with them an enemy's head. 

From that time on Midjistega stayed with the Winnebago and he 
and Old Lincoln became great friends, living together, one of the 
reasons being that Old Lincoln could understand Winnebago. 

One day they ran short of corn meal, so they decided to go and 
trade some furs for corn meal. They had plenty of furs because they 
spent most of their time hunting. When they got to the trader's 
store Midjistega said, "Say, trader, the boys have been out of paint 
for some time and you ought to give them some." "No, Midjistega, 
I can't do that." Then Midjistega, again said, "Well, the paint 
boxes are small and aren't of much value anyhow, and you ought to 
make them a present of some. However, I always knew you were 
very stingy." Then the trader said, "My business is to trade you 
my wares for your furs and I will not give you any paint for noth- 
ing." Then Midjistega said, " If I had some flour I could make some 
paint myself. However, I am short of flour, too." Then the trader 
said, " Midjistega, you can not do it, for even the whites do not know 
how to make paint (in that way), so how could you, who are only an 
Indian, do it?" Thus they spoke to and fro and finally the trader 
said, " Midjistega, I will bet you my store against your furs that if I 
give you some flour you can not make paint out of it. If I win you 
are to give me your furs, and if you win I will give you my store." 
Then the bet was agreed upon. 

Then a lodge was prepared and Midjistega' 8 drum and flute were 
carried into it. Then the trader had some flour carried over to the 
lodge and it was poured into a dish. The trader, suspecting that 
there might be some trick, stirred up the flour thorougldy. He sat- 
isfied himself that there was nothing at the bottom of the. dish. 
Midjistega, in the meantime, painted the corners of his mouth and 
eyes with ashes and then the singers sang for him. Then he handed 
the flute over to Old Lincoln and told him to blow it for him every 
now and then. The trader sat near the entrance of the lodge with 
his employees. Then Midjistega jumped up and ran all around the 
lodge on all fours. Then he took the dish with the flour and shaking 
it, began to dance around the lodge with it. After he had danced 
around for the third time it suddenly tinned into a yellow color, and 
Old Lincoln noticed the change in the expression on the trader's face. 
As he went around for the fourth time it suddenly changed to a 
red color. When he got back to his starting place it was quite red 
and was an excellent quality of paint. Then he said, "Well, trader, 
I have won your store," and the trader answered, "You have won 
my store. I did not think that an Indian could do it." Then Mid- 

258 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth.ans.37 

jistega said, "I can also make some sugar. If you don't believe it, 
give me some more flour." However, the trader said, "There is no 
need of your proving it; I believe you now." However, he sent one 
of his employees after some more flour and out of this Midjistega 
made some maple sugar. He made it in the following way. He 
sprinkled some water on the flour and said, "This shall be the size 
of pheasants' dung." Then it formed into little round lumps. Then 
the trader said, "Midjistega, my store is worth several times the value 
of your furs, and you have made me a poor man. However, I wish 
to ask you for one thing — this sugar — so that I can eat some of it 
once in a while." Then Midjistega gave it to him. Midjistega and 
his friend carried the contents of the store home. They had to make 
several trips. All the people at home got a blanket. 

Then the trader said, "Midjistega, there is not a white man living 
who would believe that you can do this and if, therefore, I ever call 
on you to do it again, I hope that you will come with your friends 
(and do it). This is the only way I can ever win any of my money 
back again." However, no one ever heard of the trader after that. 

Midjistega also made all the different varieties of corn at the 
Potawatomi meeting. 

Old Lincoln had always heard of the remarkable power the Winne- 
bago were supposed to possess in these matters but he had never 
actually witnessed any exhibition of it until he saw Midjistega per- 
form (these tricks). 

A man named Young Rogue, a brother of Robert Lincoln, could 
roll up a piece of clay about the size of a marble and then roll it on 
the ground and it would change into a toad and jump away. He 
was also able to shoot a blade of grass right into a log. 

Lincoln's Grandfather 

Lincoln's grandfather was the leader of the medicine dance and 
every time any relation of his died he would tell the daughters of 
his relative to stop their crying and that he would avenge the death 
of their father and kill four people. Shortly after he said this the 
four whom he had picked out died. 

If there was a man with great wealth in the tribe he would make 
a wooden snake and send it toward the man. Immediately after 
this it always happened that the rich man would be bitten by a 
snake. The latter would then send for the medicine man and give 
him all that he possessed. Then the former would ask him, ' 'When 
do you want to got well?'' If the sick man said "In three to four 
days," the medicine man would say, "You must like to suffer." 

For this reason the children of Lincoln's grandfather always had 
plenty of wealth. 

TtADiN] SHAMANISTIC AND MEDICINAL PRACTICES 259 

The Crow (i. e., Menominee) Indians knew what a wonderful man 
he was and whenever he went to visit them they gave him many pres- 
ents. He would be invited to a feast as soon as he arrived. 

On one occasion when they had a feast in a lodge (in his honor) 
one of the Menominee marked the ground in front of him and dared 
Lincoln's grandfather to come over, saying that if he did he would 
injure him. When the Winnebago crossed the mark he was pushed 
in all directions and finally shoved into a pit, bruising himself a great 
deal. When he came out, the old man said, ' 'You have probably 
never heard of me. To-morrow noon, soldiers will hit you." Then 
the Menominee asked, "If soldiers hit me, what will be the result?" 
"You will die.'' Then the Menominee said, "You have nothing to 
do with my life,'' and made a jump at him. 

The Menominee who had been told that he was going to die said 
the next morning to his nephew, ' 'Nephew, let us go to the lake and 
look around. I can't forget what the old man told me yesterday." 
So they took their spears for fishing and went out. While they were 
on the lake they saw a deer drinking at the edge of the water. The 
man took a shot at the deer, and the deer ran back into the timber. 
The man and his nephew pursued it. After a while the man gave a 
yell and then all was quiet. The nephew went over to the place 
and there the man was found dead. At his side a very large snake, 
with hair on its back, was standing. 

The next morning one could hear the mourning songs all over 
the woods. Then they went to look for the Winnebago, for they 
believed that it was his fault. They told him not to worry about it 
and gave him a horse to appease him. The day after they all had 
left the camp, the Winnebago pointed to some hawks that were 
circling around and told the Menominee to watch the foremost one. 
Then he pointed his finger at that one and made a sound with his 
mouth and the bird fell down dead. This Winnebago had the power 
to do this to all birds. He always told the Winnebago not to eat 
these birds because they were not good. 

The Uses of the Stench-Earth Medicine1 

There once was a man who had consumption and who knew tliat 
he was going to die soon. His relatives were about to move him 
to some other place and so he told them just to build him a separate 
lodge and leave him alone — that he wanted to die there. He asked 
them likewise not to come back to see him. They obeyed him and 
left him to die alone. 

One day he decided to go out into the wilderness and die there. 
He went to the top of a hill and lay down. He noticed many birds 

1 This is the literal translation. What plant is meant the writer was not able to determine. 

260 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [bth.ann.37 

of prey hovering around the hill and he felt certain that they were 
there so that they could devour him as soon as he was dead. How- 
ever, the birds told him they had come to cure not to devour him. 
Many carnivorous birds and many wolves were there. The turtle 
also came because he was the owner of some medicines. 

Then the animals who had gathered on the hill began to doctor 
him. The raven began first. He ejaculated e-he-a! e-he-a! gave him 
some medicine and began to exert his powers until he felt better. 
Then the wolf began. He walked around ejaculating certain sounds 
and spitting medicine on him. The man became much better. 
He was almost completely restored to health. Then the turtle began 
to exert his powers, ejaculating at the same time ahi! ahi! alii! ahi! 
and walking around the man and giving him some boiled medicine 
to drink. Now he was almost entirely cured. Finally a black 
hawk began to doctor the man. He put some medicine on the place 
where the man's pains seemed to be situated and he was immediately 
cured. Then all those who had cured him said, ''Human! In a 
similar way you shall cure your fellowmen." They then gave him 
as much medicine as he would need. The raven gave him his ' 'medi- 
cine chest," consisting of a flute and a gourd. With these things 
he blessed him. He also gave him a song which he was to sing. 
Then the wolf gave him his medicine chest, consisting of a gourd 
and a flute, and told him that he would not fail to cure any sick 
person he treated and that if the sick people offered the proper 
amount of tobacco, red eagle feathers, and food, no matter how 
serious their disease was he would be able to cure it. Then he, told 
the man that Earthmaker had placed him in charge of these things 
and that he in turn wxmld bless him with them for all eternity. As 
long as any of his posterity was left they would enjoy the benefit of 
these blessings. 

And this is true, for even to the present day his descendants use 
this medicine. 

Then Black Hawk said, "I, also, bless you. Earthmaker placed me 
in charge of some medicines and with these I bless you. If you are 
careful in offering tobacco and food to these medicines they will 
always help you to the utmost of their power. Whatever you ask 
they will accomplish for you. They will be able to understand you. 
So, if anyone is sick, you will be able to help him. In this way I 
bless you. If you are ever in any difficulty, think of me and I will 
help you." (What he meant is that if he ever was in any difficulty, 
he should think of the medicines with which Black Hawk had blessed 
him, and that that would be the same as if he thought of him.) 

Then the Buffalo said, "My grandson, Earthmaker placed me in 
charge of certain medicines. Why should you then wish to die? 
Your condition is 'pitiable,' and therefore I want to bless you. 

badin] SHAMANISTTC AND MEDICINAL PRACTICES 261 

All those spirits whom Earthmaker made with his own hands were 
placed in charge of certain things. All these spirits have had com- 
passion upon you. All those whom Earthmaker created as holy 
have blessed you. Earthmaker has placed me in charge of certain 
medicines and I am so completely in control of these that I can do 
what I please with them. There exist no beings either on the earth 
or under the earth whom I can not cure. With all these do I bless you. 
All your previous blessings were from spirits who live either on 
earth or in the heavens. The medicinal plants I bless you with are 
called Buffalo medicines. The other medicines are called 'stench- 
earth medicines.' As long as you and your descendants live these 
medicines will be efficacious. The owners of the stench-earth medi- 
cines they will be called. In this manner I bless you." 

Then the hitcara said, "I bless you with those things that Earth- 
maker placed me in charge of. I was created by Earthmaker. 
Medicines, grass, trees, and bushes (for use in the making of medi- 
cines), with these I bless you. I bless you with my utterance. With 
my mouth, I bless you. If a human is suffering and places tobacco in 
your hands, then you may mention my name and pour a pipeful of 
tobacco into the fire. I will grant whatever you request. All the 
medicinal plants with which I bless you shall belong to you and your 
descendants as long as the earth endures. Your children can use 
them, and they will protect them. If any part of their body is weak 
from disease they can heal themselves with them. Many things will 
you gain through these medicines. You may also eat them. 
Human! you have dreamed, not only for yourself but for all your 
descendants. As long as this earth endures, so long will your 
descendants use these medicines with which I have blessed you. In 
this way I bless you." 

Then the wildcat said, "Grandson, Earthmaker placed me in con- 
trol of medicines also. I bless you. The other spirits have blessed 
you with certain medicines, and to these I now add my own. I can 
not teU you anything about the heavenly blessings. The spirits 
above have already bestowed these upon you. I will, however, 
tell you this: There is nothing either upon this earth or under it that 
I can not accomplish. I bless you with the power to do the same. 
With the blessings I give you, you will be able to accomplish anything 
you wish whenever you put these medicines to use. If a person were 
dying, and his relatives offered tobacco and food to you, you would be 
able to cure him. When you use my name, concentrate your mind 
upon me, and offer me tobacco. If I smoke the tobacco you will then 
know that your request has been granted. All the medical plants that 
I am giving to you, all the herbs that I am blessing you with, to all 
these, make an offering of tobacco. Whatever you ask they will 
grant you. All the animals that tread upon the air, all those 

262 THE WINXEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ann. 37 

on the earth, have medicines that you are to use on earth. 
Whatever you say on earth it will be so. You have been blessed with 
all the things that are on and under the earth." 

All the fowls and insects of the air, all the beings that have wings, 
blessed him and gave him medicines, which he was to mix with other 
medicines. He was told to make use of all the insects of the earth 
and air, some of which we never see. All those who live on earth, all 
the fishes in the water, and all the different kinds of water-spirits 
blessed him with medicines. He was blessed with, and told to use 
as medicines, all those plants that live in the water. He was blessed 
with the leech, one of the animals that lives in the water, and he 
was to use it in medicine mixing. They say that it is good to mix the 
leech with other medicines to relieve pain. He was blessed with all 
the trees, that we see to-day, which he was to use as medicines. 
Their bark, leaves, and roots are considered very good for such pur- 
poses. He was blessed also with all the small undergrowth, whose 
leaves, bark, inner bark, blossoms, and roots he was to use for 
medicine. He was blessed with all the weeds, and he was to use 
their heads and leaves for medicine, but their roots were to be used 
for other purposes. 

Thus all the different kinds of plants that grow on this earth 
blessed him. The earth also blessed him and said to him, 
"Grandson, as the other spirits are blessing you, I, also, will bless 
you. Earthmaker has placed me here, and I therefore bless you 
with all plants that grow upon me, and all the trees and weeds and 
animals that exist on this earth, and lastly, with life and myself 
(i. e., earth). You may use me, and especially the blue clay that you 
derive from me, for medicines. Should you use as medicine all these 
things with which I have blessed you, especially if you use me, as 
medicine, you will be able to accomplish all that you attempt. 

"If a person who is sick offers you tobacco (i. e., asks you to cure 
him), remember that I also would like to smoke and that it is for 
that reason that I have blessed you." 2 

Birds, especially eagles, are used hi the making of medicines. 
The entire body of a raven, including the heart and brains, are used, 
and also the following snakes: The gray snake, the black snake, the 
blue snake, the yellow snake, the bull snake, and the snake that 
breaks itself in two. The rattlesnake is used in a mixture given to 
women when hi labor. If a woman hurts herself during pregnancy 
and kills the child within her womb, she can be made to deliver the 
embryo if she uses the medicine mentioned above. 

2 According to general belief the spirits rre supposed to have entered into a sort of "bargain" with the 
human beings by which they were to bestow their blessings upon them in exchange for tobacco, buck- 
skin, and feathers. Of course, it must be understood that individuals must have the necessary require- 
ments, such as a certain attitu le of mind, fasting, etc., before their offering of tobacco has any meaning 
to the spirits. 

eadin] SHAMANISTIC AND MEDICINAL PRACTICES 263 

Toads are used, but only for poison medicines. The quail's heart 
is used for the same purpose. If a person is killed outright, his heart 
is used as a medicine, as the human heart is regarded as having great 
efficacy in such medicines. It is used in war, for compelling people 
to give you presents, and for courting women. The bear likewise is 
used for a variety of purposes. Its liver is especially powerful. It 
is rubbed over the body whenever in pain. It is often used by 
women who have injured themselves in childbirth, or in the form of 
tonics, poultices, and emetic ; or for toothaches, bathing sore eyes, ear- 
aches, headaches; as snuff, as a physic, for burns, strictures, boils, hemor- 
rhages, injections in the rectum, consumption, measles, dysentery, 
chills, nosebleed, pains in the stomach, and headaches caused by 
poisoning. 

Sometimes a woman would take a hair of her husband and stick 
it into some bad medicine. In such a case he would never leave her 
for he would become very much enamored of her. If ever she went 
away, he would miss her very much. However, he always had a 
headache. Finally he would get sick and lose his appetite and then 
his eyesight. That is why it is forbidden to use this medicine, 
although some, still do it. 

Many Winnebago are blind, because there is a medicine that 
causes blindness. If one person offends another who possesses such 
a medicine, the latter would cause the offender to become blind. 

The Winnebago have medicines for every purpose; for -courting, 
for becoming rich, for obtaining good looks, etc. Even if a person 
is very holy, these poisoners can poison him. If a man was a good 
hunter or if he was wise and good, these bad shamans would poison 
him. If an individual was a great medicine man and these bad 
shamans got jealous, they would poison him. Indeed, only if a person 
was poor and lowly would they like him. Such a man they would 
never poison for they had no reason for being jealous of him. A 
bad shaman is always treated with the greatest respect and honor, 
because he kills many people. 

A warrior is also greatly respected and flattered. It is the Indian's 
greatest- desire to become a warrior. All desire that, and they also 
wish to become great medicine men and bad shamans. 

This is the way they prepare and use their courtbig medicines. 
The courting medicine known to me is a plant of apparently two 
varieties, one of which has a blue blossom and the other no blossom at 
all. Otherwise they are alike. The one with the blue blossom is the 
male and the one without the blossom is the female. When I go out 
to dig this plant, I do not dig for these two specimens unless I can 
find them growing together closely. Even then I do not dig any two 
specimens unless the male is found growing on the east side. For 
that reason it is very hard to find them. As soon as I find two that 

264 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ann. 37 

fulfill all the conditions I dig them out and mix them together with 
their own roots. Then I take the blossom of the male and mix it 
together with the center leaf of the female flower. After that both 
are ground together thoroughly. Then I go to the woman I wish to 
court and, at night, when she is asleep, I touch first any part of her 
body, then a place not far from her heart, and finally the top of her 
head with this mixture. Finally I make her smell it. I then wake her 
up and go home. The girl will wonder who had touched her and she 
will think a good deal about the incident and never forget it. The 
next time I see her she will like me and she will do whatever I ask 
of her. The medicine would be working. If I did not see her for a 
long time, she would get lonesome, and the only thing that would 
cure her would be to marry me. 

There is another medicine which I am now going to describe. 
When it first sprouts, which is in the spring, it is quite white. This 
must bo taken and dried. Then one must chew it and go near the 
woman with whom one desires to talk. Approach her on the side 
from which the wind is blowing so that she can smell the medicine. 
As soon as she smells it, even although the man chewing it is one 
whom she has hitherto disliked, she will get to like him. This is the 
way in which the medicine works. 

A man who was blessed was told of all these things. He cured all 
diseases. If a person had been shot and one blessed with the stench- 
earth medicine was called, he could be cured. In the same manner, 
if one is stabbed in what would generally be considered a fatal way 
and if a man blessed with stench-earth was called in time he would 
save him. The same cure is effected in cases of broken arms and of 
patients who are on the point of death. It is for this reason that 
those blessed with the stench-earth medicines are always praised, 
and that the people say "They surely are hi charge of life; for their 
blessings really come from the spirits, just as they claim." 3 

[The "stench-earth" medicine men could undoubtedly cure the 
sick, but they also used it to poison people. The courting medicine 
was a poison medicine, and therefore it was not good. These people 
cured the body, but they killed the soul. It would have been much 
better had they saved their souls. They were really working for 
the devil. It is from him that they got all the bad medicines. When- 
ever they were offended, they would go and get poisons to kill the 
offender. Thus the devil 4 was really causing them to kill their own 
souls and the souls of those they poisoned. It is the same with all 

8 The following portion in brackets is the comment of our informant, who is a member of the Peyote 
sect. 

* Although he really means the Christian devil many of the traits of the old Winnebago deity Herec- 
gu'nina, the chief of the bad spirits, are clearly discernible. 

badin] SHAMANISTIC AND MEDICINAL PRACTICES 265 

the other medicines, like the courting medicine, etc. The Indians 
were destroying their own souls. So Earthmaker decided to give 
them a new medicine. We have now all broken away from the old 
things. We have broken away from the devil and are earning our 
salvation through Earthmaker. For "this reason I am thankful 
both for my sake aud that of my people.] 

This is a medicine that is good for consumption, for stomach 
trouble, for a cold, for a sore throat, and for general illnesses. It 
consists of the following ingredients: 

1. Waraxa'dax koske'rera, English unknown. 

2. Waraxa'dax mannap'a'rara, English unknown. 

3. Enai'ntcox mank'a'nna, English unknown. 

4. Nicu'tcera, red water. 

5. Mank'a'nskaka, white medicine. 

6. Mank'a'" niyetco'tcera, medicine of the water. 

7. Gi'xuk'unina, English unknown. 

8. Mank'anne,xeda, English unknown. 

If a woman has any trouble with her womb this medicine will cure 
her immediately. She must not, however, drink it, but inject it. 
It makes no difference how severe her illness is, this medicine will 
always effect a cure. This man was blessed with the knowledge of 
its efficacy. 

This is another medicine: 

1. Marjk'a'n manup'ara'ra, medicine that spreads over the 

ground. 

2. Xanwiwingi'ckera, medicine to tie with. 

3. Mank'a'" p'orop'orora, round medicine. 

4. Hap'o'skra, English unknown. 

5. Mank'a'n kerebcera, sweet flag. 

6. Nanp'aca'k'onank' hura, English unknown. 

7. Huntc p'istara, bear liver. 

This is all ground together and mixed with wTater. When thor- 
oughly mixed it is put into a bladder and injected by means of a 
wing bone. 

This is a medicine for diarrhea: 

1. K'etcti'nk'sire tco'ra, English unknown. 

2. Aseni ho-ap hodo'p'iricera, curled sumac leaves. 

3. Mank'a'ni tetco'tcera, medicine of the water. 

4. Waraxadax skaka', English unknown. 

5. Nane1a'nicura, maple sugar. 

These are all ground together into a fine powder and sweetened 
with maple sugar. Otherwise no one would take it, for it does not 
taste good. It is called kasawah'kemank'. 
186823°— 22 IS 

266 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [bih.-ahs.3T 

This is medicine used by women when their menstrual flow is not 
very good: 

1 . Tcemanank'e, English unknown. 

2. Wazi p'ara'ske abera, pine with flat leaves ( ?). 

3. Wacutci abera, red'cedar leaves. 

4. Mank'a p'orop'oro abera, round medicine leaves. 

All four of these ingredients are ground, mixed together, and then 
mixed with water. They are then drunk by any woman having 
trouble with her menstrual flow. After she has taken it she makes 
knots in the belt and ties it around her waist. As many knots as she 
makes that many days wTill it take her to get well. She also smokes 
herself with cedar leaves. 

The next medicine that I wish to speak of is compounded as follows: 

1. K'ewaxgu'£unsera, scent of a toad. 

2. Wanirjkcu'tc na'ntckera, heart of a red bird. 

3. Hactce'kera, strawberries. 

4. Wankcik na'ntckera, human heart. 

5. XawiDjan, a plant. 

If this medicine were mixed with whisky and given to any person, 
the latter would surely die within a year. The frog that is used in 
this medicine becomes alive in the stomach of the person who drinks 
it and kills him. If he took the same medicine and mixed it with 
paint and then rubbed it over his face, all who looked at him would 
take a liking to him and give him presents, and the women would fall 
in love with him and want to marry him. The reason that the women 
become smitten is because they can not resist the sight of a ripe 
strawberry. The human heart in the mixture is the object that 
makes the medicine so powerful, and the red bird heart strengthens it. 
Whenever these two, the human heart and the heart of the red bird, 
are used in medicines, the medicine is always remarkably efficacious. 

If a woman makes fun of you and you feel hurt about it and want 
to revenge yourself, get one of her hairs and dip the root into this 
medicine and then tie it up. Hang the medicine bag in the woods 
and whenever the wind blows the woman wdl get lonesome for you 
and her head will ache. Finally she will get crazy. She will never 
cease talking about you. This is one of the medicines this man was 
blessed with. Some of them die from the effects of it. It is not a 
good thing, but the Winnebago thought that it was a very great 
thing. (Now that they know the Creator, they know that it is bad.) 

Here is another medicine that we have, and it is prepared in the 
following way: Four trees of a certain species are peeled near the 
roots lying on the east side. Then the second bark is also peeled. 
Then these are taken and boiled together with a square-stemmed 
weed. The whole mixture is used to induce vomiting. This vomit- 
ing would rid a person of a spell cast upon him which was preventing 

RADin] SHAMANISTIC AND MEDICINAL PKACTICES 267 

him from killing game. In the particular case mentioned above the 
spell was the following: A man killed a deer, and a pregnant woman 
ate a piece of the intestine. From that time on the man was unable 
to kill any more deer. 

The above medicine is used to break the spell of Ul luck in hunting 
caused by the following actions: If a man cohabits with a widow, or 
if one who is a widower eats together with another person, or if he 
smokes out of the same pipe as another person. Not only would the 
medicine free him from his ill luck in hunting, but it woidd give him 
good luck in cards and speed in running. 

Here is an astringent medicine. It is compounded of a mixture of 
the "clear" medicine and the "plant that spreads itself on the 
ground." It is used for the following purposes: As an application 
for swellings, for illness after childbirth, and for general sores and 
eruptions of the skin. In case of illness after childbirth it is injected. 
For sores, etc., it is taken internally. 

Here is another medicine, called bladder medicine. It is made of 
the roots of a certain weed. These roots are boiled and then drunk. 
If one is troubled with stricture, the drinking of this medicine will 
enable him to pass water immediately. The same medicine is used 
to alleviate a toothache and to stop too profuse a menstrual flow. 

Now this is another medicine. It is made of the leaves of a certain 
plant. These leaves are rolled up and then drunk down with water. 
The medicine is used for all stomach complaints. 

Here is another medicine used for diarrhea and dysentery. It is 
made from the roots of a plant that has many thorns and beautiful 
white blossoms. The roots are scraped and the scrapings boiled 
and gulped down. At least a pint of this concoction must be taken. 
It can also be used as a mouth wash for those troubled with sore 
mouths. 

We have another medicine used to rid a person of superfluous bile. 
This acts as a strong physic and not only cures a person of his indis- 
position but also gives him a great appetite. 

Here is another medicine. It is called the medicine for burns. It 
consists of the leaves of a certain weed that is dried. If anyone has 
a burn, he chews some of this dried weed and then applies it to the 
burn. 

Here is also a medicine for private diseases, compounded of the 
following : 

1. Doxicu'tckera hara, red willow bark. 

2. Mansixu'tckeda hara, English unknown. 

3. Nap'a'hira hara, sharp tree. 

These barks are pulverized and mixed together with skunk oil. 
The next medicine I am going to describe is used in poisoning. It 
is called small-part-of-a-black-root-tree. It is used for many pur- 

268 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ann. 37 

poses. If, for instance, I wish a person to become blind or if I dis- 
like him or were jealous of him because he was better off than myself, 
I would do the following: I would get a small part of a black root 
and pulverize it. Then I would mix it with ghost snuff and put it 
into my medicine bag. When I am ready to shoot the person I 
shake my bag and make the medicine fly out, and it would enter his 
eyes and make them sore. Soon he would become blind. I also 
use this medicine when I go on the warpath. I wrap it in a piece 
of buckskin and wear it around my neck. As long as I wear it in 
this manner I will never be shot. 

This medicine is also used as a poultice. If a man has a pain 
anywhere, he makes four incisions in his body at that place, with the 
point of a knife, and appUes the medicine. 

Here is another medicine. It is kept in a large bundle. It is 
used in the following way: At a medicine dance a person may put 
an eagle feather on the nose of an otter-skin bag and then open the 
bundle containing his medicine and bring the medicine in contact 
with the nose of the otter-skin bag. The individual then enters the 
medicine-dance lodge. He makes note of the place where the person 
whom he dislikes is sitting. After a while he gets up and makes a 
circuit of the lodge four times and shoots at this person. He sees to 
it that one of the feathers attached to the otter-skin bag lodges just 
where he wishes it. Either he wishes to kill the man outright or to 
make him suffer for a long time. Should the victim die, the man 
who does the shooting must be very careful for he might easily 
injure himself. He must know, for instance, exactly when his 
victim is going to die and then as soon as he is dead he must open 
his medicine bundle and let the feather return, which it does as soon 
as the person at whom it was shot is dead. A black hawk is then 
heard in the distance. As soon as it approaches the man utters 
curious sounds and the feather alights right in the medicine bundle. 
When the feather returns, however, it is always black, though when 
it started it was red. One might imagine that there had been two 
distinct feathers. 

If the man who shot the feather does not know when his victim 
dies and consequently does not make the necessary preparations for 
opening his medicine bundle, such as imitating the cry of a black 
hawk, or if, worse still, he is asleep, the feather will land upon him 
and he would likewise die. 

This same medicine is also used for the following purpose: If a 
person offends you and you wish to take revenge by killing him, 
take your medicine bundle and whenever you come across the foot- 
prints of your prospective victim then open your medicine bundle 
and take out a striped feather from it and sing a song. When you 
are finished, make certain sounds and stab the footprints. You can 

badin] SHAMANISTIC AND MEDICINAL PRACTICES 269 

arrange to have your victim die immediately, or, if you wish, to 
have him suffer for a long time, by becoming paralyzed. 

This same medicine is used in a similar way in times of scarcity of 
food. The people offer a shaman tobacco and he would do the fol- 
lowing: He would take his medicine bundle and walk till he came 
to the footprints of a bear. Then he would follow the tracks of the 
bear till he came to his lair. Here he would open his medicine bag, 
dip the striped feather in the medicine, and sing for some time. 
When he has finished he makes certain sounds and stabs the bear's 
footprints. Wherever the bear happened to be at that time, he 
would not be able to walk, and the people would soon overtake him. 
For that reason this medicine is valued very highly. 

This medicine is also used when one desires something belonging 
to another. All that is necessary to do in such a case is to use the 
songs accompanying the medicine. Then all the things one has 
coveted would immediately be brought. For this reason they thought 
a good deal of this medicine. 

If ever anyone uses it in gambling, he will win. 

If again he casts his thoughts upon women, then the power of this 
medicine would go in their direction, and he will lose while gambling. 
All the women will, however, like him. He can marry whomsoever 
he wishes. The same thing will occur when a woman uses this 
medicine. If she casts her thoughts upon men, she will become 
foolishly enamored of them. For that reason the old people used to 
forbid women to use it. 

This medicine bundle is also used on the warpath. If a man uses 
it upon himself and rushes upon the enemy, all those who are in 
front of him will suddenly find themselves unable to move. A 
person who goes on a warpath, after he has carefully applied the 
medicine to himself, is invulnerable. It is impossible to kill him, for 
no bullets can penetrate his body. 

This medicine was likewise used in hunting for bear, and deer 
could easily be killed with it. Even those who are not accustomed 
to hunting could kill game easily if they used it. 

Many of the medicines mentioned above were obtained from the 
man who was blessed with the stench-earth medicine. Everyone 
believed that the cures effected by him with this medicine were real. 
They believed that this medicine could cure them, and, indeed, it 
did cure them. It was this man, too, who originated the stench- 
earth medicine feast. It is a very sacred feast, considered more 
sacred than any other feast among the Winnebago. When the 
feast is given, an entire deer is boiled and cut into pieces much 
larger than any one person could eat. Nevertheless the host orders 
those whom he has invited to leave nothing upon the plate. Should 
any guest leave anything upon his plate, the host would give him a 

270 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. an*. 37 

small piece of a root and tell him to chew and eat it. This the guest 
would have to do, and from that time on he would never know when 
he had had enough to eat. He would never get satiated. Whenever 
the man who had been blessed gave the feast personally, no one was 
ever known to leave anything upon his plate. While eating the 
guests kept time. They never shook their plates, for if anyone did 
so the others would immediately give him whatever remained on 
their plates. They would assume that anyone who shook his plate 
was the possessor of the stench-earth himself and that he intended 
to eat up these extra portions with the aid of this medicine. If, 
however, the shaking was done unintentionally and he faded to eat 
up the extra portions placed on his plate, then he would make a 
noise like a raven, and those who wished to help him consume this 
food would also cry like the raven, approach him, and flap their 
arms as the birds do their wings. Then all would eat. 

When the man who obtained these blessings died, he left all these 
medicines that he had been the first one to use to another person. 
With the medicines he of course left all the songs. All that he used 
to do when he doctored a sick person he bequeathed to his successor. 
The last man who had these medicines was not a holy man but he 
knew all their uses and for that reason he was considered a powerful 
and holy man. To-day only the poison medicines are remembered; 
the good medicines are all gone. 

This is the end. 

How ax Indian Shaman Cukes His Patients5 

"I came from above and I am holy. This is my second life on 
earth. Many years before my present existence, I lived on this 
earth. At that time everyone seemed to be on the warpath. I 
also was a warrior, a brave man. Once when I was on the warpath 
I was killed. It seemed to me, however, as if I had merely stumbled. 
I rose and went right ahead until I reached my home. At home I 
found my wife and children, but they would not look at me. Then 
I spoke to my wife but she seemed to be quite unaware of my pres- 
ence. 'What can be the matter,' I thought to myself, 'that they 
pay no attention to me and that they do not even answer when I 
speak to them.' All at once it occurred to me that I might, in 
reality, be dead. So I immediately started out for the place where 
I had presumably been killed and surely enough, there I saw my 
body. Then I knew positively that I had been killed. I tried to 
return to the place where I had lived as a human being but for four 
years I was unsuccessful. 

"At one time I became transformed into a fish. However, the 
life of the fish is much worse than ours. They are very frequently 

» The shaman is represented as in the lodge of the patient and as speaking to him and his relatives 

eadin] SHAMANISTIC AND MEDICINAL PRACTICES 271 

in lack of food. They are nevertheless very happy beings and have 
many dances." 

"At another time I became transformed into a little bird. When 
the weather is good the life of the birds is very pleasant. But when 
it is cold they are compelled to undergo many hardships on account 
of the weather as well as on account of lack of food. When it was 
very cold I used to go to the camp of some people who were living 
in the neighborhood and try to steal some meat from their racks. 
A little boy used to stand near these racks and we were very much 
afraid of him because he carried something in his hands with which 
he shot and which made a dreadful noise. Whenever he shot it we 
would all fly away. What the boy was using was a bow and arrow. 
At night we slept in a hollow tree. If I entered the tree first and 
the others came in behind me I would be almost squeezed to death. 
If, on the other hand, I waited until the last I would sometimes have 
to stay outside and when the weather was cold I might have frozen 
to death. 

"At another time I became a buffalo. The cold weather and the 
food did not worry me much then, but as buffaloes, we would always 
have to be on the alert for hunters. 

"From my buffalo existence I was permitted to go to my higher 
spirit-home, from which I originally came. The one in charge of 
that spirit-home is my grandfather. I asked him for permission to 
return to this earth again. At first he refused, but then after I had 
asked him for the fourth time, he consented. He said to me, 'Grand- 
son, you had better fast before you go and if any of the spirits take 
pity upon you (i. e., bless you), you may go and live in peace upon 
earth.' So I fasted for four years and all the spirits above, even to 
the fourth heaven,7 approved of my coming. They blessed me. 
Then I fasted 10 days more and then 20 and then 30. Finally all 
the spirits blessed me, even those under the earth. When I was 
ready to come to this earth, the spirits gathered together in a council- 
lodge and 'counciled' about me. All the spirits were present. 
They told me that I would never fail in anything that I wished to 
do. Then they decided to make a trial of my powers. They placed 
an invulnerable spirit-grizzly bear at one end of the lodge and sang 
the songs that I was to use when I returned to earth. Then I walked 
around the lodge holding a live coal in the palm of my hand and 
danced around the fireplace saying wahi-! and striking the hand 
containing the coal with my other hand. The invulnerable bear 
fell forward prone upon the ground and a black substance flowed 

6 This is commonly postulated of both the life of the fishes and that of the snakes. 

7 He is probably referring to the four earths, although it is, of course, possible that there were four heavens. 
However, I never obtained the slightest indication of such a belief. 

272 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ann. 37 

from his mouth. Then they said to me, 'You have killed him. 
Even so great a spirit as this you have been able to kill. Indeed, 
nothing will ever be able to cross your path.' Then they took the 
'bear' I had killed and cut him into small pieces with a knife, 
piled these in the center of the lodge, and covered them with some 
dark material. 'Now,' they said, 'you must again try your powers.' 
I asked them for the articles that I would have to use and they gave 
me a flute and a gourd. Then I made myself holy. All those who 
had blessed me were present. I walked around the object that lay 
piled up in the center of the lodge and breathed upon it. This I 
did for the second time and all those within the lodge breathed 
together with me. Four times I did this and then the spirit-grizzly 
bear got up and walked away in the shape of a human being. 'It 
is good,' they said. 'He has restored him to life again. Surely he 
is holy.' After a while they said to me again, 'Just as you have 
done here, will you always do below. Whenever you wish to, you 
will be able to kill a person or restore him to life. Most assuredly 
you have been blessed.' 

"Then they placed a black stone in the shamans' lodge that stood 
above. There again they made a trial of my powers. There I blew 
four times on the stone and I blew a hole through it. For that 
reason, if any person has a pain and he lets me blow upon it, I can 
blow it away. It makes no difference what kind of a pain it is. My 
breath was made holy by the spirits. 

"The spirits on the earth and those under the earth also gave me 
a trial of my powers. They placed an old rotten log before me. I 
breathed upon it four times, and spat water upon it and it got up 
in the shape of a human being and walked away. 

"My ability to spit water upon the people whom I am treating I 
received from an eel, from the chief among the eels, one who lives 
in the center and in the deepest part of the ocean. He is absolutely 
white and he is the one who blessed me. Whenever I spit water it 
is inexhaustible, because it comes from him, the eel. 

"Then I came to this earth again. They, the spirits, all gave me 
advice before I left them. When I came upon this earth I entered 
a lodge and there I was born again. As I said,' I thought that I was 
entering a lodge, but in reality I was entering my mother's womb. 
Even in my prenatal existence, I never lost consciousness. Then I 
grew up and fasted again and again, and all those spirits who had 
blessed me before sent me their blessings again. I can dictate to all 
the spirits that exist. Whatever I say will come to pass. The 
tobacco you (the patients) offer me is not to be used by myself. It 
is really intended for the spirits. 

"Spirits, a person is sick and he offers me tobacco. I am on earth 
to accept it and to try to cure him. 

eadin] SHAMAXISTIC AND MEDICINAL PRACTICES 273 

"' You will live (this is addressed to the patient), so help yourself 
as much as you can and try to make yourself strong. Now as I 
offer this tobacco to the spirits you must listen and if you know 
that I am telling the truth, you will be strengthened by it.'" 

(What follows is the shaman's offering of tobacco to the spirits.) 

" Han ho! Here is the tobacco, Fire. You promised me that if I 
offered you tobacco you would grant me whatever request I made. 
Now I am placing tobacco on your head as you told me to, when I 
fasted for four days and you blessed me. I am sending you the plea 
of a human being who is ill. He wishes to live. This tobacco is 
for you and I pray that the one who is ill be restored to health within 
four days. 

"To you too, Buffalo, I offer tobacco. A person who is ill is offer- 
ing tobacco to you and asking you to restore him to health. So add 
that power which I obtained from you at the time I fasted for six 
days and you sent your spirits after me who took me to your lodge 
which lies in the center of this earth and which is absolutely white. 
There you blessed me, you Buffaloes, of four different colors. Those 
blessings that you bestowed upon me then, I ask of you now. The 
power of breathing with which you blessed me, I am in need of now. 
Add your power to mine, as you promised. The people have given 
me plenty of tobacco for you. 

"To you, Grizzly-bear, I also offered tobacco. At a place called 
Pointed Hill lives a spirit who is in charge of a ceremonial lodge and 
to this all the other grizzly-bears belong. You all blessed me and 
you said that I would be able to kill whomsoever I wished, and that 
at the same time I would be able to restore any person to life. Now, 
I have a chance to enable a person to live and I wish to aid him. So 
here is some tobacco for you. You took my spirit to your home after 
I had fasted for ten days and you blessed me there. The powers 
with which you blessed me there I ask of you now. Here is some 
tobacco, grandfathers, that the people are offering to you. 

"To you, the Chief of the Eels, you who live in the center of the 
ocean, I offer tobacco. You blessed me after I had fasted for eight 
days. With your power of breathing and with your inexhaustible 
supply of water, you blessed me. You told me that I could use my 
blessing whenever I tried to cure a patient. You told me that I could 
use all the water hi the ocean, and you blessed me with all the things 
that are in the water. A person has come to me and asked me for 
life; and as I wish him to live, I am addressing you. When I spit 
upon the patient may the power of my saliva be the same as yours. 
Therefore I offer you tobacco; here it is. 

"To you, the Turtle, you who are in charge of a shaman lodge, 
you who blessed me after I had fasted seven days and carried my 
spirit to your home, where I found many birds of prey (literally, birds 

274 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ann. 37 

with sharp claws). There you blessed me and you told me that 
should, at any time, any human being have a pain I would be able 
to drive it out of him. For that reason you called me One-who- 
drives-out-pains. Now before me is a person with a bad pain and I 
wish to take it out of him. That is what the spirits told me when 
they blessed me, before I came down to earth. Therefore I am 
going to heal him. Here is the tobacco. 

"To you, who are in charge of the snake lodge, you who are per- 
fectly white, Rattlesnake, I pray. You blessed me with your rattles 
to wrap around my gourd and you told me after I had fasted for 
four days that you could help me. You said that I would never fail 
in anything that I attempted. So now, when I offer you tobacco 
and shake my gourd, may my patient live and may life (an additional 
number of years) be opened to him. That is what you promised me, 
grandfather. 

"I greet you, too, Night Spirits. You blessed me after I had fasted 
for nine days, and you took my spirit to your village which lies in the 
east, where you gave me your flutes which you told me were holy. 
You made my flute holy likewise. For these I ask you now, for 
you know that I am speaking the truth. A sick person has come to 
me and has asked me to cure him; and because I want him to live 
I am speaking to you. You promised to accept my tobacco at all 
times; here it is. 

"To you, Disease-giver, I offer tobacco. After I had fasted two 
days you let me know that you were the one who gives diseases and 
that if I desired to heal anyone it would be easy for me to do so were 
I blessed by you. So, Disease-giver, I am offering you tobacco, and 
I ask that this sick person who has come to me be restored to health 
again as you promised when you bestowed your blessing upon me. 

"To you, Thunderbirds, I offer tobacco too. When you blessed 
me you said that you would help me whenever I needed you. A 
person has come to me and asked me to cure him, and as I want him 
to live, I wish to remind you of your promise. Grandfathers, here 
is some tobacco. 

"To you, the Sun, I offer tobacco too; here it is. You blessed me 
after I had fasted for five days and you told me that you would come 
to my aid whenever I had something difficult to do. Now, someone 
has come to me and pleaded for life, and he has brought good offerings 
of tobacco to me because he knows that you have blessed me. 

"To you, grandmother, the Moon, I also offer tobacco. You 
blessed me and said that whenever I needed your power you would 
aid me. A person has come to me and asked for life, and 1 therefore 
call upon you to help me with your power as you promised. Grand- 
mother, here is some tobacco. 

badin] SHAMAXTSTIC AND MEDICINAL PRACTICES 275 

"To you, grandmother, the Earth, I too offer tobacco. You 
blessed me and promised to help me whenever I needed you. You 
said that I could use all the best herbs that grow upon you, and that 
I would always be able to effect cures with them. Those herbs I ask 
of you now, and I ask you to help me cure this sick person. Make 
my medicine powerful, grandmother. 

"To you, Chief of the Spirits, I offer tobacco. You who blessed 
me and said that you would help me. I offer you tobacco and ask 
you to let this sick person live, and if his spirit is about to depart, I 
ask you to prevent it. 

"I offer tobacco to all of you who have blessed me." 

Then the shaman blew upon his flute, breathed upon the sick man 
and sang four times. Then he walked around the lodge and spat 
water upon the patient. After this he sang four times and stopped. 
The spirits would now let him know whether the patient was to live 
or die. 

In this manner a shaman treats his patients for four days, and after 
that takes his offerings and goes away. If the sick person happens 
to recover, the shaman would tell him that he would never be sick 
again. 

Thundercloud's Fasting Experience 

Then he (Thundercloud) told of his fasting experience. ''At 
the very beginning, those above taught me (the following). A 
doctor's village existed there; and all the various spirits that lived 
up in the clouds came after me, and instructed me in what I was 
to do. In the beginning they taught me, and did the following for 
me. 'Human, let us try it,' they said to me. There, in the middle 
of the lodge, lay a dead, rottening log, almost completely covered 
with weeds. There they tried to make me treat (the sick person). 
Then once he breathed, and all those that were in the lodge also 
breathed; then the second time he breathed, and all breathed with 
him; then for the third time he breathed; and then for the fourth time 
he breathed. , As a young man he, the dead log, arose and walked 
away. After the fourth breathing, he arose and walked away. 
'Human, very holy he is,' they said to me. 

"There, from the middle of the ocean, they (the spirits) came 
after me, for there, in the middle of the ocean, is a shamans ' village. 
There they blessed me — as many (spirits) as there are in the middle 
of the ocean — they all blessed me. There they made me try my 
power. As many waves as there are, all of them as large as the 
ocean, they asked me to blow upon; and as I blew upon them, every- 
thing became (as quiet) as (water) in a small saucer. So it became. 
Then I blew for the third time, and again it was that way. The 
fourth time they made the ocean choppy, and had (the waves) piled 

276 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ann. 37 

one upon the other; and they told me to blow again and show my power. 
And I blew, and the ocean, mighty as it was, became quiet again. 

" 'This, human, is the way you will have to do,' they said to me. 
'Not anything will there be that you can't accomplish. Whatever 
illness all (the people) may have, you will be able to cure it, ' they 
told me. All those who are on earth (the spirits) blessed me. 'If 
any human being who has suffered, pours tobacco for you, then, 
whatever you demand, that we will do for you,' they said to me. 
At Blue-Clay-Bank (St. Paul) there is one who is a dancing grizzly- 
bear (spirit) , and there they came and blessed me. If ever I should 
meet with some great trouble, they would help me, they said. I 
should pour as much tobacco as I think (necessary) for them, and 
they will smoke it, they told me. Songs they gave to me; and the 
power of beholding them, a holy thing, they permitted me, they told 
me; and their claws, which are holy, they gave to me, they told 
me. Then the grizzly-bears danced, performing while they danced. 
Their abdomen they would tear open, and making themselves 
holy, they would then heal themselves. Then they did it again, 
and shot bear-claws at each other, and they were badly choking 
with blood. Then they made themselves holy, and cured themselves. 
Now, again, they did the following: they made a front paw disappear 
in the dirt, and after a while they pulled out a prairie- turnip. Then, 
again, they grabbed a hold of a small plum tree that stood there, 
and breathed upon it, and shook it, and many plums began to fall. 

"Then all sorts of 'shells' they gave. 'All of this, human, we 
bless you with; and if you do (what we desire), you will obtain 
(what you desire),' they said. Then he sang, and breathed (upon 
me), and squirted some water on my chest. 'Very true this is; 
very holy it is, I believe, ' he said. 'You will get well,' he said to 
me." 

CHAPTER XI 

RELIGION 
Introduction 

We know that in all religions there are two factors to be con- 
sidered— a specific feeling and certain beliefs, conceptions, customs, 
and acts associated with that f eeling ; that the belief most inextricably 
connected with that religious feeling is the one in spirits more power- 
ful than man and controlling everything in life which he values. 

The beliefs themselves play an important part with all people, 
but the importance of the specific feeling varies with each indi- 
vidual. A perusal of the fasting experiences (see pp. 293-308) will 
make this quite clear. It is because we do Dot separate the actions 
and testimony of the religious man from that of the intermittently 
religious and the nonreligious man that most presentations of the 
subject are so confused and vague. It is, of course, extremely diffi- 
cult to obtain the real attitude of the intermittently religious and the 
nonreligious man, because it is the religious individual and leader who 
gives form to the expressions which religion assumes in ceremony 
and prayer. Yet we must recognize that there is a difference and that 
it is often this difference that accounts for certain contradictions in 
the information obtained. The one place where it is possible, at 
least among the Winnebago, to obtain some idea of the emotional 
make-up and attitude of the intermittently religious man, is the 
fasting ordeal, and from a comparison of those experiences it is 
quite clear that a sufficiently large number of people were not able 
to obtain that thrill which they had been taught to expect. It is also 
clear that the shamans and religious leaders recognized this fact 
and provided for it by advising such people to buy the requisite 
protection against the trials and misfortunes of life, or as they put 
it, "the crises or narrow places of life." Such a person would 
certainly not be regarded as one of the leaders of the tribe. 

The ideal that the parent held before the eyes of his children is 
quite eloquently put in the system of instructions (see p. 166). 

My son, when you grow up, you should try to be of some benefit to your fellowmen. 
There is only one way in which this can be done, and that is to fast ... If you thirst 
to death, the spirits who are in control of wars will bless you . . . But. my son. if 
you do not fast repeatedly it will be all in vain that you inflict sufferings upon your- 

277 

278 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth.ann.37 

self. Blessings are not obtained except by making the proper offerings to the spirits 
and by putting yourself, time and again, in the proper mental condition ... If you 
do not obtain a spirit to strengthen you, you will amount to nothing in the estimation 
of your fellowmen, and they will show you little respect . . . My son, as you travel 
along life's path, you will find many narrow passages (i. e., crises), and you can never 
tell when you will come to them. Try to anticipate them, so that you will lie en- 
dowed with sufficient strength (by obtaining powers from the spirits') to pass safely 
through these narrow passages. 

Among the Winnebago religion is definitely connected with the 
preservation of life values. It is not a phenomenon distinct from 
mundane life, but one of the most important means of maintaining 
social ideals. What these are can be gleaned from practically every 
prayer; they are success, happiness, and long life. The vast majority 
of investigators are often surprised at the intense religious life which, 
among the North American Indians, exists side by side with an 
intense realism and with a clear understanding and appreciation of 
the materialistic basis of life. The explanation, to judge from the 
Winnebago data, is simple enough. The Indian does not interpret 
life in terms of religion, but religion in terms of life. In other words, 
he exalts the world around him and the multifarious desires and 
necessities of the day, so that they appear to him bathed in a re- 
ligious thrill. At least that is what the devoutly religious man 
does and most of the religious data presented in this volume emanates 
from him. Still we are convinced that for the vast majority of 
Winnebago, in other words, for the intermittently religious, there 
are many moments in hfe and many actions which are seen through 
this pleasurable religious thrill. 

Every Winnebago will admit that to perform the wanantce're cere- 
mony (p. Ill) and, on the following day, to agree to start at a certain 
hour, would not necessarily result in killing a bear. The. bear tracks 
are to be followed and a person is to persevere until the bear is 
captured, in spite of the fact that the wanaHce're ceremony is sup- 
posed to insure the capture of the animal. 

Or again let us take the following example. No man can hope to 
go on a warpath and kill an enemy unless he is authorized to do so 
by a definite blessing received during fasting. If we were to accept 
this statement as such, we might be led to believe that the Winne- 
bago were willing to risk their young men on so dangerous an under- 
taking as a warpath, on the sole strength of a fasting experience. 
It does not stand to reason that they would, and a careful hiquiry 
into the subject has shown that they never did. What actually 
happened was that the prospective war leader translated into re- 
ligious terms the exact conditions and requirements of every par- 
ticular war party. That is why the chief of the tribe and the shamans 
insisted that only such a person who had been blessed with the most 
specific kind of knowledge, such as the number of men he must take 

radin] RELIGION 279 

along, the amount of food required, the number of moccasins neces- 
sary, the number and strength of the enemy, where he was to meet 
them, etc. — that only such a man might start on a warpath. If an 
individual failed to give the proper assurances and guarantees to the 
chief, his expedition was not countenanced. If, nevertheless, he 
went, any mishap was directly chargeable to him. 

In other words, we are dealing here with a more or less fixed way of 
describing the mundane happenings of life. The terminology is 
religious, but does that mean that there is always a religious feeling 
attached to it? That is the crucial question to determine. We 
believe that the religious element in such a happening depends upon 
the religious susceptibility of the individual concerned. It is quite 
possible that a devoutly religious man may think of the religious as- 
pect of a rite or action more than one who is but indifferently religious, 
but he will never for one moment forget that the questions involved 
here are of a purely human nature. The most that can be said of 
the rehgious element of the two particular cases mentioned above 
is that they will spur the person on. Perhaps it is the realization 
that such is the case that often prompts the more matter-of-fact 
individuals to lay such stress on fasting preparatory to starting on 
a warpath. There, indeed, seems to have been a matter-of-fact 
movement in the tribe, for the members of the Warrior clan claimed 
that they could dispense with the fasting, and that mere membership 
in that particular clan gave them the right to go on a warpath when- 
ever they wished to. This we know was vigorously denied by other 
individuals. 

The Winnebago has no disinterested, unselfish love for the spirit 
or deity to whom he prays, except in so far as every man is likely to 
develop such an attitude at some crisis or when his mind is fixed 
intently on the attainment of some personal advantage. Then, 
naturally enough, the spirits who are to bestow these blessings are 
addressed in the most laudatory terms. To show how intimately 
these spirits are bound up with the worldly affairs of man and how 
little they mean to him apart from this we have but to point out 
that, for the vast majority of Winnebago, the spirits' freedom of 
action is conceived of as definitely restricted. There seems to be a 
purely mechanical relation of cause and effect between the offerings 
of men and their acceptance by the spirits. The latter are not free to 
reject them except in theory. Was it not ordained by Earthmaker, 
when the earth was created, that in return for tobacco the spirits were 
to bestow blessings on man? So every Winnebago believes. The 
religious leaders insisted that only when the proper offerings were 
made in the proper way would the spirits bestow their blessings. 
But after all is said and done, the chances that the proper conditions 
would not be fulfilled were negligible And we doubt whether this 

280 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth.ann.37 

rather high conception was shared by all the Winnebago. Our 
impression is that many Winnebago believed the offering would 
be mechanically followed by the blessing. Take, for instance, the 
following example: A middle-aged Winnebago while hunting was 
suddenly surprised by the enemy. He succeeded in making his 
escape into a cave. All hope of final delivery seemed to be gone, for 
the enemy stationed themselves before the entrance. Now this man 
had never been blessed in his youth and knew little about the proper 
procedure to observe when making offerings to the spirits. Tn this 
terrible crisis he turned instinctively to the spirits. He took some 
tobacco and put some in the different nooks of the cave, and said: 
"Spirits, whoever you are, and wherever you are, it is said that you 
love tobacco and that in return for it you bless people. Here is some 
tobacco, and I ask that I may return to my people." There was, as 
far as we know, no promise made that hi return he would make fur- 
ther offerings to them or that he would thereafter love them and 
honor them. He escaped and unquestionably believed that it was 
due to the intervention of the spirits, but the spirits were, quite 
clearly, constrained to act because they had received tobacco. 

There can be little doubt that many Winnebago felt as this man did. 
We find an expression of the same attitude in a myth. The Winne- 
bago are represented as making offerings to the buffalo spirits, and 
the smoke is ascending to the home of these spirits through a hole in 
the sky. The younger buffalos can not resist the temptation of 
approaching the opening to catch a few whiffs of their favorite 
tobacco. They are thereupon warned by the older buffalos not to 
go too close, for the tobacco fumes might tempt them too strongly; 
and should they succumb to the temptation and accept the offer- 
ings, they would then have to appear on earth and be killed by man. 
As might have been expected, there is in the relation of the spirits 
to man something similar to the securing of the food animal by some 
such ceremony as the ivanankere. The spirits are dazzled, hypnotized 
by the offerings, and accept. 

In the second of the examples given above we were dealing with a 
food animal — -the buffalo. If there is any plausibility hi the explana- 
tion we advanced before that the Whmebago interprets religion in 
terms of life, the relation of the spirits to the food supply ought to 
show it. Now, it is characteristic of the Whmebago religion that 
the great generalized spirit deities, like Earthmaker, Sun, Moon, etc., 
have little to do with the securing of specific kinds of food. As a rule, 
some generalized spirit-animal presides over the various species of 
animals, and he gladly permits the animals to appear on earth to be 
killed by man when the proper offerings are made. This seems to 
have been a secondary interpretation, however, developed probably 
under the influence of the shamans as a substitute for the purely 
mechanical attitude mentioned above. To picture the food animals 

Radin] RELIGION 281 

as desirous of being killed and eaten by man is, however, but another 
way of saying that the food animals were killed and eaten, and were 
secondarily and weakly brought into the general religious life, 
because everything was seen through a religious vista. It is by no 
means certain that this was always the case, and there seem to be 
innumerable indications in the myths that there was a time when 
the securing of the food animals was not connected with religion as 
such. 

Just as the securing of food animals is to-day connected with cer- 
tain spirits, so are the various activities of man during his life. But 
characteristically it is not a generalized conception of life, but life 
as consisting of a prescribed number of years, with so many war 
honors, so much wealth, so much food consumed, so many children, 
etc. The spirits are exhorted to give to every man his allotted num- 
ber of years, food, etc. These are apparently his by right, and if he 
dies before his time the ghost of the deceased is asked to beg the 
spirits to distribute among his relatives the "unused" years, food, 
etc. So here, too, we have a clear example of the explanation of 
purely materialistic conception of life in terms of religion. 

It will be best to discuss the main features of Winnebago religion 
under the following heads : 

I. The religious concepts: 

1 . The concept of supernatural power. 

2. The concept and nature of the spirits. 

3. The power and localization of the spirits. 

II : 1 . The twofold interpretation of the rela tion of the spirits to man. 

2. The guardian spirits. 

3. Personal religious experiences. 

III. Methods of bringing the spirits into relation with man: 

1. Fasting. 

2. Mental concentration. 

4. Offerings and sacrifices. 

5. Prayers. 

IV. The folkloristic concepts: 

1 . The concept of evil. 

2. The concept of disease. 

3. The concepts of death, after-life, and reincarnation. 

4. The concept of the soul. 

V. The cosmological ideas. 

The Concept of Supernatural Power ' 

The Winnebago have no such belief in a "magic power" as Mr. 
J. N. B. Hewitt and Mr. W. Jones would have us believe exists among 

1 For a general discussion of this concept in North America cf. my paper on the " Religion of the North 
American Indians," Journal of American Folklore, vol. 27, no. 106, pp. 344-351. 

186823°— 22 19 

282 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [bth. an.n. 37 

the Iroquois and Fox.2 In the article mentioned above we have 
given our reasons for believing that these ethnologists were mistaken 
in their interpretation. 

In the Winnebago language the four words most commonly used 
in speaking of the spirits are wdk'an, waJc'a'ndja, xop, and waxop'i'ni. 
Wak'an seems exactly equivalent to our word "sacred," while 
wal'a'ndja, which is identical with the Omaha word wakonda, 
means thunderbird. In all likelihood it originally meant "he who 
is sacred " or something like that. It has nothing to do with the word 
"thunder," which is lceoire in Winnebago. The word wak'an also 
means snake, for the snake is a holy animal among the Winnebago, 
the messenger of the spirits. The word xop, identical with the 
Omaha xube, is more difficult to define. It means sacred and awe- 
inspiring and seems to be associated, in the eyes of the Winnebago, 
with the intensely emotional aspects of religion, where self is com- 
pletely forgotten. Those ceremonies, in which the performers work 
themselves into a frenzy of excitement and dance naked, are always 
referred to as x( p. The word waxop'i'ni is clearly a noun compounded 
of the indefinite prefix wa- and the suffix -ni, which possibly is an 
old agentive nominalizer, or, more probably, an old stem meaning 
"man." It occurs also in the word manka'ni, medicine-man. In 
other words it means "he who" or "that which is holy." Waxop'i'ni 
is the only Winnebago word for spirit. Both the words wak'andja 
and waxop'i'ni are very definite terms referring to individualized 
spirits. 

As to the use of the adjectives wak'a71 and xop, there seems to be 
little, mystery about them. They are used much as our words 
"holy" and "sacred." Anything in any way connected with the 
spirits is either wak'a?1 or xop. If a Winnebago were to come across 
some unusually shaped object he might offer tobacco to it, and upon 
being questioned he would undoubtedly say that the object is wak'an. 
What is it that he means by wak'a71^. From my experience in the 
field he simply means that it is "sacred," and if pressed for a more 
definite answer he would probably say that it has the power of 

3 According to Mr. Hewitt, nrenda is a "magic power which was assumed ... to be inherent in every 
body . . . and in every personified attribute, property, or activity . . . This hypothetic principle was 
conceived to be immaterial, occult, impersonal, mysterious in mode of action . . . The possession of 
orcntia . . . is the distinctive characteristic of all the gods, and these gods in earlier time were all the bodies 
ami beings of nature in any manner affecting the weal or woe of man." ( Article "Orenda" in the Hand- 
book of American Indians, Bureau of American Ethnology, Bulletin 30, pt. 2.) According to W. Jones, 
the manito "is an unsystematic belief in a cosmic, mysterious property, which is believed to be existing 
everywhere in nature . . . The conception of this something wavers between that of a communicable 
property, that of amobile,invisililesubstance,and that of a latent transferable energy; . . . this substance, 
property, or energy is conceived as being widely diffused amongst natural objects and human beings . . . 
the presence of it is promptly assigned as the explanation of any unusual power or efficacy which any 
object or person is found to possess: ... It is a distinct and rather abstract conception of a diffused, all- 
pervasive, invisible, manipulable, and transferable life-energy, or universal force . . . (Finally) all success, 
strength, or prosperity is conceived to depend upon the possession of (this force)." — "The Algonkin Mani- 
tou" (Journal of American Folklore, vol. 18, no. lxx, pp. 183-190, 1905). 

radin] RELIGION 283 

bestowing blessings upon him — in other words, of acting like a spirit, 
a waxop'i'ni. That is why he offers tobacco to it. We would be 
inclined to say that the individual finding such an object has created 
a new spirit. Such a new spirit may be forever confined to the par- 
ticular family to which the individual belongs. It might die with 
him, or, on the other hand, it might acquire great importance and 
popularity and become a tribal spirit. What seems to have happened, 
in the vast majority of cases, however, among the Winnebago, is 
that owing to the marked development of the spirit-deities and cos- 
mogonic myths, such "sacred" objects were interpreted as being 
either some manifestation of a spirit, some transformation which he 
had assumed, or as inhabited by a spirit. 

The reason why, in our opinion, so many ethnologists have ap- 
parently misinterpreted the nature of wal~'an is due to the fact that 
when something that, from the European viewpoint, is immaterial 
and inanimate, like vapor, light, movement, etc., is called v:ak'an, 
then it seems difficult for them to imagine that it can be so except 
by virtue of some intimate connection with a definite spirit, and if 
that can not be demonstrated, then the only solution left is to fall 
back upon the "magic power" idea. By doing this they clearly show 
that for them the test of individualization is corporeality of a fairly 
definite kind, dependent mainly upon visual sensations. This 
brings us to a fundamental problem, not only for Winnebago re- 
ligion, but for North American religion in general. 

The Concept and Nature of the Spirits 

Those Indians who have never spent any time thinking upon the 
nature of spirits can not truly be said to have any concept of their 
nature, whether vague or definite. They simply repeat what they 
have heard from the more religiously inclined. An answer prompted 
by a moment's consideration, as is often the case when an ethnologist 
interrogates them, does not necessarily reflect the current view of 
the subject, nor, for that matter, even the same Indian's belief 
after he has given the matter some thought. Many Winnebago, 
with whom the author was fairly well acquainted, refused to answer 
certain questions offhand and asked for time to reflect about them. 
It seems justified, when we are studying a subject like religion, to 
ask for information from those who have, in all probability, formu- 
lated the beliefs — the shamans'. It is from them that we must 
strive to learn whether the spirits are conceived of as anthropo- 
morphic, theromorphic, dream-phantasms, or indefinite entities in 
general. 

In trying to discover this the author found, not only that he was 
asking a leading question, but that he was asking an unnecessary 
question. It was soon quite clear that the Winnebago did not 

284 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ann. 37 

base their test of the existence of a spirit on the presence or absence 
of corporeality; in other words, upon such sense perceptions as sight 
and hearing. It is because we Europeans do insist that the presence 
or absence of corporeality is the test of reality or unreality that we 
have been led to make the classification into personal and imper- 
sonal. But the Winnebago apparently does not insist that existence 
depends upon sense perceptions alone. He claims that what is 
thought of, what is felt, and what is spoken, in fact, anything that 
is brought before his consciousness, is a sufficient indication of its 
existence and it is the question of the existence and reahty of these 
spirits in which he is interested. The question of their corporeality 
is of comparative unimportance and most of the questions connected 
with the personal or impersonal nature of the spirits do not exist. 

It is clear that if comparatively little stress has been laid by the 
Winnebago on the personahty of the spirits,, it will be difficult to 
define them precisely except by their names, by their attributes, and 
by the nature of the blessings which they bestow on man. What 
seems to stand out most prominently in the attitude of the Winnebago 
toward their spirits is the intense, belief in the reality of their exist- 
ence, which is due first to what might be called the "emotional 
authority" for their existence, and secondly, to the fact that the life 
values of man are intensely real and the spirits are theoretically in 
control of these life values. 

To the average Winnebago the world is peopled by an indefinite 
number of spirits who manifest their existence in many ways, being 
either visible, audible, felt emotionally, or manifesting themselves 
by some sign or result. From a certain point of view, all the spirits 
demonstrate their existence by the result, by the fact that the bless- 
ings they bestow upon man enable him to be successful, and this holds 
just as much for the spirit who manifests himself in the most in- 
tangible, emotional manner as for that one who is visible to man. 

In all those areas where a well-developed ritualistic organization 
exists a fairly large number of theromorphic and anthropomorphic, 
spirits is found. In many cases these are real deities. This is true 
for the Winnebago. Exactly how definite and distinct this thero- 
morphic and anthropomorphic nature of the spirits is will depend 
largely on the individual history that the spirit has undergone. 
Where tricksters and animal heroes have become spirits or deities 
their theromorphic nature is marked. Other deities, like Earth- 
maker, Disease-giver, the Thunderbirds, etc., have become markedly 
anthropomorphic, owing to the reinterpretations and remodeling of 
the shamans. Often enough the reinterpretations are not thorough 
and we find deities of an apparently mixed type. 

Those who care to get a detailed description of the various deities 
of the Winnebago should read the various prayers found in such 

radin] RELIGION 285 

ceremonies as the war-bundle feasts, buffalo dance, sore-eye dance, 
etc. We will enumerate but a few of them here. 

The principal deities of the Winnebago are: Earthmaker, Sun, 
Moon, Earth, Morning Star, Disease-giver, Thunderbird, Water- 
spirit, etc. 

Earthmaker. — He is known to the Wimiebago under three names: 
Ma^'una, earthmaker; wajangvnzera, he-who-makes-something ; and 
waxopi'ni xedera, the great spirit. Of these the last is the most 
archaic, which might imply that originally Earthmaker was merely 
the great spirit. In the hands of the shamans, to whom the develop- 
ment and elaboration of the great Winnebago ceremonies like the 
medicine dance and the war-bundle feasts were due, he became 
almost a true monotheistic deity, benevolent but unapproachable. 
In the older myths, like the trickster and hero cycles (cf. for instance, 
the wak'djvijl'aga and hare cycle), he is hardly mentioned except 
as a clear afterthought. In another cycle, like that of the twins, 
where he is definitely mentioned, he is treated like a spirit similar 
to the other spirits, although superior to them, but in no way re- 
sembling the benevolent deity that we find in the origin myth of 
the medicine dance (p. 350). How and when this development took 
place, and whether the introduction of Christianity had anything 
to do with it, it is difficult to say. All indications seem to be over- 
whelmingly against the latter assumption, although it can not be 
entirely dismissed. As we have indicated in a previous paper,3 
there appears to have been a well-developed pre-Columbian belief 
in a good and bad spirit among the woodland Indians. The Winne- 
bago shared in this belief and Earthmaker developed his present 
position through the displacement of the chief bad spirit called 
Herecgunina. 

The older conception of Earthmaker seems to crop out also in the 
occasional attempts of individuals to obtain blessings from him. 
(Cf. the tale of Wegi'ceka, p. 291.) 

Little can be learned as to the actual appearance of Earthmaker 
In the origin myth of the medicine dance he is described as though 
he were clearly anthropomorphic. The symbol associated with him 
in the war-bundle feasts, the cross, is unquestionably supposed to 
represent the four cardinal points. 

Earthmaker is not supposed to bestow7 any definite blessings on 
man. He is, in a general waj*, expected to give them life. There 
is but little real worship of him because he is far removed from man 
and is supposed to come into relation with them only through his 
intermediaries, the spirits. According to the cosmological myths ho 

3 The Religion of the North American Indians, Journ. Am. Folklore, vol. 27, no. 106. 

'286 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. aun. 37 

created everything with the definite purpose, of benefiting mankind 
in contrast to the creative acts of the old Trickster. It is very instruc- 
tive to notice how he gradually usurped the place formerly held by 
the older spirit-deities and clan ancestors. In the clan origin myths 
there are a number of versions where he directs certain spirit animals, 
the ancestors of the clan, to go down to earth, while in other appar- 
ently older versions nothing is said of him. 

Sun. — The sun is known to the Winnebago generally as hanbunra, 
orb of day, and ceremonially as Jianboradjera, day-wanderer. He 
does not occupy to-day the position he formerly held. There are a 
number of indications that seem to point to the fact that his worship 
diminished when that of Earthmaker began to assert itself. Many 
of his functions and powers were likewise taken over by the Thunder- 
birds, who, although they distinctly belong to the older strata of 
Winnebago beliefs, have yet assumed their present importance appar- 
ently in connection with the development of the Earthmaker belief. 

The sun is occasionally spoken of in myths, but rarely as a culture 
hero. In only one myth collected was he the hero of the myth. 
There he appears as the husband of the moon and as an anthro- 
pomorphic being who possesses an all-powerful disk (the sun). 

Offerings are frequently made to him, but he rarely blesses an 
individual. In other words, he is not a true guardian spirit. He 
only blesses men and upon them he always confers success in war. 

Moon. — The moon, like the sun, probably formerly occupied a 
more important place in the Winnebago pantheon. She is a female 
deity and blesses women, although, like the sun, she is not a true 
guardian spirit. 

Earth. — Earth, like the moon, is a female deity. She is one of the 
oldest deities of the Winnebago and appears as the grandmother in 
some of the oldest myth cycles, like that of the hare. Offerings are 
made to her at the various ceremonies, particularly at the medicine 
dance and the war-bundle feasts. She never appears as a guardian 
spirit. 

The earth is one of the deities who has received considerable rein- 
terpretation at the hands of the shamans. In the myths she is a 
purely folk-mythological figure in no way interested in furthering 
she welfare of mankind. On the contrary, she is spoken of as the 
tister of those bad spirits who are bent on destroying the human 
race. Her role as a beneficent deity probably developed in connection 
with that of the hare, her grandchild, according to the old folklore 
notions, transformed when he became associated with the founding of 
the medicine dance or its older Winnebago predecessor from a typical 
trickster to an heroic animal deity. 

Morning Star. — This is one of the spirits belonging to the older 
strata of Winnebago beliefs, who apparently was not displaced by 

badin] RELIGION 287 

the newer deities. He is both a great deity and a guardian spirit. 
That he developed out of the indefinite "folklore-spirits" is abun- 
dantly attested by the r6le he plays in the myths. 

Morning Star is preeminently associated with war. 

Disease-giver. — This is but an approximate translation of his name 
in Winnebago, which is hocere£un wahira. He is a very pecidiar 
figure, being described as an anthropomorphic figure, dealing out 
death from one side of his body and life from the other. He is pre- 
eminently a guardian spirit who only appears to the bravest and 
holiest f asters. His specific blessings seem to be connected with war 
and the curing of disease. 

He appears in none of the myths and in but few of the ceremonies. 
He plays a very important role in the war-bundle feasts. 

It is rather difficult to explain his origin. He seems hardly to be a 
deity of the people and can best be understood, it seems, if we regard 
him as largelv a construction of the shaman. Certain of his char- 
acteristics may have been borrowed from some neighboring tribe. 

Thunderbird. — Thunderbird is another of the older folkloristic con- 
ceptions that has been remodeled and reinterpreted by the shamans. 
He might be said to be the most popular of Winnebago deities. He 
is found everywhere — in the oldest myths, the clan origin myths, 
and the newest myths; he is a clan ancestor, a popular guardian 
spirit, and a popular deity. In contradistinction to practically all 
of the other deities, he is regarded as easily approachable by man. 

To the popular mind he is distinctly theromorphic in form, causing 
lightning by the flashes of his eyes and thunder by the flapping of 
his wings. In some of the versions of the clan origin myth we still 
find this conception. In the hands of the shamans he became an 
anthropomorphic deity, characterized by baldness and the wearing 
of bay wreathes. Something of the older conception still clings to 
him, howTever, for he frequently acts as a bird and the flashing of his 
eyes still causes lightning. His baldness itself is an archaic feature, 
because the Thunderbird originally was supposed to be a kind of 
eagle. 

Many representations of th« Thunderbird can be found on various 
articles and in the effigy mounds. 

He blesses men with practically everything, but particularly with 
victory on the warpath. 

Water-spirit. — The meaning of the Winnebago word for this deity, 
wak'tcexi, is unknown. The translation "Water-spirit" does not 
claim to have anything to do with the real meaning of the word, but 
it was preferred by the Winnebago because this deity is always pic- 
tured as a water monster. 

He is one of the older folkloristic conceptions and has not been 
very greatly reinterpreted by the shamans. The Thunderbird is sup- 

288 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth.ann. 37 

posed to be at eternal enmity with him, and for that reason he is 
regartled by most of the Winnebago as a sort of a mixed deity, partly 
evil and partly good, but always to be feared and capable of bestow- 
ing great blessings on man. Owing to the fact that he has become 
identified as the clan ancestor of one of the most important Winne- 
bago clans, he has undergone a partial rehabilitation. 

The Water-spirit is an important figure in the older myths, and in 
them seems to be identified with the bad spirits. The attitude of the 
Winnebago toward him is full of inconsistencies. He is evil, yet Ins 
"bones" are the most prized possessions of man on account of the 
remarkable power with which they are endowed. He is an evil 
spirit, yet according to an apparently old myth (the Traveler) one 
of the Water-spirits is the spirit deity in control of the earth. 

In addition to these marked anthropomorphic and theromorphic 
spirit deities, the Winnebago, as mentioned before, have a large num- 
ber of vague spirits, like fire, light, etc., and a legion of animal spirits. 
The latter show some interesting transitions extending all the way 
from purely nonspirit heroic animals to distinct spirits, conceived of 
as animal in shape but noncorporeal. In many cases it is, of course, 
quite impossible to say how marked the "spirit" nature of the ani- 
mal is, because it often depends on who is looking at it. To the 
ordinary nonreligious Winnebago the hare is mainly an heroic animal; 
to the religious Winnebago or a member of the medicine dance he is a 
spirit-animal or even a spirit-deity. In the same way different con- 
ceptions are held about the nature of the animal clan ancestors, 
some thinking of them as heroic animals and others as generalized 
noncorporeal spirit-animals and spirit-deities. Wherever guardian 
spirits are animals they also become noncorporeal spirit-animals. 
One of the reasons given by the Winnebago for the fact that the 
different guardian spirit>animals do not object to the killing of ani- 
mals of their own species is because, in killing a bear a Winnebago is 
not killing his guardian spirit, the bear, for the latter is a generalized 
spirit-bear in control of all the bears who appear on earth. 

In a number of cases it is not at all difficult to trace the develop- 
ment of a trickster hero, an anthropomorphic hero, or an heroic 
animal, into a spirit to whom offerings are made. Thus, for instance, 
kettles and often buckskins are offered to wak'djvyTe'a'ga, hare, and 
the twins, at the war-bundle feasts. 

The Power and Localization of the Spirits 

According to the Winnebago, spirits possess the power of bestowing 
upon man all those things that are of socio-economic value to him. 
These may vary from such very important economic things as ram 

radin] RELIGION 289 

or success on the warpath to the most insignificant trifles. Practi- 
cally any spirit, no matter how indefinitely conceived, can bestow 
generalized blessings. On the whole, however, these powers are con- 
ceived of as being in the hands of a comparatively small number, 
and the same powers are frequently possessed by different spirits. 
This will become clear after a careful perusal of the fasting experi- 
ences. 

As to the prevalence of the belief hi the localization of spirits, not 
only among the Winnebago but over all North America, there can 
no longer be any doubt. Among the Winnebago there are as many 
spirits as there are lakes, hills, rivers, etc., and all these are looked 
upon from two points of view, first as the bestowers of certain bless- 
ings and, secondly, as the protectors of their own precincts. In the 
first case they are generally identical with the guardian spirits. In 
the second case they are simply vague, indistinct spirits to whom 
offerings are made for temporary protection. So when a Winnebago 
crossed a river or lake he poured tobacco into the water as a recom- 
pense for trespassing, and uttered the prayer that no storms should 
arise or that he should not come to grief. 

As to whether the spirits here are the lakes, rivers, hills, etc., or 
some being inhabiting them, the answer is, unquestionably the latter. 

The Twofold Interpretation of the Relation of the Spirits 

to Man 

We mentioned before (p. 279) that the interpretation of the rela- 
tionship between the spirits and man was largely mechanical, bless- 
ings being secured apparently independent of any volition on the 
part of the spirits, for if the Winnebago make the requisite offer- 
ings to the Thunderbirds they must accept them and bestow on the 
suppliant the powers they possess. While this interpretation was 
undoubtedly the popular one, the shamans tried to develop another 
explanation — what might be called a "contract" theory. The 
spirits possessed the various powers without which man could achieve 
only a modicum of success; and man possessed tobacco, corn, eagle 
feathers, buckskin, etc. His principal possession, however, was 
tobacco, and this had been given him directly by Earthmaker. The 
contract was definite and distinct: man was to. give the spirits 
tobacco, etc. ; and the spirits were to give man the powers they con- 
trolled. Accompanying this change of interpretation, there was a 
difference of attitude, the principal characteristic of which was a 
heightened religious feeling. This change of interpretation is clearly 
shown in the concept of the guardian spirit. 

290 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ANN. 37 

The Guardian Spirits 

In the concept of the guardian spirits we have a mixture of both 
the "mechanical" and the "contract" theories. The guardian 
spirits themselves are, to our mind, but the transformed localized 
spirits; in other words, the genii loci. They are supposed to protect 
the individual to whom they appear in the same way as the genii loci 
protected their precinct. While theoretically every Winnebago could 
have his own guardian spirit, there seems to have been a marked 
tendency for certain guardian spirits to be inherited. This was so, 
not because there was any distinct development of the idea of inherit- 
ance, but because certain definite powers were associated with the 
spirits, like success in hunting, fishing, etc. In terms of everyday 
life this simply meant that a good hunter would try to make his sons 
and near relatives good hunters; in religious terminology it meant 
that a son was blessed by the same guardian spirit as the father. 
(Cf. the fasting experience on p. 293.) 

The following fasting experiences will show clearly what powers are 
supposed to be possessed by the various guardian spirits. The attitude 
with which the faster approaches the ordeal clearly varies from that 
of childish playfulness to one of considerable religious intensity, 
always remembering that we are dealing with boys and girls before 
the adolescent stage. Perhaps the best way of putting it would be 
to say that we are dealing with a stereotyped expression of life, 
reading as follows: "I am a successful hunter; I am a prominent 
warrior, etc.; and I am told that I have become such because I have 
done what my elders told me, have practiced these professions dili- 
gently, and made offerings to the spirits." Such a formula might be 
put in the mouth of the youthful faster, but it meant nothing until 
it was interpreted much later in terms of each man's experience in 
life. 

The youth's fasting experience is carefully tested by the elders, 
and if found wanting in any respect the youth has either to try again 
or give up. 

The guardian spirit is not supposed to be in permanent attendance 
upon man. It is only when he is needed, in the crises of life, that 
he is brought into relation with man; and it is quite characteristic of 
the markedly materialistic basis of the belief that the spirit is only 
called into aid for the particular needs of the case. 

badin] religion 291 

Personal Religious Experiences * 

how wegl'ceka tried to see earthmaker 5 

Once there was a Winnebago whose name was Wegi'ceka. As soon 
as he was grown up his father begged him to fast. The old man told 
his son that Earthmaker, when he created this earth, made many 
good spirits and that he put each one of them in control of powers 
with which they could bless human beings. Some he placed in 
control of war powers. If these spirits bless an individual, he will 
always be victorious on the warpath. Earthmaker told the human 
beings to fast for these powers and then they would be rich and 
powerful. Now, my son, if Earthmaker has put all these spirits in 
charge of something, he himself must be in charge of much more 
power. Thus the old man reasoned and the son thought the same. 
So he tried to "dream" of Earthmaker. "I wonder what sort of 
blessings Earthmaker bestows on people," he thought to himself. 

None of the spirits blessed Wegi'ceka during his fastings. He 
was always thinking of Earthmaker and asking him to bless him. 
Wegi'ceka made himself extremely "pitiable" and wept. He could 
not stop. "Perhaps I will be able to see Earthmaker if I weep," 
he thought to himself. "Indeed, if Earthmaker does not bless me 
I will die during my fast." 

He fasted continuously without stopping. Verily, he fasted for 
Earthmaker. First he fasted for 4 nights, and then for 6 nights, 
and then for 8 nights, for 10, and finally for 12 nights. Yet he 
received no blessing of any kind. After fasting 12 nights he stopped 
and ate something. He kept fasting on until he had grown to be a 
fully developed man. Then he stopped and married and, accom- 
panied by his wife, he moved away from his village to some unin- 
habited place. There he lived alone with his wife. There again 
he fasted and his wife helped him. As before, he tried to have 
Earthmaker bestow a blessing upon him. This time he made up 

* Some religious experiences belonging to Winnebagoes well known to the tribe have been cast in a 
literary form and handed down from one generation to another. The literary mold in which they have 
been cast does not in the least interfere with their value as excellent examples of personal experiences, 
and for that reason I will include one of them here. 

b Earthmaker is supposed never to bless any human being, but there are a number of accounts of indi- 
viduals who tried without success, nevertheless, to have him bless them. What the people, however, 
meant by lack of success was not so much a total lack of success as an incomplete blessing. So, for instance, 
Wegi'ceka does really receive a cane as a blessing from Earthmaker, and he has the right to call upon 
him afterwards in the same way as he calls upon other "guardian spirits." Earthmaker does not, how- 
ever, appear to him in the way an ordinary spirit would — that is, he neither appears to him as a man nor 
in the form of a voice conferring some blessing, but as a flash oflight. 

292 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ann. 37 

his mind once and for all that if Earthmaker did not bless him he 
would die during his fast. "It is true," he said to himself, "that no 
one has ever heard of anyone being blessed by Earthmaker, but 
nevertheless I will either obtain a blessing from him or die in the 
attempt." 

As time passed on his wife gave birth to a male child. Then the 
man said, "We will offer up our son to Earthmaker," and the woman 
consented. So they sacrificed their son to Earthmaker. Then 
they placed the body of the child on a scaffold and wept bitterly. 
"Surely," he said to himself, "Earthmaker will bless us to-night." 
And indeed during the night he came to him. Wegi'ceka felt positive 
that it was he. He wore a soldier's uniform and a cocked hat and 
he was pleasing to the sight. Wegi'ceka looked and wondered 
whether it was really Earthmaker. Then this person took a step 
forward toward Wegi'ceka. "Indeed it must be," he thought. 
Then he took another step in his direction and uttered something. 
Wegi'ceka looked and saw that it was not Earthmaker but a pigeon. 
The spirits had fooled him. His heart ached, but, undaunted, he 
again fasted, and after a while Earthmaker seemed to come to him 
and say, "Man, I bless you. For a long time you have wept and 
made yourself pitiable. I am indeed Earthmaker." When Wegi'- 
ceka looked again he beheld something pleasing to the sight and he 
liked it. The clothing the man wore was pleasing and Wegi'ceka 
now felt certain that this person was Earthmaker. He looked at 
him again and it seemed to him as if Earthmaker was getting smaller 
and smaller, and as he looked for the fourth tune he saw that he had 
been looking at a little bird all the time. Then his heart ached all 
the more, and he cried even more bitterly than before. Then for the 
third time Earthmaker blessed him and spoke to him. "You have 
tried to 'dream' of Earthmaker and you have worried yourself to 
death. Behold, I am Earthmaker and I will bless you and you will 
never be in want of anything. You will be able to understand the 
language spoken by strange tribes and you will never be wanting in 
the goods of life." Then he looked up for the first time, but when he 
saw the individual who had spoken to him he thought that there 
was something wrong. Soon he saw that the one who had spoken 
to him was a bird. 

Then for the last time he tried to "dream" of Earthmaker. He 
did not eat anything and positively resolved to die if Earthmaker 
did not appear to him. He felt bad, for he thought that all the bad 
birds (spirits) were laughing at him. 

He fasted, and soon Earthmaker, far above, heard his voice and 
said, "Wegi'ceka, you are weeping bitterly. For your sake, I will 
come to the earth." Then Earthmaker told Wegi'ceka that when he 
(Wegi'ceka) looked at him he would see a ray of light extending from 

kadin] RELIGION 293 

above far down to his camp. That far it would reach. "Only thus, 
Wegi'ceka, can you see me. What you ask of me (to see me face to 
face) I can not grant you. But, nevertheless, you may tell (your 
fellowmen) that you saw me." Thus he spoke to him. He did not 
bless him with war powers. Only with life did he bless him. 

Then Wegi'ceka tried to draw a. picture of the flash of light extend- 
ing from the heavens to his camp, just as he had seen it, upon a cane. 
To that cane he sacrificed. The descendants of Wegi'ceka arc using 
cane even to the present day. 

ACCOUNT OF J.'S FASTING 

When I reached the age of puberty my father called me aside and 
told me to fast. He told me that it was his fervent wish that I should 
begin to fast, so that I might become holy and invincible and invul- 
nerable in war. I would become like one of those Winnebagoes of 
whom stories are told. In future generations the people would speak 
of me often. For these reasons he wished me to fast. He assured 
me that if I fasted I would really be holy and that nothing on this 
earth would be able to harm me. I would also live a very long life, 
he told me. I would be able to treat the sick and cure them. That 
holy I would be, he told me. If I acted in this way, my father told 
me, no person would dare to make fun of me and they would always 
be careful of the manner in which they addressed me, both because 
they respected me and because they were afraid of incurring my 
enmity. For these reasons my father counseled me to fast and to 
continue fasting from the late fall until spring. During that time I 
should fast without stopping. In the spring, however, I was to 
stop, because many bad spirits are about at that time and they might 
deceive me. If he thought that I was not doing enough fasting he 
would urge me on with words, saying, "My son, fast, because if you 
receive knowledge of anything (i. e., if you have been blessed repeat- 
edly), nothing will be able to harm you. You will live long; and I 
wTant you to live long." In this way my father used to speak to me 
and in this way he used to plead with me in a piteous manner. ' ' Re- 
member," he used to say to me repeatedly, "that if you do not fast 
none of the spirits will bless you." 

There wTas a hill near our place called the Place-where-they-keep- 
weapons. This hill was very high and it looked steep and rocky. 
It must have been a very holy place. There my father had lived 
(when he was blessed by the spirits). Within this hill lived the 
spirits that we call Those-who-cry-like-babies.6 These spirits were 
supposed to have arrows and bows. There were supposed to be 
twenty of them in this hill. My father had control of these spirits. 

e These spirits are the same as those generally known as the Herok'a, or Those-without-horns. 

294 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth.ann.37 

If he (my father) blessed a man he would do as follows: He would 
take his bow and arrows and, holding them in both of his hands, 
take the man around the hill and then into the lodge (i. e., into the 
hill). There he and the man he wished to bless let their breath 
pass into the middle of the lodge (i. e., into the hill). There stood 
a stone pillar and upon this stone pillar, at about arm's length, he 
drew the pictures of different animals. My father had only one 
arrow, but that arrow was a holy one. Then my father danced 
around the stone pillar and sang some songs, and when he was finished 
he began to breathe upon the stone pillar; and, walking around it, 
he shot it. When he looked at it, he saw that the stone had turned 
into a deer with large horns. This deer fell dead at his feet. He 
repeated this a number of times and the little spirits who were fol- 
lowing him breathed with him and said, "Winnebago, whenever you 
wish to kill a deer with one horn, do as you have done here. Then 
offer tobacco to us and you will be able to obtain whatever you 
wish." 

"Now, my son, I want you to be able to do as I do. I want you 
to be able to kill deer whenever you wish, and at any particular time." 
My father was a very good hunter and I wanted to be very much 
like him. I knew that what he was saying was true and that it 
would be good to follow his advice. I was also told that if I traveled 
around the hill where these spirits lived, then all earthly things 
would agree with me and that I would be the gainer thereby. If I 
did this, they told me, then I would never suffer any pains in my 
body and I would never be troubled in any way. 

And this they told me about the ghost village — that when I go 
there I will be able to steal a costly shawl from the spirits and be 
able to escape with it; that then all the inhabitants of the ghost 
village would chase me, but that they would not be able to over- 
take me and would be compelled to turn back as soon as I reached 
the earth. In this ghost village there are no grown-up children.7 

Now, all that I have spoken of, I dreamed. I really dreamed 
that I was stealing a costly shawl and that I would have plenty of 
them all the time. I dreamed that I would obtain ten or even more 
shawls in one year and that I would not have to pay anything for 
them. What the spirits meant by shawls was supplies. However, 
all this took place before I ate the peyote. Since then I know that 
these things were not true, and that what I must depend upon is not 
supernatural power, but myself, and my own endeavors. Super- 
natural powers do not come from anywhere. They do not exist at 
all. The blessings I had received were not holy and I am not holy. 

3 He is evidently referring to the spirit home of the Herok'a, or Those-who-cry -like-babies. 

Radin] RELIGION 295 

This I know now. The whole thing is untrue. Therefore I stopped 
using these supernatural powers some time ago.8 

The old people made me fast so that I might obtain blessings, 
and that I might lead a life similar to that led by my ancestors. My 
father asked me to fast so that I might be of some help to my fellow- 
men as I grew up. It is through fasting that individuals obtain the 
power of curing disease and restoring a person to health again. 

Spirits from above also came to me. They took me to the spirit- 
shaman village. As the shamans gathered around me they said that 
the blessing would be very difficult to give me. Then the shaman 
sitting far in front made himself holy and breathed upon me (i. e., 
performed the actions of a shaman when treating a patient). When 
he was finished, then he began to sing and all those in the lodge 
began to breathe, helping him. Then the second shaman made 
himself holy and began to breathe and sing. In this way four of 
them made themselves holy. They were showing me what to do 
when I came back to earth. If a person on earth is sick (this is 
what they meant), and is in an almost hopeless condition where no 
one else could cure him, then they would call for me and offer me 
tobacco with which I was to sacrifice to the spirits who had taught 
me. 

Indeed I am holy. If a man is sick I can restore him to health. 
That is what I used to think. I really (had it been true) should 
have felt it, for I labored earnestly and honestly to be a holy person. 
Yet in spite of all my exertions I was very unfortunate. I had 
married twice and both of my wives and all my children died. In- 
deed, how could I ever consider myself a holy man (i. e., if I couldn't 
even cure my own wife and children of what value were my "super- 
natural powers") ? For a long time I knew that, at least I should 
have known it.9 (I was not holy.) Then I ate the peyote and 
now I really see myself as I am. Indeed I am not holy. My body 
is without a soul. I thought myself holy. So I have stopped the 
practice of the shaman. 

8 The informant had become a convert to the Peyote belief only a short time before he wrote down this 
account of his fasting, and it is interesting to see that, although he nolonger believes in the efficacy of the 
supernatural powers, he still believes that they exist. Two years after this, however, the same informant 
explained them, as all the older members of the Peyote cult explain them, namely, as delusions, either 
caused by the abnormal condition of the youth while fasting or as snares of the devil. 

9 In the words "I should have known it" are summed up the essential change of attitude between 
the Peyote Winnebago and the older Winnebagoes. The latter, too, had observed the apparent failure 
of the supernatural powers on many occasions, but instead of attributing them to any diminution of efficacy 
in the "powers, " attributed them, on the contrary, to a lack of something in the individual trying to use 
the "power, " in so far as they thought about it at all. But the essential difference between the two cults, 
the older one and the Peyote, lies not so much in the logical conclusions their adherents have drawn from 
the failure of the ' ' supernatural powers "to behave as they were expected to, as in the fact that the Peyote 
people make the failure of the "power" the subject of discussion and the old Winnebagoes accept the whole 
concept of "supernatural power" as such, and do not permit it to rise into their consciousness. 

296 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ann. 37 

R.'S FASTING. 

(h. was a member op the bear clan) 

There was a village near Big Lake (Lake Winnebago), and at this 
village the upper people and the earth people played lacrosse.10 The 
Bear was the chief clan of the lower people, and those representing 
that side in the game defeated the representatives of the other side 
by sheer strength. Then one of the upper people said, "What 
effeminate fellows those Bear people are. They are very strong, but 
it would be much better if instead of being so strong in playing 
lacrosse they were strong when on the warpath." Thus he spoke. 
Then one of the Bear people (the one whose fasting is about to be de- 
scribed) felt very much grieved and went out into the wilderness to fast. 
His desire was to be blessed by those spirits who are in control of war, 
and in his longing to be blessed by them he cried bitterly. Soon he 
heard some one saying, "Do not cry any more, we have come after 
you from above. The spirits have blessed you. You are going to 
be taken to the lodge of your friends." When the young man got 
there he saw four men. They were called cannibals, and they were 
brothers. "Our friends have blessed you and we also bless you," said 
the four spirits. These four spirits were catfish. Then some white 
crane spirits said, "Our friends have blessed you. With spears they 
have blessed you. Indeed, for good reason was your heart sad (i. e., 
did you make yourself suffer while fasting). With victory on the 
warpath do we bless you. Here is your bundle. Here also are your 
spears and your bow and arrows. This bundle you must use when 
you go on the warpath. Here also are some songs to use when you 
start out and when you return. With these songs I bless you. 
Here they are: 

songs 

Ho'sto k'I1ine/djaI1e/dja rahi'je? 
Where they gathered, there did you go? 
K'aro' hitcak'aro' ha'gixewiNre. 
Well, my friend, shout at it for him. 

' ' When the enemy is close upon you and aim their guns at you, if 
you sing these songs they will not be able to hit you. If you sing 
these songs then, those who gave you a name will honor you.11 Thus 
we bless you. With life also we bless you." 

aratcge'ka's fasting 12 

Aratcge'ka, Left-handed-one, went out to fast. "A spirit I wish 
to bless me. I am fasting because I was told to do so. A shaman 

i° In playing lacrosse the upper and lower divisions were always pitted against one another. 

" The sense is not quite clear here, but it is believed that he means that by singing one of these songs he 
will be victorious and be able to count coup or distinguish himself in some such way, and thus be worthy 
of being honored by his elders. 

12 This account of a fasting has been cast in a literary mold. It evidently relates to the fasting experience 
of a well-known man. 

kadin] RELIGION 297 

I would like to be. I would like to be able to treat people the way 
he does, and I have for that reason blackened my face and fasted for 
eight days." Then I was blessed and they (the messengers of the 
spirits) came after me. Up above, to a shaman spirit-lodge they 
took me. There I saw the chief, and he said to me,- "What you 
desire, what you are thirsting yourself to death for, that you are to 
be blessed with. For that reason these people have brought you 
here. Here you are to give an exhibition of your powers. I am the 
one who has caused you to be brought here (i. e., blessed you), I am 
the ruler of this village and I sent for you to give you the following 
powers: • 

"If ever an Indian is sick, even if he is so sick that he is practically 
dead, I give you the power of restoring him to life. Now you are to 
show your powers. Here is a log so rotten and decayed that it is 
practically falling apart.13 Upon this you are to exert your power 
and show that you have been blessed. This is what the spirits 
meant when they blessed you." Then he walked around the log, 
breathed upon it, and spat water upon it, and it became human. 
Then he walked around it again and again spat water upon it, 
and it began to move. Then for the third time he spat water 
upon it and walked around it and it began to groan. Then he 
walked around it for the fourth time, and again spat water upon 
the log, and it got up and walked away. He had restored the log to 
life. Then the spirit said to him, "Man, with this power you are 
blessed. That for which you longed, that for which you fasted, you 
are blessed with. Giving-humans-life, thus the people will call you." 

Then all the spirits who are above said as follows : " Brother-in-law,14 
that you may live I am telling you this story." 

In the wilderness I went, and there near an oval hill I sat down 
and wept. Below the hill lay a round lake and there I saw the rising 
dew coming in a fog. This first spread itself out over us, and then, 
in turn, shrank and became small. All this time I sat there weeping. 
There was something moving in the lake, but although I was looking 
in that direction I did not see anything. They (evidently the 
spirits) were sneaking up on me. Two (flames of) fire suddenly 
burst forth extending from above to the lake. Then a report like 

13 This log is supposed to represent a human being in a similar condition— that is, practically on the verge 
of dissolution. 

11 The account is suddenly interrupted here to tell the listener why AratcgeTca is telling the story of 
bis fasting. The personal religious experiences were very sacred and rarely told even to near relatives. 
As far as I know, they were only told before death or when a person was very ill, as in the present case. 
The purpose seems to have been to transfer the benefits of the blessing to the sicK person and cure him in 
much the same way as is done when an accredited shaman goes through his entire performance. Of course, 
Aratcge'ka*s blessing related directly to the curing of disease. But evidently it was believed that blessings 
connected with other powers were equally efficacious. 

1S6S23°— 22 20 

298 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ann. 37 

that of a gun sounded. The. two (spirits) were causing it. Suddenly 
a great noise was heard. I kept right on crying, for I was trying 
to be blessed. I sat there with staring eyes looking at the spirits. 
"I must be receiving a blessing," I thought. I continued crying 
and after a short time it began to rain very much. "How is this," 
I thought to myself, " only a little time before it was so nice and now 
it is raining." Yet in spite of the rain no water seemed to fall upon 
me. "How is it," I thought, "here it is raining and yet no rain is 
falling upon me." Then I looked above and I saw that it was very 
cloudy, yet straight above me in a direct line the sky was blue. 
This blue spot was like a round object covering me as though it 
were an umbrella. The Thunderbirds were blessing me. With the 
blue sky, they were blessing me. Soon the noise stopped, and 
when I looked above I saw four (men) standing with packs upon 
then- backs. These (the spirits) killed. Then they blessed me with 
the power of killing. They spoke to me and said, " Stop your crying. 
What you have longed for and fasted for, with that we have blessed 
you. Just as these four men have been kdled, so you will be able 
to kill people. But you will also be able to restore them to life 
again. Upon your body now we will make a mark and those whom 
you wish to bless will be given an opportunity of selecting life for 
themselves,15 so that, even when a person be practically dead he 
will be restored to health. What is above you, the blue sky, that 
we place on one of your fingers,16 and with that we bless you. If 
the patient picks the finger with the mark upon it, he will live." 

The Thunderbirds were the spirits speaking to me. They had 
spears and little war-clubs in their hands and (wreathes) made of 
flat cedar leaves upon their heads. Thus did four Thunderbirds 
bless me. 

"Well, brother-in-law, I want you to live and I want you to pick 
life for yourself — i. e., pick the finger with the blue mark upon it. 
Do it carefully and do not attempt it when you are tired. Here are 
my four fingers and one of them has the blue sky upon it (i. e., the 
blue mark that betokens life) . If you choose that, you will certainly 
live. You are the second person ( to whom I have offered my fingers) . 
Now do not miss it, for if you miss it you will surely die. Be careful, 
then, in picking it." 

Then the brother-in-law picked the little finger and Aratcge'ka 
said, "Brother-in-law, it is good. You will live." Then he turned 
his little finger around and there a circular blue mark was visible. 

ACCOUNT OF X.'S FASTING 

The spirits can bless you with everything. My father used to 
tell me how much he loved me and how much lie wished me to fast. 

'» That is, a sick person will have to guess at the part of the body that has been blessed by the Thunder- 
birds, and if he guesses correctly he will become well. 
16 That is, we will place a mark made with blue clay upon your finger. 

kadin] RELIGION 299 

He wanted me to fast all the time. I would therefore, to please him, 
fast off and on through the winter. The longest I ever fasted at 
any one time was six days. I was blessed by a yellow snake who 
lived near Medway, Wis. It was at that place that I fasted one 
winter. The spirit-snake that lives there blessed me with life and 
the right to draw bad blood from sick people (i. e., "cup blood"). 
These blessings are truly efficacious, but after they have been handed 
down to the next generation they lose their power (unless renewed). 
That same winter, not long before the beginning of spring, I fasted 
again for four days and early on the morning of the fourth day as I 
was walking along a ravine, crying and putting myself in a "pitiable 
condition," so that the spirits might take pity upon me, some one 
came to meet me. Up to this time, in spite of all my exertions and 
fastings, I had not been blessed by any of the spirits. The one who 
was coming toward me was walking very fast and when I stopped 
to look at him I saw that he was a man. His entire body was painted 
red and he wore an eagle feather on his head and garters around his 
legs. When he came near to me he said: "Human, I bless you. 
You may now go home and eat (i. e., break your fast). Every day I 
will bring the blessing of life to you. This also (I wish to tell you), 
if you think of me when you are in any difficulty, you will pass 
through it safely. The sick you will be able to heal through the 
blessing I give you. I am the Sun. Even if a day is cloudy, then 
know that I am keeping life for you beyond the clouds." 

HOW Y. FASTED AND WAS BLESSED WITH A WAR-BUNDLE " 

Our war-bundle is eight generations old. In the beginning my 
clansmen had no war-bundles. Whenever they had, war, they had 
nothing from which to receive strength. The only powerful posses- 
sion they had was fire. That was the only thing they carried when 
on the warpath. Soon they discovered that other clans had war- 
bundles and that they received them by fasting for them. So 
K'erex un'sak'a started to fast for one. He fasted from early 
autumn until summer and he received a blessing. Then he went 
to his father and told him, "Father, you told me to fast. Let us 
now go and see with what I have been blessed." So the old man 
accompanied his son.18 When the old man got there he found a 
snake dried and dressed up and standing in an upright position. 
The snake had long hairs on its back, scattered here and there. The 
father on seeing it said,' "My son, this is really too great. If you 
accept this and carry it with you on the warpath, you will not leave 
any human beings alive (i. e., you will always want to go on the 

17 This is the account of the origin of a war-bundle claimed to be eight generations old. 

18 Evidently the spirit had told him to go to a certain place and that there he would find certain objects, 
namely, the material objects with which he had been blessed. 

300 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ANN. 37 

warpath)." The son therefore refused it, and went out to fast 
again. Then the spirits blessed him again and again he went to 
his father and asked to accompany him to the wilderness and see 
what blessings he had obtained. When they came to the wilder- 
ness l9 they found two wild cats ( already stuffed) standing there 
and facing in opposite directions. Then the old man told his son 
again not to accept this blessing because it would be too powerful,20 
but the young man said, "This is the last blessing that I am going 
to get," and accepted it. 

(What follows was obtained at a later time from the same informant 
and relating to the same blessing.) 

The first blessing K'crex£u"'saka received was from the Thunder- 
birds. They dropped a flute and two feathers from heaven. But 
these he refused. The second blessing was also from the Thunder- 
birds. This time they told him to go to a certain place where he 
could see them himself. He went there and found four men sitting 
there broiling meat. They gave him a piece of meat. It was only 
when he fasted for the fourth time that he was blessed with a war- 
bundle. 

WHAT Ci. OBTAINED IN HIS FAST 

I never fasted much. I only fasted three times and I don't believe 
that I ever fasted for more than two days at a time. However, I 
never was blessed with anything (i. e., any object). I knew, how- 
ever, that I came from the home of the Thunderbirds (i. e., that I was 
a reincarnated Thunderbird). My spirit father and mother21 were 
Thunderbirds. The Thunderbirds are beings whose glance can 
penetrate any object. For that reason I also can do it. For 
instance, I have seen a man through a tree. This I did once during a 
thunderstorm when a man had sought shelter behind a tree. 

19 Whenever the word " wilderness' ' is used all that is meant is an uninhabited place far away from the 
village. 

20 By ' 'too powerful' ' the old man means that the feasts, offerings, etc. , that would be necessary for so 
great a blessing would be quite beyond the means or the ability of the young man. It is to be remembered 
that the bestowal of a blessing does not in itself insure its efficacy , but that this can only be assured if the 
proper offerings and the proper emotional attitude accompany its subsequent use. Evidently the old 
man did not feel that the young fellow would be equal to the task. I have been told by many of the older 
Winnebagoes that when the old system was still intact the older people always made it a point to warn 
impetuous youths against taking upon themselves responsibilities that they might possibly not be able 
to fulfill, a very excellent device, it seems to me, for not multiplying the chance of failures and consequently 
the necessity of explaining them. However, one need not believe that this was the reason for their caution. 

21 He says "spirit father and mother" because when he lived with the Thunderbirds he was, of course, a 
spirit. It is quite impossible to determine whether he means that he was a human being who was living 
among the spirits as a spirit or whether he was a spirit who had desired to become reincarnated as a human 
being. Originally, of course, there were no human beings, but only spirits, of whom a portion became 
permanently transformed into human beings. However, even very powerful shamans never claim more 
than three reincarnations, so that he can obviously not be referring to this primitive condition and is either 
referring to the fact that he is a Thunderbird residing temporarily on this earth, or — and this would be the 
more common form — a human being who lived for some time as a Thunderbird and then returned to earth. 
In the latter case one would expect him to obtain great blessings in his fast, and the fact that he did not 
and had nevertheless such great powers suggests that he is really a reincarnated Thunderbird. 

hadin] RELIGION 301 

When I was ready to go down among the human beings (i. e., when 
I became reincarnated) I was given the power to overcome my 
enemies in battle. And this I have actually done. All the Thunder- 
birds have small war-clubs. I also had one when I came. Whenever 
I went on the warpath I made myself a war-club and used that only 
in battle. I believe that I was invulnerable. Whenever I got tired 
of living among human beings I knew I could return to the Thunder- 
birds. I thought I knew all this and that I had these powers. For 
that reason when I ate peyote I still held on to these beliefs for a long 
time, thinking that when I returned to the Thunderbirds inasmuch 
as they are above it would be the same as going to everlasting life, as 
the Peyote people said. Finally, one night, at a peyote meeting, in 
thinking over these things, I resolved to give them up. I could, 
nevertheless, not bring myself to do it. Then the peyote began to 
strangle me; 22 at least I thought so. 

I also had the power of causing or stopping rain. All that I had 
to do was to offer tobacco to the Thunderbirds and make my request. 

HOW A BEAR BLESSED A MAN23 

Once a band of Winnebagoes used to give a feast to the bears. A 
bear had blessed one of their number with life and victory on the 
warpath. 

It was a spirit-bear that had blessed him. The man was fasting 
and the spirit blessed him and said, "Human, I bless you. In war 
you will be able to do as you wish (i. e., you will be able to kill an 
enemy whenever you desire). The first time you go on the war- 
path you will come back with the fourth war honor; the second time 
you go on a warpath you will return with the third war honor; the 
third time you will return with the second war honor; and the fourth 
time you will return with the first war honor and receive the first 
prize, which you are to give to your sister." This is what the man 
"dreamed." He believed it and was happy. Then the spirit-bear 
said again, "Human, I said that I blessed you and I really mean it. 
Earthmaker created me and gave me control of many things. 
Human, I bless you. As many years as Earthmaker bestowed upon 
you, that number I also bless you with. You will reach the limit of 
the years that were granted you. With my body I also bless you. 
Whenever you are hungry and wish to kill a bear, pour a pipeful of 
tobacco for me. If then you go out hunting, you will be successful. 
Don't abuse the bears. I am the chief of the bears. I bless you. 
Never before have I blessed a human being, as long as I have lived 
here. As long as your descendants live on this earth, so long will this 

» According to the Peyote people, if a member does not wish to do or tell something that he ought to, the 
peyote begins to strangle him and he finds no relief until he tells what is on his mind. 
33 This is really the "origin myth " of a bear feast. 

302 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE Ieth. ANN. 37 

blessing last. Should your descendants perform the feasts in my 
honor well, I will bless them with life and victory on the warpath. 
Whenever you offer me tobacco I will smoke it. If you put on a 
kettle of food for me I will be thankful to you. When you put this 
kettle of food on the fire and offer me tobacco see to it that you keep 
away menstruating women . . . 24 

HOW THE DAUGHTER OF MAXK'EREXKA REFUSED A BLESSING 
FROM DISEASE-GIVER 2~° 

The daughter of Mank'erexka was fasting. She was his third 
daughter. She decided to fast during the summer. In her fast she 
was told that she was blessed and that on the following day a big deer 
would come across the waters for her to eat. Then she went to her 
father and said, "Father, I have been told to eat a big deer, and that 
to-morrow very early in the morning it will come out of the water." 
"It is good, my daughter. That deer has been given to you by the 
spirits and you may eat it." 

Early the next morning a big deer came across the waters. "Let 
it be," the people said (to her). "As soon as it comes near we will 
chase it." So they got into a boat and chased it. Then they killed 
it and gave it to some other person instead of the young woman. 
"My daughter, what are you going to do ? Are you going to eat the 
deer?" "No, father, if I were to eat the deer I would have killed it 
myself. But you people have killed it, so I will not eat any of it." 

Then she rubbed some charcoal on her face and went to the place 
of fasting and said, "What you (the spirits) gave me others have 
taken away and eaten." Early in the morning she looked around 
toward the water. She was very weak, for she had not eaten for a 
long time. Nine days she fasted. She was saying to herself, "As 
soon as I see a deer I will tell the others and call my father." In the 
morning she went out in search of the deer. She was so weak that 
she could hardly crawl along. But she managed to reach the edge 
of the waters and, as she looked across, she saw a deer coming. So she 
immediately went to her father and told him. He got up immediately 
and, taking a spear, jumped into a boat, pursued, and speared it. 
Then the girl said, "Now I will eat." So they called her uncles, 
Wolf and Elk.26 When they came she put tobacco in their hands 
and said, "My uncles, I have offered tobacco to the different spirits 
and asked them to bless me. Now I am about to eat and I would 

M The rest of the story is a description of a bear feast and how, in spite of the warning of the spirit-bear 
two menstruating women took part in the feast; how, thereupon, two bears suddenly appeared and killed 
them, and how for that reason the bear feast was given up. 

■'' This account has been cast in a literary mold, but there is no doubt that it represents a real fasting 
experience. It is included here principally because it contains a number of extremely interesting features. 

26 Tlio^e are the names of individuals. 

radin] RELIGION 303 

like to have you put some food in your mouths."27 "My niece, it is 
good. You have indeed made yourself 'pitiable.' You have 
thirsted yourself to death and I, too, pity you. If any spirit has 
blessed you, he has done so with good reason. I, too, once thirsted 
myself to death and the spirits blessed me with life. With this life, 
my niece, I also bless you. I will gladly partake of your feast." 
Thus spoke Wolf. Then Elk said, "My niece, I, too, was told to 
fast; and in my fast the spirits blessed me with the power of having 
complete control over all my actions. This dream (i. e., the bless- 
ings I obtained) I now give to you.28 With these blessings you will 
be able to live as you desire. I will now gladly partake of your 
food." 

When they were through eating, she also ate, and then they all 
went home. After a while her father said to her, "My daughter, I 
am going to ask you a question. It is said that those who have 
been blessed might tell their dreams if they were asked." "All 
right," said the daughter, "I will tell you. Eight days I fasted and 
then the spirits blessed me. They told me that if at the end of four 
days I should place offerings south of the place known as the Big 
Eddy and situated down the stream the powers with which I had 
been blessed would be shown to me. The one who blessed me was 
the chief of the Wak£aintcun, the spirits who live in the earth. He 
said that Earthmaker had created him and given him great power; 
that he had placed him in charge of 'life.' In four days he told 
me, 'I will appear to you. The day on which I appear to you will 
be a perfect day. Whatever you wish to make for yourself, you may 
do. You will never be in want of anything, for you can make imple- 
ments for yourself out of my body. With these I bless you, for you 

37 The feast referred to here is the feast called Handaginantc Wadu-itcanenan orfaster'sfeast. It is given 
whenever a man or woman who has been blessed is about to break his fast. At this feast it is customary, 
according ti s:>me inf irmants, for the faster to narrate his blessing. However, thesefeasts have now been 
discontinued for so long a time that it is extremely difficult to obtain any accurate information. 

38 The transference of certain blessings is very common, but, to my knowledge, it is rarely done in tliis 
manner. As a rule i f a person was unable to obtain blessings, he sought to offset this handicap in life by 
purchasing supernatural powers from some of his more successful fellow-men. However, these powers 
seem to be connected almost exclusively with medicines. That blessings such as those bestowed upon 
individuals during their fast, such as long life, invincibility, hunting powers, etc., were transferred, does 
not seem probable, although it is, of course, possible. The writer was told of a number of cases where this 
seemed to have been the case, but on closer study it was conclusively shown that no real transference had 
taken place, but that in those instances where a person had said, " I transfer this and that dream to you," 
the transference had no validity unless the individual to whom the dream had been bequeathed actually 
fasted and obtained the same dream. An individual would in such a case always be careful to select as 
his "dream-heir" one who would in all likelihood obtain the same dream. It is only in this sense that 
one might actually speak of a transference. In those instances where a man is blessed with supernatural 
powers that are to extend to all his posterity thisis what is really meant, namely, an infinite repetition of 
the same blessing, one that has, however, become so certain within definite families that it might be con- 
sidered automatic. 

304 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ann. 37 

have made yourself suffer very much -" and my heart has been rent 
with pity for you. I bless you, therefore, with life, and this you 
may transmit to your descendants.' All this, father, the spirit said 
to me." "My daughter, it is not good. These spirits are trying to 
deceive you. Do not accept it. They will never bestow upon you 
what they have promised." "All right, father, but let me at least 
give them the offerings of deerskin, red feathers, and tobacco. I 
will not accept these blessings, for you forbid it." 

Then after four days she took her offerings to the place where she 
was to meet the spirit and told him that her father had forbidden 
her to accept the blessing. "'You are not a good spirit,' he said." 
"He is right, for one side of my body is not good but the other is," 
answered the spirit. "That is the way in which Earthmaker 
created me." Thus the wak'aintcu° spoke.30 Then the woman 
looked toward the lake and she saw a tree standing in the water. 
The spirit climbed upon this tree and wTapped himself around it. 
Then he took a tooth and shot the tree and knocked it down.31 
"This is what you would have been able to do," said the spirit. 
"The people would have respected you very much. You would have 
been able to cure weak or nervous people. But you did not listen 
to what I told you. You refused it." 

FASTING EXPERIENCE 

(INFORMANT, CLAN UNKNOWN) 

A man fasted and was finally blessed. When he was to be blessed 
a spirit came after him. He came from the south. "Human," he 
said, "I was told to come after you." Then the man looked at him 
and he saw that it was a man speaking to him. So he went along 
with him. He did not go far before he came to a village and in the 
middle of this village he saw a long lodge. There he was taken and 
there he was blessed. The one that was in charge of the village 
blessed him first. 

"I bless you with victory in wars. Whenever you go on the war- 
path and when you are about to make the rush, do not forget me. 
If you pour some tobacco for me and then fight, the enemy will not 
be able to kill you. I am in charge of wars." 

29 When people are blessed by the Water-spirits they make medicines from the bones of the spirits. 
They are also supposed to make what the Winnebagoes call "implements." What is actually meant by 
this term it is very difficult to state precisely. But it seems that they meant sharpened bones, etc., used 
in connection with the administration of magical medicines in painting the body, and in connection with 
shamanistic practices of all sorts. It is not common for other spirits beside the Water-spirits to bless an 
individual with the use of "his bones," but this is occasionally met with. In the trickster cycle the trick- 
ster, in one of his escapades, is squeezed into the skull of an elk, and he persuades the people that he is an 
elk-spirit and blesses them and permits them to use his bones. 

30 This characteristic would seem to identify the wak'aintcun with the disease-giver , although it is possible 
that a number of Winnebago deities had such characteristics. 

» This is a symbolistic representation of the powers she was given. 

EADI.N] RELIGION 305 

So he spoke to him. " Thus will your life be. Look at yourself." 
So he looked at himself and his hair was Yery white. As one who 
had attained a full life he saw himself. "All that are within this 
lodge bless you," the spirit continued. "You have come to the 
Buffalo village." This he was told, so he looked at the lodge full 
of people. And those whom he had seen up to that time as human 
beings now were buffaloes. 

"Human, they bless you is why they went after you. Human, 
if anyone is weighted with life and a reasonable amount of tobacco 
is given, such a one would be able to do the following": 

A dead man was placed in the middle of the lodge, and all of 
those in the lodge tried their power, but none succeeded in restoring 
him to life. At last the spirits let the man try it. So he tried. 
When he arose, all those in the lodge began to make sounds and 
when he began to exert his powers he sang buffalo songs. When 
he was through with these songs, he walked toward the dead man, 
in the middle of the lodge. He blew on him once, then again and 
again. Now the man began to open his eyes. Then he blew on 
him for the fourth time and he caused him to rise. 

"Human, you have overcome all of us," said the buffalo chief. 
"Human, thus shall you ever do to people. If anyone is sick and 
the. proper offerings are made to you, send some tobacco to our 
council lodge and I will remember you. You must send all the 
tobacco that is offered to you. I will remember it. This council 
lodge is given to you and to your posterity as long as it lasts. As 
long as the earth lasts that long your posterity will have occasions 
on which to pour tobacco. Whatever blessing they ask, we will 
bestow upon them whde we smoke their tobacco. As many as are 
the kettles that they offer to us, we will never accept one without 
giving them a blessing. We are in control of wars ; the Earthmaker 
has given us control of them, and if you ask for it we will give it to 
you. And if you ask for life we will bestow that blessing upon you 
and accept your offerings." 

They also blessed him with plants for medicine. This is the way 
they did it. Each of the spirits caused him to see a plant and to 
know the purposes to which it could be put. They told him to make 
offerings to the plants whenever he gave a feast, so that the plants 
would become more powerful. They also blessed him with a drum. 
"This you must beat when you give a feast and it will tell us your 
wants. We will understand the drum. We will make your drum 
holy for you, and you must treat it as such," they told him. "You 
must keep it holy. Whenever you are on the warpath you must 
take it with you and it will help you. Human, your enemies you will 
overcome; your weapons only will be sharp if your posterity will 
never give up this ceremony." So they spoke to him. "Whenever 

306 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ann. 37 

you -give this ceremony, no matter what blessing you ask, we will 
bestow it upon you, when you offer tobacco. A flute you must also 
keep holy. You must make it yourself, so that it remains sacred." 
They also told him to make a war bundle. The Buffalo chief told 
him this. So he made one out of a buffalo head and a buffalo tail. 
These he made sacred so that people might offer tobacco to them. 
This was done long ago and yet they still do it. 

Then they told him that four differently colored buffaloes would 
bless him — a white one, a black one, a red one, and a yellow one- 
After a while he was blessed the second time. This time the spirits 
came after him from above and took him to the home of a spirit 
buffalo. This is the one that blessed him. 

"Earthmaker has placed me here," said the spirit, "and he has 
given me control of many things. Grandson, I bless you. I am in 
control of war power, and if you ever go on the warpath don't forget 
me. If you pour a pipeful of tobacco for me before you go into 
battle, the enemy will only be able to shoot your shadow." Thus he 
spoke to him. "I will take your body, and in that way it will 
only be your shadow that the enemy will try to shoot with all their 
strength. You will be without a body, and how then can they hit 
you, being without a body?" This is what the spirit told him. So, 
therefore, whenever he went on the warpath it was impossible to 
kill him. For the spirit had said, "I am also in control of life and 
I will give you your life back, that you may control it. The spirits 
have given you a tobacco-pouring feast and whenever you give it, 
remember that I wish to smoke also. When you pour tobacco for 
me I will grant you whatever you ask. If you ask for war, or if you 
ask for life, I will accept your tobacco. As long as this earth lasts 
I will smoke your tobacco and accept the kettle of food that you 
place on the fire for me." 

Thus he spoke to him. The man, however, still kept on fasting, 
and finally the spirits came for him again. There in the middle of 
the earth lived a buffalo-ghost. There he went and the buffalo- 
ghost said to him: "I also bless you. You were given counsel and 
I who am a buffalo also counsel you. I am in control of many tilings. 
Earthmaker placed me here to live and he put me in control of many 
tilings. Human, look at me," he said. The man looked at him. 
Then he saw that his body was covered with flattened bullets. ' ' Thus 
you will be," said the ghost to him. "It will be impossible to kill 
you, and you will attain to old age, and when you get tired of living 
you may do as you please. I give you the privilege of controlling 
yourself." Then he gave him a song and he caused him to see a 
war prize, a wampum. After a while he spoke to Mm as follows : 

" I also will always smoke at your feast, and if a kettle is ever put 
on the fire for me, I will be thankful to you. Whatever the people 

kadin] RELIGION 307 

ask of me I will always take it into consideration. If they ask for 
war or if they ask for life, remember that I have been given control 
of these tilings." Thus spoke the buffalo-ghost. There he received 
all the things with which he was blessed. 

In the course of his life he made use of all his blessings. His first 
victory occurred when he went on the warpath for the first time- 
He had joined a war party and a fight occurred toward the evening 
of the same day. As he was walking along he suddenly saw a gun 
directed against him at close range. He jumped right and left and 
in that way escaped being shot. Then the enemy tried to capture 
the one who had been blessed by the buffalo, holding him tightly by 
the arm. But he struck the enemy twice against an object and tore 
his stomach open. Then he walked away. As he was going he 
thought to himself, "Why did I not kill him outright?" So he went 
back with the intention of doing this, but as he approached the man 
the latter directed a gun against him. Thinking, however, that it 
was not loaded, he did not dodge, and he was shot. His breast was 
filled with shot and he was killed. But he did not remain dead long. 
He. soon came to consciousness and sat up, uttering sounds like a 
buffalo. 

Then he remembered that a buffalo ghost had blessed him. He had 
indeed said to him, "When you are about to fight do not forget me." 
He remembered this, so he exerted his power. All the blood that 
was in his stomach he vomited forth and felt better. Just then one 
of his relatives came along and asked him, "How have you been getting 
along?" and he answered, "I have killed one. There lies his body. 
Take his scalp for me." "All right," said his relative, and did what 
he had been told, and brought it to him, saving, "Here it is." A 
horse was there also, and this the relative likewise led away and 
started back to (the camp). When he met the war leader, the latter 
asked him, "How have you been making out?" He answered, "I 
give you these trophies," and handed the leader the scalp and the 
horse. "Ah, it is good," he said, and put a wampum belt on him. 
Then the war leader sang a song and started to run, and the buffalo- 
blessed one reminded himself of his blessing and went back also. 
He was all shot to pieces. But he did not die, for he had been 
blessed with power, so how could he die ? The buffalo ghost he had 
seen with flattened bullets in his belt had fulfilled his promise, and 
the wampum belt that he had seen in his fasting had now become true. 

He went to many wars after this, but he was never harmed. He 
doctored many people and caused them to have more life. After 
a while he made a war bundle consisting of a flute that he had con- 
structed himself, a buffalo tail, and a buffalo head. Then he made 
offerings to them. These many things he made sacred. Since then 
buffalo feasts have been given. 

308 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ann. 37 

J. B.'S FASTING EXPERIENCE 

I fasted all the time. We moved back to a place where all the 
leaders used to give their feasts. Near the place where we lived 
there were three lakes and a black hawk's nest. Right near the tree 
where the nest was located they built a lodge and the war-bundle 
that we possessed was placed in the lodge. We were to pass the 
night there, my older brother and myself. It was said that if anyone 
fasted at such a place for four nights he would always be blessed 
with victory and the power to cure the sick. All the spirits would 
bless him. 

"The first night spent there one imagined himself surrounded by 
spirits whose whisperings were heard outside of the lodge," they 
said. The spirits would even whistle. I would be frightened and 
nervous, and if I remained there I would be molested by large mon- 
sters, fearful to look upon. Even (the bravest) might be frightened, 
I was told. Should I, however, get through that night, I would on 
the following night be molested by ghosts whom I would hear speak- 
ing outside. They would say things that might cause me to run 
away. Toward morning they would even take my blanket away from 
me. They would grab hold of me and drive me out of the lodge, 
and they would not stop until the sun rose. If I was able to endure 
the third night, on the fourth night I would really be addressed by 
spirits, it was said, who would bless me, saying, "I bless you. We 
had turned you over to the (monsters, etc.) and that is why they 
approached you, but you overcame them and now they will not be 
able to take you away. Now you may go home, for with victory and 
long life we bless you and also with the power of healing the sick. 
Nor shall you lack wealth (literally, 'people's possessions'). So go 
home and eat, for a large war-party is soon to fall upon you and as soon 
as the sun rises in the morning they will give the war whoop, and if 
you do not go home now they wdl kill you." 

Thus the spirits would speak to me. However, if I did not do the 
bidding of this particular spirit, then another one would address me 
and say very much the same thing. So the spirits would speak until 
the break of day, and just before sunrise a man in warrior's regalia 
would come and peep in. He would be a scout. Then I would 
surely think a war party had come upon me, I was told. 

Then another spirit would come and say, "Well, grandson, I have 
taken pity upon you and I bless you with all the good things that 
the earth holds. Go home now, for the war-party is about to rush 
upon you." And if I then went home, as soon as the sun rose the 
war-whoop would be given. The members of the war-party would 
give the war-whoop all at the same time. They would rush upon me 
and capture me and after the fourth one had counted coup, then 

radin] RELIGION 309 

they would say, "Now then, grandson, this we did to teach you. 
Thus you shall act. You have completed your fasting." Thus they 
would talk to me, I was told. This war-party was composed entirely 
of spirits, I was told, spirits from the heavens and from the earth; 
indeed, all the spirits that exist would be there. These would all 
bless me. They also told me that it would be a very difficult thing 
to accomplish this particular fasting. 

So there I fasted, at the black hawk's nest where a lodge had been 
built for me. The first night I stayed there I wondered when things 
would happen; but nothing took place. The second night, rather 
late in the night, my father came and opened the war-bundle and 
taking a gourd out, began to sing. I stood beside him without any 
clothing on me except the breech-clout, and holding tobacco in each 
hand I uttered my cry to the spirits as my father sang. He sang 
war-bundle songs and he wept as he sang. I also wept as I uttered 
my cry to the spirits. When he was finished he told me some sacred 
stories, and then went home. 

When I found myself alone I began to think that something ought 
to happen to me soon, yet nothing occurred, so I had to pass another 
day there. On the third night I was still there. My father visited 
me again and we repeated what we had done the night before. In 
the morning, just before sunrise, I littered my cry to the spirits. 
The fourth night found me still there. Again my father came and 
we did the same things, but in spite of it all, I experienced nothing 
unusual. Soon another day dawned upon us. That morning I 
told my elder brother that I had been blessed by spirits and that I 
was going home to eat. However, I was not telling the truth. I 
was hungry and I also knew that on the following night we were 
going to have a feast and that I would have to utter my cry to the 
spirits again. I dreaded that. So I went home. When I got there 
I told my people the story I had told my brother; that I had been 
blessed and that the spirits had told me to eat. I was not speaking 
the truth, yet they gave me the food that is carefully prepared for 
those who have been blessed. Just then my older brother came 
home and they objected to his return, for he had not been blessed. 
However, he took some food and ate it. 

That night we gave our feast. There, however, our pride received 
a fall, for although it was supposedly given in our honor, we were 
placed on one side (of the main participants). After the kettles of 
food had been put on twice, it became daylight. 

HOW A MAN DEFIED DISEASE-GIVER 

Once a man said, "Why do you always make offerings and feasts 
to the Disease-giver? What benefit has he ever been to you that 
you do it ? If I were ever to see him, I would kick him off the earth. 
The only thing he can give you is disease." 

310 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ann. 37 

In the fall of the year in which the man said this the people, as 
usual, went out hunting and the man got lost and was forced to 
camp out in the wilderness overnight. So he built a fire and sat 
alongside of it. Suddenly he saw a man coming toward him. As 
soon as the stranger came up to him he took a seat on the opposite 
side of the fireplace. Then the stranger said, "I am the one whom 
you threatened to lack off this earth whenever you met him. You, 
furthermore, boasted that I could not kill you." Then he pointed 
his finger in a line with the man's heart. But the man remained 
seated near the fireplace without moving. Then he did this again, 
yet the man still remained in his former position. Then the third 
time he did it and said, "In the center of the heart." The man, 
however, remained seated just as before. Then the stranger 
exclaimed, "Who are you anyhow?" and pointed his finger at him. 
But the man did not move. Then the stranger (Disease-giver) 
pleaded with the man to die so that it might not be said that he had 
failed in the " mission" for which he had been created. He promised 
the man that if he would oblige him and die he could come back to 
earth again within four days. Finally the man consented. He 
went home and told his folks that he was going to a certain place to 
die for the space of four days and that they should, under no con- 
ditions, go to see him there, for in that case he would surely die. 
Then he dressed himself in his best clothes and went to the place 
where he was to meet Disease-giver. (He rested his head against a 
tree and died.) However, on the third day his wife could not resist 
the desire to see him, so she went to the place where her husband 
was leaning against the tree. Then he really died. After his death 
a red spot was \ isible upon his forehead.32 

Methods of Bringing the Spirits into Relation with Man 

Fasting. — Fasting has been discussed before. There are two things 
to be remembered in connection with it — first, that it is a method of 
superinducing a religious feeling; and, secondly, that this religious 
feeling in turn is bound up with the desire for preserving and per- 
petuating socio-economic life values. Among the Winnebago the 
desirability of the conditions superinduced by fasting lay not so 
much in the emotional pleasure it gave, although this is not to be 
underestimated, as in the belief which the shamans had developed, 
that such a state was essential for placing people in a position 
enabling them to overcome certain crises in life, which it was reason- 
able to believe might take place. 

Mental concentration. — To the religiously inclined Winnebago the 
efficacy of a blessing, of a ceremony, etc., depended upon what they 

" This is not supposed to be a myth hut the real experience of a man named James Smith. 

kadin] RELIGION 311 

called ''concentrating one's mind" upon the spirits, upon the details 
of the ritual, or upon the precise purpose to be accomplished. All 
other thoughts were to be rigidly excluded, they believed. This was 
the insistent admonition of the Winnebago elders to the youth who was 
fasting. He was to center his mind completely on the spirits, for his 
blessing would be in direct proportion to the power of concentration 
he was capable of. The Winnebago believed that the relation between 
man and the spirits was established by this concentration and that 
no manner of care in ritualistic detail could take its place. Very fre- 
quently failure on a warpath or lack of efficacy of a ritual was 
attributed to the fact that the Indian or Indians had been lacking in 
the intensity of their "concentration." 

Offerings and sacrifices. — The theory of offering and sacrifice held 
by the Winnebago has been discussed before. To the important 
deities offerings were made at the great ceremonies. These offerings 
consisted of tobacco preeminently, buckskins, and whatever the 
particular spirit was supposed to like. The animal spirits were 
given their favorite foods — honey to the bear, for instance. Dogs 
were offered to Disease-giver at the war-bundle feasts. Whether 
human sacrifices ever existed it is difficult to say. In the tale of 
Wegi'ceka a child is offered to Earthmaker, and there is reason to 
believe that this may represent a survival of human sacrifice. 

Tobacco could be offered at any time and was so offered to the vari- 
ous genii loci whenever an individual passed their precincts. 

Prayers. — For examples of prayers reference must be made to the 
descriptions of the ceremonies. Among the Winnebago, and doubt- 
less everywhere else, the objects of the prayer are always the socio- 
economic life values. What in these values is stressed depends 
upon the ambitions of the individual, and consequently it happens 
that individuals may pray for abstract blessings or ideal objects, 
although this is rare. Prayers are undoubtedly always accompanied 
by a religious feeling when made by the religious man, but frequently 
become mere formulas in the hands of the lay Indian. 

The Folkloristic Concepts 

Tin concept of evil. — It is extremely difficult to understand exactly 
what the Winnebago concept of evil is. They undoubtedly postu- 
late the existence of evil and they have theoretically a host of evil 
spirits, the waxop'i'ni cicilc. Youths will be warned not to fast at certain 
times and children will carefully be kept at home after dark for fear 
of the evil spirits. Yet in spite of all this, no even fairly definite idea 
of what these evil spirits are and what they look like can be obtained. 
One almost gets the impression that the notion of evil spirits belongs 
to an older strata of Winnebago beliefs and that what we find to-day 

312 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ann. 37 

is but a faint survival of former times. The older myths are full of 
references to the evil spirits, and the cosmological myths represent 
the world as infested with evil spirits who are on the point of exter- 
minating the human race until the culture heroes come to the rescue. 
It would almost seem as if, from a purely matter-of-fact point of 
view, these early culture heroes had destroyed all the evil spirits. 
Certainly they are not regarded as of great consequence, for if they 
were we ought to find a certain number of prayers addressed to them 
asking them not to harm anyone. They seem to be mere bogies, 
personifications of fear, and that is perhaps why they are so intimately 
connected with darkness. 

At the present time the vast majority of Winnebago ascribe evil, 
in so far as they explain it at all, to three causes — either to some 
failure on their part to perform a rite in the prescribed way, to 
the fact that they have not invoked the spirits for protection (i. e., 
attempted to pass through life without the aid of the spirits), or to the 
evil machinations of other men. Often one derives the impression 
that they accept evil and do not try to explain it. It seems to be a 
trait characteristic of the Winnebago, and perhaps characteristic of 
other North American tribes, that explanations are developed for 
the positive aspects of things. Certainly it would require some 
thought on the part of a Winnebago to explain why a war party 
that had, in the opinion of the chief, all the necessary requirements 
for victory, should nevertheless be defeated. He would doubtless 
find some reason, after a while, but it would be an afterthought and 
would probably vary from individual to individual. In some cases 
lack of success would be ascribed to the fact that an individual had 
been misled by an evil spirit, but this is clearly a secondary explana- 
tion because the individual, when questioned, would admit that he had 
no way of telling whether this was so until he had failed in some- 
thing. We base this statement on an actual instance. 

There is some evidence to show that there may have originally 
existed among the Winnebago a belief that the spirits were neither 
good nor bad; that they could be either at different times. In two 
notable instances, that of Disease-giver and Water-spirit, this is true 
at the present time. The former deity is the only one to whom 
prayers are addressed beseeching him not to present to man his 
death-dealing side. 

In the myths we find a definite incarnation of evil in the case of 
a spirit called Herecgu'nina. The meaning of this word as given by 
a Winnebago, and which seems to be justified, is "he whose existence 
is doubtful." If this is an old Winnebago word it would confirm 
the view advanced above, that the Winnebago were not very much 
concerned about the evil spirits. There is, however, a possibility 
that Herecgu'nina is, in part, a post-Columbian development due 

badin] RELIGION 313 

to Christian influence. The one place where he plays an important 
role, the myth of the twins, shows definite indications of European 
influence. The only thing that militates against such an assumption 
is the fact that there does not seem to be any particular reason why 
the existence of a chief evil spirit should have been doubted, even 
if we were to grant that Christian influence extended the belief. The 
French of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries had a very definite 
idea of the devil and made it a point to tell the Indians that all their 
former habits were due to deceptions the devil had practiced upon 
them. To-day such an answer is the first that a Christianized Winne- 
bago or a member of the new Peyote cult will give an ethnologist. 
Perhaps, after all, it is a very old Winnebago conception, a confir- 
mation of the view promulgated before, that in former times the 
'Winnebago had a very definite conception of evil spirits taking an 
active part in the affairs of man to his detriment. The figure of 
Herecgu'nina is well defined and it would be ridiculous, in our 
opinion, to believe that the shamans would have done anything to 
develop it. We have clear indications of what the shamans were 
trying to do with this conception. They were attempting to bring 
it into some relation with the concept of Earthmaker, a beneficent 
All-Father, and to do so they were even willing to claim that 
Herecgu'nina was the first attempt of Earthmaker to create a spirit ; 
that Earthmaker was dissatisfied with his work and threw it away; 
that then Herecgu'nina watched Earthmaker create spirits and imi- 
tated him, the evil spirits representing these imitations. The 
shamans, we should expect, would have done all in their power to 
lessen the importance of Herecgu'nina, even to deny his existence, and, 
in this connection, it may be of significance that one Winnebago 
interpreted his name to mean, " He-who-seems-to-exist-but-who- 
does-not." 

Whatever the case may be, this much is clear, that in the twin 
myth he is represented as a deity as powerful as Earthmaker, whom 
Earthmaker can not destroy; upon whom the twins play jokes but 
whom they cannot really harm. 

The concept of disease. — Disease is rarely ascribed to the spirits. 
Like lack of success, it is regarded as a fact of existence, and when 
it is explained it is believed to be due either to the carelessness of 
man in trying to pass through life without the aid of the spirits or 
to the evil machinations of other men. 

The deity known as Disease-giver is the one exception to the rule 
that the Winnebago spirits do not directly cause disease, for he is 
sometimes described as scattering death broadcast over the earth. 

The concepts of death, after-life, and reincarnation. — Death is rarely, 
if ever, ascribed to the spirits. It likewise is a fact of existence and, 
186S230— 22 21 

314 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ANN. 37 

when explained, is laid at the door of some evil man. Death at old 
age is clearly taken for granted. Where explanations are advanced, 
they are always for the deaths of individuals before their time, or 
at least before what the Winnebago consider their time. 

The Winnebago look at death in two ways — as being, first, a dif- 
ferent kind of consciousness from that possessed in life, and, secondly, 
as being a cessation of certain kinds of intercourse between individuals. 
Death is regarded as a "stumbling," after which the individual goes 
right on as if nothing had happened. He does not know he is dead 
until he sees his body. The individual is divested of all his corporeal 
investment and desires. In the myth of the journey of the soul to 
spirit land the ghost is not entirely a spirit until the old woman 
whom he meets brains him, thus, by destroying the seat of con- 
sciousness, depriving him of all corporeality and carnal desires. 
The ghost then becomes a spirit, in some cases of the same type as 
the true spirits. 

Although the Winnebago know that after death they will never see 
people again, they do not feel that all kinds of intercou~e have 
ceased. The deceased may appear to a living individual in dreams 
or visions; he may talk to him or make his presence felt in a multi- 
tude of ways; and since, as we pointed out before, the test of exist- 
ence is the consciousness of some kind of contact, such intercourse 
may be of a very intense type. 

This lack of a feeling of discontinuity between the living and the 
dead is emphasized by the Winnebago concept of after-life and 
reincarnation. 

After-life is but life on earth, only idealized. Everything is pro- 
vided. All carnal desires have been done away with and men and 
women spend their time in one long round of enjoyment and bliss. 
Something of the fear of ghosts lingers here, however, for when living 
individuals try to reach spirit land — and a number of such instances 
are mentioned in the myths, particularly in the origin myth of the 
Ghost dance — these spirits are likely to be harmful. 

By the belief in reincarnation the Winnebago entirely bridge the 
gulf between life and death. In other words, we seem to have a 
cycle consisting of life (consciousness), after-life (unconsciousness 
from a corporeal viewpoint), and life (reincarnation). To live again 
is the greatest desire of the Winnebago, and practically every secret 
society holds this out as the lure to the outsider. If you join the 
Medicine Lodge you will become reincarnated, they say, and the other 
ritualistic organizations make the same claim. But not only by 
joining an organization is it possible to be reincarnated; if you live 
an upright life, if you die on the battlefield, reincarnation also awaits 
vou. 

badin] RELIGION 315 

The author was fortunate enough to obtain an account by a well- 
known Winnebago shaman of his various reincarnations. 

T. C.'s account of his two reincarnations. — I once lived in a party 
that numbered about 20 camps. When I had grown up to be a lad, 
although one not large enough to handle a gun, a war party attacked 
us and killed us all. I did not know, however, that I had been killed. 
I thought that I was running about as usual until I saw a heap of 
bodies on the ground and mine among them. No one was there to 
bury us, so there we lay and rotted. 

I (i. e., my ghost) was taken to the place where the sun sets (the 
west). There I lived with an old couple. This place (spirit land) 
is an excellent place and the people have the best of times. If you 
desire to go anywhere, all that you have to do is to wish yourself 
there and you reach it. While at that place I thought I would come 
back to earth again, and the old man with whom I was staying said 
to me, "My son, did you not speak about wanting to go to the earth 
again?" I had, as a matter of fact, only thought of it, yet he knew 
what I wanted. Then he said to me, "You can go, but you must 
ask the chief first." 

Then I went and told the chief of the village of my desire, and he 
said to me, "You may go and obtain your revenge (upon the people 
who killed your relatives and you)." 

Then I was brought down to earth. I did not enter a woman's 
womb, but I was taken into a room. There I remained, conscious 
at all times. One day I heard the noise of little children outside and 
some other sounds, so I thought I would go outside. Then it seemed 
to me that I went through a door, but I was really being born again 
from a woman's womb. As I walked out I was struck with the sudden 
rush of cold air and I began to cry. 

At that place I was brought up and I was taught to fast a great 
deal. Afterwards I did nothing but go to war, and I certainly 
took revenge for the death of myself and my relatives, that being 
the purpose for which I had come to earth. 

There I lived until I died of old age. All at once my bones became 
unjointed, my ribs fell in, and I died the second time. I felt no more 
pain at death, then, than I had felt the first time. 

This time I was buried in the manner used at that time. I was 
wrapped in a blanket and then laid in the grave. Sticks were placed 
in the grave first. There in the grave I rotted. I watched the people 
as they buried me. 

As I was lying there, some one said to me, "Come, let us go away." 
So then we went toward the setting of the sun. There we came to a 
village where we met all the dead. I was told that I would have to 
stop there for four nights, but in reality I stayed there four years. 
The people enjoy themselves there. They have all sorts of dances 

316 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ann. 37 

of a lively kind all the time. From that place we went up to the 
place where Earthmaker lived and there I saw him and talked to him, 
face to face, even as I am talking to you now. I saw the spirits too, 
and, indeed, I was like one of them. 

From that place I came to this earth again for the third time, and 
here I am. I am going through the same that I knew before. 

The concept of the soul. — This concept is not clearly developed as a 
separate entity among the Winnebago on account of their strong 
belief in reincarnation. Their notion of the soul is merged in that 
of the noncorporeal ghost who eventully comes to earth again. 

The Cosmological Ideas 

The cosmological ideas are of two types — those that are clearly of 
a folkloristic origin and those that have been developed by shaman- 
istic reinterpretations. To the former class belong all the creative 
acts of the tricksters and culture heroes, like Wdk'djuyk'agd and Hare, 
and to the latter the systematic creation of the world by Earth- 
maker. 

What is probably the oldest form of the Winnebago cosmological 
notions is that concerned with the general destruction of the bad 
spirits by Hare and by such spirits as the Thunderbirds, Morning 
Star, etc., and the removal of obstacles. Often the present character- 
istics of the earth are formed accidentally, as, for instance, the origin 
of the valleys, mountains, and lakes, as given in the myth of "Holy 
One." Even in the thoroughly remodeled general origin myth, 
Earthmaker is not conceived of as having purposely created the world. 

The Winnebago believed that there were four worlds, one beneath 
the other, presided over, respectively, by Earthmaker, Trickster 
(Wak'dfuylc'aga), Turtle, and Hare. Hare rules over the world 
on which man lives. There seems to be some confusion as to who 
rules over the last earth, because it is also definitely stated that 
Traveler (a Water-spirit) is in control of it. 

Part III 
CHAPTER XII 

CEREMONIAL ORGANIZATION 
Introduction 

The Winnebago had four types of ceremonies: clan ceremonies, 
in which only members of the clan could participate; religious so- 
cieties, for which only people who had obtained blessings from the 
same spirits were eligible; the Medicine Dance, in which only initiated 
individuals could take part; and a semipermanent organization like 
the TwJc'ixe're dance, in which only individuals who were returning 
from a war party and had counted coup could participate. In this 
grouping we do not include ordinary feasts, such as the feasts con- 
nected with different medicines and the pleasure dances. 

Every clan seems to have had a clan war-bundle feast (often called 
winter feast) and also a specific clan feast. We have reason to suspect 
that the war-bundle feasts were originally private feasts given by 
the owner of a war bundle. Then as the war bundles became of great 
importance to the clan to which the owners belonged, they were after 
a while regarded as clan possessions. But even at the present time, 
while many would contend that the war bundle belonged to the clan 
as such and could not be alienated, everyone realizes that it is the 
property, whether held in trust or not, of a certain individual, and 
that he can, up to a certain point, do what he wishes with it. For a 
detailed analysis of a winter or war-bundle feast see page 427. 

The clan feasts were specific feasts at which offerings were made to 
the clan animal. A good description of one is that of the Snake 
clan on page 325. 

Perhaps the most characteristic ceremonies of the Winnebago were 
those of secret societies in which membership was dependent upon 
blessings from one and the same spirit. There were at least four of 
these — the society of those who have been blessed by the night spirits, 
the society of those who have been blessed by the buffaloes, the society 
of those who have been blessed by ghosts, and the society of those 
who have been blessed by grizzly bears. 

In order to prevent any misunderstanding with regard to the buffalo 
societies, it might be well to point out that there were three of them — 

317 

318 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ann. 37 

the Buffalo clan feast, the society of those who have been blessed by 
the buffaloes, and the society of those who wear buffalo headdresses; 
the last apparently of Sioux origin. 

The medicine dance has been described by the author in some 
detail,1 and a general description will be found on page 350. 

Of the semipermanent societies, the hoik' ice' re dance is given after 
every successful war party by those four individuals who have 
counted coup. It has only a temporary existence, for it ceases to be 
an organization as soon as each individual performance is over. Its 
main purpose seems to be the desire to transfer to the victor, from the 
skulls or the scalps of the slain enemies obtained on that particular 
warpath, the valor and prowess for which the slain person was noted. 

In addition to the above ceremonies there were a number of pleasure 
and miscellaneous dances that are described on page 379. 

There were apparently a number of very important feasts connected 
with certain medicines, the principal one of which was the Black 
Earth Medicine feast; but unfortunately no account of this was 
obtained, owing to lack of time. 

Ceremonies Associated With the Clans 

the clan feasts 

THE THUNDERBIRD CLAN OR CHIEF PEAST 

Introduction. — The chief feast, or, as it may more properly be 
called, the feast of the bird clans, is generally given once a year, 
sometimes in late spring. It was also given on certain other occasions 
for specific purposes. At the present time it is given by the members 
of the Thunderbird clan and the prevalence of the appellation 
"chief feast" would seem to indicate that it was at all times the 
feast of the Thunderbird clan. We ought then to expect to find 
clan feasts of the other members of the uwjgeregi division, namely, 
of the Warrior, Eagle, and Pigeon clans. No such feasts are given 
to-day, however, and the members of these latter three clans always 
speak of the chief or bird feast as their specific clan feast. As such 
it is also regarded by the members of the mannegi division. 

In the total absence of historical data it is quite useless to specu- 
late about the significance of one feast sufficing for four clans, where 
in strict analogy to the feasts of the other clans we would expect to 
find one for each clan; yet the idea that naturally presents itself is 
that we are in reality dealing with one clan that has become split up 
into four subclans. Such a view has been expressed by J. O. Dorsey,3 
but the data upon which he based his opinion seem to us highly 

1 The Ritual and Significance of the Winnebago Medicine Dance, Journal of American Folklore, vol. 
xxrv, No. xcn, 1911. 
•Siouan Sociology, 15th Ann. Rept. Bur. Amer. Eton., p. 241. 

radin] CEREMONIAL ORGANIZATION 319 

unsatisfactory. Apparently his statement is based upon the occur- 
rence of four mythical ancestors. The similarity of the Winnebago 
social organization with that of the Dhegiha and Tciwere branches of 
the Siouan family, in which subclans seem to be found, appears to 
have influenced Dorsey considerably in making this assumption. 

It is true that in their account of origins the Warrior clan speak of 
themselves as having sprung from the second of the birds mentioned 
in the origin myth of the Thunderbird clan and this statement permits 
us to infer that the other two clans bear a similar relationship to those 
four ancestral birds who, according to legend, alit on a tree near Red 
Banks. But this is, of course, merely a mythical account, and the 
data imbedded in the clan myths must be used with the greatest cau- 
tion in so far as they can be expected to throw any light on early 
conditions of social organization. 

All that we can say now is that the chief feast will have to be 
considered as belonging to all the four bird clans. But this is not 
to be interpreted to mean that an amalgamation of four histori- 
cally distinct feasts has taken place, nor that, on the other hand, the 
four clans were originally subdivisions of one unit. 

The Chief feast. — Informant, member of the Thunderbird clan:4 
The chief of the tribe is at the head of all the different bands and 
groups of people that exist among the Winnebago. As chief he has 
full charge of them. All the others are, so to say, his attendants and 
servants. When his people wish anything they go to him and ask 
him to obtain a blessing for them. Thus all the members of the 
tribe, the children as well as the mature men, go to him, and to help 
them the chief gives the feast known as the chief feast. He sacrifices 
to Earthmaker, and all who are present offer up some little gift in 
thankfulness, as this is a thing of supreme sacredness. All those 
who are present — the children, the women, the middle-aged, and the 
old men — in fact, whosoever attends the feast, see to it that they eat 
some of the food distributed. 

As this feast is given in honor of their chief, all the members of 
the tribe, but most particularly the members of the Bird clan, pre- 
pare large offerings, so that there should be abundant food to eat. 
They bring all kinds of food — different kinds of meat, different kinds 
of vegetables, all manner of berries — in short, all sorts of edibles. 
These are to be offered to the spirits, and by means of these offer- 
ings they expect that their life will be filled with all that is good. 
It is to obtain these blessings that the feast is given. 

When his people get sick, when it appears that an epidemic is 
likely, then the chief also gives the chief feast. It is for the purpose 

« Unfortunately, it was not possible to obtain a full and detailed account of this feast. As in type, how- 
ever, all the clan feasts are identical, this deficiency can be made up in part by comparing it with those 
feasts like the snake, bear, and buffalo that have been obtained in considerable detail. 

320 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ann. 37 

of stopping the spread of the sickness, whatever it may be, and for 
repairing the ravages caused thereby. For this the feasters pray 
"May our people recover and thrive," they say. "May they never, 
get sick." Then they make ail those present offer up tobacco. As 
each, one offers tobacco Earthmaker is aware of it and accepts. 
Thereby do we live and become strengthened. If Earthmaker 
smokes the tobacco offered him he will give life in return. The 
people offer tobacco that they may obtain life. 

They call the Thunderbird people chiefs, and it is from among 
their ranks that they select the chief of the tribe.5 

It is the duty of the chief to ward off all evils. This is one of their 
missions in life. They preach only what is good. 

"Chief," they used to say to him, "try to do something for your 
people. Try to accomplish something difficult for them. Try to 
accomplish something difficult for your village. If you accomplish 
such a thing for the benefit of your people they will look up to 
you and respect you. Have pity on your people and love them. 
If a man is very poor, help him. Give him and his family food. 
Whatever they ask, give it to them. If your people get into trouble 
with one another, take your pipe and, walking in front, die for them, 
if necessary. From actions like these they will know that you are 
really their chief. There, in front of them, with your pipe in your 
hands, you will be lying on the ground, dead. 

"If your people are about to sacrifice a dog and he gets loose and 
runs into your tent, you must let them have something in place of 
this dog for their feast. Do not let them kill the dog in your lodge. 
This would be sacrilegious. Grant the dog his life. Similarly, if an 
individual who has murdered a person escapes and takes refuge in 
your lodge, give him his life. Use all the wealth you have and give 
it to him, that he may employ it to make peace with the relatives of 
the person he has killed. Help these people who are in need. Do not 
think of your wealth. When that is gone you will get some more. 
Do your duty. Do not pass anyone unnoticed, not even a child. 
If people have come and asked you for something, do not let them 
go away without attempting to do something for them. You are a 
chief. Do some good for your people. In that way you will show 
that you are a chief. 'Our chief,' they will all call you. The 
children that see you will call you chief. Whoever talks to you will 
call you chief. If you are good to your people, they will show their 
respect by being bashful in your presence. If you are not good to 
them they will not think you a chief and they will not be bashful 
in your presence. So, at all times, do as a chief ought to do. Be 
good-natured to all the people and in this way you will show that 

' What follows is a typical speech delivered by a member ot the Thunderbird clan. 

EADIN] 

CEREMONIAL ORGANIZATION 

321 

you are indeed a chief. And then even the people of other tribes 
will say that such and such people have a good chief." 

Informant, member of the Bear clan: The Indians always cele- 
brated in summer. It was a season of rejoicing because the chief 
fed the tribe. It somewhat symbolized a mother bird feeding her 

young ones. The Thunderbird 
clan is in charge of the tribe, 
and when the chief feeds the 
tribe all rejoice and the standard 
is raised. 

THE BEAR CLAN FEAST (FIRST VERSION) 

Two versions of the Bear clan 
feast Cfig. 36) were obtained, for- 
tunately both from a man and a 
woman. The feast was generally 
given during the month called 
Hundjwi'ra (i. e., bear month), 
corresponding roughly to our 
January. 

Informant, member of the clan 
(female) : The host tells his sis- 
ter's son, or, if he should not hap- 
pen to have any, a member of 
the Wolf clan, to build a long 
lodge. This attendant then fills 
kettles either with blueberries or 
raspberries or any other fruit that 
the bears are fond of, and places 
them on the fireplace. Some- 
times dried corn is also brought. 

The participants enter the 
lodge at dusk. The host pre- 
cedes the invited guests. In en- 
tering they proceed in a direction 
contrary to the hands of the 
clock. The host always sits at 
the southeast end of the lodge and the guests occupy seats next to 
him, proceeding from the southeast to the northwest. 

When all are seated the host rises and addresses his guests as 
follows: 

"Members of my clan who are seated here, I greet you all. To 
those from whom I have sprung I make these offerings of tobacco 
and this headdress (i. e., red feathers). I was told by my ancestors 
that if I did this I would obtain for myself, for my relatives, and for 

Fig. 36.— Plan of Bear clan war-bundle feast as given 
by John Rave, a. Host. 6, Relatives of host, c, 
Warrior clan, d, Wolf clan, e, Thunderbird clan. 
/, Eagle clan, g, Buffalo clan. 1, Buckskin for 
earthmaker. 2, Buckskin for turtle. 3, Buckskin 
for thunderbird. 4, Buckskin for sun. 5, Buck- 
skin for moon. 6, Buckskin for morning star. 7, 
Buckskin for earth. S, Buckskin for fire. 9, Buck- 
skin for heroka. 10, Buckskin for night spirits. 

322 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. an.v. 37 

the members of my clan, sufficient blessings to guide us all safely 
through life, and to make our lives pleasant. I will not tell the 
origin myth (of our clan) because it is sacred and it must not be told 
without the proper ceremony, for the telling would then injure an 
individual. Besides there are many clans beside our own represented 
here and it is not proper that these should hear it." 

He then speaks of the four ancestral bear-beings who were created 
in the beginning. 

When the feast is ready one of the Wolf clansmen gives four 
soldier whoops. Then the fire is allowed to die out, and as soon 
as the lodge is in complete darkness the feasters begin to eat. Before 
eating, the host sings four songs. These are the clan songs and are 
only sung at these feasts or on the occasion of the death of a clans- 
man. 

Those who partake of food at the feast may be members of any 
clan except the Bear clan. The members of the latter clan do not 
eat at their own feast. 

Everyone attending must bring his own wooden spoon and must 
use it with his left hand. There are four wooden dishes in which 
the food is served. These are arranged in the lodge in a certain 
maimer. 

The guests sit around these dishes and eat with their own spoons. 

The feast is given in the first bear month. Some one generally 
watches the moon and as soon as the new moon is visible the feast 
begins. The feathers and the tobacco to be offered are placed in 
four little troughs made of basswood bark, each about 1 foot long. 
These are then placed on the south side, of the fireplace. 

When the meal is over the attendant or Wolf clansman generally 
says a few words of thanks to the host and then the host hi turn 
thanks those who have participated and tells them that the feast 
is now over. All now pass out, the one next to the host leaving 
first and the rest in succession, the host himself remaining until 
the end. 

When the feast is over the tobacco and the feathers are taken 
away from the lodge and carried in a southern direction to a place 
(under a tree) that has been especially cleared and sanctified. Any 
person may therafter go there, offer tobacco, and ask for long life. 

Informant, member of the clan (male): "Well, soldiers, your 
moon is about to appear. It is good. So come forth, for it is at 
this time that the spirits asked to be remembered. Let us send, on 
this occasion, to the place at which we all originated, whatever we 
possess of wealth. This is what the spirits asked of old. Let us 
therefore put the kettle on and prepare the feast. 

"This is the way in which we prepare the feast. I offer only one 
small kettle. Here is my offering. I pray that what 1 offer may 
suffice and bring enough blessings from the spirits to include all the 

eadin] CEREMONIAL ORGANIZATION 323 

Indians who exist and especially those who are present at this feast. 
For that reason do we deliver these speeches. We were told that 
at the place where we originated our ancestors now remain, regard- 
ing it as their home. There they expectantly await us. So our 
ancestors spoke. Our offering at this feast is intended for that pur- 
pose. Let us pour tobacco for them. Let us place at the edge of 
the fire the four bark receptacles. Now listen to me for I am going 
to pour tobacco. 

(He now addresses the four original clan beings.) 

"On the north side, Earthmaker created you. Four brothers he 
placed there (you being one of them). And when one of them 
started for the earth those remaining asked to be remembered at this 
feast. These are the objects they asked to be given as offerings — 
tobacco, feathers, and boiled food. Earthmaker gave you that kind of 
life-giving material. We, in turn, ask you for this, so that when you 
take our offerings you will grant us what we ask. Here they are, 
the offerings with which you wished to be remembered. The spirits 
promised to give them. We are praying now not only for our own, 
but for all the clans. Our life wdl be strengthened, it was said. 
These words that I am telling you now, theyused. We must act very 
cautiously in this, they said. 

"If you place a portion of boiled food away as an offering, you 
must use it only in that particular place. Do not do otherwise. 
This way only is the correct way to do it." 

Then he spoke to the attendant and said, "Are you ready 1 Go and 
get all these people wdio are to eat. They must bring their spoons 
with them." 

Then the attendant brought the people into the lodge and put 
some food in their plates. 

"Place the people around the plate and let them be seated," the 
host said. "Now turn the fire down and get ready. Hold your 
spoons in your left hand, for with that only are you allowed to eat. 
None of you» must talk nor laugh. You must do what I tell you. 
Before the meal begins let us sing. Let us do it now." (They then 
sing the four clan songs.) 

"Thus they have told us. That way it was at the place where we 
began life. 

"Now the meal is over. We have had a minor council. We have 
acted correctly. It is good that you who are present have come at 
our request. You have eaten very well, and we thank you for it. 
This is what those from whom we originated told us to do. This 
council-feast they pleaded for. 'We should act very cautiously, 
they said. That you have done. It is good that you have eaten 
for our benefit. Now is about time for us to finish. I greet you all." 

324 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ann.37 

THE BEAR CLAN FEAST (SECOND VERSION) 

Informant, member of Bear clan : As soon as the first bear month 
is visible they have their feast. They do not use meat but products 
of the earth. The feast is held at night, never in the daytime. The 
people always save up food some time before giving the feast. The 
favorite dishes of the bear are sugar and blueberries. When they 
can not obtain these they use other vegetables. Indeed, any product 
of the earth is all right. 

When they prepare to give the feast they get the food ready and 
have some tobacco on hand. On the first day of the first bear month 
they put on the fire some kettles with dried corn mixed with fruit and 
others containing green corn. The latter is boiled. They also have 
ground sugar. When these are ready the feast attendant goes around 
the village to invite the people. When all have entered the lodge and 
taken their proper seats, then the host rises and addresses them: 

"All my relatives who are seated here, I greet you. It is not through 
blessings of our own that we can always make offerings of tobacco. 
My grandfather was blessed by a spirit called Black Fur, a spirit who 
is in command of all the other spirits. This spirit told us that we 
could perform the ceremony in this way. It is for that reason we 
have made an effort to heat water for him." The first request we 
make is that if we ever go on the warpath, we may conquer. Our 
grandfather was also blessed with life by the bear spirit 7 and he told 
him that he would grant him and his posterity whatever they asked. 
We shall therefore send to this spirit a pipeful of tobacco, two kettles 
full of food, and some tree sap.8 So much will we send him, accom- 
panied by an offering of tobacco. 

"As soon as the attendant gets everything ready the feasting will 
begin." 

Then the attendant puts food in every plate, and when he has 
finished the host speaks again. 

"Relatives, it is said that when the plates are supplied to you 
filled with food, then you should begin to eat. Do not, however, use 
your right hands in eating." 

The host tells the feasters to use their left hands in eating, and they 
obey him. Before starting to eat all the fires are put out and the 
people eat in the dark. 

In the spring of the year this feast is given again. Twice a year 
it is given. 

The feact 9 was always given with some choice dried corn that had 
been put away for this event. Once when it was time to give the 
feast in the first bear month, the two daughters of the man who was 

• Boil soup and prepare food in general. 

7 Black Fur is apparently a ceremonial expression for bear. 

8 Ceremonialname for maple sugar. 

• What follows is an account of why this particular feast was discontinued. 

eadin] CEREMONIAL, ORGANIZATION 325 

to give it had their menses and were fasting. When the feast was 
about to be held there was no food and their mother gave the girls 
some of the sacred food and the unclean girls boiled it and ate it. 

The following spring when the girls were out helping their mother 
tan some hide a bear approached them and tried to kill the girls. The 
old woman fought the bear off as best she could, but he paid no 
attention to her and tried to get at the girls. Finally he killed the 
girls. Then the old woman attacked the bear and finally threw 
him down and kdled him, using her tanning stick as a weapon. 

Now this bear was not an ordinary bear such as live on this earth, 
but his body was covered with blue clay. He had come out of a 
spring of water shortly before he came to this place. The girls had 
eaten sacred food when they were unclean, and that is why this bear 
came and killed them. 

Since then that particular band has stopped giving this bear feast. 

THE SNAKE CLAN FEAST 

When a person wishes to give a snake feast, four chickens must be 
obtained. The nephew of the feast giver is then told to prepare these 
chickens and make the general preparations. 

The feast is given in the fall, just as the snakes are supposed to 
go into their winter quarters and close their doors. The winter is 
their night, and then they go to sleep. 

Shortly before the feast begins the host takes out a bundle con- 
taining four snake skins — a yellow-snake skin, a rattlesnake skin, a 
blow-snake skin, and a bull-snake skin. In honor of these he gives 
his feast and makes his offerings. 

As the fall of the year is to the snakes the same as our evening, the 
Winnebago give this feast in their honor then, in much the same way 
as we have our supper before retiring for the night. The snake skins 
are representatives of the first four snakes Earthmaker made and 
which he pierced through the earth in the direction of the east. The 
snake skins are kept to represent the four original snake-beings and 
to keep evil away from homes. That is why offerings are made to 
them. Four men only are invited to this feast (as main participants), 
and they must each eat a chicken. 

The host himself opens the door for the snakes. In front of him, 
next to the fireplace, he makes four holes in the ground, thus opening 
the door for them. There he likewise places tobacco for them. 
First he pours tobacco in the fire, for the fire is the mediator be- 
tween the people and the spirit. The fire tells the spirit the wishes 
of the people and is, in general, in charge of the members of the tribe. 
For that reason they always pour tobacco upon it. 

Now the host rises and speaks. "Grandfather (fire), you who 
stand in the center of the lodge, I offer you tobacco, for you are the 
interpreter (between the spirits and human beings), and I know that 

326 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ann. 37 

you will deliver the requests I address to our grandfather-who-crawls 
(the snake), just as I have said them. I offer you tobacco. 

"To you likewise, grandfathers, you whom Earthmaker created 
first and placed within the earth; you whom Earthmaker placed in 
control of abundance of life and whose war clubs were made heavy, 
so that nothing could miss them ; to you we offer these things. What- 
ever you can give us, we ask of you in return. Here are our offerings 
of food, tobacco, and eagle feathers. We place them here at your door. 
We ask that you bless us with victory in war. We know that the 
weapons you carry make you invulnerable, and we wish likewise to 
be invulnerable. You never fail to obtain what you desire with your 
clubs, and we ask that the same power be bestowed upon us. As 
the years pass may the blessing we obtain increase in power. When 
you look out upon the world life emanates from your eyes. May this 
life be given to our posterity. As we strut about in the short number 
of days allotted to us may you keep out of our path, so that we 
may not be frightened. Yet should we cross any of your paths may 
we be strengthened thereby. It is said that you are the grass, and 
that is why we ask you to bless us. Bless us because you are in pos- 
session of the life which we desire. For these reasons do we offer 
you tobacco, feathers, and food." 

Then the host poured tobacco into the four holes that he had made 
in the ground and placed feathers there. Then he took a little food 
from each of the kettles and poured it into the four holes. After 
that he greased the heads of the snake skins which were lying before 
him with kettle grease and poured tobacco on the heads of the snakes. 
He asked all his relatives to offer tobacco likewise and he put tobacco 
into the holes again and poured some upon the heads of the snakes. 

When those invited have arrived, someone who is a good speaker 
sits near the entrance, while another good speaker sits near the 
farthest end. After all have entered, the leader of the four partici- 
pants makes the circuit of the fireplace four times. He then sits 
down, and the host greets each one in turn, as follows: 

" I greet you all. It is good. How could I say aught but that it 
is good? I am a poor worthless fellow, yet you have remembered 
me. It is good. You did not look upon my unworthiness and think 
within your hearts he is a worthless fellow, but you thought of the 
spirits, and therefore you came to sit with me so that I might see 
your face. It is good. I have obtained four chickens, and the 
attendant is now cooking them. I suppose he has cooked them by 
this time, and we will soon be able to eat them. 

"I am attempting to cook water for the beings first created, so 
that we might be blessed with victory in war, and with life. That is 
what we are asking and what we would like to obtain from them 
before they (the spirits) retire for the night. It is our desire to be 
blessed year in, year out. 

eadin] CEREMONIAL ORGANIZATION 327 

" Your plates will be filled soon, so let me greet you again, you 
(humans) who are taking the place of the spirits. All you who are 
present I greet." 

The attendant now takes the kettles from the fire and takes the 
plate of the first of those sitting in the row. Then he takes the 
sharp stick that he holds in his hand, sticks it through one of the 
four chickens, and puts it in the plate of the first man. He passes 
the plate around the kettle four times, going from right to left, and 
finally he places it before the feaster. The feaster then says, "I 
thank you all," and the attendant passes on to the next one, and so 
in succession until he comes to the last person. Then the one first 
invited rises and says, "All those present, the host and the three 
other guests, do I greet." Then the speaker addresses the one sit- 
ting next to him, who greets him in return. In the same way ho 
greets the third and the fourth one. Then he speaks as follows: 

"It is good. Who would not be thankful for this? The host and 
his relatives present here are praying for life and victory, to the 
four greatest spirits Earthmaker ever made, to those spirits whom 
he pierced through the earth so that it might hold together. All the 
snakes whom we see on the earth are ruled by these four. From 
them have they asked blessings. The first human beings on earth 
saw these spirits face to face and, we are told, they used them for 
protection. These we see before us as the host has laid them out. 
We are told that blessings can be obtained by the use of these snakes. 

"I am indeed not a fit person to be invited to such a gathering as 
this, but the host has kindly overlooked my faults. My grand- 
father fasted and thirsted himself to death and he was blessed and 
his spirit taken to a spirit-home. That is what happened to my 
grandfather, for he told me this himself. The place where he was 
blessed was at Red Banks at a place where a creek flows into the 
sea (Green Bay). At the fork of this creek there was a hill lying 
east and west. It is there that the yellow snake-chief lives. To 
the home of this snake-chief my grandfather was taken. This 
snake was at this place gathering tobacco for all the spirits. There 
my grandfather was even blessed with their bodies. For this reason 
I always pour tobacco for them. And I have been given to under- 
stand that the spirits do not overlook the least fault (in the per- 
formance of the feast). They are always in our midst just as even 
the grass and the dust represent snakes. They know everything, 
they say. It is not safe to cross their path. As, however, the 
host is now making an offering to them, should we cross their path 
now it would even strengthen us. It is good. These clubs are 
heavy and they will not fail to strike everything within their reach. 
The host has asked for that power so that he might have 
victory (in war). They, the spirits, also have life to dispose of and 
that we ask of them also, giving them these offerings of tobacco, 

328 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ann.37 

feathers, and food. They will bless us I am certain, for I am told 
that they even know our thoughts and wishes (before we express 
them) , and are willing to grant them if we pour tobacco while making 
them. However, to-day we have done more. We have openly 
made a great offering to them. How could any spirit fail to see 
such an offering? For that reason (I know) they will surely bless 
us. And the blessings asked for the posterity will surely be granted. 
I feel that when I go home and talk to my children afterwards, they will 
be strengthened by the fact that I have taken part in the feast. All who 
are present, I greet. You, the host, I also greet. I greet you all." 

Then the second one invited rises and speaks. He thanks the 
host for the privilege of having been invited and encourages him 
and assures every one that they will surely be blessed, telling them 
why they should be blessed. 

Then the third one rises and says approximately the same as his 
predecessor. He also tells how his grandfather was blessed by the 
snakes, etc. 

Then the fourth one speaks, telling what the snakes do and that he 
himself was a member of the Snake clan and was consequently 
descended from the snakes. Inasmuch as he had partaken of the 
feast, all who were present would surely be blessed by the snakes. 
He assured them that what they asked would surely be granted. 
Then he greeted them and concluded. 

After that, all the four participants greet each other in turn again 
and when this is over they sit down and begin the feast. Each 
person must eat a chicken apiece. They must not leave anything 
on the plate, for it is a sacred feast. After they have eaten the 
chicken they are given soup to drink. 

When the feast is over the host throws cedar branches into the fire 
and the plates and the spoons are held over the smoke in order 
to purify them. The host then rises and says: 

"You, the first invited, and you, the second invited, etc., I greet 
you all. It is good that you have come and occupied seats at my 
request and I am grateful to you for it. Even were that all the 
blessing I was to receive, it would (be enough). But you have 
assured me that I would receive the blessings I longed for. You 
truly encouraged me. You told me of your grandfathers' blessings, 
so that I feel positive that I am blessed, for your grandfathers' bless- 
ings were surely great and I am sure everything could be obtained 
with them. Surely your grandfathers' blessings were equal to those 
of the spirits. It is good that you have indeed partaken of my 
feast. This must be what the older people said: 'Your life is 
(naturally) weak and 30U can only be strengthened by the counsel 
and advice of brave men.' Truly you have counciled with me and 
given me enough to live on. I thank you for the speeches you 
have delivered, for it is life to me. It is good. I greet you all." 

CHAPTER XIII 

RELIGIOUS SOCIETIES BASED ON BLESSINGS FROM 

SPIRITS 

Society of Those Who Have Received Blessings From the 

Night Spirits 

Informant, member of Thunderbird clan : Once a man went hunt- 
ing so that he might be able to get the game with which to give a feast. 
All of those who were to participate in the feast went along with him. 
After they had killed some deer they built a lodge. Then all the 
other feast-givers came into the lodge, bringing something toward the 
feast, as well as the tobacco which they were to offer. Some brought 
other things, even dogs, as their contribution to the feast. The dogs 
would be killed, singed, then boiled, and prepared in the same way as 
the deer. The meat would then be mixed with dry corn. The 
attendants, who were generally the nephews of the feast-givers, would 
look after the boiling of the food. Every time they gave a feast they 
selected these nephews to do the cooking and the general work 
connected with this ceremony. 

The nephew who acts as attendant accompanies a feast-giver on 
the warpath, where likewise he has to endure a great deal. Should 
his uncle be killed, it is his duty to be killed likewise and not to return 
home. 

He acted in this way because of his love for his uncle. The attend- 
ants do all the work whenever their uncles give a feast. They also 
arrange for the place where the feast is to be held; make the four 
invitation sticks; blacken them with charcoal and decorate them at 
the ends with fine and fluffy white eagle feathers. Then they prepare 
a bundle of tobacco containing about a pipeful. After these prepa- 
rations have been made one of the nephews goes around the village 
and presents the invitation sticks to every individual who had been 
blessed by the Night Spirits. These are called the night-blessed 
children. The night-blessed children thanked the messengers and 
assured them that they now felt they were obtaining life. Then those 
to whom the invitation stick had been presented go around asking 
their relatives to accompany them to the feast. There the guest and 
his relatives would meet at the appointed time. All those who re- 
ceived invitation sticks do the same. 

186823—22 22 329 

330 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ANN. 37 

The host at the same time puts himself in readiness to receive the 
guests. 

The two drums to be used are placed in the proper position with 
tobacco on top as an offering. The two gourds to be used are arranged 
in the same way, with offerings of tobacco on top. These four articles 
are placed in a row in front of the host, who pours tobacco upon them 
again and asks them for life. 

The host now rises and speaks as follows (first, however, offering 
tobacco to the fire, and telling the people of his own band how he 
had obtained his blessing, and from what source it had come) : 

"Grandfathers, when you blessed my grandfather with life you 
promised that as often as we would boil food for you and offer you a 
pipefid of tobacco, you would smoke it. So it has been said. Boiled 
water from an animal whom you considered the same as our own body, 
and spirit food he extended to you, as well as a pipefid of tobacco. 
This we also are sending you. And what could we ask of you in 
return but war? That it may be directed toward us, we pray you. 
Grandfathers, you who are called Happy Nights, when you blessed our 
grandfather you blessed him with endless war. So it has been said. 
That is what we ask for, that as you blessed our grandfather, so you 
bless us. We ask for the same things. You, likewise, grandfather, 
you who are called The-one-with-rounded-wood, when you blessed 
my grandfather you blessed him with life. That is what he said, and 
you asked him in return to make offerings of tobacco. Here is the 
tobacco. This night we are going to ask life of you. We desire that 
you give us and all who will be here to-night, life. As many people 
as will be seated here, we ask life for all of them." 

Then all who are present rise and, holding tobacco in each hand, 
walk around the lodge, pouring tobacco on the drums and the 
gourds, and some of it into the fire. They pour tobacco into the 
fire for the Night Spirits. For the Beings-with-rounded-wood they 
offer tobacco by pouring it upon the drums. The offering is made 
both to the drums and to the gourds directly. The tobacco bundles 
tied to the invitation sticks are offered to the four cardinal points 
and the four specially invited guests smoke this tobacco, because 
they are supposed to represent the four cardinal points. Behind the 
respective invited guests are placed two women, next to the wall, 
so that they might lead in the dance. When the invited guests 
come to the feast these women remain outside until the starting 
songs have been begun. 

The host sings these songs first and when he has finished the first 
invited guest enters the lodge, ejaculating peculiar sounds (that are 
probably meant as greetings). Continuing these sounds, he walks 
around the lodge until he comes to the place from which he has 
started. There he stops and speaks. "You who obtain life, you 

radin] RELIGIOUS SOCIETIES BASED ON BLESSINGS 331 

that council, relatives, all who are seated here, I greet you. It is 
good that you have taken pity upon me. All those that I have 
along with me, my relatives, you have caused them to think that 
they were to obtain life; that a great life was to come to us through 
you. And all this you have clone when we were leading worthless 
lives. It is good. If such an invitation were to be extended to 
people when they are sick and weakly, it would heal them; it would 
overcome their illness, it is said. It is good. When I think that 
our sick people will get well by reason of this feast, I am thankful. 
Up to the present our children have all been sickly, but from now 
on we will have no cause to worry. I am thankful. The principal 
tree of the night-soldiers, standing in front of their doorway and 
which is in full bloom, has not a dead leaf upon it, not one that has 
dried. It is beautiful to look upon. They obtained it for us and 
caused it to come down to us, and we feel grateful. It will strengthen 
our families. This lodge that we have entered is like the first lodge 
(the night-soldiers' lodge), and just as we were strengthened by it, 
so will we surely be strengthened by entering this lodge to-day. In 
the night-soldiers' lodge fine white feathers are scattered all over 
the ground, ankle deep, it is said. As we are about to go over the 
past, we certainly will be strengthened thereby. The lodge of the 
night-soldiers was fair to behold from the inside, we are told. We 
will consider ourselves blest with life to-day, even although we are 
not children of the night-blessed ones, and even although we will 
not be able to conduct ourselves as it is meet. We will, however, 
do what we can in order to obtain life. You children of the night- 
blessed ones, who are seated around here, I greet you.'- 

Then he sings the entrance songs and walks around the lodge. 
His singing is generally finished at about the time that he has made 
the complete circuit of the lodge. Then he starts around the lodge 
again uttering the peculiar sounds mentioned before, until he comes 
to the seat of the host. There he stops and makes a circle in the air 
(with his hand) and addresses him as follows: 

"I greet you. A great day has come to me and all my relatives 
have tasted thereof in the hope that they might thereby be strength- 
ened. I have also brought along with me a pipeful of tobacco to be 
given to you, that we may all be strengthened. So it is said. It is 
for that reason that I am acting thus and am greeting you." 

With these words he concluded and walked to the place that had 
been assigned him in the lodge, opposite the host and, still standing, 
he said the following: "Children of the night-blessed spirits who are 
seated here around me, I greet you all. The councilor, I mean the 
host, has seen fit to give me and my relatives a seat. We will sit in 
it so that we may be strengthened thereby. We will now take our 
seats, but before that let me send forth my greetings to all." 

332 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ins. 37 

Then the second invited guest enters. He utters the same sounds 
as his predecessors and makes the circuit of the lodge. When he 
reaches the place from which he started he stops and addresses the 
host as follows : 

"Councilor, you who obtain life, relatives who are seated here, I 
greet you all, and your seats do I greet likewise. You that are 
seated in the first place, I greet you, too. All you children of the 
night-blest spirits who are in this lodge, I greet you. It is good that 
you wish me to live ; that I am here. I am not a child of a night-blest 
one, that this invitation should have been extended to me, but you 
probably knew the nature of my life and that is why, I suppose, you 
extended this honor to me. My relatives are even greater weaklings 
in the properties and goods of life than I am. That happens to be 
our manner of life. It is good. Henceforth we shall be stronger as 
we journey through life. Our men, women, and children shall all 
live in peace. As many of us as are living to-day, that many shall 
continue to live (on account of my participation in this ceremony). 
I am thankful. 

"Of all the spirits that exist, these truly are in control of most life. 
So it is said of the Night Spirits. This is a great thing. These 
spirits have given us the occasion for a great counciling. Many of us 
are not able to take part in it, especially the one now speaking. The 
songs that have been used by our fathers we will not be able to sing, 
but whatever we say I know will be acceptable to you, children of the 
night-blest spirits. I send forth greetings to you all." 

Then he sang an entrance song, and after he had made the circuit 
of the lodge, he sang another one. Then he went around the lodge 
again making his strange utterances, until he came in front of the 
host. Here he made a circle (with his hand) and stopped. Then he 
greeted the host as follows : 

"A great day has come upon us, both upon me and upon all of my 
relatives. We all have tasted thereof so that we might live thereby. 
We have all brought you a pipeful of tobacco, just as we were told. 
It is said that we would thus strengthen one another, and that is why 
we have done it. I greet you all." 

Then he went to his seat, the second one in the lodge, and sat down. 
Then all the members of his band sat down, each sending forth a 
greeting as they took their seats. When they were all seated the 
third man invited prepared to enter. 

The third one invited now entered, uttering strange sounds, and 
made the circuit of the lodge, when he paused and addressed the host 
as follows : 

"Councilors, life-obtainers, relatives who are seated in your respec- 
tive seats, I greet you all. Here I have been blessed, although I am 
not worthy of it. My grandfather, and my father, too, once said to 

badin] RELIGIOUS SOCIETIES BASED ON BLESSINGS 333 

me, ' Some day when there is a dearth of people, some night-blest one 
will take pity on you. Submit to it. ' Thus he spoke to me and 
what he referred to was this feast. These feasts are all sacred, but 
this is the most sacred one. That is what he used to tell me. It is 
not to be trifled with, even in respect to the rituals within the lodge. 
Never should one cross the lodge directly. If you trifle with this 
rule you will bring sorrow upon yourselves. The so-called night- 
soldiers are not to be trifled with. So he told me. The so-called 
night-soldiers, like soldiers on this earth, are stern. Truly they are 
stern, said my father. If we were to slight one of them we would 
most assuredly be punished for it, and punishment by them means 
death. So he spoke to me. But, said he, ' if, on the other hand, any 
one attends to all that pertains to this ceremony it will be a means 
of obtaining life. It will be a good thing to do, and one would 
thereby obtain a good life. Therefore, I have always looked upon 
the Night dance with awe, for it is a very holy thing.' So spoke my 
father. For that reason, consequently, whenever my father gave a 
Night feast he would encourage us to pay careful attention to it, and 
that is why I have always tried to do so. Remember, however, that 
I am not a child of the night-blest ones, and that, therefore, I have 
very little to say. However, I will start a song, which will be a greet- 
ing to this lodge, and I will sing it as I am passing around the lodge. 
Children of the night-blest ones, who are seated here, I greet you." 

Then he sang an entrance song, first at the west end of the lodge and 
then near the position occupied by the host. When he had finished 
the circuit of the lodge he went around again, making the accustomed 
peculiar utterances, until he came in front of the host. There he 
stopped and addressed the host as follows : 

"I greet you. You have caused this day to come upon me and all 
my relatives. We have all tasted thereof and we have all felt our- 
selves in connection with life. We are thankful. We have thought 
of this blessing of life in connection with ourselves. I greet you." 

Then he walks to the place assigned to him in the west end of the 
tent and sits down. The other members of his band do the same, one. 
after the other, greeting the people in the lodge at the same time. 

When they are all seated the fourth one comes in. He repeats the 
utterances of the former guests and then starts around the lodge 
until he reaches the entrance. There he stops and addresses the host: 

' 'Councilors and lif e-obtainers, I greet your seats. I likewise greet 
you, host. You who are seated in the north and you who are seated 
in the west, your seats I greet. Children of the night-blessed spirits 
who are within this lodge, all of you I greet. It is good. As far as 
I understand this Night ceremony is considered a life-giving one. 
The so-called happy Night Spirits alone are in control of most of life. 
So I was told, and that is why this ceremony is called a life-giving 

334 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ann. 37 

one. If I participated in this ceremony, I would be able to call it life, 
I was told. But I did not pay any attention to it. They told me it 
was good and that I would at the same time be making offerings to 
Those-with-the-rounded-wood, and that thus I would be able to make 
use of all the plants that these spirits control, so that I would never 
be embarrassed when I wished to use them. I have caused people 
who were ill to become well by means of this ceremony. All of the 
plants that these spirits control are good ones, and it is easy to obtain 
life with them. In this ceremony we may also obtain life by dancing. 
But we must dance earnestly. The leaders of this ceremony have 
held council over everything, and yet they have selected us for a seat 
of honor, so that we might greet them in this lodge and that we might 
be able to use this song while greeting them. You children of the 
night-blessed ones, I greet you all." 

Then he sang an entrance song, and when he finished he repeated 
the utterances used in entering and gradually made the circuit of the 
lodge singing. When he was through singing, he again continued the 
utterances until he came to the place of the host, where he made the 
circle (with his hands) and stopped. Then he addressed the host as 
follows : 

"I greet you. You wish me to live, and therefore caused a great 
day to come upon me and upon all my relatives. We have all received 
a taste of it, and we have all thought of ourselves in connection with 
life. We are also bringing you a pipeful of tobacco, so that we may 
strengthen one another. That is what we thought and that is why 
we are doing it. I greet you." 

Then he walked around the lodge until he came to his seat. There 
he stopped and addressed his seat as follows: 

"Seat that is reserved for me and for my relatives, we are about to 
sit in you; we will do it, and we will think that our lives have been 
helped thereby. I greet you." Thus he spoke and sat down. Then 
all the other members of his band sat down one by one. 

When they were all seated the lodge was full. Then the host rose 
and spoke as follows : 

' 'You who are seated in the first position, I greet you; you who are 
seated in the north position, I greet you ; you who are seated in the 
west position, I greet you ; and you who are seated at the end of the 
road, I greet you. Children of the night-blessed ones who are here, I 
greet vou. My father and my grandfather spoke to me of this cere- 
mony, and they told me it was good. They told me that the one 
who first obtained it was named ' Little Red Turtle.' He fasted and 
was blessed by those whom he called the Beings-with-round-wood. 
By these was he blessed at the noon hour, and he was taught what 
to do. There they taught him all. At a place where "the stars 
touched land they caused it to become night, and there they blessed 

eadin] RELIGIOUS SOCIETIES BASED ON BLESSINGS 335 

hirn and taught him how to make four circles and also certain songs. 
Since then this ceremony has been performed. He was really blessed, 
and he was told exactly how everything should be performed. So it is 
said. As he was very fond of the Night feast, he spoke in its behalf, 
and told of all the medicines that were associated with it and of 
the use to which they could be put. I myself know that these medi- 
cines are good to live on. If anyone uses them he will receive benefits 
therefrom and his children will receive life. I know that they are 
good. I would not have you think that I am one of those blessed 
by the Night Spirits because I say this. But I know that all the medi- 
cines of which I have personal charge and to which I make offerings 
of tobacco, for whom I boiled food, always make the individual to 
whom I offer them the better for it, provided that I do everything 
correctly. I was told to do this, and that is why I do it. I am now 
going to sing some songs audibly, and all these songs will be songs 
about medicines. I know that we will cause you to fan your faces 
(from perspiration brought on by making you work too hard), but 
forgive us for it. Children of the night-blessed ones who are seated 
here, I greet you, and to take the place of their sister whom they 
always place ahead of them so we also will have our sisters lead the 
dance for us." 

Two women now rise and stand side by side in front of the men and 
hold, one in each hand, the invitation sticks that had been returned. 
These two women lead hi the dance. The men who shake the gourds 
stand with their backs to the women, facing the drummers. All sing 
together and all the dancers have partners at their sides. It is a 
very interesting dance. Then all get up and start around the lodge, 
making strange utterances. When they have made the complete 
circuit of the lodge they stop and sing. When they finish this song 
they start around the lodge again, repeating the utterances. They 
stop at the west end of the tent, where they sing again. They thus 
sing at both ends of the lodge. They use all the songs they intend 
to. When the last song is over the individual who has sung it makes 
four circles and then takes the drum, gourd, tobacco, etc., and places 
them in front of the guest who occupies the first seat of honor. Then 
all sit down. Then the east leader rises and speaks as follows: 16 

"Councilors and life-obtainers, relatives who are seated here, I 
send you all greetings ; and to you who are on the north side, and 
you who are on the west side, and you who are at the end of the 
road, your seats I greet. Our host has passed over to me the means 
of our meditation, the instruments through which we ask life. This 
instrument for asking life is the foremost thing we possess, so the old 
people said. We are thankful for it. We know that Earthmaker 

'• From now on we will use the terms East Leader, North Leader, West Leader, and South Leader to 
designate, respectively, the first, second, third, and fourth guests in the order of their invitation. 

336 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ann. 37 

did not put us in charge of anything, and that for that reason the 
tobacco we received is our greatest and foremost thing. So the old 
people said. We were told that we should use it to ask for life. 
This must have been what they meant. This, the instrument with 
which to ask life, is, I feel sure, sufficient to attract them and they 
will surely take notice of it. We may also follow him who is taking 
the place of the spirits, and we will consider all those who are in the 
lodge blest. Those whom we call Nights have been offered tobacco, 
and the same has been offered to the four cardinal points, and to all 
the life-giving plants. To this many tobacco has been offered. It 
will strengthen us. This is what we call imitating the spirits, and 
that is why we are doing it. Chddren of the night-blessed ones who 
are seated here, I greet you all. The song we will now start is a 
pipe-lighting song." 

When he finished singing he greeted all those in the lodge and 
then he lit his pipe. Then he took a number of puffs. First he 
inhaled some smoke and blew it toward the east, then toward the 
north, then toward the west, then toward the south. Then he passed 
it around and all smoked, except the host, who is not permitted to 
do so. Then the east leader spoke again as follows: 

"Night-blessed ones who are seated here, I greet you. The instru- 
ment with which to ask life I will now place here, and if any of you 
want to fill your pipes you may do so." 

Then the leader of the north band rose and spoke as follows: 
"Councilors and 1 if e-ob tamers, you who sit in the direction where 
the day comes from, you who sit on the other side, in the west, and 
you who sit at the end of the road, your seats I all greet. We, too, 
have been anxious to obtain the instrument whereby we ask life, 
and therefore we fill a pipe for ourselves. I greet you." 
Then the leader of the south band rose and said as follows: 
"If the leader of the north band has finished his greeting, I also 
would very much like to have the instrument with which we ask life 
brought to me. We will immediately go and fill a pipe. I am speak- 
ing now because I wish to tell you what I intend to do. I greet 

you." 

The leader of the north band did not pass the pipe that he had 
filled all around the lodge, but merely passed it to the members of 
his band. Only they smoked from it. In the same way the leaders 
of the other bands, with the exception of the host's band, passed the 
pipe only to members of their individual band. Only the host passed 
his pipe all around the lodge. When the smoking was over the 
leader of the east band rose and greeted everyone. Then he spoke 
as follows : 

"Our grandfathers used to carry on this ceremony, I have been 
told. They told me that if at any time the giver of this ceremony 

badin] RELIGIOUS SOCIETIES BASED ON BLESSINGS 337 

can not find enough people to invite he would take pity on me. 
This is what I should say, my father told me. In the direction from 
which the day comes, there where the Nights are, live the night-sol- 
diers, who blessed my grandfather and who made him try his powers 
in the middle of the ocean — there where it is deepest. They placed 
a round object of wood before him, and the night-soldiers said that 
they would not take it away, and that every time my grandfather 
tried to seize it he would not miss. 'You have done well, human, 
you have won,' they said to him. For this reason it was considered 
an instrument of war, he told me. If you do your utmost in offering 
tobacco, it will be an instrument of war, he said. 

And he also said the following: "All the plants with which I have 
been blessed are useful and a person can receive life through them 
if he takes good care of them. These plants can be very powerful 
and some of them can even be used in playing jokes, we are told. 
But we have never used any of them in such a manner, for if we did 
our plants would surely lose their strength. I have been told that 
should I frequently use any of my plants for the purpose of playing 
jokes and then for the purpose of curing a sick person, they would 
have no power at all. If, however, I never used them in jokes my 
medicine would always be powerful. Therefore I have never used 
them in that manner. Nor have I ever poisoned anyone with them. 
I never considered myself great or used a Night's trick-medicine or 
used fire, although I was told I could do so. This I never did. 
When I use one of the plants I like to have it do its work. I am 
saying this, although I am not a child of the night-blest ones. It 
is now about time to permit our sisters to get hold of the 'chief 
sticks' and to permit them to sit here and sing together with us." 

The women are then permitted to take two sticks apiece and sing 
wherever they are sitting. As soon as the men sing the women 
join in. 

"This is the way to do, I was told, and that is why I am doing it. 
Children of the night-blessed ones, who are seated here in this lodge, 
I send you all greeting." 

When he is through with his starting song he stands up and speaks 
to them again, as follows: 

"Night-blest ones who are within this lodge, I greet you. I was 
not invited to take this seat because I was a wise man. I do not 
for a moment imagine that, but it was done in order to help me 
obtain life. We will now rise and go forth and we will brush against 
your faces, but you must take pity on us. Children of the night- 
blessed ones, I greet you. We will not remain seated here but we will 
rise and go forth in order to obtain the round stick. That is why I 
am making this announcement to you. I greet you." 

338 THE WINNEBAGO TKIBE [eth. ann. 37 

They then rise and make four circuits of the lodge, first stopping 
at the first seat, then at the second, then at the third, and lastly at 
the fourth. When they get back to their starting place they sing 
dancing songs, first stopping at the west end of the lodge and then 
at the entrance. This they repeat. By this time all the songs they 
had intended using have been sung, so they make four circuits of 
the lodge and then, taking the drum, gourd, etc., place it in front of 
the north band. When the dancers are all seated the leader of the 
north band rises, and greeting everyone speaks as follows: 

"I was not pitied because I was a child of the night-blest ones, 
my father told me. Yet if I performed my duties aright I would be 
able to make the proper speeches when called upon, I was told. 
That I have been pitied now is due to the fact that these people here 
wished to have me obtain life. Certainly my invitation to this 
ceremony has made me think of life, as my father used to tell me. 
I do not for a moment imagine that they invited me because I was a 
great man. Nevertheless my father told me to say that it was good; 
and that if I really meant all that I said, my life would certainly be 
strengthened thereby. My father knew how to perform this cere- 
mony correctly, but I am not able to do so. Although I was told 
it was a good thing, nevertheless I was not able to pour tobacco. 
Those whom we call the Ones-with-the-rounded-wood are in charge 
of very much life and they are holy. This affair is not a thing to be 
trifled with, my father told me. Yet in spite of this we will sing 
some songs, even though we know that we will not be able to sing 
them as they have been sung heretofore. Perhaps, however, you 
will be kind enough to be satisfied with whatever we do. Children 
of the night-blessed ones, I greet you." 

Then he sang the starting song, and when he was finished he rose 
again and, greeting all, spoke as follows: 

"When Those-with-the-rounded-wood start to walk their sisters 
are placed in front of them. Our sisters we will now place in front 
of us, so that thereby they may be blest with life and hold the princi- 
pal sticks and staffs. We will use the toys so that we may be 
strengthened thereby, we think, and that is why I greet you." 

Then they permit the women to lead the procession. These 
women walk in front, side by side, and are followed by the ones 
carrying the gourds, who dance with their backs toward them. Then 
come the drummers and the feast-givers, and after these, all those 
who desire to join in. They walk around the lodge making strange 
utterances. Four times do they make the circuit of the lodge and 
then they come and stop at the east end, where they sing. When 
they are through here they start around the lodge again and stop 
at the west end and sing. Then they start again, making the same 
strange utterances as before, until they come to the east end of the 

eadin] RELIGIOUS SOCIETIES BASED ON BLESSINGS 339 

lodge, where they sing once more. When they have in this manner 
sung all the songs that they wish to use the leader of the north 
band makes the four circles as before and brings the tobacco, gourds, 
etc., to the west band. Then they all take their seats. Now the 
leader of the west band rises and speaks as follows: 

"Councilors, life-obtainers, relatives, to you all who are seated 
here, I send forth my greetings. You who occupy the first seat, 
you who occupy the north seat, and you who occupy the seat at 
the end of the road, I greet. I do not mean to say anything of con- 
sequence. I was taught this ceremony, but I do not know any- 
thing about it. However, I always honored it, for I was told that 
it was a good thing. Indeed, I knew it, but I could never perform 
it well. I was told that if I performed it well I would obtain life 
thereby, just as others have done. Well, some of you are able to 
do it. It is a very great council feast. How, indeed, can the spirits 
ignore what you have done for them to-day ? If they acknowledge 
it, we who are representing the directions will receive blessings 
through the host who is giving the feast. That is what I mean. 
When we hold our mediators (that is, the drums, tobacco, etc.) we 
will be strengthened thereby. So with this in our minds, let us 
take and hold them. Children of the night-blessed ones, I greet 
you." 

Then he sang the starting song, and when he had finished he rose 
and spoke again. 

"Councilors, I send you greetings, as well as to you who sit in the 
first seat, to you who sit in the north, and to you who sit at the end 
of the road. It is said that when the night-soldiers come they walk 
over the entire extent of the earth. When they blessed my grand- 
father they blessed him with life. So he used to say of himself. We 
will now plead for these powers in our songs. We will place our 
sisters in front and follow them. That is what I wanted to announce 
to you. Children of the night-blessed ones who are seated here, I 
greet you." 

Then they made the complete circuit of the lodge until they came 
to the place wThere they had been sitting. There they made a cir- 
cle. Then they made another circuit of the lodge and stopped in 
front of the south position and made a circle. Here they made 
another circuit of the lodge and stopped at the east end and made 
a circle. Then they made the last circuit of the lodge and stopped 
in front of the north band and made a circle. By this time all the 
songs that they were to use had been sung. The leader now made 
four circuits and brought the gourds, drum, tobacco, etc., in front 
of the south band. All now took their seats and when they were 
seated the leader of the south band arose and spoke as follows: 

340 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ANN. 37 

"Councilors, life-obtainers, I greet you. You who sit in the 
first seat, you who sit in the north, and you who sit in the west, I 
greet. Children of the night-blessed ones who are seated within 
this lodge, I greet you all. It is good that to-night you have tried 
to imitate your grandfathers, that you have tried to take the. place 
of the spirits. You have said enough with which to obtain life. 
But I am more unfortunate. I can never do what my ancestors 
did or say what they said, and for that reason I suppose my talk 
will be quite worthless. I was told that if at any time I should be 
pitied, not to talk foolishly about this ceremony. If I am a bad man 
I will act foolishly in this affair, I was told. 

" My grandfather was 'blessed by those whom we call the night- 
soldiers, who blessed him with certain utterances. As many black- 
birds as there are, that many appeared to him as Night Spirits. 
Our utterances will be an imitation of those he received when he 
was blessed. We can only guess at these. 

" We were told that when we hold the mediators we will be strength- 
ened by them. Night-blessed spirits who are seated here, I greet 

you." 

Then he began the starting songs, and when these were finished 

he rose and spoke again. 

"Councilors, life-obtainers, I greet your seats. You who sit in 
the east, you who sit in the north, and you who sit in the west, I 
greet you all. Children of the night>blessed ones, I greet you. Those 
whom we call night-soldiers treated their sisters as holy and placed 
them in front. In imitation of these soldiers we will now put our 
sisters in front, so that we may be strengthened thereby. I wish 
to announce that we now place the women at the head of our pro- 
cession. Let us all come together, so that we may be strengthened. 
That is our desire and that is what we are pleading for. I greet you." 

When they are ready to begin the dancing songs all rise and form 
in line, having the women lead them. Then the men with the gourds, 
their backs turned to the women, follow, then the drummers. Then 
all those join who feel so inclined. When they have finished all the 
songs they intend to use they bring back the drum, gourd, etc., to 
the middle of the lodge and stop dancing. Then they return to their 
seats and then the leader rises and says: 

"Councilors, relatives who are seated here, I greet you. You 
who are seated in the first seat, you who sit in the north, and you 
who sit in the west, night-blest ones who are within this lodge, I 
greet you all. Whenever a night-blessed child holds council, when he 
is invited to a feast and is given the position at the end of the road, 
the intention of the feast-giver is to enable him to obtain life. So 
they told me, and that is what they meant. Most assuredly have 
they caused me to think of life. When I hold the mediators in my 

badin] RELIGIOUS SOCIETIES BASED ON BLESSINGS 341 

hand I am holding life, and when I pass them on to the others, to 
my relatives and to my sisters, I am passing on life to all of them. 
In this wajr were we made to think of life. I will not detain you 
any longer. All that I wish to say is that I am thankful. Chil- 
dren of the night-blessed ones, I greet you." 

Then he sat down and the host rose and spoke as follows: 

"You who sit in the east, you who sit hi the north, you who sit 
in the west, and you who sit at the end of the road, I greet you all. 
It is good. This is what I wanted but have not been able to say. 
You, however, told it all in my place. It is good. Of all things 
this is the foremost, it is said. The instruments with which to ask 
life you have placed before me. That alone is enough to live on 
and that you have done for me. It is good. Your forefathers 
dreamed just as the spirits did, and how they ob tamed life, all of that 
you have told me to-night. It is good. You have said enough to 
obtain life. It is good. I say this because I am thankful. If you 
do anything, do it hi the right way, I was told. I understand this 
ceremony, but nevertheless what I have done is the best I could do. 
I will now place the food before you. I am an old man, but I have 
always performed this affair just as I have performed it to-day, and, 
although I know that I have not done it hi the right way, yet it was 
my turn to do it, and I did it. I am an old man, and for that 
reason I am not able to procure meat anywhere. My relatives 
helped me and that is why I have been able to do it. Here are four 
kettles of hot water. I will place them hi the center of the lodge 
for you. The one hi the east and the one hi the north and the one 
hi the west and the one at the end of the road ; each one may have it. 
Children of the night-blessed ones, all who are seated here, to all do 
I send greeting." 

Then the leader of the east band rose and said: "Councilors, I 
greet you. You who sit over there in the north, you who sit hi the 
west, and you who sit at the end of the road, I greet you all. Chil- 
dren of the night-blessed ones who are hi this lodge, I greet you. 
We are all to arise soon and that is why I announce this." 

Then the leader of the north band rose and said: "We also will rise, 
as it is our turn. We greet you all." 

Then the leader of the west band rose and said: "The time has 
come for us to rise. I and mv relatives will now rise. We greet you 
all." 

Then the leader of the south band rose and said: "Councilors, I 
greet you. I greet all who have been blessed by the Night Spirits, 
each one hi turn. We are now going to rise." 

Then the leader of the east band said agahi: "Councilors, I greet 
you. We will now greet the hot water and I will use a song." 

342 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ann. 37 

Then the leader of the north band said: "I also will start a song. 
I greet you." 

Then the leader of the west band said: "I also will start a song. 
I greet you." 

Then the leader of the south band said: "I also will start a song. 
I greet you." 

Then the leader of the east band sang a song, and the other leaders 
sang their songs. Each band sang its own songs, not paying any 
attention to the songs of the others. Each band sang different 
songs. This they do in order to drown the voices of the others. 
Should one band overcome the other, it means that that particular 
band would be blessed with victory in war. What they were really 
saying is that their songs were more powerful than the others, and 
that their grandfathers' songs were the holiest. Then they all 
danced around the lodge, single file, and made their exit from the 
lodge. While they were dancing, the host sat stdl singing and beating 
his drum. They carry their kettles outside. Wherever they wish to 
eat, there they go and dance around the kettle of food first. Then 
they eat their meal. They dance in different bands. 

The ceremony finishes with this feast. It is customary, however, 
for the one who has been given the seat of honor, that is, the east 
seat, to give a feast immediately afterwards. Then the one who has 
been invited first would do the same thing, so that all four would 
in this manner give dances in rotation. For this reason it generally 
took five nights before the ceremony was over. During those five 
nights no one could sleep. It is from this fact that the word, "Sore- 
eye Dance," which is the general term used for this ceremony, 
originated. If a person does not sleep for five nights, his eyes 
generally get sore, and that is why they call this ceremony the 
"Sore-eye Dance." 

Sometimes they perform night-spirit tricks. These would be of 
the following nature: A kettle is put on to boil and some individual 
fishes out a piece of meat bare-handed without getting burned. At 
other times they shoot a hole into a drum covering, using a wild-cat 
claw as a missile. Then they immediately mend it. 

When a man is very bad they shoot him with an object and kill 
him. They used to be very much afraid ofsuch people. Sometimes 
they take a handful of live coals and embers from the fire, put them 
into their mouth and then spit them out without getting burned. 
It is for this reason that they are called holy. Sometimes they take 
burnt portions of a tree that had been struck by lightning, put them 
in the fire, and then when they are red hot take them out again and 
put them in their mouths without extinguishing them. They then 
spit them out, and it wTould look like lightning. Or they would shoot 
one another with cold charcoal. This is all that I know. 

badin] RELIGIOUS SOCIETIES BASED ON BLESSINGS 343 

Once a medicine-dance man and a night-blessed man became jeal- 
ous and the medicine-dance man said that he would play tricks on the 
night-blessed man. The night-blessed man said he was quite willing 
to have a contest. So the two came and sat opposite each other and 
began their contest. Whatever the medicine-dance man did the 
night-blessed man did too, but always a little better. The medi- 
cine-dance man was defeated, so from that time on the medicine- 
dance men are afraid of the former. The medicine-dance men shot 
the night-blessed men with claws, but they could not kill them. 
Therefore they were afraid of them. The night-blessed men could 
kill the medicine-dance men at pleasure. The medicine-dance men 
were inferior. That is all. 

Society of Those Who Have Been Blessed By the Herok'a 

Informant, member of the Bear clan: The feast of those who have 
been blessed by the Herok'a is given at any time of the year. Any- 
one may be invited. The feast is held in a long lodge and is gener- 
ally given by a number of members at the same time (or by all). 
Each person brings a deer and his bow and arrows. The bows and 
arrows are painted different colors, depending upon the color (paint) 
with which the individual has been blessed. The bows are all stuck 
in the ground between the first two fireplaces and the arrows in a 
row just behind them. 

During the ceremony and feast the members all sing the songs 
with which they have been blessed. The ceremony is held before the 
feast and is conducted by one of the members of the society. He 
leads, holding a bow in one hand. The others follow, holding arrows 
in their hands. Only men are permitted to dance. There are cer- 
tain songs, to the accompaniment of which women are permitted to 
dance. But the women must have passed their climacteric. 

They do not use gourd rattles as at the other dances. Instead a 
number of deer hoofs are strung together and used in place of them. 
(They do not eat with their hands or with the ordinary sticks) but use 
instead forked sticks, whittled down at one end. The leader wears 
a headdress to which a horn is attached, and paints his body with 
the same color as his arrows. Whoever leads the dance carries a 
flute, which he plays before and after each song. Those following 
him hit their mouth with the palm of their hands and whoop. 

When the dance is over, each one of the feasters takes his plate and 
dances out.17 

" This account of the Herok'a Society is unfortunately merely fragmentary, but from a few additional 
notes obtained there seems to be little doubt that it represents the same type of organization as the other 
religious fraternities. 

344 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [dth.ann. 37 

Society of Those Who Have Been Blessed By the Buffalo 

Spirits 

Informant, member of the Bear dan: "Come, it is the time for 
giving the Buffalo Feast," said my father, "so tell the attendants to 
get ready; and you, third-born, if you see anyone, tell him about the 
feast that we are going to give." 

So I went to Fire-starter and said, "Nephew, my father is about 
to give a feast, and he wants his attendants to get ready. You are 
to go over to his lodge and get a few more attendants to help you. 
We also will get ready right away." Then I greeted him and he said, 
"All right, I will go and get some to help me." I returned to my 
father and told him what I had done. He told me to go and inform 
those who were to take part in the feast that they were to bring food. 
This I likewise did and returned with the information that they would 
all do as desired. 

Now the attendants arrived and asked what was expected of them. 
They were told to haul the wood and cut the poles to be used in 
building the lodge, prepare the fireplaces, and put the kettles on the 
fire. After that they were to go and tell the young women to get 
the food ready. When the drum was fixed and the food prepared, 
then the feast would begin, they were told. 

" Well, Green-hair, my nephew, it is about time for you to go down 
toward the timber and invite the people. You, my nephew, Fire- 
starter, may go to those who possess war bundles and invite them. 
Go especially to Strikes-the-earth-with-his-wings and tell him that he 
must come immediately. When you come back, Green-hair, get the 
earth mound (manwarup'urura) ready. Construct two of them in the 
lodge. Then place upon them all the things that we are going to 
use in the dance." 

The drum, the flute, the buffalo tails, the buffalo heads were all 
painted and placed there. 

Then the feasters arrived. He-who-strikes-with-his-wings was to 
sit opposite Fleet-one. When all had entered and were seated 
Hodja'noka arose and spoke: 

" War-bundle owners, all you who have been blessed by the buffalo- 
spirits and are seated here, you who are taking the place of the 
spirits and giving counsel like them, I thank you and greet you all. 
You are taking the place of the spirits. Just as we ask for long life 
from the spirits, so do we ask the same of you. Relatives, I know I 
am going to tire you all out, but do not take it amiss. What we 
long for, aid us in obtaining. Life is what I wish. 

"What I am doing now I did not originate, for my ancestor 
Hodja'noka was the one blessed by the buffalo-spirits. When he 
was a child he was blessed by them and they gave him a certain 

badin] RELIGIOUS SOCIETIES BASED ON BLESSINGS 345 

plant and blessed him with long life and with victorious warpaths. 
He asked to be remembered by Hodja'noka in his offerings. The 
buffalo-spirit told him that if he would pour tobacco for him, and 
give feasts and make offerings of eagle feathers, the blessings he had 
given him would last forever. 

"All these blessings were handed down to my father. These I 
also was taught. This life do we pray for and we have asked you 
all to come and help us. We thank you for it. As soon as the 
attendants are finished with the preparation of the food then we 
will eat. Our servants may perhaps burn their hands while pre- 
paring the food, but they will obtain life by so doing. Those who 
possess war bundles are always told to help one another and I know 
that you have come here for that reason. Life I am seeking and 
that is why I am giving this feast. Help me, all you owners of 
bundles who are present here. I will now sing s,pme of the songs 
that Hodja'noka taught us. You who have obtained blessings, I 
greet you." 

Then he sang the following songs : 

Song 1 

Narjgura homa'ni hiwiie. (Repeat.) 
In the road walk let him do. 

Song 2 

Hodja'noka hamani Vine. (Repeat.) 
Hodjanoka Walk by. 

Song S 

Kara Hodja'noka haniani'winS. 
Say, Hodjanoka Walk by. 

Dancing song 

Hodja'noka tcawawi're. (Repeat.) 

Hodjanoka go toward. 

Erehu'na. (Repeat twice.) Wiga're. (Repeat twice.) 

It is coming say to them. 

As soon as Hodja'noka finished his songs, then all the objects 
(drum, gourds, etc.) were passed to He-who-strikes-the-earth-with- 
his-wings, and he rose and spoke: 

"Brother-in-law, councilors, relatives, all who are seated here, I 
greet you. You who have been blessed with bundles, I greet like- 
wise. You are taking the place of the spirits. It is good. We are 
trying to encourage one another and we have come to help you. 
We have brought you food for the feast. We also are desirous of 
obtaining long life and that is why we have brought our offerings, 
for we know the buffalo-spirits will accept them, as they are very 
tempting. You who are taking the place of the spirits, I greet you." 
1S6S23— 22 23 

346 THE WINNEBAGO TEIBE [eth. ann. 37 

Then he sings some songs and dances and passes the drum, etc., 
to the next guest and so it, in turn, is passed on until the fourth 
invited guest is reached. Then the drum is replaced in the center of 
the lodge.18 

Informant, unknown clan: 19 Buffalo feasts are given in spring, in 
fall, and in midwinter. No meat is offered, but only vegetables. 
The buffaloes said that maple sugar is their favorite food, so when 
this feast is given they always have some maple sugar along with 
the other things. The buffalo feast always takes place in a long 
lodge. The attendants make the lodge and boil all the food. When 
the kettles have been placed on the fire those giving the feast enter. 
The earth mound is now constructed and tobacco offered to it. All 
those giving the feast pour tobacco on the earth mound, asking for 
victory in war. When this is finished they sing buffalo songs, 
starting with the, initial songs. When they are ready to sing the 
dancing songs the feast-giver rises and speaks as follows : 

"The dancing songs that we are about to sing we use because we 
believe that our offering will thus be accepted. It is generally the 
custom to do this." 

He now calls on some one to lead in the dance. This individual is 
always taken from the Buffalo clan. He comes forward, placing the 
buffalo head on his own head and carrying the buffalo tail attached 
to himself. He leads in all the dances, the others following him. 
A plate of maple sugar is placed at the buffalo mound. When he 
approaches the buffalo mound he makes a noise like a buffalo, 
sticks his tongue to the plate of sugar, and licks up some of it. Those 
following do the same. This they do without even holding the dish, 
just as buffaloes eat. When they finish their dancing they pass the 
drum on to another person, and when it has made the circuit of the 
lodge they eat. Each person has his own dish. Then the leader in 
the dance is told that the dish of wild rice standing in the center of 
the lodge is meant for him, and that he can invite whomsoever he 
likes to help him. When all in the lodge are ready they start eating 
all at the same time. When those in the center of the lodge get 
through and the dish is empty it is thrown over their heads, and 
they do not stop this until the dish has been turned upside down. 
While they are engaged in doing this they bellow like buffaloes. 
They are not allowed to use their hands in turning the dish over. 
They must do it with their heads, for it is a sacred thing and that is 
the way the buffaloes used to do it. When they are all through eat- 
ing the feast-giver sings a dancing song and all those within the 
lodge rise, take their plates, and dance out of the lodge. 

is In this account it is not quite clear whether the drum is merely passed to the four principal guests or 
to all. At the buffalo dance witnessed by the writer in the summer of 1908 it was passed only to the four 
principal guests. This was also corroborated by a number of informants. 

" The origin myth of this feast is given on page 243. 

juimsI RELIGIOUS SOCIETIES BASED ON BLESSINGS 347 

Description of buffalo dance and its origin. — Informant, member of 
Bear clan : The buffalo dance can be given by anybody who has been 
blessed by the buffalo spirits. In the beginning the Winnebago had 
animal forms, and they could obtain all the power they wanted, but 
since they left that stage of life they can obtain power only by fasting. 
John's buffalo feast is of recent origin. It originated with his 
grandfather. 

A long lodge is prepared and in tbe center there is a pile of loose 
dirt. John's grandfather's name was Hodjanaga, Young-man-just- 
maturing. In fasting he found out that he was blessed with powers 
to cure the sick and be victorious in battle. While fasting, the 
spirits told him that he would receive what he was longing for. 
They told him that he would know what to do, for they would come 
after him. Soon they came after him and took him into camp (i. e., 
spirit country). When he got there, he saw an old man and a child, 
and he was told that it was on account of the child that he had been 
brought there; that the child had heard his prayers while fasting 
and had blessed him. Then they showed him a certain herb and 
told him, "This is what we give you. It will give you strength in 
running. Use it in time of war, and use it also as medicine for life. 
I have blessed you and given you what you desired and do you, in 
turn, make me a dog feast and give me red feathers, tobacco, and 
food." Then they taught him the songs and gave him a buffalo tail 
and a flute. 

No invitation sticks are used. They go around and invite those 
whom they want. 

When the grasses are well developed, then the Buffalo clan people 
make a feast to their life or clan; also in midwinter, for that is the 
time when all the spirits awaken from their night's sleep and turn 
over on the other side. 

Society of Those Who Have Been Blessed Bt the Grizzly Bear 

Informant, member of Bear clan: The grizzly-bear dance was 
given by those who had been blessed during their fasting by the 
grizzly bear. Women were never so blessed, and for that reason 
they never could participate in the dance. Different people received 
different blessings. We were blessed with two grizzly-bear heads, 
grizzly-bear hides, and paws. In the lodge constructed for the dance 
was placed a mound of earth called manwarap'uru. The manwarap'uru 
is supposed to represent a bear's cave, the four points of the cross 
representing the entrances to the cave and the four lines running to 
the center, the paths along which the grizzly bear travels when he 
scents a man. The place in the middle is supposed to be the habi- 
tation of the bear himself. Tobacco and red feathers are placed both 

348 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth.ahn.37 

in the center and at the four points. Only people who had been 
blessed by the grizzly bear were permitted to sing and dance. The 
dancing itself took place both around the lodge and around the 
manwarap'uru. The dancers are supposed to imitate the motions 
and the cries of the grizzly bear. Sometimes they whirl themselves 
round and round, like a grizzly bear, but their principal motion con- 
sists in stretching out their hands. In this position they will take 
tobacco from the manwarap'uru and eat it. They believe that they 
are representing the bears when they do this. 

The dancers are selected by the one giving the dance. Those 
taking part vie with each other in exhibiting the powers with which 
they have been blessed, because in this way those present could see 
who possessed the greatest powers. 

The purpose of the dance was to thank the grizzly bears for the 
blessings they had bestowed upon the people. (However, there 
seemed to be many other special occasions for which the dance was 
performed.) 

If sick people are present at the dance they are told to put some 
tobacco on the manwarap'uru and ask for life. 

There is a description of the grizzly-bear dance in the account of 
Little Priest's life which it might be well to append here in view of 
the brevity of the above description. 

" Little Priest had been wounded in so many places that he was 
practically dead. He was, of course, entirely unconscious when his 
relatives arrived. They decided to perform the grizzly-bear dance 
for him, He himself had been blessed by the grizzly bears when he 
was young. 

"The dance was to be given at the lodge of an Indian named Good 
Soldier. They carried Little Priest to the lodge in a blanket, so that 
they could sing for him and permit him to show the powers he pos- 
sessed. He was unable to move on account of the wounds and the 
bruises he had gotten. The man who sang for him at that time was 
South-Wind. There were all in all ten Indians, entirely naked, 
except for their breechclouts. Little Priest had told South- Wind 
that he was a grizzly bear and that he could heal himself (no matter 
how badly he had been wounded). 

"As soon as the songs and dancing commenced Little Priest began 
to move his little fingers. Soon he. was able to move his arm as far 
as his forearm, and gradually he regained the power of moving the 
entire arm. Finally he sat up and began to keep time on the drum. 
Then he tried to stand on his feet, but owing to his weakness it was 
only with the greatest difficulty that he could straighten out his 
body. Finally he stood erect. Then he started to walk around the 
lodge very slowly. The second circuit he made more easily, and by 
the time he had made the fourth circuit he was dancing just as the 

badin] RELIGIOUS SOCIETIES BASED ON BLESSINGS 349 

other dancers were with all his strength restored. Then he walked 
to the manwarup'uru, took some earth, rubbed it on his wounds, 
and they were healed immediately. There was only one wound 
that he could not heal, which was situated on a part of his back that 
he could not reach with his hands." 

He sang many songs while dancing. These songs were the ones 
that the spirits had taught him when they blessed him. 

GRIZZLY BEAR SONGS 

1 

Newine'na newine'na hanptcanne. 
I am he, I am he, the clay it is I. 

Ha/nanninxgunnevk'tce hiniggai're nink'tcaVnirjkEra djaniinga'gre. 
That you would be you were by the children aa many as there are. 
listened to told 

3 

Mantco'jan ho'dadjehivrera. 

The grizzly bear was starting to roam. 

Wa'wonatcant£in nihe'ka. 
Shouting you can hear him. 
Hc'ratca11^!11 nihe'ka. 
His voice you can hear. 

CHAPTER XIV 

THE MEDICINE DANCE 

(Pis. 49,50) 

Origin Myth 

What it was our father sat on when he came to consciousness is 
uncertain. Then his tears flowed and he began to cry. Not long did 
he think. He saw nothing and nothing was there anywhere. He 
took something from the seat on which he was sitting and made a 
portion of our earth. 

Then he sent the earth below him. From where he sat and as he 
looked at his own creation, it became similar to our earth. However, 
nothing grew upon it and it was entirely without a covering. It 
had not become quiet but was spinning around. 

Suddenly he thought, "If I do this, it will become quiet." Then 
he made a covering (hair) for it. He took a weed from his seat to 
make grass for the earth and earthward he sent it. That he did and 
then looked at his own creation. It was not quiet but still kept on 
turning. ''This way I will do again," he thought. He took a tree 
and toward the earth he sent it and again looked at his creation, but 
still it kept spinning around. Then he sent four men, brothers, and 
placed one in the east, one in the west, one in the south, and one in 
the north, and again looked at his creation. It was, however, still spin- 
ning around. ''Perhaps it will become quiet in the following way," 
he thought. So he made four of what are called water-spirits and 
below the earth he placed them, and for that reason they are called 
island-weights. Then he scattered a female spirit over the earth, by 
which stones are meant. Finally he looked at his creation and he 
saw that the earth had become quiet. 

He had sent the stones clear through the earth, throughout its 
extent, and only the heads remained uncovered. He looked at his 
creation and saw that it had become quiet. No clouds appeared 
anywhere, the light of day appearing motionless, and the vibrations 
of heat seemed to be like spider webs going past, floating. 

All the birds that were to roam over the sky, all the quadrupeds 
that were to be on this earth and those called subterranean animals 
he placed in houses that he had made for them and scattered here 
and there. Then he made all those insects that were destined to 
live on the earth. Finally, at the end of his thinking he made us, 
350 

BUREAU OF AMERICAN ETHNOLOGY THIRTY-SEVENTH ANNUAL REPORT PLATE 49 

a. EXTERIOR OF MEDICINE DANCE LODGE 

6. INTERIOR OF MEDICINE DANCE LODGE 

BUREAU OF AMERICAN ETHNOLOGY THIRTY-SEVENTH ANNUAL REPORT PLATE 50 

a. EXTERIOR OF MEDICINE DANCE LODGE 

b. INTERIOR OF MEDICINE DANCE LODGE 

radin] THE MEDICINE DANCE 351 

the human beings. However, we were not even equal in strength to 
a fly. We were the weakest of all. Then he looked at what he had 
created and he liked it and sat filled with happy thoughts. 

He was proud of us and gazed again on what he had created. He 
had, however, not made the human beings equal in strength to the 
others and they were on the point of being destroyed. Then he 
formed a human being, like ourselves, and when he had finished him, 
he named him the Foolish-One. "Foolish-One, to the earth you are 
to go. Weakly (pitiable) , in every respect, I made the human beings. 
I made them as my last thought. Now this creation of mine, they, 
the evil spirits, are likely to injure, so do you, O Foolish-One, go and 
put things in order." 

Then he sent him to the earth, but when he came on earth he did 
not do what he had been told. He went around the earth and ac- 
complished nothing. (As useless) as a child crawling on all fours 
he was. He really amounted to nothing. Though sent by Earth- 
maker, he amounted to nothing. He did no good and injured the 
creation of Earthmaker, so Earthmaker took him back and had him 
sit at the right of his own seat. 

Then he made another (man) and when he was finisher! called him 
the Turtle. ''The two-legged walkers (human beings) whom I cre- 
ated as the last of my thoughts, (evil spirits) are about to exterminate 
Do you go and put the earth in order." Turtle went and (took along) 
a knife that he had been given. When he came on earth he led people 
on the warpath, but he did not look after the (welfare) of (Earth- 
maker's) creation. Earthmaker therefore took back the second man, 
too, and placed him on his left side. 

Then he made a third (man) , and when he finished him, he named 
him Bladder, and said, "You are to go to the earth. As my last 
thought, I created the two-legged walkers and they were pitifid in 
every way. They are now about to be exterminated and you are to 
rescue them. Try with all your strength." 

When he came on earth he made a long lodge and created twenty 
men. That many younger brothers he had. Then they all started 
to go around this entire island and all the younger brothers were 
killed. Thus he failed in his mission. The work his father had sent 
him to do, he failed in, so (Earthmaker) took him back and placed 
him on his left side. 

Then he made a fourth (man) and when he finished he named him 
He-who-wears-human-heads-as-earrings. 

Then he made the last one, Hare, his body just like ours. "You 
are the last one I am going to create, so try with all your strength, 
Hare, try." He-who-wears-human-heads-as-earrings, the fourth one, 
faded. He therefore took him back. Hare was the last that Earth- 
maker, our father, wished to create. He (had created) him entirely 
by the force of his thoughts. 

352 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. axn. 37 

"Hare, what I am doing, you also will be able to accomplish. 
Try with all your power. If (the evil spirits) injure my creation, it 
will not be good on earth, life will not be good." Thus he encouraged 
him; thus he spoke to him. "Try and overcome these (evil spirits)." 

So Hare was sent to the earth, and when he came on earth he said 
to himself, "My brothers acted in a (certain) way and failed." Hare 
had come up to a certain oval lodge and from this (same) house came 
a young woman with a little pail. She was going toward the river. 
"Now they (Foolish-One, etc.), were not able to do (what I am going 
to do)," he said. There he entered the body of the young woman in 
order to become a human being. There he sat in the abdomen (of 
the young woman) , yet he heard their (human being's) cry. 

He heard them crying. "My father sent me to give them advice, 
and here, for so very long a time, I have been sitting." Crying, 
shrieking, he heard them (the human beings). "So long have I been 
sitting here that (the evil spirits) will in the end destroy them." 
Seven months had he been waiting when he spoke thus. Finally, 
when the proper time had elapsed, he went out through an opening. 
Not four days after, the woman died. 

He always left the house in which they lived, at night, and would 
roam around. Whenever he walked inside the house he would 
reflect much light. As soon as daylight appeared he became quiet, it 
is said. As soon as the sun went down, he went out. He traveled 
all around the earth, for its entire extent, and just before sunrise 
returned and became quiet. Throughout the day he sat thinking 
of all the work he was to do. 

For the third time he again started out, at sunset, and traveled 
over half the extent of the earth, and all the bad spirits that were 
growing wild he put an end to. "Not again will they (the bad 
spirits) live; not for a second time will they kill any of my uncles or 
aunts." Just before daylight appeared, he went toward the house, 
and as he approached it, his heart felt good. Then he entered the 
house and all day he sat there wrapped in thought. 

When the sun went down he went out and over to the very edge of 
the earth, as large as it is, he roamed, and all the bad spirits that exist 
he killed. Just about daylight he went up into the heavens and bang ! 
he pursued all the bad birds that were living there and driving them 
together in the west, he killed them all. Very early in the morning 
he went to the house thinking pleasant thoughts. "The work my 
father sent me to do I have accomplished. The life of my uncles and 
aunts will now be like mine, from now on." Thus he thought as he 
entered the house. 

"Well, Grandmother, the work my father sent me to do, I have 
accomplished. He sent me to look after his creation and all that I 
have accomplished. My uncles' and aunts' lives will hereafter be the 

radin] THE MEDICINE DANCE 353 

same as my own." "But, Grandson, how can your uncles' lives be 
the same as yours ? It is not so. The (world) is as our father created 
it. Not different can it be made." "The old woman must be re- 
lated to them and therefore does not like it that I killed (the evil 
spirits)." "No, Grandson, our father has ordained thay my body 
(the earth) should fall in two. Lest they should cause a shortage in 
food (by overpopulation) he ordained that there should be death, 
otherwise they woidd crowd each other too much on earth. So, there- 
fore, he arranged that they have a place to die." 

Hare didn't like it. "Surely, Grandmother does not like it be- 
cause she was related to them. She is taking their (evil spirits) part." 
Thus he thought. "No, Grandson, that is not so. Your heart, at 
present, feels sore. Your uncles and aunts will obtain enough of life; 
they will live to a normal old age," she told him. "Now, Grandson, 
get up. Your uncles and aunts will follow you. Try with all your 
strength (to do what I am going to tell you) . You are a man, so do 
not look back." 

Around (the earth) they started. "Not to look back," grand- 
mother said. "I wonder why she said it." Thus he thought. So 
he looked back just the least bit to his left. The place he had started 
from caved in instantaneously. "O my! O my! A man I thought 
you were, a person of prominence, and I had encouraged you very 
much. But now, Grandson, decay, death can, in no way, be taken 
back." That is what she meant, it is said. 

Around (the earth) they went and to the edge of the fire (that 
encircles the earth) they traveled, it is said. They united it (the 
fire) so that they (the uncles and aunts) would attain old age, so she 
said. 

"To look back, she forbade me. But I have already made up my 
mind (as to the immortality of my uncles and aunts). When they 
become like me, then only will I be happy. Such is my thought." 
Then he went out and there, where the sun rises, to the east, he went 
and entered the house. Opposite the occupants he sat himself. 
What he had come for (the occupants) knew, it is said, " Well, Hare, 
there is nothing I can say to you. If the one ahead has anything he 
wishes to say to you, he will undoubtedly do so." Then he (Hare) 
greeted him and went out. 

Toward the west he traveled. Even then not any (other) thought 
he had. " I can do it," he thought on the way. When he arrived at 
the house he entered and sat himself opposite the (occupant) . " Hare, 
what you have come for, I know, I believe, but I will not tell you 
anything. The one ahead, he it is that can tell you, he it is." So he 
(Hare) saluted him and went out. 

Toward the house of the fourth one, in the south, he went and en- 
tered, and sat himself opposite (the occupant). "Hare, what you 

354 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ann. 37 

have come for, I know, but if even those ahead could not say any- 
thing to you, how can I, the very last, say anything?" 

Then he saluted him and went out in the same way that he went 
in. lie started for his house and came there crying, it is said. "My 
aunts and uncles must not die!" "To all things death will come," 
he thought. Then he cast his thoughts upon the precipices and 
they began to fall, to crumble. Upon the rocks he cast his thoughts 
and they crumbled. Under the earth he cast his thoughts and all 
beings that were living under the earth stopped moving and their 
limbs stiffened (in death). 

Up above also he cast his thoughts and the birds began to fall 
down (dead). 

Then when he entered the house he took his blanket and wrapping 
himjelf in it, lay down crying, it is said. "Not the entire earth 
will suffice for us," he thought, "and in some places there will not 
even be enough earth. " 

After a while the news reached our father. "To utterly destroy 
us they will try" (the people were saying). That Hare was not 
feeling well, was the news that reached him. Then he (Earthmaker) 
said to the first man he had created, "Hare is not feeling well and 
you are to go after him." Toward the earth he came. "Hare, I 
have come here to fetch you." But he did not answer him and 
he did not even move his blanket. So the man (Foolish-One) 
returned. Then he (Earthmaker) said to the second one, "Hare 
you are to go after and bring him back here. Try very hard to 
(accomplish) it, for he is not feeling well." When he arrived there 
(he said), "Hare, I have come after you to take you back." But 
Hare did not even (answer). When he returned, he said, "Hare 
did not say anything." (Then to the third one he said), "Hare 
you are to go after, for he is not feeling well. " When he came (to 
where Hare was, he said), "Hare, I have come after you, to take 
you home." But Hare did not even answer him. Hare was indeed 
not feeling well. 

Then he (Earthmaker) told the fourth one, "You are to go after 
Hare. Be sure and bring him. Be sure and bring him. Try with 
all your strength." "No matter how hard it is, I will bring him" 
(said the fourth one). He started out and when he came to Hare 
(he said), "Indeed, for a very long time has your heart been sad, 
Hare. But let us go home now. Get up ! " Then he took him back, 
it is said, to Earthmaker he took him. But not to Earthmaker 's 
house did he take him, but to that opposite where the chief of the 
Thunderbirds lived. At his side, there they placed him. In front 
of the Thunderbird chief's (house) there was a mound and also a 
little war club painted red on one side. Thunderbird chief took 
the little war club and holding it lightly, shook it gently. So great 

eadin] THE MEDICINE DANCE 355 

was the noise (it made) that Hare got frightened and almost ran out, 
it is said. Then they freed him from the sad thoughts he had had 
on earth and restored his spirits. 

Soon after that they took him to Earthmaker and (when) he had 
come there (Earthmaker said), "Hare, your heart must have been 
very sad. Indeed, for your uncles it was, that your heart felt sad. 
Now that their lives may be benefited, a holy teaching you are to 
take back to them. "Here, look at it," he said, and pointed to- 
ward the south. There a long lodge stood (revealed). At this he 
looked and there were old people with hair all white. "Thus your 
uncles and aunts will be. They will make very much noise (in 
this ceremony). Now look down! Some help is to be given them. 
Not one bad spirit will I put there. " Then he (Earthmaker) pointed 
in that direction and said, "You are to go back there (to earth) 
and put this (ceremony) before them. Not alone are you to do it, 
but with the aid of your own friends, Foolish-One, Turtle, Bladder, 
and He-who-wears-heads-as-earrings. " These he meant. "Your 
grandmother (the earth) will help you and if one of your uncles and 
aunts performs everything properly he will have more than one 
life. I will always keep the door (through which he may return to 
earth) open to him. When he becomes reincarnated he can live 
wherever he wishes. He can return (to the earth) as a human being 
or he can join the different bands of spirits, or finally he can become 
(a being) below the earth.*' All this he (Earthmaker) did for us. 

Then Hare returned to the earth and to his grandmother. " What 
I have tried to obtain for my uncles and aunts, that now I have 
brought back with me." "Grandson, how was it possible for you to 
make them immortal like ourselves ? As the world was created, so 
must it remain." "Grandmother, I say that my uncles will choose 
their lives for themselves, and grandmother, you are to help me." 
"All right, grandson, it is good," she said, thanking him. "When 
the time comes, my friend the Foolish-One will come," he thought. 
Then he struck his drum and started the songs. All of a sudden, 
Foolish-One came in. " That you would come, my friend, I thought, 
and thus you have come." " Indeed, my friend, I knew your thoughts 
and, for that reason, I came." Then they went out together and 
outside of the village they sat and discussed what they were to do. 
This is what they were doing. All day they discussed on the out- 
skirts of the village. When they came to the house they entered it 
and sat down. "My friend Turtle will come," he (Hare) thought. 
Then Turtle did come. "My friend, I knew you would come, and 
for that reason, you have come." "Yes, indeed, your thought I 
knew, and for that reason I have come." Soon Bladder came. He 
(Hare) thought he would come and for that reason he came. Then 
Hare centered his thoughts on He-who-wears-heads-as-earrings, and 
he also came. 

356 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ann. 37 

Their grandmother listened to them quietly, but she could not 
understand them. Then (after a while) Hare said, "Grandmother, 
what I have been trying to obtain for my uncles I have succeeded (in 
accomplishing). You are now going to hear of it. Come here 
toward the fireplace and sit down and you will hear of it. (I know) 
that you are anxious to help them, Grandmother." "Indeed, 
grandson, it is good," she said, and got up. Then she took her work 
and sat down near the five of them and laid her hands upon their 
heads. In front of her nephew, Hare, she placed her work. "If you 
get this for them (i. e., the medicine dance) your uncles will live weU. 
This way they are to do forever," she said. In front of him she put 
her work and said, "For this thing, indeed, I thank our father." 
Thus she said and went back and sat down. "Grandson, what the 
nature of my help for you was to be, you asked? Well, look at me, 
grandson. For your uncles and your aunts, our father had me bring 
the following. I have for them that with which they will always be 
able to ask for life." Then she opened that part of her body where 
her heart was situated and very green leaves were to be seen, like an 
ear in shape. It was as white as a blossom. Then she opened her 
breast on the right side and said, "Grandson, look at me." Then 
unexpectedly corn was visible. "For your uncles and aunts, our 
father let me bring corn." A stalk became visible whose leaves were 
very green and whose tassels were white. These were the ears of 
corn that we were to eat. 

Then the five of them got up and Hare said, "Our grandmother, let 
us greet." So they walked up and laid their hands upon her head. 
Then they greeted her and went around again. "It is good, grand- 
mother, this is what I meant when I said you were to help them. 
You were going to help us, grandmother," I said. "You may now 
fix your breast." 

Then he went out, proceeding toward the east, and when he got 
there he stopped. Then he turned toward the west. Grandmother 
closed her breast and entered the house. "Well, grandson, I have 
done it." "It is good, grandmother," said Hare. Then he went 
out, and when he got to the door he stopped there and thought, 
"This is the way it will be." And where he stood, eight yellow 
female snakes he threw. They became the side-poles of the lodge. 
Their heads he turned toward the east, and their tails he turned 
toward the west. The strings he used with "which to tie them were 
rattlesnakes. The doorway was made of a black female and a 
male snake, the latter placed at the right. At the rear end of the 
house, in the west, he also made doors of blue female snakes. Then 
he took a reed-grass, which he had brought with him, under whose 
covering we were to live, and threw it over the lodge and the lodge 
was wrapped in it entirely. Then he took another piece of reed- 

eadin] THE MEDICINE DANCE 357 

grass and inside the house, at the right side, he threw it and it became 
white mats spread out. Then he threw a bear-skin hide in the house 
on the right side, and it extended along the length of the lodge. 
Then he made a white deer-hide extend along the entire length of the 
lodge, on the right side. A door he made of a real living mountain 
lion. This he did in order to prevent bad spirits from entering. At 
the door, on the west side, he placed a buffalo bull, and when this 
all was completed, he looked inside the lodge and then he heard 
these animals bellowing and roaring, it is said. Inside of the lodge, 
it was light. 

Then he started for the lodge, first going for his friends. "Well, 
my friends, I am through; the house I have finished. Grandmother, 
stand up, for we are going to follow." He walked behind and when 
they came to the door, the fear-inspiring lion snapped his teeth, as 
he stood there. Then they went in and walked around the lodge 
until they came to the place where they had entered and they sat 
down. Then Hare sent a number of public criers, a bear and a wolf, 
to traverse the entire length of the earth. Along with them were sent 
the winged messengers, the common crow and the shrieking crow. 

When the animals that had started first returned, their bodies were 
old and devoid of hair, and they supported themselves on staffs. 
When the birds who had gone returned, their wings were worn out, 
their eyebrows lapped over their eyes, and they looked very old 
indeed. They came in front of Hare's seat and said to him, "Your 
uncles and aunts, when they speak of you, will speak of you forever 
in praise. We have placed many life-giving objects within the 
lodge.'' "Well, my friends, it is good. This is what I meant. I 
thank you in the name of my uncles and aunts." 

Then all the messengers who had been above on the earth, etc., all 
of them came. The four very first men he had created also came. 
They all stood at the door ready to enter. The oldest one started in, 
but he turned back, being afraid of the animals within. Three of 
them were afraid and therefore failed to enter. Then the youngest 
opened the door for them and led them in. After he entered, they, 
in turn, walked around the lodge, and when they got to the door, 
Hare placed the eldest one there and said, "My elder brother, this is 
your seat, the east one." Then he walked around again and at the 
north end he stopped and made the second one sit down. Then he 
walked around and, stopping in the west, made the third one sit 
there. Then, finally, he put the fourth one in the south seat, and 
went to his own seat and sat down. 

Now all the other spirits began to enter the lodge. Then the first 
people came in and four were made to sit in the east and four were 
made to sit with each of the four seats. The people were of the 

358 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. iss. 37 

Bird clan, the Bear clan, the Wolf clan, and the Snake clan. The 
fourth one was the one they were to teach, to initiate. 

Then Hare got up and spoke as follows: "My friends, I have had 
you come together, for my uncles and aunts had been living a most 
pitiable life. You are to teach them the life they are to live and 
which they are to hand down from generation to generation. That 
is what I ask of you. What I want, you have heard. I leave every- 
thing to be done and said by those in the east." 

Then he, the one in the east, arose and spoke, "Our friends, the 
uncles and aunts of the Hare, we are to teach the meaning of life, 
so that they may hand it down from one generation to the other. 
Only today, for the first time, have we discussed this thing for them. 
Life (all that life consists of — wealth, honor, and happiness) they 
shall have from now on." The four of them said, "What the one 
ahead said (we say)." When they finished, they returned. 

Now Hare got up again and said, "My friends, that is what I 
wished for my uncles and aunts. This council-lodge I made for 
them, and as long as they follow the precepts taught in the creation- 
lodge they will be invulnerable. For that reason this seat has been 
made for them, that whosoever desires may sit therein." 

All day long the spirits taught him, and when the sun was on the 
treetops, wdien it was time to stop, the spirits dispersed, taking with 
them as they went half the light within the lodge. They rubbed 
against the door-poles as they went out. They pushed them in 
deeply so the^y would not fall. 

Then Hare spoke, "Grandmother, I will be sitting ready for any 
one of my uncles and aunts who will perform this ceremony that we 
have taught them well. With tears my uncles and aunts will come 
to me and my heart will feel sore. I will go above and sit down and if 
any person performs this ceremony that we taught him well, then 
he will be as I am, if you will but look at me, grandmother. Look 
at my body, grandmother." And behold, like a very small boy he 
was. "If any one repeats what we have done here, this is the way 
he will appear." 

"Look at me," Hare said for the second time; "Look at me!" 
There he stood a full-grown man. Then, for the third time, he said, 
"Grandmother, look at me." There he stood a man in middle age; 
his hair was interspersed half-and-half with gray. Then she looked 
at him for the fourth time, and his hair was covered as if by a swan 
(i. e.j it was all white), and he leaned tremblingly on his staff, stand- 
ing in the east. "Well, grandmother, if any of my uncles and aunts 
performs this ceremony properly this way they will live." 

"It is good, grandson. However, not only your uncles but your 
aunts, likewise, will be that way if any of the latter performs the 
ceremony properly. " Look at me," she said, and when he looked at 

badin] THE MEDICINE DANCE 359 

her, there stood a very young woman, her hair like a shawl. "It is 
good, grandmother, and I thank you in the name of my aunts. 
Then for the second time she said, "Look at me." He looked at her 
and there stood a woman in middle age, her hair almost gray. " Well, 
grandmother, it is good, that is what I meant." Then for the fourth 
time she said, "Grandson, look at me." He looked at her. Her 
hair was entirely dried up, in the nape of her neck there was a hollow, 
and like a duck looking at the sun, she appeared. Her chin, like a 
wooden poker, burnt short, there she stood trembling. "Well, 
grandmother, this is what I meant when I said that you were to 
help me. My uncles and aunts that is what I wished for them, and 
I thank you." 

Organization of the Bands 

The medicine dance of the Winnebago consists of fire bands. A 
sixth band is temporarily formed whenever the ceremony is given 
in honor of a deceased member. 

For purposes of description it will be best to divide each band 
into three parts — the leader, his two assistants, and the rest of the 
band. Leadership depends upon a thorough knowledge of the 
ceremony and its complete esoteric significance, which is in the 
possession of only a few individuals in each band. This knowledge 
can be obtained solely by purchase and religious qualifications. 
These religious qualifications, to which might be added moral as 
well, play little part at the present day, but there can be no doubt 
that they were essential in the past. The leader likewise often 
possessed other characteristics, such as those of warrior and shaman. 

The two assistants were generally men who had purchased suf- 
ficient information and privileges to entitle them to help the leader 
in certain details of the ceremony. The drummers, rattle holders, 
dancers, etc., wrere always recruited from their ranks. Eventually 
they might become the leaders. Those who were neither leaders 
nor assistants possessed a knowledge varying from that of elementary 
information, required for admission, to that entitling them to the 
position of assistant. 

There is a priority of position in the lodge, depending on priority 
of invitation. The band invited first occupies the east position; 
that invited second, the north; that invited third, the west; and 
that invited fourth, the south. The east is the position of highest 
honor; the south, that of the lowest. Between the bands there 
exists an order of invitation based on tradition, the exact nature 
of which is unknown. According to one informant, if one band 
invited another, the latter in turn would be obliged to give it the 
position of honor; but as there are five bands, this can apply only 
to special cases. Whatever may be the order, it is certain that 
each band has ample occasion to occupy all five positions. 

360 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ann. 37 

There are two ways in which a man can join the medicine dance. 
He may simply apply for admission to any of the five leaders, or he 
may take the place of a deceased relative. In the former case, if 
his payment is satisfactory, and he has the other qualifications, he 
is accepted. In the other case, his relatives decide to have him 
take the place of a deceased relative. This latter form of candidacy 
is by far the more common. At the present day initiation requires 
the payment of about $300 or $400, in the form of goods and tobacco. 
Of this, a portion is given to the leader of the ancestor host's band 
during the four nights' preparation, and the rest to the leaders of 
the other four bands during the ceremony proper. 

Exactly how much information an individual obtains on entering 
can not be determined. Much depends on the amount of the payment. 
The minimum knowledge would amount to an acquaintance with the 
bare externals of the ceremony, its general significance, and such 
knowledge of the legendary origin of the lodge as a single recital 
could give. The new member is not initiated into the symbolism of 
the ritualistic myths, and consequently a large portion of the same 
must be unintelligible to him. What he obtains is practically only 
the right to hold the otter-skin bag and to use it in a certain way. 
He may not take part in any of the forms of dancing or singing, nor 
may he even shoot at will. He very rarely remains in this condition 
long, but takes the first opportunity to purchase additional knowledge 
and privileges. 

There are three kinds of members — mature men, women, and chil- 
dren. The privileges of women differ from those of the men, in that 
the women do not have to take the sweat bath, may never become 
assistants, and are allowed to dance only in a certain way. In other 
respects they have the same privileges as men. In practice there are 
certain privileges that women never have, but this is due to the fact 
that either they do not care for them or they are not in a position 
to buy them. Children belong to a quite different category. Although 
they possess an otter skin, they have not even the power of making it 
effective. There does not seem to be any evidence indicating that 
women were ever excluded from membership. 

Prescribed duties of the bauds. — The duties of the host, called 
the ancestor-host, are as follows : 

1. To rehearse the songs and rituals with his band four nights 
previous to the ceremony proper. At this rehearsal the candidate is 
always present and is instructed in the ceremony. 

2. To send out invitation sticks and tobacco to the leaders of the 
other four bands. The messengers are always his sisters' sons. 

3. To begin the four nights' ceremony preceding the ceremony 
proper. 

badin] THE MEDICINE DANCE 361 

4. To receive the leaders and assistants of the other four bands 
before the sweat-lodge ritual, and to begin the same. 

5. To begin the ceremony proper. 

6. To take part in the main portion of the ceremony proper: 
(a) To welcome the four bands. 

(6) To lead the candidate to the secret brush and instruct him in 
certain precepts. 

(c) To act as preceptor of the candidate before he is shot with the 
sacred shell. 

(d) To turn the candidate over to the charge of the leaders of the 
east and north bands. 

(e) To relate certain of the myths. 

(/) To deliver specific speeches and to perform the actions that con- 
stitute the basic ritual of the ceremony proper. This will be discussed 
later. 

The east is known as Those-who-sit-first, Where-the-day-comes- 
from, Where-the-sun-rises. All these terms are used frequently. 
The duties of the leader are: 

1. To assist the ancestor host in passing upon the eligibility of a 
candidate. 

2. To take part in the following portions of the ceremony proper: 

(a) Accompanied by his two assistants, to take part in the brush 
ritual. 

(b) To take charge of the candidate after he has been handed over 
to him by the ancestor host. 

(c) To shoot the sacred shell into the candidate's body. 

(d) To relate certain of the myths. 

(e) To perform the basic ritual. 

The north band is known as Where-the-cold-comes-from. The 
leader has the same duties as those of the east leader. The myths 
recited are of course different. 

The west band is known as Wliere-the-sun-goes-down. The leader 
has the duty of reciting certain myths and performing the basic 
ritual. 

The south band is known as He-who-sits-at-the-end-of-the-road or 
Where-the-sun-straightens. The duties of the leader are the same 
as those of the leader of the west band, except that the myths he 
recites are different. 

The distribution of the gifts to the different bands is as follows: 
The leader of the east band receives one-half of the number of blan- 
kets, the upper half of the new suit worn by the candidate, and one- 
quarter of the food. 

The leader of the north band receives one-half of the blankets, 
the lower half of the suit, the moccasins, and one-quarter of the food. 
1SGS23— 22 24 

362 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE Uth. ass. 3T 

The leaders of the west and south hands receive each 3i yards 
of calico and a fourth of the food. 

The ancestor host receives various gifts of food and tooacco from 
the leaders of the other bands. He receives his payment from the 
candidate before the ceremony proper. 

The candidate is present at the four nights' ceremony of the an- 
cestor host's band, preliminary to the ceremony proper. At the 
latter ceremony he sits to the right of the ancestor host's band. He 
is not dressed in his new suit until after the secret ceremonies in the 
brush. 

There are facial decorations distinctive of the different bands: 
The host's band and the candidate paint a blue circle on each cheek, 
but its significance is unknown to the writer. 

The regalia used are simple and few. They consist of eagle, hawk, 
squirrel, beaver, and otter-skin bags (pis. 51-53), a drum, gourd 
rattles, and invitation sticks. The otter-skin bags are always beaded 
and contain the sacred shell and various medicines. A few red 
feathers are always inserted in the mouth of the otter-skin bag. The 
gourds contain buckshot at the present time and are painted with 
blue finger marks. 

Division of the ceremony. — The medicine dance is divided into five 
well-marked parts. The first part (I) consists of the two nights' 
preparation preceding the sending out of the invitation sticks. This 
takes place at the home of the ancestor host in the presence of the 
members of his band and the candidate. The second part (II) con- 
sists of the four nights' preparation preceding the sweat-lodge ritual. 
Each band has its own four nights' preparation, although that of the 
ancestor host begins before the others. The third part (III) con- 
sists of the rites held in a sweat lodge, specially constructed for this 
purpose near the medicine lodge, on the morning after the four 
nights' preparation. The participants are the ancestor host, the 
leaders of the east, west, north, and south bands, each with his two 
assistants, and the candidate. The fourth part (IV) consists of the 
ceremony proper, which in turn must be divided into the night cere- 
mony (a) and the day ceremony (b). The fifth part (V) consists of 
the rites held in the brush, at which the secrets of the society are im- 
parted to the candidate. Special guards are placed on all sides of 
the brush to prevent the intrusion of outsiders. The participants, 
besides the candidate, are the ancestor host, the leaders of the east 
and north bands, each with his two assistants, and all other indi- 
viduals who have bought the privilege of attending. These cere- 
monies take place at dawn preceding the day ceremony. 

Two feasts and one intermission interrupt the main ceremony. 
The feasts always take place at the end of the ritual of the east 
band — i. e., generally at noon and at midnight. The intermission 

BUREAU OF AMERICAN ETHNOLOGY TH I RTY-SEVENTH ANN UAL REPORT PLATE 51 

Wfo 

wk'^^M 

OTTER-SKIN MEDICINE POUCHES USED AT MEDICINE DANCE 

BUREAU OF AMERICAN ETHNOLOGY THIRTY-SEVENTH ANNUAL REPORT PLATE 52 

POUCHES OF ANIMAL SKINS USED AT MEDICINE DANCE 

BUREAU OF AMERICAN ETHNOLOGY THIRTY-SEVENTH ANNUAL REPORT PLATE S3 

SKIN POUCHES AND FEATHER FANS USED AT MEDICINE DANCE 

radin] THE MEDICINE DANCE 363 

generally lasts from dawn preceding the day ceremony until 7 or 8 
a. m. The intermission begins as soon as the drum and gourds have 
been returned to the ancestor host and ends as soon as the people 
return from the brush ritual. 

The first and second parts are concerned entirely with a recital 
of certain ritualistic myths and a rehearsal of the songs and the 
specific ritual of each band used during the remaining parts. 

Types and component elements of the. ceremony. — For purposes of 
greater clarity, the speeches, songs, and types of action will be care- 
fully differentiated and referred to by some designation character- 
izing their essential traits. These speeches, songs, and types of 
action together form combinations which may be regarded as units, 
and they will therefore also be referred to by some designation char- 
acteristic of their function. 

1. Types of speeches — (1) Salutations: No formal salutation is 
used during Parts I and II, the individuals being addressed by their 
relationship terms. In Parts III, IV and V the salutations are in- 
variably the same. The ancestor host and his band are addressed 
as follows: "The-one-occupying-the-seat-of-a-relative (deceased) and 
you-who-sit-with-him, do I salute." The east is addressed, "You- 
who-represent-the-place-where-the-sun-rises " ; the north, "You-who- 
represent-the-place-where-the-cold-comes-from"; the west, "You- 
who-represent-the-place-where-the-sun-straightens," or (preferably) 
" You-who-represent-the-end-of-the-road." 

The appellations of the bands, as before stated, refer to the creation 
myth and the four guardian spirits whom Hare visited for the 
purpose of inquiring into the necessity and meaning of death. Hare 
was compelled to travel around the earth, which is conceived of as 
an island, and received no answer until he came to the spirit at the 
end of the road. In the dramatic performance of the medicine 
dance the lodge typifies the earth and the four bands and their 
leaders typify the four spirits. The ancestor host's band typifies 
the ancestor of the Winnebago. 

(2) Speeches: Under this head will be treated (a) speeches of wel- 
come; (b) speeches of acceptation; (c) speeches of presentation; 

(d) speeches explanatory of the significance of the ritual; and 

(e) speeches of admonition, addressed exclusively to the candidate. 
This does not exhaust all. There are many others, generally short, 
that can hardly be classified. In their content, as well as in the order 
of their succession, the speeches must follow a traditionally deter- 
mined sequence. In practice this is certainly not always true, but 
to the mind of the Winnebago these speeches appear as old as the 
ceremony. It is their firm belief that any departure from the accepted 
type will interfere with the efficacy of the ceremony. 

364 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [bth. ann. 37 

(a) Speeches of welcome: When the leader of the east band enters 
after the ancestor host has begun the ceremony (IV, i), he addresses 
the latter as follows: " It was good of you to condescend to invite me 
to this dance. I am a poor pitiable man and you believed me to be a 
medicine man. However, I know you will show me the true man- 
ner of living, which I thought I possessed, but which I in reality 
did not." In this strain he continues, weaving into his speech refer- 
ences to the ritual connected with his band and offering thanks for 
the beautiful weather (should it be a clear day). In concluding he 
thanks all again, and informs them that he will sing a song. With 
slight alterations the leaders of the other bands address the ancestor 
host similarly. The ancestor host's answer of welcome is as follows: 
" Whatever I desired you have done for me. All night have you 
stayed with me and by your presence helped me in the proper per- 
formance of this ceremony. I am ready with a dancing song, and 
when I have finished and sit down I shall pass to you tobacco and 
other means of blessing (the gourds and the drum). All who are 
present do I greet." 

(b) Speeches of acceptation: After the ancestor host has been pre- 
sented with food he thanks the donors as follows: "You have had 
pity on me. You have been good to me and have given me to the 
full whatever I desired. You have filled my heart with the blessing 
of thankfulness. In return I give you a blessing. Here is some food 
for you. It is not anything special, nor is it as much as it ought to 
be, and I know you will remain hungry. It was prepared for the 
spirits of the four quarters (whom you represent), but it is lacking in 
all those qualities which would have made it acceptable to them. 
Such as it is, however ,# may its presentation be a means of blessing 
to you." 

(c) Speech of presentation: East presents the food to the ancestor 
host with the following words: ''I have not very much to tell you, 
because I am too poor, but our ancestors told us to give you food. 
This little that I give is all that I can, being a person of so little 
importance." 

(d) Explanatory speeches: These are of so specific a nature that 
no single one can be considered typical. 

(e) Speeches of admonition: "Nephew, now I shall tell you the 
path you must walk, the life you must lead. This is the life Hare 
obtained for us. This is the only kind of Jife — this that our ancestors 
followed. Listen to me. If you will always help yourself, then you 
will attain to the right life. Never do anything wrong. Never steal, 
never tell an untruth, and never fight. If you meet a woman on the 
left side of the road, turn to the right. Never accost her nor speak 
familiarly with a person whom you are not permitted thus to address. 
If you do all these things, then you will be acting correctly. This is 
what I desire of vou." 

badin] THE MEDICINE DANCE 365 

2. Tvpes of songs: The songs may be divided into two groups — 
(1) Those that are sung in connection with myths and after the 
speeches of a more general nature, and (2) those that are sung to 
accompany definite and specific actions. These latter can therefore 
be most conveniently divided into (a) minor dance songs, (b) major 
dance songs, (c) initial songs, (d) terminal songs, (e) loading songs, 
and (f) shooting songs. The medicine men distinguish only between 
four kinds of songs — major and minor dance, terminal, and shooting 
songs. Each has a different rhythm and music. For purposes of 
description, however, the above division is more convenient. 

3. Types of action — (T) Blessing: Either hand is held outstretched, 
palm downward, and moved horizontally through the air. It is 
always used when entering and leaving the lodge and on any occasion 
where an individual has to pass from one part of the lodge to another. 

It is always rendered as "blessing" by the Indians, and they par- 
ticularly insist upon the fact that the "blessing" was not conveyed 
bj any words used in connection with the action, but by the action 
itself. Each person who is thus passed answers with a long-drawn- 
out ''ho — o — o" and with an obeisance of the head. 

A modification of the above is the "blessing of the head," which 
consists of a simple laying of the hand upon the head, both the giver 
and the recipient keeping their eyes fixed upon the ground, the recipi- 
ent slightly bending his head. A few mumbled words accompany 
this action. 

(2) Direction of walking in the lodge: Individuals always walk con- 
trary to the hands of the clock. A person in the east band must 
make the entire circuit of the lodge in order to pass out. In only 
exceptional cases can this rule of passing be broken, and that is when 
an old and especially privileged member crosses from his seat to that 
directly opposite him during the shooting ceremony. I was given to 
understand that this was an extremely expensive privilege. 

4. Types of ritual: Parts III, IV, and V can be so analyzed that 
they fall into a fairly well-defined number of units, consisting of 
speeches, songs, and movements. These units are nine in number. 
Artificial distinctions have been avoided in this division, as far as 
possible. The units are (1) entrance ritual; (2) exit ritual; (3) fire 
ritual; (4) present ation-of-food ritual; (5) shooting ritual; (6) initia- 
tion ritual; (7) sweat-lodge ritual; (8) smoking ritual; (9) basic ritual. 

Of these, (3), C5), (7), (8), and (9) are found in Part III; all except 
(7) and (6) in Part IV (a); and all except (7) in Part IV (b). (5) 
does not actually occur in Part III, but is described in detail in the 
myth related there. The order in which we will discuss these cere- 
monial units is not the order in which they follow one another 
in the ritual. Some are interwoven with one another. Both these 
factors will, however, be considered in the description of the entire 
ritual, following the description of each ceremonial unit. 

366 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ann. 37 

(1) Entrance ritual: The band enters the tent, makes one com- 
plete circuit, and stops. The leader now delivers a short speech, 
followed by a song. The band then continues to the west end, where 
another speech is delivered and another song sung. After this the 
band continues again, and stops at the east end, where the leader talks 
and sings. Now all sit down. After a short pause the leader again 
rises and walking over to the ancestor host, talks to him, gives 
him some tobacco, and returns to his seat. Each band entering re- 
peats the same ritual. This applies, however, only to Part IV (a) 
and (6). 

(2) Exit ritual (Part IV (a) and (b)) : The east leader rises and 
speaks, followed by north, west, and south. Each one then speaks 
again and, all singing, all walk toward the entrance in such a way 
that the south, north, and west bands make complete circuits of the 
lodge, thus enabling the east band to precede them. Near the 
entrance all stop singing and say "wa-hi-hi-M" four times and pass 
out. This exit ceremony differs slightly in the two divisions of IV. 

(3) Fire ritual, Part III: The ancestor host rises and goes to the 
leaders of the four other bands individually ; and after he has blessed 
them they respond; then all rise, make four circuits of the lodge, 
and sit down again. The leader of the east band now rises, holding 
in his hand the invitation sticks and some tobacco, delivers a 
speech, then goes to the fireplace and kindles the new fire. 

(8) Smoking ritual: The leader of the east band pours tobacco 
into the fire, first at the east, and then at the north, west, and 
south corners. He then lights his pipe, puffs first toward the east, 
then toward the north, west, and south, after which he passes his 
pipe to the leader of the north band, who takes a few whiffs and in 
turn passes it around to the next member of the lodge. When the 
pipe has made the complete circuit it is placed in front of the fire- 
place. In the meantime the ancestor host has returned to his seat, 
and after a short pause, rises, speaks, and sings again. This smoking 
ceremony occurs after each entrance ceremony, IV (a) and (b), and 
before both feasts of IV (a) and (b). 

PreseJitation-qf-jood ritual (Part IV, a and b). — The leader of the 
east band rises and brings meat, berries, wild potatoes, etc., to the 
ancestor host, delivering a minor speech at the same time. Each 
of the other leaders repeats the same ceremony. When all have 
finished, the ancestor host rises and thanks them. 

(5) General shooting ritual (Part IV, a and b): The leaders of the 
east, north, west, and south bands, holding their otter skins in their 
hands, rise and, accompanied by three men, make a complete circuit 
of the lodge. They first speak in undertones to these three men, 
giving them directions. At each end the leader of the east band 
speaks, and then, singing, walks toward the west end, saying "yoho — 

Radin] THE MEDICINE DANCE 367 

o — oya — a" three times, and ending with a long-drawn-out "yo — 
ho." At the west end both he and the leader of the south band 
speak. Then chanting "yo — ho" again, they all walk toward the 
east end. Here the leader of the east band speaks twice. All now 
place their otter skins on the ground in front of them, and east 
speaks again. At the conclusion of his speech, all kneel in front of 
the otter skins and cough, at which the sacred shell drops from their 
mouths upon the otter skins. They thereupon pick it up, and hold- 
ing the shell in one hand and the otter skins in the other, make a 
circuit of the lodge four times, increasing their speed each time, and 
singing. All this time the shell is held in full view of the spectators, 
on the outstretched palm of the right hand. As they near the east 
end of the lodge, at the end of the fourth circuit, standing in 
front of the ancestor host's band, they supposedly swallow the shell, 
and fall dowTi, instantaneously, head foremost, as if dead. Finally 
they come to, and coughing up the shell they put it into their otter- 
skin bags, and then making the circuit of the tent, shoot four members 
of the ancestor host's band, four of the east, four of the north, two of 
the west, and two of the south band. Each person as he is shot 
falls prostrate upon the ground, but recovering after a few moments, 
joins those making the circuit of the tent. Each leader now takes 
his drum and gourds to the fireplace. Then the general shooting 
commences. Each person possessing the right shoots one individual, 
until all the members have been shot. As each person is shot he 
falls to the ground, feigns unconsciousness, and then slowly recovers. 
The slowness or speed of his recovery depends exclusively upon the 
privileges he possesses and the number of years he has belonged to 
the society. As soon as each person shot recovers he falls in line 
immediately after the last one shot. While all are thus walking 
around a half dozen people at the fireplace sing shooting songs to 
the accompaniment of drums and gourds. The amount of noise at 
this point is quite considerable. 

(6)" Initiation ritual (Part IV, b): All the members of the an- 
cestor host's band and the candidate make one circuit of the lodge, 
taking their otter skins with them. As they pass around they gently 
touch the heads of the members with the mouth of the otter 
skin, saying " Yoho — o — o", to which the members respond with 
"Ho — o — o." After the circuit, all return to their seats, with the 
exception of the candidate, who remains at the east end in front of 
the fireplace. After a pause the ancestor host joins the latter and 
delivers a speech of the admonition type. The candidate first faces 
the south and then the north. During the speech the ancestor 
host touches him on his head and on his chest and makes him face 
first south and then north. When the speech is over the ancestor 
host sings and takes the candidate to the west end of the tent. 

368 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ANN. 37 

The tent is now prepared for the initiation proper. Two long 
strips of calico are stretched from the west to the east end of the 
lodge. They are about a foot and a half wide and are separated from 
each othex by the fireplace. At the west end a much shorter strip 
of the same material is stretched along the width of the lodge across 
the two long strips. Upon this the candidate is placed. When 
these preparations are completed the ancestor host arises and going 
to each of the four leaders speaks to them in an undertone. He then 
returns to his seat. The leaders of the east and north bands now 
arise and make the complete circuit of the lodge. First the former 
and then the latter speaks. Then the former speaks twice. After 
that the leader of the north band delivers another speech and, together 
with his partner, walks to the west end of the lodge, where the can- 
didate is kneeling. The two leaders here speak again. Both now 
take their sacred shells, swallow them, and walk to the east end (pis. 
52, 53). 

Here they speak again and hold their otter skins in readiness for 
the shooting, but first jerk them forward twice toward the four 
cardinal points, saying "dje-ha-hi, dje-ha-hi," and concluding with 
"e-ho-ho-ho." Standing upon the two calico strips in a slightly bent 
position and holding the otter skin tightly in their hands, they now 
run rapidly toward the reclining form of the candidate, making loud 
threatening sounds in a quavering voice, and strike his body twice 
with the mouth of the otter skin, emitting two short sounds as of 
an animal who has succeeded in capturing his prey. The candidate 
falls prostrate to the ground instantaneously. He is immediately 
covered with a blanket upon which are placed the otter skins of the 
two leaders. A number of people especially privileged now gather 
around the covered figure, dance, sing, and shout to the accompani- 
ment of the shouts of the other members of the society, all of whom 
seem in a frenzy of excitement. When the noise has somewhat 
abated the blanket is removed and the figure of the candidate is 
shown, still apparently unconscious. He comes to slowly and finally 
succeeds in raising himself and sitting up. He then coughs vio- 
lently, and the shell which has apparently been shot through his 
body falls out of his mouth. After this his recovery is rapid. He 
is then undressed and the finery and new buckskin suit, moccasins, 
etc., are distributed to those to whom it is customary to give them. 
He now returns to his seat, to the right of the ancestor host's band, 
where some female relative, generally his mother, dresses him in an 
ordinary suit. 

(7) Sweat-lodge ritual (Part III): The east leader rises and with 
his two assistants makes the circuit of the sweat lodge, while the 
north, west, and south leaders each with two assistants join him. 
At the east end the leader makes four steps with his right foot, each 

kadin] THE MEDICINE DANCE 369 

time saying, " Wa-M-hi." He then makes the circuit of the lodge 
four times. After the third circuit he goes directly to the heating 
stone, "hi defiance of the rule," as he himself says, hut with the 
hope that through this defiance he will gam additional strength. 
After he has made the fourth circuit he seizes the two entranc.e lodge 
poles and, shaking them gently, shouts "e-ho-ho-ho." All now sit 
down. The ancestor host now takes four sticks and smears them 
with a special kind of greenish clay and hands them to the leader of 
the east band. The latter seizes them and holds them tightly with 
both hands. By this action he is supposed to obtain strength. The 
sticks are then passed in rotation to the leaders of the north, west, 
and south bands, all of whom repeat the same ceremony. 

(9) Basic ritual (Part IV, a and b) : This ritual is that upon which 
the ritual for the ceremony proper (Part IV, a and b) is built. In a 
certain sense it may be justifiable to consider all the above ritualistic 
complexes with the exception of the entrance and exit rituals as 
parts of this basic ritual. The important religious function of the 
medicine dance is the "passing" of the blessing, consisting of speeches, 
songs, and the blessings, going from one band to the other, for 
the greater benefit of both the host and his guests. These blessings 
are symbolized by the drum, the gourds, the songs, the speeches, 
and the specific actions in which each band participates. The cere- 
mony begins when the ancestor host delivers his first speech and 
ends when drum and gourds are returned to him. All that takes 
place between the ancestor host's first speech up to the time that 
the drum and gourds are placed before the members of the east 
band constitutes the unit that I have called the basic ritual. Into 
it are thrust as intrusive elements other rituals, so that it is at tunes 
extremely difficult to discern the basic ritual itself. But it is there 
and remains intact, for as soon as an intrusive ritual is finished it is 
taken up and continued to the end. Such a ritual as the general 
shooting or the initiation, or such myths as the origin myth, require 
hours; and yet as soon as they are over the basic ceremony continues 
from the point where it has been interrupted. 

The east leader rises, speaks, then sits down, and, together with 
the other members of his band, sings a song (initial song). When this 
is finished he rises and speaks again, sits down, and commences a 
song called the minor dancing song. While he and a few others are 
singing, drumming, and using the gourd rattles, other members of his 
band, as well as members of the other bands who so desire, and who 
have bought the privilege, come to his seat and join in the dancing. 
When this is over he and a few others, either from his own or from 
some other band, go to the fireplace, where the leader delivers a 
speech, and begin the major dancing songs, in which the privileged 
members participate. After this the drum is tied to one of the 

370 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ann. 37 

privileged members, generally the one who has been drumming, 
and the circuit is made twice, the leader and his two assistants at the 
head, followed by the other members of his band. Two stops are made 
at the west and two at the east end, where songs, called completion 
songs, are sung. Then the circuit is made four tunes, all chanting 
" Wa-M-M," slowly at first, then faster, the speed of the walking cor- 
responding to that of the chanting. Then with a final strong 
"e — ho — ho" drum and gourds are deposited in front of the next 
band. All now return to their seats, where before sitting down the 
leaders deliver a short speech. 

This basic ritual is repeated by each band in the manner described. 
As it is so often broken up by the intrusion of other rituals it will be 
best to divide it into four parts. These parts are never broken up. 
Whenever intrusive elements occur, they either precede or follow. 

The first part consists of all that takes place between the first 
speech of the leader and the completion of the initial song. The 
speech referred to is the one that follows the smoking ritual, which 
may, on the whole, be reckoned as belonging to the introductory 
ritual, such as the entrance ritual. The second part consists of all 
that transpires between the second speech and the conclusion of the 
minor dancing song. The third part consists of all that happens 
between the speech at the fireplace and the completion of the major 
dancing songs. The fourth part includes everything between the 
completion of the major dancing songs and the last speech the leader 
makes, after he has passed the drum and gourds to the next band. 

The most bewildering intrusion is that which follows the second 
part. Before the leader and his assistants go to the fireplace the 
elaborate general shooting ritual takes place. After the specially 
designated men of each band have been shot, those privileged pro- 
ceed to the fireplace. Here they sing the shooting songs until the 
ritual is over. The first set of drummers and gourd rattle holders are 
often relieved by a second set. It is only when the shooting songs 
have been completed that the leader and his assistants proceed to the 
fireplace to begin the third portion of the basic ritual. 

Ceremony as a whole: As stated before, there are certain speeches 
and types of action that can not be fitted into the above description. 
This is especially true of myths; and these, with the exception of 
the content of the myth, will now be considered in connection with 
the description of the entire ritual as related to me by B. The cere- 
mony begins with an account of the manner in which B. was induced 
to join the society. Upon his acceptance and payment of the re- 
quired amount of material, the ceremony began. 

The first two nights consisted of an informal salutation, two 
explanatory speeches, and four myths, the latter in no way con- 
nected with any part of the medicine dance. The last three myths 

badin] THE MEDICINE DANCE 371 

dealt with the legendary account of the origin of the Winnebago 
medicine dance and its dissemination among the tribes. 

At sunset the leader of the band to which the candidate has applied 
for admission gathers together the members of his band and all 
retire to a little lodge near his home, in order to begin the four nights' 
preparation. What actually takes place during these four nights is 
not as stereotyped as the other rituals connected with the medicine 
dance. There is a general rehearsal of songs, speeches, and other 
elements of the ceremony. The speeches are not actually rehearsals 
of those to be delivered during the ceremony proper, but refer to the 
purpose of the medicine dance much in the same way as do some of 
the speeches in the ceremony proper. A large number of miscellaneous 
myths are likewise related. The candidate who is present in the lodge 
of his future ancestor host is likewise instructed in as many things as 
an uninitiated member is allowed to know. This instruction consists 
in the teaching of certain myths and types of action. 

On the morning after the last of the four nights the candidate is 
given some sacrifical tobacco and told to go in search of a stone for 
the sweat bath. He selects a stone that he can carry on his back 
easdy. Before picking it up he pours tobacco on it. As soon as the 
stone is brought to the lodge of the host it is heated. The candidate 
is now dispatched for some oak branches, four pieces of oak wood about 
2i feet in length, and some grass. The grass is used for improvised 
seats; the oak wood for the four construction poles of the sweat lodge. 
They are placed in the east, north, west, and south points, respec- 
tively. It is not permitted to trim the tops of the oak wood. When 
all the bands have gathered near the medicine lodge and retired to 
their improvised lodges, the ancestor host and the candidate go to 
the lodge of the east leader, that is, to the lodge of the band first in- 
vited, and greet him by touching his head with their hands. 

He answers with "Ho — o — o." The leader of the first band rises 
and, accompanied by his two assistants, goes to the sweat lodge. 
The ancestor host then goes to the lodges of the other bands and 
greets the leaders in a similar manner. After the leader and assistants 
of the band last invited have entered the sweat lodge the ancestor 
host, the candidate, and his assistants enter, and the ceremony is 
begun. 

After the ceremonial salutation and an introductory speech the 
ancestor host, as the leader of the band giving the medicine dance 
may now be called, rises, and taking his invitation stick and some 
tobacco, approaches the leader of each band, and blessing him, thanks 
him for coming, assuring him at the same time to how great a degree 
his presence will contribute toward the success of the performance 
of the ritual. He then returns to his seat. The leaders thank him 
in turn. Now follow the fire and smoking ritual, which in turn are 

372 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth.ann.37 

followed by twelve speeches of a general and explanatory character. 
Then conies the "strengthening" ritual, and immediately after twa 
exceedingly long myths, describing the initiation of the first man into 
the secrets of the lodge, as well as the sj^mbolic meaning of the shoot- 
ing ritual. All now undress and take a sweat bath. Female candi- 
dates are excluded. A number of short speeches follow, and the whole 
concludes with the exit ritual. 

The drum and gourds are used to accompany the songs. The basic 
ritual is perhaps present to a certain extent. The writer, however, 
was not permitted to witness the ritual, and for this reason the pro- 
cedure seemed somewhat hazy to him. 

When the ritual and the sweat baths are over there is a slight pause. 
The candidate, the ancestor host, and his band enter the medicine 
lodge, and after taking their seats sing a few songs. When the last 
song is concluded the other bands enter in the order of their invi- 
tation. Now comes the entrance ritual, followed by the smoking 
ritual. Thereupon the ancestor host rises and delivers the opening 
speech of the basic ritual. The ancestor host does not go through the 
entire basic ritual at this time, because he is not permitted to begin 
the shooting ritual. Soon after the beginning of the basic ritual by 
the ancestor host, generally after the second speech, gourds and drums 
are passed to the leader of the east band. This one rises and begins 
the basic ritual, which he interrupts at the end of the second part, in 
order to begin the general shooting ritual. When that is finished he 
continues the third and fourth parts of the basic ritual. Then drum 
and gourds are passed to the north band. Its leader now in turn 
begins his basic ritual, but stops after the second part, where, the 
presentation-of-food and the smoking rituals intervene. It is now 
about midnight, and the feast is given. As soon as the feast is 
finished and the lodge has been cleared of food and eating utensils, 
the leader of the north band continues up to the third and fourth 
parts of the basic ritual. The leaders of the west and south bands 
perform the basic rituals without any interruption, except, of course, 
that of the general shooting ritual between the second and third 
parts. The drum and gourds have now reached the ancestor host, 
who goes through the third and fourth parts of the basic ritual. 
There is, however, some doubt as to whether this is always done. 
Then follows the exit ritual and all pass out to rest for a few hours. 

A short time preceding dawn the candidate and the leaders of the 
east and north bands and the ancestor host, each with two assistants 
and all other members who are privileged to do so, leave the lodge 
and walk to the brush where the candidate is to be initiated into the 
mysteries of the sacred shell and the shooting. Each band must 
have one or more of its members present at this ritual. When they 
are near the place set aside for the secret ritual the order of marching, 

kadin] THE MEDICINE DANCE 373 

which up to this time has been of no consequence, changes into that 
of single file, the leader of the east band leading. When they have 
arrived at the proper place, all stop. The east leader now informs 
those present that he is going to make a road for the candidate 
symbolical of the path of life, which forms the basis of the sweat 
bath and medicine dance. Singing, he circles the spot four times. 
At the end of the fourth circuit he stops and all turn around and 
face east. The leader of the north band has also the right to go 
through this ritual, but he does not always do it. Repeating the 
ceremony is, in all probability, connected with extra expense. All 
now sit down and the specific rites of the brush ritual begin. 

The ancestor host rises and, taking the candidate with him, goes 
to the leader of the east band and speaks to him. Then he and the 
candidate return to their seats. The east leader now relates to the 
candidate a portion of the story of the journey to the land of 
the spirits and to the lodge of Earthmaker. When this is finished 
the two leaders teach the candidate how to go through the actions 
incidental to the shooting, the swallowing of the shell, and t lie 
recovery from its effects. When they think that he is sufficiently 
adept in all these actions they dress him in his new suit, put on a 
new pair of moccasins, decorate him with finery, and return to the 
medicine lodge. 

The rites generally last until about 8 in the morning, so that 
when those who have participated in the brush ritual are returning 
the other members of the medicine dance are also about ready to 
begin the day ceremony, the principal one of the entire medicine 
dance. The ancestor host again precedes the other leaders in enter- 
ing the lodge. Then follows the entrance ritual. During this 
ritual the drum is struck four times at stated intervals. The smoking 
ritual now follows. When it is concluded the ancestor host rises to 
begin the basic ritual, which is interrupted at the end of the second 
part. Gourds and drum are passed to the east band, whose basic 
ritual is also interrupted at the end of the second part. Now follows 
first the initiation of the candidate into the medicine dance and 
then the general shooting ritual. When the east leader has con- 
cluded, drum and gourds are passed to the north band, whose basic 
ritual is not interrupted as on the preceding day. At the con- 
clusion of the basic ritual of the north band the food-presenta- 
tion ritual follows, then the smoking ritual, and finally the feast. 
After the feast the leader of the west band narrates the origin 
myth of the medicine dance, which is continued by the leader of 
the south band. The presents are then distributed. After this, 
the basic ritual is continued by the leader of the west band, followed 
by that of the south band, and finally the drum and gourds go to 
the fireplace. The exit ritual now begins, and at about sunset the 
entire ceremony of the medicine dance is over. 

374 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [bth. ANN. 37 

On the whole, it must he said that the main difference between 
(a) and (b) of Part IV, setting aside the initiation, lies simply in 
the number of myths told and the greater length of the speeches. 

Personal Accounts of Initiation 

1. J. B.'s account: I was about 13 years and over when they told me 
that they would make me a member of the medicine dance. I liked 
it very much. Some people do not like it at all when they are asked 
to join the medicine dance. I, however, liked it very much. The 
medicine dance I am going to join, they told me. Very much did my 
parents desire me to do it. If I wished to live a holy life, that is what 
I should do, they told me. 

Then, when everything was in readiness for my initiation, we 
moved on to the village where the ceremony was to take place. 
At night they were to sing at the medicine dance, and they, my 
relatives, were to join in the singing with them. There they also 
preached to me. They told me that this rite, the medicine dance, 
was a good thing. I did not even then think that those who were to 
initiate me into the medicine dance would kill me when they shot at 
me, as was the popular belief. 

Never had there been such a life, they said, as the one I was going to 
live, now that I was about to join the medicine dance. Never at any 
time woidd I have thought of such a life. Those who were about to 
make me join the medicine dance told me that the Indians, when they 
hear of it, will expect me to do great things, that they will speak well 
of me, and like me. That is all I can now think of concerning that 
matter. 

Now, those who are' about to make me join the medicine dance are 
preparing to show me the shells, and for this purpose they are taking 
me into the brush. There they, the elders, preached to me. I was 
not the least bit frightened when, after this, they prepared to shoot 
me with the sacred shell. Indeed, I was not the least bit worried 
about it, nor did I think to myself, "I wonder how it is going to be V 
Then those who already belonged to the medicine dance, those whom 
I had dreamed of all this time, shot me. When they shot me I 
didn't die. That thought was in my mind; but when they shot me, 
as a matter of fact, I didn't even lose consciousness. Almost imme- 
diately I knew how to do it (i. e., to shoot). They liked it very 
much. Everything they told me to do I did immediately, nor was I 
backward about anything. The shaman liked it. Never had anyone 
learned as quickly as I had, they were saying. "That augurs well 
for him," they say. I thought then that the medicine dance was 
true. 

When we returned from the brush I entered the lodge. Not in 
any direction did I look, not once did I speak, not once did I move 
around, not once did I change my position. Just as they told me 

kadin] THE MEDICINE DANCE' 375 

to sit, that way I remained sitting. As many Indians as were gath- 
ered in the lodge, all of them, I failed to notice. Not. once did I, by 
chance, permit my glance to wander from side to side. I was doing 
everything exactly as I was told. The shaman liked it. 

Whenever thereafter a medicine dance was given I attended it. 
Whenever I went in at night I remained there until it was all over, 
not going out once. And during the day ceremony not once did I 
permit my glance to wander outside. Never did I permit myself to 
lie down from fatigue; nor did I permit my glances to wander outside, 
because there was much noise there, or because some people were 
doing funny things. Not even within the lodge did I glance. Indeed, 
I never allowed my glances to wander in any direction. All the holy 
things I was told to do, I did. This is a holy ceremony, and I was 
bashful in its presence. 

If at any time any of my leaders in the medicine dance wished to 
give the ceremony I would stay in his house together with those who 
had been invited. I would do all the work for him, sing the medicine 
dance songs, etc. All the different things he was supposed to do, all 
that I would do for him. 

When his wife cooked, I carried the water for her, I made the fire, 
and helped her with the dishes. All the work she liked to have done 
in the house, I did for her. 

All the clothes I possessed I gave to him. Money I gave to him, 
and the food he needed I procured for him. Whenever he gave a 
feast, in addition to what he cooked, I would put a special pail of 
food on the fire for him. When he ate it he was thankful. 

"My son, what do you think I possess, that you are doing all this 
for me?" But I continued; and when I killed a medium-sized buck 
I made a feast in his honor, and all the clothing he needed, I gave 
him. Then I also gave him a costly repeating rifle, the one I used in 
hunting. All these things I offered him. Then I gave him an 
eagle, so that he could make a medicine pouch out of it. Money I 
also gave him, and gourds. Thus I acted, feasting him and offering 
him gifts all the time. I worked for him all the time. 

One day he said to me, "My son, you have been treating me very 
well. Even my own brothers never treated me the way you have 
been doing. I thank you. All my relations hate you, but don't pay 
any attention to them. You are from a different family and I am 
teaching you various things (that belong to them), they say. They 
want me to stop instructing you. My father left the medicine dance 
for me to take care of. I am in complete control of it. Not one of 
these people, my kindred, has ever done anything for me in their 
lives. My ancestors said that you are my relative for what you have 
done. I can not teach my relatives the details of this ceremony, as 
I would have done had they acted correctly. My knowledge of this 
ceremony belongs to you, for you have paid for it. My remote 

376 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ann. 37 

ancestors told their descendants, as it has passed down from mouth 
to mouth to us, that whosoever pays careful attention to all that per- 
tains to this ceremony, that whosoever has a good memory, he is the 
one to whom it should be taught. Thus they spoke. 

"My son, you alone have been good to me," he said. "This cere- 
mony you will learn. Our son, He-who-stands-on-a-cloud, and you 
have been kind to me. Both of you will live a long life. Never 
divide this ceremony in two. Never keep anything separate, but do, 
the two of you, counsel about everything. If one of you knows any- 
thing, tell it to the other. Two people are necessary to make the 
ceremony truly efficacious for either one. Never dislike one another. 

"My younger brother, you are going to be a chief. No one else 
pays attention to this ceremony. You alone are doing it. If at any 
time I should leave your presence, when I am about to go I know that 
3*ou, oh my son and brother, I will leave behind me, peacefully travel- 
ing along. Thus I will think as I am about to depart. Thus my 
ancestors told me." 

Thus in trying to obtain information I made myself pitiable. 
I* tried to be blessed. I performed all kinds of work. Even woman's 
work I did. Thus I kept myself in a pitiable condition, and for that 
reason my brother-in-law blessed me. He blessed me with the cere- 
mony of his ancestors. He told it to no one else but to me; and if 
anyone else, at the present time, narrates the ceremony as told by 
our band, he is not telling you the truth. Up to the present time this 
ceremony was an Indian ceremony, and not a second time will I tell 
it to a member of the white race. 

This ceremony molded me. I paid the most careful attention to 
it; I worshiped it in the best way I knew how. I was careful about 
everything in my life. I never drank. A holy life it was that I 
sought and most earnestly did I pray that I might live over again. 
That is what I yearned for. If I do everything that this ceremony 
enjoins upon me well, I will return to Earthmaker, they told me. 
This is what I wished. I was doing well as a medicine man and 
everyone loved me. This ceremony was made with love. 

I knew all the songs. Indeed, the leader of the dance would make 
me sing the songs for him. As many medicine men as there were, 
they all liked me. I was not overbearing, but modestly did I com- 
port myself right along. All the medicine men told me that I was 
doing very well, and they offered thanks in my behalf. 

2. J. C.'s account of how he came to join the medicine dance: This 
is how it was. A grandmother of mine was the cause of it. She said 
that the Creator's son 21 was called the Hare ; that he came on earth 
and brought life, she said. She said that whoever did this would live 
well, that their souls would always return to the place where the 

« J. C. is a prominent member of the Peyote cult and, in common with other members of this cult, he 
has identified the Hare with Christ. 

badin] THE MEDICINE DANCE 377 

Creator sits. The first tiling that they did to me was this: They took 
me to a lodge at night; there they talked and sang. Then the second 
night the tobacco bundles were made; then the great old medicine 
men were given tobacco. After this came the four nights' prepara- 
tion. Then came the great medicine dance. Then they went after 
those that were going to join, one at a time. They, the medicine 
men, were repeating what the Hare had done. When the Hare 
came on earth he performed certain actions, and that is what 
they were repeating now. Hare had visited the different spirits, 
it is said, looking for a means of life, it is said. The old medicine 
men possessed the good tidings that Hare had brought to this earth. 
That is what the people desired of Hare, it is said. 

When they entered, the first person to whom tobacco had been 
given, i. e., the one first invited, entered first. Then the others 
followed in turn. Then he talked; then the one who initiated me 
expressed his thanks, saying, "You medicine men, this affair the 
Hare has given you, you are repeating in order to bless us. For that 
reason you have come. We ask you to give to this person whom we 
are about to initiate the life you have obtained for us. We ask that 
the newly initiated one travel along that road." 

Then the first person spoke, and after that they all ate. When he 
was through they heated a stone. After that they all entered in 
regular order and I was asked to go in with them. Thus I entered 
the sweat-bath lodge. When I was inside they told me that the stone 
which they had heated was a spirit. "The life that he brought I 
should ask for," they told me. After that we went out again. 

At night we entered again. Then at about 2 o'clock they took 
me out to the brush. Not until then was I to learn what the medicine 
men really did. When we got to the brush they made me sit down 
and the man who was initiating me turned me over to the others. 
He said, "I turn him over to you. Whatever the elders have taught 
you, that we desire you to tell him." When he finished the first 
one began to talk, saying, "It is good that you are such a person. 
Earthmaker must have willed it so. In the olden times if a person 
wanted to join the medicine lodge he could not do it until he was 
quite old." Then he continued preaching to me. When Earth- 
maker first came into the world and what happened after that, how 
he created all things: that he told me. He told me that Earthmaker 
created four worlds, in each of which he placed men and women; 
that the heavens we see represent the last man he created and the 
earth we are living on the last woman he created. Then he told 
how Herecgunina was created. The story is as follows: Earth- 
maker created man, whom he wished to put at the head of the world, 
but he did not make one of his legs quite right. Then he threw him 
down to the earth because when Earthmaker made anything wrong 
186823—22 25 

378 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [ETH. ANN. 37 

he never did it over again. Herecgunina lived on earth from that 
time on, and it is said that he also created things. Indeed, it is said 
that he was almost the equal of the Earthmaker. He made the people 
very miserable. Then Earthmaker sent four of his sons (to save the 
people) . Hare alone, of all the four, accomplished what he had been 
sent out for. All the rest failed. Hare obtained life for the people 
upon this earth. 

Then the man told how the medicine lodge had been founded ; how 
all the spirits upon the earth and all those under the earth and all 
those above the earth gathered together. They brought life with them. 
Then the medicine bags began to come. Fisrt came the eagle. He 
came from above. Next came the hawk, and then the squirrel, etc. 
The otter was the last one. Then the old man stopped talking to me 
and another person began to admonish me. He told me how I was 
to conduct myself. Then he spoke to me of the medicine-lodge road 
(i. e., of life) and what happens after life. 

The first tiling that I would meet on the road would be bad birds 
making a lot of noise. "Do not look at them," he told me. They 
would let fly at me bad-smelling saliva and phlegm, but I was not 
to turn around, he said. Then the road would become thickly covered 
with thorn bushes. It would seem almost impossible to untangle 
them. I was, however, not to pay any attention to them, he told 
me. On the road, fires would send their sparks toward me, but I 
was to pay no attention to them. After a while I would lose one 
of my relatives, but I was to keep right on. I was not to get angry 
nor to give up, and after a while the road would become thickly 
covered with poplars growing on each side. Then the hair on my 
temples would become gray. This is what would happen to me, he 
told me, if I paid close attention to this ceremony. After a while 
it would become foggy — i. e., my eyesight would grow dim. Then 
I would come to a hill, one of four hills. When I came to the last 
hill there I would see red cedar trees. This is what would happen 
to me if I paid close attention to this ceremony, he told me. My 
soul would return to Earthmaker and I would then be allowed to 
come back to this earth if I wanted to. 

Then they gave me the object with which they shoot themselves — 
the shell. They shot me. After that they made me try to do it, 
and when I was able to shoot well, we all came back. It was now 
daylight. Now they put clothes on themselves and arose. Those 
who were initiating me then spread upon the ground the things 
which had been brought. Then the leader spoke. He told me that 
he would put me on the medicine-dance road. Then they sat me 
down there and shot me. Then the clothes that I had on were 
taken off and I was given other clothes. I was now told that I was 
standing on the medicine-dance road. After that they danced all 
day. In the evening they stopped. Now this is what I did; this 
is all I can say. I greet you, my friends. 

CHAPTER XV 

MISCELLANEOUS DANCES 
The Hok'ixe're Dance 

Informant, member of the Thunderbird clan: This is the way in 
which people used to bring scalps to one another. When a man 
returns from the warpath with a scalp he leaves it outside of the 
village and the warriors run out with their clubs and strike it and 
count coup (just as on the battlefield). As they count coup they 
call out their names Then they are told what ceremonial dress 
they are to wear. They then send a messenger to the person to- 
whom the scalp is to be presented to tell him to select a pole (for 
the victory dance). He thanks them and says, "It is good." Then 
the warriors who are returning arrange themselves in a circle around 
this pole and dance around it. He who has obtained the first war 
honor leads. 

The one to whom they present the scalp thanks the spirits who 
are in control of war powers and then raising his hand prays to the 
Sun. Then he sings a song and when that is finished sits down, 
beats the drum, and sings a dancing song, while the others dance. 

Then the owner of the scalp, turning toward the spirits who are 
in control of war, gives the victory whoop four times. After each 
whoop all the other people in the lodge strike their mouths with 
their hands and yell. After the victory whoops have been given 
all dance the victory dance. 

Then the man who has received the scalp lets his sisters, his aunts, 
and his nieces select the war presents which are always bestowed 
upon them. With these tied around their necks they dance. Toward 
evening they finish the victory dance and then all enter the (danc- 
ing) lodge. He to whom the scalp is given is the host and he sits 
down first. Then comes the donor and then in a row the four who 
have counted coup. 

The ceremony begins with songs sung by the host. He first sings 
two war-bundle songs (waruxa'p na^wan) and then two night songs 
(hanht' nanwan). When these are finished the meal is eaten. Before 
eating, all the animal heads are placed in front of the donor of the 
scalp and he selects those men with whom he wishes to-share them. 

Then the host rises and says, "War-bundle owners who are seated 
here, I greet you all. Our warrior (the donor) will eat together with 

379 

380 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [kth. ANN. 3T 

our grandfather, the scalp, who is standing in the center of the lodge. 
Place a plate for the scalp and bring it to that brave man." Then 
the brave warriors eat the head, and when that is finished the serv- 
ants distribute meat and food to those present who have not taken 
part in the head eating. While they are eating the host blows on 
his flute and sings some songs until the eating is over. Then he 
rises and speaks again: 

"All you who are present to give us counsel and who sit here in 
the place of others, I greet you. For the warriors who would counsel 
with us repeatedly and for the sacred speeches of our fathers do we 
ask. In this ceremony to-day we will select as many war-bundle 
owners as are present to eat together with our grandfather, who is 
standing in the center of our lodge (the scalp). And if they select 
me to eat with the scalp, poor and pitiable as I am, it would be good. 

"Should sickness suddenly come upon a village all those who are 
sick may take part in this ceremony. For our grandfather, who 
stands in the middle of the lodge, is no weakling, and when they 
take hold of him they are obtaining supernatural powers, it is said. 
We are trying to trample upon the soul {wanayxi'rak) (of the scalp). 
If we trample upon it, all the goods of life that were still coming to 
him when he was killed will be transferred to us. As many as are 
going to take part in this dance to-night should try to make the soul 
of our grandfather (the scalp) more amenable to our prayers. So 
all you women and men see to it that you dance with all your strength. 
Do not take this matter lightly, for we obtain life thereby, we were 
told. 

"Councilors of the different clans who are seated here with us, I 
greet you all." 

Then they sang holc'ixe're songs and danced the Jiolc'ixe're dance. 
All night they danced. They did not stop for a moment. Thus they 
tried to conquer the soul of their grandfather (scalp). They danced 
till early in the morning and then just as the sun appeared they 
carried the drum outside of the lodge to the victory post and danced 
the victory dance. As soon as the sun was high in the heavens 
they stopped. Then they went to sleep. 

The second day. — Just before the sun was setting they all came 
and danced the victory dance again. Then the host got ready to 
furnish the meal again. All his female relatives who had received 
presents took charge of the preparation of the food, which the serv- 
ants had previously obtained. As soon as the victory dance was over 
they entered the dancing lodge. Then the host spoke, and when 
he finished he sang four songs, and as soon as these were finished 
they all got ready to eat. Then the host said that he would give 
the heads of the animals to the donor and that the latter might 
select those warriors whom he wished to have as partners in the 

radix] MISCELLANEOUS DANCES 381 

head eating. Then the donor selected his partners. The host then 
began to sing. The scalp was taken down from the post and placed 
in a dish near the door. The soul of the scalp still remained within 
it, so they tried again to make it less powerful and to conquer it, 
for they knew that if they succeeded in conquering it all the life 
that was still coming to the possessor of the scalp at his death would ' 
be obtained for themselves. Then the dancers and the feasters, 
indeed all who had counted coup, tried to obtain some of the dead 
enemy's residuary life. All tried to add some new life to their own. 

When the meal was over, then the host offered tobacco to the 
spirits, and all those present prayed for war to the spirits to whom 
offerings had been made. They asked that if it be their good fortune 
to kill a number of people on the warpath, when they returned home 
they would be as thankful as they are now. All these warriors who 
were taking part in this dance liked it very much. 

Then the host struck the drum that had been placed in front of 
him and sang. When he finished, he had the drum placed in front 
of the man who had counted first coup. Then this man sang and 
the drum was passed to the next man, and so on until each man had 
sung. After all had sung and spoken the men and women together 
danced around the lodge. The woman who had received the pres- 
ents led the dance, carrying the scalp. The people believed that 
the scalp was dancing with them. All night they danced the TioJc'- 
ixe're dance without resting at any time, and when the sun appeared 
they took the drum outside to the post and danced the victory 
dance. Then when the sun was high in the heavens they stopped 
and went to sleep. In the evening when the sun was low they 
danced the victory dance again, and then when it was pretty dark, 
singing slow songs, they slowly entered the lodge again. Then they 
made a circuit of the lodge and placed the drum in the middle of 
the lodge. 

The feast was now ready. All that they were to eat — deer, bear, 
dog — were placed in front of the feasters. Food was brought to 
the donor and all those who were sitting together with him, as well 
as all those who had counted coup and all the women who had 
received presents. Head eating is holy, and if one eats part of the 
head it is thought that it will help him greatly. 

Then the host rose and spoke as follows: 

"The servants who are carrying the food around here will probably 
not have enough to go around, but you must remember that not 
the men but the women are furnishing the food. Although it is little, 
I hope you will eat it. We will now sing four songs." Then he 
sang two war-bundle songs and two night songs. Before they ate 
the host rose and spoke, "This is a small feast and we will try to 
give food to our grandfather (some spirit) who is in charge of this 

382 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ann. 37 

ceremony, iul who are going to partake in the head eating will 
sit together with the donor. A warrior will eat together with the 
scalp. This is all I have to say." 

Then the feasters who were selected to take part in the head eat- 
ing went toward the warrior and ate with him. This warrior (the 
donor) held a long stick in his hands with which he danced, after he 
had partaken of the head together with his friends. After he had 
finished dancing, he walked to the center of the lodge and stuck the 
stick in the ground and (sat there), eating alone with the scalp. 
Then all the feasters ate again, and when they were finished the host 
sang a number of songs and passed (the drum) to the donor, who 
sang whatever songs he desired; either war-bundle songs, night 
songs, buffalo songs, or sore-eye dance songs. When the songs were 
over, all danced. Then the drum was passed to the one who had 
counted coup first and he spoke as follows: 

" The spirits blessed our grandfather and taught him many speeches 
for this occasion. These we will try to repeat to-day. Even if we 
do not repeat them correctly, the Night Spirits will not take such a 
mistake amiss, we were told. Indeed, if I only knew one thing (a 
song or a speech) they would bless me. We wish to trample upon the 
soul of our friend (the scalp) and if you, my friends, do the same and 
repeat the holy speeches of your grandfathers, we will surely accom- 
plish our purpose. Life we wish to obtain, so let us start our songs. 
That is what I wanted to tell you. Now let us beat the drum and 
sing. I greet you all." 

Then the drum and tobacco were taken to the one who had counted 
coup second. He spoke as follows: 

"The songs and speeches that my grandfather used, those I, too, 
will use. I, too, desire to trample upon the soul of our friend (the 
scalp). Life I desire, and I will therefore start up some songs. lean 
not do what my ancestors did, but I will do the little I know. I 
greet you all." 

Then the drum and tobacco were passed to the one who had counted 
coup third, and he spoke as follows: 

"What our grandfather said, that I am trying to say now. I do 
not know any songs or speeches, however. I did not listen to what 
my parents told me, so now when I might have asked the spirits for 
many things, I can not do it. I do not know what to say and my 
eyes fill with tears at my discomfiture. But I have myself to blame 
for it. Now I will start up some songs. I greet you all." 

Then they brought the drum to the one who had been fourth to 
count coup and placed tobacco in his hands. Then he spoke as 
follows: 

"It is good. Those in the east have given me tobacco and I will 
now offer it to the spirits in their behalf. You have helped to trample 

badin] MISCELLANEOUS DANCES 383 

upon the soul of our friend (the scalp) and you have tried to gain 
additional life. I also desire life. Our ancestors were equal to the 
spirits in their power and they asked each other to help one another 
in obtaining life. I will try to ask for that which you have asked. 
I greet you all." 

Then all the war-bundle owners in the lodge greeted each other, 
and the drum was passed around until every one in the lodge had 
sung. Then they danced the hok'ixe're dance until early dawn and 
when the sun was about to appear they took the drum to the post 
and danced the victory dance until the sun was high in the heavens. 
Then they went to sleep. All day they slept, and toward evening 
of the fourth night, when the sun was low, they began the victory 
dance again. When it was dark they entered the lodge and placed 
the drum in the center. Then the attendants put dog meat in the 
kettles. When all was in readiness and all the feasters had entered 
the lodge the host offered tobacco to the spirits for whom food was 
being prepared and spoke as follows: 

"After we have sung 'four songs the meal will be ready to be 
served. The attendants, it is true, have not cooked very much and 
it will doubtless not be enough for all, but I think that there will be 
a little portion for every one. When I have finished the four songs, 
then the donor for whom this ceremony is being given will select 
the people who are to eat with him. Then the attendants will dis- 
tribute the portions of meat, in addition to the heads, and then we 
will all start to eat." 

Then all ate. The donor after first eating with his friends ate 
alone with the scalp. Then some of the men arose and gave thanks. 
Finally the host rose again and said, " Whatever little it was in my 
power to do, I tried to do. All have tried to help me. It is really 
good. I am really unable to say what I wanted, but it is good. As 
the drum passes around, may it be of some help to every one." 

Then the drum is passed to the one who had first counted coup. 
He sings and then it is passed to the other three who counted coup, 
who likewise sing. From them it is passed to all the' other people 
in the lodge who have not sung yet. Then all dance the hok'ixe're 
dance and toward dawn the drum is taken outside to the post and 
the victory dance is given. If the donor had lost a child the others 
now wipe off his tears and tell him not to cry any more; and they 
make the mourner feel joyful again. When it became (full) day- 
light they danced the victory dance and walked four times around 
the pole. Then they went to the grave of the child that had died 
and danced the victory dance there and stuck the scalp in the ground, 
for the soul of the child. There it would wither and the father would 
feel happy. This is the end. 

384 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ann. 37 

The Herucka Dance 

The Heruclca is a social dance and is frequently given when visitors 
from other tribes are present, presents being given on this occasion. 
Men and women take part in it and are generally dressed in their best 
clothes. A few customs that were noticed at a performance in 1908 
might be mentioned here. 

If a man drops anything during the dance he himself may not pick 
it up. Only a warrior who has been wounded has the right to do so. 
The object dropped is returned to the owner, who, however, must 
always give it to his sister or niece. 

It is at times customary for a man to dress himself in rags and 
beg for food, etc. He generally represents himself as an extremely 
poor man and pictures his destitution in a manner best calculated to 
amuse everyone. 

Wagers of horses are very commonly made at this dance. 

The dances indulged in are mainly victory dances and the songs 
known as Herucka songs are always victory songs. Many borrowed 
songs are sung at this dance. 

A large drum is alwaj's used, around which sometimes as many as 
10 drummers sit. The drum consists of an ordinary tub over which 
skin has been tightly drawn. It is supported by two carved sticks, 
to which it is firmly attached, so that the bottom is about a foot from 
the ground. It is painted in the following manner: Two rather 
narrow lines of paint across the center of the drum, one blue and the 
other green. The portion of the drum next to the yellow line is 
painted blue, and that next to the blue line red. No meanings for the 
colors were obtained. 

Watconank'ewe Feast 

(afraid-to-eat-greens feast) 

Informant, member of Beaver clan : Just about roasting-ear month 
people would commence to fast and continue until the green corn is 
ripe enough to be eaten. They fast so that all the plants may 
strengthen the tribe. 

The fast generally takes place in a special lodge, from under which 
all the grass has been cut, for the faster must not come in contact 
with anything that is green. When the fasting is over a feast is 
given at which all those present eat "greens" for the first time. 

The Captive's Death Dance 

Before putting a captive to death it is customary to tie his arms 
behind him in such a manner that his hands have a little freedom. 
Then the}' put a gourd in his right hand and a lance in his left hand 

Radin] MISCELLANEOUS DANCES 385 

and permit him to dance and sing. This is called the waygenirjlce-i11 
dance.22 

"So then the turtle was told to dance his death dance — i. e., 
warjgeniijlie-in dance. Both of his arms were tied behind above 
the elbows. Only thus was he permitted to walk. His wrists were 
tied in front, so that he could not stretch out his arms. His ankles 
were tied in such a way that he could not take any long steps. He 
carried a gourd in one hand and a sacred object in the other, and 
with these he danced up and down the village, performing his death 
dance and singing and shaking his gourd. Many people came to see 
him. He stopped and changed his song, singing, "O death, O death! 
You young women come here to see me. I am anxious for death." 

(It seems that it is customary to grant any wish the captive makes 
while dancing this dance.) 

The Farewell Dance 

When a person is about to go on the warpath he goes around the 
village dancing and asking for volunteers to accompany him. New 
volunteers join him as he dances and sings. When the dancing is 
over these volunteers tell the people how their forefathers encouraged 
them to go on the warpath, etc. 

At the beginning and end of each song they strike their mouths 
with their hands and give a whoop. 

FAREWELL SONGS 
I 

Hi'ske weje'ji yare'na" da'tcu" wa'rjkenangre wajan ana'ngere; hi'ske 
Truth he speaks I hope, war leaders, what he says, truth 

weje'ji yare'nA11. 

he tells I hope. 

II 

Curjkena'rjgere je'ske hidanankik'inna dotcu'nkera wanga'ninge: je'ske 
Those dogs like I think of myself war leader a man I am: Thus 

hidanankik'inna. 

I think of myself. 
(I. e., I don't value my life any more than that of a dog.) 

Ill 

Jige' ya'ragenivnAD wajan s'inp'anai'na dstcu'nkera; jige' yare/nAn. 
Again I desire it something a long time war loader; again I desire 
(I. e., it is a long time since I have been on the warpath.) 

IV 

Ga ai'recke xawa'ninktcanevnAn dotcu" wunkerareeke xawa'ninktcanenA" 
Even that they say will disappear war leader even he will disappear. 
(I. e., I don't value my life any more than the war-leader does.) 

" The following description of this dance, contained in one of the versions of the myth, " Turtle on 
the warpath," is no doubt fairly accurate. 

386 

THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE 

[ETH. ANN. 37 

The Soldier's Dance 

Informant, member of the Bear or Soldier clan: 23 The object of 
performing the soldier dance (fig. 37) is to strengthen the members of 
w. the Bear clan. They dance with 

the emblem of the Bear clan, the 
whittled stick (namayxV nixini) , 
in their hands. The dance is 
also given whenever a council in 
which tribal affairs are discussed 
is held. On such an occasion 
the men take their drums to the 
council lodge and dance there, 
followed by the women. 

The principal leader — i. e., the 
chief of the Bear clan (ma'nanp'e 
hii-'ijgera) — appoints a person 
who is in charge of the ceremony 
(ma' nan,])' e hak'o'hiduk'ono'na). 
The ceremony begins with the 
chief of the clan marching around 
the village with some followers 
and stopping here and there to 
d ance and give the soldier whoop . 
The members of the Bear clan 
are supposed to be strengthened 
by the blessings of all the animals 
who have claws. Should any- 
one be sick in the village, this 
strength of theirs would be suffi- 
cient to cure them. Then they 
return to their lodge and are put 
in control of the entire village. 
As soon as the time for the dance is at hand the soldiers give their 
whoops and an old warrior is selected to tell of his war exploits. 
He always makes it a point to tell of some exploit that seemed at 
first foolhardy — how he tried to do something that generally meant 
death, but how he succeeded by reason of his fearlessness. It is with 
such a heart, he tells them, that they must dance the soldier's dance. 
Then they all dance and sing. When they are finished, they let the 
women dance. 

Fig. 37.- 

-Plan of Soldiers' dance, a. Leader. 
b. Assistant. 

83 Throughout this work soldier is used to connote something quite diiTerent from the word warrior. 
The Soldier clan is the Bear clan, and the Warrior clan is the Hawk or the War-people clan. 

badinj MISCELLANEOUS DANCES 387 

The soldier dance is a hop up and down with both feet and in no 
particular order, anywlfere around the singers. It is held in the 
open air. 

SOLDIER DANCE SONGS 
I 

Mananp'e'ra nanjinwine. 
Soldiers get up. 

II 
Wajannija" tcexigi'ji nanjin'a"dje. 
Something difficult get ready. 
(I. e., whenever there is anything difficult to do you must get ready.) 

Ill 
Mananp'e'ra newine'nA" hu'nagiredra. 
Soldiers I am he whom they spoke of. 

IV 

Mananp'c'ra hi'ja" wine'nA11. 

Soldier one I am. 

(I. e., I am a soldier, and if there is anything to do I'll do it.) 

Ceremony of Uangeru 

(begging ceremony) 
A dummy is made of grass and dressed with whatever objects the 
maker wants to get. If he wants a horse he puts a bridle crosswise 
around the body of the dummy; if he wants clothes, he dresses him 
up in Indian clothes. Then the man places this dummy anywhere 
near a gathering, or where he expects a gathering to take place. He 
sits near it. As soon as any warrior sees the dummy he goes over 
to it and either kicks or strikes the man who made it, giving him at 
the same time one of the objects he wanted. Any person may do 
the same. They may not stop kicking the man until some warrior 
who had at some time or another cut up an enemy in war cuts up 
the dummy. Then all stop, and as soon as his bruises permitted him, 
the man would get up and pick up the gifts brought to him. 

Feast to Buffalo Tail 

A grandfather of mine called Cokeboka fasted at Neceda, Wis. 
There he was blessed by a young buffalo bull calf belonging to a herd. 
The calf said, as the herd went by, "Father, keep going in the road; 
mother, keep going in the road." He meant a warpath instead of 
the road they were going in. The man was to go on a warpath, from 
which he would return victorious. 

They used to make offerings to this tail alone, apart from the war 
bundle. The braided grass was to be used for smoking. The feast 
is given in spring after the grass grows up, and in midwinter. Ground 
corn is boiled in making the feast. 

Kikre Waci and Tcebokonank Dances 

There is a pleasure dance called Jrikre waci and a dance called 
tcebolconAn]c (wearing buffalo headdresses). The latter is of Sioux 
origin. 

CHAPTER XVI 

THE PEYOTE CULT 
General Description 

Owing to the great importance of one of the modern cults found 
among the Winnebago, the so-called Mescal or Peyote, it will be 
discussed here in some detail. Not only is this cult of great promi- 
nence in the life of the modern Winnebago, but as its inception and 
progress can be followed out in considerable detail it is of great 
significance for the study of their religion. 

The ceremony is generally held in a building called by the Peyote 
worshipers a church, although it frequently takes place in the open 
also. In the early days of its organization as many meetings as 
possible were held. In 1910 there was a tendency to restrict the num- 
ber and to have them generally take place on Saturday night. La 
1913, after the first enthusiasm of the new converts had died out, the 
authpr was informed that the meetings were rarely held more than 
once a week. Around Christmas and beginning with July a series of 
meetings was held, lasting from a week to 10 days, as a rule. The 
Christmas meetings were not prominent hi 1910, but the July ones 
seem to have been held from the beginning. They represent, of 
course, merely a substitution for the older pagan ceremonies and 
games that were held about that time. 

In the early days the ceremony was opened by a prayer from the 
founder, and this was followed by an introductory speech. There- 
upon the leader sang a Peyote song, to the accompaniment of a drum. 
Then another speech was delivered, and when it was finished the 
drum and other regalia were passed to the man to the right. This 
man, in turn, delivered a speech and sang a song, and when he was 
finished, passed the regalia to the third man, who subsequently 
passed it to the fourth one. The fourth man, when he was finished, 
returned it to the leader. In this way the regalia passed from one 
person to another throughout the night. It not infrequen tly happens 
that one of these four gets tired and gives up his place temporarily to 
some other member of the cult. At intervals they stopped to eat 
or drink peyote. At about midnight the peyote, as a rule, begins to 
affect some people. These generally arise and deliver self-accusatory 
speeches, and make more or less formal confessions, after which they 
go around shaking hands with everyone and asking forgiveness. 
388 

BUREAU OF AMERICAN ETHNOLOGY THIRTY-SEVENTH ANNUAL REPORT PLATE 54 

a. PEYOTE LEADERS 

b. BURIAL HUTS 

H 

a. 
O 

in 
> 
< 

a. 

z 
i 
o 

■D 

UJ 

HI 

DC 

UJ 

> 

_l 
o 

eadin] THE PEYOTE CULT 389 

In 1910 the cult already had a rather definite organization. There 
was, at every performance, one leader (pi. 54, a) and four principal 
participants. John Rave (pis. 5, b; 55, b), the Winnebago who intro- 
duced the peyote, was always the leader whenever he was present. 
On other occasions leadership devolved upon some older member. The 
four other principal participants changed from meeting to meeting, 
although there was a tendency to ask certain individuals whenever it 
was possible. The ritualistic unit, in short, is a very definite one, con- 
sisting of a number of speeches and songs and in the passing of the 
regalia from one to the other of the four participants. 

During the early hours of the evening, before the peyote has begun 
to have any appreciable effect, a number of apparently intrusive 
features are found. These, for the most part, consist of speeches by 
people in the audience and the reading and explanation of parts of 
the Bible. After the peyote has begun to have an appreciable effect, 
however, the ceremony consists exclusively of a repetition of the 
ritualistic unit and confessions. 

There is an initiation consisting of a baptism, always performed 
by John Rave. It is of a very simple nature. Rave dips his fingers 
in a peyote infusion and then passes them over the forehead of the 
new member, muttering at the same time the following prayer: 

"God, his holiness." 

This is what the Whmebago words mean, although some of the 
younger members who have been strongly permeated with Christian 
teachings translate the praver into, "God, the Son, and the Holy 
Ghost." 

Whenever the ceremony is performed hi the open a fireplace in 
the shape of a horseshoe is made. At one end of this fireplace is 
placed a very small mound of earth, called by Rave "Mount Sinai," 
and in front of this a cross is traced hi the earth. Upon the small 
earth mound are placed the two "chief" peyote, the Bible and the 
staff. The latter, called by Rave the shepherd's crook, is always 
covered with beadwork, and generally has a number of evenly cut 
tufts of deer hair on the end and at intervals along its length. The 
sacred peyote, known as huylca (i. e., "chief") are exceptionally 
large and beautiful specimens. They are regarded by a number of 
people, certainly by Rave, with undisguised veneration. 

In addition to the above, there is found a large eagle feather fan, 
a small drum, and a peculiar small type of rattle. To my knowledge, 
this type was unknown among the Winnebago before its introduction 
by the peyote eaters. 

John Rave's Account of the Peyote Cult and of His Conversion 

During 1S93-94 I was in Oklahoma with peyote eaters. 
In the middle of the night we were to eat peyote. We ate it and 
I also did. It was the middle of the night when I got frightened, for 

390 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth.ann.3T 

a live thing seemed to have entered me. " Why did I do it ?" I thought 
to myself. I should not have done it, for right at the beginning I 
have harmed myself. Indeed, I should not have done it. I am sure 
it will injure me. The best thing will be for me to vomit it up. Well, 
now, I will try it. After a few attempts I gave up. I thought to 
myself, "Well, now you have done it. You have been going around 
trying everything and now you have done something that has 
harmed you. What is it ? It seems to be alive and moving around 
in my stomach. If only some of my own people were here! That 
would have been better. Now no one will know what has happened 
to me. I have killed myself." 

Just then the object was about to come out. It seemed almost out 
and I put out my hand to feel it, but then it went back again. "O, my, 
I should never have done it from the beginning. Never again will I 
do it. I am surely going to die." 

As we continued it became day and we laughed. Before that I 
had been unable to laugh. 

The following night we were to eat peyote again. I thought to 
myself, "Last night it almost harmed me." "Well, let us do it 
again," they said. "All right, I'll do it." So there we ate seven 
peyote apiece. 

Suddenly I saw a big snake. I was very much frightened. Then 
another one came crawling over me. "My God! where are these 
coming from?" There at my back there seemed to be something. 
So I looked around and I saw a snake about to swallow me entirely. 
It had legs and arms and a long tail. The end of this tail was like 
a spear. "O, my God! I am surely going to die now," I thought. 
Then I looked again in another direction and I saw a man with horns 
and long claws and with a spear in his hand. He jumped for me and I 
threw myself on the ground. He missed me. Then I looked back 
and this time he started back, but it seemed to me that he was direct- 
ing his spear at me. Again I threw myself on the ground and he 
missed me. There seemed to be no possible escape for me. Then 
suddenly it occurred to me, "Perhaps it is this peyote that is doing 
this thing to me ? " "Help me, O medicine, help me! It is you who 
are doing this and you are holy! It is not these frightful visions that 
are causing this. I should have known that you were doing it. 
Help me!" Then my suffering stopped. "As long as the earth 
6hall last, that long will I make use of you, O medicine!" 

This had lasted a night and a day. For a whole night I had not 
slept at all. 

Then we breakfasted. Then 1 said, when we were through, "Let 
us eat peyote again to-night." That evening I ate eight pevote. 

In the middle of the night I saw God. To God living up above, 
our Father, I prayed. " Have mercy upon me! Give me knowledge 

badin] THE PEYOTE CULT 391 

that I maj not say and do evil things. To you, O God, I am trying to 
pray. Do thou, O Son of God, help me, too. This religion, let me 
know. Help me, O medicine, grandfather, help me! Let me know 
this religion !" Thus I spoke and sat very quiet. And then I heheld 
the morning star and it was good to look upon. The light was good 
to look upon. I had heen frightened during the night but now I was 
happy. Now as the light appeared, it seemed to me that nothing 
would be invisible to me. I seemed to see even-thing clearly. Then 
I thought of my home and as I looked around, there I saw the house 
in which I lived far away among the Winnebago, quite close to me. 
There at the window I saw my children playing. Then I saw a man 
going to my house carrying a jug of whisky. Then he gave them 
something to drink and the one that had brought the whisky got 
drunk and bothered my people. Finally he ran away. "So, that is 
what they are doing," I thought to myself. Then I beheld my wife 
come and stand outside of the door, wearing a red blanket. She was 
thinking of going to the flagpole and was wondering which road she 
should take. " If I take this road I am likely to meet some people, 
but if I take the other road, I am not likely to meet anyone." 

Indeed, it is good. They are all well — my brother, my sister, my 
father, my mother. I felt very good indeed. O medicine, grand- 
father, most assuredly you are holy ! All that is connected with you, 
that I would like to know and that I would like to understand. 
Help me! I give myself up to you entirely! 

For three days and three nights I had been eating medicine, and 
for three days and three nights I had not slept. Throughout all the 
years that I had lived on earth, I now realized that I had never known 
anything holy. Now, for the first time, I knew it. Would that some 
of the Win neb ago es might also know it! 

Many years ago I had been sick and it looked as if this illness 
were going to kill me. I tried all the Indian doctors and then I 
tried all of the white man's medicines, but they were of no avail. 
"I am doomed. I wonder whether I will be alive next year." Such 
were the thoughts that came to me. As soon as I ate the peyote, 
however, I got over my sickness. After that I was not sick again. 
My wife had suffered from the same disease, and I told her that if 
she ate this medicine it would surely cure her. But she was afraid, 
although she had never seen it before. She knew that I used it, 
but nevertheless she was afraid of it. Her sickness was getting 
worse and worse and one day I said to her, ''You are sick. It is 
going to be very difficult, but try this medicine anyhow. It will 
ease you." Finally she ate it. I had told her to eat it and then to 
wash herself and comb her hair and she would get well, and now 
she is well. Then I painted her face and took my gourd and began 
singing very much. Then I stopped. "Indeed, you are right," 

392 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [bth. ann. 37 

she said, "for now I am well." From that day on to the present 
time she has been well. Now she is very happy. 

Black Water-spirit at about that time was having a hemorrhage 
and I wanted him to eat the peyote. "Well, I am not going to 
live anyhow," he said. "Well, eat this medicine soon then and 
you will get cured." Consumptives never were cured before this 
and now for the first time one was cured. Black Water-spirit is 
living to-day and is very well. 

There was a man named Walking-Priest and he was very fond of 
whisky; he chewed and he smoked and he gambled. He was very 
fond of women. He did everything that was bad. Then I gave 
him some of the peyote and he ate it and he gave up all the bad 
things he was doing. He had had a very dangerous disease and 
had even had murder in his heart. But to-day he is living a good 
life. That is his desire. 

Whoever has any bad thoughts, if he will eat this peyote he will 
abandon all Ms bad habits. It is a cure for everything bad. 

To-day the Indians say that only God is holy. One of the Winne- 
bagoes has told me, "Really, the life that I led was a very bad one. 
Never again will I do it. This medicine is good and I will always 
use it." John Harrison and Squeaking- Wings were prominent 
members of the medicine dance; they thought much of themselves 
as did all the members of the medicine dance. They knew every- 
thing connected with this medicine dance. Both of them were 
gamblers and were rich because they had won very much in gambling. 
Their parents had acquired great possessions by giving medicines 
to the people. They were rich and they believed that they had a 
right to be selfish with their possessions. Then they ate peyote 
and ever since that time they have been followers of this medicine. 
They were really very ill and now they have been cured of it. Now 
if there are any men that might be taken as examples of the peyote, 
it is these three. Even if a man were blind and only heard about 
them he would realize that if any medicine were good, it is this 
medicine. It is a cure for all evil. Before, I had thought that I 
knew something but I really knew nothing. It is only now that I 
have real knowledge. In my former life I was like one blind and 
deaf. My heart ached when I thought of what I had been doing. 
Never again will I do it. This medicine alone is holy and has made 
me good and has rid me of all evil. The one whom they call God 
has given me this. That I know positively. Let them all come 
here; men and women; let them bring with them all that they 
desire; let them bring with them their diseases. If they come here 
they will get well. This is all true; it is all true. •Bring. whatever 
desires you possess along with you and then come and eat or drink 
this medicine. This is life, the only life. Then you will learn 

badin] THE PEYOTE CULT 393 

something about yourself, so come. Even if you are not told any- 
thing about yourself, nevertheless you will learn something of your- 
self. Come with your disease, for this medicine will cure it. What- 
ever you have, come and eat this medicine and you will have true 
knowledge once and for all. Learn of this medicine yourself through 
actual experience. 

If you just hear about it you are not likely to try it. If you 
desire real knowledge about it try it yourself, for then you will learn 
of things that you had never known before. In no other way will 
you ever be happy. I know that all sorts of excuses will run through 
your mind for not partaking of it, but if you wish to learn of some- 
thing good, try this. Perhaps you will think to yourself that it 
will be too difficult and this wdl seem an excuse to you for not trying 
it. But why should you act thus? If you partake of it, even if 
you feel some uncertainty about its accomplishing all the good that 
has been said of it, I know that you will say to yourself, "Well, 
this life is good enough." After you have taken it for the first 
time, it will seem as if they are digging a grave for you, that you 
are about to die; and you will not want to take it again. "It is 
bad," you will think to yourself. You will believe that you are 
going to die and you will want to know what is going to happen to 
you. The coffin will be set before you and then you will see your 
body. If you wish to inquire further about where you are going 
then you will learn something you have not known. Two roads 
there are, one leading to a hole in the earth and the other extending 
up above. You will learn something that you had not known 
before. Of the two roads, one is dark and the other is light. You 
must choose one of these while you are alive and so must you decide 
whether you wish to continue in your evil ways or whether you will 
abandon them. These are the two roads. The Peyote people see 
them. They claim that only if you weep and repent will you be 
able to obtain knowledge. Do not, as I said before, listen to others 
talking about it, but try the medicine yourself. That is the only 
way to find out. No other medicine can accomplish what this has 
done. If, therefore, you make use of it, you will five. After they 
have eaten peyote people throw aside all the (evd) ceremonies that 
they were accustomed to perform before. Only by eating the peyote 
wdl you learn what is truly holy. That is what I am trying to 
learn myself. 

It is now 23 years since I first ate pej'ote, and I am still doing it 
(1912). Before that my heart was filled with murderous thoughts. 
I wanted to kill my brother and my sister. It seemed to me that 
my heart would not feel good until I killed one of them. All my 
thoughts were fixed on the warpath. This is all I thought of. Now 
186S23°— 22 26 

394 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ann. 37 

I know that it was because the evil spirit possessed me that I felt that 
way. I was suffering from a disease. I even desired to kill myself; 
I did not care to live. That feeling, too, was caused by this evil 
spirit living within me. Then I ate this medicine and everything 
changed. The brother and sister I wanted to kill before I became 
attached to and I wanted them to live. The medicine had accom- 
plished this. 

O. L.'s Description of the Peyote Cult 

(PI. 55, a) 

John Have belongs to the Bear clan, the members of which had 
the functions of what might be called sergeants-at-anns. He and 
his ancestors used to be in charge of the manupetci (i. e., the ser- 
geants-at-arms lodge), to which all malefactors would be brought for 
punishment. 

Rave, although he belonged to this highly respected class of people, 
was a bad man. He roamed from place to place. He has participated 
in all the ceremonies of the Winnebago, the medicine dance alone 
excepted. He had been married many times. Up to 1901 he was 
a heavy drinker. In that year he went to Oklahoma and while 
there ate the peyote. He then returned to the Winnebago and tried 
to introduce it among them, but none with the exception of a few 
relatives would have anything to do with it. This did not in any 
way discourage him, however, and he continued using the peyote, 
now and then getting a few converts. 

There was not very much religion connected with it in the beginning 
and the reason people drank it was on account of the peculiar effects 
it had upon them. Nevertheless these Peyote people preached good 
things and gradually lost all desire for intoxicating drinks or for 
participating in the old Winnebago ceremonies. Then Eave began 
to do away with the old Indian customs. About four or five years 
ago the membership in the Peyote religion began to increase, for 
many people now noticed that those connected with the Peyote cult 
were the only people in the tribe leading a Christian life. 

At this time the Bible was introduced by a young man named 
Albert Hensley (pis. 8, d; 9, d). He, too, had been a bad person, 
although he had been educated at Carlisle. Like Rave, he was a 
heavy drinker and fond of wandering. 

During the last few years our members have increased so fast that 
now almost half the tribe belong to our religion. We all make 
efforts to lead a Christian life and we are succeeding very well. 

We use the New Testament, especially the Revelations. 

Our meetings take place at any time. We gather together in the 
evening, and as soon as everything is in readiness the leader arises 
and offers a prayer called, "Turning themselves over to the care of 

badin] THE PEYOTE CULT 395 

the Trinity." Then all sit clown and the leader makes the regular 
announcements. The peyote is then passed around, either in the dry 
condition or steeped. The leader thereupon starts the singing. 
These are some of the songs : 

1. Ask God for life and he will give it to us. 

2. God created us so pray to him. 

3. To the home of Jesus we are going, so pray to him. 

4. Come ye to the road of the Son of God; come ye to the road. 

Then Albert Hensley calls upon 12 educated members to translate 
and interpret certain portions of the Bible for the nonreading mem- 
bers. He arranges with the leader to have the singing stop at cer- 
tain places so that some of these young men can speak. When these 
are finished, other individuals are called upon to give testimony. 
Hensley always talks and so does Rave. 

John Rave baptizes by dipping his hand in a diluted infusion of 
peyote and rubbing it across the forehead of a new member, saying, 
"I baptize thee in the name of God, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, 
which is called God's Holiness." 

The peyote eaters wanted to get baptized and unite with the 
church in Winnebago, but the clergyman in charge would not permit 
them, so they went and did their own baptizing through their leader, 
John Rave, who, though he is not educated, is full of real intelligence 
and religion. 

If a person who is truly repentant eats peyote for the first time, 
he does not suffer at all from its effects. But if an individual is 
bullheaded, does not believe in its virtue, he is likely to suffer a good 
deal. This I know from my own experience. After eating peyote I 
grasped the meaning of the Bible, which before had been meaningless 
to me. 

If a person eats peyote and does not repent openly, he has a guilty 
conscience, which leaves him as soon as the public repentance has 
been made. 

Old men and women who had been brought up to worship animals 
and all kinds of spirits have cast them all away and in many instances 
burned their idols, not because they were told to do so but because 
they felt that way. 

Whenever at our meetings a person wishes to pray, he does so; 
when he wishes to cry, he does so. Indeed, we show no timidity 
about worshiping God in the right way. In the Bible one often reads 
of Christ casting out the devils and of the people shouting, etc. So 
does the peyote act on us in the beginning, although afterwards its 
effects abate. 

If a peyote eater relapses into his old way of living, then the 
peyote causes him great suffering. 

At first our meetings were started without any rule laid down by 
the Bible, but afterwards we found a very good reason for holding 

396 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ann. 37 

our meetings at night. We searched the Bible and asked many 
ministers for any evidence for Christ's ever having held any meetings 
in the daytime, but we could find nothing to that effect. We did, 
however, find evidence that he had been out all night in prayer. As 
it is our desire to follow as closely as we can in the footsteps of Christ, 
we hold our meetings at night. Then, too, when we pray we wish 
to get as far away as possible from earthly things, and the night is 
the best time, for then we are not likely to be bothered by anything. 

We have made earnest efforts to become Christians since we began 
drinking and eating this peyote, but many people say sarcastically 
that we have drunk ourselves into Christianity, and that we are 
demented. I am a peyote eater, but I have never found a demented 
person among them. We claim that there is virtue in the peyote. 
To you who do not believe and desire to find out let me quote the 
fourth chapter of the First Epistle of St. John: 

"Beloved, believe not every spirit, but try the spirits whether they 
are of God; because many false prophets are gone out into the world. 

"Hereby know ye the spirit of God. Every spirit that confesseth 
that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh is of God." 

We claim that you can not find out anything by standing off at a 
distance and only talking about it. We claim that some earthly 
things can have the virtue of God, for instance, the Bible, which is 
entirely made up of earthly material — the ink, the paper, the cover — 
yet it has survived the ages. 

J. B.'s Account of the Leader of the Peyote ' 

(PI. 3) 

Among the Winnebago there is a man named Little-Red-Bird, 
and when he reached middle age he began to travel around the world 
and learn different Indian languages. He used to travel inland a 
good deal. Once he joined a circus and crossed the ocean. He felt 
so ill while crossing that he wanted to die. Suddenly a wind came 
up and he got very frightened. He did not know what to do. Then 
he prayed to Earthmaker. When he came to the other side of the 
ocean there he saw a big island and a big city (London), and in this 
last place they held their circus. The chief of that country (the king) 
he met there. 

When he came back to his own people he told them that on the 
other side of the ocean the Thunderbirds did not thunder. All they 
did was to drizzle. There was no lightning either. As he crossed 
the ocean on his return it thundered and lightened. 

When he came home he was very glad to see his relatives and he 
offered tobacco in thanksgiving. 

1 Tho narrator was a very lukewarm follower. 

eadin] THE PEYOTECULT 397 

Shortly after this he traveled again and came to a band of Indians 
who were eating peyote. It was his custom to try everything when 
he went visiting. He did not realize what he was doing when he 
ate this medicine, but he did it anyhow. After a while he began to 
think of his manner of life, and he felt that he was doing wrong. All 
the evil he had done he remembered. Then he prayed to God. 
Suddenly it occurred to him, "Perhaps I am the only one doing this." 
Then he looked around and watched the others, and he saw them 
praying in the same manner. 

Not long after that he came home, taking with him some of this 
medicine. He knew it was holy. At home lie offered tobacco to it 
and kept on eating it. Soon it cured him of a disease he had. He 
tried to induce some of the others to try it, but they refused. After 
a while a few tried it, and the peyote movement began to spread. 
All the old customs that they had been accustomed to observe they 
abandoned. They gave up the medicine dance and the ceremonies 
connected with the clans. For that reason, therefore, the con- 
servative people hated them; their own brothers and sisters hated 
them, for they had abandoned what were considered holy ceremonies. 

Albert Henslet's Account of the Peyote2 

(Pis. 8, d; 9, d) 

I am 37 years old. It was 37 years ago that my mother gave birth 
to me in an old-fashioned reed lodge. When I was a year old she 
died and my grandmother took care of me. I had come into the 
world a healthy child, but bad luck was apparently to pursue me, 
for when I was 7 years old my grandmother died. Then my father 
took care of me. At that time he began to be a bad man; he was a 
drunkard and a horse tluef. He would frequently get into trouble 
and run away, always taking me along with him, however. On one 
occasion we fled to Wisconsin, and there we stayed two years. We 
got along pretty well, and there my father married again. By his 
second wife he had three children. 

After a while he got into trouble again, and misfortune followed 
misfortune. People were killing each other, and I was left alone. 
If at any time of my life I was in trouble it was then. I was never 
happy. Once I did not have anything to eat for four days. We 
had fled to the wilderness, and it was raining continually. The 
country was flooded with high water, and we sat on the top of a 
tree. It was impossible to sleep, for if we went to sleep we would 
fall off into the water, which was very deep. The shore was quite 
far away. As we were prominent people, we soon heard that my 

« This account is of great importance, because Hensley introduced a large number of Christian elements 
into the ceremony, the principal one being the Bible. 

398 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ann. 37 

father had been freed. We were very happy, and went back to our 
people. 

At that time a young man named Young-Bear was starting for 
Nebraska, and he said that he would take me along. I was very 
happy. So hi that manner I was brought to this country. Here 
I have had only happy days. When my father got married everyone 
disliked me. When I worked I was working for my father, and all 
the money I earned I had to give to him. 

After a while I went to school, and although I liked it I ran away 
and then went to school at Carlisle. I wanted to lead a good life. 
At school T knew that they would take care of me and love me. I 
was very shy and lacked a strong character at that time. If a person 
told me to do anything I would always obey immediately. Every- 
body loved me. T stayed there six months. I was also taught 
Christianity there. When I came back to my country the Episcopa- 
lian people told me that they wanted me to be diligent in religious 
matters and never to forsake the religion of the Son of God. I also 
desired to do that. I entered the church that we had in our country 
and I stayed with them six years. 

At that time the Winnebago with whom I associated were heavy 
drinkers, and after a while they induced me to drink also. I became 
as wicked as they. I learned how to gamble and I worked for the 
devil all the time. I even taught the Winnebago how to be bad. 

After a while they began eating peyote, and as T was in the habit 
of doing everything I saw, I thought I would do it, too. I asked 
them whether I could join, and they permitted me. At that time I 
had a position at the comity commissioner's office. I ate the peyote 
and liked it very much. Then the authorities tried to stop the Indians 
from eating peyote, and I was supposed to see that the law was 
enforced. I continued eating peyote and enjoying it. All the evil 
that was hi me I forgot. From that time to the present my actions 
have been quite different from what they used to be. I am only 
working for what is good; not that I mean to say that I am good. 

After that I married and now I have three children, and it would 
not have been right for me to continue in my wickedness. I resolved 
that thereafter I would behave as a grown-up man ought to behave. 
I resolved never to be idle again and to work so that I could supply 
my wife and children with food and necessities, that I would be ready 
to help them whenever they were in need. Here in my own country 
would I remain till I died. This (peyote) religion was good. All 
the evil is gone and hereafter I will choose my path carefully. 

I know the story about the origin of the peyote. It is as follows : 

Once in the south, an Indian belonging to the tribe called Mes- 
callero Apache was roaming in the country called Mexico, and went 
hunting in the high hills and got lost. For three days he went with- 

eadin] THE PEYOTE CULT 399 

out water and without food. He was about to die of thirst but he 
continued until he reached the foot of a certain hill, on top of which 
he could find shade under a tree that was growing there. There he 
desired to die. It was with the greatest difficulty that he reached 
the place and when he got there, he fell over on his back and lay 
thus, with his body stretched toward the south, his head pillowed 
against something. He extended his right arm to the west and his 
left arm to the east, and as he did this, he felt something cool touch 
his hands. "What is it?" he thought to himself. So he took the 
one that was close to his right hand and brought it to his mouth and 
ate it. There was water in it, although it also contained food. Then 
he took the one close to his left hand and brought it to his mouth 
and ate it. Then as he lay on the ground a holy spirit entered him 
and taking the spirit of the Indian carried it away to the regions 
above. There he saw a man who spoke to him. "I have caused 
you to go through all this suffering, for had I not done it, you would 
never have heard of the proper (religion). It was for that reason 
that I placed holiness in what you have eaten. My Father gave it 
to me and I was permitted to place it on the earth. I was also per- 
mitted to take it back again and give it to some other Indians. 

"At present this religion exists in the south but now I wish to have 
it extended to the north. You Indians are now fighting one another, 
and it is for the purpose of stopping this, that you might shake hands 
and partake of food together, that I am giving you this peyote. 
Now you should love one another. Earthmaker is my father. Long 
ago I sent this gospel across the ocean but you did not know of it. 
Now I am going to teach you to understand it." Then he led him 
into a lodge where they were eating peyote. There he taught him 
the songs and all that belonged to this ceremony. Then he said to 
him, "Now go to your people and teach them all that I have told 
you. Go to your people in the north and teach them. I have placed 
my holiness in this that you eat. What my father gave me, that I 
have placed therein." 

Then he told him to go home. He thought he had been dead, 
but it was really his spirit that had left him. After a while the man 
got well again. 

There were many peyote near the place where he was lying and 
these he picked before he started. Then he went back to his lodge. 
He thought he had been lost, but it seemed hardly possible to him 
that this was the case. His being lost in the hills seemed to symbolize 
to him the condition of the people before they had eaten the peyote; 
they would be lost and then find their way again. 

On his return he built a peyote lodge and for four nights he taught 
the people how to eat peyote. He did not, however, teach it as he 
was told, nor did he teach it thoroughly. These to whom he taught 

400 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ann. 37 

it used it for a purpose different from what it was intended.3 They 
used it for war and for horse stealing. They, however, continued 
to eat the peyote, but they really ate too much of it. After a while 
the leader began thinking that the medicine might harm them, so 
he told them to hide it. The man did not know that even at that 
time a big war party was coming upon them. This tribe was almost 
destroyed. 

They lost the peyote. One day, however, it was taught to a Co- 
manche. He ate it and prayed to Earthmaker. Then it was taught 
to the Cheyenne and to the Arapaho and to the Caddo. The Tonkawa, 
the Apache, and the Mescallero Apache were the ones who had lost 
the medicine. When these other tribes began to eat this medicine 
they heard about it and they remembered that they also had long 
ago eaten it. 

There was an old man in Oklahoma who knew#the mescal country 
very well and he went down to old Mexico and stayed there for a 
year. When he returned he taught it to the Oto and the Oto taught 
it to us. 

It is a true religion. The peyote is fulfilling the work of God and 
the Son of God. When the Son of God came to the earth he was 
poor, yet people spoke of him; he was abused. It is the same now 
with the peyote. The plant itself is not much of a growth, yet the 
people are talking about it a good deal; they are abusing it, they are 
trying to stop its use. When the Son of God came to earth the 
preachers of that time were called Pharisees and Scribes. They 
doubted what the Son of God said and claimed that he was an ordi- 
nary man. So it is to-day with the Christian Church; they are the 
Pharisees and Scribes, they are the doubters. They say that this 
is merely a plant, that it is the work of the devil. They are trying 
to stop its use and they are calling it an intoxicant, but this is a 
lie. If they will but come and see this ceremony they will realize 
this. 

J. B.'s Peyote Experiences 

When my father and mother asked me to come to the Missouri 
River (Nebraska) I knew they had eaten peyote and I did not like it. 
I had been told that these peyote eaters were doing wrong, and there- 
fore I disliked them ; I had heard that they were doing everything that 
was wicked. For these reasons we did not like them. About this 
time they sent me money for my ticket, and since my brothers and 
sisters told me to go, I went. Just as I was about to start my young- 
est sister, the one to whom we always listened most attentively, said 
to me, "Older brother, do not you indulge in this medicine eating 
(peyote) of which so much is said." I promised. Then I started out. 

a This is clearly Hensley's interpretation. 

kadin] THE PEYOTE CULT 401 

As soon as I arrived (in Nebraska) I met some people who had not 
joined the peyote eaters and who said to me, ''Your relatives are 
eating the peyote and they sent for you that you also might eat it. 
Your mother, your father, and your younger sister, they are all eating 
it." Thus they spoke to me. Then they told me of some of the bad 
things it was reported that these people had done. I felt ashamed 
and I wished I had not come in the first place. Then I said that I 
was going to eat the medicine. 

After that I saw my father, mother, and sister. They were glad. 
Then we all went to where they were staying. My father and I 
walked (alone) . Then he told me about the peyote eating. " It does 
not amount to anything, all this that they are doing, although they 
do stop drinking. It is also said that sick people get well. We were 
told about this and so we joined, and, sure enough, we are practically 
well, your mother as well as I. It is said that they offer prayers to 
Earthmaker (God)," he said. He kept on talking. "They are 
rather foolish. They cry when they feel very happy about anything. 
They throw away all of the medicines that they possess and know. 
They give up all the blessings they received while fasting and they 
give up all the spirits that blessed them in their fasts. They also 
stop smoking and chewing tobacco. They stop giving feasts, and 
they stop making offerings of tobacco. Indeed, they burn up their 
holy things. They burn up then- war bundles. They are bad people. 
They give up the Medicine Dance. They burn up their medicine 
bags and even cut up their otter-skin bags. They say they are pray- 
ing to Earthmaker (God) and they do so standing and crying. They 
claim that they hold nothing holy except Earthmaker (God). They 
claim that all the things that they are stopping are those of the bad 
spirit (the devil), and that the bad spirit (the devil) has deceived 
them; that there are no spirits who can bless; that there is no other 
spirit except Earthmaker (God)." Then I said, "Say, they certainly 
speak foolishly." I felt very angry toward them. "You will hear 
them, for they are going to have a meeting tonight. Their songs are 
very strange. They use a very small drum," said he. Then I felt a 
very strong desire to see them. 

After a while we arrived. At night they had their ceremony. At 
first I sat outside and listened to them. I was rather fond of them. 
I stayed in that country and the young peyote eaters were exceed- 
ingly friendly to me. They would give me a little money now and 
then and they treated me with tender regard. They did everything 
that they thought would make me feel good, and in consequence I 
used to speak as though I liked their ceremony. However, I was 
only deceiving them. I only said it because they were so good to me. 
I thought they acted in this way because (the peyote) was deceiving 
them. 

402 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ann. 37 

Soon after that my parents returned to Wisconsin, but when they 
left they said they would come back in a little while. So I was left 
there with my relatives, who were all peyote followers. For that 
reason they left me there. Whenever I went among the nonpeyote 
people I used to say all sorts of things about the peyote people, and 
when I returned to the peyote people I used to say all sorts of things 
about the others. 

I had a friend who was a peyote man and he said to me, ''My 
friend, I wish very much that you should eat the peyote." Thus he 
spoke and I answered him, "My friend, I will do it, but not until I 
get accustomed to the people of this country. Then I will do it. 
The only thing that worries me is the fact that they are making fun 
of you. And in addition, I am not quite used to them." I spoke 
dishonestly. 

I was staying at the place where my sister lived. She had gone 
to Oklahoma; she was a peyote follower. After a while she returned. 
I was then living with a number of women. This was the second 
time (there) and from them I obtained some money. Once I got 
drunk there and was locked up for six days. After my sister returned 
she and the others paid more attention than ever to me. Especially 
was this true of my brother-in-law. They gave me horses and a 
vehicle. They really treated me very tenderly. I knew that they 
did all this because they wished me to eat the peyote. I, in my turn, 
was very kind to them. I thought that I was fooling them and they 
thought that they were converting me. I told them that I believed 
in the peyote because they were treating me so nicely. 

After a while we moved to a certain place where they were to have 
a large peyote meeting. I knew they were doing this in order to 
get me to join. Then I said to my younger sister, "I would be 
quite wdling to eat this peyote (ordinarily) , but I don't like the woman 
with whom I am living just now and I think I will leave her. That 
is why I do not want to join now, for I understand that when married 
people eat medicine (peyote) they will always have to stay together. 
Therefore I will join when I am married to some woman permanent- 
ly." Then my brother-in-law came and she told him what I had 
said, and he said to me, " You are right in what you say. The woman 
with whom you are staying is a married woman and you can not 
continue living with her. It is null and void (this marriage) and we 
know it. You had better join now. It will be the same as if you 
were single. We will pray for you as though you were single. After 
you have joined this ceremony, then you can marry any woman whom 
you have a right to marry (legally). So, do join tonight. It is best. 
For some time we have been desirous of your joining but we have 
not said anything to you. It is Earthmaker's (God's) blessing to 
you that you have been thinking of this," said he. 

badin] THE PEYOTE CULT 403 

Therefore I sat inside the meeting place with them. One man 
acted as leader. We were to do whatever he ordered. The regalia 
were placed before him. I wanted to sit in some place on the side 
because I thought I might get to crying like the others. I felt 
ashamed of myself. 

Then the leader arose and talked. He said that this was an affair 
of Earthmaker's (God's), and that he (the leader) could do nothing 
on his own initiative; that Earthmaker (God) was going to conduct 
the ceremony. Then he said that the medicine (peyote) was holy 
and that he would turn us all over to it ; that he had turned himself 
over to it and wished now to turn all of us over to it. He said further, 
" I am a very pitiable (figure) in this ceremony, so when you pray to 
Earthmaker, pray also for me. Now let us all rise and pray to Earth- 
maker (God)." We all rose. Then he prayed. He prayed for the 
sick, and he prayed for those who did not yet know Earthmaker. 
He said that they were to be pitied. When he had finished we sat 
down. Then the peyote was passed around. They gave me five. 
My brother-in-law said to me, "If you speak to this medicine (peyote) , 
it will give you whatever you ask of it. Then you must pray to 
Earthmaker, and then you must eat the medicine." Hovewer, I ate 
them (the peyote) immediately, for I did not know what to ask for 
and I did not know what to say in a prayer to Earthmaker (God). 
So I ate the peyote just as they were. They were very bitter and 
had a taste difficult to describe. I wondered what would happen to 
me. After a while I was given five more and I also ate them. They 
tasted rather bitter. Now I was very quiet. The peyote rather 
weakened me. Then I listened very attentively to the singing. I 
liked it very much. I felt as though I were partly asleep. I felt 
different from (my normal self), but when I (looked around) and 
examined myself, I saw nothing wrong about myself. However, I 
felt different from (my normal self). Before this I used to dislike 
the songs. Now I liked the leader's singing very much. I liked to 
listen to him. 

They were all sitting very quietly. They were doing nothing ex- 
cept singing. Each man sang four songs and then passed the regalia 
to the next one. (Each one) held a stick and an eagle's tail feather 
in one hand and a small gourd rattle, which they used to shake while 
singing, in the other. One of (those) present used to do the drum- 
ming. Thus objects would pass around until they came back to the 
leader, who would then sing four songs. When these were finished, 
he would place the various (things) on the ground, rise, and pray to 
Earthmaker (God). Then he called upon one or two to speak. 
They said that Earthmaker (God) was good and that the peyote was 
good, and that whosoever ate this medicine (peyote) would be able 
to free himself from the bad spirit (the devil) ; for they said that 

404 THE WINNEBAGO TEIBE [eth. anj*. ST 

Earthmaker forbids us to commit sins. Wlicn this was over they 
sang again. 

After midnight, every once in a while (I heard) someone cry. In 
some cases they would go up to the leader and talk with him. He 
would stand up and pray with them. They told me what they were 
saying. They said that they were asking (people) to pray for them, 
as they were sorry for their sins and that they might be prevented 
from committing them again. That is what they were saying. 
They cried very loudly. I was rather frightened. (I noticed also) 
that when I closed my eyes and sat still, I began to see strange 
things. I did not get sleepy in the least. Thus the light (of morn- 
ing) came upon me. In the morning, as the sun rose, they stopped. 
They all got up and prayed to Earthmaker (God) and then they 
stopped. 

During the daytime I did not get sleepy in the least. My actions 
were a little different (from my usual ones). Then they said, "To- 
night they are going to have another meeting. Let us go over. 
They say that is the best (thing) to do and thus you can learn it 
(the ceremony) right away. It is said that their spirits wander 
over all the earth and the heavens also. All this you will learn and 
see," they said. "At times they die and remain dead all night and 
all day. When in this condition they sometimes see Earthmaker 
(God), it is said." One would also be able to see where the bad spirit 
lived, it was said. 

So we went there again. I doubted all this. I thought that what 
they were saying was untrue. However, I went along anyhow. 
When we got there, I had already eaten some peyote, for I had taken 
three during the day. Now near the peyote meeting an (Indian) 
feast was being given and I went there instead. When I reached the 
place, I saw a long lodge. The noise was terrific. They were beating 
an enormous drum. The sound almost raised me in the air, so 
(pleasurably) loud did it sound to me. Not so (pleasurable) had 
things appeared at those affairs (peyote meetings) that I had lately 
been attending. There I danced all night and I flirted with the 
women. About day I left and when I got back the peyote meeting 
was still going on. When I got back they told me to sit down at a 
certain place. They treated me very kindly. There I again ate 
peyote. I heard that they were going to have another meeting near 
by on the evening of the same day. We continued eating peyote the 
whole day at the place where we were staying. We were staying at 
the house of one of my relatives. Some of the boys there taught me 
a few songs. "Say, when you learn how to sing, you will be the best 
singer, for you are a good singer as it is. You have a good voice," 
they said to me. I thought so myself. 

kadin] THE PEYOTE CULT 405 

That night we went to the place where the peyote meeting was to 
take place. They gave me a place to sit and treated me very kindly. 
"Well, he has come," they even said when I got there, "make a place 
for him." I thought they regarded me as a great man. John Rave, 
the leader, was to conduct the (ceremony) . I ate five peyote. Then 
my brother-in-law and my sister came and gave themselves up. They 
asked me to stand there with them. I did not like it, but I did it 
nevertheless. " Why should I give myself up ? I am not in earnest, 
and I intend to stop this as soon as I get back to Wisconsin. I am 
only doing this because they have given me presents," I thought. 
"I might just as well get up, since it doesn't mean anything to me." 
So I stood up. The leader began to talk and I (suddenly) began to 
feel sick. It got worse and worse and finally I lost consciousness 
entirely. When I recovered, I was lying flat on my back. Those 
with whom I had been standing were still standing there. I had (as 
a matter of fact) regained consciousness as soon as I fell down. I 
felt like leaving the place that night, but I did not do it. I was quite 
tired out. " Why have I done this ?" I said to myself. " I promised 
(my sister) that I would not do it." So I thought and then I tried 
to leave, but I could not. I suffered intensely. At last daylight 
came upon me. Now I thought that they regarded me as one who 
had a trance and found out something. 

Then we went home and they showed me a passage in the Bible 
where it said that it was a shame for any man to wear long hair. That 
is what it said, they told me. I looked at the passage. I was not 
a man learned in books, but I wanted to give the impression that I 
knew how to read, so I told them to cut my hah-, for I wore it long at 
that time. After my hair was cut I took out a lot of medicine that I 
happened to have in my pockets. These were courting medicines. 
There were many small bundles of them. All these, together with 
my hah, I gave to my brother-in-law. Then I cried and my brother- 
in-law also cried. Then he thanked me. He told me that I under- 
stood and that I had done well. He told me that Earthmaker (God) 
alone was holy; that all the things (blessings and medicines) that I 
possessed were false; that I had been fooled by the bad spirit (devil). 
He told me that I had now freed myself from much of this (bad 
influence). My relatives expressed their thanks fervently. 

On the fourth night they had another meeting and I went to it 
again. There I again ate (peyote). I enjoyed it and I sang along 
with them. I wanted to be able to sing immediately. Some young 
men were singing and I enjoyed it, so I prayed to Earthmaker, asking 
him to let me learn to sing right away. That was all I asked for. 
My brother-in-law was with me all the tune. At that meeting all the 
things I had given my brother-in-law were burned up. 

406 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ANN. 37 

The fact that he (my brother-in-law) told me that I understood 
pleased me, and I felt good when daylight came. (As a matter of 
fact) I had not received any knowledge. 

After that I would attend meetings every once in a while, and I 
looked around for a woman whom I might marry permanently. 
Before long that was the only thing I thought of when I attended the 
meetings. 

On one occasion we were to have a meeting of men and I went to 
the meeting with a woman, with whom I thought of going around the 
next day. That was (the only) reason I went with her. When we 
arrived, the one who was to lead asked me to sit near him. There he 
placed me. He urged me to eat a lot of peyote, so I did. The leaders 
(of the ceremony) always place the regalia in front of themselves; 
they also had a peyote placed there. The leader placed a very small 
one in front of himself this time. "Why does he have a very small 
one there?" I thought to myself. I did not think much about it. 

It was now late at night and I had eaten a lot of peyote and felt 
rather tired. I suffered considerably. After a while I looked at the 
peyote and there stood an eagle with outspread wings. It was as 
beautiful a sight as one could behold. Each of the feathers seemed 
to have a mark. The eagle stood looking at me. I looked around 
thinking that perhaps there was something the matter with my sight. 
Then I looked again and it was really there. I then looked in a 
different direction and it disappeared. Only the small peyote 
remained. I looked around at the other people but they all had their 
heads bowed and were singing. I was very much surprised. 

Some time after this (I saw) a lion lying in the same place (where I 
had seen the eagle) . I watched it very closely v It was alive and look- 
ing at me. I looked at it very closely, and when I turned my eyes 
away just the least little bit it disappeared. " I suppose they all know 
this and I am just beginning to know of it," I thought. Then I saw 
a small person (at the same place). He wore blue clothes and a 
shining brimmed cap. He had on a soldier's uniform. He was sit- 
ting on the arm of the person who was drumming, and he looked at 
every one. He was a little man, perfect (in all proportions) . Finally 
I lost sight of him. I was very much surprised indeed. I sat very 
quietly. "This is what it is," I thought, "this is what they all 
probably see and I am just beginning to find out." 

Then I prayed to Earthmaker (God) : " This, your ceremony, let me 
hereafter perform." 

As I looked again, I saw a flag. I looked more carefully and (I 
saw) the house full of flags. They had the most beautiful marks on 
them. In the middle (of the room) there was a very large flag and 
it was a live one; it was moving. In the doorway there was another 

radin] THE PEYOTE CULT 407 

one not entirely visible. I had never seen anything so beautiful in 
all my life before. 

Then again I prayed to Earthmaker (God). I bowed my head 
and closed my eyes and began (to speak). I said many things that 
I would ordinarily never have spoken about. As I prayed, I was 
aware of something above me and there he was ; Earthmaker (God) to 
whom I was praying, he it was. That which is called the soul, that 
is it, that is what one calls Earthmaker (God). Now this is what I 
felt and saw. The one called Earthmaker (God) is a spirit and that 
is what I felt and saw. All of us sitting there, we had all together 
one spirit or soul; at least that is what I learned. I instantly became 
the spirit and I was their spirit or soul. Whatever they thought of, 
I (immediately) knew. I did not have to speak to them and get an 
answer to know what their thoughts had been. Then I thought of a 
certain place, far away, and immediately I was there; I was my 
thought. 

I looked around and noticed how everything seemed about me, 
and when I opened my eyes I was myself in the body again. From 
this time on, I thought, thus I shall be. This is the way they are, and 
I am only beginning to be that way. "All those that heed Earth- 
maker (God) must be thus," I thought. "I would not need any 
more food," I thought, "for was I not my spirit? Nor would I have 
any more use of my body," I felt. "My corporeal affairs are over," 
I felt. 

Then they stopped and left, for it was just dawning. Then some- 
one spoke to me. I did not answer, for I thought they were just 
fooling, and that they were all like myself, and that (therefore) it 
was unnecessary for me to talk to them. So when they spoke to me 
I only answered with a smde. "They are just saying this to me 
because (they realize) that I have just found out," I thought. That 
was why I did not answer. I did not speak to anyone until noon. 
Then I had to leave the house to perform one of nature's duties and 
someone followed me. It was my friend. He said, "My friend, what 
troubles you that makes you act as you do ?" " Well, there's no need 
of your saying anything, for you know it beforehand," I said. 

Then I immediately got over my trance and again got into my 
(normal) condition, so that he would have to speak to me before I 
knew his thoughts. I became like my former self. It became 
necessary for me to speak to him. 

Then I spoke to him and said, "My friend, let us hitch up these 
horses and then I will go wherever you like, for you wish to speak 
to me and I also want to go around and talk to you." Thus I spoke 
to him. " If I were to tell you all that I have learned, I would never 
be able to stop at all, so much have I learned," I said to him. " How- 
ever, I would enjoy telling some of it." " Good, " said he. He liked 

408 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ann.37 

it (what I told him) very much. "That is what I am anxious to 
hear," said he. Then we went after the horses. We caught one of 
them but we could not get the other. He got away from us and we 
could not find him. We hunted everywhere for the horse but could 
not discover where he had run to. Long afterwards we found it 
among the whites. 

Now since that time (of my conversion) no matter where I am, I 
always think of this religion. I still remember it and I think I will 
remember it as long as I live. It is the only holy thing I have been 
aware of in all my life. 

After that whenever I heard of a peyote meeting, I went to it. 
However, my thoughts were always fixed on women. "If I were 
married (legally) perhaps these thoughts will leave me," I thought. 
Whenever I went to a meeting now I tried to eat as many peyote as 
possible, for I was told that it was good to eat them. For that reason 
I ate them. As I sat there I would always pray to Eartlimaker (God). 
Now these were my thoughts. If I were married, I thought as I sat 
there, I could then put all my thoughts on this ceremony. I sat 
with my eyes closed and was very quiet. 

Suddenly I saw something. This was tied up. The rope with 
which this object was tied up was long. The object itself was run- 
ning around and around (in a circle). There was a pathway there 
in which it ought to go, but it was tied up and unable to get there. 
The road was an excellent one. Along its edge bluegrass grew and 
on each side there grew many varieties of pretty flowers. Sweet- 
smelling flowers sprang up all along this road. Far off in the distance 
appeared a bright light. There a city was visible of a beauty inde- 
scribable by tongue. A cross was in full sight. The object that was 
tied up would always fall just short of reaching the road. It seemed 
to lack sufficient strength to break loose (of what was holding it). 
(Near it) lay something which would have given it sufficient strength 
to break its fastenings, if it were only able to get hold of it. 

I looked at what was so inextricably tied up and I saw that it was 
myself. I was forever thinking of women. "This it is to which I 
am tied," I thought. "Were I married, I would have strength 
enough to break my fastening and be able to travel in the good road," 
I thought. Then daylight came upon us and we stopped. 

Then I thought of a man I used to know who was an old peyote- 
man. He always spoke to me very kindly. I went over to see him. 
I thought I would tell him what had happened to me. When I 
arrived there he was quite delighted. It was about noon and he 
fed my horses and asked me to eat with him. Then when we were 
through eating, I told him what had happened to me. He was very 
glad and told me that I was speaking of a very good thing. Then 
(finally) he said, "Now I shall tell you what I think is a good thing 

kadin] THE PEYOTE CULT 409 

(for you to do). You know that if an old horse is balky, you cannot 
break him of (this habit) ; even if you bought him and tried to break 
him (of this habit) you would not succeed. If, indeed, you succeeded 
it would only be after very hard work. However, if you had a very 
young horse, you could train it in any way you wished. So it is in 
everything. If you marry a woman who has been in the habit of 
marrying frequently, it would be difficult for her to break herself 
of a habit she loves. You are not the one she loves. If you marry 
her you will lead a hard life. If you wish to get married, take your 
time. There are plenty of good women. Many of them are at (gov- 
ernment) schools and have never been married. I think you would 
do best if you waited for some of these before marrying. They will 
return in the middle of the summer. So, don't think of any of these 
women you see around here, but wait until then and pray to Earth- 
maker patiently. That would be the best, I think." I liked what 
he told me and thanked him. I decided to accept his advice, and I 
did not look around for women after that. I was to wait about 
three months and (during that time) I paid strict attention to the 
peyote ceremony. 

On one occasion while at a meeting, I suffered (great pain). My 
eyes were sore and I was thinking of many things. "Now I do noth- 
ing but pay attention to this ceremony, for it is good." Then I 
called the leader over to me and said to him, "My elder brother, here- 
after only Earthmaker (God) shall I regard as holy. I will make no 
more offerings of tobacco. I will not use any more tobacco. I will 
not smoke and I will not chew tobacco. I have no further interest 
in these. Earthmaker (God) alone do I desire (to serve). I will not 
take part in the Medicine Dance again. I give myself up (to you). 
I intend to give myself up to Earthmaker's (God's) cause." Thus I 
spoke to him. "It is good, younger brother," he said to me. Then 
he had me stand up and he prayed to Earthmaker (God) . He asked 
Earthmaker (God) to forgive me my sins. 

The next morning I was taken home. My eyes were sore and I 
could not see. They took me back to a house and there they put a 
solution of the peyote into my eyes and I got well in a week. 

One night, when I was asleep, I dreamed that the world had come 
to an end. Some people Earthmaker (God) took, while some be- 
longed to the bad spirit (the devil). I belonged to the bad spirit 
(the devil). Although I had given myself up (become a peyote- 
man), I had not as yet been baptized. That was why Earthmaker 
(God) did not take me. All those who belonged to Earthmaker 
(God) were marked, but I was not. I felt very bad about it when I 
woke up, although I had only dreamed about it. I felt very bad 
indeed. I wanted them to hurry and have another peyote meeting 
186S230— 22 27 

410 THE WINNEBAGO TKIBE [eth. ann. 37 

soon. I could hardly wait until I reached the place where the next 
meeting was to take place. I immediately told the leader (what I 
wanted) and asked him to baptize me and he baptized me in the 
morning. After that morning I felt better. 

Then I went to work and I worked with a railroad work-gang. I 
was still working when the time for the midsummer celebration ap- 
proached. I always went to the peyote meeting on Saturday nights. 

The old man was right in what he had told me. The girl students 
returned in the summer. Shortly (after they returned) a man, a 
friend of mine who had gone around with me, asked me if I wanted 
to get married. "Yes, I do," I answered. Then he said, "Listen, I 
have been thinking of something. What kind of a woman do you 
wish to marry?" I told him what I had in mind. Then he said, 
"Come home with me. I have a younger sister. I want her to 
marry a good man; I would like to have her marry you," he said. 
Then I went home with him. When we got there (and discussed the 
matter) the girl gave her consent. The parents also consented. 

So there I got married and what I expected has taken place and I 
have lived with her ever since. On one occasion, after she was used 
to me, she told me this. (Before she had married she had determined 
that) if she ever got married, she would not care to marry a very 
young man. "I wanted a man who ate peyote and who paid atten- 
tion to the ceremony." Such a man she desired and such a man was 
I, she said. She loved me, she said, and she was glad that she had 
married me. This is what she had asked Earthmaker (God) in prayer. 
"And indeed it has happened as I wished," she said. She believed 
it was the will of Earthmaker (God) that we had done this, she said. 
She was therefore glad (that she had married me). Together we 
gave ourselves up (to the peyote) at a peyote meeting. From that 
time on we have remained members of the peyote (ceremony) . 

Many things are said under the influence of the peyote. The mem- 
bers (would) get into a kind of trance and speak of many things. 
On one occasion they had a peyote meeting which lasted two nights. 
I ate a good deal of peyote. The next morning I tried to sleep. I 
suffered a great deal. I lay down in a very comfortable position. 
After a while a (nameless) fear arose in me. I could not remain in 
that place, so I went out into the prairie, but here again I was seized 
with this fear. Finally I returned to a lodge near the lodge in which 
the peyote meeting was being held and lay down alone. I feared 
that I might do something foolish to myself (if I remained there 
alone), and I hoped that someone would come and talk to me. 
Then someone did come and talk to me, but I did not feel better, so 
I thought I would go inside where the meeting was going on. "I 
am going inside," I said to him. He laughed. "Alright, do so," 
said he. I went in and sat down. It was very hot and I felt as 

kadin] THE PEYOTE CULT 411 

though I were going to die. I was very thirsty but I feared to ask 
for water. I thought that I was certainly going to die. I began to 
totter over. 

I died, and my body was moved by another life. It began to move' 
about ; to move about and make signs. It was not I and I could not 
see it. At last it stood up. The regalia — eagle feathers and gourds 
— these were holy, they said. They also had a large book there 
(the Bible). These my body took and what is contained in that 
(book) my body saw. It was a Bible. The regalia were not holy, 
but they were good ornaments. My body told them that; and that 
if any person paid attention to Earthmaker's (God's) ceremony, he 
would be hearkening to what the Bible said; that, likewise, my body 
told them. Earthmaker's son (God's son) said that he was the only 
way. This means that one can only get life from the Word. (My) 
body spoke of many things and it spoke of what was true. Indeed 
it spoke of many tilings. It spoke of all the things that were being 
done (by the pagan Indians) and which were evil. A long time it 
spoke. At last it stopped. Not I, but my body standing there, had 
done the talking. Earthmaker (God) had done his own talking. 
I would be confessing myself a fool if I were to think that I had 
said all this, it (my body) told me. 

After a while I returned to my normal human condition. Some 
of those there had been frightened, thinking that I had gone crazy. 
Others had liked it. It was discussed a good deal. They called it 
the "shaking" state. It was said that the condition in which I was, 
was not part of Earthmaker's (God's) religion. I was told that 
whoever ate a lot of peyote would, through the peyote, be taught the 
teachings of Earthmaker (God). Earthmaker's (God's) ways and 
man's ways were different. Whoever, therefore, wished to help this 
religion must give himself up (to it). If you ate a good deal of this 
peyote and believed that it could teach you something, then it 
assuredly would do so. That, at least, is the way in which I under- 
stand the matter. 

Once we had a meeting at the home of a member who was sick. 
The sick would always get well when a meeting was held in their 
home, and that is why we did it. At that meeting I got into the 
"shaking" condition again. My body told' (us) how our religion 
(peyote) was an affair of Earthmaker's (God's) and even if one 
knew only a portion of it, one could still see (partake of) Earth- 
maker's (God's) religion. 

Thus it went on talking. "Earthmaker (God), His Son (Christ) 
and His Holiness (the Holy Ghost), these are the three ways of say- 
ing it. Even if you know one (of these three), it means all. Every 
one of you has the means of opening (the road) to Earthmaker (God). 
It is given to you. With that (your belief) you can open (the door 

412 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [bth. ann. 37 

to God). You can not open it with knowledge (alone). How many 
letters are there to the key (the road to God) ? Three. What are 
they?" There were many educated people (there), but none of them 
said anything. "The first (letter) must be a K, so if a person said 
K, that would be the whole of it. But let me look in the book (the 
Bible) and see what that means," said the body. Then it (the 
body) took the Bible and began to turn the leaves. The body did 
not know where it was itself, for it was not learned in books. Finally 
in Matthew, chapter 16, it stopped. There it speaks about it. 
"Peter did not give himself up" (it says). "For a long time he could 
not give up his own knowledge. There (in that passage) it says 
Key." That is the work of Earthmaker (God). At least so I under- 
stand it. He made use of my body and acted in this manner, in the 
case of the peyote. 

Then I go about telling (every one) that this religion is good. 
Many other people at home said the same thing. Many, likewise, 
have joined this religion and are getting along nicely. 

On one occasion, after I had eaten a good deal of peyote, I learned 
the following from it: that all I had done in the past, that it had all 
been evil. This was plainly revealed to me. What I thought was 
holy, and (by thus thinking) was lost, that I now know was false. 
(It is false), this giving of (pagan) feasts, of holding (the old) things 
holy, the Medicine Dance, and all the Indian customs. 

J. B.'s Account of His Conversion 

I was at the old agency. There they were to try me for murder. 
At night, as I sat in jail, certain people came to me and told me that 
they had a gallon jug of whisky, and that if I was free that night, 
I should come and drink with them. They would wait for me. 
That same night there was a peyote meeting at John Rave's house 
and my brother Sam invited me to go there. Sam stood around 
there waiting for me. He was very low in spirits. He knew of the 
other invitation I had received and he told me that he would go 
with me wherever I went. I wanted very badly to go to the place 
where they had the liquor, and should have done so if Sam had 
given me the least chance. However, I could not get rid of him, 
so I decided to go to the peyote meeting. When I arrived there, 
we found just enough room in the center for myself and Sam. Sam 
sat at the right of me and John Bear at the left. In front of me 
there was some peyote infusion, and some peyote ground up and 
dampened. 

As we sat there Sam began to cry and I began to think. I knew 
why Sam was crying; he wanted me to take some of the peyote. 
After a while I began to think of my own troubles. But I thought 
it wasn't the proper way of taking it just because I was in trouble. 

badin] THE PEYOTE CULT 413 

Then I thought of the other peyote eaters, how much they must be 
wanting me to take it. After a while I spoke to Sam and said, 
"I am going to eat this medicine, but . . ." Then I began to cry. 
After a while he tried to get me to say the balance, but I couldn't. 
I drank some of the solution. As the others saw that I was willing 
to take it they gave me a big ball of dampened peyote. However, 
I didn't like that and I asked for some more peyote in the dry state. 
I sat there asking for more and more peyote. This I kept up all 
night. When morning came I stopped. Just then Harry Rave got 
up to speak, and no sooner did he get up than I knew exactly what 
he was going to say. This must be the way of all peyote eaters, I 
thought. I looked around me; and suddenly I realized that all 
those within the room knew my thoughts and that I knew the 
thoughts of all the others. Harry Rave spoke and finished his 
speech; but I had known it all before he said a word. Then A. 
Priest, who was leading the meeting, arose and asked the rest to 
get up, so that they might turn themselves over to Christ. I also 
rose; but when I got up I was seized with a choking sensation. I 
couldn't breathe. I wanted to grab hold of Bear and Sam, but I 
didn't, thinking that I was going to stand whatever was coming to 
me. When I made up my mind to that, I felt relieved. Then I 
knew what the real meaning of turning one's self over to Christ 
meant. 

In the morning they stopped the meeting and everyone seemed 
happy and glad. I, however, was very serious and wondered why 
they were all laughing. Every once in a while they would come 
and talk to me. I wondered why they did it, when they knew what 
was going on within me. For that reason I wouldn't answer them. 

That week there were four meetings, and I went to all of them 
and ate very much peyote. The fourth meeting was at the usual 
place, John Rave's house. I sat with Sam as usual. At night I 
became filled with peyote. All at once I heard a voice saying, 
"You are the one who is to tell of the medicine dance." And I 
thought that Sam was speaking to me, so I turned around and 
looked at him, but he hadn't said a word. Soon I realized that 
nobody near me had said anything, and I began to think, "Why 
should it be I? Why not one of the others?" I rather pushed the 
idea from me; but no sooner had I done so than I began to have a 
tired and depressed sensation. This passed all over me. I knew 
that if I got up with the sincere purpose of giving in to the power 
that was wanting me to speak of the medicine dance I should be 
relieved. However, for some reason, I know not why, I felt like 
resisting. 

The next morning I asked to be baptized, and said that I would 
thereafter have nothing more to do with offerings to the spirits; 

414 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [bth. ann. 37 

that I would not give any more feasts; and that I would not have 
any more to do with the medicine dance. From that day on I 
quit all my old beliefs. I did not feel like saying all this, for indeed 
my heart was turned just the other way, but I couldn't help it, for 
I was fdled with the peyote. 

From that time on, at every meeting that I attended, I could 
not rid myself of the idea that I must tell of the medicine dance. 
At all such times a feeling of heaviness would come over me. There 
I would be with but one thing on my mind; should I, or should I 
not, tell of it ? I did not want to, and thought of all sorts of excuses — 
that I was not a member of the Nebraska division, etc. 

I was in this frame of mind while living with John Walker. There 
I received word that I would be wanted to tell of the medicine dance. 
From that moment I could not rest easy. I went to the barn and 
prayed and wept, asking that God might direct me. I went about 
but could not sit quiet. My wife stayed around me crying. As I 
stood there, someone drove up with a white team. Then I thought 
of all the unhappiness I would cause to members of the medicine 
lodge if I told the secrets of the medicine dance; and I asked myself 
if it really would not be a sin to cause so much misery. The man 
who was driving the white team was John Baptiste, and he told me 
that I was wanted to tell of the medicine dance. I got ready and 
entered the buggy. I was still crying and praying. Then it occurred 
to me that I would like to see John Rave. No sooner had I thought 
of this than John Rave appeared in the road. I got out and shook 
hands with him and told him where I was going and for what purpose, 
and asked him what he thought of the matter. He began to thank 
me for the work I was going to do and said, "This is what we should 
try to do, to help one another and to work for our Creator." Then 
he thanked me again. Perfect happiness now came over me and I 
went to Sioux City and got married legally. From now on I was 
entirely filled with the desire to tell all that I knew about the medicine 
dance. "This must be the work assigned to me by the Creator," 
I thought; and yet I have rejected the idea all the time. 

On Paul's last trip, although I had not finished the translation, I 
didn't care to have any more to do with it, and said that somebody 
else should finish the work, my excuse being that I was busy. So, as 
soon as I heard that Paul had come, I packed up and hurried out west 
as quickly as possible, for I knew that he would bother the life out of 
me if he found me. However, no sooner had I reached the home of 
my friend than I was seized with an attack of rheumatism, with which 
I had never been afflicted before, and the next morning Paul appeared 
with a wagon to take me back to Winnebago. Now I know that the 
telling and the translation of the medicine dance is my mission in 
life, and I am willing to tell all to the full extent of my knowledge. 

kadin] THE PEYOTE CULT 415 

Jesse Clay's Account of the Akapaho Manner of Giving the 
Peyote Ceremony Which He Introduced Among the Win- 
nebago in 1912 

I went to Oklahoma once as the guest of an Arapaho Indian. 
While there I witnessed the Arapaho manner of holding a peyote 
meeting and was very much impressed with it. A year later this 
Arapaho came to visit me in Winnehago, and while he was with us 
a few of my friends urged me to hold the peyote ceremony according 
to the Arapaho method. I held several meetings at which my 
Arapaho friend led. 

Now these are the instructions that Arapaho Bull gave me. 

The person giving the ceremony must get up at sunrise so that 
he can tell exactly where the sun is going to rise. He must place a 
stick and make the drawing of a cross on the earth just in that 
direction from which the sun is about to rise. He does this in order 
to get the correct location for the tipi and the fireplace. Then he 
marks a circle around the cross. Then he makes a diagonal mark 
through the center of the circle, thus making the circle resemble a 
star. The circle is the outline of the tipi. Then another diagonal 
mark is made so that the drawing resembles, to their minds, a pe- 
yote. A fireplace which resembles a half-moon is placed right in 
the center of the lodge. After that the tipi poles are raised, 12 in 
number. Finally the whole is inclosed in canvas. When finished 
it is supposed to represent the earth. It is then ready to be 
entered. Special preparations are made for entering. The drum- 
mer with his drum and the leader and those behind him with 
all their regalia march up to the door. Before theee enter, how- 
ever, an attendant, called the fireman, spreads sage all over the 
lodge, from the scat of the leader to the door and back again. Then 
he starts a fire, always placing the left fire sticks first. When they 
are all thus lined up outside of the door the leader offers a prayer. 

"May the Creator be with us when we enter this lodge." 

The leader now enters and, proceeding along the left side of the 
lodge, marches to his seat, and there he stands with his drum until 
the lodge is filled. After all have entered they sit down. Then the 
fireman who sits to the right rekindles the fire. The leader now 
spreads out his articles — a gourd, a drumstick, a staff, and the 
feathers. He then takes 12 sage leaves and lays them out in the 
form of a star, first making a cross-shaped object and then filling 
this into the desired form. On top he places the peyote, and, leaning 
against that, he places a flute made of an eagle bone, the mouth of 
the flute resting against the peyote. Then he puts an otter-skin cap 
at the foot of the flute. After a while the leader takes the peyote 
he is going to use in one hand and some cedar needles in the other, 

416 THE WINNEBAGO TKIBE [bth.ann.37 

and, going to his seat, where all the other objects are spread out, he 
sits down and prays. He prays that all the participants may be 
strengthened by the prospective meeting. lie offers up thanks for 
the peyote and praj's that all may be in the proper spirit that night. 
Then he throws the needles in the fire and holds the peyote over 
•the smoke of the cedar. When this has been finished he returns to 
his seat, eats one peyote, and gives one to the drummer. After 
they, have eaten these he passes four peyote in turn to those on his* 
left until the peyote comes to the one sitting nearest the door. Four 
peyote are given to the one nearest the door that he, in turn, may 
pass them to those on the other side of the door and so on until the 
leader is reached again. Before the peyote is eaten, the leader gets 
up and talks. He instructs the people as to the nature of the meeting 
and tells them that those who wish to go out must do so after the 
midnight water is drunk and not until after the leader returns from 
outside. No one is to go out while anyone is singing, praying, or 
eating peyote. He then speaks of the special prayers that are to be 
offered up and asks them to offer general prayers for all nonmembers 
and even for their enemies. After that the leader again offers up a 
prayer and smokes all the objects he had spread before his seat. 
Then the songs are to start, all, however, first eating peyote. 

(When the fire first starts and thereafter, throughout the night, it 
is supposed to represent light, just as God said, "Let there be light.") 

The first song is always the same and is called the starting song. 
Those that follow are peyote songs. When he has finished these 
songs he passes the singing staff to the right of the drummer. When 
this one has finished the staff is returned to the leader, who passes it 
on to the left, and then in rotation it goes to the one sitting near 
the door. The drum, when it is handed on, is always passed under 
the staff. The fire is always replenished, but toward midnight 
special care is taken in this regard and the coals are placed in the 
shape of a crescent between the fire and the earth crescent, and the 
fireman sweeps first around the left and then around the right side. 
Then exactly at midnight the leader calls for his singing staff and 
his drum, no matter where they happen to be, and, taking the singing 
staff and sending the drum to the drummer, he blows his flute and 
sings. The song he sings then is called the midnight song. After 
that three peyote songs are sung, it making no difference which they 
are. As the leader starts his midnight song the fireman takes up 
his position at the doorway opposite the fireplace and the leader. 
When the second song is started the fireman turns around to the 
right and goes out and gets water and soon comes back with it. 
When he reenters he makes the figure of a cross on the ground where 
he stood just before he left and places water on it. Then he squats 
down on his knees. 

radix] THE PEYOTE CULT 417 

When the leader stops singing he walks to the, crescent by the 
fireplace and begins praying again. After the prayer he burns some 
more cedar needles. The reason for drinking water at midnight is 
because Christ was born at midnight and because of the good tidings 
that he. brought to the earth, for water is one of the best things in 
life and Christ is» the savior of mankind. After the leader has 
made his prayer and the cedar is burned, then the fireman reaches 
over toward the smoke and makes a motion with his body as if he 
were drawing the smoke over himself. He then takes the water 
and brings it over to the leader. The leader takes a bunch of feathers 
and, dipping it into the water, sprinkles it on the peyote, then on 
the fire, on the sage, and finally all over the lodge, beginning with 
the doorway and then going around. The water is then drunk in a 
regular order, first by the leader, then by the drummer, and then by 
all the other people. After all these things have been done the leader 
returns the staff to the man from whom he had taken it at mid- 
night. As soon as this man starts the singing again the leader takes 
his flute and goes outside. He goes toward the east for a short 
distance, and there he sits down and offers up a prayer for the people. 
Then he blows his flute, and going to the south of the lodge repeats 
the same procedure. This is also repeated for the west and the 
north. When the singing within the lodge has stopped, he returns 
and takes his seat. 

The purpose of going to the four directions and blowing the flute 
is to announce the birth of Christ to all the world. 

After the leader has reentered the singing continues as before. 
At daybreak the fireman fixes the fire in the same way as at mid- 
night. The staff, drum, etc., is now passed to the leader, who as 
soon as he has received everything takes his flute and blows on it. 
Before doing this, however, he puts on his otter-skin cap. The pur- 
pose of blowing the flute just at that time is to represent the trumpet 
of the Day of Judgment, when Christ will appear wearing His 
crown in all glory. The putting on of the otter-skin cap represents 
the crown. 

The song used on this occasion is called the water song. After 
the first song is finished the fireman opens the door and a woman 
enters carrying water, which she pours over the cross which the 
fireman had sprinkled at midnight. The fireman then spreads some- 
thing for her to sit on, between the water and the door. 

When the leader has finished his four songs, he lays down his 
staff, etc., and, taking some cedar needles, offers up a prayer of 
thanks, and as ho finishes he throws the cedar into the fire and sits 
down while the woman gathers the smoke toward her in the same 
way as the fireman had done on the previous night. Then the 
leader takes a drinking cup and sends it toward the woman. The 

418 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [hth.ann.S7 

fireman now rises and pours water on the impressions he had made 
when drawing the cross on the earth, and the woman drinks some 
water from the cup, which she then returns to the leader. The water 
is then returned to her and she passes it around the lodge, beginning 
at the left. When it reaches the leader again, he takes out the same 
cup which he had handed to the woman and drinks out of it. The 
water, howTever, is passed on until it reaches the door. The fireman 
would then take it and bring it back to where it had been placed 
when first brought in. The woman rises and goes around the fire- 
place from left to right, taking the water with her. Finally the 
leader takes his singing staff and sings four songs. When these 
songs are finished, the woman places some food just outside the door. 
The fireman goes outside and brings in this food, placing it in a line 
between the fire and the door. Four things are brought in — water, 
corn with sweetened water, fruit, and meat. When the food is 
brought in the leader puts away all the objects he had spread out 
before him, which the fireman takes out of the lodge. The leader 
then offers up a prayer of thanks and says grace. The four kinds of 
food are passed around the lodge, beginning with the entrance, from 
left to right. After they are returned they are placed in line again, 
only in the reverse order from that used before. The fireman then 
takes them outside. While the people are eating the door remains 
open. 

(During the evening the leader represents the first created man, 
the woman dressed up is the New Jerusalem, the bride waiting for 
the bridegroom. The cup used by the leader and the woman is 
supposed to symbolize the fact that they are to become one; the 
water represents the God's gift, His Holiness. The corn represents 
the feast to be partaken of on the Day of Judgment and the. fruit 
represents the fruit of the tree of life. The meat represents the 
message of Christ and those who accept it will be saved.)4 

The above descriptions represent the Peyote cult as it was given 
between 1908 and 1913. It is quite clear that a definite organiza- 
tion exists consisting of a unit of five positions occupied by the leader 
and four helpers. No specific requirements, with the exception, of 
course, of that of being a peyote eater, are associated with the right 
to occupy these positions. 

No specialized features have become associated with the positions 
of the four helpers. As indicated before, John Rave is always the 
leader when he is present, but the position of leadership can be dele- 
gated to others. This is always of a temporary nature. It may be 
significant to note that whenever delegated the leadership is always 
delegated to men who have been among the first of the converts 
outside of Rave's immediate family, and who were leaders in the old 

•J. C's account ends here. 

badin] THE PEYOTE CULT 419 

pagan ceremonies. In 1910 this delegation of leadership was clearly 
a recent tendency, conditioned, on the one hand, by the size of the 
reservation and the impossibility of Rave's being everywhere, and, on 
the other hand, by Rave's frequent absence on proselytizing missions. 
In 1913 it had already become customary for a number of men to 
hold the position of leader even when Rave was present. A further 
complication was introduced when Jesse Clay began giving the peyote 
ceremonies in the Arapaho manner, for he then stood in the same 
relation to his method of giving the ceremony as Rave stood to the 
older form. As we shall see, there was, even in 1908, a separatist 
movement led by Albert Hensley, which, if it had succeeded, would 
have given Hensley the same leadership that Rave enjoyed before 
him and that Clay subsequently acquired. 

Development of the Ritualistic Complex 

From the accounts given by various members of the Peyote cult it 
is quite clear that Rave became interested in the peyote on one of 
his many trips to Oklahoma. According to the verbal account he 
gave, which differs hi some respects from the account he subsequently 
dictated on the particular visit which resulted in his first eating the 
peyote, he was in a most distressed and unhappy condition of mind 
owing to the loss of his wife and children.5 He went away from 
Winnebago with the intention of staying away as long as possible from 
the scene of his loss. 

Rave's account of his conversion gives a sufficiently dramatic pic- 
ture of how he first ate the peyote and its immediate effects. In 
response to numerous questions as to how he was first induced to eat 
the peyote he always said that it was because he had been so fre- 
quently asked. It is, however, far more likely that he was passing 
through an emotional crisis at that particular time, and the requests 
that he partake of it and the inducements held out to him, made it 
easier for him to succumb then than on his previous visits. 

To judge from Rave's remarks, Jus first belief in the peyote had 
nothing of the nature of a conversion to a new religion. It seems to 
have been similar to the average Winnebago attitude toward a medici- 
nal plant obtained either as a gift or through purchase. There is 
only one new note — -stimulation by a narcotic. 

Rave states that the peyote cured him of a disease with which he 
had been afflicted for a long time. After repeated requests his wife 
also consents to being treated; so he paints her face and, taking the 
rattle, sings peyote songs while she eats the peyote. His attitude 

5 In the account Rave himself gives he speaks of seeing his wife and children. As his verbal statement 
was corroborated by other people, we are inclined to believe that in his dictated account of his conversion 
he had forgotten the actual state of affairs. It may, of course, be that in his ardent desire to show the mar- 
velous effects of the peyote he permitted his memory to play him false. 

420 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ass. 37 

throughout, both from his own testimony and from that of others, 
seems to have been practically the attitude of the Winnebago shaman. 
He even offered tobacco to the peyote. 

We have, then, at the beginning the introduction of apparently 
only one new element — the peyote, with possibly a few Christian 
teachings. Everything else seems to be typically Winnebago, and in 
consonance with their shamanistic practices. On the whole, the 
extension of the Winnebago cultural background seems to have been 
so instantaneous that so far as the specific cultural traits of the Win- 
nebago are concerned there was hardly anything new at all. This 
view does not, of course, interfere in the least with the fact that to 
the Winnebago themselves the presence of the peyote represented 
the introduction of a new element. 

The elaboration of the peyote practices at Rave's hands is the most 
difficult problem to trace on account of the lack of data. In the 
account that he gives of his conversion there is no evidence whatso- 
ever of any antagonistic attitude toward the old Winnebago manner 
of living. When the author met him, however, for the first time, in 
1908, this passive attitude had changed to one of violent hatred for 
the old Winnebago customs. Why and under what circumstances 
this change took place we do not know. It probably represented 
the interaction of many elements, the hostility of the tribe, the 
drawing of issues sharply around certain points, and the gradual 
assumption on the part of Rave of the role of a prophet who had 
solved the problem of the adjustment of the Winnebago to the sur- 
rounding white civilization. Offhand, one might be inclined to 
believe that Rave's insistence upon breaking with the past was due 
entirely to the influence of the Christian elements incorporated in his 
new religion. It is, however, extremely doubtful whether such an 
assumption is necessary. There seem to have been comparatively 
few Christian elements in the religion before Albert Hensley's influ- 
ence had made itself felt, yet many of the old war bundles had been 
destroyed long before that time, and the peyote eaters were looked 
upon with cordial dislike by the conservative members of the tribe. 
The admonition that only a complete break with the past could 
save the Winnebagoes and enable them to compete successfully with 
the white intruders had been given to the Winnebagoes once before 
by the famous Shawnee prophet. What the latter claimed, however, 
was that the various sacred objects used by the Winnebago had lost 
their power, and that that power must now be renewed. This he 
thought could only be done by returning to the old manner of living 
which he claimed the Winnebago were no longer following. Such a 
claim was, after all, not revolutionary. It is not, therefore, the break 
with the Winnebago present-day viewpoint that characterizes Rave's 
attitude, but the fact that instead of returning to the older, purer 

eadin] THE PEYOTE CULT 421 

life as the Shawnee prophet proposed to do, he substituted an alien 
religion. It was because he was introducing an alien religion, not 
because he was introducing a new religion, that he was so intensely 
hated by the conservative members of the tribe. 

When this hostility was at its height a new convert, Albert Hensley, 
revolutionized the entire cult by introducing the reading of the Bible, 
postulating the dogma that the peyote opened the Bible to the under- 
standing of the people, and also adding a number of Christian prac- 
tices. He, like Kave, had been in Oklahoma. He brought back 
with him many peyote songs, generally in other languages, dealing 
with Christian ideas, upon which subsequently Winnebago songs 
were modeled. He also introduced either baptism itself or an inter- 
pretation of baptism, and induced Rave to attempt a union with the 
Christian Church. He seems to have been the only prominent man 
connected with the peyote who was subject to epileptic fits. He had 
the most glorious visions of heaven and hell while in his trance, and 
these he expounded afterwards in terms of Revelation and the 
mystical portions of the New Testament. Hensley's additions repre- 
sent a second stratum of borrowed elements, all of which are in the 
nature of accretions as far as the peyote itself is concerned. The 
Bible is explained in terms of the peyote. Neither Hensley nor his 
followers ever interpreted the peyote in terms of the Bible, although 
other elements of the old Winnebago culture were so interpreted. 
These elements, however, represented features that even in the old 
Winnebago cults exhibited a great variabilitjr in interpretation. 

Rave's attitude toward the innovations of Hensley seems to have 
been that of a benevolent acquiescence. He himself could neither 
read nor write. Yet he immediately accepted the Bible and added 
it to his other regalia. As such it always seems to have remained. 
To Rave, after all, the peyote was the principal element, and if Hen- 
sley chose to insist that the Bible was only intelligible to those who 
partook of the peyote why that naturally fell within its magical 
powers. From the entire omission in Rave's account of the Peyote 
cult of the more important things that Hensley introduced and 
from the fact that whenever Hensley's influence was not dominant 
there seems to have been little Bible reading, it seems justifiable to 
say that Rave's attitude toward these innovations was merely 
passive. 

There never was any rivalry between Rave and Hensley. The 
latter was, however, a much 3rounger man, quick-tempered, con- 
ceited, dogmatic, and withal having a strong mixture of Puritan 
Protestant ideas. A conflict developed after a while and in a very 
interesting manner. Rave had allowed a man with an extremely 
bad reputation, who had been admitted as a member of the Peyote 
cult, to occupy one of the four positions. Hensley violently pro- 

422 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ann. 37 

tested, on the ground that a man of X.'s character could not properly 
perform the rites associated with that position. Rave, however, 
retorted that the efficacy of the peyote, of any position connected 
with its cult, was in no way connected with the character of the per- 
former, and that it was inherent in the peyote and in the Peyote 
ritual. Thereupon, after much parleying to and fro, Hensley form- 
ally seceded, taking with him a number of followers. The bulk of 
the peyote eaters, however, remained with Rave, and within a com- 
paratively short time a number of Hensley's followers returned to 
Rave, so that in 191 1 Hensley had merely a handful of people. Since 
then he has ceased to be a force, although his innovations have been 
retained by a number of the younger Peyote members, especially by 
those who read English. 

In 1911 there was no unification of the ideas of Rave and Hensley. 
Since then, strange to say, although Hensley's attempt to set up his 
own religion failed utterly, his ideas and Christain imiovations seemed 
to have triumphed completely. This, however, has gone hand in 
hand with a marked dropping off of enthusiasm. It appears now as 
if the Peyote cult has run its course. Some of the members have 
recently returned to the old pagan customs, others have practically 
become Christians, and many have become indifferent. 

Unquestionably the most interesting of recent innovations is that 
introduced by Jesse Clay, the account of which has been given be- 
fore. This is, of course, the Arapaho manner of conducting the cere- 
mony. At the present time it has none of the characteristics of the 
Winnebago ceremonial. Whether in the next few years it will develop 
any depends upon the interest manifested in it by the Peyote worship- 
ers and upon the vitality of the Peyote movement in general. 

It is extremely suggestive to compare what Rave introduced with 
the ceremony borrowed by Clay. The former introduced an isolated 
element, the peyote and its worship, and clothed it almost imme- 
diately in characteristic Winnebago forms. It can truly be said 
that although the peyote is an alien element, from the Winnebago 
viewpoint, everything else in the ceremony is and was from the 
beginning typically Winnebago. Clay's method of conducting the 
Peyote ceremonies, on the other hand, is entirely alien. For it ever 
to become popular with the large mass of Winnebago it will have to 
become thoroughly assimilated with the Winnebago background. 

Dissemination of the Doctrine 

Let us now see how the ideas of Rave and Hensley were trans- 
mitted in the tribe itself, who the first and the later converts were, 
in what the nature of their conversion consisted, and what they, 
in turn, brought to the new cult. 

badin] THE PEYOTE CULT 423 

The first and foremost virtue predicated by Rave for the peyote 
was its curative power. He gives a number of instances in which 
hopeless venereal diseases and consumption were cured by its use; 
and this was the first thing one heard about it as late as 1913. In 
the early days of the Peyote cult it appears that Rave relied prin- 
cipally for new converts upon the knowledge of this great curative 
virtue of the peyote. The main point apparently was to induce 
people to try it. No amount of preaching of its direct effects, such 
as the hyperstimulation induced, the glorious visions, and the feeling 
of relaxation following, would ever have induced prominent members 
of the old Winnebago religious societies to try it. For that reason 
it is highly significant that all the old members of the Peyote cult 
speak of the diseases of which it cured them. Along this line lay 
unquestionably its appeal for the most converts. Its subsequent 
spread was due to a large number of interacting factors. One in- 
formant claims that there was little religion connected with it at 
first, and that the people drank the peyote on account of its peculiar 
effects. 

The manner in which it spread at the beginning was simple and 
significant — viz, along family lines. As soon as an individual had 
become a peyote eater he devoted all his energies to converting 
other members of his family. From instances that have come to 
our notice this lay in an insistent appeal to family ties and personal 
affection. A man showed unusual courtesy, showered innumerable 
favors upon relatives he was anxious to convert, and thereby earned 
the gratitude of the recipient, who at some critical moment, let us 
say, such as illness or mental depression, showed it by partaking of 
the peyote. The same methods were employed in the more general 
propaganda. The author knows of Peyote people who drove many 
miles in order to be present at the bedside of some old conservative 
who was ill, perhaps neglected by his relatives; bring him food, and 
spend the night with him in the most affectionate solicitude. They 
always had sufficient tact and understanding of human nature not 
to obtrude their purpose on the sick man too much. To the casual 
observer their object seemed simply that of a Samaritan. They 
would hardly have admitted that behind all their solicitude lay the 
desire to obtain a new convert. They would have claimed that their 
only purpose, over and above their sincere desire to cdmfort the 
sick man, was to demonstrate to their fellow Winnebago what changes 
the peyote had wrought in them. In this way the patient drew the 
inference, an inference that was likely to be drawn all the more quickly 
and forcibly when he contrasted the behavior of these Peyote nurses 
with that of his pagan relatives. The author was fortunate enough 
to obtain a fairly complete account of a conversion, illustrating both 
these features. 

424 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ann. 37 

What the Converts Introduced 

It is quite impossible to establish now what these converts intro- 
duced individually. For that matter it is not necessary to assume 
that they brought any specific additions to the cult. What they did 
bring were Winnebago; and with that, the emotional and cultural 
sotting of the old pagan background. To one, the eating of the 
peyote gave the same magical powers that were formerly associated 
with membership in the medicine dance; to another, the visions were 
direct blessings from God, directing him to perform certain actions; 
to a third, faithfulness to the teachings of the Peyote cult became 
associated with a certainty of reaching God, of being able to take the 
right road in the journey to the spirit land. Even a man so thor- 
oughly saturated with Christian doctrines as Hensley himself felt it 
necessary to introduce an origin myth; and although we know that 
he borrowed it from a southern tribe, it is quite clear that in Hensley's 
narrative it has already assumed all the characteristics of a Winne- 
bago fasting experience and ritualistic myth, similar to those con- 
nected with the founders of the old Winnebago cult societies. In its 
totality the atmosphere of the Peyote cult became thus charged with 
the old Winnebago background. In 1911 it can not be said that they 
had displaced the distinctive Christian elements. Among the younger 
members, especially those who had been trained in the east and could 
read and write English, the influence of the Christian ideas in the 
interpretation of the old pagan features is, as was pointed out before, 
so strong to-day that it threatens to displace the others. 

The following homily will show how the old myths were used by 
the younger Peyote members to point a tale. 

The old people often spoke of the Trickster, but we never knew 
what they meant. They told us how he wrapped a coon-skin blanket 
around himself and went to a place where all the people were danc- 
ing. There he danced until evening and then he stopped and turned 
around. No one was to be seen anywhere, and then he realized that 
he had mistaken for people dancing the noise made by the wind blow- 
ing through the reeds. 

So do we Winnebagoes act. We dance and make a lot of noise, but 
in the end, we accomplish nothing. 

Once, as the Trickster was going toward a creek, he saw a man 
standing on the other side, dressed in a black suit, and pointing his 
finger at him. He spoke to the man but the latter would not answer. 
Then he spoke again and again, but without receiving any reply. 
Finally he got angry and said, "See here ! I can do that too." He put 
on the black coat and pointed his finger across the creek. Thus both 
of them stood all day. Toward evening, when he looked around again , 
he noticed that the man across the creek, pointing his finger at him, 
was really just a tree stump. "O my! what have I been doing all 

radin] THE PEYOTE CULT 425 

this time? Why did I not look before I began? No wonder the 
people call me the Foolish One." 

So are we Winnebagoes. We never look before we act. We do 
everything without thinking. We think we know all about it. 

The Trickster was walking around with a pack on his back. As he 
walked along, someone called to him. "Say, we want you to sing." 
"All right," said he. "I am carrying songs in my pack, and if you 
wish to dance, build a large lodge for me with a small hole at the end 
for an entrance." When it was finished, they all went in, and the 
Trickster foUowed them. Those who had spoken to him were birds. 
He told them that while dancing they were not to open their eyes, 
for if they did their eyes would become red. Whenever a fat bird 
passed the Trickster he would choke it to death, and if it cried out, 
he would say, "That's it! That's it! Give a whoop!" 

After a while one of the birds got somewhat suspicious and opened 
its eyes just the least little bit. He saw that the Trickster was 
choking all the birds. "He is killing us all, " said the bird. "Let all 
who can run for their lives." Then he flew out through the top of the 
house. The Trickster took the birds he had killed and roasted them; 
but he did not get a chance to eat them, for they were taken away 
from him by somebody. 

So are we Winnebagoes. We like all that is forbidden. We say 
that we like the medicine dance; we say that it is good and yet we 
keep it secret and forbid people to witness it. We tell members of 
the dance not to speak about it until the world shall come to an end. 
They are afraid to speak of it. We, the Winnebago, are the birds, 
and the Trickster is satan. 

Once, as the Trickster was going along the road, some one spoke to 
him. He listened, and he heard it say, "If anyone eats me all bad 
things will come out of him." Then the trickster went up to the one 
talking, and said, "What is your name?" "My name is 'Blows- 
himself-away."' The Trickster would not believe it; so he ate it. 
After a while, he blew himself away. He laughed. "Oh, pshaw! I 
suppose this is what it meant." As he went along it grew worse and 
worse, and it was only after the greatest hardship that he succeeded in 
returning home. 

So are we Winnebagoes. We travel on this earth all our lives, and 
then when one of us tastes something that makes him unconscious 
we look upon this thing with suspicion when he regains consciousness. 

The Attitude of the Conservatives 

At every phase of the cult's development Rave had to contend with 
the hostility of the conservative members of the tribe. It would be 
interesting to know in what manner and degree this hostility mani- 
186S230— 22 28 

426 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ann. 37 

festecl itself upon the first introduction of the peyote. As we have 
seen, there was in the beginning little difference between the beliefs 
relating to the peyote and those connected with the old Winnebago 
medicinal plants. Nevertheless the author was assured that hos- 
tility was exhibited to the new cult from the very start. Would the 
same hostility have been exhibited had this new feature represented 
some development from within the tribe ? In other words, what it 
would be interesting to know, is whether the fact that the peyote 
was derived from without led to a hostility different in kind from that 
exhibited toward an innovation developing within the culture itself. 
No evidence could be obtained that would justify us in explaining the 
hostility felt by the older conservative Winnebago as due in any part 
to the fact that it was alien in origin. Certain elements that to-day 
form an integral part of the most popular of all Winnebago cere- 
monies were borrowed from the Sauk and Iowa, and the Winnebago 
realize this and mention it in the introductory myths told in connec- 
tion with the preparatory rites of the medicine dance. The explana- 
tion obtained was always the same — that the hostility was due to the 
fact that the teachings of the Peyote people departed from those of their 
ancestors and that the Peyote were simply aping the habits and 
customs of the whites. What seems to have met with the greatest 
opposition from the older shamans was the denial of the doctrine of 
reincarnation. The Christian doctrine of the immortality of the soul 
does not seem to have been felt as a substitute at all. One old con- 
servative assured the author that he had long ago prophesied the 
appearance of the peyote among the Winnebago. He told the author 
the following: 

"This medicine is one of the four spirits from below, and for that 
reason it is a bad thing. These spirits have always longed for human 
beings and now they are getting hold of them. Those who use this 
medicine claim that when they die they will only be going on a long 
journey. But that is not the truth, for when they eat peyote they 
destroy their spirits, and death to them will mean extermination. 
If I spit upon the floor, the sputum will soon dry up and nothing will 
remain of it. So death will be for them. I might go out and preach 
against this doctrine, but it would be of no avail, for I certainly would 
not be able to draw more than one or two people away from this 
spirit. Many will be taken in by this medicine; they will not be able 
to help themselves in any way. The bad spirit will certainly seize 
them." 

CHAPTER XVII 

THE CLAN WAR-BUNDLE FEASTS 
The War-Bundle Feast of the Thunderbird Clan1 

(first version) 
INTRODUCTORY REMARKS 

The Wagigo', Winter Feast, or War-bundle Feast, as it is gen- 
erally called, is one of the principal ceremonies of the Winnebago. 
It is to a certain extent a clan ceremonial, for the clan is the basis 
jDf its organization, but apart from that fact, it has really nothing 
to do with the clan and must not be confused with the specific clan 
feasts held once a year. A perusal of the following sketch will show 
clearly that we are in reality dealing with a ceremony primarily con- 
nected with success in war and that its distinctive peculiarity among 
the Winnebago is that it has developed into a general ceremony of 
thanksgiving to the spirits and developed an organization based on 
the clan unit. As a result of the latter fact, we find 12 war rituals 
all essentially the same in content and differing only in details and 
in the fact that the host in each of the 12 performances belongs to a 
different clan. The specific differences in each performance are, 
first, the content of the war bundle; second, the origin myths of the 
feast and of the songs associated with each bundle; third, the songs 

i Phonetic table.— All the consonants have the same value as those in English with the following 
exceptions: 

c Is pronounced like sh in English. e is short and close but not as close as the French 

j has the sound of z in azure. e in fete. 

tc has the sound of ch i n church. e is long close e. 

dj has the sound of; in judge. e is broad impure, as in an accentuated pronun- 

x has the sound of eft in German Bach. ciation of ci in eight. 

y is the sonant of r. i is short and open as in tin. 

t is aslightly trilled linguo-apieal r. j is short and close. 

n has the sound of ng in sing. i is long and close. 

n always represents r preceded by a nasalized o is short and open, 

vowel . o is short and close. 

t is a marked surd. 6 is long and close. 

b and g are intermediate stops, except in certain 6 is long and open, 

positions, where they become true sonants. u is short and open. 

• is the glottal stop. u is short and close. 

Consonants followed by ' represent aspirated u is long and close, 

stops. a is obscure a. 

The vowels have the following values: E is obscure e. 

a has the sound of a win aught. ' denotes nasalization. 

a is the short continentala. ' denotes primary stress accent. 

a is long a. % denotes secondary stress accent. 

e is short open as in pen. 

427 

428 THE WINNEBAGO TKIBE [eth. ANN. 37 

themselves; and, lastly, the order in which the guests are invited 
(pis. 56, 57, 58). 

It follows from the above remarks that in order to get a really 
complete account of the entire ceremony information should be 
obtained from each clan. The account given by any one clan will 
only contain the origin myth and the songs belonging to the war 
bundle of that clan, for although it is part of the ceremony to relate 
the origin myths of the various war bundles and sing the specific 
songs connected with them, no individual would take it upon himself 
to tell any but those relating to the war bundle of his own clan. 
Thus it will be seen that any single account is defective in some 
rather important particulars. 

ANALYTICAL PRESENTATION OF THE CEREMONY 

The ceremony falls into three well-defined parts: I, the Sweat 
Lodge; II, the First Division, generally known either as the Feast 
in honor of Earthmaker or the Feast in honor of the Thunderbirds ; 
and III, the Second Division, known as the Feast in honor of the 
Night Spirits. 

There is little to be said about the Sweat Lodge, for it consists 
exclusively of offerings of tobacco and prayers to the spirits, on the 
part of the one giving the ceremony, whom we will call the host. 

The first division can be divided into the following component 
elements: (1) The preparation of the buckskins; (2) the dog sacrifice; 
(3) the filling of the ceremonial pipe and the smoking ritual; (4.) the 
tobacco offering to the spirits; (5) the buckskin offerings to the 
spirits; (6) the feast; (7) the fast-eating contest; and (8) the basic 
ritual. 

The second division can be divided into the following component 
elements: (4) The tobacco offering to the spirits; (9) the throwing 
out of the buckskins; (6) the feast; (10) the episode of the "Night- 
crazed" warrior; (11) the terminal dog ritual; and (S) the basic 
ritual. 

(1) The preparation of the huekskins. — The buckskins, made as 
white as possible by old women, are taken into the lodge by the host 
and there marked in the manner prescribed for each spirit. They 
are then tied to a framework and rolled to the top of this frame. 

(2) The dog sacrifice. — The dog is strangled and a pouch of tobacco 
is tied to each limb, and another pouch and red feathers are tied 
around his neck. The body is then laid in front of the war bundle, 
facing south, this being the direction in which Disease-giver, the 
spirit to whom the dog is specially sacrificed, lives. 

Before strangling, a short speech is addressed to the dog in which 
the slayer apologizes for killing him, and assures him that in the 

BUREAU OF AMERICAN ETHNOLOGY TH I RTY-SEVENTH AN NU AL REPORT PLATE 56 

a. THUNDERBIRD WAR BUNDLE 

ti ^reB*,- ■: ^c£v,3yii 

1 riXrf"' fct^iHyr dj^^^Mm 

6. HAWK WAR BUNDLE 

BUREAU OF AMERICAN ETHNOLOGY TH I RTY-SEVENTH AN NU AL REPORT PLATE 57 

CONTENTS OF THUNDERBIRD WAR BUNDLE 

BUREAU OF AMERICAN ETHNOLOGY TH I RTY-SEVENTH AN NU AL REPORT PLATE 58 

CONTENTS OF HAWK WAR BUNDLE 

eadin] THE CLAN WAR-BUNDLE FEASTS 429 

place to which he is going he will live far more happily than here 
among men. 

(3) Filling of the ceremonial pipe and the smoking ritual. — Before the 
basic ritual of the first division is begun the attendants take some 
tobacco and, filling the ceremonial pipe, place it near the war bundle. 
As the first pipeful is intended for Earthmaker, the stem is directed 
vertically. Then "as soon as the appropriate songs have been sung 
the attendant lights the pipe and passes it around the lodge, so that 
all the men may smoke. When the pipe returns to the host it is 
again filled. 

This procedure is repeated three more times, but as in each case 
the offering is to a different spirit, the arrangement of the pipestem is 
different. At the second filling of the pipe the stem is turned to the 
west for the Thunderbirds ; at the third, it is turned to the south for 
Disease-giver; and at the fourth, it is turned toward the earth for 
the earth and the spirits that live under the earth. 

(4) Tobacco offerings to the spirits. — This occurs in two forms, 
(a) and (b). 

(a) When the buckskins have been prepared and rolled up on the 
frameworks, then all those participating march around the lodge to 
the place where the war bundle is lying and pour tobacco upon it. 
Then they offer tobacco to all the spirits worshiped. The spirits men- 
tioned specifically are, however, few in number, the offerings being 
really directed to the six cardinal points, east, north, west, south, 
above, and below. 

(6) This is a more specific offering and all the spirits are mentioned 
by name and short addresses are made to them. It is repeated three 
times — -once in the Sweat-Lodge ritual, then in the first, and lastly 
in the second division 

In the Sweat-Lodge ritual the offering of tobacco is made to the 
following spirits: Earthmaker, Thunderbirds, Great Black Hawk, 
Night Spirits, Disease-giver, Sun, Moon, South Wind, and Eagle. 

In the first division the order is different and more spirits are sacri- 
ficed to. The spirits to whom tobacco is offered are the following: 
Earthmaker, Thunderbirds, Night Spirits, Disease-giver, Sun, 
Earth, Moon, Eagle Chief, Day, South Wind, North Wind, Black 
Hawk, Wonaii're Uankcik, and Great Black Hawk. 

In the second division the following spirits receive tobacco offer- 
ings: Night Spirits, Earth, Water, Pigeon Hawk, Moon, Earthmaker, 
Thunderbird, Great Black Hawk, Disease-giver, South Wind, and 
Sun. 

Each spirit is addressed by name and then a handful of tobacco is 
poured into the fire. 

(5) The buckskin offering to the spirits. — Short prayers are addressed 
to those spirits who are to receive buckskins and requests for power 

430 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ann. 37 

are made to them. Only the following spirits receive buckskins: 
Thunderbird, Night Spirits, Disease-giver, South Wind, Sun, Earth- 
maker, Moon, Morning Star, Earth, and Water. 

(6) The feasts. — There are two feasts, the one in the first division 
of the ceremony being generally known as the Thunderbird and that 
in the second division as the Night Spirit feast. 

The guests are always divided into two divisions, the owners of 
war bundles and their male followers, and the women. The former, 
who are always warriors of repute, get the choice pieces of the deer, 
i. e., the heads, and the rest get the other pieces generally referred to 
as " the common pieces." The heads are eaten after those eating the 
common pieces have finished. 

The host never eats at the feast he gives, but while the others are 
eating he plays on his reed flute. 

(7) The fast-eating contest. — Before the heads are eaten two men 
belonging to the upper phratry and two belonging to the lower (i. e., 
generally two members of the Thunderbird clan and two members of 
the Bear clan) are selected to take part in the fast-eating contest. 
This consists of consuming an equal amount of food. The one who 
finishes first is considered the greater warrior. Both contestants 
start at a given signal and continue the contest to the accompani- 
ment of songs sung by the other guests. 

When a member of the upper phratry gives the ceremony his side 
always wins, and vice versa. 

(8) The basic ritual. — After the buckskin ritual has been finished 
the host begins what is unquestionably the fundamental part of the 
ceremony, which I have called the "basic ritual." It consists of 
four speeches, each speech followed by a different set of songs. The 
first speech is followed by a set of war-bundle songs ; the second by a 
paint set; the third by a Disease-giver set; and the last by a Night 
Spirit set. The last speech also contains a fasting experience of the 
first owner of the war bundle. When he is finished, the general feast 
and the fast-eating contest take place, and the basic ritual is for the 
time interrupted. It is continued as soon as these are finished, but 
not in the same manner as performed by the host. Instead of four 
speeches there is only one. As soon as one guest finishes speaking 
the other begins, and so on until all have finished.1 

In the second division of the ceremony the basic ritual is performed 
in a slightly different manner. In the first place there seem to be two 
parts to it, the first one quite different from the basic ritual as given 
in the first division, and the second identical with it except that 
instead of seven there are only four guests called upon to speak. 

In the first part of the basic ritual, as given here, the host delivers 
three speeches. After the first one a set of Night Spirit: songs are 

' Additional information on the Winter Feasts might lead me to an alteration of this last statement. 
In additicn to the present, three more accounts of Winter Feasts were received. 

badin] THE CLAN WAR-BUNDLE FEASTS 431 

sung; after the second one a dance song is sung and all the guests 
who so desire dance around the war bundle; after the third one the 
host passes the drum and other paraphernalia to the guest who is in 
charge of the buckskin destined for Earthmaker. This guest repeats 
the ritual in exactly the same manner as the host has done and then 
passes the drum, etc., to the second guest, and when the time comes 
he passes the drum, etc., to the third guest. Then the ritual of the 
throwing out of the buckskins intervenes, and after that the feast of 
the Night Spirits and the rite of those who have been crazed by the 
Night Spirits. Then, when these are finished, the basic ritual is con- 
tinued. The continuation is, however, quite different from the first 
part and is identical with the basic ritual as given in the first part of 
the ceremony. 

(9) The throwing out of the buckskins. — A warrior of great reputa- 
tion is selected to begin the rites preparatory to the throwing out of 
the buckskins. One who has been blessed by the Night Spirits is 
preferably selected. He delivers a speech, and when he is finished 
the guests sing songs called "terminal Night Spirit " songs. Then the 
host prepares to sing a dance song, but before that he delivers a speech. 
Then, as the oldest men present sing, the host and the guests imper- 
sonating the spirits to whom tobacco is sacrificed take the buckskins 
and make the circuit of the lodge four times. An attendant precedes 
and another follows the procession, scattering incense consisting of 
branches of the arbor vita?. Just before the fourth circuit is begun 
all the children smoke their hands and then touch the buckskin ded- 
icated to Earthmaker. After the fourth circuit has been completed 
the buckskins are unrolled and thrown out through the top of the 
lodge, where the spirits are supposed to come and take them. Af ter 
this, all holding tobacco in their hands walk to the fireplace and tlirow 
it in. Then, as a conclusion, all, even the women, rise in their re- 
spective seats and dance. 

(10) The episode of those who have been crazed by the Night Spirits.— 
This is plainly an intrusive feature and does not take place at every 
performance of the ceremony. An individual who has brought him- 
self to a state of religious frenzy strips himself entirely and behaves 
generally like one bereft of his senses. He sticks his hands into the 
boiling soup and makes a wild rush for the pot where the heads are 
being cooked and tries to bite them. It is believed that whoever gets 
the first bite will, at some future time, obtain a war honor. Then he 
takes the pipe placed in the center of the lodge, smokes it, and relates 
some war exploits. He then tells the assembled guests that in his 
trance he communicated with the spirits, and they told him that they 
had accepted all the offerings made.2 

2 There can be no doubt that we are dealing with an extremely specialized and interesting behavior, that 
in other tribes, and for that matter among the Winnebago themselves in other ceremonies, has an entirely 
different connotation. 

432 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ann. 37 

(11) Terminal dog ritual. — This consists simply of a speech by the 
host to the assembled guests, telling them that the dog is to be sent to 
Disease-giver as an offering, and that he will pray to Disease-giver 
to preserve them from disease. 

Analysis op Types op Action and Speeches 

Circuit of the lodge. — This is always made in a direction contrary to 
that of the hands of a clock. The reason given for this method is 
that it is supposed to represent the journey of the Night Spirits 
around the earth. 

Method of greeting. — This is the same as that which exists in all 
Winnebago ceremonies and is accurately described in my article on 
the Winnebago Medicine dance.3 

Types of speeches. — This subject is of great importance because, 
while it is true that a certain freedom is allowed in the method of 
delivery and the choice of words, on the other hand, their content 
and to a large extent their symbolism and imagery are stereotyped. 
The speeches might perhaps best be divided into the following groups: 

(a) General addresses. — These are generally delivered by the host to 
his guests and always contain expressions of gratitude for the kind- 
ness shown by the guests in condescending to accept his invitation. 

(b) Speeches of thankfulness. — These are generally delivered by the 
guests and always contain complimentary references to the zealous- 
ness of the host in attending to his religious duties, expressions of 
gratitude for the invitation extended to them, and protestations, 
couched in the strongest terms, of their unworthiness for the honor 
thrust upon them and their utter inability to do aught that might 
insure the acceptance by the spirits of the offerings extended to them. 

(c) Speeches of admonition. — These are plainly exhortations by the 
host to his band and by the leaders of the guests' bands to their 
bands, beseeching them to do their utmost to insure the success of 
the ceremony. 

(d) Speeches to the spirits. — These are prayers varying in length 
and content. 

THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE WAR-BUNDLE FEAST AND ITS PLAGE IN 
THE CEREMONIAL ORGANIZATION OF THE WINNEBAGO 

The ceremonial organization of the Winnebago can be divided into 
three types, according to the unit of organization that prevails. 
We find societies either based on common religious qualifications, 
such as being blessed by the same spirit, or those based on a fixed 
unit, as the five bands of the Medicine dance; organizations based 
on the clan, as the clan feasts; or, finally, temporary organizations 
based on war exploits, such as the Hok'ixe're dance, in which the 

'Jour. Amer. Folklore, vol. 24, pp. 149-208, 1911. 

Radin] THE CLAN WAR-BUNDLE FEASTS 433 

four warriors who have counted coup on the last warpath form the 
units of organization. The peculiarity of the War-bundle Feast is that 
it belongs not merely to one of these types but to two of them. 

The war bundles were originally family possessions and were, in 
the opinion of the writer, only secondarily associated with the clan 
as such. They represent a complex of blessings received from 
various spirits who are supposed to control the fortunes of war. 
They were handed down from one generation to another in the same 
family, but not necessarily to the eldest son, and could as a matter 
of default pass out of the hands of the immediate family. The 
individual who received the war bundle was that one who had by 
his interest, knowledge, character, and accomplishments demon- 
strated to the full satisfaction of the elder generation, more specifically 
to the elder generation represented by his father and close male 
relatives of his father's generation, that he was capable of continuing 
the ceremonials in a proper manner. It follows from this that he 
would have to be a well-known warrior. Now, it is customary 
among all the woodland tribes for a warrior who is about to start 
on a warpath to give a feast to which he invites all the other warriors, 
from among whom he, of course, has to draw his recruits ; and at this 
feast he explains the nature of the contemplated warpath and his 
warrant — i. e., the thoroughness of the specific blessings he has re- 
ceived— for starting it. 

In other words, we will have to picture to ourselves the war- 
bundle feast as originally a gathering of warriors preparatory to the 
starting out of a war party, in which the part of the host was always 
taken by the leader of the prospective war party. All of the well- 
known warriors were likely to have war bundles, and thus the basis 
for the development of what is, to all intents and purposes, a society 
of those who had war bundles was always present potentially. It 
is believed, however, that at the time the Winnebago culture was 
still in the formative stage this aspect of the gathering was entirely 
secondary, and that primarily it was a gathering of warriors for the 
immediate purpose of going on a warpath. 

It may perhaps be interesting to go into some details of how this 
"society" aspect of a gathering of warriors developed. This devel- 
opment probably took two lines — first, a religious one, and secondly, 
one of definite organization. It would be quite erroneous to say 
that it took these lines of evolution, because it is in the nature of 
societies thus to develop. This originally temporary organization 
took these lines of development because of the presence in the war- 
bundle ritual of two factors — first, fasting experiences associated 
with the same spirits, and, second, the influence of the clan organi- 
zation. 

Only a small number of spirits were specifically associated with 
success in war, and these were Disease-giver, Thunderbirds, Sun, and 

434 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ann.37 

the Night Spirits. All the warriors who possessed war bundles would 
of necessity have to receive blessings from these, although in different 
cases one or the other may have bestowed the more important powers. 

The prominence given to the. Thunderbird in the first and to the 
Night Spirits in the second division give the ceremony a most marked 
resemblance to societies like the Night Spirit society. In the second 
division it is even essential to have been blessed by the Night Spirits 
in order to play a certain role. There would thus develop the con- 
sciousness of community of interest due to the fact that as individuals 
they were bound together by blessings received from the same 
spirits, a feeling that was certain to be still further strengthened since, 
in all likelihood, most of the possessors of war bundles belonged to 
societies where this actually was the common bond. The religious 
and ceremonial aspect would thus of necessity be reinforced. The 
prayers for success on the warpath of course always existed, but 
as the extraneous religious and ceremonial influences became 
stronger and more insistent and as — and this should never be for- 
gotten— the pursuit of war became less and less important, owing 
to the breaking down of the culture consequent upon the advent of 
the whites, these extraneous factors became, if not dominant at least 
almost equal in importance to the historically older aspect; and our 
original gathering of warriors, while still remaining a gathering of war- 
riors, also became a ceremonial organization, in which offerings were 
made to the entire Winnebago pantheon of spirits. The great war 
spirits were still all-important, but their position was contested by so 
distinctive a peace deity as Earthmaker and such deities as Earth, 
Moon, and Water. The prayers for success in war were perhaps still 
the most insistent, but prayers for life, not life merely that success in 
war may be longer, but prayers for the whole -content of life, were 
offered up. Disease-giver was appealed to not merely to bestow upon 
man the greatest of all war honors, killing an enemy right in the midst 
of his tribesmen, but also to ward off disease from the supplicants. 

Still, as great as have been these extraneous influences, the char- 
acter of the feast as originally one purely connected with war comes 
out in numerous ways in the association, for instance, of war powers 
with Earthrnaker, Moon, and Earth, and significantly enough, in the 
absence of the more specific religious associations such as are met with 
in the Medicine dance. 

Let us turn now to the development of the organization of the feast. 
The development of a fixed type of organization is not absolutely 
necessary. Societies may exist only for certain occasions, such as 
the return from a warpath, like the Hsk'Ixe're dance or preparatory 
to the starting of a war party, and be practically nonexistent after- 
wards. Such are the temporary war feasts of the Ojibway, for 
instance. However, one all important circumstance prevented this 

kadin] THE CLAN WAR-BUNDLE FEASTS 435 

among the Winnebago, and that was the strong development of clan 
consciousness among them. A man was first and foremost a member 
of his clan, and whatever he did redounded to the credit of his clan. 
This clan consciousness was due to the strong individuality the more 
important clans possessed. They had their own traditions, func- 
tions, and customs, and each clan was quite ignorant of the customs 
of the other. This clan organization was extremely old and, for that 
reason, it is not very likely that the war bundle developed before the 
clan organization had matured, and from being originally the private 
possession of a family, became subsequently associated with the clan. 
It is more likely that the war bundle developed after the clan organi- 
zation had fully matured, but that it remained personal property. 
However, owing to the fact that the possessor was always an im- 
portant man, there must always have been a consciousness of a certain 
proprietary ownership on the part of the clan in the particular war 
bundle within its midst. This perhaps accounts for the fact that 
while the bundle can pass out of the hands of a certain family, it can 
not pass into the hands of another clan. Subsequently the idea de- 
veloped that a family was merely the custodian of the bundle for the 
clan. Such seems to be the popular conception among the Winnebago 
to-day, and it may have represented the popular conception when the 
Winnebago culture was still intact. I do not believe, however, that 
such a view would have been accepted by the family in possession of 
the war bundle or by the learned class in general. 

The fact that there was as a rule but one war bundle in each clan 
does not mean that it was developed originally through the influence 
of clan consciousness, although there is reason to believe that some of 
the war bundles arose in this way, in imitation of " clan" bundles that 
already existed. The reason for the small number of war bundles is 
to be sought in the fact that there was a very small number of indi- 
viduals possessed of the necessary qualifications, and that it was 
probably originally associated with villages or groups of villages.4 
Whatever were the reasons for the limitation in the number of war 
bundles in each clan, it unquestionably strengthened the idea of clan 
ownership. This idea must have been powerfully reinforced again by 
those war bundles that actually arose out of a clan-ownership impulse. 
If, therefore, the actual owners resent this claim of clan proprietorship 
both by reason of actual possession, of inheritance and consciousness 
of the sacrifices and expense they and their ancestors have incurred 
in maintaining the ceremonies connected with these bundles it is 
nevertheless a fact that their viewpoint is probably wrong in so far 
as it is supposed to represent the entire truth, either now or in the 
past. The actual unit of organization found at the feast is the clan 
and there, at any rate, the war bundle is a clan palladium. Perhaps 

* This statement is made provisionally. 

436 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [bth. ams. 37 

this twofold interpretation really represents the war bundle in a two- 
fold aspect, first apart from its association with the war-bundle feast 
and second from its association therewith. 

That the clan is the unit of organization comes out clearly from 
the following facts: First, there are as many buckskins offered as 
there are clans; secondly, the order in which the guests are invited 
is determined by the reciprocal relations existing between the different 
clans; and, thirdly, by references in the speeches. That the clan 
unit, on the other hand, has influenced the ceremonial aspect of 
the feast is apparent from the fact that offerings are made to the 
clan animals. For example, in the following ceremony offerings are 
made to the Eagle and Wona'7ire Uaijkcik, who seem to be of slight 
importance apart from their association with the clan. 

The ceremonial unit in all Winnebago societies consists of four 
bands, four representing the sacred number, and the ritual consists 
of the passing of the paraphernalia from one to the other unit until 
it returns to the host. The war-bundle feast corresponds to the 
other societies in every respect, except that instead of four there are 
ten bands (with the band of the host, representing the eleven exist- 
ing clans of the tribe). Had not the consciousness of the relation of 
the war bundle to the clan been so strong the ceremonial unit would 
probably have been found here, as it is found in all the other 
ceremonies. 

Summing up, then, we may say that the war-bundle feasts repre- 
sent a mixed type corresponding exactly to no other Winnebago 
ceremony, and that beginning as a war feast it developed in addi- 
tion some of the features of a secret society of the type exemplified 
by the Night Spirit society, with a unit of organization based on the 
clan; and that finally it became a general feast of thanksgiving to the 
entire Winnebago pantheon.5 

CHARACTERIZATION OF THE SPIRITS MENTIONED IN THE WAR-BUNDLE 

FEAST 

All the spirits to whom offerings are made in the war-bundle 
feast are guardian spirits, with the exception of Earthmaker. 
Some of them are conceived of as being human, while others have 
animal forms, and still others have an indeterminate body. The 
peculiar spirit, Disease-giver, has a form of his own, his body being 
divided into two halves, one half dispensing death and the other 
life. Earthmaker has no form, and in the few cases that he has been 
known to bless individuals he always lets his presence be known 
by some sign. There is generally a difference between the concep- 
tion of the spirit as such and the form that he is supposed to assume 

&The order in which these aspects are enumerated is not to be taken as representing a direct line of 
evolution. 

Radin] THE CLAN WAR-BtTNDLE FEASTS 437 

when he appears to an individual. The Thunderbirds are conceived 
of theoretically as birds, but always appear to human beings in 
human shape. As it is believed by the shaman that the spirits are 
a tertium quid, neither animal nor man, but possessing infinite 
powers of transformation now into the one, now into the other, it is 
rather difficult to indicate their precise nature except in this negative 
way. For the ordinary individual doubtless their anthropomorphic 
nature stands out most prominently. 

According to shamanistic cosmology, although the greater spirits 
are given control of various powers, still, in general, each spirit 
is given control of some specific power. The shamanistic account 
goes on to say that, upon the creation of man, Eartlimaker, realizing 
that he had no powers to bestow upon him, decided to give him at 
least the means of obtaining those powers he had given the spirits 
and presented him with tobacco, telling him that if he offered it in 
the proper manner the spirits would feel constrained to accept it and 
give him, in exchange, whatever powers they possessed. The popular 
account of the origin of tobacco was quite different. However, it was 
on the shamanistic theory that offerings were made. The arrangement 
between the spirits and man was in the nature of a contract, with this 
peculiarity, that the spirits did not have to accept the offerings. The 
prayers are generally couched in this manner: "If you, the spirits, 
accept my offerings, then grant me your blessings or a continuance 
of those my ancestors received." They were, however, theoretically 
always left the alternative of refusing. In practice it was not believed 
that the spirits exercised their prerogative of refusal, but that in cer- 
tain cases the offerings were not made in the proper fashion. The 
moment the tobacco was accepted, the blessing followed of itself, 
almost without the will of the spirit. This purely mechanical relation 
between acceptance of the tobacco and bestowal of power comes out 
excellently in one of the myths. The Winnebago are sacrificing to 
the Buffalo Spirits and the smoke of their tobacco offering is ascend- 
ing to the spirit-land where the Buffalo Spirits dwell. The chief of 
the spirits warns the younger ones not to approach too closely to the 
ascending fumes, for they are but spirits and the desire for tobacco 
might get the better of their discretion and induce them to accept it. 
If they do, they are lost, for they will then have to go down to the 
earth and be killed. No power they possess, nor any power the chief 
possesses, can save them. This " mechanical '' explanation seems to 
me quite significant, for it probably embodies the older point of 
view and the point of view of the less enlightened Winnebago. As 
such, it is to be contrasted with the later shamanistic development 
with its contract and the shifting of the spirit's role from one of 
passive acceptance to that of a spirit-deity who withholds his 
approbation unless the offering is properly made. 

438 THE WINNEBAGO TEIBE [eth. ann.37 

The elements necessary to the acceptance of offerings are two- 
fold— the specified amount of material and the proper state of 
mind. The first is quite clear, but the second needs some expla- 
nation. To the Winnebago the emotional condition of a sup- 
pliant for power from the spirits is all important, and the proper 
emotional condition is one which they call "concentration of mind," 
by which they signify a complete absorption of the individual in the 
prayer he is making. Theoretically even the slightest interest in any 
other object is liable to destroy the entire efficacy of the prayer. 
I say theoretically, for if the prayer seems to be answered a conscious- 
ness of failure to come up to the ideal never obtrudes itself. If, 
however, there is reason to believe that the prayer has not been 
answered, then the explanation would always be that there had been 
either a shift of attention or a lack of emotional intensity. This is 
not the only explanation given for lack of success in the case of a 
ceremony, for there, by an extension of the principle of the "con- 
centration of mind" to all those who participated, failure might be 
attributable to a large number of causes. 

The popular explanation was, I believe, different. Failure was 
either not discussed at all and looked upon from the common-sense 
point of view as one of life's accidents or, if explanation was necessary, 
regarded as a sign that the spirits had not been tempted to accept 
the alluring offers. 

It would, however, be erroneous to believe that much philosophizing 
took place over failure. Failure that entailed the death of an indi- 
vidual was likely to call forth not explanations as to what the failure 
was attributable, but desire for revenge. 

With the exception of food and tobacco, which were extended to 
all, the offerings to the various spirits differed in nature. To the 
eleven great deities (i. e., including He'rok'a, who is not mentioned 
in the following account) tobacco, food (i. e., both soup and meat), 
and buckskins were offered. There was, however, further differen- 
tiation. To the great war deities red eagle feathers were offered in 
addition; to Disease-giver and Thunderbird two dogs were sacri- 
ficed; to Earth and Sun herbs and maple sugar wTere given; and to 
the Moon, bear ribs. 

Having thus briefly sketched the general nature of the spirits con- 
nected with the war-bundle feast and the general theory of the offer- 
ing, we will turn to a specific enumeration of the spirits. 

Eartlimaker. — Variously known in Winnebago as Ma/yna, Earth- 
maker, Waj^gu'zEra, Creator, and Waxopl'ni Xe'tera, Great Spirit. 
Ma/una is, by far, the most usual appellation; Waj^gu'zEra is found 
only in rituals, and Waxop'ini Xe'tera is more or less obsolete, 
although not within the popular cycles relating to the Trickster, 
Hare, Turtle, Red-Horn, and the Twins. 

kadin] THE CLAN WAR-BUNDLE FEASTS 439 

Earthmaker has all the characteristics of a supreme deity. He is 
conceived of as formless and as never being visible to man. He is 
a benevolent deity, but apart from the interest he manifested in cre- 
ating the world and all that exists upon it and in sending the great 
Transformer heroes, Trickster, Turtle, and Hare, he has taken little 
active interest in the affairs of humankind. It is only as a tour de 
force that one can receive blessings from him. An instance of the 
kind will be found on page 291, 6 which is to be taken not as a myth 
but as, at most, a true fasting experience, which has been cast into 
a literary form. 

The conception of Earthmaker we have been discussing is found 
most prominently developed in the rituals and the ritualistic myths. 
In how far it represents an exoteric point of view it would be diffi- 
cult to determine now. A study of the nonritualistic myths, how- 
ever, makes it seem plausible that Earthmaker, among the people in 
general, was the vague Waxop'i'ni Xe'tera, Great Spirit, typical of 
the woodland area; and what appears to strengthen this view is the 
fact that there exists, side by side with him, that other great spirit 
common among the woodland peoples, the Great Bad Spirit, known 
among the Winnebago as Herecgu'nina, of doubtful etymology. 
The coexistence of these two spirits and their equal rank comes out 
clearly in the cycle of the Twins. The ritualistic myths have 
attempted to interpret this old Herecgu'nina as Earthmaker's first 
attempt to create man, which ended in failure. He thereupon threw 
him away, but Herecgu'nina imitated the creations of the former 
and thus brought into existence the many evil spirits that infest the 
earth. 

Only in the older traditions is this conception of the dual deities 
still to be found. In practical life the more systematic conception 
developed in the rituals has entirely displaced it, just as the older 
conception of the Transformers as heroes working in obedience to no 
one and changing the world until it assumed its present appearance 
out of mere whim, has given place to a well-ordered creation in which 
the Transformers play the r61e of deities saving the human race at 
the command of Earthmaker. 

T7mnderbirds (Wak'a/ndja). — They are always represented as 
appearing to men as bald-headed individuals wearing a wreath made 
of the branches of the arbor vitae. They are in control of almost all 
the powers that man can imagine, but they generally bless him with 
success on the warpath and with a long and honorable life. They are 
represented as having a spirit village in the west and as intermarrying 
with the Night Spirits who have a village in the east. Powerful 
shamans and warriors not infrequently claim that they are merely 
reincarnated Thunderbirds. Such is the claim of the man who is 

•Cf. also Jour. Amer. Folklore, vol. 26, pp. 293-318, 1913. 

440 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ann. 37 

reputed to have first received the war bundle of the Thunderbird 
clan, as we shall subsequently see. 

Night Spirits; — They are known under two names, one used gen- 
erally signifying literally "night" (hqhe) and the other used only in rit- 
uals signifying " Tbose-who-walk-in-darkness " (Hok'a'was manl'na). 
They are in control of war powers specifically and appear to men in 
the form of human beings. They are supposed to cause the darkness 
of night. 

Disease-giver (Ho'cere£u'wahi). — This is a spirit whose counter- 
part does not seem to exist in any other tribe. He, like the Thunder- 
bird and Night Spirits, is a great war deity, but as his name implies, 
he also presides over life and death by being the source of disease. 
His twofold nature has been touched on before. When prayers are 
offered to him he is besought to turn away his "death" side and 
present only his "life" side. 

Great Black Hawk. — Always known as K'eredju'sep xe'tera. A 
powerful war deity. 

The Sim. — The Sun is known generally as vn'ra, and in rituals as 
Habani'ndjera, Light-wanderer; or as Habanihu'ra, He-who-brings- 
the-light-of-day. There seems little doubt but that in the earlier 
history of Winnebago culture he played a far greater role than he 
does to-day or did when the culture of the tribe was still intact. 
According to one informant he and Fire were dispatched as Trans- 
formers to rid the world of the bad spirits. As in the older concep- 
tion of Earthmaker, his former role comes out most prominently in 
the nonritualistic myths, especially in the Twin cycle. In none of the 
many rituals of the tribe was his cult developed. He was regarded 
as one of the greatest war deities. 

The Morning Star. — He is always known as Wirago'cge xetera, 
the great star. He, like the Sun, seems to have enjoyed a greater 
popularity before the rise of the complex rituals. He is purely and 
simply a war deity. 

The Moon. — Generally known as Hak£'wira, night-sun, but in 
rituals as Hahe'regi hura'djone, You-who-come-at-night. The Moon 
is a female deity in control of many powers, but apparently of no very 
specific ones. She is not supposed to be one of the preeminent war 
deities but to be more closely associated with blessings referring to 
long life. 

The South Wind. — Known as Rek'u'huhi, Wind-going-with-the- 
stream. He is a war deity, but not on a par with the others. 

The Earth. — Generally known either as manna, earth, or simply as 
k'u'nik'a, grandmother, a female deity connected almost exclu- 
sively with peace. She played a far greater role in the earlier phases 
of Winnebago religious development than she did in the later and is 
found as an important figure in all the nonritualistic Transformer 
cycles, especially in that of the Hare. Her role in the ritualistic 

badin] THE CLAN WAR-BUNDLE FEASTS 441 

myths is quite important, too, but there she has been changed from 
a rather indifferent and at times hostile deity to a beneficent, 
all-loving Mother-earth. 

The Water. — Generally known as nina, water, but ritualistically as 
huTjge', chief. There is some doubt as to whether water or the Water 
Spirit is meant here. This is a deity in no way connected with war. 
He is most commonly associated with medicines, especially the 
famous "paint'' medicines (wase'). 

These are the more important spirits and the only ones to whom 
buckskins are offered in the following ceremony. The following are, 
however, also of considerable importance: 

Eagle. — Always known as Tcaxcep, eagle. A powerful war deity 
and a clan animal. 

Pigeon Hawk. — Always known as K'lrik'Irl'sgera, pigeon hawk. A 
powerful war deity. 

Wdnayi're UariJcdk. — A term difficult to translate, but meaning, in 
general, a terror-inspiring man. It refers, however, not to a human 
deity but to a bird that is supposed to be almost identical with the 
hawk. It is the name of one of the Winnebago clans. A powerful 
war deity. 

North Wind. — Known as Wazl'regi huhl'ra, Wind-that-is-in-the- 
pine-region. He is associated with war, but is no t a very important deity. 

Black Hawk. — Known as k'eredju sep. What difference there is 
between this spirit and Great Black Hawk is not clear. 

Day. — Known as ha.p, day or light. The term is used in rituals, 
especially in the medicine dance, with the meaning of life. He is 
very rarely sacrificed to and his mention in this particular perform- 
ance of the Thunderbird war-bundle feast is merely an illustration of 
the fact that offerings could be made to any spirit. 

In addition to the spirits mentioned above, offerings were made at 
different performances of the war-bundle feast to all the other spirits 
and even to heroes, like Trickster, Turtle, Hare, Bladder, Red-Horn, 
and the Twins. In the performance as given in the following account 
one great spirit is omitted, He'rok'a, meaning, literally, "Without 
horns." A buckskin is always offered to him, on which is painted 
a small bow and arrow. He is one of the important Winnebago 
deities, is supposed to be a Lilliputian, and controls many of the 
powers relating to hunting. 

In order to avoid offending any spirit they always leave a portion 
of tobacco as an offering to those whose names they can not for the 
moment think of. 

DESCRIPTION OF THE WAR-BUNDLE FEAST 

The present war bundle has been in the family of B. for a number 
of generations. Our informant obtained it directly from his father. 
186S23°— 22 29 

442 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ann. 37 

B. was not the eldest son, but, as mentioned before, the war bundle 
was always given to that son who manifested the greatest interest 
in it. When B. and his brothers were quite young their father took 
them aside one day and told them the stories connected with the 
war bundle and told them, in addition, that the one manifesting the 
greatest interest would receive it. B. immediately started getting 
material for a feast, and this he would give to his father, who would 
then give a feast. This was repeated over and over again until B.'s 
father felt that B. knew enough about the ceremony to conduct it 
himself, after which he allowed him to take entire charge of it. 

The war bundle contained the following objects: 

The body of an eagle (tcaxce'p). 

The body of a hawk (k'eredju'sep). 

The body of an unidentified bird (wanirjk'hiwitcak'i'zok'e). 

The body of a pigeon hawk (k'lrjk'I'rjsge). 

A deer-tail headdress (tcasintc wak'e're). 

Eagle feathers (tcaxce'p nu\cu'). 

Medicines (wase'). 

Flutes (hlju'juk). 

War club (nama/tce). 

The birds' bodies were supposed to give the possessor, in times of 
war, the characteristics of these animals. The flutes were associated 
with different spirits and used to accompany certain songs during 
the ceremony proper. When blown during a fight, they were sup- 
posed to paralyze the running powers of the enemy and thus make 
him an easy prey. The deer-tail headdress, the eagle feathers, and 
the war club were all war paraphernalia and were always worn when 
on the warpath. 

When the custodian of a war bundle decides to give a feast he 
has his nephews go out and kill as many deer as they can, for the 
larger the number of deer obtained the larger will be the number of 
spirits to whom they can make offerings. As a rule ten to eleven 
deer are killed, so that all the clans, or at least all that are still in exist- 
ence, can be invited. 

After the deer have been killed active preparations are begun; 
the invitation sticks (na.no'?-ona) are sent out, and the wood for the 
ceremonial lodge is gathered; and, lastly, old women who have 
passed their climacteric are set to work on the buckskins and ordered 
to make them as white as possible. In the preparation of the lodge 
only the nephews, nieces, and wives of the participating men take 
part. 

The night before the ceremony proper, the Sweat-Lodge ritual 
takes place. 

When the buckskins have been thoroughly bleached they are 
brought into the lodge and given to the host, who proceeds to mark 
them in the following manner: 

Radin] THE CLAN WAR-BUNDLE FEASTS 443 

The buckskin to be offered to Earthmaker is marked with a cross 
in green. It is quite possible that the association of the cross with 
Earthmaker is due to Christian influence. But if this actually has 
been the case it is far more likely that the Christian influence led not 
to the actual borrowing of the Christian cross, but rather to the 
identification of an old 'Winnebago ceremonial symbol, namely, the 
crossed lines representing the cardinal points, with the cross, and its 
association with Earthmaker (pi. 48). 

The buckskin to be offered to the Thunderbirds is marked with 
three semicircular lines, the first red, the second white, and the third 
blue, to represent a rainbow (pi. 48). 

The buckskin to be offered to the Night Spirits is marked with four 
parallel lines in charcoal (pi. 48). 

The buckskin to be offered to Disease-giver is marked by dipping 
the three middle fingers in red paint and impressing them 12 times 
upon the buckskin in three vertical columns, with four impressions 
in each column. In addition to this an eagle feather is tied to each 
corner of the buckskin (pi. 48). 

The buckskin to be offered to the Sun is marked with an image of 
the sun in red (pi. 47). 

The buckskin to be offered to the Moon is marked with an image of 
the moon in any of its phases in green (pi. 47). 

The buckskin to be offered to South Wind is marked in the same 
way as that to Disease-giver, except that green paint is used. A red 
eagle feather is attached to each end of the buckskin (pi. 47). 

The buckskin to be offered to the Morning Star is marked with an 
image of a star in black outline (pi. 47). 

These are the spirits to whom buckskins are offered in the cere- 
mony about to be described, but the other clans seem to show 
variations, in some offerings. Thus, for example, the spirit called 
" Without-horns" (He'rok'a) receives the offering of a buckskin in 
some cases. The marking for him is always a bow and arrow in 
charcoal. In another case Fire and Turtle receive buckskin offerings. 
Their markings are pictures of fire and turtle. 

While the host is busy thus marking the buckskins the attendants 
put the meat in the kettles and place the same on the various fire- 
places. There are always one or two extra kettles prepared for the 
women and children. 

The lodge extends from east to west and has only one entrance, 
on the east end. The host sits to the left as you enter and opposite 
him sits the guest of honor, who is, of course, different in each clan, 
but in the ceremony to be described he belongs to the Bear clan. 
Then, in definite order, sit the other guests, each one opposite a fire- 
place. The women and children sit separated from the others at the 
extreme western end of the lodge (see fig. 38) . 

444 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth.ann.37 

After the buckskins have been marked the host arranges them on 
frames. The buckskin to Earthmaker is so arranged on its frame 
that the head points upward ; that to the Thunderbirds is so arranged 
that its head points toward the west; that to the Night Spirits, that 
its head points to the east; that to the Morning Star, that its head 
points to the east; and those to the Earth and Water, that their 
heads point downward. After they have been attached to the frame 
they are rolled up, and the ceremony can be said to have begun. 
Then the guests enter, no order being observed in the manner of en- 
tering. As soon as they have all taken their places, the oldest warrior 
belonging to the host's band is called upon to offer tobacco to the 
spirits. This he does by going to the main fireplace, offering up brief 
pravers, and at the conclusion of each one pouring tobacco into the 
fire. The first prayer is always to the fire itself.8 When he is fin- 
ished, the host takes the buckskins, unrolls them, and distributes 
them to the various guests. The buckskin for the Thunderbirds is 
always given to the guest of honor, and the others are given in the 
following rotation : Great Black Hawk, Disease-giver, South Wind, 
Earthmaker, Sun, Morning Star, Night Spirits, Moon, Earth, and 
Water. The buckskin to Earthmaker is assigned to the middle guest, 
but as he is the first guest to speak, the buckskin itself is hung on 
the center pole that is erected in the front portion of the lodge. 

After the guests have received their buckskins they stand in their- 
respective positions, holding the buckskin in one hand and some 
tobacco in the other. The host concludes his remarks, and then taking 
his flute, blows upon it. After this he sings two songs, accompanying 
himself with his gourd rattles. Then the buckskins are rolled up 
again, but in such a way that the markings still remain visible, and 
hung up just west of the first fireplace, with the exception of the 
Earthmaker 's buckskin. The host now takes the war bundle, opens 
it, and places it at the foot of the center pole. He then makes the 
circuit of the lodge, pouring some tobacco into the hands of each 
invited guest. When this is finished, he pours some tobacco upon 
the war bundle and some into the fire and proceeds to offer prayers 
to all the spirits, asking each in turn for life and victory on the war- 
path. When he is through all the guests pour tobacco on the war 
bundle and into the fire. Children are often allowed to pour tobacco 
also, the attendants bringing them from the western portion of the 
lodge. After the offerings of tobacco are finished the offerings of 
buckskin are made. Then the basic ritual is started by the host. 
He takes the flutes, drum, and gourds and sings in his own place. 
There are many different sets of songs, and every time he starts a 
different set he first blows upon his flute. The songs for the Thun- 
derbird have eight starting songs and six dancing songs. When the 

8 This prayer, for some unknown reason, is omitted in the following account. It was obtained, however, 
in connection with another account of the same ceremony. 

RADiN] THE CLAN WAK-BUNDLE FEASTS 445 

dancing songs are begun, all the men go to the war bundle and dance 
around it. The flute is continually blown during the dancing. 
Women may dance at their end of the lodge. The basic ritual is 
then continued. 

When the last starting song is finished the host rises and, ejacu- 
lating ho — o — o, pours tobacco into the fireplace four times. Just 
when the food is about cooked four special songs are sung. Then 
the Thunderbird feast takes place. All the bones that have been 
left on the plate of the guest impersonating the Disease-giver are 
taken out by the host himself, carried hi an eastward direction, and 
placed very carefully at the foot of some tree that has been especially 
selected. Tobacco and red feathers are poured upon these bones.* 
The plates used by the same person are purified with arbor vita?. The 
bones left on the plates of the other guests may be thrown anywhere, 
provided the ground on which they are scattered has been purified. 
When the feast is over the basic ritual is continued. When this is 
finished the first division of the ceremony is concluded. 

During the interval between the first and* second divisions the 
attendants sweep the lodge and purify it with branches of arbor 
vita?; and new kettles with meat are placed on the fireplaces. Then 
the host and guests enter. The host rises and distributes the buckskins 
again, and while he is doing this an attendant goes around the lodge 
and scatters swan feathers all over it. Some are even placed on the 
suspended kettles. The host, because he is going to sing Night 
Spirit songs, takes down the buckskin intended for that spirit, 
blackens his face with the embers of charcoal used in marking the 
buckskin, and puts some swan feathers on his head. Before the host 
starts singing the Night Spirit songs the pipestem is turned toward 
the east and the origin of the songs in question is told. Then the basic 
ritual is begun. When the dancing songs are being sung the guests 
may either go to where the war bundle lies and dance there or stay 
in their own places and dance. When the host has finished his part 
of the basic ritual, drum, gourds, flute, and tobacco are passed to 
the first guest, and when he is finished they are passed to the second 
and third guests. After that the basic ritual is for the time being 
discontinued and the ritual connected with throwing out of the buck- 
skins intervenes, this in turn being followed by the Night Spirit 
feast. However, before the feast, as the drum, gourds, and flute 
are returned to the host, he has a kettle placed on the fire for the 
spirits living beneath the surface of the earth, and when the food in 
it has cooked he rises and sings paint songs (wase'). After the feast 
is over the basic ritual is continued. Some time before this ritual 
is finished the host takes his war bundle, wraps it up, and hangs it 
behind the place where he is sitting. When finally all the songs 
with the exception of four have been sung, the host calls upon some 
one with a very strong voice to give the war whoop four times. This 
the latter does, and after the last whoop all the guests join hi. Then 
rising, all the guests dance out of the lodge and the ceremony is over. 

446 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. a.nn. 37 

FIRST DIVISION OP THE CEREMONY IN HONOR OF THE THUNDER- 
BIRDS 

Introductory remarks by informant. — E'gi manl'negi manik'i'sak'a, 
e'gi taniwogl'jura. Ho£u'na higI'rek'djonevnA. ge e'sge wanasa' 
tek'djone'114. 

NQgA e'sge ha,he'giji Inio'k'ewe ba£uk'djo'nehi giji, e'gi wohQ'nA 
bijak'i'xdji tuxuruki'ji j e'sge hak'djone'nA.. No/gA e'gi dja/nogA 
hak'I'ju tek'djone'ra hadji'rege je ini-6'kewe£u wak'I'ju ha£uk'- 
djone'nA. giji. E'gi ini-6'k'ewe£uxna wak'e'wik'djonaVinA. hlru- 
cdja/hlrege'. 

Sweat-Lodge Ritual 

Wak'awinA. hak'ik'u'rucarudji-avnA.ga e'gi wak'a'wira hinuk'aj'- 
nawinA.. E'gi tanl'na taniwi'rogiju ya£uk'dje'ra ha*k'a^ani\vakewe,- 
nAjegu'nA, 

Host's salutation and initial speech to participants. — "E'gi 
wak'uruki'ntccAnA. sa'k'erenj^k'dJQgre njk'uruhindjwl'n^. E'gi hlt- 
co'k'ewahlVira e'gi tcok'aga' wana£j'gik'ereVegi. E'gi hIroit£u'na 
djasge nfdjirodjai'negi, e gi hij e'sge hak'a'ratlk'djanihe. 

E'gi djasge wawe'k'djegi hitco'k'iwahTwira e'gi u£'inek'djaneKnA. 
Tanl'nik' p'axu'k'djone'ra e'gi wota' hitco'k'iwahiVira wa'git- 
uxu'ru-ik'djoneTa. E'gi sa'k'erenjvk'djo>jgrA niijk'uruhi'ntc rehav- 
winA.. E'gi tanl'na hitco'k'ewahlVira, tanl'na wagip'axu'- 
k'djonevnA. njk'u'ruhindjwi'n^. 

Host's offering to Earthmdker. — "H|h§/ Ma'£una, hl-andjenl'na, 
tanl'na hoju'-ijg. ni^gip'Sxu'jjk'djonare. E'gi tco'k'aga Djobena.^- 
giwi'ijxga wana£i'nagik'e'regi. E'gi hiroit£u'na djasge n^djirora'- 
dJ4>)gi; e'gi h^'bEnirjk' hlnagl'c£una; djobo'kg, jedjai'ijxdji hIroit£- 
u'na, tcok'aga' djasge'xdji n§.djirora'dJA.gi, je£e rotcg/iptdji njgi- 
ta'nA. E'gi biujk'e wa'we-a'k'in^k'djera." 

Host's offering to the chief of the Thunderbirds. — "E'gi sa/nigohT- 
regi he'rera hitco'k'ewiwrna, wak'a'ndja hu'jjgEra, tanl'na hojii'-ijg, 

badin] THE CLAN WAR-BUNDLE FEASTS . 447 

FIRST DIVISION OF THE CEREMONY IN HONOR OF THE THUNDER- 
BIRDS 

Introductory remarks by BlowsnaJce, informant. — In winter, in mid- 
winter, then it was that I used to pour tobacco.9 That was the 
tune I would go out and hunt for game. 

Well, to-night, a vapor bath I shall take, and if I can secure food 
for boiling, that kind of a feast I shall give. As many of the leaders 
as have come, that many shall be with me as I take a vapor bath hi 
the sweat lodge. We are now about to enter the sweat lodge, for 
everything is hi readiness.10 

Sweat-Lodge Ritual 

We entered the sweat lodge and undressed, and after we had 
entered they (the outsiders) closed the lodge covering. I took both 
the tobacco and the other things I was to use as offerings with me.11 

Host's salutation and initial speech to participants. — "I greet you; 
I greet you all, war-bundle owners.12 My grandparents, especially 
my grandfather,13 had concentrated their mhids upon this for me. 
The fireplace with which they blessed my grandfather,15 that I am 
going to ask for myself. However weakly I may wobble about,16 my 
elders will aid me. I am now going to pour a little tobacco and 
offer, my elders, whatever feast I am able to. War-bundle owners, 
I send forth my greetings to you. War-bundle owners, I greet you. 
Ye elders, I am about to pour tobacco for them (the spirits)." 

Host's offering to Earthmdker. — "Hearken, Earthmaker, our father, 
I am about to offer you a handful of tobacco.17 My ancestor Djo- 
bena.giwi'r;xga 18 concentrated his mind upon you. The fireplaces 
with which you blessed him; l0 the small amount of life you granted 
to him; all, four times the blessings you bestowed upon my ancestor, 
that I ask of you directly. Also that I may have no troubles (in 
life)." 

Host's offering to the chief of the Thunderbirds. — "To you, who live 
in the west, our grandfather, chief of the Thunderbirds, a handful of 

B " Pouring tobacco" is the ritualistic term for giving a feast. 

10 The informant has passed to the present tense now, for he is actually giving an account of the last 
War-bundle Feast he gave and imagining that the writer is present. 

u The word tobacco in Winnebago rituals is used as a generic expression for an offering. Thus the word 
taniwirogi'ju means, literally, " What we are to offer as tobacco." 

13 Literally, "Children of the bundle." 

w He does not really mean grandparents, but elders. 

15 The word here used for fireplace is a ritualistic one. It means, literally, "That one throws within 
something, i. e., an offering." It also has here the secondary meaning of food. 

i« Used metaphorically. 

17 1, e., the regular offering. 

19 An ancestor of the informant. 

1B Here "fireplaces" mean blessings, for only those who had blessings could erect fireplaces, and as a fire- 
place was erected for each separate spirit, the greater their number the greater the number of blessings. 
In all rituals it is customary to speak of blessings received, as well as of personalaccomplishments, with an 
exaggerated modesty. 

448 THE WINNEBAGO TEIBE [eth.ann. 37 

nirjgjp'axu'k'djona're. E'gi tcok'aga' Djobena^giwi'7?xga e'gi 
wa'na/igik'eVeregi. [Hlroit£Q'na tea k'l'konQk'] hiroit£u' hora'- 
k£ugj, je£e r5tc§'xdji njgita'nA. Tanl'na hina.gi'curus inga £u^'gi 
e'gi haqk'e' wa'we-akTnik'djege." 

Host's offering to the Great Black Hawk. — "E'gi K'e'redju Sep 
Xe'tera tcok'aga' m§.'djoradje/gi h!roit£u'na djasge ng,djirora'- 
dJAgi, je£e rotcf/xdji njgita'nA^ Tanl'na hoju'-ijg. njgip'axu'k'- 
djonaVe hI'nagihi-a'nA.gA £u'gi. Haj?k'e' wawe-ak'I'nik'djVge, te'- 
jesge njgita'nA." 

Host's offering to the Night Spirits. — "E'gi s&'njgEregi, sa'njk' 
h^'bSgure'gi he'rera, Hok'a'was Manl'na, tanl'na h5ju'-jj§ njgjp'- 
axu'k'djonarc hinagip'e'rez a'nA.ga £ugl'. E'gi tcok'aga' djagu'- 
ixdji n|djiro'radJQvgi: hlroitfu'na djasge n§,djjrora'djogi jc njgj- 
ta'114. E'gi tanl'na hi'nagjhj-aviiA.ga £ugl' ha^k'e wa'we-ak'ini'k'- 
djera." 

Host's offering to Disease-giro: — "E'gi sa'njk' horotc|'djeregi- 
liaTjgl'ja, canAk'I'jj: ha^k'e t£e'p'jhicguvnj canAk'I'jj; ro sa'njk'- 
p'lnadja'n^ga e'gi ro sa'njk' hot£e'radjegi, H5'cere£uVahi hinjgai'- 
regj. Tco'k'aga hg/badjasge\\dji wirarotc^L'djexdjj ga'dja. n^'djorad- 
JQ'gi. Djasge n^djirora'djogj, hIroit£u'na, n^djirora'dJQgrjj. H^ijk'- 
aga' ruc£agenj'k'dJAne hlrage'gjjj. Je£e' hora£iia'n4ga. Wani- 
oi'tcge tcowe'ra wairage'ju an^ga h^k'e' wawe-a'k'ini'k'djera. 
Tanl'na hoju'-ijg, njgip'axu'k'djona're hinagihi-a'n^ga £ugi' h|7jk'e' 
wavve-ak'Ini'k'djege." 

Host's offering to the Sun. — "E'gi hitcok'enl'na, H$bani'ndjera, 
tani'na hop'j'ja. njgjp'axu'k'djonare. Hinagip'e'rez a'n^ga. E'gi 
tcok'aga' hiroit£u'na djasge'xdjj ii$djIrora'dJ4gi, jeV rotc|'xdji 
njgjta'n^. H^k'e wawe-ak'Ini'k'djera." 

Host's offering to the Moon. — "E'gi Hjk'arok'enl'na H|he'wira, 
tcok'aga' n(Ldjoradjo/gj kIroit£u'n£. Djasge'xdjj ngdjlrora'dJQgj, 
je£e' rotc|'xdji njgita'n^. Tanl'na hoju'-ij^L njrygjp'axu'k'- 
djonaVe hlnagl'p'erez a'n^ga £ugl'. Tcok'aga' hiroit£u'na djasge 
n^djlrora'djogj, je£e' hunak£u'k'djVnA. h§7jk'e' wawe-a'k'inik'- 
djege," 

Host's offering to the South Wind. — "E'gi rek'u'hublra, tanl'na 
hoju'-ijf njgjp'axu'k'djona're rijnagjhia'n^ga £ugl'. Tcok'aga' 
luroit£u'na n^djirora'dJQgi, je£e' njgjta/nA. h|nk'e' wawe-ak'ini'- 
k'djege." 

Host's offering to Earth. — "E'gi K'u'njk'a Ma'na tanl-onjgi'- 
jun^. Tcok'aga' n^djora'djonA. hiroit£u'na n§djlrora'djon4, je£e' 
njgjta'n^. Wawe-ak'lni'k'djege." 

radin] THE CLAN WAR-BUNDLE FEASTS 449 

tobacco I am about to offer you. My grandfather Djonena.giwi'jjxga 
you strengthened. The food, the deer-couple you gave him for his 
fireplaces, that I ask of you directly. May it be a fact that you 
accept this tobacco from me and may I not meet with troubles (in 
life)." 

Host's offering to the Great Black Hawk. — "You also blessed my 
grandfather, Great Black Hawk. Whatever food you blessed him 
with that I ask of you directly. Tobacco I am about to pour for you 
that you may smoke it. May troubles not come upon me; that I 
ask."' 

Host's offering to tlie Night Spirits. — "You on the other side, who 
live in the east, who walk in darkness, 20 tobacco I am about to offer 
you to smoke. Whatever you blessed my ancestor with, whatever 
fireplaces you blessed him with, those I ask of you. If you smoke this 
tobacco never will I be a weakling." 

Host's offering to Disease-giver. — "You who live in the south; you 
who look like a man; who art invulnerable; who on one side of your 
body present death and on the other life, Disease-giver, as they call 
you. My ancestor in the daytime, in broad daylight, did you bless. 
With food you blessed him. You told him that he would never fail 
in anything. You told him that you would avoid his home.21 You 
placed animals (i. e., food) in front of him that he should not be 
troubled about obtaining them. An offering of tobacco I make to 
you that you may smoke it and that I may not be troubled by any- 
thing (in life)." 

Host's offering to the Sun. — "To you, Light- Wanderer, an offering 
of tobacco I make. May it be my good fortune that you accept it. 
Whatever fireplaces you blessed him (i. e., my ancestor.) with, those I 
ask of you directly. May I not be troubled by anything in life." 

II< st's offering to the Moon. — ' ' You also, Grandmother Moon, blessed 
my ancestor with food. With whatever you blessed him, that I ask 
of you now directly. An offering of tobacco I am about to make for 
you now, so that you may smoke. Whatever blessings you bestowed 
upon my grandfather, I pray you to give me now, so that by reason of 
it I may never become a weakling." 

Host's offering to the South Wind. — "To you, too, South Wind, I 
offer a handful of tobacco, that you may smoke it. May it so happen 
that you accept it and that I am spared troubles (in life). With 
whatsoever you blessed my ancestor, that I ask of you." 

Host's offering to Earth. — "For you likewise, Grandmother Earth, 
will I pour tobacco. With whatever blessings you blessed my grand- 
father, those I ask of you. May I in that way never become a 
weakling." 

M Hok'awas Manina, " those who walk in darkness," is the ritualistic name of the Night Spirits. 
21 1, e., that you would not permit disease and death to enter it. 

450 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ann.37 

Host's offering to the Eagle. — " Tcaxce'bera tcik'o'nok, tcok'aga' 
\vana£iriA.gik'erew!,gi, hlroit£u'na ng.djIrora'djawigi, je njgita'win^. 
Tani'na b5ju'-ij$ nigip'axu'k'djonaYe. Hl'nagip'e'rez a'n^ga 
£ugl' h^rjk'e' wawe-ak'Ini'k'djera." 

Host's general offering to the spirits. — "Hah$' dja'nA.ga tcSk'aga/ 

wanaTnAgik'erewigi; han^i'tci hak'I'cdjek tani-6'nigiju\vin4. E'gi 

tani-o'vaxujf, tcok'aga' Djobena^giwi'ijxga n^djiro'radjawiga. 

Je£e' egi tcowe'regi h5£u'na nigirok'aroho'n^, dja'nA.ga tcok'aga' 

hiroit£u'na ragik'e'rewigi, je*e' woinak£uwi-a'nQga. H§,nk'e' wawe. 

a'k'Injk'djeVa, je'sge nigita'wnn^. Ni^k'u'ruhindjwTnA. wajo'- 

k'ina. 

The Dog Ritual 

Curjgeri'ja waji'nuk'Qv-inek'djonevgi xununi'rjgereMjf. hip'a' 
birak'a'rara p'j'ijxdji bJrana'114. P'i^xdji xetehirana'n^. Hg,7jk'a- 
ga' hodjl'nani xetehl'ranani. Nijjk'djo'7jk' ewani'nera wik'isge'xdjj 
hlrana'na. Waru'dJEra p'i'jjxdji birak'a/rairana^nA.. Woglxete'- 
xdjinana na ni'Tjkdjorjk e'wani^na djasge wawogixete'n^gEra je'sge 
hicge wogixe'terana^iiA.. Cu7;k'djo'7)k' e'gi wajaI'nok'uvnA. hige'regi 
cu^k'djega n^biraxai'tcanegi t£ebire'k'djanegi k'e'ni t£ehl'rani 
t£e'hl k'aroho'xdjinegi egl'dji cur?kdjega uaijk ngbiruxa/dJEra 
Luk'arohS'djega cu'7jk'djega hok'a'rakit£anaNn4. 

"Hisur)k'a'xdji, sa'niijk' yoratc^dje'regi horawace'rek'djone^nA. 
H6cere£u'\vahlra edjorace'rek'djonevnA. yahl' p'ie£u'j)k'djonevnA. 
rahl'gi. Wona'Tirera uaj?kci'goI'£na p'Ia'£U7jk'djaVi, te'jesge 
ragita'k'djen^." 

E'gi cu'jjk'djega haTjk'e' gisawl'nine waginai^uwi-a'n^ga toxo'- 
rucga rusa'gvvire e $r;k'e' wa£ini'>;k'djonen4. Wa'iwahi'ra ro7i'- 
ras£avje al'renA.. Waxop'I'ni xete'JA. n§,bigl'ruxatc hirek'djine'gi 
p'ihl'na£i' hlres£a'je. 

E'gi cu7jgEra' t£ehl'regi wajinuk'u'-ik'aroho'ga cu^gojjk'a' higik'- 
aroho'je wa£uje'. Tani' warucj'ja £uje' egi m§,cu'cutc hogicge'- 
dja hlraru'sgitcce, e'gi cur^k n$blruxa'djfr;k'a n|b£'j glgl'je. 
E'gi jige' ta'ni warucj'na ]igij§.' £uje' djo'p'I'wi tani warucj'na 
lia'n^ga hoiglcge'dja m^cu'cutc hlraru'sgitc wat£$'pce wal'za 
bidjS'bik'e hijf/cAiiA. wawiro'gicge'je cuijgo^k'a. E'gi waruT&'bEra 
rucgaI'ranA.ga waruTa'poTjk'a waruTa'p tcowe'dja horotco'djeregj 
hap'a'hi t£|bi'reje. 

General Placing op the Tobacco 

Tcaba'£uar;ge'dja jura rucdjai'nanA.ga e'gi honaw^'na djlk'erehl' 
k'arohoi'regi e'gi wa£u'-ineje wagigo'nAijk'a tani' hbjk'irup'o'nA. 
hIra'nA.ga waru7&'p edja t^'bireje. Waxop'I'ni wara'djirera 
djanAjjga'k'i han^'tci^xdji. Hldja' waglt*$'p wa£u'-ines£avje uajjk 

eadin] THE CLAN WAR -BUNDLE FEASTS 451 

Host's offering to the Eagle. — "To you, a pair of Eagles, my ancestor 
prayed. The blessings you bestowed upon him, those I ask of you. 
I am about to pour a handful of tobacco for you. May you accept it 
and ward off trouble from me." 

Hosts general cffering to the spirits. — "Hearken, all yespiritsto whom 

my ancestor prayed; to all of ye, I offer tobacco. My ancestor Dj5- 

bena.giw'r;xga gave a feast to all those who had blessed him.22 

However, as it is about time to proceed to the next part (we will ask 

you once again) to bestow upon us all the blessings you gave our 

ancestor. That we may not become weaklings, I ask of you. I greet 

you all." 

The Dog Ritual 

When they decide to use a dog (as a sacrifice) they take the greatest 
care of it from its infancy upward. With great kindness do they rear 
it. They never strike it when rearing it. Just like their own child 
do they treat it. They take great care of its food. They love it very 
much, just as they love their own children. Thus is the dog loved. 
If they are going to sacrifice it, then before they kilhthe dog they make 
the following preparation and the man who is to make the sacrifice 
speaks thus: 

"My younger brother, you are to go to the south; to the Disease- 
giver you are to go. There you will live better than here. War 
powers and life we wish to have and that you should ask for." 

The dog is not to be killed by striking, but a rope is to be used and 
he is to be strangled to death, so that there will not be any blood. It 
is forbidden to shed blood. Thus they tried to make an offering to 
one of the great spirits. 

When the dog is to be killed, the one who is to do it prepares him. 
A pouch of tobacco and red feathers are tied around the neck of the 
dog to be offered. Then the man made another pouch of tobacco and 
another, till he had four, and these with (eagle) feathers he tied to the 
four limbs, one pouch to each limb of the dog. Then the war bundle 
was opened and purified with cedar leaves. Then they laid the dog 
in front of the war bundle, making him face south. 

General Placing of the Tobacco 

When they have finished arranging the buckskins and are about 
ready to start the singing, then the feasters mix tobacco and strew 
it over the war bundle. They offer this tobacco for all the spirits 
who exist. Even the man who originally obtained the war bundle 

»"And we are repeating this now," should be added. The word forfeast here meansliterally,-" tobacco 
pouring." 

452 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ann. 37 

sarusgl'tcga djan^ga warii7a'pdjega e'dja hlcge horo'k' hidja' tani- 
ahi-a'nihe'k'djone'nA. ai'regi. Je£e' djan^ga glg^'ji-an^ga h^jjk'e' 
tani wawogi'ju ira'nigi je£e' je'jesga'n^rjk'a e'dja tani' kj'nek'dje 
wagi'£u-ines£avje al'i-eii*.- E'gi katcindja'cAiiA. waxop'I'ni wara'- 
djirera tani-o'stohfra hatca/cAiiA. wak'arak'ere'n4i)k'i tani' je£e 
e'dja hahl'iiA^kce al'ren^. Wak'a'ndja'ra tani-o'stohira ni^ge' 
tci'ja. k'ere'na^k'I al'reconunA.. E'gi HgJie'ra jige' hicge tci'ja. 
Djobenarjgi-wi'^xga n$djirodjai'neje hotagera' je£e hlcge H|he'ra 
tani-o'stohira je£e higire'n4)jkce tcok'aga' Djobenarjgiwi'^xga e'je 
ai'rera. E'gi ua^gere'gi jigl'ja. tani-6'stohTra rakce al'rena. E'gi 
jige' hicge m^ne'gerera jige' tani-6'stohrj$ tci'ja ni)jgia/kce 
ai'ren^. E'gi jige' marjk'u'hanegi jige' tani-6'stohTja. ni7jgia/kce 
ai'rena. Tci se'redjija. tani' hlk'Irup'o'nA tci-6'kisavgedja t£§bEna'- 
jjk'a je£e tani' h^ijk'e' hlk'Irup'o'nani rusa^k'I'hi hlwace'xdjj. 
Hidja' t£a.bires£a'je tani' je£e rohg/r/xdjj jen4' him\£i'nes£aje 
k'Igo'nATjk'a tciroi'xdji-aVyk'a. Tani' je£e roh§.'j?xdji wagira'sgep 
hireje'je wagigo'nA^k'a rogn' wa£una'>jkcAn4. E'sge k'igo'n^jjk'a 
hak'ik'a'razires£axje waxop'I'ni tani gihj'n^. P'j'je aireconu'114. 
"Hitadje' wa£nwi'r;ge tani roh|' rasge'bina£iVine wonaYJre 
hik'uruxu'rukce aire'na. Tani wagihi'114. E'gi hicge' wagigo'- 
nA^k'a warutctco'na wak'a'rajihiATjkce wagixona/win4 tanihu'ra 
k'igoi'miiiA^kra wawogl'jura." Cg§.£ii'-ine rohf rasgep wan^gl'£-i 
£u'-ine a'n^ga haise'retcj tanihj' wira'wajitc hlres£a'je. 

The Tobacco Offering to the Spirits 

Host's initial speech- — " Tcaha'sgara hak'e'we jeje'noga tco'- 
k'ewahiVira wagudje'ra sI'ja.cAvnA wagitu'cdja. rehak'djone'ra. 
E'gi waga'xEra wawik'aragi'rek'djone^iiA.. N^ga e'gi wawi' 
wak'arap'e'rezhi-avn4ga £ngl'ji wak'u'ruz hlreje. Je'sge roa'gn 
wa£uk'djone'n4. N^ga e'gi woho'na dja'n4ga jige' hitco'k'ewahr- 
wira woho'na wawik'arap'e'rez hire'je. Je'sge ro-a'gy wa£uk'dj- 
one'n4. N^ga e'gi dja'nAga sa'k'erenivk'djor;gEre; te tcirol'xdji 
mi'n4gican4vgwire. Hito-inak'a'ragiwfn4. Egi cindJEwatV 
nik'aragl'k'djonaVi; nunige e'gi tok'e'wehi njk'aragi'k'djonawi 
nunige' h^k'e' te£e' necewewi'ni. Hitco'k'ewahTwira e wace'- 
wewiw^ge e'sge tclroi'xdji djjp hlnagi'giwira. Ep'jga'dja.. Sa'k'- 
eren^k'djo^gEra tcl-5'jii mln4kca'war/gre nik'u'ruhindjwi'114 hit- 
cok'ewahi'wira. Higua'na tani'na wagip'a'xuk'djone^." 

radin] THE CLAN WAR-BUNDLE FEASTS 453 

will be present to smoke with them, it is said. And lest (through 
forgetfulness) they do not think of certain spirits they have some 
tobacco ready for these, that they may also smoke it. Wherever 
it is that the spirits have their gathering places there it is that the 
tobacco goes. The Thunderbirds have a tobacco-gathering place, it 
is said. The Night Spirits have one also, it is said. The place that 
I spoke of as the one where DjobeiiaTjgiwi'^xga was blessed, that is 
the tobacco-gathering place of the Night Spirits, Grandfather 
Djobenar/giwi'rjxga said. Up above there is also a tobacco-gathering 
place, it is said. And, again, on the earth there is a gathering place 
somewhere, it is said. Under the earth there is a gathering place 
somewhere also, it is said. The mixed tobacco is placed in the center 
of the long lodge, and though this is not pure tobacco there is plenty 
of it. The feasters try to consume all of it. They would smoke very 
much, for they desired (certain things from the spirits). Thus the 
feasters would encourage one another, for they, the spirits, loved 
holy tobacco. "Try to make them smoke as much tobacco as 
possible that you may obtain war powers, it is said." 

He (the host) smoked for them (the spirits). He also encouraged 
the feasters (to smoke) and had the attendants go repeatedly to fill 
the pipe of the guests seated in the lodge. "Be diligent," he told 
them "and try to smoke as much as you can." All night he offered 
them tobacco to smoke, it is said.23 

The Tobacco Offering to the Spirits 

Host's initial speech. — "Six white buckskins, with enough material 
for as many pairs of mocassins, I am going to send to our grand- 
parents. They will be able to recognize (the buckskins) by the marks 
upon them.24 If (spirits) you recognize them, it is our desire that 
you take these buckskins. That is why I am doing this. I hope, 
also, that our grandfathers will accept our food offerings. That is 
why I am making them. Many are the war-bundle owners who are 
sitting here; the lodge tent is full of them. I am thankful for it. I 
am going to make you very tired; I am going to make you very 
hungry ; but I know you never thought of that.25 You are thinking 
only of our grandfathers, the spirits, and that is why you have per- 
mitted my lodge to become filled up with people. It is good. All 
ye war-bundle owners who are seated here within, I greet you. I 
am now going to pour tobacco." 

» This was omitted in the account as first obtainsd and was told afterwards. For this reason i t partakes 
more of a general description than of a detailed narrative. 

* Every buckskin is marked with a symbol sacred to the particular spirit to whom it is offered. 

15 It is one of the cardinal traits of Winnebago ritualistic oratory that everything that the speaker does 
is to be depreciated and that any honor or consideration shown to him by bis guests is to be ascribed more 
to a feeling of pity in their breasts than to his worth. 

454 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ann. 37 

Host's offering to Earthmaker. — "H$h$' £ua.7)gere'gi hi-a'ndJE- 
nina, waJA'na hang/tc nac£une're nunige e'gj tanl'na hoju'-ija. 
njgip'axu'wlcge hlnagl'k'ik'djonaVije hlrak'i'ge e'je al'reii*.. 
Tanl'na hoju'-jj§ nigip'axu'k'djoneha're e'gi wagudje'ra si'ja. 
hjrasa e'gi woho-nA wani-oi'tcge hjsgai'ja. wowa'k'ona hirasa' 
warutc xo'p'ini. Te je'nQga njgitu'cdjoneha/re. E'gi wlragi'- 
p'erez a'nQga £ugl e'gi wota'tc tconi'na roh§.bot£e'kjna, wona'7- 
irera, uankci'go£I'na woirok'I'pina. Je jesge wawa'wrjeje. Te 
jesge ronjgirygu'wige. Wajo'k'ina dja'n^ga mI-a'nQganQvgwire 
meje'nQga ronigigu'win^." 

Host's offering to the Thunderbirds. — "E'gi sa'nbjgloheVegi hitco'- 
k'eniwTna Wak'a'ndja hu'qgEra, tcok'aga' nfdjoradJQ'jjgiji tanl'- 
na hoju'ijg. nigip'a'xuj?gi. Wa£I'n4p hjnagi'gik'djone'je. E'gi 
wagudje'ra si'ja. hirasa' nigitu'cdja. reha'nA. E'gi woho'na rohi'- 
wisge hlnai^k'arabwl'ra jesge'ja. rohl'ra hlk'Isgi-a'k'Iadje'ra nigitu'- 
cdja reha'nA.. NQga e'gi warutc xo'p'ini hlra'gitu'tcap teje'noga 
nigitu'cdja reha'iH- Ra e'gi dja'noga hok'Ik'ara'dJEra hanA.'- 
gwire, wo'tatc tconi'na r6h$bot£e'k'jnA. wona'7irera, enaj'^xdjinA 
woirok'I'p'ina hij§' ha£uwije'je. Cfar?kcig6'£ina meje'nQga roni- 
gigu'wina je'n^ga ntgitawi'na. Hok'jk'ara'dJEra ua>;kci'go£i 
iianldjodjai'sge ha£ua,dja/win4 p'i uaijkci'ga£i7)k'djavwira. Te 
jesge ro-a'guwTnA^ 

Host's offering to the Night S pints. — "E'gi sS'niijk h^bogii'regerera 
Hok'a'was Mani'na tcok'aga' uana£i'nagik'e'rewigi e'gi tanlnigl'- 
juhanihe'k'djawira jes'ge n^djlrora'dJQgj. Tanl'na hojii'jja. 
nigip'axu'icge wa£I'ni.p lijnagik'I'k'djera tanl'na hojii'ijtv 
nigip'a'xu^k'djona're. E'gi wagudje'ra si'ja. e'gi jjge' woho'na 
wa'rutc xS'p'ini hiraru'tcap meje'nQga renigi'giwina. E'gi tcok'- 
aga' djagu' n§,djirora'dJQgi je£e' je'sge rQnigigu'winAhok'ik'a/- 
radJEra dja'iHga. Ra je'n^ga wo'tatc tconi'na wonA.'nre woirok'I'- 
p'ina hjjg/ £yk'djawi'iH. N^ga e'gi uar;kci'go£i uan§,djodjai'sge 

kadin] THE CLAN WAR-BUNDLE FEASTS 455 

Host's offering to Earthmaker. — "Hearken, Father who dwells 
above,20 all things you have created. Yet if we would make an offer- 
ing of tobacco you would accept it with thankfulness 27 (you said). 
So it has been said. I am about to offer a handful of tobacco and a 
buckskin for moccasins with it and a white-haired animal 28 to be 
cooked so that (you may have) a holy feast. These things I turn over 
to you. If you accept them, the first thing I wish to ask for will be 
(the honor of) killing (an enemy) outright, of leading warpaths, and 
of obtaining life honors.29 That is what we would like to lead (i. e., 
a war party). That is what I wTould ask of you. My relatives, as 
many as are sitting around here, even that many ask the same things 
of you." 

Host's offering to the Thunderbirds. — "Those in the west, our grand- 
father, Thunderbird Chief, you blessed grandfather, and I am now 
going to offer you a handful of tobacco. With thanks you will accept 
it (it has been said). Buckskin for moccasins, also, I am sending over 
to you. A feast made from one whom we regard as one of yourselves, 
whose body we are like.30 I am sending along for you. Indeed a 
sacred feast I am offering you; that I am now sending toward you. 
As many of our clan members as are here, they (all) desire to make 
these requests: To kill an enemy outright, to lead a war party, and — 
O grant it to us ! — a life honor. Life, that is what I pray for to you — 
that we ask of you. Our clan has put itself in a pitiable condition,31 
so that we may live a good life. That we ask of you." 

Host's offering to the Night Spirits. — "You who live in the east, 
you who walk in darkness, you directed your minds toward grand- 
father, and for that I will pour tobacco for you, now and forever, 
so that you may bless me. A handful of tobacco, if we pour for 
you, we know it will make you thankful, and for that reason do I 
offer you some. A buckskin for moccasins and, together with it, a 
sacred feast that I am about to send toward you. With whatever 
you blessed grandfather, that I and all my clansmen who are here 
ask of you. This request, that one of us lead the war party you 

MNo Christian influence is to be suspected in this term of address. 

17 According to shamanistic cosmology, Earthmaker first created all the various spirits and bestowed 
upon each one of them certain powers. When finally he created man he noticed that he had nothingleft 
to give him, so he decided to give him tobacco. This was to remain his exclusive possession, and not even 
he, Earthmaker, would be able to take it away from him. It was finally agreed that man would offer it 
to Earthmaker and the other spirits and receive in return therefor specific blessings. 

88 Ritualistic name for deer. 

29 " Killing an enemy outright " means killing him in the midst of his own people and without the assist- 
ance of anyone else. It was the highest war honor that a Winnebago could obtain and entitled him to 
wear an eagle feather in his hair. "Life honors " always refer to war honors. 

30 The whole phrase from "rohiwi'sge" to 'Tohi'ra hik'isikl-a/djera," is the ritualistic expression for 
dog. The dog is referred to as ''like one of ourselves" in deference to the fact that one of the clans is 
called wolf or dog. Thus in offering up the dog they wish to imply that they are offering up themselves. 

H I. e., a condition which calls for pity. 

456 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [bth.ann.37 

ha£uahg/gwire ua??kci'go£i p'ia^uk'dja'wi. Te jesge ro'njgigy'- 
winA.. 

Host's offering to Disease-giver. — "E'gi sa'nbjgloratcadjeVegi 
Hocere£u'\vanira, tcok'aga' djobena^giwi'xga rvmst£e'k'igi uan|d- 
jodjai'sge wa£ugl'ji. E'gi n$'djoradJQvgi wonA'Yire ruk'o'nA 
xete'ra ne'cMH. Hiranitce'ra wonA'Tire xetehi' hicu'ruk'ona^noga. 
E'gi hg/bEra xetehi hi'curuk'ovnA.ga rosa'ni^k hg/bEra nine'je 
hirak'i'gegi ai'gi jige' rosa'nbjk hot£e'ja. nine'je. Hirak'i'gegi 
tcok'aga' Djobenagiwi'7jxga nadjoradjo/gi wirarotca/djegaMja. 
bl'badjasge'xdji harak'i'cdjanAgja. E'gi n$'djoradJQvgi wonA'Tir- 
era n§,'djiroravdJ4gi, je£e' nigita'win^. 

Hok'ik'a'radJEra dja'n^ga £u-ine'wira je'n4ga tanl'na hoju'- 
iJ4CAn4s nigip'axu'k'djonaVire njta'k'atcEra. Wa'jagu'zEra 
wani-oi'tcgigi£u'n4 wani-oi'tcge hjsgai'ja. wowa'k'0114 njgitu'cdja. 
reha'winA.. E'gi wagudje'ra sl'j$. Hlrasa' wak'e'rera hirasa' 
meje'n^ga njgitu'cdja. reha'^in^. Tcok'aga' Djobenagiwi'xga 
djagu' nfdjirora'dJ4gi je£e' tani-oni'gijuwi-a'n^ga hak'a'rataVigi 
hoici'pdji hunak£u'k'djenaVi. Tco'k'aga Djobena.giwi'7jxga e'je 
al'renA. wona'7Jre ua7jkcigoei'na te jesge nigita/win^. Hagare'ja. 
homam'na rak£ugi tcok'aga' Djobenagiwi'^xga redju'wanina hatci'- 
ndja nlhaj'regi ha^k'e' wamaci'ninbjk'djone hiceje' ai'rera tcok'a'. 

Host's offering to the Sun. — "E'gi tc5k'a' Hgbain/hura h|bo- 
k'a'ki cu'radjane tcok'aga' Djobeijagjiwi'^xga nfcljoradjo/gi wona'- 
7}re liar/kcigo^T'na n|djirora'dj^gi tanl'na hoju'ija. njgip'a'xu-i- 
&vnA.ga. Waja,gu'zEra djagu' hlrok'o'nA njgigi'giji je£e' hana'tci 
tcok'aga' hok'I'k'aradJEra n§'djiroravdJ4gi dja'n^ga £u-ine'wira 
hana'tcjxdji tani-o'njgiju'k'djonaVire. Tanl'na ga." 

"Ai'rera djagu' nigita'wigi c^'k'djone^je. Hirak'i'k'eje tcok'- 
aga' eje ai'rera. WonA'Tire iiarykcigo£i'na me'jesge ronjgigu'winA.. 
Tanl'na wSho'na mgcu'na n|bwe'nigituxavdjwire warak'arai'- 
saba'ri4ga £ugi woiiA'7-irera woiruk'i'p'ina ya£ujjk'dja''\vira. 

badin] THE CLAN WAR-BUNDLE FEASTS 457 

have predestined for us (we make).32 Pitiable we are making our- 
selves in life, that we may live a good life (by obtaining blessings 
from you). That we ask of you." 

Host's offering to Disease-giver. — "For you who live in the south, 
Disease-giver, my grandfather Djobena^giwi'xga thirsted himself to 
death 33 and put himself in a pitiable condition. Then you who are 
in charge of great war powers blessed him. For you control a 
greater amount of war powers than any other spirit. A great 
amount of life you also control, for you are said (to possess two 
sides), one side of your body containing life and the other death. 
You told grandfather Djobena7jgiwi'7;xga that you would bless him 
at noon, in broad daylight,34 and thus indeed you met him. There 
you blessed him with war powers; and with whatever you blessed 
him, that we ask of you now. Whosoever of niy clan are present 
they all pour an offering of tobacco for you and also (give you) 
soup.35 The Creator made animals for us, white-haired animals for 
food, and these we send to you; together with buckskins, that you 
may have moccasins. We also send toward you a head ornament 
(of eagle feathers), that also. We offer you tobacco and we ask of 
you to bestow upon us that with which you blessed our grandfather 
Djobenar;giwi'7jxga. Grandfather Djobena^giwi'^xga had had war 
powers and life, it is said; and those we ask of you. And it is said 
that you told grandfather that whenever you go on your warpath 
you will not walk upon the descendants of DjobenaTjgiwi'rjxga 
wherever they breathe.38 

Host's offering to the Sun. — "You, grandfather Who-bring-day, 
who come every day, you blessed grandfather Djobena?;giwi'r;xga 
with war power and life and I am therefore offering you a handful 
of tobacco. All the (war power) the Creator controls he delegated 
to you and for all of that which you blessed our grandfather, as many 
of my clansmen as are present, we are about to pour tobacco to 
obtain. Tobacco, here it is." 

Host then pours tobacco into the fire. 

"It is said that you will do what we ask of you. You yourself 
told that to grandfather, it is said. War powers and life, that we 
ask of you. Tobacco, food, and feathers, we sacrifice to you arid 

32 A person may be blessed witb victory on the warpath directly or he may be entitled to war blessings 
to which near relatives were destined but which they were deprived of by an early death. The present 
prayer is directed toward both things, that he may enjoy the "unused" blessings of his relative and that 
he may not be cut off by an untimely death from the fulfillment of his own. 

33 Ritualistic expression for fasting. 

3* To be blessed in the daytime, especially at noon, was considered as particularly holy. Generally a 
person was blessed at night. 

35 Literally, "hot water." 

36 1. e.,when Disease-giver deals out death he will avoid all the descendants of Djobenatjgiwi'ijxga. 
"Mani'na" is the technical word for warpath. The word for descendants really means "roots." 

186823°— 22 30 

458 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ann. 37 

TJar/kcigo^i'na racgu'ni s£I uaijkciga^'ijk'djawi nigitawi'iH tani- 
onjgi'ju.'winA tcok'a'. 

Host's offering to Earth. — "E'gi jige' k'u'ni^k'a tcok'aga' Djobe- 
n^giwi'ijxga ng/djoradjo/gi wajagu'zEra djagii' ruk'o'no ni??- 
gigi'gi. Tcok'aga' banl'tci n&djoradjo/gi djadjai'rjxdjj manA'gEre 
mi'naijk'i jedjafxdji p'a dani-onigi'ju hanihe'k'djawi. Hlrage'gi 
djagii' ni)jgita'wigi hina,gic£u'k'dJ4naVi hice'je e'ra. Tani'na 
hoju'-ija. hirani'p'ahak'djonibaVinA. dja'nAga wak'i'k'aratcwira. 
Tani'na k'Q'nb)k'a hi^giru'zwi-g/dje. Tani'na hoju'-ijg. tci-o'k'isago- 
najTnA e'dja ni7jgip'axu'j)k'djona\vire. WonA'7Jrera uar;keigo£i'na 
huryk£uwi-a'ndje, tejesge niTjgita'w'n^. Tani'na teVrenA. 

'Ninta'k'adJEra, woi'dJAiiA naro'ni hirasa' renbjgigi'wiiiA. HinA- 
gi'p'erezwigi, ua^kci'go^na je£e' ya£uijk'djona'wira; je'sge niijgita'- 
wanA." 

Host's offering to the Moon. — "K'ii'nbjk'a k§,he'regi hura'djonev 
n4 e'gi k'u'nirjk'a tcok'aga' Djobena.giwi')?xga n§,djora'djor;gi 
tani-oni^giju-a'nihek'dja-wi dja'nAga honi'jjgera eu-ine'wigi. Tani- 
owaxu'na jinadji'wigi tani nijjgip'axu'wigi. Hirak'a'rap'erez- 
caVai^k'djone'nA. hirak'i'geje ai'rera. Tcok'aga' Djobenfigiwi'7)- 
xga djagu' hicuriik'o'nQgfji, je'sge n§,dj6radjo'gi mabjk'i'xdji 
hata'nihek'djawf ra hoici'p hunak£u'k'djonaVi hiceje' ai'rera. 

"Tani'na teVrenV' 

"Tani'na uar;kci'go£i k'arata' ya£u'k'djera. Wajagu'zEra 
hanir/gigi'ranigip'axu'n4. WonA'TJrera wak'i'k'aradjwira dja'nAga 
hanl'\viii4 hagare'j^ narygu'ra hi'ja. wawa'wigi e'dja woiruk'i'p'ina 
ya£uk'dja'\vira nigita'^-inA. Njnta'k'adJEra \vaja.gu'zEra wani- 
oi'tcgbygi £u'nA hice'bEra; wiwe'wi-owinQvgera runta'k'atc 
niTjgigiwi'n^. Wa'rutc xo'p'ini bira'nir/gitutc^VinA. E'gi 
wagudje'ra si'ja. nbjgitu'cdja. reha'winA.. WonA'Tire ua7)kcigo£i'na 
ni^gita'winA. bunak£u'gi uai}kcigo£i'na p'ia£u'k'djaVin4. E'gi jige' 
k'u'nbjk'a tcok'aga' Djobena.giwi'7?xga n|'djoradjo/gi waja.gu'zEra 
wona'TJre ua7jkci'go£ina hiruk'o'no ni^gigi'gi. Je£e' tcok'aga' 

radin] THE CLAN WAR-BUNDLE FEASTS 459 

if you accept them, then we will assuredly wear war honors (some 
day). That we may pass through life without any troubles and that 
we may live long, we ask of you and offer you tobacco, grandfather." 

Host's offering to Earth. — "Grandmother, you blessed Djobem\gi- 
wi'ijxga with whatever the Creator delegated to you. With every- 
thing that exists on the earth, for all eternity, did you tell grandfather 
you would bless him, and this is what we ask of you and for which 
we will forever offer you tobacco. You will do it, he told us you 
had said. A handful of tobacco we are about to send toward you, 
we, as many of our clansmen as are here. Tobacco do you accept 
from us, grandmother. A handful of tobacco there, upon him who 
stands in the middle of the lodge,37 do we pour. Give us war powers 
and life; for these we beseech you. Here it is, the tobacco." 

The host then pours some tobacco into the fire. 

"Soup, vegetables, together with maple sugar we are about to 
send you.38 If you accept them, life we will obtain; that we ask of 
you." 

Host's offering to the Moon. — "Grandmother, You-Who-Come-at- 
Night,39 grandmother, you blessed grandfather Dj5bena.giwi'77Xga 
and now all his descendants, as many as there are, are about to 
offer you tobacco. Now when we come to a tobacco offering we 
will certainly offer some to you. And you will be cognizant of it, 
you assured us yourself, it is said. Whatever you are in control of 
and with which you blessed our grandfather Djobena.giwi'?jxga for 
all eternity, that we are to ask for at all times, they told us you had 
said and you will assuredly give it to us. The tobacco, here it is." 

He pours tobacco into the fire. 

"I am using the tobacco as a means of obtaining life for myself 
and my relatives.40 The Creator gave it to me and I am offering it to 
you. As many of our clansmen as are here we beg of you war powers ; 
and that if we ever go on a warpath 41 there we will obtain the war 
honors. Soup and the animals the Creator made for me,42 the black- 
furred one43 we are offering you; soup of bear ribs. A sacred feast 
we are about to hold for you. A buckskin for moccasins we are 
about to send out to you. War powers and life we ask of you ; that 
you give us life, so that our days may be happy. Truly, grand- 
mother, did you bless our grandfather Djobena,giwi'7?xga with what- 

""He who stands in the middle of the lodge" is the ritualistic name for the fireplace. He is always 
personified and the tobacco is generally conceived of as being poured upon his head. 
w As the offerings are made to the earth, vegetables and maple sugar are selected. 
89 Ritualistic name for the moon. The regular name is "hahe wira" (night sun). 

40 The term "uaqkcigoei k'arata," literally meaning "a life beseecher," is used only in rituals and is gen- 
erally taken to include any offering. 

41 "N^gfi," is the regular word for warpath. Literally it means simply "road." 

43 1. e.t what the Creator bad placed in his way and permitted him to catch and prepare for this feast. 
It is in this specific significance that it is meant here. 
43 " Hi'cebEra" is both the ritualistic and deferential name for the bear. 

460 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ANN. 37 

nfdjoradjo'gi djadjo'nA. tani-owaxu'na hi^gire'wigi ni^gita'wigi 
hunak£uharani'cek'djenaVinA. hiceje. Tcok'aga' Djobena.giwi'i?xga 
e'je ai'reo4. Tanl'na koju'ija p'edje'dja hidjeaijjgl'gnngi. Rak'a- 
hl'k'djone hirak'I'geje tcok'aga'eje al'rera. Tanl'na hoi'cipdjj 
blnagl'k'saip'djonaVi hiceje' tcok'aga' Djobenagi\vi'r;xga e'ra. 
Tanl'na ga heredjigo'." 

"Tanl'na hm^gl'hiwigi won^'yirera uarjkcigo£I'na pia£u'k'djena 
je'sge nijjgita'wioA.. Ninta'k'adJEra woi'djonA. si'na naro'ni 
klrak'I'sa niijgitu'cdjonehaViiL^; e'gi wagudje'ra sl'jq, hlrasa' 
vi'nagip'eVezwigi wona'TJre uaijkcigo*i'na ya£uanihe'k'dja\vira. 
Je'sge nigita/winA. k'u'nirjk'a ha'n^ga.'' 

Host's offering to the chief of the Eagles. — "Tcaxcep hujjgera' 
£iia'7?gEregi h$bamanl'na. Ne'cAnA. xetera' nine'je wonA'Tirera 
hlruk'o'no. Pani'je hlrak'I'gegi. E'gi uarjkci'go£i jige' hicu'- 
ruk'ong/jeni gjgigi'ji- Tco'k'aga Djobenqgiwi'ijxga n^djoradjo'gi 
waj^gu'zEra djagu' ruk'o'no ni7)gigi'gi. Tcok'aga' nldjoradjo'gj 
manA/gere djadjaj'xdji nike'gi jedjai'xdji tani-onirjgl'ju hanihe'- 
k'djona'wigi. Je'sge tcok'aga' hlrage'gi tani-o'waxu niiygl'k'- 
erek'djaVi hiceje. Tcok'aga' e'je al'rera. Hlcge' tcok'aga' wax- 
op'i'ni wana£i' rusgl'tcgi hlcgidja' wana£i' yorak'a'rak'ereje^ tcok'- 
aga' eje al'rera. Tanl'na ga alredjigo'." 

"Tc5k'a' Tcaxcep hurjgEra' tani-oniijgiju'nA.. Tcok'aga' djagu' 
na^djc-radjo/gi je£e' niijgita'win^. E'gi wawakl'k'aradjEra tanini7;- 
gip'axu'7)k'djonavwire hinagl'ksapwl'gj wonA/TJre uai?kci'go£I'na 
hunak£u'wigi maiha'gEregi ya£u'k'djawrnA.. Te jesge nirjgita.'- 
winA. tcok'a'. 

Host's offering to the Day. — "E'gi jige hg/pdjane tanl'na hidje' 
nigigl'nA.. Ninta'k'adJEra wani-oi'tcge hjsga/ra wiwe'-wj-owinQr- 
gera warutc xo'p'ini hiraniiygl'tutcap reha'win^. Tcok'aga' Djo- 
bena.gi\vi'r?xga n^djoradjQ'gi hlcge wlwe'wj h!djo'rak'arak'erevje 
al'rera. Tanl'na woho/na hlnagip'e'rezwigi w5nA'7Jrera uat;kcigo£I'- 
na ya£uanihe'k'djawi. Niijgita'win^ tcok'a'." 

badin] THE CLAN WAE-BUNDLE FEASTS 461 

ever powers the Creator put in your control. That with which you 
blessed grandfather it is said you would give us, too, when in the 
course of time we would pray to you to bestow them upon us. So it 
is reported our grandfather Djoben^giwi'^xga said. A handful of 
tobacco we place for you in the fire. You would smoke it, it is said 
that you, yourself, told grandfather. Tobacco, you told him you 
would always accept, it is said. Here it is, the tobacco." 

He pours tobacco into the fire. 

"If you smoke the tobacco for us, war powers and happiness in 
life we will ask of you. Soup, vegetables, rice, and maple sugar we 
send out to you, and buckskin for moccasins likewise. If you accept 
these things from us, it will be ours to use, war power and life. That 
we ask of you, grandmother." 

Host's offering to the chief of the Eagles. — "Chief of the Eagles, you 
who walk on light 44 up above. You, yourself, said that only you are 
the greatest one in control of war powers. That you are thus, you 
said of yourself. Life also you are in charge of. You blessed our 
grandfather Dj5bena.gjwi'r;xga with whatever powers the Creator 
put you in control. You blessed grandfather for all eternity,15 and 
for those powers we are now about to offer you tobacco. It is for 
that purpose you told grandfather we should have a tobacco pouring. 
So grandfather told us, it is said. Grandfather also made a sacred 
bundle 46 and to this you also added your power, grandfather said, it is 
said. The tobacco, here it is." 

He pours tobacco into the fire. 

"To you, chief of the Eagles, grandfather, do we pour tobacco. 
With whatever you blessed grandfather, that we ask of you. All 
the members of the clan offer you tobacco that you may have knowl- 
edge of it (i. e., the tobacco) and bestow upon us who dwell on the 
earth war powers and life. That is what we ask of you, grandfather." 

Host's offering to the Bay. — "To the Day47 I pour tobacco, also 
soup, and a rib of a white-haired animal (i. e., a deer). A sacred meal 
we are about to offer to you. Grandfather Djoben^giwi'^xga you 
blessed and you also added your thoughts,48 it is said. If you accept 
tobacco and the feast, war powers and life we assuredly are going to 
obtain. For that we ask, grandfather." 

« "HabamanT pa," is the ritualistic name for any bird. Although rarely used except in rituals, it is yet 
generally known among the people, a fact that does not hold for most of the other ritualistic appellations. 

45 The set phrase which from now on we will translate by "eternity," is literally "as long as the earth 
lasts, that long." 

*s " Waxop'i' ni wana/i'rusgi' tcgi" means literally, " He tied up the spirit mind or manifestation," i. e., 
he made a bundle of the blessings he received from the various spirits. DjobenangiwiVxga is the indi- 
vidual who is supposed to have first received the clan bundle. The word "wana/j" is a very difficult 
one to render accurately in English. 

a Although, according to the Winnebago conception, the light of day is associated with the sun, yet the 
sun is not regarded as causing the light any more than the absence of the sun is thought to be the cause 
of darkness, but both light (daylight) and darkness arc associated with special deities. 

18 " Wiwe'wj " Is not to be thought of in an abstract sense but as something quite as tangible as a material 
object. 

462 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ann. 37 

Host's offering to the South Wind. — "E'gj jige rek'ii'huhTra 
tcok'aga' Dj5bena.giwi'7;xga waxop'I'ni wa'na£i rusgl'tcgi hicge, 
wana£i' dj5rak'a/rak'erejev e'je tcok'aga' Djobena.ghvi'i?xga al'rera. 
Wajqgu'zEra djagu' hiruk'o'no ni^gigl'gi tcSk'aga' Djobena.gi- 
wi'r;xga nfdjoradjo/ gi djadjai'xdji p'a man^'gere mI'nAj;k'I 
jedjai'xdji p'a, tani-onb/gl'p'axu hanihe'k'djawi hirak'I'gegi. 
Tanl'na ga aire'114." 

"E'gi njtak'a'dJEra waj§,gu'zEra wani-ol'tcge hi7;gj£u'nA. hiidjo'- 
bimanj'ja nj'tak'atc niijgigiwi'nA. wak'e'j^. Tanl'na hjnagi'- 
hiwigr njta'k'adJEra hlnagl'p'erezwjgi wonA'Tirera wota' tconi'na 
hlrak'I'rak wawek'dja/winA. uarjkcigoTna pla/u'k'djaNvinA.. Me'- 
jesge nii/gita'win*;." 

Host's offering to the North Wind. — E'gi jige wazi'regihuhlVa wa- 
k'ip'I'na hlceje; tcok'aga' Djobenqgiwi'Tfxga e'je al'rera. Tanl'na 
njta/k'adJEra wol'dJAne nab?k'anA/gIja. ha'ra waiya/gek'djaVira 
je'sge n|ro'nj hlrak'I'sa ni^gi'tucdja. reha'winA. WawI'nagip'ereV 
wigi w6na'7Jre ua7?kcigo£i'na w5ta'ra te je'nuga ni)7gita'win4. 
Tcok'a' waxa-I'na rohg,bot£e'ki-eVlja hl£u'p'lnanrje hlrak'i'geje. 
Tcok'aga' Djobenqgiwi'Tjxga e'je al'rera ha'n^ga." 

Host's offering to the Bla-ck Hawlc. — "E'gi tcSk'a' k'eredju' sepEra 
hicge' wowe'wj higi-orak'a'rak'erevje al'rera tanl'na hoju'-ija. 
ni?;gip'axu'na. WonA'7Jre uar;kcigo£i'na wajg-gu'zEra hiruk'o'no 
niijgigl'gi, je£e' waniijgita'114. Tcok'aga' Djobena.giwi'7/xga n^ldjo- 
radJQ'gi manA'gEre djadjai'xdji ml'na^k'Iji jedjaj'xdji p'a. tanl'na 
rabi' ranica'k'djone'je hice'je al'rera. Tanl'na hlnAjjI'wik'sa^pwigi 
uaj/kcigo£I'na ya£u'?7k'djawira wonA/TJre. Nijjgita'win^ ha'nAga." 

Host's offering to the Wona'yire Ua'-qkcik. — "Tcok'a' Wak'a'ndja 
Wona'TJre tfa^khlniTjgal'rawigi, tcok'aga' waxop'I'ni wana£i' rusgl'- 
tcgi hicge wana£i' dj5rak'a'rak'erevje al'rera. TanI' nii7gip'a'xu- 
wTn.^. Tanl'nacAnA. wona'TJre ua??kcigo£rna tcok'aga' Djobena.- 
giwi't/xga ni?7gita'win4 je£e maik'I'dja. ya£uanihek'dja\niH. 

badin] THE CLAN WAR-BUNDLE FEASTS 463 

Host's offering to the South Wind. — "South Wind, to the bundle 
grandfather Djobena,giwi'7;xga made you added your power, so 
grandfather Djobena.gi\vi'^xga said, it is said. That which the 
Creator put in charge of you, and with which you blessed grandfather 
Djobena.giwi'7)xga, as long as the earth lasts, we are about to pour 
tobacco for, as you yourself told us. The tobacco, here it is." 

He pours tobacco into the fire. 

"A four-legged animal,49 a coon, that the Creator made for us, we 
are going to give you in the form of a soup. If you accept the soup 
and likewise smoke the tobacco, then the first request (we wish to 
make) is that it might be our fortune to obtain war powers and 
travel safely (on the path) of life. This is what we ask." 

Host's offering to the North Wind. — "Wind who lives in the north, 
you said 'I am the equal of (the spirit of the north) ' ; 50 so grandfather 
Djobena.giwi'r;xga said, it is said. Tobacco, soup, vegetables, what 
a tree bears, fruit, as we call it, and maple sugar, that also we send 
toward you. If you accept them, the request (we make) is for war 
power and life; that we ask of you. To kill a person outright is an 
excellent power to have, grandfather Porcupine,51 you said of your- 
self. So grandfather Djobenajgiwi'^xga said, it is said." 

Host's offering to the Black Hawk. — "Black Hawk, you also added 
your powers for grandfather, it is said ; and a handful of tobacco I am 
pouring for you for that reason. Whatever war powers and life the 
Creator put in your control, that I ask of you. You blessed grand- 
father Djobenqgiwi'rjxga for as long a period as the world would last, 
and you said that you would always smoke tobacco, it is said. If you 
are cognizant of this tobacco, let us obtain life and war power. For 
these we ask." 

Host's offering to the Wdna'rjre Oa'rjkcilc™ — "Grandfather Thunder- 
bird, Wona';-ire Ua'qkcik, as they call you, you added your power 
also, it is said. Tobacco we are about to pour for you. Tobacco only 
(we are giving you), so that we may obtain war powers and life; that 
with which you blessed grandfather Djobena.giwi'^xga for all eter- 

*9 A ritualistic manner of speaking of a quadruped, just as it is common in rituals to speak of human 
beings as "the two-legged-walkers." 

60 1, e., cold does not affect me. The North Wind and the spirit of cardinal point north are of course 
entirely distinct. 

61 No reason is known why the spirit is here addressed as porcupine. 

63 The "W5na'rjre t}a'i;kcik" are birds living in the empyrean generally identified with the hawk. 
Here they seem to be identified with a kind of Thunderbird. Whoever is blessed by them becomes a great 
warrior. The term really means "a terror-inspiring man," by reason of his great war powers. One of 
the Winnebago clans has this name. The explanation for the identification of theWona'rjre Ua'ijkcik with 
the Thunderbirds is probably the following: The Thunderbird is not regarded as belonging to any particular 
bird species, but any bird can be either a normal bird or a Thunderbird. When used in this sense, the 
appellation Thunderbird is generic, and the term used in the text, " Wak'a'ndja Wona'rire Ua^kcik," is 
then best translated by "Thunderbird — Wona'rire Tja^kcik." Thunderbird specifically is understood 
to be in reality not a bird but a being in human shape. Cf. Introduction. The general conception of 
Thunderbird given here is touched upon also by J. O. Dorsey in his "Siouan Cults." 

464 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ann. 37 

Tani'na hlnagip'erezwi'gi ua?;kcigc>£rna pl^'k'dje nii/gita'wia^ 
wak'ik'ara'djwira dja'iHga haniwl'n^. Je'nuga." 

Host's offering to Big Black Hawk. — "E'gi k'eredju'sep xetera' 
sal'ruk'ononV tcok'aga' Djobenagiwi'Tjxga n$djoradjo'7jgi wona'- 
7ire ua77kcigo£i' je£e hata'nihek'djaSvi tcok'aga' hirage'gi tani- 
5'waxu. K'ere'k'djonegi tani-o'waxuna djan$/hi k'e'rek'djone,- 
gi jena/ha. n§biruxa'dJEra djaiHga'k'djonegi jena'hf,. Tani'- 
na woho'nA n|biruxa'dJEra haiig/tcbjxdji hlragl'p'erez ranice'- 
k'djoncje. Hirage'gi tcok'aga' DjobenagiwiVxga. Tani'na ga 
heredjlgo'." 

"Tani'na hoju'-ija, hlranl'p'ahawl'cge hoici'p tani'na hlnagl'hj 
haranl'cek'djoiiaVihicera. Tani-onirjgl'ju tani'na rahi-a'nA.ga £ugi 
wona'TJre uar/kcigoTna wowo'tara te jesge niqgita'vinA.. Nita'- 
k'adJEra rohlk'I'sge hlnai'k'arapwrra jesge'ja, k'Inu'p hak'I§/- 
djera, ni7jk'djo'jjgeni^gera wak'I'tcanA/gera n;ta'k'atc niijgighvl'n^. 
E'gi n^biruxa'djera wogudje'ra sl'ja. e'gi rohiwik'I'sge hlnaik'ara- 
bwi'ra jesge'ja. ro'ra p'i£u'xdjinVnaga n^phiniijgiruxa'djirera. 
E'gi wak'ere h$bitai'£una hlrak'I'ratcap ng,binij?gituxadjwrii4. 

E'gi wonA/TJre hlruk'o'no xe'tera ne'ja. nine. Waja.gu'zEra 
njgy'zEra iiar;kcigo£i' hlruk'o'no; £ua.7jgere'gi "wajsgu'zEra 
njgusk'i'. Je'e tcok'aga' DjobenagiviV/xga n$djoradjo'r/gi dja- 
djaj'xdji p'a nianA/gere nihe'gi majk'1'dja. Tani-6'waxu hak'ere- 
a'nihek'djawi huiia'k£u'win4. Tani'na hlnagicuruzwi'gi woho/na 
hlnagip'ere'zwigi n^biruxa'dJEra \vainA/gicuruvzwigi wonA/TJrera 
woiruk'I'p'ina ya£u'k'dJ4iia\vi uarjkcigo£i'na ya£u'k'dja,Vira. 
Nbjgita''win4 tcok'a/wira dja'n^ga tcok'aga' DjobenAg;i\vi'7?xga, 
waxop'I'ni wa'naej rusgitegl' dja'n^ga wanajdjora'k'arak'ere- 
hTgi. Han§/tci)jxdji hfijk'e' wajik'I'nA niniV/k'djonihaVige 
tanina'cAn^ nb/gip'axu'wicge hg-^k'e' waj§/ woI'cAnA. hlwa£u'- 
nik'djaVige hlrohihik'I'sge." 

"Tani'na wogiju'ra te jesge al'recAnu^n^. E te£e'ren4." 

The Buckskin Offerings to the Spirits 

(Host speaks again.) Sak'ereni'k'djoTjgera mlna^kca'wa^gre 
nbjk'uruhi'ndj reha'winA. hltco'k'ewahTwira hok'I'dja wagjgl' 
naTnisge ha^k'ecge'ra nunige'. Waxop'I'ni hok'Idjg.' glgi' naT- 
nisge waeuanA/gwi nunige' hlrudjl'sdj hawl' nunige. Hltco'- 

eadin] THE CLAN WAR-BUNDLE FEASTS 465 

nity, may we obtain from you. If you accept the tobacco may I 
and my relatives live well by reason thereof; that we ask of you. 
That is all." 

Host's offering to Big Black Hawk.*3 — "You, Big Black Hawk, who 
are in charge of war powers,54 blessed grandfather DjobenaJgiwi'7;xga 
with war powers and life, and these we are to ask of you, you told 
grandfather, and pour tobacco at the same time. As many tobacco 
offerings as he (grandfather) would have liked to have had and as 
many (buckskin) offerings as he would have desired, that many there 
will be for you. If you accept the tobacco and feast and all the 
offerings, you will assuredly give (us blessings). Thus you told grand- 
father Djobena,giwi'r/xga. Tobacco, here it is." 

He pours tobacco into the fire. 

"If we extend toward you a handful of tobacco, you said you would 
always smoke it. If, at a tobacco offering, you smoked the tobacco, 
the requests we might make are these — war powers and life. A feast 
of one whom you look upon in the same way as ourselves (i. e., a dog), 
one whom I have been treating like a brother, with whom the chil- 
dren have eaten the soup of such a one, we are giving you. An 
offering of buckskin for. moccasins and of one like ourselves (a dog), 
whose body is well prepared, do they offer you. Food they are 
offering you, asking in return for life.55 You are the only one in 
control of great war powers. The Creator placed you in charge of 
life; above the Creator created you. With that you blessed grand- 
father Djobena^giwi'^xga for all eternity. We will have a tobacco 
pouring, that you may give us (these things). If you take cognizance 
of the feast offerings, the buckskin offerings; if you will take them, 
then we will obtain the war honors and then we will obtain life. We, 
as many older people as we are here, beseech you for those powers 
you added to the spirit bundle of our grandfather Djobenq.giwi'jjxga. 
We will not have enough food to go around,56 but if we offer you 
tobacco, it will not be an offense (thus to act to you) (we have been 
told)." 

This is what they used to say at the tobacco pouring. This it is. 
(Song.) 

The Buckskin Offerings to the Spirits 

(Host speaks again. 1. "War-bundle owners who are seated here, 
I greet you. We are endeavoring to prepare footwear for our grand- 
fathers,57 but we did not really accomplish it. Spirit footwear we 
tried to make, that is what we were doing, but our work was lacking 

" A deity apparently distinct from Black Hawk. He is the one to whom offerings are always made. 

•* Literally "in control of grass bundles." 

65"Ha,p" is the ritualistic name for life. Literally it means "light." 

M A ritualistic expression of modesty. 

*' I. e., offer buckskins for moccasins to the spirits. 

466 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth.asn. 37 

k'ewahTwira ha^k'e' wajlne'p'jhlranrje ai'rera. Haijk'e' woiya'eu 
klwa-runjk'dja'wige hltco'k'ewahi'wira wagudje' wani'nera£. 
tla^ge'dja hInA7)k wagigi'k'djonaVin4." 

Offering to ike Thunderoird. — "Tcok'a' Wak'andja'ra wagudje'ra 
si'ja. renirjgi'giwinA. wajokianiwi'114. WonA/TJrera uarykcigo£I'na 
wotara' me'jesge nir/gita'win^." 

Offering to Night Spirits. — "E'gi jige hg,bogure'gi herera' wagud- 
je'ra si'ja, reni7jgi'giwinA, wota/ra wSna'TJrera ua7)kcigo£i'na. Te£e 
me'jesge ni7)gita'winA.." 

Offering to Disease-giver. — "E'gi jige Hocere£u'wahi tcok'a' 
wagudje'ra si'ja, renijjgigl'nA.. Tcok'a' rohT sani^k h(Lbera', rohl' 
sanbjk hot£e'ruk'onA rani'je, tcok'aga' Djobenqgiwi'^xga e'ra. 
WoiiA'7irera uajjkcigoTna w5ta'ra te£e' jenur/ga roni^gigu'winAy ' 

Offering to South Wind. — ''E'gi hitc5'k'enTna rek'uhuhi'ra hitco'- 
k'ewahlVira tani'na te e'redjigo. Tcok'aga' Djobena.giwi')jxga 
n^djoradJQ'gi wona'Tirera uajjkcigc-Tna n^djoradjo'gi je£e' 
djadjo'na tani'na hoju'-ija. hldje' niijgigl'wigj hinagip'e'rez hara'- 
nicek'djanevnA. hirak'I'gegi. Wagudje'ra sl'jq, renbjgigi'n^. 
Woho'na te jesge nijjgitu'cdja. reha'winA.. Tcok'aga' djagii' 
nfdjjrora'djogi je£e' hatawi'nA. ha'n^ga." 

Offering to the Sun.— "E'gi hgibani'djirerahl'tcok'enrna tcok'aga' 
Djobena.giwi'>?xga n^Ldjoradjo'gi djagu' n§.djirora'djogi koici'p 
djadjo'na tani'na hoju'-ija, ni)jgip'axu'\ri-avn4ga hatawi'gi 
tani'na va-i'n.^p hinagi'hir/k'djonaVi hirage'je. E'je ai'rera. 
Wagudje'ra si'ja, renijjgigl'win^. Njta'k'atc wol'dJAnA n|ro'ni 
hlraki'sa niijgitu'cdja, reha'win^. Tani'na meje'nuga e'dja 
hiranl'na£iwlii^. Hinagi'gsabi-a^n^ga £ujjgi wonA'Tirera woirukT- 
p'ina ya£'uk'djaVria. UaijkcigoTna ya£u'k'dja'wira wota'ra 
meje'nuga nijjgita'winA.." 

Offering to Earihmaker. — "t)aj?gere'gi hi-g,'ndjennvi,na tani'na 
uai)kcigo£i' hlk'arata' ya£uijkdja'wira. Hlnagi'c£uwi-avn4ga hani'- 
nAgiwTn^. E'gi nec£une're nunige' hak'dja' h5ju'-ija. niijgi- 
p'a'ha reha'wicge wa-Vn^p hinagi'k'i^k'djonaHvije. Hinag&'wije. 
Tcok'aga' Djobena.giwi'7jxga e'je ai'rera. Tcok'aga' Djobena.- 
giwi'ijxga n|djora'djo)jgi wonA'7irera uaijkcigo^j'na. Xbjgita'wiiiA 
tani'na hak'dja' hoju-ija, niijgip'a'ha reha'winA.. Ai'gi wagudje'ra 
si'ja. nijjgitu'cdja. reha'wina wajohok'i'na djasge'xdji haniwI'nA, 
jesge'xdjj uarykcigoTna ya£u'k'djaVi. Nbjgita'winA. tani'na 
tcaha' nghiruxa'djera woho'nA wani-oi'tcge hjsgal'ja. wani-oi'tcge 
iiaijgl'ja. nbjgitu'cdja. reha'winA/' 

Offering to the Moon. — "E'gi Hfhe'wira k'u'nik'a wagudje'ra 
sija. e'gi njta'k'atcEra tani'na me'jesge ni^gitu'cdja. reha'win^. 

kadin] THE CLAN WAR-BUNDLE FEASTS 467 

in every respect. However, our grandfathers (the spirits) would not 
take offense at the (inadequacy) of our work, it is said. That we 
may not be weakened, for that reason it is that we are preparing the 
moccasins for our grandfathers. Up above we are going to send 
them." 

Offering to the Thunderbird. — "Grandfather Thunderbird, our clan 
is sending you moccasins. War powers and life are the requests we 
make in turn." 

Offering to Night Spirits. — "You who live in the east, moccasins do 
we send you, and the request we make, is war power and life. That 
we ask for." 

Offering to Disease-giver. — "Disease-giver, grandfather, moccasins 
we send you. Grandfather, life you possess on one side of your body, 
and death you are in control of on the other side of your body, so our 
grandfather Dj6bena.giwi'7;xga told us, it is said. War power and 
life, that is the request we make." 

Offering to South Wind. — "To you, grandfather South Wind, here 
is the tobacco for our grandfathers. You blessed grandfather 
Dj6bena.giwi'>?xga with war powers and life and you said yourself 
that you would bless (his descendants) whenever they offered you a 
handful of tobacco and you accepted it. Moccasins we are sending 
you. Food we are about to offer you. Whatever you blessed grand- 
father with that we ask of you." 

Offering to the Sun. — ' ' Grandfather Light-Wanderer, you said that 
if at any time we poured a handful of tobacco for you and smoked 
tobacco as an offering (you would give us) that with which you 
blessed grandfather Djobena.giwi'?jxga whenever we ask for it. So 
it is said. Moccasins we are sending you. Soup, vegetables, and maple 
sugar also we are about to send you. Tobacco is what we think of 
in connection with you. If you take cognizance of it, war honors 
we will assuredly obtain. Life, that is what we would like to obtain." 

Offering to Earthmdker. — "You who are above, our Father, we ask 
life of you, extending tobacco. You made this for us; you let us 
have it. Indeed it is you that made it and yet you will take a 
handful of it that we extend to you and accept it as an offering. 
That is what you said to us. So grandfather Djobena.gi\vi'r;xga said, 
it is said. You blessed grandfather Djobena.giwi'>?xga with war 
powers and life. Bless us in turn now that we are about to offer you 
a handful of tobacco. We, as many clansmen as there are here, are 
about to send to you moccasins so that we may obtain life from you. 
Tobacco, deerskins as offerings, food of the white-haired animal, of a 
male animal, we are about to offer you." 

Offering to- the Moon. — "Grandmother, the Moon, moccasins, soup 
and tobacco, these we are about to offer you. Our request is for the 

468 THE WINNEBAGO TKIBE [eth. Ann. 37 

Tcok'aga' Djobenagiwi'jjxga djagu' n§djirora'djo7?gi wota'ra. Je 
jesge nirjgita'win^." 

Offering to the Morning Star.—"~E'g\ jige £ua^gere'gi Wirago'cge 
Xetera' tcok'aga' DjobenQgiwi^xga n§,djora'djo7)gi djagu' ng,dji- 
rora'djoijgi wota'ra jesge'ja. niTjgita'win^ ha'nAgja. E'gi tani'na 
woho'na nfbiruxa/dJEra wani^gitu'cdja. reha'winA. a'n^ga." 

Offering to Earth. — "E'gi tcok'aga' waxop'i'ni Djobentigiwi'jjxga 
wanaei' rusgitcgi' nlcge' wana^'djorak'aVak'ere giji ma'na hik,aro'- 
k'enina. Ma/£una e ni£u'iiA djagii' ruk'o'nA. ni^gigl'gi tcok'aga' 
nijdjirora'dJQjjgi Djoberu\gi\vi'7jxga je£e' ni7;gita'win4. Tani'na njtak- 
adJEra' n^biruxa'dJEra wanijjgitu'cdjq. reha'win4 wona'7Jrera 
iia^kcigo£i'na wota' me'jesge nijjgita'win4 tcok'a'." 

Offering to the Water-spirit. — "E'gi jige tcok'a' huj?ge' roni-anl'nera 
tani'na woho'na ngibiruxa'djera wagudje'ra sl'ja. niijgita/winA. 
reha'win4. Wajo'kin.\ wona'7irera hatutcaip'dja/winA. iiaryk- 
cigoH'na ni>jgita'win4." 

General prayer to the spirits. — "Tcok'a'wira hlrudjl'djis zlk'dje'114 
nunige' h^ijk'e' wa'ji>7giravwini-§vndje tcok'a'wira. Sa'k'ereni'- 
r/k'djo)?gera, ni^k'uruhi'ndj reha'win^. Ua7jkcik tcowa/redja^nA. 
honiha'ra djagii' adjl'regi h^k'e' jesge'ja. e tuxu'ruk niijk'- 
djona'wi, nunige hlgu' djasge hawl'gi here'k'djonegaMja. Hitco'- 
k'ewahl'wira h§u?k'e' waji'nep'riunanivje aire'jare. Higu' 
djasge'nir;k hagi' here'k'djonegaMj^. Ni^k'uruhi'ndjwidjigo'." 
(Song.) 

Filling op the Ceremonial Pipe and Smoking Ritual 

First filling of the pipe. — E'gi jige' tcek waruTa'p nawg hl'regi 
nawc/na e karohoi'regi tanihu'ija. hoju-jra'n^ga waru7a'p edja, 
" tlaijgere'gi hi-a'ndjehihiVira tanl'hura hoik'e'rera edja hap'a'hi 
k'ere'ren^ uajjkdji'negi hu'nqbra hap'a'hi k'ere'ren^. Ma£u'na 
ua^kdji'negi n^yjkce a'n^^kce. E'sge tanihu'ra hoik'e'rera e'dja 
hap'a'hi k'ere'ren*.. N§/wa. haisu'ntc hirera tanihu-a'k'a warutco'- 
na hl'ja. wa£u'n4 ruza'n^ga tae' hi-a'n^ga hoira'tcge huwa'ren4 
han^'tcjx^dji k'igo'n4J?k'a hi wagigire'114. tJar^gera'cAn^ ha^yk'e' 
hlnuijgera' hlwagigi'nin^. Hogigj'^x tanihu'ra hi'nera rasge'p' hirera' 
jige' hoju'. 

Second filling of the pipe. — Hinubo'hona woho'na hidja' wak'ere'- 
rega e'gi k'eni nawai'nani warirya'p nawai'nek'djone^gi tanihu-ija. 

eadin] THE CLAN WAR-BUNDLE FEASTS 469 

things with which you blessed grandfather Djoben^giwi'^xga. That. 
we ask of you." 

Offering to the iteming Star. — "You who are above, Morning Star, 
our request is that you bless us with that with which you blessed 
grandfather Djoben^giwi'jjxga. Tobacco and food and a buckskin 
offering we are about to send you." 59 

Offering to Earth. — "Grandmother Earth, you also added your 
power to the spirit bundle that grandfather Djobenqgiwi'^xga made. 
The powers Earthmaker put you in control of, and with which you 
blessed grandfather Djoben^giwi'^xga, those we ask of you. 
Tobacco, soup, and a buckskin offering we are about to send to you 
and the request that we make of you, is war power and life." 

Offering to the Water-spirit. — "Water-spirit, grandfather whose 
body is of water,60 tobacco, food, and a buckskin offering for moc- 
casins, we are about to offer you. I and my relatives desire to lay 
our hands on war and life." 

General prayer to the spirits. — "Grandfathers, we have probably 
been very remiss in what we have done, but do not hold it against 
us, grandfathers. We greet you, war-bundle owners. The life 
(blessings) that those who have gone before us had, the songs that 
they handed down to us, not in their manner will we be able to sing, 
but still, however it be, it will be (our best). It has been said that 
nothing will provoke you,61 grandfathers. Well, however, that is the 
way we will do it. I greet you." (Song.) 

Filling of the Ceremonial Pipe and Smoking Ritual 

First filling of the pipe. — After they have sung the first war-bundle 
song, then they get a pipeful of tobacco ready and place it near the 
war bundle, speaking as follows : ' ' Our father who art above, for you 
the pipe is extended; up straight above it is placed." Up straight 
above it is extended to Earthmaker, they say. For that reason do 
they arrange the pipe in that way. Then when the songs are finished 
the attendant takes the pipe, lights it, and takes it with him to the 
left side, giving all the men in the lodge an opportunity to smoke. 
Women are not allowed to smoke. The tobacco in the pipe is 
entirely consumed as the pipe makes the circuit of the lodge and it 
is then filled again. 

Second filling of the pipe. — Then there at the feast for the second 
time do they place (the pipe). When they are about to sing the 

" That this spirit was not mentioned before is an oversight on the part of the informant. 

60 Deferential and ritualistic name for the Water-Spirit. It may mean chief. The general name which 
we loosely translate " Water-spirit " is " Wak'djexi." 

61 1, e., that no inaccuracy nor ignorance on their part will anger the spirits and cause them to refrain 
from bestowing their blessings. This is, of course, an expression of ritualistic modesty, but I suspect 
that there is also a reference intended here to the fact that in these degenerate days not only are 
individuals no longer blessed as of yore, but certain details of the ceremony have been forgotten. I see no 
reason for giving too much weight to this last fact, but it may be best to have it in mind. 

470 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ann. 37 

hoju'-iran^ga wanr/a'p tcowe'dja wak'adjowak'irrredja. tanihu'd- 
jega hoik'e'rerera hap'ahl' k'ere'ranA.ga. E'gi n|w§i hirana'nA. na- 
\vA.'na haisu'ndjiregrji tanihu'djega wak'andjaj'dja wap'a'hi k'ere'- 
n^jjk'a wak'andja'nA^jk'a wagigo'n.v>?k'a e'dja hadji'regi hi'nek'- 
djVgi. E'sge je£e' hidja' k'ere'nA^k'cAnA.. Wak'andja'n^ijk'a 
tanl'na woho'na nfbiruxa'djera, wak'aragl'£u wagigo'nA.)jk'a e'dja 
wak'a'ragu hadji'regi. E'sge tanihu'djega hijaidja'djegi hnjk'dje'ge 
e'sge wa£u'n4j?kcAnA. tanihu'djega. 

Third filling of the pipe. — E'gi wagigS'n^jjk'a wawigiwa'^xcAnA. 
we'nA, "Hatci'ndja hop'fi'hi-ak'ere'k'djone'je," e'ra wagigo'n^k'a 
kl'ja. we'n4, "Sa/nbjk herotco/djeregi hop'a'hi k'ere'ren^." E'gi 
n§wai'nenA. H5cere£u'wahi mVwa. wa'n^gi vvawieu-ine'n4. E'gi 
haisu'ndjirera jige' tanihu'ra hogigi'ijx wagigi'ren^. 

Fourth filling of the pipe. — E'gi jige' tani'hura p'jhi-oju-a'n^ga 
egi jige' wawigl'waijxcAnA.. 

"Hatci'ndja hop'a'hl-a?" "K'ere'k'dje'je mai'ndja t£&bere." 
E'sge mai'ndja te$pce. Mak'u'hanegi hurjge e'dja tanl'huk'a 
kop'ahi t£§p wa/u'-inen^, mai'ndja t£aibrega. E'gi vase' 
na.W4'nA nacdjai'negi tani'hura hogigi'jjx hiwagigl'je. E'gi k'irigi' 
haijk'e ojunl'je je'gu maindjat£g/pce." 

Basic Ritual 

Host's first speech. — Sa'k'ereniijk'dJQ^gEra mlnA^k'ca'wajjgre 
hltco'k'ewahlVira. Ep'I'nA. hlnagl'djiwira. Cjdj wat£e'eni)}k'av- 
ragik'djonaVi nunige kaijk'e' wajigl'rawlni-§,'dje. Tok'e'wehi 
t£eni)jk'a'ragik'djonaVi nunige waxop'i'ni wara'diire cewewl'wiijge 
hir/gl'djjwrra. Ep'I'114. Harjk'e' wajg/ni-ija. p'jhanl'k'djonaVi 
nunige hltco'k'ewahlVira yoire'regi herera'tcok'aga' Djobenagi- 
wi'vjxga honiha' glk'ere'regi wora'tcga, na£I'n4. Je'sgek'djonihax- 
win4 tcege'dja honiha'ra djasge' tcok'aga' waglt£u'biregi yoweha'- 
k'djawlvje nunige' honiha'ra. Hlgu' hl'jaijk'ira hlrap'e'rez a'iHga 
e'cAnA. hawerai'cge p'ik'djone'je; tcok'aga' e'je al'ren^. Hlgu' 
djasge a'n^ga honiha' hlgu' djasge nana'nA.Tjk'1 yak hjbra'gi hl- 
tco'k'ewahlVira hlnirygi'p'erez hl'rek'djonena, al'rera. Je'sge 
p'ewl'wiijge hok'a'raga na£I'nisge. Honiha' tests' waha'i- 
k'djonihaVin^; djobo'hA. hak'aral'sundjwigi e'gi hSxgu' sak£i'na 
herek'djone'nA. 

kadin] THE CLAN WAR-BUNDLE FEASTS 471 

war-bundle songs then they fill the pipe and place it in front of the 
war bundle, in the path of the Thunderbirds, extending the mouth- 
piece in that direction (i. e., the west). Then they would sing some 
songs and when these were finished, the Thunderbirds would come 
as feasters to where the pipe lay extended and smoke. That is why 
they place the pipes there. The Thunderbirds do this (i. e., smoke) 
as a sign of acceptance of the tobacco, food, and buckskins. So that a 
Thunderbird might smoke, do the feasters place the pipe there. 

Third filing of the pipe. — Then the host asked the others, "In 
what direction shall I j)lace this pipe?" and one of the feasters said, 
"Toward the south, place it." Then they sang the songs of the 
Disease-giver. Then when they were finished they carried around 
the pipe. 

Fourth filing of the pipe.- — Then the host fills the pipe again and 
again asks, "In what direction shall I place the pipe ?" (and some one 
answers), "Place it toward the earth." So he placed it toward the 
ground. For those under the ground, the Water-spirits, they also 
place the pipe by standing it on the ground. Then they sing paint 
songs and when they are finished they pass the pipe around so that 
all may smoke. When it returns (to the host) it is not filled again 
but placed empty on the ground. 

Basic Ritual62 

Host's first speech. — "War-bundle owners, who are sitting here, I 
send forth my greeting to you. It is good that you have come (in 
response to my invitation). It is my purpose to make you tired 
from sitting, but do not for that reason think any the worse of us. 
We will make you hungry, hungry to the point of starvation,63 but 
(we know) you came for the sake of the spirits (not for our sake). 
It is good. We are not going to do anything in the correct manner, 
but our grandfathers who live in the west taught our grandfather 
Djoben^giwi'7jxga some songs and these we are going to try and 
repeat. We will now sing the songs just as they taught it to grand- 
father. We may perhaps sing only one song. However, if you 
know only one song and take pains about it, it will suffice (to pro- 
pitiate the spirits); so grandfather said, it is said. Anyhow, if we 
try to cry, in our efforts of singing,64 our grandfathers will take 
cognizance of it, it is said. That is what we are flunking of when 
we try to get the spirits' attention by singing.65 We will do our 
best to sing the songs,66 and we will sing four of them ; and when we 

62 For explanation see Introduction. 

u Ritualistic depreciation. 

64 I. e., if you put yourself into a state of religious fervor, a state that I have generally rendered by the 
word "pitiable." 

K The word "hok'a'raga" means, literally, "by voice to attract attention." "H6" is not an instru- 
mental particle but the word for voice, speech. 

66 Literally, "to make one's breath visible in the form of song or speech," a ritualistic circumlocution for 
song. 

472 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [bth.ann. 37 

"Sa'k'erera tci-o'ju rnlna^kca'wajjgre ni'Tjk'uruhi'ndj reha'wi- 
djigoV (Warvrya'p N^wft.) 

tla^gi'ja. w5gig5'min47?k' aga'k'inQ^k t%p djira'n^ga we'je. 

First guest's address to the young people. — "Sa'k'erenijjk'djo^gera 
mlna.ijkca'waiygre njk'uruiii'ndj reka'win^, Hotcintci'n watcegera' 
waxop'i'nihlk'isge'ja. hSnika'ra niTjgiwawi'^u-inek'djanaVe hlwacl'ra 
djirehiregi'ji \vanAr;gijiwi'ne wSn^'TJrera na.k'ixu'ruk na/I'wine. 
E'gi hl'nygEra wa^gwatca'bwira wonA'Tire \van4gLxu'ruk na/I'- 
wine. Ha^k'e' ga/dju^ga je'sge hlnuxu'rugenihaha/kcAiH tcege'- 
dja uar;kcik tcowa'redjane hi'ja. \var07I' te jesge hlga dja'n^ga 
ua^gi-e'riga je'nuryga hiwaci' djirehl'rega. Hana/tciiyxdj; ha.ijk'1'ja. 
mln.v'genina)jksfa'je. E'gi jige hlnygera' hicge uarjkci'go£i wagi'-'y 
waeu'-ineje. Hajseretci'cge wacira' ka^k'aga' horuc£a'giranis£avje 
ai'rera. Je'sge hanik'a'rajlwige waha'djen4. WoriA'TJre uaijkci- 
go^'na e'gi wo\vat£e'giregi horuxu'rugEra je ai'rera je'sge p'ewi'7jge 
wahe'114. Sa'k'erera miiiAjjkca'waqgre niijk'uruhi'ndj rehawidjigo'. 

Host's second speech. — Sa'k'ereni^k'dJQ'gera minajjkca'wa^gere 
njk'uruhindj reha'win^. 

"Hltco'k'ewahl'wira tcin^gidjai'ja. wajadjl'giji wirok'u'na 
wawiro'k'yijgi. P'1'114 hip'erezlre'je. Hlp'e'rez na£i'negi 
n^Ldjok'I'dja. el'regi. Hl'nyk waro'ni m§k'§' al'reje. HitcV- 
nuryk'evja. nf'tcgera tek' hi'regi. Hinygl'ja. iwustfe'k'i)jglji hujjge' 
ma>jgitca'wa_ \vat£y'pce huijge' xgicgu'ni wajqgy'zEra wajinuk'o'no 
glglgl. Hlnujjk'djega n^djodjaj'je. Hujjge' teewagik'i'kefi-axn4ga 
hlny'k'djega e'dja wirok'u' rusgl. P'1'114 hip'ere'ziregi. Mgik'aj'- 
k'arartcgagi. Tcek'dji'114 \va£y'je. Mfxl' flaijgeregl' hlwfzi'gija. 
m|xI'k'orascop giwj'x n|ji'je. HlnygEra wiryje' mak'ai'ja. 

radin] THE CLAN WAR-BUNDLE FEASTS 473 

are finished then it will be time for us to eat.67 Warriors who are 
sitting within the lodge, we send forth our greetings to you." (War- 
bundle song.) 

Then a man sitting opposite the seat of the host gets up and 
speaks. 

First guest's address to the young people. — "War-bundle owners, 
young men, those who are the proxies of spirits, are about to use a 
song for you and start a dance in your behalf; and when they do it, 
get up and try to obtain war powers by dancing. Women, you should 
also try to obtain war powers for your brothers by dancing. Now 
we are not able to obtain (the number of men) that our ancestors 
used to obtain in the beginning. Then, if in a speech they asked 
for them, as many men as there were around would immediately 
begin to dance. Not one of them would remain in bis seat. Young 
women, they used to act in that way in order to obtain life also. 
All night they would dance and not a single one would tire of it. 
We encourage you to do thus; that is why I am saying this. That 
the obtaining of life may be easy, is the reason they told us this. 
Because I believe it (likewise) is the reason I am telling it to you. 
War-bundle owners who are seated here, I greet you all." 

Host's second speech. — "War-bundle owners who are sitting here, 
I greet you all. 

' ' Our grandfathers knew that one of a different tribe 6S had had a 
vision and obtained material for use (in life). They tried to obtain 
it and (finally) asked him to pity them. The medicine was called 
hinuTjgwa'roni.69 They made the heart of the man of this other 
tribe (Hit£e'nu7jk'e) sad.70 (He had obtained it in the following 
manner): A woman fasted71 and one of the Water-spirits whom the 
Creator had placed there for all eternity, a Water-spirit for keeping 
(the earth) quiet,72 blessed her with the power he had been placed 
in charge of. The Water-spirit had himself die and the woman there 

" Literally, "last movements" in reference to the fast-eating contest that takes place during the feast. 

68 This is not a Winnebago tale. 

89 My interpreter could not translate the name of this medicine into English. He thought that it might 
mean "wicked woman medicine," but this is extremely doubtful. 

70 1, e., at the idea of parting with it. What tribe is meant by "HitVnuijk'e," it has been impossible to 
find out. The word, I believe, means "those whom we can speak with " in reference to the fact that their 
language was intelligible to the Winnebago. I was definitely assured that neither the Oto, Iowa, or 
Missouri were meant. I have sometimes surmised that the Winnebago may be referring to the Mandan, 
whose language, from the little I have seen of it, is surprisingly close to that of the former. All that the 
older Winnebago could tell me about the Hit'e'nuijk'e was the fact that many years ago they had been in 
contact with a tribe speaking a language similar to their own. 

n Literally, " to thirst oneself to death," the ritualistic expression for fasting. 

« He is referring to one of the four beings whom Earthmaker had placed at the four ends of the world to 
prevent it from moving continually, as related in the origin myth of the Medicine Dance and of the Thunder- 
bird clan. 

186823°— 22 31 

474 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ANN. 37 

n^pwiro'ra hik'I'-o hl-a'nAga hlwizl'k'djega himanA/k'I t£e'xdjj 
ci'beregi; tcirahe'ra howa'djihQhf je hinugenA/k'a tcowehi-e'dja 
k'IrjnA/kee. M^k'o'k'on^jjk je£e' £uk'dje'gi hereje. Egi uaijk 
nace'rege iha/pcAnA. nihe'ra hate'gi. £Ja)?k'djega wageje', "Hak'- 
ik'u'ruk'oza'dje ha^k'e' e'gi owahu' na£iya/dje." Waja/ wahl'- 
racge wawogi'rakce hirak'a'rak'arawi-a/dje. "Hahe' te£e wase' 
nawa.ijk'djone'nA. uajjk'djega djigl' t£ek'djone'n4. Ha^k'e' 
djlni7jk'dje'n4 hirak'a'rak arawi-avdje." E'gi h^he'regi wase' 
nqw^'gi lia'^k'djega nAijgadjI'je. ftogJTi'ra nunige hok'awa'n^ga 
wacidja'£u t£eje. E'gi wase'no^k'a hitVmujk'e wase' hlgai'reje 
tenia gldjal'ja. meje'nuga." 

"Wase'nAk'a p'ina hlp'e'rezirevge hlgik'I'cereje nfdjok'I'dja. 
ci'regi wagiru'cdja. huhl'je. Ege wase'nA>?k'a harutc^'biregi 
haryk'e' tci-oro'gEregi wajinok'u'-inaru/je. WaruTa'p k'u'-ineje. 
Wase'nAjjk'a wona'7iredja hi£u'-inegi p'irjgi hlp'e'reztinege. Hl'- 
k'aracrcik hirege' waruia'pregi h5k'a'rak'aW7jk hire'n^. Honi- 
ha'ra tc$t£i' waha'k'djonihaVinA. wasi-a'ni haniwi-a'nAga 
wahe'k'djonihaVije waruia'p nawa. wahe'k'djonihfiVin^. 
Wasja'ni haniwi'gi haga waja'nija. £Q'-inewicguvnin4. Hajjk'e' 
wasia'ni hIranA/k'Ik£iwi a'n^ga waha/ni>?k'djonavwin4 honiha'ra 
ha^k'e' wawat^' p'lnjk'djona'wi nunige hija^k'I'ra hlrap'e'- 
rezgrcge 7ak' hjbi-f'dje al'rera. Je'sge wahek'djona'win^. 
Sa'k'ereniyjk'dJQvgEra mlnA^kca'warygre njk'uruhi'ndj reha'- 
widjigo." (Wase' Nawa..) 

Host's third speech- — " Sa'k'ereni7jk'dJQvgEra minA^kca'wa^gre 
ni'^k'uruhindj reha'win^. Tok'e'wehi t£enir;k'a'ragi-an4);gwi 
nunige' hok'a'raga na/I'nisge wahanA/gwire. 

Tcok'aga' Dj5benqgiwi'7jxga uaijgi'jq hot£e'ruk'onavjja. sa'ni^k" 
yorotco/djeregi naijk'I'ji waxop'i'ni wara'djirera djanwjga'k'i 
hl'cAiiA. hiraitce'raje w6na'7Jre ruk'o'nAn^ xete'ja. hereje. E'gi 
hfbiruk'onal'ja. hereje e'gi hot£e' ruk'o'naya. hereje. Tcok'aga' 
wirarotcu'djegadja. hak'idja'je wageje' wona'ijre uajjkci'go£i n§dji- 
rpra'dJQgi. E'gi wageje, "Hagare'ja. kak'arak£u'icge redju'na 
djadjaj'xdji kip'a' nine'gi jedjaj'xdjj p'a hatei'ndja na^k'I'ji 
hq7)k'e' wama'ninirjk'djonevnA. howajaire'cge, honi'jjk waci'nina 

kadin] THE CLAN WAR-BUNDLE FEASTS 475 

took the material (the remains of the Water-spirit).73 That it is 
good, they knew. Then she tried her medicine. The first time she 
did the following: Up above, almost near the sky, a hawk stood 
whirling around. The woman dipped her forefinger into the medicine 
and then she pointed it at the hawk and it fell dead; she made it fall 
through the top of a house; right in front of the woman it landed. 
She wanted to use it as a medicine bag. Then she dreamed that 
they had taken a man from his home that he might fast. She said 
to the man, ' ' Put forth all your strength and don't try to come here." 
She also told his relatives to watch him. "To-night I am going to 
sing a paint song and if he comes he will die. Take care of him that 
he doesn't come." That night she sang a paint song and the man 
came running to her. She forbade him but he came anyhow and 
he died dancing. This medicine is called hitee'nu>jk'e medicine, re- 
ferring to the name of another tribe, and that is how it acted. 

"They (our ancestors) knew that it was good paint and he (one 
of them) tried to get him (the Hit£e'nu»/k'e) to bless him with the 
paint (the latter had obtained from the woman). "When they 
obtained it, they never used it in their own midst (i. e., among 
themselves). They made a medicine-bundle of it. The paint-medi- 
cine, it is good to use in war. That they knew very well. They 
were very sparing in their use of it (because it was so valuable). 
They placed it in their war-bundle. Paint-songs we are about to 
use, yet we are singing for the war-bundle. If, indeed, we had paint 
medicine we would amount to something. We are not going to sing 
as if we thought ourselves in possession of paint-medicines nor will 
we sing them correctly. Yet if we knew only one, if we could (in 
singing this one) bring ourselves to the state of crying (it would be 
all right), it is said. That is why we say it." 74 (Paint song.) 

Host's third speech. — "War-bundle owners wdio are seated here, I 
greet you. I know that I am causing you to famish with hunger, 
but we are doing this in an attempt to get the attention (of the 
spirits). One in control of death who dwells in the south 75 and who 
of himself possesses greater war power than all the other spirits that 
exist, blessed grandfather Djobena^giwi'^xga. He is in control of 
life and in control of death. He met grandfather in the middle of 
the day and blessed him with war powers and life. He said (to our 
grandfather when he blessed him), "If I should ever go on the 
warpath, your descendants, as many as they are and wherever they 
live, I will not tread upon, should they get sick.76 However, your 
posterity never will get sick. Should they ever have a bad illness, 

73 The Winnebago believe that the "bones" of the mythical "Water-spirits" possess the most magical 
qualities when powdered and mixed up into medicines. All "paint medicines" are made of "Water- 
spirit bones." 

74 AU these sentences are, of course, expressions of ritualistic modesty. 
7& 1, e., Disease-giver. 

76 Cf. note 36, p. 457, for explanation of these words. 

476 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ann. 37 

ha^k'e' howajai'ranirjk'djone'iH. E'gi £u'inegi ua7)kci'go£i'na 
hlrani'nA I'rawi-avn4ga tanio'ni^giju'irawigi hiju'juglxj%." 

" Hocere£u'wahira e'xdjj wa£uje' wak'a/tcA^k wagigi'je eje. 
tTa)jkci'gofi'na howaja' cici'k' eu-ina'n4ga tani-oniijgI'ju-ira\vigi 
hiju'jugEra woho'na tani'na m^cu'na cur,ksga'rij§, teje'nuga 
nCibin^'gicuruxadji-a'n^ga. "E'gi hiju'juk wak'^tc^'k nirjgi'- 
giwira h6we£Q'na ru-a'Tira c£uwi'n4. Nabiruxa'djera hin4 hinagi'- 
giwigi hiju'jugEra hocewe£u'wigi. tJarjkci'go^ howatcehi'ra hij| 
tcora'ju wac£u'gi. Howaja' cici'k £Q'n4 jedjai'^xdj p'a, hanant- 
cgai'sdjonexn4. H^k'e' hawidje'dja. hij(i howaja' cici'k £u'nik'- 
djonevn4." 

Hocere£u'wahira ewe'n4. E howaja' cici'k £u'wahlra wege 
jesgek'djone'114. Te'jesge tcSk'aga' Dj6benA^giwi')jxga ngidjirod- 
jai'neje. Honiha'ra tc§t£i djireha'k'djonehaVin4. Sa'k'erenhjk'- 
djo'gEra mina>?kca'wa>?gre niijk'uruhi'ndj reha'widjigo. (Hocere£u'- 
wahi N|w$.) 

Host's fourth speech. — "Sa'k'erenbjkdjc/gera minaijkca'waqgre 
niijk'Qruhindj reha'win4. Hiro-a'gEregi hak'aral'suntc djik'djona'- 
win4. Tcok'aga' Djoben^giwi'^xga h^bogu'regi hok'a'was mani'- 
na wax5p'i'ni wana£j djok'arak'e'reje. Tcok'aga' Djobenqgiwi'- 
rjxga, p'e'rez na^gi'ji tok'e'wehi iwu's t£e'k'jje lianadjodjaj'sge 
wa£uje. Tcek'dji'nA hati-a'gin§vtcgi djoba/hona ga'dja hok'a'was 
mani'na hagu'iregi. Rok'o'no gu'ireje niha' gu-ireje higi' kiridje'- 
reje. 'Uarjkcige' Iwust£e' rak'j'ge n|djonidja'win4. H§he' wigai'- 
rera je'sge wahadja'win4. WonA'TJrera uaqkcigc-Tna n^djjrora'- 
dJAn4 higai'reje'. Woruxu'djgadja. djaguana'cge, 'Te£e h|he' 
wana'gen4 hl'regi?' Woruxu'tcgadja. te wa'nbjk xonu'nbjk hece'- 
pge wa'iiAjjkce. Gicdjahe'regi. Jige hlral'tcera n^ntcge'ra te'kce.' 
"Tcak'o'! Jegu tce'kdje!' kireje. Je'gu hatia'gin^djera jige' p'ihi' 
hiwaja'je je'gu ha.7jk'e' wa'rudjenrje. Hak'e'weha. nA^ga'dja. 
E'gi hgbogu'regi Inihe'ra hagu'-iregi. Rok'o'no hagu'-ireje niha' 
gu-ireje, e'gi hidja' k'Iridje'reje, 'Uaqkcige' n(idjonidj$'win4. 

eadin] THE CLAN WAR-BUNDLE FEASTS 477 

they have the means of obtaining life by praying for it,77 by offering 
tobacco and a flute.78 

"Disease-giver himself made these things holy. Thus they would 
obtain life, if they had any illness, by offering you reed flutes, food, 
tobacco, feathers, a white dog, and by making you at the same time 
an offering of buckskin hides. (Thus Disease-giver spoke to our 
grandfather when he blessed him:) 'A holy flute I made for you, and 
I forbade you to blow upon it, yet you did it. Now, hereafter, if you 
offer me a sufficient number of buckskins, you may blow upon it. A 
different life from that of others will you lead, if you do that. You 
will be able to cut off (stop) a bad disease caused by someone else. 
Nor will this one (who was ill) ever have another disease.' 79 

"Thus Disease-giver spoke. This is what the one who causes 
disease said. That is how they blessed our grandfather Djobena.- 
giwi'^xga. A song I am now about to start. War-bundle owners 
who are seated here, I greet you." (Disease-giver song.) 

Host's fourth speech. — ' ' War-bundle owners who are seated here, 
I greet you. The last (songl we will now finish. You who are in the 
east, Night Spirits, you also added your blessing to the spirit bundle 
of grandfather DjQbenqgiwi'rjxga. So that he might know (be 
blessed by) the spirits, grandfather Djobem\giwi')jxga starved and 
thirsted himself to death 80 and made himself pitiable. At first he 
fasted four nights and the Night Spirits came to him; with mighty 
sounds they came.81 There they stood (and said), 'Human, you have 
thirsted yourself to death and we bless you (for that reason). We 
who speak are the spirits who are called Night Spirits.' They blessed 
him with war power and life, they said. Then he looked and (said to 
himself), T wonder whether these really are the Night Spirits that 
speak.' So he looked at them and they were small birds called 
hece'pgeP They had fooled him. Then once again was his heart 
sore. 'Well! I will die,' he thought (fasting). So he fasted again 
and once again he rubbed on (the charcoal). For six nights he con- 
tinued to fast. And again from the east the Night Spirits came. 
They came making a great noise and they stood near him (and said) , 
'Human, we bless you. You have thirsted yourself to death and 
you have made your heart sore. We felt sad on your account. With 

" A rather curious expression used only in elevated language and meaning, literally, "to obtain with 
the mouth " — i. e., either by speeches, prayers, or singing. The expression would hardly be permitted in 
ordinary Winnebago. 

79 He does not mean by offering flutes, but by playing on them. Reed flutes are generally contained in 
the blessings of most spirits, but they seem to be more closely connected with the Disease-giver and the 
Buffalo. 

" This, I believe, is the meaning of the last three sentences. They are somewhat obscure, and I do not 
guarantee the correctness of the rendering. 

80 Ritualistic expression for fasting. 

si All powerful spirits are supposed to approach with loud noises. This is also characteristic of the 
Ojibway spirits. 
88 English equivalent unknown. 

478 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [bth. ann. 37 

I'wus t'e'rak'iijge nftcge'ra nlte'gEra. Nftcge'ra ni^gitegwl'n^. 
Wona'TJrera ua^kcigoTna n§,djirora'dJA.gi,' hiijgal'renA. glji'- 
Woruxu'tcce, 'Djagua'h^he' wanA')?genA. hirega'dja?' hireje. Te 
hqryk'e' ha.he' wanl'nA^kce. K'awl'cge, tcoxdjl, ci'k'ok'ok' jeje'- 
sge wa/na^kce gicdja'k'e wa'najjkce kl'ji. E'tcg, npcge'ra tek'djl'- 
je, "Tcak'o! glji tcek'dje,' hireje' glji. Hata'gjn|dJEra. Jjge' 
p'lhj' hlwa ja'je. Hatagina/djena7jk'a haruwo'gahg, naqga'dja. 
E'gi jjge h(ibogu'regi ha.he'ra n|wa.gu'-ireje. Nlhavgu'-ireje 
higl' k'Iridje' regi wagai'reje,' Hitcycge', n§djonidJA/win4. Hlgy 
k'i'ni sJI klra'TagwTn^. "Oaijkcige' hi^k'aga' hija/ n^djwadja'- 
wininA.. W6na'7}rera uajjkcigoTna djagu' gip'j' ^uijk'dje'a*.',' 
hlgal'reje giji. Wonryl'tcce te, 'Djagua'nacge hijhe' wanA/gEnAj' 
hlregl gadja,. Te ha,>?k'e' h§he' wanlna/kce. P'atco gisge wi'iEra 
djiinaga tcap'5xge'ra ce'pgi. Jesge wa'nA.)jkce dja'nA.ga waniijk 
clci'geni^gera k'lji. Hl'kcakciT-ire hireje' Djobenagiwi'r/xga. 
Tcak'o! Hatagin^'djeregi je'gn tce'k'dje' hereje. Hatagin§'- 
djera jige' p'ihi' wajaje je'djuijga m$cdj§/ akce. 

Tanl'na n^ba/k'I hoju' h^hlo'wak'IrjreMja. hop'a'hi n^ji-a'n^ga 
tanl'na n^bo'ju edjop'a'hi tanl'na waglwa'ha. n|ba'k'I n§ji-a'nA.ga 
nfdjok'idja'xdji akce. Je'djiiiyga m&cdja/ n^tcge'ra tekce glji. 
K'e'repon$vija. na_ga'dja. E'gi kaguadjl'reje. tJa^kcige', 
hani^k'oa'djin^. HironA/gireje hfbogu'regi hap'a'hi howa'ni- 
ak'ararreje; h^he' tcmo'gEra hatci'ndjanAijk'I e'dja hanl-a/girevje. 
H§he' hu^gera e hagu'hi wagjgl'je. Tcinojjk'Isa'gedja tclseredji'ja. 
h^bogu'ra hap'a'hi-a'kce. E'dja hani-o'-ik'awrarreje. H|he' 
dja'n^ga xete-a'k'I waj|ruk'o'nono)jk'rji je'nuijga tdroixdjl-a/kce. 
Hok'awa'regi wahlsQ'sgara si koc£o'gedja hip'a' hlna/p'ogere^je. 
Tcl-a'k'a wohc/na p'edjera' djanaga'k'I woho'na godjowai'reje 
hadjaje. E'gi tcaha'ra tclsa'niryk tcowe'ra Eunina/je. E'gi wagai'reje 
uarykcige' higuk'I'ni s£Iarawe'nA. ; hlgyk'i'ni n^tcge'ra nite'kce. 

badin] THE CLAN WAR-BUNDLE FEASTS 479 

war power and life we bless you,' they said. Then he looked at them. 
'I wonder whether they really are the Night Spirits?' he thought. 
They were not the Night Spirits who were speaking to him. The 
birds that spoke were the kaim'cge, tcoxdji, and cj'fc'oifc'ojfc'.83 They 
were the ones that spoke and they were the ones that fooled him. 
Instead of feeling sad this time, however (he said), 'I don't care 
what happens; I am willing to die (in order to get the blessing),' 
he thought to himself. Then he began fasting again. lie rubbed 
the (charcoal) over (his face) again. Seven nights he fasted. And 
once again from the east the Night Spirits came singing. They came 
and stood (before him) and they said, 'Nephew, we bless you. So 
long have you been sad and cried to us piteously (that we will bless 
you). No one did we ever bless before. In war and life you shall do 
just as you wish,' they said. Then he looked again. 'I wonder 
whether those speaking are really the Night Spirits?' he thought. 
But they were not the Night Spirits. They were the bluebird, 
g\'sge,Si and duck, and as many of them as there were, their breasts 
were dark. As many birds as there were, they were bad. 'My, O my! 
How they abuse me!' he cried. At first Djobena.giwi'7;xga had 
thought in his fastings that just to spite them he would fast again. 
Now he rubbed (charcoal on his face) again and wept bitterly.85 
Both hands contained tobacco and he stood in the direction from 
which the Night Spirits came and weeping, put himself in the most 
abject condition. 

"Now, indeed, to its very depths did his heart ache. Ten nights 
did he fast. Finally they (the Night Spirits') came after him. 'Hu- 
man, I have come after you.' He followed (the spirits) and they took 
him to the east; to the site of a Night Spirit village they took him. 
The chief of the Night Spirits had sent this one to go after him. In 
the village was a long lodge standing in the east. There they took 
him. As many Night Spirits as there were in control of powerful 
blessings, of that many the lodge was full. When he entered he 
walked in white feathers up to his knees.86 Many kettles and 
much food he saw stretched right across (the lodge). On the out- 
side, a buffalo hide stretched almost across the entire lodge. Then 
they said to him, 'Human, without giving up, long you have suffered; 
your heart has, indeed, been sad. They, as many spirits as there are 

"English equivalents for the first two unknown. The last is probably the robin. 

m English equivalent unknown. 

» He wept bitterly not so much on account of his disappointment as for the purpose of bringing himself 
into a state of religious ecstacy . The change of attitude from one of spite to realization that not in such a 
way were blessings from deities like the Night Spirits to be obtained is very well brought out here. It was a 
cardinal tenet of the religion of the devout shamans that your success in obtaining blessings was in direct 
proportion to the motives and intensity of feeling you brought to your prayer. To throw away your life 
through mere disappointment was deemed absolutely unethical, (a thought that) is brought out quite 
distinctly in the systematic teachings given to the young. 

B« The lodges of the Night Spirits are supposed to be strewn with white feathers as a sign of holiness. As 
far as known no symbolism is attached to it. 

480 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ANN. 37 

Ha£e'nine,na djanlsge'k'djera td-o'ju-avgere meje'nuga han§.'tcj 
h§he' wa£ua'r;kcAnA. E'gi ne h$he' wlruk'o'nAiiA. £uine'n4.- 
Woguzotcl'ra hacdjaco'iiAjjgre, te£e honik£u'-inena. Woho/na 
djasga'gere ha^k'aga' curuc£a'geni);k'djonevn4. Tcaha' n|biruxa'- 
djera djan4ga'cdjare teje'nuga tani-o'waxu rak'ere'ranicek'djon- 
en^. Hoici'p djasga'gere jesga'njhek'djanevnA.. H^he' tclnc/- 
geregi woguzotcl'ra honik£u'-inen4. WonA'TJrera djagu' c£unanac£i 
cnijyk'djone'n^. E'gi uaijkcigo£i'na djadjaj'xdji p'a. Tani-6'- 
wax\pna £una'nihevgi jedjaj'xdj; p'a hoici'p'dji, tani'na woho/na 
tcaha' n|biruxa'djera macy' cudjera' hoici'p'dji wogu'zotcira 
hacdjare. E'gi dji-$'gik'djonevnA. hoici'p hlnijygi p'erez hiranilic'- 
k'djonehv*.. 

"Tcok'aga' Djobenqgiwi'jjxga, te'jesge hjgal'regi. E e'je. 
K'arata' wahe'k'dJAnaVina honiha'ra tc§t£j waha'wigi. Sa'niryk' 
h|bogure'rera tcok'aga' Djobenagnvi'jyxga honiha'ra djasge'xdji 
gik'ere'regi ha.>?k'e' jesge'xdji howeha'winicge hltco'k'ewahlVira 
ha.7jk'e' wajine'p'ihrnanije. Al'rejare. Honiha'ra hlja.k'1'ra 
hlrap'e'rezkTcge 7&k hjbi-^'dje airera. Je'sge wage' wahek'- 
djona/wigadja.. Sa'k'erenJTjk'dJQ^gEra mina^kca'wajjgre nbyk'uru- 
hindj reha'widjigoV (H^he' N§w^.) 

The Feast 

Host's speech. — "Sa'k'erenbjk'djo/gera mlnajykca'waijgre nb?k'- 
uruhi'tccAa*.. Hij^k'i'ra waxop'i'nina waj^gu'zEra glji e 
wa7jga£u'nA. here nunige' waj§'gere e an§/tc £u nunige' djagii'rija. 
njta'k'atc hiTjgigi'wige tani'na warutc xo'p'ini hlrak'I'rutcap 
hagitu'cdja, rehak'djona'win^. Djasgl'kiwi-a^ga; djasge halcge 
hiryglp'e'rez hirana'guni hlnega hlwecu'nugadja. A'n^ga, 'Uar/kci'- 
gEra liijg. sak'ererera niiygena/k'I e'dja wohQ'djega wara'djenjTn.^. 
E'gi jige sa'nhjk' hoire'regi herera' tani'na wagigl' na£I'nisge rohi'- 
wlk'Isgawi wajjgaik'a'rabiraVira jesge'jq. Warutc xop'ini tani'na 
hlraru'tcap hagitu'cdja. reha'wira yoire'regi wak'a'ndja kurygera. 
Djasge' halcge hbygip'e'rezirana^guni. Hjnega hlwa£u'cunyga,dja. 
a'ii4ga. Jige sak'ere'ja, hldja'na^k'I wohQ'na e-a'ratc." 

badin] THE CLAN WAR-BUNDLE FEASTS 481 

in the lodge, that many talked of what was to happen to you. And I, 
I am the chief of the Night Spirits. This creation-lodge just as you 
see it (i. e., with all it contains) I give to you.87 You will never be 
in want of food. You are to offer as many buckskins as you see here 
and tobacco for all time. Thus it shall be. The "creation-lodge'' of 
the village of the Night Spirits I give to you. You can go on as 
many war parties as you wish and obtain as much life. As many 
tobacco offerings as they (i. e., you and your descendants) continue 
to give, all the tobacco, food, buckskin offerings, red feathers, as 
many as there are, they will all come to the "creation-lodge" that 
you see, and we will accept them.' 

"Thus did they speak to grandfather Djobena.gjwi'j;xga. So he 
said. We will do this that we may ask (blessings) for our relatives 
and sing songs. Even if we do not perform everything in just the 
manner that the spirits in the east (told) our grandfather Djobena- 
giwi^xga, we know that our grandfathers (the spirits) will not be 
offended. So they say. Even if you know only one song, if you 
bring yourself to the point of crying in your efforts (it will be all 
right). Thus we mean to say it. War-bundle owners, who are 
seated here, I greet you." (Night Spirit song.) 

The Feast 

Host's speech. — "War-bundle owners who are seated here, I greet 
you. Every spirit that the Creator created he made for us,88 but 
whatever food he made for us all those things we were to offer up (to 
the spirits) together with tobacco and the sacred feast. What we are 
to do, what I can do to make these things known to them, that is 
what we should think of and talk about. (This is what the Creator 
said) : Let (the host) call upon a warrior, a young man present at the 
feast. For the one who lives in the west he should make offerings of 
tobacco and attempt to be like (the spirits), so that one of our own 
members should be considered (by the spirits) as the same as them- 
selves.89 A sacred feast and tobacco together with it we are about 
to offer to the chief of the Thunderbirds in the west. What can I 
do that they might have knowledge of these (offerings) ? Thus we 
should be thinking, (the Creator) said. A war-bundle owner who is 
present we should call upon (to take charge of) a kettle." 90 

" The lodges of the spirits are always called "creation lodges" in reference to the fact that it was by the 
assembled spirits in these lodges that at the beginning of the world everything was set in order. The 
principal "creation lodge" was that of Earthmaker, to which thesonlof adead individual wandered after 
death and from which he was sent to the world again if he chose to take human form once more. 

M I. e., that they might give us blessings. 

69 1, e., impersonate the spirits. It will be remembered fcf. Introduction) that each guest is supposed to 
impersonate a spirit. 

M Host's speech ends here. What follows is description. 

482 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. axx. 37 

E'gi jige wohaj'jtt sairak'a'rara K'aradju' Sep 103 Xetera higai 
regi wohai'ja. hirana/£ij?gi jige' hicge je£e' niryge' waratcce. 

E'gi jige Hocere£u'wahlra wohaj'ja. hagik'ere'regi jige je£e' nbjge' 
wa'ratcce. 

E'gi jige' hicge Kek'u'huhi hjgai'regi w5hai'ja hagik'ere'regi 
e'gi jige waratcce'. 

E'gi jige h^bawi'ra woh§/ gik'ere'regi jige je£e' hicge ua^k 
hidjahi' waratcce. 

E'gi jige' Wirago'cge Xetera waha'gik'ereVegi jige niijge' waratcce. 

E'gi jige tconi'xdjj wohana'djira nlhera je£e' wok'e'ra djana'hi 
hi'regi lia^gera hjna ruse, je'nuga hak'itca/k'djege. E'gi jjge 
hinu'bera woh$' harii'djirera hicge'sge k'flruza'n^ga. 

Wap'e'nA^kce ua^gera dja'n^ga wap'ara'djirera. 

E'dja jige hicge han$'tc wok'e'ra djan^ga'gi je'nuga hina' 
k'uruzire'je. Han^'tciryxdjj wasge'ra wawok'a'raju-iravn4ga, 
wamo7?k'a'rajejeravn4ga. Woru'djiracAnA. hap'e'djin.Vgeregi. 

E'gi jige djan^ga tciroju-a'k'a hota' ha>jk'e' wap'a' rudje'dja wara- 
djira'ni^gi. Woki-6'niryge wawogiju'reje. E'gi djan^ga uaijgera 
hinu'gera wa£uaijk'I'ji hang/tciiyxdji hak'i'tcgus wasge'ra wawogi'ju 
hi'regi. 

E'gi wap'a' rudje'narjk'a. tlar^gwa'cocera wa£ii'na7?kce. Ha>?- 
k'e' liajjgwacoce'nina wok'Io'nij;ge vawogi' juhirevje. Hinygera' 
iiar;k hajjk'e' wacoce'nina wap'a' rudjenf'k'a. t)ar;gera'cAnA. 
wap'a'rutc ruxu'rugEn^kcen^. Ha^k'e' hinu'gera wap'a'rutc 
wagigi'na^kce. tJaTjgwa'cocera hota' wagig5'na>jk'a gik'jri'regi 
wagik'I'rinaijk'a hinugwa'tcabEra hitcujc/wahira hitcu'-jwahiVa, 
je£e' wawiro'k'arapuvnun4 ere'na^k'e. Tci-6'k'isavgedja wap'a'- 
rutc wak'aragi'nA. wak'iri'djega. Hinuwa'tcabEra hitcujc/wahira 
hinu'k waja'wahira hi'nuijk tci-o'k'isa'gedja wap'a rudjena/k'a 
waj$ woito-i'xetexdjij;\ herege'. Han&'tciijxdji hirak'i'k'araji na'- 
kcAn4. 

E'gi woru'djera hap'e' djinagi'regi han|'tcj wagigo'iiAjjk'a 
wak'uruhi'ndjerhi-avnaga weje. 

" Wasge'ri-owidjeMja herecunuga/djq wak'a'ragak'djoniha,- 
win^. Sa'k'erenirjk'dJQvgera mina^kca'wa^gre niijkuruhi'ndj reha'- 
widjigo." (Wa'rudj Ngwa.) 

103 The "e" of keredju has became assimilated to the "a" of the preceding word. 

badin] THE CLAN WAR-BUNDLE FEASTS 483 

And a war-bundle owner for the second kettle should be called 
upon — a kettle offered in connection with him whom we call Great 
Black Hawk. 

Then they call for someone to take charge of the kettle placed for 
Disease-giver. 

Then they call for someone to take charge of the kettle for the spirit 
whom they call South "Wind. 

Then they call for someone to take charge of the kettle for the Sun. 

Then they also select another man to be in charge of a kettle put 
on for the Morning Star.91 

Then the first one who had been called upon for a kettle takes as 
many pieces of food as there are individuals in his band who eat with 
him. The second one who had been called upon also takes enough 
pieces (for his band). 

Those who are going to eat the head have to wait.92 

Then all took enough pieces to suffice for their band. 

Then they (the attendants) put the pieces of meat in plates and 
cut them up into small portions. Now all are in readiness for the 
meal. Only some of those in the lodge are called upon to eat the 
head. The plate of the others is filled with ordinary cuts (of meat). 
As man}' men and women as are present, for that many do they cut up 
the pieces of meat evenly and place them in the plate. 

Only warriors are head eaters. Not to warriors do they give com- 
mon pieces. Women and men who are not warriors can not take 
part in this head eating. Only men can take part in the head eat- 
ing. They would not permit women to eat the head. However, those 
of the feasters who were warriors and had brought home war tro- 
phies would speak a good word for the trophy bearers, their sisters, 
their neices, and their aunts,93 and these would be allowed to sit in 
the midst of the head eaters. The sisters or the aunts, whatever 
women were allowed to sit among the head eaters, considered it a 
very great honor. Thus all were encouraged to do. 

Now (the preparations being finished) all are waiting for the meal 
and the host gets up and speaks.94 

"I greet you all. When it (the meat) gets into the plate, then it 
is the time to try to get the spirit's attention by singing. War- 
bundle owners, who are seated here, I greet you all." (Eating song.1 

01 In the first division of the ritual seven kettles are prepared; in the second division, four. 

93 The eating of the deer's head is the greatest honor that one can obtain in this ceremony, and only war- 
riors are permitted to take part in it. 

93 When a warrior returned from a successful war party with the first war honor, i. e., if he had counted 
coup first, he was given a wampum necklace, and this he presented to his oldest sister or to the daughters 
of his father's brother or mother's sister or to his mother's sister. 

M This is the continuation of his speech that had been interrupted by the preparations for the meal 

484 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ann. 37 

The Fast-Eating Contest 

Tcek'djl'na waru'djera here k'aroho'gi e'gi wagigo'nA^k'a 
hljak'I'ra hidjai'ra p'lranajjk'i'gi hotu'djera p'jxdji hotadjii'gera 
aidja'xdjerevxdji hira'n^ga warutctco'na hanf/tciijxdji rutcop'- 
djine'je. Ha^k'e' hoce'rek' hidja' wajf/ nlhehl'ranjje horocdjana'- 
cge ha^k'e' nir/ge' nihehl'ranlje. Hirucdjg.'xdji ki'regi e'gi wagigo'- 
na>?k'a ng-ji-a'n^ga we'je. 

"Sa'kerejjijjkdjo'gera minarjkca'wajjgre ni^kuruhi'ndj reha,'- 
wiiH- Wanirygik'i'k'aratc xete'ra wak'adjal'k'Ik'aVatc blja/ 
hidja'narjk'I warudj sak£u' haratcec. Hlj§/ tcok'a'rak'ere £uxdje 
higeje. Egi jige' mai'djereja. hundjk'ik'a'radjrja, je£e warusa'k£u 
haratcce' weje. Wa'nirygik'ik'aVadjera djam^ga'k'I je£e' herera'- 
n4ga e'gi mane'girera djan^ga'k'i wonVTirera hak'ik'ue'k. 
Wagi'gi wa£uk'djone'je, waniTjgik'ara'djia. mane'gereja, kik'i'£u 
wagigik'aroho'nA. wonA/Tirera hak'ik'ue'k' wagigi' waeuijk'- 
djone'114. E'gi hlnu'wb/k'e klj§/cAnA k'uruzira'n^ga waru7a'p 
tcowe'dja warutc sak£u' ik'arohoi'ren^. Waru'djera nawa'sge 
xetera' nup'i'wi hik'ik'I'naijxdji woju'-iraiHga e'dja wak'are'renA. 
waruj-a'p tcowe'dja. Wasge'naryk'a wak'andjal'k'ik'araMjenAr/k'a 
bija/ tcok'e're wasge'naijk'a hlja/ djI-a'minajjgire'nA., e'gi jige 
hjndjik'ik'a'radJEnaijk'a hij^' tcok'e're wasge'djone'djega hadji- 
a'minAqkce. E'gi agl'xdji k'lk'o'nogireje bidjo'bik'e. Wagigo'- 
narjk'a juju'k' djlreki-a/n4ga ng/wa. djireki'gi. Warutc sak£u'na 
kik'idjai'xdji hanimiiygireje. Tconi £uar;ge'dja xetena'r/k'a tcebi- 
reki-S'n^ga Iro'k'aradji'djjrie^e, e'gi weje, " Ahu'-irasavnar;gre Ira 
xete'ren^. Haijk'e' warudje'dja wanf'p'ini waeuna/kcAnA.." 
E'gi wanaina'nAijk'a wai'reje k'e'ni tcebria'ni nabo'ju ruzira'riA.ga 
koho'birera. Wal'reu^. MaJ'djere xete'naijk'a wa'naijkce, 
"Har/k'e' wogl'zok lilwanai'nanigaMja. mana'geregere Ira xete'renA. 
£ut|'genar;gere djasge'xdjiiiArjgre, hqijk'e' nir/ge' ragajenl'najjkcAn^ 
eje?" HohI'renA.r;k'a wana'kcAii^. E'gi k'Iga'ra wap'a'warad- 
jireje. Jemujga'dja. te£e'. 

"Waru'dj n$wa. djlrehi'giwagigoviiAj;k'a waru'djna hlk'idjai'xdji 
waru'djera djlk'erehi're waru'djenajjk'a klk'uhe'xdji xapge' tcebi' 
na£I'ne tconi' tcebi'djegacge waj$'nij$ berehirana£rne. 

eadinJ THE CLAN WAR-BUNDLE FEASTS 485 

The Fast-Eating Contest95 

As soon as the meal is about ready and the host thinks that (the 
food) in the kettle belonging to the first guest is about cooked and 
when it is soft and just right, then the attendants take it and cut it 
up. They do not leave any bones in it, nor do they leave any of the 
hard parts. When they have prepared it, then the host rises and 
speaks. 

"War-bundle owners who are seated here, I greet you. One of the 
great ones belonging to the Bird clan,96 a member of the Thunderbird 
clan, has called for a fast-eating contest. One of his followers will 
represent them (i. e., their clan), he has told me. Now a member of 
the Earth people, one of the Bear clan, must be selected 97 for the 
fast-eating contest, he said. As many of the Bird clan people as 
there are present, they all will try to take from those of the Earth 
people present the war honor (belonging to the fast eating). That is 
why they have it, so that the Bird and the Earth clans may compete 
for it,98 that they might take a war honor from one another." Then 
both of the contestants took (the food) in front of the war bundle, 
and they get ready for a fast-eating contest. Two wooden bowls with 
exactly the same amount of food are placed in front of the war 
bundle. Then the Thunderbird clansman, with a follower (taking) a 
plate, sits down, and afterwards the Bear clansman, also with a fol- 
lower, sits down. Now they hold themselves in readiness, the four 
of them. The feasters now start playing on their flutes and begin 
singing songs. The fast eaters (i. e., the contestants) start simul- 
taneously. The upper people (phratry), the great ones, devour it 
first and shout, striking their mouths. "Those with wings98 have 
large mouths. They can never be beaten in eating." The defeated 
ones took the meat in their hands and ate it up and gave the war 
whoop. The leaders of the Earth people said, "We have not been 
beaten fairly, for the upper ones have greater mouths, so how could 
they fail?" Thus the beaten ones said. Then they called for the 
heads. That is all.100 

As soon as the host starts the eating song,101 all the guests began 
to eat at a moderate pace, then they try to eat fast because they 
believe that it is an honor to be the first to have finished. 

95 This detailed account was left out in the general description and inserted afterwards. For that reason 
there may be a number of unnecessary repetitions. I have not tried to adjust this insert to the text proper, 
but have preferred to place it just where my informant desired it. 

m This is a rather unusual appellation for the upper phratry. 

97 This is the regular name for the second of the two Winnebago phratries. 

98 This is only one of the ways in which these two phratries compete. 

99 Ritualistic name for the Bird clans. 

100 i believe it is considered correct form to permit the phratry to which the host belongs to win in this 
contest. Those who win get the choicest pieces of the deer head. 

ioi Neither the host nor any of those who belong to his band eat during the feast. 

486 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ann. 37 

"Ge esge egi jige k'igo'na>;k'a hlja, wa£in§/tcicge higu djasge'gi 
tcebi'k'dje jesge'ge. E'sge waruc£a'gera ha.)jk'e' p'inl'je hok'Ira'- 
genaijk'e. E'sge p'ejege'regi hajjk'e' waruc£a'genl na£I'na>?kce. 
E'gi jige han$'tc woru'dJEra je'gu hi'regi hanf/tc djagQ'cAnA. 
tudjl'regi tcebi'xdjinexgi. 

Continuation op the Basic Ritual 

Speech of first guest. — E'gi tconi'xdji wohadjiranihe'nA. 
wa£i'n^p CAn4 we'114. 

"WaroTl'ra hok'ik'a/radjera mI'na)jkcaVa)jgre nir/k'uruhi'ndj 
reha'widjigo. Djan4ga sa'k'ererera mlna^kca'wa^gre hanftciijxdj 
niijk'uruhindj reha'widjigS. War67l'ra hok'I'k'ar&Yljera War07l 
p'anaj'na.xdji \va£u'wi-avnAg;a waxSp'i'ni wara/djirera hana/cgeni 
gi'k'aratc mlna/genajjgere. Ep'jga'dja. sa'k'ere hiwatca'bwira 
waxSp'i'ni glk'ara/djera te'jesge hlna/gere. E te£e' uarjkcik 
hlyaha/gwigavdja. Hota'ji j e'sge hlruxu'rugwije te£e' ewa£u'inege 
haijk'e' waijgajedja'ni-ahaijk'aMja. Waro7i'ra waxop'i'ni wara'- 
djirera hljg,k'i'ra hlraitce'ranAijk'i, tani'na woho/na gigi'rera e'gi 
tcaha' ng,biruxa'dj era. Te je'nuga. Ma.£u'na uarjgere'ginaijk'I 
woriA'7irera uaijkcigo£i gitaira'n4ga. Djasgehi-a'n^ga haijk'e' 
wawiqgip'e'res hiranj'k'djeje wawirjgi'p'erez hlregl'ji. Oajjkci- 
go£j'na wira'ruxe waro7l'ra ha£U)jk'dja'wi; ua^kcigo£I'ria hirana/- 
k'ik£j')jxdji £uinawi'ra waxop'i'ni tani'na gigi'rera. Waxop'i'ni 
wonaTjkci'wina dja'n4ga wak'ik'ara'djwira ha£v'xdjiwi-a'n4ga. 
Waha'dj wireconane'cge p'jga'dj^. E'gi uaijkcigo^'na hirana/ 
k'ik£j\vire ep'i'n*. wa£ia'na.pge waha'nAr;kcAn4. E'gi c£agwaha'ra 
hlja. hltco'k'eniyjk' hi'regi waxop'i'nina har/k'I'jq. eo'rakcigenljq. 
ai'rera je£e' hlrjgiwewi'rege. Waro7l'ra wawak'I'k'aradjera waxop'- 
i'ni honaijkd' hijjgigi'rera. Ep'iga'dja. Wawarogi7i'rera ma/u'na. 

"Hak'uruhindj reha'nA.ga. E'gi waro7i'ra wak'urulii'djan^ga; 
e'gi sa'kereni^kdJQ'gera tcI-S'ju mlnaijkca'wajjgre niijk'uryhi'ndj 
reha-widjigo'." 

"E'gi hlnu'bra wohQ'na radjira'niheVa wa^'nAbik'aroho^nA. 
we'nV 

Speech of second guest. — Warp7i'ra wajaniwi'na mlcana^ga'na^k'a 
nirjk'uruhi'ndj iehawidjigo'. E'gi sak'ereni'^k'djojjgera higl' aca'- 

eadin] THE CLAN WAE -BUNDLE FEASTS 487 

Even if a feaster gets satiated, he must continue to eat until every- 
thing is finished. They tell one another that it is not good for any 
one to fail (and leave any food). Whatever food there is they must 
finish it all. All that is cooked must they eat. 

Continuation of the Basic Kitual 

Then the one who was called upon for the first kettle thanked them 
and said: 

Speech of first guest. — "Councilors 102 and relatives who are seated 
here, I greet you all. As many war-bundle owners as are seated 
here, I greet you all. The councilors of the clans have enjoined 
upon us earnestly to offer up sincere prayers to all the different 
spirits who are seated here (in the persons of the guests). It is good 
that our war-bundle owners offer up prayers in this way. It is 
for this reason that we are still living. Some of us can not accom- 
plish much in that line and that is why so many of us are gone 
already (i. e., are dead). This ritual was made for one who is the 
very greatest of all the spirits, for whom they have offered tobacco 
and food and offerings of buckskin. Thus they have done. Earth- 
maker, who dwells above, they have asked for war power and life. 
Indeed, how would it be possible for (the spirits) not to take cog- 
nizance and accept (these offerings).103 If we follow the preaching 
(of our host), life (we will obtain); life we will feel ourselves in con- 
nection with through the holy food that they (the host and the 
members of his band) have offered up. We have (had the honor too) 
of impersonating the spirits, I and my relatives. The meal likewise 
was excellent. It is good that they have brought us in connection 
with so much life and it is to thank them that I am saying this. 
That one of their ancestors whom they called grandfather (and 
whose place I am taking) was not one to speak foolishly, it is said, 
and still his place they thought of for me (unworthy as I am). 
They have given me (the part) of a councilor of their own clan and 
(the privilege) of impersonating a spirit. It is good. Earthmaker 
they have prayed to. 

I greet him. To the enjoiner Qiost) I send my greetings; to all 
the war-bundle owners who are seated here, I send forth my 
greetings. 

Then the second one who was called upon for a kettle gets ready 
to thank them and says: 

Speech of second guest. — " Host and relatives, as many as are seated 
here, I send forth my greetings to you. War-bundle owners that 

102 The word means, literally, "enjoiners" and refers to the injunctions and instructions the elder people 
give to the young. 

"» I. e., the offerings are so wonderful that the spirits would have to be blind not to see them. This 
and the following sentences are formulaic compliments always paid to the host by the invited guests. 

488 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ANN. 37 

iHqk'i ni/jk'uruhi'ndj reha'widjigo'. Wawik'I'k'aradjera \var071' 
p'onal'nA wa£uwina'nA.ga dja'n^ga hinu'gera nbyk'djo' rygeni^gera 
hanf/tciijxdjj wajjgirop'o'nuhfrawi wa/una'r/k'adJEi. Djagu'ija. 
woxe'teje! Uar;kci'go£'Iaj?gerevCAnA. woxe'teje? Waroil'ra wawak'i'- 
k'aradjera waxop'i'ni k'lsge'ja. honiho'k'irana7jgere waxop'i'ni 
wana/j' rusgi'tcgi djadjo'na tani-owaxu'na hjgire'regi waxop'i'ni 
tani'na glk'ara'nav?k'i jedjonai'xdjj ho£u'nigereVegi. Howare'ra 
waxop'i'ni hlnacge'ni gik'ara'tc mlna'Tjgira'naga. WonA'Tirera 
kadjal'regi s£Ire'dja. ua'vjgEra tudj|ra'n4ga hak'ara'gware. Wa£u'- 
inegi howare'ra. Hop'Iowai'rek'djone^gadja,, woiiA'TJrera. Ha- 
gare'ja hak'idjai'regi hak'it£a/p hlk'arokol'regi e'dja waxop'i'ni 
waradjlre'ra wonA'TJre ruk'o'nonA. tanl wawora'giju-avn4ga. 
'Tcok'a'waln'ra gasge niijgigi'wicunu^n^ wira'gegiji.' Howare'ra 
wona'TJre ruk'o'non^ honI'nir;gihan4k'rcge harjk'e' rak'arap'- 
erezei4'k'djonevn4 howare'ra hak'itffj/biregi. Wap'ahi-ok'e'ra 
horawe'k'djeiH hlju'gemana mana nyQ'-itajenfsgecge hljii'g- 
emok'eVa howawe'k'djenA. racgu'nixdji haragl'xebik'djone'n^. 

E'gi jjge ua^gerl'jak'Ira hak'lkue'gire'cge ni-a/cinicawairjk'- 
djone'iH- Waxop'i'ni njta'k'atc g2gl'ra p'ina/gi tani'na woho'na 
roh|' tatce'bragi waxop'i'ni wara'djirera e'cAii^ wak'andja'na^gere 
wona'iire ruk'o'nona'nA. xete'reje hahl' hlsge'xdjj p'iral'cge. 
Djadjo'na wak'andja'ra hagu'-iregi raJEra hinip'e'rezirek'djonevn4 
hahl' wak'andja'ra hagu'-irecge raJEra nina'djiranaga, "Edjagi 
tani liirjk'djawi'n4," hlniTjgai'regi. Uar,gena'r,gere hlj§/ tcek xete- 
hu'game'jesgehlrak'i'k'arajrrek'djone. Hotak'I'ra te jesgana^k'a'- 
dja. Te£e ep'ijjga'dja. WaroTl p'onaina waMjne dja/n4ga uar,gera 
gl'ji je'nuga hirop'u'nu wai&unai}k'a'dja. Wi-oire'regi hitco'- 
k'ewahTwira nita'k'adjera wagigl'rera tani'na tcaha'sgera k'arap'i- 
e'sge wagirii'cdja. rehi'rera. WonaijkcJ hirjgigi'rera djan^ga' hok'- 
ik'ara'djenij;gEra uaijkci'go£i uang.djodjai'sge ha£uaha>2gwi'ra je'- 
nuga. UaijkeigoTna hlrana/k'lkT'jxdji. Waj^gu'zEra woju'- 
irjgl£u'n4 yak'aragusti-a'naga tia^kcigoTna hlrana/k'ik£ivwin4 way- 
anAbwi'na. Warogjil'rera sa'niijk yoire'regi herera wak'uruki'- 
ntc reha'114. A'iHga e'gi waroTi'ra hok'iwik'a'radJEra ml'naijkca'- 

BADIN] THE CLAN WAR-BUNDLE FEASTS 489 

are here, I send forth my greetings to you. Those of the various clans 
(present) have counseled me repeatedly and all the women and 
children have pleaded in my behalf (with the spirits). What love 
that was ! And what does life consist of but love ? The clan coun- 
cilor is repeating the songs (that were obtained) when the sacred 
bundle was made, so that when the time for the tobacco offering to 
the spirits came, they would have the tobacco that they have kept 
all this time (ready). Now, sure enough, the time has arrived and 
they are sitting prepared to pray to all the various spirits. Long 
ago when they saw war they cooked the man they were to go after.104 
That is why they did it. A good (prosperous) warpath they will 
surely have. When they are actually in the midst of their warpath 
and are about to rush for one another (i. e., the Winnebago and his 
enemy), let him pour tobacco to the various spirits who are in con- 
trol of war. If you say 'Grandfather, thus we used to offer you,' 
although you may not know (by any word or direct sign) whether 
those in control of war have answered you, (you will know it) as 
soon as the rush upon the enemy takes place and, although you go 
where the bullets and arrows rain hardest, you will pass out of the 
reach of the bullets and will pass safely out (of all danger). If the 
people rush for a man to bestow the wTar honors upon,105 you will be 
the one. If you give the sacred feast in the proper way, if you burn 
up much tobacco and food, then the various spirits, especially the 
Thunderbirds, who are in control of the greatest war power, (will 
bless you) for the excellent way in which you have (prayed to them). 
Whenever the Thunderbirds come they will remember you; and 
when they come they will even call you by name and say, 'Let us 
smoke here.' 108 When the young begin to grow up, one of the men 
encourages them. Only a few, however, are like this. It is good. 
He (the host) has preached and pleaded for as many men as are 
present. They (the host and his band) have made offerings of food 
to our grandfathers who live in the west (the Thunderbirds) and 
pleasing offerings of tobacco and buckskin have they sent out to them. 
They have permitted me to impersonate (this spirit) and have thus 
given life to myself and my unimportant clansmen, who have been 
living in so lowly a condition. With real life have we felt ourselves 
connected (through your actions). With life have we felt ourselves 
connected by means of that vessel which the Creator gave me as a 

101 Here the literal translation is nonsense. The real meaning is that the spirit of the enemy they are to 
kill on the warpath is present Ln the food offered up at this feast. This is a characteristic Winnebago con- 
ception. For another example, see a version of the origin myth of the Thunderbird clan bundle, where the 
hero, by drinking a certain liquid, has not only a vision of the people he is going to kill, but even hears 
their dying groans. 

i« This refers to the custom of running out to greet the returning warriors in order to conduct them into 
the village and bestow the war honors upon those who have counted coup. 

1M I. e.,ifa person makes it a habit to offer tobacco, the spirits will say," Let us stop at such and such a 
man's place as we go along and have a smoke." 

1S6823— 22 32 

490 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ass. 37 

wa^k'a nhjk'uruhi'ntc reha'win^. E'gi sa'k'erera tci-o'ju minaTjkca' 
wa^gre han£,'tcir;xdj! nirjk' uruhintc rehawidjigo'. 

Speech of third guest. — E'gi jige tani'na woho'natc hlara'nihera 
wak'uruhindj rehl'114. Wo£i'nobEra hlral'djige. Waroil'ra hok'i'- 
wik'aradjrera minaijkca'wajjk'a niijk'uruhi'ndj reha'win^. E'gi 
sa'k'ereni'^k'djoijgEra wona^kci' ml'na^kcaVa^gre nijjk'uruhi'ndj 
reha'widjigo. Epirjga'dj^. Je'nuga jesge'cguni are'cge aire te£eje 
waja. p'onai'narjgadjq. Hok'I'wik'aradJEra waro7i' p'onal'na. E'gi 
hitco'k'ewaha'yanl'nenA. hu>jk£u'-ineje airera. Hagare'ja. Ine'k'I 
hjwatcg^'xgi waxop'i'ni wa£yA7}gin^bi'k'djegi hlhana'je? Hi^gai'- 
rera hljartcok'ekawTgi hajjk'e' waja'nija. herein' nunige ewewl'nege 
waxop'i'ni honaijkcj' hir/gigi'rera. Ep'i^ga/dja. Djasge'ja. sa'niijk 
yoire'regi wonA'iire hiru'o'nora wak'a/ndja hujjgra hlrak'i'sanijj- 
gEOAj;kce salrak'a'rara wo ha '7 ire hlruk'o'nonA. uaijkcigo£j/ hirasa' 
n^djirodjal'negi waxop'i'ni hlk'isge'ja honiko'k'Ira'najjgre djasge 
hia'-nA.ga hajjk'e' wawigi'p'erez hlranj'kdjeje? Wawir/gip'erez 
iregi'ji hicge wira'tuxe ha£ur;k'dja'wira. WSnA'ijkci hirjgigi' rawira. 
Ep'iryga'djq. Howare'ra hak'Ik£u'wigadja. wajok'i'^gEra sto- 
a'k'iwi-a,nA.ga ua)jkcigo£i'na hlrana/k'ik£iwnaviwira. Ep'i^ga'dj^. 
Wawaro'gjiirera K'eredju' Sep Xetega, hak'uruhi'ndj reha'n^ga. 
E'gi war07i'ra niijk'uruhi'ndj reha'win^. Waxop'i'ni wona^kci'na 
sa'k'ereni^k'djoV/gera tci-o'ju mlnajjkca'war/gre nijk'uruhi'ndj 
rehawidjigo'. 

E'gi jige hicge ua^gidjane'jq, wohQ'nadjire.ra wa^I'nAp 
hlk'aroko'nA. we'n4. 

Speech of fourth guest. — "Sa'k'ereniTjk'djo^gera mi'narykcaVa^gre 
nijjk'uruhi'ndj reha'win^. Waro7l'ra mlnar/kca'wa^k'a wa'jani- 
wTiia. niijk'uruhi'ndj reha'winA.. E'gi waja.' p'onaj'nacgiinije 
hagi'ja. je'sge hinuxu'rugadje'je ua7ygi'ja waja/ p'j p'onaj'naxdji 
£u>jga'dja_. Uar/kcigina'rygere hotak'I'racge c£aganA.gixgunega'dja. 

kadin] THE CLAN WAR-BUNDLE FEASTS 491 

measure.107 To those preached to, who are in the west, I send forth 
my greetings. To the host and those of his clan who are seated 
here, I send forth my greetings. To all the war-bundle owners who 
are seated within the lodge I send forth my greetings." 

Speech of third guest. — "To all who possess tobacco and food do I 
send forth my greetings. The means for my feeling thankful has 
come to me.108 Councilor (i. e., host) and members of his clan who 
are seated here, I send forth my greetings. And to you, war-bundle 
owners, who are impersonating (the spirits) seated here, do I send 
forth my greetings. In my thoughts I used to think that this is the 
wTay it was to be done, they said, but it has actually happened.109 
Thus did the clansmen, the councilors, sit acting. This (place of 
honor) belongs to their (the host's) grandfather (i. e., ancestor, the 
original impersonator), yet they gave me this position! If at any 
time a person (finding) me alone (had asked me) if I wanted to offer 
.up thanks to the spirits (i. e., take part in this feast), how could such 
as I have said anything ? They told me that they had thought of one 
of their ancestors in connection (with this feast), one who had been of 
no importance and that I was to impersonate the spirits (in his 
place).110 It is good. How could the spirits who dwell hi the west 
at the side of the chief of the Thunderbirds who is in control of war 
power help but recognize one who impersonates them, sings their 
songs, and whom, withal, they have blessed with control of a war 
bundle and given life? And if they recognize them, we, too, will 
follow them.111 They have given us the place (of the spirits). 
It is good. Most assuredly have I helped myself and my relatives 
in gathering around here, for we have been brought in connection 
wdth life. To those they have preached to (who represent) the Big 
Black Hawk, do I send forth my greetings. And to the host and 
the war-bundle owners who are impersonating the spirits do I send 
forth my greetings." 

Then another person whom they had called upon for a kettle gets 
ready to express his thankfulness and says: 

Speech of fourth guest. — "War-bundle owners, councilors, relatives 
who are seated here, I send forth my greetings to you. This is indeed 
a marvelous performance and he who was able to do it is surely a 
marvelous man. Very few people listen to the counsel of their 
parents, but he was one of those who did, and (for that reason) he 

'»' A rather curious circumlocution for stomach. 

ioe I. e., now that it is my turn to speak and offer prayers, I can thank those who have invited me and 
the spirits. 

im I. e., in my fondest imaginings I used to think that the ideal way to give the feast was the manner in 
which I see it given here. How could I have imagined that such a thing was actually possible. This is 
intended as a compliment to the host. 

110 This is, of course, all modesty. 

111 1, e., they will recognize us too. 

492 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ass. 37 

teee' jesge'ja. wa£unaijk'a'dj^, wa'ja. p'onai'naxdjj wa^ujjga'dj^. 
Waxop'i'ni hok'Ik'S'radJEra hlnacge'ni gik'ara'tcna7jgre waxop'i'ni 
k'Isge'ja. sarusgl'tcgi wocgo' hanjgl' djagu' egi'ji e'xdji hani- 
ogiwa/na^gre. Ep'i^ga'djawocgo' eanl'nera k'arak£u' wa£unar/k'a'djq. 
Woho/na glksa'ben^djVxdjj wona-y^re riik'o'nona waglk'e'rererlT- 
nA.ga tani'na hlwace'xdji wag!t£u'biranA.ga ngbiruxa'dJEra lilk'- 
Ira'ra wagI'ju-ira,nA.ga. Tcaha'sgara k'arap'i-e'sgehigitc|' wagiju'- 
ira'n^ga wak'e'rera m§cu' cud j Era k'arap'i-e'sge w6nA/7ire ruk'o'- 
nona. Won^'ijre hik'arata' hr'u'na>jgre. Djasge' hl-a'naga ha^k'e' 
waglksa'p klrani'k'djeje? Wawiijgip'erezire'gi wonarjkcl'na wlra'- 
ruxe hi£UT)k'dja'wi, wonA.7Jre'ra iia/jkcigo£i'na." 

"UajjgEnu'nJguj. s^Iredjg/xdjj ng,djirodjai'negi k'arata'na7jgre 
wok'araik'a|'regi iiar;kcigo£i'na p'i£u>jk'dja\vi. P'edjok'e'reja. 
e'gi hFuaha'qgwire iia)jkcigo£I'na hi£u')jk'djawi ta wa/navjk'aYljti 
ha.7)k'e e'cana wak'Ik£u'nina7jk'avdja_. Tcege'dja uaijgenu'nj^gra 
wal'reje, "HaTjk'e' h§ta'gina.tc curuxu'rugenrnA. waxop'i'ni njta'- 
k'atc gigl'ra p'i'na wap'a'hi k'uruk'a'razre." Wawik'a'ragarregi. 
Howare'ra uana'^erega'dja. Ne waja'nija_ £uini-a'n4ga waxop'i'ni 
njta'k'adj gigi'regi wona^kci'rjk'djera. Hirjgi^u'inare waxop'i'nina 
wara'djirera hlja^k'I'ra hiral'tcerana^ka roh§,bot£e'k'i biruk'onal'- 
ja.. E'gi rohl' saniryk h^biruk'o'nadjegi e'gi h6tee'ruk'ovnaja_ here- 
je. Tani'na gigl'rera woho'na wani-ol'tcge hi'sgara wanioi'tcge 
uajjgl'ja, tcaha'sgara mucti'na tani'na k'arap'i-e'sgexdjL Hocere£- 
u'wahira glrucdj^' rehi'rare wonA'7Jre uar/keigo£i' hlk'a'rata 
hl£u'inare. Waxop'i'ni naijk'e'we nadjesgevja. n^piruxa'djeregi. 
Wahena'jjgere waxop'i'ni hanqrjxgu'ne p'ina'r;kci nunige wawiwu- 
a'git£ek'djera. Tcok'aga' wewpia'nAga wonA'ijkci hiijgigl'rera. 
Waxop'i'ni wara'djirera ba^k'aga' raJEra ho-ini'r;ge radji'nanis^je 
ai'rera. Hona^kci' glgirere hak'uruhi'ntcgi raJEra tajereha'- 
kdjonaVe ha^k'e' woi'ya£u nai'jinik'dje. Tani'na gigl'rera tcok'a' 
Hocere£u'wahira hak'uruhi'ndj reha'n^ga. E'gi waru7l'ra niijk'- 
uruhi'ndj reha'win^. E'gi jige waxop'i'ni wo'naijkcrna tcl-6'ju 
mlna7)kca'wa7;gre nir/k'uruhi'ndj reka'widjigo. 

Radin] THE CLAN WAE-BTJNDLE FEASTS 493 

has done so well. The members of the clan have been sincerely 
worshiping the spirits. He who made the war-bundle ritual was 
like a spirit in power and what he told them to do they are doing in 
every detail. It is a good work that they are doing. Sufficient food 
they are offering to those who are in control of war powers that they 
might easily be cognizant of it. They have placed plenty of tobacco 
and different offerings of buckskin within their reach. A pleasing 
white buckskin they have strung out and offered to you; a pleasing 
red feather as a hair ornament (have they also offered to you). They 
have offered these things, so that they might ask for war from those 
who are in control of war. How, indeed, would it be possible (for 
the spirits) not to recognize these offerings ? And if they recognize 
them, then we who are impersonating (the spirits) will also receive 
the benefit of the blessings of war and life (intended for the host) . 

"Long ago our ancestors asked (the spirits) to bless them so that, 
having been blessed with life, they might live happily. Here we are 
(sitting around) a fireplace and the life that they (host and his band) 
have asked for, the spirits not only are extending to them but to 
every one. In the early times the old men said, 'You are not able 
to fast and offer up proper food to the spirits so as to clear away the 
weapons (held) against you."12 Thus they spoke to them (the younger 
people). Just as (the older people would have liked it) so they are 
doing. I, who do not amount to anything, have nevertheless been 
permitted to take the place of a spirit to whom food is offered. This 
they have done for me, (given me the place) of that very spirit who is 
the very bravest of them all, the one who is in control of the power 
whereby one can kill (an enemy) outright! One side of his body con- 
trols life and the other death. Now they are about to offer him the 
food of a white animal, of a male animal (i. e., a dog), a white buckskin, 
feathers, and tobacco, all objects that please him very much. To 
Disease-giver they are about to extend these things, so that there- 
with they may ask him for war power and life. It is a fear-inspiring 
spirit that they have been making offerings to. I, who have listened 
to the spirits (through the host's kindness), surely don't have to say 
anything in their behalf.113 They thought of their grandfather when 
they asked me to impersonate this spirit. Of all the spirits, his is the 
name that one can not speak of lightly, it is said. If I greet the 
name and speak about this spirit whom they have asked me to 
impersonate, may I not be weakened by uttering (his name). Those 
who are about to offer food to you, grandfather Disease-giver, send 
forth their greetings. To the host do I send forth my greetings. 
To the war-bundle owners who are seated here do I send forth my 
greetings." 

m By denying that they can do it he tries to spur the young people to redoubled efforts. The weapons 
are the obstacles encountered in life. 
118 1, e., this feast will speak for them, more than any words I can utter. 

494 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [bth.ann.37 

E'gi tia^gl'j^ w5ho'radjire'ra hicge je£e' wo-i'nobra hlradjl'ge 
nfji-a'n^ga wak'u'ruhinte rehl'nA. we'n^. 

Speech of fifth guest. — "Waro7l'ra hok'ik'a'radJEra mlnaTjkca'- 
wa^gera nirjk'uruhi'ndj reha'win*.. E'gi wonaijkci'na tci-6'ju mlna- 
r;kca'wa7jgi-e nijjk'u'ruMndjwi^na. Ep'I'114. Ep'i'ni-egl,ji ha,)?k'e'- 
hosge wanbjk'dje'ra. Me£e'cAnA. ga/djurjga ua7jkcik£i'yaha7jk'a'dja. 
sak'e'rera teje'sge hinarjgre. ewa£u'-inege. Te jedjai'ijxdji p'a 
hixgjxgi-ahar/k'a'dja. hotejl je.'sge hlnuxu'rukce sa'kereVa 
waxop'i'ni tani-6'giju warup'ina ewa£u'-inege. Haj^k'e' wa7jgage'- 
djani-ahavjjk'adja.. Waroii' warup'm*. nir;k'djo'^gEni7jgEra hlnu'- 
7)gera uaijkci'k hiinubi'manina p'edjok'e'reja. hujjgiwatca'bwira 
e'gi k'erena'7jgere. Httygiwatca'bwira p'e'djerok'aVak'ajran^ga. 
Haijk'e e'cAnA. wak'hVu'nina^k'a'djq. Te'jesge hi'na^gre eje£e' 
hlni-a.ba'ha>jk'adja.. Rek'ii'huhi'ra rajera rajerehl'rare h^biruk'o'- 
110114 e'cAnA.. Xeteje' je'sge hlp'ere'zirege. Uar/genu'-ija. waxop'- 
ini hlk'isge'ja, DjCbena^giwi'^xga hjgai'regi raJEra raJEna'^gere. 
Waxop'i'nina djanaga p'i'nA. hangir/xdjiryxdji wowe'wj k'lk'ere'- 
regi. Je£e' k'aradjira'naga waxop'i'ni klk'ara'dJEnarjgre. Hlsge'xdjj 
wa'nar/k'aMja. ua^genu'npjgEra nadjodjai'negi hlgy' h$p te£e' 
ua7jkcigo£i' je£e' hl-una'^k'adj^. Wona'TJrera djasage'xdjj n|dji- 
rodjai'negi. Ha^k'e' glcdjaTjk'c' raniga'dja. K'arata'na^gre hisge'- 
xdji wanajjk'a'dja. wok'araik'ai'recge. Harjk'e' hlk'arap'e'rezE- 
ninaijk'aMja. te'jesge p'ewl'n^. Wa£Ia'nA.pcAnA. won^'TJrera 
uar/kci'g£o'ina hlrana/k'ik£i Rek'u'huhira. Tani-o'giju-ira'n^ga 
tani'na gigira'n4ga tcaha/sgara m^cu'cudJEra hlrak'i'rutcap 
glwaha'rehfrare. Tani'na k'arahi'ijk'djone'gadja. giji ua7jkci'- 
go£i'na hage'dja wiro'naryk hi£uj?k'dja'wira. HSk'I'k'aradJETja^gEra 
waxop'i'ni honaijkci' gigl'rawira. Ha£uwi-a'nA.ga ua7jkcigi£i p'{'- 
ryxdji hi^glgria'wira. Wa£in4'bwin4. WaroTi'rera Rek'u'huhira 
hak'uruhi'ndj reha'iiA.ga. E'gi waroyi'ra niryk'uruhi'ndj reha'- 
widjigo. E'gi wonA'ijkcina tci-6'ju mlnaijkca'wajjgre nbjk'uruhi'ndj 
reha'widjigo. 

eadin] THE CLAN WAR-BUNDLE FEASTS 495 

Then another man who has been called upon for a kettle rises as 
the "means of blessing" comes to him and greeting, says to them.114 

Speech of fifth guest. — "Clan councilors who are seated here, I 
greet you all. You all within this lodge who are impersonating the 
spirits, I greet you. It is good. If we say it is good, we mean it.115 
That we are living 116 is because they have done this for us (i. e., 
asked us to participate in the feast). That we have been able to 
move about so long (i. e., are still living) is due to the fact that the 
war-bundle owners knew how to offer tobacco to the spirits. It is 
for that reason likewise that we have not been killed. Expert in 
their preaching to the youths and maidens, our chiefs have also kept 
the fireplace for us two-legged walkers.117 Our chiefs have piled 
more fuel upon the fire that it may start up.118 And not for them- 
selves are they doing this. What they are doing is to enable us to 
obtain life. The name of South Wind they have uttered; he who 
alone is in control of life. They knew that he was a great (spirit). 
An old man, one who was like a spirit (in his power), called 
Djobena.gnvi'?7Xga, they are speaking of. As many good spirits as 
there are, that many added their thoughts (power). Of this they are 
reminding the spirits whom they are worshiping. Sincerely are they 
saying it. The life they blessed the old man with, that life they are 
using. With war powers they blessed him. They did not fool him. 
Because they have made their requests sincerely is the reason that 
(the spirits) have given them these things in return. I feared that 
they might not take cognizance of them (i. e., their offerings). How- 
ever, now I thank them (the host, etc.), for we have been as though 
connected with war power and life through South Wind. Tobacco 
they have poured for him, and white buckskin and red feathers 
have they extended to him. He will smoke the tobacco and we will 
follow in the path of life as a consequence. As though we were a 
member of their clan they have made us by (permitting us) to imper- 
sonate the spirits. What we have done will give us plenty of life to 
live on and for this we are indebted to them. We are thankful for it. 
Those who have been preached to, the South Wind I greet. Coun- 
cilor (host), I send forth my greetings to you. You who are seated 
here and are impersonating the spirits, to you also do I send forth 
my greetings." 

in By "the means of blessing " he means the opportunity to speak and sing. 

115 Literally, "It is not for nothing that we say this." 

ne I. e., have been blessed with life. 

117 The reference to the fireplace is twofold here. First as host it is incumbent for the owner of the 
Thunderbird clan bundle to take charge of the fireplaces; and, secondly, it is his duty to do so because 
fire is the sacred possession of the clan. " Two-legged walkers " is the ritualistic name for human beings. 

119 To be taken figuratively as meaning "blessings," since in adding fuel they are cooking the sacred food. 

496 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. as.v. 37 

Hlcge uajjgl'ja. wohona'djirera wo£I'nQbEra k'ara-e'k'djonevra 
we'114. 

Speech of sixth guest. — "Waroyl'ra hok'lk'a'radJEra mlna7)kca'- 
wajjgEre nir^k'tiruhindj reha'widjigo. E'gi jjge sa'k'ereni^k'djorjgera 
mina^kca'wa^gre niijk'uruhindj reha/widjigo. Hokl'wik'aradJEra 
waroyi' p'onai'na wa£u'inavn4ga. Tcok'aga' hagare'ja. waige'nA. 
Hagare'ja. iiajjkci'g aredjiregi'ji. Waxop'i'ni tani'na gigi'regi. 
Wok'e'ra djanAhi' m|tca'naijk'i jena/hi wak'Qtca'Tjgqge. Niinige 
wap'al'rasara hldjohai'negi. Wap'a'na^k'a ha^k'e' wadje'rasa 
je'sgerudjirani'je. Ha_j?k'e' wap'a/ra hinn'gEra wawigi'ra e-e'ranije 
al'rera. Wok'e' wak'a.tca'7?gEra hagare'jqna wap'al'rasara hljokai'- 
negiji ua7jkcik tciicgu'ni anaga. Wok'e' wak'a.tca'ijgera ni-a'- 
nin|djiregrji jedjere'riA. haj?k'e' wonA.'7ire rak'i'p'Ini-a'n^ga 
hA^k'e' waiza'ra bija/ rak'ik'uruxuVugni-a^n^ga waxop'i'ni waj§Lji 
wa£inA'ginf/bge e'ji wai'zara hija/ n§,k'lk'u'^llxu^uk'e, k'lji 
waxop'i'ni wa£inA/gin|pgi waxop'i'ni wara'djirera nfiniijxgy'- 
nanana. Ceagwaha'ra hi^gal'ra niinige egiji jige waigai'ren^, 
'Tcok'aniijk,' weje ai'rena. 'Waxop'i'ni wana£i' rusgitcgi'ji 
iia7jgere'gerera mane'girera. I'ra Irok£ti'-ineje waxop'i'ni wai'rege 
woro'ii-odja'djak'dje hjgai'regi. I'ra hlrak'I'ware hok'ik£iiahu'- 
iregi.' E'gi kl-a'ndjwaha'ra hicge I'ra hurjk£u'nege hirygal'rera. 
Hawa£u' waxop'i'ni wa^a'^ginai^k'djege hihanana'na. Waxop'ini 
waradjire'ja. njta'k'atc glgi'rare, waxop'i'ni xete'ja. gik'ara'- 
djirehrregiji. Njta'k'atcra tam'na warutc xo'p'ini tcaha'sgara 
k'arap'i-e'sge glru'cdja. rehi'rare. H§,bitar£utia h^bik'a'ratafrera. 
Ne wo'nar^kci^k'djawira sak'ereganai'xdji-aijge. Niinige ne waja.- 
hare'regi iia)jkcik£i'. Uan^djodjai'sge ha£iiaha'rjg\vira uar/kci- 
go£j'na hrran§,'k'Ik£ir;k'dja\vira howare'ra. Hlto-a'k'Ik£iryxdjjx- 
winA.. Wlgip'erezeregl'ji nlcge liajjkcigoTna e'dja ya£uj;k'dja'- 
wira. Hok'i'wik'araMJEnirykra hak'ik£u'r^xdji a'nAga. Ep'b?- 
ga'dja. WaroYi'rera Wlrago'cge Xe'tera hak'u'ruhindj reha'n^ga. 
E'gi waroyl'ra hok'i'wik'araMJEra mlna>?kca'waj?k'a nbjk'iiruhi'- 

eadin] THE CLAN WAR-BUNDLE FEASTS 497 

Then another man to whom a kettle has been given gets readv to 
express his thankfulness and says: 

Speech of sixth guest. — "Host and members of your clan who are 
seated here, I send forth my greetings to you. To you also, war- 
bundle owners who are seated here, do I send forth my greetings. 
The members of this clan have often preached to me. My grand- 
father once told me the following: 'Some day there will be a dearth 
of people (for a feast). There they will offer tobacco to the spirits 
and as many pieces of meat as they cut that many will be holy. 
There also they will cook heads. Heads are not to be eaten by those 
wearing dresses (i. e., women). Women are not permitted to scatter 
their food in eating, we are told.119 Some day if they boil these holy 
pieces, the heads, they will be in need of people to invite to the feast. 
If they call upon you for one of the sacred pieces, even if at that time 
you had not yet obtained a war honor, if you had not counted coup,120 
still if you offer up thanks to the spirits for anything; still more so, 
of course, if you had been able to count coup and you thanked them 
for all this, they will listen to you.' 121 My grandfather told me, 
' Thus they spoke to me/ he said, it is said, 'Little grandfather, the 
spirits up above gave (your ancestor) a war bundle to those of the 
Earth phratry. They gave them a mouth for speaking (in offering 
thanks), but they told him that it was forbidden to speak to outsiders 
about this matter. They gave them a mouth that they might speak 
to one another (i. e., members of the same clan)'. 

"My father gave the information to me. For that reason, they 
told me, I am in a position to thank the spirits. One of the greatest 
of the spirits they have offered tobacco to, to one of the greatest of 
the spirits they have prayed. Tobacco, food, a sacred white buck- 
skin, pleasing to their eyes, they have extended to them. With 
offerings of life 122 they have asked for life. We have been asked to 
impersonate (the spirits), even although there are plenty of war- 
bundle owners. But the host is a relative of ours and therefore 
wishes me to live. A pitiable existence we had been living (until 
they saw to it) that we were brought into connection with life. Proud 
we are of it. For if they (the spirits) accept their gifts, we also will 
be able to utilize the life (obtained). Clan members, we did as we 
pleased here. It is good. Those preached to, the Morning Star, 

n» In eating the deer head and in the fast-eating contest the meat is devoured so fast that the food is liter- 
ally scattered in theprocess ofeating. Whether there is an implied warning that a man should not be found 
in the same class as the women I do not know positively , but it is quite likely . 

120 Literally /'a limb." The four coup counts are likened to the four limbs of the human body. As such 
they are always referred to. 

ui The whole meaning of the speech up to the present is the following: Should they in the future want t° 
give a feast and lack of the proper people cause them to call upon you, even if you had counted coup only 
once, thespirits would listen to you. And yet here I am and haven't even counted coup once and yet I 
have the effrontery to expect them to listen to me. 

ln I. e., with offerings of deer and dogs. 

498 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ass. 37 

ndjwina. E'gi wona^kcl'na mlnaTjk'ca/wa^gre rn7)k'urukindj reka'- 
widjigo. 

tfa^gera kak'e'we wakQna'djirera klro-a'genixdji klrak'e'wera 
we'n^. 

Speech of seventh guest. — "WaroTi'ra wajo'k'ina minaijkca'warjk'a 
nijjk'Qrukindjwi'n^. E'gi wajf'nija; e tuxu'rugEni nunige rokl'ra 
ka^k'e' wa£i7jk'Inobra'ji waji'nobfranije ai'rera. Je'sge wage- 
wake'k'djonega'dja. tTajjkcigoj'' klrak'l'racdja/n4gi ka^k'e' 

wajjnohl'ranije ai'rera. Je'sge p'e'wbjge. Hagai'ra wok'e' 
■vvak'a.tc§/7;gera klj$ wo'na7jkci kbjgigl'rera wa£InAbra'ji kbjk'- 
Ihab|'xdjiconuvn4. Ha^k'e' wonA'ijre ewagi'gi tuxa'rugEnj'- 
k'djena. Nunige iia)jkcigo£i'na klrana/k'Ik£i £uina'wira. Woiia'- 
7}re . ruk'o'non4 xete'ja. wogikaj'nera ko'naqkcj glgl'rawira. 
Ep'kjga'dja. waxop'i'ni wa£ir;gI'nAbra rok'ryl'reja aira nunige 
h^birak'I'racdjonA. rokl'ra ka-e'kiriA. je'ji ka^jk'e' wajl'nobira'ni 
gadja.. Yara'n^ga waibeconarjga'dja wa£iya'n4pdjj. Nunige 
waja'nija. e tuxu'ruk'rji wiroto' waha'naje. Hitco'k'ewakTwira 
kjibanl'kura kabo'k'aki hu'djane Wona'TJre klruk'o'no xe'tera 
iiaijkcigo£i' kiruk'o'naija, tanl'na woko/na k'arap'i-e'sgexdji 
nfbiruxa'dJEra tcaba'sgara wak'e'rera meje'nuga glrij'cdja. reki'- 
regi. WokQ'na ne waxop'i'ni konarjkci'jjk'djera ki^gai'rera. 
Waeiya'n4pdjiNn4 dja'n^ga wak'lk'a/radJEnijjgwfnA. sto-a'k'iwi- 
a'n^ga k|bital'£una je'nuganiijk waxop'i'ni kona^kci'win^. 
Ep'bjga'dja.- Wok'e-o'ni7jgeregi kaitcerare'cge rok'o'no iyara'- 
no^gEra te£e'ji waxop'i'nina wajlnuk'onai'ja wokA/gik'evreregi ne 
wonaijkci' glgira'wira Wa£lya'n4bwin4. Warogl'Tirera bak'uru- 
bi'ndj reka'n^ga. E'gi waroTira wakurukindj anaga. Waxopini 
wonarjkcina tci-oju mlnajjkca'wa^gre nkjk'uruki'ndj reka'win^. 

Te£e' jegu'kiregi wa£i'nabra kan§/tci ai'regi egi koracdjai'ja. 
wagigo'nA^k'a kicgi-a'ga naji-a'n4ga waeio4'pcAn4. 

Terminal speech of host. — "Sa'k'ereni7jk'djorjgera minarjkca'war/gre 
ni^k'uruki'ndj reka'winA.. Ep'iijga'dja. Djagu'xdjinir/k rii-ii'gu 
wa£uanA/gwira. Hok'i'wik'aVadJEra han^'tciijxdji koglga'ra. 

Radin] THE clan WAR-BUNDLE FEASTS 499 

I send forth my greetings. To the host and all the clansmen sitting 
with him, do I send forth my greetings. To those who are imperson- 
ating the spirits I also send forth my greetings." 

Then the sixth one for whom a kettle has been placed, the last one, 
speaks.123 

Speech of seventh guest. — "Host and your relatives who are seated 
here, I greet you all. I am not able to say anything (i. e., I don't 
amount to anything), but I can at least thank for the body.124 It is 
no harm to do so, we are told.125 That is what I mean and why I say 
it. To speak of life is surely no harm, we are told.128 Thus I thought. 
If ever I obtained the position of one who impersonated (a spirit) and 
(partook) of a sacred piece of food, I felt that I would be beside 
myself with thankfulness and gratitude. Not of war power will 
such as I be able to speak. In spite of that, they have seen to it that 
I came in connection with life. They have permitted me to imper- 
sonate one of the spirits who is among the greatest in the control of 
war power. It is good to thank the spirits and at the same time to 
preach to one another, it is said. To speak to one another of life and 
of the body(?) certainly there is no harm in it. Thus I thought, and 
that is why I am saying this. I am very thankful. If I could only 
say something (that would be of any value) to the spirits I would say 
it. You, grandfather, who come every day, you who are in control 
of great war power and life, tobacco, food, an offering of a white 
buckskin pleasing to the spirits, and a head ornament — that is 
about to be sent toward you. I was to be one of those impersonating 
the spirits at the feast, they told me. I am deeply grateful for the 
honor, to all those of the various clans that are gathered together 
here with offerings and who are impersonating the spirits. It is good. 
Even had I eaten a common piece of meat I would have considered 
myself well repaid, but I have actually been put in charge of a spirit 
who controls something. We are thankful. To those to whom we 
preached (i. e., the Sun) I send forth my greetings. To the host I 
send forth my greetings. To those who are sitting in the lodge 
impersontaing the spirits I send forth my greetings." 

When they are through greeting each other, at the end, the host 
rises and thanks them, saying: 

Terminal speech of host. — "War-bundle owners who are seated 
here, I greet you all. What I long for is exactly what we have been 
doing. All the members of the various clans have pleaded for us in 

1:3 This is a mistake of the informant. It should be the seventh one. He seems, however, not to be 
counting the person who partakes of food offered to Earthmaker. 

i« I.e., the dog (7). 

1JS I.e., there is no harm done if even a worthless person like myself thanks for the food of the dog, even 
although by doing this he is actually taking part in the feast. 

,afl I. e., there is no harm in obtaining life for one another by delivering speeches and offering up prayers 
to the spirits. 

500 THE WINNEBAGO TKIBE [eth. ann. 37 

P'bjxdjj hiijgigl'rawira. E'p'hjgadj^. Djagu'xdjj no-a'gu wa£ua'- 
n^gwira han^L'tci^xdjj p'i'xdjj ygigai'rawira. Ep'b/ga'dja. warogl'- 
gogi djagii' rora'gu wac£u'conQgEra. Sa'k'erera dja'n^ga'k'I hanf- 
tcbjxdjjhujjgjgal'rera. Ep'irjga'dja. waJ4'na xu'rug. P'J7)xdjj wahj- 
bira/n^ga. Ep'1'114 p'iijxdji. Tcebjnagl'giwjra haiza'xdjj tcebwa- 
ira'gigiwira. C£agwara'wiga waxop'j'nj ho!t£et£e' nfdjwawirodjai' 
riegi han^'tci^xdjj wawl'rak'aracawi-avn4ga waja.' naxu'rug p'i'xdjj 
waca/wira. Ep'I'n4 wa£ya' nAbwinA. je'sge ru-a/gu waeiia/n4gwi>ra." 
"Sa'kereni^k'djojjgere minajjkca'waijgre nirk'uruhi'ndj reha'- 
wjdjigoV 

SECOND DIVISION OF THE CEREMONY IN HONOR OF THE NIGHT 

SPIRITS 

Introductory remarks. — E'gj wohQ'na hlnubQ'hona hldjowak'ere'- 
regj warutc4'na, wohajk'jce'rera. Hoicibi'regj e'gj wohQ'na 
waxop'j'nj djagu'cAnA. wagjxu'cdjanehjrek'djane'gi jeguhi'regi egj 
wagjgo'n^k'a taniwogi'jura eu-jk'ai'oho'gi taniwaxu'114. We'je. 

The Tobacco Offering 

Offering to the Night Spirits. — "Tcok'aga' Djobena^giwi'qxga n|dj5- 
radj|L'giji h^bogure'regereVa h§he' hurjgera tci'ja. wogu'zotcjra 
ha'cinjwijjgiji. Wak'pca/jjk rak'aragj-aradje'gj. Nfdjjrora'djawl'je 
e'ra. Hagare'jan^ tani-owaxu'114 hiijgi'rewigi tani'na hoju'-ija, 
nb}gjp'axu'wj-an4ga. Won^'vjrera tcok'aga' djagu' gjp'j' euijk'- 
dje. N|djirora'djawigi je£e' hakarata'win^. Tcok'a' hfhe' hur/gra 
tani'na te£e'ren4." 

"TcI-ok'Isakonajj'negj hldje' nbjgigl'gi hoici'pdjj. Wogy'zotci 
wak'atca/Tjk haci'niwi-evdja tani'na wohQ'na wa'rutc xop'jni 
hlraru'tcap wagudje'ra si'ja., te je'nyga nirygjtucdjaneha'win^." 

Offering to Earth. — "E'gj Mana hlk'arok'e'njwiha, tcok'aga' 
Dj5ben^T)gj\vi'r;xga nir?gjta'win4 won4'7Jrera uaj?kcigo-j£na nbjgjta'- 
win4. Djadjai'^xdjj p'& mlca'naTjk'e jedjaj'^xdjj p'a tani'na 
njta'k'adJEra wagudje'ra si'ja te je'nyga k'unjk'a nbjgjtu'cdja. 
reha'wjn4." 

Tani'na te£e'rena. 

"Hrtcok'Isa'gEnajTna e'dja hldje' nij)gjglgl'n4 wohQ'na n|bjruxa'- 
dJEra wanbjgitu'cdja. reha'wjre. Hoici'pdjj hlrak'a'rap'erez ranica'- 
k'djonevje tcok'aga e'je ai'rera. Wak'Ik'a'radjwjra won4'7Jrera 
uar;kcigQ£j'na h!rak'-I"Irortca. wawe'k'djawjx. 

radin] THE CLAN WAR-BUNDLE FEASTS 501 

song. Very good have they been to us. It is good. This is what I 
have longed for, what we have been doing and all the good they 
have said about us. It is good when you give a feast to do just 
what you wish. The war-bundle owners, as many as there are here, 
have spoken for me. It is good to obtain something when asking for 
it. Very well have they spoken. It is good; it is very good. You 
have eaten (the food) in my behalf; very carefully have you eaten 
it up for me. All the sacred speeches that they blessed him (our 
grandfather) with you have repeated so that you might obtain real 
life, you said. It is good and I thank you, for we have done here 
exactly what I have longed for. War-bundle owners who are seated 
here, I greet you." 

SECOND DIVISION OP THE CEREMONY — IN HONOR OF THE NIGHT 

SPIRITS 

Introductory remarks. — Then the attendants get ready to put on 
the kettles for the second feast. When they are finished arranging 
the food that is to be turned over to the spirits the host prepares 
bis tobacco and gets ready to pour it. Then he speaks the following: 

The Tobacco Offering 

Offering to the Night Spirits. — "To you, grandfather Djoben^Tj- 
giwi'^xga, does the council lodge of the Chief of the Night Spirits, 
standing in the east, belong. Holy you have kept it. You (Chief of 
the Night Spirits) were the one who blessed him with it, he said. 
When the time comes for the tobacco pouring we will offer you a 
handful of tobacco. War power he liked to obtain by doing this. 
With what you blessed him, that we ask you to give us in return. 
Grandfather, Chief of the Night Spirits, tobacco, here it is. 

' ' Here in the fire I shall place tobacco for you at all times. Tobacco, 
holy food, and buckskin for moccasins, all those things I will send 
to your sacred creation lodge." 

Offering to Earth. — "You who are our grandmother, Earth, you 
blessed grandfather Djobena.7)giwi'7;xga with life and war powers. 
As far as you extend, that far, O grandmother, do we spread out for 
you tobacco and food and moccasins. Here is the tobacco. Here in 
the fire shall I place tobacco; and food and offerings of buckskin 
will we send to you at all times. You will always accept them, 
grandfather said, it is said, so that our clansmen may travel in a 
straight path of war and life." 127 

127 That is, may nothing intervene to prevent them from enjoying all the blessings they have received in 
war and life. 

502 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ann. 37 

Offering to the Moon. — " Niijgita/winA, e'gi k'u'njk'a. Hicge 
tcok'aga' Djobena^giwi'ryxga wanaTnagik'ereVegi warage'je 
djadjai'rjxdji p'a maiijk'I'dja. honi^gEra' djadjal'jjxdji p'a 
ranice'gi jedjai'r/xdjj p'a tani'na hojii'-ija. hirjgiwaxu'-inegi hoici'- 
pdjj wa£I'n4p wagik'i-a'nihek'djonen\4. Hirak'i'geje al'rera. 
Tani'na ga airedjigo'." 

"Djan^ga hok'i'wik'aradJEra uar)kcik£i' uang,djodjai'sge ha£u- 
aha/ijgwira wonA'7Jrera hlrak'i'roitca. wawe'kdjawira, te'jesge 
nijjgita'winA. njta'kadJEra wagudje'ra si'ja. meje'nuga nbjgitu'cdja. 
reha'wina. Tcowe'regi gagu' tek'djaniha're wonA'7}rera uaijkci- 
goTna ya£U)?k'djaVi." 

Offering to the Water. — "E'gi jige nl'na hu^ge roni-ani'winera tcok'- 
aga' Djobena^giwi'^xga n^djoradjo/ijgi. Ga eredjigo'. 

"Tani'na tci-ok'isa'k honajl'negi nirygip'axu'gjji, rak'arahi' 
ranice'k'djonexje hirak'i'geje, al'rera. Njta'k'adJEra wagudje'ra 
sija. niijgitQ'cdjanihaVin^. W6nA.'7!rera ua^kcigo^'na te£e'- 
niqgita'winA. hoici'p hirak'a'rap'erezdane\je tcok'aga' era. 
Tcok'aga' Djobena^giwi'jjxga hicge tani-o'waxu ni^gi'k'erek'djaVi 
hirak'i'geje al'rera. Ga airedjigo'." 

"Tani'na hoju'-ijajcge hlrak'a'rap'eresk'e hirak'i'geje al'rera 
woho/na tani'na hlrasa' niijgitu'cdja. reha/winA.. TJaijkcigoTna 
wona'Tirera wak'I'k'aradjwira te'jesge ro-a'go£fna." 

Offering to North Wind. — "E'gi jige' waxa.hi'na tcok'aga' 
warage'je roh§/bot£e'k'I-eVlja hi£upI-a'ninA., hirek'I'geje al'rera. 
'Wazi'regi hohirare cge wak ip i na!' Tcok'aga' hirage'je era. 
Wagip'axu'wigi hbjgire'wigi hicge wagip'axu'wigi nbjgik'e'rek'- 
djawi hlraki'ge gljl. Tani'na ga airedjigo." 

"Wota'tconi'na wonA/7Jrera uaijkcigc-Tna te'jesge niijgita'- 
winA/' 

Offering to the Pigeon-Hawk. — "E'gi jige K'irik'iriki'sgera tani'na 
ga eredjigo'. Tcok'aga' w5nA.'7Jrera ua^kcigoTna n^djirora'djorjgr- 
giji hoici'pdjj nirjgita'wigi c£unanice'k'djane hirak'i'geje tcok'aga' 
hirak'i'geje e'je al'rera." 

Offering to Earthmaker. — "M§'£una tanlna'cAnA. wagip'a'xuwigi 
tanina'cAnAre'cge. Eraitce'raje hiceje' al'rera. Tani'na hoju'-ija. 
wagip'axu'wigi." 

Offering to the Thunderbird. — "E'gi wakandja'ra tanina'cAiiA. 
nir;gip'axu'-Icge. Eraitce'rak'djane'je hiceje' al'rera. Tanina'- 
caiia. wagip'a'xuwigi." 

badin] THE CLAN WAR-BUNDLE FEASTS 503 

Offering to the Moon. — "This we ask, grandmother, of you also. 
You added your power to (the other hlessings) of grandfather 
Djobena.j?giwi'ijxga and you said that as long as the world lasts you 
would willingly accept the offerings of tobacco that his posterity 
extended to you. Thus you yourself said, we are told. Here is the 
tobacco. 

''As many of our clansmen as are here living in an abject condition 
(spiritually), may they all follow in the direct path of war. For 
that we are now extending to you tobacco, food, and moccasins. 
And may we in the future travel in the path of war and life." 

Offering to the Water. — "You likewise, Chief of the Water, whose 
body is water, blessed grandfather Djobenarygiwi'j?xga. Here it is 
(the tobacco). If we poured tobacco into the fire, you said you 
would always smoke it, it is said. Food and buckskin for moccasins 
we are about to extend to you. War powers and life, that we ask 
from you in return, for you said that you would always accept (our 
offerings), we are told. When you blessed grandfather Djobena^- 
giwi'jjxga you said that we should pour tobacco for you at all times, 
it is said. Here it is. 

"You would recognize the offering of tobacco and the tobacco 
with the food that we sent forth to you, you said, it is said. We 
desire war powers and life for our kinsmen." 

Offering to North Wind. — "You likewise, Porcupine,128 told grand- 
father, 'For killing an enemy outright, I am useful, it is said. I am 
even the equal of the one who blows from the north!' Thus you told 
grandfather, it is said. When the proper time has arrived we should 
pour tobacco. Tobacco, here it is. 

"Our first request is for war power and life." 

Offering to the Pigeon-Hawk. — "Here is tobacco for you, too, 
Pigeon-Hawk. You blessed grandfather with war and life and it is 
said you told him that you would always give him what we asked of 
you." 

Offering to Earthmaker. — "For Earthmaker, who is the foremost, 
you said we should pour tobacco, so for him we (pour) tobacco.129 
A handful of tobacco we are about to offer to you (Earthmaker)." 

Offering to the Thunderbirel. — "To you, also, Thunderbird, I am 
about to pour tobacco. It will be one of the foremost offerings, you 
said, it is said. Tobacco we pour to you." 

128 Porcupine is also associated with the North Wind in the first division of the ceremony. 

129 1, e., we even have the effrontery to offer him tobacco as if people like ourselves could ever obtain a 
blessing from so great a deity as Earthmaker ! The order in winch the offerings to the various spirits are 
made is rather peculiar, for that to Earthmaker should, I believe, come first. I suspect that my informant 
was probably in error in the arrangement given above, a fact easily explained when it is remembered that 
he tried to visualize a ceremony he had not given for some time. 

504 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [bth. ann. 37 

Offering to Big Black Hawk. — "E'gi jige K'eredju'sep xetera' 
tani'na hoju'-ija. wigip'axuwl'cidjigo V 

Offering to Disease-giver. — "E'gi jige Hocere£u'wahira tcok'a' 
tani'na h5ju'-ija. tanina'cAnA. renijjgigl'n*;." 

Offering to South Wind. — "E'gi Rek'u'huhira tcok'a' tanina'- 
cAnA. wlgip'axu'wigi tanina'cAnare^cge. E hlraitce'ra raik'aral'p- 
djone hlceje' ai'rera." 

Offering to the Sun. — "Tani'na hidje' niijgigi'nA, tcok'a' h|bani- 
hu'ra. Tani'na hoju'-ija. tanlna'cAiiAxdji* hidje' nbjglgl'rL*.." 

Basic Ritual 

Host's first speech. — "Sa'k'ereniVykdjo^gEra mlnaj)kca'wa7)gre ni- 
jjk'uruhi'ntc reha'winA.. Hok'a'was Mani'na h5niha'ra tcok'aga' 
djasge glk'erere'gi Tdwoit£e'higa Hok'a'was Mani'na wawi'p'erez 
na£i>jgi'ji. H§,ta'ginadjavnA.ga Iwust£e'k'i)?gi hltco'k'ehiwahiVira 
m^a'k'I wana^'ijgik'ereVegiji. Tcok'aga' TcIwoit£e'higa we'je, 
niijgi-owadji'ja. hereje' hik'Ige'je h^boguregina'^gEre h§he' 
hiyuiygi'winA. e £unihe'je egi jige sa'nirjk yoire'regi wak'a'ndja 
hu>jgra hlniijkhl'gi e ang/tc hl'je e'sge ma/a'k'I c£agwahi. Nunige' 
wagi'n|tcgi p'ihl' ng,djodjaI'neje. E'sge hagare'ja. t£egljl' 
mf£a'k'I horak'dje'k'djoneje e'je aire'114. E'sge honiha' gu'se 
h|he' n§,WA.'na djagu'xdji egl'ji je'sge tuxu'ruik'djawTje. 
Nu'nige honiha'ra hlj§'j?k'lra hlrap'e'resgrcge ha^k'e' hjtcge' 
wara'ni^k'djonehi^; hlja^k'I'ra hlrap'e'resgi e'cAnA. haw era '-lege 
Tak'jnbEra'gi hlgu' ere'nA.. Ha^k'e' to-j' waca'nb;k'djonevnA. 
wonA'7Jre haxl'ri tia)?kcigo£i' haxl'ri wacek'djone'114 ai'reij^. 
Je'sge wahek'djoneha/wigaMja.. 

Sa'k'ereniv7)k'djoj?gEre mlna^kca'warjgre niijk'uruhi'ntc reha'- 
win^." (H§,je' Nfwq..) 

Host's second speech. — "Sa'k'ereni^k'djojjgera mlnaijkca'waijgrc 
nir/k'Qruhi'ndj reha'widjigo. E'gi hak'aral'sundjwigi e'gi hlna^gl'- 
djieerek'djaVira c£agwara'wiga honiha'ra waxop'i'ni hok'Ira'ra 
djagu' adji'regi waworak'a'rak'IcanVk'djg,wira. Jesge nijjgita'- 
wiii^. Hlwacl'nbjgera tc|t£i' wahaira'n^ga e'gi tacdjg/wigi 

badin] THE CLAN WAR-BUNDLE FEASTS 505 

Offering to Big Black Hawk. — "To the Big Black Plawk we also 
offer a handful of tobacco." 

Offering to Disease-giver. — "To you, grandfather Disease-giver, I 
also send tobacco." 

Offering to South, Wind. — "To you, also, grandfather South Wind, 
I send tobacco. You would consider it foremost, you said, it is said." 

Offering to the Sun. — "Here I place tobacco for you, too, grandfather 
Sun. A handful of tobacco here I place here for you." 

Basic Ritual 

Host's first speech. — "War-bundle owners who are sitting here, I 
greet you. The songs that the Night Spirits placed within the reach 
of grandfather TcIwoitVhiga,130 those he tried to learn. He fasted 
and thirsted himself to death for the blessings our grandfathers (the 
Night Spirits) gave him (spread) over the length of the earth. Our 
grandfather Tciwoit£e/higa said that he had come from somewhere in 
the east and that a Night Spirit chieftainess was his mother and that 
the son of the chief of the Thunderbirds was his father; that his 
parents lived beyond the confines of this earth.131 When he fasted 
to be blessed by (these spirits) over again,132 they blessed him. If at 
any time he should die he would be able to visit the earth again, he 
said, it is said.133 The song he was taught, the Night Spirit song, 
that we will try to sing. Even if you know only one song, you will 
not bore them (the spirits) with it; for if you bring yourself to the 
state of weeping in your efforts, it will be (acceptable). If you do not 
put on any embellishments when you pray (literally, cry) for war and 
life (it will be acceptable), it is said. Thus we should say it. 

"War-bundle owners who are seated here, I greet you." (Night 
Spirit song.) 

Host's second speech. — "War-bundle owners who are seated here, 
I greet you. When we finish (our part of the ceremony), may you 
help us by repeating the spirit songs your ancestors gave you to be 
handed down (from one generation to another). That we ask of you. 
Now we will start a dance song and when we are finished singing, our 

i» Literal translation, " Kills within the lodge." 

la What Tciwoit'e/higa means by saying that these spirits were his parents is that he is a reincarnated 
spirit that has chosen to be born of human parents. Such claims were by no means rare even in late Winne- 
bago lustory and there is, as a matter of fact, a powerful shaman living in Wisconsin now who claims that 
he is the reincarnated Hare ( Wacdjinge'ga). 

»32 Before coming to the earth as a human being, he had of course been told that he would receive certain 
blessings, but nevertheless he had to fast for them just as a human being does. However, shamans who 
obtained their powers in this way were always supposed to obtain them more easily than other people. 
For an illustration of this cf. the account of a shaman's blessing in the " Reminiscences of a Winnebago 
Indian" by myselfin Amer. Jour. Folklore, XXVI, 1913. 

133 That is, become reincarnated. 

186823—22 33 

506 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE Iran. ann. 37 

e'gi hltcok'iwahl'wira wldja'dja tcabire'ra manl'nek'djeVa. Je'sge 
niijgita'win4. Sa'k'ereni^k'djo^gEre mlnar;kca'wa7)gre nbjk'uruhi'- 
ndj rehawidjigo'." (Ng/wa Hlwad'ra.) 

Hak' araisu' ndj iregi. 

Host's third speech,. — "E'gi sa'k'erenTjjk'djoijgEra mina>?kca'- 
wa^gre niijk'uruhi'ndj reha'winA.. Hok'a'raga n§,£ini'sge wa- 
e{iaii4'ijgwira jedjaj'jjxdji p'a je'gu hldje' hawi-a'n^ga. E'gi 
hlranikTk'uruxe'k'djonehaVije. Hihe'ra wirora'gEra manl'- 
nek'djera je'sge honi^gl'tawinA.. Sa'k'ereni\jk'djo7?gEra mlna^kca/- 
waijgre rnijk'uruhi'ndj reha'widjigo." 

"E'gi tcek'dji'na sa'niijk hoiratcge' howa/reje ne7arupa'rogEra 
warutca'naqk'a hlja/ wa£uje' ruha/k'ereje. Sa/k'ereja. h5wahlre- 
gina'jjk'I e'dja hltce'glgigigi tcowehl-e'dja glk'ereje' p'e7 so/so7ra 
wlro'ragEra mlna^kca'wa^k'a. E'gi tani'na n^bo'ju gigi'je." 

Speech of first guest. — "Waro7l'ra hok'I'k'aradJEra mlna^kca'- 
wa^gre nirjkuriihi'ndj reha'widjigo. E'gi hona^kd'na waxop'i'ni 
tclju mlnar;kca'\va7)gre niijk'Gruhi'ndj reha'widjigo. Ep'i^ga'dja. 
Waro7i'ra hltco'k'ewahTwira taniwogi'ju hiijgigl'rare. Hok'a'was 
Mani'na hg,bogu'regirera tcok'aga' hicge wanaci'gik'erevreje 
hi'k'igevje ai'rera. Hagare'ja. honiha'ra tc$t£i' wagl'gik'djona'- 
wigi tani'na hagip'a'xuwrge hir/k'a/rap'erezf k'djoneje, e'je ai'rera. 
Tani'na hogu'-ija. hagip'axu'^k'djonaVe k'arahi'je glji. Hok'I'- 
wik'aradJEra waro7i'ra uan§,djodja|'sge wa£unajjgre hicge' 
uan§djodjaj'sge wahana>?k'a'dja wigip'e'rezira/n^ga, tani'na hicge 
hir/gip'e'rezire'gi wdk'i'djirevja. hereje ai'rera Je'sge p'ewj-a'n^ga. 
Wirora'gera tca,tei' djlreha'k'djonare waxop'i'ni naj?xgu'ne p'lng,'- 
Tjkce nunige honiha'ra djagu'adjl'regi je'sge hota'tcg^jjk'djonaVe. 
Hlj§/)jxdji hlsge'ra hatuxu'rugan^ga €\xrjgl']\. Hitco'k'ewahlVira 
Hok'a'was Mani'na woho/na tani'na ngblruxa'dJEra nai^xdji'na 
wawigl'p'erzireje'je. Hire wahe'k'djaVinA.. Waro7i'ra hok'I'- 
wik'aradJEra mlnarjkca'wa^gre niijk'Qruhi'ndj reha'wirL*.. E'gi 
waxop'i'ni hona7jkcj'na dja'n^ga mlna^kca'wa^gre^cge niijk'uru- 
hi'ndj reha'widjigo." (Hgbe' N$wa..) 

Second speech of first guest. — "M|£una hok'arai'cipgi hldja'- 
gikereVanaijk'a we'je. Waro7l'ra hok'l'wik'aradjera mina^kca'- 

RADiN] THE CLAN WAR-BUNDLE FEASTS 507 

grandfather, the drum, will start to walk (in your direction).134 That 
we ask of you (i. e., to help us also in our dancing). War-bundle 
owners who are seated here, I greet you." (Dance song.) 

When the dancing is finished the host speaks again. 

Host's third speech. — "War-bundle owners who are seated here, I 
greet you. We are now trying to do our best to attract (the spirits' 
attention) to what we are doing and that is why we are placing (the 
drum) (in front of the guests). What I said about the messenger who 
is about to walk,135 that I am going to speak of to you. War-bundle 
owners who are seated here, I greet you." 

Then the attendant first moves the drum to the left side, and places 
both the drum and the rattle in front of the war-bundle owner who 
is next (in turn). He also places tobacco in his hand. 

Speech of first guest. — ' 'Host and his relatives who are seated here, 
I send my greetings to you. To you who are sitting here imper- 
sonating the spirits I send forth my greetings also. It is good. The 
host and our grandfathers pour tobacco for me. Those in the east, 
the Night Spirits, added their blessings also, grandfather said, it is 
said. If at any time we sang the songs and poured tobacco for 
them he would take cognizance thereof, he said, it is said. The 
handful of tobacco we poured they would smoke. The clansmen and 
councilors who are living in as pitiable a condition as I myself who 
am speaking will be helped, should the spirits accept their offering, 
just as I will be helped if they accept my tobacco. Thus I thought. 
The messenger that they have caused to come my way so that the 
spirits might hear my words,138 I am unworthy of. What our 
ancestors have handed down I can merely guess at.137 O, that it 
were my good fortune to say even one thing (as they desire it) ! 
Would that the Night Spirits, our grandfathers, would accept the 
food and the tobacco and the offerings of buckskin! It is with that 
wish that we say this. Host, members of this clan who are sitting 
here, I send my greetings toward you. All who are sitting here 
impersonating the spirits, I send my greetings toward you." (Night 
Spirits' song.) 

When the person in charge of the kettle in honor of Earthmaker 138 
has finished, he says (again) : 

Second speech of first guest. — ' 'Host, and your clan who are sitting 
here, I greet you. You who are sitting here impersonating spirits, I 

1M I. e., the drum will be passed from one guest to another. This constitutes the Basic Ceremony. Cf. 
Introduction. 

'» The drum is known variously as " wldjd'dja," the public crier, or as " wiTo'ragEra," the messenger, 
i.e., literally, " the one through whom something is told." In this second term is included, however, not 
only the drum but also the gourds. The sound of the drum and the gourds translates into a language 
intelligible to the spirits what the Indians are pleading for. 

138 I.e., the drum. 

137 I.e., my knowledge is so imperfect that I will have to take chances at saying the right thing. 

13» This is probably a mistake on the part of the informant. It should be Night Spirit. 

508 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ann. 37 

wa7jk'a ni^k'uruhi'ndjreha'wjnA^ Waxop'i'ni hS'na^kciVecge dja'- 
nA,ga mlnaijkca'wajjgre nrqkuruhi'ntc reha'wjn4. Waxop'j'ni 
widja'dja tcabire'ra manjgigl'rera te tconi'xdjj hamanl' £ujna'wjra. 
Wajok'I'^gEra dja'n^ga hanjwi'114 jc'nyga nftci'ijxdji wjro'- 
ragEra watutcabwl'ra fiaqkcigoTna hirana/k'lkeIvwin4. Woiia'- 
7Jre glxe'we. Wa£ub?ga'dja wiro'ragEra ma'ni-arjgra jedjaj'jjxdji p'a 
hoicahage'. Wahe'nA.. Waro7l'ra wak'uruhi'ndjaiiA.ga. Sa'- 
k'ereni^k'djo^gra minajjkca'wa^gre niijk'uruhi'ndj reha/wjdjjgo." 

"E'gj te£e'jj hok'aral'cipan^ga. E'gj jige klcge hlnube'dja jige 
uajjgl'ja. sak'ereja'na^k'j e'dja hlnybo/hona ne7arup'a/rogEra 
e'dja gik'ere'regj tanl'na nfho'ju gigl'regi. UagEna'rjk'a we'je 
rusgi'." 

Speech of second guest. — " Waro7i'ra wak'i'wjk'aradJEra mlnarjkca'- 
wa^k'a ni^k'uruhi'ndjw-rn^. E'gi waxop'j'nj onarjkci'na minarjk- 
ca'waijgrecge nbjk'uruhi'ndjwinA.. Ep'i^ga'dj^. Sa/k'ere-yatcav- 
bwjra wa'rutc uajjgo'kuk^u^-inawi-a^n^ga. E'gi jige wa'rutc 
raji'cge here nunjge' wan^p'l'rjxdjj wani-ol'tcge k'arap'I-e'sgexdjj 
rutc waijgagjgl'rawjra. E'gj je£e' CAnAne'cge p'irjga'dj^. E'gi 
waxop'j'ni wogi'hu wa£u'nA>?gEra uarjkcigoTna ta wa£u'najjgEra. 
Haj^k'e e'cAnA wak'ik£u'njnarjka\lja tclroi'xdjj haha'^gwire te 
ana'tcir?xdji newa>;ga'wagj £u'-jnawjge wa£u'nA7?gEra. Je'djujjga 
hoLxtc|'r;xdjj jige ne'xdjj taniwogl'ju warjgagjgi' rawigaMja. 
Wjro'ragEra hamanl' £u-jna'wjra. Wa£jya'nabwTn4. Ne waja'njja. 
£u-jnj-;a'n4ga tegasge'je waja/ yara'na^kce. Tcok'a' ewewl'negj 
wagl£una'wjgadja.. Tcok'aga' k|bogure'gi herera' Hok'a'was 
Mani'na honjha' glgu'zjregivjj. H$he' tconl'na hoxdjan'pdjj 
hagu'naT)kTjj tanl'na hldje' wagl'gjk'djoneVa honjha' ra ha^k'e' 
erewaha'winrcge n^djor/gjdjaira/wjgj e tanl'na hir;gjhj'nek'dja\vjra 
ha'n^ga. E'gi waroil'ra hokTwik'aradJEra waxop'j'njna hln§- 
cge'ni gjk'ara'tc mina^kira'n^ga wawbjgjp'erezire'jeje. Ya're 
wahek'djonjha'wjgadja,- WonA/TJre xirira' 7ak'jbi-§'dje. 

Hagare'ja. nabjruxa'djeraviHga waxop'i'ni widja'dja tcabjre'ra 
hamanjnl'negi H^jjk'e' waj§' waxdjo' ho£u'jjo. hereniijk'djone'114. 
Djagu' rogu' wanarjk'e' warcvyl'ra hicge je'sge haxlrj-a'dje hbjgaf- 
rera c£agwaha'ra. Je'sge hjhe'wahek'djonegaMja.. Hlgua'na wiro'- 
ragEra tca.t6!' djireha'k'djawjra Waro7l'ra mlnaijkca/waijk'a 
niijk'uruhi'ndj reha'win^. E'gj sa'k'ereni\?k'djo7)gre ni7jk'uruhi'ndj 
reha/wjdjjgo." 

Hlrai'sundJEra wawl£u' rucdja'jjgj e'gj hjwad'ra djirehl'- 
k'djone'gi we'je. 

Second speech of second guest. — "Wa'ro7Jra hok'Ik'a'radJEra 
minaijkca'wajjgre nijjk'uruhi'ndj reha'winA.. E'gi nbjk'uruhi'ndj 

radin] THE CLAN WAK-BUNDLE FEASTS 509 

greet you. The messenger of the spirits (the drum) they have 
caused to walk in our path, first.139 This drum has brought me and 
all my relatives who are here in touch with life. We have done this in 
order to obtain war power. The messenger that has walked thus 
far I have annoyed.140 That is why I am saying this. Host, I greet 
you and yours. War-bundle owners who are seated here, I send 
my greetings toward you." 

When he has finished, then for the second time they pass the drum 
to another warrior and they place tobacco in his hand. This man, 
taking the tobacco, speaks as follows: 

Speech of second guest. — ' 'Host and members of your clan who are 
seated here, I greet you. You seated here who are impersonating 
the spirits, I greet you. It is good. Food you have given our war- 
riors. There is plenty of ordinary food, but you hasre made us eat 
nice food, of animals that we like very much.141 Even (common 
food) would have been good enough for us. They are boiling food for 
the spirits so that they might ask them for life. You are not merely 
doing this for them, but you are doing this for all those people 
who are present in this lodge. You have filled us full (of blessings 
and honors) and you have permitted us to pour tobacco. You have 
caused the messengers (the drum and the rattle) to walk over to us. 
We are thankful. Do I or does anything I say amount to anything ?143 
You thought of your grandfather (the spirit) and that is why you 
did it. Those in the east, the Night Spirits, taught him songs. 
The first nice evening that they start the Night (songs?), then I will 
offer tobacco for them. Even if we don't sing the songs correctly, 
they (the spirits) may still take pity on us and smoke our tobacco. 
The host and the members of his clan prayed earnestly to the spirits 
who are sitting here that they accept (these offerings). It is with 
this thought (before me) that I speak in this way. War powers let 
us cry for. 'When they give the feast, when they see to it that the 
sacred criers (i. e., the drums) come to you, remember that you 
should not take things lightly on that occasion. What the host 
desires do thou also pray for,' my ancestors told me. That is why I 
will say it. Now we are about to drum. Host who is sitting here, I 
greet you. War-bundle owners who are seated here, I greet you all." 

When they finished the terminal song, then he got ready to start 
the dancing song and he said: 

Second speech of second guest. — " Host and his relatives who are 
seated here, I send my greetings toward you. War-bundle owners 

189 I.e., they have given us the place of honor so that the drum will be passed to us first. 
"° 1, e., I have made requests of the spirits by means of the drums and the rattles. 
1(1 I.e., we have been asked to eat the deer head. 
14a Question implying a negative answer. 

510 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ann. 37 

reha'winA. wo'naTjkcina^cge mlnaj?kca'wa7?gre niijk'uruhi'dnj reha'- 
widjigo." 

E'gi hiwaci'ra wawl£u' rucdjo'ijgi wak'Qruhi'ndj rehl'je we'je. 

Third speech of second guest. — "Waro7i'ra mlna^kca'wajjk'a nirjk'- 
uruhi'ndj reha'widj igo'. Ep'i^ga'dja. Wiro'ragEra watutca'bwira 
■vronA'Tire glxe'we wa£uwl'ra. E'gi iiaj;kcigo£i' glxe'we wa£uwiga'- 
dja. Djagu' rogu' wa£u'naj;gEra. Ha^k'e' waja'nija. naxu-'ruk 
tuxu'rugEnir;k'djona, nunige' higu' djasge'hagi he'rek'djone'ge 
jegy'ni^k djik'e'we-axnA.ga Wiro'ragEra jedjaj'jjdji p'a hoica/- 
hanAga. Waro7l'ra hokTwik'aradJEra mico'nA7jkcawai}k'av niryk'- 
uruhi'ndj reha'widjigo\ Sa'k'ereni\kdjo7jgere minajjkca'warjgre 
nijjk'uruhi'ndj reha'widj igo." 

E'gi jjge ne7arupa'rogEra ruhak'ere'regj hltani'hona tani'na 
hlrasa' tani'na harutcf'pgi we'je. 

First speechof third guest. — "War07l'ra hok'Ik'a'radJEra mlna^kca,'- 
warjgre niijk'uruhjdjwi'nA.. E'gi waxop'i'ni wo'najjkcrna dja/nAga 
tci-o'jumlna^kcawajjgre nbjk'GruhindjwI'nA.. Ep'I'nA. waxop'i'ni 
widja'djatcavbirera mani-a'^gra horo'k hamani' £u'-inera. Ep'i^ga'- 
dja.. H^bogure'girera Hok'a'was Manma wok'i'ra huhi'rera 
hltcSk'ewahl'regi waw5k'a'rahlra. Huhi'rera hlcge Wiro'ragEra 
hamani' £u'-inera hltco'k'ewahiVira honiha'ra djagu'adjl'regi hlcge 
wawa'k'arak'Itak'djawivna. Hltco'k'ehawigrji h§.he' wjgal'regi 
honiha' gik'erere'je e'ra. Hagare'ja. honiha tc$t£i wahak'dja'wigi 
tani'na koju'-jja. wagip'axu'wigi k'arahl'nek'djane^n^ hjgai'reje 
e'nA.. Tani'na Hok'a'was Manl'na hldje' wagigI'k'djonaVi-avnA.ga 
war07l'ra tanl'waxu hijjgigi'rawTra tani'na hldje' wagigiwI'nA. 
Hlcge hl'cAnA. wajj'djahi yare'wahek'dja'wije? Waro7l'ra tani'na 
woho'na n(Lbiruxa'dJEra wawI'gip'erezirejVje. Yare wahek'dje. 
WonA/iire haxlrl' wahe'k'djawigaMj^. Waro7l'ra hok'Ik'a'radJEra 
sa'k'ereni^k'djoijgre mlnajjkca'waijgre nbjk'uruhi'ndj reha'widj igo." 
(H§,he' Nawa..) 

Second speech of third guest. — E'gi hiwaci'ra jige wawl'£uk'arah5vgi 
we'je. 

"War07l'ra hok'I'k'aradJEra mlnaijkca'wa^k'a niijk'uruhi'ndj 
reha'widjigo. E'gi hona^kcl'nacge tcl-o'ju mlna^kca'wa^gre nirjk'- 
uruhi'ndj reha'widjigo. Hlwacl'niijkra tc§t£i djlreha'k'djawira. 
Waja'nija, naxu'rug p'I£una'7jkce nunige ha^k'e' hlk£i'7jgi p'inine'dja. 
wahe'k djonegadja. Nijjk'uruhi'ndj reha'widjigo." (Hiwaci'ra 
Nawa..) 

Third speech of third guest. — E'gi hiwaci'ra haisu'ntcgi we'je. 

"Wiro'ragEra hamanl'winawiVa jedjaj'^xdji p'a hoicg/ hawi'ii*.. 
E'gi dja'nAga hok'Ik'a'radJEra watuk'o'zwira hlmajcdjaryk'dja'wira 

radin] THE CLAN WAR-BUNDLE FEASTS 511 

who are seated here impersonating the spirits, I send my greetings 
toward you." 

When the dance songs have been finished, then greeting, he says 
as follows : 

Third speech of second guest. — ' 'Host who art sitting here, I send 
forth my greetings to you. It is good. It is to obtain war that we 
accept the drum. It is to gain life that we are doing this. We are 
doing this because he (the host) wishes it. Nothing can be gained 
by anything I would say, but neverthless, howsoever small its value 
may be, let us start the drum. Host and members of his clan who 
are seated here, I greet you. War-bundle owners who are seated 
here, I greet you." 

Then they pass the drum to the third person and he, taking the 
tobacco, says as follows: 

First speech of third guest. — "Host and relatives who are sitting here, 
I greet you. You sitting within this lodge who are impersonating the 
spirits, I greet you. It is good that the drum of the spirits has been 
made to walk in our direction. It is good. They have sent us the 
means for imitating the Night Spirits who live in the east ;' for imper- 
sonating our grandfathers. The drum which they have caused to 
walk in our direction, the songs that they have handed down, we will 
also repeat them. Our grandfathers, who are called the Night 
Spirits, it is for them that these songs have been offered, he said. If 
at any time we sing these songs and offer a handful of tobacco, 
surely they will smoke the tobacco, our grandfathers said, it is said. 
Tobacco we place here for the Night Spirits. The tobacco that the 
host has poured for us, here we offer it. How could I have thought 
of anything else to say ? That the spirits may recognize the offerings 
of the host, the tobacco, the food, and the buckskin; that is why I 
speak. To plead for war power piteously; that is why we speak. 
Host, members of his clan, war-bundle owners who are seated here, 
I greet you." (Night Spirits' song.) 

Then when he is about to use the dance songs he says as follows: 

Second speech of third guest. — "Host and members of his clan who 
are seated here, I greet you. You also who are seated within this 
lodge impersonating the spirits, I greet you. An insignificant dance 
song we are about to use. I know that I am unable to obtain any- 
thing by singing. However, one should not be discouraged, and that 
is why I am saying this. I greet you all." (Dance song.) 

When the dance is finished he speaks again. 

Third speech of third guest.—" We have been annoying the messenger 
that walked in our direction (the drum). As many clansmen as have 
taken hold of it, that many have been strengthened. Thus have we 

512 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ann. 37 

jeje'sge r5gu. Widja'djera watutcabwi'ra wa£iya'nAbwTra. Jed- 
jai'rjxdjj p'a hoica/ hawi'na. Waroii'ra nijjk'Qruhi'ndj reha'wid- 
jigo. Wo'najjkd'nacge hanf/tciijxdji niijkuruhi'ndj reha'widjigo. 

The Throwing Out of the Buckskins 

Warutco'na tarn' hok£u'-inanA.ga e'gi warii7a'pk'ere nljaj'- 
naitceVa waro7i'ra warup'i'na^k'I te£e' waro7l'ra warup'I'naijk'e 
e'sge najji waxop'i'ni wara'djirera hlp'e'reziragenrguni. Hlral'rege 
waja naxu'rugEiiA. hlral'rege liarygEra hok'o'nogire^nA. waxop'i'ni 
hana^xgu'ine ng,dje'xdjija wak'atca/gi-acge jige' wa£u'naijk'e 
jige' ua^k'Ik'u'ruxurugrja, wa£u'na7jk'e waxop'i'ni klk'arap'e'- 
rezire^ja. wa£u'na7)k'e h§,he' hlh§te'ja. wa£u'nar}k'tTni hlral'rege. 
E'sge tcaha' gici'p gigl'rek'dje'ge. Neyarupa/rogEra hldja' 
glk'erere'nA. tanl'na nabo'ju glgl're we'114. 

Speech of prominent guest. — "Waro7i'ra hok'Ik'a'radJEra 
mlnar;kca'war/gre nir;k'uruhindjwi'n4. Hona^kcl'na tciro'ju 
mlnaTjkca'waijgre ni^k'uruhi'ndjrekaVidjigo. Sa'k'ereniSjk'djojjgere 
mlnar;kca'wa>?gre mr/k'uruki'ndjrebaVidjigo. Ep'I'nA. sa'k'ere 
ahlwatca'bwira war07l'ra p'anai'naxdjj wa£u'ina,nA.ga. E'gi 
n^djowa'ijgodjaTnawige tciwaijgo'juiravn4ga warudj wajjgok£u'- 
inawi-a'iii-ga. E'gi jige taniwogl'ju wajjgaglgl'rawi-avn4ga. 
Ep'iijga'dja. Hbjk'I-5'sge hlwa'nik'dje djadjiga waige'nA.. 
Hagare'ja. fiarjkci'k haranl'na-Ira/naga waxop'i'ni wagudje' gici'p 
ni7jgigi'regi, ha^k'e' wahehe' wagi£u'nanije al'ren^. Wajfi'nija. 
nlnl-a'n4ga waxop'i'ni wagudje' glci'binijjgigrregi. Ni^gla'k' 
hitco'k'ewahTwira ma/ak'i'a. wawik'I'p'erez hit£e' £u'-ineje. 
H^he'ra naijgiwai'neje e'gi hlcge wak'andja'ra hok'I'dje hfhe' 
na^giwai'neje hagak'I'tcecAiiA wawigi'wa£a. mlnagire'je." 

H^he'ra nawA'na racdja'^gi hicgaga' wak'andja'ra nawA.'na 
hijai'rygiwa'V aires£a'je je'cAiiA. h^he'ra wak'andja'ra hak'icdjek 
h$he' na^giwal'neje. Hagare'ja. uajjkci'k hirana'ni-inanA^ga 
waxop'i'ni wagudje' gici'p nir^gigi'regi wana£i' wagik'ere'xdjj- 
$vdje. Hqjjk'e' cgadjeni'cge waja'nija. anl-g/dje. War07l'na>?k'a 
uan§djodjai'sge wonA.'7ire haxirl're hicdjaTjIruxuxuna'^gra. 
t}ar;kcigo£i' haxl'ri tanl'na woho'na nf,biruxa'dJEra m§,cu'na 
hak'ara'niwa7a'gEna7>gra. Uang,dj5dja|'sge waxop'i'ni njta'k'adJEra 
ogEm'negi, sini-6'rahotc k'lna'n^ga wawe'k'IinVn^ga. Najryxdjj 
waja'nija. gasge waweje'je! Hirai'rege wa£u'nar?gra har/k'e e'djahl 

RADiNj THE CLAN WAR-BUNDLE FEASTS 513 

annoyed it. Host, I greet you. You who are impersonating the 
spirits, all of you, do I greet." 

The Throwing Out op the Buckskins 

Then the attendants give that war-bundle owner who is regarded 
as the foremost, as an expert, tobacco, for it is about time now that 
the various spirits should accept (the offerings'). 143 Therefore they 
select a man who is proficient, one who has very likely been blessed 
by the Night Spirits and one therefore to whom they are likely to 
listen, a holy person, a man who has attained war honors. He is 
likely to be the best one to make the spirits cognizant of the buckskins. 
So they brought the drum for him to his place, and placed tobacco in 
his hand. Then he spoke as follows: 

Speech of prominent guest. — "Host and members of his clan who are 
seated here, I greet you. You seated in this lodge who are imper- 
sonating the spirits, I greet you. War-bundle owners who are 
seated here, I greet you. It is good that the war-bundle owners 
have done so much for the host. He has brought us the means of 
blessing and caused us to come into this lodge and has fed us. He 
has permitted us to offer tobacco. It is good. Not insincerely 
should we speak on such an occasion, our father told us. If at any 
time the spirits pay any attention to a human being and permit him 
to offer them moccasins, rest assured that they will not let a weakling 
do this. If you are of any importance the spirits will accept the 
moccasins you have offered them. Indeed, my son, our grandfathers 
on both ends of the earth will have knowledge of these offerings,144 
they told each other." 

For the Night Spirits they sang and alternately they would start 
up a song for the Thunderbird as they sat there. 

After finishing a Night Spirit song, then they would start up one 
for the Thunderbird, and then they would sing Night Spirit songs and 
Thunderbird songs together. " If at any time they consider you a man 
and accept the moccasins you have offered them, use your power. 
Above all, be careful that you do not say anything in a frivolous 
manner. The host putting himself in a pitiable condition has with 
copious dropping of tears besought the spirits for war power. For 
life he has also besought them and has prayed to them with offerings 
of tobacco, food, buckskins, and feathers. Putting himself in a 
pitiable condition he has hunted for the spirits,145 weakened himself 
through exposure to cold, and caused himself untold sufferings. Oh 
that I could have done similarly! It is for this (these laudable rea- 

M3 I.e., that the buckskins should be placed where the spirits can get them. 

1H I.e., the Night Spirits living in the east and the Thunderbirds living in the west. 

lw I. e., hunted the deer that are used at the feast both for eating and for the buckskin offerings. 

514 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth.ann.37 

hlxdjahi' nawani-g/ndje wanyyi'ra tanl'na hak'ara'ni 7agene7/k'a. 
hicge taniwogl'ju ni7)gigl'regi. Hicge' h§bitai'£una hanl' Taga'dje 
warpTl'ra djasga'naijk'a. Hicge' jesga'dje wajok'Idjire'ja herege'- 
djini uajjgenu'iiATjgEra tcege'dja re'dja, tiadji'rena k'Idjire' £uina'- 
n^ga. Waja'nija. £u-ine'ga hasto' £u-ine'ga nuxu'rugires£avje. Ge 
je'sge bl-adji'reje tcege'dja waxop'i'ni k'isge ua7}kcik£i'negirevcge. 
Tanl'na hak'arani Yagire'je djadjl'ga hiqge'r.*.. HSk'a'was Manl'na 
tanl'na hidje' wagigl'k'djonege. Ni^k'uruhi'ndj reha'widjigo. 
(Hahe' Nawa. hiral'suntc.) 

Speech of host. — E'gi te£e'ji hlral'sundjera hok'araiciba'iHga e'gi 
hiwaci'ra wik£u'j)k'djanevgi. 

"Sa'k'ereniv7jk'djo7)gera hok'Ik'a'radJEra minaijkca'wangre 
nijjk'uruhi'ndj reha'widjigo. Hlwaci'ra hi£u-inek'djona're e'dja 
hltco'k'ewahTwira wagudje'ni^k wagitu'cdja. reha'k'djonikaVira. 
E'gi ua7)gErowaI're wak'a'raglk djanihawln^. Hosge je£e' wak'a'- 
rak' reha'ge wahe'nA.. Sa'k'ereni^k'djojjgEre h5k'Ik'a'radJEra 
mlna7jkca'wa7jgre niijk'Qruhi'ndj rehawidjigo." 

Uajjkxete'na7)k'a ng,wa. hlwaci'ra djlrehl'gi. Wagiga'ra tcaha' 
n^biruxa'dJEra wak'urucibira'n^ga han|'tcj hlja^k'I'cAnA. tcaha'- 
naijk'a hanl' wad'reje tciro'gigir/x djobo'ha. hogigi'ryx hlrek'djone'gi. 
Warutcteo'na klj§. tcowe'dja wdta'p'onA. hanl'wanije egi jige 
wagixo'nonA. hlja/ hage'dja wazip'a'rasge hota'p'ona wagigi' manlje. 
E'gi tanl'na hogigi'TJra'n^ga hok'I'rire'dja. jige hiro-a'gEra 
hogigi'r/x hldjobo'hoiia haral'rek'dja'negi tcaha' n§biruxa'dJEra 
tcowe'xdji e'dja hanl' mani'na^k'a M|£u'na tcaha' nabirnxa'- 
dJEra glrucdj^' nehiVega je£e' wagal'reje hana/txbjxdjj 
nir;k'dJQr;gEnir)gra'cge hlk'I-o'wire n(LbErota'p'onA. hiwi-a/n^ga. 
Hlk'i-o'wire je'sge hl'reje hlro-a'gedja han§'tcb;xdji higu' 
p'ejegere'ra hang/tci^xdji hik'i-ol'reje Ma/u'na tcaha'naijk'a 
k'urusgl' es£ini-§'birek'djevge e'sge hik'I-oi'reje e wa£u'na7)kcAiiA. 

Hidjobo'hQna hohu'-iredja hagi'regi tcaha'ra e'dja wowap'a'rok 
hlra'n^ga tclrahe'dja howal're wahl'ren4. Tanl'na ng.b£a'k'I 
n^bErore'xdji wani' wa£u'-iriegi tanl'na p'edje'dja wowaxu'-ineje. 
E'gi hana'tci^xdji wagiga'ra tcaha'ra wak'a'rani tdrowa'gir/X 
wak'a'raninav7jk'a e'gi k'lga'ra dja'n^ga tclroju-a'k'a nir;k'djo?7gE 
nirygEre'cge hl'nurjgEra iiar/gera' hana'tcj^xdji nAJi-a/nA.ga wacl'- 
reje homl'nAr/gEra wo'na7)k'arajina'n4ga waeire'nA.. Je£e'ji jegua'- 
nA.ga. 

E'gi jjge k'eni tcaha'ra uar/gerowai'rewahTrani waireconu'nA. 
ha7jk'I'js\ n^wi'nine h|he' c£akra' h^bidja'n^ga hagu'narykcAiiA. 
hlj§/ hlsagua/nik'ererawl-evge luujk'e' hlja.' hahe' c£a'k' hisagua.'- 

Radin] THE CLAN WAR-BUNDLE FEASTS 515 

sons') that they (the host and his band) have done this. Do not say 
anything frivolously, for the host has offered in your behalf tobacco 
and tears. Cry that you may obtain life, even as the host and his 
people have done. Act thus so that you may be of help to one 
another even as our ancestors of old were. If people act together 
they will accomplish their purpose. That is what they did in the 
beginning and that is why they lived like spirits at that time. They 
cried and made offerings of tobacco, grandfather said. For the Night 
Spirits shall you pour tobacco here. I send forth my greetings to 
you." (Terminal Night Spirit song.) 

After they have finished the terminal Night Spirit song then (the 
host) gets ready to use the dance song, but (first) speaks as follows: 

Speech of host. — ''War-bundle owners who are seated here, I greet 
you. The dance song they are about to use and then they will get 
ready to throw out the offerings of buckskin to the spirits. Now let 
us put them above. This is. what I wished to tell you. War-bundle 
owners who are seated here, I greet you." 

The host and the others now take the buckskins and dance around 
the lodge four times. 

When he (the host) starts the oldest men sing the dance songs. 
Then the feasters take the buckskin offerings down and all, one by 
one, dance around the lodge four times. An attendant precedes 
them carrying cedar incense and one follows them carrying the same. 
After they have made the circuit oi the lodge for the third time, just 
before they begin the fourth circuit, those carrying the buckskin 
that is to be thrown out for Earthmaker and who march at the 
head of the procession, let the children, after they have smoked 
their hands, touch the buckskin. After that all touch it for (they 
believe) that if they touch this buckskin they will obtain long life 
thereby. 

After they have made the fourth circuit they roll up the buckskins 
and throw them out through the top of the lodge. They hold 
tobacco in both hands when they do this and this tobacco they pour 
into the fire. Then all the feasters, those who had buckskins and 
the others who were within the lodge, the children, the women, 
indeed, all the people, rise and standing near their seats dance. 
Thus they did. 

Before throwing the buckskins through the top of the lodge they 
would tell the people not to sleep, for otherwise some of the old 
Night Spirits who are about at the approach of day might strike them 

516 THE WIKNEBAGO TRIBE [bth.ann.87 

ruijk'ererawTgi, cdjek'djaniha'win4. Ge'djinj ro7ina'ijkcana. Je£e'ji 
tcaha'ra £ua'>ygEra howal're wahira'nagagi je'ji e'p'a' nir/k'djo'- 
jjgEnAjygEra hija/ n§dje'kcge £u'r;k'dje ai'recAnuvn4." 

E'gj je£e'jj nawanihe'ra we' 114. 

Speech of first guest. — "Warc-7i'ra hok'i'k'aradJEra mlnaijkca'- 
wajjk'a nbjk'u'ruhiridjwTn4. Watu'tcabwjra liimaj'cdjar;k'djav- 
wira dja'n^ga wajo'k'ma watutcabwi'ra. Ep'ijjga'dja. Jedjal'- 
Tjxdji p'a hoica/ hawl'114, wiro'ragEra! WaroTi'ra hok'jk'a'- 
radJEra mina^kca'war/k'a ni^kuruhindj rehawina. Waxop'i'ni 
wonaijkci'na dja'n4ga tcj-6'ju mlna>jkca'wa7;gre niijk'uruhindj 
reha'widjigp." 

Ne.Tarup'o'rogera warutc^'djega ruza'n^ga tcjok'Isa'gedja 
k'irjdje'hjje. 

Wagigo'nar^k'a t£$pdjjra'n4ga, we'je. 

Speech of host. — Sa'k'ereniVyk'djo>?gEre mina7)kca'\va7)gre niy?- 
k'uruhi'ndj reha'win^. Ep'iryga'dja- Djagu' ru-a'guna//xdji 
jesge'jg. hani£una'gigawira. Hang/tcbjxdji hai'seretc djagu' 
ru-agu'n4 hunagiga/wira. Ep'1'114. Oagwara'wiga waxop'i'ni 
wana£i' rusgi'djiran^ga. E'gi waxop'i'ni agJYe'TebEra djagu'ra 
icek'dja'wigi hlnijjk'a/ragairaVigi je'sge hai'seretc horak'a'rak'jcax- 
rawira. Ep'bjga'djq. Haijk'e' hinaTica'rawini. Waja/ raxu'- 
ruk'p'i'rjxdji wacahjbrfi'wira. Ep'I'114. Wa£ya'n§,pcAn4 e'ge hai'- 
seretc cindjwat£e' nbjk'a'ragjwTra here nu'nige e'gi tok'e'wehiniwi. 
Nu'nige e'gi sa'nbjk h^bogu'regi herera' hok'a'was mani'na wohai'- 
nirjgljg, hidja' wagik'ere'rera hlro-a'gEnbjxdji nawa'na^gre e'niijk 
p'andja' gjk'ererek'djonega/dja.- E'gi jige ma'naijgre wohai'- 
nirygija. hidja' gjk'ere'rera hija/ haradjl'regi hidja' gjk'erere'r±4. 

E'gi jige we'nA. h^he'wira nita'k'atc gigi'rera jige hija/ hidja' 
gik'ere'ren^. E'gi nlna wohihal'nera jigl'ja haratcce. E'gi 
tcaxce'bEra woha'gik'erevrera. Jige je'cge iiaj?gjja. haradjire'ra. 
E'gi jige woxahi'na woh^gik'erere'114, jjgi'ja. hana/ djjren4. E'gi 
we'n4. 

Second speech of host. — "Ha^k'e' hltcok'ewahi'wira dja'n^ga 
tcok'aga' wana^'ijgik'ertPregi hanf'tciijxdji, ha^k'e' wajir/k'I'na 
waha'nbjk'djonaVj nunige' hlhriuk'isge wa'wana>?gwigavdja 
ha^k'e' hltco'k'ewahTwjra waji'ne p'ihi'ranije tcok'aga e'ra. 
E'sge higu' djasge'ni^k' tuxurugwl'ra je'sge hawa£uwiga'dja. 
Jige' harjk'e ne'cAnA. wa£unjga'dja dja'nAga wajok'Ina'ijgera. 
Je'nuga djasgehop'I'ni^gEra hatuxu'rugwira7. Je'sge hawa£uwiga/- 
dja- E'gi sa'k'erenir;k'djo)ygEra nilnajjkca'waqgre nirjk'uruhi'ndj 
rehawjdjigo." 

Radin] THE CLAN WAR-BUNDLE FEASTS 517 

with their canes, and if they did this such a person would surely die.149 
For that reason do they warn them not to sleep. However, as soon 
as the men have thrown the buckskins outside then any child who 
desires may sleep without danger. 

After the song had been sung he (first guest) speaks as follows: 

Speech of first guest. — "Host and members of his band who are 
seated here, I greet you. By coming in connection with the drum 
I and my relatives have been strengthened. It is good. To such 
an extent have we annoyed the drum. Host and members of his 
band who are seated here, I greet you. As many as there are [who 
are seated within the lodge] impersonating the spirits, I send forth 
my greetings to you." 

Then the attendant takes the drum and places it in the middle of 
the lodge. 

The host rises and speaks as follows: 

Speech of host. — "War-bundle owners who are seated here, I greet 
you. It is good. What I have longed for, that you have completed 
for me. All night have you prayed for me. It is good. Blessings 
did the spirits give your grandfathers. What you were to say to the 
spirits that they (your ancestors) told you and that you have repeated 
here all night. It is good. You weren't selfish in your actions. 
You -wished to obtain something for all of us. It is good. I am 
thankful to you, for you must have inconvenienced yourselves 
greatly by sitting here all night and you must in addition have 
suffered from hunger. Now in addition to the kettle that has been 
placed in honor of those who live in the east, the Night Spirits, the 
last band to sing will also receive a head. A kettle is also to be 
placed in honor of the Earth." 

Then he said that food was to be placed in honor of the Moon, as 
well as a kettle (for soup). Then they named a person to be in 
charge of a kettle in honor of the Water. Then they called upon 
one to take charge of the kettle in honor of the Eagle. Then they 
placed one in charge of the kettle for Porcupine. Then he (the host) 
spoke again. 

Second speech of host. — " I realize that our grandfathers did not 
bless me much and that I have hardly enough food to go around, 
but we will nevertheless do it, for it is said that our grandfathers 
will not be insulted thereby, grandfather said. That is why we give 
this feast, however little it be that we obtain. And I am not the 
only one, for all my relatives are doing the best in their power that 
we may obtain (blessings). That is why we give the feast. War- 
bundle owners who are seated here, I greet you." 

> '« They speak of the Night Spirits appearing toward dawn as old in reference to the gray light of morning 
which they compare to the white hair of an old person. For the same reason these old Night Spirits have 
canes just as an old man has a cane. 

518 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ann. 37 

Feast to the Night Spirits 

E'gi djanaga waradjira'nihera hinhjk'e'hi wok'e'ra djanaga 
wawjgl'k'arabiregi. Hang/tc hjn^ k'uruziregi e'gi djanaga ha^k'e' 
wap'a'idja ha.r;k'e' horok£u'-inanigi warutco'na kang/tciryxdji 
hik'isge'xdji wawogiju'-ireje. E'gi han^itc je'gu hi'regi wagigo'- 
narjk'a jujii'k djirehl'gi warudJEra hlk'idjaj'xdjj. Waru'djireje. 
E'gi waru'dJEnaijk'a ha^k'e rux£ex£erani'7?k'dje. E'gi jige' 
ha_ijk'e' \v5k'e'ra wScgatc hlrani'ryk'dje. E'gi huce'regra hq,qk'e' 
woi-e'rani^k'dje'nA.. P'i'^xdji sto wakira'nAga p'bjxdjj' njge' 
wawaxu'-inek'dje hure/jak'ira. E'gi jige k'lgo'nA^k'a ha^k'e hai'- 
seretc wacgi-era'cAiiA. airani'rjk'dje liajjk'ik'u'ruxurugEra niryge'- 
CA114 miii^'giregi p'etc e'dja. WonA'Tire hok'aragana')?kcAnA. 
hototco'na djasge hi'regi. E'gi wok'i'zara djasge hi'regi je'jesge 
kaj'seretc hora'gireje. Hotcitci'na hlcge wana^xgu' haj'seretc 
hires£a/je. WonA'Tire wagigo'naijk'a ta wa£u'nA7jk'e hldja' w6ra'n4 
na£j' waires£a'je. 

Rite op Those Who have been Crazed by the Night Spirits 

E'gi jige hija/ £u'na7;k£u kghe' rudja'iii7)girega. Wak'a.tca'- 
rjk'djj wa£U7)ge'. Wainina'cge hang/tci^xdji hocarodJEraI'res£aje 
al'rerj^. E'gi nanok'a'xdjj ha^k'e' waja'nija. hlk'Ik'a'TEni tclro'- 
gigir;x waci'rega. UajjgEra hang,'tci)jxdji hap'e'xdji mInA'gires£aje. 
Hghe' wogihai'negi hatci'ndja djegi ha^k'e' nuninines£a'je. Yahl' 
tcawaI'res£iVje. E'gi wohA/djega xere' haraca'cakdje'cge hfhe' 
rudja'njgiraMjega wa£usa£je ng,bi£ua'nAga. Woha/djega p'ara 
hatcindja'na^k'i ru7es£a'je ruTegu'gi iia^gEra hak'ik£uegires£avje. 
Hija.' tconi njge' ratce' naei' wa£u-ines£a'je. Hlgu' p'eje wan^ci- 
a'naga tconi njge' ratce'gi hlgu' djasge'ga ua7?gona>jgires£a'je. Ge 
e'sge hija.' jejesge hlga al'gi hak'ik£ue'gEna7;k'a rucdjal'nega e'gi 
wagigS'najjk'a tanihu' tci-o'k'isa/gedja k'ere'narjk'a ruza'nAga 
tani-6'giju hlres£a'je tanihl' rucdja'^gi. E'gi wora/gEnaje wagigo'- 
naryk'a woha/ djagu'cAnA. giru'ziregi n^biruxa'dJEra djagu'cAn^ 
giru'ziregi je'jesge ho'rakEna.vje hagal'racge wai'res£aje wagigo'- 
narjk'a tanl'na, woho'na, n§,biruxa'dJEra hang/tcijjxdji wagiru- 
zire'je hlgaires£a'je je£e' wajqp'fu wa£u'inecAnA. Hq,j?k'e' wogigo' 
hok'ahi'xdjj wa£u'-inanis£avje airecanii'nA.. Ua^kcik wakatca7)k 
wau-inesaje. Han4ga e'gi wagiga'ra k'igol'ra nlhe'ra rucdjajnegj 
hana'tcirjxdjj waru'dJEra jeguhl'regi e'gi uaqk wap'a' wara'djira 
nlhe'ra tconI'7jxdji woha/ n|,djjra'nihera t£$pdjira'n4ga we'je. 

eadin] THE CLAN WAR-BUNDLE FEASTS 519 

Feast to the Night Spirits 

Those who were called on for kettles now took the pieces of meat 
that had been counted for them (by the attendants). The attendants 
divided the pieces evenly for all those who did not eat heads. As 
soon as the distribution was finished then the host started playing 
his flute and all began to eat at the same time. The feasters are 
careful that they spill nothing and that the utmost precautions are 
taken. It is not proper to scatter the bones. They are afterwards 
gathered up and thrown in a consecrated place. Never do they talk 
frivolously throughout the night. Those who had obtained war 
honors as they sat near the fire would now tell of their war exploits — 
how many warpaths they had been on and how many fights they 
had been in. All night do they talk in this way. All night would 
the boys listen, it is said. They are asking for war powers; that war 
might come their way — that is why they do this (recount their war 
exploits). 

Rite of Those Who Have Been Crazed by the Night Spirits 

As they do this some become crazed by the Night Spirits.147 A 
religious frenzy comes over them.148 All their clothes would be cast off, 
it is said. All naked, without any apparel, would the man dance 
around the lodge. All would sit waiting. They (these crazed ones) 
would not be in ignorance about the place where food was being 
boiled for the Night Spirits, and they would go toward it. Even if 
the kettle was boiling over the crazed ones would stick their hand in it. 
Similarly, as soon as the head was taken out from the place where 
it was being boiled, then these men would make a rush for it and 
try to get the first bite. Whoever was able to get the first bite 
would surely, at some later time, receive war honors. When they 
are finished with the rush for the head, then the fe'aster (i. e., the 
successful one) takes the pipe placed in the center of the lodge and 
smokes it. When he has finished he would tell of his war exploits 
and also tell them what offerings had been accepted by the spirits. 
That the one who has just come out of his trance would tell them. 
They (the spirits) told the feaster (i. e., the crazed one) that they 
had accepted all the things that had been offered — the tobacco, the 
food, and the buckskins; that the feasters had done well.149 How- 
ever, not at every feast would a man become crazed, it is said. A 
holy person he would have to be. When the feasting is over and all have 
finished their meal, then the first one to whom a head had been ap- 
portioned and for whom a kettle had been placed rises and speaks. 

1,7 I.e., they get into a state of religious ecstasy through worship of the Night Spirits. 
1<8 Literally, "holiness comes over him." 

1<9 Apparently the one supposed to be crazed by the Night Spirits sees them in his ecstatic vision and 
finds out whether they are satisfied or not with the offerings. 

520 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ann. 37 

Continuation of the Basic Ritual 

Speech of eighth guest. — "Waro7l'ra wajo'njwjna niryk'uruhi'ndj 
reha'widjigo. E'gi waxop'i'ni ona^kcl'na mlnarjkca'wa>jgre 
nijjk'uruhi'ndj reha'widjigo. Ep'iryga'dja sa'k'erejanapjxdjj 
ca'warjge. Nunige' waxop'i'ni njta'k'atc gigl'regi ne wona'- 
7jkcir;k'djevra wo'na^kcj hiijgigi'rare ep'bjga'dj^. Ha^k'e' waj§'- 
hage e'sge te'jesge jiijgigi'nijgaMja. WonA'TJre hStatcg^i' 
waeuwiga'dja, uar;kcigo£I'na hiranq'k'ik^wira. Ep'bjga'dja.. 
Djanaga/ wajok'I'nbjgEra je'nU7?ga hak'iwik£u'>jxdjiwinA. 
uaijkcigoTna hIrana/k'Ik£ivjjxdjiwinA/. Hltcok'ewahl'wira 

h|bogu'regi narjk'i'ji LJjq' hu7)genayjkce eyanatcj'ryxdji 
wawiruk'ona'na^kee glji w5nA'7ire hlruk'onai'ja. hereje' tcok'aga' 
nfdjodja/je tcniA'gidja. hok'Ira'dJEra han^tci'rjxdji nahi' gigije' 
gigigiji. UdJEr5'gedja idjal'ni^gera 7erahe' najyk'a'raxguje e'je 
al'rera. Je£e' tcok'aga' wew^'nege waxop'i'ni honayjkcj hbjgigi'- 
raje. Tani'na wSho/na ng,biruxa'dJEra hajyk'igip'e'rez p'ini wajg/ 
£u-ines£a'je! Waro7i' p'onai'naxdjj wa£u'-inavnAga wigip'e'- 
reziregiji liicge djanaga wonar/kci'na wlra'ruxe hi£uijk'dja'wira. 
Te'jesge uarjkcik xetera' adjl'renA., 'Waxop'i'ni tani'na glgi hlra'- 
nagi wagizo'xdjj-andje haizo'xdjj wamiijgi'naijgaMJQ. Tani'na 
rohg/>yxdji rasge'p nala'ndje tani'na roha/r;xdjj carasge'pgiji 
je£e'cge waxop'i'ni wara'djirera wonA'TJre hlruk'o'nAn^ 
wajjgigip'e'rezinaijgwi'je al'recAnun^. Hija/ tani'na rohf'ijxdji 
rasge'pgi h(Lhe'ja wa>?gik'ik'u'ruxurugEna/je al'recAnunA.. 
Hltadje' wa£u'ine. Hotcintci'iuV;gwTra te'gi wonA'7Jre ok'Ik'u'- 
ruxurugEra wowatee'giniijkce uarygEnu'niiygEra al'recAnun^. 

Tani'na woho'na n^biruxa'dJEra wagiksa'biregi hage'dja wona- 
Tjkcl'na hrvvira'ruxe hl£ujjk'dja'wi. 

"tJaijkcigoTna wonA^irera hl7anak'Ik£i7/k'dja'wi. Wa£Iya'nApce 
hihe'ge waha/na^kcAnA. djagu' eresga'nA^gre. Warii7a'bEra 
wok'a/ragihonA. p'Ina'gi tani-ok'aragl'jura p'Ina'gi hagare'ja. roh§'- 
bot£ek'ina hljd'rawegi warirya/bEra maniijgl'cdjaTjk'djone^n4.. 
H^Tjk'e' t£ehip'i rariinbjk'djone'nA.. Waro7l'ra mlnaTykca'warygre 
hok'ik'a'radJEra niryk'uruhi'ndj rehawidjigo. Waxop'i'ni onaijkcl'na 
mlna7jkca'wajjgre nirjk'uruhi'ndj reha'widjigo." 

kadin] THE CLAN WAR-BUNDLE FEASTS 521 

Continuation of the Basic Ritual 

Speech oj eighth guest.150 — "Host and relatives, I send my greetings 
toward you. You seated here who are impersonating the spirits, I 
send my greetings toward you. It is good that there are so many 
war-bundle owners here. It is good that they have given me the 
opportunity of impersonating the spirits, by placing me in charge of 
the food that they offer to them. Though I am not related to the 
host, he has done this for me. That I may grope for war powers, 
feel niyself in connection with life, that is why we do it. It is good. 
As many of my relatives as are here, they all worked splendidly so that 
we might be connected with life. He who is the leader of our grand- 
fathers who dwell hi the east (the Night Spirits) , who is in control of 
all things, who is in control of war powers, he blessed our grandfather 
and he caused him to swallow as many people of other tribes as had 
been preordained for him. Within his stomach our grandfather 
heard their cries, he said, it is said. Thus thinking of my grand- 
father they asked me to impersonate the spirits. How could the spirits 
do anything but accept the offerings of tobacco, food, and buckskin! 
They have had a very great feast, and surely if the spirits take cogni- 
zance of it, all those who have been impersonating the spirits will also 
be permitted to participate (hi the blessings) to follow. Our ances- 
tors handed down to us from generation to generation the following: 
'When you offer food to the spirits, sit down to your undertaking 
with the greatest possible attention and care. Try to smoke as much 
tobacco as possible, for if you smoke much tobacco then all the 
spirits who are in control of war powers will pay attention to you, it 
is said. If a man smokes very much tobacco in one night, then he 
will be able to obtain a war honor, it is said. Try your hardest. 
Young men, it is easy to obtain war powers, the old men used to say. 
If the spirits accept the offerings of food and tobacco and buckskins, 
then afterwards those who have impersonated them will participate 
in the blessings that follow.' 

"We feel that we have been connected with life and war power. 
It is for that reason that I say these words of thanks. If you give 
the feast for the war bundle well, if you pour tobacco well, then, if 
at some time or another you have a chance to loll an enemy outright, 
the war bundle will strengthen you greatly. No one will be able to 
kill you. 

'» I. e., eighth guest to receive the buckskins, continuing the numeration from the first division of the 
ceremony. 

186823—22 34 

522 THE WINNEBAGO TEIBE [eth. ann. 37 

Wa£i'nqp tconl'rjxdjio4., e'gi jige hlnubra wohA' ng,djire'ra 
we'114. 

Speech of ninth guest. — "WaroYl'ra hok'ik'a'radJEra mlnaTjkca'- 
wa^gre niryk'uruhi'ndj reha'widjigo. E'gi hona^kci'na mlnaiykca'- 
waiygre nbjk'uruhi'ndj reha'widjigo. Ep'I'114. War07l'ra uarykcik£i 
war/ganaijgi^'wiiy-ge. Waxop'i'nina \v0nA7ire ruk'o'nAnA. 

uar;kcigo£i' hlruk'o'nAnA. djanugEra p'l'na herera je'ny^ga 
glk'a'radJEnar^gre. tJar;kcigre howaja'jairecge waru7ap ke'ren^gre 
te'jegu hi'regi wogiga'ra harak£u'inegi ; howaja'ja hlranihe'ra 
han^sga'biran^ga howaja'ra rucdjaj'nes^a'je ai'rera. Hu7jgiatca'- 
biwira p'edjok'e'rera hok'a'wak'a wa£u'ineje tejegu hi'regi 
djadjiga ecAnu'114. Te£e'cge djadjiga waxop'ini njta'k'atc glgira 
p'ye. HuTjgira'gEra hlsge we'ra yap'e'rez nunige ha.rjk'e' tuxu'- 
rugEnige harjk'e je'sge hani-adjega'dj%. AnAga e'gi, 'Hagare'- 
ji\ wonA'Tire hacdjak'djo'negi hak'It^Q'bik'arohoI'regi, ha^k'e' 
nana Ticarani^kdje, took' a wira gasge ni^gi'giwicAnu^A. tanihu'ra 
p'i ni^gi'giwicAniTnA. wogi'hona p'i ni7jgi'giwicAnu,n4 hok'i'dja. 
nirjgi'giwicAnu'nA.. Gasge wa£inek'dje'nA. k'lzai'k'arohol'rare. E'gi 
hicegi'ji honi'ni^gihan^k'i'cge ha^k'e' nana.>jxgunik'dje'nA. wap'ai'- 
ni^k'dj; warak'djek'dje'114. Hlk'igai'reje hisge'ra hip'ere'zirege. 
E'sge hak'ik'a'rajireje. TeV warc>7l'ra hok'ik'a'radJEra je'sge 
hiwa£u'najjk'adja.. Ep'ijjga'dja.. Waj§/ p'i ponal'na ruxp'- 
rugiregaMjq. Ma'na ka'rok'ehTwira wogihaj'nera. Tanl'na tcaha 
nabiruxa'dJEra teje'nuqga glrucdjo/nehihireVa wdnA'7Jre 
hlk'arata' hl£uw^£u'inera. Ep'i'n*.. Karok'ehihi'wira hona^kci 
Hirjgigl'rare hik'arok'ehihlwira hak'uruhi'ndjanA.ga. E'gi war07l'ra 
wak'iiruliindja'iHga hage'dja djanAga tci-o'ju mlnajjkca'waiygre 
nirj k' uruhi ' nd j Erehawidj igo \ 

Hitanl'na wohA/na hara'djirera wa£inai'pdjone,n4 we'nA.. 

Speech of tenth guest. — "Warc-71'ra hok'ik'a'radJEra mlnajjkea'- 
warygre nir/k'uruhi'ndj reha'win^. Ep'I'nA.. WaroYi'ra waxop'j'ni 
wara'djire tani' hlragik'arana'ryk'i jedjonaj'xdjj hlgire'regi tani-o'- 
waxu^n*.. Waro7l'ra ponaT'na wa£u'inai-anAga. Waxop'j'ni 
hlk'Isge'ja. uarykcigo£i djop guci'gixdjineMja. uaj/gl'ja. djagu' 
egi'ji jedjaj'^xdjj p'a djagu £u'wacigi e'xdjj heregigl're naTjgre. 
Ep'i^ga'dja. "Oajjkci'gija. ua>)kcigi£i'negi s£Iredj$'>jxdji here 
nunige' jedjaj'ijxdjj p'a h|he'te£e hadjanar/gwi'gadjq. 
Hansujk'araxgurjxdji'nera djagG'xdjj egi'ji gieu'>jxdjinega\lja.. 
Hotaji je'sge hlnuxu'rugEnigaMja. tani-o'waxunA. DjanahT hltco- 
k'ewahl'wira djanAga' tanj-6'hJnA k'ere'rek'djone Djobena.ijgi- 

kadin] THE CLAN WAR-BUNDLE FEASTS 523 

"Host and members of his clan who are sitting here, I greet you. 
You seated here who have impersonated the spirits, I send forth my 
greetings to you." 

Then the second person for whom they had put on a kettle spoke. 

Speech of ninth guest. — "Host and members of his clan who are 
seated here, I greet you. To you, seated here, impersonating the 
spirits, I send my greetings. It is good. The host has tried to make 
us live. All those present here have been pleading to the spirits who 
are hi control of life and war powers. If any Indians are sick and the 
keepers of the war bundle give this feast then their illness will be 
overcome; they will recover from their disease, it is said. My father 
said that the people used to add more fuel to the fireplace of our chiefs 
when they do this. My grandfather told me that even if I (insignifi- 
cant as I am) who speak were to make an offering of food to the 
spirits it would be good. I knew that he always spoke the truth, yet 
I knew that such as I could not do anything. (Thus grandfather 
spoke to me), 'Some day when you are hi the presence of war and the 
rush is about to be made, you will not be frightened for you can say 
to the spirits, "Grandfathers, I always gave you something to smoke, 
boiled food for you, and gave you the material for moccasins. Now 
I wish to go to the fight that is to take place." If you speak to them 
thus, though you do not hear them answering you, (you will recognize 
their answer in the fact) that without any effort you will be victo- 
rious.' They told. the truth to one another, for they were certain of 
these things. That is why they encouraged one another. This is 
what the host and the members of his band are doing. It is good. 
A laudable thing they have done. They have boiled food for our 
grandmother, the Earth. They have offered her tobacco and buck- 
skins and have as a reward received war powers. It is good. Our 
grandmother whom they made me impersonate, I greet. Host and 
all those who are seated within this lodge, I send forth my greetings 
to you." 

Then the third one whom they called on for a kettle rose to thank 
them and said : 

Speech of tenth guest. — "Host and members of his clan who are 
seated here, I send my greetings toward you. It is good. The host 
has given the tobacco offerings to the various spirits at the proper 
time. They (host and clan members) have accomplished very much. 
Once long ago, four generations back, a man like a spirit in power had 
told them what to do and since then they have been repeating it. 
It is good. Their ancestors long, long ago first gave (this feast) and 
yet even to-day we have seen it. They (host and his relatives) lis- 
tened attentively to what they said and they have repeated it exactly. 
We, ourselves, could not accomplish anything if we gave a feast. 
When in former times they had feasts hi honor of our grandfathers, 

524 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ann. 37 

wi'ijxga higal'regi hlrahl'rega waxop'i'ni tanihi'gigira waxop'I'nina 
hlnfcge'ni glk'ara'dJEnaTjgre. Je'sge djadjaj'ijndji p'a, hi-adji'rera 
hl-a'wip'erezwfgadj$. Djadja|'vjxdji p'a hoici'pdji woru'Tira 
ka'rak£u'inera jesgehi'ra wajapTj^ herera' hip'e'reztiwiga'dja.. 
Nunige ha.))k'e' hotaji je'sge hlnuxurugEniga'dja. te£e'ji waha'- 
iiAgre ha.7jk'e je'sge tuxu'rugEnigaMja, k'ik'u'ruc£ak uaj?kcigo£iga'- 
dja.. Ha^k'aga' waxop'i'ni tanl'na hlja^k'I'xdji wagituxu'rug 
tuxu'rugEnigaMja.. Hota' waxop'i'ni tani-o'gijura p'UiI'nA^gre e 
wa£u'inege ua^kcigo^'na p'fni^k hi£uadj§'wicguni. Yarecanu'114. 
Waxop'i'ni tani'na gigl'regi h5na>;kcl'gigirevra ep'bjga'dj^. H§he'- 
wira tani-o'gijuregi wok*.' gik'e'reregi n|pgiruxa'djeregi. Je£e 
e'dja hap'a'hi wiru-a/git£exgi hlrai'rege waigi£u-ina'neguni te£e'ji. 
Ha.T)k'e' wajg/nija. e tuxu'rug £u-ini-a'n4ga rohi'ra. Wa£ik'I'- 
nAbra. P'Jje al'rera. Je'sge wage' waha/nar;k'adja. WarugiTi'- 
rera h^he'regi hu'djane hak'u'ruhintc reha'n4ga. E'gi war07l'ra 
nijjk'nruki'ndj rehawidjigo. E'gi waxop'i'ni wonarjkcl'na nrinaijk- 
ca'wa^gre nir;k'uruhi'ndj rehawidjigo." 

Speech of eleventh guest. — ' ' Waro7l'ra mlnarjkca'wa^gre nbjk'uruhi'- 
ndj reha'widjigo. E'gi waxop'ini wo'narjkcrna tci-6'ju minaqkcawa- 
7)gre nbjk'Qruhi'ndj rehawidjigo. Waro7l'ra wSnA'Tire haxi'ri mlnA/- 
>?giranA.ga. E'gi jlge tanl'na uaijkcigo£i' k'arata' hi£unek'dje'ra 
tanl'na hak'a'raninaviHga uaijkcigo£i' ta minarjgira'nAga. E'gi 
wonA'TJrera p'I'n4 hlp'e'rezirege taira'riAga hIcdja'ni^uxuxu,- 
nArjgre. tfa^kcige'dja t£e'ra p'i'je waT'zara hlja/ ng,k'lk'uruxuv- 
ruk'i hijg,' uaT?gwa'cocegi uaj?k djaiHga'gere han§/tcbjxdji wajg/ 
p'j £u'wa£uvdjera. Hip'e'rezwinaiH- E'gi haqk'e' wanafcgimi 
nar;k£u' Qa7jgwa'cocena>jk'a je'sge djinA'qgEni wa£u'na7?kcAn4. 
Hawe'xdji k'i-a'nAga je'sge k'Iruxu'mg wa£u'naj)k'adja. uar?gwa'- 
cocenarjk'a. Waro7J'ra hawe'xdji k'lna'nAga; tani' waxy' hira'- 
nAga. Waxop'i'ni wogl'han^gre waxop'i'ni n|bimxa'dJEna>?gre 
me jegu'ihlgi cAnAWona7Jre-a'gEre hiqk'i'ruxurugfk'dje. Waja.gu'- 
zEra je'sge hi'114. Ha.nk'1'ja. hata'gina.ntc hip'e'rezEni^ge hajjk'e' 
wonA'7ire-avgere hlcdjaga' ruxu'rug p'hn'je. tJajjkxetenTnbjgre 
adji'renA. hajjk'i'ja. ha.ta'gina.tc ruxu'rugEnTcge waxop'i'ni tani- 
o'gijura waxop'i'ni inta'k'atc gigira' waxop'ini ngbiruxa'dJEra 
p'jhl'ra wonA'7ire hlruxu'rukce. Hora'gEna^kcAnA. hip'e'rezira^- 
nAga wa'naijkce. Te jesge waro7i'ra hok'lk'a'radJEra minA'- 
7)gEnA7jgre na^xgu'inege wa£u'nA^gEra. Djasge' hi-a'nAga hajjk'e' 
wonA'7ire ruxu'ruk p'l'ni waVnaqkce! WonA'7Jre nuxu'rugiregi 
niege hage'dja wira'ruxe hi£U7)k'dja'wira. £Jaj)kcigo£i'nA hlrana'- 
ijk'ik£i waxop'ini wona7)kci'wira waxop'ini wara'djire xete'ja. tanl'na 

Radin] THE CLAN WAR-BUNDLE FEASTS 525 

him whom they call Djobena^giwi'jjxga gave them tobacco to smoke 
and he worshiped the spirits sincerely whenever they came to him. 
Thus these people have done for a long time and that is why we are 
recognized by the spirits. As often as they gave this feast they gave 
it for the honor of the spirits. They have done well and we are very 
well acquainted with the spirits as a consequence. Yet I myself 
who am now speaking can not do anything; I can hardly be said to 
have lived (i. e., lived the life of a respectable man). I am unable 
even to put on one kettle in honor of the spirits. Those who have 
given this feast to the spirits have done well and perhaps, as a conse- 
quence, we may be able to obtain just a little of the blessings of life. 
So I thought. It is good (I tell you) , who have made offerings to the 
spirits, who are impersonating the spirits. He who has been given 
the kettle in honor of the Moon expresses his thanks. They gave this 
to me so that we might plead for them (with the spirits). Not any- 
thing of consequence can we say. We are thankful. It is good, it is 
said. That is what I wish to say. Those counseled, I greet, the 
spirit who comes at night. Host, I send forth my greetings to you. 
You impersonating the spirits, I send my greetings toward you." 

Speech of eleventh guest. — "Host and his clansmen who are seated 
here, I send my greetings toward you. Those impersonating the 
spirits, I send my greetings toward you. The host and his people 
sit here crying for war powers. Tobacco they offer, asking for life; 
the tobacco that they possess they sit here offering that they may 
obtain life. They know that it is good to have war powers and that 
is why they ask for it with tears in their eyes. It is good to die in 
war. If you can kill one enemy, then you will be a brave man and 
all the men will say that you have done a good deed. We would all 
know it. However, not without effort can men become braves. 
They must suffer to obtain this honor. The host has made himself 
suffer; they have poured tobacco. If we do as they did and make 
feasts for the spirits and offer them buckskins, then we will be able 
to obtain war powers for ourselves, and only then. That is what 
the Creator would do. Not without fasting, not white faced,152 are 
war powers obtainable. Yet the old men long ago said that if one 
could not fast, still if he poured tobacco for the spirits and offered 
them food and if he made excellent offerings of buckskin to the 
spirits, war powers might be obtained. Thus the elders spoke and 
they knew of what they were speaking. The host and the clansmen 
sitting with him listened (to the elders) and that is why they per- 
formed (this ceremony so well). How could we ever obtain war 
powers as they have done? All we hope is that we may obtain 
some of the war powers that will follow (as a result of the feast here 

1H I. e., not without blackening one's lace as is done in fasting. 

526 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ins. 37 

nita'k'atc gigi'rera n§biruxa'dJEra wagiru'cdJAnehTrera hoici'p 
wik'S'rap'erez hlranihe'k'dje alregi. Je'sge ya£wa£u ha^k'e hol'- 
niijge gLxa'waninani^kdjinege howare'ra ha^k'o'ni^ge wawe'k'iraiiix- 
Tjk'dje. Waj^gy'zEra e je'sge hige jesge'114. WarogJYl'rera 
hak'uruhi'ndj reha'nAga. E'gi waro-yi'ra niijk'uruhi'ndj reha'- 
widjigo. E'gi jige waxop'i'ni konajjkcl'na djanAga mlnarjkca'warjgre 
nir;k'uruhi'ndj reha'widjigo." 

Host's terminal speech. — Wagjga'ra we'114, n|ji-a'naga wa£in§'- 
pcAnA. wajok'i'ra. 

"Sa'k'ereiii^k'djoTjgre minarjkca'wajjgre nijjk'uruhi'ndj reha'- 
widjigo. Ep'1'114. Wa'jo uanadjddjaj'sge ha£u'winA. hlnagi'- 
zoxdjj-a^nAga. Ha|'seretcj mlna^gica/naijgira/nAga. Ep'I'114. 
Haizo'xdjjni^k tcebinagl'giwira. Ep'i'n^. E'gi we'nA. wagjgo' 
hlriik'o'riAdjega woua'titc ruk'o'nAiiA djanaga wogyzEra'naijk'i 
jesge'xdjj wawogi'ragireje al'rera. tJa^gi'ja. wonA'7Jre hlruk'o'- 
nAnA. djanArjga'k'i uar;gEregi Waj^gy'zEra hominQ'gEriojjk'i ep'g' 
egi majha'gEregi e'gi maijk'uh^'negi e'gi je£e' ana'tcbyxdji 
wawogl'rak rehi'k'djera, uaqgl'ja, liqharatcce. NawA/na djop'i'wi 
ya£U7jk'djona're hlja/ hip'a/ waiyga' hojedjai'ndja, £ua.conur/k'dje 
djobo'ha. hotc^t£j' hlk'dje' hlge'gi djobo'ha. wak'dje £uajiA>?gere 
je'sge e'je e'gi je'ji jegy hlra'n^ga." 

Terminal Address to the Dog 

E'gi cu7jk n^biruxa'dJEra. Hocere£u'wahira glruedja/ rehi'rera. 
Wogl'go uaiyk'dji-e'dja hiru-a'k'djin^ wocgo/ je£e' e ru-a'gEra 
here'nA. wagigo'rjA^k'a n|ji-a'nAga wak'uruhi'ntccAii^. 

Host's speech to Disease-giver. — "Sa/kerenbjk'djo^gere minaqkca'- 
wa7jgre nbyk'uruhi'ndj reha'widjigo. Tcege'djaredja, tiaijgEnu'- 
nj^gra hlteok'eha'wira we'je uajjgl'ja. wi-orotcQ'djeregina>)k'a 
wonA'ijre hlruk'onai'ja. hereje'. Rosa'nbyk hap £uje e'gi hot£e' 
ruk'onaj'ja. hereje' hlk'ige'je. Tcok'aga' n$djodjo'r;gi redjy' 
wanl'na hatci'ndja hlra'nihegi hoici'pdji wawip'e'rez nihek'djone'je 
e'je, e'nA.. Djadjo'na tani-6'waxu ha'k'erewigi higy' p'eje'ga 
hang/tcbyxdjj taniwoglju'regi ha.>yk'e' hocere'ranirjk'dje e'je al'rera. 
Je'sge wa£u' tauiwogi'ju hires£a'je. Rohbjk'isga/wije hagitu'cdja. 
reha'wira hij§,'nb?k tani cawa7jxu'7jk'djawigi c£ur;kdja'wige honiqgi'- 
tawin^. Nijjk'uruhi'ndjwidjigo." 

Horucdjo'114 he'regi biro-a'gera hana'tciijxdjj taniwogl'ju 
wagigl'iiA. uaiygEra hl'nygEra ni7jk'djo'7jgEra hang/tci^xdjj. 
Harjk'i'jq. jeginiha'nije k'Iga'ra han^'tc taniwogi'ju hlreje e'gi 
hanatcj'jyxdji ho-ere'ra here'114. 

radin] THE CLAN WAR -BUNDLE FEASTS 527 

given). We feel ourselves connected with life, for surely one of the 
great spirits will take cognizance of the tobacco, food, and buck- 
skins that we who are impersonating the spirits have offered. 
Surely they (the spirits) will not care to see (these offerings) lost 
nor let us cause ourselves to suffer in vain. Thus the Creator said. 
As counseled ones do, I greet you.153 Host, I send my greetings 
toward you. You seated here impersonating the spirits, I send my 
greetings toward you." 

Then the host arose and thanked his guests. 

Host's terminal speech. — "War-bundle owners who are seated here, 
I greet you. It is good. We were living in an abject condition, so 
you performed this ceremony most carefully for us. All night have 
you been sitting here. It is good. With the greatest care have 
you eaten. It is good. That is what those who are in charge of 
feasts, who are in charge of war powers, counseled us, it is said. 
I shall now call on a man who can make himself heard by all the 
spirits who are in control of war power, including those who live 
above where the Creator lives, to those who live on the earth, and 
those who live under the earth. I will now sing four songs and when 
I begin them that will be the end (of the ceremony). Then the man 
is to give the war whoop four times." 

This he said to them. Then the victory whoop was given four 
times. 

Terminal Address to the Dog 

Then the dog is sent forth as an offering to Disease-giver. There 
at the place where the last guest has been( ?) the host rises and greets 
all. 

Host's speech to Disease-giver. — "War-bundle owners who are 
seated here, I greet you. In the beginning one of my grandfathers 
told me that the man in the south is the greatest one in control of 
war powers. One side controls death and the other life, he said. 
He blessed our grandfather and his descendants wherever they might 
be and he said that he would at all times remember them. When- 
ever we pour tobacco, then those who offer tobacco will not take 
sick, he said, it is said. That is the reason they pour tobacco, they 
said. We are extending to you one like ourselves (the dog), and we 
have told all, that all who wish to pour tobacco may do so. I greet 
you all." 

When the time has come, then all pour tobacco, the men, the 
women, and the children. Not one was there left of those who had 
poured tobacco. They had all scattered. 

■s» Apparently the name of the spirit he is impersonating has been omitted here. It is the Water. 

528 THE WINNEBAGO TKIBE [eth. ANN. 37 

ADDENDA 

Wariitc sak£u'na higy' riicdjai'naga e'gi wap'a' waradJEra 
rucdjal'naiiAga e'gi wap'a' wara'djirega k'eni uarjgEra' hinak'u'- 
ruxirani e'gi wagigo'na^k'a wak'uruhi'ndjirehi'je. 

Speech of host. — Sa'k'ereniVyk'djojjgEre mlnaijkca'warjgre ni^k'ii- 
ruhi'ndj reha'widjigo. Hitco'k'e waha'wigi wa^u'ines^a'je hoici'- 
pdjj hi]V waiiATi'rak hok'a'ratcgas^je p'; hlp'e'rezjrege. 
Hltco'k'e waha'wigi hija/ Wanihe'ga higai'regi hoici'pdjj e 
wanA7i'rak horatcgas£a'je. Wana7i'rak horatcgg/djega Wani- 
he'ga higai'regi wana7i'rak horatcgl'djega uaTjgjk'j'je e'sge p'i'nA. 
hlp'e'rezireje Wanjhe'ga higai'regi uaijgwa/coce xeteje' ha^k'e' 
Hik'i'sge p'ia*. wa£uje'. Togija/djane totco'na hik'a'wakcAnA. 
ro7i'res£aje ha^k'e' hop'ini howai'res^a'je. E'sge ro7i'res£aje. 
Nunige Wanihe'ga togi'ja. totco'na djobo/ha. hik'awa'kcaje aire- 
canu'114. E'sge wana7i'rak hok'aratc§,'djega e waj/gik'ik'ii'ruxu- 
rukce. Hahi' wak'^tca'jjkce hahi' sak£i je'cge. E'sge hoici'p'djj 
hija/ wana7i'rak hok'aratcgas£a'je. Hijg, je'sge hak'djona'winA. 
woh^' tconi'xdji dja'wine. E e'dja horok nfdjona'gidjiywigi 
liidjo'rogEnijjk eurjk'dje'ge. Je'jesge nir)gita'wjn4. Sa'k'erenirjk'- 
djor;gEre minarjkca'warjgre ni^k'uruhi'ndj reha'widjigo\ 

Radin] THE CLAN WAR-BUNDLE FEASTS 529 

ADDENDA 

After they have finished the fast-eating contest and eaten the 
heads and hefore the men are picked out 154 then the host greets all. 

Speech of host. — "War-bundle owners who are seated here, I send 
forth my greetings to you. Our grandfathers used to say that if 
one would take a chance at becoming a ghost 155 then the spirits 
would consider it especially good. There was one man among our 
grandfathers who was called He-who-shouts-in-the-distance and he 
put himself in the position of one who desires death. This warrior, 
He-who-shouts-in-the-distance, was a great man, an unequaled 
person. Now in summer it is forbidden to go on a warpath, for no 
good could come of it. That is why they forbade it. Yet He-who- 
shouts-in-the-distance went on the warpath four times during the 
summer, they said. Thus he became one who risked his life. In 
this way he proved that he was a great man. Finally he became 
holy and was permitted to carry the war bundle.156 Thus does one 
do to be a person who takes risks with his soul.157 Thus we will do 
at the very first feast we give. May (the spirits) also have pity 
upon us [as recompense for] the kettle of which they will partake. 
That is what we ask. War-bundle owners who are seated here, I 
greet you." 

IM I. e.f before the men to whom kettles had been assigned were called upon to speak. 
166 1, e., risk one's life in a brave way. 

1&0 It is one of the greatest privileges a warrior can obtain to carry the war bundle when on the w'arpath. 
157 1 have purposely translated this phrase, "wanari'rak horatcga' dja/' in three different ways to give 
all the different shades of meaning it possesses. 

530 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ANN. 37 

The War-bundle Feast of the Thunderbird Clan 

(second version) 

Informant, member of Thunderbird clan: * There were originally 
four warriors. The youngest one was the bravest and the most 
powerful. He claimed that his father was a Thunderbird and his 

mother a Night Spirit. He is 
the one who made the bundle 
about which we are going to 
speak. 

The lodge (fig. 3S) is prepared 
by the nephews and the women 
relatives of the host, generally his 
nieces and wives. The invited 
guests arrive toward evening, 
while the women are still prepar- 
ing the buckskins. These buck- 
skins are to be made as perfectly 
white as possible. Only those 
women who have passed their cli- 
macteric are permitted to do this. 
As soon as the buckskins are pre- 
pared the kettles are put on the 
fire. The buckskins are taken by 
the host and marked with the spe- 
cific symbols associated with the 
different spirits. (For the mark- 
ings, see pis. 47, 48.) These 
buckskins are then tied to a stick. 
That for Earthmaker is attached 
to the stick with the head point- 
ing upward; that for the Thun- 
derbird has the stick and the 
head of the buckskin facing the 
west; that for the Night has the 
stick and head of the buckskin 
facing east; that for the Star also 
faces east, as do all the others 
not mentioned. When the sticks have been prepared and the buck- 
skins attached to them, the latter are rolled up upon the sticks. 
Whosoever of the guests is the oldest feast-giver then arises and 
pours tobacco, first for the fire and then for all the other spirits. 
When they start the fire for the first time they use the old ceremonial 
fire sticks. With that the ceremony begins. When the old man is 

oe 

07 

06 

OS 

Fig. 3S.— Plan of Thunderbird clan war-bundle feast. 
1, Buckskin forearthmaker. 2, Buckskin fordisease- 
giver. 3, Buckskin for thunderbirds. 4, Buckskin 
for night-spirits. 5, Buckskin for morning star. 6, 
Buckskin for sun. 7, Buckskin for moon. 8, Buck- 
skin for water-spirit. 9, Buckskin for earth, lu, 
Buckskin for hcroka. 

1 This is a generalized account. 

kadin] THE CLAN WAR-BUNDLE FEASTS 531 

through, the buckskin is taken down, unrolled, and the thunder-buck- 
skin given to the band sitting opposite the host. The other buckskins 
are then distributed in rotation, except that the buckskin to Earth- 
maker is given to the guest who occupies the middle position in the 
lodge. All the guests remain standing with their unrolled buckskins, 
holding them by the sticks and keeping tobacco in their other hand, 
while the old man speaks to them and blows first upon a flute. Then, 
to the accompaniment of a gourd, he sings two songs. After that the 
buckskins are rolled up again in such a way that the markings remain 
visible, and hung up again on sticks that are placed near the individual 
invited guests, just west of the first fireplace. There they have a pole 
for Earthmaker, at whose foot the war bundle is placed and opened. 
Tobacco is then poured into the hands of each of the invited guests by 
the host. He offers tobacco especially for those individuals for whom 
he has prepared buckskins and kettles, asking each of them in turn 
for life and for victory on the warpath. When he finishes he pours 
some tobacco into the fire and some upon the war bundle. All the 
persons invited then, in turn, do the same. If the host has any chil- 
dren present in the lodge, he has them do the same. Children are 
always escorted by the attendant. The host now takes the gourds, 
drum, etc., and, remaining in his own place, sings different sets of 
songs. As often as he starts a new set, he blows upon his flute. The 
songs of the Thunderbird consist of eight starting songs, sung slowly, 
six dancing songs, etc. As soon as the dancing songs are begun, all 
the men in the lodge come around the war bundle and dance, blowing 
the flute, etc. Women may dance likewise, but they must remain in 
that part of the tent especially assigned to them. 

Before the contents of the kettle are cooked the host sings four sets 
of songs. As soon as the first set has been started the attendants get 
as many pipes as possible and bring them to the war bundle. They 
also place there a large pipe with stem directed toward the west and 
a large pile of tobacco. These pipes are then passed back to the 
various guests in order to be smoked. 

After the first set of songs is over the large pipe is taken and lit 
by one of the attendants and passed around the lodge, in ceremonial 
manner, each member taking a puff and passing it to the next one. 
When the songs to the Disease-giver are sung, the pipe is placed 
against the center pole with stem directed south. Before the Disease- 
giver songs are sung the story of their origin is told. At the end of 
the last of the initial songs the old man with tobacco in each hand 
says Ho — o — o — o—l He then pours tobacco into the fireplace. He is 
really presenting it to the Disease-giver. Then dancing songs are 
used as before. Usually dog meat is put in the kettle designed for 
the Disease -giver. 

532 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [bth. ANN. 37 

When the songs of the Night Spirit are sung the stem of the pipe is 
pointed eastward. 

Four songs are sung before the cooking is finished, in honor of the 
Thunderbird. The feast is then spread, and all those in the lodge 
smoke and dance. The attendants take the kettles down and take 
the food out. While the kettles are still on, however, branches of 
cedar are carried around the lodge to purify it. Before distributing 
the food, while the singing is still going on, the attendants count the 
number of people in the lodge and cut the meat into a corresponding 
number of pieces. As each kettle is supposed to suffice for any one 
band, a number of small sticks about the size of a toothpick, corre- 
sponding to the number of people present in each band, is placed in 
each kettle. After the last four songs are used the host arises and 
calls for the kettle that is to be given to the person opposite him. 
The attendant brings it and tells him how many pieces of meat there 
are in the kettle. The host then speaks about his intentions 'in 
offering the kettle to the spirits; that he is seeking life and victory 
in war, and that he begs all those present to intercede for him. He 
then calls for the other kettles. There are generally one or two 
kettles for the women and children. When the feast is spread out 
and they all have their food, the host tells them that they may now 
eat whenever they think proper. He himself does not eat anything 
but merely sings, shaking the gourds that he holds in his hand. 

The Disease-giver is considered the most sacred of all the spirits, 
and for that reason all the bones and the plates that have been used 
in connection with his particular kettle are purified with cedar 
branches. The host carries these bones out of the lodge himself and 
buries them under the foot of some tree. He also takes tobacco and 
red feathers along with him on this occasion. As the other spirits 
are not considered to be as sacred as the Disease-giver, ,the bones from 
the kettles offered to them can be buried anywhere, provided the 
ground has been purified. 

After the first invited guest has finished his meal he rises and 
thanks the host. He then tells the story of how he, or his ancestor, 
obtained the war bundle, and assures the host that he feels confident 
that so great a feast as this in which he is taking part will most 
certainly be recognized by the spirits. He also adds that inasmuch 
as he and the other invited guests have partaken of this feast they 
also hope to receive life and strength in proportion to the blessings 
bestowed upon the host. The other invited guests, in turn, speak 
in the same way. 

While this is going on the attendants are preparing the kettles for 
another lot of meat. The whole tent is swept again and purified and 
the kettles are once more placed upon the fireplaces. The host now 
rises and, holding tobacco in his hand, informs each spirit of the par- 

Radin] THE CLAN WAR-BTTNDLE FEASTS 533 

ticular kettle assigned to him. Then he pours out tobacco. Now one 
of the attendants goes around the lodge and scatters small swan 
feathers in every direction, even putting some near the kettles. 

The host then prepares to sing night songs, but before doing so he 
takes down the buckskin assigned to the Nights, blackens his face 
with the ember used for marking that buckskin, and puts swan 
feathers upon his head. It is said that those who during their 
fasting time visited the land of the Night Spirits saw swan feathers 
scattered all over the land, and that is why they use them now. The 
host now has the pipe turned toward the east and before singing the 
night songs tells the origin of these songs. He asks all the other 
invited guests present to help him with his songs and apologizes for 
asking so much of them. He now uses two sets of songs. When 
the dancing songs are sung all the men who so desire may come 
around the war bundle and dance, and some may even dance near 
the places where they sit. When he has finished his songs he passes 
the drum, gourds, flute, and tobacco to the invited guest opposite 
him. This one now arises, pours out tobacco, and tells the origin of 
his particular war bundle and sings the night song connected with it 
for the benefit of the host. He then repeats the same actions that the 
host has done. The drum, etc., are now passed to the next man, and 
so on until daylight. Some one especially selected is given the honor 
of singing those songs that are connected with the taking down of 
the buckskins, and when this one starts his song all the invited 
guests in whose honor kettles have been put on the fireplace take 
down their buckskins and, holding them in their hands, walk around 
the lodge four times. An attendant precedes them, walking back- 
ward and purifying the path. The buckskin with the cross marked 
on it is generally carried first. The fourth time they make the 
circuit all those in the lodge first hold their hands over the cedar 
incense and then touch the buckskin, because Earthmaker is going to 
use it for moccasins, so that, by touching it, they might become 
strengthened. After they had made the circuit for the fourth time 
they rolled up the buckskins and threw them through the openings in 
the roof of the lodge, so that the spirits for whom they were intended 
might receive them. 

After the buckskins have been thrown out tobacco is poured into 
the fireplace and all the people take their places and dance. When 
the drum has made the entire circuit of the lodge — that is, when it has 
again returned to the host — the latter rises and sings the so-called 
paint songs. A short time before that a number of kettles had been 
put on the fireplace for the so-called lower spirits. The host then 
declares that the feast is ready and that whenever they wish to 
the guests may begin to eat. The rites of the preceding feast are 
now repeated. Toward the end of the feast the host takes his bundle, 

534 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [bth.ann.37 

wraps it up, and hangs it behind him in the lodge, but he keeps the 
flute unpacked. When all but the last four songs have been finished 
he calls upon some one who has a rather strong voice to give the 
war whoop, which he does, at the end of the song. This war whoop 
is given so that all the spirits might hear it. When he is through all 
the other guests give war whoops four times, and the feast is over. 

The War-bundle Feast of the Thunderbird Clan 

(third version) 

Informant, member of the Thunderbird clan: When the feast is 
ready, the buckskin prepared, and the kettles of meat put on to boil, 
then the host rises and says as follows: 

"Warriors and sons of warriors who are present here, I greet you 
all. You have put aside all the wrongs I have done you and ac- 
cepted my invitation. I am glad of it. You have filled my lodge. 
It is good. Our four great ancestral fathers were all warriors. The 
oldest one was called Whirling-Four, the second one Sitting-Chief, 
the third one Wabanansaka, and the fourth one Kills- Within-Lodge. 
When in battle, Kills-Within-Lodge was bullet-proof. He used to 
wear a belt which when full of shot he would loosen and his blanket- 
belt would be full of bullets. He is the one that made this bundle. 
With it one can obtain victory and blessings. 

"The blessing we ask of you is war; for ourselves and for all who 
are present. We have offered kettles to all the spirits and we will 
also pour tobacco for them. This is why I am speaking to you, 
warriors, and you taking the place of the spirits. All in this lodge 
I greet. I greet you all." 

He takes tobacco and gives some to each of those who have been 
especially invited. Then he goes to the fireplace and throws some 
tobacco into the fire, saying: "Here it is. Here it is. To you 
who stand in the center of the lodge, to you I offer tobacco. You 
encouraged us to believe that when we call upon some of your fellow- 
spirits, it would be only necessary to put tobacco upon your head, 
and that you would deliver the message. 

"This is the first blessing we ask — namely, that our weapons 
and not those of our enemies be made sharp. And if in a vision we 
be directed to go on the warpath, may we receive the complete 
blessing, even though we be in the midst of the battle. Therefore 
do we lay all these birdskins that are used in war here in the center 
of our lodge. We pray that if we use one of them we will be able 
to avoid danger and that we be granted long life. For that reason, 
grandfather, Fire, do 1 pour tobacco to you. Here it is. Here 
it is. 

Radin] THE CLAN WAR-BUNDLE FEASTS 535 

"And thou, grandfather, Earthmaker, I offer tobacco to you. 
I offer tobacco to you. It was you who made the tobacco, yet we 
were told that even you cannot take it from us unless we offer it 
to you willingly, because you ordained it thus. I offer tobacco to 
you, that I may become a warrior and have long life. This I ask 
of you. A white-furred animal, a deer, with its hide, the buckskin, 
and its meat as food, do I offer to you together with tobacco. The 
hide you may use for moccasins. Here it is. 

"And you, Big Black Hawk, you who are in charge of war weapons, 
I offer tobacco to you, that my prowess as a warrior, if I be blessed 
with any, may be great and audacious. Even if it is only a single 
enemy (that I encounter) , may I be the victor. May we go through 
battle without injury. A kettle containing half of a deer, with its 
hide for moccasins, we offer to you. Here it is. Tobacco we offer 
to you. Here it is. 

"You who live in the place of the setting of the sun, Thunder-chief, 
tobacco I offer to you. When my grandfather made his war bundle 
you added your power; and whatever knowledge of warcraft you 
possessed you taught him. For that we now ask you. One of our 
members 2 whom we feed like a baby, we offer to you together with 
tobacco. Here it is. 

"You who live hi the east, who walk in darkness, tobacco we 
offer to you. When our grandfather, Kills-Within-Lodge, made 
the spirit bundle you added your war power. We ask that when 
we take this bundle up we may be able to gam victory without any 
effort on our part. This we ask of you. As our children become 
big enough to go on the warpath may you see to it, in your myste- 
rious manner, that we have war. We offer you tobacco and also a 
kettle containing a female deer with hide for moccasins. These we 
offer you. Here it is. 

"You who live in the south, you who give us sickness, to that part 
of your body which contains life, we offer tobacco. In the bundle 
that our grandfather made you added your war power. That power 
we now ask of you. In the middle of the day you blessed our grand- 
father. That blessing we ask of you again. One of our members who 
wears a headdress,3 do we offer to you, and likewise a deerskin for 
moccasins. All these together with tobacco we offer you. Here it is. 

"To you, grandfather, the Sun, I offer tobacco. You blessed my 
grandfather, Kills-Within-Lodge, with your power when he made his 
war bundle. The blessing that you gave him, that do I ask of you. 
Let that be your first gift. May we have victory in war: and in 
the presence of the weapons of our enemies, make us safe. If there 
be any men (enemies) to whom death has been ordained, may we be 

3 He is referring to the dogs eaten at this feast. 
a I. e., a deer. 

536 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ann.37 

the ones who will be the victors. It is said of you that even if a 
prayer be offered to you hi silence, along with the tobacco, you will 
hear it. Here we offer you tobacco, deer for food, and buckskin 
for moccasins. This, grandfather, is our prayer and our offering. 

"To you, grandmother, the Moon, do we offer tobacco. We 
desire to have victory in battle. The blessings you bestowed upon 
our grandfather, Kills-Within-Lodge, when you blessed him with the 
powers of a warrior, those give to us now. The blessings that were 
not fulfilled by him (that is, all those blessings that death prevented 
him from using) we ask that they may be fulfilled by us. Tobacco 
and deer for food and buckskin, all these we offer to you. Here it is. 
Here it is. 

"To you, Morning Star, do we offer tobacco. When my grand- 
father was blessed with your power, while he was making his war 
bundle, he was to give you tobacco for smoking and food at mid- 
night. That is what we are trying to do, although we are lacking 
hi all the essentials necessary for success. However, we wish to be 
prepared hi times of trouble and that is why we ask, grandfather, 
that we be blessed with life. A kettle with tobacco, enough buck- 
skin for moccasins, and tobacco we offer to you. 

"To you, grandmother, the Earth, do we offer tobacco also. We 
pray for victory in war and for all the medicines that are necessary 
to obtain it, so that we may bind ourselves with medicine; that we 
may use the flowers of the earth for paint — -all that is red and all 
that is blue — this we ask of you. Should there be anything better, 
we ask that you arrange it so that we obtain it. Tobacco and corn 
for food do we offer to you, and should you need more tobacco we 
will send it along. Here it is. 

"To you, Eagle Chief, you who blessed our grandfather with power 
to conquer hi war while he was making his bundle of spirit-power, 
do we offer tobacco. For all that he told us to retain and which 
he said was powerful in the bundle, I am making this feast. I am 
trying to-night to make a feast in honor of the spirits. To you and 
to the hawk I offer this kettle." 

All the kettles which are to be used at this feast have by this time 
been put on. The nephews act as attendants and place the kettles 
on the fireplaces. Those spirits for whom no kettles are placed on 
the fire receive tobacco as an offering. After the host has offered 
tobacco to these latter spirits, he returns to his place and sits down. 
Then the war-bundle owners to whom tobacco had been given get 
up hi turn and with one hand pour tobacco hito the fire and with 
the other upon the war bundle. The host then rises and speaks as 
follows : 

"Sons of war, and you who stand in the footsteps of the spirits, all 
you who are in this lodge, I greet you. We are boiling hot water for 

RAlim] THE CLAN WAR-BUNDLE FEASTS 537 

the spirits. We will try also to use some of the songs that were 
taught to the owner of the bundle when he was blessed. We will 
perhaps make you smoke poor tobacco and tire you out by making 
you sit too long, and we will probably keep you hungry too long, 
but we know that you have served at these feasts and that this 
ceremony is good and that you know how to carry it on. It is good 
that you act thus. They say that if we sit up all night at a feast 
we will be able to obtain victory in war and long life. For this 
purpose you have come here and intend to sit with us. We are 
very glad. We will be at your service and as soon as the attendants 
have the food ready you shall receive some. To those sitting in the 
place of the setting of the sun, the Thunderers, we will sing the songs 
they taught our grandfather. We will attempt to sing them for you. 
If we can remember them, we will use about four." 

After he has concluded, the members of his band sing the Thunder- 
bird songs and when they are finished they sing the dancing songs. 

When these are over the host speaks again. 

"Sons of wars, I greet you. We are delivering our speeches as 
fast as possible. When our grandfather was blessed he fasted, 
denying himself water. He suffered much. It was then that the 
spirits had compassion upon him. One of the spirits met him in 
broad daylight, one day, at noon. He blessed him with victory in 
war and with the life, or good half, of his body,4 and with the right 
to hand on this blessing for generations. As long as the people 
offer red feathers and tobacco and make feasts in his honor, so long 
will he not trouble them with disease. He said that these were 
the things he liked — dog, red feathers, and tobacco. These are the 
things that we accordingly offer him. We will now use his songs, 
which are in another language. I suppose we will make a great 
many mistakes, but it is said that even if a person knows only one 
song he should try and use it, for through it victory in war and long 
life can be obtained. With this thought before us we will try. We 
were also told that we must leave nothing undone. 

"Sons of wars, and you who represent the spirits, I greet you." 

Now the slow songs are sung, and after they are finished, the dance 
songs. Then the host rises and speaks again. 

"Sons of war, I greet you. After we have used four lots of songs 
we will have the feast. The attendants will have the food ready 
about that time. The songs that we will attempt to sing will be 
Thunderbird songs and the songs of the different spirits that accom- 
pany this bundle, the Sun, the Moon, the Morning Star, the Earth, 
the Water, the Daylight, and the Eagle. The songs of all of these 
spirits we will try to use and sing. 

4 Evidently it was the Disease-giver who blessed him. 
186823—22^—35 

538 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ann.37 

"Sons of war, I greet you." 

After these songs are sung the host speaks again. 

"Sons of wars, I greet you. We will sing the dancing songs. If 
anyone cares to dance he may do so. They say that through dancing, 
also, we may obtain victory in war. Therefore you women may 
dance and help your brothers. Dancing also is a means of obtaining 
life. We will now sing about four songs if we can remember them." 

When the songs are over the leader says : 

"Warriors, I greet you. We will sing another lot of songs and 
then we will have our feast. This lot of songs was sung by our 
grandfather, who obtained victory with them, so he added them to 
his bundle. So we are told. These songs can also be sung by watch- 
men in the camp, or on the warpath, or before the rush for the enemy, 
as well as while crossing rivers and in scouting. We will now try to 
sing them. Warriors all, who are seated here, I greet you." 

The host then sings the slow songs and then the dancing songs. 
Then he continues: 

"Warriors, I greet you. The next four songs we sing will be for 
all the spirits for whom we have placed these kettles of tobacco and 
buckskin for moccasins. The first kettle over the first fireplace is a 
big deer head, which our chief will partake of. This kettle is in 
honor of Earthmaker. The kettle will be placed for our chief. We 
know that he has been attentive to the spirits and that he has the 
right to forbid us to do wrong. 

"The next kettle will be put on in honor of the war spirits who 
live in the place of the setting of the sun. It will be placed before 
the Thunderbird clan people. It is our desire that the spirits 
remember us for these our offerings. For that reason we will turn 
over to them a kettle with tobacco and enough buckskin for 
moccasins. 

"The kettle on the second fireplace we intend to offer to the war 
spirit, the Big Black Hawk. Together with the kettle, we are 
offering tobacco and buckskin. It will be placed before Strikes-the- 
Tree. He understands this affair better than we do. He under- 
stands what our intentions toward the spirits are and he can therefore 
best make them understand us. Another kettle on the same fire- 
place we intend for the sun. We have already made known our 
intentions to him by offerings of tobacco and buckskin. That kettle 
will be placed for our grandfather, who understands and can perform 
these things better than we can. 

"On the third fireplace there is a kettle for our grandmother who 
comes up after the dark — the Moon. That will be placed before 
my nephew. He knows how to take care of a war bundle. That 
we wish should be made known to the moon he will make it known, 
as he knows how to do it. 

eadin] THE CLAN WAR-BUNDLE FEASTS 539 

"The next kettle is in honor of the Morning Star. We offer 
tobacco, buckskin, and food to him. This kettle is to be placed 
before my uncle, as he knows how to make offerings to spirits better 
than we do. All that we wish is that the spirits should know that 
we have done this; and he understands how to make this known to 
the spirits. Warriors, I greet you. The kettles have now all been 
put on by the attendants and we offer to you all that they can hold. 
It will be lacking in every way, but, warriors, you understand how 
to divide it. Knowing this, we know that you will all get some. 
Whenever you get ready you can start eating. In the meantime we 
will sing." 

After singing four songs those present partake of the feast. When 
the feast is over, the guest who received the first kettle rises and 
speaks: 

"Elders and you who are mere participants, who have partaken 
of our feast, and you warriors, I greet. It is truly good. Who would 
not say it is good ? Relatives, a lesson this has been to me, the fact 
that I have been invited. It is indeed a real pleasure for me to be 
here, but I have been accorded an even greater honor in that I have 
been given a kettle, and especially that it should be just that kettle 
that we offer to the greatest spirit, Earthmaker. For him have I 
eaten and for him have I smoked the tobacco that was offered. We 
will be strengthened by the blessing that it brings us. All our rela- 
tives that had anything to do with this offering will be strengthened 
How can the spirits help recognizing such an offering? It is said that 
if we wish anything of the spirits and we offer tobacco to them they 
would accept and recognize it. Surely such an offering as this (in 
which we have participated) will be received by the spirits, and assur- 
edly they will bless our host with victory, just as he has wished it. 
I am thankful that I had something to do with it. I consider that 
my life has been renewed. I therefore greet him, Earthmaker, and 
I greet the host and the warriors who are representing the spirits. I 
greet them all." 

Then the guest who had received the second kettle rises and speaks: 

"Hosts and relatives who are sitting around me, I greet you all. 
It is good. Who would not say that it is good? I do not intend 
this as mere imitation of the preceding speaker, but my grandfather 
taught me to be thankful at all times for such an affair as this. I 
did not gain honor in war, and (for my presence here) I am conse- 
quently all the more thankful. It is good. He has honored me 
together with the spirits when he offered to them tobacco, buckskin, 
and food and when he asked them for victory and life. How could 
such a one go unblessed ? Do not the spirits even know our thoughts ? 
I thank all the relatives that have partaken of this spirit food, through 
which they will be strengthened. Again I say, it is good. In my 

540 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ann. 37 

thoughts I greet you, feasters. Spirits of war, elders, warriors, I 
greet you." 

Then the third speaker rises and speaks: 

"Elders and relatives, I greet you. Warriors within this lodge, I 
greet you also. It is good. Who would not say it is good ? Many 
times haw they done this to us in the past. They understand and 
know how to make examples for us to follow. They have made 
offerings of tobacco, of food, and buckskin for moccasins to all the 
spirits. They have gathered us together and given us places of honor 
that we may obtain life thereby. They have given us spirit-food to 
eat in the presence of our relatives. The blessings they receive will 
also strengthen us in life. With these thoughts we have partaken of 
the feast. While boiling the water, the attendants have burned their 
hands, and surely they will for this reason take part in war, with 
honor. It is good that it is thus. What spirit could overlook such 
an offering ? It must surely be known to them. Again I say it is 
good. You feasters, host, and warriors, I greet you all." 

Then the fourth speaker rises and speaks: 

"Elders and relatives, I greet you. Host and feasters, I greet you. 
It is good, the previous speakers have told me. Most certainly it is 
good. The chiefs have up to now asked blessings for the Winnebago 
fireplaces. Our host has also made offerings to all the spirits and 
asked victory and life for our women and children. I hope we minor 
ones will also receive blessings. A spirit named Kills-Within-Lodge 
came upon earth in the flesh and caused this (feast) to be made, and 
to this day it is so. It is good. With war he was blessed, we all 
have heard it told. It is good that we have partaken of this food, 
for we have been told that all meat partaken in feasts strengthens 
us with spirit blessings. I want to thank all of the relatives and 
feasters who are here, and for that reason I am speaking. Feasters, 
I greet you all; I greet you all." 

Then he speaks again: 

"It is good, my relatives, that the spirits have been given offerings 
of food, tobacco to light their pipes, and buckskin to use for moccasins. 
Now it is the midnight of the spirits, and we have all heard that at 
this time they turn over in their beds in spirit land, and whoever 
offers tobacco to them now can be assured that they will smoke it. 
For this reason the people have added food and moccasins. They will 
surely bless them with the victory and life for which they have asked. 
We believe that those who have partaken of the feast will be blessed, 
for it is said that the spirits even know our thoughts. This is what 
I think. I am sure I have been strengthened by it. Feasters, I greet 
you all. You likewise, Grandmother Moon, I greet." 

The kettles are now put on again. 

BADIN] THE CLAN WAR-BUNDLE FEASTS 541 

Now the host speaks again: 

"Warriors, I greet you. It is good that you have told one another 
my wishes and spoken about the things that are usually discussed 
at this ceremony. I say again that it is good to hear such words 
from you. We are making you suffer, but the attendants are put- 
ting on the kettles again. I will therefore give all the spirits for 
whom kettles have been prepared smoking material again. I greet 
you all." 

Then he begins to pour out tobacco for the spirits. As often as 
he calls upon a spirit so often does he pour tobacco into the fire, 
saying as follows in each case: 

" Here it is, the tobacco, grandfather, who are in the middle of the 
lodge. We have been told that you said you were the mediator 
between (the spirits and human beings). It is said that if we place 
on your head tobacco for the spirits you would see to it that our 
offering had not been made in vain. So I pour tobacco for you. 
Here it is. 

"To you, in the South, the Disease-giver, grandfather, I offer 
tobacco. A four-legged animal,5 one of our own members, we have 
put in the kettle for you. Tobacco, food, feathers, and buckskin we 
offer you. You blessed our grandfather and met him in the middle 
of the day. With the blessing with which you blessed him do you 
now bless us. This we ask of you — that fever (disease) may not 
come upon us, and that we may have victory and life. This we ask 
of you because you claim that you are in charge of these things. 
Grandfather, in return for all the things that we ask you, we offer 
tobacco for your pipe. The same we offer to your grandfathers, 
those under the light, those who walk in darkness.6 My 
grandfather you blessed. The things that you taught him we ask 
for. Our offerings are poorly given, and not of the best kind, but 
it is said that your feelings can not be hurt since you permitted 
our grandfather to enter your spirit-home. We pour tobacco 
for you, Nights, that victory may come our way, and that you might 
walk faster so that day may come to us sooner. Men's tobacco, 
food, and buckskin we offer you. Here it is. 

"Morning Star, tobacco we offer you, with buckskin and food. 
When our grandfather made a bundle of spirit-powers, you added 
your blessing of warrior prowess. That is what I ask of you — that 
we may have victory whenever we meet the enemy. It is said that 
if we wait till then we might not receive your blessing. That is why 
we ask it now. We pour tobacco for you. 

"To you, the chief of the Eagles, I offer tobacco. In our grand- 
father's fasting you blessed him with victory in war. That which he 

6 Cf. note 2. 

• I. e., the Night Spirits. 

542 THE WINNEBAGO TKIBE [eth. ann. 37 

would have used were he alive do I ask of you. And if we take the 
feathers that are in this war bundle on the warpath, may it so happen 
that even if we see only one enemy we may be the ones to have the 
war honor. This is what we ask of you and for this we offer tobacco 
to you. 

"To you, Hare, do we offer tobacco. Here it is. The blessing 
you bestowed on our grandfather, that we ask of you, the so-called 
nephew. Victory in war and life we ask, should we ever go on the 
warpath ; that we may conquer without effort and that we may be 
safe in the midst of the weapons of our enemies. 

" To you, the Turtle, we offer tobacco. Here it is. Men's tobacco 
we offer you that you may fill your pipe. Our offerings are lacking 
in every respect, for we have no kettle for you. But we can not 
offend you, it is said. You have, in truth, power in war and that is 
why we ask you for victory in war. Grandfather, we offer you 
tobacco. 

"To you, grandmother, the Earth, do we offer tobacco. We offer 
you men's tobacco. We ask victory in war from you. When our 
grandfather made a bundle of spirit-power, you added your power. 
For that reason we have been keeping tobacco for you. Here it is. 
Grandmother, we offer tobacco to you. 

" To all those who have blessed our grandfather with spirit-power — 
for we do not know you all — we offer tobacco to those on earth and 
to those above. It is our desire that you bless us with the blessings 
you conferred upon our grandfather. Grandfathers, warriors, I greet 
you all. I am sorry that I have been boring you with my talk, and 
that I have perhaps made you smoke too much. But we wish to 
obtain victory and life, and it is said that patience gains both of 
these. Knowing this, you have faithfully sat through this whole 
ceremony. I thank you, and yet I must ask more of you. I must 
ask that the drum and songs be sent around the lodge as soon as I 
get through singing. As the Nights go around the earth at night so 
will the. drum go around this lodge. I will now use the songs of the 
Nights, that is what I mean. Warriors, I greet you." 

After singing slow songs he sings dancing songs, and then he 
speaks again: 

"Warriors, I greet you. As I said before, you may sing the songs 
of the Nights. Your songs are certainly more spirit-like, and they 
have the power of obtaining life. I now send the drum to you." 

Then the attendants take the drum, together with some tobacco, 
and carry it across the lodge, to a place opposite the host, and place 
it in front of one of the guests belonging to another clan. He also 
puts some tobacco in the hands of this person. Then the one about 
to sing rises and speaks as follows : 

badin] THE CLAN WAR-BUNDLE FEASTS 543 

"Feast-givers and relatives, as well as you guests who are present, 
I greet you all. It is good that I have been honored by being placed 
in the path of the drum. It is said that so great is the sacredness 
attached to this affair that one must not refuse to accept the drum 
as it passes around the lodge. I also feel honored at the offering of 
tobacco. Indeed I feel saved, and I pray that whosoever comes in 
contact with these things may be strengthened thereby. As soon 
as I have offered the tobacco I will use the songs of our fathers. 
We do not know them as well as we ought to, but we will try never- 
theless. It is said that if you only know one song, you must try to 
use it even to the point of tears; just as it is said, that if you cry 
after a victory you must put aside all sense of shame. Thinking of 
these things I will now try to sing. Tobacco I offer you." 

He throws it into the fire, saying at the same time, "Grandfathers, 
Night Spirits, I offer you tobacco. I know that we will spoil your 
songs, but it is said that you are merciful and that you will sing 
them again to yourselves correctly. If we make any mistakes have 
pity on us, grandfathers, and we ask you to walk faster so that 
daylight may come soon. Here is the tobacco. We offer it to you." 

Then he sings slow songs, and then dancing songs. One of the 
attendants now comes forward with tobacco in his hand, and takes 
the drum and moves it to another of the invited guests. He also 
gives this person some tobacco. This one then rises and thanks all 
the other people in general and says approximately the same as the 
man before him, praising them for all the things he could think of, 
accepting the tobacco, and then offering it to the spirits and to the 
fire. He particularly asks the Nights to walk faster so that morning 
might come to them sooner. After he sings his songs, which like 
the others are Night songs, the drum is taken and moved to another 
of the invited guests. Thus it passes from one to another until it 
has made the entire circuit of the lodge. Generally at about dawn 
it reaches the place of the host, from where it had started on the 
previous day. He sings certain songs which are called the old 
night songs, because the old nights are not supposed to come 
until approaching daylight and because their hair is white from age. 
When they come they bring light. All those who may perhaps 
have fallen asleep at this time either wake up or are awakened, for 
the Nights who now come are old and carry canes which, when directed 
toward a sleeping person, causes him to die. After the host has 
finished the old night songs he sings the dancing songs. 

The buckskins are then taken down and carried around the lodge. 
All those present now arise and dance in their special places, as the 
buckskin passes them. The host and his invited guests now take 
their buckskins in one hand, holding tobacco at the same time, and 
pass around the lodge in single file. Thus they go around the lodge 

544 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ann. 37 

four times. The fourth time they make the circuit they stop at the 
first fireplace and throw the buckskins through the holes of the 
lodge. It is supposed that the old Night Spirits seize them at this 
moment and carry them up to the sky with them. The singing 
now ceases, and all the people take their seats again. The drum is 
now taken and placed in front of the host's place. He thereupon 
rises and speaks as follows: 

"Ye warriors, as many as you are who are sitting here, I greet. 
It is good that you have complied with my wishes and that the 
spirits have already taken their buckskins and their food, and that 
they have left our presence. But nevertheless we will sing our last 
song, even if it appears that they are being sung into empty space. 
I know that you have already had compassion upon me, even although 
I am making you suffer with hunger, but let us, nevertheless, sing 
one more song, and then we can rest. My grandfather used these 
songs in time of war, and never did he miss a war honor when using 
them. These we will now use. You, warriors, and those of you 
who possess holy paints, it must seem shameful to you for me to 
speak this way. For we have no holy paint. However, we will 
not sing them with the intention of making people believe that we 
have holy paints, but simply because we have used them in war 
and found them good. That is why I am about to use them now, 
and that is why they belong to this bundle. Warriors, you may 
hear. Know you that I will use these songs in seeking victory and 
life. Nor will the dancing be limited merely to those who possess 
paint, but to anyone of the warriors here present. This will be the 
last dancing song. I greet you all." 

Then he sings some songs, both the slow and the dancing songs. 
After that he rises and says the following: 

"Warriors who are seated here, I greet you. I suppose it is 
enough that I have made you suffer with hunger all night. As 
soon as the attendants can get around to it the food will be placed 
before you again. I know that it will be lacking in every respect, 
but let me appeal to your good natures. On this first fireplace there 
is going to be a kettle for the Disease-giver. A four-legged animal, 
one of his own members, we will offer to him, together with tobacco 
and deerskins. We are also going to send to him a little four-legged 
animal, one with whom our cliildren have been fond of playing. 
He is now in front of us. Whoever wishes to offer tobacco to the 
Disease-giver can do so now, and as soon as the feast is over and 
the bones are gathered, we will take them and, strewing tobacco 
upon them, place them outside. Let me tell you again that anyone 
who wishes may offer tobacco and ask of the Disease-giver that he 
keep illness away from him. Women are not permitted to partake 
of this kettle, so see to it that only men eat of it. As I said before, 

radix] THE CLAN WAR-BUNDLE FEASTS 545 

O warriors, the food will be lacking in every respect, but try, never- 
theless, to have it pass around. 

"We also have a kettle on the fireplace for the Nights, which the 
attendants will put on in honor of the father of my wife and my own 
father. We offer, likewise, tobacco and deerskin along with this 
kettle, to the Night Spirits, so that we may obtain victory and life. 
That is what we wish. As I said before, I will not have any too 
much food for you. But they say the spirits are merciful. 

"To the Morning Star we will also offer a kettle. We will have 
it put on for Ku'nu, as he understands these affairs better than we 
do and knows better than we how to ask the spirits for blessings. 
We offer, in addition to the kettle, tobacco and buckskin, asking 
victory and life from the spirits in return. As I said before, warriors, 
our grandfather never failed when he had this bundle. That is 
why we have kettles put on the fire in honor of it. 

"To our fourth brother we will offer another kettle, in honor of 
the chief of the Eagles, praying for life and victory. Warriors who 
are seated here, I greet you all. Whenever you get ready to eat you 
may do so, and we will, during that time, sing some of our songs." 

Then they sing Earthmaker songs. These songs were songs that 
a certain person called Wegi'ceka obtained in his blessings from all 
the spirits, but they were taught to him by Earthniaker. 

After Wegi'ceka had been blessed by all the spirits there was just 
one lacking, and that was Earthmaker. So he fasted more and 
more, almost to the point of death, crying and longing for a blessing 
from Earthmaker. Finally he was told that he was to be blessed 
by him. At the appointed place and time a being wearing dark 
clothes and carrying a cane that looked fear-inspiring stood before 
him, like the blue of the sky. "Wegi'ceka," he said, "I bless you. 
You have inflicted suffering upon yourself and have hungered and 
thirsted on my account. With everything that I possess do I bless 
you; with victory and with the power to heal the sick, with riches 
and with good fortune as a hunter, and even with the power of hav- 
ing women become enamored of you — with all these things I bless 
you." Then he turned and walked away and Wegi'ceka saw that it 
was a bluejay. He felt very much humbled and so he fasted again. 
Four times was he treated thus. Finally he even sacrificed one of 
his own children, and then he was told that at a certain time and 
place, about the hour of noon, he would meet Earthmaker. When 
he came there some one said, "Wegi'ceka, I bless you. You have 
humbled yourself and cried unto me. I bless you. Heretofore I 
have blessed nobody. You are the first one." Thus he spoke, and 
he gave him the cane and four songs. Those are the songs which 
we use at the end of our feast. 

546 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [bth. ann. 37 

After these songs are finished and the invited guests and the others 
present have finished eating, the feast is practically over, with the 
exception of a few remarks. The host rises and speaks as follows: 

"Warriors and guests, I greet you all. It is good that we have 
this life-power to use in our travels through life. The spirits caused 
us to make offering and have also given us a chance to sing the songs 
of our forefathers. This they made us do. It is good. Our guests 
have shown us a great example in that they have offered enough 
buckskin for all the spirits and enough food and tobacco. What 
spirit could let such an offering pass unnoticed, without bestowing 
a blessing? It is said that even if you wish something and do not 
express it in words, still if you pour tobacco into the fire you will 
obtain what you wish. If that is the case, how much greater must 
the efficacy of the offerings be that were made here! You Feast- 
givers and relatives, I consider it a blessing that I was permitted to 
be present here. But that blessing was even increased when I was 
called upon to partake from a kettle offered to one of the greatest 
spirits. I feel that now I will surely be able to live. They say that 
the one called Disease-giver has victory and life in one half of his 
body. Tberefore I greet the Disease-giver. Feast-givers, warriors, 
all you who are present, I greet you." 

The second singer now speaks. 

"Elders and ye other guests who are present, I greet you all. It 
is good. It is good. Who could say otherwise? Relatives, a great 
example has been set us. We have seen buckskins for moccasins, 
tobacco, and food offered to the spirits, and we ourselves have been 
permitted to represent these spirits by proxy, that we also might 
live and be strengthened; that if we should ever chance upon the 
enemy we might remain safe and unbanned. Such, in substance, 
were the tearful prayers of our leaders to-night. They prayed for 
victory and life, and made their offerings to the Nights, of deerskin, 
tobacco, and food. Most assuredly have the Nights accepted these 
offerings, for they have walked fast as we asked, and the night has 
been very short. They certainly have answered our prayers. It is 
good. We likewise feel that the fact that we have been here with our 
relatives and partaken of everything will strengthen us in life. Feast- 
givers and guests, I greet you all. Warriors and singers, I greet you." 

Then the third one rises and speaks. He says about the same 
thing as the former. The fourth one does the same. When they 
are finished, the host rises and thanks them because they have said 
and done the things that he had most at heart. He speaks as fol- 
lows : 

"Warriors, as it is the custom, so we will now sing four more 
dancing songs and then we will call upon someone to make his 
voice known to the war-spirits. If any of you wish to offer tobacco, 

badin] THE CLAN WAR-BUNDLE FEASTS 547 

you can do so, and the women likewise can join, because we have 
rolled up our bundle. To the dog that we have here, an offering of 
tobacco can be made." Thus speaking, he sings. After he has 
finished the song, someone specially called upon gives the war 
whoop, in which the rest join. In this manner they sing four times, 
and the ceremony ends. They have a dog around whose neck they 
tie a red rag, together with a bundle of tobacco, and to each of 
whose limbs they also tie a bundle of tobacco. This dead dog is to 
be placed wherever the bones that remain of the feast are buried, 
generally under some tree. It is supposed that the dog will go 
directly to the Disease-giver together with the tobacco and there 
be taken over by him. 

Notes on the Thunderbird clan war-bundle feast. — Informant, mem- 
ber of the clan: Place of honor at the feast is given to the bravest 
man present. Scalps, etc., are always brought to those keeping 
the war bundle. 

Contents of bundle: Black hawk (main thing), two wolf tails, 
buffalo tail, snake, weasel, three flutes — one red, one black, and one 
blue. 

Black hawk used in time of war. If I were leading the war party 
I would carry it and it would be able to fly. It had a small bundle 
of medicine tied around the neck, on each wing and each leg. A red 
flute always went with it. 

The two wolf tails could be taken on any warpath. It gives an 
individual the power of running. The medicine tied to it is to be 
smeared over the body in order to prevent fatigue. It is also used 
in hunting. 

Buffalo tail gives fleetness and indicates that the man received 
strength from the buffalo spirit. 

Weasel and snake could be put around the neck and worn over 
the shoulders in times of war. Gives the power of these respective 
animals in wiggling. 

Flutes, blue in connection with the buffalo, red in connection 
with the black, hawk, and black in connection with the night spirits 

The War-bundle Feast of the Bear Clan 

Informant, member of the Bear clan: The people were about to go 
on a hunt, it is said. They returned. Four deer had been killed. 
And again they went, and this time three deer were killed. But it was 
not sufficient, so they went out again, and when they returned it was 
found that they had killed only three deer. "Well," they said, "this 
will be all right. We have ten deer. Perhaps they will last as food 
until dawn." 

They told the attendants to get ready the lodge and to build the 
fireplaces. They told them also to have the wood and the. buck- 

548 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [bth. ann. 37 

skins ready. Then they told them to make some invitation sticks. 
Only four invitation sticks were to be made, and they were to tie 
tobacco to each of them. The lodge was now ready (fig. 36). They 
had fixed the vertical poles and had tied them with prickly cedar 
sinews. The vertical poles they painted blue. 

Then he who was to be the host told the attendants to take the 
invitation sticks to certain people. "Bring the first one to my friend, 
Ma.nuba'ga. See that you give it to him. I am sure that he will 
be here soon after. The second stick you may give to Ka.-o 'saga. The 
third one you may give to Mqzihimain 'iga. Be sure that you bring 
them to all those who possess war bundles." 

The attendant did as he was told and returned and told the host 
that it was done. "I have seen all of them and told them to make 
ready. They will soon come and sit down." 

All were now in the lodge and were seated. The old man, Ka^i'ga, 
was the host. All his posterity were there. He had placed meat in 
the kettles over the fireplaces. The first kettle was for Earthmaker 
and the second for Turtle. ' ' Put them on," he said to the attendants. 
"Put the third one on for the Thunderbird, and the fourth one for the 
Fire, the fifth one for the Earth, the sixth one for the Morning Star, 
the seventh one for Without Horn, and the eighth one for the Nights. 
Then put on a small kettle for Disease-giver and a full kettle for the 
Ruee'we. 

" Rao, we will pour tobacco for them my friend, Manuba'ga. 
Whenever we can obtain a 'counciling' we always do this, for in that 
way we help one another. You who are sitting here for me, bundle 
owners, as many of you as there are within this lodge who are taking 
the place of the spirits, all of you I greet. War-bundle owners, all of 
us are thus. When you obtain a council feast for yourselves, then you 
will help one another. We are putting ourselves in a very pitiable 
condition, so you must have thought of us, and that is why you came 
at our bidding. It is good. And we are going to make you fearfully 
tired. But I beg of you, nevertheless, to continue until the end. 
We are now going to sing." 

They get up and the guests hold tobacco in their hands. TheD 
they sing and weep. The one who was fasting at that time stood at 
the war bundle crying. Then they sang the following songs : 

Human, four chunks of meat I give you. 

Human, four chunks of meat you will eat. 

I made it for you, for you who carry the war bundle. 

Thus they spoke standing and weeping, pouring tobacco upon the 
war bundle. This they did. Then Turtle songs were used. That is 
what they call them. After that they used Thunderbird songs, and 
then what are called friends' songs. Finally they used the songs 
they obtained when Disease-giver blessed them. Four songs they 

Radin] THE CLAN WAR-BUNDLE FEASTS 549 

had given them. Then songs that were associated with the drum 
that they use in the Night-Spirit dance were sung. The feast was 
now ready. 

"Make ready the kettle in front of the fireplace; take the most 
prominent parts of the animal out of it ; make the second kettle you 
put on also ready. Hurry up, for we are about to have a fast-eating 
contest. The lower clans and the upper clans will contest. They will 
try to partake of war. Make ready. You, Majiuba'ga choose a 
person, and do you, Ka^o'saga, do the same." 

Now they were ready to have the fast-eating contest. They all 
sat down. 

"Now listen," said the host, "as soon as the flute is blown they 
will begin the contest. Then will be the time for all the feast givers 
to sing." 

Now, this is one of the songs they sang: 

Where they eat, there you went, it is said. 

Now they finished. Mqnuba'ga was defeated and Ka?-o'saga won. 
The guests filled their dishes, and the kettle that had been put 
on for Earthmaker was taken down and placed before Manuba 'ga, so 
that he might select the best parts. Then the second kettle that had 
been placed on the fire for Earthmaker was put in front of Ka^o'saga. 
The third kettle that had been offered to the Thunder-spirits was 
placed in front of Nsizihima'niga. The host then, in turn, mentioned 
by name all the invited guests and told the attendants what kettles 
were to be brought to them. As soon as the dishes had been dis- 
tributed each one began to eat. They never waited for one another 
to start. While they were eating the members of the host's band sang. 
When the meal was over Ma.nuba'ga rose and spoke as follows: 

"Councilors, relatives, uncles, I salute you all. As many spirits as 
are in charge of life you have mentioned during the ceremony. 
Tobacco and food you have sent to them as offerings. I am sure that 
for that reason they will give you all that you have asked, and I also 
feel that I, myself, will be able to obtain something on which I can 
live, and that should I encounter on the warpath an enemy whose 
death has been ordained, it will be my fate to kill Mm. Thus I have 
been thinking, and that is why I have been sitting here. War- 
bundle owners, as many of you as are sitting in this lodge — war-bundle 
carriers, as many of you as are here — you have, indeed, had tobacco 
poured out for you to-day, and tobacco has also been offered to the 
powers that you have tied up in your bundles. I feel grateful for the 
fact and that I have been invited to attend, and that is why I am 
saying this. Councilors, war-bundle owners, all who are seated in 
this lodge, I salute you." 

The leaders of all the other bands say practically the same. 

550 THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE [eth. ann. 37 

Af ter the speeches were all over the offerings were taken down and 
thrown outside through the opening in the roof of the lodge and then 
night songs were sung. Before throwing the offerings out theymarched 
around the lodge carrying them in their hands. At the approach of 
dawn the drum, gourds, etc., have about made the entire circuit of the 
lodge, and as soon as they reach the host he begins to sing the night 
songs. After these he sings turtle songs, and then the songs are over. 
The host now calls upon some one to give the war whoop, so that the 
spirits in the west may hear their voices. Nanhj'tcoga gave the 
war whoop. All joined in, and the feast was over. 

Descriptive notes on the Bear clan war-bundle feast. — Informant, 
member of clan: About the middle of winter, in the month called 
deer-breeding month, the Winnebago used to go out hunting, and 
they gave a feast to all the spirits who had blessed them. 

They are very careful not to have the kettles boil over, because 
they believe that a man's soul (nayi'ralc') might be wandering about 
and is likely to come down along the chain of the kettle. If it 
doesn't boil over, the man is likely to conquer the possessions of this 
spirit (of an enemy) in the next battle. 

The invitation sticks are sent out only to men who own a war 
bundle, and the clans are invited in the following fashion: First the 
Wolf, then the Hawk, and then any order. 

The contents of the war bundle represent the following: The crow 
means strength in running. The turtle and the spear, the blessings 
which enable one to get out of difficulties, the former referring espe- 
cially to difficulties in crossing water; they also enable their possessor 
to foretell when enemies are approaching and to tell an individual 
how many enemies he is going to conquer. The flute represents the 
voices of musical birds. When an enemy hears them it paralyzes 
him and he can not run. 

INDEX 

Page. 
Aborigines of West Indies, memoir on, by 

Dr. J. Walter Fewkes " 

Adoption — 

customs of 139 

name used after 128 

Agriculture 115-117 

Alliances of the Winnebago 58-59 

Alphabet, syllabic, used by Winnebago. . . 47 
Alsea, grammatical sketch by Dr. Leo J. 

Frachtenberg 18 

Altpeter mounds — 

form of 10° 

location of 99 

number of 100 

American Museum of Natural History, 

acknowledgment to 48 

Animals — 

method of slaughtering 113 

mythological classification of 186 

power of transformation of 197 

Appropriation for American Ethnology. 1 

Arapaho Bull, instructions given by 415 

Arapaho Peyote ceremony 415-^119 

Arbor \itm , use of, in purifying rites 445 

Archeology of the Winnebago 76-103 

Arrowheads — 

authorship of 86-87 

distribution of 79 

types of 88 

Arrows, five types of 110 

Atkinson's camp, location of 99 

Attendants at feasts, duties of 329 

Axes, copper, types of 88 

Aztalan, description of 88-90 

Bandoliers, described 109 

Baptism , as practiced by Peyote cult 389, 395 

Bear clan— 

customs Of 227-228, 148-153 

dance for benefit of 386 

feast of 321 

functions of 200, 226 

importance of 226 

insignia of 226 

known as Soldier clan 218 

lodge of 226,229 

origin myths of 225 

personal names 236-237 

relations of, with Wolf clan 227 

songs of 235 

symbol of 203 

war-bundle feast of 547-550 

Bear feast , origin myth of 301-302 

Bear hunt, description of 1 11-112 

Begging ceremony 387 

Behne, K. A., specimen purchased from 30 

Bible, use of, in Peyote religion 394 

Page 

Big Fox's village, location of 51 

Big Hawk's village, location of 51 

Bingham mounds. See Rufus Bingham 
mounds; Ira Bingham mounds. 

Bird clans, feast of 318-321 

Birds, use of, in making medicines 262 

Births, customs concerning 126 

Black Earth Medicine feast, mention of. . . 318 
Black Hawk— 

characterization of 441 

offering to 429,463 

Black Hawk's camp, location of 99 

Black Hawk's Island, camp site 99 

Black Water-spout, cured of consumption. 392 

Black Wolf's village, location of 51 

Bladder, the hero, offerings to 441 

Blessing — 

act of. in medicine dance 365 

passing of 366 

special, for warfare 157, 160, 168 

Blindness, belief concerning 263 

Blowsnake, Jasper— 

acknowledgment to 48 

remarks by 447 

Boas, Franz— 

acknowledgment to 48 

papers by 27, 28 

work of 19-20, 21 

Bogaras, Waldemar, author of Chukchee 

grammar 20 

Bone, artifacts of, from mounds 102 

Bow, of simple type 110 

Bracelets 109 

Brown, C. E — 

acknowledgment to 48 

quoted on copper implements 87-88 

quoted on garden beds 103 

quoted on intaglio mounds 81 

Buckskins — 

ceremony of throwing out , to spirits. 431, 513, 544 

marking of 443 

offering of, to spirits 429-130, 465 

preparation of, for War-bundle feast 428, 442, 530 
Buffalo clan— 

functions of 200, 243 

funeral customs 154-155 

origin myth 243-245 

personal names 246 

songs 245 

Buffalo clan feast, participation in 206 

Buffalo hunt, description of 112 

Buffalo societies, number of 317-318 

Buffalo Spouts — 

myth of 437 

society of those blessed by 344-347 

Buffalo tail, feast to 387 

551 

552 

IKDEX 

Burial mounds — Page. 

in group at Rice Lake 92 

in upper Baraboo Valley 91 

See Conical mounds. 
Burials — 

customs connected with 140-155 

earth, clans employing 187 

Goldthorpe 99 

in conical mounds 84 

in Nacoochee mound 2-3 

in stone chambers 103 

of the Thunderbird clan 211 

scaffold, clans employing 187 

two methods of 140 

"Buried City of the Panhandle'' visited 

by Dr. J. Walter Fewkes 6 

Bushnell, D. I., Jr., work of . . . '. 22 

Buzzard Decorah's village, location of 51 

Calendar of the Winnebago 124-125 

Canfield, W. H. — 

intaglio mounds discovered by 90 

plat by, of Man mound 102 

Cannibalism— 

envoys eaten 54 

indications of 218, 219 

Canoes 123 

Captives, dance at death of 384 

Carcajou mounds, location of 99 

Cardinal points, offerings to 429 

Carley, Sam, acknowledgment to 48 

CastanEda, Miss Isabel R., Mexican tales 

collected by 21 

Ceremonial organization, influence of clan 

on 204 

Ceremonies— 

Arapaho Peyote 415-419 

Begging 387 

four types of 317 

of Medicine dance 362-374 

of Night feast 329-343 

of return of war party 158 

of Soldier's dance 386 

of stepping over grave 151 

of throwing out buckskins 431, 513, 544 

of wake 141-144 

Chaco Canyon, archeological work in 4 

Chapman, Robert H., specimens collected 

by 30 

Cherokee, sacred formulas of, collected 

by Mr. James Mooney 7-9 

Chief— 

a peacemaker 209,210 

duties of 319, 320 

functions of 209-210 

lodge of, a refuge 209 

relation of, to his people 319 

selected from Thunderbird clan 320 

Chief feast — 

food served at 319 

object of 319 

property of four Bird clans 318, 319 

symbolism of 321 

time of 318, 321 

Children — 

decapitation of, in war 161 

instruction of ISO 

treatment of 17s 

Page. 

Chisels, copper, types of 88 

Choukeka's village, location of 51 

Chumashan stock, studied by Mr. John P. 

Harrington. . .- 16 

Circular mounds, map showing distribution 

of 77 

See Conical mounds. 
Clan animals — 

as guardian spirits 195-196 

as property mark 203 

attitude toward 195-196 

relationship to 195-198 

Clan consciousness 435 

Clan feasts 318-321 

nature of 317 

Clan songs — 

of Warner clan 219, 220 

use of 204 

Clans— 

conception of tie between members of 198 

immaterial possessions of 203 

influence of, on ceremonial organization . 204 

list of. 190-191 

marks of identification 203 

names of, discussed 182 

organization of 190-192 

political functions of 199-201 

preceded by village groups 185 

property marks of 79. 203 

reciprocal relationships of 201 

seating of, in council lodge 163 

songs of 204 

specific possessions of 202-203 

unit of organization in War-bundle feast. 436 
See Bear clan, Bird clans, Buffalo clan, 
Deer clan, Eagle clan, Elk clan, Fish 
clan, Hawk clan, Pigeon clan, Snake 
clan, Soldier clan, Thunderbird clan, 
Warrior clan, Water-spirit clan, Wolf 
clan. 

Clark, Miss May* S., work of 31 

Clay, Jesse — 

a Peyote leader 419 

account by, of Peyote ceremony 415-419 

innovations of 422 

Cliff dwellers, supposed builders of Sun 

Temple 6 

Clothing, men's, described 106 

Cokeboka, blessed during fast 387 

Composite mounds, interpretation of 84 

Conch shell cache, location of 99 

Conical mounds— 

as burial places 84 

distribution of 78, 91 

joined to linear 92 

made by Sioux 76 

number of 83 

of Lake Koshkonong 100 

See Burial mounds. 

Contest, fast-eating 485 

Copper, use of. by Winnebago 85-86 

See Implements, copper. 
Corn— 

feast of 384 

varieties of 117 

Corpse, preparation of, for burial 146,149 

See Burials. 

INDEX 

553 

Page. 

COSMOLOGICAL IDEAS, types Of 163 

Council lodge— 

order of entering 163 

seating arrangements in 164-165 

Councils, held for all important undertak- 
ings 163 

Coukttng, medicine used in 263 

Creation lodge, meaning of 481 

Crooks, in possession of Bear clan 202, 203 

Cup-and-ball game 122 

Curtin, Jeremiah, Seneca material collected 

by 11,27 

Customs — 

adoption 128, 139 

berry time 116 

birth 126 

burial 1 40-155 

"counting coup" 158 

general social 126-139 

marriage 138-139 

of Bear clan 227-22S, 148-153 

of Buffalo clan 154-155 

of W olf clan 238 

puberty 135-138 

war 158-161 

See Facial decoration, Fasting, Feasts. 
Dances— 

Buffalo, origin of 347 

Captive's death 384-385 

Farewell 385 

for benefit of Bear clan >. 386 

Grizzly Bear 347-349 

hok'ixe're, after war party 318,379-383 

kikre waci 387 

Medicine 359-374 

of the Buffalo feast 346 

of the Herok' a society 343 

of the Night Spirit society 204,338 

Soldier's 22S, 386-387 

Tcebokonaok 387 

Victory 379-383 

Day— 

characterization of 441 

offering to, in War-bundle feast 429, 461 

Dayton village, location of 51 

Death, concept of 313-314 

Decora, position of wife of 193 

Decora family, origin of 65,67-69 

Deer— 

division of, at War-bundle feast 430 

killed for War-bundle feast 442 

Deer clan — 

customs of 246 

dog names of 246 

origin myth of 247-249 

personal names of 249 

song of 249 

Deities — 

attitude toward 279 

list of 285 

offerings to 311 

See Spirits. 
Densmoke, Miss Frances — 

paper by 28 

work of 21-22 

186823°— 22 36 

Descent— Page. 

conception of, from animals 197 

reckoning of 185, 192-193 

Dhegiha, twofold organization of 181 

Dice Game, women's 122 

Disease— 

concept of 313 

cured by Peyote 419 

See Sickness. 
Disease-giver — 

associated with success in war 433 

characterization of 436, 440 

conception of 168,287 

defied by man 309-310 

most sacred of spirits 532 

offering to, in War-bundle feast 429, 

430,449.457,467,505 

refusal of blessing from 302 

Divisions of Winnebago 181,185 

functions of 183, 187 

Dixon, Roland B., quoted on Ohio mounds. 76 

Dog names in the clan 201,211,229 

Dog ritual, terminal 432 

Dogs— 

eaten at feast 329 

sacrifice of 428,438,451,527 

Dorset, J. O.— 

list of clans by 191 

list of names by 221 

monograph by 181 

Doty Island, Winnebago village on 51, 80. 87 

Downs, Miss Mildred, work of 19,20 

Draves mounds, location of 99 

Drum, description of 384 

Dugouts 123 

Dumb-bell mounds 93,100 

Eagle — 

characterization of 441 

offering to, in War-bundle feast 429, 436, 451 

Eagle Chief, offering to, in War-bundlefeast. 429 

461,536 

Eagle clan, of little importance 220 

Earrings, modern 109 

Earth— 

characterization of 440 

conception of , as a deity 286 

offering to, at War-bundle feast 430, 

449,459,469,501,536 
Earthmaker— 

a peace deity 434 

attempt to secure blessing of 291 

characterization of 438-439 

conception of 285 

myth concerning 168 

offering to, in War-bundle feast 429, 

430, 447, 455, 467, 503, 535 

world ruled by 316 

Earth mounds 76-103 

Earthworks at Aztalan 88-90 

Eating contest, at War-bundle feast 430 

Effigy mounds — 

as property marks 79, 203 

at Fond du Lac 98 

at Lake Koshkonong 101 

at Pishtaka 94 

bear type 90, 91 , 9» 

554 

INDEX 

Effigy mounds— Continued . Page. 

bird type 95, 99, 101 

distribution of 78-79 

explanations of 79 

goose, where found : 99 

made by Winnebago 76 

mammal : 96, 101 

number of 83 

panther or water-spirit type 90, 99 

possible purpose of 98 

representations of elan animals 79, 80, 98 

significance of distribution 49 

turtle and allied forms ; . ; . . 96, 101 

types found 93, 98 

unknown animal 96 

water-spirit type, where found. 99 

Wingra group 94 

Elk clan— 

customs of 249 

functions of 201, 249 

origin, myth of 250 

personal names of 250 

Evil, concept of 311-312 

Facial decoration — 

asclanmark 204 

of Bear clan 228 

of Elk clan .• . 249 

of Medicine dance 362 

of the dead 144, 146 

of Thunderbird clan 211 

of Warrior clan 219 

Farewell dance... 385 

Farewell songs 385 

Fast-eating contest 485 

Fasting — 

a test of religious attitude 277 

blessings obtained by 166-167 

experience in ;. 275 

for war powers 157,160 

instruction for. ....-.....: 169,171 

personal accounts of 293-309 

Feasts— 

afraid-to-eat-greens 384 

at adoption 139 

at wake 141,142,145 

in honor of chief 319-320 

invitations to. .. ..'. :.. 329 

naming -. 128 

of Bear clan 321 

of Buffalo society 344-347 

of Medicine dance 362 

of Night-blessed children 329-343 

of those blessed by Herok'a : 343 

■ of Thunderbird clan : 427-547 

of War-bundle ceremony 430, 4S1-483 

to buffalo tall 387 

to Earthmaker ■..-.-...,. 126 

Feathers, used as war insignia ........... 161-162 

Fewkes, J. Walter— * 

paper by ..!....: 27 

work of ■.......*... 4-7 

"Fire— 

a possession of the Thunderbird clan.. - . 210 
regarded as a spirit 166 

Fireplaces, arrangement of, when on the 
warpath 189 

Page. 

Fibe ritual of the Medicine dance 366 

Fish clan, personal names of 250 

Fishing 114 

Fletcher and La Flesche, reference to 

monograph by 181 

Flute, played by host at feast 430 

Fond du Lac, effigy mounds at 98 

Food — 

at Bear feast 321 

kinds of, served at feast 319 

offering of, to spirits 319 

preparation of 116-118 

preservation of 118 

Football game 121 

Fort Atkinson, intaglio mound at 91 

Foster, Dr., list of names by 221 

Four, the sacred number 436 

Fowke, Gerard, collection made by. 30 

Fox Indians — 

expedition against 54 

relations of, with Winnebago 58-59 

researches among, by Dr. Truman Mieh- 

elson 16-17 

Frachtenberg, Leo J., work of 17-19,20 

Freire-Marreco, Barbara, paper by 28 

French, first contact of, with Winne- 
bago 65,67-69 

"Friendship" relation of clans 187,201 

Fulton mounds, location of 99 

Fun Hunter's Point mound 99 

Gambling — 

wagers of horses .. 384 

See Dice game. Moccasin game. 

Games 120-123 

cup-and-ball 122 

dice, women's 122 

football 121 

kicking 121 

lacrosse 120-121,190 

moccasin 121-122 

played at wake 145, 153 

tree 123 

Gann, Thomas, paper by 27 

Garden beds of Wisconsin, described 103 

General Atkinson mounds— 

form of 100 

location of 99 

number of 100 

Gentes, discussion of names-of 182 

See Clans. 

Ghosts, society of those blessed by 317 

Gifts, at wake 145,153 

Gill, De Lancey, work of 28 

Gilmore, Melvin E., paper by 27 

Gods. See Deities, Spirits. 

GOLDTHORPE BURIALS, location of 99 

Grave posts, markings on 144, 155, 162 

Grayson, G. W., Cherokee speech obtained 
from 10-11 

Great Bad Spirit, a creation of Earthmaker . 439 

Great Black Hawk— 

characterization of......: - 440 

offeringsto 429,449,465,505,535 

Great Spirit, identified as Earthmaker.... 438 

INDEX 

555 

Green Bat— Page. 

home of Winnebago : 77 

settlement on 80 

Greeting, ceremonial. 432 

Grizzly-Rear dance, a religious society. . . 204 

Grizzi.y-Beab Society 317, 347 

Guardian spirit — 

conception of 290 

offerings to 430 

Guiana Indians, paper on 27 

Gurley, J. G., work of 27 

Habitat of Winnebago 52,76-78 

Habitations of Winnebago 104-106 

Haeberlin, Hermann K., work of. .-. ... 19,20,21 

Haight's Creek mounds, location of 99 

Hairdressing 109 

Hanga — 

a division of the Omaha : 181 

a division of the Osage 181 

Hare, the hero — 

identification of, with Christ. .....:. 376 

offerings to 441, 542 

world ruled by 316 

Harrington, John P.— 

paper by 27, 28 

work of 16 

Harrison, John, conversion of 392 

Hawikuh, plans for excavation of 4 

Hawk clan— 

functions of. 200 

identical with Warrior clan 192, 218 

Headdress — 

buffalo, society of those wearing 318 

described 109 

Hensley, Albert, a Peyote leader i 419 

account by, of Peyote 397-400 

conversion of 394 

innovations of 421 

Hf.rok'a — 

characterization of 441 

feast of those blessed by 343 

Herucka, a social dance 384 

Herucka songs, always victory songs 384 

Hewitt, J.N.B.— 

paper by 27 

quoted on the Iroquois 281-282 

work of 1 1-14 

Heye, George G., archeological work of 1 

Hoard mounds — 

location of '. 99 

number of 100 

Hodge, F. W., work of 1-4 

Hodjanaga, fasting experienceof 347 

Hok'ixe're dance described 379-383 

Holmes, W.H.— 

paper by 28 

work of 21 

Hospitality, instruction in 170 

Hough, Walter, work of 22-24 

Hrdlicka, Ales, paper by ; 27 

Humphrey, W. A., work of.. ...'. 28 

Hunt, George, data collected by 20 

Hunting 109-114 

Hunting customs . 1 13-1 14 

Ictacunda, a division of the Omaha 181 

Ictunga, a division of the Kansa 181 

Ideals, social, connected with religion 277-278 

Page. 
Illinois Indians, defeat of Winnebago by. .. 54-55 

Immortality, belief in 169 

Implements— 

copper 79, 85, 87, 88, 102 

stone 87,102 

wooden 118-119 

Initiation, into Medicine dance 367, 374-378 

Insignia of war 161-162 

Instruction, system of — 

to children 180 

to daughter 177-180 

to son 166-177 

Intaglio mounds — 

discovered by Lapham... 90 

located near earthworks 90 

possible meaning of : 81 

where found 79 

Invitation sticks — 

making of : 329 

order of sending 550 

presentation of 329 

Iowa tribe , legendary origin of 50 

Ira Bingham mounds and village site 99 

Iron Walker's village, location of. . 51 

Iroquois League, memoir on, by Mr. J. N. 

B.Hewitt ;.; 11 

Jenks, A. E., quoted on rice gathering 116, 117 

John Son mounds, location of 99 

Joking relationship 174 

Jones, W., quoted on the Fox Indians 281-282 

Judd, Neil M.— 

collection gathered by 30 

work of 24-26 

Kalafuya material, revised by Dr. Leo J. 

Frachtenberg. 17 

Kansa, divisions of „ 181 

Karraymaunee's village, location of 51 

Kettles— ..."-• 

offerings of, to the spirits 482-483, 532 

soul descending chain of 550 

Kewaskum's camp, location of. 99 

Kjckapoo, territory occupied by 77 

Kicking game .- ... 121 

Klamath dictionary, by Gatschet 27 

Knives, copper, types of . . : 88 

Koshkonong Creek mounds and village 

SITE 99 

Kroeber, A. L — 

notebooks from 26 

work of : ;..,. 26 

KUMLIEN MOUNDS — 

location of 99 

number of 100 

Kwaktutl Indians, manuscript on, by Dr. 
Franz Boas — .... 20 

Lacrosse— 

ceremonial 190 

game of. 1 20-1 21 

La Flesche, Francis— 

specimens collected by. 30 

work of :...... ...:... 14-16 

Lake Koshkonong — 

areheologic map of 99 

mounds of. . .-. 97, 98, 100-102 

Lake Mendota, effigy mounds at..... ^ 98 

Lake Waubesa, effigy mounds at 98 

556 

INDEX 

Page. 

Lake Wingra, effigy mounds at 98 

Lamere, Oliver, acknowledgment to 48 

Lamere and Radin, paper by, on Winne- 
bago funeral 148 

Lapham, I. A.— 

Man mound described by 102 

work of, on mounds 76 

La Valle Man mound — 

outline of 97 

plat of, by Canfield 102 

Leary, Miss Ella, work of 29 

Legends, migration, of the Winnebago. ... 50-52 

Leggings, pattern of 106 

Lenape or Delawares, paper on physical 

anthropology of 27 

Le Sellier mounds — 

location of 99 

number of 100 

Llnear mounds — 

as defensive works 82-83 

as lodge bases 83,84 

as snake effigies 83,84 

at Madison 93 

at Pishtaka 94 

classes of 81-82 

explanation of 79 

in Wingra group 94 

interpretation of 82 

made by Sioux 76 

number of 83 

of Iowa County 93 

of Lake Koshkonong 101 

purpose of 92-98 

where found 79 

Little Decorahs' village, location of 51 

Little Prlest, grizzly bear dance given for 

benefit of 348 

Little Priest's village, location of 51 

Little-Red-Bird, account of Ufe of 396-397 

Lodges — 

arrangement of, for War-bundle feast 530 

bark 1M 

ceremonial 105 

ceremonial circuit of 432 

constructed by women 106 

council 163 

creation 481 

gable 104,105 

menstrual 136 

of Bear clan, diagram of 229 

of Bear clan, position of 229 

of chief, a refuge , 320 

orientation of 443 

purification of 445,532 

reed matting 104 

sweat, form of 105 

Loge Bay mounds and garden beds 99 

Lookout, Mrs. Fred, specimens presented 

by 30 

Lookout mounds, location of 99 

Man Eater's village, location of 99 

Man mounds— 

described 102-103 

interpretation of 81 

outlines of 95,97 

Mandan and Bjdatsa Indians, work among, 
of Miss Frances Densmore 21-22 

Page. 

Magic, sympathetic 254 

Manito, discussed by W. Jones 282 

Manitowoc County, effigy mounds in 98 

Manuscripts, added to collection in Bureau 

of Ethnology 26 

Marriage — 

customs connected with 138-139 

instruction of women for 177-178 

regulated by twofold division 183 

Mascoutin, territory occupied by 77 

Maya hieroglyphs, paper on 27 

Medicine dance — 

a religious society 204 

admission to 360 

duties of bands of. 360-362 

five bands of 359 

paper on, by Radin 318 

Medicines— 

classification of 254 

formulas for 265-267 

stench-earth, uses of 259 

use of 171-173,263 

Menominee, territory occupied by 77 

Mesa Verde National Park, work in 4-6 

Mescal. See Peyote. 

Messmer garden beds, location of. 99 

Ml\mi, territory occupied by 77 

Miami-French dictionary, copy of 26 

Michelson, Truman, work of 16-17 

Midjistega , stories told of 254, 255-258 

Migrations — 

Siouan 49-50 

Winnebago 49-52 

Milwaukee Public Museum, acknowledg- 
ment to 48 

Missouri tribe, legendary origin of 50 

Moccasin game 121-122 

Moccasins, patterns of 107, 108 

Moieties 185-190 

Moon — 

characterization of 440 

female deity 286 

offering to, in War-bundle feast 429, 

430, 449, 459, 467, 503, 535 

Mooney, James, work of 7 

Morgan, Lewis H., list of clans given by 191 

Mobley, Sylvanus G., paper by 27 

Morning Star— 

characterization of 440 

offering to, at War-bundle feast. . . . 430, 469. 536 

spirit associated with war 286-287 

Morris, Earl, paper by 27 

Mound Pkatrie, West Group 91 

Mounds— 

age of 79,84-85 

builders of 76 

distribution of 77, 78 

types of 79 

works on subject of 76 

See Altpeter mounds, Bingham mounds, 
Burial mounds, Circular mounds, Com- 
posite mounds, Conical mounds, Dumb- 
bell mounds, Effigy mounds, Intaglio 
mounds, Kumlien mounds, Le Sellier 
mounds, Linear mounds, Man mounds, 
Noe Springs mounds, Oral mounds, 
Tadpole type, Turtle mounds. 

INDEX 

557 

Page. 

Mourning, period of 146, 150, 153 

Munroe, Miss Helen, work of 28 

Murie, James R., work of 26 

Museum of American Indian, cooperation 

with, by Bureau of American Ethnology.. 1 
Music, Teton Sioux, bulletin on, by Miss 

Frances Densmore 22 

Musical instruments 123 

Mutilation, sign of mourning 146 

Myths— 

of Buffalo spirits 437 

used by Peyote members 424-425 

See Origin myths. 

Nacoochee, origin of name 1-2 

Nacoochee mound — 

collections from 30 

excavation of 1-3 

Names— 

of animals 115 

of gentes, discussion of 182 

of months 124-125 

of newborn child 127 

of trees 115 

of tribes and peoples 75 

of vegetables and fruits 115 

used after adoption 128 

See Names, personal. 
Names, personal— 

discussion of 193-195 

of Bear clan 236-237 

of Bird clan 221-225 

of Elk clan 250 

of first four children 251-253 

of Fish clan 250 

of Snake clan 250 

of Water-spirit clan 242-243 

of Wolf clan 240-241 

Naming feast 128 

Necklaces 109 

Nevtlle, A. C.t on habitat of the Winne- 
bago SO 

Newman, Charles B., work of 29 

Nichols, Mrs. Frances S., work of 27,29,31 

Night-blessed children, society of 329-343 

Night songs, singing of 533 

Night-Spirit Dance, a religious society 204 

Night Spirits — 

associated with success in war 433-434 

ceremony in honor of 501 

characterization of 440 

episode connected with 431 

feast to 519 

offering to 429, 430, 449, 455, 501 

rite of those crazed by 519 

society of those blessed by 317 

Noe Springs mounds— 

described 100-101 

location of 99 

number of 100 

Norman, Arthur L., collection presented by 30 

North mounds, location of 99 

North Wind — 

characterization of 441 

offerings to 429,463,503 

Oak-tree House, excavated and repaired . . 6,7 

Offerings to deities 311 

Ogden mounds, location of 99 

Page. 

Ojibway war feasts, nature of 434 

Old Gray-headed Decorah's village, 

location of 51 

Old Lincoln, stories concerning 254,255-259 

Omaha, names of divisions of 181 

One-eyed Decorah's village, location of. . 51 
Orenda, discussed by Mr. J. N. B. Hewitt.. 282 
Organization, twofold, discussion of., . . 181-190 
Origin myths— 

of Bear clan 225, 229-235 

of Bear feast 301-302 

of Buffalo clan 243-245 

of Medicine dance. 350-359 

of Thunderbird clan 212-218 

of Warrior clan 219-220 

of Water-spirit clan 242 

Osage tribe— 

divisions of 181 

paper on, by Francis La Fle-'che 14-15 

Oto tribe , legendary origin of 51 

Oval mounds, distribution of 78 

Paint medicine— 

made of Water-spirit bones 473 

use of 475 

Painted House, excavation and repair of . . . 7 
Painting, facial. See Facial decoration. 
Paragonah, mound at, excavated by Mr. 

Judd 24-25 

Pearody Museum, acknowledgment to 48 

Peet, Stephen D., theory of, regarding 

linear mounds 83 

Pesheu's village, location of 51 

Peyote— 

curative power of 423 

effect of 389-392 

experiences with 400-414 

See Peyote cult. 
Peyote cult— 

Arapaho ceremony 415-419 

connected with teachings of Shawnee 

prophet 69, 73, 74 

development of 419-422 

dissemination of 422-423 

essential change made by 295 

general description of 3S8-389 

reference to belief of 376 

Pigeon clan, of little importance 220 

Pigeon Hawk— 

characterization of 441 

offering to 429, 503 

Pigeon hunt, described 113 

Pipe— 

ceremonial, ritual of 469-471 

ceremonial use of 142, 145, 148, 149, 158, 429 

See Pipes of peace. 

Pipes, found in Nacoochee mound 3 

Pipes of peace, custodianship of 183-184 

Pit dwellings, at Luna, N. Mex 22-23 

Poast, Miss Florence M., work of 31 

Ponca, divisions of 181 

Population 53, 54, 184 

Porcupine, associated with North Wind 503 

Potawatomi, territory occupied by 77 

Pottery— 

for cooking 119 

from mounds 102 

from Nacoochee mound 3 

558 

INDEX 

Prater— Page. 

for success in war 156, 159 

general, to spirits 469 

object of.. 311 

to avert illness 320 

Prophets— 

a development of contact with whites 69 

notes concerning 74 

See Shawnee Prophet. 

Puberty customs 135-13S 

Public crier, duties of .-. 210 

Publications of Bureau of American 

Ethnology, report on 27-2S 

Pueblo Indians, bibliography of, by F. W. 

Hodge 4 

Quapaws, legendary origin of. 50 

Quarries, in Winnebago territory 86 

Qutleute tribe, work among, of Dr. Leo J. 

Frachtenberg 18 

Radin, "Max, acknowledgment to 4S 

Radin, Paul, manuscript by, on Huave 21 

Rattles— 

of deer hoofs 343 

of gourds 340, 343 

Rave, John— 

a Peyote leader 3S9, 41S 

account by, of Peyote cult 389-394 

acknowledgment to 48 

conflict of, with Hensley 421-422 

conversion of 394 

Red-Horn, offerings to 441 

Reincarnation, belief in 314-316,426 

Relationship — 

joking 133-134 

terms of 128-131 

Religion, of the Winnebago 277-316 

Religious experiences 291-309 

Rice, gathering of 116 

Rituals— 

basic, of War-bundle feast 430, 

471-501,505-529 

of the Medicine dance 365-370 

Shooting 370, 372 

See Ceremonies, Smoking, Ritual. 

Robbins, Wilfred W., paper by 28 

Rock River mol^nds and village site 99 

Rockwall, Texas, sandstone formation at. . 7 

Roth, Walter E., paper by 27 

Rufus Bingham mounds— 

location of 99 

number of 100 

Rush Lake village, location of. 51 

Salish dialects, preparation of paper on 19 

Sarcel's village, location of 51 

Sargent, Homer E., acknowledgment to... 19,20 

Sarrochau's village, location of 51 

Sauk and Fox, territory occupied by 77 

Sauk County, effigy mounds in 98 

Scalps, used in Victory dance 158, 379-383 

Schelski, Miss Lana V., work of 28 

Secret societies, qualification for member- 
ship in 317 

Seneca Indians, paper on 27 

Sequoya statue, suggestions for, by Mr. 

James Mooney 10 

Shaman, patients cured by 270-275 

See Shamanism. 

Page. 

Shamanism, practices of 254-276 

Shawnee Prophet— 

admonitions of 420, 421 

Peyote cult connected with teachings 

of 69, 73,74 

teachings of 69-73 

Shell, sacred, rites of 372-373 

Shirt, buckskin, pattern of 106 

Shooting ritual, of the medicine dance 370, 372 

Sickness — 

averted by feast 319-320 

belief concerning 171 

See Disease. 

Siouan tribes, migrations of 49-50 

Sioux, mounds made by 76 

SrusLAW language, work on, by Dr. Leo J. 
Frachtenberg 18 

Skarlem mounds, location of 99 

Skinner, Alanson— 

quoted on Menominee .- 86 

quoted on men's clothing 106 

quoted on tanning 119 

Smoker's village, location of 51 

Smoking ritual — 

of Medicine dance 366 

of War-bundle feast * 469 

See Pipes, Tobacco. 

Snake clan, personal names of 250' 

Snakes, use of , in medicine 262 

Snowshoes 123 

Societies— 

basis of 432 

Buffalo, feast of 344-347 

Herok'a, feast of 343 

See Secret societies. 

Soldier clan— 

different from Warrior clan 386 

See Bear clan. 

Soldier dance, of Bear clan 228, 386-387 

Songs— 

associated with clans 240 

Farewell 385 

Herucka 384 

night 533 

of Bear clan 321, 548, 549 

of Buffalo clan 245 

of Buffalo feast 345 

of Gizzly Bear dance 346 

of Medicine dance 365,370 

of Soldier dance • 387 

of Thunderbird clan" 211 

of War-bundle feast -444-445 

of Warrior clan 219, 220 

ofWolfclan 240 

Soul — 

concept of 316 

defending kettle chain 5.50 

South Wind— 

characterization of 440 

Offering to 429, 430, 449, 463, 467, .505 

Spear heads, types of 88 

Speeches — 

at funeral 149-151 

at wake 141-144 

at War-bundle feast 471-481, 487-501 

INDEX 

559 

Speeches— Continued. Page. | 

by member of Thunderbird elan 320-321 

of acceptance 3*54 

of admonition * 364 

of Medicine dance 363 

of presentation 364 

of welcome 364 

to deceased at funeral 147, 148 

to dog, before sacrifice 428 

types of, at War-bundle feast 432 

Spinden, H.J. See Will and Spinden. 
Spirits — 

brought into relation with man 310^311 

characterization of 436-438 

concept and nature of 147, 283-2S8 

corporeality of 284 

indefinite number of 284 

of the cardinal points 168 

offerings to 319, 429, 43s 

power and localization of 288-289 

prayer to 469 

relation of, toman 289 

Spotted Arm's village^ location of 51 

Springer, E. L., work of 2s 

Squeaking- Wings, conversion of 392 

Stevenson, Matilda C, paper by 27 

Stout, A. B.— 

quoted on Lake Koshkonong mounds... 100 

quoted on linear mounds 81-82 

theory of, regarding linear mounds.-. 84 

work of, on Wisconsin archeology 76 

Sun— 

associated with success in war 433 

characterization of • 440 

conception of , as a deity 2S6 

offering to, in War-bundle feast 429, 

430, 449, 457, 467, 505, 535 

Sun Temple, description of 5-6 

Supernatural power, concept of 281-283 

Sw anton, John E., work of :... 10-11 

Sweat bath, in initiation ceremony 371 

Sweat lodge, formof 105 

SWEAT LODGE RITUAL — 

of Medicine dance 368 

of War-bundle feast 428,429,447 

Sweeney, Albert E., work of 28 

Taboo, mother-in-law and father-in-law 135 

Tadpole type of mounds 100 

Tanning, description of 119-120 

Tay-e-he-dah mounds and vtllage site ... 99 

Taylor House mounds, location of 99 

Tcuu— 

a division of the Osage 181 

a division of the Ponca 181 

and Ictacunda, identical terms 181 

Tctwere, twofold organization of 181 

Tebungki rutn, visited by Dr. J. Walter 

Fewkes 7 

Teit, James, work of 19 

Teton Sioux music, work on, by Miss 

Frances Densmore 22 

Tewa Indlans, paper on ethnogeography of. 27 

Thiebeau Point village site 99 

Thomas, Cyrus, work of, on mounds 76 

Thunderbird — 

associated with success in war 433 

ceremony in honor of 447 

Thunderbird— Continued. Page. 

characterization of 439 

conception of 287 

offering to, in War-bundle feast 429 

430,447,455,467,503 

Thunderbird clan 207-211 

chief selected from 209 

feast of 318-321 

functions of 200 

funeral ceremonies of 146-148 

importance of 207 

known as Chief clan 218 

origin myths of 207-208 

symbol of 203 

Time, divisions of 124-125 

Tipi— 

of simple construction 105 

used on the hunt 106 

Toads, use of, for poison medicine 263 

Tobacco — 

account of origin of 66, 437 

ceremonial use of 141, 145, 151,330, 348, 429 

offering of, to spirits 170, 320, 453, 501-505 

placing of, in War-bundle feast 451 

Totem— 

descent from 197-198 

See Clan animal, Totemism. 

Totemism 185-187 

Tozzer, Alfred M., work of 21 

Traditions of the Winnebago 55-58,59-69 

Transformation, power of, of animals 197 

Transformer heroes 439 

Transportation 123 

Traps for game _. no 

Travel and transportation 123 

Traveler, the ruler of the world 316 

Tree game 123 

Trickster — 

offerings to 441 

stories of 424-125 

world ruled by 316 

Tsimshian mythology, paper on , 27 

Turtle, the hero — 

offerings to 441, 542 

world ruled by : 316 

Turtle Creek, effigy mounds on 98 

Turtle mounds 81 

not connected with Winnebago clans 98 

Twins, the heroes, offerings to 441 

Twofold grouping, discussion of 1S5-187 

Uangeru, ceremony of 387 

Utensils, cooking and eating 118-119 

Vessels, wooden 118-119 

Victory dance 379-383 

Village groups — 

as social unit 184-185 

present names of 185 

Villages— 

divisions of 188 

location of 51, 77 

organization of 188 

plansof 188,189 

Wagigo'. See War-bundle feast. 

Wajaje, a division of the Ponca 181 

Wake— 

description of 140-146 

origin, myth of 154-155 

560 

INDEX 

Page. 

Walking-Priest, conversion of 392 

War bundles— 

contents of 442, 547 

meaning of contents of 550 

ownership of 210, 433 

possession of 202 

transmission of 193 

War-bundle feast— 

a ceremony of thanksgiving 427 

clan basis of 205 

description of 441,445 

development of 432-436 

divisions of 428 

nature of 317 

of Thunderbird clan 427-547 

origin of 433 

War clubs — 

of Thunderbird clan 210 

possession of 202 

symbol of Thunderbird clan 203 

Warfare — 

blessings for 157, 160, 168 

customs of 158-161 

exploits of 519 

honors in 167 

reasons for 157 

responsibility in 156, 157, 168, 209 

War feasts or the Ojibway, nature of. . . 434 

War parties — 

influenced by leligion 27S 

manner of conducting 15S-161 

return of 15s 

Warrior clan— 

effigies representing 214 

functions of 200, 219 

identical with Hawk clan 192 

lodge of 218-219 

not Soldier clan 386 

origin myth of 219-220,319 

privilege of 15s 

rights of 279 

songs of 219, 220 

Washington Decorah's village, location 
of 51 

Water— 

characterization of 441 

offering to, in War-bundle feast 429, 430, 503 

Water-spirit — Page. 

conception of 2S7-2S8 

offering to 469 

Water-spirit clan — 

customs of 242 

functions of 201,241 

origin myth of 242 

personal names of 242-243 

Watertown village, location of 51 

West, G. A.; description by, of Aztalan 88-90 

Whirling Thunder's village, location of.. 51 

White Crow's village, location of 51,99 

White Ox's village, location of 51,99 

Will, G. F., and Splmden, H. J., quoted on 

Siouan migrations 49-50 

Wlngra mounds, effigies 99 

Winnebago — 

attack on, by Illinois 54-55 

first meeting of, with whites 53 

name for themselves 53 

separation of, from Siouan kindred 50,52 

territory occupied by 52, 76-78, 80 

tribes once composing 52 

Winnebago County, effigy mounds in 98 

Winter feast. See War-bundle feas* 

Wissler, Clark, work of 26 

Wolf clan— 

customs of 238 

functions of 201,238 

origin myth of 238-240 

personal names of 240 

position of 191 

songs of 240 

Women, instruction concerning treatment 

of 170, 175 

WONA-jl'RE UANKCIK— 

characterization of 441 

offering to 429, 436, 463 

identified with thunderbirds 463 

Worpenberg, Rev. George, manuscripts 

loaned by 27 

Yata, a division of the Kansa 181 

Yellow Thunder's ' 'forty,' ' location of. . . 51 

Yellow Thunder's village, location of 51 

ZuSi Indians, paper on etnnobotany of. 27
