Eulis!
========================================
Paschal Beverly Randolph (1874) — Randolph's doctrine of sexual magic — the turning-point text of American occultism. Source: https://archive.org/details/eulishistoryoflo0000pasc. Public domain.

AW ‘S | ie
Ae e uy)

Pa sc h al Bever ly R andolph M.D.

Parse
EWES I
. wert 9 ae? are ' to cab ey. oa »

; LOTHE. HISTORY) OF LOVE. .:.

«te ot eet table moe i sey vee 1 “ ae
Veer a, MA, SUPA. Matas ial (S fe AD. Oph Mies cr eite Wre

ITS WONDROUS. MAGIC, CHEMISTRY,‘ RULES} LAWS,

MODES, oops AND RATIONALE

ts.

THIRD REVELATION OF SOUL’ AND SEX.

Fa { "TERS et ¢ be . . wa AtSO,' REPLY, 10 U 03 se + tout * ‘ it
be er Ant tk os en “ et ~ 5 Py ‘yf ae
‘ > . « Wea 1 Oh!

me SOLUTION: VOR" HE DARWIN PROBLEM

asin pw tf: a St er %
aPestie > ee : Ge: Pe La a , : a eee as : pie he es
at ne aa
ha Dees adhvik gar ENTIRELY. NEW Bt om

raetod ey eters
ae -

PASCHAL BEVERLY, RANDOLPH, M D.

7 Ge.

“SECOND EDITION.

iy Ae eee time ony cr

th A ha ok TOLEDO , OHIO’: get
RANDOLFH ica Ye co.

on ee wrt

Republished 1961
BY
HEALTH RESEARCH, MOKELUMNE HILL, CALIFORNIA

Unity Library & Archives
1901 NW Blue Parkway
Unity Village, MO 64065

eae et res

i, et Pap aed at Eig tie | Set SS a es ea f : vest ogoregd Ps '

fe. Fite: UC eet WHY. JS MAN AMMORTALTS 1a

Sta nev ey PES es B% -2ttt intend hh HAS

1) BAePEas 85 oom heh ad wit Se "se wth wk! i er
b BAF ot fee ie

WAI

ry toe :
445 ~
ba hee Soe
a We Jt
F rey
Stas Se as
, are
* 1c ae
t
iste o)
‘ ytd
ran
= Se ‘
ei

Ca
JOHN F. KAPP; L. H. McLAUGHLIN;

ALBERT BURPEE; JOHN TEMPLE;
GUSTAV SCHRADER; LEWIS AND JONATHAN KIRK;

B. A. PERCEVAL, JR; ABU~ID-DURR

Fe, Fas

DJUNDUB OF THE ANSAJREH; OTHMAN ASWAD EL
KINDEE; HER GRACIOUS PURITY,

= FAIROOZ SHIRWAN AFRIDOON,

4, \ A
and to every man, woman or child besides, whoever, as the named great, be-
cause GOOD Souls, ever did me a kindness or spoke me fairly in the dark hour,

end through them to all human kind, for the firm and steady rebuilding of a right
and true system of social ethics, based upon the purity of woman, the noble-
ness of man and the honor of the race, one wholly free from all abnormalism;
devoted to the everlasting discomfiture of all who aim to pervert the higher,
better, purer, nobler instinets of our common human nature; to the speedy down-
fall of all false systems and shams, whether in Physics, Morals, Politics or
Faith; and to the corresponding advance, thrift and triumph of the Good, the
Beautiful and the True, and to the assured success of the Superlative Order
of Men and Women who constitute the E. W. A. S., this present Edition of

MY WORK OR RELIGIO-MEDICI
IS GRATEFULLY DEDICATED BY THE

RE-FOUNDER AND HIERARCH OF EULIS,

TOLEDO, OHIO, 1874. ,fortids a P. B. RANDOLPH.

Entered, according to Act of Congress, in the year 1874, by
P. B. RANDOLFH,

In the Office of the Librarian of Congress ct Washington.

PART I.

* "READER, mine, I am about to, treat herein the grandest. subject that ever engaged
or. challenged human thought. In doing so it is likely ‘that I may repeat some things
elsewhere, by myself or others, said”) ef dre s ‘but even if 80, Tr have ‘struck POR, many
things | now, given to, the race for, the: ‘first tine.

4 ' A me fey
a Fadel rie lan ea tk . fap

A vast amount of "Physiological" chaff ‘is éurrent in’ ‘the ‘jorla ‘originating in:
the pulpy brains of certain people with "M.D." after their names ; folks who eke out
‘a good living by -Fubting men canoe of Which ‘they know stele nto bodies’ whereof’
they know less. fey bes sheaod “

A still. lerger. amount. of "aig lebedied ‘Wphilosorby" 4s afloat, generated for
the most part in the angular heads of people, whom , A, “chroni¢. prostatitis or ovarian |
fever has so deranged that they really ‘imagine themselves philosophers, --being only
shams, --who propose to revolutionize the world, especially the domain of Marriage-
land, by inculcating pudacious sophistries, better calculated to kill than to cure
the victims, on either side. One thing:is certain: Light is needed; and this work
{originally intended ito be galled by a.different, ‘title, but which intent was abandon-

ed, owing to the vastiy’ larger scope of the completed and. rewritten volume) is meant
to: os goad exactly what ‘is. peers and .
"Ea gy OF

a What a trenshadub deal: of: wartersthe, horror, crime, wxebthednses ei ages:
pair there is in this*beautiful , but badly misused world of. ours!--most of which
might be prevented in the first instance,-or remedied in the-second, were there less
consummate and confoundéd -ignorance. afloat up and.down the earth's strong tides of

~human life, with its strangely, wildly surging ebbs and flows, heats, and snows, in
reference to matters pertaining to, and concerning the, relations, wise and otherwise.
subsisting between the separate genders of the: human race; especially that portion
of it located in the so-called’ civilized" lands, and particularly in ‘the eG
Atlantic portion of. ‘the Soe eae eee Aaa eee *

Now, whoever duiprinies that the ‘ignorance alluded to is confined solely to the:
masses,-~sometimes’ spellable as "them asses," according to Carlyle,--or that the +
sum total of non-knowledge mustibe looked for among the unread, unlettered and un- =;
washed crowds that ‘throng ‘the great highways of the world, and whose struggles for.
life, and clamors for bread, occupy most of their time and attention, --will find him
‘or herself most wofully mistaken; for ’a far less dense and conglobate ignorance upon
matters of vital import*to every -human being exists among the people--the rude crowd
who jostle each other everywhere; and which is the plastic material that the brain-
ful few mould into voters, hero-worshippers, or send to fight their battles against
each other; armed witHploughs or rifles, pitchforks or bayonets, ‘cannons or spades
--than is t6”be found in’ circlés* making very lofty pretensions, not only to knowledge
‘ut to morality 8180,,‘from its! ‘geologic base to its astronomic summit.

“For: gross ad culpable LCE SaRet eapecialty- upon al} the vital points that
élustér’ rourid ‘the’ one word "sex," you must look, not amidst the untaught hasts, the
democratic ‘underiayer of society, but right squarely among the so-called "learned,"
professional, much-boasted, highly-cultured upper-strata, especially in those centres
of population whence eee ene fe by: ee are gp big g over — ee BADD E

ms

Were not this a painful fact, stich cldsses of. "reformers" as now march over the world
were in utter impossibility.

They are an unhealthy set, the fungi of a flase civilization, regnant for a time,
but certain to disappear with the advent of common sense among the people as @
general thing. re

.Sex is a thing of soul; most people think it: but a mere matter of earthly pee
-and’ physical structure. True, there are: some unsexed souls; some: no’ sex at all, an
others still claiming one gender, and manifesting ite exact opposite. But its laws,
offices, utilities, and its deeper and diviner meanings are sealed books to all. but

about two in a million; yet they ought to have the attentive study of every rational
human being, every aspirant to immortality beyond the grave. te

In some sense this matter:has been, and is, the subject of thought, but only in
its outer phases, or its groaser aspects; seldom in its higher ones, and never, until
now, in any of its loftier and mystical bearings. Books by ship-loads on one or two,
and always either its physiological or sentimental sides of the subject, have been
put forth by ambitious M.D.'s, or motoriety-seeking empirics; books which mainly
satisfied a prurient taste or morbid curiosity, gave but little light, and generally
left their readers practically as ignorant as before, 8 7 ee se

Other books, in other millions, vile, rhuigaleseraar ds ete peel Paes

3 in on every page, have been, still are being, scattere
Aine rowntcesateteabionas bisaaabe tower of the world's youth has been blighted,
and the morality of earth sapped dry. Oh, that literature, foul, disgusting beyond
belief! terrible as the cobra's fang, keener than the dagger's edge, monstrous as 4
drunkard's dream, more devastating than the spotted plague! until between the two
millstones--quackery, pseudo=professional literature on the one hand, and the execr-
able, libidinous abominations on the othef-—-one-half of the manhood and womanhood of
our nation has been ground into the very dust. No punishment can be too severe for
the disseminators of the latter; no .contempt. too great for the authors of the former.

Not. one of the very many respectable people, including fifty French, .a.score of
English, about as many Americans, and a few German authors, who have stained reamm
of good white paper, and spilled gallons of ink in writing anent the sublime subject
of sex, have taken the trouble to go one inch below the surface; but have been content
to. copy each other, and repeat the same old worn-out story,--else concealed a few
gocd ideas in barrels of words. They have ‘taken man and woman, shown us their
anatomy; explained something of physical gender; said something about function and
periods, and there left us, because they knew nothing further themselves...

___ For example, there are ten thousand treatises extant concerning what the doctors
call, the sin of one Onan, meaning, thereby, a certain nameless. solitary vice. But. .
the man alluded to in the Bible never was guilty of that sin at all. Albeit his
crime was equally bad, equally disastrous and hateful. In these days it is politely
called "conjugal fraud," and in plain terms consists of the nuptive union to the
orgasmal climax, which was allowed to occur only in a manner never intended by the
Infinite God. "He wasted his seed upon the ground, that he might not beget children
_ to inherit his brother's name." (See Bible.) Millions do the accursed thing to-
day that they may be childless, as indeed they deserve. to be; for he who does that

‘heinous wrong commits a quadruple crime, against his wife, himself, nature and God 3
_ to say nothing about the right of all souls to be incarnated, by the act of man,

Now the doctors truly say that the sin

solitary, and aiktblacki :
both bad; but fail to give us even half the Y 31 OnG hen Rese QO REEL ARR

reasons why.

~2—

|
|

|
|
|

i

Pr. ~— ie F * D
PE Cn ia eURS ao OPN Wes

Here let me make a point for the doctors, and all others besides. In the normal
proper nuptive union, a term I invent expressive of the most sacred and intimate fact
of marriage , ‘there ig-a certain: amount of the male vital‘life:in fluid form (semen) _
voided. exactly ‘the same by'actiial.weight or volume may be wasted in a lascivious
dé ert, --a8 spontarieous ejéction of superfluous.vital force inthe same form; 3d, the
sathe* hay: ‘be 1ést by thé abomindble ‘conjugal :frauid; ‘or by the. heinous. sin against onés
self--soditary vice. But note the tremendous differénce in the results that follow
‘in each of the four cases lst. In the reciprocal and normal one, only joy results,
positive’ and’ prohourieed ; "ahd never is follow®d. by any particularly sombre feelings;
pepesnene. ‘ensues, ‘and the: man’ Ss ‘soul Ap at perfect peace’ ‘with his Physical form.

PiIn: the sétond case, ‘resulting nh ppdrmtine stietinive,: a relief follows, bats
Rete a weakness after it, requiring phosphoric food to recuperate’ from. There! a:
a little shame-facedness too, but not much. In the third case the whoée being is
shocked, and the iian féels’ himséif’.to. be contemptible and’mean; and so:hé is. ‘In
the fourth’ case, 4 bitter, poignant remorsé haunts the self-sinner day‘and night, ~:
for sémetimes’ weeks" together ;* and the..results of his dreadful sin stands‘ by him like
an accusing: goblin from” the: ‘deeps. Now’why?.°Remember,’ we suppose, what is:true,
that wéights and Treasures are the same in all four instances; that the exact amount ~
of fluid life ‘is lost; yet'one lathches its: victim into ee ee ‘ge of remorse- ©
ful, ‘nental er end ‘the others: do. noe a, Eid

? a we foes i

‘the piystotogists have erenbuerel thiet. diiestsons: ‘Twill. ind! Gasd- Pi eS
formal one, waste is occasioned by the magnetic action of the electric lymph,.the © ©
absorption of which by the masculine compensates the vital loss on one side; and the
absorption by thé féminine: parieteé of the exudation from Cowper's gland compensates
on: the other side; and’ tere’ I give the doctors a-new discovery—-t6 them, not: me-~
which is,.that just’within' the vulva are two little glands, .calléd glands of Duvernay,
from their’ French discoverer. That. much. the doctors were aware of. But they did -
not know that: those glands’ are the seat‘of all vaginal and uterine Tife} nor that ~
trouble. sedis’ them up; Love only Keeps them’ opens: -When sealed there is no exudation
of whagnetic lymph, which. must'bé present, else'marital rites meah death to her sooner
or later.: That's what ails. half the wives of Christendom. Now. another: new ‘thing ""
for the doctors. Just forward a the prostate gland is what is*known asiCowper's -
grand; but they know not its:use. I have, just explained it. It is to''collect, ‘store
up; and-discharge the:magnetic’ fluid of the body in*liquid form: .It ptecédes Both:
the semen and prostatic lymph; and upon céntact: with the lochia-——Duvernay-—-they fuse}
the result of ‘whichis the fulfilment of God's purpose in bi-sexing man: I hope this
thought will be carefully studied: and- understood. Now in the case of the solitaire
there’ is but one force at work, ‘Thé result is from imaginative and mechanical ~~
forcés; not from electric, magnetic or spiritual ones; hence hé‘draws upon his very.
soulvitself; violates and disobeys::the fundamental: law of LOVE, and ‘that-is why he’
pays the dreadful penalty. Love resides in the soul; the basic: law of that soul-he.’
deliberately FRRSLLUEAS wherefore his pou, as well as his body, must and gop
5 aia ¢ Sere och 3 MegEoces ; ,

encsel _~Strea a . *; tT)
Bee’, i : we oe
nett AN, EPISONE .--A SINGULAR EXPERIENCE. ae .

om "One day as: : toe walking. up and down. the town ee agi Sinqhootnite, I net.
a man,. whose woe-begone countenance hetokened great griefs tugging at his heart-: ~ -
strings; and that soul-pangs were racking the very foundations of his being, I. MET .
THE MAN, No, .I did not say that--it was my alter ego encountering myself!-<and 1. *
learned his sad.story, Y, pondering deeply. upon. which, I pursued .my way to where: sleep:
and I were wont to woo each other; and there, throwing myself upon a lounge, drank
some fresh, sweet milk, brought me by a chunky little germanesque neighbor of mine,

ses

of say nine years, pretty, as all children are, and loquacious and aceniah as all

-children should be. - -»

Ag. I lay there I thought of the man,--a lone, and lonely nee oe she whomale
loved and trusted, many years younger than himself, was afar 5 ; fgg ber hs think
people, where amid the rounds.of gayety, in fashion's bpp cance a that thoughtless
of him,--the delving toiler; and far too many follow the example ©

She was wondrously fair, and heedless as beautiful; with fashions to air and
conquests to achieve; neni sweet little lady! . And_as:1 pictured her beauty and eS
bloom, I could but justify her vanity, and on that basis condone her ge aang
less coldness in never deigning to write to him, who was suffering daily deaths by
reason of her cold silence--and --contempt. spony sae rown

“And so I lay upon the lounge and quaffed the sweet, delicious milk,:and 1...
thought about the Woman and the Man; and, as I did so, I fell into a sort of magnetic
trance and clairvoyance--a habit familiar, seeing that the power to do wo was born
with me; and by its means I have a thousand times been able to see afar off, and to
glimpse things denied to mortal vision. On this occasion I fell into it from hav-
ing incidentally cast my eyes upon a third class triune, or magic mirror, such as 7
for years I have used expressly to induce the state of psycho-vision. It hung over
the table against the wall, where I had placed it after polishing it, preparatory to
sending it to a lady in Brooklyn, N. Y., to whom impecuniosity had compelled me to
sell it. pe M ad
It was a fine one, though not the best or most costly; yet was capable of
mighty things when in the humor; for, be it known, they like watches, razors, locto-
motives and women, are very set in their ways, and will not work unless well treated,
“and coaxed besides; then they operate well enough, as did the one alluded to. Its ©
power ranged to the aerial spaces above, and to the vaulted deeps below; and on its
surface the dead could, and often did, cast cognizatbh pictures of themselves and -
surroundings then and THEN again. On the morning alluded to, as I breathed upon:it, |
‘a thick, heavy, black, portentous cloud obscured its face, followed by a silvery sheen |
indicative of coming trouble, hatred, folly, error, succeeded by happiness and |
contentment} but I actually. forgot all that, nor recalled it till after the approach-
ing drama was ended,-~a drama strange and weird, fraught with pain unutterable, in-
expressible, almost unendurable; yet whose results or fruitage was as ripe pome-
granates are to the thirsty pilgrims, or the cool, bubbling waters to the parched
lips of the Arab on the burning sands of Sahara, Little did I dream that the strange
experience was full of true light to others than myself; yet such it is, and was,}3
and with grateful heart I thank the Most.:Compassionate God, the Ineffable Lord, that

I was found worthy to become the vessel forthe conveyance of so grand a lesson to
my brethren of the wide and wasteful world. i ; .

’ In an instant, as my eyes fell on it--that wondrous glyphae--the outer world
Sight receded, and the sou}-sight came in play. Child, table, chairs, lounge--all
were gone and unheeded, and on the face of that marvellous glass I beheld a scene
which at the time, and for six weeks afterwards, I religiously believed was at that
very instant being enacted far away, in, to the man in Toledo, dreadful reality.

The sequel--far along in this book--will show whether it was the shadow of an enacted
fact,.or a figment of fancy woven of mist, and conjured up out of the cellars of
suspicion. I loved the man, at all events; hence what I saw froze my blood with
horror, and made my nerves fairly tingle with excitement and pain. I saw the lady,
whom the MAN loved so well, and for whom he yearned, and mourned, and wept’ bitter

_ tears, revealed before the eyes of my soul. She was just emerging from a dormitory,

busi

‘evidently’, - “Jurigsing Mhyesa ppednaniose } ‘béth: ‘a ‘dishonest “and aisiondred sitfe: ‘eid: woman.

"She Was \gaily ‘chatting With hér “paranctir’, -a gd Telit ‘youtig féTlow;“who “stood rear ’ her,

and ‘on “vihom she’ gazed ‘with unut'terable- terdertiess ; ‘Wolupty -and’ loves: I “shuddered’’

With ‘mortal: anguish; for I loved my frietid, and ‘that woman bore ‘his nemes ‘Until that

hour! °I'.and “he ‘had ‘believed, her tobe pui'e “as an’ -atigel “from heaven; ‘arid ‘now did ‘T,’
Se en for bim, suffer,—-ay) the agorifes Of. the nether ‘hell. Presently’

-iyow Will see whether the vision ‘was ‘@&- lesson ora fact; and whether JedTousy Kgs ha
Bids cece’ Inst based ori “aotid be sjpeinie sometimes ay, air. sheds

‘ qe ” ay Bi on 4 7% “ . .
ivaram fatal aeviones hue waving yiso dose Ona ,acisit~ivoy to oniedserb site:
|

{ . ae “ .

Soesetths aay: at ‘net the man; hHé’ da’ tba. me: ithe aha! haa asked hin vd sella
mene tone x "Is it possible Sr a ‘husband to discover if his wife. goes astray during
anvabsen¢e, Without ‘thé ordinary evidence’ that’ establishes’ such facts? Can he find
“it: out Without: seeing or hearing of it?". I ‘doritt!-know what ariswer ‘was’ given; Ss but |
I do ‘know that’ the Wortls sunk ‘deep, ‘Like thot ‘iron, -into ‘his'soul; and he pondered’
on them till ‘he ‘gréw morbid,: and every ‘day’, in his loneliness,’ he ‘imegiried ‘all ' Sorts
of es which: now bodied: thenidelves in = oa en before ay scaghehala ee

Losd-¥ Subsequently she had wnfttten to say that the yoertiings were drsaty ‘eat ‘atid was
dying from the mere fact ‘of prolonged ‘absence; yet’ withiit ‘a week wrote that’ she"Was
‘supremely. happy, and -longed for nothing.’ ‘This was ‘ground for’ suspecting her: to. ‘be
a truant wife, and my friend a deteived husband; and ali the more in that ‘she was”
thrown ‘in ‘contact wrth. some’ very “popular agitators of the a 5a fidelity. et
ama what ‘T regarded ‘as’ the wrong ‘Sid. ute) os ) rabbit
srodt «dias I gazed'-on the: scene uport the mystic adress? s tice) op saw ithe aay: and het
lover as‘ before’, and beheld his birning kissés ‘fall thick and fast upon ‘her rich,”
ripe, and alluring ‘lips; saw her languish ‘ini voluptuous death in his strong rms,’ é
and watched her. returr::his fiery salutation. I-heard his’ love expréssions, ard her
‘warh replies;. but: the most cruel thing of all Was their combined: ‘dish’ ‘and "joke" °
they were playing on my friend, by making his slender purse bear’ thdé’cost of their
guiltful amours. He loved that woman as eer. love the Siebsd we Sede a through
“pierre aap ‘to their loriging heerts.* LUCE ZS 7 aa

ais eg

» Ag

ei 3 re from the: ckackly imaged’ to my friend's sree end “told him ‘the’ waite
siren fired his soul with veriveance’ dire; and, putting’ a’ lodded revolver im his pock-
et, bade him ‘swiftly traverse ‘the 1,100 miles intervening betwixt ‘bim ‘ahd his’ deep
revenge: This done,’ I went to a grocery'hard ‘by, to drink beer to “drown out’ the °
agony felt for the manj--the detestation of thé women. - “Man proposes," but’ God: up-
sets: his, calculations; or Déstiny. does. So now, om my’ way to Granbrins ‘Halle, TF -
: bincountered my little friend, the German child, ‘at play. She ‘strangély interested’
me; and J left the Halle with but one glass, where I had intended to drink at‘ least
a dozen. The child saved me! Returning, I caught her up, seated her jauntily on
my head ,: ‘and nd marched back to the’ ‘lonely house on the hill, where I threw myself on
» the lounge,,.. kissed’ thisslittle child goodby, and; as she yan: off ‘trippingly home’, at
her: little brother's call, who was: just ‘then having dreadful ‘trouble with his rabbits,
Iucaught sight of a’ scintillent: flash. of white! light issuant’ from her ‘head, like the
;radient gieam of a peerless diamond, when all-the lemps are briphtily burnings) ‘and a
“ glowing, streaming iridescence flowed fron’ her ‘lips. I had drawn her’ to me,and’ —
‘pressed her rosy, childish’ face to mine, inhaling the baliny aroma of her - ‘pure, fresh,
joyous soul; and a. ‘portion ofthe roseate’ fire: of her sweet lips had clung to mine.
IT saw:it, like a ‘thin cloud of opalescence,' waving ‘gently to and’ fro,” as i moved “ny
head, or "breathed. et rr to’ ethdy the meaning of a kiss. ‘ a |
There are. but few among. the niatiy ihe know the: Hoehshye of- a kieas tor that thé
soul, from its seat in the brain, is in telegraphic unity with ‘the’ Lips j“-affees :
tional, friendly, filial, parental, general, in the upper one; sensuous, magnetic,
passional, in the lower; nor that, when loving lips meet lips that love, there is a

wil

iy i large measures
magnetic discharge of soul-flame, and each party Eve a caaite eat akan
of magnetic life and fluid love at the instant of imp toed aee catch, comarautienia«
are greater or less according to the love-fulness or empvan pie pict me gree
While pondering on this, and marvelling at the beautiful sae : | fete 8. Fo Mores
above, I chanced to recur in thought in the mirror scene, = oe eect
man, the wierdly strange phantorama already described ; agannt fenithc heS antraned
of. the outer being came.over me, and in another instant I lay tot mes "acatanerly.
transfigured, and for the time being was as are the newly dead. gio Peal sestad 4
did my soul's vision penetrate the spaces and localize itself in that fa weet
where still stood the recalcitrant wife and her new-found lover, and the woman i
on this side, the man upon that, hands on shoulders, and mutual Se a
with glowing red passion-fires from lip to lip; and as I thought ere r 7 deer
husband, I exclaimed, "Guilty! by the Lord of Hosts!" But as 1 said so praaery aited
a great change came over my feelings and my soul. I put myself in ny — . i e
husband's place, by means of the three principles, Posism, Volantia and Decre asi
hereinafter alluded: to, and then, far more.clearly comprehending the situation, me |
would not, as before, have slain her, spattered his heart's blood upon the walis “i :
floor, or have sent a leaden bullet crashing through his brains, for the whole world,
or millions more just like it; for whereas before I had observed effects, I now be- |
held their producing, hidden causes. A great cloud rolled away from before my gaze |
into the vague, dim AEth, and my soul, representing my friend, the.man said unto my |
soul, She did not love you; if she had, this scene could never have occurred. it |
is but one of millions, this very day, transpiring in thousands of places the wide
world over, and is the legitmate result of the wrong relations subsisting between
the mated, or rather, mismated marriagees of the earth! Love only can keep souls,
and the bodies they wear, true and faithful! Where it:does not mutually exist there
can be, and is, no guaranty of fidelity. . Wherefore, it is incumbent on you to face
the facts; call to your aid the rare philosophy of COMMON SENSE; struggle manfully
against this dreadful, appalling, yet perfectly natural catastrophe; accept the
situation; hush the throbbings.-of your tortured heart; ask God for strength to bear |
the heavy burden, and be wise. [ bi |

Still representing my friend, my soul said on: Perchance what you see is, after |
all, but a fevered dream, begotten of your depressed nervous state, morbidity of |
fancy and loneliness, combined with the suspicions kindled by the strange questions |
asked upon the eve of her departure many days ago, and greatly strengthened by un-

' wisely worded letters sent back by her; and made still stronger by her six weeks!

utter silence--in itself good cause for, suspicion, for every husband has a right to
know his wife's whereabouts, her surroundings and the company’ she keeps; and if she
does not keep him thus informed, he has fair, and just grounds to infer that her . |

actions are such as ought to be hidden from his gaze, and also from that of humanity
at large. . is §

may really have no more solid foundation, than vague and empty air. let justice rule
on both sides; for she was unwise, while your illness tortures things out of shape,
till mere phasmas assume forms as solid in appearance as the very truth itself; and
it may. be your anxiety and sympathy may have conjured up a lie; and this apparently
recusant woman really be as unsoiled as the down upon the ring-dove's breast, or the
spotless plume of an angel's wing! 0h, how my heart, for my friend, clung to that:
hope3’ My soul to my soul went on: They twain, the far-off couple, are young; are’
adapted to each other; you(my. friend, of course) are too old for her. You had no _
right to subject her to the terrible temptation of being away from your side for

months together, in the midst of gay people, where everything appealed to and im-
pressed her young heart and fancy, and made a wider gulf between herself and you.

I know your heart is bleeding, that hot tears are streaming down your face, that-

wie

|
If innocent, she is still guilty of a great folly; while your trouble and pain |
|
|

¢ re . +
‘ty eh | . on ; a
Ee roy aa vf Mee, ahs ithe) i Ana ‘ nike yin 5} : 4
Aim 4 : -) 2 5 E

‘your poor soul is sweltering amidst the tortious ‘flames of the fiercest hell.of

jealousy; yor why? for one who loves you not!--who is heattless to you, heartful to

»,. per paramour! .Be. a man!. and. remember that she, too, has rights which you are bound

te. respect;--not the. right. to dishonor, but to be free from you by laws human and

divine, -and. to.m make: such choice and legal: disposal of herself as her’ youth detiands,
and. her. will, -soul,. and conscience prompt.

oy ae If she hae fallen, ,it is, the. fault of Her wiletiend, not altdgethor her own. ° She

admires him, but probably loves this distant Adonis, end’, tempted: beyond her
_ strength, she may have forgotten and neglected duty, at the urgence and call of love;

ae

the facts. of which .came rushing. through the air to you and took form and shape
through . the .vision of the seer. eral. ae | ane Sp | a

. Be magnanimous! and if ye “twain: part, ‘as ye Likely wild, and fovena'r. do not
fail to recognize the end as the legitmate result of the stupid folly of allowing
her to dwell so far away in the'midst of tempting ‘scenes and people. Guilty, or
not guilty, forget and ‘forgive. Voluntarily free this simpleton from the chafing.
thrall that binds her to one whose purse, not person, is all on earth she cares for.
let her go at the call of affection, and, forsaking you and duty, yield her to the
better and nobler law of love.. Free her, and they twain will likely wed. Hold her,

and she.is. that ata h thing—a wedded harlot.

My soul nad, still a6 my friend, not myself, duces thus far in its just reason-
ings when methought I heard’ a sweét and silvery voice say, "Behold!" And as the ©
delicious tones rung glorified changes through my spirit I felt that I had grown a
century within an hour; and notwithstanding that'I actually believed my friend's’
wife to be guilty, and might probably so believe until my dying day, yet I‘had °
charity for her, as,well as sorrow and sympathy for him. I put myself in his tacks
and for. the first time in my life not only realized the luxury of férgiveness, but

.. felt. capable of even dying a lingering death that the woman so loved might be happy

with him.ske so loved; and greater affection than that can no man show, in that’ he
would lay 4 down his life for a frietid. I talked with the husband; persuaded him: to
lay by the pistols and revenge. He did so, and ceased to be jealous from that'hour,
caring. but little whether. the eg ee was of actual fact or a delirious Area.

“Benoa I looked, still with that ultra soulsight which leaps all boundaries
cleaves all ‘space, flashes over. rivers, mountains, seas, penetrates all- bodies, and
brings us in actual contact with the. whole domain of mystery; and again I saw the
little German child, through the walls of both houses, as clearly as if they were of
mnt i crystal or purest, glass instead of boards and mortar. And- I beheld an in-

Ly ‘pure, pearly-hued effulgence playing about her little head, undulating in

% Pate Owy movement, all about her infantile shoulders, streaming from her hair, glowing

round her waist, and in loving wavelets “all around. I watched this with ‘dstonish-
‘ment. It was but the prelude to the celestial cantata that followed. JI saw her
mother gently chide her,’ and soon she went to bed, “and slept the ‘sweet, delicious
slumber of absolute innocence; and as she thus 1ay I saw the gossamic cloud of :
pearly aura expand till it filled the room, penetrated the ceiling, the roof, meen

..dng and lengthening out clear into the starlight, and forming to a point: shot out

and. afar off into the very depths of ‘space till I could follow it no more .' Then I
turned me again to the sleeping child; and what was my astonishment at beholding
lite: ‘lly hundreds of bright shining and divinely beautiful forns, as of young

chil rel and the virgin dead, come trodping down the lane of pearly light, and,
entering the house, gather and’ dance and play at the bedside of the aireteine’) little
one. -Good is ¢atching! — That child had enabled me to dtave off'a fit of jealous
rage in sympathy with my friend; and now I was, through her’ again, “about to learn
one of the most important lessons of my life. I had kissed that child, and had be-
come suffused with a portion of her own’ sweet aromal aura or atmosphere, and was,

ten

was herself, and was played

b
therefore, en raprort with the same bright beings a8 She ve ef-Love was the dominant

upon by the same celestial, pure and divine influences,
or major element. how pla! ae

A portion of these purer, better, and hyperrhysical auras displaced. and occupied
the get See prosser cites oaetabame and turbid. 1 found myself cleanet wyan
than before, and comprehended Christ's "Suffer Jittle. children to come unto nee |
Not until that holy hour of rapt contemplation had I realized the ee Bi iia
of a single touch of loving lips; that if it be purely given and. receive > " ee
participants are blessed, not only directly, but through oblique ways, a myriad 10id.

Love ave deed lies at the foot of all, and its mystic and ideal meaning out-—

weighs the material and ular ones by as many degrees as the pure soul of that.
bab fairl outweighs the ore body of the low-lived debauchee. ee ee! be hugged,
embraced,‘ kissed into heavenly states, or into their exact opposites! Hence, aside
from common relational lip-contacts, they are worse than unwise who touch lips un—
less love be the underlying prompter; for if the kissed or kisser be pate just so
much of that specific evil is sure to flow from the magnetic poles of either pair
of lips to the soul of him or her upon whose mouth they are laid.

I have said the moist lips are batteries charged with our very inmost. good or
evil. It is utterly impossible for a negress having borne a child to a white father
ever to give birth to one perfectly negro,--even though its father, like herself,
has never a drop of other blood in him,--for the reason that the blood of the white
man, through his child, has mingled in the mother's veins. More than that, her
blood under the microscope will not show the same crystalline forms after the birth
of the mixed child as it did before. Just so is it impossible for us not to be

made better or worse by lip touching.

Harlots invariably descend unless snatched from ruin by-a miracle. It is .
because of the many forms of hell struggling in their veins, combating in their
nerves; and as heaven or its opposite attends the kiss so also is it with every other

sort of human contact--even the ordinary shaking of the hands. Gloves, therefore,
have new uses.” .

I awoke from my slumber a wiser, and, I trust, a better man. I went out and

” found my soul-harried and victimized friend. I reasoned with him just as I had with

my own soul a while before. I. told him it was clear as sunlight that the absent
woman really cared not a straw for him, but only for what current funds she could

extract from him; and that, although to lost her was a bitter draught of gall, yet

he had better swallow it, for that he was only loving his own sphere wherewith he
had embalmed her, I asked what right had he to hold a woman in duress couvert or
non-couvert, whose soul was not attached by love to his; whose compliance, duty only,
not affectional. It was clear he ought to give her up at once even if the effort
snapped his heart-strings, because the marking of her child was a doubtful question.
Why should he pursue a heartless phantom? They were disunited in soul. Behold the

folly of continuance! Let her go!

III, As previously remarked herein, writers upon the general topics of love
and its offices, uses, abuses, nature, moods, and modes, have, in the main, been con-
tent with the merely superficial or external view thereof, and have, as a general .
thing, utterly ignored most, if not all, of the other and deeper significances
attached thereunto; and not one of them has even:attempted: to tell mankind any more
of the principles underlying sex, Love, and their copula passion, or desire, than

any one's personal experience suggests; but we have plenty of hard, dry, pseudo-
scientific fummery, else’a long row or medical platitudes wholly useless, because

‘

-8.

oD ne a a :
Pea ¢ Ne ool 3 oon; ie * be ‘ ad

totaly indigestible ty the average intelectual hack Who of them all has, piven

_, Us the rationale of the orgasm—-the why and wherefore, or the cause of its being a

thing’ of ‘apparently’ no: moment whatever’ ‘at certain times, and under circumstances:
_yet at another will almost’ shock the human‘ soul out:of its: earthly tenement, the |.
“ body--by its’ keen, ‘incisive, cutting, awful intensity? Which of them all has ex-
plained what every one ought to, but does not’ know to be a fact, i. e., that, as
explained in the "New Mola," and elsewhere in this book, human conjugation is or may
_be triple; that is, it may be of soul, spirit or body, alone or either, and the
“binary minglings of ‘the’ three, in verrious déprees, even to an infinity; for instance,
one’ ‘part soul, ten spirit, five hundred of mere body, and so on; but never: true or
normal except in exact ‘equations; ever!’ tens or huridreds, according as the D papihban Soa
pants are high or low. * “The philosophers never even guessed at this truth .’ ee ae:
‘Who of them had told, or can tell,’ why the’ nuptium fairly laps the very’ soul”
itself, of each: participant, too,” in the tenderest, epee ‘truly human, ‘because
strictly humen , joy at one time; yet at: another’ gived!naught ‘but cruel” painy: else is
but a nervous spasm, unsatisfactory: to one party, and injurious to both; ‘and! hie the
same People in both Anstences? _ .

Thy is it, O skews shtiropplvexetar that tie ited rite will at one time
Wholly unman one, yet at another--same ones too--will fill him with the most exquisite
‘manly, gallant Sensibility; ‘inspire Kim with the most ‘lofty virtue and high resolve;
charge him to the lips with true and royal éourage; yet at another time transmute
. him.into an errant coward and miserable poltroon? And; mirabile’dictu--same parties

stall, --bring pain, keen mental agony, shamefacedness, “and suicidal th thought ; yet at
anther, result in pride,’ joy, ‘gratefulness, generosity, and mental summer, with ©
physical springtime? Why will this mysterious duty--for such it is in God's sight,
who by its means peoples the worlds, arid stocks in the starry ‘spaces~-plunge us into
the ‘deepest "blues," and fang our souls with remorse cruel-as the s7ave, relentless
as the Hacean gulf of Milton, and the other poets; yet at another indus a state of
feeling in youl and spirit quite ‘approaching the’ supposed angelic; why?” and a myriad
gaping crowd of scalpel-drivers repeat the sound, and echo "Why?" The ‘answeis: their
science don't know, therefore cannot answer; wherefore I must ‘take up my pen’to
age to it, for ‘those who need th i. information ‘it is. my lot ‘to ge Rs

‘Since Dr. Dixon, of "The: ‘Scalpel, " printed his great and warning essay on "The
‘oston ‘Law" (of sex), and‘ the ‘anonymous author of "Satan in Society" faintly echoed
those stirring notes, nothing has been given to the world on the mighty subject
worthy of attention or record. Neither essay filled the required bill, and for that
reason I ‘print this series ‘of salvatory counsels. I may, and probably ‘ shati, ere
long, be numbered with the armies of ‘the dead; and who then will give Randolph! — lth
thoughts to the world? I don't know, ‘and therefore give at least a part of them be-
' fore I leave for good and all; consequently, I shall now convey certain brief and
concise ‘forms of certain knowledges, which, if abided by, will prolong many a life,
and add immeasurable happiness to mankind. I wish to be clearly understood, and yet
not to offend the most delicate or fastidious; for God is my judge that my sole aim
is to teach’ certain truths, whose mission is to stop the tide of crime, misery and

--‘wretchedne'ss now devastating our Sole I am forced to use similes, but eee to be

fully and seq Meee understood.

, oeagv gs “Now for the answer to the loud "yhys of dedeten three. ‘The stgese ord
 qnating happily from human fusion were because there really was -a human fusion, ‘and

- that's just it! In all the other cases theré was either too “uch body, too much

spirit, and“too little or no ‘soul at all. ‘They were violations of the love-law, and
the suffering was the perialty. It is a pity thatten thousand times the pain was
not the direct result of every violation of the organic law; and if every proposed

af on

debatichee could or would but die in the attempt, the world would soon be a great deal
better off. ! : 1p: ” ‘

Where love sits enshrined over the married man's chamber loom. And pe nsen, aiines
his conduct towards his wife therein, peace will reign, and the gale o ey r aaa
remedies vastly decrease. No pangs follow the celebration of the EALOR Se oy?
nor judicious use of the divine, but abused, faculties of Our, DELETES nless ove;
equals passion, marriage rites are never right; that’s all:

V. The grand mistake made by physiologists and other essayists, writing on the
current topic, consists in their persistent over looking of the fact theta an
woman are not the same. The male is an incarnation, so to speak, of maroc i 8
Deity; one hemisphere of the Imperial Over SOUL; one section of sees a ES e
Superlative and Infinite Mind of Minds; while the human female represents and is an
embodiment of ‘the other; for there is a male and female side to all these, and the
two genders correspond to, represent, affiliate with, derive their respective powers
from, and are attracted to, those respective sides. Thus either, alone, is an In-
completeness;. they belong to opposite side of nature, and it requires a- bridge to
span the amazing gulf that rolls between them. The magnetic materials for said
bridge exists in nearly all human beings. Its name is LOVE, Bridges are in great
demand. There's room for more. . :

VI, No true man can help loving all true women; not in the grosser sense, but
in the higher one of soul. Not such as lie a man out. of his manhood, run him in .
debt, empty his purse, and rob him of his peace, until he actually jeopardizes his
soul's salvation,--pretending to love him, but meaning not one word of it,--laughing
at him in the sleeve, and triumphing in the knowledge of how smart she was, how great
a fool was he. That's the sort of women who, from the year one, have driven hard
bargains with the masculine portion of the race, and rushed many a good man down the
hills of ruin and gloom, and.horrid, blank despair. Nor are they all dead yet.

Ihave neither time, assistance, or inclination for moralizing; but little
patience with "Scripture" quoters; none at, all with the modern "reform" tribes of
the land and age; besides which I cordially despise all women-haters on one side,
and Wesnerites (man-haters) on the other; and no words of mine can express my utter
abhorrence of the things miscalled Men, who practically regard woman as if she were
_ nothing but.a pleasure-vehicle, to be kissed, petted, and ill-treated in alternate
slices. But I feel quite as much indignant contempt for that large class of women
who are ever ready to use their beauty as a trap to catch male gudgeons; who look on
all men as fair game, to be lied to, and played on, generally to the tune of rust-
ling silks, and crisp band notes; and whose utter heartlessness belies the index of
their sex. There's quite as many heartless shes as hes in the world; only that one
soulless woman is a.egreater danger to the world than a dozen scoundrelly men; for
her sex gives her points of advantage denied to all of the opposite gender. A good,
true woman is a.diamond; a bad and heartless one worse than Milton's Satan.

Sitting near me in the eating-house where I dined yesterday, were four grave
men, deliberately traducing their mother's sex. They went into paroxysms of what
they called "Fun" anent pregnancy, menstruation, and sexive matters generally. They,
and millions like them everywhere, in every bar-room, hotel, stable, store, grocery,

consider it "smart" and manly to, even before young boys habitually blas D
and dishonor the mothers that bore’ them,’ b diese A eae ta

| irreverent, fli t and ob
concerning the sex. Poor wretches who di : r aot mais eisai eae

: Sgrace the forms they bear by. speaking of
woman as if she were nothing but a target for filthy tongues a hap Abas rl
or, at best, as destined victims to, their own abominable lubricity; mere extinguish-

_ ers of the bile-fires rioting in their own veins,--the venomous fever-passions of,
their own ‘gross natures, and far more ignoble than those of the four-footed dogs

=i Ou

‘that run our streets. It made me sick; it always did--to listen to the outrageous
tae going on everywhere about women, whenever two or more human males of the -
* "civilized" kind happen ‘to get together for an-hour. Even stately officials,
“fathers of families, do; and if not, at least often allow it in their presence, ;
which is almost as bad. So almost universal. is this foul talk, to be heard everywhere
at any time,--ribald, coarse, obscene, and altogether devilish,--that it is no wonder
wall the public’ ‘mind is debauched and totally demoralized. .

; It is a curious fact that people will talk smut; laugh heartily at coarse Ayoe
and improbable stories concerning the eternal God's method. of peopling the ,worlds,
and filling up the starry domes beyond the grave, when of all human deeds. it is the
most sacred, serious, and laughless. ‘No human being laughs then; for the weight of
worlds rests upon human shoulders...

It is a bad sign any man hangs out when he makes "fun" of what ought to

challenge his holiest emotions and most profound respect. There was a young man of
“the fun-making genus,--a fellow whose nature was inflamed nearly a year before his:
birth, and who kept it up to’ boiling-point by food and drink, and the secret books
he first read, and then:so artfully concealed, that -the servant-girls were sure to
find them,--read, get detected,--of course, by the owner,--result, destruction to
poor she,--brag by he, who of course:was petted and made much of, while his victim's
head, in time hung low, for a. bleeding heart was breaking. Well, this‘ Lothario!s
eyes used to fairly glisten when they rested upon any young female form, and the |
burden of his talk was the victories he had won over too, neembsa tng women. Brags:

It so diSeaket that he was one of a jury of che over he fiead body an poor
‘Maria lee, a child of sixteen summers, whom a rich merchant of Loudon had betrayed,
and then procured a double murder at the hands of an abortionist. Poor child! she
bled to death from a skewer. of steel. run. clean through both the uterus and its con-

»- tents. The rich merchant paid some money;---some more in charity;--»y-and-by~ joined

the church, and his sin was forgotten. The medical practitioner went to jail for
six months; was pardoned out in five- wake 3 and the babe went back to heaven in the
arms of its algughtenet mother z

t, But there she ley, poor “ebila, upon the long Be be eric of good Simon 'Seatt,
the carpenter, all pale and delicate as finest ‘Parian marble or waxwork, and io
ful! O God, how immortally beautiful!--just as Deity had fashioned her. before the
rich merchant of Loudon and his friends, the doctor and death, had finished the work
so fairly begun--finished her for the grave and heaven;:for if ever its golden
portals swing wide to admit a shining ‘soul, 2 Ror its binges will revolve like
lightning to let in a ruined woman.

Well, the autopsy went on; the aecte were. aisclosed;. and vita, the surgeon
plied his work,:and'a strong magnifying glass was. handed round among the jurymen,
none were’so eager and earnest in scrutiny:and question, as the fast young man,--
the general lover alluded to. He carefully examined lungs, brain, stomach, breasts,
heart, uterus--all; end as he laid down the glass he muttered--and I--with the womb
in my hand, and the knife between my teeth--echoed, from the floor of'my soul, his
words-~!'Murdered, by GOD! curse him,--THEM! and me, too, if ever I"+-and. there he
stopped; but not till his oath was as registered up there where vows are never broken,
and nothing is forgotten. If I could, I certainly would have every male over fifteen
witness‘ just’ ‘such @ redemptive and impressive scene; and would take every boy through
the wards of. a: hospital for syphilides. I would have every girl taught the long- -
forgotten truth that her soul is worth, at'least, quite as much as her body; some-
igen | they little dream of, so ardent is their worship at the shrine of Saint Frivole

“Had I been so instructed long years agone, I had escaped very many subsequent
-li-

mistakes, and consequent misery; but I, like most others, was ain Berar) eT
“ing thoroughly the tremendous difference between the chaste desire o pi lakers

the lurid fires of burning lust. I learned it at last; hence this, an a pera Fe
books, which I trust will serve as beacons to warn mankind off A
long after these hands have returned to primal dust, and the soul eae ee

is kneeling at the feet of the Redeeming God.

VII. From the earliest historical ages an unnatural custom has prevailed; and
its results have been fearful,--sub rosa mainly, for the victims generally grieve,
‘mourn, and die in silence. I refer:to the abominable practice of old men cart
young girls. I know that the temptations,--youth and freshness on one side; ree :
_ fluence, society, position, money, on the other,-~are great indeed; but for all that,
- dt as a something against which that same society ought to turn; and one that God

Himself frowns down; for never a marriage among them all produced other fruits than

discontent, jealousy, madness and despair.

Campbell, in that odd book "Hermippus, or the Sage's Triumph," lays it down .
that the old can regain many months or even years of life by, consorting and cohabit=
ing with the young. It is, and is not true. If it were possible for two people,
one sixty, the other sixteen, to fully and mutually: love each other, then the girl
would help the man, and the man increase the girl's: recuperative power. But, happily,
girls of sixteen can't love sixty, nohow you can fix it. I knew a man in New York
State, who literally drove his daughter, a thin, pale, waxen child of sixteen, into
a hated marriage of sixty-five or thereabouts. Two years afterwards, a child was
buried in the West, and four weeks afterwards the father bore his daughter's body
to bury it and his happiness together in one grave on the hillside.

Were a man of that age to use means to thus get a daughter of mine, say twenty-
five years ago, when I was young, I think there'd have been a third-class funeral
in that town; for I regard it as a crime even worse than some sorts of murder; and
here are my reasons why: It is safe to say, where occasionally the young girl marries |
an old man, and good results follow, that such cases are extraordinary, and alto-
gether exceptional to an almost universal rule; because the old man's motive is to
prolong his miserable existence at the expense of a fresh young life; and of course
his "lovei" is one of advantage, either money-wise or from gratitude, and therefore
not real love at all; because in the very nature of things she can but feel an utter
disgust, an awful and appalling horfor and loathing at the bare thought, much less
the sickening ordeal of fact. S Esrs: ELadre .

Happiness is out of the question, and the cases exceedingly rare where they >
produce anything but misery. Nearly every one will at once see many of the reasons
why; but there are some others not quite so self-apparent, and here they are. In
marriage and its offices there must be a reciprocal play of electric and magnetic
forces; for unless mutual, there's disaster just ahead, and sunken rocks all around,
upon which that ship of wedlock is sure, sooner or later, to run aground; and in the

wreck that follows some one is sure to be lost,--and that some one is a youn wife,
tired of an old, besotted worn-out ‘man! ‘ sit : fwier ei

The great disparity of years, magnetism, vitality and life-force between such
an ill-starred couple renders it utterly impossible for the young thing to have one.
single taste or desire in common with the old dotard she calls husband.

_ She cannot absorb, reciprocate or assimilate him, or aught pertaining to him,

magnetically, or in any other way; and she even loathes the food he dotes on, and
_ the liquids he consumes to keep his unnatural fever up. ;

The magnetic auras issuant from them are unlike, and to her repédignt, efter a

i bo

feet “ a AM ye ser, 4

time, if nat at once.. He conaumés J shears ane assimilates the totality ‘of hen;
vital life, ard at length’ she dies for sheer ‘want of ‘that whereof he robs her. But
a “still ‘stronger protest is here: it is found in the well-known fact that the old
and ‘Coarsé magnetism of the man poisons both the’ body and soul,of the young girl;
seals up ,the fountains of her youth and reponsive power; shuts the door of amative |
joy in her face; robs her of her rights as wife; suggests evil thoughts to. her mind,
and paves the way for her to yield heart and all else to whoever near her own age .

' tries:to win her, by giving her a kind of love she needs, and which is proper fom one
of her tender years.

’ Where the disparity is even twenty years it is infinitely far too great.’ Ten
years' difference is a'deal too much, ,and five the limit, save in the case of blood-
less girls and very magnetic men; in which union the female thrives on the fresh |
vitality of the man. But; even in such cases, she must be blonde, and he the oppo-
side--always;.for if the reverse ‘happens, she's a doomed woman,.and he a physical .-
imbecile, in five years' time. at the utmost. In the case of ordinary December and:
May marriages he robs her of life; she gestates horror instead of affection; for in
natural marriage souls blend and interfuse more or less perfectly after a time; and
, those who have lived unhappy lives often’find out how well they loved at heart, after
death. comes tapping at the gate, if not before. Then it is: "Who'd have thought
it? but too late!: Such antipodes‘cannot~blend, because the girl is peach-downy, .
supple, gay, lithe and lightsome, but the man lithy, that is, limy, calcareoys; and
they cannot, will not prongle in oe more iia agiaees relations than that of father and
daughter. 35 , vet? hal

Some- people have: young sarge in old: podies; in eihcl4 case “‘Hidoos are not, “80
bad; but where such soul-youth does not exist, and the parties live. in passable
harmony, st41l there's great harm done,--in fact, constructive wificide, and this is
the reason why,--a wife is apt to become a- mother quicker: by an ol¢ husband than a
young one; because the old man's blood is cooler, his passion slower in culmination;
and she is likely to conceive from sheer weariness,.and physical and mental, inability
to guard herself; besides which, she‘never:dreams of danger, or. a the female finess-
es she mould put in play agassst a VND Be Ri husband. . ao *

_ If ever it is right to prevent conception, Ls Deals it is in exceptional
cases like this before us; for his old blood, through his child, courses through her .
veins, making-her old.prematurely; loading her down with the accumulated mental,
physical and moral, magnetic and other diseases of all-his long run of years. ae
sides which, his child is born 9]d;--never knows what babyhood is, or childhood -
means. It looks, feels, is an oddity; knows no infantile days or pleasures, and is
thus, by its.own father, robbed and. cheated out of its best and most halcyon days.
But that's not the worst of it yet; for the offspring of January is sure to be near
ly as. calcareous as its father. Its bones are harder, firmer, more solid than is...
right; its: cranium is broader, flatter, thicker, and dense as those of, a’ grown man;
and if the young mother escapes forceps-delivery, ora still worse operation, she ~
may consider herself a fortunate woman. May eats pity. all. euch and , aa thousands.
of such there-are.

«How often we hear the expression, "She tapped the fountains ef his love." Well,
the thing is, possible, yet is seldom realized, for that can only be'done when both.
are maritally conjoined while influenced by a passion born of .perfect,..deep, soul-
founded love; and. then! ah, then! the cup of. human bliss is indeed full. Why ? Be-
cause a portion of each soul “becomes incorporate in the other, and the mystical |
Rignatne-— they twain shall be one” ~-is ph
But souls can he ‘tapped Ua ihone anerecity for the young wife! s eee i
drained from her, either directly as a sponge, by her old husband, or indirectly

aie

through the uterine and vaginal diseases sure to be her lot sooner or aoe ie
fluids of the twain will not, cannot blend, except in so far forth as to wise.

the poor young thing with malignant poison, by which I.da not an ne syp Le
but I do mean that worse poison resultant from chemical incompatibili oe ie ‘
affectional disgust and repulsion, which leave ulcers and corrosions in oe rain,
with death in the foreground. Gentlemen M. D.'s, here's the ones of relia:
even if the husband is not old, but: only a hellion to her, she s your patien :
straightway, and you have a fine chance for the sale of lotions, Se aa oat
supporters, and all the other vast paraphernalia born of: non-love, "in the au eee
et hame."

Birth months. Children conceived in May, June, July, August and September, and
who, therefore, are born in February, March, April, May, and June, are unquestion-
ably, better constituted and will live longer, have more character and power than
when the double events occur in other months; because nature and weather are more
propitious at the start. Conceptions occurring in the morning hours are a myriad
degrees’ better than when that event occurs at other periods.

A person's shadow on the wall in a room, by lamp~light, will reveal more of
that party's real character than’all the phrenology extant, and in its minute phases,
too; just as a peculiar smile, observation, movement, or tone of voice will some-
times tell in a second more of a person's real self, than an acquaintance of fifty
intimate years would otherwise.

Gender in the human being is a very different thing from gender in the animate
kingdoms below the grade of man. In the beasts it means propagation, mainly for
food purposes; but in man it stands for, and implies, a great deal more, as will be
seen hereinafter. .

At this point I wish to pick a flaw or two in the reasonings of the popular
physiologists and phrenologists of the day, every one of whom urge their moral pleas
mainly upon the ground that the marital-functional nuptive rite of the human being
is precisely on a par with the creative act of beasts; that is, that God intended it
in man as in animals, to be solely and only a propagative function,--that, and noth-
ing more. It is for generative ends only, and the nervous state precedent to, and
succeeding it, is but the natural spur to the God-foreseen result; therefore, say
they, the sacred nuptium is permissible only when both parents desire to add one more
unit to the great world's population. Now these philosophers either are conscious

hypocrites, teaching what they don't believe; else they think us fools, and we know
they are.

I have seen a book, of nearly a thousand mortal pages, and that. doctrine was
the whole gist and burden of its labored and lame argument: lame, for its author
shows in a hundred places that he don't believe his own logic; he continually con-
futes himself, and the completest refutation of the absurdity is to be found in the
words: IT IS NOT TRUE! Why? because man is nota beast, and is not governed by
identical laws; but comes under, and is played upon, and moved by, higher ones alto-
gether than such as rule in the kingdom of beasts, birds, reptiles, fish and insects.

In those realms, sex is an instinct, a periodical function and appetite. In
man, it is a fact of soul; a principle, and a mystical and divine power, altogether
superior to the passing furore of beasts that perish and are known no more; and it

means more in his case than it does in all other departments of the sentient world
singly or combined. ?

I here throw down the gauntlet, and state, boldly and squarely, right in the

pen fj

C—O EE a — EE
~
-3

teeth of all the so-called scientists on earth or under heaven, that the sexive.

principle, habitude, and instinct in the human is not in very many respects identical
with that of the non-human inhabitants of the globe wé-live on; on the contrary, in.
us it means, implies, and leads to immeasurably more and deeper things than the
average thinker ever dreams of or imagines. In the organic kingdoms outside of the
human, :the instinct is blindly obeyed, and selfseeking there, as everywhere else,

and not propagation at all, is the all-powerful impelling motive, if motive there be.
Bears and horses, cats and fishes, dogs and flies, and every other living thing bear-
ing gender, invariably trouble themselves not at all concerning increase of family,
or prolongation of the species, until such increase appears; by which time Nature

has brought a new instinct and passion into’play. Parallels between man and beasts
are not correct or just; for in beasts.sexive and parental instincts are separate.
affairs,--in man they coexist. In beasts the offspring and parents become disunited
at maturity; in the human, the practical relationship lasts not only to the gates

of ‘the grave, but leaps the barriers of death, and flourishes in the far-off-heaven;
and will till the universe grows old, and Time himself topples with hoary age.

We are gravely told that animals obey the impulse once a year, or season, as

‘the case may be; that man ought to go and do likewise, but he won't; nor will these

self-same philosophers,--I'm sure of that!--especially in their own especial and
particular cases; because man is a myriad grades or degrees higher and finer in ~
organization than the animals; and his a calls for more than theirs possibly
can, or does.

They obey the instinct; it is the spur to Gicahcnatiois but Sie beast, just like
man up’to a given point, riske all for the spur, and cares nothing for subsequent
consequences, but leaves them for nature to attend to; and she does it like the kind,
dear old mother that she is! In the average human, the: ‘spur is all that's cared for

.at the time; albeit consequences are foreseen, and due provisions made; for we marry

and mate,-~beasts only mate, and marriage is unknown to them. Not one human couple
in fifty millions propagate on purpose, for as a rule it is impossible; not so with
beasts; for one hour seals the origin of the progenal result; and men mark the
periods, and know to a day when to look for the new animal; but we can only guess
the time when our eyes shall gladden at the sight of the new soul God sends to cheer
and bless us.

We are all accidents: --and not a few of us unhappy ones,--I,; for instance. Te
apply rules. to man applicable to animals alone, is an insult to the human race.
Stirpiculture, or the rearing of better children, will never succeed upon agri-
ouktunnls sheck=taes 3 or barnyard principles.

True, Aature requires a rich soil to produce deh grades of fruit, ‘whether human
or erties sorts; cite in the former she requires the richest of fertilizers, and its)
name is LOVE. S7that, and she'll make your eyes glisten at the beauty of the
work she does; deprive her of it, and crab apples are the result; and a human crab
is the gnaliest and most bitter fruit in all God's garden. In the lower kingdoms
nature does her best to produce a superior grade of body. In the human world she
works wholly to produce a loftier order of soul in its triplicate divisions ,--in-
tellect, imagination, emotion; and is never satisfied until success fairly crowns
her efforts. A handsomer race, physically, I never saw than the modern Greek; nor
such a perfect race of scamps; for your Romaic rascal can discount all others on the
earth, if we except these of New York and Boston, who are lords paramount in all
sorts of. ‘villany, from the picking of a pocket to stealing a railway.

gr | guess I'll make an exper iment--only just oie, Nauays many a man; and he makes
it; the upshot being that from the instant he does so, home ceases to be such to hin,

ah

and any woman's presence and activities mera to those 9 ee
i because his imagination Nas <rendere e--other * 28 charms - ae
Sinmaaitne iuportantthansthey detus2ly are, and -yet they, are, su ficient to enable
him to ‘draw disparaging estimates “beeen solid wife end fleeting epee io ra
fire, strange blood, has inspired him with fresh passion, an he ee se
old wife, in presence of the new harlot; and so he abuses one, an ip e ig hes:
has on the other.” But you just wait a bit; we'll see how it Maks in ee ae ie 3
86 will he; and happily, too, if it be not too late. Three weeks’ experience oe ;
mistress will cure almost any man of that sort of weakness, if he have not, ml at
time, buried his wife's love in a grave ten thousand resurrectionless fathoms deep:
He did not know that the strange, new, exciting magnetism meant death bre panics,
love, desolation to his hearth-stone, isolation to his heart, and ruin to at happi-
ness;. yet it did and does,’ and eternally will, because it-is scortalerys seach ’
fiery’, and while it effectually displaces and kilis home~love, it fails to sat sfy;.
and its end is bitter ashes. : In a weak moment, many..a man, fired with sudden and
electric fire, has fallen into. passion's dreadful snare, and for a moment of delirious
joy has bartered off a whole life of happiness; for when once one Andaigses+8 stolen
fruit, which may be sweet, but is never so good as that which grows on one's own
trees, the habit becomes fixed, and "just once" lands him--or her--neck-deep in
perdition! His ‘talk--or hers--ought to be not "Just once;" but, "It's all very fine,
sir or madam--but it won't pay, ‘and--1'll see you in--well; you can guess where——
first." That's human talk! «: - : i ABs Mae SH, et

IX, As already said herein, marriage--by which term hereinafter, whenever and
wherever printed in italic letters, I mean the nuptive union of the sexes; and it
is only really ‘nuptive when love is the prompter; otherwise it is a desecration and
worse than beastly profanation--is productive of an entire series of effects and
results aside-from the perpetuatotfyor propagative one wherein man and animals are
alike, and therein only; for in them sex distinctions are, of course, merely bodily,
while in the human it involvés and embraces. the entire vast domain. of both body, soul,
and the interwoven spirit. In the’non-human races the marriase office ceases when
the germ is lodged; but in the human being its offices only begin at that point; for
its results continue, whether the rite. be propagative or no, not only through an arc
or chord of fleeting time; but they, the results, stretch away into and through the —
infinite and eternal spaces, and probably cease not, but endure forever and forever.

If there is one thing more certain, after death, than another, it is that every |
immortal man and woman of us is»bound and doomed to have.all love and lust escapades |
universally known. We are destined to meet all with whom we have been.carnally in-
timate in any degree, from that of pure’and gentle love, to the horror and violence
of inhuman rape. Every carnal association affects us, leaves its mark on us and the
other; and some there be who will be astonished that their whole career was turned
on earth in ‘consequence of such or such an act--fact; and that defeat followed them
in after life by reason of the invisible presence of some wronged victims, married
or not. Nor is ‘this all, for‘ every escapade mingles magnetisms more or less; and a
man in New York in 1875 may féel. the life going out of him day. by day, himself not
even suspecting that a dozen or more women in as many different -parts. of the earth,
or even from the spaces, are at that instant thinking. of him, yearning for him, vol- |
untarily or not, and’ are drawing out his soul. just as easily and surely as he drew |
their life through jhoneyed. lips ten, twenty-or thirty years. before; wherefore E
libertinism and cyprianism’are attended with strange penalties. .

In the truly'human being--the non-savage and non—barbaric specimens of the races
--marriage never degrades the parties either in their own or each other's eyes; but
it purifies the heart and soul, uplifts them to the Father, is really Pulchritudinem
Divitiis Conjunctam, as it’ ever should ibe, thatidis, Beauty and Divinity joined as

? He Shy
ees

-16-

“one; it roranors beécnes in’ this bien Light, instantly, the holiest and most
effective of all possible prayers, hence the most potent ‘and tremendous energy in

* the evttire material and hyper-physical universe. ~

let me tell you, reader, how and why this is so. But before I do it, just look
at Jugurtha, Attila, Nero and the Bonapartes, with scores of other scourges of God
and the human world,--called into being in an instant of time to lash the earth to
agony,—-a prayer of evil-guild, silently, but effectively uttered at the instant of
‘their descent into the matrices that thereafter gave them to the world, Is not this
‘sufficient to prove the truth of what I call a most effective prayer? Turn the page
and behold 'a Christ, St. John, Buddha; Confucius, and see the results of peaceful
prayer uttered silently too, exactly as in the other case or cases. But there are
other proofs :-- !

Xy ‘That the creative function is the highest force in us, as it is in and of
the Deity, admits of no denial; for it ought to be, if it is not, a perfectly self-
evident proposition, axiomatic in its nature, and therefore requiring no attempt

toward its demonstration; for it is palpably clear that ‘two principles are inter-
woven and reciprocally acting and reacting upon each other everywhere and in all
things in the universe whereof: we know. These principles are male and female, and
both alike are manifestations‘ or modes of the superlative and ineffable Master-
Potency, Fower, Energy, or over-lapping, subtending, underlying, crowning essence of
the universal realm, call it by whatever name you will; and it, the bisexive energy,
displayed all eround, demonstrates itself to be the Imperial Force of all that is.
To! it! all things are subsidiary, To it all things bow, bend, acknowledge the
peremptory sway: of, and without which the ALL THAT is would become a blank and star-
cess void, as terrible as eternal Night itself; more cheerless than the grave; a.
radical nibility, so utterly benumbed and benumbing that destruction itself were
pene in comparison.

God is supposed to be a dual being; so is man; ‘but Deity is dual ina double
sense; that is to say, God is positively male, and positively female; while also, as
-in man, all the madculine or electric attributes of God are pervaded by the. magnetic
feminine principle. We all know that the better side of man is the she or mother .
side;.and that from it spring all the major: elements of both his greatness and his
goodness; and we admire an intellectual giant, while we adore a loving man; because
from his love, not his intellect, arises all of goodness, inspiration, aspiration,
generosity of soul which characterizes him. We are pleased with the Platos, but we
worship the Christs. It is the softer side of soul that generates moral or any ~
other real grandeur, and makes great deeds’ ‘possible to man; for it is that alone
which ‘has, ee to transmute man the oii into man the incarnate demi-god.

All sentient and non-sentient being is more or less pervaded, according ‘to.
capacity, with what I may call the male and female aura or effluence of the great.
Supreme, the unknown and unknowable Deity; and all these incarnations of the original
Life, save only the human, are distinctively and radically either wholly male or
female, True, there are among the lower types and forms of organic life, a few
seeming exceptions, as the so-called hermaphrodites; but, in reality, such are
apparent only; for examination in the light of modern science proves all such
_ organisms to be a union of the two principles in a single body, and not a fusion, by
any means; and that the male side fecundates the other. But a human, canine, equine,
bovirie, or any other bisexed being is an utterly impossible thing, all those affirn-
_ng to the contrary notwithstanding. There are and have been malformations claimed
to a OES of dual gender, but they were really one or the other.

. Below man, while the sexes are distinct, in him, as a principle, not a physical
fact, they for the first time fuse and blend, at least on this, and probably upon

-17=

every other soul-bearing world in the Sedans pt apa init ean pee =
f sex.in soul that. es us what, we are; for were we 1 pee peaiete

en arcs upon us aka ig ap the world to.chaos in.4 year; and 2, ab’ Saenhen:
excellent in us is the capacity to love and grow; and nothing is capabiy

mane

'" "There isa curious proof of the soundness of the foregoing erie pre
gems to have escaped the notice of the scientists: T allude to the neteszoul, {oe
that some womb-bearers, wives and. mothers too, are females only physica ar Bb

spiritually, mentally, morally, psychically, and every other way aoe pry ratibed core

“and are wholly hard, cold, masculine beings, living contradictions .of ‘hes

“their forms and-functions declare to the world. On the. other hand,,.many Who ween

the Phallic sign of gender are no,more men in soul, than is the little PONBINE STAGE

5

of five brief summers a full-grown, full-blown woman. a“

Such people are human monstrosities, and were, born wrong. anf you ask me’ why
and how, listen, and. the story shall be fully, fairly,. yet briefly tolds—~:. of: &

Baie If a human monad, or "Zoosperm," from the left side of the father, encount-
ers a ripe ovum from the left side of the mother, that fact determines the gender.
It will be male. (See a section on this very point. in the sequel.) Reverse the case,
and reverse rewults will follow, invariably,--though how to do it on purpose is a
somewhat difficult problem to solve; yet it.gan be done, and is. far more easily
accomplished than at first sight may appear... 5 mises Jsew

Now accidents and inversions, aversions. and perversions, occur .in. all. depart-
ments of nature, but none so glaring and positive as are encountered among human:
‘beings; ard the mis-sexing of, them is one of: the most. common forms: of mal-construc-
tion; for it frequently happens that a female zoosperm, which is the living monad,
or soul-germ, supplied by the male parent, and clothed in flesh by the-mother, is.
unable to reach a corresponding female ovum, and is compelled to be expurgated, or
enter one from the wrong ovarium; in which case. the body of the child will be. of one
gender, its soul and spirit ofthe opposite one.- In a normally peopled world such
“monstrosities, which now abound all about us, could not possibly be coaxed, drawn.or
forced into existence as a human incarnation; and-it is utterly impossible for such
to appear at al] upon the world's stage, if parents wholly,.or even partially,. love
each other; and when such miscreations are seen, it.is proof stronger than holy writ
that love did not-rule in the hour. of their generation. Now I:have affirmed as a
truth that true human sex is primarily of soul, and secondarily of body; hence it -
follows that the post-mortem state of such mixed beings is not a permanent duration
of their condition here; for gradyally the true sex of the individual asserts its
native force and power; the physical, or rather hyper-physical being is -gradually
toned down or up to his or her true condition; the malformation begins to lessen by
Slow degrees, its signs to disappear, and then they assume, either, the perfected
states of man, or that of woman; their angularities are worn away, and the beings
. who on earth belied the story of their true gender become as other normal beings

are; the memory of what they once were fades away, and they take rank .among the
truly human, ' LEOX Bete ace ONE eet. org

XII. The philosophers of my day were generally blind, to, or oblivious of, the
fact that the greatest degree of human excellence in offspring can never be attained,
even though the parents are physically perfect; but. that a wife every way inferior

: except ‘in love, loving and being joved, will give the world such children as will
“prove themselves, indeed, truly, great, and grandly -good. The strongest force, mental
power, and creative energy in the domains of science, art, philosophy, and literature
everywhere, is invariably manifested by those who have the most loved and loving
mother in them--people whose feminine or magnetic side entirely balances, or slightly

| ata , a a / a t SOr YVesz Hoe

ete

overweighs the electric or masculine moiety of their being. He is everywhere most
welcomely greeted, caressed and influential, who is.most magnetic, or female,--not:
in the effeminate sense, but in the glowing, radiant heartfulness of his nature,--
is oné who has not the most intellect, but most gentlemess, love, affection, com- |
boned with it. Take the real or’ ideal Nazarene, per example, who perished for: lov-
ing mankind in the 49th year(see Bunsen); or, going back of his alleged times, leap
the chasmal years to the Bo-Tree man, and scores of othérs equally good, if not so
famous; and whenever you find a great soul in a male body, depend upon it he is more
than half mother; for it is the woman of such people that gives them power, genius,
mental pith, and enables them to write their names in adamantine letters upon the
grand facade of the universal human temple! It is equally true, that those are the
most glorious and glorified of the other gender, who were, or are, not the most
électric, masculine and intellectual, but the most tender, pure, loving and feminine
in all respects. : 7 ) bce :

XIII, But you say, "We women are not perféct ‘yet. We want perfect offspring!
Soine of us have not just such husbands as we wish. We are too pure to sully’our
souls, no matter how great the temptation may be. We prefer to abide in marriage
as we have found it. Some children, the results of such marriage, are not what we
would’have them; therefore, pray tell us how to improve upon them hereafter."

The answer is simple, the method easy: Never run the risk of conception, ex-
cept-you be mentally and physically prepared,--not for it--but to utterly banish
everything but the pure desire of your’ soul to ‘give him all the love then--at the

~warriape--that you can, and wish, will, pray, desire, decree, that the result, if
such be, may be modelled after your soul's loftiest ideal. Keep up this all the
time of géstation.if possible, and the operation of the law just revealed will con-
ceive you and the world that nothing equal to it ever fell from human lips or pen.*

Please recall the incident of myself and the little fairy. Weil, that is worth
worlds to you, for suppose that, instead of wishing, willing, desiring, decreeing
perfect offspring, you exert it to redeem your husband, to kindle up his love for
you, for home, for his own fireside. But perhaps you care little or naught for all
that; still you want health, beduty, strength and long life, all of which are achiev-
able by thé same magic means; else in such moments--during power absence--all these

* Complaints on both sides -- deep, if not loud -- are made about want of pas-
sional fervor, and affectional ardor; and unjustly often in both cases, for each
takes especial pains and particular care not to strive in any way to bring about a
different nerval condition. I once asked an Arab physician in Egypt, if such things
existed among the dark races, in the harems, or amidst the nomads. Yes, he said; —
but seldom, And when it does, the entire character of the food is changed; abstin-
ence l'amour, is persisted in; and when both these fail, the weak one is by the other
mesmerized with a lone-fringed feather, tenderly, lightly, slowly drawn down the spine
breasts, and across all parts of the well-washed cuticle, so lightly as scarce to
touch! There is a peculiar and powerful conducting property in such a feather, and
never yet in 2,000 years has it been known to fail. In your cold land (America)
the aphrodisiacal treatment should be accompanied with the internal cordials I told
you of; and Allah, precious Allah! will speedily bless the unfruitful pair; for a
"-goul begotten without fervor had better never come to earth, for it’will be wretched
and a curse to itself until its flight toward the Ghillem. There is more on these ©
points, but they cannot be given herein. : .

~19-

are lost, and another nail driven home into your coffin. Obey this grand prea:
out this splendid rule, andere: tone you wild Sihd ae yer eee Agowk al vou ted me
‘augment, most assuredly be felt, and before y of it wil $
aaah hive change as shall bathe.your, house in-pearly glory. eerpe comm hase
win him from all-others, and kindle: love,-where all was cheerless, wintry sae bee
fore, 1 know it, have seen it tried,,and.am confident that she who Bees ete ~ og
tries cannot by any possibility. fail! Of -course the same power can be used by =
‘bands. “It is simply substituting active soul-will, love, for lnd1f femeniem pAroe
body. and’ sufferance; but, as sure as death, here.is the: starting point of a divine
°° XIV, But how about promiscuity or variety in the love relations of life?’ ~

‘Reply: There may be those who .can find happiness therein. I never could, and
‘do not gor to make "the éxperiment. My reasons will be seen further’on in this
work; but before we come to that, I wish at this point once for all to say that I
believe in free speech, and wide-spread agitation of all questions, social and sexual
-inéluded; but while I champion the right, I by no: means espouse ‘the cause of those
chémpions, for I must abide by the laws of my own-individuality, and it is my firm
belief that love-variety in any shape is.injurious to soul and body, and that the
highest point of human power can only be reached: by. those who are amatively true to
each other; for purity alone is the price of power, the secret of soul-might, and it
is the coin accepted at God's exchange for such glories as he keeps especially for
true and earnest souls. I, write these lines here because: at this moment a paper
lies, in two senses, before me, which, distinctly says that I am an advocate of: cer-
tain opinions which my entire life. has been spent in confuting--as witness every book
I have ever written, every. speech I have ever spoken. Having: put this on record, I
now drop all that matter,--both the falsehoods and the falsifiers, forever and for-

evermore, as being beneath either notice or contempt.

_ The demand for novelty, "variety," or.change in -love matters, is not a part of
‘being, and only foiled zealots--feminine--and worse things in male shape, éver started
such malignant: slanders ‘against me,--human perverts of both genders; who, failing
to induce mé to pervert certain knowledge and powers to their base ends and ‘systems,

sought to injure’me by the meanest and most, contemptible of all possible scandal.
But I laughed at the cyprians, and snapped,my fingers at the rogues in“grain. I am |
only capable of one love at one time, but that time to me fastens its further end to |
the eternities just ahead of us all. Temporary attractions departed with my dead
years, thank Heaven, and their fruitage, was ever bitter, bitter.

* ‘ as SSL ORPE CL Pe ESCO Ts. ot Py )

“XV. So true is the statement. concerning. the. vastly greater. and superior relatdve |

valué of the Feminine Principle, that.even in the present, lubricious age, when women

is almost everywhere wrongly rated,, badly. educated, and worse placed than she should

be, there is still, dsep down in the hearts of most,: even the coarsest.men, a meas-
ure of gallant respect, which: occasionally gleams forth in noble deeds, and brace

<«championage of the sex, in such guise as. to give great hope. for fuller and bettér
bb ings By ANd DV ers ce a hens dorm Pes a ke hee aed . a

*

' Thé chivelry of all ages has not only proved..feal to. her and acknowledged its ©
dependence upon her smile and’ frown, boldly fighting for her right or.wrong, then, ©
in the foretime, just as now; but -has taken especial pains: to celebrate individual
women and the universal sex; and this worship-of the second, if not'-the primal element
of nature, has been carried further, and been more general, than the modern reader °
might imagine. For instance, who among those who peruse this essay would bélieve,
save on most indubitable evidence, that the very flower of one, nay, two of the lead-

- ing nations of the world this day do homage to the emblem of Womanhood? Yet, never-
theless, such is the fact; for the noblest regalia, the highest honor won and worn by

~20—

“Britain! s poeudede men, is to Be acknowledged to be worthy of wearing the royal in-
signia of the Garter; while the Fleur-de-lis of France, meaning something Pas glance
fe he has been the boast of her noblest for centuries.

Now what does that same Garter mean? ‘Is there any one so uninformed as to
imagine for a moment that it signifies the mere string worn about the leg to keep
nice stockings from dragging about fair heels? If so, here let that absurd notion
' be rectified, for the emblem signifies no such puerile nonsense at all. The motto
of ‘the order , Princely and Imperial, is in these days written Honi soit qui mal y
pense, translated to mean--to the uninitiated, outside world-—"Evil to him who evil
“thinks," which, in a certain sense, is true and correct, for it does mean that, but
not at all in the manner that people generally think it "does. It has no reference
to gerieral evil whatever, but it expressly means evil of a certain and peculiar
kind; for it so happens that the real first word is not Honi but Yoni, and that means
nothing more nor less than the feminine organs of generation, coupled with their
pensosae 2 agent

Now, while in all ages of the world's known history, a grand mention sey of all
mankind, including all modern Christians, worship brute force, and luxuriate in
varied fornis of Phallic or Priapic worship, and the Phallus is the male organ of
generation and Priapus was its god; while they, I repeat, adored and adore CREATIVE
ENERGY as symbolized by the emblem alluded to, of which all steeples, towers, bea-
cons, light-houses, monuments, cenotaphs, and May and liberty poles and flagstaffs,
are but symbols; while that form of worship-- of the male god--has been, and still
is, almost universal, except in its coarser, grosser forms, in our days, there have
been wanting other human hosts who did, and still do, pay homage at the shrine of
the Feminine Deity, whose symbol is the rose, discus, arch, oval, ard dome ; and in
some barbaric lands the organ itself, openly, as in all lands sub rosa or secretly;
but in civilized America in its most low and disgusting forn, for <iousands seem to
adore no god but Lust, and practically worship at no other shrine. Witness the
universal prevalence of concubinage and’ harlotry, gotten to be even a licensed
thing, and everywhere a winked-at adjunct of civilization, to the debasement of man
and blasphemy of God and Womanhood, as of yore in Greco-Roman days; but this time
entailing dreadful petialties dnstead of rewards upon its multitudinous devotees; for
not even the triplicate king evils, opium, alcohol, and tobacco, inflict such awful
punishments upon their votaries as Cypriana, the salacious Diva of Harlotdom. To
return to the point at issue: In some form or other, most of us worship the disc
symbol; and four-fifths of the intelligent world is to-day agitated, not merely con-
cerning the symbol and its nature, but about the tremendous mysteries it shadows,
and the vast volume of meanings that underlie and are embosomed within it. I trust,
before this task of mine is finished, to demonstrate it to be in very truth what it
claims,--a new revelation of sex, and to make one successful effort to remove the
subject far above the muck, slime and filth hitherto attendant upon it; for if there
is a divine thing on earth, it ought to be LOVE--its laws, rules, phases and moods,
--knowledge of which is a redeeming power.

I alluded to the universality of sex emblems, and will close this section by
calling attention to’ our national banner; for the American flag floating from a
staff is one of the finest illustrations of the double glory in the world; because
the staff symbolizes the Phallus; its cord represents the chain of love binding the
sexes together; the folds of bunting are emblems of woman's floating drapery; the
blue means his, her, their mutual truth and fidelity; the white; her purity; the
red symbolizes her periodicity and ability to defy death by repeopling the world.

I shall allude to other colors in another section.

XVI, <A true negro never reaches a stage of mental development enabling him to

a)

master metaphysics; nor at maturity does he ever surpass in oe tae pre ey:
average Anglo Sdxon; but in the power of maintaining love ‘at high t re per
count all the white races of: the globe! I make this observation abi fern

two reasons: first, to draw a parallel; second, to tell the ss Fad a cee =
medical practice, in nervo-vital diseases, I often prescribe. egro pe ss als:
fifty cents in the plate" for being thereby benefited. They did so, these st p
haggard wives and chlorotic girls, shout, get glorious, and fill Se a |
rich and healthy magnetism, every inhalation of which, to the sick o a esata
a month's life, and a ton-of doctor's stuff thrown in. Now for the other point: '
No “sooner does an Anerican boy get on his first.pair of pants than he has prurien
notions right straight alone, and takes good care to demonstrate them with chalk aed
on the.walls and:fences everywhere. Now this is not so dreadful after all,--for su
antics characterize all young animals, -- provided his elders would take him in
handand teach him the true meaning of the origin of the strange ideas which from ©
morbid nature, -inculcation, precept and example of his associates he has imbibed,
but does not comprehend. eto" : .

I have said that this nation was the most passional one on earth. But then you
know that natioris and individuals are’ exactly alike; moved by the same forces, |
governed by the same principles, prompted by the same motives; and remember too,
that this nation is but a boy yet, not out of its ‘teens; hence, its universal pudi—
city is not to be wondered-at; ‘nor that its principal, most’sincere and best-paid-for
worship is,and:for some time’ to come yet will be, at the passional shrine, in or
out of wedlock. ‘The same thing prevails all over the globe, and likely for the
same reason; i. e., because as yet it is but a baby-world! At all events its wor-
Ship is of the character already set forth; and its best men have been the most ~~
earnest devotees; for somehow or other, there is not and never has been a really
great man in it but who has been more or less chargeable with practices not accordant
with the strictest rtles*of nun-ship or monk-hood--which is oftener--in results--

‘

monkey-hood instead,’

XVII, Hargrave Jennings, of England, the eminent Rosicrucian, writing upon the
subject of the Garter, and before quoting Ashmole in regard to the same matter, ob-
serves: "All the'world knows the chivalric origin of the Most Noble of the Garter. |

“It arose in a princely ‘act, rightly corisidered princely, when the real, delicate, — |
inexpressibly high-bred motive and its circumstances are understood, which motive |
is systematically and properly concealed. Our great King Edward III. picked from |
the floor, with the famous words of the motto of the Order of the Garter, the .

"garter," or, as We interpret it, by adding a new construction with hidden meanings,
the "garder"” (gaurder, P..B. R.), (or especial cestus, shall we call it?) of the.
beautiful and celebrated Countess of Salisbury, with whom, it is supposed King
Edward was in love." In other words she dropped a cloth which men ought never to
behold; and Edward acted the part of a true gentleman, in preserving her from
ridicule and shame, by turning an accident fools would giggle at, into one command~

ing profound reverence and chivalric respect from all who pride themselves on being
men. : Sen |

| Old Elias Ashmole, the very highést’ British authority on the points here in- |
volved, writing about them, says: "The Order of: the Garter, by its motto, seems to :
challenge inquiry, arid defy reproach. ‘Everybody must know the story that refers the
origin of the name to a piece of gallaritry; either the Queen or the Countess of
Salisbury. having. beer. supposed ' to have ‘dropped one of. those very useful pieces of
female attire at-a dance. (Here follows some’ Latin, the gist’ of which I have al-
ready given’ in.the conclusion of the last sectibn. P. B. R.) ‘The ensign of the
order, in jewelry or enamel, was worn originally on the left arm. Being in the form
-of a bracelet to the arm, it might possibly divert the attention of the men from the

~22=

hefasliae de etoany it might be dropped and ee without confusion; and the only
objection Ican see to the use of such an ornament is ‘the hazard of mistake from the
double meaning of the term perisesiis; which signifies ‘not only a garter, but ‘breeches,
which ‘our aan ladies never wear,"

That settles the point. The garter was a irder, which the lady dropped; and
the true gentleman picked it up, pinned it to his breast, and challenged the world's
' respect for himself and woman forever and forevermore. Glorious Edward!

BVIIIT, Isn't it curious that the generality of even educated people fail to
see that the idea of sex as a principle, and in all its implications, runs through
everything, even language? In French there's no nts as with us, but everything is
il or elle,--her or she. We all know that human speech is the result of the gradual
development of the tace through ages of time; its different forms being determined
by the differences of latitude, soil, climate, physical and other concomitant
surroundings. letters are but external symbols of human thought; and in them all

two basic predominate--i.e., the thought; and in them all two basic ideas predomin-
ate--i.e., the male and female. The letter D and its equivalents, the Egyptian
hieroglyph and hieratic figure, and the Fhoenician one likewise, is but the feminine
symbol, more or less perfectly drawn, according to the ability of the scribes or
sculptors who made them. Thus: also -- and nearer nature -- are their equivalents of
the’ Roman R; while their N, L, and she, are unquestionably suggested by the phallus,
or lingam, the opposite idea. And so it is-all through the entire list of alphabets,
ancient and modern; some letters representing one emblem, others its opposite, and
still others the union of the two. Instance the Archaic alphabet, Greek, Phoenician,
Italic, as they existed from 1,000 to 600 years before Christ's date--for the Aleph,
Beth, Gimel, Daleth, He, Var, Zyin, Cheth, Kaph, Teth, Lamed, Samekh, Ayin, and Tav,
and their English, Fhenician, Greek and Italic equivalents, as unmistakably |
emblematize the above three ideas, as that rain tells of growth in field, forest

and fen! What is the soft, sweet, flowing circle or ring, but the symbol of Faith,
Eternity, Eternal Love, Mapgnetism,-~the YONI,--the female emblem--~the letter 0?

What is the letter I or the figure I, but the symbol of generative power,--the .
lingam, or male? Ay, all letters are but interchanges, interminglings of the two

ee oe forms--the I or male, and the O or female ideas.

For instance, B is two-thirds female, one-third male; C is mainly female; D
is both sexes; Q suggests union; and in fact, all letters convey the same meaning in
clear, or less clear form.

XIX. The Lingam, Linga or Lingum (male organ-worship), is but the reverse of
the discal or oval worship. The dome everywhere is but the female idea; the minaret
represents the male; and as said before, actually the colors of all our flags, red,
white and blue, green and yellow, are representative of the same, or Garter Idea;
the first two meaning the spiritual purity and sacrificial blood of woman; the blue
already explained; the green representing the result of the union of male and female
--production, fertility, growth; and the yellow typifying ripeness, or the first
completion of the destiny ordained to both.

XX. Torches, flambeaux, and firewors everywhere eyiitol sa sexual, therefore
creative passion (and what this last means will be seen hereinafter; for it is not
limited to the generation of progeny). They typify vaguely to some, clearer to
others, the strange, inner mystic FIRE which, unlike all other forms of flame, has
its origin in God, and its flow from within us, not from without; for passion rises
in the mind when normal,-—in the soul; not the body, save when our natures are in-
verted; and even then its fountain is in the unholy soul, before it leaps to the
still more unholy body. Desire is always first metaphysical before it is material in

a

human kind; but when the conscience and moral poles are reversed, poem oe
plodes the mental flame may be, and often is,,sent from the body ip iovor ie icy
Thus certain: foods or..drinks generate an excess of caloric in the — - —
. of the reproductive system; a spark--spontaneous combustion--leaps suse to.theduo
‘brain, the soul catches fire, and hurls its masses of luyad fdeper WaepehaT eee
_brum, cerebellum, spinal cord, ovaria, prostate gland, testes or vagina .

the curtain o'er the dreadful scene: | |

“XXI. Just as sex.runs through all nature so does it obtain of nations, tribes,
peoples and ages; some are entirely female or male in their genius, pF
and general specialties; and so plainly does this truth manifest itself tha .
not. care-to occupy time in proving it. But this will I say: The most mascul ae Nee:
nations tend greatest to feminine worship; and, per contra,.;the ideal of the eminine
peoples is the masculine. worship. a ete

‘Finally, the most masculine man adores at the female shrine, and his-god is
far more. she than. he; while the most~-feminine woman worships the most masculine man,
Thus here, there, and everywhere the two universal principles seek each other, blend,
fuse, intermingle, and unwittingly obey the mighty dual law! :

XXII.. Love between human beings: of opposite,sexes is of two general kinds:
lst, that in which passion is not an integrant, such as the love between parent and
child; that which is wholly amicive or purely friendly; that which is platonic or |
‘purely spiritual, ethereal, based upon affinities. of taste, similitudes of sou};
that which is founded upon gratitude; and, lastly, that which is wholly and: absolute-

. ly mystical--the don't-know-why-but-it-is-so kind of feeling--and which, while
' it may be a limited extent pratified,on earth, yet its full fruition can only be
achieved, felt and realized after both shall have become citizens of the country of
disembodied souls. Now it.often happens that people in whom this sort of love
exists mistake its nature and significance; imagine that they. were born for each

other; and, so they are, but not for the life below. They marry, and, to their
‘first surprise, and subsequent horror,: discover that. for all..the purposes of
matrimony one is oil, the other water, without a particle of mental lime to combine
and fuse the two together, and thereby form a true kalsomate of soul.

"I think the pity of this earthly life
Is love. So sighs a singer of the day

,, Whose, pensive strain my sympathetic lay .

Sadly prolongs. Alias! the endless strife
Of Love's sweet law with cold Convention's rules};
The loving souls unloved; the perfect mate, :
After long years of yearning,. found—too late!

. ."The treason of false friends; the frown of fools;
The fear that baffles bliss in beauty's.arms;
The weariness of absen¢e; and the dread;
Of lover, or of love, untimely dead, -- ... .
Musing on these, and all the direful harms . |
That hapless human hearts are doomed to prove,
I think the pity of this life is love!"

a toe M4 fellg pA ti 28, pt gen Saal mks “9 ain:

So do I. But.even a greater pity exists where, fired by the most ardent hopes
one or both find out that not a real tie of soul binds the, twain together. Sanne ;
comes the unveiling; and, my God, what an awful, horrible spectre stands frowning :

where each expected, to behold and hold~she an Adonis, he.a perfect Heba!. |

tad. ae

pa

When the mistake is made such parties marvel and wonder how on earth it can be
so; and why the actual marriage produces effects so utterly foreign to their ex-
pectations and hopes. In the union of two such there is.a compatibility of. spirits
to a great extent, but none whatever on the amative plane,--the sex of form; for the

actual fact of marriage produces utter dissatisfaction to him, horror, pain, mental |
- anguish, disease and lingering death to her. This generates discord and despair,
general unhappiness, and is almost sure to drive the man to the house of the strange
Woman, and his wife either to insanity, the grave, or the arms of a lover who can
_ affiliate with her to some extent, at least upon the external or mainly senuous
plane; and the upshot of the matter is divorce and two wretched lives. Now, in ny
travels up and down the lanes of Marriage-land, I have seen scores of just such
cases; and there are other scores, ay, millions, that I have not seen, and of whose.
terrible secret no one but themselves are aware; and sometimes they do not know what
alis them, and attribute their distresses to a thousand causes, not:one of which: is,
the real and true one. / . | an i

When, further on in this New Revelation, I shall analyze the matter, hundreds
who ;read it will see the real point, and, probably, make no effort to better their
sad condition. From such unions as these spring a class of children so utterly
angular and-deficient that the marvel is they ever find peace at all on earth, or
enjoy a happy hour. :

XXIII. The second general kind of love between the sexes may be numbered ONE.
and TWO, The first of which is the exact opposite, in nearly all respects, of that:
just described in Section 22d. It is just as earnest, honest, and deceptive, as the
other, but is far more endurable, because there is a better cohesion between them
than in the other case; their lives are evener, their marriage satisfactory; their
offspring more adapted to life on earth, and in society;-their own physical health
and that of their children is better; and their union will last longer and produce’
generally better results, albeit said union is quite as far from being right and
proper as anything can well be. |

- .In.the first case, to use a meaning metaphor, the first couple only met each
other upstairs, in the garret; they only fused .in the brain. They could not affili-
_ ate downstairs--in the passional rooms of the house marriage; although they were
compelled to descend once in a while, it was something to be gotten over as quickly
as possible, and to be only remembered with a shudder by her, a smothered maledic-
tion by him. | foi rene, pie

In the other case it was kitchen and cellar life all the time; a monotony ~
endurable certainly, but very unsatisfactory: for all that; for it so happens that
although some of us overvalue body, its adjuncts, functions and offices, yet, being
human, we require a little intellect, soul and emotion with our lives; cannot be
contented with body only, and feel the need ofa little sour leavening to season the
dry bread of earthly being. Such couples grow tired of each other; of the monotony;
and either party of such a firm will strangely take to other persons who manifest
qualities and, powers, which, from their own state of woul-starvation, they know how
to appreciate! The origin of such marriages takes its rise in physics purely. He
is stout, magnetic, robust, full of fire, and passional auras envelop him round a-
bout; and passion always exaggerates both the properties and qualities of the object
upon whom its eyes are cast; mentally. endows it with what it has not, and never will
have; and at the same time revels in an insane dream of fancied joys, destined never
to be realized, because his whole being is in such a red-hot fever, that, could he —
actualize his desire, death would stop him instantly, because nothing human could. .

L : 2

endure such a poignancy as he hopes to. enjoy. RY
She is young, round-limbed, rosy-cheeked, spirited, vivacious, full of health,
| ane

--and from what she has learned through other females--full of seach ria fae 8
facts of marriage." Well, ‘she has passed ‘the cif en aae twain lengt

their héneymoon for’ about a year; at the end of whic . : and f-
legs erg and discontent comes in, because each feels the need ai line wri
The upshot of such a union is that neither of them see a genuinely happy ;

that wherein each hopes tobe free from the other, and try their chances elsewhers. |

So much for general division number one. The next division is that which is ‘being, ©

with its mysteries holy and’ unholy--that is in its normal development, and abnormal _

or unhealthful one--about to be treated in the pages that follow.

_xxIv, Love ‘being much more’ thai a mere sentiment between the sexes, it is

plain that neither its ground-work, nature, or cryptic meaning, has hitherto in any —

land been thoroughly understood. Ihave for long, weary years studied it in many

riesof the’ globe. Here ai ‘6 I ‘got--not a new 3 it, ‘but suggestions
countries’ of the globe. Here and there 1 ‘got--not a new idea of it, es .
which led.me to investigate and explore. And now, in this, probably the last mabige
but one or two which I shall ever write, I desire, not to make a confession, for

am proud of the truths alone I delved for and brought up from the zem—Zem of mystery
-~but to'inake a statement and explanation. I had struggled'so hard to get a fair

hearing at the bar of the world, that many a time, in view of the cruel fact that I -

was met everywhere with suspicion, slander and malignant envy, I have bathed in the
dark waters of despair; and but’for, as I believe, the protecting care of the dead,

whose loving hands either held me up in the bitter strife, or, failing to be able’ to ©

do that, eased my falls--I should have rushed of my own act into the awful fields of
eternity; Early in life I discovered that the fact of my ancestry on one side, be-

ing what they were, was an effectual estoppal ‘on my preferment and advancement, use,
fulness and influence. JI ‘became famous, but never popular. I studied Rosicrucianism,

found it suggestive, and’ loved its mysticisms. So 1 called myself The Rosicrucian,

and gave my thought. to’ the world as Rosician thought; and lo! the world greeted with |

loud applause: what’ it supposed had its origin and birth elsewhere than in the soul
of P.B, Randolph. haeE Low hoiddy ake" eam. veh noe :

Very nearly all that I have given as Rosicrucianism originated in my soul; and
scarce a single thought, only suggestions, have I borrowed from those who, in ages
past,. called themselves by’ that name--one which served me well as a vehicle wherein
to take my mental treasures to.a market, which gladly opened its doors to that name,

but would, and did, slem to its'portals in the face’ of the tawny student of Esoterics.

Precisely. so was it with things purporting to be Ansairetic.: I had merely
read lydde's book, and got hold of a new name; and again mankind hurrahed for the
wonderful Ansaireh, but incontinently turned up its nose at the supposed copyist.
In proof of the ‘truth of these statements, and of how I ‘had to struggle, the world
is challenged to find a line of.my thought in the whole 4,000 books on Résicrucian-
ism; among the brethren of that Fraternity--and I know many: such in various lands,
and was, till I resigned the office, Grand Master-of thé only Temple of the Order
on the globe; or inthe Ansairetic works, English, German, ‘Syriac or ‘Arabic.

One night--it was in far-off Jerusalem or Bethlehem; I really forget which--I

made ‘love to, ‘and was: loved by, "a dusky maiden dof Arabic ‘blood.. I of her, and that
experience, learned=-not'directly; but-“by suggestion--the fundamental principle of
the White Magic of Love; subsequently I became affiliated with’ some dervishes and.
fakirs of..whom, by .suggestion still,.Ifound the road té6" other knowledges; and of |
thése- devout practicers of @ simple, but sublime and holy magic, I obtained addi_
tional clues-~little, threads of suggéstion,

my soul inte labyrinths of “knowledge themselves did not even suspect’ the existence

of. I became practically, what Iwas neturally—a’ mystic, atid in ‘time chief. of the

lofty brethren; taking the clues left by the masters, and pursuing them farther than

ch time it is an old and flavor- °

“which, beirig persistently followed, led” |

|

|

age ms a tise 5 so GPa eau) ide Pe 1 ss

BE eys had, ever: Bedi! efor; ieetadiiy: icietcas, bee stile: ELIXIR: OF: LIRR; sitted universal
Solvent, or celestial Alkahest;-the water ‘of beatity and perpetual youth, ‘and the::
philosopher 's stone,--all of which this book contains; but only findable ‘by him or
ther’who’'seafthes well, The thoughts which I gave to the world, that world: paid me
for, agit’ always:has paid: ‘for «png eh big jr day of that? Tustiee ‘is sure to be
done me *y ‘and; ibys: . me Wd sertgors’
. f aol 3 . : ah ie

7: ‘am: hatioea! to say ae sth in Order: ‘to disabuse the public: mind reatd va’ to
Rosiewtetaiseyy ‘which’is but one of our outer doors--and which was not originated by
Christian Rosencrux; but merely revived; and replanted «in Europe by “him subsequent ©

to histreturn from oriental lands ;: id yedie ty Like: myself and hundreds of oe iabe be
went te pee eee “4

The RébieFacisA egeten is, ‘end never was other Sees than a door to the ineffable
Grand Temple of Eulis.. It was the.trial chamber wherein men were‘tested as to their
fitness for doftier ‘things. And even Eulis;*itself, is a triplicate of bea spirit,
soul, There are some in: the outer, a:few inthe inner ——.

These, the facts craps pees Spee and myself, are ith at last. Now let us
go" “on with: the te nh oleae

PRathumipate: are fc baidsaddone of God. It: as. satbeodih a ay that great”
truths reach the world, and that world takes exquisite pleasure in erucifying all
such; and yet they will arise, proclaim their mission, deliver their message’,
establish new truths, and then march straight to Calvary or Patmos! In all ages
there have been‘menscut out after ‘a different pattern from their .contemporsries, and
who, for that-.reason, had .and have a differant destiny to-fulfil. "To be great, is
to be misunderstood," ay, and crucified time and again. Among all who have ever
lived, none have worked harder, or accomplished more good for mankind than that
class” *of men known in all time asMystics, foremost among whom was, and is, ‘that ‘:
branch of ‘them known as Hermetists,--men of mark; Pythagoreans, : ‘Rosicrucians, and
lastly, the Brotherhood of Eulis,--all of whom were and are, “students of — ‘same
school.

ty : ; ;

- When Davia Ge Spvouis) of the city, of New York: ‘more Stanly conhiseted with :
Bennett's"Herald, " was, in Montreal, I believe, asked conéérning thé origin of the
Great Society, or rather Fraternity, (the Rosicrucian branch,--but differing es=" —
sentially from the branch of that august brotherhood represented by adepts in Europe,
Asia, and myself and confreres in this country,--yet identical “in spirit, so far as
the general welfare of universal man is ‘concerned ), he responded‘as follows, save
that he-disguised certain names, which: disguises I now throw off!~-As one standing
upon: the:#beach by the sea, and gazing. far off over the turbulent waters, finds the |
horizondowering in the distance, and ‘shutting otit the land unseen that lies beyond;
so we, standing upon the“sands of time, and looking ‘back over’. thé sea of our ‘past
history, find there is a boundary’ beyond which the vision carinot extend, a point
where many have oe er "No more > beyonds"

ert

And,’ as. he’ ocean caste up from its ‘unfathomable depths oie of Vode te ‘lost,
which float upon its surface, and are lost upon our shores; so sometimes, from the
immeasurable gulf that has buried in its depths the secret of our, origin, a waif

drifting on the bosom of time finds its way to the limits of the historical epoch,

and reveals to’ us something of what ‘was, and is’ lost.’ Then let us learn all that —

we may from these. waifs, let us wander tipon these trackless shores of a silent °

sed, and bring ‘from its drift-wood_ and: wrecks all that may be gathered. I6t us add |
all that may be added of our childhood"s glory to our manhood 's. suffering, and’ our *
coming triumph. We will be proud that we are disciples of Hermes Trismegistus, that

~2]=

A

VA

thrice-sealed Lord of Mind,--the Mystical Mal-Kizadek (Me1chizadek ) of Pee Fernie:
but let us not forget.to be proud that we are disciples of theavsewags ve oferde
Twine the leurel wreath for the victor, but add the cypress..for the wath a gingett
let us go, then, to the land of romance and of dream,--the land of the : y y PF
and the Sacred Ganges. Stending upon their shores, our minds will rere at <
dim ages, to the days of our childhood, and the birth of the mystical reign of
Ahrimanes. We will behold in our mind's eye a succession of kingdoms, like the :
succession of seasons, a rise and fall of dynasties, like the sowing and reaping as
grain. ‘We will count. the number of patricians who live in idleness and luxury, an
shudder at the multitude of plebeians who die in agony.and want. Behold those
moristers of selfishness and cruelty, whose insatiable appetite of ambition E
pride, wealth and power, could not appease, and for whose ‘maw. the quivering es.

and trickling blood of a people became food. Here and there, we will find mee
struggling against oppression as we have struggled; people teaching virtue an

charity oppression as we have struggled; people teaching virtue and charity as we
have taught,--reviled and scorned as we have been, We will discover that others
have borne our-burdens who had no hope of. receiving our reward; that knowledge is
universal, and has no royal road;..and that they were as wise in the wisdom of their —
generation, as we are in ours.

And now tread softly. We are entering the dark realm of the slumbering ages.
The dust of a million years has gathered here, and no voice has awakened its echoes
since the days when the Indian Bacchus consorted with the daughters of men. -.

We have left the land of the, probable, and are journeying in the. regions of
the possible. The footprints here and there are of mortals, but of those who have
beheld: the hidden mysteries of Eulis, who are familiars of the Cabbala, who have
raised the veil of Isis, and revealed the Chrishna, the--YAE or the A.A.

Behodd in the distance, shining from the east as the sun from the sea, the un-
quenchable torch of her who is nameless; observe the stars that circle round her, as
she kneels to write upon the sand. See the sheen of her golden hair, and the spot-
less white of her robes; catch the first strains of that. wondrous. philosophy, classic
and pure; as they fall in wordless music from her lips; and remember how its infinite
truth and marvellous beauty, have, in all the ages that are past, bound us together
by an indissoluble bond of brotherhood, and leavened with our faith in the innate
kindness of the human heart, taught us to sacrifice ourselves, that the peoples may
advance.

- They were fragments of this philosophy which we wore as a crown of glory on our
natal morn, that were disseminated by our Master and his innumerable followers, and
cast hither and thither upon the stream of time, were finally washed by successive
waves of war and pilgrimage, to the shores of Egypt. It is of these the author of
the "History of Civilization in England" speaks as "forming one of the elements in
the school of Alexandria, and whose. subtle speculations, carried on in their own
exquisite language, anticipated all the efforts of modern European metaphysics."

They were fragments of this philosophy which, perverted by the strong in-

dividualities of Plato, Aristotle and Pythagoras, became alike the systems of their
schools, the Portico, the Grove, and the Garden. | ih a

| Melchizadek, or Hermes, was our first great master; but like meny masters before
ot aires he i when the "times were aut of joint," and the age was not attuned

o symphonies of thought and feeling. He taught his rich philosophy to all, opened
great hidden depths of ‘thought to the public eye, explained “the Boat subtle’ trathe
to barbarian ears, and--threw pearls to swine. And his success. He gathered round

“og Fra. i ri oe

£

bint his disciples,’ fo i looked Sayoud at their yutibuera’ they extended in every diree-

tion, as far as eye. could reach, surging like the waves of the sea, when tossed by
tempests , --and with all the deep undertones and matterings of the ocean. Were all
these, his pupils? ‘All these versed. in the shoals and depths of reasoning? No.

They were families, some member of: whom believed an abstract philosophical truth,
and all the rest believed the man.

They reduced the laws of nature to. form a creed, and they made a golden calf of
some special ‘physical force, and fell. down to worship it. They resolved, themselves,
after. their agitation, into their own natural element. That was all.

As, a rustic, uninstructed in the prdiictbies’ might with open-mouthed wonder :
watch the butning of coal, and endeavor to associate it with the inflation of a _
balloon, so Hermes, expecting only the preconceived consequences of his teaching,
was awed by the immense bubble he had formed. As he comprehended the magnitude of
his creation, and its now evident consequences, perhaps there arose in his mind: that
inevitable conclusion that from all his teachings and all his labor little would be
accomplished. The great minds among his followers would be philosophers, but they
would have been philosophers without him. . The mass would be fanatics, as they had
been fanatics before him. He had done only. this--given a direction to their. studies
and speculations, given a name and method to their, ignorance and madness.: And all:'
this scholasticism and philosophy, all this ignorance and. madness, would be the new
religion of India, would take the place forever of her first idolatry.’ -Hold! It.
is not yet too late to retrieve, and by one of those rapid and eccentric movements |
in literature, which the: great genius of Bonaparte was wont: to receive in war, to
change the whole features of the campaigne. And I am so changing it!--I, the last
Grand Master. of the Order, prior to L final absorption into Bee peerless
a ed ts 2 oe

80 we received our heritage, and the soul of philosophy vanished from India ‘and
the world as.a dream. The kernel was hidden, and the shell alone permitted to re-
main to excite the awe of past generations, and-the wonder of ours. Ah! most noble
Master, you have long since, like Her who.came before you, passed forever among the
shadows of the invisible, and the dark, but deathless realms, where our fathers
have’ gone before us. But as the material form was indestructible, and lives for-
ever in that land of blossom and of flowers, so that spiritual and ideal emanation
shall, through all coming timé, live in the minds of men, and never cease to be
born anew, for Eulis' nature is infinite and eternal! ;

How safely c our secrets have been guarded, let éach answer ‘Kodi aaihe to. ‘the
progress he has made in mastering them. How little was abstracted by the Essenes,
Gnostics and Batiniyeh, you all know.

For ten thousand years after Hermes, we lost no more, in our contact with; all —
the various peoples of the worjd, than-the electric elements we threw: as ins weeks
ing their hands: |

Though few in itt Sig’ we guarded the great trust committed to our ares a
never~ceasing ‘vigilance. Every member realized that the flowers gathered from the |
graves of dead years must be preserved as a wreath to crown the. age to come. “Amid. -”
the’ swarm of sécts and societies that sprang to life in the East, surrounded by:all
the schools that flourished in the. Golden Age of Greece, that little band of A
preserved their purity. oa ,

~ Setretly aa silently’ they moved over. the sands. of time to ;the, coming of Ee
nabarene’ co fes es in the twilipnt that succeeds the crucifixion of Calvary we

“295

ndividuals, and the banding of men. They
Honk cauplasad curr Meehan OTe onda Bete have lost their old effectiveness.

One, two, three, five hundred years roll by as one would count the hours to midnight.

Then there is a bustle. Work is at hand. Into those dark ages that pean: ae

the mustering bands, and for a thousand years death at the stake, be dane eer
despair on the one hand, and the retribution of the se a ta ‘sarge ona
ciations, alone point out the position of the contestants, and the progres: se
fight.

‘Then from his cradle in the Alps.looms up Christian Rosencrux. Seizing all at
a glance, the society is reorganized; no-more to dream, but to work; no more “7 ‘2
wait for the human race to accomplish its destiny, but to assist in its pie sh-
ment; to offer her bosom to the :wfortunate;:to raise the fallen; to eae an
oppressed; to interpose her form between the tyrant and the slave; te citi eae

in the great fight. She has the gathered knowledge of her ages of student- i rae
She has the patience taught by centuries of adversity. She has the courage o :
true and the beautiful; and, above all, .she loves the peoples, and Paschal Beverly
Randolph succeeded Rosencrux, as the legitimate Grand Master of Rosicrucia, and
Hierarch of Eulis. y

"And now I would say one word in regard to contemporary societies. Many of them
were organized with meritorious objects in the days gone by, but the state of things
that gave them being has long since passed away. They presented a sad spectacle

of having outlived their usefulness, and drag out a fitful existence of senseless
ceremonies and abstract forms, from which the soul has long departed. A few should
receive the tribute of respect due to that which is venerable and good, and Free-
masonry should ever be associated with the broad mantle of its charity.

In the superstructures which have been erected at different periods, upon these
foundations, one will often observe a pillar, here or there, called the Rose Croix,

or occasionally hear the mystic name Eulis, softly pronounced. ~ t

I was conversing with a gentleman whom.I supposed to be a member of one of
these "Chapters," and he said, "The Rosy. Cross is dead. We have, it is true, |
galvanized its skeleton into a transitory life, but the Rosy Cross of history is
dead." Dead! I cried. She lives!--lives with the rich blood of the South in her
veins; with the vigor of the North in her constitution; with the clear brains of
the temperate zone, the depth of thought of the Orient, the versatility of France,
and earnestness of purpose, and boldness of resolution of the New World; lives these
three hundred years that you think her dead, as she lived the countless centuries
before you thought her born; and may she never cease to have a fitting casket for

her jewels, and remdin a reflex of the glorious truth and beauty of the superlative
wisdom, power and goodness,

So far well; but at last the world wants to know more of that wonderful
fraternity, which, nameless at times for long centuries, blossomed a few centuries
ago as Rosicrucia, but now has leaped to the fore-front of all the zeal reform move-
ments of this wonderful age, and lo! the banner of peerless Eulis floats proudly—-
rock-fouided--on the breeze. We, the people of Eulis, be it known, are students of
nature in her interior departments, and rejecting alike the coarse matevialization
of the ages, and the sham "philosophies" of the ages past and current, accept only
that ‘which forces conviction -by its irresistible logic. Men who realize the exist-
ence of other worlds than‘this are not apt to give loose rein to passion; nor be
content with fraud in eny shape. We cannot take so-sos for facts, and therefore
we reject much that appeals to others with the force of truth, We are ambitious to
solve all possible mystery; we prefer one method to all other hyper-human agencies
knowing it to be infinitely weferable to all other modes of: rapporting the occult

-30—.

and mysterious; .and this:-beok, and all others from. the same pen, is but a very im-

perfect sketch . or. outline of. the sublime, philesopby. of: the Templars of EULIS. We
know the enormous . importance of the sexive.principle; that a menstfuating woman is |
an immense power if she but knew it! that a pregnant one holds" the keys of eternal

mystery in her hand, and that while thus she can make or mar any human fortune! We

: know the mystic act is one unhinging:,the, gates. alike of heaven and of hell; and we

know two semi-brainless people; may by. an. application. of. esoteric rinciples stock
the world with mental giants. . But where shall. we find students? ike not ali we *”

people, nearly, the slaves of, lust, place, gold? Well, we find one now and then; *

and we hail him or her as: the Greeks. hailed the gea--with excessive, Joys, Thalattal.
Thalattel _ They. are not mits tua inous ni but will. be. in. the good tine coming, '

as ag Unquestionably witle. we occupy flesh a blood bodies, and probably. after
we wear ur electric or ethereal ones subsequent to death, Love, other than emicive
and filial, . will depend . upon the magnetic, congeniality existing between the two ¢on-
cerned; although even the most perfect state of magnetic , fusion and reciprocation’
is sapien to be disturbed by cehied one of quite a numerous list of causes.

eee are all of us, more or betel ‘counterparts. and ‘embodiments of nature} ‘and
Baseees has her ups and. downs, fogs and sleets, storms and. heats; ‘ice and’ ‘Tire; .
volcanoes. and ‘wintry blasts;. and. so do, .s0 must we, just as lofig asthe earth and
nature.are as at. Present; when they change, so “so will Wey and very ‘Tikely” not much
before.., If. between. a couple there be a full and mutual play. of: magnetism, if néither
draws from ‘the - other, except to replace with his or her own, thére is a good, chance.
of . general ‘harmony , joy. and content for them. If not, then not. . If_one , party over-

_flows with magnetism, and the other has. but a scanty supply, strong love may exist
between . them, all.other things: being. equal; and the weak one will depend. almost. for.

life: itself upon .the strong}. and the strong be firmly drawn toward the weak. But.
there.must,.be..en assimilation between, and blending of, the two magnetisns, else é;
they. will: assuredly antagonize and repel each other! One. party, may be. very. glowing
and loving and magnetic, say, for instance, on plane A,--a solid, physical, ‘muscular,
heedless, jolly, devil-me-care-sort of (Sr ee a man; such an aone could make
a, perfect heaven--on his plane--with a woman of the same grade; but,how would it be
were. the conjoined.with a joyous, rich-souled, healthy, magnificant, intellectual, .
refined, delicate and spiritual woman, --equaily magnetic, as himself, but: the: a a
of those magnetism was as satin compared to his. own--tow-cloth? | Now just. such . ;
couples,-or those as naturally and organically incompatible, somehow or: other, man-
age to. get. together, and the, consequence is a life removed from happiness by ..a ereat,
yawning, ‘ings gale gull, ‘whose. black, and sullen waters | cannot be bridged. YEA

gcmne. day,. in, the future; there wilt’ be honorable me thods whereby. the present.
genera] mixed-ypness will be made awrenent, and people, having unfortunately made
the, Wrong ‘choice, and gotten some one's else wife or husband, will. be,able. to--yes--
in.some cases. actually "swap." Why not, if themselves are. rendered happier, by lusin.
society, is satisfied, the prior families duly provided’ FOr». and no sin comm Les no

nee done? wit wya st witheen evs » Or agn

ee faces heaven when she gives herself to. love and man!--willingly < or
Bits The rule is universal, the exceptions monstrous; for there are, there can
be none save in three daneacwulier human depravity; certain physical malformations;
and third, in, those mysterious forms of prayer.in vogue before Nineveh the first
was ‘founded, and whose tremendous importance and vital sacredness compel me to allude
to no further herein. The first fact,above ig.not only her nature, but I hold is
an.especial gign of. her celestial nature, and. of .heaven's, vnystical favor. She re-.
ceives both, the. ‘human and. the divine in her demise of .affection,--if even by. force!
But. coarser. man. looks ‘toward . the world's face, for then he is almost entirely. of the

-31-

wut wren tage ve itt, Nt eee reas ee +s Hortified—but ‘she looks to-
earth earthy. ‘Woman ‘never is; she may be “indifferent; ‘horri Ag teD pet: MONE ie i Eee
ward the tee ies aa from it—--however ‘de gréded-=te ce ives a eS ete eae
for low as she may be, but touch the right thord, ‘and she ‘can mother"heroes, and.
give gladsome Marys to ‘the world. oF eh ares eee tee /

~ Now here comes in a mooted point: of oné an ee hagtak cecides wate
isba ¥ieh its the preater sin?--or is it-an equal grade qf offence before
Be rib mcrempa Piet act, right or wrong, man gives “of ‘hihself, whether a
good or evil; and women receives. The malign influence is external with and to him;
internal with and to her... It is easy for him to rid hinself of the bad sept See
compared with her ability to do the same; for the foreign influence imparte ah
remains with her, and becomes an integrant of her very being; and, as she naturally
stands nearer heaven, the greater is her fall--far greater than his who is already
a ‘gréat deal too near the earth. Hence I hold her sin greatest, just as I would
tell an angel who had sinned, "Be thy punishment severe," but would bid a half ime:

becile to "Clear out and not bother the court."

r

XXVI. But there is another thought arising right here: It sometimes, and in
this age and country, very. frequently, happens, that one or both the parties to a
martal compact, from a variety of causés, some of which ‘I will state, manage to lose
thie magnetic attraction toward the other party; and ten to one each will at once’ ~
conclude that all love between them is wholly lost or dead, when the fact is that.
‘each has quite as much as ever, but the bridge is broken down--that mystic bridge,
which, resting on the abutments of both souls, spans the gulf of eternity. But,
although often broken, this bridge is seldom utterly destroyed. ~ The statistics of |
divorce prove the position’here affirmed; for a large percentage of divorced couples,
after enjoying a brief period of "Freedom," begin to think about it; conclude they
had “not been wise enough, and were altogether too hasty; that, after all, there's —
no home like the old one; no love like the old one; and they marry each other over ~
again, and, having ‘cut their eye-teeth, steer clear of former faults, and lead happy
‘lives ‘thereafter, <0) © vt Be pe hide i ic i ae

Why? Because they have a little more care; a gréater amount of give and take,
without being mad about it, and make‘more strenuous endeavors to please each other-——
and that's just it} °for as soon as people do that, they cease fretting, scolding, —
fuming, worrying, complainitig and borrowing trouble; and therefore eease to waste
their magnetisms, consequently the honey bubbles up again and life's vanegar-leaks ©
out? Now, owing to these causes, married people are not as they should be,--the “es
happiest beings on earth; far from it; the youths and maidens discount them largely ©
on the general average; and you can almost always tell a married pair wherever you
clap eyes on them; for it's heads up! and a smirk or smile to every one else but
each other. Not so with unwedded lovers.* The former lean away from each other,
and gaze askant; the latter lean to each other and drink in delicious draughts of
ecstasy from each other's eyes. ‘Now the man who accounts for this state of things
on the hypothesis that the one is passion appeased, the other only anticipatory, *
is a fool, besides being a selfish knave. The true reading is: Magnetic exhaustion
in one case--magnetic.reciprocity in the other, What magnetism is I will tell you
presently; suffice it at this stage to record its existence, and to note such facts
as above adduced, — EPRI HLT CPR EE og ma —

| lke: 1B EDS igs : . | mete 2
__. 1 have already, in a previous paragraph of this section, indicated; generally
by suggestion, the cure for this state of affairs. Briefly, they are to utterly put
a stop to all sources of magnetic deplétion. Keep cool everywhere, under all
provocations and circumstances.’ Eat, drink; sleep well, and whatever you do, make
a ‘business of “it. When you work,’ with hends or brain, do it with a will; but don't
work gll‘the ‘time. When''the day's lgbor is done, forget all about it,’ and devote

po eg

|

atleast two hours of the evening to social talk,., chat, visiting, or receiving,
visitors; walk out; read, listen to music, - and. persistently have your two, or even.
one -hour a day, free from. sordid strife and worldly care. Hard to do it at first.
“inithese grab+all days, wherein, as the sailor said, "People eat hard, work hard,
fare hard, sleep hard, have.a-hard time generally through this. life, at length . dy-

ing hard, and going to perdition at last," which the sceptical old. salt said was

"particularly derned herds

SA otha: of -water saataa ts latent Fohcg showeh 0 cae a ‘town to. flinders; an
Ruel amount of magnetism’ contains. active force. ‘enough to inearnate a new being, and
-launch an immortal soul upon the limitless sea of eternal tye: sn4) yet in five minutes
of growling, stewing, fretting, anger, or in a wanton's.or libertine's arms, thrice
that amount of imperial life is lost--and it penne, 1 PESOs the epertensne of at least
ten. good- deys on earth! : -

 XXVII. of: course excessive venery . is 30 eoGeite nail in. any one. Is coffin;

| Bnd so is excessive child-bearing, seeing that both are broad rivers, discharging
magnetism from the human body and soul. And this reminds me to say. something in

reference, not to the fetid and unclean subject of coneeption-preventives, for I
hold nearly all of them as utter abominations; but on the culture of the will .
directly, and the use of that will, and it, alone, in determining for. and rire
excessive progeny; for a couple had better’ have three peetiy fine esate es than ..,
thirty: half-formed and delicate ones. ety;

2% ' Excessive. pemmeiel plesepres: fst ies produce. dyspepsia, ; Re only. of the body ,
but.of the mind, intellect and soul; and when,off-spring results from such conditions,
what wonder that they are lacking in all the grand essentials of a genuine. and per-
fect. man and womanhood. Absolute and prolonged continence is but a less evil, though
its penalty is’ inflicted upon the transgressor ALONG, The human will, next. to love,
is the most powerful attribute of immortal mankind. In most people it. is splurgy,
occasional, paroxysmal, and, as a steady: power, practically of no account. I have |
“told ‘some persons to "will, f and. straightway they screwed up their faces,. clenched
their teeth, end. looked mo most absurdly and amusingly awful--or ridiculous. . They .
strained. and fumed as if trying to lift a ton. Now will is no such ‘thing, to, be:
exerted in no such way. It is simply a quiet power, “and. requires no muscular. OP ¢,.
nervous, but simply a still, mental force, to urge it into play, when it is feeble,
as>in most it is; it should be cultivated by thinking determinedly, at intervals, of
ene thing only at a time, to the total exclusion of everything, topic. or subject.
besides. . Thus one can will-~after practice--tears to the eyes, blushes to the
cheeks,. pallor to the face, as thousands of ministers and other. actors constantly.
do. We-can will to close our hands or eyes; and just so we close or open the
sphincter ani, or that: of the bowels, bladder, lips, and close them at pleasure. .
The Oneida Perfectionists declare, and with undoubted truth, that any man can, at.
will, after a little.practice, effectually control the ejective action of the
seminal vessels; but he is an unwise and suicidal man who attempts a ShADg so un~ _
natural and injurious.

But how is it with women? Can she control corresponding uterine muscles? I
answer, most assurediy. All mothers: and obstetricians know the enormous expulsive
power of the uterus; and that contractile and expansive power, like that of any
other sphincter, is. measurably under her will. When she.sees fit to keep it closed,
no other power but her own can defeat her purpose; and. she ought to know when to
exert. that power; and there is no necessity to use it, save when she believes an
ovum is then present, and undesirable maternity threatened. In the will-.she has
the only natural agent and means, justified of nature and God, of controlling the

number of her children; but she is. only thus justified, when disease, excessive

«290

maternal weariness, a sickly,‘disordered, depraved or drunken husband, oF one w

she aeae oe is bead sBy yok insanity, gloom of malforiation, tell Ses wee
tones she ought not to ‘give to the world what she cannot give’well, a nt a oa
to her own life. By simply willing, and without much strain, the os tu : wi rele ;
and remain thus for days ‘together; hence all washes and ‘preventives can be pe bite 2c
forever to the bad limbo whence they originated. .

But this is only one of the silent energies of the human will, It is al

and I believe, that whom a woman blesses or curses when her moon is ‘on her, s ays
cursed or blessed till that same woman removes it;*well, if she curses, she hurts
herself, hence cannot afford to do it; ‘but she can, and ought to bless, ‘all the a
This will-power, once started, grows apace; and with it, you, O wife of the troub ed
heart! can powerfully, silently, resistlessly, use it to direct the mighty magnetic
power of your own soul upon him you love, would retain and wear, and wean too, from
bad habits, and the malign influence of those who, claiming to be his friends, are
really your foes, and, by their bad power over him, are practically enemies’ to’both.

Fail you cannot. NOTHING GOOD CAN EVER FAIL! True it may, to quote Poe, be
trodden down; but it will’ rise again to the life everlasting. But to its present: ”
application. In far-off ‘Oriental lands I was the guest of some Arab brethren, of a’
certain mystic tie; and onée'day, in a boat, we sailed away from Boolak, the port.of
grand Cairo, up the stately and solemn Nile. How far we wént, whither, or what‘for,
matters not; but then and there I ascertained that the women of that brotherhood’.
and some others in that distant sunny land, knew some natural secrets, which their
fairer sisters of the West are totally ignorant of. When one of those wives is per-
fectly assured that, by reason of illness, age or weakness, she cannot safely bear,
more children without hazarding both lives, she shrinks with unutterable horror from

what our American women contemplate with a*"pish." At the house of one Mrs. L--ds,
in Boston, I once heard a "woman," then oh the point of marriage, declare she never
would bear a child; but would kill them just as if they were "so' many’ puppy dogs!"
--thé worse than female demon! The Oriental«wife, I repeat, shrinks’with’ superlative |
loathing from the idea of murdering, or conniving at the murder of the fruit of her
womb, as all true women do, and ever will, knowing she were a murderess if she; and
that she is just as certain to suffer for it subsequent to death, as that death it-
self-is sure to come. She knows: that’ the: nature of’ the ties bhat bind her in
marriage will, time and again, subject her: to the chances of maternity. Refuse
those risks she never dreams of doing, well knowing she would be’ either laughéd at,
abused or divorced, or even, if not, that such denials failt to generate quietude- in
the tent, or peace in the family. What then? Why, she either times her meeting: |
with her husband, with reference to her periods, so‘as to: avoid distasteful chances; |
or, if accident prevents that, she merely places the ball of her thumb in her mouth,
breaths hard upon it, strains and "bears down," and is instantly out of danger, ‘for.
both ovum and zoosperm are forthwith expelled by the forceful contractions of the.
uterine and abdominal muscles. In these respects the law of God rules in the Arab
tent, instead of the abortional devils which haunt’ the boudoirs of civilized and’
Christian mankind. ‘ ge

and then only when age, disease, or thalformations render it imperative, On the
contrary, offspring are rightly congidered as spé¢ial blessings from the Supreme
God; hence, the first lesson a bride receives from her mother are those that favor |
such a result. She is told to wholly, fully, freely, prayerfully abandon her entire
faculties and being to the one grand end of woman+life--the sacred mission of the
wifely mother. Hence it happens that the Oriéntal wife is always pure; there are
not a hundred adulteresses or child-killers in all Islam, with its 200,000,000 = *
votaries! There is not as many of thdse fearful crimes committed ‘among all the”

It is indeed very seldom that an Eastern woman resorts to that sinless method,

mi) bod

Mosims, in ten years, as disgrace Boston, New York, or Philadelphia every month we
live. The Oriental wife, with all her glowing soul, wills--save in very rare in-
stances--to be fruitful, as all women should; and becomes so. There are rare cases
in which a wife cannot, * without imperilling her life, undergo the ordeal of maternity,
and then, and then o only, the timely exercise of the will alone foréstalls death,
prevents crime, “and obviates. all suffering. ae. ;

z

XXVIII. love, 3 have stated, is magnetic, and subject to magnetic Peper sone
va-force also, capable, as all know, of exerting very strange effects both upon human
| souls a and bodies. But how? that's the question! Tell us that! I will, listen:z-- |

} Matter and mind, in some mysterious way, are not only both alike and unlike, and
-conjoin to form the thing called man, but they act together directly and indirectly,
fully or partially, and yet are not of the same ceeat albeit they act and react
upon each other -in myriad ways, a fact which every one's experience demonstrates
beyond, cavil. One thing is absolutely. certain; that the mind resides .in the brain; ~
that in it inheres what constitutes us human; and that the conscious point resides
in the centre of the encephalon, at that spot where all three brains meet, viz.,
cerebrum, cerebellum and medulla, or spinal marrow, which is an.elougated brain, is

a clear fact, the proof of which can be found by consul ting any gocd anatomical and
physiological atlas. In this central point, as through and around the corpus.
callosum, there is, in death, a nervous.and spheral waste; in life a briitiant SUN
varying in size from that of a large pea to a perfectly gorgeous sun-shining diamond
three inches in diameter.--A ball of dazzling WHITE FIRE!--and this is the SOUL--
the being par excellence, the tremendous human mystery. It has a double consciousness
one facing time and its accidents and incidents; the other gazing square and straight
right into eternity. For its hither use it fashions material eyes; for its thither
use every one of a myriad rays darting from it is an eye whose powers laugh Rosse's
Telescope to scorn! But there arises a fog from the body which mainly so envelops
this central point that the EYES are veiled; sometimes in magnetic or other sleep
‘the clouds shift, and then one-:or more eyes glance over infinite fields, and —
momentarily glimpse the actualities of space, time, possibility and eternity. - (Were
I, at this point to reveal what I know of. soul, its Gestiny s nature, and the realities
of ‘the ultimate spaces, this world would stand Sesre Ue if renee the temptation,
‘and go on with this book. ). |

‘This central ball draws its supplies from space, air, ether, ana! being ‘mystic
and divine, directly from the Lord of the universe,--the Imperial Mystery ,--Infinite
and Eternal God. .(About which mystery the Savans are as greatly at fault as they
are concerning the facts of GROWTH.) It breathes; has its tides, .its diastole,
systole, flux and ebbs; and, being compelled to gaze on the outer world through
opaque. glasses, diseased bodies, it takes but distorted views of things, and scarce
ever can rely upon the absolute truth of what the SENSES tell it; from which results
mistakes, confusjion,, misapprehensions, crime, and whatever else of evil betides its
fortunes here.

' The Biedth of the body is atmospheric air, which air is more or less penetrated
with the ether of space, the breath of God, and the magnetism of the heavens surround-
ing the entire material universe. On these it subsists; and when it means .a thing
it. discharges a portion of its own sphere, its divine nerval life toward the object -
of its desire and attention; and the vehicle is magnetism, and magnetism is that -

specific vif or fluid life manufactured by the sexual apparatus of either gender, as
said before. . The thing conveyed by it is.the purpose of a soul;. the. result, a cer-
tain yielding of any other force on earth--for nothing can withstand the absolute
decree of the waked-up human. soul. Illustration: eA

XXIX, The soul of a woman non couvert sends its fires all over her form, be-_
cause she loves the man. The atmosphere surrounding her bulges at the equator of

-35=

her body--thé pelvic region-cacross the hip} and she Grews all males to her thon

with a very powerful attraction, . — “? +
ss But after couverture, and before impregnation, if she be disappointed in el
dream of bliss she sends the same. sphere out to any one else ‘but bin; and for a
affectional purposes thereafter, so far as she is concerned, he might as well be
dead; for the sphere flattens,up when he is near her, and although he may cannes. her
obedience ,. he can -never reach her..soul,, Then comes Hades} if not openly, SB act, f
assuredly behind.the scenes! For there's no more warmth, verve, lau, or Pag ite:
her for him, “bécause he has lost the power to evoke them; and while he may, by r gh
of human law, and her sufferance, possess her forn, her soul in its secure citadel
grimly laughs him to gcorn, and dispises him with perfect unction, because it knows
that every time he profanes her he stabs himself to the heart; for he outrages her :
soul, and outrage invités, curses, and whomsdever cn God's broad earsh a WOMAN CURSE
then and there stays accursed, and horror ,and defeat follows in his footsteps wher~
ever he may be! What d'ye think of that, my lady? What d'ye think of that, my
au ee os Age. Ae eee .

_ But take a woman couverture, to the point of pregnancy; no sooner is the monad,
seed or perm lodged within the sacred and most transcendently holy and mystical —
chamber of the womb, and the filamental door has closed the aperture thereof, shutt-
ing out and in its treasure, and from all eyes concealing the divine workshop of the
Eternal, than her soul withdraws its attentions from the womb direct and alone, and
begins to concentrate it and its magnetism upon that womd's contentsz; and from that
instant she begins to love the man no less, but the unborn baby more. Why? Because;
up to that point, her soul depended on the man; but now a new soul depends almost -
wholly upon IT. .She must search out all the best particles of her blood, brain,
food, drink, air, light, nervauca, muscle, bone, lymph, cartilage, carbon, and a
million chemicals wherewith to build up a new body, from original materials, wherein |
this new soul is to dwell for a time and‘tines and half a time,--if the abortionists, |
quacks, and fashions don't kill it. The goul sends lime, iron, silver, gold, ~~
calcium, nearly all thé’earths and salts to make the body stout and strong. Then
she stores up fire in the body,--phosphor,--manuractures canals, pumps, reservoirs, —
telescopes, drums, cylinders, flutes, colwnns, domes, cellars, chemical laboratories, |
and mechanical contrivances of the most marvelous kind. After which she goes aloft |
and brings down fire from heaven, metaphysical flame, and lodges angels all. over the |
little mansion; music here, science there, mathematics and memory, ambition, hope, |
joy, sorrow, love and aspiration.’ After which she takes a lower flight, and calls |
up tempters from the deeps of being to offset the angeis, among whom are avarice,
anger, lying, robbery, lust, and a fearful host beside; well knowing that if her new
charge reach heaven it must do so alone; must toil, and sweat, and tread upon and
over red-hot sands; wade through a million hells on its own feet; fight its way
with its own strong hand, alone; while God looks on and smiles, he knowing that the
goal is sweet, though the road be bitter, and that victory may be won at last.

_. Now, what time has a woman got for the frivolities of love when she is doing
so grand a work as that? : ;

Well, is it any wonder her love changés ‘from her uterus to her bosom? Not any;
and yet there are fools called men who cannot, will not, see all this, but think and |
insist that she whq was so then shall be SO now, when in fact a whole universe rolls
between the two states. She is queer, short, snappish, soft, cranky then, and no
wonder, for she has an undoubted right to raise the very Satan then if she choose;
and most of them do it, for the simple reason ;that they can't help it! Why? Reader,

I have already told you that the human being is all nature incarnated. Nature is
changeable in her moods, sunny, tempestuous, coarse, foul, mean, genial, calm,

Oi, oF

blustery; and all these things and states she is forced to incarnate in the soul,
-spirit;-and body of the new pilgrim about starting on its way from the valley of

earth to the eternal land of A ebiohle the: Spier ae city of the Ineffable God.

ip os oe I have said that,--pregnant stitae aside, and even to a great: Gbites then,
for the mother is’ aided: in all. her mystic work by the husband and father if he be a |
man, and loving, gentle, kind and forbearing as he should be, and not fly at her in
fury and anger , because she fails in some essential things,--the ethereal, magnetic

vehicle, with its load of soul-born love, can be by the persistent’ will projected

upon, and made to effectively she on, almost any though not every human being.

There are those that a given person's magnetic etic effluence will no more touch than
water will a duck's back; it rolls off, and never contacts at all. In such hard
cases the attempt had better be abandoned , for two reasons: first, it cannot succeed,

: owing to organic differences of constitution; and second, if it could it would be

effort thrown away. But the same power and force can be lairacted ‘upon ourselves by
ourselves, either upon an afflicted member of the body , --from brain to heel, --Or

_ upon the internal viscera, as in cases of dyspepsia, liver trouble, ‘kidney | qarri-.

culty, heart disease, cancer of stomach; above all, the pelvic viscera of either
gender when disordered, as most are; gravid uterus, ulcerated, originating frequently
in lacerated, vagina; ovarian disease, vulvular congestions; inflamed prostate, or.
febrile testes and vaginitis,--all these are reachable by the force named, exerted in
the-manner specified in a preceding section, but which are worth repetition. Direct
the attention toward the cause of anxiety,--a person, sick or well, generally, or

to a specific point of body, mind, morals,--and strongly, yet calmly, desire, wish,
will, the love-cure to be effective ; but a few trials will be’ needed to ensure
absolute, if qualified, success; an assuagement will assuredly follow, nor is the
genuine cure far off. It is a scientific application of thé mother's power over her

babe, exerted on a wider scale.

XXXI,- But what's the use of anything unless fees and enjoyed? There are
thousands of married couples living in a very bad and unhappy state, simply because
they won't fairly try for any other; and so magnetic will-force is of no account,
whatever, as a force per se. It must be exerted to be available.» Then, and not till
then, it, and the love borne on it, is_one of the most powerful instrumentalities on
earth, Witness the many undoubted. cures of disease effected by those who go about —
laying on of hands; for although some of them ar charlatans, yet others are not, in
proof of which behold the results following their practice. But wives and husbands -
neglect this matter, and suffer in consequence. People find one another growing
cool--from causes already set forth herein,--and instead of checking that coolness,
by trying to, they fly off at a tangent, set up a domestic growlery, create in-
numerable excuses for a fuss; grow sullen, morose; and contrive, by every earthly
means, to render matters ten times worse than ever; when a timely and persistent
resort to the aid of the great magnetic law would speedily correct all the, trouble,
which, in married life, nine times in ten, originates either in outside or inside
magnetic exhaustion; or in domestic passional satiety, and excessive nervous waste,
which creates disgust on one side, antipathy on the other, with a grilling fire of
discontent between the two. Now this, to some, may be an unpalatable truth, yet
true nevertheless. And here, as well as anywhere else, let me say further, that a
fair share of obedience to the supreme law of cleanliness, sunshine and ventilation,
will go a gréat way toward preventing magnetic exhaustion, and put a stop to that
same satiety and disgust, with all their attendant and over crowning horripilances..
Some people bathe ‘too often, and a have seen ‘those whom I did not borteye had bathed
five times’ in sixty years.

If a vwite finds her hisBAAd growing cool, let her attend to her ‘dress, manner 3
smiles instead of frowns; sugar, not salt; ‘honey, not vinegar; and place her ee
steadily, strongly, persistently, upon him, at the same time sending forth her

i

ih ce Ci is ea : i oy ane Re ; i : 1 4 i
womaii's love, sympathy, and magnetic force of magnetic love. The man emmuar
who can resist it!. His. love will revivé. just as surely as that beateh a= ste oo
she cannot work this magic pees 2 anger, Jealousy 2c ees Rib ae
member this, for it is the gra rue secret of fascir = ene
‘birds, and has worked miracles in human life. The same principle obtains among
unwedded. Jovers: | eae iPes |

“When wi ar reir best food their own house-
‘When wives dress up and put their best food forward to please

holds, as they do for outsiders;. when the husband dons his best coat and pene ogni

boots and.bat, cane and gloves as often and readily, to walk out with his own wi Bs

as--when away--he does to do. the same for somebody else's, the world will be a goo

deal better off than it. is to-day.. adic

” Ment ves will be happy and pleasant when they learn: lst. That a woman is...
ati eg ebteas oe eee sort. atin a. That wives appreciate forbearance. 3d. .
That, occasionally a woman's organization becomes so deranged that she needs sym-
pathy, love, tenderness and great patience on his part, for she cannot help her
_vagaries. Bread thus thown upon the waters will return a harvest of. love ere many
‘days. Ath, A wife is a truer friend, even if homely, than the most beautiful out-
sider that ever lived. 5th. Take your wife into your counsels; the place of amuse-
ment; walk, talk, and be pleasant with her.. Attentions pay large interest. 6th.
Never bring all your troubles home to saddle them on her; and 7th, and last, Study
your wife, and adapt yourself to her; let her really be your other half; for lo!
ye twain are one flesh. No matter what mothers-in-law, or any relation, may say or
do. Remember that ye are one, and "For this cause shall a man be such in soul and
Spirit, as well as in law, gospel, and appearances. . |

Any mother, can, if she will, produce offspring that shall be superior to either |
parent, by avoiding all disagreeable of whatever kind of nature. By believing she
shall and will produce a superior specimen of the race, and by firmly resisting dis-

content, anger, jealousy, hatred, and all evil-~dwelling only on that which is true,
- beautiful and good. “

_ Women suffering from affectional perversions, resulting in the trains of evils
known, as "female complaints," have a positive means of rejuvenation in the will, in
the cultivation of the purer attributes of their nature; observance of the law of
soap and water, and a firm determination to be no longer slaves to drugs, anger,
selfishness, the doctors, envy,.or anything else calculated to unbalance them. Thus
mentally they can heal themselves, become healthy, and gain the new, life, energy,
and power. 7 cai . Aves “A

We now pass to the consideration of one of the ‘tost strange and aberant. phases
of love--if love be not a misnomer as applied to it--with which the mind has to .
guapple during. its search into the mazy labyrinths. concealed beneath the human form.

universe with the jaundiced eyes of some zealot, full,of bile, gloom, bitterness .and
bigotry;.if I were capable of believing that God is not all good; if I could imagine
a yawning gulf, and it peopled with tortured souls, whose agonizing shrieis for
sudden death were answered back by the exultant shouts of jubilant fiends, with a |
KING DEVIL at their head,--which I can't--but.if I could, then would I.believe that
from that pit, clean back of the shadow of God, came trooping forth.a score of 24
superlatively horrible gorgons, destined by the mandate of the chief fiend to desolate
the earth, and torment mankind, among which, gne, always clad. in. rays of light, yet
sweltering with venom at its.heart, stands among.the foremost... I mean:that awful

thing for whicl7Epglish there is.no mame, but which ever and always assumes the garb:

XXXII, If it was possible for me to look upon this broad world and broader .

=38-

and mien and office of the bright, heaven-born angel, IOVE. In other of my books I
have. named. this Eaahs tent thing Vampyrism ee)

Now the name is. familiar to everybody, because, in the first place it pertains
toa monstrous leech which inhabits tropical waters; fastens on to whatever has
sentient life, and never lets go until the last drop of blood, is sucked out, and the
victim topples into the arms of death. Secondly, the same name is applied to a
huge. bat inhabiting dark caverns in Oriental and other lands, darkness and gloom
being its natural habitat; and when man or beasts travelling along that way chance .
| to, fall asleep, ‘this bat of Hades stealthily approaches, ‘and gently, ‘soothingly,

) flaps its huge wings, croning and droning its weird sing-song the while; thus fanning
| its victims, until a deep, comatic sleep falls upon them, so hard and strong, that
not a stir is made whilé the bat Prans: a vein, and drinks its fill of living gore! .

“When the awaking comes, the ayes open in another world than this, for. mankind,
never at all for beasts. The name in the third use is attached to certain peculiar,
| fantastic beings,--half human, half demon,, of Oriental and German story. These be-
ings emerge from deep darkness in the middle of the night; open new-~made graves,
take out the bodies therein, eat the flesh, and then , the horrid banquet over,
stealthily return whence they came, surfeited to plethora with the dreadful repast.
But it sometimes happens--so goes. the legend--that no new-made graves offer their
temptations, and still the ghouls must live; wherefore they gain access to houses
and drain the veins of whomsoever they possibly can. These harpies are, however,
vulnerable to shot and death; but if you kill one, be sure to bury him five feet or
a fathom, beneath the solid earth; and be sure you run a stake through his breast,
with a cross on top; and if possible, at a cross-roads; for if you negleét to do
this, and the vampyre's body remains above ground, just as soon, and as surely as
the moon's beams shine upon it, just so surely will its life return and it go scot
freeto continue its ravages through successive lives and deaths. All these horrid
things, whether creative of nature in some of her dark moods, or whether some of
them are the offspring of.perverted imagination, the reality, if of life or of
legend, alike are all bad enough, and we turn from the bare contemplation of each
with a shudder, begotten of horror on the body of disgust; and yet, fearful as they
are, not one of them, or all combined, can equal the horrible reality--the absolute-
ly unmistakable genuine, living human ghouls,.right in our very midst; devouring
gorgons, who are everywhere about us; who go up and down our streets, and in and out
before us, clad in fine raiment; faces decked with smiles; and who only enter our
houses, and partake of our hospitality, to betray our trust, and fatten on the lives
of us and ours--for where of the male gender their sole aim is to gratify their own
infernal morbidity of passion at anybody's expense whatever; and the wives and
daughters of our friends become the prey of wretches, for whom no punishment is too
severe ;--doubly-dyed vampires, from whom conscience has forever taken its flight,
and to whom gratitude is unknown. The ghoul ériginates in such marriages as have
no love to cement the union. The father is a coarse, selfish, material surface man,
without tenderness, affection,--anything wholly human; and his wife, if not as cold
as himself, is probably just the opposite, and from the altar to the grave never
realizes the least love;--nothing but selfish passion,--is a woman who yearns, and
vainly, for what she cannot get, --true love; and the consequence is that her child
comes to earth with yearnings never to be gratified; love-hungry from eternity to
time, and through time all the way back to eternity again! Now, when he or she
thus born, encounters those of opposite gender, who are full of love, they cling to
such with the tenacity of death itself, until they sap.out the full soul, and fill
their empty ones. What care they even though desolation, despair and death follow .
in their footsteps, and all their tracks are blood spots from hearts that they have
broken? For so long as these leeches get their fill, no matter what. evil betides
those upon whom they feed,--and whom they ruin. These ghouls have no principle,

-39-

declare love with like fervor to every one they meet; and having age ara prot
ed their happiness, destroyed their peace of mind,. shipwrecked = reps phage
daughters, debauched honest men's wives, they brag of it, and send fie 7 eee ee
remorse and shame, to crown the victims of their rapacity, and piten ge os °
Their crime is fiendish. I conclude this section by briefly recapitula ng : © Fee

gestee of it, which may be thus summarized :--

“Many people of both sexes often experience a terrible attraction nice another,
that resembles, but is not, love. On the contrary, it is a fearful, mons ae
passion, and they almost vainly struggle to escape it. Such persons et vampyr : 3
and a vampyre is a person born love-Hungry, who have none themselves, who are ag 2 y
of it, but who fascinate and literally suck others dry who do have love in their
natures. Detect it thus: the vampyre ‘is selfish, is never content but in handling,
fondling its object, which process leaves the victim utterly exhausted, and they
don't know why. Break off at once. Baffle it by steady refusal; allow not even
hands to touch, and remember that the vampyre seeks to prolong his or her own
existence, life and pleasure, at the expense of yonr own, Women when thus assailed
should treat the assailant with perfect coldness and horror. Thus they can baffle
this ‘pestiferous thing--which ‘is more common than people even suspect; in fact, an
everyday affair. Many a man and wife have parted, many still live unhappily together.
some aware, but many unconscious, that the prime cause of all their bickerings and
discontent is vampyrism on the part of one or the other. It causes fretfulness,
moodiness, irritability; a feeling of repugnance arises toward the one who should ~
bé most dear; and eventually positive dislike takes the place of that tender affec-
--tion which should ever grow more and more endearing between those who have given
themselves to each other. This dislike becomes in many cases so strong that the
parties cannot endure each other's presence; and separation becomes inevitable,
neither, perhaps, conscious of the true cause, This is sometimes owing to an in-
ferior development of amativeness, sometimes to debility, lack of vitality, the
consequence of a feeble or shattered nervous system; and in either case the cure is
to be found in less frequent contact, separate rooms, health, and’ mutual endeavor
to correct the fault. , .

XXXIII. What vast hosts, what tremendous throngs of what are called husbands,
and notoriously what almost infinite numbers of married women find home a real hell |
on a small scale instead’, and all for want of mutuality, domesticity, sympathy, and, |
above all, reciprocity, that is the impartation and reception each by, to, and
from the other, of the mysterious thing known as magnetism! And many such there be,
who, realizing nothing but the worst kind of blanks in their lottery of life, |
actually long for death, or anything else, to mitigate or change the current horror
of their lives. People, too, maké gréat mistakes about this self-same mystic’
magnetism. They imagine it to be either all physical, or all mental, when, in fact,
it is both; and this subtle fluid, or emanation, is the absolute connecting link
between soul and body, matter and mind, and, ultimately, between man the Deity.
Thus in a few lines is solved a mystery which has puzzled the world for centuries,
--that of the subtle something which was, and is, the connecting link between the
two. There is a magnetism or effluence of soul, arising in, and flowing forth from, |
the persons of either’ sex, who are, by nature, endowed with large, open, free,
sensitive, generous souls; and this sphere is deeply charged with mind, love, and
all else that distinguishes noble from ignoble souls. Nor does this magnetism de-
pend at all upon size of brain, or mere physique; for it abounds as much among the
@mall people, intuitive and physically weak, as it does among those who are
-materially opposite in construction. Hence a man or woman of this wort, if the.
partner be loved, will be able to parent offspring every way perfect, and phy-
sically speaking, better than themselves. There is but little danger of Buch per-
sons: going to the bad, because all their natural tendencies are upward and advancive,

=L0s!

not retrogressive, barbaric, or descensive; for their soul-magnetism charges their
physical, and it is full of life, energy, emotion and goodness; hence, whoever comes

within the area of its action is. pened sheds not injured; and this is an imperative,
pniversal: Tae! 7

7 XXXIV, But there is another, and e gome extent, more powerful magnetism ‘than.
this. And I may here remark that it is a generally conceded fact ,that illegitimate
_ children are nearly always smartest, as compared with the fruits of honest marriage;
' but are they the best? Doubted, as a general thing. They are smarter, fuller of
nerve, dash, elan, be because struck into being at passion's highest tide; but their
moral natures and principles are almost universally, wofully deficient; and of all
' the famous bastards of hisoty not one was ever noted for goodness! © True, they all

have a very large measure of personal magnetism, and mental force; but let it never
_ be forgotten that goodness alone is absolute power, and, therefore, the best is al-
ways greatest, even though -the good man make less show then the more volatile and

estimably gifted son of earth; wherefore, he who would beget the noblest sons and
*« daughters must do so under the “dominends of a calm and steady love, within the pales
of those barriers which society has erected to protect itself from barbaric savage
principles and peoples, individual as well as aggregative. an

XXXV. There is another sort of magnetism, rich, full, voluptuous, ‘atga ak
which originates in body, not in soul; and it flows in copious streams from the per-
sons of such as have it, suffusing everything and everybody with its warm and.
vivifying power. It is charged with passion, enthusiasm, volcanic fire; and ‘while
it warms others is very apt to burn. It comes of full veins, ‘large lungs, Jlévers;
good digestion, steady nerves, fulness of habit, appetite and spirit, and always
more or less wins influence and marked distinction for its possessor. Aaron Burr
was a good example of its nature, character, and power. Now mark this: The ghoul
wins and ruins, because affectionally and in love he is a perfect vacuum; and:silly,
female butterfly women rush to him, and get their wings scorched like any. miller at
-@ candle, because the empty gorgon draws upon their fulness. . They think to find
reciprocation, but attain utter exhaustion and ruin instead. On the other hand, the
physically magnetic man,suffueses the bodies and souls of his victims with his own
magnetic fulness; the woman, or man, as the case may be, is drawn to him or her, ‘and
while he or she is there to keep up the incessant play. of aromal forces; both are
happy; but when the parting time comes, and the lesser person no longer has the full -
one to draw, drain, or feed upon magnetically, then heart-aches and: excruciating
pangs follow upon one side, and, generally, a magnificent Sere and Somtin
care-much-about-it-ness on the Ait 7

People with debts of gratitude to pay name towns, countries, ent rivers,
ships, inns, horses;.and boabs after their benefactors and friends. I never exactly
follow precedents, yet have a little bill to pay, and do it by ehristening a hither-
to nameless crime. I allude to the horrible one committed by a species of human
ghoul differing from either of the others just described. The Dentonite,--for such
is:the name I give the awful sin--is soulless, and ‘altogether void of human feeling;
.I mean he is not immortal any. more than a mongrel cur-dog is, and his lack of soul
impels him to seek to supply the dreadful want from young girls, whom he will re-
morsely violate and ruin, even if cool deliberate knife-butchery aids him in his
fiendish crime--as is often the case; and terrible, awful, outright murder ends. the
dreadful tragedy. 1 can conceive no worse horror than that, nor give it-a more

befitting name,

XXXVI. My investigations into the mysteries, philosophy, and rationale of the
human being, and its loves and passions, has led me to the inevitable and irrestible
conc unee that Force is of body, APTOS» and muscular SR RPRAP AREAS mainly; and that

Ra

ee” Giri Fee Pees *, re i pro ea (rte FESS ie ¥ i ee , 3 gone -
real POWER lies in the soul alone. Now, by the term power I do not mean, a ie
aS misunderstood me.in the past to mean, the mere genital powers oe ge to
ihan and brutés; but 1 do mean that itresistible energy latent in all souls, ¢ 2
developed but in an exceedingly limited fewe I hold that no power, Bie as hes
intended to be understood, ever comes to man through the intellect. ater =
the Baconian adage, "Knowledge is power," is not wholly, but only Saat il ici
for I here repeat, Goodness alone is power, and goodness inheres not in rain, ms

in heart, metaphysically speaking, or on the emotional side or ‘department of man's
intricate and’ involute nature; wheréfore, I lay down as an axiom, that power can
only come to,,and be developed in, the soul through Love; not passion. or lust, his.
you, but Love; the underlying, primal fira-life of the immaterial soul; the invisi e
being that’ constitutes us man or woman; the fire-energy subtending the very basis of
our being and, indeed, of all else that exists outside the Eternal Flame itself, the
unimaginable Lord God of the Infinite Universe, that most mystical Heat which fuses
all things, subtends. all existence, and which is the formative floor of the worlds
now rolling in silent majesty ‘through space, cushioned upon the AEther, the: very

“breasts of the mother side of ! Now, the true sensing of that higher, deeper, inner

love is the beginning of the road which leads the soul into, anc invests it with,
real power in the loftier degrees; for Love, I maintain, lieth at’ the foundation.
And it is the very synonym of life and strength, and lordly will, and clingingness, |
and truth, and real development; wherefore, I lay it down as another immutable truth |
“that the true=love conjugation of man and wife is the loftiest and most sacred.
prayer to, and imitation of, God, possible to any creature in the whole'vast realm
of matter and mind, spirit and thought. Thus, in proof: how often it happens that
a loving couple continually grow more youthful in soul, fruitful in happiness, and
joyous in habitude, instead of servile, decrepit, warped and prematurely wrinkled,
as in the cases of those to whom the wondrous realities of love are as thrice- _
sealed books! Why? Because they who thus truly love, in their sacred, spiritual
‘passion, strike, out’ this divine spark; partake of that celestial fire; replenish
themselves with the quintessence of life itself; grow better, and spiritually
stronger, and more beautiful, ripe, morally wealthy, calm, hopeful, attuned to’ this
‘ upper music; pass the brutal lands untouched; walk unharmed-amidst moral malarias,
and draw down to their souls, as copper-rods the lightning, the divine fervor and «
fire’ of the aerial spaces, the far-off heavens, and become baptized of the Holy
Spirit, and earthly proteges of the supreme Lord of Glory,--our God. on

‘Now once in a while couples do love each other, and from the product of such |
uriions, what few civilized people there are take their rise and departure; and thus
the world is saved by God's fiat, just as-one honest man, and good,:was declared }
sufficient to prevent the overthrow of Sodom.

re .. The world owes its salvation to the accidents of Love; but by and by, what are
" now exceptional cases will become the universal rule, and then farewell human Boy~ |
hood, and welcome Manhaod, x _
Couples not loving each other are mutually exhaustive, and, as a consequence,
fret and fume, worry the life out of ene another, and.wear their very souls thread-
bear and to shreds, so’ that here on earth they amount to but little, and after
death enter the ethereal realms in a state of immortal leanness, wizzemess, .
scranniness, requiring, perhaps, ages of time, or, at least, a long lapse of years,
before they can ever reach a condition of soul-fatness', or celestial plumptitude.
We can gain much by truly loving! it,

4 XXXVEI, LIGHT ts the shadow of God! Deity is never to be seen, for He ever

_recedes from telescopic or visual scrutingy. But He is always to be FELT; and who-
soever feels for God is sure to’ touch and find him! for when we feel for him. he
invariably comes forth and whispers to the sou}: HERE AM I! But the inscrutable

Bi

BEING dwells within the Everlasting SHADOW,--behind the the Everlasting Flame; for
HE IS THE ‘ETERNAL, FIRE! and the Giateasehos of All HEAT: not the heat of combustion,
but its opposites, like unto that which is evolved from within our souls when we .
truly LOVE. Men gazing upon soler light have been struck dumb with the tremendous
conception that God was concentrated Light, and that to find him they must rush into
the intolerable’ effulgence, the awful brillance of all the focal spaces} But they
erred.: The amazing glories they beheld and conceived, and which they. confounded:
with,*or’to be the very God, was but the dark shadow shiefding him from view in the

_ penetralia os mystery! Man, not God, is concentrated, focalized fire,--a condensa-
tion and crystallization of God's Nervous Fluid; and everything, especially the
human soul, is a form of that firé. But man, as we know him here, is not the only
boi?-Gdaseloughows in being; nor is this the best or worst of worlds. “There are,
and the AErial spaces abound with, multiform intelligences, having their conscious.
origin in AEthereal realms, as we "have ours in matter. But as the divine Fire is
the base of all alike; 4nd as love and interfusion is the destiny of all, it follows
that there is one common point where the sub-human, human, and’ ‘ultra-human can con-
tact .each ‘other and-meet; and this point is that of interblending, for that. one.
point everywhere, and in all things, is the only one thing common to all which exist
vas" payne entities anywhere. % ' 4

It follows again that the higher the motives urging us when ‘that. ‘univorgal ‘auty
is accomplished, the more powerful is the prayer it really is; the highér iu yeaches;
‘the more it brings us en rapport with the blessed ones of the purer AETH, and the —
greater rain of goodness, power, health, life, mystic enjoyment, and all possible .
good it‘calls down upon our heads to saturate our souls. But there are grades of
these ultra-human orders, towering away from our place and position in the eternal
scale, in series vast, inconceivable Eterne; and other series descending to an
equally unimaginable deep of the opposites of what we call goodness; and _these, too,
meet us on one common ground as the others; and can and do, when we give lust.the..
rein, instead of love, ascend from the depths to us, and infuse ws with strange. ills
and evils. The White Magic, » which I here revedl, teaches how to rapport the good,
The Black Magic of Africa and America Gendicoten rapports us with the denizens Pee
hell; and crime and wretchedness as surely flow out from the one affiliation, as the
good flows forth from the other. I have made this revelation here, because it will
do good, and afford a new field for the explorations of such’ as are interested din.
solving the ‘tremendous problem of evil, its Sages and OTa2 iN, 5: ; r

ye im.

‘<EXXVITIS ~T Have’ Lei wady told the worla nebeint and asthe te "Soul, the .-
Soul-world, and Homes of the Dead;" reprint and enlargement of the original volume
"Dealings with the Dead" )--that the seat of human consciousness is. in, the brain, --
that it is a polar world or globe of white diamondesque fire in the human head... It
is subject to two states, a positive and negative, masculine or electric;. and a-
feminine, oh VES or womanesque state. In its intellectual or male mood, it  ..;
thunders forth its edicts from its throne in the brain, the central point éf the

“head. But in its most awe~inspiring, creative and mystic moods, its fiats are given
forth’ from another seat within the body. The’ brain is its throne of Force; the
pelvis its seat of POWER! In sleep, especially that which is healthful, t therefore
dreamless, the soul sends a fibril of fire--an incandescent railway, from. the corpus
calossum to the medulla oblongata, down the spinal marrow to right back of the .
stomach; to the solar plexus,--the great storehouse where the servants af the body .
bring all the treasures they:-have gathered during the wakeful day, from the various —
laboratories,--stomach, intestines, ovaria, nerve-ganglia, lungs, liver, testes,
arteries; and there the soul charges the fine aroma with its own life, and sends.
them back to become parts and portions of the living being; it imparts, life-fire to .
every section of the human frame. After this the soul sometimes.sends a filamental .

ports out into the air, above : the earth, and on that ladder of light mounts, the azure,

~13-

and scans and’ contemplates distant Scenes, and occasionally Entei reat ak ee a
.4tself! “Hence: all dreams, could we translate them, have a fixed and determinate .

MeerADgs 4.4) adi foun ownte aced eved sine l aa Baad.
‘c. | But ‘there is a farther revelation to be made right here. Jf human, interblend-
ing occurs while weary, half asleep, vexed, anxious, distrustful, suspicious,,

thinking of money, or in an excited, passionate or mental state, two things are
Likely to occur, i.e., pregnancy,--in which case the child is sure to come here

‘and stay’ here, die here, and go ‘to the other world,, and remain there, for centuries
perhaps--half asleep, vexed, anxious, distrustful, suspicious, and mentally or
otherwise éxcited all the livelong years; for although the woman builds up the child,
the’ father invariably imparts the bias, because :-- .

' XXXIX. In the beginning'of the marriage every fibre of his body sends a -
“gpiritual--material portion of itself to the left half of the prostate gland, and
his spiritual, emotional, soul and mind send corresponding portions of themselves

to the ‘right half of the prostate, and at the ,exact instant that these all meet at
‘that point,.the nervo-vital muscles spasmodically contact, and the procreative fluid
passing through, takes with it the prostatic exudations, and the immortal being is
thus charged with a joyous load of heaven, or a grievous burden.of intolerable
‘horrors. But impregnation may not occur; yet the fluids thus charged, and discharg-
! ed, are absorbed in’ great measure by the innumerable mouths and ducts.of the..vaginal
parietes, and she ‘absorbs his physical, mental and moral poisons as surely as if

the husband was freighted down with syphilitic virus;--only that the one eats away

and cankers her flesh;-‘while the other corrodes her soul! |. .;. '

Men are: proverbially, in these matters, careless of possible consequences, and
,this is‘a source of terrible dread to their wives; to such a degree, that fear
paralyzes their passional nature; and on‘their side there is, and can be, no re- ..
‘sponse; finding which to: be the‘case, the average husband prows crisp and cranky, ,
offish, petulant, downright angry; all of which she feels, and discord and misery
reign beneath that ‘roof, .~.!. aa i ee Lae = ;

Well? Reply: By an effort of the will the male can prevent the prostatic
flow; ‘and, secondly, the wife by becoming mentally positive at the crisis, and
willing that she ought not, mist not, will not conceive, cannot; or that she will
not absorb that which will impair her mental or physical health--cannot so absorb

it. Hence she is ‘safe, whenever she willis to be! .

-+ XL. Power, true power, can only descend from heaven to true loving souls, be-
cause: power is feminine, and woman represents it, albeit she is. practically. ignorant
of the fact; and a man has yet to learn that the seeds of power descend either
through the feminine: channels of his soul, of to him through woman, All great- men
have been made so through women, either by their mothers, or by some woman whose love
made her will and-wish him to be good, great and happy, during the sacred prayer of
holy, loving wifehood, I haye already alluded to the ability of a woman to utterly
ruih any man: her soul loathes and hates, under precisely the same circumstances; .for
itvlies’within her power to make or mar the best man living. I have seen it tried,.
in both the make and the mar, and with results magnificent in the one case, and in-.
sufferably poignént ‘in the other, Thus man, by love all the time, but especially |
then, can wholly modify woman's character, and, kindle her ice to a gentle, constant
and invigorant flame. But carelessness and ignorance on the part.of many millions
of wives; in some sense, make them responsible for their own miseries; for they all
have the ability to ‘resist the depleting effects of pestilent vampyrism, and avoid
all ‘the‘disedses, disasters and ailments, mental, moral, physical and emotional. ...
thus erigendered; and also to wholly transform the nature and character of almost 7"

|

wile

any man, no matter how coarse, inconsiderate, careless, indifferent or mean.

ft dst
,

In hart these new and weighty truths I victoriously plant the: white banner
over ‘the frowning ramparts of the social world. Why? How? Attend :--

_XLI. Because almost everywhere in this broad ‘and marriage practically exists

as & repressive system; it is all head, and the man is that head, while the wife is

but an appendage, and by no means either partner or equal; and, so long as such is

, the gase, things will not grow better, because happiness is what every one seeks _

for, and if not found at the fireside at home will be searched for elsewhere. Now
I want to stop all that by showing the law underlying human weal as it has never
been shown before on earth. The system of marriage should be one of absolute
equality and partnership between couples. I want to help along that system; for -
the one now in vogue practically drives enormous hosts of people to heaven across
lots, over steep-down gulfs of social and domestic horror. I am teaching all to
avoid such. On the marriage question, as mainly discussed , at present, there is too
much everlasting gabble on the horrors of deformity in all parts of the social,
machine; but I seek to make people purer, nobler, truer, and draw, not drive, ‘them
heavenward by appeals to the good, the true, and the beautiful latent, within them,
and which, when active, brings bliss to every beating heart. _

~ Sidhe TOO many marriages concern themselves about mourning; I wish them to be
deeply, continually interested about Joy. They think mainly concerning how to make

the best of a bad bargain; bearing life's crosses; abiding with befitting patience

to the end, and all that; while I am teaching them how to make a bad.bargain an
exceedingly good one; ae to neutralize the social poisons by wholesale--and the
worst of them are generated at home and all through the triple white magic of Love,
will, and persistent trying; that is, to cure their ills by the constant exercise
of common sense, which, it seems, after all, is a very uncommon thing, judging by |
the stupid way in which nine married couples out of every ten totally ignore its
clear and plain behests; for common sense is the genius of the AYO age mind, and is
an excellent guide to go by.

_ XLIII. I have said, and it is true, that the other, the feminine, magnetic,
and, therefore, superior pole, or polar dwelling, of the viewless soul of human kind,
is in the genital system of each sex respectively; whence it follows that in all

nuptial unions,. where true love reigns and rules, governs and controls, the entire

beings of each party, the entire soul of each officiates at the banquet, and the,
celebration; wherefore, both the positive and negative powers and forces of each .

party assist at the--in the--incarnation of the new soul, if a new soul is then and
there called into outer being, to run the gauntlet of time “in its race.to the fields
of ati and all such generation is holy; and, it being a genuine ArEigce, none
but truly human children are called into the world.

But where no ins inspires the parents, only one of the two, grand forces of

their souls officiate either in, or at, the generation of. their mutual offspring;

and, such children are death-sure to be "deficient in some quality, and to pay through
lives more or less angular, limited and bitter, for. the sins of their parents, and
their profanation of the holiest of all human sanctities, and violation of the grand-
est and deepest law of the human world--that of Love; from such. conditions it

happens that the lands are teeming with half-men, half-women, and abound in human
weaklings. "Illegitimates" are exceptional in, brilliance, because at least some
tolerable measure of love, and a great deal of Passion, obtained when they were |

_ called into earthly existence.

Apply the principle herein laid down, and it is not hard to see the reason why

ohh

inferior-brained, but strongly loving and loved women, become mothers of mental-
moral millionaires, while bron cness give us children born to pthc ee pba
“pentiry. Men’ with comparatively small cerebral capital and calibre, bu z ee e -
nature is large, full, open, generous, almost invariably become fathers to : e ;
mental superiors; while per contra we all know that great talent, and actua foree
seldom produtes anything higher than a very low grade of mediocrity. Their children
are notoriously below par-~and PA also, These truths may be new and novel, as are
many of those to follow herein, but they aré assuredly destined and commissioned to
revolutionize the world of thought on these subjects, nevertheless and nothwith-
standing. aD |

XLIV. “The negative or brain pole of the soul, so to speak, is Thoughtful.
Its‘itission is to scan, search, explore, investigate, reason, understand, know. It
is en'rapport more or less perfectly, with the intellectual and OCR ean es
that’ is to. say, it is masculine and electric. Now an electric man “progresses,
stores up; ‘ddvances toward, ‘arid captures knowledge, facts, things, ideas and
principles; arid only give him time, and he will become an encyclopedia on legs, for
all ‘that's ‘knowable he feels’ bound-to find out. But the positive pole or sphere of
the sdul being feminine or magnetic, is. in direct- contact or rapport with the very
soul of being itself;--the foundation fires of the universe--with all that vast
domain underlying increase, growth, generation, evolution, emotion, heat, expan-
sion, efiergy, power--the sole and base of being, the arterial blood of God Himself
~-measureless: LOVE--the primal fire-flow of the whole vast realm of universal
existence, whence ‘the female is nearer God than the male, and God is far more female
than its oppésite; for it is in him, as‘in the human, a far less iabor to create
than it ‘isto gestaté and bring forth. “God struck the universe into being a single
- fiat of hisImperial Will; but it took ‘even him billions of centuries to gestate
and bring forth man;' just as a man occupies one second of time-only, to plant a
monad in the utériine soil, but it takes woman forty odd weeks to prepare it for its
uses on ‘the earth; or it takes man one second to begin to work, which occupies all
the energies of woman's soul and body about. twenty-six million seconds to complete
what he began! Hence one good mother is worth at least fifty millions of male
drones, without love to guide them heavenwards; and her influence for good in the
universe; bears the ‘same ratio to his worthlessness, as a general rule; and right

- here I desire t6 impress upon my readers, not only the tremerdous value and im- = |
portan¢e of any human soul, and the awful corisequences of destroying human life at
any ‘stage; but to enforce upon them the absolute necessity of marriage and parentage, |
--for every child, no matter how imperfect, is eventually a positive gain to the
universe; and every female who goes to the grave childless; every man who fails in

‘his ‘duty to himself, God and nature, and dies without prolonging his human Tine, ©

conitiits a grave offence,--so grave as ‘not ‘to be easily forgiven. ~ ~~ |

\

Thus it is readily seen that ‘through’ Love man seizes directly on'‘all ‘that is,
and is in actual contact and rapport with all and singular every being that FEELS
and ‘Loves ‘within the confines of the habitable universe. But shy amount of brain or
oe Sp te may SS aoe him to a very few at most, because all seritient
“ereatures love and feel, while comparatively few can think and know. ‘UJ FOREVEE

against THE WORLD! “The positive’ throne or Sant of the soul, an he uate, tert
‘near, and about the prostatic gland, with three radii extending to the connected
viscera, whence t happens that emasculation injures the very soul itself.’

; In the female, the major: forde of the’ soul resides inthe uterus, with three
radii extending to the right and left ovaria and the cohnected viscera, whence it |
happens that illness or injuries there have the most batéful, -injurious and debilitat-
ing effect upon every portion and department of her being and nature, We often
hear the phrase "A fine specimen of a woman!" "A magnificent woman!" but such terms

-L6— :

. are never applied to any mere bundle of brains, but always of those of fine phy-.
sical presence, geniality of demeanor, and magnetic fulness, indicating Love within
the soul, whether it be well and highly cultured or not. Now it is possible for a
man to grow fat who is lean, or lean who is fat, by pursuing steadily Bantingism--
_ 1 believe they call it--or its opposite, as the case may demand; and I know that a.
lean soul can also. grow fat, and non-magnetic people reverse their states. The
mode I have already herein pointed out, hence need not again recur to.

XIV. Do not forget that herein and elsewhere I have declared the great truth,
that true manhood and woman hood are more or less en rapport with one or more of |
the upper hierarchies of Intelligent Fotentialities, earth-born and not earth-born.
I believe there are means whereby a person may become associated with, and receive
instruction from, them. More than that, I believe in what 1 may call will-magnets,
or talismans; that it is possible to construct and wear them, and that they emit
a peculiar light, discernible across the gulfs of space by those intelligent powers,
just as we discern a diamond across a play-house; that such are signals to the be-
holders; and that: they will, and do, cross the chasmal steeps to save, succor, and
assist the wearers, just as a good brother here flies to the relief of him who shall
give’ the grand hailing-signs of distress. This is provable. -

4 eZ

This grand mystery of the will, properly cultured, is the highest aid to man,
for it is a divine Energos, white, pure magic, the miracle-working potentiality
which cometh only to the free and wholly unshackled human soul; while to woman it.
is the only salvation from marital vampyrism, the shield and buckler of her power,
and the groundwork upon which must be builded the real rule of her influence in the
world and at home. The reasons why will be readily seen by recurring to the basic
propositions of the divine science, which declares that God, the soul of the universe
if POSITIVE HEAT, CELESTIAL FIRE; that the aura of Deity (God-od) is LOVE, the
prime element of all power, the external fire-sphere, the informing and formative
pulse of matter. The deduction is crystalline; for it follows that whoso hath most
love--whether its expression be coarse or fine, cultured or rude--hath, therefore,
most.of God. in him.or her; the element of time being competent to the perfecting of
all refining influences, over the ocean of Death, if not upon the hither side. Con-
versely put, the statement stands thus: whoso most resembleth God, therefore, hath
most of love, goodness, and the elements of power. God is not a libertine! Now
these latent energies I claim to here give the true knowledge of, that all may
understand the laws of love, will, and ethereal force, and the principles and modes
of their evolution, and crystallization in the homos; the result aimed at being the
climination of the gross, and their orderly consolidation into personal power. I
hold that LOVE is, ever was, and eternally will be, absolutely pure. Paste is not
diamond,. though they resemble somewhat, nor is LOVE ever anything but its own
transcendant self; yet normal passion is divine, because through it alone God gives
TRUE MEN to the great man-wanting world. There. can be no such thing as unholy
Love; nor good badness, nor bad goodness. .

Pia te Silence is strength, and the silent lip and steady head alone are worthy.
I do not believe in the, to me, absurd dogma of human equality; it is the. demon-»
strable negation of all human reason and experience; is a hypocritical, cruel, and
delusive falsehood; puts people out of their element, and into wrong positions; it
never was, will, nor can be, true; for "aristocracy" of some kind always rules, is
always a unit in interests, while "democracy" is always ruled, and is eternally at
war with itself, and clashing about its own interests, which interests, it perpetu-
ally injures and destroys. But it is true that some souls are nobler, better,
higher, finer, richer,. riper, rounder,--these SEVEN,--than. some other souls, and are
worth immeasurably more, whether weighed or plumbed in God's scales or man's. | For
some souls are young, green, acid, acrid, bitter, imperfect, and non-poised,--these

seven,--and such stand for deons of agés geping, on the highways, at regal souls
Shing arose tha déavk. tow ie ts b ‘there, now, then, up the streets
rushing across the deeps toward Achievement; here, Jan We a ptepeetem weedeat
of the worlds, and down the corridors of heaven. Splendid), ar te, pe wees
who will circumnavigate eternity while the others are, Wpnuerine, oh OF sible ie
"Did you ever!"--new souls, just created, requiring a thousand or i Ae otek
their eternal sea-legs on, before being able to steadily walk the aro ai ‘
eviternal ship of centuries and power, or compete with those who, liv ioe ye i
have passed their ordeals long before this civilization had taken root in the mou ry
soil of scores that had preceded it.--Men who make and govern circumstances instea
of allowing circumstances to govern then. : ener ie" |
" XIVII.. True’ Passion is but one,-and a minor mode'of love's expression; its
offices are ‘triplicate; and when people understand that one grand secret, farewell
to social, domestic, and all other ills; and it is this grand secret I have, for
‘long years, been teaching, somewhat, not fully, in all my books, on both shores of
the’ oceans that girdle’ the world. JI kriow that brains and intellects differ, but
héarts and affection are ever the same; that through these last man can attain unto
 Godness, and woman reign queen and equal, where she now serves as drudge, toy, and’
legal and illegal--something worse; that woman, as such, has most of love crystal-=
lized within her, and for that reason is entitled to stand the peer of the best
man breathing God's free air; not by reason of her beauty, accomplishments, wealth,
or, any other accident, but because shie hath the womb,--the perfected laboratory _
wherein she fashioneth, and alone coitpletes, what it took God, Nature, and Man, _
singly and combined, to only bégin; and that, too, so badly, that the wonder is, ©
‘that swarming hordes of murderers do not throng the world's highways where civilized |
man now walks. But so infinitely ‘great an artiste is she, that from the worst of
' ‘seed she has raised many a splendid human tree; redeemed the race from savagery;
fostered and cultured art, science, religion, and all that renders earth habitable,
_and that, too, under all sorts of repressions and bad conditions; assuredly entitl-
ing her‘‘now to a chance of trying what she can do, under favorable circumstances,
.who @id' so well under the bad;-and I hold this to be the strongest argument for
woman ever made since the world began; and I advance it only as'one of the external
‘reasons I entertain, holding in reserve others as much stronger and more cogent
than these, as a *chain-eable is superior to a child's slender whip-cord.

XIII. I further‘hold that there are AEthereal (spacial) centres of Love,
Power, Force, Energy, Goodness, and for, and of, every kind, grade, species, and -
order of knowledge known to man, and whereof he knows not anything; and that itis |
not only possible to reach those centres, and obtain those knowledges, but that-it
is achievable by a vast number, who riow drone and doze away life, die half ripe, and —
wake up, when too ‘late, to find out what fools they have been, necessitating ‘what |
it is not the present purpose to reveal. In the present instance it only remains
for the purposes of this Declaration of Principles, to draw a brief comparison be-
tween my system and the very best that can possibly, truthfully be said of any single
one of all the others now extant anywhere. They are divided into two parts, one
' of which proceeds to tomlly ignore the body, mortifies the flesh, and renders life

truly a semi-graveyard operation from birth to baptism, from that to death. ‘The

other allows the utmost limit to ust and literise to the elect, and roundly berates |
all‘others outside. Vide Mormonism, Perfectionism, and Islamism, ‘and contrast’ them
with their opposites in belief, as the Shakers. But current systems, as a genera]
thing, bend all their energies toward the salvation of meti's wouls, and, iin, spend-
ing time in trying ‘to get souls into heaven, lose sight of the bodies, which, 4
practically, may go to the other place, of so little account are they. They believe
in crucifying the flesh altogether, and generally effect. that very th'ing for the
soul. They wholly lose sight of a fundamental principle’ of human nature, which ig
to take delight in doing the very thing it is sternly forbidden to,

|

-48=

The people of a town might not, if let alone, leave its boundaries once in ten
years; but. you just make a law‘that they shall not leave it, and that town will be
empty in less than a single day, Again: ' “Said landlord Boniface, “Traveller, you
must go further to pass the night’, for my house is full, and I have no place to put
you." Says weary traveller, "DON'T say so; don't say no; poor mes, How can you
serve'me so? I'm so fageed. out I can't walk another step. I'11 put up with any-
thing rather than go on." Says Boniface, "Poor, weary man, I pity you, and on one
condition you can stay; there is one room with two beds. The one nearest the door
you can sleep in; the other--at the far corner--is occupied by a lady, who must not
be disturbed in any way. You must enter it on tiptoe, without a light on, go quiet-
ly. to bed, and at daybreak quit it in the same manner. Do you agree to these condi-
tions "~="I do;" and he was shown the door, and again strictly cautioned. But, by
and by, there was a sound of devilry by night, and that weary, wayworn traveller
lifted up his voice and yelled aloud; and his voice went flying the descending stairs,
and his body, with protruding eyes, and hair erect, cam speedily following down,
down, reaching the lower floor just one second after his voice. abs Lord!" said the
traveller. "What's the matter?" asked Boniface. "Why, that woman's dead!" --"I knew
that before," said landlord; "but how did you find it out?” Just so. “Human nature.
is strongly perverse, and this “ineident s' suggests | ts the | query that were social life and
marriage based: upon CONSENT and ATTRACTION instead of what they are based on, there
wouldn't be a hell on earth or anywhere else, in less than one hundred brief. years.
~-~brief to api and to immortal man.

‘Finally, to conclude this section, I admit, and triumphantly, too, that in the
cultured, or magic, because magnetic, will, I find a remedy for very many of .the
ills besetting us on the earth, especially in our marriage matters of the false of .
to-day; and furthermore, that by obedience to law, herein set forth, the ELIXIR of
life may be found, and the human stay on earth be yah ‘a preat deal beyond _ the
storied threescore years and ten.

Let us now proceed to the consideration of a phase of the matter in hand, ‘never
before fairly treated upon, or even touched by those who’ assumed to discuss it. by.
reason of its recondite nature. It being my highest ambition to do good while mare
frame lasts, I possibly may achieve it better in essaying the unravelling of. the. knot
alluded to, than in any other way.

Men are often seen whose actione currente is wholly feminine; but a far. greater
number of: females. are found who have all the yearnings proper only to the opposite
gender. Understand me. It is the proper function of man to impart, to give, to en-
force, to generate, to beget his kind; and of course the impelling sensations are
peculiar. It is the proper function of woman to reverse all this--to receive,
respond, provoke passion, accept, exude, gestate, and to have all the sensations
proper thereto, ‘But thousands have the characteristics of their proper sex,
“physiologically, with their normal sensations, impellant or nervo-vital action, and
instead have all the latter characteristics of the reverse gender. This abnormal
state, so very common, results from their mothers wishing and hoping that the unborn
may. be of one sex, while nature determines to, and: does produce its opposite; where-
fore such girls will love like a man; such boys’lové like a woman, and of course can
never be satisfied in this life on that very account. The upshot of it all is, that
urged on by an irresistible impulse, such persons resort to unnatural methods to
appease the quenchless thirst; assuage the yearning appetite, --hence we have onanists,
masturbationists, pederasts; those who associate with four-footed beasts, and in ¢
other respects sink to very infamous levels--even to those horrible ones, to name
etc I fairly abudder and therefore will not. ae

Pate a ‘eapricat dl "pregnant, her whole desire should be that of giving to the

= hf

world a perfect apecimen, of har matertial. work, allowing nature to et ae
and then we shall behold no more such improperly constructed bigneate i ate !
fair earth of ours; wherefore we shall be rid of agitators of the "Sexu °

‘XLIX. In announcing the law and fact that the subtle element ale
is the connecting link between mind and body, the flesh, sinew, bone = wees
and the incorporeal viewless soul of man, ace hee oO oe ate o ie
: ai i ecte ate ;
newly discovered. | rue ink, but I am not eware that the subtler element, magnetism,
“was ever even suspected to be such link. Body is the seat of’ the ieee gaa tet ‘
“the seat of the deeper faculties; for Emotion, love, Sympathy , Memory ,' ae iP
ment, and a bundred other human attributes belong to the region and domain waa ;
spirit, mind,--the invisible.man within,--and the vehicle of their display a my
‘action upon, and in the ‘outer. world, is magnetism. Proof: When we are in perfect
maghetic rapport with. an individual, that person can be made to ee oer nt
think our. thoughts, do as we do, and be for the time our exact counterparts; —
“we may be in absolute electric contact, and not one of these strange results will ©
follow. ‘Observe these facts: cohabitation, love not being the spur, is a magnetic
haifness; with love, it is a magnetic circulation, that is to say, pleasure results
from a nervous current rushing along the nerves of each, and mingling in chemico-~—
magnetic union in and at the termination of the nervous filaments radiating from --
every portion of the two beings, and converging to a point at the respective vital
centres of each. . a z ae :

» ?

There can be no mutual joy unless such nervous currents do flash along:the |
nervo-telegraphic.system; nor can we experience any pleasure, whatever, either nerv-
al, gustatory, .or in any other manner, unless such currents do thus pass; and, more-
over, every true; or even false human joy, must first be in thé soul, before the
body can participate. We cannot lift a board till we bend to it, and brace the .
muscles to the task. This is the principle of POSISM: i.e., placing ourselves to do
“the work, receive a blow, shock or impression, : We hate, and all our external
features array themselves-—-involuntarily~-ever to materially express the metaphy- ~
sical emotion. Now for the application of this principle to the subject under con-
sideration. | ., ax 1!

L. It would look foolish for one to verbally protest burning love, while the
face betokeried its deadly opposite, or actual, stupid indifference! If the heart |
means love, and the lips assert it, the voice, manner, eyes, and genial glow, must
express it also, if one expects to be believed. Yet in spite of the notoriously ©
plain truth, there are thousands who talk love, while face, feature, voice and. con-
duct give the lie direct to all the lips have spoken; and yet the speakers marvel
because their story is not credited. Such persons, too, may honestly.mean just
what and all they say, yet, failing to pose themselves to the ‘requirements’ of the”
case, fail also\both in winning credence, and retaining what of love they have al-
ready won, ,Counsel: If your,lips speak love, always pose your features to-the °~: |
natural language ‘of the passiqn or sentiment. For the expression of:feature, the) —

Te |

soft and flowing modulations of tone, the mellow cadence and inflection of the: ~~.
voice, tells the immortal story of the heart quite as plainly, and far moré 6lo-.
quently, than can’ possibly any collocation of mere words, which any one can marshal
to his or her aid; and soft and gentle tones will do more for errant, faulty hus-
bands’ and wives than all the protestations or verbal storms that one could utter in’
a century! | ee

We have societies for the protection of beasts; and need a larger one for the
protection of human beings in certain vital respects. It. ought to be just groind
for instant divorce wherever and whenever a human male forces unwelcome embraces

=50.

+, Upon, any. female, whatever, The beasts of the field don't do so, Why should men?
"More. than that; it ought to be a criminal offence in the eye of the law; and as:
such, punishable, for any human male, under any circumstances, whatever, to force
the Hi ay of any woman, whatever, or to exact or seek wifely offices or
concessions, except, when she wills and ordains that such. may be, Make this a law, |
and'we shall have less work for sextons in digging graves for "Mrs, so and so," at
any age between sixteen and thirty-five. The common sense of mankind knows fall
well that he is no man, but only a satyr, who demands what cannot be granted, save
, with a shudder of unutterable horror and disgust; pangs past endurance .or.at the
risk of health and life. ‘4

. The action, of the muscles is as clear an expression of a passion, . and iP Sctal
states behind it, as are. the tones which utter it; for" Actions speak louder than .
words" is not only a truism, but an absolute and unqualified truth itself. Where-
fore if you mean love, look love from top to toe, and all over! bn

ara * You: never saw a sick man, really, desperately sick, whoever denied the

_ existence of a God. It requires a fine stomach, keen appetite, and excellent diges-
tion to make a first-class sceptic. Why ? Because conditions: of. body effect changes
in the soul's feelings; and the play between the outer and the inner being is
mutual, fot the soul affects the body for good.or ill quite as much as the body
affects the invisible soul. Married people are either not aware of this double-
acting law of the homos, or else wilfully ignore its heavy meanings. They live a
_cat-and-dog life, because neither reasons that some physical disturbance unhinges
the soul, or that some metaphysical derangement unfits the body.to express what the
soul itself may be completely full of. Thus, a woman suffering catamenial pains, or
some other ill, is apt to be rather Novemberish externally, even while July really
reigns deep down in her sweet, but “but ruffled, soul; and a man, worried .to..death with
worldly .cares, is not always either in mood or condition to lavish tenderness even
upon the children of his. loins, or the wife of his bosom, all of whom he loves be-
yond his then-capacity of expression. A person in certain physical states is insame
for the time being; is fully willing to curse God, and die; yet a dose of opening
medicine would unbar the gates of his souks and within two hours that self-same man
would bless God, and live.

“And a wife in certain magnetic and mental states, the result of physiological
causes, would fly at a man and scratch his eyes out, when, next day, a a Aso
dose of senna, she would love and caress him half to deatheraial saadt TE 4

At this writing I am suffering fron: partial paralysis, partly the result: of a
severe fall,--a mere matter of twenty-five feet through the. trestle-work of a bridge,
upon a not, very soft pile of rocks at ‘the. bottom, | sent down there by the savage .
‘threats of two converging locomotives, one behind and on before. But that injury I
could have recovered from, by reason of the strong resilient energies of my. -..
‘constitution, had it not happened that for months before, then, and months afterward,
I was continually laboring with brain, hands, and pen,--bad enough,--but was also
subjected daily to violent and continued affectional and mental, emotion; cause:

"A woman at the bottom of it;" and that sort of excitement is quite sufficient to
bring on paralysis, without the help of any locomotive that ever screeched over the
"Middle Ground," --a place in Toledo, where more ghosts of mangled dead some than”
upon any surface of. equal area in the entire universe. *

As physician, I have treated many cages of disease stints the. patients attributed
to scores of causes other than the right one,--affectional trouble. Merchants,
bankers, men of large business, are almost. invariably, and, anevitably,. stricken down
in the midst. of life and hope, by, apoplexy,. paralysis, chronic dyspepsia,’ stone, ...

~51l-

-“best six tonics the world had ever seen, or has yet. I refer to the Protozonic

“ponlexy were left behind,--riot because they were remedials, but civilizers; humaniz-

-%
cn

«wand “victims of man too often beside,--and I-have felt like rushing upon, ard téar=

iv business activity, Or evén nervous
change their. modes of motion, and
"fun." “Business, the infernal

gravel, or embolism; -not a lorie by reason of the
exhaustion,: but ‘because they do not eer ah .
devote more time to the homeside, social life, and ¥ es
demon-god, is all in all; passion but a spasm; loys » Smyth en a ee ce peene?
its joys still°more unreal, vague, phantomesque, until ‘at length aad sh s out,
God insulted, and he send the Angel of Midnight to drop the curtain, and change _

the scene. - rsa - as : {te

toe Pers hin ca ati ais arhatieundeh”
~ “ Aphrodisia¢s ‘aré certain preparations--most of them outright inferna ~-which
excite the amorous or passional appetites of the human being. There are long lists
of them; and many years before this book was written, its author discovered the

Remedials, And ‘I have kriown hundreds upon hundreds of people, who Lived so close
tothe dollar-countér, that nature withdrew her smiles from them, and impotence ,”
dead, sterile, horrible, became their lot, and for years they had never known love
in its physical aspects unless under the forcing power of some disastrous stimulant.
To these the protozones were blessings, indeed, and once more the mad-house and a-

erv; fitting the wasted nerve, balancing the tottering brain, restoring the primal
concitions upon which human happiness in the social are depends, not being mere .
chemicals, ‘but alchymics or conveyers of spirit: soul. But what a state of things:
is-that wherein men, otherwise sensible, so far forget their duties to self, home,
wife, ‘society, and God, as, in the mad chase for wealth, to sacrifice Manhood, ‘Love
and Paternity. Paternity! just think of it! ‘what a glory, ‘and what a joy,’ compared
46 which all :the wealth and honor earth can give were but hollow shams and empty
mockéry! while Parentage, Fatherhood,--above all -Imperial Motherhood, is a diadem—
which even gods might well aspire to,-'I have seen.women pass along the streets”
who.gave token of their coming pain and glory; and I have seen things shaped like
unto men laugh and giggle as they passed dlong; these doers of God's finest and” “
greatest .work;: the incarnators of regal soul; ‘these .unappreciated martyrs of: love,

ing the heartless scoundrels to pieces; for if there be a transcendantly glorious ~
“thing on earth it is a mother. And I, Paschal, the writer, here ‘say that T took’ —
off my hat, and did homage to every pregnant woman I ever saw; and I would do it, ©
were that woman no higher than a common troll, so highly and devoutly did I, do I,

adore and worship MOTHERHOOD, Theré, that's my soul! ~

But if these laughers, these careless husbands, knew the truth I now reveal ~
in the next few lines, they too,, like myself, would laugh, but with royal joy, |
instead of coarse derision, It is this: lst, most seekers after domestic bliss,

. *sLike him who builds from the roof groundward, begin at the wrong end. It is to be |

found in soul, not sense; spirit, not form; heart, not dress; and“love, not passion.
2d. A pregnant woman, judiciously loved and treated,--not spoiled‘ and pampered, or
kept at a'dead level of life, love, temper, feeling, passion, ardor, fervor,” labor,
rest, but made to develop her womanhood ,--will, in every ten days, add more soul,
strength, feivor, beauty, compactness, energy, power, and force’ of ‘character and
genius to her baby than she could in all the forty*weeks of gestation if neglected,
in the above respects; for she- will knot more greatness in it every hour she lives;
and each step or stage of gestation will be carried ohe or-more degrees toward) ~~
perfection. “The only difference between a genius and a human. ninny is, ‘that one: is
finished up as the work goes on, He is well kneaded, ‘and needed, too; will keep —
well; give excellent satisfaction all around, and will be longed for, and wept over

t-Wwhen. gone; Just as children mourn. the good things that have passed away forever.

LI. Paralysis, caused other than by physical injury, is the’ result of over="

emotion; too acrid states of the blood and fluids-<(often ‘removable by continued

=52m

\. catharsis ) and by nerve-embolism, as well as that of the blood-vessels, consequently
_ the system is not supplied with a proper amount of vitalized pabulum. Paralysis:
more often results from affectional troubles than anything else, and the only cure

is their re-arrangement, accompanied with phosphorized cordials, and phosphoric
food, to which may be added the daily pouring over the head and backbone of at least
two pailfuls of hot water, as hot as can be borne, alternating with ice-rubbing of ©
the spine, or rhigolene-spray baths; this ‘will cure it nine times in ten, when

‘mentally caused; and would have saved Napoleon III., and perhaps a disastrous war,
’ had his physicians been wise; but they were not, and suffered him to eat, drink,

smoke, and libertinize to excess, until at last nis constitution, enfeebled by
amatory outrage in his early life, refused to respond to desire; his embolism in-
creased; fistula attacked the perinaeum, involving the entire pelvic systen,

_ necessitating castration at the knife of the surgeon, and ending at Chiselhurst,
in fever and death, but a few months after,--and the crisis hastened swiftly by the

keen anguish resulting from the consciousness that he, the great emperor, was no
longer a man, but only a eunuch or human stag. This fact of his loss occasioned ~
the "Decheance" act of the French Senate ;--for they would not be ruled by either a

‘woman--or a castrato.

Barreriness of woman results from similar causes; and so also ‘dose thé four’
kinds of male impotence, now abounding everywhere to a frightful extent. “These are,
ist. Lack of muscular force; 2d. Inability to elaborate the vital! ifluid; 3d) ‘In-
ability to retain it at all; or to retain it if, and when, e elaborated; Fit «- In=-”
ability to vitalize it by reason of trouble in the prostate gland. Hitherto the a
medical people have recognized but one form of impotence, whereas’ there are no less
than four, each, of course , requiring quite dissimilar methods of curative: treat-

- ment.

bene

‘ LIII. Nothing goes on either in soul or body without some sért’ of ee pahtet i .
We have a mental, moral, and affectional digestion as well as a physical one; and
we all know that. unless we excrete the superfluous matter of the food and drinks we
take, dyspepsia comes in, and finally we grow dull; sleepy, and stupid from the
accumulated phosphates, acid or alkaline, lime, carbon, etc., urea, uric acid, etc.,
and death soon comes tapping at the door; but who ever suspected that it is: just as
necessary to void mental, moral, ‘and affectional wastes, and thus prevent soul- —
dyspepsia, or cure it if " established? Yet such is the case, “The mind that would be
healthy must cast out of it all it cannot appropriate, assimilate, and transmute,
else mental, noral, and affectional diseases set in, and-psychal debility is the *
result, terminating in a complete deadening of all these higher qualities which par

excellence make us truly human.

LIV. Now he or she who dwells mainly in the brain is subject to enormous

“nervous waste ; and the blood, charged with refuse brain and nerve-rust, rushes to

the kidneys, and there unloads its bad freight; but all servants get tired, and so

‘do the organs named; so that after a while they cease to drain and sift so "perfectly

as of yore; consequently the alkaline ‘phosphates and urea are not all discharged,
but a portion is poured back into the circulation, until finally every inch of the

a physical body is poisoned; and a healthy soul cannot healthfully act through poison-

ed nerves and tainted fluids. The kidneys begin to suffer and give out; the supra-
renal capsules change their fibre, and no longer act as storehouses for the kidney-
life placed there daily by the watchful soul. ‘The bladder goes next, then the
testes, prostate; ovaries, or uterus follow; and before you know it, the manor ©
woman is a splendid wreck. Wherefore follow Solomon's advice, and remember two |
things: lst, that there's a time for work and rest and sleep, and amusements ‘and’
converse and amorous diversion; next, that all work, and no play, makes Jack a dull

‘boy; meals, sleep, love-seasons, all * should be as nearly as possible orbital or
‘periodic in their motions, just as the day, night, winter, spring, and autumn in the

-53—-

201%

“world without, In a little while nature will assist, pk adupeapiee Pte Crt):
full force at its proper time, just as eclipses occur, and green tie ier

_.. Surely married people will understand this delicate, but verd baa amer his

’ gestion. Hundreds of people, consulting me as physician, have Pc heuitaehe
advice,.and by resolutely sleeping apart, as a custom, have Re Te 1a BR
douestic felicity they never before imagined to be possible. Nay, it is sbsolul
necessary in all cases where perfect restoration does not follow every night:
slumber a.) ap jon gente :

” Reader, you. have one hundred and sixty bones, and five hundred PUpere es your .
blood weighs.twenty-five pounds; your heart is five inches in length an EDFPS, soog |
inches in diameter;.it beats seventy times a minute, four dagpeend. any ule dag
per hour, one hundred, thousand eight hundred times a day, and twenty-six m 4 ope
seven hundred and twenty-five thousand two hundred times per year. At each beat a
little.over two ounces of blood is thrown out of it; and each day it teceives .and
discharges seven tons of that wonderful fluid, Your lungs will contady bere a
air, and you inhale twenty-three thousand gallons a day. The average surface o # fc)
airycells of your lungs, supposing them to.be spread out, exceeds twenty thousan
_sguare. inches, . The weight.of your brain. is three pounds. in the average American
man it will weigh about eight ounces more. Your nerves exceed ten millions in .

number. Your skin .is. composed of three layers, and.varied from one-fourth, to.one-
eighth. of an inch in thickness. The area,of your skin is about one thousand seven
.hundred sguare inches, and you are subjected to an atmospheric pressure of fifteen
pounds to the square inch, Each square inch of your skin contains three thousand |
sweating tubes, or respiratory pores, each of which may be likened’to a little drain- |
tile one-fourth of an inch long, making the aggregate length of the entire surface
-of your body.of two hundred and one thousand three hundred and sixty-five feet, or
a tile-ditch for draining. the body almost forty miles long. a.

”

} Now in any act, which requires more than anormal drain, every atom of this Dig

magnificent machine is injured, and its life, jeoparded.. But in sexism, true and
normal, and false and, perverted ones also, yield up a portion of the life of every
particle of the being; also when we sleep with, nervous or organic. incompatibles.
In. righteous. eonjugation what one gives oyt is, instantly replaced by the other, and
perfect rest, and equilibrium follow. the natural shock, But in the false rites,
what of life. goes out, stays out, ,There_is no return in kind; no change given for |

te

_ the golden coin of life recklessly thrown on the counters of lust! . 1 ~ at het

WW. The bitterest matrimonial discontents arise from the half-unconscious mis- _
conception that happiness, not growth, is.the end of;marriage, and the forgetfulness
that human nature is ynivergal. It is impossible for two people thoroughly to, know
gach other until they have been tested by the exigencies of a united life. If then

_ & radical antagonism of temperament’ is developed, which makes the, union oppressive,
"why should the discordant souls be kept together? What is to be gained by holding
them in the bonds of hatred? The remedy cannot be found in the abolition of the
pfeil contract of marriage, leaving them free to repeat again and again the disastrous}
“éxperiment, because that has been ‘tried and failed. Now it seems to me that there
.should be schools of marriage; that is, institutions with professorships, expressly
to teach the laws which alike, everywhere, underlie human happiness. As it is to-
day, pretty faces win male stupidity, and disaster invariably follows, Above all,
our system of nervous life, the good food, poorly cgoked, the way we eat, drink,
sleep,--all are axes laid at. the roots,of the tree of domestic life! nt bees

| _, Theré!s not one’ sound man in five hundred; nor a woman in a thousand, who does
_ not. have the doctor's cére for ills resulting from'this false life. The food we eat,

-54-

and what we drink, act upon our,souls, our emotions, and our loves, quite as much
,88 upon our mere bodies; and I had rather have one meal cooked by a‘ good, loving
.0ld mother, than all the hotels of earth, with golden plate, could furnish; because

such,,food is seasoned with goodness.

IVI, Iam satisfied that sleeping together, and too frequent yielding to the |
impulses incident to the chemically fevered state we are in, produces a peculiar —
nervous exhaustion which, if long continued, always results in a chronic morbidity

_ closely verging upon actual insanity,--indeed, in most cases, upon some points, it

is insanity itself; for what else can that state be called which sees’ nothing at all
but ill, dark-omened shadows continually floating over the. sky of life; and which

- beholds, in the wife or husband, nothing but demons or gorgons; chatters about him,

or her; exposes faults, magnified mole-hills into rocky’ mountains; and only breathes
venom, spite, and malignant hate, upon one sworn at the altar to be loved and
cherished till death did them part. This is sheer madness; downright insanity;

and in that mood what worlds of wrong are daily done, and that, too, by people in

“whose hearts angels slumber, and long to be awakened, that their wings might fan
the fevered brow, and lull the weary souls to rest. This insanity has its rise in
satiety, and non-reciprocity in the more intimate relations of husband and wife; and

[peice eegeameane which falls like a leaden pall sooner or later upon the onanist and
ebauchee,

_ Owing to the imperfect marriages of to-day, and the few past decades, millions
of half-children, or unsound ones, have been. born:. crooked, angular,.violent, un-
reliable, impulsive, vagarious, and constitutionally morbid, with a powerful, bias
toward unquestionable insanity. Passing along the streets it is easy to pick out
people thus born; their faces and heads betray the unmistakable brand of incipient
lunacy; and it requires but little provocation to fan the latent embers into a glow-
ing and terrible flame. The average insane head.is smaller in all its dimensions —

_ than the sane. The latter shows, also, “less irregularity of outline. The left

anterior quarter of the sane,head is usually larger, than the right, while the right
anterior quarter of the insane head is almost always larger than the left. Many in-
sane people show.a decided projection in the right frontal region. Now mark the
conduct of your friends thus organized. — | bly

IVIII. But why are they insane? What's the actual--not theoretic—-but purely
scientific facts of such cases? Reply: Magnetic and amative depletion act upon some
people precisely as starvation acts ypon everybody. When the stomach can no. longer

_get food, the body begins to consume and feed upon itself; first it absorbs the
‘fat, and. we grow lean; then it attacks the muscles, and we become skeletons; next
the liver goes, and we become cadaverous; then the musous surfaces are called upon;
and at last the serous plates are attacked, and the grave closes over a bunch of
bones only. In the case of the sexual pederastic, Dentonian debauchee, when his lust
alone drives him to either excess or sexive horrors, there is no return, and his...
passion consumes his body. First, the nerves become strained and tensioned beyond.
endurance, and one after another gives way; then the muscular cords are. slackened;_
then the testicular glands decrease; then the prostate; then the marrow of the back-
bone softens and yields its fat to feed the fearful fire, creeping up till it reach-
e$ the brain; then the substance of the brain goes down to death's hot furnace; the
soul shuts itself up, moodily waiting its time of flight, and when it acts at all.
is compelled*to do so through diseased organs and perverted channels; hence, all it
does is distorted, outre, queer, abnormal. The man is mad--and --let the curtain

fall; the tragedy is ended.
VIII. When teaching those who were desirous of mastering the principles per-

vading the books, and constituting the soul of the system evoked and elaborated by.
him whose pen scores these lines, it was the custom for him to address them in these

“B5——

following words, 6r their equivalerits: First,’ the hyStery, OF de? Rt On Ty
ship,--in its loftier, not merely its leases meanings porter err l oct ana tabeeaat eal
far-sight, longevity, silent peste ere Lop peeane ta etenad
lie in, flow out of, pertain to, and a ith , ;

Seapeie the love-principle of human-kind, and the sexive natures oF be ae
homes. Outside of its sphere of operation’ all'is cold and deathful; wi reel ane
mystic.and magic circle dwells all there is of fire, iatent and actives ac uel ae
metaphysical; all there is of energy, procreant power, . physical, mee 2.6P te 3
and bill ‘other; and it--Love--is the master-key unlicking every barre sGoor, 3 aoa
reas that are, Remember, 0 Neophyte (and reader, of this bock), that be not. cf “
ing. in mere philosophical formulae, "recipes," or trashy ppeheens cae emer bepes Tat
with fundamental principles, underlyifig’all being. Fix this fifet. pr op saan y
in your memory, and roll it under the tongue of your clearest understanding; ake _
it in the stomach of your spi:it; digest it well, and assimilate its pemncae
to, ard with, your own soul. That. principle is formulated thus: LOVE LIE ; ie
FOUNDATION’ (of all that is);.and love is convertibly passion; enthusiasm; pe feat on;
heat; fire; SOUL; God, Master that. Second, the nuptive moment, the instant where-
.in the. germs of a possible new being are lodged, or a portion of man's essential

self is planted within the matrix, is the most solemn, serious, powerful, and .
energetic moment he can ever know on earth; and only to be excelled by correspondent :
instants after he shall have ascended to realms beyond the starry spaces.

LIX. If a man actualizes that moment while under” the dominion of animal in-

stinct, or human lust alone, then the effect is losing, unmanning, degrading, to
both himself and her; murderous toward the recipient, and suicidal to himself, It
means hatred, disease, and magnetic ruin’ to both; its influence for evil spreads
over a wide area on earth; feeds and sustains barbarism; nourishes the monstrous
Larvae of the middle kingdoms of the aered habitats of disembodied beings, even
when no progeny results. But if there shall, then he and she generate misery, crime,
and possible murder’as the heritage of that child. If, on the other hard, love be
the prompting angel at the hearth-nuptial, then strength, goodness, truth, harmony

“ and’ sweet melodies of life ensue to the twain, and are insured to the offspring .
God shall give them. Third, at the very instant his seminal glands contzact to ex-
pel their treasures, at such instant his interior nostrils open, and minuté ducts,
which are sealed at all other times, then expand, and as the lightning from his :
soul darts from the brain, rushes down the spinal-cord, leaps the solar plexus, .__
plunges along the nerval filaments to the prostate gland to immortalize the germal ”
human being; and while the vivific pulse is leaping to the dark chamber wherein
soul is clothed in flesh and blood, at that, instant he breathes in through ‘the inner |
nostrils one of two atmospheres underlying, inter-penéetrating--as the spirit does
the body~-the outer air which sentient things inhale. One of these auras is deeply

_ charged with, because it is the effluvium of, the unpleasant sphere of the border
spaces, where is congregated the quintessence of evil from every inhabited human
world in the entire congeries of goul-bearing galaxies of the broad universe; else

he draws in the pellucid aroma of divinity from the far-off multiple heavens. It
follows that as are the peoplé at that moment so will be that which enters into them
from the regions above, beneath, and rourid about; wherefore, whatsoever male or fe-
‘male shall truly will for, hopefully pray for, and earnestly yearn for, when love,
pure and holy, is in the nuptive ascendant, in form, passional, affectional, divine
and volitional, that prayer will be granted, and the boon be given. But the prayer
must precede. in Z bys. ’

Discord reigns in marriage-land to-day, and one principal cause is, that while
the magnetic tide is at its height, and before the soul withdraws its power from the
pelvis back to the brain-seat, they part company., and the spiritual auras and vital

air escapes into the external world, instead of being stored up and absorbed by the
woman's spirit and soul. © 2 ‘ ur

863

_.%L. The consequence is that the evil forces take hold, with deadly grip, upon

the very roots of their triplicate being, because in acting as they do, they defy,

= iq

annul, prostitute, violate and disobey, the very primary law of human existence,

sand. voluntarily seek to defeat God Almighty 's great purpose, underlying their crea-

tion..

_ IXI, Balzac says: "He who begins with his wife by a rape is a lost man!" I

say, it is next to impossible that she ever can love him after, as before! and I

say this after a large medical practice of not less than thirty.years. But most
"Men" (?) not only begin thus, but keep it up--the fools!--and their name is legion!
--till hatred, horror and disgust either kills her outright, or suggests an evil
from which every true human shrinks.

XII... Abortion at. any stage from conception to birth is--MURDER in the first
degree. It effectually kills the child, demoralizes the mother, destroys her moral
and physical health, while living, and after death dooms, irrevocably DOOMS, her
and her assistants to the perpetual society of MURDERERS beyong the grave, from which
doom there is no appeal. So beware of the crime. .

IXIII. Circumstances may demand non-increase of family; therefore, avoid all
risk forty-eight hours before, and one hundred after the Catamenail period. Avoid
all rish after a return from a journey or temporary absence; dnd mera

IXIV.. After the make-up following an unpleasantness, tiff, spat.or downright
family quarrel,. because the reaction creates not only increased affectional and.
procreative energy, but also a peculiar liability to the risk of unwished-for
parentage, then especially.

LXV. Mental, moral, physical and domestic trouble, mutual magneto-vital ex-_
haustion are easily preventable between couples if they will but sleep apart, have
hard beds,.good-ventilation, never sleeping in day-worn under-clothes, and.each
magnetizing the other at the seven magnetic points of the human frame--sides, spine,

throat, head, breast, and over the stomach.

LXVI. Superior men, whatever their rank or calling, are very attractive to |
women, as a general thing; therefore such men--as they are almost always very
licentious--have great need of watchfulness and prayer; considerable prayer-—-but
more. watch! ’ an .

IXVII. The true nature of any wife is quickly changed for the worse by the
pigness and private brutalisms of their husbands; and "can't a man do as he likes
with his own?" requires a universal No, even if ownership of the wife is conceded,
which it isn't... . |

LXVIII. When a husband's private conduct, unreasonable demands, etc., has _
estranged the dear love, so precious to every genuine man, there is but one way to
change it back, and that is forbearance, self-restraint, care, gnetleness reciprocity,
LOVE, .It is best to eat only when one is hungry. But.why force an unwelcome feast_

i f

to you, horror to her, except she be ahungered as well? If she be not in sympathy

with ber husband in all respects, it means death to her affection for him, in time,

if not at once; and he is a poor bird who foolishly ruins his own nest, and how
many human birds do it: : a

We are triplicate beings--soul, spirit, body. Our loves and passions may .be.,

of either one, two or all three of these. If our love be only of soul it is too
fine and ethereal for this lower world, and for all practical purposes is useless.

ay

‘If it be of spirit only, it is too vague, unsubstantial, Sd” Ghia natltetd
Gally unsatisfactory. If it be of body only, then lust +8 SOGL and “SPIRIT only
around, and crime swelters in the air. If dur loves be of he ange Ge lack the
“then we are bereft of the power to become Energies in the world, becaus ; aaa
maierial force to either make our mark on each other, the world, pe — a e
phrsioco-vital constitutions to our offspring. If our loves be 0 cae Fe am evens

we ave isolated from. the rest of mankind, and are lone pilgrims ell é Gea er
Iz they be spirit and ‘body onty, we are extreme--either all Transeenstiee eet ue
_ov. downright animal passionists. It is only when our loves are triplicate that w

fulfill our true mission, and realize the supreme . joys of existence. rae
The marital office and function is therefore material, spiritual and MYSTIC. ; :
The Christian world knows much about the two first, but nothing whatever ets pe last.
‘This book of my doctrine only contains it, for it alone declares and establishes
the fact that the marital function if unquestionably the highest, holiest, most
important, and most wretchedly: abused of all that pertains to the human being. Its
’ offices are so vital that I hold as cardinal, indisputable axioms, that .

LXIX. He who is diseased or unsound, pelvically, is not a true man while thus;
that his soul is barred out from the heavens whither all souls repair during sound
sleep, and that his immortality is not certain till he does become sound. Woman
everywhere is subject to the same law and penalty.

IXX, We hold that any over-assional, inconsiderate male human is no man, and
that such a husband must necessarily destroy the best wife ever given by God to the
son of man; and ieee . Pi : “a

IXXI, An over-passional woman can easily destroy and ruin any husband on the
earth, and totally unfit.him for combat with the world. — ae
_ IXXII, ‘Children are the gifts of God. They will‘not come unless the message
is sent from them during the wife's lunar season; hence any. artifice to prevent
conception, save such as are based upon time, wili, and her moon's changes, are
diabolic, inhuman and dangerous to both the man and the woman, souls as well as

bodies.

IXXVII.’ Giours and fools think to avoid all disaster through the murdérous |
habit of incompletion of the conjugal rite. But they are mistaken, both the wife

and husband, for such, folly begets hatred, disease ef bladder and brain, nerves
and soul in him, and a.corresponding host of evils in the wife. Why? ° | |

LXXIV. Because it is not merely suicidal and unnatural, but is also a conjugal
fraud, among whose results may be reckoned dyspepsia, insanity, paralysis, and im-
potence on his side, and uterine, vaginal, and ovarian inflammations, ulcers,
pees? and prolapsus on her side, physically, and hatred, disgust: and ruin on

both sides. © re | PSE OF OVOR ABGE) Seen 2 ae

>. + LXXV, Too few husbands respect the modesty of their wives; forget that ©
drapery, perfumes, beautiful trifles, are powerful adjuncts; do not know that it is
impossible for a wife to love him unless she is.WON, not forced, to compliance; that
he can never hold her soul, and she be made to redize the natural God-intended joy
of conjugal association, except by those affectional and magnetical caresses and
endearments which to the wise husband suggest themselves. ABOVE all let none be
careless of modesty; for WHOEVER CANNOT BLUSH IS LOST!” ; |

“a
a) wae

IXXVI. “Too frequent’ exercise of any power, quality, or faculty is ruinous,

"-58—

This is sanantandy true of marriage matters, which are only productive of two re-
sults--hell or heaven. ‘For the true and holy rits"is ascensive, and leads. to health
happiness, delight, longevity, gracious, celestial and glorious joy; or descensive,
leading to the lowest depths of social, moral and domestic horror, on which sad
rocks too many souls are wrecked,

LXXVII. Love between husband and wife should last to the brink of the grave;
but “it don't, With careful obedience to these rules, and judicious foo, drink, and
, occasional baths, it WILL, Doctors, clergymen, merchants, lawyers, people of.
letters, all whose minds are constantly on the stretch; also, women of like mental
culture, are all more or less deficient in vital energy, and all will speedily
reach primitive - vigor, endurance, and elasticity of spirit and body, only through .
the natural methods herein set forth.

IXXVIII, Conjugal love never stands still. It either increases or diminishes,
and husbands and wives both injure and mar it by heedlessness.

LXXIX. She who. yields to a libert ine is sure to be despised by him. He who
patronizes a harlot is worse than a beast, and either are unworthy of the forms
_they bear, for no beast sins against beast-horals, as humans do against theirs. .

ee Whoever yields to passion not love-founded is not only a fool but a suicide; ‘
and every one guilty of the folly knows this from experience, for a debauch, ‘lessens

the entire volume of power. Whoever is.false to a true wife or husband: contracts, .
the malaria os the SHADES, and is sure to bring home the subtle poison, and lay. the
broad foundation to domestic RUIN. Sexual faith and purity is the price of powers
just as IOVE is the sole base of immortality. ALL PEOPLE DO NOT HAVE SOULS.

IXXX, Both husbands and wives will grant as a boon, when either would refuse
to accord 4 rite claimed as. a right. ‘Nothing. is lost, but everything is gained by.
the. -persuasive mood.’ He comes’ too near who comes to he. denied. Insistance is.
brutalism. Ask in. love--be sure to show it; if you're true, she's sure to. know. jit
Slow paces. ‘last the longer. Unless there! 8 mutually, a little, but. gro’ growing pande-

fronium is kindled.

’ LXXXI, ‘Govern yourself, then you may rule a kingdom, and then your itt
‘IXXXII, Nothing but love can keep a man faithful, and not’ that alvays, unless

“he finds’ greater solace at home than abroad; and that's just it. They too often. es
and that's her fault; for unless he. does she's never. sure of hin. aveink £%

so

3 “IXXXIII. A woman must have love--must love and be’ ehh ali’ ite $700 5.
Bsa Sages “ought, of course, to have and exercise it at home, but if she don't have,
“it’there she will elsewhere; and he who imagines he can keep her true, in n heart,

at least, without loving her right along, and right straight from his to her soul,
is an egotist, a fool, and dolt!. Lost love seldom returns., It can only. be won by
truth, assiduity, and genuine manhood . ry

’ TXXXIV. An idle wife may be successfully tempted; so may a dressy one, ‘or pee
oné subject to flattery. For’ such to be tempted is to fall. She will forget every-
“thing but a slight to her love--not passion; but.a man will forget a slight to
his love, but never forgive a sin against his. conjugal rights. Ought he?

~ EXXXV. No power’ can tempt. a woman against the man she loves and whom ‘she j
“Knows loves her in return. — ; ;

Cae

59=

ee rer eee . cn ute Baltes. . weet ie bese he eed peta ale i it
2, ieee LXXXVI.. No rite of marriage gives. ownership, but: equality. “Proprietorship
means despair to hery dishonor toon ane a A igang eked ee hrs

' EXXXVII. “A woman in love'can be wholly trusted, but not so with aman.

 LXXXVIII. One sheep-killing, dog will ruin all the other dogs he comes across,
HPOSN gent him time; and one loose woman will corrupt five Hunde? tae e gi
‘or wives in six months if you but give her the chance to do, $0. It is their chief
Gpight. tet tom, pete racd@age wid we vibaudands oa | fs (bit

_ Finally I commend these twenty-eight points to the study of mankind, as also
that’ portion of kriowledge’ which is yet to be taught: you here (in) after.

LXXXIX. The entire social, conjugal and domestic worlds today, are in an up-
roar, ‘chaos and revolution. eb ati hit Chis Hee

It is deplorable that such much ill-will, sickness, discontent, hatred, sadness,
insanity and wretchedness exists among the married of today. But it is true, and
domestic happiness is the exception to an almost universal rule, at least among the
people of every sort and section of this nation, and scareely anywhere else, in such
frightful forms upon the globe. Husbands néglect their wives and practically hate
them; Wives the same, and universal domestic chaos reigns ‘supreme, The worst of
the matter is, that both wives, husbands, and-society at large attribute the bad
state of thing to wrong causes, for the fadt is, that the real one lays right before
their very eyes, yet they will not see, Such a state of things cannot exist among
Oriental nations, or the dark-skinned people of the world. Were it not so serious
a matter, one would laugh at the absurd and puerile folly that permits the reign of
such social non-concord for a single day, when its causes are so palpable, and its
eure so easy, As things exist, wives are defrauded, husbands do not love them, and |
wives fail to hold their lords in affectional duress. How few, indeed, know how, |
or even care to accomplish health and happiness at home;~and yet, it is in every
man's power to make his wife love him, and in every wife's to make her husband wor-
ship God through’ her. On my soul, I truly believe, that’ if my rules were followed,
the social millennium would be close at hand. No strictly good human power can
dwell in, or be developed by any man who is sexually unsound, imbecile, puerile,
weak or impotent; nor in any woman with fallen womb, leucorrhea, ulcerated vagina or
passional frigidity. How, let me ask, in God's Holy Name, can you.expect home,
happiness or heaven in a family where the wife neyer, from the altar, where she swore
her life away, to the grave that clogés over her freticd corpse, never realizes the
slightest marriage joy, or anything else than utter and profound disgust? How can
aman be constant, faithful, good or great, who is in a sense, compelled to run after |
harlots because his wife is concentrated ice? You can't expect perfection from condi-

tions themselves imperfect! But there is a clear passage and open water out of this
Folar sea of marriage land. 2 ; ree ot Te f Ee:

XC. There cannot be a doubt but that the "Philosopher 's Stone" of. ancient and
mediaeval lore, and the "Elixir Vitae" Water of Life and Perpetual Youth, aso :
vaguely hinted at by old writers, and which constitutes the burden of the celebrated
book "Hermipus Redivivus" OR THE ‘SACE'S TRIUMPH OVER DECREPITUDE AND DEATH, means
this’ identical triple mystery, which scarce any one practically knows, but which all
should learn, and which every phySician and divine in thé land ought’ to be compelled
to teach their subjects under heavy penalties of neglett, because it is the secret.
of sustained youth, grace and beauty; it is the gate of power, and the crown and
signet of ineffable human glory; it unveils the throne of Will, and taps the fountains
of excessive joy; it is the Jemschidgenie of Persian story; and he or she who knows,

appreciates diviner and celestial bearings of life and its meanings, becoming indeed

-60~

a child of the Infinite, and no longer a stranger to the Father's face; and they

alone who have it, are able to reach that magnificent sweep of clairvoyant vision;
| which, leaping from earth at a bound, scans the unutterable glories of avuee, and

beholds the rain of starry systems as we view a gentle summer shower.

XCI, The great source of crime, illness, wretchedness, and suffering has been |
traced to its one single source, and that is, the abuse, improper use, and mismatch-
ing of people in their loves, conjugal relations, and sexual imcormvatibilities.

It is proven that these bad conditions are frequently the resiit of organization,
and sometimes spring from incompatible, electric, magnetic and chemical velations
between couples. That absolute separation is the only cure for sono whe are wretch-
ed in their married state, or inter-relationship; while attention to heaith, and a
fair amount of TRY is a certain cure for other cases.

XCII, The body of man is a mere conglomerate of earths and mesals, gases and

fluids wholly material, but penetrated and permeated in every atom »y imponderable
elements essentially electric in their nature. Thus beneath, and liming our eyes
are ethereal organs corresponding thereto; beneath our limbs, heart, lungs, brain,
in short, all our parts are corresponding electric organs, and the totality of these
constitutes the ethereal, spiritual, death-proof man or woman, and when dissolution
occurs this inner man or woman oozes out of the material structure, becomes seli’-
conscious again, and takes its place among the countless armies of the departed,
but neither lost or dead; and this internal, ethereal man, woman or child, can be
contracted by us in the flesh, by conforming to the laws governing such contact,
and the observance of a few simple rules. ‘

XCIII. A passionless man or woman is a human nonentity. It is only when we
are wholly man or woman in the higher, holier, and also physical sense, that we can
reach the loftier and more significant heights of any sort of power. whatever ; there-

‘fore, those who would cultivate those loftier instincts, and gain mental. wings where-

with to sclae the heavens, should at once attend to the business of. regaining per-
fect health, mental, physical, emotional and passional. Presently ereat-hearted
love and blessed compassion will nestle in all our hearts, and in this glad, —
prophetic hope we may all be happy yet. We are none of us ever wise except when
merciful. let us all be so, for only then can we be perfectly human--only then
become vessels’ for the influence and effect of GOD-NESS. Never yet did. man come

~to the absolute conviction of SOUL and Inmortality, but he also came to that of God
-and Prayer; for, say’ what you will, both are and ever will be positive. realities in
‘the universe.

IN LOVE alone lies the boon of IMMORTALITY! INJUSTICE reigns ‘to-day.
Sad are the times when wedded wives. decay,
And brothels flourish, and Cyprians bear the sway}
' These are the times! their scarlet banner waves,
‘And And honest wi wives, neglected, fill up a million graves!

"When woman's eye grows dull,

' And her cheek paleth,

When fades the beautiful,
Then man's love faileth;

He sits not beside her chair,
Clasps not her fingers,

Wwines not the damp hair

_ That o'er her. brow lingers.

61-

rae rhea: | "He comes but a moment, in,
Pe Ppa rae Though her ‘Cheek, pdlé and thin,
Feverishly brightens.

“He stays but’ a moment near,
When that flush fadeth,
Though true affection's tear
Her soft eyelid shadeth. ‘ :

- “He goes from her chamber straight |
“Into life's jostle; .
bapa " “"" "He mests ‘at the very gate -
Business and bustle;
He thinks not of her within, .
“ “Silently sighing; ~ _ eee
“He forgets, in that noisy din,
That she is dying. |

"And when her heart is still,
ag What though he mourneth, iri x
Soon from his sorrow chiil Pld ny ee et
. Wearied he turneth. RR POR HE a 2
¥ 2 9! a Soon o'er her buried head Oe ae ee
a w Bm Memory's lights setteth, |
And the true-hearted dead
_, Thus man forgetteth.” _

But it won't be #0 when both sides have fount'out, as a rule and law, that no
happiness is direct, although joy may be--but always reflected; in other words, that
‘to be happy, and loved, we must first love and render happy some other soul. This
is the eternal law of love'seduation, and is as absolute, rigid, and unalterable,

t . ; . ¥

as are the laws of number, reflection and gravitation,

‘We all need, at times, a little, and occasionally a good deal of, coaxing. We
are a perverse set, and often times refuse to do the very identical thing others
want, and we ourselves are aching, dying, to do, simply because some witling has not
sense enough to coax us; ahd many a good man, and better woman, has been suffered
to gallop straight into the jaws of death, right into the mouth of hell, for want of
a little, gentle persuasion, even of the blarney sort; especially is true of men,
even quite as much as of the other sections of. the human being.

I believe the only physician who has been known to condemn exercise was
Cardenus, a physician of Milan. He exclaims against using any exercise that can
fatigue a man in the smallest degree, ‘or throw him into a sweat, or accelerate his
respiration. Hé gravely observes that trees live longer’ than animals, because they
do not stir from their places. About ‘the same time Asgill, a French writer, under-
took to prove that man is literally immortal, or rather that any given living man
might probably never die, ‘if he used sufficient prudence, and a forcible exercise of
the will. He complains of the cowardly practice of dying, considering it a mere

trick, or unnecessary habit.’

XCV. I copy from my manuscript of the Ansairetic Mystery, a medico-religio,
and mystic composition of mine upon the same geheral subject as this book, but which,
as it expounds certain very delicate facts and principles, adapted only to the mature,

and therefore for private study--the following paragraph--stating, before I do so,

-O2~

(that while alive and able, such of my patrons and ients as need that now widely
famous letter, can write for it; but in no case Ee sent save under seal, as a
private message from physician and teacher to patient and pupil; and genuine ~
candidates for full, true,noble Man and Womanhood :--

eal

"Wherever you see a rich, jouissant, beauty, spirit or power in a boy or girl; |

_wherever you behold force of genius, you may rest assured that the conception of

Which they are the result, occurred whan their parents both loved and were impas-

Sioned. Au contrarie:--whenever you come across genuine meanness, lean, weazelish,

deceitful, slanderous, lying scrawny, white-livered people, grab-allish, selfish,
and accursed, generally, you may safely wager your very life that such beings were
begotten of force, and were mothered by passionless, sickly, used-up sives, without
the slightest danger of perilling your stake!"

XCVI, The best people on earth see the most trouble; while the heartless,
dry and mean'go on to success swimmingly, and never feel a soul-paug from the cradle
to the grave; yet, nevertheless, true man and women are never feilures! Sham ones
always are} because the good influence survives, the bad dies out. The good, when
they enjoy, do so intensely; but the bad, coarse being's life, in all its. phases
must be on a par with--him or herself; and there's as much difference between the
joys of such as betwixt the Dundreary skip of a fop and fool, a ninny, or idiot,
and the joyous romp of'a gushing-hearted, brainful girl.

It has been my lot to encounter a great deal more of human pinchbeck than the
solid soul-ful gold; not that I have not known some noble and glorious people among
the radical classes, I for years associated with; yet, as a general rule, I found
it unsafe to trust to the honor of those who were extreme in the business of world-
bettering; they are a bad breed; and Diogenes! lantern is still needed by whomsoever
travels among them.

A happy man never writes a book} This is my twentieth! But I might have been
happy and I kept away from the world-saving "Philosophers." ,Here and there I have
met a real lady or gentleman, such as that king of nature's nobleman, Jesse B.., —
Furgusion, of Tennessee--God bless his green and pleasant memory!--and latterly a
few others of the same State; but among professional reformers-—-and I speak only of
such as I personally know, I found a few golden ingots, and a plentiful surplusage
of brass ones--born malcontents who take to world-saving, themselves needing it
most By far. Such people as preach divine charity and all that, yet constantly
yelp and howl down to the bitter depths of death, slander or disgrace, and every
human being whom they cannot ase at will, or who disagree with them. They are
magnificent demonstrations of the sublime truth of the philosophy 1 teach, viz.,
that as was a person's anti-natal circumstances, so will his or her subsequent life
be. If begotten in lust, alone, then that will be their bias from the breast to
the grave; if of "authority" backed by brute force, on the body of half-dead com-
pliance, then such will go through life, biting, barking, snarling, growling, mek-
ing all sorts of trouble; incapable either of generosity or appreciation, and
scattering discord wherever their scandal-scattering footsteps fall;--generally,
long, lean, lank, slab-sided human halfness, one or more of whom infests nearly
every neighborhood. Thus in close juxtaposition with nature's noblemen, I have
never failed to meet. men of souls so contemptibly small as to make one ashamed of

the form one wore. Who would naturally have dreamed, surmised, or indeed have ever

suspected there was the slightest connection between Love and Slander? yet there is.
Read this scrap,..which I cut from a paper many years ago, and then to the proof:~-

"The slanderer is a pest; an incubus to society, that should be subjected to a

| slow cauterization, and then be lopped off like a disagreeable excresence. Like. the

63

i aves a shining trail in his wake. Like a tarantula, he weaves a thread
Srteander ath a web of dileds on j"vith all the mendicity of hints, whispers a
his tale, that, like the fabling Nile, no fountain knows. piers Fen
dead--over whose pale, sheeted corpse sleeps the dark sleep no anti: en <a
wake, and whose pale lips have then no voice to plead, are subjecte ° sca ~

ous attacks of the slanderer-- |” |

"IWho wears a misk the Gorgon would disown,
A Cheek of parchment, and en eye of stone?!

"T think it is Poltoek who says the slanderer is the foulest whelp of sin, —
‘whose tongue was set on fire in‘hell, and whose legs were faint with haste to cir-
culate the lie his soul had framed.

MIHe has @ lip of lies, a face formed to conceal,
That, without feeling, mocks at those who feel.'

"There is no animal I despise more than these moths’ and scaraps of society,
the malicious censurers-- . anion ‘ ay:
"!These ravenous fishés who foldow only the wake
Of great ships, because perchance they're great.'

"Oh, who'would disarrange all society with their false lapwing cries! The
‘slanderer makes few direct charges and assertions. His ‘long, envious finger points
to'no' certain locality. He has an inimitable shrug of the shoulders, can give
peculiar glances-- ii OF. :

"Or convey a libel to a frown,
Or wink a reputation down!'

- « “He seems to glory in the misery he entails. -The innocent wear the foulest
impress of his smutty palm, and a soul pure as ‘arctic snow twice bolted by the *
_ northern blast, ' through his warped and discolored glasses, wear a mottled hue.

"tA whisper broke the air-+ —e
A soft, light tone, and low, © ©

Yet barbed with shame and woe!

Nor might ‘it only perish there,

No farther go!

nf

"tah, me! a quick and eager ear
Caught up the little meaning sound;
Another ‘voice then wreathed it clear,
_And. so it wandered round,
Fron.ear to lip, from lip to ear,
Until it reached a gentle heart,
_ And that--it broke!"

Now observe that it is inflexibly true that every slanderer. of wha
is nearly always a long, lank, little, lilly-liveted, ticked-up, tizenish bein’. with
. out. the slightest love save that of self; and when modern spiritualism came alon
thousands:of such rushed into its ranks, disgraced the cause and themselves my
foisted their miserable twaddile upon the world as true supernalism, when in fact
“spiritualism really. had nothing to do with ‘it whatever.* As at present constitut a
‘that ism contains, within its ranks, thrée, hay;

: ‘four, sorts of people. lst,
who hail it as the demonstration of human continuance beyond the greta ant he

~64-

celestial harbinger of the good time coming. These people are true supernalists;

}:’and among them have lever found sympathizers, and people fit for the heaven they

| seek, 2d. A large class of social revolutionists wnder various leaderships, who,

| accepting the facts, are eager to push on toward the realization of the promised

| ‘good time, These two comprise the army whose iconoclastic .blows right and left are

demolishing some of the idols of the Past; but they are builders yet, ‘and it remains

to be seen what sort of edifice they will give us in lieu of those now crumbling
before their fierce artillery. 3d. A smaller class who cling to old traditions;

_ insist upon tying this century’ to the old dead ones, and fastening their faith about
equally on the Bible and the manifestations. The fourth class is made up of mal-
contents; always making trouble, never satisfied; having, here and there, an able

leader who bas his hands full all the time. The rank and file of this trouble-

| making army wouldn't pass muster at the gates of heaven; for a more ungenerous, |

malignant, back-biting set was never developed by any civilization earth ever saw.

Born of loveless parents, they rush through life striking alike, hep~hazard, at
friend or foe; discontented from the nipple to eternity; full of maiice; steeped to
the lips with cruel, cool, cobra-like venom, they are never happy szve when slander-
ing their betters, picking flaws in others' characters, and in stabhing in the back
those whom they dare not face. Beware of such! They abound, and ‘like some snakes,
not on legs, are dangerous. I have already described ‘them physically, so that

they will be known when met. TI owed this duty to mankind; and I now proceed to. pay
my little Bill. : phied CABRIO Boy

XCVII, Reduced from competence to nothing, by the terrible Boston fire of Nov.
1872, I went to Ohio from necessity, and finding materials at hand, in great abund-
ance, made it my ‘especial business to study .the workings of the organic law of sex,
as displayed in the product of marriages, ‘accotiplished at periods varying from fif-
teen to sixty-five years anterior to 1873. .One remarkable case was that of a man in
Ohio, a long, kank abortion, whose ‘nature ‘constantly impelled him to find fault
with everything and everybody--even himself, or rather Itself; nor was it ever happy,
except when going up and down retailing slanderous tales and scandal concerning who-
ever failed to suit it, come or go at its beck and cali, and do humble homage at its
feet. Now the fault is not altogether theirs~--these unhappy ones,--for they had no
hand in their own make-up (save in that they usually make no effort to correct their
shortcomings), but is that of their progenitors. We have no right to run ‘the risk,
--of being guilty of the insensate folly of parenting such monstrosities ,--for such
they are, and moral abortions-beside~ nor to parentage at all unless mutual love, ©
esteem and respect be the prompting spur. He SEG, POs ees

People of that grade are usually one-sided, angular, not to be depended’ on, and
generally passion-driven; or rather you may set it down as incontrovertibly true,
that wherever you find one of the class alluded to, there also will you find a
devout disciple of Onan, I once lost the "friendship" of a male human being of a

slightly different type from the above, yet still a monstrosity. He had fed me for
_ months in exchange for information marketable at far higher prices than he paid--
still I was. grateful; and one day he proposed that I shoul aid him a cruel scheme;:
~ but I preferred to go hungry, ay, starve outright, rather than:comply with his de-
mands; because I well knew that to do so would be conmiving at an outrage against ©
an innocent child, in the first place, and at his own destruction and probable
death, in the second; hence my pity for her made me foil him; and my friendship
for him caused me to defeat his well-cherished plans. I knew I should transform
him, and his household, too, into bitter enemies of mine; yet still I determined to
do right, no matter at what sacrifice or pain to me; and at once decided to protect
-@ young thing, and save him from himself, by in no manner leading either knowledge,
- power or influence, to, do an evil deed. Magic powers, too, he wanted,--he, an old
man, of eight and sixty!--to enable him to compass the ruin, or "marry"-~just.
think of it!--a mere child, of but a few months over fifteen summers,--fair to look

-~65-

ron wg! s¢ ; ” : 4 a Sere lh he Snes ae te my eee j Hina :

on; a‘hundred weight of. beauty..and glee; simple, -heedless, joyous as a morning bird,
carolling eee roundelay; and he coarse..as rag-carpet;. brutal as t race |
on the: war=path;.lecherous as a satyr; one-third human, two-thirds. goat; pase y ve
hundred’ poundsof rough, uncouth, unwashed feculence, whose, PORAe ROS ay Deena non

. sign hung out, warning passers-by to "keep to the windward . And yet oa ; man had.
a great, rich jewel of goodness, away down in the inner deeps, and that naceee :
which, as will be hereinafter seen, urged him to sacrifice all things, ; ae vague

*hope of achieving one certain, but tremendous gyenion, rsine. eee pea pens
soul; yet he knew not what he was striving after. I did; and so instead of helping
him wed her, I cautioned the child against it, because I knew such a step varie:
inevitable death to her within a few brief, lust-harried, agonizing months; for, the
gentle Adonis“had confidentially boasted to me of his intentions, yet he said that,
passionally a moderate man was he, and that, save under extraordinary cirsymahen sees
he would be. content. with--what may God protect even a woman of the wilderness. from!
Finding: some Power working against him--for I had taken a woman and a man into my

- confidence, to enable me to.save the girl from the horrible fate threatened her,

the old "man" desired me to use certain magic spells, common among the people down
South, and other lands, I wot of, to enable, him to gain control of her, to be used
for awhile, as only a human beast can use God's image in female form-~and then,
utterly ruined, to be cast aside as a loathed, and loathsome thing forever, with a
bagnio close by, and a darkly rolling, sullen river, in the near distance! For the
life of me I was so stone blind as to be wholly unable to view the matter as he did,
and so--well, he lost the game; for a young man honorably wooed and won her,

_ > BCVIII. «I missed many a good meal by doing as I did, but 1 kept my manhood un-
-Sullied, by defeating a wrong. To this day I hold his own written letter requesting
‘me: to disgrace myself, and tarnish my soul, by an infamovs deed in furtherance of
his abominable and abnormal passion, ‘said letter being written. that I might clearly
and distinctly comprehend his. meaning. That man- thereafter hated me with fifty -
thousand: horse-power, in which he:.was:natural, because all animals are rendered |
‘furious if their lusts are defeated. . - ae :

Not only do individuals in their conduct proclaim the cat-and-dog lives led by
their immediate. progenitors, but. it. often happens that whole classes in a community
do the very same thing; for instance: Once I went to a "Religious Picnic," of. the
"Reformers," and while taking a drink behind a tree,--it was whiskey, too, a bever-
age plentifully provided and dispensed by the saints, most oall of whom were ex-.
cellent judges of the article,-~and at the earnest solicitation of a particularly
reverend brother, 1 tried it on; and as it passed. along the tube leading to my
stomach I experienced a sensation, only comparable to a desperate encounter between
two infuriate ironclads, going on ‘simultaneously with an electrical storm, a couple
of Vesuvian volcanic eruptions, and four typhoons, all going on in my internal man,
until I gasped for breath, and mine eyes resembled a pair of exceedingly large peeled
onions, or two burnt holes in a blanket; which experience satisfied me once for all,
and led me to wonder if that was the best brand of Reformer's whiskey, what could

be the quality of the article served out down below. I failed to see wherein whiskey
was a high moral motor, . ; e wed sates

While trying to catch my breath, I overheard one saint counsel another to: get-
me to orate, and both spoke of. me in:such opprobrious terms as would have fired me
with indignant anger without the additional damnable stimulus of the rankly poison
draught. Teri minutes afterward, against my will, I took the stand and spoke my
piece, just as we Randoldphs are. accustomed to; and dealt out justice to my’ traducers;
for doing which, and differing from them about what constitutes manhood, the leading
saints: proposed: to’ silence'me, demonstrate their sainthood, and end the dispute by
cool, calm, deliberate, premeditated MURDER, by drowning me in the river hard by. +

-66—

They did not attempt it, because when they proposed it my hand slid round to my hip-
| pocket, and cowards seldom attack a well-armed man. This experience satisfied me
that, until people are really spiritual, it is best to be always prepared with carn-
al logic to withstand their material arguments. I have alluded to these things to
make-a point in my book, and not because the savages who proposed.to murder me are.
worth the slightest notice, but solely, only and for the express purpose of making.
two remarks; the first is this: that the world needs something better than it has
now before Reform will be a thing of heart and conduct, instead of empty words as
at present; and second, to point out the characteristics of certain salacious and
other self-assumed "Reformers." Of course, your pseudo-philosopher is never a full,
round, genial, or generous man; but will invariably be found, on close examination,

_ to partake largely of the hang-dog, sneak-thief, and lecherous look. They are
. generally moderately tall, thin, and angular, heads, than either lavge, fat, or
little-bodied men. The same holds true of females--such as delight in breaking up.
families, creating scandal, and ruining other people by slanderous tongues or
innuendo. Husbands, wives, be very chary of entertaining guests of either sex thus
made up; else you may expect moral poison and ruin to remain after themselves have
| departed. Theirs is the vampire build, and that sort of influence is theirs, seven
times in every eight, where they have taken to the business of world-saving. In
thirty years I have conversed with scores of such and found, exceptionless, that
their ideal of love was that which better men stigmatize as wnhallowed lust. and fiery
passion, unredeemed by the faintest spark of manhood, womanhood, or genuine goodness.
They all declare for a "central, solar, or pivotal love, with planetary loves re-
_ volving round it;" that is to say, a main one with "outside" indulgencies to keep
_ the cosmos in order; which means, in plain Saxon, that man is but a featherless
-,rooster, entitled to one queen-hen with a fiock of lessor chic-a-biddies to relieve
her during incwbation. I should not like to Lionize, bat would assuredly glory in
 caponizing that species of foul fowl; such peopie can cee no higher use for certain
organic functions than to fill their own places after death, or to gratify their
morbid natures. : - ; : , myst

They cannot imagine anything else, nor even dream that through the offices of |
monogamal, conjugal life, the soul itself may be enormously intensified and expanded,
and the evolution of mighty thought itself go on at a more rapid rate, taking higher
flights, skimming deeper oceans, and, consequently, the mental, psycnal, emotional,
and creative powers of the human spirit be enhanced a million fold. This is all
Greek to these harpers on a single string, and that a base one. Some of these
_ people call themselves physicians, and pass their time in inventing "preventives,"
embracing "shields," "pellets," "plugs," exoriating and tanning "washes," and a
hundred other infamous abominations to entrap the suffering, and enrich themselves.
Let all henceforth know, not only what is set forth on this point elsewhere herein,
but that the man who wishes to spare the partner of his joys, who, poor soul, al- —
ways runs the risk of death every time she yields, not to please herself, but to
bless the man she has called husband, can, by will, restraint, and firmly holding
his breath, when so disposed, prevent the inhalation of the monad or germ, and its
descent to the prostate, and, also, by will, the flash of fire from his central soul,
which alone, and only, can render fruitfulness possible. They never dreamed of that,
yet it is as certainly true as truth itself! They cannot see these splendid things,
because their visual range is groundy, while these lofty truths are at their base
anchored in the substance of the human soul, and held there by a cable, love, whose
other end girdles the Infinite God?

Man deals with masses; woman with individuals; and the Great One deals with,
protects, comforts, solaces, and, through pure love alone, redeems both. Would that
these revealments might reach every human heart, even though mine own is aching and
breaking the while. # |

Late

- > XCIX, Said Lewis Kirk, "An ounce of heaven, ‘a pound of hell, makes life, eo
‘ttany ever experience mental -pain-~mind-suffering-~in-its ‘keenest sense. eee arr
trouble}-~Pshaw}-<is nothings" and as times:go, the: first statement.is correct; tor
none but-those who are conscious of soul,:can experience soul=pangs;~-and.it 48 i
these -who ‘turn sin any direction for relief, and fall ‘victims ‘to desde ae ir Ms
quaekery of the ‘would-be world-reformers;+—a ‘class’ whieh sprung into no ice wi
Fourier’and Graham, and ‘which, since the advent of Spiritualism, has increased tor:
an alarming extent all-over this land, Theiri hébby is “Sexism; "+-a thing ‘of whose ©
basic principles they are as ignorant as.they are of ‘who built Baalbec. - pace
tramps sceur the country, victimize honest men's wives and, daughters; and .even ave
the effrontery to enforce their odious embraces ypon decent women, on the infamous |
and filthy. plea that they, the lady-victims, require a ‘change -of magnetism—fersootht
~-which ‘change themselves are:the very ones to triumphantly effects: Hoodwinked by
psychologic: power, deluded by ‘snecious sophistry, anxious for relief, ready to make
any sacrifice ‘to obtain it, women, by hundreds, fall into the accursed net, and ..
ave ruined; for no matter how secret the deed may :be;s,her soul knows the facts feels ;
the weight, and suffers unt*ld agony in consequence, and all because of salacious ~~
wretches who ought to swing by their heels,.:if not by their necks, at thenearest
tree, I can have some pity for those who fall for.lack of strength to resist oak ad

stemptation; but none for-those who ruin by:a "medical theory!" These people find-a

.women ill with gravid uterus, leucorrhoea, or ulcerated’ vagina or womb, whereupon
they proceed to the most infernal exposures, inspections, and tactual manipulations,
conceibavle, ‘and utterly horrent’ to any: sensitive and delicate woman; the upshot of
which is she takes his stuff, and grows ten times worse than ever; because wholly |
bent ‘on. symptomology, they are ignorant that all these troubles are physical expres-
sions of-internal, mental, emotional, affectional or spiritual states half the - ~~
time; and that ulcerations proceed from lacerations;--or brutalisms on the part of:
the tie head of the house, They. do not realize that disturbances, originating ‘in ~
spiritual commotions, can only be cured by administering spiritual remedies,-—-that: ~
is to say, operating upon the soul as well as upon its physical garment-—-flesh,
bleod,: bone an& nerves. ‘How this’ is accomplished, has ‘atready~been set forth ©

.bherein, = («7 °. ETOne ad tfeadl iv pe er ‘ros , lamasor

A

= vf > poe ~

, es Ce It is my intention, if I live, during the years I. spend on earthy to de- ©
vote: Iny :time to teaching such as desire more light on the matters which have been: «.
the sale study of my life. Ostracized. by those for; and with whom I: had labored » ~
since. 1848; met with ingratitude at every step,:I gkadly accept the ostracism of
the many for the.:good companionship ofthe few; yet natiso few after all, for day
hy. day the!ranksof the discontented' army, who have,‘been content. to follow where. <
impulse: led, has grown thinner,and our Brotherhood of--Thinkers.-has: increased .

§

correspondingly, until at last we,.of Eulis,, know we have. kut..to. let. the world know.
that our doors and hearts, are open, to welcome acolytes by thousands.. Neglect,,
slander, vile; prejudices, contumely--all have~-in.this; trial of, six and, twenty ...
years--though ranking millions, armed with staves, crying, -"Crucify. him! crucify him}

, sproved signally unequal, to the, task of defeating. a single solitary man, and that. «
marr the penman of. this book,—-PASCHAL BEVERLY: RAN DOLPH!--the sang melee!--Proud: of.
his descent from the kings :and queens, not of: Nigritia, but; of liadagascar, tio say”
nothing,--to say nothing.of the Randolphss: nor their rise from Warwick,: the: king-
maker! Listen to one of our;wild meloedies,, and then say, if such blood should bow. -
and bend before the ignoble crowd whose only patient is that they boast the line. .
age of the seashore sorcerers:-~

. MADAGASCAR SONG, |... ea

ys

" Translated by Sir John Bowring.
Trust not--trust not to the seashore sorcerers!

<tfe

- err =. Im the. times of old the. sorcerers. came

To our island and were thus accosted:
-"Land is here, so tarry. with your women;
Be ye good and just, and be our brothers!"
Thus the sorcerers promised--we believed them.
Soon, they overturned our walls--erected. ..
Threatening fortresses, which poured forth thunder
In their fury; and their priests would give us
Other. unknown gods than ours to worship;
And they spoke of services: and obedience.
Better die! The fight was long and bloody.
They were masters of the murderous lightnings,
.: And our multitudinous hosts they scattered;
- All were scattered--all--our people perished.
Trust: not--trust not to the seashore sorcerers!
“More invaders came, yet boldér--stronger.
On the seashore: they. their banners planted;
But Heaven fought with us, and they were conquered!
Heavy torrents fell; and mighty tempests,
Storms and poisonous winds o'erwhelmed the stranger.
They are gone--are dead; and we, the living,
Live to know that we-are free and happy.
Trust not--trust not to the seashore sorcerers!
: , : : PE
cs I did not follow the counsel thus given; and lo, the terrible penalty I paid. >
My crime was:rete mucosmal, and for that scarce a lecturer or paper devoted to

"Reform" but had its fling at me, even to the extent of abusing my dead mother, who.
went to heaven nearly fifty years ago. But I bided my time? VENI! VIDI! VICI!

Hundreds of "Lecturers" and-thousands of "The faithful and unco-Godly," most of whom

I never saw, considered their labor incomplete, and their speech imperfect, unless
they could soundly abuse my mother's only son. ‘But what did. it avail--in the end?.
They were compelled to borrow, or rather steal, my thought, and pass it off as their
own; and I have cut out of their articles and speeches thousands 6f lines, and
hundreds of thoughts, which I héd first given to the world:. It-is a terrible crime.
to be by. God constituted differently from.those who see light in the same thought
you do, yet feel the pulses of manhood throbbing in your veins;--and suré to be. =
hated on that account. I am a SANG MEIEE; and not less than twelve strains of».
blood rush through my veins, yet have. + ever met insult all the way along of life,
because I dared to be myself! But triumphantly have I done that same thing,."and —
all despite my good lords Cardinal," from the early days till now,--Selah! For the
fault of the Infinite, if fault it was, to make me of an unfashionable’ cast, have

I been almost crucified, and have suffered, as it were, a thousand deaths. For the
Madagascan tinge on my cheek, not its volcanic fires. in my soul--Fires which held —
the cowards at bay for five and thirty years--have I been doubly wronged, by these |
and them and those, who, when help was needed, gladly availed them of my brain and’

“speech and pen, to. devoutly damn me when the fights were won! Driven by the flam-

ing sword of mean prejudice from all noble occupation and employment, by those

whose pallor, alone, not Soul, or Honor or Manhood, or nobility of character, made
them strong, and gave them warrant to invade my rights, and darkly slander me,-—and
invariably behind my back} lacking manly courage‘ to do it to my face,--wowards, all,
whom I felt and feel were, and are, as far beneath me as the floor of space is bélow
the loftiest Turret of the Immeasurable Temple wherein God resides: Attacked with
bitter and envious malignity, ever without the chance of reply,--by tongue and pen, ©
~-still I survived; and--despite them all. Treated more like a beast of the jungle

-69-

--themselves
than a human being; they exhausted all logic trying to prove me a nobody , t ;
the only real tnirenes ee in seeking’ to justify their own outrage, aie: eee
ed me! They thought it better to denounce and slay me, than to afford me a .
free field to contest in the matter of Mind!--and heaping abuse ed ota on me
all the while, yet what availed it all? I became a power in Appt talk F ; a pi
they? I took to Mirrorology’, ‘and: they did’ not: like it, because ee wae
laugh their isms and practice to utter scorn!=—just where and as, 4 em
in this hour! But their hostilities--in all these years +-drove me back upon ni
and my own sou}; and I prefér being called ail the names the che ts aaa os a
can apply, to being counted among their malign confraternity, because my she jgsonby
taught me to forbear retaliation, seeing they could not help doing as they did,
being aborts, badly begotten and worse brought forth+-constitutionally mean, -—
physico-worshipping fathers, half-murdered victims for mothers. My science told me
just what to expect of them; whilé ‘my ‘vision dis¢losed images of pool-haunting
newts, when seeking for: figures to' represent their souls; and, en passant, it was
partly because I advocated Oriental Magic, in preference to their’ mesmeric and
similar revelative methods, that’ Iwas hated. I could not help it, for I believe in
God, and even so do I believe’ and know that those dark ovoids, in proper hands, are
capable of enabling a true soul*to scan more mysteries in a week than they can in a
lifetime, with all their fantastic methédds combined--Mysteries forever and ever be~
yond their reach; for we know where we’go after death; they but guess at it.

“at

Oh, how I have yearned for everlasting death, in view of the pitiless, remorse-
less persecutions, insults, wrongs, heaped on my head by thousands whom I never
either harmed or even met--envioud, jealous, sordid! I pitied them, and longed for
lasting rest. It is not so now, for the victory is mine, and I pity. and forgive
them‘ a1l--in the same spirit in which an elephant pities and forgives--a bed-bug!
~-for I regard all slanderers as most people do that delicate and deliciously —
odoriferous insect. = dahpels . ie . Fe

_ During the year 1874 I propose’ to give the world’a test of the powers of Vision
of the soul when under the sleep of Sialam,--that upper clairvoyance which comes
never by mesmeric roads, nor drugs, fumes, ethers or spiritual circles, but ever by
the three principles, through the aid of-'the Vast Ovoid élsewhere treated of herein.
(If I die thete is another--a selected chief of Bulis--who, in time, will finish *~
what I leave’-undone--at least, such is my hope.) Because I know well that weak and
impatient ones or mere wonder-seekers, fail with them, as would an Ashantee with a
transit instrument; but others, a ‘goodly band of royal'seers! succeed, and are able
to accomplish loftiest things of sesrship, not elone by visions, in the oval, but _
from the point _d'tappui of’mental crystdllic, ascensive, penetrative, and comprehen-
sive ‘grasp,'reéached by steadily gazing'on their dark and glorious faces. It is only
unripe ones who fail; ‘malignant quacks and folly-driven ‘fanatics who, too low in.
the sensual scale, too gross in mental and physical tastes and habitudes to appreci-
ate aught ef pure spirit, unsullied thought, and thé vision that flights immensity,
and laughs at towering mountains, and roaring, intervening oceans, of either water
or Bpace, denounce through’ malignant envy and the spiteful jealousy of the Naga, |
what is forever beyond and above them. These are beneath notice, and ‘their spite and
hatred, as their regard and praise, are of equal weight’ and ‘value,--less than that
of the shadow of an atom! : vo : . “7 On yw

Mesmerism and other methods of reaching'psycho vision were ‘but the guide-boards
pointing to this, the surer, purer, better, than all others on the globe beside.
Many a man has become a libertine, and many a woman fallen-low, low, low, from the
temptations and facilities afforded by animal magnetism; but in all thé broad world
no ‘soul has’-been degraded, but all uplifted, through this Old-new, New-old Sight of
the Soul. I expect to produce ‘the Sequel to "AFTER DEATH," and "DEALINGS WITH ‘THR’ ~

~70-

READ," in a volume concerning "BEYOND THE SPACES." Through the SIALAM SLUMBER have
be been educated; and I honor. and paenize the glorious bridge that enabled me to keep
the human bloodhounds at bay, and to span the unfathomable ocean of Eternity! .—

_ CI. The saying, that to the pure all things are pure, is not tue, for filth
to everybody, and you can't dress it up, or sugar it to deed, suggestion, or thought,
be right, no matter what subterfuges of sophistry or false logic are brought.to bear
‘to prove. it so; wherefore, the slang of these pseudo reformers, stripped of its
glitter, is insufferably offensive to any health-loving soul in all the lands. It
can never be right to defile the bed of a. husband or wife, even though their lives
be cat-and-doggish; nor can it ever be right for any one to love one and hold another
in unloving, legal duress. let: them fairly, squarely, part company before either ..
ge Sign, TO IET. Be off with the old in honest style before going on .
with. the new!

_We, people. of the world are born to trade in equivalents. If we give love we |
want it in return. If we labor for and protect even where there's no love whatever
in the case, yet still we have the right of being respected, and you shall not live
on my earnings yet respect me not, and have dalliance elsewhere. For if you yield
to another, you and that other must abide the consequences. That other must care

for, feed, clothe, labor,for, and protect you; for I am not bound by any law, human
or divine, to keep a corner in that I work for, for others' uses!--and, by Heaven,
I won't do it! If you do the bad thing then let's part, for you no longer command .
my respect, nor are.entitled to the results of my labor, or deserving of my homage '
or esteem in any degree whatever. Equivalents is the Eternal law! Remember and
abide by it! j

_. Now here is another new revelation: Plegsure, like light, has two modes and
motions; lst, wave; 2d, linear; one in rays, the other in billowy undulations; one
like beams from a candle-or star; the other like the swelling of the ocean waters.
The pleasures of Lust or passion alone, as in unloving union, or the sin of the.
Onanite, is alweys Electric, non-responsive-aloneness, non-mutual; therefore, like
lighhing, destructive. it is keen, sharp, cutting, incisive, and shocks the body
and soul to the, verge.of death. It is wholly selfish, and results from the rush and
escape of gust so much nervo-vital life, wherefore, ,of course, is self-murderous,.
because the electric loss is not compensated by a magnetic inflow from a loving - -
opposite, It is linear. But when pleasure results from a meeting of the electric
currents of the male with the magnetic flow of the female, in the nerves of each,
as in the touch of loving lips, the two currents spread out into waves, which flow
all over the vast nervous network of both, until they die out as they roll upon the
foot of the throne whereon each soul sits in voluptuous expectancy. In the one
case all joy is local; in the other,.it is diffused over both beings, and each is
bathed in the celestial and divine aura--the breath of God; suffusing both bodies,
refreshing both souls! But this holy experisnce cannot be had where habit has
blunted the nerves of each; excess has destroyed impressibility. Rest, :Repose, |
Slumber and Activity, Wakefulness, impressionableness, are the equations of the
eternal sexive law,--and all others as well. —

let me restate the law in clearer terms: lst. The joys of love are consequent
upon the rush of .nervous fluid along the nerval fibrils, filamental cords, or. wires
of the system, centring in the vital ganglia of either sex. When it flows-alone it
is electric. When it contacts on both sides it is magnetic, 2d. The fulness of
Love~joy depends upon the plethora of vital life and nerve-aura stored up in the
ganglia of the system, but especially upon the greater or less stock magazined with-
in the mystic cripts appointed of Nature for that purpose. 3d. The conditions
essential to the maintenance of any special power. of either soul or body, especially

-/1=

‘ rae cen topes Sse ge. goons Oc
of love ‘and its 6ffices, which involves both, are: Regular Pipa rege tens ae
cessation of its activities for a period more or less pki betas aan ene of iede
depends upon, lst, the amount of force expended in other direc eure al ee
the recuperative energies of the individual. Ath. In orton FO aeaei deine nia
possible affectional life, there must be lengthened terms os eat 2 ee
‘period, the forces accumulate; the nervous magazines expand ; the 52 AMA Ge

stronger, more conductive, and sensitive at the same time; eae ed iatnoy Jet Oe
tions cease and normal appetite succeeds to insane a si im deta ta Seine oe
vbich latter. are unnatural, while the former is healthful. 5th. The ae
relations between soul and body render each at times the tormented vict Ne Gene
“martyr to; the other; hence Love-offices’ are never in ape ih bless ee
each body agrees,with the other, and the four combine and unite to one oe
pose. Otherwise disastrous results inevitably follow; for loveless an An o
a money-lender,--it serves you in the present tense, lends you in the ir ona
mood; keeps you in the present tense, lends you in the conditional Peron eTees ike
in the subjective; rules you in the future, and puts a period to you int sends.
whereas Loving union wafts you up to, Godness; ripens you; increases thé bulk of.
soul and sdds. immeasurable joys to the sum total of life, THEREFORE TAKE CARE =
YOUR LOVE DON'T PERISH IN THE USING OF IT! 6}h. Remember that the human soul is a
musical instrument played’ on by the fingers and the breath of God, wherefore see to
it that it be kept in tune so that none but finest symphonies are evoked; for it:
is; only then that you can realize either the true stress or strain of being. For-_
get not that‘the soul is a Republic; that each organ’and faculty is one of the
States; ahd that to insure the common weal each’ should conspire to one common pur—_
pose~-the happiness of all. | ~ - *

7th. Life without love is perpetual death: To be truly human and purely good,
we must love, To be strong, something must lean upon us; and they who live apart,
isolated lives, are dwelling in the midst of viewless horrors, ready at: any moment -
to take form and lash their souls to frenzy. We were born to love; to beget our kind
to beer children to the world and God; and failing therein, we defeat the very
purposes for which Deity launched us: into being. = ot sats

o

——

‘CII. Ever since I began to write on this prolific and most vital theme, I have.
persistently, constantly. endeavored to prove’ that the overstocked. condition of the |
female labor market, and the preponderance of the female over the male element in
society were fruitful, causes that led to the increase of the’ Social Evil; and I now
write’to show'that there are operating, right here in our very midst, the most
wicked practices, tending not only to an increase of this evil,* but sapping the
very foundations of the morals of society. a dyes gee

_ It i8/startling fact that the number of marriages is diminishing; the number ~
of divorce cases increasing, there being forty-four on ths ‘docket of the Supreme _
Court for one term in a single county in Connecticut, the State of "blue laws" and
"steady habits." Another starling fact is, that among the native,element. of society
pee ig of births is less than the number of deaths in‘many sections of all the

tates, A 6 Lis irae y

“A wicked and fearful extravagance in the mode of living, rendering marriage

and ‘housekeePing $0 difficult, is one cause of the decline of marriage. The poorer
class must apé the style of the rich, and they make a great display when they
marry. “Being unable to come up to the standard, they remain single, and’ plunge a
into ‘sensuality and vice.” It is estimated that in New York City, and the surround’
ing suburbs, there are more than two hundred ‘thousand females, and quite ag many
men, living, openly or in private, lives’of shame ‘and senuality.* The same causes
are operating in New York to-day that lea' the citizens of San Francisco, years ago, ’
to form vigilance committees, and for the Same purpose, viz., to correct intolerable

/ evils, and to purify the political and social atmosphere. Marriage and employment
would have a tendency to check this fearfully growing evil. The better portion of
| society must look to it, or this element in their midst will rush by a pathway of

ruin to restore the equilibrium, for they cannot wholly escape the dread influences
and effects. at | )

There is the revolting sin of foeticide, or infanticide, the tendency of which
is to ruin both soul and body, sunder the bonds of pure love between the sexes, and
| send our most promising young women and wives into premature graves, spreading a
gloom dark as night over hearts and homes that should be bright with health, joy and
happiness. It is trying to checkmate the Infinite God.

There is a plan whereby much of this evil may be obviated. I am aware that it
has been tried, but never in right-down earnest in these States; or under municipal
surveillance. I refer to the establishment of Matrimonial Bureaus, under sworn
commissioners, and direct care of Public authorities. So far all such affairs have
been in the interests of money-seeking panders and procuresses, and to afford better
facilities for supplying men with victims and mistresses, and bagnio-keepers with
.ruined girls. -There are scores of thousands of both sexes without any chance of |
finding mates, and they are rushed to ruin through "Personals" and blind advertise-
ments; and in trying to sail toward honorable marriage, run straight upon thereefs
of social vice, and are forever lost. No one wants to be bad; no one sighs.for
harlotry or libertinism; and no one prefers a life of shame to one of honor and
respect; hence it is the duty of the State to take measures to prevent all such
steps, and establish bureaus wherein women, and men, too, may.find- suitable mates,
and establish decent, comfortable homes, instead of filling bagnios, gaming-hells, .
jails, prisons, syphilitic hospitals, and premature graves. All of us have human
hearts and human feelings, and we were created duo-sexed expressly that we might
commingle our natures. The soul needs love just as much as the body requires food.
Love-starvation--the nostalgia, or’ homesickness. of the soul--is the most terrible
evil that can oppress the human spirit. Reader, think how dreadful must have been
the suffering that inspired these lines--—the requiem of a breaking heart:--

"Out from his palace home
He came. to my cottage door;
Few were his looks and words,
But they linger for evermore.
The smile of his. sad, blue eyes
Was tender as smile could be; .
Yet I was nothing to him, .
Though he was the world to me}

"Fair was the bride he won,
-Yet her heart was never his own;
Her beauty he had and held,
But his spirit was ever alone.
I would have been his slave,
With a kiss for my life-long fee;
But I was nothing to him,
While he was the world to me}

"To-day, in his stately home,

On a flower-strewn bier he lies,
With the drooping lids fast closed

O'ter the beautiful, sad blue eyes.
And among the mourners who mourn

-,.. I may not a mourner be;
For I was nothing to hin,
73m

£ Though he was: the world to tes” | pet

‘HHow'will it bé with our souls: |
When they meet in the better land
What the mortal could never know, —

"W411 the spirit’yet understand?

?

_°-“Or, in somé celestial form, .
“Must ‘the sérrow repeated bé,
And I be nothing: to him,
While he dims heaven for me 7"

Lear

~And yet just ‘such’ wails arise heavenward every day in the year from literally:
‘thousands of bleeding spirits. a 20%

“CIII. I do not’ envy the feelings of those guilty of breaking up love-matches,
or tyrarnically ordering what shall or shall not be. If there is a hell, hereafter,
it: seems to me that all such ought to go there, at least for a summering, if no-
longer; yet there are those who ruthlessly destroy others" happiness, because’ they
have the power. re . meee: ; aa ey ee a:

"My wife was not my wife, but always her mother's daughter!" has béen the story
ever since mothers-in-law came in fashion; and it is my opinion that more families
have been "smashed into smithereens," to quote a Hibernicism, by that awful power,
than perhaps any other singlé cause in the list, yet they think they.do no harm;
forcibly reminding one of the "Moral man" of the Russian poet, NEKRASOF:—

"A strictly moral man have ! been ever,
And never injured anybody--never’ : :

"I lent my friend a sum of money he could not pay,
I jogged his memory in a friendly way,--

Then took the law of him the affair to end;

The law to prison sent my worthy friend.

He died there--not a farthing for poor me!

I am not angry, though I've cause to be.

His debt that very moment I forgave,

And shed sad tears of sorrow o'er his grave.

A strictly moral man have I been’ ever,

And never injured naybody--never.

"I sent my slave to learn the art of dressing
‘Meat--he succeeded--a good cook's a blessing;

But he,: too, oft would leave his occupation,

And gained a taste not suited to his station.

He liked to read, to reason, and discuss;

“I, tired'of scolding, without further fuss,

Had the rogue flogged—all for thé love of him;
He‘ went and drowned himself--t'was a strange whim.
A strictly moral man have ! been ever,

And never injured’ anybody~-néver;

"My silly daughter fell in love one day,
And with her tutor wished’ to run away 3
I ‘threatened curses, and pronounced my ban;
She yieldéd, and: espoused a’rich, old man.

Tie

Their house was splendid, brimming o'er with wealth;
But suddenly poor Mary lost her health,
And .in a year consumption wrought her doom;
She left us mourning o'er her early tomb.
£33 | A strictly moral man have I been ever,
By ii And never injured anybody--never."

' CIV. Probably when animal loves die out, and spiritual Loves succeed them, as
@ general rule, the true civilization we hope for will come along. Society must
outgrow the possibilities of evil, and change its impudicities; its scabrous practices
its practical polygamy and polyandry; its infernal saturnalias of lust, for their
exact Opposites, and then, but not till then, will all the sexive horrors take their
| departure from the world. We, who ourselves, MEN OF EULIS, beholding the curses
_and contrasts of the present civilization--this thing that shines so bright, yet
nurses Murder at its breasts,+-this thing that glitters with the Beaute du Diable,
_--strive by lifting the veil to show the concealed horror; and to warn mankind a- ~
_gainst it. We believe not in any form of concubinage or libertinism, but we do not
use the same weapons against them that others are accustomed to. We propose to

make every man and woman master and mistress of themselves, and enable them to de-
tect the paste from the diamond! ra

‘

CV. Of late years there has run a chain of peculiar crime the whole length and

breath of the United States, from Maine to Texas, Boston to San Francisco. It
appears as if the arch-fiend of Lust, himself, had invented this new enormity. I
allude to the systematic rapes, by terrible violence, or by drugging, of young
children,--girls of from five to fifteen years of age, and generally by hoary-headed,
scoundrel lechers, rheumy-eyed, filthy, wholly disgusting in every conceivable
sense. Many of these awful crimes are the work of demonized men, acting from sudden
impulse upon their own responsibility; but there is every reason to believe that an
atrocious. gang, with its head-quarters in New York City, and having its laws, rules,
countersigns, and pass-words, with branches here and there all over the vast country,
and members in nearly every considerable city, town, and village in the land. There
are papers which advertise their regular meetings; albeit in a blind way, so that
none but the initiate can understand. The principal idea that forms the soul of
this infamous band is this: Young girls are by them supposed, while pure, and
preceding, and: just subsequent to puberty, or their natural advance into womanhood,
to be endowed with the power of prolonging the life of him who shall first, by

means foul or fair,--if it be possible that such an horror could--which it cannot,
never can be, fair,--succeed in debauching her. It is supposed that two-fifths of

her allotted term of life will, by the deed, be transferred from her to him; and .
that the life-stock thus obtained, can be, and is, shared by all others of the band,
on the principle of magneto-vital transfusion, not of blood, by of Nerve-aura. Thus
a band of forty would gain an average of one month's continued life beyond the
allotted term of each, as the result of one outrage--but which they term by a gentler
name. It is to this band that is to be attributed eight tenths of the child-rapes,
which, by their ultra horror, so frequently shock the nerves of the people of. the
world, They are all sworn to secrecy, and.the traitor is liable to sudden death

by murder, the pistol, knife, or poison, at any moment. Perhaps their secret had
never leatted out by for the confession beneath the rope, and in view of the fire .
that awaited him, of the wretch, whose summary, and I almost said--Righteous, --tak-
ing-off a few years ago, by an infuriated mob in the West, is still fresh in the .
public mind, The crime, like that of Onan and the Pederasts, I regard as worse than
murder, because it has none of the terrible motives for, or provocatives of those
awful deeds, or ordinary rape; for this latter is seldom aided by the cruel knife,..
nor the dreadful climax crowned with inhuman butchery, as the latter nearly always .

-15=-

has been, ins 2

Jub oe z a : : : i 4 : ; ' y ae ae e . DB a f the
Lust seems to behaving a Saturnalia in these days and in 1873 o
Christinki c Era mgs haba through the Public Press, Hae rei 8s wee about
the country seducing men's’wives on "Principle"!! declaring he phe if aes
Onanism is mainly a physital disease;-‘butthe other crimes, RES : ne ed
libertine's, --meaning, one Moses Hull, the author of a shocking pei wane
--are the deliberate actions of lost and conscienceless human souls! | n ° ; ;

of human brutes; not yet ‘immortalized. os Tyee aad. sTatee 8
hs Qy ES “in “September ; £873, I attended g convent ates rele’ ray onc aa
j by a noted ‘ae as, With whose courage and persistence i atin ms
Atcle "lead garth culerly pleased, and took xy ‘stand on her side, because, of bee ok)
and ‘a “‘persétuted member of it besides; and not because it was, is, or ever cou F ae
possible ‘for me to'view the social question from either her standpoint or that of | of
confreres}I donot, cannot, never did, believe in Promiscuity, as some claimed tha
woman ‘did, ‘but which I heard her emphatically deny,--a little while before either | |
that convention closed » or some peoples' eyes were opened--as mine certainly were,
through ‘dn incident that occurred in the hall. However , on the ground of her gender,

her championship of Fair play for womah; her splendid attack upon the unjust and
unequal Taxation laws, and because of her right to a fair and candid hearing, I
maintained in Chicago, as in Boston the year previous, when the same woman was up
for office--stout battle in behalf,not of her peculiar doctrines, but of human, .
responsibility, individualism, ‘and the sacred right’ of Free discussion; and I would
have stood by the side of any other human being under similer circumstances, even
thougli;; as in this case, nearly every one of her points of doctrine were and are .
quite dissimilar and antipodal to those I hold upon the same questions, I defended
her right to a fair héaring in her bodd, iconoclastic attack upon the wrongs of _
woman, and the injurious marriage system of to-day. I by no means covld see it right
for one man or woman to share the favors of another's wife or husband,--for I was |
barbarian enough then to have Sickleized him who should victimize a loved and, loving
wife. of mine; and I would have justified any other man or woman in the ‘same procedure
then; I. justify them’ just the’ same’ to-day; and’ hope to till I pass. away, —provided

always that she was: not to blame,--assisted not at her own disgrace. | Bad
a noah nt it ashi Lealecita sad . otasetebag a6 eles : he

At that convention I uttéred no word either for or dgainst "Social Freedom;" —
confining my’ speeches’ to the three points above named; but I hailed.‘that woman and’
every one else's declaration of belief and confidence’ in sanctified monogamic ~
marriage; and theit denunciation of unbridled license. A few days: before I went to
that convention I had heard of, and read, the unqualifiedly infamous.and infernal. _
recital of "A Personal’Experience;" and I went there expressly to measure swords:.. .
with the thing in’human shape who published it; but. she coward and braggart dared not
Show his polluted front; for Mr. Moses Hull was not’ there to defend his, peculiar |
views and practice.’ ~~ , 2S st eee <p Pn at

a ie Pas an

+ “3My command'of language is limited; nor could I’ find words bitter, enough’ to’ ex
press my opinion of him, who’ gloried in profaning the very holiest shrine at which _
Manhdod worships and ‘teriders grateful homagé--that of the, family; and I then, and
now, would: justify the wronged husband who ‘shbuld kill him.. My intentions became _
known by the injudicious gabble of a confidant; and others came and persuaded me.
to ‘bottle my lightning against him for the time being, lest it kindle a fire not...
easily ‘extinguished. ny | Pe est Swe 5 ak Toe

"On the sete 'déy I learned that the fdes of Free discugsion were preparing a
coup against the female leader.’ She was a’woman; I a man; the duty was plain: I

_ would Have ‘#-hand in the battle, ‘and ‘stand up for fair play ‘until there was good

Ie”

‘skating upon ice five feet,thick on.the lurid.lakes of Gehenna! I took my stand,
and committing the. author. of. "A Personal Experience" to the care. of God and his own
| conscience, fairly and. deftly threw that bone of ,cantention entirely outside of the
rather warm arena; but in doing so purposely allowed. myself to be misunderstood by,
many people in the conclave, and throughout the nation. I sought in my speeches to
make two points only;. they were these: ist, the individual nature of the human soul;
its actual life, its personal responsibility and: destiny; and,.2d, I declared. my
belief, and here repeat it,--that a female adulteress or harlot is no. worse than a
male Libertine or voluptuary; that. neither is beyond: the range. of pardon; and that -
I.could, and do, alike pity her who "falls" from force of circumstances, poverty,
presents, opportunity, importunity, and organization; and him who, distracted and

| rendered passion-mad by a billowy dxpanse of beautiful, snowy, palpitating bosom,
loses his seven senses and follows straight in old Adam! s whtgel

In the Chicago conclave, as in all my works, I pleaded for the female outcast,
and held that she who through misfortune stepped aside and became a mother ere a
bride, should not be held in less. esteem than him who brought the trouble to her.
door. That it is but fair to remember our. own weakness, and give the helping heart.
and hand. I think: so still; and it was in allusion to what the leading woman of
the convention said on that v very point that I uttered the memorable sentence: "I,
will stand. by this woman naming her) in the utterance of such views until there! a:
good skating on ice five feet thick upon the Lakes of Tophet!" and so I would, and.,
eternal 4 or whenever a wrong is to be iggy and human eel dealth out as | God's
eternal is.

. cvII. It is impossible for me to denounce as an umd bi catad Mani iereahaed . af
villain, any human being whose misconceptions of Mahhood and human duty and obliga-.
tion lead him to trample upon what most of us regard as holy; for we may not know
the hidden. causes upderdying his actions. He is certainly a. strange man who can
justify his own.or another's proceedings when lust is alone the prompter ,--to. first.
seduce every woman, parriee or single, that he can, and then publicly boast of it!.
Impregnating other men's wives; compelling men and.women too to remain in ignorance-
as to the paternity of a given child, if such should be the issue of the " Passional.
attraction;" forcing an honest, hark—working man to support his harlotized wife, - .
and. the. wandering "Lover's" bastards, and he, the "Wanderer," laughing at the-man he
has dishonored, and the wife he has degraded !--forgetting the last victims while in
search of new ones; repeating the ghastly crime everywhere; encouraging his own
wife. to play the. role of common cyprian; and scattering possible discord and:
desolation wherever his salacious footsteps fall! Supposing such a, being to be
sane, then such:a thing in human shape, who would deliberately win the favors of
any woman, save a very common courtesan, and then brag of it, to her shame and his
own dishonor, is too small a specimen of the genus homo to: re tolerated in society .
calling itself civilized. Savagery is his status, and to it should he be. regegated.
But a civilized man of such views and practice:is not sane; for he gives. incontest-
able proof of being the victim of chronic prostatic ¢ inflammation, undoubtedly of.
Onanistic, but more likely of Pederastic origin; and thus being gexually mad, is a
semi-responsible cerebro-prostatic maniac, to whom the universe appears as one rae
discus or yoni and himself .the aspiring priapic-phallic godling! 5

"But there! I have done with him; this thing named Moses Hull, having thus hand-
ed him and his ilk down the ages, and that's enough! That crime, and the other,
child-rape--which latter I call Dentonism--after the most-wretched and contimptible
thing that ever wore the. semblance of a man,--Hull:excepted,--I regard as the worst
that .ever existed within the confines .of civilization, and..in calling the attention
of the public, but especially chk gett sthearetes I peo redeem my - Lah ica Na and
have fully paid my little Bill!

“Tle.

'T fever ‘dia. by ‘speech’ or peri; advocate any of the pectliar social theories
broached ‘aria ventilated in thats Be giy similar conclave--for reasons already herein
and elséuhere set forth in my various’ writingsy: and yet, because I held my peace
upon ‘the ‘main questions at issue,’ ard-“in spite of the fact, I was ‘held to have ms
sanctioned and fully endorsed all the radical 'titterances there made}; to pelge ae
what TI have fought all my ‘life long,--the total abrogation of all marriage; an nt
have espoused the doctrine of connubial handfastening, or temporary marriages, and
I ‘ktow not what ‘else df absurdity the foes of Fair play and Free discussion chose
to invent and fashion “in' fantastic garb out of whole ‘cloth to suit their own peculiar
fanciés. As I sufferéd by distortion, so did others, and yet the sun actually rose
here days -* = ae goa I PRS ee 13) ie is LST EOGLS -g BG

oe . ‘ . oy My sy uss SS ee “4 : oe
Sau Gad Bi aae otel Heate Es te Rx Bt he 2 OO

WN DAL
Ten
~ et

LOVE'S ALCHEMY--THE MARROW; RES GESTAE; SUMMING UP. — oe

“CVIII. “Human marriage, being triplicate,--material, mental, emotional,--has
three offices, clear and distinct, Ist. Its functions are humanizing and perpetuat—-
ing; 2d. They are refining, elevating, a means of soul-growth; and, 3d. The purpose
it serves is a mystic one, for beyond all doubt the ultimate of the human is deific
-<a fusiéi mingling, interblending--at-one-ment with the Omnipotent God; what came
from, must return to, the- centre; and he who would be nearer God is he who loves the
purest + by | Miyisns : , ;

CIX. The test of all Love is its self-sacrificing unselfishness; and all amative
love is false, unclean, abnormal, unless it be based upon the non-physical; it must
be builded of respect, affection, that which is mental and spiritual; else it lasts
not.’ r take ee : Us sig ; we ? ¥ ; 4

_ ‘CX, Woman loves’ easier than man, and it is easier broken, unless its roots are
grounded in her very soul; then it is next to death’ to give it up.’ When a man loves
in right down earnest, and from the feminine side of*his soul, it, all’other things
being’ ‘equal, evermasses, overweighs, any love moderh women--Society people, I mean
-~are capable of. But take the two and probably thé loves: will balance each other,
with: this eternal fact in woman's favor; she is self-sacrificing, and her love,
when it is love, is untainted with earth; is never external, ‘never merely sensual. .

€XI,.- Woman can conceal, dissémble, pretend love,--not a spark of which’she _—
really féels,+-to' perfection; and hoodwink any man’ she chooses to play upon; but a
woman ‘with her eyés open ¢armot be served the same way by aman; for live, if it
be real, telis its own story. More men love their wives'than wives their husbands!
He’ cannot make’ believe half as well as shé; for thé lady’can coolly kiss a man with
the intent of playing upon him at the very first chance; embrace him, with a load of
deceit in her heart... But when a man loves he loves all over, Blast it, and you —
destroy him.’ “But in these days loveias true‘and solid: as that is exceédingly rare —
indeed etn. sa | rele LatC fo aida iv oa a i
* ‘The ‘undetected and unconvicted adulterers exceed the uncaught ones five hundred
to one. This result'from the non-understanding of ‘the real and radical differences
existing between true soul-love and its mere passional and magnetic counterfeits
=-which ‘are fifty times moré abunddnt than thé other. lets) * ef

CXEI." No wicked person cen truly love and remain wicked. That is ‘the rez
demptive,isalvatery and: alchemical -power of the divine principle! ‘Trué-heartedness
is theicérrective agency of the grdat human world and humien soul. Without i+ we are
ships on the'‘stormy deep, with a wild"rush of angry waters threatening ‘to submerge
- us at any instant; With it, we are life-boated into fair havens and’ secure ‘anchor-

-78—

|
i]
|

I age! With. it,y,we arise into bliss and blessedness; without it, misery is-our lot;
‘for it-is the telegraphic. System wherewith God engirdles the worlds! . From. Him. it
).QOCS$, to Him it returns, bringing up from the deeps the poor forlorn ones it finds
| there, and stringing them like beads to hand round the neck of the Anat table, and

| viewless lord of infinite and superlative glory!

CXIII. At first love springs up and surges in our wouls, € a newborn and strange

_-power, which rules us with a rod of iron. At the start it is vague, general,
| diffusive; and we are glad without knowing the reasons why, like unto the babe

quickened en utero; and we are irresistibly urged to centre it on some one, some

L: reciprocating soul soul; and unless we do, wretched are we! If we fail so to do, but

/ expend its forces here, there, everywhere, anywhere, we speedily cease to be truly
| human; but sink till we are the bond slaves of pernicious, debasing, demoralizing.

| habit, from which there may be deliverance, but a very troublous one,, We must. love

one; for unless we do the measure of our life on earth is unfilled... .: ..

. CxIV. ‘The new aou descends to man; by him is bequeathed and entrusted. ta the

| dear mother's care, during those mysterious forty weeks. By her it is robed in

flesh and blood, and during the wonderful and thrice holy process she needs all the
vital life that he can spare; and it is his bounden duty to impart it in every
possible form, from the gentle caress to the kind word: and act of tender gallantry.
She knows when she requires magnetism, and she is to be sole and supreme judge of
when, and where and how that vital power shall be imparted! Do not forget this,

An hour's rest on his loving shoulder at the eventide, just as they sit by the
open casement, is.sometimes of more value t an unwell woman, than untold. gold and -
diamonds would be at another time, and under different conditions.

Moreover, I have no patience with the puerile jargon of the "Physiologists,"

to. the end that the great climax of connubiality, ought always to cease from the con-

ceptive moment till after lactation;--that non-intercourse should be the ruie, and
rigidly enforced, all of which I regard as stupid nonsense--prefixed with a dash

and two. d's,--because we are human. beings, not mere animals; and both the mother and
babe require that magnetic life and vif ghee only the father and husband. can. supply.

There is a very curious thing right here: Instances are numerous of a vate
descending, subsequent to conception, to other than the father of. her child. In
such case, the second man determines the shape, quality and calibre.of the unborn
infant's soul! The woman has no right to wrong any man in that style; for she ranks
but .as.a cyprian,.and the child is essentially an illegitimate; because, whereas,
the husband has given body to his offspring, the other supplies it with the elements
of spirit, and the babe will be more like him than its own father! because. seitstue.
laws are of stronger foure than physical! ‘Don't forget , this} .

But the husband a no more rights in this respect than his wife; be cause
wherever he. goes he is sure to bring a non-assimilable, foreign, magneto-vital in-
fluence:, ‘which neither his wife nor child can appropriate and absorb; and thus he
warps. the babe's soul, if not its body, and infuses an aura into the very marrow of
the being of both his dependents, which is injurious to all, and may crop out in |
physical disease or mental ailment, in after years, def the hair-eraying tonduge of

‘his angular child!

When babes and children have trouble, they ery themselves to sleep; when men
and women have trouble, slumber. flies their weary eyes. Now when men are careless
concerning the substance of this paragraph, they indicate a bad.state of puerility;.
for of all human duties, the grandest.is that of fathering those who shall be .

Unity Library & Archives
1901 NW Blue Parkway

Unity Village, MO 64065

“ke Di piace ; evien it ‘ i; : ae vig ete oT pt Paes aye oe : : ae ee ‘ready pregnant
superiot to ourselves. "But how? Suppose'an inferior woman to be al dy nee
how shall I, hex husband, correct the feulte of heste, imperfect orgénizetion,——in
a word, suppose the chHild’to be has been launched into existence under very unfavor—
able conditions; how shall I correct the bad bias; and what shall Ido that it may

come to the world a far better and nobler being than if things ended just as id
began? Tell me this, O man of Eulis, and I--I will thank you on bended knees"

Well put, my questioner. Now heed thot well the reply thereto:--lst. Remember
that in her condition your marital offites are never in order save when she deter-
mines .they shall, ought, to, or may be. 2d. That if offered and accepted at any —
other time, 4 direct injury restlts to the mother and her unborn: child. 3d. Where~-

taper, Agents aa) rr ton tt od results.
fore .Infr ney is the true policy to be pursued, if’you hope for good o
4th, Remember that. consuttiation is threefold:--of body, spirit, SOUL. That then

the greatest streams of magnetism flow from husband to wife, and wife to husband. -
That said Magnetism is a vehicle conveying the states of the goul, body and spirit;
and through it, then both the mother and the child may be blessed or cursed; poison-
ed or purified; filled with ‘divine life, or charged with the quintessence of horror
aoa We klar BE Se ter va Sisan erao Woe rer ea Pia 3

_ Weil do, you see the point? do you understand yout duty? and do you perceive
that, if by ‘restraint you add vigor to your entire being; and when she invites you
to share it with her, you'do so, wishing, willing, praying that untold good, un-
numbered blessings may follow, and result therefrom,--that they will come, just as
sure as God reigns? If you.do not so perceive it, it is high time you did. Were
you an. initiate of Eulis, you would find out more on this wonderful point; but as it

ars - o)

is, take what I herein give you, and God grant you may profit by it. °

CXV. .Love, and love only, can. secure the devotion and heartfidelity of a

woman, and any other, sort is not worth having. When a woman loves, even if unreturn-
ed, she isa heroine} but if returned, she is happy, which is a great deal better
thax heroism! | or i : Phone EO re |
-  CXVI.. Married people ruin their homes, even though’ loving ones, by unwise and
‘ untimely association, It should never be a matter of course, but ever and always
a dual inspiration; otherwise it is defective. |

_ CXVII, Woman and man are not equals. They aré diverse compatibles; each con-
_trasts and opposites the other,+-offsetting in all ways. The two, together, con-
stitute the being called man. Hither alone is but an incompleteness,=-a halfness.
Neither owns the other, ‘but are joint -interestants in the social compact. The idea
‘of ownership is what has'made marriage as it ‘is to-day,--a jangle, wrangle, tangle,
--anything, everything, but what it should be. ‘It were well if we would each of us
constantly bear in mind that we conquer oftenest when we stop to do so; and that —
more is to be gained by graceful sacrifice than stubborn reliance reserved rights.

_ | GVTTT, The second purpose of marriage is the peopling of the Spaces; its
essence is spiritual. In true marriage ‘there is a mutual infiltration of soul, -
whence it happens that nature, in slowly mouiding each to resemble thé other, pro-
claims that marriage real and true} but not all the ceremonies of earth could fuse
a couple of natural antagonists. If these likenesses are not observed, it is a
pretty sur sign that there is but little love coursing round that homeside, and still
less flowing through the channel of their lives.

“, We do’hot' want to .find ourselves growing away from each other; but in fusi
et 10 HOU tit 3 vin ! ‘usin
natures and blending spirits, to coalesca with our opposites, effecting a ibe

union, admitting no separation, and the only solvent of which is the grand Alcahest

-80-

————

_~7Death:--And if the marriage be. perfect, even death is unable to change it.

_ Reader: don't be a fool! don't lavish your love on one who talks; but never acts
it. I, the author of this book, tell you that if your heart is overflowing with
affection, you are in all ‘the greater danger of first filling some empty, bladder-
like being, with your own soul's sphere, then falling desperately in love with it,

only to waken from the dreadful sleep to find him or her a Gdiabolic sham, and your-

self wrecked, ruined, prostrate, helpless, broken-hesiied, deserted, and wretched

.. beyond description. Prove all thing, especially proffered Love, and when you find

it real, give rein to your soul:--But not till then?!

CXIX, When a couple are alike, equally choleric, mental, physical, frigid or
the reverse; passive, positive, magnetic, electric, tail, slender, fat, “active,
indolent; then such are constitutionally, temperanentally, and in most other respects
non~adapted to each other; and if they are not careful, there will be more down
than up, discord than its opposite, in that family, But, where such persons have
already cast the die of what passes current in these days as marriage, there's
wisdom in seeking to create or build up an artificial harmony, which care and time
will render habitual, natural and permanent; because Habit becomes even stronger
than nature, as witness the use of narcotics, which ali are disgusted with at first.
If people will but attempt in thus making a second nature, the barrenness, usual in
such cases, will be obviated, as well as the premature seniiity and impotence
resultant; for that both these effects are often owing to such causes is as clearly
established as any other medical fact, albeit the sufferers are not always aware of
the reason, : Shs ; :

; CXX. In all males of the human species the personal, physical charms of woman,
based upon desire, is the central attractive point, round which all desires cluster.
His’ better, nobler, higher love comes afterward. Reverse the case for woman. Her
love never has that rise. She takes to the better side first--his social, mental,
moral, spiritual manhood; and only after the lapse of time, frequently a whole year,
does she awaken to the ralization of the purely sensuous or passional; and uncounted
thousands there are who never awaken to the ralization of the purely sensuous or
passional; and uncounted thousands there are who never awaken thereto at all from the
altar to the grave. In all such cases he is an unwise man who does not by careful
and assiduous attention, by every delicate and tender means, seek to establish the
natural equilibrium; by all true human methods arouse the dormant power in the ~~
breast of her who shares his lot and life.

* CXXI. Prior to the actual marriage the husband loves deepest, most intensely -
and devotedly. But after that, his ardor cools, and a revulsion of feeling, amount-
ing to dislike, is almost sure to follow; in which he is the exact opposite of
woman; for it is then only that she begins to cling to him with a depth and fervor

“surprising tc him, astonishing’ to herself. Wise is he who then gives her reason to.

make that love permanent, “solid; lasting, even to the brink of the grave.

Men, all males’ in fact, love fiercest before ‘marriage; all females subséquent
thereto. It ig the Law. But a man must so comport himself at these primal inter-
views as not to wound her sensitive spirit, or cloud her life with gloom, dread,
fear, suspicion. First impressions last the longest:

CXXII., Man's Love is never a steady stream, or constant force, He, so to.
speak, packs it away in the presence of other "Business," and gives it an airing now
and again; but woman reverses all that, and loves right straight along from the start,
every day and all the time, provided she loves at all. Whatever she may be about, ©
no matter what, her love is the sole theme of her life, the only occupation of her

~8l-

jt Be ees oe
mind; and she takes good care to ‘give sh gibel si 4 the Ty si where
.turn,.in kind, amply repays her for many. an hour of mortal AaNngulsie.. 4:
to got: it, God help her: for her life is, but a lingering, pel arti death,
It.is.even so.with men. If he loves,-<-as, I have loved, My Gods-~and. alter Jong . ..

months of. toil awakens to find his ico] but, a phantom;, that he has, been, embalming

a.doll in his own heart and loving it,,but getting no. return, what, wonder that mad-

f @: 2 is bl “and thr f his temples drive.’ .
negs; comes, and the wild beating of, his peart and throbbing o is ive.
him ‘to the brink of ruin, until. he: stands toppling on the cliffs of suicide, doubt—
ful whether to leap or not; and only saved by the Omnipotent hand of the interfering
God! see et a aa RE a 0 SS :;

CXXIII, Lust ties. man tothe outer walls, of eter pp bite him there a
isoner feeding upon the: poorest of husks. But Love frees him from many a gyve

and thrall; dives hin the freedom. of, God's gardens of joy; feeds him with the bread
of life; opens. the gates. of heayen; and admits him to the companionship of celestial
Verities and divinest life and truth, Without love we are, indeed, poor hermits in
the world! A. EEE aa cea

CXXIV. People plunge headlong into perdition and social gehenna by rushing —
into each other's arms too often! Passional excess generates disease; Love cures
them; and all the kidney difficulties and nervous disorders extant are but the
physical expression of the morbid and unhealthy states of the love-natures of their
respective victims. POX _ lott a

Those who love can never prostitute themselves or each other, in any way.

«+ It is just as impossible to kindle fire with ice as.,to long deceive a soul that
loves. But, ah, God, how terrible is ‘the awakening to the fact that all this time
you have been lavishing your heart's best treasures:on a dead stock! Then--in her
case, comes leucorrhoea or gravid uterus,--not. physical ailments, but the outward |
sign that there's love trouble in the soul, and love the only remedy. In his‘ case
insanity more or less pronounced, and enduring. |. ea

_ .CXXV,. There are periods when love insists upon passional ‘moods. It is ite
natural appeasement... If not yielded to, a.frightful train of ills are sure to ©
follow;.and madness may end the cruel scene. |. |: a ;

CXXVI. Jealousy quite as often springs from magnetic incompatibility and im-
potence as from love-estrayal; and-it brings on heart-pain, dyspepsia, liver and
Bright's disease, prostatic, urethral, vaginal, Ovarian, and other fatal troubles,

long, before the allotted span of years run out. -

_ CXXVII. Doctors tell us that actual marriage will cure some diseases of women.
But a diseased woman is not fit for it; and actual marriage in diseased states of ©
either party is--monstrous! The doctrine is nonsense, pure and simple. Magnetism
may do, marriage no! But facts are facts, and the thing occurs. If love underlie
it, well and. good; if not, then not, It is disastrous. But if good results follow,
it is Affection that works the miracle, nothing coarser! And more wives aré injured
in that manner than sextons can, find spades to dig graves for! ca

That is a very poor sort of love which always exacts but never gives! "She
 prated of love all day long, and neglected by one single act to prove her truth,"
is the story of many a man's life. "He says he loves me—-but just look at me; does
love waste one as I am wasted? My God! “Let this bitter cup pass from me!" is ‘the
daily cry of millions of "Married" women! ao) ae

Pa:

_.... I! tired and sick of dead babies}! They ought to fill out the term of three-
score years and ten; but they don't; and those who escape the sewers, sinks, drains,
and being carried out with the tides, or being snugly put away in a cigar-box and

| stuck in a hole in the garden, are mighty undertain of a safe deliverance from
measles, scarlatina, croup, paregoric, or Mrs. Winslow's soothing syrup! Ah, but
isn't it a soother?--soothing many a one to a sleep that knows no waking! But these’
dead ones are not all the offspring of the riff-raff, or hard-handed servitors at

_ labor's shrine; but many a hundred of them might lay, claim to aristocratic lineage;
and I have quite enough experience to satisfy me that those who do, or who wink at,
Such deeds, are, many of them church-goers, full of deadly piety, who, behind the
scenes, revel in debaucheries dreadful enough to shame a Satyr. Not a few of them

_ are "Reformers," in public preaching perfect purity, but in private practising

_ promiscuity, and the very ones~-if male--with whom no decent, respectable woman

| could be alone with ten minutes, save at the absolute certainty of being insulted

_ by the most villainous proposals.

ie In my Medical practice, and that of Teacher, three classes of persons mainly
Yelief or counsel: Ist. Wives whose daily life was a living death; whose "homes"
_were tophets in petto; and whose "Husbands"--sic?--in one respect treated them worse
than they did the dumb brutes in barn or stable--poor, waxen-faced martyrs, worse
than sacrificed and slaughtered on the altars of a legalized sensualism, so low. and
mean, selfish, exacting, as to even shame the beasts of the field; and these wives
human! 2d. Men and women whose hearts and souls yearned for affection which they
found not; and- which they were denied by those from whom they had the right to ex-
pect it!—-people who were either fretting to death under the awfully galling yoke
of a bad marriage; or who wanted advice to guide them to the desired haven--and
heaven, of Marriage, as God intended it should be. 3d. But by far the largest class
of.-callers and correspondents must be reckoned that vast mass of people whose entire
_gender-nature had been broken up, or down, and demoralized until they had become ~
‘mere phantom -men and women, incapable of realizing the sublime. meaning of the words
Sex and Marriage; and so disordered and diseased that Hope itself, with folded wing
and fouled anchor, perched upon a bleak cliff on some island far away. O my God}...
what utter horror and blank despair have I seen gleam from: the eyes:of thousands}. .
~-victims all, --to vampiral depletion; nervous and vital. exhaustion; impotentia,
barrenness; diseases of uterus, vulva, ovaries, kidneys, prostate, heart, lungs, .
brain--the terrible personal hades outgrown from society, society, society, with its .
falses and shams; its money-marriages; its deceit and hypocrisy, denouncing the Wrong
with the breath, but with act encouraging concumbinage, cyprianism, libertinage; |
and by its repressions, fashion, style, display and airiness discouraging marriage,
and fostering thereby the solitary vice now desolating millions, and decimating all
the fair lands! I make the solemn statement and declaration that a very fair per-
centage of that third class were from the dignified, wealthy, respectable, Christian,
aristocratic, and even reverend stratas of society, not of this country alone, but
of all divilized lands, including Cuba, Chili, Brazil, France, Spain, China, Australia
Japan and England. In fact, the demand for sex tonics and invigorants is not ‘only
simply enormous but almost universal, and all springing from violation of the love-
laws of our common human nature. Of course, such a demand for such medicines speaks
in thunder tones against the causes producing it, and equally loud against the
private habits of us of the world. But the facts exist; and even the dreadful
syphilis in modified form rages in the blood and bones of unnumbered thou sands--_
not only of guilty debauchees,--who are scarce to be pitied!--but, alas, in those.
of. innocent wives and prattling infants! What are these half murdered ones--of-.
both:: the latter classes--to do? suffer and die like leprous dogs? or are they ta:
‘reach. forth and make desperate efforts for physical salvation? If the latter, then
“all legislators. should at once look to the enactment of laws suppressing quackery; |
“making syphilis a criminal offense; hanging abortionists; squelching "flash" papers,

-83-

:
and legalizing all unions based on blind trust on one side and he pee
age on the other; and punishing re-unions elsewhere as it now punishes po ha y
 outsidé the favored Mormon. and Perfectionist churches, institutions or ba 2 QS,
"Religious" and.. ‘UPheological.” Shame on. the Press-~the First Estate of mo se pf 2, |

_ nannons that. At hesitates to. launch its thunders at the class of aed just cite

..and hurl them. forever. into hades}

"ip in thé right! the Public ‘Press should be,

' The tyrant's foe, the champion of the free?
Faithful and constant to its sacred trust,--
Calm in its utterance, in its judgment just,

_ Wise in. its teaching; uncorrupt and strong, |
To spread the right and to denounce thé wrong:
Long may it be ere candor must confess
On Freedom's hordes, a weak and venal Press."

It is generally admitted that there's something wrong in society, but what the
cure is.or shall be is not so apparent. One class of people advocate "Social Free-
_dom" as the panacea, whatever that may mean. Before I went to, at, and until the

‘last day of,. the Chicago Convention, elsewhere alluded to, I thought I knew the .
correct ‘meaning of the terms. I find I did not; and therefore look in other direc-
‘tions for the social eure. Spoiled cheese, and cheese spoiled, . are the same to me;
nor for my life can I now see the difference in the moral grade and status of a
cyprian or libertine on the pay-rolls, and the same, impulse and passion DeAPs the
spur and motive. The cheese smells equally bad in both cases! | re ,

It wouldn't be a Bed, ting to make it a punishable offence for’ any. M.D. “to
ell syphilis by the dicér néme of, serofula,. thus fooling honest wives, and screen-=
“ing recreant husbands~-éven if they are well paid for their white lies! For in
these days that scourge | burns the bodies ‘of unspotted virgins, in the shape of fluor
albus, womb complaint, etce,, inherited from infected mothers. The evil is bad —
‘enough veqerks stopped ‘right there, but it don't; because, in the first place, it
brings | on pruritis,-~vaginal. itching; creates morbid desire, and subjects girls as
pure as snow to the almost dead certainty of falling victims to the first graceful,
smart, sand salacious scoundrel that comes along,—-a scoundrel and victim too, it may
be of the Same inherited-fluid ruin coursing like streams of fire through his.

-.fyollen veins: In the second place, these girls are to become wives and mothers;

ése boys’ husbands and fathers; thus the curse is injected into the veins of

myriads of the yet unborn-~children doomed before birth to endure a life of per-
‘petual, Ali-health and morbid unrest; to know nothing of real happiness from the
breast ‘to the tomb--to which latter they are likely to be rushed prematurely by
Suicide, resultant from insanity begotten by the beings who parented them. agedn I
“repeat Syphilis is a crime, and should be held as such.

_CXXVITI. Love is multiple, in form and mode. Sometimes it will endure and
suffer long. At others it will die as if lightning~struck; but the "dying" sort of
_ affection. is not worth tying to! Never?

Irish love is gallant, but non-lasting, and is more affectional or amicive
than ardent“ and eamative, Negro love is diffusive, hilarious, sensual. Oriental
Love‘ is, “sad-eyed, dreamy, vague, skyey, poetic, rapt, heavenly, divine, but not
keen, or passional. Spanish Love is fiery, ardent, impetuous, terrible, scorching,
consuming; tender, but not enduring. German Love is parental, maternal, filial,
domestic, . dead-level, ‘and mainly physical, It has no Italian heights; no sunbursts;
no motintains or valleys; no anguish; no great joys; no hill-tops crowned with glitter
ing sheen French love is superficial, lascivious, and, when youth is gone, a

~Bh—

“thing of memory, not of fact. English Love is domestic, but mealy. Northern Love
is like that of the felidae--catty, scratchy, periodic, poisonish, often downright.

brutal, and never tender, delicate, or refined, Yankee Love is fitful, uncertain,
changeful, passional, moody, seldom more than superficial, because the Yankee
faculties are all engrossed in the one grand object of American life--dollars and

| dimes, dash and display. Western Love I know but little Hout, and, judging from

~

health,

what I saw in Ohio, is so-so-ish, not deep cool, calculating, and seldom drives its
victims to suicide, because only the heartful sink to despair! |

Lastly, Southern Love is volcanic, chivalrous, gallant, true, tender, jealous,
safe when earnest, devotional and devoted, genuine and manly. The well~bred
Southerners are the true ladies and gentleman of America! I never met but one mean
man among them in all my life (and he was descended from a French family, born in -
Limerick, or the Cove of Cork), They have less sharp intellect, perhaps, than the
northern people, but more Soul; hence, while subject to fevers, amative weakness
they are free from!

CXXIX, An old man should be very careful of the intimacies of wedded life; he
should change his amative for AMICIVE ardor; because all old people are more or
less troubled with Embolism--a clogging of the veins, nerves, arteries, muscles-~
all'the viscera, with the limy, chalky, carbonaceous, calcareous refuse of the body
--such as the organs cannot get rid of; and the accumulation means a cessation of
physical joys and vigor, and ultimate death. When Embolism prevails to a consider-
able extent; the orgasm is a dangerous thing for that man, and death stands close
by whenever he forgets that he is no longer a youth. But if such will insist on ~
being foolish, they should first get rid of the Embolism, and cleanse the body of
all superfluities in the shape of phosphates, alkaline or acid; dissolve the clayey
refuse, and evacuate it at once, else some time he may, in repeating youth-like
follies, so shock and shatter his nervous system as to rob him of what few years
remain to him on earth. This cleansing process is quite easy of accomplishment, as
I have elsewhere stated, and while alive, am ready to instruct about. And this
point suggests another closely connected with it:--

CXXX. Self-venery is more often a disease than it is a vice or crime. In
either case the fault or habit is easily corrected, cured, and broken. All that is
necessary is to exhibit medicines that will repress the amative appetite, and for
awhile*seal up the ducts, The waste being stopped, of course strength accumulates,
for the rich, vital life is retained, assimilated, and the diseases of nerves, brain,
and pelvic viscera disappear before the returning march of vigorous and triumphant

CXXXI. T cannot resist the desire to repeat my warning against the ruinous
and suicidal policy of "conjugal frauds," that is, carrying the marriage to’a point

‘short of completion; but I have additional reasons. They are these: The shock to

the nervous system is at least ten times greater in such cases than in normal rite,
or even its dreadful counterfeit; and I never saw a case where it had been a habit,
that the man was not terribly injured, cerebrally as well as nervously. In all
such cases Sanity was a diminishing ratio; and the brain-injured almost beyond the
power of reparation. The natural office must be naturally fulfilled, else the
strain on the blood-vessels of the pelvis is so great, that premature impotence is
sure; while that upon the cerebral arteries means insanity, paralysis, brain-soften-
ing, spinal disease, apoplexy, and death: Unless both realize what God intended,
ruin, sooner or later, is the inevitable result. In cases where the senuous equa-
tions are not alike, the more rapid nervous action can be retarded by an effort of
the will, and God's design be accomplished, not frustrated. One-half the sudden

deaths of middle-aged men result from this cause:

~85-

oe: |

“" (XXXII. Meany husbands; by, various means, have so impaired ete tee vigor,
as to be semi, if not wholly; impotent} "but instead’ofimputing it to the right =

ause, they attribute it to some fault on ‘the other side of ‘the house, ahdpoor she
leads an unhappy life in consequence. Now this is all wrong; but the cure quite:
eary:,.lst. He should occupy his own chamber solus. 2d Breathe deeply. 3d. Be
much in the sunshine. 4th. Drink no liquors. 5th. Bathe often. 6th. Eat solid
teef, ‘ahd unsifted flour--no potatoes at all; and in four weeks he will recuperate:
all his lost energies, and be a man again; for while he remains a weakling ‘and a
passional imbecile, he could not be happy with the best and fairest wife that ever
was fashioned by the master hand of Omnipotence!. — pidigde , heactene. ed

CXXXIII. .It often happens that from some occult redson there is a great
deficiency;..even to the extent of horror and disgust on the. part of some ladies;
whose lords not realizing the enormity of such conduct, lead lives of insistance, —
and reap crops of passive, yet enforced compliance on the part of their--victims, ~
shall I say? Such men should realize that it is in their own power, by delicacy and
kindness, to. change the morbid to a natural state; so that what was shrunk from
with loathing, will, in six months, be accepted as natural and right, and be fully .
reciprocated--with a little’ noble and forbearing trial, and. some patience; yet the
reward is ample;’and oh, how delightful! to feel that she regards you as a saviour
from yourself! instead of as before,--a little domestic tyrant, bent on mischief,

a

gareless who suffers so long as you-do not!: | ai be

. og

-CXXXIV. True Manhood, and all that it implies, proclaims itself in nothing so
well and’ fairly as in the tones of our voices. When we are right’ in that respect,
the sounds are clear, deep, round, full, sonorous, melodious, with an underlayer of
music ringing out bell-like from our very souls. It then shows that we are right
both at the emotive and brain centres of our duplicate being; but when they are
cracked, shrill, sharp, acute, squeaky, false, coppery, gongy, it indicates. little
power and less Soul; for it is morbid, and its péssessor is bettér fit for almost -
anything else than holy, honorable God-sanctioned marriage! =~ ete.

+

CXXXV, Soul-vigor, and what it implies, depends to a great extent on Lung
capacity, and that generally indicates good digestion. ‘ wrx Ply og

No great act or mighty though can originate in, or be accomplished by, one who
is deficient in the foundational quality of absolute manhood. Just so long as we:are
‘* morbjd’ in that department, that long we are demoralized all over, inside, outside,
head to heel, and soul and body. © ‘ Bic eees’ | chien aye

Sexive health and purity is the price of power. We cannot have it on any other
terms whatever; wherefore Truth to one love builds up the entire being; while any
departure therefrom, any degree of promiscuity, beats the soul's wings to the ground,
cripples its energies, lays it low, just as’ summer torrents lay low the ripening ©
grain, As a thinker, I regard that’ as one of the most important of all truths! In
nothing is this rule more’ imperative than in the cases of such persons as desire to
cultivate the inner powers’ of* the being; for any ‘passional' excess or "Variety" as
certainly disarms the’ soul,’ seals up the spirituél eyes, ‘blunts’the inner power of
perception, and ruins the ‘capatity for psycho-vision, as that water and fire are ”:
antagonistic. It is said that’ one cannot ‘sérvé’ God and Mommon at the same time; and

it is ‘equally certain that We cannot cultivate’ the better and loftier powers resident
within us, and at the same time-pive’'s loose’ tein to the carnal passions of our
nature. : od ain ate | bee =
Bia RE Oe wena WGeE « : + Sp 20
CXIXVT, The force of Genius’ is the Torce of Gender, and both are ‘the’ force of
Destiny! No man or woman can be truly’ great’ unless’ their amatory natures are well

“86-

developed! Er
)~ In my medical practice I first cured people of innumerable diseases myself,
and then' taught my. pupils how to do likewise, by, firstly, secondly, and lastly,

getting them right sexively.; after which dear old Nature carried them straight up
the hills of death! ;

When a-man is full of vigor he scorns to do a mean thing, because he feels him-
self so much a MAN, You pick out all the scoundrels and drivers of hard bargains,
and that portion of their nature will be found missing; no color in their faces,

no manhood in their being; too mean to live; too miserable to die!.

On the other hand, when a lady's periods are sweet, pure, regular, she's mighty
apt to be very pleasant company to whoever chances to pass by that way; and her |
very smile is a ray of sunlight straight out from heaven! But just as soon as the
. blanches appear, she begins to sour right away; and a woman in either state
| should forever be held: apart and sacred; for she is no more capable of wifeliness
at Shcte timer than is the weanling crawling on the floor, Why, every one can see at
a glance, iri tes es

CXXXVII, Death is but the beginning of some people's’ real trouble; and
marriage is generally the comméncement of everybody else's; for there's so much
morbidity afloat that people are perverted before marriage, and remain so afterward.
Such can never avoid slander, scandal, backbiting; but take thereto as ducks to —
water, because the foundations of nobility are sealed up; and neither man or woman
heen eaten can live at péace-with any other of God's creatures on the foot-
stool. tO ues ;

_ Such wives either fool their lords, or make home-too hot to hold them. Such men
neglect their wives, and general chaos reigns supreme. Now if such would but take
pains to revive and cultivate the true instinct, the road to happiness would open ©
straight before them. .

CXXXVIII, When the skin of the face, hands, arms, is loose and flabby, it is
a sure sign of three things: kidney, bladder, vaginal, urethral, brain, or uterine
trouble; originating in affectional disturbances; of chronic discontent; and of the
need of cure by affection. let this be done, and they who would love and be loved
breathe deeply, and the physical ailments will disappear. Promiscuity can never.
do it. I have heard doctors recommend it; but I have no patience with them or with
that other ilk who contend for "Variety ‘in Love." To me they are but human toads |
bent on besliming the morals of mankind. I defy any sane man to love the wife whom
he knows shares with another favors to which he alone ‘by their mutual troth is.
entitled'. Public opinion sets in strong tides against such doctrine; and although
it is sometimes pig-headed and wrong, yet in this it is unquestionably right; be-
cause no, true, genuine man or woman is willing to, or capable of, sharing the love
which ought to be exclusively their own. Lecherous human halflings advocate the =
doctrine; but it is always on their side of the house, at the expense of scme one
else's wife or daughter! It is simply monstrous and impossible for healthy people
to be happy in "Variety."' : , eg Soha

CXXXIX. People who have no charity toward those who, by pressure of circumstanc-
es, place, opportunity, or magnetism, step aside and commit a social fault, will .
upon analysis be found not overly sound at heart, secretly unprincipled, ‘and wofully
lacking in the basic elements of genuine man or womanhood. sy "

: Prudes are not perfectly clean in all corners of their souls.

87 =

who demolish baenios are usually bagnio-patrons! Rakes and libertines ~
have ieee than Har ape EY while those who say a good word for the fallen
are the ones: who- know how it is. themselves to be spat. upon, maligned, lashed, scorn~
ed, negilected;: and that too, by: those unworthy to latch theix. shoestringss while’
tho: whe hate; the opposite: sex give proof positive of foul) personal habits within
the secrecy of their own rooms! S Te whe

. t+» €XL. Mén-often like their wives, as household conveniences, yet never really
husband them; and. that's exactly what every. woman'wants but don t get--ad 4 general
rule! Now if there is one fool:greater than another, it is either the wife who’ —
submits to such treatment,: when she has her: remedy in the exercise of the three ©
principles named elsewhere in this book; or the husband who expects that a neglected
wife can really love.him, and honestly be sorry when: he dies!. i rf ‘

_:-CXLI.., Virtue, -not 4ts.opposite, is the-normal state of.man!, Affection, not '
passion, is. what.we- crave and yearn for; and finding are blest. When we go astray .
it is:more from the pressure of ‘circumstances: than the natural inclination‘of our ©
souls. Most of us were torn wrong, and inherit tendencies not good for us; still
in the cultured will we have a never-failing remedy. ache

The: heart's .allegiance' must. first: be turned: aside before the body yields to
passional breezes: blowing. from. off the home-shore; wherefore I hold it better’ to
not.try to break the bad connection by force; but by the applied will rewin’the ~:~
straying.one to leve's arms again. Miiigad ,foboset , .sebited ; Towa eo

_ -CXLII. . The essence of Marriage is consent. Ceremonials merely publish the ~
fact; wherefore it should be the law of every land that he who finds a woman worth.
seducing, and does it, should, by that act alone, be compelled to maintain and ac-
‘knowledge her as a lawful wife, unless she sees fit ‘to Waive ‘her undotibted right to
claim:and hold him.as a husband. The fact that a man“has done such an act should
in law..bar him from marriage with any other woman; -Such is the way in Which I look |
at it; and if society would but adopt the idea there would be fewer libertines, and
some millions less of ruined girls and forlorn prostitutes.

_ She who robs a woman of her husband; or he who ruins a confiding girl merits a”~
season in Tophet; and if I were Brahm would get it--sure! ic Beekt ants ae

-CXLITI.. The more familiarities aigingle.woman permits a man to take, the more ©
he is sure to undervalue ther, and.the less she respects and honors him. It is
natural for him to despisei‘one who allows too great freedoms; So also within the -
sacred pale of wedlock: the very first immodesty on either side blunts the edge, —
takes the bloom .from the .peach, jlessens’ them.in their: own and: each’ other's eyes, and
is the beginning of folly which.often ends in the divorce courts, the brothel,
bagnio, or. the graye. Modesty .and ciroqumspection build up tottering loves. -Their ‘”
opposites, bring disrespect and finally dissolution.::.I say these things herg, be-"' ~
cause J have long known :them,to be true.: - sLov bai | :

What a pleasant thing it must be. to a.sensible ‘and’ senitive woman to have, -
whenever her heart prompts her to express affection--her better’ half meet her with ©
a storm of coarse and disgusting passion,—the base idea of which must be perfectly
withering to her soul., Foor She!--one of thousands!~-how ardently must she long for
death, and dread even heaven itself, if. there is marrying and giving in marriage
away over.in the upper, Land! And how such a woman must’ try to be’a! Budhist and’ long’
for nihility rather than continued.life. But then such states: are begotten’ of her--
their, deep unrest, causing them to long-~as have I ere now--for whole eternities
of sweet and restful, sleep,'-But then women capable of such yearnings aré immortal;

-88-

will survive death, and, . ast us believe--their longings will be appeased, their pangs

| assuaged over there where ‘it is certain they, like myself, will at last be under-
| stood; for such seldom are on this earth, and at thirty odd, it is too late to hore
to be "while in the ‘flesh.

Helen, a loose one, caused the wars of Troy, and fron her down the lane of ages,
/men, and women too, have practically adored body, and worshipped Lust and Fashion, *
openly or sub-rosa; and until some decimating scourge, originating in lust, shall
sweep the earth--as it will within a century!--of six-tenths of its human denizens,

|

| the same wild worship will continue as before.

CXLIV. How very seldom married people praise each other! yet nothing on earth
goes. so far toward rejuvenating a waning regard, as the expression of gladness at
each ‘other! s points, acts, trials, victories, industry, perseverance; yet all this |
power for good is practically ignored; and while others are praised and cheered to
“the echo, Wé never get the slightest token of appreciation, even though we toil like
abject slaves to deserve it. If love exists between couples, it ought to show it-
self in something better than mere empty words, If it does not, whole troops of |
discontentments come crowding at our fireside; for. neglected duties, broken prom-

ises, lip affection, magnetic, or passional attraction, will not fill the bill of an
anxious heart; They paralyze us, render us cross, selfish, non-ambitious, ‘careless,
hopeless, solitary, and despondent. That affection which words itself by dayieehhe
and snores when Night veils the world, is not worth’an hour's«purchase. Palsied
affection seldom gets entirely well again! and non-reciprocal marriage infuriates |
all males; and too many wives make not the slightest effort toward mutuality; and

by so neglecting one of the first of wifely duties, clap the lid on the coffin of
their happiness, and hurry’ their joys to an untimely grave; and after thus committing
marital suicide, they weep and wonder that their lords do not fall down at ‘their
feet to worship and ‘idolize them as of yore, in the halycon days of courtship: ‘and |
the honeymonth; not realizing that he, poor fellow, has found the lace all paper,

the diamonds all paste;--and no man likes either of these! She is not wise, who
expects to hold a man securely unless one of her strongést cords is reciprocation,
which every husband has a right to expect and realize; and every wife, by ner vow,
is be amg: to culture and accord. _ Otherwise their union is but a mockery and a abeaue

She who habitually fails in that wifely duty helps to eds ait the fenéles ‘who.
occupy the palaces of sin--and gin, to whose society her husband is, as "they say,'
driven by her coldness. The strange woman at least simulates accord; while tnG anc
honorable wife expresses frigidity, horror, indifference, or disgust; neither of —
which are well calculated to keep @ man in good training for his constant combat with
the world: |

I hold him not a good man who ever seeks what can never be sanctioned eset
by mutual love; for it is a profanation of the divinest sanctities of the human souls;
and he is a poor specimen of a man who can seek solace in a cyprian's arms, or revel
in passional debauch bought with current coin either in or out of wedlock; for. noth=
‘ing but Love can ever justify an act which may launch an immortal soul into being.
Under these holy conditions marriage generates glorious thoughts, noble resolve, ..
courage to endure; gives a better zest of, and hold on, life, fortune, goodness,
Godt '

“Under the false condition every participant rests on the edge of Hades, ready
to oll off into it at any moment; and if there is an especial curse, they deserve
it who, with their eyes open, as mine now are, and for some time have been, --violate
that sacred law. That and "Variety" are death to true affection, and also destructive
of the power and ability to experience any but coarse and gross emotion; besides

-89-

‘ pritelizing human nature, destroying noBletiess of chafacter, they totally unfit us
to, bécopie ‘parents of pure ‘children and good ones; but only of Such as, born of pas-
sion, shall rush on passion-tides adown the stream of life, cursing their progeni-
tors at every inch of the dreadful way! But true love, thank Heaven! antagonizes,
and. finally destroys, lurid, baneful lust. The twain are incompatible; but the angel
"slays the fiend whenever they meet in combat.on anything like even terms. Thank God
for that again! So be it forever!’ 7° ay rr he

Sera rer

XLV. There are too many millidi outrages inside, as well ap without, the pale
of matrimony; but these won't be, when both sides understand and obey the law which
underlies human nature everywhere. Men are chronically inflamed by reason of wrong
life; are too excitable, hence unreasonable; and are apt to obtrude offensively, ;
and far too frequently, for the best interests of all concerned. Wives yield when
it is clear that from ill-hedlth they ought not, and cannot without injury. No
human season occurs oftener than thrice a month at most;--before, after, and midway,
‘of her lunar period. The first two’ being ovarian seasons, maternity may result. _
The latter is her periodic 'soul-season, when motherhood ‘is impossible, but soul-
blending the divine resultant. Here ‘is another new revelation of Sex, and the state-
merit of' a law discovered by carefully noting hundreds of cases’ in a medical practice
‘of nearly thirty years; and it is one that’ ought’ to be comformed to, because it will
‘yet prevent innumerable child-murders that elgé would result from ignorance of it. —
In announcing this law I do mankind.a service, and save many a woman from risks that
they may. not wish to encounter... =. ©, | «ents amtaeine .
, It ‘is held by some modern physiologists to be a law, that if the wife reaches
_ the natural demise of marriage before the husband, and conception occurs, ‘the .
resultant will be a Boy, whose nature will resemble her own far more than it will
her husband's; but if the father anticipates, the product will-be feminine; but she
will be more like him than. its mother. Thus the gender of an inchoate human being
can be predetermined by the Omnipotence of Will; all that is essential is the agree-
ment as to what it shall be. ae ot Ae a

tie f ; “es

' Before ending this section, I desire to re-impress the great truth and vital ©
law. It is this: Where husband or wife is ill, mentally, morally, emotionally,
or in any other way, that illness can be assuredly remedied by them, if when lying
by each other they will but place their hands on each other's ‘breasts, and will an
interchange of vital life. It will instantly pass and repass, affording an exhibi-
tion of sdul-power that shall ‘astonish most péoplé; and this mutual impartation
becomes not merely a physical-nervous joy, but a mést powerful ‘magneto-vital, health-
engendering force; an invigorant of the most wondrous potency; a direct and holy
prayer, certain to be honored and answered by the everlasting and very loving God!

_ _GXIVI, Couples fail in being happy or rendering each other so, from muscular
flabbiness, and consequent pulpinéss of brain. Now if they will but lift all they
can, gradually increasing the weight of the bags of sand, or whatever else it may i.
be, five minutes before retiring, and two on arising, while in night-dress, ovarian,
uterine, vaginal, kidney, biadder, testicular, and prostatic weaknesses will vanish
like mists before thé morning sun; and with the increase of muscular strength will
come an accrenent of Love snd its ‘cognates, thus dispensing with the aphrodisiacs —
now so largely used. In three months this course will revolutionize a household.
Be cause it will give the soul a vetter vehicle to operate thrcugh; cleer the channels
of the body; remedy constitutional weaktiess; prevent and cure Enbolism--the great
A ene Oa will give a prolonged lease of life and all its, nobler
pleasures. | os sc a te ss

ar :

“CXIVII, Love-starvation is a terrible thing to endure,” but one which is not at

-90~

all necessary; for by posing the soul for a mate or a love;--by willing and decree-
ing it as a system, the love-power will go out from you and centre on your adapta’.
tion, just as surely as that you make and persevere in the effort. The same principle
applied to amative disorders will repair the impairment. fa a

CXLVIIT. Accursed forever must he, she, or they be, who counsel either conjugal
frauds, condanuism, or any other destructive social abomination. They are seldom
anything else.than murderous. They lead to abortion, that is, MURDER; and its per-

“Petrators, non-professional, should be paraded through the streets on a mule's back,
_placarded "ABORTIONISTS!" while the. proféssional baby-killers should swing by the ©
neck to the nearest tree or lamp-post! owe

Bis Another class of wretches need legal attending to. I refer to. the makers and -
advertisers of peculiar stimulants, because they are compounded of villainous drugs,

which agitate for a while, but are dead-sure to.land the takers upon the bleak shores
_of.sterility and hopeless impotence, There are cases wherein sex-tonics, invigor—

‘ants, and direct aphrodisiac agents are absolutely essential to the restoration of

-amative and general health, but such are incapable of harming even 4 child, because

all my works.

their action is tonic and constitutional, and not sudden, fiery, lust-begetting, _
and destructive, C | : ;

There are plants, essences, tinctures, and extracts, which, in the hands of

_good physicians, are effective for the purposes sought, while utterly non-dangerous,

and free from harm. let such be used, or none at all.

Elsewhere, herein, I have alluded to a paper upon the esoteric. part. of the
grand topic of this volume--called the Ansairetic Mystery, in which form I have open-
ed up certain knowledges which I deém quite essential to the complete education of
every true adult person. Concerning it, while I live, letters can be addressed
to me; when dead, to my heirs, and those who will then become sole publishers of _

ee
a eg

a

THE END OF THE VISION,--I promised to give the sequel to the curious Vision, ,.

related in the forepart of this book, concerning The Woman and the Man.

‘1st. It will be remembered that I sincerely loved and sympathized with my
friend, to such an amazing magnetic extent that at times I was in absolute rapport

with his entire soul; and at one time, believing the vision.to have been true, I
“pitied him, and the millions who have sailed in the same boat, and been wrecked up-

on the rocks of treachery, adultery, and deceit. But in this case the vision was
not true, for the lady,was then, and ever after, as pure as snow-flakes winging. their
way from space to earth, while still floating in mid-air. But she had, prior to .
leaving, associated a day or two with a woman of the world, who had suggested the
strange question upon which the man had long pondered and morbidly brooded; and his
loneliness, and her long silence, had strengthened his evil suspicions, which
suspicions he had .imparted to me, and I had entered into full sympathy with him,
believing just as he did. |

2d, My ‘friend was an artist of wide celebrity; very magnetic, and ties of that
character were easily formed by him; and to sever them was often as fraught with _
agony as would be pulling teeth from a sensitive soul, were that possible; hence he
was quite easily vampirized by unprincipled women, just as I have been a score of
times, in as many larids, in my own strange life, by female leeches, who attracted by
the magnetic fulness of the nature inherited from the dear mother who bore me, came
to feed upon it, and deplete my very soul; this, be it known, being possible without
the slightest guilt of a sensual character, for such is not always essential to the

‘EO 3 vee es le

‘attraction of the vital life of a full soul by an empty cormorantic one. ‘At was
- Prom the abundance of.these she-fiends who clustered round me, that.for a time a
~ “Semielibertinish odor attached itself to my name; because, being foiled in their
desperate game and diaboli¢c intent, they generally went off and took sweet revenge,
. &.la Mrs. Fotiphar, and scandalized me far and near, right and left; cyprians, vam-
“pirés, ghouls, all!--without 4 single exception!--penniless adventuresses, who came

to ‘learn of me how to victimize, mankind, because I knew all the higher, white, as
Well as the lower, and black,.’magic, and they panted like the hart, after the brook-
“lets for the information they knew I alone, if I chose, which I did not, impart, but
dismissed them empty as they came. It is a curious circumstance of my life that the
worst foes I ever made were, lst. The people to whom I lent money; and, 2d. Those
whom I refused to initiate into the mystical secrets adverted to above; for the
fellow who invited me,to Massillon, after the Boston fire, finding-I would not .in-

_* struct him how to be a greater scoundre], than Nature made him, or God intended, ~

; ‘perjured what soul he had, and thereby extorted nearly all I had saved from the ©
fiery wreck two months tefore. . The old "Man" of the letter .and young girl notoriety,
also turned upon me for identical reasons, The Ranks of "Reformers" are thickly
strewn with unprincipled males, and females, too, and I have been "done" to the
turie of thousands by adventuresses of that peculiar ilk, as in the La Hue case de-
tailed in the book called "My Curious Life;" and in the case of "La Blondette,” of
the "Woman's Book." hes ard ; 3 ee a

‘ ’

f:

-*""""$0 much for victimization through magnetisme mauvaise, to say nothing of enother
instance where, through a cleverly morphined pint of ale-~"Bitter beer" it proved--
my mother's only son was relieved of some hundreds of dollars; compelled. to. execute
a will, and acknowledge a fact which’ never existed, by the persuasive eloquence of
a six-barrelled revolver. in the hands of a male, and a four-barrelled one in the
pocket of a thieving she-zingara. I therefore could pity the Man. 3d. If you. turn
to the section of the Mirror Vision, you will see that it had prophesied coming
trouble, to be followed by a calm; and also that I had utterly forgotten’ the fact
for the time. About the same period in whith my friend was in the trouble about the
woman, that trouble was. enhanced and exacerbated by, the arfival of a female from
California, who had crossed the continent expressly to lay seize to his heart and--
passions. She was strongly sensuous; of fine presence; voluptuous, sharp, keen,
practical, and totally devoid of honor and principle; yet fearfully,.desperately in
love ‘with him; so that, between all the powers bearing on him the.,man. was entirely
distraught ; and that, too, at a time when from other causes he was ill, morbid,
downcast, and very negative; he, therefore, had brooded on his wretched fancies till
himself was half daft, and I, his friend, through sympathy,. was in. full. rapport
with him. th. He had entrusted the absent one with certain very important financial
business, which she, in thoughtless mood, had utterly jignored and totally neglected;
consequently he was angry. 5th. He wearied me with the constant.recital.of his |. .
troubles, while I myself was ill, tired, worn.out with excessive loneliness, mental
toil, end financial embarrassments, all of which combined, threw me into a very
morbid physical state; and his injuries and my absurd fancies took the dreadful ©
form they did, which state of soul was taken advantage of by the teaching dead!-—
the viewless powers of the empyrean, to inculcate the most solemn, if most painful

: lesson he or I had ever learned; for there was not, and never. had been, the slightest
ground for either jealousy or suspicion; for their object.was as pure. as,.the sweet-
est angel who flits in glory about God's eternal throne! .— eye oS ae ee

The lesson cured two of us of’ jealousy in the first place. 24..
© iesson < C jealousy i first place. 2d.-Rid him. then,»
Tee shortly afterward, of all vampiral influences, whether from California or.
elsewhere. 3d. It brought us both nearer to, those to whom..our hearts went out in

)

craving, longing, yearning, for the bread of ‘life--Womanly affection. 4th. It led

us to bend our stubborn souls at the shrine of the forgiving God! 5th. It taught
us the mighty lesson of God-reliance and self-control, 6th. Taught us the folly of

pe a

indulging even in occasional bibulant habits. 7th. It opened the road-way to a

higher possible life, though the lesson was a terrible one; taught us the folly of
unjust.suspicion, and.to ask pardon, while extending charity--of all, to all, and

to ‘ask it, too, of that good and compassionate Lord whose chastening hand had
brought us face to face with truth and human duty, antil at last the glorified beings
flitting by that way peered into our humble rooms, beheld us there on bended knee, -

---contrite souls pleading for full redemption, and, turning their holy gaze heaven-

ward again, they sent a message héme to God:--"Behold! They Reason justly!" Reader,

‘go thou and do likewise!

- MORAL!--1st. Never let your love be drawn out till you are sure it-is right

: that it should be. 2d. If you are magnetic, take care to restrain its flow, and do
not allow yourself to permit it to saturate a vampire, and then fall.in "Love" with

your ‘own ‘spheral emanation. 3d. Pray for celiverance all the time, else embodied

and viewless leeches will sap your body eud soul.to the very lees; and then laugh ..

at -you when the certain Horror comes! Ath. Trust no one who seeks to separate you
from your mate. 5th. Bear and forbear, give and forgive, and trust ye each other..
6th. Never be jealous, no matter what the proofs be, so long as your two bodily.

eyes do not sanction it.. Remember my LESSON! 7th. Fulfil the part of husband and

wife as if both stood on the verge of death; so shall ye be holy, pure, and-fully,

-truly Human! .

Upon good physical conditions, soundless, health, normal play of electric, | —
nervous, magnetic, and passional forces, depends, unquestionably, much of the weal.
or woe, happiness or misery,.sanity or insanity, attendant upon us ‘in our journey

-through life. An experience of many years, in many lands, has familiarized me: witb.

all methods extant for creating the best conditions of vital health; combating ~~
obscure diseases of the nervo-vital organization, and for overcoming the effects of
both excess and violated natural law. That experience, travel, experiment, and.
observation enabled me to not only found, but firmly establish a NEW SYSTEM of
Medicine, embracing all that is good of Homoeopathy, Water Cure,. Magnetics, anda’.
dozen other. methods. I am nearly at the end of my career as a practical Physician,
but desire that my-methods and systems may*survive to bless and relieve mankind, when
my body shall rest beneath the hillside, and my weary soul shall sweetly sleep near
the Throne of my Redeeming God,--the Ineffable One, whose hand has brought me out

of the deeps, and given me a crown of victory at this end of my half-century of life;

‘wherefore I propose to'teach others a part, or the whole, of the magnificent System

evolved during all these years of toil and struggle; and: these are my reasons for: .
desiring to do'soit-- : ey . : 7 Uaennte

Very many of the large-brained, active-minded People of this Country, :as.is the
case with the same class in Paris, London, Berlin, Vienna, Constantinople, and- other
large centres of population, labor under some form of Nervous disease, caused manly
by cerebral exhaustion from mental overwork. Another large class, including both
sexes, suffer the same troubles, but from.different causes,--the distressing ©
symptoms being difficult to alleviate, much less to cure, with the means at hand,
for the reason that until my‘disdcoveries and improvements there was no absolute
medical agent, or Fharmaceutical preparation in existence, capable of meeting such
cases successfully; and sincé my..préparations--during 25 years of trial--have proved
their unexampled :power over all:diseases involving nerves, brain, lungs, kidneys, and
sexual organization, their popularity, without the adventitious aid of advertising, |
paid-for certificates, and other modes of puffery, demonstrating this fact,--I am
proud to say, the field of their usefulness is wholly: unchallenged by the products
of the Pharmacopoeia of the civilized world. — A # oe

In the experience of every Physician worthy the name, numerous cases present
themselves, which may be generally defined as loss of magnetism, depletion of

-93-

magnetic force; in other words, Vital Exhatstion; to cure which, thousands have
resorted to the various hypophosphites, preparations of lyttae, Valerian, etc.;
some of which undoubtedly afforded temporary, felief; but, all of which are imperman-.
ent,-and, as. Dynamic remedies,.and no other, are adapted to that class of troubles,
wholly.and utterly unreliable. , Patients who need and.resort to such remetties-~and.
in'vain, for reasons self-apparent--may be classified,as, First, those who, forget-

”

ful that Vigor is the gift of God, havé exhausted the brain and nervous system by

‘indoor life, too constant mental applications,--of course involving loss of lung-
power,- and hence, like plants in a cellar are bleached out. The Second class have
lived too fast; and late hours, wine, and personal excess have stranded them midway
of lifé’s sea; the Nerve fountains are run dry; vital energy is sapped and gone; and
existence ‘is dull, feverish, wodlly spicéless, and insipid. A Third class have led.
such fretful, vexed, and troubled livés that, without intentional error, they have ©
nearly éxtinguished ‘the fire of life, “A Fourth class, embracing both sexes and all |
ages, from ten years to threescore, .consists.of those unfortunates.who, by neglect _
or other causes, have.becgme inverted, and.by solitary habits (not to be mentioned,
but whose terrific consequences must be met and conquered), have sapped and drained
their' vitality, till their flesh is waxy, nerves unstrung, brain softened: they have
become’ unreliable, changéful, angular, crooked, wild, shiftless, aimiess, suspicious,
lonely, nervous; easily affected by the weather, bad news; are gloomy, morose, scary,
discontented, dreamy, fidgety, suicidal, secretive; now tender, then coarse and
callous; now gentle, then the opposite; vapory, fretful, easily worried; wholly un-
fitted for life's most sélemn duties; disquieted themsélves, and estranging their
best friends; they have become worn out, exhausted, and, in the case of females, _
loaded down with troubles that would kill half ‘the men living; often, in their cases,
resulting in morbid state of mind and body; and in men resulting in Impotence, and
worse trouble. There is a Fifth class, whom Disease ,Has wasted and reduced so that
there is scarcely life enough to make it at all desirable; and a morbid melancholy,
almost utter despair, follows. They have frighful dreams, flashes, headaches, palpi-
tations, anger fits, hysteria, and angularities without number, A Sixth class have
gone to waste, impotence, and senility, at 30, 35, and 40 years of age,who with a
little care could retain full vigor till threescore years att ten!

The above list embraces, 1st. All that’ vast mass of people who are exhausted
by mental] labor and sedentary occupations; who from various causes are angular, ~
excitable, nervous, and, at times, unaccountably morbid; 3d, All’who aré passionless,
cold, non-attractive, non-attracted, or, if attracted, hopelessly so, from lack of
responsive ability; who are unsettled, uneasy, subject to mental, temperamental,
gloomy, longly, and passional storms; 3d. All who have half-ruined their minds and
bodies, sapped their health and vigor, and are now crooked and fretful, despondent

Yi a

by passional excess, normal or otherwise, or from any Cause whatever. _.

 ‘" Who can doubt that, in reference to very many of these troubles, perverted,
excessive, or abused Physical Love lieth at the foundation? No woman is ill whose-
Nervous apparatus is sound; no man is wo whose natural appetites and brain are strong
and ‘vigorous, Life and power, strength and force, beauty and love, talent, genius,
endurance and longevity, all dépend upon the normal health of the vital-nervous or-
gans, for when these ére disordered the whole being must and does ‘suffer, and nine—
tenths of all the'diseases of "Civilization" originate in ‘the disturbances of that
‘portion of the human economy. pei ae pk pyle adie — :

eds ! a i as! Cieaw «ea Toy OF * 4

3 The remedials I propose to teach how ‘to manufacture, will revive energy lost.
i whatever cause, for’ they are DSPvOuE Sac autre aes in tangfble form, and
act, not by stimulation, but b IGORATION ring magnet namic power,
a HE aye maa ae eee » eae magnetic and dynamic power,

4
amg

~94—

_». Physicians and others are hereby given to clearly and distinctly understand,
that in no sense whatever are either of these preparations empirical productions, or
"Patent Medicines." Their discovery opens.a new era in the curative art. They are
not Medicines, but DYNAMIC AGENTS; have been thoroughly: tested in France, England,
and 35 States of this Union; and, where properly administered or taken, it is doubt-,
_ ful if a case exists of Incipient Consumption, Wasting, Nervousness, Hypochondria,
-Hysteria, Nervous or Vital Prostration, Leucorrhoea, Sterily, Brain Softening,
Dyspepsia, Mental Wandering, General, Debility, Whole’ or Partial Weakness from Nerval
Exhaustion, that they will not speedily and radically cure, because of their extra-
ordinary dynamic power. ; es

: ;
i IN THE MEDICAL PROFESSION, the great want has long been that of a powerful,
| positive, certain, yet harmless Nervine-Invigorant, capable of direct action upon .

_ the brain, nervous centres, and pelvic apparatus; an agent that will allay morbid
inflammation, yet stimulate, exhilarate, tone up, and permanently strengthen; that
.»will supply nervous energy, correct all morbid action, and furnish the material lost

_ or wasted by excessive mental toil, venery, masturbation, onanism, and other forms
of vital prostation. Every Physician of any reasonable amount of practice frequently
has cases of weakness, mental and physical, demanding the exhibition of: peculiar
-tonic stimulénts and aphrodisiacs, that shall be certain in effect, yet non-irritant
or reactionary. This want is generally met in my remedials, beyond all question the
most perfect vitalizing agents known, and hence peculiarly adapted to all cases ef
Female disease, Marasmus, or Wasting, all anaemic cases, and those morbid states
resulting in Hysteria, Despondency, Melancholia, Insanity, and Suicidal Depression,
all of which result from Uterine, Ovarian, Cerebral, Nervous, Prostatic and Seminal
Exhaustion in either sex respectively. To meet and conquer, especially, severe

and stubborn cases of all such, I propose to instruct suitable persons how to pre-
pare and use the following list of remedial agents, hitherto prepared by no one but
myself; viz., 14 Formulas, embracing 1 Barosmyn, 1 Lucina Cordial, 1 Protogene, 3
for Eye diseases, with instruments, 2 for "accidental" complaints, but whose effects
are supremely terrible--(these formulas are the ONLY perfect cure on earth,--Hope
for poisoned wives). In short, I purpose to teach the best of my discoveries, and
to give Parchment certificates to Prove the purchaser has actually been instructed
in my system and my formulas.

_Through these remedials many have regained health;.old men and barren women
have become happy parents, and patients standing on the verge of death have been
rendered strong and vigorous,--of course not alone by medicines, ;but by the course
laid down for their guidance, especially those set forth in my Pamphlet on the
Prolongation of Human Life and Power, called "THE GOLDEN SECRET,"

Where, Parties expressly desire it, the above system will be supplemented by a
Series of Esoteric instructions, involved mainly in the Ansairetic Mystery.

Those who have read my Works, need not now, at the end of 30 years, be told
that, as an expert, in diseases of the. nervous and genital systems, my fame if too
well established to be successfully contested by any man, men, or party, nor that
the ablest Physicians in the land are glad to accept my teachings and improvements
upon original discoveries. During the past year I have by a new discovery revolu-
tionized the entire treatment of such diseases. By it the physician and patient
need no longer "guess,". but go at once to the cure of the case. The discovery is.
entirely original, and will be imparted to practioners,--those who wish to make a
specialty of treating that class of human ailments. Terms by mail. The cardinal
principle of both the treatment and remedials, is that, contrary to all the "schools,"
I hold that LIFE itself is a principle; that we are not born with a given amount of
it, which, when exhausted, gives us up to death; but that we can not only accrete

and gather in NEW LIFE, and thus add long years to the sun. total of its’ duration, but

~95=.

rae

ALGO ae + yo. "The best. laid: of mice or ‘inen**:*) ~~

also'that wé can'intensify;‘deepen, broaden, and expand: it: in' every direction, thus
‘<preserving our fire, béauty,- vigor, energy, magnetic and pérsonal~force, to pie
Limited: degree.’ And‘not’ dhly that, ‘but--and here is: indeeda mighty discovery=~ s
that: the very:source of exhaustion, is, properly understood, the actual fountain of
-porpatuity; endurance, Jong life, and™power, mental, physical,«moral, emotional,” ;
ard wagnétic. In a'wordj I hold it possible to almost wholly’ rejuvenate aus ee
and become young again in spirits, °vigor, mental’ power, and endurence ,--that 1o8s'.0
'Iéveig loss:of life, arid that both’ can be restored. hese things I teach; and among
otkérs give much practical knowledge of inestimable value, on the observance of
which fills the land with vice, murder, suicide, divorce, and wretchedhess. in—..
calculable. (This knowiedge is broadly leid down in the large work, "The Master
Pession,"and:the greater-one "Good Néws," Tables of. Contents of which will be sent
tovauy address’on receipt of postage’ thereon.) © ©" res

be ah a ‘ «
i i} M »

+ i+My--dristructions will prove of.inestimable value’ and importance not only ‘to —
}Fhysieians; ‘but* to. other men,.and especially to womén, for d-preat many reasons which
I donot: choose to’ set forth herein. © °°" od Latent 6 3 :
Paaiiet? sot FoSts relete alisiouses ¥ te rat ES of [Ot
Lastly: this. book will inevitably: call attention to‘the B. 0. E. (Brotherhood
S6f Eulis), the Hope of the worjd and Sheet anchor: of Mankind. All such are informed
- tha’ & handbook of ‘the Order: will té issued from‘this Grand Lodge; to the officérs
of-which application:for information should be.made; and to no other authority, :—
save myself, untilsdeath.* 2.0 se Una a ee “a
“x. oMy address at present is Toledo, Ohio}; when it is changed, due notice will be’
givens)" .% sc Mas See ‘ong a2. (LS PABQORANDOLPA yaarre 2. noher
.at~Seé second not below, FAUEISHE Os oe ry v4) +& 22 EBS8 Wests)

r

Paty

De ; . i CU alt “ “ay

“%

There are quite a number of exceedingly important and inexpressibly holy and
delicate questions connected:with the subject-matter of this work, which, although
alluded to, have not. been openly and freely discussed herein, for self-apparent —
reasons. These ‘things relate to the inner mysteries of thé human being and of Eulis,
(or the Fhilosophy ‘of love, AGAPE; not stogu,) and are only to be given under the -
sacred conditions of Patient and Physician or Teacher and Pupil. How long I may
remain to teach of course I do not know,--only this I do know--that I have suffered
much:‘and ‘am weary; but while-able I shall take great delight in clearing up the :
doubts and mysteries besetting ‘those ‘about me; and all who need such courisel as I’:
am capacitated to impart, are hereby freely warranted in asking or writing for it,
~-assured that I will do my best.‘toward alleviating the distresses of body and heart,
Soul and Spirit; and ‘although I cannot bear the burdens of all, still I have done ~
somewnat of good in that line, and am ready to coritinue so doing while life lasts.’

-{ *In March, 1874, I organized a'society, provisionally; down in Tennessee=-"The
B. 0. E." to which it was my intention to’ teach all the occult branches of esoteric
knowledge, constitute it my literary heir, and through it spring many léfty truths
upon the world; but ~ _ Statofiostg at bebt a iii3 -A60(QFIo Vaetisng

7 eer) “Sy cod  aaone
i as Yad &,

Sf ‘Aft gang aglee!""

4

twiase Vis + SS Feary J 2 ize ge nie ,
: And so did mine with reference: to that society; for owing to drreconcilable misunder-

962

standings it became absolutely necessary to dissolve the provisional society as the
B. 0. E., and to utterly decline to permanently organize it, owing to the presence
in it of a person with whom it became impossible for me to break bread and taste
salt--things which no man of Eulis or.Rosicrucia will ever do under unpleasant
conditions. Consequently, hereafter as héretofore, I shall do what good I can,
single-handed and alone-~yet not alone, for God and I are a clear majority. I'll
help myself and others, and He will help me.-

JON 30, 1872.

97-

ay " sehr, sy
ae ae Ses ee a dete St ue a

me he er ups ie es ee ai
2 : epee 2
r Pa 8 eal ae atte font Re i NT pp hieane ai a LAE Me eee S| US
" im mh “ Hf
bes 3 wn aioe fs io weet : = : ‘ ae i sa ea id f ses In . tw fe he § .

Ty ae i sy : be or epider a ae ag ;
te 4: ‘ are ") ey Ome ah etd wee
ts ws ° "1. TMMORTALIZATION. °°. st 4 4 anacll Bae!
! ay. Ms : rae AME PIE SES REM, ce ME A Nike ops ER No a

* t ors 4 . s J
Otc rey é ci yee eel *: ¢ ee Se SS rks. cre!
pe ie 4g Bache ‘ ee: eo 2 snes ;

ai ie rao re ip cn A
"PHILADELPHIA, Sept. 30, 1873.

ey om 3 :

"DEAR SIR,--I am deeply interested, I have never read anything of your ee
ticns except the NEW MOLA.* On the 6lst page of that work, under Section xix,
find a single sentence in capitals: the same thought I have been inclined to believe
foe more than thirty years:--'ALL PEOPLE DO NOT HAVE SOULS!' My dear sir, do you
mean it? Have you said something more about this somewhere else in your publications
« « « Oh, do you guess how my soul hungers in viewing the table of Ca thats
extraordinary Works published by your House:--and you will guess I HAVE A

"Praying that your valuable life may be long preserved, and that you may continue
to enlighten the millions as only you can,

"I am, your trve friend,
E. B. MERRILL,

308 WALNUT STREET."

E. B. MERRILL, Esq.--Sir: The following Paper, in substance, is the reply to
the questions involved in the "Mola" and your letter. In response to your inter-
rogatories, allow me to say that:--All things are generally reputed and believed to
reproduce their kinds. That is regarded as a determinate rule, and strict, unswerv-
ing law of nature. But it is not wholly true, nor an unchangeable law, because there
is a law of spontaneous generation both in the faunal and floral departments of
nature,--both vegetable and animal life produced by other than seen germination,
some Of which have, and others have not, the power of reproducing their kind; in-
stances of which are altogether too numerous to need special mention--as, for in-
stence, the various acarii, produced from powdered flint which had first been
ca.icined to white heat; and the familiar phenomenon of lizardesque beings originat-
ing from salted cabbage in dark, moist cellars; and still further, the occasional
procuction of the low-type baboon, by the arrestation of gestation in pregnant .
neesresses,--an instance of which occurred in Charleston, South Carolina, but a few

years ago. So it is not always strictly albeit generally true, that things reproduce
their types and species,

In the case of man, his origin by the methods and processes universally believed,
in a few years ago, is not almost as universally discredited, for the Science of
To-day rejects all that cannot be demonstrated accordant with Law; and the human
being is proved to have been a gradual, and by no means a sudden or miraculous
creation. (See the Volume "Pre-Ademite MAN,” Published by this House)

It is difficult to determine the precise point at which the purely animal left
off, and the purely human began. Every recession from the highly human type is an
approach toward the Simian, or ape-type, and ape-like forms, shapes, hands, facial
angles, faces, noses, mouths, and features meet us among all races, colors,,and

ates EQ Gres Cem ema -- ewer eoanee

* See notice at end of Vol.

Loe

, Classes.of mankind at every turn; while embryology clearly demonstrates that the
human being in utero passes through every stage of the world's animal growth and
products, from the jelly-point to. tadpole, fish, monkey, up to man; and the farther
each gestative, stage is pushed, the more perfect the resultant child. The lower
types and forms of the Simiana are not, cannot be, immortal, by reason of paucity of
cerebrum, or fore, top, brain, and redundance of back, low, brain, or cerebellum.

_.-.. If aman is, as science proves he is, a growth; then his immortality is a

_ growth also, and not a miracle or gift, or the result of any sudden force applied
‘from a non-immortal ancestry. We need a new exegesis of early scripture, for in the
light of the daily resurrections of the remains of dead nations and absolete civiliza-
tions; of the constant exhumations of the remains of Prehistoric races, some of. which,

_ reckoning from geologic data, date back not less than from three-quarters of a

»s Million to two whole millions of years ago, it is impossible to accept the literal

account as we find it. People used to hold and believe that all mankind were the |

progeny of an original pair of Protoplasts, the autochthones or primal couple--Adam

(Kadmon) and the fair,Eve, his rib-originated compagnon du vie, or wife, But that

dogma is a dogma no longer. Black, brown, white, yellow races, are all as clear |

cut and distinct from each other as are grayhounds from poodle dogs, or bantam fowls

from headstrong, long-spurred, do-or-die game; nor will one race, even by admixture,

produce a perfect speciment of either of the others. al

In these days science explodes the fables of antiquity, and has already gone
far toward dispensing altogether with the Edenic couple,--insisting that Tartar,
Caucasian, Indian, and the Nigritian race came from diverse centres and sources, and
Darwinian theorists hold the reins and drive straight from Palace to cavern; from
man in pride and pomp, to man the cousin of hairy chimpanzee and red-rear baboon;
and she demonstrates him to be a natural outgrowth of nature; and that his ancestors
were some sort of superior ape-monkey or baboon, gorilla, nschiego or chimpanzee};
and that he is himself a grand improvement, by natural and sexual selection, upon
his progenitors, who slowly advanced from monkey-hood to be cave-dwellers and
‘weapon-users; who gradually learned the use of fire and fighting, monogamy and mat-
ing, hut-building and clothes-wearing, and who, developing still, finally,. through
the lapse of thousands of--centuries, grew to be what he is now--generally, half-
civilized; for he yet hangs, beheads, cruelizes his kind, and at best delights in
carnage, drums, war, glory, gibbets, jails, Alcohol, Tobacco, Robbery, and Force,
meat. food, and fiery drink, still laying claim to survive the ordeal of death, in
an etherealized form, but without knowing really how ow whys Holding firmly to the
belief ‘that his life on earth is but the prelude to his music of perpetual being
beyond the grave, while all nature chants the low, sad mequiem of all other sentient
forms, the totality of which topple over into their original dust, and are no more
as Individuals, but only survive in their respective species. This belief gladdens
him, yet it is a sad thought--Nothing sentient beyond the grave but man alone;--.
while all other forms of life and beauty go out forever? “-

Doubtless this development theory--of Darwin and others, is mainly true--so far
as it goes,--but it fails to go far enough. It is eminently unsatisfactory to every
true thinker and hoper for life beyond death; and the same class of persons find it
utterly impossible to predicate immorality upon the materials furnished for that .
purpose by those who are. mainly-jnterested in the firm establishment of the grand
idea. They ask WHY? but no logical reply is given. I shall present it here and
noW. f

:No one, that I am aware of, contends’ that monkeys, either large or small, are
’ capable of overriding the billows of Death, and. swimming safely to the etheral shores
beyond, (they probably deserve that power quite as much as some men do), yet man is,

: -99-

higher simia will, and do, inter-breed with the lower human.

ce ie tT op act Sesinitaethy wat fl nd pep fs Viet nfs 1s serps At wmengens veh xo Oe: the

cally, but an improved ape, which fact has a singular proof in this: viz.,
Ay Ie cee e Proof--the tailed.
"Men": of Namaqua Land: the dwarf peoples of gorilla~land, and the offspring of

 Hottentot women, captured and impregned by the giant apes of Nigritia. But it does,

: : ; ta
+, follow that. the monstrous progeny thus generated are immortal, even if, as is.

doubtful ——the human esque parent may chance to be so; nor does it follow that all

who are. undoubtedly human, are also possessed of. power to exist consciously subsequen

to. actual death; for unquestionably all are not thus endowed who possess the external

and ordinary characteristics of humanity; and.there are thousands. who pass and re-

_pass usin the streets every day of our lives-who are no more immortal than the fish

- they ate for dinner; for that power, fact, quality, call it what you will, is a

development, an. outgrowth,.a result, the principia of which I herein purpose to
briefly- set forth an, so far as my limits permit, explain. And first let me define
what the world. and myself understand as ‘the. true definition of the term I Inmortality:

wm + ; ag N oe A oe ee whet oes
ies Peas ty Hee 9 ' > A 4

“The -body is supposed to contain within itself an electrical form just like it-

- self+-head eyes, brain, tongue, arms, legs, sex-organs; that at death that AEreal
form egeapes the. body, and goes to spend.its eternal years in heaven or. in hell;. .

that it can die no more, but lives, loves, suffers, thinks, enjoys, in that other. .
life; and that it is in all respects a human being still. This brief definition is
as good as one occupying a hundred pages. : ee ees

Now if man is--and the affirmative proofs are strong--the descendant of any _

| sort of ape, existent now or extinct for a hundred millepia; if he is immortal and

the ape-parents not so, it is clear that those, immortal humen beings must have con-

_ ferred on their off-spring a power and quality themselves had not; so that at. death

attain that quality in -some “ther way, by some other method, through some other

mtr

the progenitors returned to dust, while the progeny exulted in perpetual life, and
renewed .existence; immigrated to other worlds in the Vault, immortalized beings,
but with no parents to meet, and, greet: them on the farther shore--thé ‘lands beyond —
the swelling flood, the kingdoms o'er the Sea!--and, undoubtedly, such“was actually
the case. Of course these first fruits were not of the high and fine‘grades sub-
sequently developed on the earth by dint of time and better. physical“ cdénditions.
Logic.is @ good sieve, even if a grain or two or 6rror does occasionally fall
through the meshes among the finer truths.” Now either the parent-apeé were capable
of conferring what they had not themselves--which is equivalent to extracting the
greater from the less--an absurdity, on its very face,--or man is not immortal by
right or dint or weason of birth, and must, therefore, reach that condition, or
rue or Law; that is, children must, have the quality conferred upon them at the.
very instant of generation; must acquire it during the gestative period; at some
other point or moment of their career, or, finally, gain it in.some mysterious or
miraculous manner not generally known or fairly understood. But it is sheerly
preposterous to believe, and impossible in every way, that an immortal thing could,

. or can, derive ,its death-defying nature from that which is itself death's common

prey and victim. To take a gallon from a river is easy; but a river from a gallon

As Ampossible, yet not more sq than to predicate the immortality of the offspring

of apes as a derivative quality. ..Yet I hold that a non-immortal human couple may
generate immortal offspring; ,but then that comes of the magnetic.unction and appul-
sion of the parents, whq thereby impart the immortslizing bias, which bias or tendency

pe ME dette may either increase or destroy, by methods hereinafter explained and set
orth. si

Now let it be distinctly understood that we of EULIS hold that thé general, pur-

pose of the material universe, the end for which it exists, is the. crystallization
of mind,--the immortalization of Soul; but it does not follow that all human beings

*ST00-

are death-proof, any more than that all the countless myriads of seeds produced
_ every year in the floral departments of nature are endowdd with reproductive vitality;
for’ by far the greater number is wholly inert, while others possess but weakling life,
and.even if they do germinate soon perish and decay. Transfer the view ot the —
animated world and.it will be seen that the union of the genders fails of one of its

‘

purposes--reproduction five thousand times for every single success, taking the lower

. planes of life only; while in the case of man, the union, so far as offspring is

'eoncerned, fails nine hundred and ninety-nine times for every single successfully
implanted germ.- Cat only’

Again: Every hedihy man--of course excluding libertines, debauchees, habitual
passional transgressors, and all injured persons--in fair spirits generates from
one-quarter of an ounce ot an ounce and a half daily of the three forms of fluid
life--semen, prostatic lymph, and the exudation of Cowper's Gland; and every normal
evacuation thereof will average half an ounce, containing, as I have repeatedly
demonstrated under a powerful microscope (one magnifying 35,000 times) from nineteen,
the lowest number, to seven hundred and eighty-three, zoospermes, every one of which
was capable of being developed in utero to perfect human proportions. Take the
first case, and it is clear that eighteen must fail if one succeeds; and seven
hundred and eighty-two ose their chances if one is fortunate enough to reach the |
ovum, and become incarnate in the mother's bosom. But, the chances are billions to
one against even one of them effecting a safe lodgement; and we conclude that for
every successful human union there are not less than nineteen hundred and fifty-
seven billions of human germs doomed to quiesence, if not to perpetual death, taking
_the adult population of the globe to be about thirteen hundred millions. Another
thought right here: Nature selects the fittest to perpetuate species; and the
- strongest and most active zoosperms always override the weaker, and reach the ovun,
dooming, thereby, all the rest; but it is clear that they too must perish if there
- be no ovum to invite them. Precious few ripe zoospermes reach the ripened ova, be-
cause deprived of the element time, essential to their perfection, the consequence
of which is, that the great majority of people spring from unripe conditions, and
remain unripe from the cradle to the grave. I will tell you a profound secret of
generation, whereby the most magnificent results in that line are producible at will.
It is this: (Here fdlow the glorious truths hinted at, but of such a holy, delicate,
and private nature as to be only impartable by words or ink. The publisher hereof
has no desire to exclusively retain it, and will, therefore, impart it to such noble
souls as can appreciate it.*) These principles alone can redeem the world, and
clinch the rivets of Immortality. Nature makes many attempts, but only few successes,
and as it is with trees and grasses, shrubs and flowers, so also is it with mankind.
She tries, and tries hard, to immortalize a species, but only succeeds in doing it
for individuals; and it is as,easy to pass along the streets and pick out those of
Perduring souls from those whose future is nihility, as it is to select a negro,
Indian, Hottentot,.or John Chinaman from a crowd of Digger Indians. The truth is,
that while man, generally, is immortal, he is not universally so. The development
theory is good. and true to a certain limit, but it at any stage or rate is wholly
incompetent. to the tremendous, achievement of accounting for the existence of Soul.
It needs improving; and it is astonishing that its chief priests have never even
attempted to demonstrate man's immortality, but rather have studiously evaded con-
tact with the troublesome question, Their theory fails them from the moment. they
reach the psychical.and metaphysical phases of the grand subject. They take no
cognizance of. soul per se whatever, because fully aware’ that they cannot give a
reason why Souls should be at all. The fact is, that immortalization could not,
cannot, be at all on their hypotheses. It is not inherited (of necessity); it is
not. a gift, nor the result of fiat or miracle, but is a process, an evolution, the
principia of which are as clear and’ plain as one, two, three, or a, b, c.

_*® See the. Asian and Ansairetic Mysteries—-Passim.

-101-

"Three brothérs may live: one of them shall survive the process of Death; the
"second shal: die’ forever, 4s that specific Person ‘or Individulaity} and the third one
“having once been possessed of the elements and cofiditions of immortality may lose
them and go Out like an extinguished taper or snuffed candle, by reason of his re-
_“pueted violation of either one of the fundamental or organic laws of his nature;
‘“\Wu22e a fourth brother may nearly lose the great boon,--if boon it be,--as some
believe it, and millions of others do not; but this fourth brother, by prompt action,
the instant abandonment of all his pernicious, ‘soul-wasting, mind-dwarfing practices
and habits; the tcl and persistent avoidance of all infractions of the fundamental
love-laws of his being, and a steady, manly course and demeanor, may regain what he
has so rashly jeopardized and imperilled. _ - ”

-" Some human’ infants ‘are born immortalized, déath-proof, and indestructible from
the moment they were conceived; while others réquire long years and terrible dis—
ciplines and experiences eré’ they reach the coveted goal. For thousands of yearS

:* the ‘followers of Gantama, the Budha, have’ considered what we call immortality as an
‘unmitigated curse, and continued existence as’ the most terrible and tremendous: evil
thet can possible ‘befall a human being, They regarded Narwana, or the final cessa-.
tion of existence, as the prand desideratum)--the Ultima Thule of all ‘possible human

hope, aspiration, and endeavor.

“ “Dissatisfied with life, its pains and penalties, there are‘millions of us who
_ would gladly cease to be, (Time was when the penman of these lines, disgusted with
the sham Fhilosophies and Philosophers of the age, actually ttied to accept. the
doctrine of Budha; but, having reached the power--through the extraordinary means re-
counted in Part III.--of glimpsing the mystical states beyond, he changed his faith,
and raised his hopes, and all the more so by reason of his discovery that Nibilism
anil iimbrtallity alike are reachable through the continued exercise of the human will.)

_ The discovery alluced io in the bracketed sentence ig this: There are two

kites of immortality: lst, A wan may survive death, and escape the thrall of his
_Phystcal form, and maintain his ‘ethereal state for a while}-yet if he shall not have
reve ved the proper and essential love-impulsion before birth, or else have subse-
quer.t1y developed love, he is as ‘certainly doomed to GO OUT, fade, dwindle’, go back
to tue monadal ‘state, as that gravitation in a law. He will be like the huge soap-
bubb.te at the end of a pipe-bowl, which only requires to be let alone in order to
grcw smaller by degrees until it is again all within the rim of the bowl, and then
‘busets forever beyond the possibility of reparation. » es

Since the advent of the modern phase of Spiritualism, there have been thousands
of people who have sought to ‘commume’ with their deceased acquaintances, but wholly
unavailingly. Why? Simply because their friends thus sought have ceased to exist.
ad. A man may have reteived the proper impulsion before birth, or have gained it:
afterwards, and he may enter the ethereal lands with, to use a corimon but very ~~
expressive phase--such a good send-off as to be able to continue on forever. The |
two kinds of immortality’ may be likened unto this: one is as a’ seed planted in good
rich soil, but only an inch or two deep, with a hard pan of solid, arid rock beneath
it, which defies the’ roots to’ spread; wherefore, that plant looks well and promises
much for a while’, but it sooh withers and‘is seen no more forever. The other seed’
eee 28 gett rebates plenty of water and root-room, grows gayly} waxes f
strong, spreads, blodms, flourishes:,' triumphs, an : elf; ye ‘See
were alike, and so‘was'the soil.’ > out ott tits 43 of hiiede arioe aaeneaneee

as Ad Sievaten io) bot breada) er a ; neh eeeeed apt ey ‘
' There are, ‘also, two kihds of Nibiliem: 1st.’ That of the brute and the 1 we
homos, or brutal-mans-both of whom are doomed to suddén and tdél Etikctionc
extinction--a cessation of being as complete as that of exploded powder, or ex= -
tinguished light, which,as powder or light, can exist no-more forever; and, ad.

~102-

A truly human nihility, rest, divine Narwana,--a state infinitely harder to reach

than: any phase of active immortality, whether transient or permanent!--the man dies
with a celestial etrain.or note‘of divinest harmony and seraphic melody ringing
sweetest music through every avenue, vault, and chamber of his being. Now observe,
and.mark well this definition of Narwana; On earth the longest duration of any single
musical note never exceeds a few moments; but. this Note of which I speak, this Sun-
burst of celestial music, this instantaneous rapture lasts unchangingly FOREVER, and
FOREVER! It is unaltered,-the sound, the music, the man, eternally the same, with-

out an interval to suggest even the idea of monotone! It is an infinite melody,

struck:on an Eternal harp, enduring forever and aye!

‘: ‘Such-is the Narwana of the good! The other, the Nihility of the evil and in-

perfect. Thus death has three Gates: the Iron one opens on Night--total extinction;

the Silver one, .on.Immortal fields; the golden one on--What Gods may well aspire
toi-+if we-are to believe what lordly and loftiest Seership tells us--and I am one
who thus believes. .

I, within the year 1873, met people whom I knew were under the ban of the bad
Nihility. Elsewhere, in. the volume of which this is a chapter, an account is given

of a hoary-headed "man," of nearly seventy.years, who sought, and expected, to

prolong his own miserable and wretched life by absorbing that of a third young girl,
--one of sixteen years,--he having aiready performed the burial-service over two
prior victims; that ol@-man is doomed to absod@ute extinction, unless ‘saved by
repentance, physical regeneration, and thé growth of affection within him. It was
not passion of lust. only that urged him to prolong his own existerice at the cost of
others; to stretch out his-wasted years by the awful crime of drinking the young
life, and wrecking a child of so few summers; but the conscious and unconscious
want of love was what urged him onto the deadly, selfish deed; he felt the need of
the great base upon which immortality must be builded, or not at all. Many such as
he there are.

But it does not follow that the monadal point, spark, or germ, constituting,
underlying, and animating the old lecher, and others of his ilk; the detestable
crew in whom lust reigns supreme; the infamous "Hullites"” of the year 1873; and the
still more infamous followers of the example of the thrice-dyed scoundrels who
ravished young children, and were burnt for it,--it does not follow, I repeat, that
the germs, or monadal points, basing their existence, will, at their demise, cease
to be forever; but they will only cease to be those particularly villainous and
vicious personalities; while the germs basing their being may appear and reappear
here again and again, clothing themselves with new elements, and, of course, for
that reason, running new careers. No one ‘can go.to the heavens until he shall have
gotten all of good the earth or earths can give him; and not till he has undergone
the full ordeal and disciplines incident to material life can he reach that golden
supra-immortality whereof modern thinkers, outside the pale of us few, have never
even yet dreamed, imagined, or surmised. .

Nothing organically imperfect can ever enter and remain in the superlative and
ineffable land of pure Souls. The imperfect must go back to the domain of chemics:
and matter; nor can they, with hope, knock at the doors of the golden temples of
Eternity, except they be full, fair, pure, free, and good, even though their dis¢i-
pline extends through a billion of ages; and the greater the gifts or talent, genius
or innate power one has, the heavier shall be the price paid for all accorded unto
him. It may be well and truly said that there can be no peace in high places, --for.
storms, hail, and tempests, hurricanes, fierce lightnings and crashing thunders play
and break around the mountain's brow; and he who would win the game of triumphant
immortality must do so by loving well and much.

—-103-

““OBat to“return to the subject: Datwin and his, co-thinkérs saw clearly that’s
different genesis of man than the usually assigned one was imperatively demanded ‘in

preserice of the startling discoveries constantly being made,’ and they adopted the, |
theory of selection, and, so far as externals went, were right; but instead of
"Smmortal souls, originating iri, among, from, or by, the Simiadae, it was only the |
-scul-tage, the mere physical body, the outer form that was thus developed, thus grew
“yp through the slowing ages, while the inside, the works of the grand watch, the —

imperial ‘soul itself, originated otherwise and-elsewhere. —

Now by soul is here meant the thinking, conscious, knowing, hating, loving,
aspiring principle--that mysterious something about whose origin, nature, perdur-
ability or'co-perishability with the body,'so much has been said, sung, and written,
‘until philosophers generally have got by the ears, while waging the fiercest of all
intelécttial battles. I propose herein to settle the controversy, or at least.to ©
indicate the clear‘road to such settlement, being perfectly confident and conscious
that herein will be found the only possible method and route to the final adjudica-
tion. It is hard for a true thinker to have much patience with those whose highest
conception of Soul and Spirit is that of a rarefied gaseous ether evolved from gross
Substance as light’ and heat radiate from flowing coals of fire in a wintry grate; be-
cause such a concéption is’ wholly untrue, seeing that no possible refinement of solid
substance or mattér'can ever approach the state of even the magnetic AEth of Space,
much less that diviner thing of which we are treating. It is clear that matter does
not think; Soul does, therefore Soul is one thing, matter quite another, requiring
a bridge to span-the gulf between them, and that bridge is some subtle form of —
magnetism; nor cari Soul be evolved from it ‘by any process of rarefaction or refine-
nent; for Soul it was from all past Eternity; soul it'i#, and such it will remain
to all possible eternities ‘to come; while matter, either in its solidified or con-
densed, or in its far-particled or fluid states, will remain matter until all its
life ‘is exhausted, and Deity shall have become senile and decrepit from the weight
of Time and lepse of hoary centuries! ,

‘" We know, can ‘know, but little concerning God, notwithstanding so many people
claim to be quite ‘intimate acquaintances, and’on familiar terms with Him! yet we —
heave every reason to believe’ the Ineffable One to be pure SOUL; and I, the writer
hereof, so believe; and furthermore, that he “is A Sun, emitting countless billions
of teams and rays évery ‘instant--and that each contains myriads of scintillas, every
one of which 4s ‘an embryon, or soul<germ, capable of development into perfect man or
womanhood} =i" 45" oe BF tS 3 .

While’God? is clear Soul, matter is pure body; one is a unit, unparticled it-
self, yet emitting and trradicating, besides the countless scintillant sparks or
monads just ‘alluded to-~-a glory<sphere, aroma, aura, a portion of his divine Life,
which is ‘the bréath of life to all these monads, and all else ‘that exists within the
radius of the universe, Soul, like God, is homogeneous, unparticled, iiidivisible, |
necessarily death-proof, in itself considered, and we conclude therefore Eternal,
albeit no one can tell what "eternal" means, for we cannot clearly grasp a thousand
years’; much less millions of --ages! Matter, on the contrary, is heterogeneous,
divisible; its Spirit is CHANGE, and that ‘is the quintessence of Death itself.

 Erewhile I spoke‘ of the menstruum wherein floated the rain of soul-germs, and
I gave it’a name. I row give it another, LOVE!--which is the life of All,--the .
celestial influence of the Eternal One. In ‘beasts, apes, et caetera, this vivific
force is diffused. ‘‘In’some human beings it is condensed and crystallized. In some
it is not, The first is’ immortal, That latter not’ so. Beasts, apes, Low-grade
_ people, have instincts, attachments, magnetie attractions, and affection:--Man.--
true men--alone have love! Beasts die. Immortal man lives on; but if'man be more:

“=104-

_. beast than human he must share their fate and lot, and as that specific individual
dies out, and the divine spark, losing its consciousness, escapes, and once more .
floats freely i' th' air, until God once more breathes into some man's nostrils, and

it again becomes not a quiescent, but a living, active human soul! If he be more

than animal he may challenge Death, defy ruin, laugh at destruction, snap his fingers

in the face of the grave, and ride triumphant and victorious o'er the mazy wreck of

worlds and countless. starry universes! aes

But, as I have hinted, there is such a thing as being ultra-human, not only in

the line of Narwana, but in quite another direction. If a man reaches that mystic

plane, then he comes beneath the sway and rule of supre-human, and ultra Law, and

- attains a destiny better, greater, higher than is afforded by the ordinary immertality
eee Se reestae so much care and trouble, and for which he so painfully years. and .

sighs? - 7

“What the destiny, state, condition, better someth ing pee am not yet ready.to
inform the world--but may leave it for the Brotherhood of Eulis to impart.

_.,. There are limitless regions of unexplored, thought toward. which that fast-in-
creasing multitude, who, think as. I do,.push; nor do.we, as do many ofthe super-
nalists,--though not all,--confine ourselves to the.mere outside, i.e. soul-facts of
the universe. We believe a few things as do they, but. not all that they do, for .
which they rate.us soundly. They rejoice in the physical demonstration of the
reappearing dead, but are not quite sure always that the manifesting powers are |
‘really their departed ones, for they have not, as have we, the means of establishing
identities through an unmistakable agency alluded to elsewhere. Vast numbers of,
but not all, the Spiritualists concern themselves mainly about raps, tips, quarrel-
ing, scandal, mutual vituperation, backbiting, libel, misrepresentation, "Social
Freedom"--things of earth; while we occupy ourselves in.actual research and inquiry
into what happens to man after his flight over the river of death to that mystic
state alluded to; to Narwana and Nihility; or to the upper spaces of the blue
Empyrean. At and across the borders of death-land, we strike hands with 4ll the
Spiritualists, and there part company with some of them, because we seek to know more;
they are content to drink fourth-class mental vinegar, acrid as gall, flavored hell-
aciduously, and call it wine; while we quaff the waters of life on the very brink
of the mighty River. ot |

Just so far do we go.with the cold, hard, dry, materialistic, uncheering
Darwinism--a system which lands us in the grave, there to stay until we turn. to
grass, trees, beans, pineapples, or bananas--according to the locality where death
overtakes ard trips us up; but at that point we separate from Darwin completely,--_
because the system ignores Soul altogether. We are not wholly content with the
modern spiritual doctrines, seeing that they fail to fill the great bill--of human
want; and because it is all head and no heart; has no warmth, fervor, ardor, religion,
about it; not because it fails to make men better, but solely because it affirms and
accepts the development theory as opposed to the genesic account of man's origin,
yet fails to tell us how, when, where, or by what agencies immortality became a
~ fixed fact. It-accepts the dogma, but gives no valid adequate reason why. It |
originates no thought, but boldly borrows and appropriates the mental stock of others.
In all lands it depends upon, and bases its faith on media, whom it teaches man to.
accept as oracles, yet no two of whom tell the same story, or see facts alike.
George, Feter, ‘and Thomas, communicating through Medium A, in latitude 16, have no
recollection of communicating yesterday with the same party through medium B, in
latitude 17-30. We, in our investigations of the recondite, occult. and mystical;--
ey, even in matters of mere finance, such as specution buying, selling, contracting,
or even in purchasing tickets in a lottery, prefer the better agency of a surer .-,
power--because it never lies, falters, prevaricates, and it ever tells the seme

-105-

story of the same thing, to all’ alike, no matter what the latitude or longitude may

bert ge. Oe pao obeo BOD Lidietesthe ide. (2 eheemiel

But stop we here? Oh no! for by the. seme instrumentelity.,we enter the Slumber

“of STALAM, and with keen glance. and quickened consciousness, scan, and léisurely —

survey realities denied to "Media," ‘and with sure and rapid gaze trace the awful: and
shi ate tea hurricanes of glowing galaxies,--the wintry storm of falling
worlds!--lemps of God flickering in the Vault! starry eyes glimpsing down into the
Deeps!--pregnant earths waiting patiently to, be delivered of the Humanity gestating
in their bosoms. Eg eS PRE a eke sieone

“Seers, ancient, mediaeval, and modern, alike, inform the world that the supernal
country is peopled by all grades of persons from the low and brutal barbarian, to the
high and polished civilizee; which, if true, proves that intellectual power and
capacity is not a passport thither, nor a perquisite of immortality;. for there are
myriads--not merely of people--but of armies of savage races, tribes,.and nations |
dwelling in that starry land, .

“Moral goodness is not the touchstone’or key either; for no amount.of that alone
will warrant success, or prove the "Open Sesame" to the farther gate of the grave,
nor bé potent’ enough to ensure a man's safe arrival at the golden portals of dis- .
bodied glory; for af all mendacious people; of all pullers of the longbow; all
perfected liars--on the authority of those who claim to know about it--the disen-,
bodied ones are ‘champions, able to give long odds, and then heavily denied jhis, lord,
down to the leyel of--who' you like. It is not race, nation, or complexion, that.
determines a title td supre-mortal existence; for there are people of all-kinds
there, even "Niggers" and Sangs Melees,--lots of them too, vivat!--and the dark-hued
Southern and Oriental races and peoples outnumber’ the Northern and fair ones in‘ the
ratio of about twelve thousarid.to one hundréd; besides excelling them.in the same
degree in mind, love, knowledge, force of character, and power of soul. The white.
Yankees; as a general rule, occupy, according to one A. J. Davis, a large tract —
known as’ "Diakka-land;" while but few dark-hued beings can be found there, because.

“they constitute the population of the heavens proper,--along remove from the stormy

realm ane imporfect people alluded to and named above, albeit myriads of the Light-
hued races help to people these choice abodes of spirit-land. " im att te

It is not age or sex either; because, if reliance can be placed upon the state-
ments of investigators--thousands of infants,.and people of both genders are continu-
ally demonstrating that they still live--and lie! Nor-is it talent, genius, or
social status. What, then, really constitutes the ,passport to the ethereal worlds
beyond and above the earth we Jive on? Reply: All who return evince, express, and
counsel] LOVE! and so confirm the faith of ys, who hold that, and that alone, to be
the great sine qua non, the grand desideratum, without which it were as impossible

* to survive death as it would ‘he to shoot out the centre of Donati's comet, with a

‘pocket-pistol! This establishes one pregnant fact, vix., All who are deathless
have love atthe core! It, alone, is the life-boat in which man sails o'er sounding
seas to triumphant existence beyond the grave! Whence it assuredly, ay! and remorse-
fully follows that they who waste love, waste soul (see further on), and will. i+.
assuredly dwindle back to his or her pre-existent monad life or state, there and: -
thus to abide’ the chances; patiently waiting for an opportunity to begin a better. ;
oe fairer race on earth toward the glittering, golden, sunny, shining sbores be=
yond $ ° ; rae b a A ane E yg Ty eee

4

«$ x Xe t +
vie me ’ ake SLO Ue

_ How large the mittber. of those who have written and preached’ about, the immortali-
ty of the Soul; ani ‘yet not one of, the whole vast host, with a single exception, has
ever attempted to ‘give a scientific reason why men is endowed,with the power of. ..

‘ple.

 death-survival, for which reason. I attack the problem here, and for the. first time
in. the world! 8 "iiterery history give the reasons why, enlarging somewhat upon, the

,, theory, advanced -years since, from the same source,.in the book now called "Soul:

‘The, Soul. World, and Homes of the Departed," then known as "Dealings with the Dead; ;"
and..I now proceed to state the argument ; and start with. the propositions, thati,-.
No. Apes, are. Immortal: Man is an improved Ape; therefore man.is not immortal--by , |
reason of descent. But some men are immortal; they, ascended from, Ape-ancestors; .
therefore apes possessed the elements which, in man, conspired to produce immortality.
No apes being immortal, or endowed with death-proofness, it follows that. his. Simien
ancestry could not. have endowed him with such qualities. Then where did he get then,
or it? and How? If he obtained it subsequent to birth, may he not lose it? If his
origin.is purely mortal, whence his immortality? A stick must have two ends. If
man begins ‘as_a soul, what. -hinders him from coming to a full stop;.a final cessa- .
tion; for commencement. not. only implies, but inexorably means, END also? If he is
death-proof in part, or totally, what is the rule and law podeniyang the tremendous
fact? Is.it gainable? Issable?.. If .cither, ved :

Now, all of these are fair, questions, eortas: of fair reply. ..In the first place,
there. are what, in one sense, I may call apparitional or phantom men; individuals
who are only so in seeming; who have little mind, less "Soul," and none of.the ..
higher, nobler traits, which we associate with the terms MAN ” and Manhood. Such may
, have been born so; or, as in, civilized life, may have worn away the jewel, and
“deprived themselves of the very first essential to the attainment of supra~windane
existence; people who talk about, but will never even glimpse the ."Summer aprae
of scent their blossoms afar off, ‘because they have wasted their substance , and.
steadily declined from the first, exhausted soul, spirit, body, therefore Love, -
consequently are not true Men, but mere phantons, who at best become but the -
sentient vehicles for the. exploitations of disembodied wags.

; ‘Some, so far. as immortality is concemned, die in bringing. forth : some wor ky or
mechanism; --laboring without recuperats ion, until the ability to build, up soul is
forever and forever lost; they having injured the heart-valves, kidneys, supra-renal
capsules, prostate gland, and seminal vessels, rendering it wholly impossible:for
them either to propagate their kind, equal their former. mental.efforts, or elaborate
the electro-ethereal bedy without which immortality can not be, There are very many
in our midst who never received the proper congenital 1 impulsion; and acquired it .
since birth; or who have lost or wasted the, power by too faithful worship at the |
altars of Memmon., Venus, or Onan. But it is gratifying to-know that.such even may
escape nihility, and gain enduring life beyond the grave; aye, and by stern resolve
and persistent endeavor, aspire to the sublime destiny reserved for. noble souls,-~
that magnificent future awaiting the choice spirits of mankind--the Peers, princes
and Powers of the eAterEy skies; ' » Bee

Soul, per se, ‘4 hold to be Eviternal, Sempiternal, and Eternal, just as is that
Supreme. Deity whom we believe to be, not because His existence -is denonstreble, but
because we cannot help. it, for God is Soul, so.is man--existence ergo sum! It has.
been from Now to all .past "Eternity; is, and probably will.be, .from Now to all
Eternities to come, and its one orbit is,.the grand Eternal year. Of course there
will come a moment in the far-off aeons. when matter will have yielded up all its
electric, magnetic, and ethereal life and essences, which it will have contributed
to form the electric bodies of the Imperial hosts of the dead; when the last monad
will have been incarnated, and no more new souls will be launched into: being, .and .
the mighty armies will migrate into space; the refuse of Matter prepare to again-re-
new its forms in loftier moulds; the second act of the transcendent drama. be ‘ended,
the third begun,’ and the true and real purpose and meaning of the bic ed universe
begin to be realized and understood--as not Now! shots

~107—

- scious.

. life, and they'derive sustenance from it in-two ways: First, from the AEth=Love

“gilver-hued body intended for eternity, and may. thus doom one to Nonenity--the |
‘equivalent of complete Annihilation! Why?) Because ‘no mechanic, not even Nature, can

‘senses than one! It is from the source named, alone, that’ the soul obtains the

“such cases an especial study fo?'many long yéars, in very many lands, the result of

"Soul is“an Empire, or rather Pikes prone thik Mdr cpt ty ems
rning power. So'is Deity--a sun radiant’ thfough all space, yet central av ,
Het ee mest all over He body, but'mostly in a tiny point at the centre of his
brain. Deity is conséious at all points; but’ supremely and infinitely so at the .
centre 6f that vast Brain whereof stellar *galéxies are but tiny convolutions. and «
ast®al‘ nebulae mere nervous fibrillia?: Soul: is a radiant, invisible, crystallized
globe of white Fire and’ Light located topographically, so to'speak,. in the: middle.
of the: head; arid metaphysically, at the centre .both of the conscious being, and-that
other existence of which we see the effects, but are not, and’ never will be, con-

4 3 te

we Fr, yr
“ate ¥

" All things whatever emit a sphere,-aura, air, aroma, or atmosphere peculiar: to
themsélves. So ‘does man; so does Deity, afd, as said ‘béfore, His nervous fluid, or
sphere, is Love, which, like all other fluids, is governed by Wave-motion, not linear,
Proof: We are suffused with love, not merely penetrated by it. When a love is.
sharp and cutting, beware of it, for it is electrical passion, not magnetic affec-
tion. Love is the effluence of God's body; upon it souls feed, for love is their

pervading the Empyreal Vault; that wniverse-life which. flows out from God. Second,
upon that’ fabricated by, and supplied‘ it through, the*nervous and pelvic or genital
apparatus of the human frame; for that entire organic: system of each gender is but
a mighty, powerful, intricate, yet wonderful chemical laboratory and electro-magnetic
battery, whose function and office it is--giving us pleasure, comfort, peace, and
joy, while performing the strangely esoteric task--to elaborate matter's highest,
purest, subtlest essences’ from Food and drink, and absorbed imponderablies, and send
it to the central brain,--Material whereof Soul fashions the deathless lining’ of the
fleshly frame, the:electric body within and beneath that of clay, and which it ‘will
wear in the spaces where gross substances are unknown.’ Now it is easy to see that
this great end and aim of Nature may be, and is, defeated in a variety of ways, some
of which I will point out,and thus this monograph may be the means of saving many
a being from ruin, utter, total, eternal, and  compdete. And’ first: It is clear that
all diseases,..injuries, disorders, or misusé of the sexual: apparatiis ‘have a direet'
injurious effect upon the soul, arid may, and do, often bar it from building the’

peform perfect work without good materials and:tools; and if the Prostate. Cowper's )
glands;' the uterus, ovaria, and‘supra-rendl ¢apsules; the testes and vaginal fibrilia |
~-which are’the implements with which the spirit-building is accomplished--are not |
sound, active, healthful, normal, non-inflemed, thé’ soul can no more erect its

desired electrical body than a'pood brick-house can be built without mortar; for

such a house would‘ tumble ‘in the first gale, while the touch of death would crumble
the half-formed spirit into atoms finer than sparks of Light! Thus it is literally
true that every excess and bebauch adds a nail to a man's coffin; but, alas! in more

materials and elements whereof to construet an ethereal body--from the finest‘ ”
essences Of matter held in absolute coales¢ence by the highest law, and} theréfore,
proof against'death, division, decay, or dissolution--within its fleshly one, by -
processes analagous to that of gestation--and completes it as the vehicle whose true
use only begins subsequent to: the fact of physical death! The problem ‘is Solved!

‘cEn-my: day I have encountered thousands of Lust-fired, passion-driven Human
beings:of both sexes who I am sure were’quite as pitiable:as blamable; and°1 made

which is that 1 know, with more than mathematical certainty, that it is utterly im-
possible that ‘such beings,. as those described a’ few lines above, or ‘the ead bat
whose criminal longing for the lives and vitality of yourig girls I have elsewhere

~108=

| @liuded to, can by any possibility have been rightly formed en utero. There was |
something lacking: too much mortar; too few bricks; nor did they receive the proper
immortalizing impulse before birth, or have acquired it since. Such beings are
semi-conscious of their lack of elemental soul; that it was and is attainable; that
Love was a grand Fact, but not theirs; that it alone could satisfy their longings,

. and confer the boon they craved; that young girls were generally over-full of soul,

life, animation, vivacity, and were easily drainable; that magnetism is a soul-ccnvey-
_ ing vehicle or fluid; and they rushed headlong to the conclusion that possession of
such would, in some mysterious way, cause the young life to pass to the old frame,
renew it, and confer upon them what themselves had not-~the power of death-survival,
Such beings--for Men.they are not--have a secret, craving for, and sense of lacking
of, the magnetic unction.and inner power which alone is the assurance of ethereal
life beyond the grave; and this half-conscious sense constitutes ‘the impelling spur

aA motive to the unhallowed wish, and the diabolic and detestable crimes it leads

_; Furthermore: My investigations with all the powers at my commend, and facilities
accordant, let me to the irresistible conclusion, and deeply solemn religious belis?,
nay, absolute knowledge, that no confirmed Onanist, or correspondent transgressor
of the other gender, is. immortal, for reasons set forth elsewhere herein, and which
cannot be repeated in this chapter, except to observe that the mechanical, vegetable,
tree-like life of the insane from that abominable and most accursed cause, absolutely
demonstrates the lapse and loss of Soul itself, leaving nothing but a mere human-
esque automatan behind to show the world what once was, but is no-longer, an immortal
human being! . Familiarity with, and investigation of Spiritualism, proves beyond
all cavil, that while thousands of all other sorts of debauchees claim to reappear

eases assess Geese sSsSea~ses= =fe=

this and other works by the same author.

Attraction, gravitation, selection, are regnant and. unbending laws alike «.°
Soul, Spirit, Mind, and Matter. Oil and water wont mix, neither can the floating.
germs or monads be attracted to, or be inhaled by, any non-human being nowy, becsse
that possibility exists no more. Apply the law just stated, and you will see ti
reason why; for they can only be breathed in by, and come to active, conscious life

within , brains of the very highest bimana.

_The Simian progenitors of man did not endow him with. immortality; but, by
natural, which is, sexual, selection: (of the finest and fairest by the strongest,
bravest, and most intelligent), at length produced beings a great: deal finer, superi-
or, higher, better, than themselves. Their parental affection erlabled gestation to
. advance a step toward perfectness, and the. consequence was: superior bodies, and

affections,.in.their young. "Cowper's" and the prostate: glands were developed, en-
larged, perfected; as were the testes,,ovaria, yterus, and nervous systems of the.
females; and, for the first time, an organization existed of such potent, magnetic,
and chemical power, that these organs in the course of generations--still by selec-
tion--were. enabled to evolve and elaborate that which coalesced with the. animal '
life-principle, elevating that specimen of the pre-human, until it was enabled to —
4nhale monads of the strictly human type. Thus it is true that God breathed into
his--her,.its, their, nostrils the breath of life, and man became a living, conscious
soul,,which, being competent to evolve the finer essences, at once immortalized the
being! ae. bye ; ei /

Now take notice. Magnetism is the power of man, It is of two kinds, physical:
and mental,.or. of the body and the soul. One may abound in the first, and have

-109-

Pe Ce ee eee Pore om eee 1 Bt we 2 ye ‘a. firm
nothing whatever of thé other; elsé Would we expect to see men of strong build, fir
ealth, any amount of physical; magnétic plethora, capable of being fathers peng
very finést specimens of “the ‘humati ‘race; but’ such is notoriously not the fact, but
quite ‘contrary; for they only who ‘abound An ‘sekital, embtidnel, Sout eee ony ance
capablé of gerieratirig a‘superior breed of humén’teings. ' Again, Magnetic phan il age
one thing, magnétic unction quite another. The first is material; the second psychal;
the results of one are superior physi¢al specimens of the species; those of the
second, mental and mordl giants; and in the scale of soul-weight puny people, with
levge spiritual souls and magnetic utiction, will produce children a myriad times®
superior“to the other. Bear this in mind, for on it hangs the solution of the © pat
problem ‘before me; for if the breather have not love-unction sufficient to plant the
germ -of immortality, by bequeathing strong love-power to his offspring, how can that
child have a starting-point wherefrom to go toward the land of spirits? or force to
elaborate the electrical body essential thereto? And if he does not then endow bis
babe, at death its soul will dwindle back to the monadal state; its present identity
and individuality be lost, and the monad will escape into the spacial AEth, to be
again breathed in under more favorable auspices, until at last success crowns its
efforts in the process of immortalization. This often, very often, occurs; and ; |
these reincarnate souls frequently partially awaken to a vague, dim sense of their -
then pre-existent states; and this explains in a few lines what has been an insoluble |
_ problem 411 along the ages, from Budha to our own day; and it is the only satisfactory)
' solution ever given to the world, =~ |

Were Darwinism all true, and man’ mérely a developed Simian, ‘there could be no
such thing as destiny or Fate. But there is, and men are cast to a certain lot and_
career as positively as that they are“born, and are compelled by a resistless power
to move. in given lines and grooves, hopelessly,’ and are as certainly and solidly
bound to the wheel of a peculiar fortune, for good or ill, as was ‘the fabled Ixion.
Some are doomed to perpetual strife, struggle, poverty, hopless effort, from the
nipple to the grave; they fail in all things, and disappointment, disaster, ruin,
and defeat stalk by their sides, turn whithersoever they will or may. love, wealth,
fame, comfort, rest, joy, happiness, success, all elude them, and if-’apparent
triumphs come, defeat invariably ends the game. Other people do or say with impunity
things that are sure to bring down storms of obloquy. and pain' upon their devoted
heads, ‘and sorrow and agony is their lot forever on the earth. On the other hand
there ate those exactly opposite; whose every Step is a triumph, and whose touch ~
transforms everything to gold, money, fame; success flows in upon them like a roll-
ing tide, and they revel in delight without a shadow, till life on earth closes on
them in a blaze of wealth and glory; yet these people are not half as able, good,
noble, true, as the other class. Now all the Darwinism on earth cannot account for
this, yet the solution is easy. The'successful class are those who are embodied for

the first time, and all their rank’ can not’ furnish a first-class man. The others,
the failers, have undergone prior’existences on earth, and are either paying penalties
for former transgressions, or* dre’ undergoing ripening disciplines preparatory to
special sunbursts of ‘Wéefulness, joy, and‘plory on the further shores of time... _
Weigh a soul of each class in’ the scale’of'actual worth; and the Failers touch ground

while the victors on earth kick the beam; and one of the former is of more real .
value to earth, life, God,’ ard the universe, than scores of the others. It is as
the Atlantic toa brooklet,--'" | : ~ . A ae Va.

i ’

culture of their better parts may easily make them so. They who dé generate off-. “
spring by loveless marriage commit a crime against nature and the Deity; for all”.
human beings have a right to receive the immortalizing impulse at the moment of their
_ generation; and alsé to that culture-and training thereafter which alone can ‘make
assurance doubly sure*in respect to\this, the most important of a1] human'matters.

. Children begotten without’ love are not necessarily immortal; but a proper

-110-

They who become parents under Love's sweet influence at once give the required

impulsion to the new being; enable it to survive death's ordeal, and help God Him-
self to empeople the atarry homes of the dead!

It follows that the low, harsh, crash, selfish, hard, crusty, dry, ungenerous
people are not entitled to, nor without Very strenuous effort at self-redempticn
from the lot of beasts, can attain, immortality, much less the other and vaster
_ glory reserved for greater souls, mainly those who, themselves abounding in love,
yet languish unto death without return. Ay oO} +

_ OF course a child receiving love's impulsion will ride triumphant over death's
dats tides, even though its bodily eyes never open upon or glimpse this. world of

Many and many a full-grown man or woman, stepping into the grave at ripeness of
years, only step out of it again as dwindled monads; and when reborn they too have
vague, shadowy reminiscences of the, to them, foretime.. They who are loveless are.
no more. immortal than the ox which falls beneath the butcher's axe; while, per ©
contra, myriads of savages, Indians, blacks, and the uncouth of all races, ages,
and climes, attain to immortality, because of the love and love-generating:power
within them; for that:alone lies at the foundation, and is the sole process of its.
attainment--or Immortalization. | #60 | :

ia In conclusion: Let all who wish for immortality learn to Love, and cherish the
better feelings of the human heart; take good care to preserve, regain, and cultivate
affectional, amative, and psychical Health}. Where the nature is injured take —
jmihediate means to restore it; thus the point will be gained, and goodness reign.
Iet nO one despair; for while there's life there's hope} and, however dark the out-
look, don't for a moment forget, that God still lives!.that the derkest hour is jus%
before day; that the densest clouds haye silvery linings, and that, though love-~iorn

and wretched, friendless, isolate, and.alone, still.

"WE MAY BE HAPPY YET!

e Le ee oY at oe
tT laa

Te aH , y aks 9 a? . By ou ¢
ae oer qt . i . w §, ‘

Ayer te y . y
Py : Sse

-l11-

AEM we: eed 2) Br TAT RSM, See
foo Bue ,fasiio 2 laa aviPRR ie Oe ee
Ps ROU, VEE As
CONCERNING SOUL-SIGHT AND MAGIC MIRRORS .

oot met

. ; i um Gh. ae, , ce? Nhe thet F ‘ Sait 5 bby ‘
I ADD this chapter to the present work for two reasons: lst. To’ gratify the
hundreds of correspondents who, for five years past, have pressed me for something
on the: points-involvéd; and, 2d. To:give, ina concise and conderised printed form,
information which it would be wholly impossible for me to write out for even ’one-—
fifieth of those who ask it of me. This and "Seership" contain all that is necessary
to be known upon that occult subject. But first I quote the subjoined article :—

eae |

aug

The ‘far east must ever. lead*the world in the practice of necromancy.. All ‘the
skill.and mechanical.ingenuity ofthe most expert prestidigitateurs of Europetor’
America cannot produce a single exhibition which will compare with the feats of the —
commonest Indian juggler. The Japanese have taught us the greater part-of the —°
slight-of-hand illusion which is now’paraded before staring audiences in .this
country and in Europe; but the necromancy of Japan is as boys' play “compared with
the mysterious jugglery of the nether and farther Indies, and especially of Siem. |
In the latter country there is a royal troupe of jugglers, who perform only at the
funerals and coronations ofthe kings, and then ‘only in the presence of the nobles
of Siam, or those initiated into the mysteries of the religion of the country. |
These necromancers do not perform for money, are of noble blood,’ and it-is seldom ~
that a European sees even their faces. Last year, however, an English surgeon, who
was.in the country, performed a somewhat remarkable cure upon a princess, who had
been treated in vain by' all the physicians of the country. Great was the gratitude
of. the Siamese court: at. the doctor's performance; and, as a reward commensurate with
his great service, he was permitted to witness the ee ee royal
troupe of jugglers, This exhibition was given in the sacred temple of Juthia, on the
16th of November, the occasion being the coronation of the young king. The sur-
geon's narrative, stripped of a large amount of description, and materially condens-
ed, is given below:--

" IN THE TEMPLE OF JUTHIA.

"Woun-Tajac called me very early, and he and his father's cousin, a jolly, fat
old gentleman, called Soondatch-Tam-Bondar, set to work to prepare me for witness-
ing the performances in the great pagoda, A white turban was wound around my head;
my skin was stained the color of new bronze; my mustache ruthlessly trimmed down,
blacked, and waxed till it had the proper Malayan dejected droop and tenuity; my
eyebrows blacked; and native garments furnished me, over which I wore the long white
robes which, I was told, were peculiar to the 'initiated.' The pagoda of Juthia is
more celebrated for its sacredness than its size, or the splendor of ibs architec-
ture. It is, nevertheless, a building of some very striking features. It is
situated without the city, upon a broad and commanding terrace, elevated consider-
ably above the level of the river-plans, It is approached from the city by a long
brick-paved avenue, wide, straight, and imposing. ;

"ADMIT ONE.

"Soondatch and Woun-Tajac, each holding me by an arm, now directed me toward one
of the doorways of the temple. It was guarded by two men, with drawn swords, and

#112-

ig

very fierce aspect, who stood in front of a heavy drapery of red cloth that concealed
the interior of the temple from outside eyes. At a triple password these men admitt-
ed my companions, but crossed their swords before my breast. Soondatch whispered

in the ear of the elder of the two; he started, gazed at me intently, but did not
withdraw his barrier. Woun showed him a signet. He took it, and reverently placed |
it upon his forehead; yet still he refused to admit me. There was a controversy
between the. doorkeeper and my companions; and, at last, the elder guardian whistled

' shrilly upon a bone-pipe tied about his neck with a strand of silk, A tell man

suddenly appeared, I could not see from whence. He: was middle-aged, athletic, and
had a most peculiar, cunning, self-possessed look of person and intelligence, |

"'TEPADA!'

exclaimed both of my companions at once; but the man, who was naked, except for A.
breech-clout, took no notice of them. He put his hand heavily, but not unkind’,
upon my breast, gave me a piercing, long look, and said in excejlent French, ‘Avo,
you a brave man?'-~'Try me!}' I said, Instantly, without another word, he bancazed
my eyes with a part of the long white robe I wore; he snapped his fingers suddeniy,
whispering in my ears, 'Not a word, for your life!' and the next moment I found my-=
self seized in the hands of several strong men, and borne some distance along a
devious way, ascending and descending several times. At last I was put down; tha
bandage was quietly removed; and I found myself squatted on a stone-floor, betwee
Soondatch and Woun-Tajac, who, with bowed heads, and faces partly shrouded in the‘r
white robes, squatted like statues of Buddha, their knees and shins close to the
ground, their haunches resting upon their heels, their hands spread palms downward
upon their knees, their eyes deflected, and a look of devout reverence and absivacted
meditation in their countenances. The lizht was dim to my unaccustomed eyes, bus
all around, as far as I could see, were wiite-robed worshippers crouched in the sane
attitude of silent reverence.

"A WEIRD SCENE.

.. “By degrees, as my eyes grew used to the dim gloom, I began to look about me,
The place was a square vault, so lofty that I could not see the ceiling, and 1 shold
say, not less than a hundred paces long and wide. All around the sides rose gigantic
columns, carved into images of Buddha always, yet with a thousand variations from
the central plan, a thousand freaks of fancy, a. thousand grotesqueries, through
which shone, the more effectively for the departures, the eternal calm, the
stagnant, imperturbed ecstasy of apathy of Buddha's remarkable face, with the great
pendent ears, and the eyes looking out beyond you into the supreme wistlessness of
Nieban--a face that once seen can never be forgotten. By degrees I came to see the
plan of this evidently subterranean vault, and to look with wonder upon the simple
grandeur of its massive architecture, which was severely plain, except so far as the
carving of the great columns went. At the farthest end of the hall, resting against
the columns, was a raised dais or platform, covered with red cloth. This stage was
raised between three and four feet above the floor of the vault, and was about
thirty-five or forty feet deep and one hundred and fifty broad. Behind it a curtain
of red cloth hung down from the capitals of the towering columns. In front of the
stage, just about the spot where the pulpit of the orchestra in a Greek theatre
would be, was a tripod-shaped altar, with a broad censer upon it, in which was burn-
ing a scented oil, mixed with gums and aromatic woods, that diffused through the
whole vault a pungent, sacramental odor.

-113-

" THE OPENING, CEREMONIES.

. . "Suddenly there was a wild and startling crash of barbaric music from under the
stage--gongs, drums, cymbals, and horns--and with wonderful alertness, and a really
indescribable effect, a band of nakes, men came, out. from behind the curtains, bear-
ing each a scented torch in his hand, climbed the, columns with the agility of monkeys,
and lighted each a hundred lamps, strung from the base almost of the columns ‘sheer _
up to the.apex of: the vault,. which, I could now. see, rose in a lofty dome, that |
doubtless pierced far up into the interior of the pagoda proper. The illumination
from these multitudinous lamps was very brilliant; too soft to be dazzling or over-
powering, yet so penetrating and pervasive that one missed nothing of the perfect
light of the day. The din of the horrible orchestra increased, and a band of old
women came out from under the stage singing (or rather shrieking out) the most . .
diabolical chant that I ever heard. The red curtain fluttered a little, there was
a dull thud, and there, right before us, alongside the censer, stood a very old man,
but wrinkled, with long hair and beard, white as cotton fleece. His finger-nails
were several inches long, and his sunken jaws were horribly diversified with two
long teeth, yellow and ogreish.. He was naked, except for a breech-cloth, and his -.
shrunken muscles shone with oil. He took the censer in his hands, and blew his.
breath into it until the flame rose twenty feet high, red and furious} then, with a
sudden, jerking motion, he tossed the burning oil toward the crowd of squatting .
spectators, It shot toward them a broad sheet of terrible flame; it. descended upon
them a shower of roses.and japonicas, more than could have been gathered in a cart.
Turning the censer bottom upward, he spun it for a minute upon the point of his long
thumb-nail, then flung it disdainfully away toward the audience. It struck the
pavement, with a metallic clang, bounced, and rose with sudden expanse of wings.

"A SHRIEKING. EAGLE, .
frightened horribly, and seeking flight towards the summit-.af the dome. The old man
gazed a moment upward; then, seeing the tripod upon which the censer had stood, he
sent its legs apart, with a nervous hand, straightened them against his knee, and
hurled them, dartlike, toward the eagle.: They glanced upward with a gilded flash,

; and instantly ‘the eagle came fluttering down to the pavement in our midst, dead, and
three horrible cobras coiled about him, and lifting their hooded heads defiantly, |
and flashing anger out of their glittering eyes. The music shrieked still wilder,

the snakes coiled and plaited themselves together in a rhythmic dance, lifting the

dead eagle upon their heads, and, presto! right in our midst there ‘stood ‘the tripod,
again, with its flickering flame, and its incesse-savored breath. . A more perfect.”
illusion never was seen, ; Staged’ Lhe wate » att han “ehen eee

peytee a ada

 "'That is Noredom, ' whispered Woun-Tajac in my,ear. . Another actor now came
upon the scene, whom I recognized to be. the tall athletic, Tepada. . Behind him.came
a smaller man, whose name, Woun-Tajac informed me, was. Minhman, and a boy, probably
twelve years old, called Tsin-ki, These four began some of the most wonderful
athletic exhibitions that can be conceived. It is ‘: 7 Sa

MIMPOSSIBIE 10 BELIEVE, . ee

unless you saw it, what work these men put human muscles to. I am not going to
provoke the incredulity of your readers nea W M3 to describe ‘the eteety of
them. In one feat Tepada sezed Norodom by His long white beard, held him off at —
arm's length, and spun round him until the old man's legs were horizontal to the
athlete's shoulders. Then, while they still spun with the fury of dervishes,

te

Minhman sprang up, seized upon Norodom's feet, and spun out a horizontal continua-
tion of the ancient; and when Minhman was firmly established, the boy Tsin-ki caught
to his feet in like manner, and the tall athlete, every muscle in him straining,
continued to whirl the human jointless lever around. At last, slowing slightly, |,
Tepada drew in his arms till the'old man's white beard touched his body; there was
a sudden strain, and the arm of men from being horizontal became perpendicular,
Norodom's head resting atop of Tepada's, Minhman's head upon Norodom's feet, and
_ Tsin-ki's head on Minhman's feet. A pause for breath, then the column of men was |

propelled into the air, and, presto! Tepada's head was on the ground, Norodom's. feet

to his, Mibnman's feet upon Norodom's head, Tsin-ki's feet on Minhman's head. Each
had turned a summersault, and the column was unbroken! | KORTE

"METAMORPHOSES .

"One trick which Minhman performed was a very superior version of the mango-tree
''feat of the Indian jugglers. He took an orange, cut it open, and produced a ser-
‘pent. This he took down into the audience, and, borrowing a robe from one, cut the
snake's head off-and covered it with the robe. When the robe was lifted again, a
fox was in the place of the snake. The fox's head was cut off, two robes borrowed,
and when they were raised there was a wolf, which was killed with a sword. Three
robes, and a leper appeared; it was slain with a javelin. Four robes covered a most
savage-looking buffali, that was killed with an axe. Five robes covered in part,
but not altogether, ‘a lordly elephant, who, when the sword was pointed against him,
seized Minhman by the neck and tossed him violently up. He mounted feet foremost,
‘and finally clung by his toes to the capital of one of the columns. Tepada now
leaped from the stage and alighted upon the elephant's shoulders. With a short sword
he goaded the beast on the head until, shrieking, the unwieldy animal reared upon
its hind feet, twined its trunk about one of the great. columns, and seemed trying

to lift itself from the ground and wrap its body around the great pillar. The music
clashed out barbarously, Nerodom flashed forth a dazzling firework of some sort, and
the elephant had disappeared, and Tepada lay upon the stage writhing in the folds

of a great bos-constrictor and holding up Minhman upon his feet.

"During three hours the exhibition continued, feats of the sort I have described,
each more wonderful than the one that preceded it, following one another in rapid
. succession, _I shall content myself with describing the last and culminating wonder
of the startling entertainment. . . a

"THE BEAUTIFUL LUAN FRABANA.

— °-“"A perfectly formed and most lovely nautch. girl sprang out upon the stage, and:
was hailed with universal exclamations of delight, everybody calling out her name,
Iuan Prabana, as if it were a word of good omen. Her only dress was a short petti-
coat’ of variegated feather-work, A wreath of rosebuds crowned her soft, short,.
black hair, and she wore a pearl necklace, as well as broad gold armlets and anklets.
With a brilliant smile she danced exquisitely for some minutes to the ,accompaniment
of a single pipe, then she knelt and laid her head on old Norodom's knee. , The boy
fanned her with a fan made of sweet-fern leaves, Minhman fetched a lotus-shaped
golden goblet, and Tepeda poured into it from a quaint-looking flask a fluid of
greenish hue. The old yogi-like Norodom held the goblet to Luan Prabana's lips, and
she drained the contents with a sigh. As if transfigured she suddenly sprang to her
feet, her face strangely radiant, and began to spin giddily around in one spot.
First the boy, then Minhman, then Tepada tried. to arrest her, but they no sooner
touched her’ than oer ae :

~115-

* x ese
‘

-MSHE REPELLED’ THEM WITH A SHOCK

that thrilled them as if she had imparted an electric spark to them, Spinning con-
stantiy, with a bewildering rapid motion, the girl now sprang off the stage and down
the hall, along by the foot of the columns, Tsin-ki, Minhman, and Tepada in active
pursuit. In and out among the crowd they spun, the three chasing.. Tepada seized
hold' of the chaplet that, crowned her; it broke, and as she was-whirled along, a spray
‘of -rosebuds was scattered from her brow in every direction. Anything more graceful
néver was seen; And now a greater wonder, At’ the extremity of the hall the three
surrounded and would have seized her, when, still revolving, she rose slowly into

the air and floated gently over our heads towards the stage, scattering roses as she
went. At the brink of the stage she paused in mid-air; then with a slight, wing-like
motion of her arms, mounted up, up toward the loftiest arch of the vault overhead.
Suddenly old Norodom seized bow and arrow and shot, toward her. .. There was/wild shriek,
a ‘rushing sound, and the dancer fell with a crash to.the flags of the. floor, and laid
there an apparent bloody mass... The music burst forth into a.wild wail, and the chorus

of old haga came tumulttously forth ‘and bore her off in their arms.

"WAS ITA MIRACLE.

‘Now, from behind the red curtains came a dozen strong men, bearing on their
shoulders a great leaden box, which they laid ‘upon the front part of the stage. As
they retired the old women came out bringing a low couch, decorated with flowers and
_ gold-embroidered drapery, upon which lay Luan Prabana, decked forth in bridal gar-
“ments, arid sweetly ‘sleeping. The couch with its sleeper was put quietly down upon
the front of the stage, and left’ there, while Norodom and Tepada went to the leaden
box, and with hot irons attempted to unseal it. 'That is Stung-Tieng's coffin,’ «
whispered Woun to me; 'the old saint has been dead more ‘than half a millenniu,! -

"Quickly, eagerly it seemed to me, the two men broke open the fastenings of. the
coffin, until the side next the audience falling out at last, a teak-box was dis-
covered. This was pried open with a small crowbar,. and what seemed a:great bundle
of hankeen taken out. Tepada and Norodom commenced to. unwind this wrapping, which
was very tight. Yard after yard was unwound and folded away by Minhman, and at lest,
after at least one hundred yards of wrapping had been taken off, the dry,.shrivelled
mummy of a small, old man was visible, eyes closed, flesh dry and hard,--dead and
dry as a smoked herring. Norodom tapped the corpse with the crowbar, and it gave a
dull, wooden sound. Tepada tossed it up.and caught it--it was still as a log. Then
he placed the mummy upon Norodom's knees, and fetched a flask of oil, a flask of
wine, and a censer burning with some pungent incense. Norodom took from his hair a
little*box of unguent, and, prying open the mouth of the mummy with a .cold-chisel,
showed ‘that the dry tongue could rattle like a chip against the.dry fauces. He ..
filled tHe mouth with~unguent and closed it, and anointed the eyelids, nostrils, and
ears. Ther he and Tepada mixed the wine and oil, and carefully rubbed every part of
‘the body with it. Then, laying it down in‘a reclining position, they put the burn-
ing ceriser upon the chest and withdrew a space, while the drums and gongs and cymbals
ae ie ‘clattered , and. the shrill, ¢ackling.treble of the chorus of old women -rose

eously, =o: 4 8 ‘ hor” -GeVaS. Trot

sae 5 yay |

ny v

| : “8 9A TA LAZARUS |
"A breathless pause @nsued--one, two, three minutes—-and the mummy sneezed,-
sneezed thrice, so violently as to extinguish the flame of the censer. A moment,

a
h

-116-

later the thing sat up, and stared, blinking and vacant, out around the vault--an
old wrinkled man, with mumbling chops, a shrivelled breast and belly, and little
tuffs. of white hair upon his chin and forehead. Tepada approached him reverently,
upon his. knees, bringing a salver, with wine and a wafer-cake, The old man-did not
notice him, but ate, drank, and tottered to his feet, the feeblest decrepit old —
dotard that ever walked. In another moment he saw the nautch girl slumbering upon

sher couch; he scuffled feebly to her, and, mumbling, stooped as if to help his dim
.eyes to see her better. With a glad cry the maiden waked, clasped him in her arms
and to her breast, and kissed him, Incomprehensible magic! He was no longer a
monagenarian dotard, but a full-veined fiery youth, who gave her kiss for kiss.
_ How the transformation was wrought I have no idea, but there it was before our very
_ eyes. The music grew soft and passionate, the chorus of the old women came out,

and with strange Fhallic songs and dances bore the two away--a bridal pair. I never
expect again to behold a sight so wonderful as that whole transformation, which, I
may mention, my learned Jesuit friend, to whom I described it, regards as a piece
of pure symbolism. His explanation is too long and too learned to quote, but he

‘connects the ceremony with the world-old myth of Venus and Adonis, and claims that’

it is all a form of sun-worship. oo

"BACK TO THE TOMB.

. "The show went on for some time longer with many curious feats.- At the end of
an hour the Fhallic procession returned, but this time the Bayadere led it, a

strange triumph in her eyes, while the youth lay upon the couch sleeping. The
Phallic chorus sank into a dirge, the youth faded visibly; he was again the shrivell-
ed dotard; he sighed, then breathedno more. Luan Prabana retired sorrowfully;

‘Norodom and Tepada wrapped the corpse again in-its interminable shrouds, restored

it to the coffin, and it was borne away again. The attendants climbed up to and
extinguished the lights. I was blindfolded and borne away again. I found myself
once more at the doorway of the temple in the broad sunshine with my friends--as
the mystic ceremonies of the great temple of Juthia were over, it may be for many
years.

“With strange Phallic songs and dances born the two away--a bridal pair." "Ven-

us and Adonis--a form of sun-worship." "The Phallic chorus sunk into a dirge.” —
Can anything be plainer or more direct in confirmatory proof of what I had written

. in this book, than this excerpt from a newspaper, dated April 11, 1874, months after

this book was completed,--but the appearance of which necessitated a brief additional
page or two? There is no need to go to far-off Siam to witness such marvels, or to
learn their strange principia, for I have not only witnessed displays of High

Magic in*this country, quite as marvellous, but different from the above, but.have
myself perfcrmed the feat of Fire-drawing, and came very near destroying the life

of 4 woman who assisted at the rite, and but for the quick, brave, self-sacrificing
action of Dr. Charles Main, of Boston, that woman would have been slain by fire
drawn down from the aereal spaces by principles known to me. For fifteen years I
sought a female of the right organization--an European or American Luan Prabana

(the Fair and Virgin invocatress )--and not till March, 1874, did I find her. ‘Her

. Self-will, and brother-in-law's (he was a Pupil) lack of decision, and his weighing

of less than three dollars! expense against the possession of the loftiest Magic
earth ever saw, determined me to seek elsewhere for the true material--which, it is
needless to say, I have found again in my own personal circle. The Mysteries are
all wrought through the Phallic, Discal, Yoni Principles, in unsullied purity, and
the highest, noblest worship known to man. The great trouble with all whom I have

.. partly taught in this land is that they--not one of ‘them--saw anything nobler than

the brilliant chance of sure gain, or opportunities to gratify Passion. Wherefore,

-of course, I dropped them all. The Phenomenal magic recounted in the extract given

-117-

above, together with the equally startling things of Egypt, rages 4 Pate etn Hae
Tartary, and: India--only distantly approached by the Fire-tests, pabed Feet ea on a
-the Tike, as seen in the case of Hume,’ the Baltimore negro and others, oge ns
Soyith the’ air-floating of various pérsons, myself‘included,' are, so far as real use
is concerned, but secondary trifles compared to that loftier system of the far Orient
whereby persons are énabled ‘to glimpse behind the scenes of life, and note what
~transpireson'the further side. To the special’ consiceration of that transcendent
“phase sof high magic; I shall-devote this concluding chapter: of my book; observing,
ere Ido so, that I hope these things now written, wiil‘ne-ther. be scattered to the
winds, or'seiged on°in’the interests of éither dollars or lusts; for I cannot help
“cuttérly despising the worshippers of either Mammon or Priapus. One thing, however,
is absolutely certain, and this it is3 No oné can succéed in either branch of high
‘magic whose spur and motive is such as I'deprecate above; but success is sure to
eventually crown the efforts of the persevering student, whose actus are goodness
and. the acquisition.of power for nobie<ends. ii WIRD

| For many° ages’ people have’ sought to. penetrate through, or lift, the veil which
hangs between the worid we inhabit and that vast relm where causes reside and
principles exist. To that end, recourse has been had to drugs, such as opium,
cannabin, and camphora; to mesmerism, "Psychology," disks, magnets, and fasting; and
in later times to circles and various so-called marvellous methods; all of which,
in the end, have proved unsatisfactory, and the student and searcher has been, by
them; left worse off than before, Not all persons can reach the interior sight by
such methods, because all are not possessed of thé essential organic'attributes, or
constitutional bias and tendency. To allisuch there is°a*surer, bétter, safer,- and

~'. grander: road, and that is self-devélopment, by ‘means entirely wittiiii the reach of

every. one, ‘and which are within their will and"control; and which: fequire but’ the
elements of Time, Patience, Assiduity, Persistence, and periodical‘effort to -ensure,
if not complete success:in soul-sight, then in thése other qualities, powers, and
attributes essential to perfect humén characteri © ibs

That agency, I hold, is-some form of the spirit-glass‘or lens,-=-not the "Urim
and Thummim," or metallic breast-plates used for purposes of divination, and ‘worn
by the priesthood, as recounted in the Bible; nor the stones and crystals of later

- ' dayS,r-but thei perfected spirit-seeing or magic-glass, .formed:of materials prepared
in the Orient, and fitted for-use in Paris and France. § — ten 8 PROT

These are of two generic kinds, and also of diverse grades, sizes, sensitiveness, |
'. focal power, and-magnetic planes,--because those made for, arid adapted’ to, one line
‘of use, ‘are not ‘so well suited to different lines: And First. ‘The cominon kind.
averages about. éight inches by sévén, and is a true AEthic mirroe adapted to
ordinary ends, such as invoking the dead; and the other purposes for which they
have for ages been used. ayitwes Fd ao 8 ; .

The difference between the spirit-seeing mirrors, such as are described in”
"Seership," and the methods and materials of their. construction therein set forth,
and those hereinafter described,is the difference~between a first-class gold re- -
peater, and @ common cylinder--escapement watch. Both are time-keepers, but one is

- vastly superior to the other. The materials of the two -classes of mirrors are ~'
quite dissimilar; and the labor expended:6n those hereinafter described, is simply
enormous,’ for after they come into the hands of us of America, they cost an immensity |
of toil, in.cleaning, polishing, heating, bathing, and magnetic manipulation, and
this it'is that renders them valuable, and adapted to the uses for which from hoary
antiquity they were intended. I have been a very small crystalline mirror, weigh-
ing less than a’pound, for which the owner demanded $4,000 :in gold coin, and was not

., at all anxious to part with it even at that price. © Second. The. larger and finer
ones of the same sort; but which of course are far better, stronger, more perfectly

~118-

magnetic, and have a great deal wider range. Formerly there were five sizes of this
Class; -but it was found that but two could be depended on; as the rest were ex-
tremely liable to fracture by reason of the great climatic ranges of. temperature in
Western Europe and North America.

This class were also found better suited to beginners.than to proficient seers;
especially those who, not content with the limited ranges of the ordinary ones,
were anxious for a perfected instrument of greater sensitiveness, magnetic calibre,
focal range, AEthic basin, or magnetic reservoir, and of a capacity equal to the
solution of almost any subject capable of demonstration by such means; wherefore
that form was superseded, in 1874, by the ne plus ultra of all such things in that
line;-~fine oval magnetic polar ones, with deeper, broader, larger basins, or
magnetic reservoirs, presenting a deep-sea surface, nearly absolutely. perfect, and
_ leaving almost nothing to wish for in any respect;--a beautiful, clear avoid, and
: of size, focal length dnd calibre seldom equalled and never surpassed. They go in
_ grades, sizes, ranges, and cost according to their illuminant power. re

In January, 1874, I received a few from Paris, and hung them on my chamber-wall
to charge and fit them for their owner,--a lady; and there they remained till the
morning of Feb. Sth, when they became suddenly illuminant, and no grander sight
ever. was beheld by human eyes than was presented on that memorable morning; for the
_ whole starry galaxies; rolling world-systems of nebulae; vast congeries of stellar
constellations; cities afar off on the earth; and scenes never before beheld by eyes
of this world, were displayed to such a grand, sublime, and amazing extent ‘that the
soul panted with the weight of the transcendent Fhantorama.* Such mirrors as these
--would they were mine!--if kept free from promiscuous handling, treated judiciously,
and rightly used, are capable of more psychic marvels than all the mesmerists on the
globe: Very few of any grade are imported, save when expressly ordered; the risk
of breakage in crossing the seas and by inland carriage being too great to admit of

larger-consignments, even were it possible to'have such, which it is not.. ——  .

Full directions for their general use and care are given in the book called
"Seership," a work devoted exclusively to the subject. But those of the superior
grades require suplementary advisements concerning their treatment. lst. They
sHould--when not in use,<-be kept either with face to the wall in a dark place, else
“ be. covered with a-board or plate (usually furnished with them) so as to exclude every

* They are, every one of them--(from.the plain surface mirror, to the magnifi-
cent, golden-edged, Beauties; or the enormous 40-inch ones+-fit for a Lodge!--worth
a king's ransom! )--capable of mirroring correctly--and beforehand too: the MARKETS
of the world. Here is a strange test, whose truth I solemnly avouch:—- .

A pregnant lady--and such are ever the most favored in all lines of celestial
magic,--on the.-morning alluded to above--Feb. 8, 1874r-gazed into one of the mirrors,
and demanded to know the sex of her unborn child. The reply came instantly--"A

Boy! and a great one! a vast soul!--the king-seer of FIVE THOUSAND YEARS!"

The result, so far as sex was concerned, was absolutely true; and there is but
little doubt that the rest will prove equally so. This same lady was the only true
mystic of her sex I.ever saw in America.. She was the best mirror-manipulator on
the earth,. and:-.owned--still owns all: the .genuine ones én the continent. Through ©
her I..have obtained specimens of such rare value,. that to part therewith was like
the. loss of the right eye. 7 “ =

-119—= ee

rey of light. But about once:d month: they should be exposed to the full blaze of
thé’ sun for at least’an hour; While a similar exposure, but of longer duration, to
moon or starlight, invariably increases their power, and quite often adds new ones,
The larger ones may be used by a room full of persons at the same time; being fixed
jmmovably, and the people arranging themselves so that each san see the broad white-
black river flowing continually across the surface; but no one, save the owner,
should either touch, or sit, or stand closer than from’ four to seven feet or more;
‘and when the seance begins, no word should be spoken, no movement made; and it

ought to open with a prayer to the Most High, while special invocations » for any
given purpose or purposes, may be made to lesser potential intelligences. Those
which are now in this country are of an extraordinary character and degree of power;
their illuminant surface has never. been equalled; while their true cuspic-ovoid,
depth and breadth, is most admirable,--appreciable by those favored ones who are
true seers and born mystics, as being immeasurably superior io enything of the kind
seen since the days of the magi onthe plains of Chaldea!--for great pains have been
taken with thé glasses, which act as protecting-shields to the material beneath,--
on which material, the mode.of its preparation, seasoning, application, and .
magnetic manipulation, and not tpon the glass itself--their beauty and excellence —
wholly depends; albeit the highest art is brought to bear in the making and shaping
of the crystal-shield, and in the construction of the frames in which they are
“mounted. -The GLYPHAE-BHATTAH, or Mirror surface itself is the true, and well-
“factured bhatt from India, whence alone it can be procured even by the Mystic Brother
hood of Paris, France, where the mounting is done. : .

Due care is essential that they, like a'child, be kept clean; to which end fine
soap and warm soft water, applied‘with silk or soft flannel, is the first step;
‘followed by a similar bath, whereof cologne, fresh beer, or liquor spurted from the
mouth, are the three ingredients: the second for the sake, lst, of the spirit; 2d,
of the individual magnetism; and, 3d, the symbolism émbodied in the ritual--so |
palpably as ‘not to need further explanation. Write for other’ information on this
delicate point. . : = ae :

y

wv; > co yh ~, m= i ae 5 is

"But why are ‘these black-white, cuspic ovoids magnetic or magical in any degree?
_ or, if they are, why may not we of Western Europe or America fabricate the same?"

To which the reply is?” You cannot! because ‘you know not how to mingle thé materials
--even if you knew them, which you’do not-—that’enter as elements into the mysteri-
ougly sensitive substance wherewith the shields are covered, and which alone con-
stitutes the magnetic or magic film, of which and to which the lave-glass and frame
are merely protective covers. ©: ee ne OS ee ee a

“People of -the West (Europe,--America) are ‘not subject to the same extremes of

passion (sexive) as are Orientals; ‘and”hénce know not eithef its awful intensity,
or its terrible penalties, because they dwell far more in the Brain than in the

gender, wherefore they have less verve 'ela , and passional power than their brown
brethren and sisters of the far-off eastern lands; as a general rule, with 6ccasion-
al exception, they are unable to reach the magnificent goals of soul-vision and
magic power easily attainable by the sallow devotees of Sachthas and Saiva; and
therefore cannot realize the intense passional furore, essential both to the
successful invocation of correspondent AErial Fotentialities, and the charging of
mirrors with the divine spiritualteflective powers which characterize them, I
here alluded to a profound nystety”connected with their consttuction, known only
to the initiate, but which is vaguély hinted at in the subjoined quotation;--a
mystery at which dolts and fools may leugh--provided they sense its nature, but
which higher souls must reverence, honor, and adore. aa

Says Colonel Stephen Fraser, in his glorious volume entitled "TWELVE YEARS IN
INDIA," a magnificent book, which was kindly lent me by MR. W. G. PALGRAVE, of

-120-

»London, who. called on me in-August, 1873, while on his overland route to China,. via
» an, Francisco, and whom .I had. known in England fifteen years before, as a ‘polished

Gla and ie ae and one of the asaPaee mystics on the globe’ outside ‘of the
rienti-— . ; ms

Bist ain “We joyfully, ste went, aeF ite of us, her Majesty's Officers, on a tour of
military, inspection, the toils. of which were likely to be rewarded by an opportunity
of witnessing the dance of Illumination, of the MUNTRA-WALLAHS, or Magic-working
.Brahmuns,. whose .strange miracles, worked apparently by the triple agency of Batta-
Shas (rice), Gookal (red-powder), and, strangest of all, by.means of oval glasses
a crystals, but Black as night, in which it is ‘reported, some ,very strange things
were to be seen, We were all prepared to witness skilful jugglery, for which the

» residents of Muttra* are renowned, but fully resolved to ascertain, if possible,
how ti.was all done, rejecting, of course, everything claimed to be either supra-
mortal or hyper-natural, so far as the underlying principles were concerned. « ..
It was sheer skill, but such as no Eyropean could pretend to equal; yet how the.
sleeping girl . could tell our names, ages, place of birth,.and fifty other true
facts, she never having seen either of us before,--because the dust of Jubalpore
was still upon our.clothes, we having been but one day in Muttra,--was a problem

not easily salved. They call it, the PaeSR of Atatams and she. Hiner Be Hs by.
_ gazing into a dark glass. , e

"After reading Lane's story about the Magic Mirror .in his 'Modern ‘Egyptians;
what DeSacy says in his famous ‘Exposition de la religion des Druses;' Makrisi's
account in his 'History of the Mamelukes ; ''J. Catafago and Defremeny . in the ‘Journal
Asiatique;' what Potter affirms as truth in his Travels. in ‘Syria;! Victor LtAnglois,
"in 'Revue D'Orient;! Carl Ritter; Dr. E. Smith; Von ‘Hammer in his 'Hist. des
Me aes tort H. Taylor's 'Nights with Oriental Magicians; '_ the. 'Gesta Magici! of
- Laspanola; | ‘Lettres Edifiantes et Curieuses; 'tYouett' s Researches into Magic Arts,!
“and. innumerable other unquestionable authorities,——it was far.less difficult to
“believe in the existence of some occult visual power possessed by these mirror-_
gazers, of both sexes, all ages, and diversity of culture, ‘than to attribute it
all to chicanery and lucky guesswork. . . .‘Sahib, it true,' said our Wallah, next
morning, when speaking of the exhibition of the previous day; 'and now I s'pose you

“go see Sebeiyeh dance-~- (the Mirror Briddl-fete of a renowned Brotherhood of Mystics,
‘Philosophers, and Magicians )—-no doubtee?{ Well, we all determined to go; and a
three-hours': ride, brought, us to a plateau in a mountain-gorge of the Chocki hills.
We were. ‘not too late, and were kindly offered vantage ground of view by the Sheikh,
‘--a ‘man of at least 125 years of age, judging from the fact that his. grandchildren
were. white with snowy locks and beards waist long. .. e « .« The two brides entered

% "Mittra, a town in the province of Agra (India), o on 3 west pant of the. river
Jumma, in latitude 27 deg. 31 min.. North; longitude 77.deg. 33 min. East;--a place
- famous for the manufacture of Magical appar stus; and one of the only two places on
4 . earth where the Parappthaline gum is prepared, wherewith the adepts smear the backs
- of. these extraordinary mirrors, so celebrated by the various authoritses pamed in

tthe i crime-ige Hears win nD Vol. 2; siPeteee Vatdt

ae

Me matatallinn me OT

“: thé circle followed by the two grooms, 411 four bearing large earthenpots full of
‘black, smeary, tar-like substance, which, on inquiry of the Sheikh, we learned was
“the product of the Volcanic springs of the Mahades hills, in the far-off province
of Gondwana, in the Deccan; that it only flows in the month of June; is co Lise
-by girls and boys who are virginal,--that is, before puberty ; and must be prepare
‘for use within the ensuring forty-nine days, by similar ‘persons on the eve of actual
marriage, as it is supposed certain properties of a magical nature attach to it
when handled by such person under such circumstances. Of course I, with my western

“habits ‘of thought and European education, could “but laugh at this, which seemed so
“very, palpable and gross a superstition; and yet, strange to relate, when I expressed
“ny sceptical views to the old Sheikh, he laughed, shook his head, handed me two
‘parts of the shell of a large nut, and requested me to fill one with the crude
material, and ‘théother with the same after it had been prepared. I did the first,
and reserved the émpty shell‘ ‘for the other, taking care to hold both in my hand
well ‘wrapped up in a brown bandana. . . . » The circle had a pile of stones in the
centre, upon which coals were brightly burning; and over this ‘fire--which, by the
way, is the Eternal sacred Fire of the Garoonahs, which is never allowed to go out
from one year's end to ‘the other—was suspended from a tripod of betel rods a
coarse earthen vessel, into which the four expentant marriages poured about one-
fourth of the contents of the simla gourds already mentioned; amid the din of an
hundred tom-toms or native drums; the clashing of rude cymalos (cymbals) and wild,
clarion-like bursts of the strangest, and, shall I, a staid Briton, confess it?--
most ‘soul-stirring and weird music that ever fell upon my ears, or moved the man

. within me! After this was done, the Sheikh's servitors erected a pole near the

“fire, around which pole was coiled the stuffed skins of the dreadful hooded snake
of India,--the terrible Naga, or Cobra; while on top was an inverted ,cocoa-shell,
and two others at its base--understood by the initiated as symbolizing the Linga,--
the male emblem, or creative principle of Deity; while the susperided vessel over the
fire represented the Yoni; or female principle; the tripod emblematizing the triple
powers or qualities of Brahm--Creation--Preservation--Perpetuation;--thé fire below
corresponding to love, or the Infinite Fire which is the Life of All! .....

And now began a strange, weird dance, to the wild melody of five hundred singing
; @evotees of that, wonderful Phallic, or sexual religion; mingled with the mellow

‘nybreath of cythic flutes, the beating of tambours, the thrumming of various instru-
‘ments, and. an occasional ziraleet, or rapture-shriek from the lips of women and
young girls, whose, enthusiasm was unrestrainable, and who gave vent to it in wild
movements of their graceful and supple bodies, and in shrill cries that might be
heard long miles away, like voices from heaven awakening the echoes of Space! . .
“e « Advancing with a slow, voluptuous, rhythmic movement, not of the feet alone,
but of the whole form from crown to toe, the girls--aged about fifteen, brown as .

, berries, agile as antelopes, graceful as gazelles; lovely, with barbaric splendor,

‘as an Arab's ideal houri;--they swayed, bent, advanced by twists arid curves, by..
nameless writhings, by sweeping genuflexions, by movements the very poetry of

_ passion, but passion of soul far more than of body, with suffused faces and moistly
gleaming eyes, toward the talleremblem, round which they slowly whirled and danced,
even and anon stirring with a silver spatula the dark.-substance contained in the
vessels they bore. This by turns. While the two youths, bearing similar vessels,
performed corresponding movements about the vessel which symbolized Nature in her
productive aspect--until we five Europeans were lost in a maze of astonishment at
the capacity of the human frame to express mutely, but with more meaning and
eloquence than 4 thousand tongues could convey, the amazing heights, depths, and
shades of passion, but a passion totally free from vulgarity or indecency; and as
pure as that of the ocean billows when they kiss each other over the grave of a
dead cyclone: .... . Observing my surprise, the old Sheikh touched my arm, and
in purest Bengalee whispered:--'Sahib, ARDOR begat the Universe! There is no power
on earth either for good or ill, but Passion underlies it. That alone is the
spring of all human action, and the father and mother alike of all the good and

-122-

vil on the Earth! It is the. golden key of Mystery, the fountain of Weakness and
of Strength; and through its halo alone can man sense the ineffable essence of the
Godhead! The materials in the vessels are charged with life,--with’ the very essence
_ Of the human soul, hence with celestial and divine magic power! for 0, Sahib, it is
_ only lust and hatred that keep closed the eyes of the soul!--and in the crystals
_.Whose backs we cover with the contents of these five vessels, the earnest seeker

may behold, not only what takes place on earth, but also what transpires on other
globes, and in the SAKWALAS of the Sacred Gods!--and this is the only true Bab,--
(Door).'-~"But,' I rejoined, 'we of the West magnetize people, who, in that:
mysterious slumber, tell us amazing'--'Lies!' he said, interrupting the sentence,--
‘for no two of them tell the same tale or behold the same things! Why? Because
they explore the kingdoms of Fancy, not of FACT, and give you tales of imagination
“and distorted invention, instead of recitals of what actually exists Beyond! . But
wait!' I acquiesced, and turned once more to the dances of the Aleweheh,’ who by
_ this time were moving in a more rapid manner to the quickened strains of the more
than ever wild and fantastic music. . . . . Three of them began stirring the con-
tents of the cauldron, into which all the material from the gourds had now been
poured; murmuring strange, wild bursts of Phallic song the while; and the fourth,
the taller maiden of the two, stripped herself entirely nude above the waist and
below the knees; her long raven hair streaming around her matchless form--a form of
‘such superlative contour, proportions, lively peach-blow tint, and rounded beauty,
' as made me blush for the imperfections of the race that mothered me! There were no
violent exertions of legs. and arms; not the slightest effort at effect;, none of
the gross motions in use in the West, on the stage or off it--whose palpable object
is the firing of the sluggish blood of halfblase spectators; but a graceful move-
ment, a delicious trembling, half fear, half invitation;--a quivering, semi-long-
‘ing, semi-reluctant undulation of arms, bosom, form; eyes even--rippling streams of
most voluptuous motion; billowy heavings and throbbings of soul through body, so
wonderful, so glowing, that one wished to,die immediately that he might receive the
reward of centuries of toil in the ravishing arms of the houris of the seventh,--
ay! even the first paradise of the Ghillim, and.the resplendent Queens of the ~
Brahminical Valhalla. And yet there was absolutely nothing suggestive of coarse,
gross, .animal passion in all this transcendental melody of hyper-sensuous motion;
on the contrary, one felt like seizing her by the waist, drawing his. sword and
challenging all earth, and hell. to boot, to take her away, or disturb her tran-
quillity of, celestial--whet shall I call it?--I am lost for a name. —

"Presently both the girls joined the mystic sensuous-magic dance; and one of
them seized me’ suddenly by the arm and dragged me to the central vessel, saying,
"look, Sahib, look!' I. did so, but instead of a black mass of seething boiling gun,
I beheld a‘cauldron bubbling over with the most gorgeously pink-tinted froth that
imagination ever dreamed of; and while I stood there marvelling at the.singular
phenomenon--for every. bubble took the form of a flower,--lotus, amaranth, violet,
lily--Rese!--the old Sheikh drew nigh and said, ‘Sahib, now's the time!' pointing
to the bundle containing the empty shell and the one already half filled. Acting
on the suggestion, I held forth the empty shell; into which the girl, ladled, about
a gill.of the contents of the swinging vessel; and the Sheikh produced two perfectly
clean’ ovoid glass plates, over which he poured respectively the contents'of the two
shells, and held both over the fire for a minute, till dry, and then handing them
to me, said, ‘Look, and wish, and will, to see whatever is nearest and dearest to
your heart!! Internally I laughed, but he took the two shells, and while he held
them, I looked into the hollow face of the glass which was. covered’ with the singular
substance. first handed to me, and gazing steadily about half a minute,-—the. mystic-
dance going on meanwhile,--I willed to see my home and people in far-off Albion; but
nothing appeared. The old man smiled. 'Now look at the other one, which is a true

Bhatteyeh-—-full of divine light and imperial power, and you will--' Before he

“4

-123-

‘inished, T el ith tis othe via sae the We: ader will
finished, I glanced into the other, and--scarce hoping that the Western re a
emerge ays! anythirig loftier than a vivid imagination, fired almost beyond endur-

— EEE Geechee GmENeee 8 elne

accident that had just befallen him while in the act of drinking from’the swinging-
pail or bucket! Now came the most astonishing phenomena of all,+-for‘each of the

_ three friends who were looking with me, started in surprise, and uttered exelama-
tions of undisguised astonishment, for each had seen things’ beyond the range or
pale of trickery or the play of excited fancy. One beheld the thrée forms of his
dead father, sister, and uncle,--the latter pointing to a sealed packet on which
was ‘inscribed’‘the words, 'Dead--Will--heir--Oct. llth. Go home!' The other beheld
the drawing-room, and its occupants, of the 61d house at héme,; and ‘on the table
lay a large pile of gold céin, across which lay a legend thus: ‘Jem and David's
winhings: Lottery: Paris: June 18th: 10,000 Pounds!! The third man saw a battle

or skirmish waging in the-Punjaub, and his senior officér struck down by ‘€ shot in
the side, thus opening the road to his own promotion. * Much more we saw and noted
in that wonderful scene of diablerie, portions of which I shall détail at length
hereafter, But it became necessary to attend to other matters. I did so (as will
be hereinafter cited), and then accompanied the Sheikh to His tent, where the -

marriage was celebrated; and he told me thete certain wotiderful secrets in reference |

to the further preparation of the ‘strange ‘material compdsing the reflective sur+'
faces of the curious Bhatts, which, while’ exceedingly mystic and effective, at the
hands and offices of the riewly married people, is yet of so singular and delicate

a nature as not to be admissible to these pages; for while really of the most holy
and sacred nature, yet the miseducation--in certain vitalrespects and .knowledges--
of the divilized'Teutonit, Anglo-Saxon,’ ‘and Latin races; would render the matters
to which T’allude subjects of either not well-based blushes ‘or outright mirth.*

¢ +s + » Seven lohg months after these memorable experiences, I parted with three
of my then cotirddes, and, accompanied by two others, embarked on‘one of the steamers
of the Messageries Imperiales, from Bombay; homeward bound. Before -I' left, one of
my friends had, sold his commission in consequence of having fallen heir to ah ~
uncle's estate, who, the letters of recall: stated’, ‘had diéd. in"Erigland,:on Oct. 10th
and not on the 2th, as the ovoid"had stated! It-had actually taken the differnces
of Latitude, ‘ard was correct to an hour!’ The second man, on‘arrival .in England, —

Sey yn at , oh -

4

Pie adept or adapt

# Exactly the’ reason why I have been unable to find a single
in the U.S.A.--P.B eit

7

4

-124~

a

4f

proved the truth of the mirror, for Fane, not 'Jem' as the glass stated, and.
Davison, not -'David'+-cousins of his--had fallen on a lottery-fortune of over a lac
of.rupees in India money! The other officer was promoted in consequence of the
death of his lieutenant-colonel, in a skirmish in the Punjaub, which event was the:
result of a shot.in the loins, not the side. Arrived at home, I found my: people

in deep mourning for my younger sister, the widow--after a wifehood of less than a
year--of Capt. H----, of Her Majesty's Navy, whom she had met for the first time
only a few months before their marriage. I had left for India five years before,
and ‘though I.had often heard of my ‘brother-in-law's ‘family,:yet we had never met.
He went down in one of the new crack iron-clads on her trial-trip. ‘The awful news
occasioned premature motherhood; she died, and her. remains. were deposited in the
hillside vault, skirting which was a railway just equipped and opened for traffic

a month or two prior to the marine disaster! Lastly: Within eight months after my
return I became sole male heir to our family-property in: consequence of the death
of my. brother by a charge of shot, not a bullet in the groin, as the Mirror showed;
--but full in the abdomen while climbing a fence for a drink at the brookside, and
not at a well. Every:fact shown ‘so mysteriously was proved strangely true, though
not literally so. I,-just previous to my départure from:the strange bridal, asked
the old. Sheikh some questions; and learned that the material on the erystal surface
wherein we saw the strange miracles was but partially prepared,--as my readers will
also recollect; but some which he placed ona glass just before I left, and which
had been fully prepared, the finishing process being a secret one and conducted by
the newly wedded couples by a peculiar process—~and nameless--néver made a mistake
while in my possession; for I confess I lost it from. a silly servant having. shown
it boastingly to’a gypsy, who stole it that same night, .through the most adroit bit
of scientific burglary I ever heard or read of, The loss; however, was not irrepar-
able, for I have since that these strange Nuntra-Wallehs, as they are contemptuously
called by their Islamic foes in the Carnatic (but trué magi in the opinion of better
informed people), have brethren and correspondents in nearly every country on the
globe--Brazil, China, Japan, Vienna, and even our own London; while they have a
regular lodge-in Paris, of some of whom the initiated, and favored ignorants even,
can and do obtain occasionally, not only well-charged:;and polished Bhatteyeh,. but
actually, now and then, a gourd :full of Moulveh-Bhatteyeh--the strangely mysterious
dubstance which constitutes the seeing surface, as mercury does in.the ordinary
looking-glass, and the two are alike in all save..that the latter reflects matter and
the living, while the former sometimes-—but not at all times, or: to all pedple,

or to the successful seers on all occasions--reveals only spirit andthe dead,--ay,
and things that: never ‘die! Heaven help all whom a Muntra-Wallah hates!--or loves
either, for that matter--unless that love be returned; for ‘the magician’in one case
will bring up the hated one's bhadow,--and then strange horrors will seizé him or
her; and in the latter case--well, stranger things happen, that is ‘all."~ fan

he) | : We ; 4% . ss » 4 $
. ‘Thus much’ by, way. of information, Those who have read the works of MUNDT, —
HARGRAVE JENNINGS, LAWRIE, PALGRAVE, MORIER, LANE, need not be told’that these ©
-Bhatts have: been imitated often,‘ but without avail; for, unless they “be true, ‘not
a cloud even can be seen. There is another secret ‘about them which can only -be

Sere eo eee Sem Se Se eee ae

— sae Sr =aeSase aHeEeEe eee

worthy of the knowing...

Now I.wish right here to say, that some persons. have been disappointed in such,
because all mysteries of the heavens, or gold in the ground, or’hidden money, etc.,
were not. atsonce revealed. I never used one for any such purpose; but I sat and
gazed upon it, awaiting patiently for‘ aught that was vouchsafed in the way of visions
or phantoramas, This is their negative and immeasurably lowest use. The highest

-125-

is to sit gazing until the gazer shall pass into a transcendently lofty and most
interior state--absolute,’ unequivocal supre-clairvoyant condition, and’ then, eh,
THEN, as myriad glories untold and roll before the'Soul's eyes the seer is every
inch a king or queen, and’ can laugh this life and world, and all their trials, —
troubles, and infinite littleness ‘to utter’ scorn, and,‘ as it were,’ snap their
‘fingers ‘at life, death, and their’ copuld--circumstance.’” And‘ this fs the positive
usé-of a good Bhatteyah. oe Bl BEER, e “
The facts of -Psycho-Vision, Mesmeric lucidity, Somnambulic sight, and Clair- |
‘voyance, so called, are too numerous, palpable, ud well authenticated’ in’ this age
to be questioned. The old time animal magnetism and its marvels gave way to what
was called "Electrical Psychology," which ‘in turn receded before’ the ‘advance of
what’ were called "Seeing Mediums," but few of whom, however, could see the same
facts alike; and’ all gave way before the better method of developing the inner
vision; by a royal noad the goal is reached in these days, and that too without
the delays, dangers, and uncertainties heretofore attending all methods of attain-
ing that strange soul-sight wherewith not a few have astonished the world. But a
higher, brosder, deeper clairvoyance is now needed and demanded by mankind,’ far —
' superior to’ that displayed by the riff-raff pulings of half-crazed fanatics; the
-money-grabbing hordes of "Fortune-tellers" infesting all large cities; the 45
"Biologists," "Psychologists," and others of the same order and genera. The new
has become old, and the old new, and a better: méthod' of seif-development is found |
in the revived practice thar in all the others singly or combined. In India, China, |
Japan, Siam, Upper Egypt, Arabia, Central Nipgritia, and on the far-off plains of
. Tartary and Thibet, the old usage still survives; and the seers divine through °*
shells, and crystals, and diamonds, emeralds, or the plain and less expensive dark-
ovoid--wholly surpassing the: boasted clairvoyance of France, England, and America,
‘and: in the same identical lines too,--albeit some uses. thereof are perversions from
the true and normal, whether for mere financial ends,-+as by the rising and the
falling of a white or yellow cloud-or spot on the mirror's surface, indicative of
Similar movements in the correspondent precious metais; the, floating or the sinking
of a fleece for "stocks;" the rising or lowering of a stalk or shaaf' of wheat,
declarative of the course to be taken by that coreal in the markets of ‘the world,
for, sometimes, weeks ahead; or whether the objects, purposes, and ends sought:
pertain to the higher, broader,-or deeper rahges' of human thought and speculation.
Unquestionably this ancient mode of dealing with the dead, and rapporting the
_mystical worlds above, beneath, within, and around us, is as superior to modern
"Circleism” as gold in beauty outvies rough iron; hence students and explorers of
“the mystical side of-the: human soul;. those desirous of opening. the’ sealed: doors
of stzange. new worlds,.and realizing somewhat. of the tremendous problem of Being,
must develop, not merely "Progress;" and to such the protess of! self-culturement ‘is
by me considered absolutely indispensable, and worth more to an anxious, earnest,
light-seeking, yet not impatient. soul, than all the "circles," and magnetists on
the four continents; because the developed man or woman grows CHARACTER; the
"progressed" ones, merely memory and tact; and. to be an Independent'Seer is to be-
come an absolute Power on the globe} whereas all forms of automacy, “magnetic or-
otherwise, are but forms of serf-dom and Slavery to powers intapable of identifica-
tion, and for: that..reason doubly dangerous! wr On MGs re

But the question arises with many: "Can any and every one‘sutécessfully use
the Bhatts?" and the reply is, No! Yes! Not every one can see in them; but every
.one can develop by them:the Nine characteristics of perfect man and womanhood:
-WILL;. ATTENTION; CONCENTRATION; PERSISTENCE; SELF-RESTRAINT; RELIANCE; MAGNETIC
ENERGY, and AFFECTION, by an hour's steady.use per day, and: thtis"develop’soul, °

.: thereby growing the’ power of death-survival:«and ensuring immortality. For I hold.

that ‘those who, cannot see in them at.’all,; or produce clouds, or other magnetic
effects after fair trial, may rest assured that they lack the great essential to

-126-

_ immortality, and: unless they cultivate soul and strive for it, when death lands
their bodies in the grave their inner selves will dwindle back to the monadal state
or blank Nihility.

Others can see in them, if not’ at once, then in periods varying from six weéks
.to one year; and the slower the development, the grander will -be the power, when

., culture shall have brought it into play. I have known a few utter failures with
them; but the, successes outnumber them at least in the ratio of five. hundred to one.
‘Those who would learn more of these matters are referred to the special work on
that subject, "Seership." But when ‘that was written no first-class Bhatts were on
this continent; now there are a few, and they may be used’ in. a. company’, lodge , or
circle of from five to one hundred persons. When used by a single one .that. front
may be gazed at; but a glorious surface is presented edgewisé, or obliquely. In
lodge, the company, whether it be few or many persons, should.sit in a semicircle;
the mirror leaning against the wall, and the glare of a bull's-eye lantern be thrown
full and round upon its glowing face. Let all be still and motionless, and then.
carefully note the result.

To conclude: I do not approve of the use of them for purposes of magnetizing the
opposite sexes,--affectionally; for although easily done, yet I think Love thus
gained is not apt to be enduring, by reason of its too ardent and’ too often passion-
al character,--hence cannot fully satisfy the needs of the human soul; yet I do
believe it good to stir the medicine for the sick, with the finger, in the Basin of
the ovoid, for by such means it can be quadruply charged with the divinest and. most
loving, therefore healing difference, of the tremendous soul of mane :

2

CONCLUDING PARAGRAPHS.--Many will suspect from our true name--BROTHERHOOD OF
EULIS--that we really mean "Eleusis," and they are not far wrong. . The Eleusinian
Philosophers (with whom Jesus is reputed to have studied ) were philosophers of Sex;
and the Eleusinian Mysteries were mysteries thereof, --just such as the writer of
this has taught ever since he began to think,’ and suffered for his thoughts,
through the unfledged "Philosophers" of the century, amidst, ‘whom only now and then
can a ‘true thinker or real reasoner be found. ert

Through the Night of time the lamp of EULIS has Lighted’ our path, and enabled
obscure brethren to illuminate the world. Before Pythagoras, Plato, Hermes, and.
Budha, we were! and when their systems shall topple into dust, we will still flour-
ish in itimortal youth, because we drink of life at its holy fountain; and restored,
_pure, healthful, and normal sex with its uses,to and with us means Restoration,
Strength, Ascension, not their baleful opposites, as in the world outside the: pale
. of genuine science. Up to the publications. hereof on this continent, we were indeed
secret, for not one-tenth of those tested and called "Rosicrucians,". knew of the
deeper, yet. simpler philosophy. But the time has come to spread the new doctrines
becausé the agé is ripe. I--We--no longer put up difficult barriers, but affiliate
with all who are broad enough to accept Truth, no matter what garb she may, wear.
But, ‘till ‘then we shut out the world; now we open our hearts and hands to welcome
all true searchets of the Infinite, --all seekers after the attainable. We have
determined to teach the Esoteric doctrines of the AEth; to'accept all worthy .
aspirants, initiate them, and empower them to instruct, upbuild, and initiate: aera

=-forming lodges if so they please. JB,

‘The doctrines and teliefs are broadly Fasd git in the series of books published
from the same source as the present; but especially in the volumes noticed herein.
‘Those who wish further and private instructions, and to obtain information, condi-

' tioris, secrets, writings, etc., and who purpose | to cultivate the esoteric and mystic

-127-

powers of the Soul, may’ correspond with that’ object with’ the publisher hereof--(or
“his official successor when dead)--who possesses certain keys which open doors _
hitherto sealed from man, but which are ready to swing wide when the proper "Open
Sesame". is. spoken by those worthy of-admission.. i
“" LASTLY, ¢-"CANST THOU MINISTER .TO A MIND DISEASED?" Yes! by teadbing that mind

_the. nature and principles of its own immortal powers, and the rules of their, growth
' “Lonot otherwise,, For centuries we have known what the world is just finding out--
_that all. the multiple hells on earth originate in trouble, unease, of the love,
“affections, and. passions, or amatory sections of human nature; and that Heaven
cannot come till Shiloh does; in other words, knowledge positive on the hidden ..
regions of the mighty world called MAN, Hence this partial uplifting of the veil
between. us.and the people of the continents. MN FALL AND DIE THROUGH FEEBLENESS
_. .QF-WILL! Women perish. from 00 much’ passion, nene at all, ‘cond absolute, cruel |
'"“love-starvation. This WE intend to,correct. We shall succeed; for True Men NEVER
FAIL! i beans Paik , f

. .,;, CONCLUSION: THE LYMPHICATION OF LOVE.--I have already herein called attention
to the various secretions--normal--of the human pelvic viscera, and named them _
_lochia, exuviae, semen, Duverneyan lymph, prostatic. and Cowperian fluids. I now
call attention to another, different from all and far more important than either,
_and which is the only one common .to both sexes alike. T'tefer to that colorless,
_ viscid, glairy lymph, or exudation which is only” present under the most fierce and
intense amative passion in either ‘man or,woman. This lymph has been noticed by ©
M.D.'s, and regarded as a vaginal or prostatic secretion, but it is neither. They
sought for its point of issuance, but fount it not, because, prior to its escape,
per vagina and male urethra, it is not a liquid at all; but the liquid is the
resultant of the union of three imponderables, just as common water is the result
of. the union of two gases and an electric current. Just so is this lymph the.
union of magnetism, electricity, and nerve-auta,--each rushing from the vital
ganglia and fusing in the localities named. When it is présent in wedlock's ‘sacred
rite then Power reigns and love strikes deep root in the soul of thé child that _
.then may be begotten. .If it is absent, the world ‘is sure to receive ‘a selfish, —
mean, small, contemptible thing in human shape,--a terror, or stalking crime and.
pestilence,--a partial man or woman, of little use to him or herself, and none at
all to others, the world, or God. .Wherefore the IMPERATIVE LAW--the violation of
which entails horror, crime, and suffering, 'through at least a dozen lives-=is:
_ Absolute self-mastery in certain respects unless the presence of this divine fluid
.is God's permit for’ the holiest of all human,enjoyments and duties. Tt is often
' present when it ought not ‘to be, and when 80, many a man has forgotten his manhood
and triumphed over a similarly tempted girl; and many an honest girl ard woman has
fallen to rise no more, When this fluid is*abundantly secretéd the only ‘safety is
' in instant flight, for, unappeased, it begets an’ insanity and furore too dreadfully
intense and imperative to be successfully resisted even by an archangel, much ‘less
.poor, weak, erring. sons and daughters of men, Jf flight do not take place, and ,
the leakage goes on, Soul itself is wasted, and Madness, with Horror at his gorgon
side, waves his cruel baton, and another victim.takes hig or her place among the .
awful’ ranks of ‘the Impotent, Barren, or Insane. It is.the logs of ‘this ‘through
personal vite solitary, and from the reading of infernal books and plates of ~—

_ damnation, that so many rush into bagnois and the madhouse. ''Could my readers but
visit, as'I have done, the'magnificent Institution for the Insame at Nashville, ©
Tenn., most ably presided over by Dr. J. H. Callander, a man who knows more about
Madness and its cure than all others.in the world combined, and witness she soul-
harrowing spectacle of splendid -people reduced ,to drivelling, soulless idiocy,. .
wild mania, or absolute dementia from.sex perversions, I am sure that no one would
... allow himself or herself to stand’an instant in the presence .of a temptation which,

if successful, means havoc ard destruction to the liiman goul. May God long

~ Tats

preserve Dr. Callender, for the world will need him and such for centuries to come ,
until the race shall learn that "Love, indeed’, lieth at the foundation," and who-
soever infracts its laWs must pay the dreadful penalty. I have spent the best
years of my life in the endeavor to awaken mankind to a realizing sense of the redl
meaning, the words just quoted, and in ministering to those who had suffered from
violations of thet fundamental law;-..and..I.trust that when I am gome others will
_ take up and carry on the good work. As will be seen in my work, "The New Mola," I

desire to leave my system in good hands after my death, or at once, if need be;
and I trust that through such, and other means, the great evil of love infraction
and perversion may be put a stop to, measurably, if not altogether. So may it be.

. P, B, RANDOLPH. »
NOTE,--The Provisional Grand Lodge of Eulis established ‘in Tennessee; ‘was

. dissolved by me--the creating, appointing and dissolving power--on June 13th, 1874.

I intend’ to re-establish Eulis in organic form tefore I ‘pass from ‘éarth, efid as
soon as the Brethren of over one year's standing, ‘constituting the C.S. Grand: Lodge,

shall assist me in codifying its laws. The Supreme Grand lodge is re-transferred
to these head-quarters of the Order, and Eulis has none other on the globe.

a ae | Eo pe ene at ys Se
Supreme Grand Master of Eulid: Pythiariae and-Rosicrueia and Hierarch of ~"

the Triple Order. ©"

I here°tender my thanks to theBrothérs Lumsden for aid in issuing this work--
their purchase of part of the edition; and to Ernest A, Fercival, Esq., who came
_ to the rescue, and contributed toward completing it,--after others! promises,
‘solemmly made, were ruthlessly broken! -And yet God’ réignhs!’dnd"my book suw the
light despite the blows aimed ‘at me and*it by the rulé“ér ruin policy of--Never
‘mind! The Book Survives and Thought Prevails. © ~ pF aah ual . V4

sf : . + ero
yo React apne f

2129-

PARTIAL LIST OF WORKS
BY THE SAME AUTHOR.
a
Le
PRE-ADAMITE MAN, Seventh edition. Demonstrating the existence of the Human
Race upon this earth 100,000 years ago. $2.00. SRA |

"A remarkable book." "We hail this shot from the Fort of Truth! Shows that men|

built cities. 35,000 years ago! .. . Extra valuable volume.". "Great er eemic

thoughtl s «.* Proves’ Adam was not the first: es nor anything like feet eve

in ee interesting. Mj caida ax fore!’
"The. literary and philosophical trum of ‘the ) contury, written ay one of that

century! 8 most remarkable maria” 43 | | i

AFTER DEATH; or, DISEMBODIED MAN: - Sixth. and enlarged edition; with notice of the
, author. $2.25, +4 eee

"No modern work ever created auch astonishment and surprise, cspecielly anne
Mints tbewe and Theologians."

"this: new work is, by far, the most kpartans and thrilling that has yet fallen |

from the author's pen, inasmuch as it discusses questions, concerning our state
and doings after death, that heretofore have been wholly untouched, and, perhaps,
would have been for years had not this bold thinker dared to grapple with them,
For instance, do we eat, drink, dress, sleep, love, marry, beget our kind, after
death? These and many other most astounding and thrillingly interesting subjects
are thoroughly treated in this very remarkable volume."

"No other living man could have penned such a work as this. The immortal

tenth chapter, concerning sex after death, is alone worth a hundred ordinary books."

ILt,
THE NEW MOLA! THE LAWS AND PRINCIPLES OF MAGNETISM, CLAIRVOYANCE, AND MEDIUMISM.

This is unquestionably the most important monograph on Mediumship ever yet
published in any country on the globe,

How to obtain the Phenomena in all its Phases. Conglomerate Mediumship. New
and Startling Doctrine of Mixed Identities. A hand-book of White Magic. Explicit
forms for all Phases of Cabalistic, Incantatory, and Thaumaturgic Science and

Practice.

-130-

ae

“60 their weappsarance., Essentials of Mediumship and Clairvoyance.--Blonde and
‘Brunette: Meéia. | Curious redsons. A vast disodvery of inestimable importance.

MOTHS hog yoabowes f SYNOPSIS.

White Magic an actual fact. Identification of the dead. cocpaielene essential

Conglomerate Cifeles. The YU-YANG.  PSychic Force. Medial Aura. Spanning the
Gulf-of Bternity! Electric People. To gét the Phenomena when alone. Odyllic

“Insulation.: To form a splendid Circle. Double Circles and new arrangement of the
‘sitters. MATERIALIZATION OF SPIRITS, and how to bring it about! The -Phantom hand

of Toledo. The Spirit-room. MACHINERY E ESSENTIAL TO PHYSICAL M MANIFESTATIONS! AN
ASTOUNDING IDEA--ATRILISM! Mergement of Identities--A dead one walks, talks, eats,
drinks, and does what it chooses while occupying another's body, while the latter's
sSul is aiiescént, and consciousness and identity wholly lost!--a most momentous

. problem, or énormous importance to. every ‘Physician, Judge, Juror, Minister, husband,

cs *

Black Magic. Price, ag cicada « Gents ‘per CORY «

> -wifé; in short, to every human beings It is the most astounding thought yet evolved
| 8S At. accounts for much heretofore ote oe unaccountable.

"3

PART IT; ie to Mesmérize. ‘Clatrvoyende. Peyshonietey othe or differences.
The Eastern Mystery -of obtaining Seership. “The Mystical Mirror-~in a drop of
common ink. The Breath-Power. ‘An-Arab Secret. Magnetic Spells. “*VOODO-ISK"

4 E
4
ri

mv!

THE ‘SECOND: REVELATION OF SEX; “LOVE, WOMAN, MARR TAGE . “THE WOMAN'S poapeee

FOR THOSE WHO HAVE HEARTS. Prive, $2. pee Postage free.

MRO UET a CPE LIND PRIA ne Ktenle

CHAPTER T. steve, Wealth, fas sinestpnd mighty: Lesson. The two Sphinxes: Woman,
Paeeitiation: True and False " Love, --their' “Lines of ‘difference. Some very peculiar

_4deas about women. Female nature superior:to male, and why. Test of a genuine

Love. Passion-love. Curious notions of Noyes, Smith, Swedenborg, and some
spiritualistic affinitists on love,--and bad ones,--some of them. 'Women suffer
less and are more cruiel in love matters than ‘hers - Is it‘true? If so, why?

Mama of a false love and a true one.

- CHAP, II. _-The one great human Went is love. Why? Happiness impossible with-
out a ‘love to crown life. Women worse off than men. She must have love or die:
Men satisfied with Passion, but women never! Why?’ Magnetic attraction. Physical

aspects of Love. Its celestial chemistry ,--a grand secret and hint to every woman,
and lover, .and: husband, too,--not to be negiected.. One of Love's saiden Mysteries,

and a wonderful one. Conditions of Love. Why we are not loved. Divorce ‘Sharpers.
"Passional Attraction." The Miser on the Desert. ‘A Wonderful Dream. ° Why'a
eeracen Wife can: never bs happy with her Seducer. The Laws of” “Amatory Passione.

CHAP. a7 aaa femtecarictn of xin penctir Sotins Why a loved wife can ‘never
be Seduced. No wife who is loved can ever be led astray. Why no husband can
prevent her going aside unless he does love her. A hint for Husbands, ~—and ° a
terrible. fact. -A fallacy exploded. Marks of LOVE,--THE MYSTERY OF MYSTERIES! How
wives are slain;:how husbands make them false! Seduction by condolence! New ~
readings: of ‘01d words “The quietus of Anti-Marriageists. Whoever cannot weep is
Lost! Why Libertinage can never satisfy or pay. The death-blow to "Free Love;

_-131-

The Home argument! A Love Pang worse than triple death. Jealousy. From Parent
to Child. Theories of Soul-origin. A curious thing about Parentage. A Strange
Mystery of Fatherhood. Secret and Mysterious cause of Adultery.

CAHP, IV.--Necessity of returned Love. Who wins a body loses; who wins a soul
wins ALL!! a strange, but mighty rule of love: The Vermicular Philosophers. Why
Free Lovers always come to grief! The llth and 12th Commandments. Passional dan-
gers of Eating-houses} "The long and bhort of it." Moments of very strange,
wonderful, and mystic beauty in all women. The mystery of Vampirism,--a terrible
revelation! Picture of a love-laden woman. True Womanhood, and its counterfeit.
A true woman's Love. Men cannot call out love; but can kill it quickly. Why?

The three things essential to call out woman's love?!

CHAP V.--A strange, weird Power of the human soul. The sunbursts of love in

_heart-reft and lonely! The Solar Law of love. A Vampire. The Better "Something."
The Bridal Hour, and the fearful "afterwards." An unsuspected, terrible counterfeit
of Love. legend of the Wandering Jew, and Herodias, his mate. "Circles," "Sorosis, |
and the Circean Sisterhood. Protection from Vampire Life leeches. How these are
created by Parents not loving each other. Singular fact and a Plea for the fallen
woman, Actual Vampirism, a case described. Spiderwomen. Kidney troubles indicate
Love troubles also. The triple form of. Love,--a new revelation, The kind of Love
that sets ts crazy! LOVE TIDES! Proof of love-adeptedness, love and Friendship,
--the difference, Eternal Affinityism dissected. A grand love-Truth.

CHAP, VI.--New definitions of Marriage,--Love a fluid AEtheri! Origin of
Vampire Life, how they destroy plant and animal life. Why loving wives and husbands |
fail. A Test. Genius, Love, and Passion go together. Why? ‘The Genius-producing
Law. The Law of Social Joy. A chapter full of redemptive counsel for those
wrecked on Love's storm-lashed rocks. Vivat!

CHAP. VII.--Love's Chemistry,--very curious, but very™true. Love's double
nature. Magnetic, Electric, and Nervous bases of the grand Passion! Law of Tidal
love. The Poison flow. Attraction of Passion. .Chills and Fevers of true Affec-
tion: IMMORTALIZATION, Difference between male and female existence, Strange.
What a woman never forgets or forgives. To Husbands and Lovers. Words never to be
forgotten by either.. iz .

CHAPTER VIII.--Goodness alone is Power. Brain versus Heart! Knowledge is»
strength, not power! Head versus Heart Women. Grooves, Moods, Phases of Love.
How Love requires but one second to change to deadly Hatred. A Mystery. Isabella
of Spain, and Marfori, her lover. How the Franco-Prussian War resulted from their
loving. Singular fact about a woman's Magic Photographic power. Darwin of the.

"Monkey-origin of Man" on trial. His acquittal. A Hint to Parents. :

CHAP. IX.--Why women are ill, but should not be. Confectionery and Love.
Drugged Candy. An unsuspected rock on which lovers are wrecked. Mental Sex, not
physical, is what men love most. About woman's dress, as Love creators. A mis-
take about women which most men make. Another word for the "Strange Woman", Why

women complain, and why wives die early! Extremes: Shakerism--Freeism, Caution
to a id. ° ° / ;

CHAP. X.-- Divorce: Hereditary Bias. The love-cure, An Old Friend in a New
Dress. Why boy-babies are kissed more than girl infants, Why girl-babies reverse
the business after the second year. Camp-meeting and Ball-room:Loves.. Another
Mystery. People who are Love-starved. The Affection-Congress,--the Conductor,

thet eS le the Passengers, and the Arrival, A splendid series of FACTS FOR THE |

-132~—

‘Chemical’ Tove’. ‘Secret of absolute ee sebolgt

‘-CHAP. XT. cen Uiedovery in Love, and‘a great one ‘too! To a husband! To a
Lover! Jealousy exists without Love! Love may” ‘exist w without’ Jealousy. Gems of
rare truth. ‘How to recover when Love-exhausted. ‘Beginning of Souls, Why Foeticide,

at any stage, ‘is worse than adult Murder! Freezing of Affection. The Sad Story of

a Heart!’"What a man said about it. A Persian Poet's plea Ae "Free bags Its «
Refutation. Rome before the Caesats. ' ECE Bee

CHAP, XII.--"The age of Brass." Why Mutilates: cannot Loyal Why a Woman recog-
nizes Genuine ‘Manhood. "The Origin of Eveil.” "Organic"Love. Why no Man‘ can re-
spect ‘a "Mistress." Why a si bapeot CANNOT BE HAPPY! Something contending Wedded

, life, very seldom thought of.

‘ CHAP,.XIII.--A Pice of a Man! Wife’ versus "Kept uadeyes sa 1mdeing pasvaddes the
bad rule and the good one. Pre-nuptial “Familiarities. Marie and her "Husband!"
Keep cool. How a wife bore a Chtist-like Infant! wi laaapesad, tame and wild,--
their effects. Eternal Affinity is infernal nonsense! Why? A novel idea of “how
Eternity may be’ Passed, An idea ofa new and better method of divorce. "Complex
Marriage" in Heaven,--a curious’ “notion, ” Why Great Men and’ Women are often Sensual-
ists. Did ever a ‘woman forgive’ a man! 's preference of a ‘Rival. Can she? -

CHAP. XIV .--A fenny s Worth of wit, and what came of it? Dimity vs. Divinity!

‘One-sided Love, and Single-sided Marriage. oe Piggitude of Husbands" (2) What

a Serisible Woman said about Love-making Men!! Wives Beware! How to make Him Love

‘Her!! Denial,--its fruits. The Great Question Direct. Its answer! How to Make

Her Love Him!! No Ugly Women. All are Beautiful somehow! All Women Demand Home »
and ‘Homage. No one can Seduce a Loving Woman. Why? Potiphar's Wife. How to
Conquer by Stooping. Why a Coarse Person can Resist Temptation better then a Fine
one. old Maids: Old: ‘Bachelors! | What Sappho said on Love; her Poem. halt

CHAP. XV .--The Long-haired Fhilosophers on Love; Mr. Boarland and Miss Green.
Ascent, Descentsa'Great New Truth for Wives and Husbands. How the Coarse Feeds:

‘upon the Fine,--the Stronger’on the Weaker ore. Who are Strictly Human, arid who - -are

nots’ Anatomy of several grades of Professional’ love-ists. Homeymoonness : versus”

‘Settle-dowmnity! Definitions: Strength, Force, Energy, Power, Esteem, Friendship
‘and Passion. Unléss you love you“ean't be great; or éven gooey How to’Reconstruct

a Wife. love arid the other,--in ancient’ Pompeii.

CHAP. XVI.-<Antagonisms. Stormy love; its uses. A Defensé of Adem,«-premier.
Who Falls by Love-by Love must Rise!! Skeletons in People's Closets,--and our own.
Copy-ists.« -Hero-Worship,--its totes Why?’ Anatomization of a Hero! Picture of
a Modéri "Husband!" Why Lincoln was a great Man. St. Peter and Paddy O'Raffety!
What befell an Affinityist in Same Company. JAMES FISK, JR. His Love-power and
Career, His Parentage, Nature, Character. The Grand Secret of his wonderful
Success! What the yikes Lady said about. Fisk, Vanderbilt, Butler and Forney.

CHAP. XVII<-Womman' s Eyes, and how to read them. The Sor ihie conditions of
Winning “a Woman. Her rule of Safety,-~Powerful.: The Grand Magnetic Law. The Rule
and Law of Ruin; also the Rule and law of Right. How a false step photographs
itself and the Party--in ‘her eye--an Egyptian Secret! The distrusts of Love-life,
and-their causes. The deeper meanings of Love! Descensive: and Ascerisive Passion.
"THe mother-in-law Curse." Admiral Verhuel--the father of Napoleon III.” The ©

‘Louisana Belle and what befell her! The Male and Female Worlds distinct. “New Fact

=-Woman's rights destroys marriage. "Who! s been here since Tive been gone?”

“be

2 HG

CHAP. XVIII.--"Spiritual or Mediumistic marr degeey® a ‘eoniaiiiinie Shem! - lalate

-133—

George Sands! Consuelo Love-theory--rejected. Personal Earthquakes. and Periodic
Excesses. True Love renders us maleria-proof--Singular Fact! Debauchees and the
Parasites that attack them! Why insects and beasts prefer human prey to all other
_-A STRANGE AND VAST DISCOVERY! LUST PRODUCED PY ANIMALCULAE, Another Discovery
--and how some little worms brought on the War in Europe’ How to make Home happy!
~-a new recipe. Want, and what it does! The Seducer s Wiles. A Woman's Story,
and a sad one. The lst, 2d, and last grand duty of every husband living.

CHAP, XIX.~-How meat hurts ovr souls at times unless properly slaughtered--
which it seldom isi! A fact for legislation--How a wicked cook magnetically in-
jures our food. Ethereal action of Love. An Extraordinary Love Mystery revealed.
How Slovenliness kills affection! The Suffrage Problem. The New Departure. About
Relationship, very curious}: Touch! Good women get the worst husband; Bad men,
the worst wives. The general mixed-upness. Boy and Girl love. Something for
everybody.

-CHAP.XX.--The Girl and Bride of the Period. What's up? Why Honeymoons turn
bitter so quickly! Curious causes of Female Whims and Oddities. Scarcity of real
Friendship. The Love Key. The Seven Devils. The King Passion. Amative love —
Passion beyond the grave!! Woman's Grand Power. Ben Eli's Marrowy letter.

CHAP, XXI,--Dead-level love. Tiffs and spats. Husbandic Rules, which husbands
neglect--any pany for doing it. Married celibates. Angularities. More about

Toes SEE SE Sa

Blondes resist outward pressure better than Brunettes. Brunettes fall from within
Quicker than Blondes. Why, in both cases. Singular: Astounding theory concern-

ing Brunettes one only,--their Fire-Packed Souls! Their relative love and revenge
power: A Brunette's love. Its intensity. Blonde-love--its superior delicacy.
Disadvantages of the Ruddy. Brunette love, -<Sense-subduing; Blonde love, Soul-Subdu- |
ing! Brunettes never vampiral. Blondes are, and a startling fact: Their relative
immunity from varied diseases! A widow's and widower's chances of marriage better

than those of single persons: Curious reasons. Cotton-Aids. How to win a true |
man: A "Case." Male Vampires. Little women have advantages. Why? Reconstruction |
of Dead-Loves. How? loftier Gospel. New England Love. Comparative deaths of the
wives of light and dark men. Whose children live longest--and Why!

_ CHAP, XXII.--How we sigh for the old loves! Prodigal Wives and Husbands.

. Meddling "Friends." Dangers of unrequited Love: The Awakening. Never Make your
loves Public! Watching a wife--and what came of it!! What befell Mr. Connor--and
his trowsers--while watching his wife!--The place of sighs!--a touching story of
"Lost Souls." ‘The "All-Right" fallacy exploded. The Social Evil!--a chapter of
which the Author is proud-—and his readers will be glad.

CHAP. XXIII.--Pre-nuptial Deceptions sure to be found out! Complaining
Marriages. Necessity of loving some one. Dissection of an Atheistic Libertine.
The Upper Faith. The Dog Nature. Temptation. The True Bill, Bad Marriage-
horrors: The Magic Power of dress. Wife-neglecting husbands. Woman's love--~a
Poem. Evidences of high civilization from a savage's point of view. A rebuke to
the 19th Century. Ignorant offers, and foolish acceptances. Wedded Licenses-=
Impure brides,--Discovered. The Married Rights of Man. What a Turk told the Author
about Women--New, and very good! How the great are fooled by the little. -How the
best women must act queer and offish at times.--A Hard "Case." No Atheist a full
man, Hopes fixed on inappreciates. No man can endure neglect. A powerful female
advantage! A powerful male one! Stingy husbands! How husbands can rewin the
wife's love: A splendid resort!! ol

-134-

oh ‘story’ sin beth concerning "the animiles what went out for to fight." The
flat, and what came of it, Singular fact about jealousy. "Only once!--that won't
count much!" Won't it? Can a lover trust a woman who deceives: her husband? Social
Brigands-—their own worst‘fops. Why? A bit of the author's life history. . - What
love is like. Human Responsibility. Vastness of the human soul! "She was. all the
world: to"Me!" “A Heart Poem. No libertine can evoke real Love. Modern Love! .

, ** Setisitivenécss-~its advanbages.. The seven Points--this alone is worth the cost of
the book to every woman. Something for wives ; ‘do. for husbands. “When ;her. soul's
at work!" The distributive Offices of woman's Being. The human Telegraphic
_ system. Tts ‘wonders, aes and Scoundrelton.: Counterfeit kisses. - "Opportunity.
‘THE REAL KISS! ITS MRANING, GRAND! When friendships fail!. "Bitter Beer!"
Home! ‘Sweet Home! Its Joye. "Like a enti summer rain.” A Poem, The twain .who
truly love. Vive L'Amour! Finis. on

rn

: ‘ 5. fe r “ie . i ~ 4

eee FIRST REVELATION OF ‘SEX. LOVE: ITS HIDDEN HISTORY. TWO VOLS. IN ONE. A
+ > BOOK FOR WOMAN, MAN, WIVES, HUSBANDS. THE -LOVING AND THE UNLOVED. .ALSO
, FEMALE BEAUTY AND - POWER. THEIR “ATTAINMENT , sare daa AND ural pith ak

wei~fety = redrte? ® Hearte?. Sed ia
aah ; - Who .speaks' of rit ga Hearts,

Price $2.50. Post free.
Of this volume, réprinted “from the large octavo edition, nothing need be said;
for "Seventh Edition" tells its own storys’ It differs’: entirely rin oo a
ed work, and covers: inact pee a: piney =

CONTENTS,

CHAPTER I.--What is Love? -Reply-=All of us born with a certain amount of Love
in us. Passion is not love; :but love ig Passion: "Free Love" :Infernalisms. ..Life
and Love a desperate game. True Love and its counterfeits. 'Prudery.  Why-young
girls "Fall." Magnetic Love; Why the wedded disagree--a curious cause--and/-un-
suspected! ABORTIONISTS-- the ‘infamous’ tribe: Love! 8 Hidden Mysteries... The. TEN
great Rules and Laws thereof! She stoops to conquer! Dress--Silence--as Powers
of Love. Vampires life-teachérs. Soul-devourers. Test of Trte® al . Jealousy.
Suspition. | ‘When; ‘woman is divine, and how to make her SO. bey , gS

eee Oe CHAP; /IT.--The wife's great fault and ‘overeighti Adultery. The kiss. A.
wotiani ts * Fdea lof Love. -Doggish husbands, Blind Tom and the’ Monkey: boy. Love. an
Element.” “Why she "can't bear him!" Why he "hates her!". Divorce.” "Spirit-medium"

frauds. -"Love powders." “Dragon's ‘blood.” The Heart Song. Barn-yard Love...
Philosophers. "I've gallen--again!"’ Passion in Men and Women.’ Song of thet.
aa pough ing Scandal. Sunshine. Sugar-life.

adé CHAP, dtr0rgrverted Magnetisms. ‘Magnetic Poisons. Uterine diseases; undreamed
“of causes ofsuch.'- Complaints of women. “Vulgar natures, Love dependent on’ -
victuals and drink. The Song of Wedded Misery. Vicarious Love--Wretchedness. |
Pogt Bar ieger snes it is, and is not! Meddling People. lLove-song of the Soul!

& CHAP. IV: =-Power of ‘words--A startling truth. AIR; the supreme joy of life.
Curious, but true!--Oxygen!!--a Love creator! iThe two Babies. A sad,‘sad, story.
°. ‘Nellie and‘ thé flickering ‘candle. Consumption. Affection; Love; the difference
between; “Lové aid provender! “The: secret sin!’ The Proper Study ‘of Mankind '‘is*.
~--Woman! :
61 35=

CHAP. V.--Origins of the Black, Red, and White races. Differences between the
‘Sexes. "Blue Pill for Breaking Hearts." Unwelcome Love no love at all. Forced
attentions and other Poisons. Dark people healthier than light ones. Why? Modern
marriage not a Bed of Roses. Why? The wonders of a woman. Nuts for married |
people. False Divorce. © Helplessness of woman. Men of lofty soul love simple
women best. Why? Actual Marriage means reciprocateness. Why a woman who bears

a child by a dark man can never thereafter bear a light. one. Transfusion. » Tempta-
tion--and how to resist it. Magnetism. .Mingling. oe ys ;

CHAP.’ VI.--How to win a husband's love., The Three Oriental Love Secrets. An
excellent, but strange, revelation. Magnetic Will and love Power. love Starvation
 .eand how to cure it! .The Seven Rules of husbands--good ones to the wise. Mrs.
Grundy. Free will. John and Sally. "Animality.".. The other side. Tides of -
Passion and Love. The Social Evil. "When it is dark"--a mournful tale. In- |
compatibility. Why relations hate each other. Fhysical basis of human love. Seven
Laws of Love. Vampires. The author's experience. Why he loves a pretty woman.
"When the Sultan goes to Ispahan!" Funny, but dangerous.

| , |
CHAP. VII.--Woman is Love Incarnate, only men don't realize it. Dimity versus
Divinity. Hearts for sale! Woman fails to know her Power. love, an Art. The
Magic Ring--very strange. The Love-cure. Mother-in-law--the trouble they make.
Once in a whilish love of husbands. Iola Montez. The Christ-imaged child. |
Wonderful law. Love-storms, gales, tempests. How to subdue wild husbands. Woman's
second attack wins, and why.

CHAP. VIII.=-Love not to be forced on either side. What Leon Gozlan said about
women. "Infernal fol-de-rolisms," "Legal" violence! How Love-matches are broken
off. The Lesson it teaches. The French "Girl's curious Prayer. Beauty; its. laws.
Insanity. An invaluable Chapter on the arts and means of increasing Female Beauty;
translated from the French of Dr. Cazenave.- Special instructions for beautifying
the skin, hair, eyes, teeth,--in short, the Perfect Adornment of Women.

CHAP, IX.--Good -Humor. Home... The true life, Heart versus Brain. The Woman
condemned to be strangled, and how she was saved. . The Three lessons, A latter-
day Sermon--Text: "Jordon is hard road to travel." The Castaways. Singular.
Magdalen. Scandal and Gossip. What Echo said, The Baby World. A thrilling | |
Semmon by a reformed Prize Fighter.. A splendid Poem--Swinburn,. ©

CHAP, X.--"Eternal Affinityism," and Church-ortion. Honeymoons versus sour
Syrup. Marriage in 1790. One happy man;.the curious reason why. "Doctors."
Science--a wonderful case of its mighty Power. Cyprians not all bad or lost.

Why? Monogamy and Amative Stimulants. The finest race upon the Planet. Propaga-
tion of Heroes--how it is accomplished! _The Eye as an Index of character—Gray,

Blue, Hazel, Black eyes. The Laughcure in a new phase. .Matrimonial career. |
Gossiping. Healthy love. Sex in Nature. Marriage of Light and Matter. Music is
Sexive. Three classes of Women. Whom not to Wed. |

CHAP, XI.--Married Celibates. Friendliness. Fretting. "Lip-Salve." Boston. |
-Philosophy-~Soul-Marriage! A Fashionable Lady's Prayer. Prayer of: the Girl of the
Period. Hottentot's Heaven. Voudoo John, and Female Subjugation by Black-magic
Arts. ..Breastless Ladies...How Wives are Poisoned! a 3 é

_ CHAP, XII,~-The Fountain of love. How to remedy vital exhaustion. What to
gat to gain love-Power. Power of a loving Woman. Her child. Excess. Promiscuous
"Love." "When Sweetness reigns in Woman!" A half man; and how to pick him out.
Ankles. Genius and Wedlock. Why. the Talents are generally Wretched in the Marriage
State. Singular facts, and Singuler Faults in Women. Bitter Experience. A

+) -136-

Singular: Paper upon Incest. ‘Non-reciprocation--and.its cause--and cure. Ghildless |

Couples--Causes-—Cure,. ep palette Sa i ibe its cause and cure. The,Rule and

Law" oF oie ee & or: Ion. : rar

al “The hebk cise! bomb a iin specie: ankinien concerning why wives hate. their hus-
Babee Singular causes:of wedded misery, and its, cure. A hint. to mothers, Hint

© **to- unloved Wives. Gusty: Love. When woman has;most conquering, power. The stormy

lifey The-magnetic attack. Sex and passion after we are dead. - Old-maidhood, and
how to avoid ith. 4 fs ofsem 6 nm .

t <2 sa eae
x . & i ty ; a
aaSae os er i

an wit

THE MYSTERIES. OF THE MAGNETIC’ “UNIVERSE, ., " SEERSHIP, NEW.EDITION. A wonderful
; series of discoveries for self-development in all branches of Clairvoyance, © in-
; nati the Pee Beanery of MAGIC MIRRORS; end. how to use hates

ne |

inate ec ne iggpesla oe a

Somnambulistic lucidity. Genuine clairvoyance a natural birthright. ‘Two
sources of light, astral and magnetio,. ‘Why mesmerists fail to produce clairvoyance
intheir "subjects."- Vinegarded water, magnets and tractors as agents in its.

*. production. Specific rules. Clairvoyance is not spiritualism. The false, and the

‘true. Psychometry and+intwition are not clairvoyance. Mesmeric circles. .Eight
kinds of Clairveyance! Mesmeric coma and magnetic trance. ‘The difference. © ffect
of .lung power. : Effect. of amative passion on the seer. Dangers to women. who are
mesmerized. Oriental, European, and American methods. Thé mirror of ‘ink. How to
mesmerize by a common "‘1ookine-elass. The insulated stool. The electric or magnetic
battery. The bar magnet. The horse-shoe magnet. Fhantasmata, Chemism. Why
"Spirits" are said to take subjects away’from magnetizers., Curious. Black Magic.
Voudoo ("Hoodoo") spells, charms, projects. Very Strenge! "Love Powders." ‘The
-sham,--and the terrible dangers of the real. How. they are fabricated. Astounding

‘ “-@tsclosures: coneerning Voudooism in Tennessee. Proofs... The cock, the conches, the

triangle, ‘the-berbs, the test, the spell,,the effect, . the. wonderful result. White
-seience baffled by: black magic. Mrs. Aso; ‘the Doctor,.and the Voudoo Chief. . Ex-
planation of, the mystery. The degrees of Clairvoyance, and how to reach then. The
road. to. power, love,- and money. Self-mesmerism. Mesmerism in ancient’ Egypt," Syria,
~Chaldea;. Nineveh, and. Babylon thousands of. years ago. Testimony of Lepsius, Botta,
Rawlings, Horner, Bunsen, che gh bee and Mariette... The Phantorema. Advice: to
*peskers after A pa oe | 25 Hoos ;

fi:

Taye ig ¢ Pes >
Rei or N il te

_ PART L.-T ‘Maceo MIRROR AND ITS, UBS... |

Dr. Dee end his ate pare, Strange things seen in it. Not a ‘apirituel
juggle. George Sand. The Count St. Germain, and the Magic Mirror of Spirit-Seeing
glass. Jewels used for the same purposes., Hargrave Jennings (the Rosicrucian),
On fire. . Curiqus things of the outside world, and divine illumination. Cagliostro,
. and his Magic Mirror.:. Frederick. the Great: Crystal-seeing Count. | American. Mirror
“Seers. Dr. Randolph, jin. April, 169, predicts the Gold panic of. September,” Its
literal fulfilment. Business men use mirrors to forestall the markets.” “Their
singular magic. Better and more, effective than animal magnetism. -Why,....Extra-
ordinary method of holding a psycho-vision steady as a picture. Two kinds of

-137-

.. mirrors. - Crystals. The. pictures seen in a magic mirror are not on or in, but
above it. Dangers of "Spirit control." Facts. Theory. Constructors of magic
mirrors. Failures. Success. Chemistry of mirrors. The Life of Dream, and the
Street of Chances. The Past, Present, and Future are actually now, because there
can be: no future to Omniscience. The future embosomed in the Ether, and he who can
penetrate that can scan unborn events in the womb of coming time. It can be done,
is done, and will be by all who have the right sense. Sir David Brewster, Salverte,
-Iamblichus, and Damascius. A magic mirror seance extraordinary. The Emperor
Basil's sons is brought to his father in a magic glass by Theodore Santa Baren.

Mr. Roscoe's account of a strange adventure of Benvenuto Bellini. What death really
is. A new theory! The phantasmagoria of real things. Absorption. its use and
meaning. Platonic theory of vision. Theory of spiritual sight. Magic and magnetic,
one and the same. Statement of the seven magnetic laws of love. The blonde wife
rewins her straying brunette husband from a brunette rival--from a blonde rival.
Polarites. Caressive love. The antagonal polar law of love. Backthrown love.

A singular principle. Egyptians. Magic mirrors. Mrs. Pool and Mr. Lane's:
“testimony. How a maiden discovers a lover--a rival--a wrong-doer. Awful magnetic -
power of an injured women's "magnetic prayer." Oriental widow finds a husband--
having seen him--never having seen him. "The Master Passion." "After death."

Rules and laws of magic mirrors. How to clean and charge them magnetically. The
Grand Master, De Novalis. The celebrated "Trinius" Japanese magic crystal globe of
San Francisco, Cal.

- ~The price of this work has been fixed at two dollars. It is the only work on
the subject now extant in the English language, and incontestably excels either

the French, German, Arabic, Syriac, Hindostanee, or the Chaldaic treatises upon the
same topic, and is, probably, the fullest and most perfect compilation and exposi-
tion of the principia of the sublime sctence ever penned. A work of this extra-
ordinary character is, indeed, rare. It can only be had direct from my office.

~

VII.

The WHOLE, instead of a part, of the quite Extraordinary ANSAIRETIC MYSTERY-~
the fourth Rosicrucian Revelation Concerning Human Sex, and, as thousands can testi- |
fy, the most astounding that has ever yet appeared anywhere on earth; and while
there is nota word or line or suggestion in it, or in the third Revelation, that
favors anything that could make an angel blush, yet they go to the very food of
the subject. Said a celebrated agitator, on hearing a portion of them read:
"What do you charge for that astonishing writing? alluding to about one-fifth of
the whole. "Five dollars; as it is hard work to write it out." Five dollars!
Why, it is worth $500 to any one on earth with an ounce of brains, or a thrill of
Man or Womanhood left in them!" Well, I looked up the Oriental MSS., and copies
can be had of me, and if the mighty things therein--things not even dreamed of in
these cold, practical lands--are not found to be worth ten times the sum, then the
here secrets the world ever held must wait another century for appreciative
S0uLSe * ‘ , :

To those whose orders hereafter reach $5 at one time, a fine likeness of the

_ author, by Poole, of Nashville, Tenn., will be sent as a premium, and the
Ansairetic Mystery will be given gratis, and without any charge whatever, but only
when requested in letter of remittance with return stamps. tet:

‘Address this Publishing House, Toledo, Ohio.

-138~-

THE CURIOUS LIFE OF P. B. RANDOLPH! "The Man with Two Souls!"--A Revelation of
the Rosicrucian Secrets! The Oath! Their Initiation! Strange Theories--Very.

His Birth, Blood, Education, Adventures, Secret of his Power! His Glory and Their
Shame! The Scandal and Sensation! 7

‘Part I. The Bright Side. What the People say.

, Part II. The Ordeal, The Accusation. His Experience. Behind the Bars. He
loses all he has made in Life-time!

Part III, The Charge and Trial! The Witnesses. Curious Testimony. Speeches
of the Attorney against Randolph, and Selden's the Free-love Champion.--A Caution
to Masons, Odd-Fellow's, and other Secret Societies. (See Part 3.) Randolph's
Defence, and Address to the Jury. He makes a Clean Expose of the Whole Thing!

These three masterly efforts are undoubtedly the strongest and ablest ever delivered
for and against Free Love,

The Verdict! Startling Disclosures! "The Mysteries and Miseries of Love."
Talk about Novels and Romances! Why they are tame nothings beside this man's life
and career. It reads like a romance. The strange oaths of the Rosicrucians regard-
ing all females. Extraordinary comparison between Agapism and Free-Love! The
Rosecross initiation,--the officiating girls--and what they do. "Doctor" BAY and
his "BUG" theory! "When the Band Begins to Play!" What was said concerning
Randolph's Book about Love and Women, Affection, the Sexes, Attractions, Vampirisms,
Infatuations, Friendship, Passion, Beauty, Heart, Soul, Lost Love, Dead Affection,
and its resurrective law, True and False Marriage.

One of the first writers in the country, when asked his opinion of the MSS,

from which it was printed exclaimed: "All I can say to the people of America is
Buy the Book! Price only 75 cents! and that will tell the whole strange story!"

-139-

eee oes nae ee oe ; . a ;
19 neti Rtevel hen "Tei seh owl ait welt eat Aioue 7 ef, ey “a med
‘ - ead i wae Pe ieee Syd _ Re ae me $ : ; i
A SETS BOOKS. BBR ROR RSSECS TE seit Tiel pafl ett. Lgeegeet
we Fins PRS ; i ;

Sent Gye ytelo ei itewa Bix te Pewee. ‘neon evOk (net dasides oe
, : | (not saaree ‘Ere ‘ .

wate / Sait i syn agitt darth © ap aeaeet capt
Oe” eRTeS ork ds Gin Hot Poems ne oh S0eebxO wat? | eas
Yamba: La it Bboy’ Bord at Tis"ee
Sepemits svsdaflast sint0 -ovmecittW od sce te oes oa cRtE ite
a ine Bat 1 Grose sea) eth at nebiee bas (dephin afk Jantass verrogen 8

Aa tooniet 41 Pret: gee)" pesitepeoG F-12982 Ge 4
oy base op aod nile ‘Ss song nel 0 aS  S8 ey SSO bes” V8 'ywelle™-£A0° ; eiree ai”
“bet vet cuky % Fad FOS SROg RS Hels eG tSe 4 ut ody of Enanb bi, baa, 3‘
ove tudida Ane dpegtiotts eas bedded ern abaretts “Davitt corte ‘ae
¥ pared cot. deatega ‘bas 2 0,
. alc Me Baa ; ;
; o Ot ts rm <t ee er thyy ey 2 rf ‘ 1 , Leg
aa te es fs eskiroe iN bite eet gee gsi aon rotsas? yaptsaast ‘Hatheey eapee
ca % } shtead aya dbors rte Todt yi tm ; Yyree
“Baga aartocss thoi = £9 re | pas rtm bo | PB pans Sv ea oh
1g * vt ad. aenaadé sdf ee tamot s eutt ehsar' 31: tee785 “by
Bone 4 ese tro aatedgA csewhed soe brags ersat buses es Rim ot? ets
“bas wat ‘BOSION", 4a yout Ferdy bossces vig, gat tat SETIO sty
ao noo: ea: fact Fn 1 of extneT Bia edt ‘ecit™ i ¢toedt Matt $
"Bak cies? ‘yannndoatt A sexed “eet acide’ ; aie ol bess Gs
nokteeztA bat , svat: Sum S tinue ident: ai sket Eee dogs foot al dato
a! ‘ feel -;fie8 . pagel . idee - soteaat qhtabnek st , Beeb os itg
oR abrrsil nabs te San acy?” al Co Soetigest ad f

REM dt 6 anG Hits «ix PA dita teeta : si oe ale 7

oS A oe soshete eet ha fd Daves sede | yadeic ) oft ni etotiny oSRri aby ts) BOE >
real, 28 eicosd ‘at’ eee trey TRE ee ie ai

Uf arid cin) 28 GAS08 “Gin oF Yee deo 1 if" Siemens bebater gay $f dase

MtOs8 .oRuatia efody edt (lat {fiw gedk feet

.

“Tadaes OU eine SF yeaa ott §
he is

CONTINUITY OF
CONSCIOUSNESS

s ~~

CUAIRAUDIENCE

Me

TRAVELLING ~ 234)

oe

NAW = |
FEEUNG “U5 7 .

SUGGESTED READING

ASTRAL PROJECTION (Modus Operandi) By John Mittl, Ps.D., M.S.D. - 8 8% x U1

Mimeographed pages - Privilege of Questions Being Answered by Auther. $2.50
THE PRIMAL POWER IN MAN Or The Kundalini Shakti by Swami Narayananda (1950)
155 pages, 8% x 11, light cardboard cover. 2 S.08

THE SERPENT FIRE - The Awakening of Kundalini - Secret Yoga Methods of Rejuve-
nation Through Awakening a Mysterious Power at the Base of the Spine , Known
as Kundalini or the Serpent Fire, Causing it to Ascend to the Brain, Which
it Energizes and Vitalizes. By Dr. Raymond Bernard, A.B., Columbia Univ.,
M.A., Ph.D., New York Univ. 8% x 11 minreo., ills. printed cover, 100 pages.
Formerly sold as a correspondence course at $15.00 - now in one volume with

no personal. by-mail instruction (author is deceased). 6.50
THE HUMAN AURA AND THE SIGNIFICANCE OF COLOR - W. J. Colville - small, fac. 2.00
THE STORY OF THE HUMAN AURA - George Starr White, M.D. (1928) Ills. in.color.

215 indexed pages, spiral binding, facismile 8.50
THE FINER FORCES OF NATURE IN DIAGNOSIS AND THERAPY - George Starr Whtie, M.D.

(1929) 231 pages, illustrated, facsimile, spirals 8.50
GOETHE'S APPROACH TO COLOUR - 62 8% x 11 mimeographed pages, ills. cover 3.00

COLORS - A Compilation of the best Bocks 6 Articles on Chromotherapy - Mirmeo.

(Over 21 books digested and compiled by an authority on color and the

human aura). The famous bock, The Principles of Light and Color by Edwin

D. Babbitt, M.D., LL.D. is also ccndensed in this volume. Thousands of

these bocks have been sold and have mace many friends for Health Research.

This ts the best all-around book on Chromotherapy to buy first! 177 8%

x 11 mimeographed pages. Illustrated 6.50
CLAIRVOYANCE - C. W. Leadbeater - 62 mimecgraphed pages, 8% x 11 3.00
COLOR AND HEALING - How Color Affects Us - By Gladys Mayer - 28 mimeo. pages 2.90
THE AURA AND WHAT IT MEANS TO YOU - Compiled from Many Authorities by an

authority on the Aura. This also includes the famous book, The Human Aura

By Walter J. Kilner (condensed). 125 8% x-11 indexed, mimeographed pages.

Tlis. of Aura on light cardboard cover (1955) The best book available on

this fascinating subject. 6.50
THE OD FORCE: Letters on a "Newly Discovered Power in Nature" and Its Relation

to Magnetism, Electricity, Heat and Light - By Baron Von Reichenbach.

Offset facsimile, small size, spiral binding. 5.50
NATURE'S FINER FORCES ~ Rama Prasad - 251 pages, facsimile, spiral binding 8.50
YOUR AURA AND YOUR KEYNOTE - Julia Seton Sears, M.D. (1912) 61 small pages 2.00
SPECTRO-BIOLOGY - Maryla De Chrapowicki (1938) 62 pages, facsimile 3.00
COLOUR MEDITATIONS - With Guide to Colour-Healing - A Course of Instructions ;

Exercises in Developing Colour Consciousness - By S. G. J. Ouseley 2.50
THE POWER OF THE RAYS - The Science of Colour-Healing - S. G. J. Ouseley
(1951) 99 pages, facsimile 3.50

THE HUMAN ATMOSPHERE Or The Aura Made Visible by the Aid of Chemical Screens
by Walter J. Kilner, B.A., M.B., Cantab., M.R.C.P., Late Electrician at
St. Thomas' Hospital, London. Illustrated with full page drawings (1911)
328 indexed pages, facsimile, spiral binding 9.50
GEM STONES OF THE SEVEN RAYS By Nelson Stewart, M.A. - The Doctrine that one ..
of the Seven Rays of Life, or seven types of forces, dwells in every form
is clearly recognizable in the writings of Cornelius Agrippa, and also’
bears a strong likeness to the Astrological concept-
HEALTH RESEARCH ion of planetary rule. In modern Theosophical studies
900 UNUSUAL BOoKs! WE find a somewhat fuller development of the same
Health - Catalogue $2.00 basic 1dea, particularly in regard to human biengs.
Cie OO 1S 9 pages fa cs tmi le
pean sie ae

Be eT RNG Hit, Please Include $1.70 Minimum Handling Per Order (add 35¢ for

CALIFORNIA $5245 ach book more than 2). California Customers Include 6% Sales
Tax. Thank you.

HEALTH RESEARCH, P.O. Box 70, MOKELUMNE HILL, CA 95245

HEALTH RESEARCH FACSIMILE TITLES/LIGHT CARDBOARD COVERS
‘ HEALTH RESEARCH
A THOUSAND AND ONE NOTABLE NATIVITIES "The Astrologer's Who's Who'! 900 UNUSUAL BOOKS! ,

Health — Catalogue $2.00

4th ed. With Corrections, etc. by Alan Leo (Astrological Manual (Refundable); Occult -

No.. 11) 130 small pgs. Facsimile with spiral binding $3.59 O oeindate
, DIET FOR HEART TROUBLES by Dr. Kime; ills. 30 pgs. 8% x 11; Box 70,
mimeographed & offset; stapled; ills. cover $3.50 oe HILL,
ILLUSTRATED PHYTOTHERAPY ~ Thomas Deschauer (1945) Bock Two - ec

163 ills. pgs. (herbs) spiral binding $5 .00
THE SCIENCE OF TRIDOSHA By An Analysis of the Three Cosmic Elements in Medicines,

Foods, and Diseases by Dr. B. Bhattacharyya - 55 pgs. (homeopathy); rare;

facsimile; stapled $3.50
THE TRUE TEMPERANCE PLATFORM by R. T. Trall, M.D. (1864). The substance of ad-

dresses delivered in the Queen's Concert Rooms (London) 88 facsimile pgs. $6.50
THE VOICE OF ISIS - Harriette Augusta Curtiss € F. Homer Curtiss, B.S., M.D.: (1923)

442 pages, light cardboard covers; spiral binding; facsimile $12.00
THE HUMAN ATMOSPHERE Or The Aura Made Visible by Aid of Chemical Screens by

Walter J. Kilmer, B.A., M.B., Ills. with full-page drawings (1911) 328

indexed pages; spiral bound . $9.50
THE LAW OF CHRISTIAN HEALING - David Bruce Fitzgerald (1908) 144 pgs. Su. .00
ANGEL'S WICKEDNESS A True Story by Marie Corelli (1901) 54 small pgs. stapled $3.00
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN PARAPSYCHOLOGY AND GRAVITY J. G. Gallimore; Yol. 3 of

Handbock of Unusual Energies; 215 ills. mimeo. & offset 8& x li pgs. spi $35.00
THE POWER OF THE RAYS The Science of Color Healing by S. G. J. Ouseley - 99

6 x 9 pages, offset facsimile $3.50
THE ART AND SCIENCE OF PERSONAL MAGNETISM - Theron Q. Dumont (1913) 192 pgs. $6 .00
"MAGIC" BLACK AND WHITE - Charms and Counter Charms - Divination & Demonology

Among The Hindus, Hebrews, Arabs, and Egyptians by T. Witton Davies, B.A.

(London), Ph.D. An Epitome of "Supernaturalism," Conjuring and Its Relation

to Prophecy - Including Biblical and Old Testament Terms and Words for Magic.

(1910) 130 pages, spirals $4.50
NIKOLA TESLA — RESEARCH - Assorted Tesla Articles - Approx. 45 ills. offset pages;
8s x 11; ills. cover, stapled $4.50

A MANUAL OF MATERIA MEDICA AND PHARMACOLOGY (1927) by David M. R. Culbreth, Ph.G.,
M.D. Comprising the Organic Drugs Which Are or Have Been Recognized by the
United States Pharmacopoeia and National Formulary Together With Important
Allied Species--Especially Designed for Druggists, Pharmachists, and Physicians.
7th ed. Thoroughly Rev. with 497 illus. 662 ind. pgs. spirals $17.50

PERFECT HEALTH - How to Be Young at 60 and Live to Be 100 (Vol. 2 - Second Issue,
Year 1923 ~ Nos. 14-15) 56 8% x 11 offset pgs. (reproduction of magazine) $3.00

THREE YEARS OF HCL THERAPY (1935) Medical World; 159 pgs.; spirals $10.00

THE BIBLE OF BIBLES A Source Bock of Religions - Demonstrating The Unity of the
Sacred Books of the World Compiled by Frank L. Riley, M.D. 2nd ed. (1928) 432

large pgs. (list of Citations from Holy Bible, The Old Testament) $11.00
THE FIRST PRINCIPLES OF THEOSOPHY by C. Jinarajadasa, M.D. 5th rev. ed. (1938)
465 indexed pages; spirals $9.50

FRAGMENTS OF A FAITH FORGOTTEN Same Short Sketches Among the Gnostics Mainly of
the First Two Centuries--A Contribution to the Study of Christian Origins Based
On the Most Recently Recovered Materials by G. R. S. Mead (2nd ed., 1906)

633 pages; spiral binding W: $16.50
ARABULA; Or, THE DIVINE GUEST Andrew Jackson Davis (1867) Containing A New
Collection of Gospels - 1867 - Boston ~- 403 pages, spirals; facsimile $11.00

THE WORK OF INVISIBLE HELPERS by Amber M. Tuttle. A collection of allegedly True
Occult Fairy Stories that staggers the imagination. Starting with the occultism
of the Bible, it also establishes Reincarnation as a fact. 635 pgs. spirals$12.00

Add $1.70 postage and handling on each order (up to 2 Ibs.). Calrr. Residents Add
6% Sales Tax. Please print or type your neme”- including address and zip code.

THE VOICE OF ISIS by Harriette Augusta Curtiss & F. Homer Curtiss, B.S., M.D.
(1923) - Facsimile, light cardboard covers, spiral binding. Impossible to obtain
in book stores, libraries. Limited edition of 210 copies. 442 pgs. $12.00

Contents: Life's Duties; The Cycle of Fulfiliment; Degrees & Orders; The
Wisdom Religion; Concerning the Doctrine of Hell Fire; The Eleventh Commandment ;
Narcotics, Alcohol and Psychism; A Student of Karma; The Self; The Doctrine of
Avatara; A Study of Reincarnation; Power (''All power is given unto me"); A Brief
Outline of Evolution; Details of the Relation of the Masters to Humanity; The Law;
World Chains; Purity; The Origin of Man; The Symbol of the Serpent; Purification
vs. Deification; The Manory of Past Lives; The Cycle of Necessity; The Path;
Earth's Finer Forces; The Light; The Two Tables of Stone; Healing Prayer; The
Silence; Nature's Mystic Alphabet; The Word; Illumination; The Symbol of the Salt;
Thou Shalt Not Kill; Prayer of Consecration; Concentration Hours; The Meaning of
the Symbol; Appendix (A) How to Form a Study-Class; (b) Prayers of the Order;

(c) Special Information on Sex; Index.

"The Path to Mastery is marked by the severest self-discipline, absolute
obedience, and unswerving allegiance to the chosen Teacher or Guru, bringing the
student to a realization of the greatness of his calling, the littleness of the
personal self, the emptiness of the pleasures of sense and the barrenness of
physical life as compared with the fullness and glory of spiritual attainment."

ORO IO IOK
ANGEL'S WICKEDNESS by Marie Corelli (1903) Rare copy, now in facsimile. 54 pgs.
light cardboard covers, stapled. This is one of her most elusive titles. Send
for complete list cf our facsimile reprints of this famous occult author. Small,
pocket size; now available; a true story $3.00

FOO KK 7
THE SCIENCE OF TRIDOSHA - An Analysis of The Three Cosmic Elements in Medicine,
Foods, and Diseases by Dr. B. Bhattacharyya, Republic of India —- With An Intro.
by Howard D. Stangle (U.S.A.) (1956) 56 pages, impossible to obtain elsewhere!
Hundreds have asked us for this gem on Homeopathy. Now in. facsimile reprint.
light cardboard covers, stapled m $3.50

FORO IOK OOK
VITAL MAGNETIC CURE — An Exposition of Vital Magnetism and Its Application to the
Treatment of Mental and Physical Disease - By A Magnetic Physician (1878). Con-
tents: The Gift of Healing; Moral Integrity of Healers; Unconscious Magnetism;
Detrimental Influence; Insanity; Obsession; Healing Practised in All Ages; Condi-
tions for Healing; Fitness For The Work; Healers' Peculiar Modes of Treatment -
Positive & Negative Magnetism; Quantity; Diseases Renediable by Magnetism; Nature
the Source of Cure; Clairvoyance; The Material & Spiritual Bodies; The Change
Called Death; Psychological Phenomena; Contrast Between Medicine & Magnetism;
Hygienic Suggestions; Animal Magnetism; Biblical Account of Vital Magnetism, Con-
clusion.

If you wish to heal by uSing unusual powers, this may be the book for you.
Not all methods work on all problems (diseases). Some must come from ''far out''.
This book may give you knowledge and faith to go out and heal others. Magnetic
Healing is being used all over the world by thousands of miracle healers. Yau may
have been born with this ability - or may be able to develop it. 216 pages,
facsimile, light cardboard covers, spiral binding 7.00

FO OOK

See Catalog #2-A (Occult Facsimiles), $2.00 (refundable) for other listings in
these and other subjects.

Postage and Handling Extra on All Orders 1.70 minimun, ‘

&

orders. California Customers Include 6% Sales Tax on all purchases. Thank you.

HEALTH RESEARCH, P. O. BOX 70, MOKELUMNE HILL, CALIFORNIA 95245, USA

| | 4

|

| New, Third Edition Revised.
This formerly appeared in

\ ‘| 9 1952 under the title, Man’s
cL f i fag, Mtraculous Unused Powers!

. The author was presented,as
Kenyon Klamonti, a pseu-

dcenym. This revised edition
; lj ir er. is in offset facsimile re-

production, with Durable,

Heavy Pebble Grain Paper

Consciousness Dialing edppeoninceeyaet

pages, 6% x 8%. Lays flat
for easy reading. $8.00

This is not a medical book
- in fact it presents the

~ woferssor Alou Wotema exact opposite view point
- the prevention of disease
and sickness!

This work attempts to show

Keused Edetion the reasons why the radio
and television mechanism in
the human skull fails to

$8 00 respond fully now to cosmic
radiation as it did twenty

thousand years ago, when
: the Ancient Masters accum-
ulated their Wisdom of
Published (962 Creation, Life and Man,
then recorded it in fiction
z and fable, for interpreta-
F tion to those who proved by
test they were worthy to

a , 2, , receive the same.

The great schools in which
WMokkumue Aull. California the worthy ones were taught
these secrets of Creation
were known as the Ancient
Mysteries. Their reguire-
ments for admission were so high, that the time came when despotic rulers of the peo-
ple had sunk so low that they were unable to meet them. In their anger they decided
to establish a counter system of their own invention, and then employed their armies
of servants and slaves. to destroy the Temples of the Ancient Mysteries and slay the
Masters who presided over them.

In his work titled "Anetent Egypt The Light of The World," Gerald Massey wrote: "For
perhaps fifty thousand years or more, people lived in peace upon this earth under the
spiritual guidance of the Original and True Religion of the Ancient Egyptians (receiv-
ed from Atlantis). Times have changed. For several thousand years selfishness, hat-
red and greed have brought untold miseries to the suffering Masses, The True Light,
the Light that Lighteth all the world, the Light that shone so brightly in Ancient
Egypt, no lcoger shines."

The lfasters who escaped death, were those who fled to _istant India, where thelr Suc= |
cessors still abide in the fastnesses of the Himalayan Mountains, and whose ages are ‘|
said to range fram 500 to 1500 years. From that source there trickles the small t

stream of that Ancient Wisdom which Hotema presents in his various writings. |

1 i 1 i 2 llowing: Daily ©
The author gives as his concepts and discusses in a general way the fo ly?
exercise; cepa diet; raw focds; sun bathing; periodical fasting; deep breathing; 4
history of longevity; cosmic forces; secrets of the ancient masters. Some of the head - 4
ings taken from the book are as follow:

The Aging Process; Conditions of Artificial Life; Return Must Be Slow and Gradual; _
Antiquity of Man; Haw to Réverse Physical Appearance of Aging; Constipation the Nati-
onal Disorder; Does Man Starve; Finding The Truth; Food Stimulates; It Is ‘The Body
That Acts; People Who Crave Poison; Power of Adaptability; Fish Does Not Give Brains;
Danger of ---

Qyznee
ace

Abrupt Changes; Men of Great Stature; Stature Originally Gigantic; Man's Body re-
sembles Planetary Bodies; Misleading Reports; Body Craves Food, As It Does Poison;
Man Eats To Die; We Eat To Live, and We Eat to Die; Chronic Auto-Intoxication; Body
Tries to Maintain Balance; Vitality Increases; Eat Little and Live Long; Body Needs
Minerals From Cosmic Rays; Sensation of Hunger; Eating is a Vicious Circle; Atomic
Energy; Eating Poisons; Dangerous Narcotic From Juice of Poppy; Mice Unable to Live

on Human Diet; Body Vitality Reduced; Cereals Are A Bad Bood; Fruits Easier Produced |
With Less Labor; Earthy Salts Cause Oid Age; Alimentation and Decrepitude; Camivor- al
ism is Bad; Fresh Fruit; Reason For Increased Vitality; Flesh Foods Putrefy; 48 Mil- |
lion Have Trichinosis; Mode of Living Builds Cravings, Aches and Pains; Opinions Mm = |}
Salt Eating; Table Salt; Longevity - hundreds of records; Fruit and Longevity; Doc- |
tors Do Not Live Long; Water Causes Aging; Live 200 to 300 Years; Less Minerals Need- ©
ed After Maturity; Causes of Sclerosis; Lime deposits Cause Stiff Joints; King of i
Fruits; Spiritual Organs; Mcterialism Is A Superstition; Spiritual Intelligence; J
Man's Intelligence; Spiritual Powers; Ancient Science of Man; The Kingdom of God
Within; Uncanny Powers of Indians; Man Is Dead As He Lives; Man Lives in The Spirit-
ual World; Parthenogenesis (Virgin Birth); The Kingdom of God; Feeble Minds; Physical ui
Purification; Function of Breathing; Shower of Red Mist (Blood); Breath Culture; The |
Skin; Exhalation; Breath of Death; Pernicious Anemia; Cerebral Hemorrhage; Causes of |
Cancer; Air is Life; The New Age; Eternal Physical Life; Breathe More -- Eat Less; |
Tonized Air; Why We Live and Why We Die; Man Eats to Die; Physical Perfection; Breath qj
of Life; Stages of Degeneration; Magnetism; Spiritual Potentiality to Physical Act- va
uality; The Way to Improve Physical Man; So Called Civilized View; Why The Truth is
Suppressed; Economic Freedom; The Living Cell; Chiropractic Law of Physiology; Where |
Did the Living Cell Come From; Is Eating Necessary; Elimination; Cells Are Not Pro-
duced by Food; Early Men Were Breatharians; The Miraculous Cell; Physical Immortal-
ity; Why Man Degenerates; The Transportation System; Blood Purification; Vital Ad-
justment; Disease Germs; Good Health Is Not Immmity; Immunity Reduces Power to Re-
sist; Conditions That Destroy Health; Danger of Smoking; Toleration by The Body; Im-
munity; Body Changes; Misleading the Multitude; Harmful Practices From Birth; Fewer
Centenarians; The Body Fights Against Changes; Rudimentary Organs; Man's Natural Home; ©
Altitude is Beneficial; She Eats Nothing; Survival Is Nature's Goal; Breatharianism 4
to Gluttarianism; Buried Six Months and Lives; Spent Tim in Cell; Materialism; |

eee
oe

+ )

Weight and Vitality Loss Due to Autointoxication; Live Without Eating; The Great Body |
Normalizer; Body Building Material; Discovery Amazed Material Science, ete. "ere %

+
7

$1.70 Handling extra. California Residents |Add 48¢ sales tax.
HEALTH RESEARCH, P.O. Box 70, MOKELUMNE HILL, CALIFORNIA 95245

Sok

; INTERVIEW with ex-navy weatherman gerald w. admires about...

_ Gerald W. Adrmires is a retired Chief, Navy Quarter

master, a specialty in which weather and navigation are
the job. He served on active duty 27‘ years, 19 of
which were spent on carriers, ammo ships, ana other
vessels. Many courses of study and constant research
have made kim an informed weatherman. He claims
there !s no such thing as an expert in weather, The very
nature of the variables with which weathermen are
confronted rules from the field the so-called specialist's
approach. Admires retired in 1969, and now lives on a
small farm near Holt, Missouri. He observes weather

_ daily and keeps up the charts that weather observers

become attached to. He follows the scientific develop-
ments in weather modification with utmost zeal, always
beating back the frustration that goes with irying to
bring a modicurn of that knowledge to the general
public. In order to further explore the topic, Acres
U.S.A. visited with Admires and turned on the tape
recorder. Here is a transcrip: of thar conversaticn.

~~

ACRES U.S.A. Mr. Admires, Dr. Irving Langmuir,
the so-called high priest of weather modification. once
told Roscoe Fleming of the Denver Post that Dukas’
Sorcerer's Apprentice would make a fine theme’ for
rainmakers. You remember the apprentice could turn
the water on, but not off, so he nearly got drowned!

ADMIRES. Well, Irving Langmuir was one of the
pioneers in cloud seeding for the purpose of turning on
rain, He developed his process in a laboratory. He
discovered the seeding idea by using a freezer to create
‘ice particles out of silver iodide crystals put into the
cold atmosphere of a freezer. From that starting point,
extensive cloud seeding activities have developed.
Obviously Langmuir believed—and [ believe—that the
weather modifiers have too many variables to deal with,

and this puts them into that sorcerer’s apprentice role.

ACRES U.S.A. OK, we say raimmuking. Can man in
fact make rain?

ADMIRES. No. Man does noi make rain. He merely
manipulates the elemetits of the atmosphere to bring
together the forces that cause the air mass to drop
moisture that is in it.

ACRES U.S.A. Can this be done without denying that
same moisture to someone else downwind?

ADMIRES. No, it cannot. There are different opinions
about this particular question, however. If you ask it of
one person, he will tell you that the air mass—as it
moves along—picks up moisture from the previous
precipitation and carries it along the weather track.
However, if enough silver iodide is used in a cloud, this
will lock the precipitation up into the form of ice and
carry it hundreds of miles away, and bypass someone
close by the seeding activity. [Langmuir in fact noted
that the danger was not that of one stealing rain from
another. He held that there was always a million
acre-feet of moisture up there, mixing, moiling,
hurrying about. Langmuir believed overseeding was
more of a danger than stealing.]

ACRES U.S.A. Are the weather modifiers really able to
fine-tune nature the way they claim?

ADMIRES. Well, they can't really fine-tune, so to
speak. They are able to modify the interaction cf the
atmosphere between the earth and the sun. The
problem: is they cannot control that which they modify.

ACRES U.S.A..Can they form a cloud?

ADMIRES. Yes, they can form a cloud under certain
circumstances. They can do this with carbon black, for
instance. There are many aerosols they can carry into
the atmosphere at different levels and sow those
aerosols—dust particles. carbon particles, burnt car-
bon—into the air mass, and the moisture gathers
around the aerosol particles. But if the humidity isn't
there, they cannot do this. There are those who claim
that there is always enough humidity in the air,

however.

ACRES U.S.A. If this is the case, would it be possible
to give the desert plenty of rain?

RES. Not by seeding alone. There must be a
Staion to seed. It is very doubtful that they
could go over a desert area with low humidity and
create a cloud. They would have to bring the humidity
by manipulation of an air mass. The problem is that

ACRES US A PHOTO

rising heat from the desert floor becomes so great it
would be difficult to keep any humidity there. So the
indication would be te work at hight. The temperatures
on a desert floor are extreme. It will get very cold at
night and hot in the daytime. In the night time they
could create a cloud and catch it in the early morning
hours and cause it to precipitate. But heat from the sun
upon the desert would soon dissipate and carry off
humidity existing over a desert.

ACRES U.S.A. Then the idea behind weather modifi-
cation is that rain can be either created or prevented?

ADMIRES. That is correct. It is indeed used for both
purposes, from what | have observed.

ACRES U.S.A. Well. doesn't the ability to do this
suggest an ability at fine-tuning weather?

ADMIRES. It depends on what we're talking about
when we say fine-tuning. Fine-tuning means getting an
art science down to cloud physics. True, there are
modifications by people who have demonstrated an
ability to fine-tune a particular individual cloud of cell.
When you talk about fine-tuning you're talking about
dropping moisture out and not changing the interaction
of the air masses around that particular cloud cell. This
is where fine-tuning is lost. They simply cannot control
what they modify.

ACRES U.S.A. OK, then what we have in weather
modification is the sum total of accomplishments and
problems from Langmuir forward. This art and/or
science is now in the hands of government, private
business, and so on. Is there any real coordination in
weather modification either nationally or world-wide?

ADMERES. There is a world-wide coordination in the
intent to modify, but the actual coordination vetween
individuai entities is not available. Each little entity
does its own thing —either private enterprise for.money,
or local governmental units to experiment or to gain
immediate return on crops. No long range planning.
What you have is activities taking place, and then a
reporting system takes over—after the fact—through

WEATHER
MODIFICATION

eae W. ADMIRES

4

This is reprinted from ACRES U.S.A., P.O.
Box 9547, Raytown, MO 64133 (subscrip-
tion $10 for one year).

This is reprinted by Lord's Covenant
Church, (America’s Promise), P.O. Box
5334, Phoenix, AZ 85010 as part of a
‘‘Weather Packet’’ offered on radio in
January 1983. These packets are available
from Lord's Covenant Church for an

offering of $2.00.

ACRES U.S.A. In a nutshell, then, just what is the
principle problem with weather modification?

ADMIRES. First, the earth’s atmosphere must be
considered as an organic whole Let me give you an
example. If you take a large container of gas and let
that gas circulate according to heat that it absorbs
around the container, you'll get the picture. If you have
a glass container you will see that gas circulating
randomly throughout that entire vehicle, but it will be
more active in the vicinity of the sunlight. or a light
hitting that glass at a point. This is convection. Now the
atmosphere acts the same way——except, the vessel I told
you about contains the gas with no center obstruction.
The earth’s atmosphere is contained around an earth
that receives insulation from the sun and creates
heating effects from below and from above. And this is
where they cannot control weather modification—
because there are so many varying factors in insolation
from the sun above because of existing cloud masses -
with moisture that has come from the oceans and the
lakes.

ACRES U.S.A. And, of course, the oceans are
influenced by the moon?

ADMIRES. Absolutely. Now the cycle theories use the
moon. But let me give you an example of what they do
not use, those I have examined at least. They do not
take into account explosive volcanic debris in the
atmosphere. They do not take into account meteoritic
debris such as the recent Siberian explosion, They're
not sure yet whether that exploded mid-air or on the
ground. There are eminent scientists who believe that
meteorite exploded mid-air and flung particles to the
earth as well as into the sky. And that debris—which
some people believe to be a comet with ice particles—
would disrupt the total atmospheric interaction for a
number of years, especially in the upper stratosphere.
You have residence time for particles. This is where
local governments are fooling people. They talk about
the terrible effects of pollution in the air. In terms of
chemical pollution, this is correct. But carbon parti-
cles, no! The residence time of particles in the lower
atmosphere—such as industry and frash burner smoke
500 to 1,000 feet—runs from a few hours to a couple of
days. That's how long those particles stay up, according
to weight, structure, air currents. But if you get into the
upper throposphere, the residence time becomes three
te four weeks, perhaps longer. And if you get into the
lower stratosphere, beyond the tropopause, then the
residence time becomes one or two years, maybe even
ten years.

ACRES U.S.4. You're talking about debris from
atomic explosions, meteoritic explosions and so on?
What about voleanic explosions?

ADMIRES. Volcanic explosions such as Krakatoa,
Pelee Martinique, send enough debris into the lower
stratosphere to attect the weather tor several years. If
the debris slowly rises out of the ground, then the
inversion—hot air above, cold air beiow—will keep that
smoke at a lower level. Your effect is reduced. But the
whole thing we're pointing out here is that cyclists do
not generally censider the destruction of the forests, or
things like the dust bow! where we built shelterbelts and
windbreaks. In the past 30 years the weather cycles
have been disrupted by man-made weather modifica-
tions—expetiments and operations.

ACRES U.S.A. Outside of things you've described
here, just what governs weather systems?

ADMIRES. Basically the weather is the battle between
warm moist air and cold less moist air. The warm moist
air from the oceans and the trcpical zones move
northward toward the poles and the colder, less moist
air from the poles meet. A battle ensues. Whirlpools
are created in the atmosphere, and this distributes the
heat of the earth and the moisture of the earth
throughout the continental areas and the ocean areas.

ACRES U.S.A. Is this the reason we have monsoons
south of China—because of the great land mass
furnishing cold dry air from the north, this moving
against the warm, moist air from the China Sea and the
Indian Ocean?

~

ADMIRES. That is one of the reasons. Our south has &
less of this activity because of the lesser land mass to the a
north. Of course the topographical contours of the m
various continents figure. This affects wind circulation.
A wind blowing against a mountain will change course, =
see next page %

WEATHER MODIFICATION

from previous page

and when it changes course and moves to the north or
the south it will change the general circulation that
comes from the ocean. It will change the heating and
cooling effect because the wind has been deflected to a
different direction.

ACRES U.S.A. Then weather is really a nature created
device with a great many variables. Just how significant
is this little variable called weather modification which
man presumes to throw into the natural system with
silver iodide and other substances?

ADMIRES. The silver iodide at first was not that
significant. Man was only messing with the weather in
small areas. But then he began expanding, and a great
number of people started using silver iodide in the path
of the air masses coming out of the north, the
southwest, and so on. This happened without coordina-
tion. Silver iodide creates ice crystals which water
gathers around. This locks up the moisture in the upper
atmosphere, thereby changing the sun’s effect upon the
atmosphere and interaction between the atmosphere
and the sun. When you have changed it in one point,
that is going to change the circulation of the jet streams
for one, and these jet streams travel at a tremendous
speed and they will carry this change all around the
globe.

ACRES U.S.A. This becomes so significant that it is
kicking the cycles one way or the other?

ADMIRES. I believe it is, yes. I base that on the fact
that the cycles are more affected by what happens here
on earth than by what happens on the outside. The heat
on the face of the earth is far more important to our
precipitation than the swing of the stars. The swings of
the stars are significant, but they are not as significant
as cutting down a forest or making a desert out of north
Africa. The effect of over grazing reduces the flora of
an area, such as you see in the perimeter of your deserts
in Africa. Overpopulated animals get hungry. They eat
up all the flora, and this changes the insolation of the
earth. It is a well recognized fact that there are different
degrees of insolation by sand, dry earth, wet earth,
green grass and by forest. Green grass and forests each
put a different amount of oxygen back into the air.
Much of our farming has gone to hybrids. Hybrids
require nearly. five times more moisture than the open
pollinated seeds.

ACRES U.S.A. What is the scope of weather
modification? In the states, or world-wide?

ADMIRES., It is world-wide, and it is not paper thin. I
should like to refer you to a presentation made by Dr.
Kricks at St. Joseph, Missouri. He showed how he had
been involved in weather modification all over the
world, and the extent of it. And he’s just one cperator.
He has been operating in the modification field ever
since WWII. In fact he was involved in weather
modification when we made our most significant attack
on Europe.

ACRES U.S.A. Are yuu suggesting that we were able to
create skies favorable to Operation Overload?

ADMIRES. I'm not saying that. I’m saying it was
possible. We did know how to do it. Let me illustrate.
When a destroyer wants to make a screen for a fighting
unit at sea, he has a special smoke maker. This smoke
rises. We have known for centuries that water gathers
around particles of smoke. We also know that
gunpower exploding in air. throws aerosols into the
atmosphere, and under certain conditions this means
rain on the battlefield. There were those in the scientific
field who knew this. Even in the day of Catherine the
Great, they almost went toe war because she was trying
to modify weather.

ACRES U.S.A. Well, people in Platte County,
Missouri were aiso in arms about weather modification
this last summer. Just what happened to the Dr. Kricks’
proposal?

ADMIRES. It fell through. I attended those meetings.

And I asked questions. Why can we expect seedable

type clouds in the Missouri area in 1977 when there

were no such clouds in 1976? His reply was that he
«¢ would have to check the records to see if my question
“ was valid. This got him around answering the question.
w The question was valid to me because I am a retired
te Navy weatherman. I observe the skies each day, and |
= did not see one cumulo nimbus cloud during the period
a in question.

A tireless letter writer, Gerald Admires often hits
the prints with timely comments on items of instant
interest. Here, for instance, is a typical response to
a story in the Kansas City Star headlined
Legislators Decry Bomb.

Our federal legislators are quite vocal about the
“neutron bomb,” a device to kill life but not
destroy buildings. However, a strange silence exists
when that same legislative body is warned that
weather modification techniques can do the same
thing—and do! In fact, it appears that science is
kept busy locking for celestial phenomena to blame
for activities occurring in the bottom of our
atmosphere.

The atmospheric condition reported as “Fog”
(August 23, 24, 25) was correct—up toa point. The
public was not told that the “Fog” included a
contaminant that fell from artificial clouds. A
contaminant intentionally sprayed into the atmos-
phere by ‘“‘special interests’’ for other “special
interests.” That same contaminant, when taken
intc the lungs by respiration, can create respiratory
problems in random individuals. In essence, the
weather modification aerosols can be “slow kill”
for some people. In fact, the residual climatic
conditions resulting from weather modification
are, in reality, a form of population growth control,
governed by the United Nations. Does this adhere
to human rights?

ACRES U.S.A. How did he propose to insert silver
iodide?

ADMIRES. From the ground level. He said the silver
iodide only affected approximately half way up the
cloud chimney. So I asked him how he could get the
cloud to stop an updraft from sending that silver iodide
to the top of the cloud. and the downdraft from
circulating it all through the cloud. He didn't answer
the question. As you know, the man with the
microphone can dodge any torpedo and still stay in
command of the situation, and those who are adept at

handling a meeting simply do this, and this whips an.

audience in advance.

-

ACRES U.S.A. Acres U.S.A. recently tripped to
Wisconsin. We made several talks in the Manitowoc
area with reference to weather modification then being
proposed by a private co-op. People in Wisconsin were
concerned that another carcinogen was being pumped
into their atinosphere.

ADMIRES. As far as carcinogens are concerned, I
can't document for the purposes of this interview.
However, what I can add to that comes from family
experience. In Missouri—from my own personal
observation after noting wind direction to make certain
industrial smoke from Kansas City wasn't coming my
way—40 miles north of Kansas City, visibility was
reduced to less than 2 miles as a consequence of
atmospheric haze. My lungs became irritated. My
wife’s coughing increased. I could observe that this
haze appeared after aircraft laid down aerosol contrails
the day before.

ACRES U.S.A. Does this mean that even though
weather todification was turned down by local
farmers, the practice proceeded anyway?

ADMIRES. I would say this is correct, and it happened
in response to a law that was signed October 13, 1976.
This is P.L. 94490, formerly $.B. 3383. The title is the
National Weather Modification Policy Act of 1976. It
instructs the Department of Commerce to implement a
weather modification policy. It also directs the Depart-
ment of Commerce to do a study and gave them $1
million to handle this profitable studying task.
Congress balked on this $1 million grant. This law also
directed the Department of Commerce to institute a
policy of weather modification across these United
States.

ACRES U.S.A. What is the policy?

ADMIRES. To carry out a program of weather
modification.

ACRES U.S.A. Yes, but what is the policy?

ADMIRES. I have asked the Department of Commerce
about this. They will not tell me. I have asked them
what the program is and what the policy is. I have
asked them to notify the people about what is being

done. I have asked them to tell us what private people —
are doing under government programs. NOAA (Na- ©
tional Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration) is the _
information gathering entity. This is also in coopera- —
tion with the National Science Foundation.
ACRES U.S.A. Yet we can’t put a handle on what the —
policy is?- 3
ADMIRES. If there is a policy it is to create rain in
accordance with national needs. That's the eyewash.
There's where they stop. If you have conclusions that —
can be drawn, I presume you will draw them. I have —
drawn my own. The decision as to where and when —
weather modification meets national needs is made by
bureaucrats.

ACRES U.S.A. Then the increased roster of drought —
counties stands as a monument to the mistakes vf these _
same bureaucrats? ;

ADMIRES. Absolutely. They have made mistakes time __
and again. Senator Edward Pearson of Kansas held a
public meeting in Topeka, and I attended. There were =|
a group of meteorologists there to testify for S.B. 421,
which is before Congress now. It: would presumably

provide some form of control. Senator Pearson did not
let me testify, and that was my purpose for going there.
As soon as reps of various meteorological organizations _
and a retired Congressman testified, the show was over,

ACRES U.S.A. Were there any discordant notes? a
ee
ADMIRES: Not really. The Director of the National
Storm Service here, Allen Pearson, was there. He dida q
very good job. He stated that he doubted that weather

modification policy was beneficial enough to offset
potential dangers.

ACRES U.S.A. Still, don't we have to conclude that
just about any bureau stays alive because it is composed
of technically unemployable types who would starve |
outside the umbrella of socialized employment? The i i}
educated ignoramus makes a perfect sorcerer’s appren-
tice?

+a
“

.

ADMIRES. This may be true. But don't forget that
P.L. 94490 is part of the World Meteorological Organi-
zation plan to overall world-wide treaty. We just signed
that treaty this year, and this puts world-wide weather —
modification ahead of the Constitution. We just got
through signing a treaty with 35 countries in Canada
this year—to ban weather modification in time of war.
My question—‘‘How does Mother Nature determine
the difference in the phrase ‘‘in time of war’ and the —
wants of special interests in peacetime? There is no dif- —
ference. It isjust a matter of degree. We sign a treaty to
ban weather modification in time of war, but we allow
destruction via weather modification to go on in
peacctime.

ACRES U.S.A. What is the aature of this world wide
apparatus that we're signing treaties with?

ADMIRES. The UN is an entity that is supposed to be
creating world peace. Depending on how you define ©
peace, we have hardly had a day of peace since the
United Nations was founded. As a man who has spent
27 years in the Navy, I've been through several wars,
and I can’t recall when there wasn’t some fighting going
on somewhere.

ACRES U.S.A. Where are the anchor points to this
world-wide weather modification treaty?

ADMIRES. The central information points are Wash-
ington D.C., Moscow, and Australia. There is total
exchange of information between the three. The papers
tell us we are going to have a world weather watch. Not
one word about modifying weather. Yet under the
current plans, modification of weather all over the
world is in the wind. In fact modification since October
13, 1976, will affect weather for at least two or three
years.

ACRES U.S.A. Wouldn't it be possible to create an
overbundance of rain or a shortage for, say, northern
Europe by either miscalculation or design?

ADMIRES. Either miscalculation or design! Drought —
can be created. An extra-cold winter can be created. A
flood can be created. Tornadic potential can be
created. A mild winter for Alaska during pipeline
construction can be created, and an off setting cold
winter to consume that fuel can also be created. People
who have no knowledge of these things will not find
such observations credible, but as you have pointed -
cut, credibility is largely subjective. and depends on
maturity, special knowledge, and insight.

OCCULT, METAPHYSICAL & RELATED SUBJECTS — SUGGESTED READING |
(Add $1.70 minimum handling per order — California residents add 6% sales tax)

THE LAWS OF SCIENTIFIC HAND READING —

William G. Benham, 685 pages, spiral ........... $15.00
SECRET OF REGENERATION —

Broressoriilton Hotema oi... occ eee ec oe oe 25.00
ORTHOPATHY [Elementary Orthopathy]—

Drs. Shelton and Clements ................/.... 20.00
THE GREAT LAW — Prof. Hilton Hotema......... 20.00
THE AURA — AND WHAT IT MEANS

TO YOU — Compiled, 8'2x11................... 6.50
COLOR HEALING [(CHROMOTHERAPY})

es Ca a Ce 6.50
THE HOLLOW EARTH — Dr. Raymond Bernard

& Dorothy Ann Wilborn — 82x 11............... 7.00
A JOURNEY TO THE EARTH’S INTERIOR —

Marshall B. Gardner, spirals, 877 pages .......... 10.00
THE WALL OF LIGHT —

Nikola Tesla & A. H. Matthews, 81/2 x 11, ills.......7.50

SECRET INSTRUCTIONS TO PROBATORS OF AN
ESOTERIC OCCULT SCHOOL — By Mme. Helena

Petrovna Blavatsky, 81/2 x 11, offset, color plates . .13.50
THE BOOK OF JASHER — 290 pages, facsimile,

Sn SA Se ag ot eae ccaengn Se oem 8.50
HANDBOOK OF UNUSUAL ENERGIES — |
J. G. Gallimore, 400 81/2 x 11 pages .............. 45.00

NIKOLA TESLA 1856-1943 — LECTURES,

PATENTS, ARTICLES — Published by Nikola Tesla
Museum, Beograd, Yugosiavia (1956),
2 massive vols., schematicills. .................. 45.00

INVENTIONS, RESEARCHES AND WRITINGS,
OF NIKOLA TESLA — By Thomas Comerford Martin

MMOILOHC RECIDAROS ans os ne EO 15.00
- UNIFIED FIELD THEORY — J. G. Gallimore,

MUM 29 90 YT a Sie ee Sa Ses he 10.00
KEELEY AND HIS DiSCOVERIES —

By Mrs. Bloomfield Moore (1893), 373 pages ...... 15.00
COLLECTED PROPERTIES AND WRITINGS OF
J. G. GALLIMORE — 160 812 x 11 pages........... 35.00
RELATIONSHIP OF PARAPSYCHOLOGY AND
GRAVITY — J. G. Gallimore, 215 8/2 x 11 pgs. ..... 35.00

STUDY OF PALMISTRY FOR PROFESSIONAL
PURPOSES & ADVANCED PUPILS — St. Germain 18.00
THE HIDDEN WAY ACROSS THE THRESHOLD —

James C. Street, 598 pages, spirals .............. 17.50
ANTIQUITY UNVEILED (Unabridged) —

J. M. Roberts, 608 pages, spirals ................ 15.00
THE GRACES OF INTERIOR PRAYER —

R. P. Poulian, 637 pages, spirals................. 15.00
AWAKEN THE WORLD WITHIN —

Prof, milton Hotemd-< io facce* atacu yl eR ae 10.00

ANACALYPSIS Or, An Inquiry Into the Origin
of Languages, Nations and Religions — By Godfrey
Higgins, F.S.A.F., 1,492 81% x 11 pages, 2 vols. .. .50.00
PHENOMENA OF MATERIALIZATION — A Con-
tribution to Investigation of Mediumistic Teleplastics
— By Baron Von Schrenck Notzing, 340 pages ....15.00
LETTERS BY INEZ PERRY ON USING THE
CELL SALTS — Lorena Gardenhire............... 15.00

OUR PROFESSOR HILTON HOTEMA FOLIOS: The Basic Set of Twelve. New 1982 Price. These have light cardboard,
illustrated covers (8'/: x 11). New price for this $41.50 value only $32.50 if ordered at one time and sent to one address in the U.S.
(and possessions). We will send C.O.D. in the U.S. for a $5.00 deposit. Deluxe covered, heavier embossed cardboard covers —
one gat HEALTH RESEARCH, 1 i!syette St., MOKELUMNE HILL, CALIFORNIA 95245
HEALTH BOOK LIST SENT FREE

THE COMPLETE WORKS OF PROFESSOR HILTON HOTEMA — Sent at one time, to one address for only $179.00. The total
cost of these 41 books and folios, purchased separately would be $225.00 (plus postage). (This offer does not include the 2nd
edition, revised and illustrated of Cosmic Science of the Ancient Masters, nor books written under his real name (George R.
Clements). (The Virgin Birth, with H. M. Shelton, N.D. — $7.00; Elementary Orthopathy, with H. M. Shelton, N.D. — $20.00;
The Law of Life and Human Health — $7.00). California residents add 6% (or current) sales tax. Postage paid.

THE ASTRO-BIOCHEMIC SYSTEM OF BODY THE HIDDEN LIFE OF FREE-MASONRY —

THE HARMONIAL PHILOSOPHY OF
ANDREW JACKSON DAVIS, 423 pages ........-. 12.00

BUILDING — Twelve Lessons — By Inez Eudora Co Wi beadbedterss (erat ma fn, ee ae 12.00
etry MUMMEOREHDNOG (05 foi oe Sh aod sons canes oo 8.50 AN INTRODUCTION TO ASTROLOGY —
NEW CONCEPTS IN DIAGNOSIS AND William Lilly, 500 ills. pages ............0..0000% 15.00
TREATMENT — Albert Abrams, 335 pages........ 15.09 THE KABBALAH UNVEILED —
ASTROLOGY — MUNDANE AND SPIRITUAL — S. L. MacGregor Mathers, 359 pages............. 10.00
S. R. Parchment, 906 pages, 2vols. ............. 20.00 THE KEY TO THE UNIVERSE —
ASTROLOGY IN THE OLD TESTAMENT — Harriette & Homer Curtiss, 400 pages ........... 12.00
Kar] Anderson, 502 pages ..............00.00eus 15.00 THE MAGIC STAFF — Autobiography of
AYESHA — THE RETURN OF SHE — Andrew Jackson Davis— 552 pages ............... 15.00
H. Rider Haggard, 359 pages ................... 12.00 | MANRESA: Or The Spiritual Exercises of
THE ARABULA OR DIVINE GUEST — St. Ignatius — 364 pages ............. 00... cece eee 12.00
Andres Jackson Davis (1867) ................05- 11.00 MEMORANDA OF PERSONS, PLACES AND
THE DEVIL’S PULPIT — Rev. Robert EVENTS — Andrew Jackson Davis ............... 12.00
Taylor, B.A,, G00 PAGES «pases wees. v's betas 17.00 THE MYSTERIES OF MAGIC —
THE DIEGESIS: Being a Discovery of the Origin, Arthur Edward Waite, 349 pages..............4. 12.00
Evidences, and Early History of Christianity — MYSTIC SEALS AND COLUMNS — |
Reye Robert Taylor, AB.) wings lice een 15.00 Dr. Rudolf Steiner, 75 81/2 x li pgs., ills. .......... 9.00
DO FOUR THINGS NOW — Brown Landone, MYTH, MAGIC AND MORALS — A Study of
528 Pages «. wwe eee wee eee tees eens 14.00 Christian Origins — Conybeare .................55 12.50
EVENTS IN THE LIFE OF A SEER — ; THE PENETRALIA: Harmonial Answers to
Andrew Jackson, Davis, 488 pages ...... inet 12.00 Important Questions — A. J. Davis................ 12.50
FIRST STEPS IN EGYPTIAN — E. A. Wallis Budge 10.00 PEOPLE FROM THE OTHER WORLD —
FRAGMENTS OF A FAITH FORGOTTEN — HenrvS. Olcott. 492 pages .....---... 6... eeees 17.50
G. R. Ss. Mead, 633 pages... Oy ee 16.50 USED AND NEW CLOTHBOUND BOOK CATALOGUE
GLIMPSES OF MASONIC HISTORY — 1982 ON THE FOLLOWING SUBJECTS: Religious,
C. W. Leadbeater, 380 indexed pages ............ 12.00 Comparative Religion, Spiritualism, Health, Dreams,
THE GREAT PYRAMID IN FACT AND 12.60 Memory, Political, Inspiration, History of the Bible, Yoga,
2 THEORY — Wm. Kingland Jit Gott nea ORIG Cane a a 12.5 Economics, Magnetism etc. Set Up In Easy to Read
THE HARBINGER OF HEALTH — Typewritten Format - Mimeographed 81/2 x 11. Free With
Andrew Jackson Davis, 428 pages ............... 12.00 Any Book Order, Or Sent First Class Mail in U.S. &

Possessions, Mexico & Canada for .75 ($3.50 Foreign
Countries).

th
‘
’
Fait
Ie?

4
