Pre-Adamite Man
========================================
Paschal Beverly Randolph (1869) — Randolph's pre-Adamite anthropology — American occultism's contribution to the antiquity-of-man debate. Source: https://archive.org/details/preadamitemandem00rand. Public domain.

nae een : 
: Pon 
= . 
eter eee nr he 
STAN Races 
wth Pre 
oe He em. 
Y, 4 : 
: wacteoriechet - 
-. ore 
e os ¥ 
~ 
eenesy : 
“ Ps Me My mee 
Y Ps Reems Ss weMNe 
stow ay Rowe hy eo 
See x 
“ 
= 
ae Me 
pe Nath g Bo se’ 
8 OAD Paar 

He 

~t. 

sa 

cad 
; as 

Py 

z 
* 
>. 
: 
* 

io 

a So ye A Oy © 

eee”. ee ee Oa a has oF Oa aa ace 
il ’ > ree 

— a ; aa * > 
w 7 Pip “ 

BY a gee sae 
Dr. PASCHAL BEVERLEY RANDOLPH. — 

de Denais de mes Cendres. 
Pa + aa 

— Zé a 

When the gude Laird was making ‘Adarn, even then the clan Grant were as thick and 
numerous as the heather on you hills! — BAILIE GRANT. 

a I need not ask thee if that hand, when armed, 
Has any Roman soldier mauled or knuckled; 
For thou wert dead, and buried, and embalmed, 
Ere Romulus or Remus had been suckied, 
Antiquity appears to have begun 
Long | after thy primeval race was run. 

G ADDRESS TO A Mummy. Hoan N 

. e FOURTH HDITION. 
Tee, Pte 
BOSTON: 
WILLIAM WHITE AND COMPANY, 
f, . . BANNER OF LIGHT OFFICE, 

158 WASHINGTON STREET, - 
NEW-YORK: BRANCH OFFICE, 544 BROADWAY. 
1869. : ‘a 

noble and strong-hearted Pioneers of the 
vance ; to those who hte bravely fought 
Joc od fight,—the Battle of Mind against the Spirit of .; 
fa to whose forte the World is indebted for 
. of True Fresaoas this ee Edition of my 

lovingly dedicated by 

P. B, RANDOLPH. 

ed, according to Act of Congress, in the year 1863, by A. J. Ate ve. 
| a. For Dr. PASCHAL BEVERLEY RANDOLPH, .* 

lerk’s Office of the District Court of the United States for the oo 
; ay District of New York. 

APACE 

Mi bsrn , 2A) PAE 

eA AME I ERK’ ’ . ; 

PREFACE TO THE FOURTH EDITION. 

Since I printed the first copies of this work, the 
opinions of mankind regarding the origin of the race 
and its varied divisions, have essentially changed, and « 
to-day the Spirit of Research is active as ever. Up to | 
the present, the book has had mountains almost insur- — 
mountable in its path, but hath overcome all obstacles, — 
until now, through the energy of Publishers who ap- A 
preciate the labors of the humble but fearless student — og 
of Truth, Wu. Wurre & Co., Boston, Mass., it takes ame 

its place among the few books destined to do good | os 
and outlive the error it was created to combat. Sir « 
hath outlived adversity; hath become a standard 
Betliority in the world of letters on the subage 
whereof it treats, and in the future, as in the past, * 
will do much toward disabusiug the Public Mind on. 
the subject of the ANTIQUITY AND ORIGIN OF MAN. .¥ és 

P. B, RANDOLPH. — 

Loston, MAss., Oct., 1868. ° 

wo 

Ay ) PD 
aiiies 
ie 

Sketch of an undoubted Pre-Adamite Skull, now in possession of the 
_ London Geological Society (supposed to be 100.000 years old.) 

~ 

eg WE wae 

CONTENTS: 

Prerace.—Authorities consulted ; Dedication, 
IntRopucrory. HuisTortco-CHRONOLOGICAL. 

Adam not the first man; Men built cities in Asia thirty-five thou- 
sand years ago; Luke Burke and the credibility of History; The 
Fate of Genius ; The New York Zribune and Leonard Horner on Egyp- 
tian Pottery 13,500 years old; How we know that the Egyptians made 
Pottery 7,500 years before Adam’s date; The Artesian-Well borings 
of the French Engineers in the Egyptian Delta; Discovery of the 
colossal statue of Rhampses II.,and what followed it; Syncellus and 
the Chaldean Chronology, stretching back 36,000 years; Chinese 
Kings 18,000 years ago; Pu-Awn Ku, the original Chinaman, created 
VOD Yenis BOO leah sos vcs wie «.co,4 «beeps MAE em eae Page 12 

PART I. 

CHAPTER I.—Adam, Menes, Egypt; Menes (Mizraim) not the 
grandson of Noah; Rabbinical Forgery Demonstrated ; Herodotus 
and Manetho—their credulity and credibility ; The First Man, accord- 
ing to the Egyptians ; Bunsen’s Deduction that civilized men inhab- — 
ited the Nilotic lands over 20,000 years ago; Persian Chronology— 
Mahabad, Jy Affram, God and the First Man ;.A Heathen’s Philoso- 
phy ; Who built Baalbec and the Pyramids; Did God or the gods 
create Adam? Some curious suggestions ; Precarious. foundation of 
Adam and the Adamic theory....... rN ee Page 23 

CHAP. I11—Cain, Cain’s wife, Lamech’s wives—where did they 
get them? The answer; Pre-Adamite nations east of Eden; Job— 
who was he?—certainly not a descendant of Adam ; Numerous Scrip- 
tural authorities establishing the existence of men not of Adam’s race 3 
Pontinuediin other chapters. <.s/<< +. 26 dys a's S40 ny aes eee Page 40° 

CHAP. III.—On the banks of the Nile ; ; What an Indian Chief! 
thought of the Shem, Ham and Japhet tradition; Bronze, Steel and — 
Glass 4,800 years ago ; Are Joppa, Jerusalem, Damascus, Pre-Adamite 
cities? Philological observations ; Specimens of two New Languages" 
RAIN ee Cie dans 6 paid hee age now. id ch Rae Page 48 

CONTENTS. 

CHAP, IV.—Spiritism, Table-turning, Rosicrucianism, Philoso- 
. “pher’s Stone and Elixir of Life 3,000 years ago; Negro Kings of 
; Egypt; Has the Negro ever excelled his present condition? What 
- the Monuments of Beni Hassan say about it; Is Jehovah (Iaveh) and 
Elohim of Genesis the Eternal God, or an Oriental mythical god? 
The two accounts of Man’s creation from Genesis, side by side ; 
Melchizadek, and who he probably was j The Pentateuch; “ There 
A TR CEG Ef ee Page 60 

CHAP. V.—‘ Coasting the Head-lands of Eternity ;” A charge 
against the Jewish Rabbins ; Some scriptural corrections ; The Kab- 
_ bala, Adam, Eve and the Devil; Eve’s Adultery. Her second crime 
_ and what it was ; the sons of Ish; Berosus and the Chaldean Genesis ; 
5 Scandinavian Cosmology from the Prose-Edda.............. Page 68 

CHAP. VI.—Cosmogonico-chronological ; Cataclysms; 63,000 
_ years of Chinese History ; 150,000 of Japanese; 3,000,000 Brahmin- 
i ae j Buahistic fabulous eras ; The site of Eden and of Adam’ 8 crea- 

f 0 ; 26,000 years of Human History vs. 35,000 years of Civilization ; 
_ The true story, philosophy, date and effects of the “Flood ;” A new 
SMOURPARTTING HYPOTHESIS. /. 0.005 cee ces cco ececcecuses Page 108 

PART Ii. Awncrtent EUROPE. 

CHAP. I.—Greece and Italy older than Egypt; The Cyclopean 
Be csares of Southern Europe; The Egyptian Monuments ; Why the 
byrne were built ; Pyramids of America; Hieroglyphics; New 
Deductions......... 66 cei ceeeee cece cece eee ee cece ees Page 137 

PE ~ oHAP. Ii —The Rise and Fall, the Ebb and Flow of Empires ; 
Assyria, Chaldea, Egypt ; Europe Asia’s mother........... Page 156 

_ OHAP. IlI.—The stupendous structures of Etruria; their styles 
indicate two distinct nations of antiquity succeeding each other on — 
the same spot, with a vast interval between................ Page 166 — 

Ss CHAP. IV.—The Fictions of Chronology, Ancient and Medivyval ; 
_ The Artificial and Mythical Characters of the Principal Epochs of 
Roman History, Regal, Republican and Imperial.......... . Page 180 

: Bi: CHAP. V.—Ten thousand years of Iialic Tradition; The Brrors — 

CONTENTS. vil 

and Adjustments of the Roman Year and Calendar, from Romulus to 
MEER ATAU OUT Taal sg wie oC GEA as Wea db ule in hs ot See ale Page 199 

@HAP. VI.—Silence and Ignorance of the Clerical Writers relative 
' to the most important and curious facts of so-called Contemporaneous 
MEIOOES ego da ole dw ewisist buns tetas wae seh sha sae OR eee Page 225 

CHAP. VII.—Ethnological ; The Genesis of Nations... .Page 238 

CHAP. VIII.—The Gorilla vs Man; Is the latter but a developed 
form of the Mammalia? or is he the INITIAL TYPE of a new range of 
terrestrial existence— of a new class and kingdom of Nature? If the 
latter, what a future lies before him!.............e.seenee Page 251 

PART III. Fosst May. 

CHAP. I—Discovery of Human Skeletons in the West Indies, the 
Kirkdale Cavern, Quebec, Caverne de Enghoule, Florida, and else- 
where, from 50,009 to 150,000 years old ; Human Remains from Gravel 
Hills; “Flint Weapons.”...............000% 2 Page 277 

CHAP. II.—The skeleton of a Whale found with a human weapon, 
ina Scotch hill; The fossil Elks and human bones of Ireland ; Human 
remains and Elephants’ teeth found in non-tropical climates, indicat- 
ing an age of 38,000 years at least ; Mr. Koch and his flint arrow-heads 
from the “ Drift ;’ Human remains found in a Rocky Mountain gold 
MG hac oitk ea site ts tC ais 2 as ast ie Oe Page 295 

CHAP. III.—Johbn Elliott in the “Geologist” on Fossil Man, and re- 
mains found in Durham; The Heathery-Burn Discoveries ; Professor 
Huxley, F. R.S., on the celebrated “ Muskham Skull ;”” The Trent 
Skull and its dimensions ; Human remains from Neanderthal; The 

Belgian Skull, found with the bones of Bears, Hyenas and Elephants: — 

The Massat and Mecklenburg Skeletons; Dr. Schauffhausen on the 
‘* Piau Skeleton ;”’ The Mewslade Skull; The Sennen Cranium; The 
Montrose and boat-shaped human skulls ; The Eastham Skull and its 
measurement; Skull of a Gorilla compared with that of Man ; Skulls 
from Etruria, and their dimensions ; Human Bones from Switzerland ; 

Copenhagen fossil skulls compared with that of an Ashantee Negro; 

Professor Owen on Ancient Crania; Tbe Engis Skull, “the oldest — 
record of man on earth ;” The Dolichocephalic crania; Apes, Man, — 
Chimpanzes, Negroes ; Table of the oldest human relics found with — 

CHAP. IV.—Proceedings of various Geological Societies, and dis- 

coveries of fossil man by their members; “Flints in the Drift:” 

% 

~ 
* ie 

3 vill ae oe CONTENTS. 

Liverpool, Glasgow, three skulls; Prof. Burk, C. C. Blake, and S. L 
‘Mackie on “Human Fossils ;” Joseph Prestwich, Esq., on “ Fossil 
Man; 3” The human remains referable to three geological ages back of this 
; ison ! John trade, Flint Implements; Criel, Flint Hatchéts ; 
Rouen, Clermont, Human Remains and Fossil Elephants, Bhinhee- 
ros, Oxen and Cats found five hundred and forty feet above high water 
mark! English Human Fossils; O. C. Blake on “ Past Life in South 
__ America ;” Indian Giants; Apes es large as Man ; Professor King on 
Natural Selection ; Darwin’s Theory; Dr. Buckner on the Monkev- 
___ origin of the Negro and other Men; A host of names in favor of the 
_ Derivative Theory ;” Humary remains in Alluvium; The River-bed 
_ Skelton! The Leicester Skull and its measurement........ Page 349 

CHAP. V.— Per Contra.—-Prof. Gras vs. The. Geologist, on the * An- 
_tiquity NTN Sines cu vais pide ewes s 6 ev ae woe Re Page 378 

_ Gonorusion.—The Past, the Present, and Future of the Earth and 
Man. The Better Time Coming................... lA Page 398 

ee 

‘ 

PREFACE. 

Adam was not the first man! The writer and com- 
piler of this book believes this affirmation. The reader 
of this book will also believe it after its perusal. The 
work is written, not for fame or emolument, for the 
writer has no need of either, but because there was and 
is a need for just such a book as this.. Of course much 
more can be said to the purpose on the subject of Hu- 
man Antiquity than this volume contains. It will be 
said in future editions. ‘Those who adhere to Adam, as 
the ancient lady did to her Total Depravity, will be 
troubled by this book, and will denounce all Adamicides 
in general. This cannot be helped. The truth must 
come up sooner or later, and the quicker the better for 
the world. Here it is! at least a portion of it. At 
first my search for matérials was unrewarded ; but pa- 

tient industry, long-continued research, an indomitable 

resolution not to be foiled, a lively consciousness that 
I was doing mankind and the world a service, and one 
that would be acknowleded by wnbiased minds, at 
length resulted in placing so much material at my com- 
mand, that it became difficult to decide what to admit 
and what to reject. So much for devoutly believing in 
the magic word—Try! The exigencies of the war at 
the magic word—Try! No subject with which the 
human mind can grapple—save only one—that of im- 
mortality—the triumphant Fact of our continued exis- 
tenve after life’s fitful fever shall © been ended—is 

“4 

ota, 

ee 

a, ta : PREFACE. — 

_ fraught with more intense interest than that upon 

_ which this work treats. i 

Bulwer says, in the preface to Zanoni, that now-a-days 
one can hazard nothing in print without authority, or 
scarcely quote Shakespeare without citing chapter and 
verse, “This is the age of facts—the age of facts, sir ; 
to which truth we most heartily assent. Facts are stub- 
born things. In this book I have demonstrated two 
propositions : 1st, That a certain portion of Ancient, as 
well as Modern. History is a“ gigantic swindle ;” and, 
2d, That Adam was not the first man ;—in short, that 
-Pre-adamite men existed on all the continents of the 

= globe certainly 35,000, and probably 100,000, years 

prior to the date usually assigned to that rather mythi- 
cal personage ; and this Fact is one that—it not being 
possible to be set aside—will have to be taken, no mat- 
_ ter how bitter the pill, and. digested accordingly. 

- The following are a few of the authorities consulted 
in the preparation of this volume : 

Lord Lindsay on the “ Anakim ;” “ Angels, Cheru- 
_ bim and Gods’—London, 1861 ; Abydenus—* Frae- 
ment of Berosus ;” Apollodorus, with Heyne’s notes ; 
_ Arrian ; Avienus—Festus ; Birch and Derougé on the 
‘ Egyptians ;’ Benjamin of Tudela; Wm. Brade’s 
“Sphinx of History ;’ Beyers’ Notes to Selden—De 
dis Syrius ; Bampton Lectures—Mansell’s ; Luke 

Burke’s “ Future ;” Botta’s “ Nineveh ;” Baron Bun- 

_ sen’s ‘ Egypt’s Place in Universal History ;” The Bi- 

ble—nine differeit versions; Cory’s “ Fragments of 
Ancient History”—Berosus, Svncellus, &c., &e. ; Bisho 
Molenso’s “ Pentateuch Critically Examined ;” Basil 
Cooper’s (B. A.) “ Hieroglyphical Date of the Exodus ;” 
Candlish’s “ Contributions to an Exposition of Gene- 
sis :” Miss Fanny .Corbeaux on “ Rernt +”. Chamnol- 
a> 

me Sl ; Pe 
hy a ' ere 
‘. ty ot) S, 1. | x € i Ls | 

PREFACE. xi 

|lion’s “Egyptian Researches ;” Ctesias ; Cratylus ; 

Donaldson’s Works; “ Flint’s i in the Drift : ” « Genesis 
of the Earth and Man, ” edited by Reginald Stuart 
Poole, Esq., British Museum ; Diwarchus’ History of 
the “ Reign of Alexander the Great ;” Dr. Edersheim’s 
“ History of the Jews,” edition of 1856 ; Eusebius’ 
Chron. ; Hardy’s “ Eastern Monachism,” and “ Manuai 
of Budhism, ” London, 1861 ; Eustathius ; Eratosthenes ; 
Eneyelopadia Britannica -Eney lopxedia Americana ; Ra- 
pin’s English History ; The “ Veil of Isis ;” “ Mysteries 
and History of the Druids ;” Francis Newman’s “ He- 
brew Monarchy ;” “ Fossil Man”—London Register ; 
Editor of, and contributors to, “The London Geolog- 
ist;” Foster’s “ Arabia ;” Cyril Graham-- Quarterly 
Review, July—Oct., 1859 ; “ Hieronymian Hebrew— 
a Grammar of the Sacred Language”’— Wm. Beeston, 
London, 1843; Zhe Samaritan Pentateuch, of Nablous, 
Syria, examined by the writer hereof in Jerusalem ; 

Horace Woelby’s “ Life, Death and Futurity”—the Eng- 
Jlish Edition ; Her odotus ; Lucian ; Lepsius ; Homer ; 
“Kings of the East ;” Miss Angharad Lloyd ; Lowtit 
on the Scriptnres ; Manetho ; Mantell’s“ Fossils of the 
British Museum ;’ Vaux “ Nineveh and Persepolis ;” 
“ Pre-adamite Man ;” Pliny ; Ptolemy ; Pompeius ; Po- 
cocke’s “ History of the Arabs ;” Prof. Wilson’s “ Pre- 
historie Man ;” Strabo ; The “ Timzus and Scholium ;” 
Travels of Sir John Chardin; American Journal of 
Science and Arts; Trogus ; “ Unpointed Text of the 
Book of Genesis ;’ Xenophon, and many others, need- 
less to here enumerate at greater length. 

! 

' 

var.’ aN < 
if : a 
: (1% “4 0 ‘ 
Bid 
ie ; Fy 
TA + Sy 
O51 One 
V, Oe : * 

INTRODUCTORY. gi 

Who ever heard of th’ Indian Peru ? 

Or who in venturous vessel measured 

The Amazon huge river, now fotfnd true ? 
Or fruitfullest Virginia who did ever view ? 

Yet all these were, when no man did them know, 
Yet have from wisest ages hidden been ; 
And later times things more unknown shall show ; 
Why then should witless man so much misween 
That nothing is but that which he hath seen ? 
What if within the moon’s fair shining sphere, 
What if in every other star unseen, 
_ Of other worlds he happily should hear? 
He wonder would much more ; yet such to some appear! 

SPENSER— Fuerte Queen. — 

* 
Ws 

Adam was not the first man! Men—whole nations 
__ of men—civilized men, not only lived before the period 
usually ascribed to Adam, and to Eye, his wife, but 
lived at least thirty-five thousand, and with even greater 
.. Be probability, one hundred thousand years ago. This fact, 
Startling as it may appear to the mass of superficial 
___ readers, is one so clear and plain as to be demonstrated 
si _ with as much ease as a good geometrician could solve 
__. the thirty-fifth problem of Euclid. € 
_ Thousands of years before the 4004th year of the 
world before Christ—the date of its creation, according 
to the Christian and Hebrew systems of chronology, thel 
Plains of Asia, over which I have recently traveled 
(while collecting materials for the series of books, o 
__ which this is the first,) abounded and teemed, not only 
_ with populous centers of civilized life, but with the ruins 

a 

ae 4 
ied 

4 af. 

| science, and she sneeringly bids you starve ! Bea Wil- 
} ‘SS ye 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 13 

of scores of cities, the very memories of whose names, 
and of those who once lived in them, were forgotten 
by, or had possibly never been known to, the dwellers 
in the towns, the ruins of which we now exhume from 
beneath the sterile sands and burning deserts—the mute 
but eloquent record that 

3 =~ “ Once upon a time a strange, and mighty people were.” 

I Delieve with Luke Burke, from whose works I have 
largely availed myself in the second part of this volume, 

~ (and to whom I tender my sincere thanks for the excel- 

lent privilege,) that ‘‘ History,” especially Ancient His- 
tory, in some portions thereof, at least, approaches very 
nearly to being totally unreliable, and to discover, cor- 
rect, and prove which, such glorious intellects as those 
of Neibuhr, Baron Bunsen, and Luke Burke were de- 
voted through long and laborious years. 

For our dearly loved, but by the masses, our unap- 
preciated America, I have engaged in a task similar in 
kind and intent, though perhaps not in quality, exhaus- 
tiveness, or scope, to that so triumphant one performed — 
by the first two above-named heroes of a battle-field 
greater than marshalled armies ever trod upon, and 
who are now, let us hope and believe, gathering a new 
and better sort of laurels in the 

eee 

ery 
Lands beyoud the swelling flood, the kingdom o’er the sea hs 
é 

of Death; and the third of whom, to the eternal dis) 
erace of Literary England, is now laboring for the 
World, and fighting for the truth, against obstacles, and 
an antagonism so great and bitter, that every true and 
honest heart shudders at the sad spectacle of the terri-_ 
ble and unequal contest. 
Invent a murderous shell, and England will make 
you a gartered knight! Devote a life to letters or t 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

n Armstrong, and she will pour millions in your 
! Bea Luke Burke, and you cannot raise money 
jough to print a pamphlet once a month, although 
at Errchlet contains truths a million times more val- 

guns! But this is the fate of genius ; this is the way 
of the world. Let us hope that it will not always be 
so! | ’ ° 

_ Burke made an ee discovery of the vast an- 

nd, and the universe. His reward for these original 

emonstrations was in effect ‘a crust and a garret!” 

e, and its original in the Hall of Arms in Malta, 
vhere myself saw it in 1862. He seizes on the idea they 
u ey makes a gun aljer the paueen of these ald fur 

or Batra and ined on Chitbs, now shed its rays on 
- Barke, and withers, but, thank heaven ! cannot utterly 
Beto. The reader will please pardon this tribute 
of oratitude to a great man. 
I purpose to write concerning the Pre-Adamite men. 
In the columns of the New York T'ribume, in the summer 
ef 1855, I think it was, there appeared an article white 
} erhaps millions of people read and passed over with- 
mut a thought, but which in its final effect upon my 
mind, entirely changed the current of my life—especi Ly 

ny y intellectual life. The article is here partly qi 

ae ee 

_ 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 15ReRE 

from memory, but is quite correct so far as it goes: 
“Jn sinking one of 95 artesian wells across the Egyp- 

tian Delta, by French engineers, under the orders of a 
Turkish Viceroy, the borer came in contact with what 
afterward proved to be an immense statue of Rameses, 
or Rhampses II., the great Sesostris, who lived, accord- 
ing to one Egyptological authority, some’ 1350 years 
before Christ ; and 1400, 1800, and 2185 B. C., accord- 
ing to others. Probably all are wrong. The base of 
this statue was 12 feet, or thereabouts, beneath the sur- 

face ; and its discovery throws much light on a question 

actions of the Royal Society,) has established the fact 

purposely veiled in darkness by the Rabbins of the 
Jewish faith. After reaching the base of the statue 
they continued to bore, and from an additional depth 
of 32 fect, the borer brought to the surface many frag- 
ments of pottery, some of which evidenced considerable 
taste and art in its structure. Now, according to Lep- 
sius, and other Egyptologers, the vertical rising of the 

floor of the Delta, from the overflowing of the river, is | 
at the mean rate of 34 inches per century. Accord- |— 
ingly, these bits of pottery muss have been manufactured _ 

by the’ hands of civilized men 13,500 years ago !” 

A clearer statement, from the pages of a recent vol- 
ume, by the late Baron Bunsen, will throw additional 
light on the subject: “ Mr. Leonard Horner (Transac- 

from researches made near Cairo, pertaining to the 

geological history of the alluvial land of Egypt, that_ 

Keypt was peopled by those who made pottery 11,000 és = 

(in the area of Memphis, and but a short journey fromany — 
one of a dozen pyramids or more.) It had previously — 

it 

_ been settled, upon strictly scientific grounds, by Lepsius — 

years before Christ. Mr. Horner was in Egypt during 
the process of boring for water by the French engineers 

and other distinguished savants, that the vertical rise — 

x 
4 4 

V¢ <2. 

4. 
yi 

= y 

aye 

_ ry : é eg ee eee ‘ 
“3 ‘ i , 
~! . ee” 

16 | PRE-ADAMITE MAN, 

of the floor of the Delta from sedimentary deposits, 
caused by the annual Nilotic overflow, was at the rate 
of 33 inches per century. Mr. Horner found the depo- 
sit at the colossal statue of Rhampses IT., to be 9 feet 
- 4 inches in depth, which gives, at’ the above rate of in- 
crease, the item of 3,215 years for that particular accu- 
mulation of mud. But, let it be remembered, he found 
the mud to be 32 feet deep beneath the base of the statue, - 
giving a total of 41 feet 4 inches. The last or lowest 
two feet were found to consist of sand, below which it 
is possible there may be no true Nile sediment in this 
locality, and we thus have but a total of 39 feet 4 inches, 
from which it follows that the lowest deposit of mud 
was made there 10,285 years before the middle of 
~- Rhampses’ reign, 11,646 years before Christ, or exactly 
13,508 years ago (1862). The deeper parts of this ac- 
cumulation, says Leonard Horner, are probably more 
a compact in structure, from the long applied superin- 
- eumbent pressure, and therefore their age may be, and 
_ probably is, far greater on that account, than that ar- 
_. rived at by the application of the chronometric scale of 
) _ 8% inches per century, obtained by measuring the su- 
perficial and specifically lighter part of the accumu- 
lated mass.” 
The unscientific reader may possibly cavil at such 
astonishing results, until he comprehends how the con- 
clusions were arrived at. A few words will thoroughly 
ventilate the subject: 1. The river Nile annually 
overflows the greater part, if not the whole, of the 
Egyptian Delta—a tract of alluvial land numbering 
millions of acres; and upon which the proud river 
leaves a thin scale of mud every year, which mud it 
brings from the wash of the mountain streams of south- 
ern and central Africa—Dongola and Nigritia gene- 
rally. IL. The statue alluded to was, of course, built, 

Wincaas oa « 
PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

not in a pit, but upon the surface of the ground, y 
was found 9 feet 4 inches below it. How came 1 
there? “It might have sunk!” True, it might, but 
then, again, it might not/ for at its base was found, at 
various distances, such lighter things as bits of broken 
clay-pots, charcoal, burnt stones and bricks, on the 
same level, which could not possibly have been the 
case if the statue had been gradually sinking; for its 
immense weight would have provided for the statue a 
far quicker and deeper grave than the other things 
possibly could have found, by reason of their vastly in- 
ferior specific gravity. The statue, then, was found ex- 
actly on the surface upon which it was. originally 
erected, but that surface was exactly 9 feet 4 inches 
beneath the present one. III. Sinking being thus out 
of the question, the accumulation of nine feet and over. 
of Nile mud, must be attributed to the waters of the 
annually overflowing river. IV. The age in which 
Rhampses IT. reigned is known approximately. A mean 
being taken, we judge that the middle of his reign 
must have fallen, probably more, but certainly not less, 
than 1,350 years before Christ. Itis absolutely certain 
that it could not have been one hundred years either 
before or after that date. V. The result is a mere arith- 
metical one, for we accept the 1350 years, and allow 
one hundred years for every 3} inches of mud from the 
foot of the statue to the present surface of the ground. 
Vi. The deposit may have, during some of the centu- 
ries, been more or less than 3} inches, but the average 
gives that rate and no more. Remote as is the date 
of 13,500 years from the present time, which these 
-probings have disclosed, they have not enabled us to 
attain the hoped-for object of discovering an approxi: 
mative link between historical and geological time. No | 
trace of an extinct organism has been turned up to 

- 
bs 
We. 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

ne formation of the alluvial land of Egypt beyond 
t modern epoch from which, in our artificial sys-_ 
tems, we are used to carry back our geological reckon- | 
ings. In the lowest part of the borings of the sedi- 
ment at the colossal statue of Rhampses in 1854, at 
a depth of thirty-nine feet from the surface of the 
ground, consisting of true Nile sediment, the instru- 
ment brought up a fragment of pottery, now in my pos- 
session, which fragment must be the record of man’s ea- 
astence 13,375 years before A. D., 1854. 

In another pit,354 yards north of the statue, and, 
300 from the river, similar fragments were brought up 
from a depth of thirty-eight feet. Fragments of burnt 
brick and pottery have been found at even greater 
depths, in localities near the river, ten and sixteen 
miles below Cairo. 

At Sigiul fragments of both were found in the sedi- 
ment from between forty-five and fifty feet from the 
surface ; and in boring at Bessousse they were brought 
up from a depth of fifty-nine feet below the surface! 
Now, by a rule applied elsewhere, the Sigiul pottery 

tells of man, at the lowest, having lived there 20,000 
years ago! Baron Bunsen concluded from the above, 

and other data, that “man lived on this earth not less 
than 20,000 years before Christ, and that there is 

no valid reason for assigning a more remote beginning 

for our race.” Heartily accepting the Baron’s first’ — 
conclusion, I feel compelled to reject his Bi for rea- | 
sons presently to be developed. 
Some few months after the Z'ribune article had set 
me thinking on the subject, the following fragment 
from Syncellus attracted my attention, and provoked to 
further inquiry and investigation. I strove to accept 
nothing that was nof well authenticated, and to reject 

% A 
a 

3 

¥ : F 

Rained 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 19a 

everything that would not bear the closest normal cri- 
ticism. ) 

The fragment alluded to gives a portion of the Chal- 
dean (Babylonian) chronology, as subjoined : 

9 Sari of 3,600 years, consequently 32,400 years 

2Neri‘* 600 “ , 1,200... 
8Séssi* 60 “ x 480 «“ 
Total years, 34,080 

Again, we have the following rather startling items 
of chronology, all of which’ concern posé-diluvian dy- 
nasties, and if they are true we must carry back our 
chronological reckonings many thousand years more 
than we usually do. Here are the extraordinary lists : 

ist Dynasty, 86 Chaldean Kings pened years, 34,080 

2d “ 8 Median ce “ 224 
3d “ 11 Chaldeans “ $6 ows “ 258 
Ath & 49 ‘“ “ Ye cer ‘“ 458 
Bist i:-9* 9 Arabians “ ae ee 245 
eres, 45 Assyrians “ by % 526 
7th 73 8 “ 66 173 ¥ 73 1232 
8th éc 6 (4 “cc 6é éé 82 
Total, Kings, 222 Years, 35,995, but say 36,000 

A tolerably long stretch of either the truth or time. 
My opinion is that the truth is not stretched half so 
much as at first sight might appear. Probably good 
reason exists for assigning a hoary antiquity to every- 
thing that pertains to ancient Chaldea ; but when we 
are shown, in addition to the above, a list of the reigns 
of ten ante-diluvian kings or dynasties, who reigned for 
” 452,000 years, we feel that we are either walking on 
ground not the most solid; in fact, that we are read- 
‘Ing something very much akin to the mystical writings 
of Plautinus, Budha or Jacob Boehm, or the dreamy 
platitudes of Swedenborg, or, not rising so high as 

— 20 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

these, that we are having a pre-edition of the senseless 
and ridiculous nonsense whereof so much has been 
foisted upon a too credulous world within the present 
century, by such men as Joseph Smith. When we read 
in the Talmud, Rabbi Dimis’ account of having sailed 
thiee days between two fins of one fish, and that the 
ship flew through the water faster than an arrow from 
the bow; or when we read in Budhistic books that the 
inhabitants of the sixth heaven, or Bramah-loka, live 
sixteen thousand years, every day of which is equal to 
sixteen hundred of our years, their entire age being 
nine thousand two hundred and sixteen millions of 
earthly years, we reject the whole as either utterly ab- 
surd, or conclude that a mystical meaning is couched 

beneath the statements, which meaning lies so deep that 

we forbear to trouble ourselves with the business of 
exhumation. Like the nonsense just alluded to is, at 
first sight, this Chaldean story of nearly half a million 
years ; and yet there must be no inconsiderable amount 
of truth buried under the vast pile of rubbish. Our 
reason may reject the conclusions of Leonard Horner ; 
we may smile at old Syncellus, and laugh outright at 
Herodotus, Manetho, Plato and Bunsen ; and yet, just 
as soon as we hear the little word “ geology,” we find 
it almost impossible, without grains of allowance 
amounting to thousands of years, to accept the chronol- 
ogies of the Jewish Rabbins, which assign but six thou- 
sand years as the epoch of the Genesis both of the earth 
and man. I do not deny, as many others, that six 
thousand years ago there lived a man in the East, the 
father of a tribe, nor that his name was Adam ; but I 
do maintain that he was neither the first man, the only 
man, or the only man of that name, for it can be clearly 

_ and distinctly proved not only that there were other 

meu, but others bearing that identical name, and myth- 

‘ 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 21 “> 

ical A daze, quontum suficit beside, as well as others 
whose names in other tongues are the exact pees 
of the Hebraic Adam, or Adamah. There are hundreds — 
of legends extant concerning the original protoplast 
' afloat in the world, and especially in Oriental lands. 
The«Chinese records tell us that Pu-An-ku, the prime- 
val man, came out of the mundane egg; that he lived 
.cighteen thousand years ; and they speak of events that 
transpired among their ancestors one hundred and 
twenty-nine thousand six hundred years ago! The 
simple and effective answer to such assertions is, that 
neither the work of. human hands, nor the records of 
human thought, could by any possibility survive such 
an enormous lapse of ages; nor, if immortality be 
a fact, which I certainly affirm, does it seem to me pos- 
sible that anything short of the intelligence and mem- 
ory of the infinite God, could retain and grasp, over the 
yawning gulph of dead years, the remembrance of what 
took place at the further end of the tremendous hiatus! 
Paleontology, ethnology, archeology, geology and 
chronology, are intimately correlated arcs or segments 
of the great circle of the Sciences, and they grow into . 
each other as naturally as sunshine does into smiles and 
beauty ; and the study o 6f one inevitably leads to that 
| of another, so that a question asked of one science very 
often evokes ma provokes a dozen answers from as 
many more. Thus we ask concerning the antiquity of 
- man: “Did all men originate from a single pair of pro- 
| lasts, and were these latter the Adam and Eve that 
»- read about?” No sooner do we ask these general 
_ astions, than a dozen sciences present us with their 
several and diverse replies. Comparative anatomy 
and physiology, comparative philology, geology, geo- 
graphy, craniology, theology, and, strongest of all, eth- 
nology ; all these and more are ready with responses, 

~~ 

- 

a 

j 92 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

Si he a bad 

Lge 

- and these responses give one vote in the affirmative, 

to at least two in the negative. 

The article in the Zribune prompted the writer not 
only to ask these questions, but to engage in studies 
and travels, extended to Europe, Asia, Africa, Central 
and South-western America, at a cost of much time and 
some thousands of dollars, in order to investigate the 
subject in all its bearings, a digest only of the results 

-. of which, this volume contains. I have freely availed 

myself of Bunsen’s researches, and of Luke Burke's 
writings. To Prof, Levisohn, of the Russian Bishopric 
in Jerusalem ; Prof. Wilson; R. S: Poole, Esq., whose 
works I profited by ; to the authorities of the British 
Museum Library in London ; to similar authorities in 
Paris and Munich ; to Prof. Krause, Mr. Ducat, our 
Consul, and other gentlemen in Jerusalem and other 
parts of Syria; to Mr. Goddard, our Consul-General 
at the Court of His Polygamous Majesty, Abdul Aziz, 
Constantinople ; to Captain Giacomo, Consular Inter- 
preter thereat ; and to Mr. Charles Trinius and other 
gentlemen, for the kindness shown, facilities for inves- © 

tigation afforded, and information tendered, I am duly 

grateful ; as well as to y others in various parts 
of the world, for assistance rendered me while search- 
ing for evidences of the existence of Pre-ADAamiTE Man. 

: *. 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. . 2 

Dut Lirst. 

CHAPTER I. MENES—ADAM. 

WHOEVER has wandered amid the stately ruins of 
Karnac, and El Uqusor, the palaces, tombs and dun- 
geons, the massive statuary, pylons and hypethral tem- 

whe Ye oe De 

ples of the hoary old Land of the Pharoahs, of Moses — 
“and Thothmes, Joseph and Potiphar, must have felt, as 

I did, that the civilized world as we now know it, is 
very young indeed ; and that its proudest structures. 

are infantile compared with the massive and aged gran- — 
deur of other civilizations, upon the ashes and ruins of | 

whjch the Present may be said to have been builded. 

Reader, let us imagine ourselves to be on the banks | 
- .of the Nile. Weare there. Tread lightly, my fellow- 
traveler ; we are on holy ground, here in Egypt, holy 
> by vanttias of the awful shadows that enshroud its Past. 
_ Look! yonder is the grand Memnon—him whose voice 
_ trilled in the morning, and melodiously called the. The- 

bans to their matutinal devotions—to holy prayer to | 

the Lord of Life and Light ;—the same God whom you — 

and I worship—but under tiie name—called them | 
to prayer through stony lips, just as the morning sun 
& aps them with his rosy light. Tread lightly! for. 

we are walking over the graves of kings and nobles, 

wer 

> 

y ae 

4 

gi high-born dames and stately lords !—aye! we are tread- 

24 ie PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

ing on the tombs of Dead Nations ; we are walking on 

x the graves of Music, and of Ag Governments, laws 
~ jand languages, and of high and wondrous learning! — 

oe 

‘Tread lightly ! for we are now in the land that Menes 
iruled ; and Menes is he whom we know in Genesis 
ander the name of Mizraim, and he passes there as the 
‘grandson of Noah ; but the era of Noah is four thousand, ; 
that of Menes six thousand years ago! Menes was 
but an innovator—a conqueror, in all probability. At 
all events, he was a great king and mighty, and it is 

- mainly through the telescope he and his times afford us, 
that we are enabled to see through the gloom into the 
light beyond, and we are astonished at the spectacle 

disclosed ; tor instead of finding a new state of things, 

we only discern a new beginning—a new order. In 
other words, Menes and his throne at Memphis—a city 
near Cairo, and a long way below Thebes—were but 

the last mile-stones on a road so long, that the farther 
~-end is hidden in the night-time of the world. He and 

it are but one link in a chain of kings, thrones and ages» 
---and that link the one nearest our own times, yet six 

thousand long years off! We arrive at this result by 

counting, first, the periods of the Dynasties, the dates, 

~ and order, and duration of which are proximately 
‘known. There were thirty dynasties, the names of 
which are here withheld, simply for the reason that no 

one would take any interest in reading them. Suffice 
it that the names of the kings of all these dynasties, 

from Menes to Alexander, from Alexander to Said 
Pacha, the present ruler, are known, as well as the 

“number of years each monarch governed the land. 
‘These figures give about six thousand years in the ag- 
gregate, on the authority of the best students of Hgyp- 
tian History in England, France and Germany. Now 

_. - 

ad 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. ae g5% 

it is plain that if Adam lived in Syria, Assyria, Meso- 
potamia, Armenia, or thereabouts, six thousand years 
ago, as the Bible tells us—and it is not my purpose at 
this point to dispute its truth—and Menes also lived at 
that date, the latter could not have descended from the 

former, for the reason that Adam had not lived long. 

enough to have a family of sons sufficiently numerous 
to build one of the largest and finest cities in the 
Ancient World, nor to turn the course of one of the 
mightiest rivers on earth; for, be it known, King 
Menes caused a new channel to be dug for the river, in 
order that he might have a convenicnt place to build 
his Memphis on; and the space thus reclaimed was 
scores of thousands of acres in extent. Again: it is 
doubtful if any of Adam’s children, supposing there 
was an Adam, six thousand years ago, while their father 

was yet a young man, had developed the art of sculp- 

ture and architecture to the extent of being capable of 

carving from a single stone such splendid statuary, and 
of erecting such buildings as Menes’ city was graced 

with. The Adamites and Memphians were not even 

cousins german, for reasons already stated ; and, .con- 

sequently, the king. and his people were undoubted Pre- 

Adamites. Again: Menes and his race. were not 

autocthonic where we find them ; but had moved away 

from a place called This, located far above where Kar-. 

nac now stands. When they came down the Nile to 

build a new city, and to found a new Empire, they had — 

left an old on he resourees of a 
worn-out nation, sg core eratad en masse to localities 

where they speedily dev ‘cloped new ones. 

_ Within the last twenty years there has quietly grown 
up a scientifically-founded scepticism, which has spread 

so widely and gone so deeply down, that every class of 
society is more or less affected hy it, and that to an ex 

gy Fan a ™ 

(26 | PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

tent almost too great to be readily believed. The 
scepticism I allude to is that regarding the literal cor- 
rectness of scriptural statements in reference to God, 
Nature, human origin and our final destiny. It does 
not follow that this has in any degree retarded the 
erowth of vital piety, for many an intellectual doubter 
is in heart and in practice a religious man ; on the con- 
trary, the religion of these days is one of the under- 
standing, not of blind credulity as formerly; and I 
believe that—if the entire Bible, from Genesis to Reve- 
lation, should prove to be other than what is claimed 
for it, notwithstanding all that, Christianity, in its 
essence and benignant spirit and sway, would thrive 
quite as well, and perhaps more rapidly thereafter. 
The first quarrel between Science and the Bible was 
_ that of Astronoiny, in. the person of Galileo, against 
the religious but ignorant zeal of the past, and As- 
tronomy carried the day, after a rather bad rolling in 
the dust. Then- came the case of Geology against | 

Moses, and Moses gracefully retired. ‘Then comes 

“ Adain vs. many another First Man,” and we are fight- 

- ing that battle to-day. Science is about to settle for 

ever one of the most vexed question that ever came 
up for human discussion. Arrayed in martial panoply 
on the one hand stands a vast army of men who will 
not sce ; and on the other a smaller army of men, each 
armed with a couching-needle, wherewith they propose 
to remove the cataracts from the eyes of those, who, on 
being told that Man can rightly claim an antiquity 
vastly more remote than has been assigned him, have 
persisted in declaring that they™ can’t see it.” 

The learning of the world, its talent and its — 

is now gathering, preparatory to grappling with the — 
great problem of Man’s genesis and his destiny. N or 

7 * 
Ld ¥ - . g 
a: es Se 

‘ 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. oT 
can the discussion and the combat be much longer de- é 
layed. The issue is not at all doubtful. = 

The question would long since have been settled, had 
we any faithin ancient chroniclers; but there is so 
much of apparent fable in their account of ancient times, 
that if we do not reject them altogether, we at least 
require a great deal of concurrent testimony before we 
accept their statements. Herodotus seems to have 
been an honest man, but a rather credulous one, else he 
would not have sent down to us along with his un- 
doubted truths, so much of nonsense as he has, and 
which was palmed upon him by the priests of Memphis. 
Manetho is no better. Indeed it is doubtful if we have 
much that he wrote, as he wrote it; for many of the 
fragments that have reached us bear the imprint of 

other hands than his, affixed too, long after he left the. 

earth. These alterations of his text doubtless took 
place in the Helleno-Egyptian age, and suspicion points 
her finger at Ptolemy Mendesius as oue, if not the of in- 
cipal, interpolator. 

With the remark, that the Priests of Memphis told 
Herodotus that Menes, the founder of the New Egyp- 
tian Empire, began his reign 11,340 years before the 
rule of the last king of the 23d Memphite dynasty, and 
that he gives us this as veritable history, [ proceed to 

quote, first a fragment of Manetho, and second, the con- . 

clusions of Baron Bunsen, based upon it, and other 
authorities concerning the early days. Manetho says: 

“The first [man], in the opinion of the Egyptians, 
was Hephestus, (afterwards the god Phtha,) who is 
also celebrated among them as the inventor of fire. 
From him proceeded Helius (Ra, another god) ; after- 
wards Agathodemon; then, Kronos, (Seb, another god) ; 

- then Osiris ; then came Typhon, the brother of Osiris ; 

ims 

298 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

then came Horus, the son of Osiris by Isis, his wife. 
These were the first who reigned amongst the Egyp- 
tians. Down to Bydis the royal authority was trans- 
mitted successively in uninterrupted series during 
13,900 years. After the gods, heroes reigned for 1,255 
years ; then, again, other kings reigned 1,817 years; 
then thirty other Memphite kings for 1,790 years ; then 
ten other Thinite kings 350 years. A dyuasty of oldats 
and heroes then fojlowed, during 5,813 years,” making 
a grand total of twenty-four thousand, nine handred 
and twenty-five years—of Egyptian history; and yet 
Eeypt was but a baby nation compared to others, and 
its civilization quite imperfect contrasted with civiliza- 
tions that were cotangent and contemporaneous with it. 
Bunsen’s deductions, in brief, are as follows :— 

“First AGE oF THE Worup. THe HisrortcaAL PrimEvAL Wor LD. 
CREATION TO FLoop. B. c. 20,000 —10,000. 

“First Periop. Formation and Deposit of Sinism. B. 0. 20, 000— 
15,000. 

“Primitive language, spoken with rising or falling cadence ; eluci- 
dated by gesture; accompanied by pure pictorial writing ; every 
syllable a word, every word a full substantive one, representable by a 
picture. 

“Deposit of this language in Northern China (Shensi), in the coun- 
try of the source of the Hoango (Sinism). 

“The earliest polarization of religious consciousness ; Kosmos or 
Universe, and the Soul or Personality. Objective worship, the firma- 

i ment ; subjective worship, the Souls of parents, or the Manifestation 

of the Divine in the Family. 

«© Seconp Periop. Formation and Deposit of Primitive Turanism ; 
the Hastern Polarization of Sinism. B.C. 15,000—14,000. 

“Pure agglutinative language ; formation of polysyllabic words 
by means ot the unity of accent. 

“ Origin of particles, words no longer substantive and full, but de- 
noting the mutual relation of persons “and things ; finally, of complete 
‘parts of speech. 

“ Deposit of this stage of formation in Thibet (Botiya language). 

Germ of mythology in the substantiation of inanimate things and 

properties. 

*“‘TutrD Pertov. Formation and Deposit of Khamism and the Flood; 
Western Polarization of Sinism. B. c. 14.000—11,000, 

“ Formation of stems into roots, producing derivative words ; com-_ aS 
plete parts of speech, beyond the distinction between full words — 

(nouns, verbs, and adjectives) and formative words, B. c, 14,000. De 

ap 
‘et 

PRE-ADA MITE 

clension and conjugation with affixes, suffixes, and enc 
the Egyptian, 8.0. 13.000. Commencement of symbolical a 
phics, t.e., picture-writing ; but without the introduction of the 7 
netic element, or designation of sound, B.c. 12,000. Deposit of t 
stage of language in Egy pt owing to the earliest immigration of We 
Asiatic Primitive Semites. Invention of, or advancement in, hier ogly- 
phic signs ; the phonetie element introduced, by means of the estiab- 
lishment of ideographs to express a syllable, without reference to the 
original meaning; primitive syllabarium. B. c. 11,000. Tar Ftoop. 
Convursion iN NorrHeRN Asta. EmrGration of the Arians out of the 
country of the sources of the Oxus (Gihon) and Jaxartes, and of the 
Semites out of the country of the sources of the Euphrates and Tigris, 
B. C. 11,000—10,000. 

“ Ssconp AGE OF THE WORLD. ForRMATION OF HisToRICAL TRIBES AND 

EMPIRES OF ASIA. 

‘““First PeErtop. 
Egyptian Deposit. 
“The period of the Nomes, and 
the formation of Osirism or the 
psychical element of religion, and 
basis of the union ; provincial solar 
“worship ; beginning of Egyptian 
nationality... 2... 5: B. c.10.000. 
« Beginning of the formation of 
CostEe ; priests and warriors. 
“Close of the Republican pe- 
riod in the Nomes...... B. C. 9086. 
“Bytis, the Theban Priest of 
Ammon, the first Sace:dotal King. 
B. C. 9085 
“Duration of the Sacerdotal 
Kings, according to Manetho [7], 
1855 years; end of Sacerdotal 
PPM GE hy ob sis viscens B. ©. 7231. 

History of 

* Seconp Period. B.o. 7250— 
4000. History of Egyptian De- 
posit. 

“ Beginning of Elective Kings 

B.C. 7230. 

“Duration of these, according 

to Manetho, 1817 years; end 
B. 0. 5414. 

‘ Beginning of Hereditary Kings 
in Lower Egypt, B.c. 5413. 

“Duration of them, according 
to Mauetho, 1790 years; end 

B ©. 3624. 

“The Contemporaneous Thinite 

Princes before Mcnes, during the 

, 

=) 

4 ipa 
mab aoe 
+ Yen ee 

FLoop TO ABRAHAM, B. C. 10,000— 2878, 

“General Epochs of Asiatic 
History. Establishment of Sem- 
ism in Armenia, Assyria, and Me- 
sopotumia, and the Kussite-Tura- 
nian Empire. 

“ Complete severance of Western 
and Eastern. polarization by the 
separation of the Semites and 
Arians. 

“ Establishment of Semism in 
the formation of affixes. | 

“The Triliteral system, as ex- 
clusive furmative principle. 

‘The Turanian Invasion and 
Empire: Nimrod, the Kossian. 

* Assembly of peoples at Ba- 
bylon (watch-tower), and Semitic 
Polarization and Envigration. 

“Journey of the ‘Arians from 
Upa-Meru to Sogd and Bactria. 

“ General Epochs of Asiatee 
History. Establishmemt of Iran- 
ism and the Egyptian Hierogly- 

phics. 

“Perfect formative language ; 
the united races of the Aryans and. 
their gradual separation as Kelts, 
Armenians, Iranians, Greeks, 
Slaves, Germans. &c. " 

B. Cc. 7250—5000. 

“In this period the individual 
formation of the separate races of 
northern and southern Semites. 

“ Formation of the Aryan king- 
doms in Central Asia as far as 

it, Pah Ps 
Tees ei 

Mm. according to MAnetttos col- 
Prally with the Memphiies. 
B.G. 3974—B.06. 3624. 
‘ Consequently a double govern- 
ment: the Upper Country (Aby- 
dos)-—the Lower Country (On, 
Heliopolis). 
‘ Development of the three 
forms of worship in their pal it 
characters : Sct (Delta)—Ra (He- 
liopolis, Heptanomis)—Ammon 
(Thebes = City of Ammon : Osiris 
gradually becomes the object of 
worship of the whole confedera- 
tion. 

‘THIRD PERIOD. 
Egyptian Deposit. 

“Menes, King of all Egypt; 

Osiris-Union and the conscious- 
ness of Egypt being a kingdom. 

B. U. 3623. 

“Pyramids built in the First 

Flistory of 

PAPMIABLY 5. Se B. C. 3460. 

“Animal worship introduced, 
improvement and establishment of 
writing, begiunings of Literature ; 
Second and Third Dynasty (coa- 
temporaneous : Begiunings of the 
2 B. GC. 3400. 

“Building of the largest pyra- 
mid (second of Herodotus) 

B. C. 3280. 

“ Nitokris and the tomb in the 
pyramid of Menkeres (the third) 

B. C. 2957. 

DAMITE 

MaN. 

Northern Media, and to Kabul 
and Kandahar. 3. o. 5000—4600. 

% 
- 

‘ General Epochs of Asiatic His- 
tory. Power of Chaldeeism and 
Khamism. Beginnings of writirg 
with Letters by the Semites. 

B.C 4000—2878. 

“ The Aryans migrate into the 
Indus country.......... B. Cc. 400 

“ Formation of a powerful Chul-» 

dean Empire in 8. Babylonia. 
‘ Beginning of Chaldean series 
of Kings‘in Babylon... .B, ¢. 3784. 
« Zoroaster, the Seer and Law- 
giver of Bactria. .B. c. 3500—300». 
‘“‘ Building of the city of Baby- 
lon 2000 years before Semiramis 
(Temple of Belus).....B. 6. 3250, 
* Abrabam (Abram) born in Ur 
of the Challees;:...... B. 0. 2927. 
“ Abraham withdraws to the 
south-western part of Mesopo- 
tamia with his father. .B. c. 2900.” 

What an amazing stretch of semi-historical time! 
And yet modern research, while it rejects every thing 

that bears 

the faintest resemblance to myth, establishes 

the fact that even the enormous lapse of time above 
recorded is based more on the truth than upon fable. 
The Persians, in their Dabistan, and other books, 
tell us such strange stories of past time, aiid so earn- 
estly, that despite ourselves we are inclined to listen to, 

if not believe them ; 

and after we deduct nine-tenths 

of the years in their chronologies, we still have left a 

ce. 

wa bs, 9 ow ren “ y . 
- Pre “he... 

re i 
~ 
a ” 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. oO 

period of time compared to Wit Menes and Mem- 
phis ure but of last year, 

According to the authority just named, Time, 
from all past eternity, has been divided into a succes- 
sion of cycles. During each of these there exists a 
class of beings, intelligent, progressive, immortal, who 
all die when the cycle ends, except a single pair, who 
become mysteriously changed, and give birth to the 
progenitors of the beings of a new cycle. 

At the end of the great cycle that preceded the pre- 
sent one, the last survivor was a-being named Mahabad ; 
and he was the first lawgiver, priest and king. He 
had thirteen descendants, to whom he taught all the 
primitive arts, by whom he was succeeded, and who 
were the first teachers of the human world. All this 
«happened a great many thousand years ago. During 

the reign of the last of those kings—Azorabad, a 

good and pious man, the world became crrupted by 
fraud, violence, chicanery, and loose passions, from 
which it was at length saved by Jy Affram, a devout 
man, who, at the instigation of a messenger direct from 
heaven, assumed the cares of State, and restored order 
and happiness by very summary dealings with the 
vicious and unwise. f 

The new dynasty, thus re ied, came to an end. by 
the miraculous disappearance of its last king, Jy Abad, 
and the world again relapsed into an awful state of 
violence, crime and confusion. It was again redeemed 
as it had been ; but once more fell ; but this time lower 
than before. A merciful God again smiled upon, and 

saved the race from complete wreck and ruin. All 

was of no avail. ‘The drama was again enacted, and 
with the sume results. A vast number of ages had 
now elapsed, and God determined to make use of their 
evil habits 1 in order to put an end to the whole popula- 

ee “X > 

Ny 
. + _ 
+} 5 ‘ - ’ ait 

le 

32 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

tion of the cities of the world ; and accordingly he let 
loose all the restraining cords, and murder, war, lust 
and rape very speedily accomplished His will, and hur- 
ried them over the ramparts of eternal gloom and — 
death. When all this was done, God called into ex- 
istence a being named Kyomarz, or Gil-Shah; and he 
was the father of all the present human race—that is 
to say, of the Persians. “Gil” means “clay,” “ Shah” 

means “ king,” “ Kyomurz” means “ First Man.” Thus’ 
we have the first king ; earth-king ; king of the earth, 
and Adam. ‘The time that has elapsed since Gil-Shah 
lived must be computed at not less than one hundred 
thousand years. \ 

In this identical book, whose antiquity is very great 
indeed, we learn that a certain king of their country 
was in the habit of fighting pitched battles with the 
_Deeves—an order of disembodied gentry, who took to 
building cities in the province of Mazunduran ;* he 
defeated them, but the remains of their cities still re- 
4 qiain. This is a very pretty conceit, but have we not 
e something very like it concerning battles with spiritual | 
beings, led on by Michael and Satan? Is there the 
— remotest connection between the two—accounts ? 

How strange it is that, try as we may, we cannot 
reach an absolute historical commencement of any an- 

e 

* Recently, while travelling in Oriental lands in company with a 
“ Heathen” friend, who was well read in Oriental lore, beside being 
an excellent English and German scholar, our conversation turned on 
“ Who built Persepolis, Baalbec, and the Pyramids?’ Said he, seri- 
ously, ‘They are too collossal to have ever been erected by human 
hands of the present race or orders. My opinion is that they are the 
remnants of a gigantic race of intelligent beings, compared to whom 
we are the veriest pigmies. Such people did once live, and they, and 
. not the present race of mortals, built those vast monuments !”? — 
+ “When?” “ Allah knows! There is but one God! Perhaps one 
___ hundred thousand years ago.” Je 

ae . ; 5 Ste iva 

_ PRE-ADAMITE MAN, 33° yi 

cient nation? Let us fly as high and as far as we 
may, and alight upon the hoariest spot on earth, and 
yet we are only at the hither end of long dynastic 
lines! In the very oldest mythologies now extant, we 
perceive evidences of second-handedness; no matter 
whether we seize upon the Chinese annals, extending 
back, with probable truth, from eight to twelve thou- 
sand years, or take those that Manetho and Herodo- 
tus have handed down the ages ; or those which were 
extant hundreds of years before either of them walked 
the earth, all alike yield the same results. The Greck 
historian and the Kgyptian scholar alike, are but latter- 
age men! We find no new thing, either in what they 
have given, or in what we reach from beyond them ; 
but we always find derived knowledge, theory, myth 
—selected from the “has been,‘ or the “once upon a 
time”—something that was, but which had ceased to be 
—the mournful remnants of the foretime, the ruins and 
debris of what once was comparatively perfect ; vast 
systems that had grown up, matured, fallen into dis- 
suetude and decay, and finally gone out like an oil-less 
lamp! The oldest mythologies, Greek, Roman, Egyp- 
tian, Indian, Bactrian and Assyrian, are but new piec- 
tures of old facts long antecedent to ¢/eir time. 

Said my rather free-thinking, Moslem friend, to me 
one day, as we were taking our coffee and smoking our 
chibouques under the shade of the sycamores.ifi the 
Wzbekiah, Cairo : “ I have lived seven years in Europe ; 

have mastered four languages ; have fitted myself for 

my Shah’s service (military engincering,) under the 
tuition 6f English, French and German masters, and of 

course have had abundant opportunity to observe. 

The result of these observances are that all you, people 

of the West, are one-sided and fanatical! You are the — 
best mechanics in the world; are. rich and. powerful, 

Ae, 

” 

of immortal beings. We are but the initial types of. 

ete SaaS 

* 
a? 

“34 | PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

but—excuse me!—are not very wise with all your 
knowledge. You laugh at our Koords, who, disdain 
ing all your prosaic theories of Creation, boldly assert 
that they did not spring from your Adam, but were 
begotten of women created especially for that purpose 
by Allah, through the instrumentality of the Ginns 
(spiritual beings) ; and yet, while you thus laugh, you 
at the same moment tell us impossible tales of five 
hundred distinct nations of men all springing from one 
common pair! This is more absurd than the Koordish 
legend. You know that the 112th chapter of the 
Koran tells us—and perhaps you would do well to 
consider its teachings—that “God never begat, nor 
was begotten; neither had He any equal ;” He was 

nion or a child. Ido not know, but I feel, that God is 
a being too vast for human comprehension ; and I 

believe that this God is He who created man, solely 

and alone ; but you believe that another God, in asso- 
ciation, made man. I am believing the truth; youare 
accepting a Shemitic myth! I believe that this earth 
has, for millions of ages, been the scene of human acti- 
vities ; you, that it is but a few thousand years old! 
Your God is human; mine is celestial. I am a be- 
liever in one God ; you have a score or two—French, 

never incarnate in any body, nor took a female compa-— 

American, English, African, Jewish, Russian, Scotch— | 

in fact all sorts of gods; and you degrade the noblest 

faculties of your souls, and bow down, not to the 

august Creator, the great Mind of minds, but to a 
series of conventional gods. I suppose that Time moves 
in cycles, and that each has its peculiar order of intel- 
ligent beings, both like and unlike the present race of 

men. By and bye these last will disappear, as others 
have before them, and be superseded by a loftier race 

% 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

‘~ . 7 | .. ii " 

glorious races to come after we are gone to act our 
parts in another drama, in another stage of being! ’ 
You, as well as myself, have been amongst the Ansal- xe 
rech of Syria, and have gratefully listened while I 
translated for you their sublime cosmogonical theories. 
You know how eloquently they spoke of the five ages 
before the present race of men inhabited the earth, 
and of the Djan, the Ramm, the Tamm, the Bann, and 
the Djam, all of which lived long ages before your 
Adam. You perhaps understood that those five orders 
of intelligent beings were men as you and | are. They 
were ; and believe me, the legend is more than a mere 
figment of imagination; for behind there les a vast 
~ deal of sober truth ; and in these orders you can easily 
see the faint but certain record of long lines of ‘kings, 
nations, religions and political systems—forms of faith 
and records of past human action. And these five or- 
ders of fanciful-looking beings mean nothing more nor 
less than so many recollections of the human {foretime, 
stretching away into the dim distance, beyond the epoch 
of some of your geological ages, whose days are centu- 
‘ries long. 
Allah slowly plants a garden, but he plants it very well! 
Do you remember the day that your friend, Mr. Du- 
eat, and Professor Krause, yourself and I, strolled. 
out to see the ‘wailing place’ of the Jews, near the 
mosque I] Aksur, in Jerusalem? And do you remem- 
ber the historical fact that Jerusalem was known four 
thousand four hundred and seventy-nine years ago, and 
that the story that Melchizadek founded it, is not 
true? Well, on that very day an Arab, in digging a 
a well, found a jug-hanlle of a form and material 
so entirely different from any other discovered in mod- 
ern times, that it atiracted the attention of learned | 
men. Well, again, did.you observe that on the handle 

— _— a ae 7. / 

a 4 a A 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 
was a peculiar figure? That was the figure of the 
sun ; precisely such as had before been found amidst 
the ruins of Nineveh and Memphis, Tanta and Helio- 
polis; and consequently it spoke, not merely of four. 
thousand five hundred, or five thousand years ago, but 
it speaks of the early days of the Chaldean empire ; 
‘of commerce and art; and hints, not merely at the 
z Jebusite reign, but of Ninus and of Nimrod. When they , 
; lived, you must ask your Western scholars, but proba- 
bly in the days of the nations called the Djan. 
“4 Chaldea was an early nation, and yet, in my opi- 
nion, science will yet prove her, old as she is, to have 
been of Indo-Germanic origin; and so with many 
other of the nations of Asia, particularly those upon 
the Western portions thereof. No, no, my friend, do 
not put yourself to the trouble of believing that the 
__ present is the first, or only, family of men that have ex- 
 isted on this globe. Men, nations, civilizations, all, 
like the seasons, move in cyeles, and each round of ages 
is but a varied repetition, on a larger or smaller scale, 
upon the same general theatre, of events that have, 
time and again, been enacted and observed. Just 
_look at yonder moon : it rises, falls, comes up and goes 
*. down again; the same unvarying round forever and 
; forever. So the earth, and man, and nations, and eivi- 
lizations, and historical and unhistorical epochs and 
eras. They all rise, grow, flow, reach a perihelion 
splendor, and then a night, and then again a new moon, 
anew day. But come, let us fill our pipes. Philosophy 
is tiresome!” And he became silent. I could not 
help marveling at such things falling from an Orien- 
tal’s lips, nor wondering at the dogged persistency 
with which he clung to the notion that all we of the 
Western world, were at this very moment, not only — 
- idolators, but actuat Polytheists ; but aside from ter 
Ry 

. «eas 

=. 

Br ais 
PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 7 | | 
and one or two other matters, I couid not but admit 
that his remarks*were, to say the least, very sugges- 
tive. In another work I shall detail many strange 
things derived from my:.intercourse with this man. 
It is held by a great number of scholars that the 
words in Genesis, “Let us make man in our own 
image,” does not warrant the assumption that the per- 
son there spoken of was the first man on the earth, but 
implies that man, as he then existed, did not so exist as 
the intellectual and moral image of God ; consequently 
Deity determined to make man 2m that image, though 
to whom God alluded when he said, “ Let ws make 
man,” is not yet apparent, but. will be before we con- 
clude this book. Another reading of the 26th verse of 
Genesis, Ist chapter, might be: ‘ Let us create other 
men in another and better moral mould than those whe 
now exist.” But as this exegesis might be set down as 
a mere quibble, I trust no weight will be attached to 
it, for it is not safe to even attempt to build up a theory, 
or to establish any hypothesis, the grounds of which 
are not solid and based on the very truth itself; for 
though a false doctrine or system may pass current, and 
be successful for a while, yet in the end, both the system 
and its authors are sure to sink into a night that knows 
no ending ; hence, if my theory cannot stand on better 
authority than perverted texts of either Scripture or 
Science, nothing is more absolutely certain than that it 
_ is destined ‘toa very limited career in the worlds of 
Letters and of Thought. It has already been admitted 
herein that the name Adam is one used to signify a par- 
ticular individual ; but it has also other meanings, as, 
_ for instance, Genesis vi. 1—7; “ And it came to pass, 
when ha-adam (the Adam—the Adamites) ' began to 
. multiply on the face of the earth, and daughters were 
_ born unto them, that the sons of God (“sons of the ——— 

a : 
38 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

gods” is the true rendering) saw the daughters of the 
ha-adam that they were fair (literally goodly) ; and 
they took them wives of all which they chose.?,_ There 
were giants (Nephilim) in the earth in those days ;3 and 
also after that, when the sons of God (of the gods) came 
in unto the daughters of ha-adam, and they bare children 
to them ; the same became mighty men, which were of 
old, men of renown. Literally these were the mighty 
ones which were of old-time men of renown.* And the 
Lord said: I will destroy the ha-adam whom 1] have 
created... for it repenteth me that I have made 
them.” Now the events here related refer, not to the 
days of Adam, for, according to Scriptural chronology, 
no less than 1556 years had elapsed since creation, 
and 626 since Adam’s death. In Hebrew the prefix 
“ha” is equivalent to our “ the,” and is, of course, an 
“ article,” while “ Adam” was both a proper individual 
name, and also a collective patronymic, like“ Anakim,” 
“Tsrael,” “ Jacob,” “ Gideon,” “ Dan,” and “Reuben ;” 
though in some sense the term “ Adam” differs from the 
others,inasmuch as it wasa “generic epithet.” “ Adam,” 
without the article, was the name of the Hebrew proto- 
plast ; it then became the name of himself and wife ; 
then it became that of any one of their descendants, and 
then to any multitude thereof; and, by a synedoche, or 
extension of meaning, is applied to the whole human 
race. Saysarecent British author, on this very point : 
“ When ‘ Adam’ does not signify the man whose proper 
uname it was, nor relate to his time, it is properly a 
generic epithet, but used as a collective noun, and sig- 
nifying ‘The Adamites,’ including none beside them, 
and excluding none of them.” “ Ha-adam” is a vague 
singular, but virtually a plural. The Septuagint has 
“ha-adamah,” which, in my opinion, is the better ren- 
dering of the two. Adam also signifies “ redness,” 

° 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. -39 

“ red-earth,” “red-men ;” so does “Edom ;” so does 
“ Hamor,”’ which latter is also a generic epithet; a 
male patronymic; a female name; a collective noun, 
and a special hero of the Bible. In quoting the pas- 
sages from vi. Genesis, we encounter something more 

- than has yet appeared, for instance : '“ When ‘ ha-adam’ 
(the Adamites) began to multiply.” Can this passage 
mean “ When that particular branch of the human 
species began to increase ?” Such is, at least, the im- 
plication ; as also that other branches hgd already 
stocked the land. Indeed, the fact that there were 
other tribes of men, not of Adam’s race, is clearly and 
emphatically stated in the same quotation ; and they 
are called the sons of God, as Adam’s offspring are 
called after their great progenitor. Some writers \1ave 
claimed that these sons of God were spiritual beiugs ;? 
but this cannot be possible, seeing that such are neither 
in the habit of marrying flesh-and-blood women, nor 
capable of becoming the fathers of such a goodly race 
of mortals as became the mighty men of old. ‘These 
sons of God were therefore of another race than the 
Adamites, as were also the people mentioned in the 
next verse totally distinct from either of the human 
races just mentioned.* “There were Nephilim (giants) 
in those days.” Now this passage neither states nor 
implies that the giants were overgrown specimens of 

- humanity, such as we see in these days in museums, but 
they were a race of men of exceeding stature. “ Men 
of old, men of renown.”* It appears that there was a 
hoary antiquity ascribed to those who lived in the 
Noachian Age, even according to Genesis; and this 
passage plainly indicates a Pre-Adamite race, or races 
of men. “It repenteth me that I have made the 
 ha-adam.”> And God promised to destroy them—and 
. did, all save Noah and the people in the Ark—all of 

bau. 

40 -PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 
the Adamites except eight persons, but not all of man- 
kind, by as many millions, as will be hereinafter seen. 

Let us push our inquiries one step further in the 
same direction. 

CHAPTER IL. 

CAIN—HIS WIFE—JOB. 

Gan. iv. 13-26: “ And Cain said unto the Lord, My 
punishment is greater than I can bear. Behold thou 
hast drivejme out this day from the face of the earth ; 
and from thy face shall I be hid; and I shall bea 
fugitive and a vagabond in the earth ; and it shall come 
to pass, that every one that findeth me shall slay me. 
And the Lord said unto him, Therefore, whosoever 
slayeth Cain, vengeance shall be taken on him seven- 
fold. And the Lord set a mark upon Cain, lest any 
finding him should kill kim. And Cain went out from 
the presence of the Lord, and dwelt in tbe land of Nod, 
on the east of Eden.... And Cain knew his wife, and 
she conceived, and bare Enoch; and he built a city, 
and called the name of the city after the name of his 
son Enoch. And unto Hnoch was born Irad: and 
Trad begat Mehujael, and Mehujael begat Methusael : 
and Methusael begat Lamech. And Lamech took unto 
him two wives: the name of one was Adah, and the 
name of the other was Zillah. And Adah bear Jabal ; 
‘he was the father of such as dwell in tents, and of such 
as have cattle. And his brother’s name was Jubal : 
he was the father of such as handle the harp and organ. 
And Zillah, she also bare Tubal Cain, an instructor of 
every artificer in brass and iron: and the sister of 
Tubal Cain was Naamah.... And Lamech said unto his 
wives, Adah and Zillah, Hear my voice. ye wives of 
Lamech, hearken unto my speech: for I have slaina — 
man to my wounding, and a young man to my hurt. If © 

® 
( 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 41 

Cain shall be avenged seven-fold, truly Lamech seventy 
and seven-fold.... And Adam knew his wife again, 
and she bare a son, and called his name Seth: For 
God, said she, hath appointed me another seed instead 
of Abel, whom Cain slew. And to Seth, to him also 
there was born a son; and he called his name Enos: 
then began men to call upon the name of the Lord.” 
Now several noteworthy things here present them- 
selyes, which we will glance at, seriatim: 1st. Adam 
and Cain and Eve were all of that particular branch 
of the human family then existing—three persons. 
Cain having killed Abel at home, surely did not allude 
to his parents when complaining that whoever: found 
him woula slay him! Although he was a murderer 
himself, it is not likely that he deemed his father and 
mother capable of the same dreadful crime. It is far 
more reasonable to conclude that he feared the punish 
ment due to murder. If he so feared, then three parts 
of one grand conclusion instantly present themselves : 
2d. There must have been some other human beings 
beside his family, in existence, and these others were 
not a few, but many, as is implied by his “ Whosoever 
shall find me.” These others were of a different race 
than Adam, and by reason of their numbers, must have 
been of a race who had existed in that region long 
antecedent to Adam and Eve. Nothing is mentioned 
about other brothers of Cain, for further along we are 
told that Eve’s third son was expressly given to fill up 
Abel’s—the dead man’s—place. Of sisters of Cain 
nothing is said, and on this point we have no right to 
go behind the record, and suppose that Adam had a 
number of female children. But, supposing that Adam 
had daughters, it is not likely, in the first place, that 
Cain would have been afraid of a few women ; nor 
that, if such existed, that they would have sought the 

oe 

” es 
42 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

life of one brother, by way of revenge for the slaying 
of another one, in the second place; ard in the third, 
it is not likely that, supposing such sisters to have been 
in existence, (first), that Cain and Abel had been guilty 
of incest with them, and raised up sons; and (second) 
it is not likely, supposing such to have been the case, 
that they would have slain Cain in revenge of Abel’s ° 
death at his hands, for the sons of Abel would have 
feared the lex talionis at the hands of the sons of Cain. 
lt was not his sons, nor Abel’s, for there were none 
such, nor of his sisters, that Cain was afraid. Again, 
it is not likely that Adam was guilty of the dreadful 
crime of which reason demands that we exculpate 
both of his sons. Who then was Cain in fear of ? What 
grounds had he? The text obliquely answers these 
__ questions: He was fearful of the penalties exacted for 
murder. These penalties imply human society, and 
human codes of Tiaw, hence a state of advanced civiliza- 
tion ; and the people who had, at that early period of 
_time, advanced far enough to frame and execute such 
laws, were of course of an entirely distinct branch of 
the genws homo ; for it cannot be supposed for an in- 
stant that Cain would have feared the vengeance of 
Savages or barbarians, supposing that such existed; ~ 
for men, savage or civilized, act from settled motives ; 
_ and if savages existed in those days, they could not 
have any motive in avenging Abel’s murder. But, 
admit that such savage men did exist, it is clear that 
they were not related to Cain, and were, consequently, 
Pre-Adamite men. 

In the next place, it is clear that there were other 
people than the Adam family in existence, else why 
was a mark put upon Cain to protect him from human 
vengeance? <As to the nature of this mark, or whv 
God connived at Cain’s escape, no remarks need here 

Soe \ 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 43 

be offered, although if this whole account should turn 
out to be either a myth, tradition, or allegory, we may 
be able to answer both of these queries. Nothing can 
ever induce a rational man to the belief that the Infi- 
_ nite One either sanctioned murder or incest among 
men at any period of human history. I feel that such 
a defense of God is gratuitous, yet it seems apropos at 
this early period of our investigations, for the question 
is but opened ; we are only at the beginning, and a 
splendid vista lies before us..... “ And went out from 
the Presence—and dwelt in the land of Nod, east- 
ward of Eden.” Here two new questions come up: 
Ist. Why did Cain go there? The reply is, “To get 
where his crime was unknown, and where he would be 
safe from the ‘clutches of the law.’” And 2d. Did he 
go to the wilderness—to live and labor alone? The first 
answer replies to the second question, He did noé go 
to the wilderness, but to an inhabited land, where he — 
“knew his wife.” Who was she? Not his sister, for 
reasons already given. She must therefore have been 
either a daughter of the land he fled to, or a woman of 
the people of whom he was atraid before he emigrated. 
In. either case she was not a relation of his, and was, 
consequently, a Pre-Adamite. Again: a single person 
could not build a house alone, much less a large number 
of houses; and even if he could do so, he would not, 
unless there were people to occupy the aforesaid houses. 
Well, in this land of Nod, whither Cain fled, he builded 
a city, and called it Enoch, after his son. Who were 
the helpers of Cain in this work of building? Why 
build a city for a single family—Cain’s?, Who were 
Zillah and Adah, Lamech’s wives? Not of Adam’s 
race, assuredly. Well, Cain went to Nod, married, 
had children, and grandchildren, and built a city; his 
descendants began to raise cattle, and had invented the 

- 

Sehanige 

44 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

Harp and the Organ ; had learned how to make brass, 
and fashion it and iron into useful implements, and all 
within a period of one hundred and thirty years, for it 
was all accomplished before the birth of Seth, who was 
born when Adam was one hundred and thirty years 
old, and it was not till after Seth’s birth that Adam 
begat sons and daughters; and before Adam had 
daughters at all there were Adah, Zillah, Seth’s wife, 
Cain’s, and the wives, mothers, daughters and sisters 
of all the people who helped Cain to build his city! 
In the second verse of Genesis iv., it is said that Cain 
was a tiller of the land, and in the same verse that 
Abel was a keeper of sheep. In the last verse of 
sane chapter, “Men began to call upon the name of the 
Lord,” 2. e-—worship God. Now, observe: Ist. Men 
cultivate land for either a livelihood, or for profit. 
They keep sheep for the same purpose ; yet why, in 
that climate—and it matters little whether Adam and 

his family dwelt in the region where Damascus now 

stands, as one tradition claims, and where his head lies 
buried to this day, according to a second legend; or in 
Mesopotamia; or in Southern Armenia; or near the 
Ural mountains ; or near Jerusalem, or on the plains 
now submerged beneath the Caspian Sea; or in Cen- 
tral Persia, according to as many other traditions ; it 

__ matters not, I repeat, which of these may be the true 

locality. No adequate motive or necessity could possi- 
bly exist, either for keeping sheep or cultivating the 
soil as a profession, if there were but four human beings 
on the earth. The very fact that such professions were 
pursued, implies the existence of other human consu- 
mers of the commodities—wool, meat, milk, cheese, 
butter, fruits and vegetables, thus produced. 2d. Adam 
and his family knew but one God, the Creator, and yet 

we are told that in the 105th year of Enos’ life, and 

-PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 45 

the 235th of Adam’s, and while only Adam, Eve, Seth, 
Cain, and thirteen others, including five women, were 
yet alive, that “ The people began to call on the name 
of the Lord.” This implies two things: First, that 
there were others beside these seventeen people in ex- 
istence, for they already “called on the name of the | 
Lord;” and secondly, that the hearts of those others 
were then, for the first time, withdrawn from the wor- 
ship of their old gods, and directed to the worship of 
the God of Adam and his family ; for it cannot be sup- 
posed that Cain, who had too good reason to remem- 
ber, had forgotten God in the land to which he fled. 
But it is likely that he worshiped in repentance in his 
new home, and won the nations over, so that they 
began to forsake their old, and conform to a new and 
loftier system of worship. It strikes me that this last 
passage presents a formidable obstacle in the path of 
those who insist, on Scriptural grounds, that all man- 
kind originated with the Edenic protoplasts. 

While on the Scriptural part of this investigation, I 
call attention to a few more passages, after which there 
are some things to be said on the Bible generally, 

_ of great interest to all who admire that most wonderful 
of all books that was ever written. . 

Turn to Job, chapter i.6,and chapter ii.1 : “There was 
a day when the sons of God came to present themselves 
before the Lord, and Satan came also among them. 
And the Lord said to Satan: Whence comest thou? 
And Satan said: From going to and fro in the earth, 
and from walking up and down in it.” In noticing 
these passages it must not be forgutten that the entire 
sublime Book of Job is, beyond all doubt the oldest in 
the Bible—not excepting Genesis. This latter Book 
is a collection of separate narratives, usually attributed 

to the pen of Moses—as is also the Book of Job—but 

ee ad 
a —_—*< 
eH ae 
Si’ re 

46 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

probably without good reason. The Pentateuch, or a 
~ part of it, at least, may have been, and probably was, 
compiled by the great Legislator ; but Job is the work 
of a single pen ; is a connected story throughout ; and 
the grand, magnificent, and lofty style in which it is 
written, differs so greatly from that of Moses, as to 
leave no doubt that it was the work of another, and 
widely different order of genius. The date usually 
ascribed as that of Job, is 1520 before Christ, but this 
assignment is made not on the very best authority, viz., 
that of the Jewish Rabbins. The entire Talmud, ag 
was demonstrated to me while in Jerusalem, to my 
entire satisfaction, abounds, not merely with numberless 
chronological, geneological, and historical falsifications, 
and perversions, but with the most puerile and absurd 
statements ; as, for instance, that one of their Rabbins 
once went hunting; started a hare; the animal, to 
save itself, plunged into a dark Jane—a sort of tunnel ; 
the Rabbi pursued it incessantly for three whole days 
and nights, and then discovered that during all that 
time he and the hare had been running through the 
marrowless shin-bone of the defunct Ogg, King of 
Bashan !—-and there are actually hundreds of volumes 
of just such ridiculous nonsense; and these self-same 
worthies have tampered with every page of the Old 
Testament that they chose to, thus compelling the 
scholars of Christendom to find the world’s history, bit 
by bit, and scrap by scrap, from ten thousand graves, 
where they have lain entombed for ages. But they 
will do it, and in accomplishing the mighty task, will 
do the worlds of Letters and Religion a service and a 
benefit, incalculable by the human mind, as at present 
constituted. To resume: Job, or the “ Poem,” as not a 
few regard it, was of Chaldean origin; and if the 
splendid tale is a record of a human experience, then 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 4T 

that experience was undergone by a man who, in all 
probability, was not related to the “ Rabbins” even in 
the ten-thousandth generation or degree. ‘The reasons 
for this opinion will be manifest in chapters further 
on. 

Many readers regard the “Satan” mentioned in Job, 
as the very Devil incarnate in the human form. The 
notion is childish—the idea an unworthy one. That 
term is one signifying falsity in the abstract, 7. e., an 
oppugnment, a negation, the spirit that opposed the 
Good. The sons of God referred to, are, doubtless, 
the same race of Pre-Adamite men, already treated of, 
while the “Satan” here can mean no other than the 
doctrine-mongers of the land —a class of idolators—a 
people distinct from either the Adamites, or the right 
eous people above noticed. 

Science, especially Astronomy, requires a long time 
for development, and yet in this exceedingly old book 
we read passages that indicate a close acquaintance 
with it. We read of Arcturus, Orion—‘ the sweet 
belts of Orion,” of Pleiades, and “ the sweet chambers 
of the South,” and even with eclipses of sun and moon ;* . 

*In all ages and among all nations the eclipses of the Sun and Moon 
have excited an unusual degree of interest in the minds of the masses, 
_ For many centuries they weie looked upon with that awe and rev- 
erence which the human mind in its uncultivated state is apt to be- 
stow upon all phenomena which appear strange and unintelligible. 
And even at the present day there are many who ascribe peculiar 
power to the Sun and Moon. The Egyptians, Chaldeans, Indians and 
Chivese, each began to observe these phenomena at a very remote pe- 
riod. We have satisfac ory evidence that the Egyptians recorded ob- 
servations more than 1600 years before Christ, and the Indians at a 
' yet earlier day. In fact, it has r-cently been proved beyond a doubt, 
that we have the record of a remarkable pLenomenon which was ob- 
served in the year 2460 B. C., or some centuries before the “ universal 
flood’’—-according to the H>brew chronology, or the systems of reckon- 
ing usually accepted. At a very early day, the Chaldeans knew a 

d im ‘dea 

48 PRE-ADAMITE MaN. 

while other passages show that even Physiology was 
tolerably well understood. Job speaks of kings and 
thrones and diadems; so that monarchies already ex- 
isted in his days. Even the arts of criticism and 
authorship were common in his time, for he expressly 
wishes that his adversary had written a book—that he 
might “ Review” it? The 35th verse of the 38th chap- 
ter looks very like an allusion to the modern electric 
telegraph. And in passing, I will mention that while 
in Egypt I became satisfied from evidence there pre- 
sented—from Macrinius, I think—that something very 
similar must have been known to one of the Cleopatras, 
‘else how did she “ send news by a wire to all the cities, 
from Heliopolis to Elephantina, on the upper Nile ?” 
The word “ Jordan” in the 41st chapter is believed to 
be an interpolation, or to refer to another than the 
Syrian river, for Job lived in Idumea, and far* away 
from the Jordan. 

OW AP Pe RoE. 
THE NILE. 

Aimard, in a recent work on South America, says a 
thing so happily, that I cannot forbear quoting it here : 
“Learned men have endeavored to prove that America 
was quite new, comparatively with the ancient known 
world. This hypothesis is absurd, quite as absurd as 

period of 223 lunations (or eighteen years) when the same eclipses 
- were reproduced. This leads us to suppose that they were careful 
observers,and had made considerable progress in the science of As- 
tronomy. Oue of the early Chinese Emperors founded a school of As- 
tronomers, whose duty it was to predict all remarkable eclipses, aud 
on failing to do so, paid the forfeit with their lives. In a subse- 

quent reign, YHanG, the Astronomer Royal, announced two eclipses — 

which did not take place, and in order to save bis head, he said it was 
uct because his calculations were erroneous, but that the Heavenly 

bodies deviated from their regular course out of respect to the virtues 

of the Emperor. 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 49 

that which asserts that this land was peopled from 
Asia, by means of Behring’s Straits. The imposing 
ruins of Palenque, the city recently discovered in ~ 
Yucatan, prove not only a more remote antiquity than 
the Egyptians have preserved for us, but still further, 
a civilization that the ancients (Oriental) never pos- 
sessed. The Red race, whatever may be said, has no 
relation whatever with the White, Black or Yellow 
races, and is, hke them, primordial and autochthone. 
On this subject we remember a repartee made one day 
by a Comanche Chief to a missionary, who—we don’t 
recollect exactly to what purpose—was endeavoring to 
prove that there had not been an aboriginal race in 
America, grounding his argument rather clumsily, we 
think, upon that passage of the Bible, which says that 
Noah had three sons, one of whom peopled Asia, the 
second Europe, and the third Africa, and that thence it 
followed that the inhabitants of the New World must 
be descended from one of these three children of Noah. 
‘“‘ Brother,” said the Indian, “ The Father has forgotten 
this—they who preserved the tradition of this Noah 
have only given him three sons, because at that period 
our land was not known; if it had been, there would 
certainly have been a fourth, you may depend upon it !” 
The reply is worth~being written in letters of gold. 
As with the Indian, so with many another race of men. 

To aid us in our researches the Genius of History 
bears us back and down, through the long tane of the 
centuries. until we stand face to face with Hipparchue, - 
Euctemon, Meton, Ptolemy, Eratosthenes and Auto- 
lyeus; where we rest a while, and resting, sigh “‘ There’s 
no beginning here!” Once more we take wing, and 
after a vast flight through the Glimmer, we halt to talk 
with Herodotus, Manctho, Berosus and the Babylonian 

illuminati, every one of whom repeats the same mono- 

50 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

tonous song of, “No beginning here!” specially is 
this true of those whom in this chapter we are treating 
of—the Nilotic branch of the human tree. Having 
parenthetically glanced at other races, let us now re- 
turn to our starting-point—EKgypt, and to Menes—that 
wonderful man, who left his father’s house, and king- 
dom, and the lovely city of his birth—the ancient This, 
in Upper Egypt, probably in the latitude where after- 
wards stood the famous Abydos, to found a new king- 
dom—to erect a new empire. 

Menes had two sons, one of whom, Athothis, suc- 
ceeded him on the throne, but whether of Upper or 

Lower Egypt, is not exactly known; if it was, it would 

matter little. But what is of vast importance in this 
connection, is that this king Athothis, five thousand 
“nine hundred and forty years ago, was a very liberally 
educated man—indeed a man of prvfound learning and 
scientific attainments ; for we are assured on the very 
best, and unmistakable authority, that he was not only 
a munificent patron of literature, but was himself an 
author of excellent works upon Physiology and Ana- 
tomy.* Now if literature and art had reached thus 
far at that early date, it follows that they must have 
been developed by some other race of men than those 
claiming the Adam of the Hebrews, as the primeval 
originator. ‘The simple fact is, that in this first begin- 
ning of what is fairly proved to be comparatively 
modern Kegyptian History, we are simply becoming 
acquainted with a people who had already worn out 
one phase of civilization. and were then beginning to 
found a new order of things, just as had been probably 
done before—just as will. be done again and again, 
until Time himself shall have grown hoary with age! 

* See » Early Egyptian History.” London: 1861 Macmillan & Co. 

— 
eh ada 
PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 51 

We must go away from Eeypt—old as she is, and at 
least in four different directions, before we arrive at 
any thing like a true beginning of the great civilized 
drama; for we can never reach that of Man himself; 
true, we can guess—and that is all. In Memphis—on 
the pyramid-plateau—on the site of Cairo, and west- 
ward of the present Egyptian capital, the sacred Bulls, 
Apis and Mnevis, were worshiped in the days of 
Menes—a fact so pregnant with meaning, and one that 
so clearly points backward to a, human antiquity, com- 
pared to which the era of Menes is but of yesterday, 
that the wonder and astonishment is indeed great, that 
European Egyptologers have not perceived it long ago. 
That fact is this: These sacred Bulls were supposed to 
symbolize Life—the Principle of Animation. In these 
Bulls the god Pthah, Sokar-Osiris, (Life,) was resident. 
This Bull-worship was not indigenous to Nilotic lands. 
It was an importation from Western Asia, was borrowed 
from the banks of the Euphrates, and the Bull-worship 
of Memphis was but a locally modified service of what 
had been a nation’s faith in Babylon, thousands of 
years before the Meneites’ progenitors had dispossessed’ 
the Nigritian kings and founded This. The proof of 
this is clear, and has been demonstrated by recent dis- 
coveries in Egypt, and in Birs Nimroud. We know 
when Bull-headed gods, and Jiving Bulls were intro- 
duced into Egypt; we know that the early nations 
copied the examples of each other ; we know that this 
mode and form of worship was in vogue in Babylon, 
Nineveh, and Nimroud, in their palmy days; and we 
know that these palmy days stretch away vastly beyond | 
the horizon of Time, bounded by Menes, Apis, Osiris 
and Memphis. The golden calf made by Aaron for the 
Children of Israel, was but this identical Bull-worship, 
modified and adapted to the demands of a somewhat 

Sach Cais 
Re ie Oe 

: , ey Tea 
7 oe; A“ ns © ei ¥ 

52 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

differently organized people. The same people worship 
the gold in another shape ever since that day. Does 
any other people? This relapse of the Hebrew wan- 
derers into Memphite idolatry, disgusted, discouraged, 
and so enraged their great leader, that he threw down 
and broke the two tables of the law, which had cost 
him the labor of forty long days to engrave, while 
alone upon the Asiatic mountain ; and no wonder! It 
was enough to provoke Moses—or any other man. 
‘Ina large tomb near the Pyramids, is the picture of 
/ the preparation of a feast. A man has just killed a 
cow, is sharpening a bronze knife on a steel rod, while 
“Fan iron pot of three legs is boiling over a fire! The 
_ - colors explain the metals. Bronze, iron, steel, five 
_ thousand eight hundred years ago! Surely Adam’s 
Be children had not yet experienced that stern necessity, 
which is the mother of invention, to such a degree, in 
less than two centuries from Adam’s creation, as to 
lead to these important results! Were not these re- 
sults the product of centuries of human experience, 
then already long since passed away? Is not this the 
most reasonable view ? 
The first Pyramid was built, according to the best 
' authorities, about two hundred years after-Menes came | 
- to lower Egypt; and one of the tombs near it is 
ascribed to the butler of a king then upon the throne; 
- and on the walls of this tomb are pictures of cabinel- 
makers, bout-builders, sail-makers, and glass-blowers. — 
Kach one of these trades, of course, imply at least a 
score of others; else whence their highly-tempéred 
steel tools, planes, saws, needles, looms, and so forth? 
There are no iron mines on tke banks of the Nile : there 
are no copper mines there either; but the first must 
have been obtained in South-western Africa; thelatter 
from the Asiatic deserts—perhaps from Wadi—Maghra, 

° 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 53 

in the Sinain wilderness; for the mines there give 
abundant evidence of having been worked a long, long 
time ago, probably in the days of the Pyramid-buiid- 
ing—perhaps anterior thereto. A people must have 
been far advanced to have been able to make as excel- 
lent edge tools, as were in use when those vast buildings 
were reared. Another picture represents the Egyptian 
king in the act of slaying his captives, who are evi- 
dently Asiatics, but as far unlike any known nation, 
as the Negroes are unlike the modern Greek. Who, 
and what were, this captive people? Sons of Adam? 
Mercantile arts were pursued, as well as war ; for we 
find pictures of bartering; exchanging leopard-skins 
and other peltry, for coin and other commodities ; and 
those skins were foreign produce ; Egypt having nei- 
ther leopards nor pearls of her own—and strings of 
pearls are represented. The ancient .people tanned _ 
leather, blew glass-bottles, made wine, hunted, fished, 
farmed ; were floriculturists, tamed beasts, dyed cloth, 
imitated precious stones ; played on flutes, harps, lyres, 
a sort of guitar; and, in brief, possessed an hundred 
arts, which arts are proved to have existed, by seulp- 
tures on the monuments, and in papyri manuscripts, 
taken from-tombs, where they had lain five thousand 
long years and more; and it is difficult to understand 
how such an amazing advancement could have taken 
place in so short a time, supposing that the Adam 
of Genesis was the first and only created man, as it 
would be for a Mohawk Indian, fresh from the woods, 
to give-a learned lecture on analytical geometry, or the 
calculus of variations. 

Little by little we are unraveling the tangled skein 
of ‘Time and human history. I have already had ocea- 
sion to connect Egypt with Assyria, in the matter of 
the Bulls. Long before the Bull-worship became part 

ve aT Pe ¥ 

54 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. ° 

of the national practice on the Nilotic shores, Babylon 
was a city of a million inhabitants ; one Nineveh had 
already fallen and crumbled into dust, and a new Nine- 
veh had, like the fabled Phoenix, arisen from its ashes. 
Babylon was built before the Deluge, and, old legends 
tell us, survived it. True, 2,233, B.C., is the date 
of the building of that remarkable city on the Plaiiis 
of Shinar, assigned by James, the British king’s trans 
lators of the Bible ; but it is one purely arbitrary, and 
wholly unwarranted, as our researches will presently 
demonstrate ; for if we add a term equally long, we yet 
fail to reach Babylon’s era. She was a mighty centre 
of a mighty belt of nations, and the sculptors of her 
sister city, Nineveh the second—built, as I have said, 
_ thousands of years before—were carving out of solid 
stone the monstrons winged Bulls—the identical Bulls 
that now grace the Halls of European Museums. The 
great city of the Jebusites (Jerusalem) had waxed old ; 
Joppa (Jaffa) was an old sea-port; Damascus, the 
queen of cities, was a very ancient town, and one whose 
origin man cannot fix ; and a hundred other human 
hives were thronged with busy life many a long cen- 
tury prior to four thousand and four years before 
Christ ; and if we take our stand upon the towers of 
any one of those places—and from them interrogate 
China as to fev age, she replies, “ O, sons of Belus, and 
Nineveh, thousands of summers had passed over my 
head ere thou wert born among the nations!’ And 
probably China would speak the truth, for her chron- 
ology extends many thousands of years beyond the |. 
Mosaic; while that of the Hindoos is older still,and 
“has ast aS, records to prove its truth, suchas the 
occultation of some stars, the conjunction of some 
others, and the heliacal rising of others still. Nor will 
it do to attempt to account for the correctness of these 

. PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 55 

recorded events, on the hypothesis of “ back reckon- 
ings,” because, although possible, it is improbable. 
Men never act but from motives of some sort of inter- 
est ; and no nation, especially the Hindoos, had or has 
. any tnterest in telling falsehoods to posterity —always . 
excepting the Jews—and they had a powerful motive, 
namely, the desire to prove themselves God’s chosen 
people; and their desire to appear as the “ First 
Family.” But—Science is telling her story now! Serip- 
ture is common human property, and no more belongs 
exclusively to Eber’s children, than sunshine does to 
Africa alone ; and as Scripture itself does not claim 
to give chronological accounts of creation and human 
events, it is but right that its friends clear it of the — 
rubbish attached to it by interested parties, and let the 
sublime Book stand for what it really is—a dateless — 
narrative of certain past occurrences. I have seen it 
suggested by a British writer, quite recently, that in the 
legacy left by Joseph to his children, called the Book 
of Genesis, or the Beginning, that we have an ancient 
oratorio, transcribed from an Oriental tragedy. An- 
other writer expresses his profound conviction, that in: 
Genesis we have but the lucubrations of some of the 
visionary Rabbins of the olden time. I reject both no- 
tions, because we know it relates historical facts. The, 
sublime thoughts in Genesis were never achieved by a } 
playright, nor were they the invention of any mere | 
literateur. The world’s best thoughts were then, as 
now, the world’s own property, and by that world were 
treasured and housed in books—printed or written, 
both on parchment and the tablets of human memory. 
To this common cache the writers of old were indebted * 
_ for the priceless fragments they have bequeathed us. 
There is a chronology of Soul as well as of material 
‘history ; and not by the study of material things alone ar 
- 

F ; 
oP 7 : or 
v4 7 : 
Pee! * = 
. £ 4 so. 

es 

ms 

eS sian. ete 
5 > e * 

56 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

. shall we arrive at the age of man or of the world ; but 

by the study of the human mind itseif, and it alone, shall 
we solve the great problem; for the birth and death 
of Ideas are the true mile-stones on the great path that 
man has traveled. There are no abortions by Thought’s 
great mother—Nature. Her children take a long time 
to gestate, and a still longer one to be born and reared ; 
and thousands of years are often consumed in the pro- 
cesses. For instance, let us take two ideas: Ist. That 
wars are not necessary ; 2d. that all men are naturally 
orethren. Both of these ideas were, thousands of years 
ago, born into the world; the first is part of every 

man’s internal, but not of his practical consciousness ; 

and the second —embodied in the Golden Rules of 
Brahma, Confucius, Budha and Jesus, has not yet reached 
the outer, from man’s inner world. A great idea re- 

‘quires not less than five thousand years for an orbit. 

Give us the known succession of ideas, and we can 
come far nearer to deciding how old the human world 
is, than by the study of all the monumental records in 
existence, save when those monuments are themselves 

the idea expressed in stone—as, for instance, the obe- 

lisque or the scarabeus. As a whole, the world deve- 
lops, and ideas are climacteric—crude, less crude, fine, 
polished —and then they beget new ideas, thought- 
babes, which, though different from the parents 
themselves, are, nevertheless, a decided improvement. 

Illustration: The idea of a God, beginning with ele- 
.mental worship, idolatry, polytheism, and so on, from 

the crude concept of the savage, to the sublime idea 
attempted to be grasped by modern genius. Probably 
the space of time between the two poles of this central 

Thought of, thoughts must be measured by thousands of - 

—centuries, shall I say? Take another instance: the 

birth of the Promethean instinct—Fire, and its uses. 

ur 

“ 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 57 

What a wide egulph of years separates us from that 
early time when man discovered the art of making and 
~ using fire! How long it took him to learn to melt the 
' ores; how long from the first rude casting to the 
last cylinder, for some grand “ Naugatuck,” or “ Van- 
derbilt,” “ Persia” or “ Adriatic,” “ Great Eastern,” 
or “ Roanoke?” Nay. How long did it take to de- 
velope the mageric art—to pass by slow degrees from 
the simple broiled or roasted lump of meat, to the 
patés and entrees of a Parisian chef de cuisine? Bring 
two men together: one shall be one of Livingston’s 
Makalolos, the other the chief cook of Napoleon, the 
Whosatisfied ; contrast them—and the difference is as that 
of one to one-hundred ; and yet the art of the last is 
unquestionably but the out-growth of the first. Put the 
question: How long would it take Zambuzi to equal 
Alexis Soyer—how many generations would it require ? 
The people who dweit in This, and who afterwards 
founded Memphis and erected Thebes, were, beyond. 
all reasonable doubt, a branch of that singular trib@ of 
people now called the Basinjes, remnants of whom are _ 
still to be found in Central Africa, occupying that 
splendid series of basins—the great lake-region— 
through which the Zambezi and the Leeambye roll 
their magnificent tides, which now embraces lakes 
Ngami in the south, Tsadi in the north, Dilolo in the 
west, and Taganyika and Nyanja in the east. This 
whole region was once only a single lake, but one 
nearly three thousand miles long, by one thousand in 
width ; and there cannot be a doubt that recent geolo- 
gical changes—though an event geologically recent, 
may mean twice ten thousand years ago !—drained all 
but the above five portions through the fissure of Mosi- : 
_ oatunye. These Basinje people are, in form, stature and 

‘ 

58 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

are the Copts, who claim to be the descendants of Menes 
and the Pharoahs. New conditions, localities, and 
climates develop new habits, customs, languages, forms ‘ 
of thought and worship ; and if, as is probable, on the 
oecurrence of that terrific earth-quake which opened 
the fissure of Mosioatunye, and emptied the lake of its 
waters, the remnant of survivors emigrated in search 
of a new home, which they at length found on the | 
banks of the Nile, how long must it have taken them 
to rise above and out of their barbarism, to develop 
a new form of thought, a new language, and to found 
a new empire? How long must it have taken this 
primitive people to subdue the possessors of the coveted 
soil; to engraft on their own sacerdotal systems the 
to them—new order of things which they found? 
How long before their simple language became so — 
altered and enriched by contact with, and absorption of, 
that of the conquered race, and the nations with whom 
they were commercially related, west, east, and north 
ofthem, as to become an entirely distinct tongue? 
Bunsen tells us that ten thousand years are not suft- 
cient! but Bunsen is not an absolute standard—at least 
with us Americans, whatever he may be to Europeans. 
The Baron peoples Egypt from Asia ; I prefer to peo- 
ple it from Africa—and, I think, with far more reason ; 
contending that a tribe or tribes of Central Africa, 
driven out by some cataclysmal event, migrated to the 
banks of the Nile, and there founded a new nation, just 
as was done on our shores, and is being done on the 
Pacific at this very time. 

Wherever a new race of men settle with, or in prox- 
imity to, an old one, the habits of both become measur- 
ably at first, and finally, inextricably blended. While 
by association and intermarriage, the language of each 
becomes so mingled with the others’ vernacular, and 

be 
> " ca Y uae te “ 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 59 

with other tongues, that, in the course cf time, an en- 
tirely new language is produced, On the Western coast 
of-America the English is rapidly changing both its 
“structure and its volume, owing to foreign admixtures, 
-and to the physical and organic changes in the people, 
from climate and custom. The“ Pigeon English” of 
_ Chinese ports, illustrates this point admirably. It is 
already a common dialect, and will one day boast an 
extensive literature. ‘“ Pigeon” means “ Business.” I 
take you to a friend of mine in Canton, and—“ Md 
Ohin-chin you, this wun velly good flin belong mi ; mt 
wantchie you do plopel pigeon along he all same fashion 
dlong mm ; spose no do plopel pigeon, mi flin cum down 
sue mi housie, talkey mi so fashion, mi kick up bobbery 
along you.” Such is the way in which I introduce you 
to another trader with whom you desire to deal, and : 
“ Me savey no casion makery flaid ; can secure do plopel 
piyeon long you flin all same fashion along you.” And — 
the business is done perfectly satisfactorily to the three 
parties. ae 
Let us sail right across the sea to the Northwest 
coast of America, and land at Fort Vancouver. Here 

we shall find a new language even more remarkable 
than Pigeon English, because it has a dozen or a score ~ 

of elements, while that has but two—English and — 
Chinese. At the Fort we find twenty different Indian 
languages; the Chinese, the Sandwich Island dialects,” 
English, French, Spanish, Portuguese, and a dozen 
others besides, all contributing to one common end— 
the formation of a new tongue, that in time will surpass 
all the rest ; for though the Onomatopceic process is a 
slow, it is. nevertheless, a sure and perfect one. Mr. 
Clark’s friends used to salute him with, “ Clark, how 
are you?” and now the common salutation of every- 
body, instead of “ How de do,” is “ Clak-ho-ah-yah ?” 

Ls = 
i. # \ 

a 
= i Se 

ee PRE-APAMITE MAN, 

f “Hehe” means laughter; “Tala” (dollar) means 
money ; “ Ting-ling” is a bell; “Tum-tum,” a water- 
fall ; “ lip-lip,” to boil ; Rum is “lum ;” fire is “ Paia ;” 
to-morrow is “tumola;” “lamestin” and “ lakles” are 
la medicin and la grasse ; and yet there are thousands © 
born every year to whom this apparent jargon will be 
vernacular ; and, with the amplitude of soul which ex 
perience and age will give this new people, their lan 
guage will expand and refine just as the Anglo-Saxon 
and the Gaulic has, and as the Nilotic speech did a 
hundred ages ago; for the same great natural and in- 
tellectual forces are in operation now as then; and 
only the element of Time is required to produce resulf8 
quite as profound aud startling in the world’s Future, 
as the Past has witnessed. 

CHAPTER IV. 

ASIA——-AFRICA——-PEOPLES. 

In speaking of China, with reference to human anti- 
__ quity, [ am tempted strongly to present philological 
_ | reasons why the claims of the inhabitants of that sin- 
| gular country to a vast antiquity, are entitled to far 
| greater respect than has generally been accorded them ; 
___| but as such a disquisition would be unsuited to the ma- 

ee jority of readers, by reason of its dryness and techmi- 
% calities, I shall postpone its consideration in the present 
ae a e . 

| volume, merely remarking as I pass, that, according to 

certain, distinguished philologists, there are but two 
| roots from which all languages sprung. There are two 
general and grand systems —two poles, so to speak—a 
positive and a negative, and between these two, and 
springing from them as an arch from its pillars, all lan-" 
guages had their development. These two, the Aryan, 
from which came, in addition to hundreds that are 

ae 

FF. 

2d) 
Pd 

=e . 7m “es 
PRE-ADAMITE. MAN. 61 

dead. and other hundreds that are living, the tongues, 
dialects, and languages now spoken by the British, 
Celtic, Gallic, Sclavonian, Persian, Hindoo, Greek and 
Italian peoples ; and the Semitic, or Turanian, the root 
of as many more, such as the Turkish, Hungarian, Tar- 
tar, Thibetan, and similar tongues. Now this pleasant 
theory is all very good, and, but for one little hindrance, 
would be quite acceptable, and that is: It is not true! 
for there is no more relationship between the thirteen 
hundred tongues of the North American Indians and 
the Semitic and Aryan root languages, than there is 
between a potato and a melon. There are not less 
than forty-five hundred languages now spoken on the 
earth; and assuming that an equal number have be- 
come obsolete and dead, we have nine thousand dis- 
tinct forms of human speech. Now if the whole human 
family sprung from the Adam of Eden six thousand 
years ago, the linguistic faculty must indeed have de- 
veloped at a prodigious rate. But the formation of 
language is not a rapid process, even under the most 
favorable circumstances. Philologers tell us that thou- 
sands of years are requisite to the formation of a per- 
fectly new tongue, from elements furnished by an old 
one. Bunsen says ten thousand years! Taking the 
best possible view of the case, it is not to be conceded 
that these nine thousand, or even two thousand, forms 
of speech, could have developed out of the one tongue 
spoken by the Adam of Genesis. [It will be observed 
that I have conceded that there was such a perso 
and that he was the Hebraic, and, possibly, th 
ian protoplast, but not at all that he was the omginator 
of either the Negro, EKeyptian, Assyrian, Chinese or 
American Indian races of men. | 

- China has a bewildering antiquity, even if we only 

allow her the usually accorded forty-one centuries. 

ory 

* 2hs05 
be . 

62 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

But what are we to say to the records now in France, 
captured by the French Commission, which speak of 
events of eight thousand years ago? What are we to 
think of Mariette’s mummy, believed to be ten thousand 
years old? Is it all myth, all fable? By no means! 
Every nation under heaven, our own beloved America 
especially, has a buried history, as well as the living 
one, recorded on paper and in human memories. There 
are missing chronicles of all the peoples, but pre-emi- 
nently so is this true of China; for even the vastly 
ancient records that have been found, undeviatingly 
point backwards to ages, so remote that the epochs of 
Adam and Eve, and Menes ard Cain, and the building 
of the antediluvian city of Enoch (Babylon,) are but 
comparatively recent. China, according to Hue, the 
French traveler, and others, and her own records, was, 
once upon a time, in that long, dark night, or early 
twilight of human story, the theater of a most wonder- 
ful and mysterious event—a national cataclysm, change, 
upheaval—not produced by human means, nor yet. by 
that strange flood of Noah or Deucalion, recorded of 
Anno Mundi, 2,348, because the legend is known to be 
older—we having quite as much right to believe the 
‘records of one nation as we have to credit those of 
another ; nor is there any just reason for accepting 
a rabbinical legend or account, and rejecting a Chinese 
one; especially in view of the fact that the former 
stands aiready convicted of historical dishonesty, while 
no such charge can be laid at the doors of the Chinese 
) _ They give us allegory and tradiiion, but no 
- deliberate falsehoods. 

Kong-foo-tse (Confucius,) who lived in the sixth de- 
cade of the Sixth Century before Christ, speaks of, and 
names, both men and hooks, who, and which, in his day, 
were of a hoary antiquity ; as also does the great Chi- 

eee 

sewn 

=, 

Ww, 
PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 63 

nese Philosopher, Laou-tze, who was born B OC, 604; 
and the “ Book of Reason and Virtue” claims to con- 
tain the sum total of the wisdom of the “ Ancients of 
years,” and to be “ full of profound knowledge, whose 

very obscurity was a recommendation.” When Con- 

fucius first arose, he did so as an innovator on a system 

of religion that had become corrupt and effete, merely | 

by reason of its extreme age. Of course, at that time, 
the worship of Foh, or Budha, was then unknown, for that 
celebrated Mendicant had not then arisen in India; or 
if he had, his system was confined to his local and per- 
sonaladherents. In the days of Confucius, a new order 
of things was established on the ruins and debris of 
the old ; and there can be no doubt but that there was 
some truth in the traditions of his day, which affirmed 
that “ there once existed on the soil of China, a mighty 
nation at the very head of civilization, in ages so re- 
mote that their historical monuments have been lost or 
submerged in the deluge of the waters of oblivion.”* 
The spirit-rapping, and magical religions of China, 
which Confucius superseded by a better, or eclectic 
system of his own, was itself, like Mahometanism, Brah- 
minism, Budhism, and some later forms of religion, but a 
remodeling of other precedent systems, that had, proba- 
bly, existed during long previous ages ; and the proof of 
this is, that all the most ancient recorcs point ta seme 

dead parent of the religions which themselves commemo- — 

rated. A singular confirmation of the truth of Solomon’s 
apothegm, “ There is nothing new under the sun !” is the 
fact that the great, valuable,.and strange philosophical 
system of Rosicrucianism, probably the most perfect 
system of human thought the world has ever seen, or 
will ever see, inasmuch as it alone, of all others, has re- 

*Brade’s “Sphinx of History’’—article—“ Asiatic Mysteries ;” 

page 253. 

ae Bie ds 

+ eee 

ad 

64 PRE-ADAMITE MAN, 

solved the mysteries of human origin, nature, and des: 
tiny ; and which, though long considered to be dead 
and buried, has within twelve years been revived in 
Germany, France, England—under a Grandmastership ; 
and in America, (New York,) and also in California, in 
all of which places it bids fair to do a vast amount of 
svood in the direction of dispelling many of the clouds 
that obscure the mental vision of the race. ‘This great 
system, once supposed to have originated in Germany 
in the 16th century ; afterwards fathered on the an- 
cient Greeks ; then attributed to India; finally reach- 
ing a home in early Egypt, is now found to have been 
an old story with the Chinese who lived scores of ages 
before it became a wandering star in other lands. As- 
trology, medical and judicial, the search for the Philo- 
sophers’ Stone, the Elixir of Life and Immortality ; and, 
in short, all the Hermetic and Spiritualistic mysteries, 
table-turning, et hoc genus omne, all and each of them 
were as familiar to and with the inhabitants of An- 
cient China, as they were to the Confucianists twenty- 
five hundred years ago, and to the mystical philosophers 
of the present day, in America and Europe. What, 
then, must be the age of those peculiar ideas? What 
ages must have rolled away since the absolutely origi- 
nal man lived on earth ! 

Many modern scholars believe that the Adam of 

Genesis was not the first or only created man, and I 

perfectly coincide with them. Indeed it is demonstrable, 
even from Genesis itself, that he was not; and this is 
quite as certain as that creation did not take place in 
the period of one hundred and forty-four hours, although 
there is no question that the authors of the original 
legend, afterwards copied in the Book of Genesis, be- 
lieved that such was the fact, not on the authority of — 
their own positive knowledge, or divine revelation, or pe 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 65 

of dreams or visions, but on the authority of tradition- 
ary legends that were current when they wrote. It is 
bat of little use for us to speculate at this point con- 
cerning the origination of the human race, whether by 
the “ Development theory,” or by a sudden Deific ictus, 
so long as we are ignorant of even who our well-at- 
tested human grand-sires were ; for we have a long list 
of human relatives before we get to the Gorilla-cou- 
sins of Monsieur Geoffroy St. Hillaire. When the 
stupendous Mammoth, the Iguanodon, and the ponder- 
ous Dinotherium, tramped over the earth, like walking 
thunders, and woke the deep solitudes of primeval 
forests with their terrific roars, Man was a listener and 
spectator, and he beheld the wanton sports and gam- 
bols, and the fearful battles of the monstrous Saurians, 

‘and the huge Paleotheria, and the Mylodonic beasts, 
unmoved perhaps, perhaps in mortal fear and terror ; _ 
but that he did witness these things | shall prove before 

this book is ended. 

Could we, in these days, summon the shades of Plato 
and Hudoxus, and demand of them an answer to such 
questions as our subject suggests, with what rapture 
would we listen to the storied legends and strange tra- 

_ ditions regarding primeval and autocthonic man! How 
eagerly, and how gratefully we would drink in Egypt’s 
ancient story, as understood, and current, when they 
were studying Philosophy under priestly masters on the 
banks of the Nile, and in the marble halls of Heliopo- 
lis, or, perhaps, beneath the massive pylons of the very 
Temple of the Sun, where now stands that single lonely 
obelisque, mournfully telling the wondering on-looker, 
the pilgrim from far-off lands, that “ Once upon a time 
a mighty city had there stood, and marvelous things 
been taught.” Strange things they must have learned 
during their long initiation of thirteen years! But 

” 
a Z 
-_ J 

i x ees 

= 

66 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

Plato and Eudoxus are both asleep, or else refuse to 
come. They have no affinity with jumping-tables, like 
so many of their disbodied brethren are said to. What 
a pity! Could we only snatch an hour’s chat with the 
ghosts of the architects of Baalbec, how pleasant it 
would be? Orif they would deign ‘to tell us when 
that wondrous town and temple were built? and why ? 
and by whom? Or who laid the foundations of Jaffa ? 
or of Beyrout? or of lovely Damascus? Aye! or if 
they would point out when and by whom the city of 
the Jebusite, old Jerusalem, was reared on Zion, Moriah, 
and the twin hills, it would be a great satisfaction. 
Or if some obliging ghost would but whisper in our 
ear who was really the original Chinaman, we would 
cheerfully forgive him any little fright he might occa- 

sion us. But, seeing that not one of these answers © 

have been printed in the papers of the day, the ghosts 
are exceedingly reticent upon the subject. Let us hope 
they will finally relent. 

It is held by several talented writers that once upon 
a time Egypt was ruled by a race of Negro Kings, and 
that that people dictated laws to the nations from the 
colimned halls of Karnac. Of course I do not Gispute 
these writers ; for not being familiar with their author- 
ities, it would not be either courteous or safe to do so ; 
but 7f a dynasty of Negro monarchs reigned over Egypt 
since the days of the Adam of Genesis—I say that if 
such a fact is really true, then I cannot see it. Such 
may have been the case, antecedent to the first Mem- 
phite dynasty, but not since. On the walls of the tombs 
of Beni-Hassan, between Memphis and Thebes, are 
numerous representations of Egyptian Kings and cap- 
tives, the latter in chains and undergoing the punish- 
ment of the bastinado, applied to the feet. If these 
tombs, as some think, represent events of Heypt’s 

... 
PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 67 
early days, it follows that the Negro Kings must have 
reigned, not at Karnac, but further up the river to- 
wards Dongola, and long prior to the founding of either 
Memphis, Thebes or This: and not only so, but at a 
period so remote, that we are startled at the figures. 
The Pyramids of “Ghizeh had begun to wax old when 
Abraham, the Chaldean father of Israel, was yet un- 
born ; and in a long line of centuries—6,000 years—- 

from the present to King Menes, there was no Negro | 
King over Egypt—neither before or after Thebes was 
built. Before Menes we are told of the reigns of eight 
gods, succeeded by a short line of three hundred and 
forty-five High Priests. These last were extinct five 
thousand years before Horus (son of Osiris). Then 
came a reign of twelve lineal gods; and then twelve 
more; and it was fifteen thousand years from Osiris to 
King Amasis: the whole embracing a period of 35,000 
years, without one single Negro King. It may be that 
the writers alluded to, imagine that because there were 
Ethiopian monarchs over Egypt, that therefore they 
were Negroes. A mistake, but a natural one. Negroes 
are Africans, but all Africans are not Negroes. It is 
doubtful if the Negro, since the world began, ever even” 
approximated to such a high state of civilization as he 
has attained on Northern American soil; but that he 
will achieve great things in the future, is, of course, 
but a mere question of time. What I wish to deduce 
from all this is, that over five thousand years ago the 
Negro was just as we find him to-day, so far as color 
and feature are concerned. In these respects he has 
been without variableness, neither shadow of turning 
—any other color. Climate, therefore, had nothing to 
do in making him the hue he is: for in Africa, beneath 
_ the torrid sun, and in cold Icelandic regions, he and 
his children retain the same complexion, save where 

A= | ain ‘a 

68 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

amalgamation bleaches it. The notion that the “curse 
of Cain” is the cause of his sable hue, has long since 
been discarded by all people of common sense. He 

must, therefore, be a distinct species of the genus homo ; — 

for, differing so totally from the sons of Adam, he 
couldnot have descended from the same source, and is, 
consequently, and beyond all doubt, a Pre-Adamite Man! 
because, d fortiori, the sun had not shone hot or long 
enough to tan him black, on the hypothesis that he 
originated from the Adam and Eve of Genesis. The 
differences between the Negro and all other Oriental 
races, is too apparent, and pronounced, to leave room 
to doubt that he is a distinct species of the human 
family—but a species destined to power and greatness. 

CHAPTER V. 
THE BIBLE—THE APOGRAPH. 

Tue Hebrew chronology is said, by what is consid- 
ered as being competent authority, to be at fault in 
many respects, and, indeed, to be totally unreliable, an- 
terior to the epoch of Solomon, that is, 1,015 years B.C. 
In reference to all dates back of that, we are said, on 
Bunsen’s authority, to have but the records of the wild 
dreams and vagaries, and sometimes criminal state- 
ments of the Rabbins of Alexandria and Jerusalem. 
We are able to fix the date of Solomon by means of 

other than Scriptural testimony, with which, however, 

it accords. ‘Those means consist of monuments, histo- 
rical dates and narratives of contemporaneous events, 
derived from a hundred different sources. We are cer- 

tain of what took place in some parts of the world : 
2,877 or 2,900 years ago. And at that point we are 
adrift, so far as Rabbinical chronology is concerned, 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 69 

By means of the same process, we reach Menes from 
Solomon, and still on, into the deeps of Time. 

The quaint old Sir Thomas Browne truly said that 
“The number of the dead long exceedeth the number 
of the living—or that shall live; and the Night of 
‘Time far surpasseth the Day.” It seems strange, how 
ever, that men should willingly and zealously attempt 
to falsify the story of that “ Night,” merely for the 
sake of making facts conform to their ill-digested hypo- 
theses. Yet soit is; and of all things else the Bible 
has been tortured and twisted to effect this end more 
than any other book ever written by mortal hands, or 
conceived in the human brain. The text of the Bible has® 
been so willfully tampered with and perverted from its 
true meaning, that 1 venture to affirm that it has been, 
and still is, the cause of more unbelief, disbelief, and 
atheism, than any other one thing in Christian lands. 
The Book is plainly one whose sphere lies in the Moral 
world, and not in that of Science at all; and whoever 
seeks to interpret it so.as to make it sanction his own 
vagaries, had better be about something else, for which 
he is better adapted. Conscientious men sometimes at- 
tempt the impossible task of reconciling Genesis and 
Geology, Creation and Astronomy—and make lamenta- 
ble failures, as a matter of course. Had Hugh Miller 
been less honest, he had not slain himself. He tried to 
harmonize Science and Genesis, and failinge—died. The 
Bible, as it stands before us to-day, is to be received for 
what it claims to be, not for what its unwise friends 
claim for it. Genesis gives what looks like either 
two distinct accounts of the creation of one man ; or an 
account of the distinct creation of two men! Before 
proceeding to the consideration of this part of our sub- 
ject, it is meet first to make a few preliminary remarks, 
It is quite evident that Moses, or whoever else wrote 

ee 

i cea 

70 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

the Book of the Beginnings, or Genesis, must have so 
written on the authority of legend, tradition or hear- 
say ; else by direct inspiration, revelation, or vision ; 
for of course, supposing that Moses was the author, 
and the Hebrew chronology is correct, it was impossi- 
‘ple for him to write, of his own knowledge, concerning 
events which took place over fifteen hundred and 
seventy-one years before he was born. In these days 
we reject the Persian and Budhistic systems of metem- 
psychosis, and refuse to believe thet either Moses or any 
other man, while in one body, saw and carefully noted 
events which he remembered when, ages subsequently, 
“Ke occupied another. We cannot believe that he 
beheld things, and wrote accounts thereof, on the banks 
of the Nile, or in the Syrian Deserts, which had oe- 
curred nearly sixteen hundred years before. 

Science knows nothing about inspiration. That per- 
tains to the domain of the psychologist and theolo- 
gian. A man’s visions may be all very satisfactory 
and consoling to himself, and to whoever else chooses 
to believe them; but they are not considered sound 
evidence in modern courts—and, because they are 
visionary, are rejected by all sensible juries—either in 
the box, or in the world. Legends of all sorts, and 
traditions of all kinds are, and from immemorial time 
have been, accepted for what they intrinsically may be 
worth, in the latter case frequently for a great deal 

more, and as they are usually based upon the truth, 

they generally bring a fair price in the world’s great 
literary marts. The original writers of the Penta- 
teuch must have given us apographs, more or less cor- 
rect, of what, to them, seemed original truth. That they 
did so, is proved by the fact that we now have posses- 
sion of very many of the identical legends whence 

those of Genesis were undoubtedly taken. They must — 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. ey) 

have jotted down the traditions current in their day 
and age, concerning the great human origines. I say 
“ they,’ for the reason that Genesis is, in these days, 
almost universally conceded to be, not a continuous 

narrative from a single pen, but a series of fragments 

oy different authors, cemented into one semi-consistent 
whole. The book tells us, in plain language, that this 
world of ours, all the beautiful things in and on it; 
the sun, moon and stars; the great fish; and the seas 
in which they swim; the crawling worm and _ noble 
man ; lovely Eve, and all other things above, below, 
around and within this globe of ours, was created out 

of Nothing, by the gods (Elohim,) in six days, or ones” 

hundred and forty-four hours. Thus stands the ac- 
count. 

Now, it so happens, that by virtue of a singular dis- 
turbing cause, inherent in most men—the meddling 
propensity—that these six days of creation, these one 
hundred and forty-four hours, have been so stretched 
that now they mean any perio. of time, from a centary 
to six geological ages—from thirty-six thousand five 
hundred days, to two hundred and fifty millions of years; 
and yet they ery “give! give!” and all this in direct 
face of the fact that the Bible speaks of the evening and 
the morning as one day! The grand and simple story 
is perverted, defaced ana stultified by interpretations 
and exegeses, as violent-as they can be, and such as 
would drive the writers of Genesis to distraction, could 
they witness the very pleasant way in which their works 
are dealt with. If the writers of Genesis had meant 
to say that the process of creation occupied a million 
of years or of ages, surely they would have so placed 
it on the Record! The vook says, and means, that the 
gods, (Elohim, for not till long afterwards was the 
erm Iveh, or Jehovah used,) did, out of Nothing, create 

72 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

_ this world and man in six literal days. We have two 
~ accounts, but the same space of time is assigned in both. 
The Bible says, and means, that a man was made out of 
the dust of the ground, and that after he was duly — 
finished, life and a soul was imparted to the clay by the 
process of breathing into his nostrils on the part of the 
Klohim. After this, the man was put into a garden. 
After a while, Elohim saw that the man needed what as 
_yet he had not, and yet could not very well do without ; 
—a wife; and so, the man having been put to sleep, 
Klohim cut his side open and removed a bone, whereof 
he fashioned another human being, pleasantly varying 
‘somewhat from the first one. This couple got along 
very comfortably until a serpent tempted and seduced 
Eve, who did the like by her husband. And one time, 
as Elohim was taking a “walk in the garden, in the 
cool of the day”—for the weather was sultry—the 
transgression was discovered, and Eden was forthwith 
vacated. 

The same people who contend for geological ages, 
also maintain that the serpent of Genesis means the 
Devil, or a snake acting as his proxy. But the Bible 
says a “serpent,” a “beast of the ground,” and it 
means a snake, and not a devil ; if it did, it would have 
so Leen written. Nowhere in the Sacred Book is it 

| stated, or the implication warranted in the slightest 
degree, that Satan was a fallen angel of God. John 
Milton had not written “Paradise Lost” in those days. 
Nowhere is it stated that fallen angels became eyil 
spirits, tempting man to ruin and destruction. Those 
who think that the ‘ Lucifer, son of the morning,” mei- 
tioned in Job, means the devil. are not familiar with 
ancient astronomy, the convertibility of astronomical 
terms, the ancient names of Saturn, ancient races, . 
forms of religious faith, nor with Semitic forms of 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 73 

speech. Such forced interpretations of Scripture have 
been the cause of much discord in the human family, 
and have divided mankind into thousands of sects, each 
one thirsting for the other’s blood and ruin. They have 
begotten carnage, blasphemy, bigotry, and hatred ; sown 
more discord, falsified more truth, promoted more irre 
ligion, created more party-feeling, repressed more 
learning, stultified more common sense, and been a more 
terrible bane of civilization and true religion, than any 
other thing under the sun. Why do they not let the 
Bible alone, and by teaching its morals, and spreading 
its ethical light, seek to illumine the profound heathen- 
ism of the world? not all of which exists either in~ 
Africa or Boroboola Gha! . 

Beyond all reasonable doubt, Moses, “who was 
learned in all the learning of the Egyptians,” also 
knew their theories of the human origines, as well as 
their current legends and traditions, most of which had 
been grafted from an Asiatic stock upon African stems, 
long before his cradle was found in the bushes of 
Rhoda by the King’s daughter, of Royal Memphis. 
Long, long before the Hebrew Law-giver had listened 
to the promptings of ambition, old Chaldea’s poets had 
sung of a “time in which nothing rested but black 
darkness, and an abyss deep of waters,” which frag- 
ment differs but little from the second verse of Genesis : 
“ And the earth was without form, and void, and dark- 
ness was upon the face of the deep; and the spirit of 
God moved upon the face of the waters,”—a passage 
whose awful sublimity is not always seen and appre- 

gates by those who read it. There is every reason to 
believe that the latter description was not written till 
thousands of years after the former had been crysta- 
lized in the legendary consciousness, the faith and be- 

ha of an entire family of nations —great and civilized 
a 

74 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

peoples, dwelling in cities scattered thickly over the 
plateaus of Eastern Asia, and along the banks of the 
Euphrates; and of whom Herodotus and Manetho 
were as ignorant as they were of Canada and New 
Orleans :—quite as ignorant as we are of who built 
the WALLED LAKE,* a work not done by the present 
race of Indians, from whose labors it differs as widely 
as does the Cyclopean structures of Etruria, or a Ro- 
maic hut from a Greek Temple. 

Long before Menes founded Memphis, the Phenician 
sages had taught of a“ turbid Chaos and black as starless 
night, over which swept breezes of thickened air ;” and 
the hosts that peopled India were probably quite as 

* The wonderful walled Lake is situated in the central part of 
Wright county, Iowa. The shape of the lake is oval. It is about 
two miles in length, and one mile wide in the widest part, comprising 
an area of some two thousand acres. The wall enclosing this lake is 
over six miles in length, and is built or composed of stones varying 
in size from boulders of two tons weight down to small pebbles, and 
is intermixed with earth. The top of the wall is uniform in height 
above the water in all parts, which makes its height to vary on the 
land side, according to the unevenness of the country, from two to 
twelve feet in height. In the highest part the wall measures from 
ten to twelve feet thick at the base, and from four to six at the top, 
inclining each way—outwaid and inward. There is an outlet, but 
_ the lake frequently rises and flows over the wall. The lake at the 
deepest part is about ten feet in depth, and abounds witb large and 
fine fish, such; as pike, pickerel, bass, perch, etc. The water is as 
¢.ear as a crystal, and there is no bubbling nur agitation to indicate 
that thereare any large springs or feeders. Wild fowl of all kinds 
are pleutr upon its bosom. At the north end are two small groves 
of ten acres each, no timber being near. It has the appearance of 
having been walled up by human bands, and looks like a huge fort- 
re-s. yet there are no rocks in that vicinity for miles around. There 
are uo visible signs of the lake heing the result of volcanic action, it 
being smooth. and the border of regular form. The lake is seventeen 
miles from Boon river on the west. and eight miles from lowa on the 

east, and about one hundred miles from Cedar Rapids. It is one of, 

the greatest wonders of the Wist. bs 

—_— 

} 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 5 75 

familiar with the same idea. Indeed the same sublime 
notion that has been handed down to us in Genesis, 
constituted the starting point of a number of Oriental 
cosmogonies. Let us, then, accept the first verses of 
Genesis at their proper value. It is unfair to distort 
the Scriptures till they accord with either science, or 
the peculiar notions of theologians. The language in 
which they were written is susceptible of correct trans- 
lation into all the European tongues ; and when the 
writers say “two” we have no right to aver that they 
mean “ten.” The Book of Genesis is a compilation 
of many fragments, probably not collected, but adopted, 
and adapted by Moses; and it is criminal to attempt 
to make them conform to modern science. To do so 
is to rob them of their sublimity, weaken their power, 
ruin their meaning, destroy their moral force and sense, 
beget a thoughtless, heedless scepticism, and to arouse 
a bigoted antagonism, and provoke the sneers of the 
unthinking multitude. Our simple duty is to free them 
of the vicious interpolations of the Hebraists. It is 
generally admitted by Biblical scholars, that the first 
verse of Genesis is to be regarded as a preface to what 
follows, and that the second one belongs to an account 
which ends at the fourth verse of the second chapter, 
and which embraces one narrative of man’s: creation; 
while the second chapter, from the fourth verse, gives 
a totally distinct account of the same, or another crea- 
tion ; and many persons believe that an enormous in- 
terval of time elapsed between the separate events 
recorded there. : 

In this work, up to the present, the existence of the 
Mosaic Adam is not contested, but concéded ; my de- 
sign not having heretofore been to prove him a myth, 
but to show that, admitting him to have existed, he was 

neither the first or only created man. The Adam of 

a oy : , : 

16 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

Genesis may be a myth; he may have been a miracu- 
lously created man; he may have been an immigrant 
from other parts of Asia, or may be the Ideal Hero of 
the poets who sung of Auld Lang Syne when this world 
was six thousand years younger than it is to-day. In 
either case it matters little, so long as we can prove 
man’s antiquity to be immeasurably greater than is 
usually believed. 

No one, let it here. be distinctly understood, once for 
all, can entertain a profounder respect for the truths con- 
tained in the Bible than the writer of these pages. Its 
_ moral teachings, its inculcations of the Golden Rule, 
~ its sublime prophecies of good to come, and its lofty 
eloquence, all challenge his deepest regards. But it 
does not follow thence that he is bound to accept either 
the absurdities, interpolations, pucrilities, or falsehoods 
of the Rabbins, and others, merely because they happen 
to be bound up within its lids, along with much that is 
unquestionably sublime and true. There are things in 
the Bible concerning Deity, that, it seems to me, 
very narrowly approach downright blasphemy ; while 
other things so derogate from the Infinite Dignity and 
overwhelming Majesty of the Eternal God, that it is 
impossible for a normal healthy mind to regard them 
with any thing but absolute horror. 

Concerning miracles: 1st. Man’s origin may have 
been, literally, as stated in Genesis, but if so, the pro- 
cess was discontinued after the first experiment, for 
natural processes have long since superseded miracles. 
2d. We are told that the first woman was taken out of 
man. ‘This I do not believe, seeing that it is impossi- 
ble, has been all along the ages, and will be so through 
the limitless eternities. Neither can I believe that the 
Infinite, Awful, Eternal One, ever had a child by any 

woman in the physical sense, virgin or matron; ard I 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 77 

- say it with all respect, for I believe in Jesus Christ— 
but in a moral—not in a miraculous sense. It is 
equally impossible for mé€ to believe certain other 
things, deemed by some people essential to a blessed 
immortality. No man was ever yet a Deicide!—God 
has neyer_yet been slain—for no_ human being was, or 
éver will be, capable of killing God! No spear wielded 
by human hands has ever yet penetrated the sides of 
the Awful Lord of Glory—the Infinite, Supreme, Ever- 
living God! True, all these things: may once have 
been ; but as I am unable to grasp the miraculous prin- 
cipia of their evolution, they must, by me, be set aside 
till they can be comprehended, it being my opinion at 
present that we owe all these accounts of miracles to 
the idealizations of the custodians of the Bible long 
ages ago. Again, itis not at all plain to me, first, how, 
and for what reason, God was in the habit of walking 
in the garden in the cool of the day, seeing that he is 
a spirit. Second,how and by what means Adam knew 
about Eve’s building up, or manufacture, from a rib? 
third, how he knew that the rib was taken from his 
side by God, (from whose sublime dignity and majesty 
the whole thing derogates,) when and while the man— 
this identical Adam himself, was in a deep sleep? 

In the first chapter of Genesis it is said that the 
birds were created before the beasts, and the beasts 
before Adam ; but in the next chapter the birds and 
beasts are said to have been made out of the dust of 
the ground, and to have been brought to Adam to see 
what names he would call them ; and, consequently, 
Adam was made before the beasts. Let us compare a 
few of these pasages : 

Gey. I. First Account. Gen. 1. Seconp Account. 
ist. Preliminary preparations. lst. Preliminary preparations. 
Gen. Ist to 11th verse. "Gen ii., 4-7. 

78 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

2d. Creation of the Vegetable 
kingdom. Verse 11-14. 

3d. Arrangement of heavens and 
creation of avimals, 

4th. Creation of Man (MALE and 

FEMALE!) at the same time! 
Verse 26 to end. 

5th. [It is conceded that the verses 
1 to 4 of the second chap- 
ter belong to the first one.] 
Sabbath instituted. Gen. 
ii, 1-4. 

GENIsIS 1ST CHAPTER. 
In the beginning God ereated 
the heavens and the earth. 1-11. 

And God said, Let the earth bring 
forth grass, the herb yielding seed, 
and the fruit-tree yielding fruit 
after its kind whose seed is in it- 
self, upon the earth, &c. ; (to verse 
j4.) . 

14th. And God said Let there be 
lights in the firmament of the 
heaven to divide the day from the 
night, and let them be for signs, 
&e. ; (to v. 20, and Gen. ii. 1-4.* 

And God said, Let the Waters 
bring forth abundantly, &c., to 
verse 24. 

V.24. And God said, Let the 
Earth bring forth the living crea- 
ture after his kind, cattle, and 
creeping thing, and beast of the 
Earth after his kind. And it was 
80. 

V.25. And God made the 

* Was this a-second creation? Verses 
8, 4,6, tell ns that day and night and 
. light already existed. 

14-26. 

2d. Formation of Man—a single 

male ondy—out of dust. Gen. 
, 4-1, 

3d. The planting of the Garden of 
Eden, and commands to the 
man concerning it. 8-18. 

4th. Formation of beasts and fow!s 
out the ground fur man. 
The result. 19-21. 

5th. Formation of Eve from a rib 
taken by Elohim from 
Adam’s side, while that in- 
dividual was asleep. Adam 
sees her, likes and names 
her :— The _ iustitution of 
Monogamic marriage and 
the Edenic state of life. 21- 
25. 

GENESIS 2p CHAPTER. 

These are (the following are) the 
generations of the heavens and 
the earth when they were created, 
in the day that the Lord God 
made the earth and the heavens, 
and every plant before it was in 
the earth, and every herb of the 
field before it grew : for the Lord 
God bad not caused in to rain 
upon the earth, and there was not 
a man to till the ground.f But 
there went up a mist from the 
earth and watered the whole face 
of the ground. 4-6. 

And the Lord God formed man 

of the dust of the ground, and 
breathed into bis nostrils the 
breath of life; and man became 
a living soul. ... And the Lord 
God planted a garden eastward 
in Eden: and there he put the 
man whom he had formed. 
And out of the ground made the 
Lord God to grow every tree 
that is pleasant to the sight, 
and good for food; the tree of 
life also in the midst of the gar- 
den, and the tree of knowledge of 
good and evil, (to v. 10.) 

V.15. And the Lord God took 
the man and put him into the 

+ This implies that agriculture was not 

the result-of the curse as the earth need- 

criminal son was in existetce, 

ed tilling before either the man or * 

. 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

beast of the earth after his kind, 
and everything that creepeth upon 
the earth after his kind. And 
God saw that it was good. 

V. 26. And God said, Let us 
make man in our image, after our 
likeness ;—[Can it be possible that 
the gods here alluded to were 
deified heroes, such as both before 
and after the supposed date of the 
transactions, here recorded, were 
worshiped in Babylon, Egypt, 
Nineveh, and Phenicia?] and let 
them have dominion over the fish 
of the seas, and over the fowl of 
the air, and over the cattle, and 
over all the earth, and over every 
creeping thing that creepeth upon 
the earth ...So God created 
man in his own image, in the im- 
age of God created he him, male 
‘ and female created he them... 
And God blessed them, and God 
said unto them, Be fruitful, and 
multiply, and replenish the earth, 
and subdue it: [Then it appears 
that the earth, even before the 
& Fall,” was in a condition that 
needed subduing? Alas! alas! 
“one after another, our long cher- 

ished notions are being melted 
away.] and have dominion over 
the fish of the sea, and over. the 
fowl of the air, and over every 

living thing that moveth upon the 
earth . . . And God said, Behold , 

re 

T9 

Garden of Eden, to dress it and 
to keep it... . . And the Lord God 
commanded the man, saying, “ Of 
every tree of the garden th, 
mayest freely eat ; but of the tree 
of the knowledge of good and evil, 
thou shalt not eat of it: for in the | 
day that thou eatest thereof, thou 
shalt surely die... .And the 
Lord God said, It is not good that 
the man should be alone; I will 
will make him an help meet for 
him. . . . And out of the ground 
the Lord God formed every heast 
of the field, and every fowl of 
the air; and brought them unto 
Adam, (ha-Adam—the man,) to 
see what he would call them. 
[Does not this remarkable sen- 
tence, ss well as the 8th, 9th, 10th, 
11th, 12th, and 13th verses of Gen. 
iii. and the 9th and'10th verses of 
chapter iv. directly challenge, or deny 
God’s omnipotence and omnisci- 
ence? To me it certainly seems 
so. Can this be due to the 
Rabbinical tamperings heretofore 
alluded to? Or is this, as well as 
other parts of the Pentateuch, a 
legendary fragment? Is the 
wholeamyth? Is the whole book 
a material symbol, in the depths 
of which great spiritual truths re- 
side, as is claimed by the Swedish 
Seer, Swedenborg? Or, inter- 
mingled with the original text of 
the Books, do we find the crude 
speculations of undisciplined 
minds? These are all serioug 
questions, and are not to be pass 
ed over lightly. For if this Book 
of Genesis be proved not what it 
claims to be, then nothing on earth 
can prevent an overwhelming re- 
volution throughout the whole of 
Christendom. If Adam’s story be 
proved a myth, and the fall, and 
the Scriptural account of the pev- 
pling of the world, then the whule - 
Messianic doctrine must fall, never 
to rise again ; and practical Chris- 
tianity supersede the mysticul—a 
cuange that some people will not 
regret. Indeed, L have heard 
several good men already prayiug 
devoutly that the Christian reii- 

—80 

I have given you every herb bear- 
ing seed, which is upon the face 
of the earth, and every tree, in 
which is the fruit of a tree yield- 
ing seed; to you it shall be for 
meat ... And to every beast of 
the earth, and to every fowl of 
the air, and to everything that 
creepeth upon the earth, wherein 
there is life, I have given every 
green herb for meat. And it was 
so... And God saw everything 
that he had made, and, behold, it 

was very good. 

And the evening and the morn- 

ing were the sixth day. 

Thus the heavens and the earth 
were finished, and all the host of 
them. 

And on the seventh day God 
ended his work which he had 
made ; and he rested on the sev- 
enth day from all his work which 
he had made .. . And God bles- 
sed the seventh day, and sancti- 
fied it: because that in it he had 
rested from all his work which 
God created and made. 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

gion might speedily be superseded 
by the religion of- Jesus Christ— 
and, somehow, at the conclusion 
of these prayers, I could not help 
responding “ AMEN!”’] ... And 
whatsoever Adam called every 
living creature, that was the name 
thereof. And Adam gave 
names to all cattle, and to the fowl 
of the air, and to every beast of 
the field : But for Adam there was 
not found an help meet for him. 
[Here are two extraordinary cir- 
cumstances related : lst. The num- 
ber of living species now amounts 
to so many millions that it would 
require ten lifetimes to name them. 
2d. Language is known to be a 
thing of growth—progression to 
be a Jaw of life; how, then, did 
this protoplast acquire language 
and names to give the beasts? 
Let it be remembered that Godis * 
a spirit—the God of Heaven—not 
using vocal speech—and that Eve 
was not yet created, and therefore 
could not converse with Adam. 
Was the God of Genesis a mate- 
rial being? This is implied both 
in his speech with Adam, and his 
“walking in the garden in the 
cool of the day.” All this is very 
curious—but quite explicable— 
further on.] 

And the Lord God caused a. 
deep sleep to fall upon Adam, 
and he slept; and he took one of 
his ribs, and closed up the flesh 
instead thereof; and of tbe rib, 
which the Lord God had taken 
from man, made he a woman, and 
brought her unto the man. And 
Adam said, This is now bone of 
my bone, and flesh of my flesh : 
she shall be called Woman, be 
cause she was taken out of man.” 

It is clear to every attentive reader that these two 
chapters cannot possibly relate to the same event ; for 
the whole procedure essentially differs from beginning 

to end. 

The first chapter relates to a creation of - 

the human species, totally distinct from another one 

occurring, perhaps, millions of years afterwards—when _ a 

a 

PRE-ADAMITE MEN. 81 

the earth had performed one great cycle, and the for- 
mer race of men had worn out both the world and 
themselves. Not to enlarge on this subject, it yet be- 
comes my duty to point to a few other things which in- 
dicate at least two distinct orders of men—merely re- 
marking, as we pass, that the God of this part of 

Genesis is the Elohim. Jehovah—correctly Iaveh-— 
.literally, the Eternal —the God that was, and is, and is 

to be—was not known till long subsequent to the 
events above recorded. And the Elohim, so far from 
being the Infinite One, are properly classible among 
the Spiritual intelligences—deified men, living or dead. 
There are numberless. gods, of whom are predicated 

. speech, power, life and action, mentioned in the Bible ; 

for instance, those who fought against Sisera, Lucifer, 
Baal, Baal-zebub, Astarte (Ashtoreth), and others, par- 
ticularly the gods of the nations circumscribing Israel, 
who were all intelligent beings—that is to say, spirits 
ormen. In the present instance, we are forced to re- 
ject the spiritual hypothesis, and conclude that the 
heathen gods—before the advent of a mere mechanical 
and material iconolatry—were human beings. The 
God who walked in the garden, and the gods of whom 
felchizadek was not high priest,* the wrestling gods ; 
the gods of the giant sons of Anak (which giant race, 

* This Melchizadek king of Salem was not Shem, the Holy Ghosts . 

nor an Adamite ; for the Order of which he was a priest, existed, ac- 
cording to Parkhurst, prior to the events of the Creation recorded in 
the first chapter of Genesis—and perhaps the second. Christ was a 
priest after Melchizadek’s Order. The priesthood was hereditary, 

and this mysterious priest of a Pre-Adamite Order, and king of a Pre-. 

Adamite city, had, of course, a Pre-Adamite Pedigree. Many proofs 

_ exist that his history has been tampered with ; as that he neither had 

beginning nor end, but a charmed life like Valmondi, le juif errant, or 

~ Croly’s “ Salathiel.” CPerhaps he was a Rosicrucian of the Ravelette 
stamp, and possessed the elixir and the “ wondrous stone 

yay 

82 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

be it known, existed before the flood, and existed after 
the flood ; which, therefore, on a Biblical guarantee, 
did not destroy all buman beings, save those who were 
in Noah’s ark.) We are told, and I most certainly 
believe, “that no man hath seen the Infinite God at 
any time,” consequently the God of Adam was not’ the 
Kternal One; but either a local Deity or a Represen- 
tative of Tuz One. The last supposition seems unrea- 
sonable. The three Gods that appeared to Abraham, 
as well as all other gods who “did eat” as they did, 
are not of heavenly Genesis. The God of Abraham 
Isaac and Jacob, was not the God of other nations, nor 
could he—on other, and quite apparent grounds— 
have been the Eternal. The witch of Endor saw gods 
ascending out of the earth; and we have so many re- 
petitions of the title, that it is difficult to determine 
the real from the genuine. 

The Adamic Pedigrees do not accord better than 
the two cosmogonies : 

Gen. IV. Gen. V. 

Adam —Eve—Abel—Cain. Adam, Eve, Cain, Abel—Seth. 
Cain—Wife—Land of Nod—-Enoch. Seth--Enos—Cainan——Mahalaleel. 
Enoch—irad, Mehujael, Methusael Mahalaleel—Jared—-Enoch—Me- 
—Lamech. thuselah. 
Lamech--Adah, Zillah, two wives. Methuselah—Lamech—-Noah. 
Lamech—Adah, Jabal—-Jubal. Noah--Shem, Ham, Japhet, from 
Lamech——Zillah—Tubal-Cain. whom the world was peopled. 
Adam, Eve—Seth. 

This speaks for itself, nor is it possible to reconcile 
such discrepancies, for not only do the names differ, but 
in.one case the world is peopled through Cain, and in 
the other through his brother Seth ! 

In this connection another singular thing presents 
itself. Weare told in Genesis vii. 21, that “All flesh 
died that moved upon the earth, both of fowl, and of 
cattle, and of beast, and of every creeping thing that 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN, 83 

ereepeth upon the earth, and every man: All in whose 
nostrils was the breath of life, of al] that was in the 
dry land, died.” And yet in the 10th chapter, after 
the subsidence of the Flood, the sons of Shem, Ham, 
and Japhet are enumerated by name, and “ By these 
were the isles of the Gentiles divided in their lands ; 
every one after his tongue, after tlreir families, in their 
nations ;”’ and “ These are the families of the sons of 
Noah, after their generations, in their nations: and by 
these were the nations divided in the earth after the 
flood.” Two most extraordinary things appear here : 
Ist, If all flesh died in the flood, who were the “ Gen- 
tiles” whose lands were divided (among themselves) by 
the sons of Shem, Ham, and Japhet? That is what I 
am anxious to discover! Have we not more “ Rabbin- 
ical” work here? and, secondly, these Gentiles, these 
gentile nations, spoke various tongues ; and that, too, a 
long time before the building of the city of Enoch (On, 
Babylon,) or its immense Observatory: and the word 
“ Tsles” certainly implies Navigation, for Isles cannot 
be on the main-land, unless, indeed, the Oases of Sin, 
of Shur, and Zahara are to be accounted such. These 
things seem strange, and unaccountable, save on certain 
hypotheses already indicated, if not expressed, in these” 
pages. I have ho apology to make, in thus handling 
the Scriptures ; for no improper spirit prompts me, but 
only the love of truth itself. The moral teachings of 
that book, and all its sublime, ethical, and religious 
truths, will stand.. To me they are sacred, and I dis- 
turb them not at all; but its historical parts have 
been aforetime so tampered with that it is now difficult 
to separate the text from the alterations and interpola- 
tions. No mere Rationalism lies at the fourtain head, 
nor am I alone in questioning the historical accuracy of 
the Pentateuch. Long before I had been tempted to visit 

84 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

the Orient, men from the very bosom of the con- 
servative Church of England had led the way that I 
am following, viz: Benjamin Jowett, M. A., Regius 
Professor of Greek in the University of Oxford ; Mark 
Pattison, B.D. ; C. W. Goodwin, M.A.; Baden Pow- 
ell, M.A.F.R.S., Savilian Professor of Geometry in 
the University of Oxford ; Henry Bristow Wilson, B. 
D.; Vicar of Great Staughton, Hunts; Rowland Wil- ; 
liams, D.D., Chaplain in Ordinary to the Queen, Head 
Master of Rugby School, Chaplain to the Harl of Den- 
bigh ; in “ Essays and Reviews ;” besides a number of 
equally intelligent scholars of our own dear America. 
And now, even as I write, tbere comes to us from over 
the broad Atlantic another eloquent protest against 
the historical inaccuracies of the Book of Genesis, and 
of the entire Pentateuch, from a Bishop of the Church 
of England—the Right Reverend John William Col- 
enso, D.D., Bishop of Natal (Africa). This prelate, 
after years of patient study, has arrived at the conclu- 
sion that he must reject the entire Pentateuch, both as 
a historical narrative, and asa Divine revelation. [| 
refer my readers to his work—‘ The Pentateuch and 
Book of Joshua Critically Examined,” and content my- _ 
self with quoting a few of the objections raised, remark- 
ing, as | do so, that the discoveries now being made 
concerning those books, and the antiquity of man, are 
rapidly but surely demolishing the whole system of 
Christianity, and just as rapidly paving the way for the 
advent of the Religion of Jesus Christ: destroying ‘the 
letter and the form, but preserving the Spirzt and the 
Soul ; dispersing the clouds that envelope Jesus and 
the Past, and fixing Him and His Imperial Truths in 
frames of shining light, so that all can see their glowing 
beauties, and every thirsty soul drink at the fountains of 

f living water. Says the Bishop: My knowledge of , 
% : 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. ; 85 

Geology satisfied me that a universal deluge, such as 
the Bible manifestly speaks of, could not possibly have 
taken place in the manner described in Genesis, not to 
mention other difficulties which the story contains. . . . 
The result of my inquiry is the conviction that the Pen- 
tateuch, as a whole, cannot possibly have been written 
by Moses, or by any one acquainted personally with 
the facts which it professes to describe; and further, 
that the so-called Mosaic narrative, by whomsoever 

written, and though imparting to us, as, I believe it- 

does, revelations of the Divine will and character, can- 
not be regarded as historically true. 

The Bishop then proceeds to say that, for the best of 
reasons, he must reject many things, as I have myself, 
and onthe same ground, viz.: that the original Book 
has unmistakably been tampered with, by additions, 
interpolations, glosses, and subtractions. He cannot 
believe, nor could I, when overlooking the river, that 
the waters of the Jordan ever stood in heaps, like solid 
walls, yet kept running all the while ; nor that the sun 
and moon stood still in the heavens at the command of 
Joshua, or any other man; nor that Egyptian magei- 
cians, or any one else, ever transformed rods into living 
serpents. He cannot believe that the God of Heaven 
ever sanctioned rape, murder, slavery or incest. He 
cannot probably believe that Cain’s descendant went 
bodily to Heaven ; nor that in the second year of the 
Hebrews’ flight from Egypt, that they numbered six 
hundred and three thousand five hundred and fifty men, 
—fichting men, over twenty years of age. All who 
have ever been in the Deserts of Sin and Shur, as I 
have, and where this vast host is said to pave been, 
will know at once that by no possibility could every 
-available spot of cultivable land in that whole region, 
_ from Sinai to the Middle Sea, from the River of Egypt to 

¢ 

€ 

86 . PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

the gates of Ramleh, afford food enough in one year to 
support that number for a single week ; while water 
enough for such a host could not have been had any- 
where—and yet this host of over six hundred thousand 
could have been but about half of the entire number 
of people in that hegira, for there were the women, 
children, and the aged men. He cannot believe that 
the Gileadites slew of the Ephraimites, their brethren, 
forty-two thousand men; that the Benjamites killed 
forty thou:and men of Israel; nor that the latter re- 
taliated, and killed forty-three thousand Benjamites, 
“all mighty men of valor;’ nor that the Philistines 
slew of Israel thirty thousand men; or that the former 
had thirty thousand chariots ; or that David slew forty 
thousand Syrian horsemen ; or that Pekah, King of Is- 
rael, slew of Judah, in one day, one hundred and twenty 
thousand men, all valiant and brave ; or that he carried 
away captive sons and daughters, women and fair mai- 
dens, to the number of two hundred thousand ; nor that 
Abijah, with four hundred thousand men, went out to 
fight Jeroboam, with eight hundred thousand, and beat 
him, leaving half a million of Israelites dead on the 
field, to say nothing of his own probable losses—a 
carnage simply impossible. Waterloo’s bloody field 
counted less than five thousand dead; and Antietam, 
Fredericksburg, and Baton Rouge, with their mighty 
‘hosts, backed by Parott guns, shell, shrapnel, grape 
and Minnie-bullets, rifled cannon and revolving pistols, 
swords, carbines, thirst and heat, and all other dread- 
ful enginery, did not send half that number of souls 
to pardon and to God! How, then, is it possible to 
believe these Rabbinical statements? But we have 
not yet done with the Book. How can we believe 
that twelve thousand Israelites slew all the males of - 
an entire nation--the Midianites—and took captive 

‘PRE-APAMITE MAN. 87 

all their little ones and women, without the loss of a 
single man! Surely this beats the “nobody hurt” of 
Sumpter and Moultrie! Is it possible to believe that 
by command of Moses all these prisoners, except the 
virgin girls, were butchered in cold blood—all, all 
killed, except these thirty-two thousand little maids? 
Is it possible to credit the tale that Moses—that 
great man, could order the wholesale slaughter of 
not less than sixty-eight thousand children and women? 
This is not all: These (forty-eight thousand) women 
represented an equal number of men, for they were 
the mothers and wives of Midian, and consequently the 
number of victims is swelled to the enormous amount of 
one hundred and sixteen thousand! This valiant deed 
was achieved by twelve thousand Israelites, who, besides 
this slaughter, must have each man taken eight cap- 
tives, and sixty-seven head of cattle ; making a total 
of eight hundred and eight thousand head —and “ no- 
body hurt” on their side! Now, when such absurd 
things are palmed off on us by whoever interpolated 
them in the Scriptures, we may well pause before we 
accept as literally, absolutely, technically true, the pre- 
vious account of the Creation and of man. 

A very few more observations on Scripture, and I 
have done. The first relates to the “ giants.” It is 
said that Ogg, king of Bashan, could only sleep in 
comfort on a bed twenty-seven feet long and twelve 
broad, because he was so large. Now I have no man- 
ner of doubt but that races of gigantic men did live in 
the early days, but if Ogg had been a little smaller he 
would have suited me better. Baron Bunsen, speak- 
ing of the wanderings of the early Chinese and Tura- 
nian races, says that: Wherever they went they found 
the land occupied by Barbarians, represented as being 
of prodigious stature; and in the records of old Se- 

= fe 

88 PRE-ADAMITE MaN. 

mitic and Turanian empires, we find traces of the exist- 
ence of gigantic races of men. 

Genesis tells us that man was made of the dust of 
the ground, but also that other human beings—in Job. 
xxvi. 5—probably a Chaldaic fragment—were made 
from under the water. The passage says in Knglish 
“Dead things.” But the Hebrew says “ Rephaim”— 
“dead men—giants ; “things” not belongmg to the 
text. These Rephaim, dead men, giants, were not 
Adamites. The “ Rephaim,” “ giants,”. “ Anakim”—— 

“dead great-ones,”*—are convertible synonymes, and - 

their origin was not the same as that of other men. I 
conclude this chapter by quoting one of Hngland’s 
noblest scholars: “ Mankind sprang not from one, but 
from many centers over the globe!” and “ Turn whith- 

__—sersoever we may, on every hand, we behold the giant 
ae ‘shapes of ancient empires, which flit like dim shadows 

evoked by a master hand !” 

CHAPTER VI. 
VARIOUS HUMAN BEGINNINGS. 

We have long since left, but will now return, to the 
columned grove of the Memnonium, and Osiride ave- 

nues ; at least we have lost sight of the hoary old land - 

which boasts them. In thus returning, we feel as if we 
were coasting the head-lands of eternity on a dark and 
stormy night. We know who built Thebes, Memphis, 
Heliopolis, and we think we know who founded mighty 
Babylon ; but we do not know who built Gilgal of the 
nations—the modern Jiljulio, nor Jerusalem, nor Jaffa, 

* Cyril Graham — Quarterly Review—July—October, 1859, has given 
us an extraordinary account of certain deserted Oriental cities, with 
houses as perfect as those of Pompeii, but in their stone doors and 

large dimensions, showing all the impress of a gigantic race of men. _ 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 89 

nor Damascus, nor Bagdad, nor Baalbec. In fact, we do 
not know even who built Naples, in Italy. We do not 
rightly understand the Genesis of modern, much less of. 
ancient nations, or who the Mound builders of America| 
were. Indeed the British pedigree itself is in consid- 
erable confusion even now; for it is held by clever 

people on England’s shores that “ The English are of, 
Israelitish origin—descended from Joseph, through the 

Angles and Saxons, who came originally from the coun- 

try near Caucasus, to which some of the ten tribes 

were carried away, and whence the inhabitants were re- 

moved to occupy Samaria, where they were obliged to 

dispossess a people whose legends claimed an antiquity 
considerably older than the Israelitish one,” which, as 

it extended to Adam, would give them the precedence, 

so far as age is concerned. We have already seen 

that, cotangent with Egyptian civilization under Menes, 

were other civilizations vastly older, and, as ‘we shall 

see, quite as perfect, and having cosmogonical theories 

equally worthy of attention. I proceed to present a few 

out of hundreds that might be produced. Let these 

suffice ; non cuivis homini contingit adire Corinthum, 

says Horace, to which we reply: True, we may not 

reach our Corinth—the First absolute man, but at least 

we are on the fair road to the coveted goal. 

Two worthy sons of Scotia were once disputing each 
other’s pedigree and their respective lengths. Donald 
had “ bagged” fourteen hundred years in triumph, but 
was routed, horse, foot, and artillery, by Grant, who 
said: “Tut, mon! when the gude Laird was making 
Adam, the clan Grant was even then as thick and 
numerous as the heather on yon hills!” I do‘not wish 
to copy Grant, but it certainly seems to me that at the 
_ date, six thousand years ago, of Adam’s asserted crea- 
_ tion great and civilized nations were strewn about 

7 
hes ®@ 

~S “The ss —— 

- 90 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

Asian, African, European, and even American soil, a 
‘great deal thicker than heather on some Scotch hill- 

sides. My reasons for this belief will be given first, 

after which we will try to find still stronger testimonies — 

to the existence of Pre-Adamite Man. 

My theory is that there may have once existed an 
approximately true account of the Origines, but that 
the magnates of Israel, who had exclusive possession of 
it, had not virtue enough to restrain them from med- 
dling with it in a variety of ways since the earliest epoch 
of their People’s history. Science will yet restore the 
lost links of human story, and we shall kuow it as it 
really was, and that, too, without a Gorilla at the 
farther end. The true Scriptures relate to man’s com- 
paratively early days, if not to his absolute origin— 
this latter being a question that must be eventually de- 

_eided upon on an entirely different sort of evidence 
from that which we are now discussing—and from any 

hitherto resorted to, or depended on. Here, in my 
opinion, are some of the methods by means of which 
the Origines have been enveloped in almost impenetra- 
ble clouds—my authority being “ Edersheim’s History 
of the Jews, 1856,” and contemporaneous literature on 
the same, and cognate subjects. These authorities in- 
form us that, as the result of long continued and earn- 
est. investigation, they find that when the spirit of the 
reality, indicated by the type (in ancient sacred Serip- 
ture), was lost sight of, and the type alone remained, 
the latter was either mistaken, or purposely accepted, 
for the reality itself, in consequence of which a direc- 
tion altogether new and erroneous was given to reli- 
gious thinking, which being pursued, led at length to 
complete apustacy. The Rabbins frequently, in order 
to substantiate some new conceit, or fanciful hypothesis, — 
violated the very rules of grammar and the construe. — 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 9] 

tion of sentences, and they not only determined the 
meaning of words by tradition, but they devised and 
applied new meanings for old words. Words were 
split in two or three, and meanings given the compo- 
nent parts merely on euphonic grounds, because their 
sounds were like other words whose meanings they 
wanted the new word to imitate or conform to. Some- 
times they traced words to cognate languages, or their 

meanings were elicited from parallel passages. The . 

Hebrew is written wholly with consonants, and the 
vowel-points, a comparatively modern innoyation, are 
added afterwards. But a sentence, written without 
these points, has a totally different meaning from the 
very same letters, in the very same sentence, written 
with them. In a word, the Hebrew is a double lan- 
cuage; Ist, the Ancient tongue; and, 2nd, the same 
with the Masoretic, or traditional vowel-points. The 
first connected, or compiled and collated, form of the 
Old Testament was unpointed, though even then its 

texts had already been tampered with ; and out of that | 

form was begun to be translated into Greek, in Hgypt, 
ander Ptolemy Philadelphus. It was completed by 
different scholars, and their translation is called the 
Septuagint, because seventy men of seventy minds, sev- 
snty notions of their own, and seventy conceptions they 
each wanted to send down the stream of time, performed 
the work. In the next place let me observe that there 
3 a direct relationship, in sound at least, between the 
Ancient Hebrew, Sanscrit, Arabic, Syriac, and Atthi- 
ypic languages, of which the Rabbins took good care 
0 avail themselves when they came across a word of 
imilar euphony, but different meaning, that suited their 
gurposes. ‘The Masoretic, or pointed, Hebrew did not 
some into use till one thousand years after the Septua- 
rint—sufficient time for both to be corrupted in/ 

92 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

I give a few instances in proof of what vast changes 
meaning are given to ancient Hebrew records by the si 
ple process of pointing, or attaching vowel signs there 
The same passages are given, from the accepted vi 
sions of the Bible, and from the unpointed Hebrew te: 
I quote from the celebrated work of Henry. F. 
Pratt, one of the best Hebrew scholars of the prese 
century: Gen. x. 11, 12, referring to Nimrod—‘A: 
the beginning of his kingdom was Babel, and Hrec 
and Accad, and Calneh, in the land of Shinar. Out 
that land went forth Asshur, and builded Nineveh, ai 
the city Rehoboth, and Calah, and Resen, betwe 
Nineveh and Calah: the same is a great city.” Tl 
identical passage, as it existed in unpointed Hebre 
thousands of years before the Masoretic vowels we 
invented, reads, word for word, as follows, still refe 
ring to Nimrod: “ Now the beginning of his kingdo 
was Babylon, and he extended, and fortified, and esta 
lished it, in the land of Shinar. From this land | 
went out into Assyria, and built Nineveh, and the pu 
lic places of the city, and (its) wealth: this was 
great city.” The difference here is startling—no le 
than the removal of the names of six apocryphal citi 
from the text, besides the exchange of the name of 
person (Asshur, Assyria) for that of a country. 

Joshua xxiv. 19: “Ye cannot serve the Lord; f 
He is an holy God, He is a jealous God; He will n 
forgive your transgressions, nor your sins.”—Bib 
Masoretic pointing. Unpointed text: “Then Josh 
said unto the people, Cease not to serve the Creato: 
for an holy God is He; a jealous God is He (He wou 
be) that will not (would not) forgive your transeré 
sions and your sins.” What a difference! What 
defence of God! Job ii. 9: “ Curse God, and die” 
his loving wife’s advice to her lord, according to # 

* 

ie 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN, 97 

from thence was formed true men. A sort of “ Devel- 
opement theory” in disguise. 

This is the reason, says the record, that men are ration- 
al beings, and endowed with Divine instincts and know- 
_Iedge. Belus divided the darkness, separated heaven 
from earth, subdued Chaos, and reduced the universe to 
order. The afore-mentioned animals were not able to 
stand the light, and therefore perished ; whereupon 
Belus, desirous to improve the scene they had occupied, 
compelled one of the subordinate gods to decapitate 
himself, and mix the blood with the earth. He did so, 
and there sprung into existence other men and animals | 
of a higher order. Belus also made the sun, moon, stars 
and planets. Such, according to Polyhistor Alexander, is 
Berosus’ cosmogony. Luke Burke, commenting on this 
_ extract, observes, that the account is not over consistent, 

and thinks that it evidently reflects the conjectural inter- 
pretations of historians and commentators, rather than 
the actual creed of ancient Chaldea. The monstrous 
animals are symbolical of natural forces, and are such 
as are common to all nations of antiquity, as is proved 
by the slabs of Nimroud and Nineveh, exhumed by Lay- 
ard and others—both the legends and the slabs being 
vastly older than the modified Hebraic cosmogony, or 
its original man. 

Here is a Seandinavian cosmogonical fragment : in 
the prose Edda isa conference between Gangler, the 
Question-asker, and Har, Jafnhar, and Thridi, the 
answerers. ‘This is the substance of the Legend: 
Niflheim was formed long ages before the earth was 
made , In the middle of Niflheim was the spring Hver- 
gelmir—-the source of twelve great rivers, that of Gjél 
being the nearest to the abode of Death. In the soath- 
eri sphere, or region, was the world called Muspell. 
It is too glowing and light for any but those belonging 

~. 

98 -  PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

there. He who sits at its borders, or on its lands-end 
to guard it, is called Surtur. In his hand he bears a 
falchion, with which, at the end of the world, he will 
vanquish all the gods, and then consume the universe 
with flaming fire: 
“Surtur, from the South, wends 

With seething fire ; 

The falchion of the Mighty One 
A sun-light flameth. 

‘** Mountains together dash, 
Giants headlong rush, 
Men tread the paths to Hel, 
And Heaven in twain is rent ” 

Voluspa. 

To Gangler’s inquiry, as to the state of things ere 
the races mingled and distinct nations came into being, 
the following reply is given: 

When the rivers that are called Elivagar had 
flowed far from their sources, the venom which they 
rolled along hardened, as does dross that runs from a 
furnace, and became ice. When the rivers flowed no 
longer, and the ice stood still, the vapor arising from 
the venom gathered over it and froze to rime, and in 
this manner were formed, in Ginnungagap, many layers 
of congealed vapor, piled one over the other. 

That part of Ginnungagap that lies towards the 
north was thus filled with heavy masses of gelid vapor — 
and ice, whilst everywhere within were whilrlwinds 
and fleeting mists. But the southern part of Ginnun- 
gagap was lighted by the sparks and flakes that flew 
into it from Muspelheim. 

Thus, whilst freezing, cold, and gathering gloom pro-. 
ceeded from Niflheim, that part of Ginnungagap look- 
ing towards Muspelheim was filled with glowing 
radiancy, the interveniug space remaining calm and 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 99 

light as wind-still air. And when the heated blast 
met the gelid vapor it melted into drops, and, by the 
might of him who sent the heat, these drops quickened 
into life, and took a human semblance. The being thus 
formed was named Ymir, but the Frost-giants call him 
Orgelmir. From him descend the race of the Frost- 
giants (Hrimthursar.) 

To the inquiry, “ where dwelt inti and on what 
did he live?” Har replies: “ frinteaintaly after the 
gelid vapors had been resolved into drops, there was 
formed out of them the cow Audhumla. Four streams 
of milk ran from her teats, and thus fed she Ymir.” 

“But on what did the cow feed?” asks Gangler. 

“The cow,’ answered Har, “supported herself by 
licking the stones that were covered with salt and hoar 
frost. The first day that she licked these stones there 
sprang from them towards evening the hairs of a.man, 
the second day a head, and on the third an entire man, 
who was endowed with beauty, agility and power. He 
was called Bur, and was the father of Bor, who took 
for wife Besla, the daughter of the giant Bolthorn. 
And they had three sons, Odin, Vili, andeVe; and it 
is our belief that this Odin, with his brothers, ruleth 
both heaven and earth, and that Odin is his true name, 
and that he is the most mighty of all the gods.” 

After this the sons of Bor slew the giant Ymir, and 
when he fell there ran so much blood from his wounds 

: that the whole race of the Frost-giants was drowned in 
it, except a single giant, who saved himself with his house- 
hold. He is called by the giants Bergelmir. He 
escaped by going on board his bark, and with him 
went his wife, and from them are descended the Frost- 
giants. | : 

Then the sons of Bér dragged the body of Ymir 
into the middle of Ginnungagap, and of it formed the 

100 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

earth. From Ymir’s blood they made the seas and 
waters ; from his flesh, the land; from his bones, the 
mountains ; and his teeth and jaws, together with some 
bits of broken bones, served them to make the stones 
and pebbles. 

With the blood that ran from his wounds, (added 
Jafnhar,) they made the vast ocean, in the midst of 
which they fixed the earth, the ocean encircling it as a 
ving, and hardy will he be who attempts to pass shows 
waters. 

From his skull, (continued Thridi,) they formed 
the heavens, which they placed over the earth, and set 
a dwarf at the corner of each of the four quarters. 
These dwarfs are called East, West, North, and South. 
They afterwards took the wandering sparks and red 
hot flakes that had been cast out of Muspelheim, and 

*~ placed them in the heavens both above and below, to 

give light unto the world, and assigned to every other 
errant corruscation a prescribed locality and motion. 

To the gianis were assigned as a dwelling-place the 
outward shores of the great encircling ocean. Within, 
round the earth, the gods raised a bulwark against 
their turbulence. This bulwark, to which they gave 
the name of Midgard, they formed from Ymir’s eye- 
brows ; and, finally, they tossed Ymir’s brains into the 
air, ehid they became the clouds. As it is said in Grim- 
nis-mal :— 

Of Ymir’s flesh was formed the earth; of his sweat 
(blood), the seas; of his bones, the mountains; of his 
hair, the trees ; of his skull, the heavens ;~but with his 
eyebrows the blithe gods built Midgard for the sons of 
men, whilst from his brains the lowering clouds were 
formed.* 

* Prose Edda, sec. 4—8, in Mallett’s Northern rig Bohn’s 
em PP. 401—405. 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 101 

The next step in this collation of cosmogonies takes 
us to the wilds of North America. The traveler 
Hearne has, fortunately, saved from oblivion a curious 
fragment of tradition current among the “ Northern 
Indians,” the name by which the tribes around Hud- 
son’s Bay are designated by the servants of the Hud- 
son’s Bay Company. This story is told as follows :— 

“They have a tradition among them, that the first 
person upon earth was a woman, who, after having been 
sometime alone in her researches for berries, which 
were then her only food, found an animal like a dog, 
which followed her to the cave where she lived, and 
soon grew fond and domestic. This dog, they say, had 
the art of transforming itself into the shape of a hand- 
some young man, which it frequently did at night, but 
as the day approached, always resumed its former 
shape, so that the woman looked on all that passed on 
those occasions as dreams and delusions. ‘These trans- 

formations were soon productive of the consequences 

which at present generally follow such intimate con- 
nections between the sexes, and the mother of the world 
began to advance in her pregnancy. 

“ Not long after this happened, a man,of Rich a sur- 
prising height, that his head reached up to the clouds, 
came to level the land, which at that time was a very 
rude mass; and after he had done this, by the help of 
his walking stick, he marked out all thelakes, ponds, 
and rivers, and immediately caused them to be filled 
with water. He then took the dog and’ tore it to 
pieces ; the entrails he threw into the lakes and rivers, 
commanding them to become the different’ of 
fish ; the flesh he dispersed over the land, commanding 
it to become different kinds of beasts and land animals ; 
the skin he also tore in small pieces, and threw it into 
the air, commanding it to become all kinds of birds ; 

a” 

- 

me... PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

after which he gave the woman and her offspring full 
power to kill, eat, and never spare, for that he had 

_ “commanded them to multiply for her use in abundance. 
After this injunction, he returned to the place whence 
- . he came, and has not been heard of since.” * 

The simple juxta-position of these three fables pre- 
sents us with a curious illustration of the mythic affin- 
ities which connect together different, and often widely 
separated regions of the earth That we have here to 
deal with affinities of genuine connection, with evi- 
dences of a bona jide transmission of thought, and not 
with mere chance coincidences, is oovious at a glance. 
The subject, in each case, is nothing less than the erea- 
tion of a universe, the grandest theme that could be 
offered to human contemplation. In each case, the 
work is accomplished by means which never could 
spontaneously or directly suggest themselves to any 
one, for there is nothing in the nature of things to 
countenance any such working. In each case the form- 

“ative material is the body of a slaughtered animal; an 
old woman in the first instance, a giant in the second, 

= 

and a dog in the third, and in two of the cases the dis- 

tribution and. transmutations of the several parts of 
these beings Mo strikingly analogous. In the third, 
the mechanism is more simple, and, though differing in 
detail, bears out in the main the fundamental idea of 
the others. Nor do the affinities stop here. The agent 
in two cases is the supreme divinity of each region, in 
the other he is obviously an equivalent being, though 
merely described as a man of prodigious stature. In 
the Babylonian fable we have but two personages men- 
tioned, in the two others we have, so to speak, three— 

* Journey to the Northern Ocean in the years 1769—-72. Lond. 
1795, p. 342. 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 103 

a dog being added in the one, and a cow in the other. 
In two cases we have a woman as part of the machin- 
ery, in two we have also a giant. The idea of eating 
is similarly duplicated. The old woman feeds upon 
berries, the giant lives upon the milk of the cow, who 
in turn is supported by licking the stones covered with 
hoar frost. And even the idea of the young man is 
common to both the northern fables, for while the cow 
is licking the stones Bor gradually emerges ; he comes 
after the cow as his equivalent does after the woman, 
and then appears in each case the creative agent. 

And now, after these coincidences, comes a set of 
contrasts which are not the least interesting part of the 
story, since they prove that none of these versions is a 
direct copy of either of the others, but rather an analo- 
gous, though independent, working up of some common 
material—of some fundamental fable now, to all ap- 
pearance, perished. In the Scandinavian legend it is 
the first personage who is destroyed, in the Chaldean it 
is the second, and in the American it is the third. This 
looks something like a sequence of eras in the three 
versions. It is, at all events, in the analogy of transi- 
tions, very frequent in mythic fable. 

It is obvious that it would never occur to any human 
being, as a preliminary idea, to suppose that this uni- 
verse was formed out of the body of a slaughtered 
woman, giant, or dog. Such conjunctions could only 
arise in the course of association. The mind must be 
prepared for them by a special train of thought, and 
this fact dispels all idea of independent origins, and 
makes it plain, even in the absence of special evidence, 
that all three legends have had but one fundamental 
source. What that source may be, it is impossible to’ 
conjecture, from the materials supplied by the legends 
themselves ; but the difficulty is not so formidable when 

104 PRE-ADAMITE MAN, 

we take into consideration the analogies afforded by 
the numerous parallel conjunctions which the study of 
general mythology presents. One point will easily be 
admitted, even at this early stage of our inquiry —viz., 
that it is only in symbolic language, and in metaphoric 
picture writing, that we can expect to find the source 
of such extraordinary associations. In this view it 
may be that the giant, the woman, and the dog, are but 
different symbolic expressions of some one idea, or set 
of ideas, or that they imply the transfer of sympathies 
and prerogatives from one personage of a legend to 
another, just as the most sacred symbol in one creed 
may be an abomination in another. 

These legends also present a very interesting geogra- 
phical relation. The mythology of the North is con- 
nected by many links with the religious traditions of 
the Persic or Iranian family, and the migrations or con- 
quests of the Scythic tribes offer a ready means of ac- 
counting for the affinity; nor could we at first sight turn 
to a more probable source of connection with the re- 
gions of North Hastern America, than the explorations 
and colonizations of the bold ocean wanderers of Scan- 
dinavia. Yet there is nothing in the fables that speak 
of relatively recent connections. They rather point to 
times when some common tradition was delivered to all 
three, and in the course of ages modified to the existing 
forms. The tradition of Babylonia is plainly very an- 
cient ; the creed of the North reaches back to unknown 
times ; while the American fable, though handed over 
to literature but yesterday, as it were, carries with it | 
no, more appearance of juvenility than either of the 
others. . 

The curious legend of which we have here presented 
three versions, in as many different regions, has evi- 
dently traveled much farther than this. An allusion 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 105 

is made in the Dabistan to a local Hindu tradition, 
which reported that the world was formed of the skin . 
of a Rakshasa or Demon, but we can only speak from 
memory, as we have not, at the moment, an opportunity 
. of verifying the passage. There is, however, in one of 
the hymns of the Vedas, a description of the mystic 
sacrifice of a primeval ‘being named Pwrusha, which 
has evident bearing on the present range of thought. 
The following is the substance of the legend, which 
our space compels us to condense :— 

“This victim, Purusha, born primevally, they immo- 
lated on the sacrificial grass.” They divided him into 
parts. The Brahmin was his mouth, the Rajanya his 
arms, the Vaisya his thighs, the Sudra sprang from 
his feet. The moon was produced from his mind 
(manas); the sun from his eye; Indra and Agni from 
his mouth ; and Vaya from his breath. From his 
naval came the atmosphere ; from his head the sky ; 
from his feet the earth ; from his ear the four quarters ; 
and “ so they formed the worlds.”* 

A very distinct version of the original story has also 
existed, or still exists, in the cosmogonical traditions 
of the inhabitants of the Marian islands, as the follow- 
ing passage will show : 

Pontan (they say) who was a very ingenious man, 
lived for a long time in the imaginary regions of space 
which existed before the creation. At his death, he 
commanded his sisters to form, of his breast and shoul- 
ders, the heavens and the earth; of his eyes, the sun 
and moon ; and of his eyebrows, the rainbow.t 

The tradition seems even to have traveled farther 
than this, for the Tangaloa of Tahiti “ formed the ocean’ 

* Prichard (Physical History of Mankind, vol. v., p. 17 6) quoting 
Freycinct, &c. 

t Muir, Original Sanscrit Texts, p. 7. 

106 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

from the sweat of his brow--so hard did he work in 
. making the land.”* And there are, we believe, some 
other fragmentary vestiges or allusions, to which at the 
moment we cannot distinctly refer. But even those 
that are unequivocal form a curious series of facts, and 
evidently point to wide-spread and remote relations 
among the families of man; but such relations have 
nothing to do with the speculative dreams so fashiona- 
ble in the last generation, and not yet wholly forgotten 
by the present, relative to the primeval peopling of the 
earth, and the branching out of a primeval faith into 
an infinitude of local superstitions. 

Mr. Kohl, in his Krrcosi-Gami, or Wanderings round 
Lake Superior, gives a variety of Indian traditions, 
which he collected with care and judgment. The Ojib- 
beways (he remarks) and, indeed, nearly all the North- 
ern American Indians, situate their paradise to the 
West. 

“The Sacred Land of the West,” beyond the West- 
ern Ocean, on the borders of the earth, and “The Sa- 
ered isles of the West,” were familiar ideas to the 
ancient Greeks, The paradise of the ancient Irish, 
Hy Brasail, was an island in the Western Ocean ; that 
of the Tonga islanders—the island Bolotoo—was situ- 
ated in the North-west of the world. The Amenti, or 
Hades of the Egyptians, like the Elysium of the Greeks, 
was also in the West, and so of several other tradi- 
tions. . 

When we come to stratify and analyze these and 
their correlative legends, it becomes apparent that the 
West was the original place of the paradise of departed 
heroes, and that it was only in long subsequent ages 
that this paradise was transferred, first to the North- 
west, and finally to the North and East, when it 

oe 

_* Latham, Varieties of Man, p. 193. 

a mh 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 107 _ 

became connected with Initial as well as Terminal 
myths. 

In answer to Mr. Kohl’s inquiries relative to the 
ideas entertained by the natives, on the subject of their 
paradise, he observes :— 

Here my friend began telling me of a great, straight 
path, and its branch and side roads ; of a great straw- 
berry that lay in the path of souls; of a river, and a 
serpent before the entrance to paradise. And as the 
description was not very intelligible, one of the Indians 
called for a pencil, traced a rude diagram, and after 
some preliminary explanations, continued as follows : 

“When men die they all go, after death, along the 
path of souls. On the centre of this path thou seest 
the strawberry lying on one side. [tis extraordinarily 
large, and is said to taste very sweet. © A man stands 
by it, who invites all passers by to taste it. But they 
must not accept it, for whatever soul does so is lost at 
once. Those that resist continue their journey pros- 
perously till they come to paradise. It is, altogether, a 

journey from three to four days. Then a large broad. 

river bars the way. Over it there is no regular bridge. 
Something that looks like a great tree-stump lies across 
it. Its roots are firmly fastened on the opposite shore. 
On this side, it raises its head, but it does not reach 
quite to the land. There is a small gap over which 
the souls must hop. The log, too, is constantly shaking. 
Most of the souls spring across, balance themselves 
properly, and save themselves. Those, however, that 
jump short, or slip off the bridge, fall into the water, 
and are converted into toads and fishes.” 

This paradise is very veautiful ; it was formed by 
Menaboju (the Hiawatha of Lenefellow) at the com- 
mand of the Great Spirit, and the souls there “are 
always merry, happy, and contented, play the drum all 

Le re 

% 

108 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. .s 

day and night and dance. They live on 4a variety of 
mushroom, and a species of wood that resembles the 
phosphorescent wood that is seen shining in our forests.” 

From another source the author learns that, ‘‘ After 
the strawberry, a huge dog lies in the path. This dog, 
when sitting, is as big as a house. He watches the 
path, allows every one to pass unhindered Westward, 
but does not suffer any one to return from the world 
of souls to the East.” 

His informant also added that what seemed to be 
a log stretched across the river, was, in reality, a ser- 
pent, whose windings produced the trembling of the 
apparent log. 

Many of the circumstarces of this journey of the 
dead have direct affinities with the. Mexican notions on 
the same subject, and no slight analogy also to the 
Hadaic journey of Classical fable. The bridge and its 
casualties is an important idea in Mahommetan le- 
gends, only that the log and serpent are there replaced 
by a razor. _ These connections between the Old world 

,and the New, are extremely interesting, since they 
Speak of inter-communications of which history has pre- 
served no trace. 

CHAPTER VIL 
COSMOGONICO-CHRONOLOGICAL.—CATACLYSMS. 

There is nothing more uncertain than chronology, as 
may easily be seen by the following :—Creation took 
place according to : 

Septuagint, date of the Flood, (Before Christ, 3,246), eg: ago, 5,108 

Septuagint, Creation’s date. ......0.......cc cee ees 7,371 
Ussher, Creation to present time................. ve 5,867 
PRG PALM ia gigs sen as oa Gis a'= 02 Pha Fie wees se 5,673 

Byzantine Chronicles..... PST re toe vts AI) ) <a 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. = "109 

NE FOR ho tay ora hp ibow bie bala Pes 0 ole belo wrens us 6,576 
SRTEIOM ee Senn. Lai tie sok pe to alle Ws eas a vss U 8,788 
LL aaa ete aie eT meg teed re 17,000 
SRST are ure cae CUES vote’ Se Oe Ue Oars s 0% t's 108 Mt 498,600 
MLO FEC C SEAIEU RAK teitta ot AES QUES ahs od Sit bs « 473,000 
Samaritan Pentateuch (Nablous, Syria) EPR Aah « 6,167 

And Plato tells us that the Atlantis (Isle of Delights) 
sunk in the ocean 9,000 years before the age in which he 
lived. One account tells us that Noah’s Flood took 
place, B. C. 2,348 ; and another fixes that of Deucalion 
at 1,503 B. C.; while the Deluge of Xisuthrus, dates | 
at least 10,000 years before the Christian era. 

The Thibetan Chronology—semi-Budhistic...... before Christ, 11,869 
iiis Known: that Budha died... ... 0... cn. ce ee ewe years ago, 3,384 
The progenitors of the present race of Turks had 

great kingdoms in Asia......... Perera a 4,211 
Chinese records (probable?) extend.............. “63,000 

And they ousted nations who had occupied the soil 
for 7,000 years. 
But totally divested of traditional eiements, it is 
certain that the Chinese empire was an old 
POTS 8.65. AS hte Sie ah ee be 5,164 

A Chinese work, dating six hundred years before 
Christ, speaks of the “ advantages of ancient systems of 
Education !” 

Turning from China to Japan, we hear things quite 
as astonishing as any yet listened to, for their annals 
declare that they were ruled for fifteeen millions of 
years by celestial spirits, and then by human emperors 
for fifteen thousand years; to which must be added six 
hundred, and one thousand eight hundred and sixty- 
two years, a total of seventeen thousand four hundred 
and sixty-two years. Their history is satisfactorily 
traced to 700, B. C. 

The next step we take shall be to Hindostan. One 
of their periods, the ‘Satya Yug, is now elapsing ; at its 
commencement the Seventh eae one of their ances- 
tors, lived three million eight hundred and forty-two 

110 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

thousand nine hundred and sixty-two years ago. But 

their claims are well founded as far back as five thou- 

sand yearsago. The Budhistic cycles of chronology are 
something startling, if for no other reason than their ex- 
ceeding modesty. Here they are, according to the sacred 
books of the great Mendicant Order. ‘There is a num- 
ber known to the Budhists called an Asankya ; it is ex- 
pressed by a unit and one hundred and forty cyphers. 
The square of that constitutes an Anta-Kalpa ; and the 
square of that in turn constitutes the number of years 
since the first Budha ceased to preach, and attained 
Narwana, or celestial beatitude. To-day there are hun- 

~. dreds of millions on this earth, who believe the whole 

of tlis monstrous system, so far as figures go. Just 
imagine a human intellect capable of grasping a number ~ 
only to be expressed by the figure 9 at the left hand of 
one hundred and eighty-two million places of figures! 
To give the reader something of an idea of only an 
Anta-Kalpa, we will quote from a Cingalese author. 
“Were it to rain as violently as rain ever fell, for the 
period of eleven years, all over the earth, the number 
of drops would not extend to an Anta-Kalpa. Were 
an angel to fly from heaven once in ten thousand years, 
and touch with a silk handkerchief, as lightly as possi- 
ble, a rock five million acres in extent, and twelve 
thousand miles high, it being as hard as diamond, the 
handkerchief would have worn the rock entirely way ; 
and a bird carrying away the dust of it, one speck ata 
time, and being twelve thousand years on his outward, 
and twelve thousand more on his inward flight, would 
have. taken the rock entirely aw wy, and the angel and 
the bird would have abundant tin to repeat the expe- 
riment twelve thousand times between the commence- 
ment and ending of the period of a great Kalpa, or 
Maha-Kalpa. 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 111 

If we turn to the Babylonian chronologies, we are 
forced to reject their enormous statements and claims ; 
but, while doing so, are compelled to admit that thou- 
sands of years before the date of the Man of Eden, the 
Babylonians had attained a high state of civilization, 
it being perfectly clear that nations capable of having 
such sublime conceptions of creation, of time, or dura- 
tion, and the world of thought generally, as they un- 
questionably had, must have, long previous to the begin- 
ning of the six thousand years of Genesis, passed 
through that primitive barbarism which we erroneously 
attach to all ancient peoples. My own opinion is, that 
this world has witnessed more than one civilization, quite 
equal in degree, if not in kind, to that now existing. 

Babylonian, Egyptian, Ninevite and Egyptological 
researches, have, through Bunsen, Layard, Miiller,Schel- 
ling, Von Humboldt, Wilson, and others of the great 
galaxy of Scientific Stars, demonstrated the total unre- 
liability of Theological chronologies ; and the barriers 
which Jewish superstition and Christian sloth have 
erected upon God’s free field of human history are, 
thank Heaven, being rapidly and forever broken down. 

On the banks of the Nile we find that lofty arts, 
sciences, letters, anda high degree not only of civiliza- 
tion, but of learning, and luxury, existed in great perfec- 
tion six thousand years ago. 

All things advance from imperfection towards the 
perfect ; but the rate of progress is necessarily slow. 
Nations, languages, science, art and intellectual systems 
do not, like the fungus, spring up in a night, nor wither 
in a day ; but, like the cedar and the oak, are of slow 
but solid growth, and when they die, die hard. They 
do not perish swiftly, but’ become gradually extinct. 
Nations are like men; they are born, reach the virile 
age, reach maturity, and grow old. The process, where 

~~ 

112 PRE-ADAMITE MaN. 

a nation springs out of barbaric or savage conditions, 
requires immense periods ; and in reference to Kgypt, 
it must have required thousands of years to develop 
the state of things found there when Menes turned the 
channel of the Nile. Bunsen gives 20,000 years B. C. 
as the date of the Beginning of what we find in Egypt 
4000 years B. C.; because it would require not less, 
ut probably more, than that length of time, to develop 
one or both of the two vast families of languages in the 
Kast, namely, the Semitic and its antipodal speech, from 
which he thinks all modern tongues have sprung ; 
though how he-.connects either the languages of North 
and South America, and the monosyllabic tongues of 
China, with one or the other of these primitives, is 
hard to be seen.* The Sanscrit is one branch of the 
early tongue, and is known to have been a dead lan- 
- guage 4500 years ago, or long before Moses, and even 
- then it was the offspring of other dead tongues. 

The writer of this work cannot believe that all lan- 
guages sprung from one or two sources, or that the ha- 
man race had its origin with the Adam of Scripture, 
for the reason, among others :—First, that it is Impos- 
SIBLE that any of the Nigritian races, the American 

Indian—many distinct varieties both in North and 

South America—and the Chinese, could have sprung 
from one common stock. Intermarriage could never 
change people as we see them, had all originally been 
alike. True, the darker races bleach whiter by amal- 
gamation with lighter races ; but no possible amount 
_ of admixture will ever make people change from white 
to jet black, the originals being white 7a the first place. 
Take it as you will, here is a fact that cannot be gotten 

Fly? yA 

—— 

Teese 
*That eminent scholar’s researches convinced him that Abraham 

was the first really historical personage of Genesis, for reasons already 

developed herein. 
» 

a 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 113 

over. Undoubtedly, all nien are entitled to rights alike, 
and are equally to be regarded as heirs of immortality ; 
but they are not all descended from one origina! pair. 
In the great battle of the Polygenesists against the 
-Monogenesists, the former carry the heaviest artillery. 
During the entire historical human period, the same 
identical radical differences that exist between men of 
different continents to-day, have existed; and this is 
proved by monuments, statuary and sculpture of all 
kinds, and wherever discovered. The Negro, the 
Mongolian, and the man of Caucasian lineage, present 
the same respective features—the first, in hue, shape and 
outline ; the second presents the same sallow, flat face, 
oblique eyes, high cheeks ; and the third, the same lofty- 
browed bearing now, that they each did fifty centuries 
ago: nor is it likely that the respective branches of the 
human family would, or will change, save only by amal- 
gamation, in the next 500 generations. It follows, then, 
that the idea of a single origin for all men must be 
abandoned ; and only two other hypothesis are pos- 
sible: first, that man sprung, through the Development 
process, via Baboons, Gorillas, etc., or that he came 
into being at a score of points of locality and time. 
As yet, I see no reason to accept the former repugnant 
notion, and cannot understand the modus of the latter. 
We cannot believe ourselves developed Monkeys, even 
with an interval of a million ages separating us from } %n.» 
them. We reject the thing in scorn, and will continue\—" 
to do so until reason and science demonstrate our \” 
error; and with this peculiar phase of the Develop. 
ment and Monogenetic theories goes that of the De- 
luge, and some other notions based on the accounts in 
Genesis. With the “ Garden” goes the “ Ark” and the 
“Flood”—as being universal; and yet there was a 

114 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

flood or floods, that probably swept millions of human 
beings out of existence. But of this more anon. 

It is maintained by learned men that, geographically, 
man began his career, not in Syria, but in what is now 
a barren wilderness, on tle northern slope of the Hindu 
Kush. The “Garden,” therefore, stretched to the 
Taurus and the Polar Sea; eastward to the Altai, or 
Celestial Mountains of the Chinese; and its western 
boundaries were Ararat and Caucasus. This land was 
watered by the Oxus, Euphrates, Jaxartes and Tigris.* 
It has also grown to be a cardinal doctrine with the 

same scholars that, by a dreadful catastrophe, brought ~ 

about. by earthquakes, fire, water and wind, volcanoes 
and noxious gasses. not only were vast numbers of 
human beings swept away, but the very face of the 
region was changed: aad the Caspian Sea and Lake 

| ‘eUral were formed, and a temperate climate was changed 

into one of frost and snow. The Hebraic legend in 
Genesis, the Bactrian one in the Véndidad, and at least 
half a score of others, so strongly confirm the same 
story, that it is reasonable to suppose that it has a 
foundation in truth ; albeit it is certain that more than 
one boat-load of men and animals survived the occur- 
rence, whether there was only one or several deluges. 
Wherever these traditions of a flood have been found, 
they are connected with legends older still. 

* Geological research has proved that a vast inland sea existed 
aforetime, which filled the whole space between the site of Constanti- 
nople on’ the west, and Turkistan on the east—a length of 2.000 miles, 
by about 1,000 broad. The Caspian, the Seas of Azoff and the Aral 
are but small ponds left when this great sea was drained. How and 
when this latter event took place is, of course, not precisely known ; 
but that it was the result of causes, presently to be noticed, there can 
be no reasonable doubt. My theory, though novel, is worthy of scien- 
tific examination. , 

—— 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. ‘115 

On the Couteau des Prairies, situated between the 
Missouri and Minnesota rivers, in the Western part of 
the American: Union, is the identical spot where Cre 
ation first begun, many centuries before the great freshet, 
or flood ; at least such is the tradition and belief of 
many independent Indian tribes—and it is quite as re- 
liable as any other. When the flood took place, many 
centuries ago, and destroyed all the nations of the earth, 
all the Indian tribes assembled in the Couteau des 
Prairies, to escape from the impending watery ruin. 
After they had all gathered there from every part, the 
waters still kept rising, till they finally entirely covered 
them, and changed their bodies into red pipe-stone, 
which pipe-stone abourds there till this day. While all 
the rest were drowning, one young virgin girl— 
Kwaptahw—caught hold of the foot of a very great 
bird that was flying over, and by it was carried to a 
safe place on the top of a high cliff, not far off. This 
bird was the War Eagle ; and by him she became preg- 
nant of twins—a boy and a girl, and from these two the © 
whole red-skinned world was peopled. This legend re- 
sembles, in some features, others that are a great deal 
more popular, especially in the miraculous and concep- ~ 
tional elements. Equally singular with the above are 
some of the Eastern legends not yet mentioned ; for in- 
stance, that of the Arabs, to the effect’ that Creation 
began in the center of what now is Mecca ; that Adam 
was over one hundred feet high, and Eve nearly the 
same ; that Paradise was situated in the heavens ; and 
that the Fall wasnot only a moral, but also a physical 
one ; that Adam fell on a mountain in Ceylon, and Eve 
on Arafat, a hill near Mecca ; that being separated, they 
began to search for each other ; Adam beginning to tra- 
vel on foot, in hopes of finding her, each footstep being 
- one hundred miles in length, and a city arising wherever 

116 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

his foot rested; he finally rejoined his wife on Arafat, 
where they lived till death ; Eve being then buried at 
Jeddah, a port on the Red Sea, where her tomb—two 
hundred feet long—is still to be seen.. Arabian legerds 
tell us that the tombs of Noah, Abel, Joshua and Moses, 
are each one hundred feet long. Also that, on ordinary 
occasions, God speaks in pure Arabic, save when mer- 
cifully inclined, when he adopts a Persian dialect. 

Miracles, such as these and others, may have once oc- 
curred, but they have long since ceased. Science can 
take no notice of a miracle; the two names are anti- 
podal. Science and miracle are deadly foes, and 
whenever they meet in the shock of warfare, one party 
invariably suffers defeat, and that party is not Science. 
Galileo’s world moved, then it did not ; but then again 
it did. 

Science is called upon to account for the Deluge, or 
tell us how the universal testimonies all to the same 
general purport originated. She does so ; and not only 
tells us why and how the catastrophe—this Flood—-hap- 
pened, but she also tells us, very nearly, when it occur- 
red. Of course the Deluge must have been a human 
reminiscence, else we should not hear of it. The catas- 
trophe was the result of natural law, totally indepen- 
dent of any miraculous element whatever ; and we now 
know that the Deluge could not have happened much, 
if any, less than twenty-two thousand years ago, but 
with greater probability, not less than forty-two thou- 
sand vears have elapsed since the greatest of these 
events—for there has been more than one—recorded it- 
self, and engraved its history on the tablets of tradition. 
_ It may not be known to the general reader, but it is a 
well-attested fact, nevertheless, that, in addition to the 
diurnal and orbital motions of the earth, there is a third, — 
an oscillating motion, requiring vast periods of time for _ 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. | yh by: 

the accomplishment of one movement. This motion is 
that of the deviation of the earth’s axis, and by means 
of it the poles, and therefore the equator also, are 
shifted, and a great change takes place in the temper- 
ature, not only in polar, but in all other regions of the 
globe ; and the cold is greater or less, for a period, at 
the middle of one of these oscillations, than at the end. 
Itis believed that when this movement of the earth 
reaches one extreme, there is a terrible degree of cold 
at the poles, and consequently vast accumulations of ice 
are gathered there; and it is certain that the poles 
have been permanently shifted more than once. The . 
coldest recent period occurred at the poles ten thou- 
sand one hundred and fourteen years ago; and of course 
the earth there is now gradually verging toward the op- 
posite extreme, and the climates of America and Europe 
are undergoing rapid changes on that account. The 
greatest recent degree of heat occurred at the poles not 
less than twenty-two thousand years ago, in consequence 
of the deviation of the earth’s axis; and the melting 
fof the ice,on that occasion may eee been the cause of 
Noah’s Flood—for it is certain that it has not a date 
‘within. the truly historical and monumental periods ; 

and these carry us—the first to Menes, and the second 
to nearly, or quite; double that length of time. 
But we have distinct accounts of two Oriental floods ; 
the first of which could not have taken place less than 
forty-two thousand two hundred yearsago! Subsequent 
to the assigned period of the last flood, we have great 

nations in the Hast :— . e aon | 
We know that Menes lived, years ago,................. 6000 ; 
And kings reigning in This, Upper ‘Egypt, for years. .. 350 
And kings reigning in Lower Fgypt, for years.......... 1790 

Secular princes ; 
re) princes, of all Egypt (Bunsen’s authority)... i 1855 

Since the Flood, years must have elapsed to the num- 
ber of, at the very lowest, Buns«nian calculation .... 11,812 

~~ 
ee —— 

118 ; PRE-ADAMITE MEN. 

The Baron’s conclusions are arrived at mainly on 
philological grounds. They may be unsatisfactory to 
some readers, and are not at all relied on here to prove 
the existence of Pre-Adamite man, as we are enabled to 
do that on totally independent grounds. 

To trace the growth and culmination of languages, 
and seek to establish man’s antiquity by that course, 
is a task which, although it might be done, is not my 
province in this book, though there are many solid ar- 
guments to be adduced from that direction, such, for 
instance, as the following: The Sanscrit is but an off- 
. shoot of another: language, yet in the days of Moses, 
itself was a dead language. The Rig-Veda is written 
in that “sacred tongue,” yet the Rig-Veda is at least 
eighteen hundred years younger than another sacred 
volume, written in a language quite as ornate; full and 
complete as that of the Vedas—the Egyptian “ Book of 
the Dead!” The Iranian languages were an improve- 
ment on ‘I‘nranian stocks; and the number of these 
off-shoots are to be counted by the hundred ; and yet 
there is another, and totally distinct, class ot languages 
—the Semitic, quite equal to the others, and which 
was developed in as early ages of the world. 

The Arabs, and the Aryas of India, have an old 
legend, that a tribe of what they call Geni —but which 
were probably as solid men as themselves—inhabited 
the earth before Adam, and who spoke a polished lan- 
guage ; which race of beings all died out many ages 
before their successor, Adam, was created. Another 
tradition is to the effect. that in the primeval ages two 
separate races of men inhabited India, who spoke lan- 
guages so pure and perfect that nothing equal thereto 
has ever been heard since, and will not be until a per- 
fectly true man, in all respects, shall arise to redeem 

: 
’ 

i 
PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 119 

and save all the nations. I now leave the philologi- 
cal argument for others to adduce, merely remark- 
ing that Abraham, went to Egypt nearly thirty centu- 
ries before Christ was born; ard he found there a 
vast and populous kingdom, and a language exhibiting 
abundant proofs of long cultivation. It is not possible 
_ to tell now what language was spoken first; we can 
no more answer that question than we can tell who 
named the lands spoken of in Gen. ii., supposing that 
Book to be what is claimed for it; or how and where 
King David got his knowledge that the world was 
round! ‘The fact is, that there must have been civiliza- 
tions on this earth an enormous number of ages ago, 
and languages that have all passed away, leaving nota 
wreck behind to tell that such things were. : It is 
highly probable that Plato’s Atlantis was. not a figment 
of poetic brains; and that “ocean beds may now be 
stretching beneath the weltering seas, which, over 
wide-extended regions, have been once the busy conti- 
nents and islands of an inhabited and civilized world ;” 
and so far from man haying had an origin even forty 
thousand years ago, recent discoveries lead us to. the 
belief that that enormous period may be at least dou- 
bled, and yet be within moderate bounds ! 

It has been proved, by Bunsen and others, that Egypt 
was an organized State 5,863 years before Menes, or 
nearly 12,000 years ago; and taking the first year of 
that date as a point of departure, we demonstrate a 
human antiquity which was ancient even then! The 
grounds upon which this conclusion is based are the 
following :— 

First. The six days of creation, 6,000 years ago, are 
not geologically satisfactory ; nor is the matter any 
clearer when these six days are stretched into six or 

120 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

sixty millenia; for so far from there having been but 
six great Geological Periods, the number usually allot- 
ted and insisted on, that number does not express the 
half. Mon. D’Orbigny, in his Podrome de Palcon- 
tologie, has demonstrated twenty-nine of these periods, 
in every one of which both plants and animals existed ; 
and as since he wrote, the remains of man have been 
found, coupled with those of animals long since extinct, 
and which animals lived ina period so remote, and 

-“- 

under such climatic conditions, that it was deemed by 

the Geological schools utterly impossible that human 
beings could have existed contemporaneously, it follows. 
_ that man may have existed during any one, or the 

whole of these twenty-nine, or rather thirty Geological 

periods. The six usually accepted are the Azoic; Si- 

lurian—Old Red Sandstone ; the Carboniferous ; Per- 

-mian and Triassic; Oolitic and Cretaceous; and the 

Tertiary day, or 8 iods. 

Second. The Babylonian kingdoms long ante-dated 
the earliest Egyptian governments.* In Egypt, several 
distinct forms of Religion had grown up, decayed, died 
out, and been superseded by others, before the era of 
Menes. This King established in his realm an old 
Asiatic Mythical Religion— Osiris worship—which 
worship was preceded by that of Num, 1; Amun, 2; 
Ra, On, 3; Set—Seth—Seti—Suth—Saturn—Phee- 

nician worship, 4: Ptah, 5; and with that, of Isis and- 

Osiris, six forms of Religion—State Religion, up to the 
days of the Thinite conqueror. 

Eusebius tells us that between these reigns of gods 
and the commencement of human kings, a vast period 

of time elapsed ; the Theocratic form of government be- 

ing exchanged for that of the Nekyes (Souls of Dead | 

* Egypt's Place in Universal History, Vol. IV., page 635. 

' PRE-APAMITE MAN. 121 

men—priestly administration) ; which in turn was su- 
perseded by a long reign of demi-gods. Bytis was the 
first of the sacerdotal kings. His place is at the head 
of the Nekyes Priests, and it was 13,900 years from the 
beginning of the reign of the first-named god to the be- 
ginning of the reign of Bytis. The reign of the Manes, 
or Spirits, lasted 5,813 years, making a total of 19,713 
years from the reign of the first-named god to the end 
of that of the last ghost—Manes—Nekyes. 

But these enormous lapses of time may be objected 
to. Well, we will leave out the reigns of both Gods 
and Ghosts, yet still there remain the 6000 years to 
Menes, and the reigns of four Dynasties of Human 
Kiags prior to him, extending over a space of 5812 
years, and giving us a sum total from the storming of 
Fort Sumpter to the first King, of the first of the above 
four dynasties, of nearly 12,000 years. 

Third. “The Chaldees had a story about the Flood 
and Ark, ages before one of their race (Abraham), car- 
ried the tale to Egypt and Syria, and that the story in 
Genesis is but a copy of the older one, as is also that 
of Creation, Adam, the “ Fall,” the “ Ark” and “ De- 
luge,” there can be no more doubt than that light op- 
poses darkness. It is not hard to demonstrate the 
mythical, allegorical, and typical character of much 
that we have been accepting as true, in both profane 
and sacred history. 

The Babylonians and Chaldees had an Adam-Kad- 
mon, or first man—and had also ten epochs from their 
head mortal to the Flood, just as the Hebrew story has 
ten generations from Adam to Noah. The first epoch, 
according to the Chaldaic Historian, was that of ALo- 
Rgds, and extended to the beginning of the Second 
Kpoch— 

122 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

Lunar years ago*... 2... see eee cece eee eee ees Re 36,000 
The Srconp, Epoch of Aloparus, lunar years ago....... Saesl Eee 
The Tarrp, Epoch of Almélon, lunar years ago............ 46,800 

The Fourtu, Epoch of Ammenon, during whose reign Oannes, 
‘a fish-man, came out of the Red Sea, to teach mankind, 

RIOT PORES REO Hi inh. cue bw Mio bir oa awning Se aeoh i cahaen e 43,200 
The Fiera, Epoch of Melagarus (a second Merman Teacher, 

came out of the sea), lunar years ago.............2.- 64,800 
The Sixta. Epoch of Daonus, lunar years ago.............. 36,000 
The Sreventa, Epoch of Edoranchus (another Merman who 

| came to teach the human race), lunar years ago........ 64,800 

The Erautu, Epoch of Sancharis, lunar years ago........... 36,000 
The Ninru, Epoch of Otiartes, lunar years ago.............. 28,800 
The Tenra, Epoch of Xisuthrus, the Man of the FLoop, lunar 

SEO O. SVEN ais: d's s Vitebis ae. ae. EE tae iw os Beka 64,000 

Total, from Atorus to the Deluge, lunar years ago say...... 432,000 

Now let us see if the story of the Flood in Genesis 
is original or not. The reader will please read Gene- 
sis, 6th chapter, 13th verse, ef seq., at the same time 
that he pernses the following account given by the na- 
tive historian, Berosus:t “ Kronos (God, Set, Seth, 
Saturn), revealed to Xisuthrus, in a dream, that on a 
(certain) day the Flood would commence, in which all 
mankind would perish. That he must bury all the 
books in the city of Helios, Sippara, and forthwith 
build a ship five stadia long (3,125 feet), and two stadia 
broad (1,250 feet), for himself and wife, children and 
next of kin. He must load it with food for his family, 
and also for the animals of all sorts, fowls and quad- 
rupeds, which he was to embark with himself in this 
great (Hastern) ship. Xisuthrus asked Set where he 
was to sail to? who replied, “to the gods, with a 

* That is to say, lunar years ago, when the account was written, 
which. of course, necessitates an addition of some thousands of years 
at the present date. 

+ See Eusebius III.; Syncellus, page 30; Bunsen’s Egypt, Vol. Ys 
page 369. 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 123 

prayer that it may fare well with mankind.” All of 
which was done according to the command of the god. 
“After this the Flood came. As soon as it ceased, 
Xisuthrus sent out birds ; but they, finding neither 
food nor resting-place, soon came back to Xisuthrus in 
‘the ship. ... <A few days after, he again sent out 
birds, for the second time, but they also returned, and 
with mud upon their feet. ... A few days after, he 
again sent out birds, for the third time, who did not 
return. Then Xisuthrus knew that there was land 
again. ... Now, he took out some of the planks, 
and saw that the ship was landed on a mountain. 

He went out with his wife and daughter, and the 
builder, and threw himself upon the ground, and prayed, 
and built an altar, and offered sacrifices upon it. 

After the sacrifice, those who had come out disap- 
peared. ... Those who had remained behind looked 
for them, and called to them by their names, in vain ; 
but a voice answered them out of the air: ‘ Fear God ; 
for he has (they have) been taken up to the Gods, be- 
cause he (they) feared God:' his wife, and his daugh- 
ter, and the builder, have shared the same honor: Go 
back to Babylon [Bab El—Gate of God], and com- 
municate to mdnkind the books that are concealed at 
Sippara:? the place where they were was in Ar- 
menia. ... Upon this they offered sacrifice, and 
went their way to Babylon. ... On the Gordian 
Mountains, pieces of the ship which stranded in Ar- 
menia, are still to be seen. ... They ouilt a temple 
and restored Babylon.” ... Notice, first—That here 
we have the probable original of the “ Translation of 
Enoch ;” and, second—Even according to the old 
legend, all mankind were not destroyed. God had 
taken the patriarch, his wife, daughter and the builder, 
to heaven, bodily ; yet those left in the ark were to 

124 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

repair to Babylon and reveal the contents of the Books 
that had been hidden—(from whom? to whom?) It 
is plain that Bane was not destroyed, neither was 
Sippara. 

Note here, First : (still remembering that the above is 
a Chaldean legend,) That Abraham was a Chaldean, and 
therefore perfectly familiar with it, and that he un- 
doubtedly transmitted it ‘to his descendants, some of 
whom wrote it out as we find it in Genesis, barring the 
rabbinical additions to it, and others of whom have 
so garbled it as to necessitate long and laborious re- 
searches, in order to get at the original truth. Second: 
The whole Pentateuch was not written in Moses’ day, 
for proof of which, see the very suggestive assertion in 
(Fen. xxxvi. 31, where kings of Israel are alluded 
to (some hundreds of years before Saul was elected 
first to that office,) in such a way as to imply that that 
Book was written after there were kings over Israel. 
Third: It is also worthy of note, that Jehovah was not 
the God worshiped by the Israelites during the “ Fort 
Years in the Wilderness.” Ea scorer Wine 
this, refer to Amos v. 21 to the end, and be convinced. 

There are proofs extant that the Bible has been tam- — 
pered with, no matter whether it be regarded as the 
work ofthe copyist or of inspired penmen. I have an 
opinion that there is a great deal of Man, and but 
a very little of God about the Pentateuch portion of 
it, as the Book now stands, however much of the latter 
there, may have been originally. If the Hebrew Bible — 
was an original revelation from God, then it is certain 
that those to whom it was given altered it in such a 
manner as to make it appear to be a very imperfect 
apograph of that original revelation; or else they 
changed it so as to make it conform generally with 

legends and traditions vastly older than itself. Be 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. een 

thisas it may, the following facts have a very import- 
ant bearing and significance: The great question of 
the Bible’s authenticity has to be met in this age. 
The thing cannot longer be avoided. If it is an origi- 
‘nal inspiration, it will stand ; if but a copy of older 
cosmogonical theories, that fact will stand also ; and 
in either case the event will be the firmer establish- 
ment.of God’s Truth, whether that truth be written on 
the rocks alone, or partly on parchment, paper, or 
man’s conscience. We know, according to Egyptian 
monuments, records and traditions, that civilized peo- 
ple dwelt on the banks of the Nile not less than nine 
thousand five hundred years before Menes, at the lowest 
calculation ;* we know that Genesis resembles older 
cosmological accounts; we know that the story of 
the “ Fall” was not oriyvinal with the Hebrew nation, 
but that in various shapes the legend existed before 
Menes ;t and knowing all this, many an honest man in 

* Egypt’s Place in Universal History, Vol. IV , pp. 57, et seq. 

+ Of the connection of the serpent with the temptation of Eve, we 
have heard a strange story related by an American traveler in Egypt, 
who was noted among his companions for his willingness to intrude 
upon out-of-the-way and admitted-to-be dangerous places. Ah Arab 
guide, perceiving this peculiarity, offered, for a consideration, to con- 
duct him into the interior of one of the large pyramids, and show hima 
room, upon the walls of which was a picture no Frank had ever seen. 
The bargain was at once consummated, and the parties entered the 
structure, and after sliding down an inclined plane of some hundred 
feet, they came upon a large room, out of which led a narrow and 
half choked-up communication with an adjoining apartment. This 
apartment reached, the Arab lit his torches, and exposed to the aston- 
ished gaze of the traveler, a painting fresh as if the work of yesterday, 
representing a serpent with human arms and legs, handing an apple to 
an Egyptian woman ; both figures relieved by the conventional trees 
peculiar to such early art. If this story be true—and we have no rea- 
son to doubt its authenticity—we have a pictorial representation of 
the Fall of Man, possibly more ancient than even the Mosaic account. 
—Harper’s Magazine. 

126 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

these days feels it a duty to probe the matter, even at 
_the risk of being regarded “ Infidel.” But such a stigma 
can only be applied by the ignorant and bigot. Men 
who love truth and serve God are above that weakness, 
and will not quarrel with Science, even if she proves 
all the Adams to have been not human beings, but Ideal 
Men. Let us now present a few curious things that 
throw much light on the borrowed and mythical ele- 
ments in the Book of Genesis : 

I In the comparatively modern Pentateuch we read 
of Seth as being the son of the first man; but in far older 
accounts (Assyrian Monuments,) the same character is 
God, from whose son, Enosh, the world was peopled. 
(See Gen. v.) Now Set was at one time Sothis (Suthi, 
Sirius, the Dog Star,) and afterward Saturn; there are, 
consequently, unmistakable mythological elements in 
Genesis. 

Ii. The Pheenicians were neighbors of the Egyptians. 
The Hebrew Jacob, wrestled with God, (Elohim,) and 
was hurt in the thigh ; in consequence of this he was 
ealled Israel, which means “ Wrestler with God.” But 
long previous to Jacob the Pheenician Hercules had 
wrestled with Typhon, (the Sun-god at the meridian ;) 
he was wounded in the thigh, and he was thence named | 
Palaimon Yisrael, “the wrestler with the god.” . But, 

III. Jacob wrestled with his twin-brother, Esau, in 
his mother’s womb ; so had Acrisius with iis twin-bro- 
ther, Proetus, in the womb of their mother. 

IV. Esau, Jacob’s brother, was a hairy, rugged 
man. But so, also, long before him, was the Phe- 
nician Usov—Isauv, Esau, Isa—Jesus! 

V.—a. The Pheenicians had a Qayan (Kain—Cain) 
before the Hebraic one. 

B. And they had also a first man—earth-born— 
(Adam—Kadmon). | 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. Let 

c. Also a Tubal-Qayan—(Tubal-Cain—Worker in 
Brick— Craftsman). 

D. They had also an El-Saddai, as the Hebraic Al- 
Shaddai—(God Almighty). 

E. They had also a Sydyk—(Zadeq—-Malki-Zadeq— 
Melchizadek)— the Redeemer, Redeemed, the Just, the 
Kternual ; Priest of the High. 

F. Jacob saw Heaven open, and angels ascending 
and descending on a ladder, and he named the place 
Beth El (House of God). But before that the Phe- 
nicians had a similar Beth-El (God’s House), and so 
had the Egyptians their Hath-hor, which means pre- 
cisely the same thing. 

Gc. Circumcision was an old Aramzan custom, and 
commemorated the cutting off of his own head by 
Kronos-El, the Phoenician god. It was not, therefore, 
original with Abraham, but was adopted by him. 

H. The account of the proposed sacrifice of Isaac by 
Abraham was but a revival and adaptation of an an- 
cient Phoenician Myth. The Arabic legend says Abra- 
ham was about to offer up Ishmael, not Isaac; and at 
Muna, near Mecca, not in Jerusalem ; in other respects 
the three versions are alike, but the Hebrew one is’ the 
youngest. 

VI. Genesis, certainly written not earlier than Moses’ 
time, and probably not till centuries had elapsed after 
his death, speaks of the building of the Tower of Babel. 
But Babylonian traditions, handed down to us, demon- 
strate that that event, as described in Genesis, was 
but a copy of a legend very old, at least three thousand 
years before the foundation of Memphis by the Thinite 
monarchs. (See Syncellus.) Hippolytus, (Heres, v. 7, 
p- 97), tells us that the Chaldeans called the man who 
was born of the earth, but who afterwards ‘became a 

128 | PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

living soul, Adam. The Gnostics, also, speak of a god 
Adamus. 

VII. No living man can reconcile the discrepancies 
and flat contradictions of the 4th and 5th chapters of 
Genesis. But when we call to mind the fact that Seth 
was God’s primitive name in Asia, (as was Shem that 
of the sun), long before the founding of the first Egyp- 
tian empire ; and that “ Enos” is the Aramaic word for 
“MAN 3” that “Adam,” “Adamah,” or “ Ha-Adam” is in 
Hebrew; and that “Enos,” therefore, means “The 
‘Man,” the whole thing becomes as clear as daylight ; 
and it is equally discernible how the Myth came where 
we find it. 

VIll.—a. It is repugnant to reason—in fact, utterly 
so-—to imagine it true that the Men of Genesis ever 
lived to the ages there stated. No two versions of the 
Rible agree as to these apocryphal years. 

B. Philology and tradition alike demonstrate that 
many of the names of those supposed long-lived Patri- 
archs, are not those of Men, but of Epochs, periods or 

‘reigns. On these grounds they are understandable, and 
on no other, But— | 

c. I reject even this interpretation, philologically 
demonstrated though it be ; and unhesitatingly set these 
patriarchs, and their ages, down to the credit of the Rab- 
bins, who, in my opinion, invented them ; or if they did 
not invent them, they gave new readings to very old 
accounts. But again: 

D. Supposing the numbers usually accepted as mean- 
ing the ages of the Patriarchs to really mean the period 
of the duration of the reign of certain ideas, or forms 
of religious worship, or even of political dynasties, the 
account would then stand thus :— 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 129 

E. Pure Theocracy—Rule of Set, (Seth, or God,) years....... 912 
Rule of First Change: Adam—Enos. First-man-system, 1 a 

Rule of Kaanan, (Cainan ) pentane. 21S es 910 
Rule of Mahalaleel, (Mehujael,) years..................-. 895 
BERBERS re UCC. ( IPR PBATS a6 ose d n-ne ps » rdw eels kbs «ela 962 
Rule of Hanokh, (Enoch,) years............cccccseeeeses 865 
Rule of Methuselah (Methusael,) years.................. 769 

| Smeette teamceln  yearac setY 0 ee ee, a Pete 777 
Noah to the Flood, and Shem after it, years............... 1200 

Giving usa pericd of over eight thousand years be- 
tween the end of Shem’s rule and the “ Beginning.” 
This view I present for what if may be worth. The 
suggestive idea here presented appears to have escaped 
the vigilance of biblicists, so far as I am aware. 

F. If we apply the same touch-stone from Shem 
downwards to Abraham, we have a grand total of 
eleven thousand two hundred and ninety-one years. 
And all this from the Bible ; singularly substantiating 
Egyptian chronology. | 

IX. Turn we now to Babylon once more. Nimrod 
is not named at all among the monarchs of the first 
Chaldean dynasty. He preceded them. He was not 
a Chaldean, but an Ethiopian, or Kossic-Turanian 
King. Now, Berosus gives us the names of eighty- 
seven Kings of that first dynasty ; and we have, from 
the reign of the first King of that dynasty, to the sack 
of Babylon by Zoroaster, which took place before 
Christ two thousand two hundred and thirty-four years, 
a .semi-historical period of over thirty-five thousand 
years! ut, suppose we omit the whole of the eighty- 
seven Kings, and fall back on certain history : in this 
case we have a period of ascertained dates, ending at 
the three thousand seven hundred and eighty-fourth 
year before Christ, or, years ago, five thousand six hun- 
dred and forty-six, (1862.) It is certain that Nimrod 
lived, flourished and triumphed, built cities and carved 

130 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

winged-bulls, a very long time before the beginning of 
the fifty-six centuries just mentioned. But: 

_X. This Nimrod was a Kushite, (Kossian) and spoke 
a ‘uranian language, and therefore preceded those 
Kings, and nations who spoke the Semitic tongues, 
which were a development of a much earlier age, 
Heber lived two thousand years before Abraham ; the 
latter lived not less than twenty-eight hundred years 
before Christ, at the lowest calculation ; and between 
Heber and the first Chaldean King of the last dynasty, 
at least five thousand years intervene ; and Nimrod 
existed before the first dynasty. It is worthy of note 
that the first account we have of him in the Bible is in 
a fragment interpolated in the geneology of Kham, 
Genesis viii—12, where it had no right to be placed, 
save by Hebraists, who despised all rights whatever, 
except their right to falsify. Nimrod’s period is one 
of vast and hoary antiquity ; and yet when he went to 
fight and build on the plains of Babylonia, he found 
there a settled state of things, and a civilization of a 
high order ; just as the early Egyptians did when they 
conquered and supplanted the Kings of This, in Upper 
Hgypt. 

Turn where we may, toward any point of the compass, 
it is utterly impossible to find anything that even dis- 
tantly approximates a real beginning—an origiral peo- 
ple—save only one, and that one the Negro. <A few 
zealous Scientists, more zealous than wise, endeavor to 
make us believe that the first couple begat children, 
which children afterwards scattered about the earth, 
and that the physical conditions of climate, water, soil, 
valley-life, mountain existence, and so-forth, gradually 
tanned some, and blanched others, to such an extent 
that, in process of time, the world became peopled with 
nations as we know them now—from the splendid jet 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 131 

black men of Africa, to the pearly beauties of the(State 
of Maine—where dwell the handsomest white women 
« on the habitable globe*in Portland especially) The 
Monogenesists alluded to, are in fault. AIT men— 
Negroes excepted—now living, are hybrids, or rather 
concrete men, formed by intermixtures, carried on 
through countless ages. 
Which ever way wé'look we find no true beginning, 
“but only irruptions, immigrations, revolutions, and 
dynastic changes. Many a long century before either 
Nimrod or Babel, the Table-lands of Asia, were thickly 
strewn with mighty cities. When Solon, the learned 
Greek, was at Sais, in the Egyptian Delta, he asked 
the scholars of that country certain questions abotit 
the Origines of themselves and other nations, and the 
priests answered that they could show him Athenian 
names of his countrymen, who lived nine thousand 
years before the date of the conversation (which occur- 
red in the reign of King Amasis, B. C. 619.) They 
not only told him about one disastrous Flood in his 
own land—for the Egyptians knew nothing about a 
deluge in theirs—-but of many that had- aforetime 
swept the lands of Greece and other nations, as with 
a destructive broom. They imputed his ignorance of 
these several cataclysms to the fact that, in those days, 
letters were not well cultivated in Greece; and there- 
fore but few or no records were made—which few, if 
there were any, probably were lost in the general ruin. 
Solon was astonished at all this ; but still more so when 
they told him that their sacred books contained a record 
of their institutions for eight thousand years; but of 
Solon’s, for one thousand more: “These records state 
that your couutry (Greece,) once checked the advance 
of a mighty power, which threatened all Europe and 
Asia, bursting in upon them from the Atlantie Oecan. 

132 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

For at that time the Atlantic was navigable, and be- 
yond the Straits which you call the Pillars of Hercules, 
there was an island larger than Lybia and Asia put 

together. . . . Now on this great island, in the , 

Atlantic, there was a vast and powerful kingdom. 
This united Empire attempted to subjugate 
your country, O Solon, and ours. . . . Then your 
country aroseand . . . drove back the aggressors, 
and erected columns to commemorate the victory. 
But at a later period extraordinary earthquakes and 
floods took place, and in one fatal night and day 
the whole of your fighting men there collected together, 
were swept off from the face of the earth, and at the 
same moment the Atlantic Island sunk into the ocean.” 
[Extract from the Timeceus. |] . 

i 

Bunsen says, in his last work (1862,) that, “ There is 

nothing improbable in itself in reminiscences and re- 
cords of great events in Egypt nine thousand years 
before Christ ; for, as we have seen, the Origines of 
Heypt go kack to the ninth Millenium before Christ,” 
(nine thousand years, or nearly eleven thousand, dating 
from the present time). There never was but one 
such conqueror as the Atlantean hero, and that hero 
was Nimrod, the Kossian, the “mighty -warrior before 
the Lord ;” and his date cannot be lower than seven 
thousand, but probably was not less than twenty thou- 
sand years before Christ.* According to the same 
high authority, the Egyptians made the Origines of 
Asia, that is, the Asiatic peoples, antecedent to theirs, 
and, as they displaced an already settled people, and 
their own records reach back nine thousand years 
before Christ, the very latest date of their immigra- 
tion to the Nilotic banks, cannot be lower than the 

* Egypt’s Place in Universal History, Vol. [V., pp. 462, et seq. 

eS ae 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 133 

11000th year B. C.; and is probably twice as great, 
even on the testimony of Horner and Marriette. The 
history of the world is post-diluvian and ante-dilu- 
vian, and the barrier that divides them is the last of 
the so-called Floods, and there were civilized States 
in Asia as far antecedent to that event as we are sub- 
sequent thereto. This gives not less than twenty- 
six thousand years, at the farther end of which, civil- 
ized nations unquestionably existed on the Nile ; for it 
is impossible that the Deluge can have happened later 
than from twelve to fourteen thousand years ago, and 
probably long before that ; and it seems to me that this 
tradition was a hoary one, even in the earliest days of 
the first Chaldean monarchies—those that preceded 
Nimrod—on the assumption of only one deluge; but 
there were more floods than one—if not, whence the 
American legends ? 

A summary of results deduced from Bunsen’s and 
other Biblico-Egyptological research, will present the 
following approximations toward, if not, the very truth 
itself, independent of my own reasonings and researches, 
or any other authority adduced herein: — 

Creation of Man in the dim background of Time...... UNKNOWN. 
Civilized Nations on the Plateaus of Eastern Asia..... B.C. 35,000 
Earliest Date of the Founders of the Thinite Nation... “ 28,000 
The Flood in Asia and part of Europe............... " 21,000 
Date of Nimrod, Atlantis and Babylon............... - 16,000 
Date of Ghost-worship in Egypt........... ‘ooo. eee « 12,000 
ROTOR et ee es ‘¢ 4,209 
Date of Abraham, probably not less than............ “n 2,900 
GTI PARP etic ako aca ccs erences oe . alteots Hem bi 1,900 
TCMINON Sy aly. ok RD sede ss ada A Ab ts 1,015 
From First Civilization known, to Christ ud i orale’ OOP a 35,000 

These figures appear alarming, but we have it in 
our power to prove, equally high. if not higher human 
dates than these as will be seen in both the second and 

134 ' YRE-ADAMITE MAN, 

third parts of this work. The “Flood,” itself, may be 
dismissed in a few words. I consider the testimony to 
- that event as being unimpeachable. There must have 
- been, at least, two great cataclysms in Asia and Africa, © 
| besides others of equal magnitude in America—the 
last of the former of which was caused by the shifting 
of the axis of the earth, from causes already stated 
herein. The melting of the ice at the Poles, the burst- 
ing of volcanoes und other frightful convulsions of this 
last event, caused the molten bowels of the earth to 
move, aud in their movements, mountains, islands, con- 
tinents were upheaved in some portions of the globe, 
and other mountains, islands and continents sunk to 
rise no more. (Vast floods of water rushed down 
from either pole; myriads of peoples, scores of na- 
tions, attained immortality in the twinkling of God’s 
eye ; and their souls, in millions, rose to heaven and 
entered the portals of disbodied glory, while their 
fleshly forms sunk, food for fishes and for worms, leay- 
ing only here and there a fragmentary bone or skele- 
ton, to become in future ages, after other upheavals, 
mute but eloquent witnesses to the fact that there did 
exist, once upon a time, Pre-Adamite races of men. 

The particular event here alluded to, is the Oriental 
“Flood” of Noah, Deucalion and others. «But there 
was one before that. I allude to the “ Mysterious 
Event” so dimly alluded to in early Chinese annals ; 
and, perhaps, may be the same terrible catastrophe 
alluded to by the Priests of Sais, in their conversa- 
tions with Solon, something like six centuries before d 
the Christian. Era. 

Upon geological, astronomical and other grounds, 
I have reached the conclusion that, at a period not less 
than 42,000, nor more than 58,600 years ago, there 
occurred the most tremendous event this earth ever 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. } 3h 

wituessed, or ever will witness, until a final convulsion 
shall hurl it out of being—as a habitable globe. It is 
known that the Planets of the Solar System are in- 
terdependent, and mutually connected ; and from re- 
searches conducted for long years, I conclude that 
about 58,600 years ago, the planet of this system then 
revolving on its axis in an orbit between those of Mars 
and Jupiter, BURST asunder—scattered into a million 
fragments, the larger ones now constituting the Aste- 
roids, and named Juno, Vesta, Pallas, Ceres, and so 
on, to the number of a hundred or more, and the smaller 
bits of which are now revolving at greater or less dis- . 
tances apart, in a track or belt, so situated as to be 
srossed by the earth from the 10th to the 24th of every 
November, at which time we are visited by showers of 
meteoric stones, attracted then by the globe, and which 
fragments once formed part of the now shattered world. 
Millions of such fragments are yet flying through space 
in elliptical orbits; but their number will continually 
lessen as Novembers pass, for then 
“We gather them in! we gather them in!” 

As the result of this bursting, I conceive that this _ 
earth suddenly changed its axis and its angle toward ~ 
the ecliptic pole ; the sun melted the ice at the earth’s 
poles ; the melted mass in the earth’s bowels became 
disturbed, and it vomited forth fire and flame from a 
hundred volcanic mouths ; and Strombolie craters rain- 
ed down fire enough to bury a thousand Sodoms and 
Gomorrahs.* Earthquakes rent the globe almost 
asunder ; scores of Asiatic, European, African and 
American cities—peoples, nations, were hurled into 
fiery and watery graves; the Atlantis island sunk to 

* The reminiscences of these scoriac rivers—these floods of sulphur. 
ous fire, in my opinion, furnished the basis of the Sodom and Gomor- 
rah stories, 

136 _ PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

rise no more; the great lake of Central Africa was 
drained; the British Islands were riven from Continen- 
tal Europe ; the vast region of Africa between the 
sixteenth and thirty-fourth parallels of latitude, and 
now known as Zahara, was upheaved from the bottom 
of the Salt Sea; the Hesperidean lake of Diodorus 
Siculus, situate in Afric’s heart, ceased to be; the re- 
gions of the Atlas and the Soudan were tossed up from 
briny depths ; the Arabian Peninsula, the Deserts of 
Shur, Sin and Lybia, the Salt-Kuveers of Persia, the 
prairies and deserts of America, and the sterile steppes 
of Russia, Tartary and Siberia, appeared with all their 
dreary majesty and horror on the world’s surface. By 
this great convulsion, Japan was torn from China, the 
Caribbean Islands wrenched from Columbia’s main, and 
the Greek Archipelago was brought into being. The cli- 
mates of whole continents and zones were changed ; 
men and animals, in countless millions, perished on this 
earth, and the entire face of nature assumed an altered 
aspect. Ihave myself picked up many a sea-shell and 
fossil tooth on Zahara’s burning sands, miles and miles 
from the sea coast. I believe that I have handled 
things fashioned by the hands of men who lived before 
that awful ruin fell upon them. I believe’that the Cy- 
- clopean structures of Etruria pertain to men who were 
on earth at that period; and that Palenque, Labhak, 
Copan, Uxmal, Kobah, Chichen, and Cuzco, are Ame- 
rican remnants of that terrible devastation! If I am 
alone in this belief—so be it; I believe it. . . . Death 
rode in many chariots on that awful day ; aad men and 
animals perished oy sulphuric, nitrogenic, and carboni- 
ferous blasts ; avd that they alone escaped who occupied 
peculiar localities, is quite plain. That climates — 
changed at that time, is proved by the bones of tropi- — 
cal animals, and remains of tropical plants now found 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 137 

in frozen regions ; and the plants and remains of north- 
ern fauna now exhumed from tropical graves. I do 
not say that all these things were so; I merely affirm 
that, to me, they seem to appeal and cling to reasoning 
and reasonable minds, with all the force of Revelation. 

Such, then, are my reasons for rejecting the histori- 
eal and some other pretensions of the Pentateuch. 

Accepting the Bible as a moral guide, so far as it leads 

to virtue and to God, yet boldly casting away its crudi- 
ties and imperfections, whether of Rabbinical origin or 
not, but in so doing I ape neither the flippant raillery 
of Voltaire, the dreamery of Dupuis, nor the bitterness 
of a Fuerbach, or a Compte. I simply follow Truth. 

Hut Second. 
THE SPHINX OF HISTORY: HER TRIAL. 

TOPIC FIRST. 

CHAPTER I. 
THE RIDDLE OF THE SPHINX: ITS SOLUTION. 

Asia, with all her weight of years, is younger than 
Europe! And here are my reasons for thinking and 
saying so, albeit many of them are borrowed from the 
great man spoken of in the introductory chapter of this 
work. Others of the views are mine own; while from 
a broad field I have taken special pains to garner such 
treasures as I found, and which I thus use, not for selfish 
purposes, but for the healing of the people of the nations 
of that mental strabismus which, whenever they look 
for their great fore-parents, either light on Adam, on 

one side, or a ringtailed monkey or chimpanzee on the 

138 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

other, instead of glancing down the vast avenue of the 
Ages, and resting upon the manly forms of civilized 
progenitors, whose origin is not to be found either in 
Eden or Chaillu-ville, in Adam-Kadmon or Adam 
Gorilla. | F 

The Editor of “THe Fururs,” in the pages of his 
matchless journal, writing on the general subject of this 
volume, says, most eloquently, that :— 

The time has gone by when any serious opposition 
can be expected, on the part of intellectual men, to the 
presentation of mere facts. The age, indeed, has be- 
come, in a paramount degree, an age of facts, and abund- 
ant facilities exist for laying before the public all nov- 
elties in this line. Science has fully emancipated its 
eyes and ears and hands, but the case is very different 
when we come to its brain. The man of detail is free | 
and honored, but the reasoner is ever an object of sus- 
picion, or even of aversion, unless he can manage to 
reason in accordance with established opinion. After 
all, man is yet but a child ; in favored spots, his senses 
are relatively matured, but his brain is everywhere in 
an undeveloped condition. The age of Philosophy has 
yet to come: there is no adequate provision for the 
thinker. ; 

Existing science is rich in materials, but *it is rela- 
tively poor in philosophy, deficient in organization and 
low in the general character of its reasoning ; hence 
the scope for discovery in every direction, for all who 
can aim at it through the higher methods of organiza- 
tion, analysis, and synthetic evolution. But if this may 
be affirmed with any justice of physical science, histori- 
cal science may, as regards genuine argument, almost 
be called a virgin subject, for, with special exceptions 
here and there, we have gone on supinely leaning on 
tradition, bowing to authority, arguing in vicious cir- | 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 139 

cles, and weighing one unproved assertion against 
another unproved assertion. 

It will be firmly insisted on and practically proved 
herein, that the historical sciences can only be rationally 
studied by a rigid and exclusive adherence to those 
metliods of inductive research which have made the 
physical sciences what they are. There is but one ra- 
tional method of reasoning, and that is by rejecting all 
conjecture and credulity, and advancing methodically 
from certainty to certainty. The moment this method 
is applied to ancient history its entire structure totters 
and becomes disintegrated, and facts begin to assume 
new and wholly unlooked-for combinations and mean- 
ings. Hence the startling positions announced, and to 
be announced, in these pages.* 

There is a Europe of which history knows nothing ; 
there is an antiquity which had frown gray and vener- 
able ages before her birth; there are monuments on 
which she pours darkness instead of light—fossils of 
a perished world, mementoes of a story longer and 
stranger than her own, | 

One power alone can give us back this Europe, this 
antiquity, this lost story, even in part. That power is 
Science—to her, then, shall we look for light and gui- 
dance in this journey into the long forgotten past. His- 
tory would here be but an ignis fatuus, cheating us with 
phantasms and false hopes, plunging us, ultimately, into 
inextricable difficulties. Why should we listen to her 
in cases about which she knows nothing. 

History is the daughter of Tradition and Credulity, 
the foster-child of Hypothetical Criticism. What could 
reasonably be expected from such a parentage, and such 
an education, but that which we have got—illusion ? 

* Of “The Future,” whence this and many following analagous ex- 
tracis are taken. 

140 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

Were an inhabitant of some other sphere to alight 
suddenly upon this earth, ignorant of its history, its 
literature, and its languages, but with senses capable of 
taking cognizance of the facts around him, and a mind 
adequate to the due intelligence of the information thus 
communicated, what would be his conclusions relative 
to the past history and present condition of the races 
with whom he was thus brought suddenly into con- 
tact? | 

We will suppose him landed upon the continent of 
America, amid the bustle and din of one of the great 
cities of the Union. We will suppose that having duly 
scrutinized the novelties before him; he advances into 
the country, penetrates the forest, traverses the prairie, 
goes everywhere, sees everything. What are the his- 
toric inferences which these observations must naturally 
suggest to him? They will necessarily be to the fol- 
lowing effect :— 

Here is a region, (he will say,) where dwell two 
widely separated races, types of two epochs and two 
social conditions, equally far apart. On-the one hand 
is the dusky Indian with the forest and the prairie for 
his scene of action, the bow and the tomahawk, the 
bark canoe and the snow-shoe, the wigwam and the 
painted skin, the pipe and the string of wampum for 
his sole wealth, protection, shelter and ornament; on 
the other, an entirely different race, with all the appli- 
ances of an advanced civilization. Between these great 
extremes there is nothing intermediate. The palace 
displaces the wigwam, the steamer the canoe, the rail- 
road the narrow trail. Antiquity and To-day sit side 
by side. | 

For the savage, there is no history; what he is 
now, he was of old. But there must be a history for 
civilization ; for civilization is a growth, the expression 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 141 

and result of a long and eventful struggle. Yet here 
are no traces of this struggle or of this growth, no 
youth or infancy in any of its stages. No ruins, no 
dismantled fortresses or crumbling palaces, or antique 
walls, or half-buried cities, meet the eye ; all is new, 
from the mansion to the hut. But civilization must 
have had stages and fluctuations, and these must have 
left vouchers of one kind or other. Everything ancient 
could not have been thus completely swept away with- 
out humanity itself being swept away with it. No; 
this region never could have been the parent of its pre- 
sent civilization, nor is it possible that races incapable 
of accepting this. civilization, when offered to them, 
could have been its actual creators. It must be exotic, 
like the race which holds it; it must have entered this 
region fully formed ; and I must search elsewhere for 
its early annals. 

For America, read Africa ; for the United States, 
Egypt: change a few phrases ini their required equi- 
valents, and in this account of a modern colony, you 
have the story of the old Nilotic civilizations. 

We search Egypt in vain for any trace of the ante- 
cedents of its great monuments; yet the oldest of these 
monuments are the mighty pyramids, the wonders of 
the world—wonders even in Egpyt, the land of wonders. 
Equally vain would be our search through Africa for a 
race or nation capable of originating and developing 
such a civilization as these monuments imply. ©The 
races of Ethiopia and the North have been unable to 
preserve even what they received, and all else in Africa 
is barbarian. ‘These mountains of burnt and unburnt 
brick, of cut stone and polished granite, speak unequi- 
vocally of high natural talent, much acquired know- 
ledge, ages of labor and training. If races possessing 
these requisites were ever indigenous in Egypt, they 

4 

142 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

have left no successors behind them. Individually and 
collectively, the pyramids imply a vast aggregate of 
labor, wealth, time and ingenuity. Viewed as temples 
and public monuments, they are works which only great 
empires could erect; viewed as bond fide tombs, they 
speak of wholly fabulous resources ; yet these empires 
and their resources repose immediately upon primal 
barbarism, as the monuments themselves do upon the 
rock and sand of the desert. We no more find be- 
ginnings in ancient Egypt, than we find them in mod- 
ern America. | 

What is true of the pyramids is equally true of the 
other great classes of Egyptian monuments. From the 
pyramids to the cavern temples and tombs on the one 
hand, and to the exposed temples and palaces on the 
other, the transition is sharp and abrupt ; without any 
intervening links. The pyramids are monuments of 
extreme simplicity ; the temples generally display the 
prodigality of ornamentation and detail. The pyra- 
mids are without hieroglyphics; everything else in 
Kegypt is literally covered with writing. Such transi- 
tions as these form no part of the spontaneous life of 
a nation. They are invariably the result of compul- 
sion and external force. In the most restless and pro- 
gressive races, conservatism and the tendency to inno- 
vation are balanced forces, and change is ever a com- 
promise. In the nations of the Kast conservatism rules 
supreme, and, to all appearance, has ever done so. It 
would be vain to seek there for any important sponta- 
neous innovation in the usual habits of thought or ac- 
tion. All human experience, indeed, is decisive against 
the possibility of such clear, sharp transitions in the 
nature and style of great public works, as we have 
here, by any other force than external conquest; for 
we have not now to deal with one of those cases in 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN 143 

which a later age seeks to imitate or reproduce the 
styles of antiquity, but with one of those in which 
ancient custom is rudely superseded by entirely new 
ideas. 

Whether we view the pyramids as modified temples, 
or as bond fide tombs from the beginning, they must 
equally have been, in their day, part and parcel of the 
national thought and feeling, religious as well as civil, 
and nothing but an imperious necessity could have in- 
duced a people to abandon its relations with monu- 
‘ments so majestic, symbols of its faith, and types of its oe ~ 
power. Assuredly, then, the nation that had accus- eh 
tomed itself for ages to erect such costly structures for 
the sepulture of its kings did not spontaneously aban- 
don that custom to hew out of tle rocks mausolea of 
a quite other character. Custom in Egypt was like 
custom in China, a force which the nation itself had 
no power to break through; and the burial of the 
dead was so solemn a portion of the national creed, 
and court ceremonial is everywhere so regulated by 
ancient precedent, that the transition from the pyra- 
mid to the cavern can be viewed in no other light 
than an evidence of conquest, and a change in the 
national faith. 

But if the pyramids were simply tombs, what were 
the temples of a nation which could build such tombs ? 
The pyramids are confessedly the. oldest monuments of 
Egyptian civilization; if they were built as tombs, 
Keypt had no temples when they were built, or every 
vestige of those temples has perished. But Egypt, a 
creat nation, and yet without temples, is an idea which 
no one will think of maintaining ; and no people will 
ever deyote to the memory of dead kings monuments 
surpassing in grandeur those assigned to the worship 
of living gods. . When these, then, were the tombs, the 

144 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

temples must have been surpassingly grand. Where 
are their vestiges? Nota fragment exists, and not a 
breath of tradition alludes to them. Such works could 
not have been utterly swept away while so many infe- 
rior ones have defied the ravages of time. 

Shall we reverse, then, the obviously rational deci- 
sion of antiquarians, and say that the existing temples 
are coeval with the pyramids? How, then, account for 
the utter want of analogy between the two classes of 
monuments ; for the entire absence of writing, of 
columns, pilasters, and ornaments of every kind in 
the one case; with their lavish profusion in the other ? 
As well might we assume that a nation which had 
erected the palaces and cathedrals of modern England, 
would be satisfied with burying its kings and heroes in 
great rude mounds like Silbury Hill, without name, or 
date, or record. Such violent and needless contrasts 
are not in the nature of things, and no nation has ever 
been known to indulge in them. 

But, assuredly, the pyramids were never built as 
tombs ; there is no sort of proportion between the ob- 
ject and the enormity of the cost. Any one of the 
greater of these works would be a serious undertaking 
for even the wealthiest empire; the liability to have 
such works repeated in every generation, perhaps seve- 
ral times, is what no ration could possibly think of 
assuming, or carry out if assumed. Some one has eal- 
culated that the great pyramid, which originally co- — 
vered an area of thirteen acres, could not be built, at 
the present day, for less than thirty millions sterling ; 
and Mr. Gliddon* gives it as the opinion of a particu- — 
lar builder, that if the materials of the great pyramid — 
were converted into brick, they would build the entire 
city of Philadelphia. What, then, must such a struc 

* Otia Hegyptiaca, pp. 26-29. 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 145 

ture have cost at the period of its actual erection! for 
however numerous the population, and however cheap 
the labor, a modern steam-engine and its concomitants 
might easily do the work of hundreds, or even of thou- 
sands of Egyptians; with their rude appliances. A 
monument of this costliness would be a somewhat 
serious compliment to departed worth or royal imbe- 
cility. 

Lepsius has proposed an ingenious theory in expla- 
nation’ of some of the difficulties involved in this tomb- 
theory of the pyramids. According to this theory, the 
the size of the monument was always proportioned to 
the duration of the reign which it was intended to com- 
-memorate. Every monarch, at his accession, began to 
build his tomb; a rather sombre amusement, it must 
be confessed, for a royal mind. He erected a nucleus 
in the shape of a small pyramid ; every year he built a 
a layer of blocks round and above it; the longer he 
lived, the larger it grew; as he descended, his tomb 
arose ; as he grew feeble, his monument waxed strong ; 
till the plaything of his early days became, at last, the 
devouring monster of his later years, swallowing up 
his resources, and devastating his kingdom. No won- 
der we find a tradition in Egypt which tells us that its 
ancient kings were allowed, by law, to live and reign 
only a certain number of years. When the period ex- 
pired, a priest announced the fact, and the accommo- 
dating ruler of millions went straightway forth, took 
his cup of poison, and was gathered to his fathers. In 
- these economical days, the reigns of pyramid-building 
kings wOuld. be of very moderate duration, for it is a 
matter © Sequence to settle accounts as speedily as 
may be, | claims which annually increase at a rate 
so fearfully rapid as this theory implies, How, under _ 
such circumstances, old Phiops, or Cheops, managed to 

“ 

a 

146 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

evade the law, and reign some ninety-four years, is 
somewhat of a marvel. 

Seriously, however, and were there no other grounds 
of rejection, it would be impossible, without the most 
unequivocal evidence, to believe in the existence of a 
system which practically measured glory by age, which 
was @ premium upon regicide and revolt, and which 
bound a great nation to the lability of building a mo- 
nument like that of Cheops, for some superannuated 
fool, while forced to content itself with commemorat- 
ing, by some ridiculously disproportionate structure, a 
youthful hero, the pride, perhaps the savior, of his 
country. Or is it possible to believe that a people so 
prone to monument-writing as the Egyptians, and who 
took such pains to perpetuate the names and deeds of 
their heroes, would leave their tombs, and such tombs, 
without any record whatever? We shall be told, per- 
haps, that it was intended to conceal the place of— 
burial, or render it difficult of access, in order to pre- 
vent the chances of profanation. But what is the 
meaning of a monument which seeks to conceal what it 
was intended to proclaim, or of a secrecy which takes 
such infinite pains to reveal itself? Better, surely, 
bury within the rock, than above it, or hew out the 
mountain’s side, as in later times. It is impossible to 
believe that a nation which had such a passion for 
writing on everything, would have left the pyramids 
without inscriptions, had they been erected at a time 
when this passion had developed itself. They are 
plainly anterior to this time. 

The difficulties of archzwology are often due to causes 
‘fully within our own control. In the I 
have studied in too sectional a spirit 
Egvptologists, Indianists. Classical antiquarians, Brit 
ish antiquarians, and so forth, instead of being siinply 

ve been 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 147 

Archeologists. In point of fact, archeology is as much 
one indivisible science as geology is, and it is as impos- 
sible to understand any important section of it in detail, 
without a general knowledge of the whole, as it would 
be for geology to fix the succession of strata and tlie 
forms of life by an exclusive study of some one region 
of the globe 

In the next place, we have placed an undue reliance 
on the statements of history, a reliance entirely incon- . 
sistent? with the requirements of science. The object 
of all genuine science is the attainment of certainty ; 
all certainty of deduction must be based on certainty 
of evidence, and no evidence can legitimately be called 
certain which cannot be proved to be such. It is but 
rare, comparatively, that the statements of history ad- 
mit of any proof, and, therefore, a science, based to ar.y 
cousiderable extent on such statements, is but a science 
in name. Such, unfortunately, is too much the case 
with archeology even at the present day, whenever 
it rises beyond simple description. The systematizer 
and reasoner have to squander away fruitlessly their 
time, talent, ingenuity, and learning, in finding proofs 
and explanations for facts which have no existence, and 
never had. 

When we look Reyes Kgypt, every important idea 
‘connected with the pyramids finds its counterpart or 
explanation in one or other of the great centers of 
monumental archeology. In Mexico and Central 
America, for instance, we see by existing evidence that 
the main, if not only, use made of pyramidal structures 
support a sacred shrine, a temple, or a sacerdotal 

he American pyramids, if divested of 
their cfownine shrines and finished to an apex, would 
differ in no respect from the Egyptian model. We 

i 

148 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

simply find a greater variety and the evidences of a 
longer history in the Cis-atlantic monuments. A 
pyramid at Ocosingo, in Central America, figured in 
_ Mr. Stephens’ work,* has very nearly the same inclina- 
tion as the great pyramid at Ghizeh, while two analo- 
gous monuments at Palenquet resemble, in their more 
extended base, several monuments at Sakkarah and 
Dashour,{ and are almost identical, in inclination, with 
one of. the group at Metanyeh. These American pyra- 
mids, like most of those of Egypt, are graded and ter-’ 
raced. In other cases we have, in both countries, ter- 
raced monuments. There is a very striking general 
analogy between one of the terraced pyramids of Mexi- 
co, described and figured by Dupaix, in his Monuments 
of New Spain,$ and a terraced pyramid at Meydoun, 
described in the great French work just referred to.{ 
The Mexican structure is found near the town of Quer- 
navaca ; it has three stages; on the top is a ruined 
building, doubtless a temple, or shrine, to which leads 
up, from the base of the pyramid, a broad flight of steps, 
a. very frequent concomitant of the American monu- 
ments. The Egyptian structure has also three stages, 
and chiefly differs in the middle one being twice the size 
ofthe upper. In both countries we find pyramids with | 
four, five, and even more stages; the pyramid of Pa- 
pantla, in Mexico, had six, if not seven stages, which 
number was rarely exceeded. Many of the Egyptian 
pyramids which are now carried to an apex have every 
appearance of having once been terraced and truncated, 

i eee 

——— 

* Incidents of Travel in Central America, London, 1842,.Vol. IL . 
pp. 258-9. 

+ Ibid, pp. 339, 344. 

} Description de l’Egypte, tom. 4, pl. 72, fig. 4. 

§ See Lord Kingsborough’s Antiquities of Mexice 
Ist, pl. 7, fig. 16, and for text V. VI. 

I Description de l’Egypte, tom. iv..»%,72, No.3. 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN 149 

for they have a double inclination. If the lines that 
spring from the base were carried up till they met, the. 
present height of the pyramid would be nearly doubled, 
and the inclination of its sides would present a degree 
of acuteness of which we believe there is no parallel in 
either country. ‘This form is easily accounted for if we 
suppose these structures to have been originally ter- 
raced, the first inclination representing their lowest 
stage, and their actual condition, the change made in 
them when pyramids began to be converted into tombs. 
There has always been a close connection between 
the temple and the tomb. In every age, and in almost 
_ every creed, there has been a tendency to deposit, in | 
consecrated spots, the remains of the illustrious dead ; 
sometimes in the temple or sanctuary itself, sometimes 
in its immediate vicinity. We see what our own ten- 
dencies are in this respect ; we find that the gigantic, 
though rude mounds and Cromlechs of North-Westerh 
Europe, to which it is impossible, on any rational 
grounds, to attribute a sepulchral origin, as it is to at- 
tribute such an origin to the pyramids of Egypt, were, 
nevertheless, in numerous instances, subsequently used 
as places of sepulture ; and we also find from the Span- 
ish writers on Mexico, that not only was the idea of 
sepulture always connected in the national traditions 
with their pyramids, which were all Teocalli, that is 
temples or Houses of God, but that even in the little 
sanctuaries which crowned the great pyramidal temple 
of the city of Mexico, and which were respectively dedi- 
cated to the two principal deities of the nation, there 
were deposited, in-one of the upper stories. the ashes of. 
some kings and lords who, from special devotion, wished 
their nt to be so disposed of.* The plain in which 
the pyramids of Jeotihuacan were situated, was called 

ss Clavigero, Storia Antica dei Messico, lib. vi, svc. x. 

150 PRE-aDAMITE MAN. 

Micoati, or “ the path of the dead,” and the hundreds of 
small pyramids which surrounded the two principal 
monuments were said, by tradition, to contain the ashes 
of the princes and nobles of the race which erected — 
those structures—the ancient Toltecs. 

We must remember, too, that the gods of the ancients 
were generally believed to have once been terrestrial 
and mortal rulers of the nations which principally wor- 
shiped them; this was especially the case in Hgypt, 
and it was natural, consequently, that their principal 
temple should be regarded as their tomb, and in such a 
case, an emp:y sarcophagus in the chamber of a pyra- 

_ mid, orin the sanctuary of a cavern or other temple, 

would be a natural and appropriate symbol. Add to 
this, that ancient kings, even when most human looking, 
are, in numberless instances, nothing else but the gods 
of perished creeds, and it will be easy to account for 
all the facts, and even for all the traditions connected 
with the pyramids of Egypt. 

It is easy, too, to understand how, after creeds had 
been superseded for ages by rival faiths, and had _ per- 
haps even been forgotten, that the great monuments 
which they had left behind them should be converted 
to other vurposes. It is also intelligible how even a 
modification of an ancient creed, introduced in connec- 
tion with a more advanced civilization, might entail a 
modification of the ancient temples of a nation without 
detracting from their sacredness, and that what was 
once both temple and tomb, should subsequently be 
tomb only, when the deity to whom that temple and 
tomb were dedicated, was now worshiped in temples, 
and with ceremonies, of an entirely different order. : 

Frm one or other of these causes, the ee of 
Egypt have, in many cases, undergone modifications. 
Some of the graded pyramids have heen carried on to 

ot! ae 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 151 

an apex, and their steps filled in so as to make them 
present smooth, unbroken, and polished sides, from 
base to summit ; some of the truncated pyramids would 
seem to have had their stages similarly filled in, but as 

many of them were very broad in base, while relatively 

inconsiderable in height, like some of the Mexican 

structures, instead of going to the heavy cost of com- 

pleting the monument from the slightly inclined lines 
of the lower terrace, that terrace would seem to have 
been treated as a foundation, new lines being. struck 
from its upper extremities. Thus filled up, the pyramid 
was thenceforth a tomb exclusively, and the final rest- 
ing-place of the god or king was secured, as far as pos- 
sible, from the injuries of the elements and the profana- 
tion of the impious. 

In the archeology of America we may almost trace 
the entire history of the pyramid, from the rude earth- 
mounds of the Mississippi valley, tv the magnificent 
structures of Palenque, Uxmal, and the other great 
eities of Central America. _We have mounds of vari- 
ous descriptions and constructions, pyramidal terraces 
and platforms supporting magnificent temples and pal- 
aces, and regular pyramids of almost every character— 
some simply graded, others smooth, and others present- 
ing a succession of stages. The pyramid of Cholula, 
one of the oldest monuments of Mexico, had a base 
twice as large as the great pyramid cf Egypt, being, 
according to the measurements of Humboldt,* a per- 
fect square, each side at the base measuring four hun- 
dred and thirty-nine metres, though its height was 
only fifty-four, little more than that of the pyramid 
of Mycerinus. Like all the American monuments of 
its class,t its sides, as in Egypt, faced the cardinal. 

* Vues des Cordilléres, Vol. VII., p. 24, &c., folio. 

t Antiquities of Mexico. 

152 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

points; and, according to Dupaix, it was ascended, 
on the western side, by a flight of steps, which ad- 
yanced diagonally, and in a zig-zag manner, from ter- 
race to terrace. A similar mode of ascent may be 
seen in the pyramid of San Cristobal T'eopantepec.t 
All the pyramidal structures of Mexico had their as- 
cents, approaches, and the openings of their sanctua- 
ries, facing the west. 

The pyramid of. Cholula had four equal terraces or 
stages, and its summit commanded a magnificent view 
of the great plain in which it was situated. It was 
built of layers of unbaked brick, alternating with 
strata of clay. The two great pyramids of Teoti- 
huacan were built on the same model, but with a less 
extended base. The larger of these monuments was 
fifty-five metres in height and two hundred and eight 
in breadth of base, the second being of somewhat 
smalier dimensions. ‘They were formed of clay mixed 
with small stones, and cased with a thick wall of stone, 
resembling in these respects one of the pyramids of 
Sakkara described by Pococke,} as a mass of small thin 
stones and yellow gravelly mortar enclosed with a wall 
of hewn stone. ‘This pyramid has six stages, the Mexi- 
can monuments in question had four. 

The great temple of Mexico, on the arrival of the 
Spaniards, was a pyramid of five-stages. It was in 
the midst of an enclosure, large enough, according tc 
Cortez, to contain a town of five hundred houses. This 
enclosure was formed by a thick wali of stone and 
lime,and contained the residence of the priests, semi- 
naries for youth, &c., together with upwards of forty 
lesser temples, all, with one exception, likewise pyra- 
midal, and dedicated to different deities. 

* Antiquities of Mexico, Vol. IV., part 1st, folio 8. 
{ Description of the East. Vol. I, p. 59. o 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 153 

As the stages of the pyramid receded but slightly, 
the upper terrace was very extensive, and on it were 
represented the principle ceremonials of religion in the ° 
sight of assembled thousands below. At its eastern 
extremity were two small sanctuaries, in the shape of 

towers, dedicated to the two principal deities of the 

nation— Tezcatlipoca and Huitzilopochtli. In front of 

each was a stove, in which the sacred fire was kept 

- perpetually burning, and similar stoves, to the number, 

it is said, of over six hundred, were, in like manner, 
kept burning in the court below. | 

At Teotihuacan, the two principal pyramids, dedi- 
cated respectively to the Sun and Moon, were surround- 
ed by several hundreds of small pyramids, forming 
streets running north and south, east and west. In 
like manner we find the pyramids of Egypt arranged 
in groups. Those of Ghizeh present three great struc- 
tures in decreasing ratio, with many small ones in their 
immediate vicinity. 

The Mexican Temple gives us the key of these vari- 
ations, as well as that of the pyramidal worship gener- 
ally. We see that difference of size represents the 
relative rank of the deities worshiped, and has no- 
thing to do with the varying lengths of kingly 
reigns. In the one case we have a great duality 
worshiped on a single temple, in the other a duality, 
of which each member has its own temple. If in 
Kgypt we find this duality replaced by a trinity, the 
fact is in full accordance with what we know of its an- 
cient creeds. It would be strange if, among so many 
analogies, all should be accidental. 

The structures that crowned the American pyramids 
were often of imposing dimensions and great solidity, 

_ but in other cases—and this was evidently the. older 

« 
- 

“8 

idea of the American monuments—they were insignifi- 

‘a 

se 

154 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

cant in size and fragile in material. In the temple of 
Mexico the sanctuaries were not only small, tut their 
two upper stories were formed of wood. No vestige 
of a temple or shrine is found on Cholula, nor do we 
hear of any at Teotihuacan, though we are told that 
these monuments were surmounted by two colossal sta- 
tues of the sun and moon covered with plates of gold, 
and, of course, long since plundered and destroyed. 
It is not surprising that monuments so ancient as the 
Egyptian pyramids should represent, in this respect, 
the older ideas of the American continent, rather than 
the far less ancient ones represented chiefly in Cen- 
tral America, as well as in many of the Mexican struc- 
tures also. 

Under every aspect, then, the pyramids are clearly 
the oldest monuments of Egypt. The entire absence 
of hieroglyphics, their utter simplicity of structure, 
the rude materials of which many of them are composed 
viz., unburnt bricks, and even -mixtures of rough 

- gravelly mortar and small flat stones —all these are cir- 

cumstances so utterly discordant with the associations 
of the other monuments of the land, that it is impossi- 
ble to assign both to the same era, and if so, it is im- 
possible that the pyramids should have been other than | 
temples originally. If we want, then, to trace the ear- 
lier stages of pyramidal architecture, we must look for | 
them out of Egypt; the_very rudest of its monuments 
are works far too serious for the infancy of civiliza- 
tion. 

The same may be said of the cavern- inte and 
tombs. They belong to a distinct phase of thought 
and creed ; they represent a distinct era of civilization, 
the antecedents of which must be similarly looked for 
out of Egypt, for there they do not exist. 

Still more emphatically i is all this true of the general 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 155 

architecture of the country. It bursts upon us in meri- 
dian splendor ; we look around in vain for its earlier 
and ruder stages. 

What is true of the monuments is equally true of the 
arts and learning of Egypt. Its creeds are neither 
primitive nor original ; its writing is a perfected sys- 
tem from first to last; its implements are hardened 
copper ; there is no “ stone age” in its archeology, no 
real beginnings in any direction: we must look else- 
where for the origin of its civilizations. Let us stretch 
its antiquity to any extent we please, there must still 
be other antiquities beyond it. What we see, is rela- 
tive maturity, what we do not see is the youth and in- 
fancy of this maturity. 

As with Egypt so with Assyria, Chaldea, Babylon, 
India, China. China has, properly speaking, no monu- 
mental antiquities of remote date, none, at all events, 
known to European research. In Southern India, we 
find some rude structures of the same class as the Crom- 
lechs and stone circles of North Western Europe, and 
in Northern Asia we have specimens of the mounds of 
the same region; but, with these exceptions, all that 
we know of the great centers of Asiatic dominion and 
civilization, speaks only of relative maturity. 

It is in vain, then, that we search Africa or Asia for 
tke early eras of monumental history. It is still more 
in vain that we question written history for any in- 
formation relative to the Primeval World of man. 
The earliest lispings of history give us but the names 
of perished empires. She speaks of the East only, and 
the Hast, everywhere, bears the unmistakable stamp of 
a Recipient, not that of a Creator. We must look 
elsewhere for the Master and Teacher. 

-» * 

156 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

CHAPTER Il. 

CYCLOPEAN STRUCTURES OF SOUTHERN EUROPE AND 

I ASIA MINOR. 

' Anp so Greece and Italy were dark and barbarian 
when Egypt and Assyria were basking in the meridian | 
splendors of empire and civilization, building pyra- 
mids, and towers, and palaces, and temples, spreading 
their conquests far and wide, and carryirg the appli- 
ances of advanced knowledge into the recesses of Negro 
forests, or taming down the Tartar nomad to the usages 
of stationary existence! So says History, and so says 
Hypothetical Criticism, endorsing her statement ; but 
there are witnesses to be examined on the other side, 
also—we have yet to hear what Science and actual 
Fact have to say upon this matter. 

Egypt and Assyria had made bricks for ages ; Baby- 
lon and Nimroud had stamped theirs with written cha- 
racters—an elaborated and perfected system. Palaces 
and temples had grown up upon the soil of Asia, and 
sculptured slabs had handed over to posterity, in the 
language of advanced art, the story of national great- 
ness and the symbols of highly developed creeds. On 
' the banks of the Nile, architecture and sculpture had 
achieved their highest triumphs ; polished granite faced 
the pyramids, forests of gorgeous columns supported 
the temples, colossal sculptures had risen on every side, 
and every vacant spot bore a legend or a paintiyg re- 
cording some scene of battle or of triumph, some inyo- 
cation of the gods, ur some picture of domestic life. 
Yet all this while Italy and Greece were unborn as na- 
tions ; commerce a;proached not their shores, religion 
deigned not to think of them, even the accidents of — 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 157 

barbarian barter had never revealed to these benighted 
lands the marvel of a brazen scymitar, or the utility of | 
a metal axe or chisel. Nay, the very waves of the 
Great Sea, which had a thousand times strewn other 
shores with wrecks, had never awakened in Greco- 
Italic minds the least suspicion that, beyond those wa- 
ters lay the land of the pyramids—the venerable Egypt 
of unborn Solons and Platos. ‘This is what we have to 
believe, if history be true—nay, even worse than this. 

Many centuries after the times of which we now 
speak, when the Shepherds had been expelled from 
Kgypt, and the Great Kighteenth Dynasty had repaired 
the ravages of ages of confusion and foreign despotism, 
an Egyptian prince, the brother of the reigning mon- 
arch, having violated the trust reposed in him, was 
compelled to fly the land, and with a band of followers 
* reached the shores of Greece, where he was hospitably 
received, and subsequently became the founder of a line 
of Argive kings. <A century later, the Egyptian Ce- 
crops led a colony from Sais, founded Athens, human- 
ized the rude natives, taught them to worship the gods 
of Egypt, and made them, in a word, partakers of the 
fruits of centuries of foreign culture. ; 

Thus was Greece first eivilized, and thus did she be- 
come the pupil and the imitator ag Egypt. So, again, 
says history. 

Upon this statement, the record of monumental facts 
makes a curious commentary. It tells us that these 
civilized invaders or colonists, in leaving their native 
land, left behind them—not their hearts, but: their 
brains. In their new homes they raised no temples, — 
they sculptured no statues, they engraved no writing, 
they cut no stones. They neither buried in lofty pyra- 
mids, nor worshiped in pillared halls, nor dwelt in gra- 
nite palaces, nor told the tale of their achievements by 

158 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

graver or by pencil; but with marvelous humility and 
oblivion, they were content to shelter themselves in 
wooden dwellings, rudely shaped by means of stone 
axes, pointing their javelins with flint, exchanging their 

brazen swords for wooden clubs, and surrounding their 

cities with huge walls of unshaped rocks—walls which 
one would have thought would have been a very hor- 
ror to an EKyyptian eye. So completely must the bil- 
lows of the Middle Sea have washed out of their minds 
every idea bearing an Egyptian stamp, that as far as 
monumental connection is concerned, they might as well 
have dropped from the moon as have sailed from the 
Nile. Gentle, indeed, must have been the sway of 
these Southern invaders, airy the tread of the Genius 
of the Nile, for the current of monumental thought 
flows on from first to last in one unbroken stream, and 
not a vestige remains to testify that an Eastern teacher 
had ever here spoken, or an Hastern ruler ever trodden 
this classic soil, until we come to late and evil* times. 
Such are the thoughts which monumenial history sug- 
gests, and such the kind of commentaries she is ever 
making on our traditional legends. 

It is quite true, indeed, that the gods of Greece and 
Keypt are, in the main, identical, and the same may be 
said of the gods of India also; but this fact does not 
prove that either Egypt or India must necessarily have 
been the teacher or originator, rather than Greece or 
some fourth power. To establish the true order of se- 
quence, in this transmission of ideas, requires an ex- 
tensive induction and a profound analysis of mythic 
- facts ; while criticism, hitherto, has usually begged the 
question at issue, in accordance with the lights or pre- 
possessions of each individual writer. The ground has, 
therefore, to be gone ‘over again, and in a very differ- 

J 

ent spirit. Hypothetical criticism has done its. best- 

—_— om 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 159 

and its worst, and the question is no more settled than 
it was ages ago. It is high time that we should per- 

- ceive that such questions are only to be settled by a 

direct appeal to the laws and appliances of inductive 
science. 

The monuments of Greece and Italy have not only a 
native aspect, but they even present a progressive and 
unbroken sequence from first to last, and the few spe- 
cialities which do not belong to the general stream of 
thought have an exclusively Européan, never an A{fri- 
can or Asiatic character. It is only in comparatively 
late times, as in one or two paintings in Htruscan 
tombs, that we see anything in the least calculated to 
remind us of Egyptian art. But such could not be the 
case, had Greece or Italy ever derived any consider- 
able amount of instruction from the civilizations of the 
Kast, or been to any serious extent subjected to the 
sway of its monumental empires.’ 

With Asia Minor, indeed, the relations of the Greeco- 
Italic races have always been most intimate. This re- 
gion, in fact, is essentially European, ethnically as well 
as monumentally. Eastern Syria, too, is semi-Euro- 
pean, and has been repeatedly influenced by European 
conquest and commercial relations. If the Western 
wave has sometimes been rolled back—if Phoenicia, in 
its turn, has acted upon Europe—this is only like say- 

ing that Constantinople has acted upon Rome, We 

see how, out of the civilization spread abroad by Greek 

and Roman conquest, Asiatic empires, Persian, Sara- 

cenic, and Turkish, have subsequently arisen, two of 
which have seriously re-acted on parts of Europe, and 
we also see that whatever light belonged to these em- 
pires was but a planetary reflecticn from the Sun of 
the West. The Turkish rule is actually before us, and 
it is obvious that while its heart is Asiatic, its brain is 

160 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

Greek. Might not similar remarks have been equally 
true when the Moor was in Spain, and the Caliphs in 
Bagdad? Might they not also have been similarly ap- 
plicable in the old times of Egyptian and Assyrian do- 
minion? It is just as if, two centuries hence, a British 
India should invade Britain itself. Before such an 
event could be possible, the soul would have to be 
Kuropean, however Asiatic might be the body. 

Had Egypt or Assyria, then, ruled or colonized in 
ancient Greece or Italy, they would necessarily have 
left their mark there. A nation can no more divest 
itself of its associations than an individual can lay 
aside his character. A creed can no more migrate 
without its impedimenta of ceremonial, than an army 
can travel without its baggage. ‘The laws of antiquity 
are the laws of to-day, and the movements of present 
humanity the best key to the obscurities of the past. 
We see that wherever Rome held dominion or planted 
colonies, we can trace her presence monumentally ; 
and sc also with Greece before her; nor do we need 
historic evidence to assure us that the Saracen has ruled 
in Spain, or the Turk in the city of Constantine. How 
could the case have been otherwise with the Egyptian, 
the Assyrian, or the Persian, had they ever been here 
as rulers or teachers? As little, in fact, could an an- 
cient Egyptian colony have avoided engraving its hie- 
roglyphics or carving out statues of its gods, as a 
modern Anglo-Saxon colony can migrate into the wil- 
derness without presently setting about the erection of 
a church, a school-house, and a tavern. 

To form, then, a correct estimate of the past, we 
must begin by ascertaining the facts and laws of the 
present. Geology has recognized this truth, and bene- 
fited accordingly. Before we can become archzxolo- 
gists to any serious purpose, we must first become 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 161 

ethnologists. As little could geology have preceded 
natural history as scientific antiquarianism can pre- 
cede the ethnological study of actual man. Our de 
facto antiquarianism has taken this precedence, and, 
as might have been expected, it turns out to be, in the 

main, a dream. 

PeRcacwe 

How stands the case with actual humanity ? Simply 
thus, that the noon-day sun, in a cloudless sky, is 
scarcely more evident than is the intellectual supre- 
macy of the European races in the present era of the 
world. No matter what the cause, the fact is beyond 
all rational question. ‘lhe moderate intellectuality of 
the American races either wholly perished or vanished 
by eclipse at the first touch of Spanish energy ; Africa, 
when not barbarian, is simply the reflex of Europe or 
of Asia; Central and Eastern Asia are as fixed as 
their mountains, or wherever there is an intellectual 
movement, it obeys an impulse from without. Even 
Western Asia, though mentally higher, has, at the 
present day, almost as little spontaneity of advance as 
the more eastern regions. Europe alone is inherently 
mobile, restless, progressive, enterprising, cosmopoli- 
tan. The theatre of Asia is Asia; the theatre of 
Africa, Africa; the theatre of America, America; but 
the theatre of Europe is the world, and the theatre of 
its higher thoughts the very universe itself. This is 
more or less true of every one of its nationalities, 
emphatically so of several of them. It is more or less 
true of every educated man, in every one of these 
nationalities. We wake from our slumbers, descend 
to our breakfast tables, and there as naturally expect 
to find spread out before us the record of what is doing 
at the ends of the earth, as we expect to see the physi- 
cal comforts necessary for repairing the wear and tear 
of the previous day. It is simply a matter of circum- 

162 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

stances, whether we look more eagerly to home or to- 

foreign news. Some transaction at the antipodes may 
be that which absorbs all our thoughts ; it may mean 
for us happiness or misery, wealth or beggary, life or 
death. We make but little difference as to place; it 
is often but the turn of a hand whether we erect our 
dwelling on ancestral soil, or settle down in the woods 
of America or the plains of Australia. 

Every body must have its head; and beyond all 
question, the body of present humanity has no head 
but Europe; that is to say, of course, the races of 
BWurope, wherever they may dwell. Every living body, 
also, is expected to grow or to have grown, and we 
know it to be a general law that the higher portions 
of any growth are the latest in reaching their ultimate 
development. It would not, therefore, be anything 
strange if, at certain periods, the chest or abdomen was 
found to be more advanced in development than the 
head ; but it would do violence to all analogies were 
we to find the different regions of any body periodi- 
cally interchanging functions—were we to find that the 
head of to-day was the stomach of yesterday, and 
would be the lungs of to-morrow. But such must have 
been the case if Egypt, as Egyptian, or Assyria, as 
Assyrian, or India, as Indian, was ever the real center 
of intellectual life and movement—the brain of human- 
ity. Analogy here rises up against history, and op- 
poses fact to fables. Ethnical research equally does so, 
and shows us that the present superiority of Hurope is 
not a thing of accident—not the mere fortune of war, 
or the transfer of material resources, but a thing in- 
nate, organic—a superiority of structure and function, 
a superiority of temperament and material, a supe- 
riority of blood and race. If this be the character of 
European supremacy, then, humanity must obey. other 

- 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 163 

laws than those of zoology, or Europe has always been 
the place of its head. But we are not thrown exclu- 
sively upon zoological evidence in this case. History, 
indeed, knows nothing of Europe as the head of human- 
ity, until it comes down to the times of classic Greece 
and Rome; but archeology lights up the darkness of 
the past, and reveals to us the fossils and the foot- 
prints of an older Europe—of a Hurope which also was 
cosmopolitan. 

The nations of the earth may have their rotation in 
development and decay, in organic action or remission ; 
but ‘they have no -rotation in natural authority or 
power, and where they seem to have, there is illusion. 
We are looking on the surface of things ; we are daz- 
zled by reflected light; and the great under-current of 
realities escapes our notice. We look, for instance, 
upon ancient Rome, and we talk of it as if it were all 
Roman, and forget, for the moment, that Italy was in 
those days a great vortex which drew into itself large 
accessions of the native talent, enterprise, and energy 
of all surrounding regions, even of many which history 
calls barbarian. We look upon modern England, and 
think ourselves all English, and forget, for the time, 

that that land is the refuge for the persecuted brave, — 

the ark of political deluges, the mart of every form of 
intellectuality. We forget how Italy sends us her 
artists, Germany her musicians, France her patriots, 
and even distant Phoenicia her merchants; and how 
all of these pay us back with interest, and often when 
we least know of it, whatever of benefits our protection 
or wealth has conferred. We look upon America, and 
think ourselves American, totally oblivious of the fact 
that we are a concrete people, and that we have been 
raade what we are by the force of circumstances, of 
_ blood-minglings, and our central position on the globe ; 

164 ei PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

for we are mid-way between old Enrope, and still 
older Asia and Africa. Even viewed from within, 
we are not one but many ; at least, three distinct and 
important nationalities converging into a focus their 
united energies and talents. Under common or fami- 
liar names, under undistinguishable features or accent, 
we are perpetually appropriating to our own glory the 
patient industry, the clear practical sense, the indomi- 
table energy and force of character which Scotland ig 
ever sending us, as well as the dash, the entiusiasm, 
the varied talent, the eloquence, and the genius of 
Ireland, True it is, all three form one consistent— 
one natural aggregate, despite political conflicts aud 
theories; but are not one race or nation. And if 
we can thus so easily overlook, in our reasonings, pre- 
sent and familiar facts, how much easier is it for us to 
attribute to the native races of ancient empire, qualities 
which may not at all have belonged to them—qualities 
which may have been wholly an importation from with- 
out, which may have belonged exclusively to the mas- 
ters who ruled them, and who, while bearing histori- 
cally their name, may, nevertheless, be of very different 
blood and lineage. 

While, therefore, it is unquestionable that there is a 
succession in empires, an ebb and flow, a transfer and 
a journeying in the movements of civilization, it is not 
the less true that nations and races have their inherent 
specialities of character, and a fixity of hierarchical 
position which, while perfectly consistent with develop- 
ment and progress, entirely negatives that rotation of 
attribute and rank which a superficial view of history 
may countenance, and which popular theories are so 
fond of insisting upon. The growth of humanity, as a 
whole, is as much an affair of zoological law as the 
growth of its individual elements. There must be re- — 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 16 

gularity and control in its masses, however chaotic may 
seem the relations of its constituent atoms; for with- 
out such regularity and control these atoms could not 
maintain their existence. 

This hierarchy in race and nationality is not an iso- 
lated fact in zoology ; on the contrary, it 1s a general 
rule. This rule is but gradually dawning on the minds 
of naturalists, but they have long been preparing for it 
by the facts they have collected relative to the different 
fauna and flora of the earth. If these facts be carefully 
collated, they will be found to show that natural pro- 
vinces vary in rank as well as in general character ; 
and that just as we may speak of the region of Austra- 
lia as among the lowest of these provinces, Europe 
possesses claims to a marked superiority over all of 
them. Excluding things unfitted for the climate as 
regards mere temperature, it may confidently be as- 
serted that in no other region of the earth have so many 
of the higher types of vegetable and animal life at- 
tained so high a status as in Europe, and that in no 
other have introduced plants and animals manifested — 
so little tendency to degenerate, so frequent a tendency 
actually to improve. All this is as true of man as of 
the inferior animals. The Jew, for instance, has not 
degenerated in Europe or America. On the contrary, 
he has advanced in mental expansion and general in- 
tellectuality ; and this, seemingly, exclusive of any- 
thing that may be due to an occasional mixture. of 
blood. 

Except, then, as regards traditional legends, and the 
criticisms based on them, there is nothing incongruous 
in the idea of the pre-historic superiority of the Euro- 
pean races. The laws of the present necessitate it, the 
facts of zoology harmonize with it, monumental evi- 
dence admits of no other conclusion without doing 

166 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

violence to the laws of inductive reasoning. Europe, 
therefore, is now civilized and dominant, not because 
fortune has so determined it, or because it has come to 
its turn to beso; but it is so because it has come to its 
turn to take a new and greater leap than ever in de- 
velopment—to be, in a more complete sense than ever, 
the master of this earth, the brain and intellect of 
humanity. The New Zealander may, indeed, one day 
stand upon the ruins of a perished London; but when 
he looks around him, he will not find savages in the 
Jand. He may, possibly, find a country torn by civil 
discord, or slumbering in relative torpidity, or held 
down by the strong arm of a foreign despotism ; but 
assuredly the arm that holds down a British or Ame- 
rican race will have European blood in its veins, and 
though there has been savageism here as well as else- 
where, yet the entire sweep of terrestrial development 
emphatically proclaims that the days of European and 
American savageism) have vanished never to return. As 
well might you expect the Megatherium and Iguanodon 
back again, as a seriously retrograde Europe, or Ame- 
rica. 

CHAPTER III. 

PRIMEVAL EUROPE. 

There is a sense in which’yesterday is younger than to-day, and 
in which the “ wisdom of antiquity” is but the voice of Childhood. 

There was a time, and no distant time either, when a 
mountain gorge revealed nothing to the eye but a mass 
of rocks irregularly broken through, and when every 
bone of unusual size, or fossil of unusual shape, was the 
remnant of a giant, a freak of Nature, or a monument 
of the deluge. For the history of the earth, that time . 

‘Sites 

«an le 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 167 

has passed, never to return; for the history of man, that 
time is still the present. | 

Touched by the spell of Science, the mountain gorge. 
is now a written book, every line pregnant. with mean- 
ing, every stratum the history of an epoch, every fossil 
the record of a vanished race. The bone, indeed, is the 
bone of a giant still, but of a giant of quite another 
mould from the monster of human credulity ; and the 
strange-looking fossil, though thrown into being in a 
mood of Nature, very different from any which she now 
puts on, was yet planned and fashioned with the same 
seriousness and care as the very latest of her produc- 
tions. ‘There are, too, here, records of a flood, and of 
many floods, but they are floods on whose waters no 
mystic ark ever floated, and for whose devastations no 
erime ef man’s commission is responsible. They are 
floods which speak of millious of years: floods which 
had become rocks countless ages before the date which 
human story had fixed for their rise and ebb. 

And thus the veil has fallen, and man at last sees 
that ancient books knew uothing of the history of this 
universe. 

But every generation must purchase its own expe- 
rience, and pay for its special wisdom the price of its 
special folly. And thus the generation that has dared 
to face even the worst anathemas of theology, still trem- 
bles. before the harmless frowns of a few literary critics, 
and still devoutly believes in the civil story of ancient 
Italy, after having ventured to confront with doubt the 
sacred records of Judea. 

But the veil has beguu to fall here also, and if in 
these pages we presume to lower it still further, and 
with no ceremonious hand, the reader should remember 
that we but do for the present time, and for a special 
panbject, things which he has long learned to rejoice at 

a 

f 

168 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

and commend in other persons, and times, and topics. 
If we look at a ruined temple, or at the remnant of 
an ancient wall, without forethought or preparation, or 

plan of study, or law of reasoning, and then decide or 

speculate about its founders, its era, or its purpose, just 
as chance, or the accidents of our ‘previous knowledge 

and prepossessions may determine, are we not simply - 

in the position of the pre-geological critic discoursing 
learned folly about the flood, and the giant, and the 
freak, or spinning world-theories out of the vacuum of 
a fancy without facts? If we wish to evolve a stable 
deduction, if we wish to build up a system which the 
next observer will have to add to, instead of pulling 
down, we must give up the idea of building until we 
have made some progress in the collection and selection 
of our materials, learned the fundamental rules of our 
trade, and acquired due facility in the use of our tools. 
The age, indeed, has awakened to the clear conscious- 
ness of the first of these requisites, and has worthily ex- 
erted itself in the collection and sifting of facts, but it 
is still much in arrears as regards the second, and still 
builds very much at hazard, or by the aid of rules, which 
however sanctioned by tradition, have never yet pro- 
duced any really substantial result. 

If we want to understand the character and place of 
a fossil, must we not previously understand the struc- 
ture and physical history of existing animals? Or how 
shall we correctly estimate the laws of action which 
have governed past humanity, while leaving out of con- 
sideration the laws and facts of the present? What, 
then, can a pre-ethnological archeology possibly be but 
a direct equivalent of a pre-zoological geology? In 
these pages, then, the reader must not expect to find 
any deference shown, or any special attention given to 

reasonings which have preceded, or which ignore, the 

atelier _ 

% 
r 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 169 © 

ascertained facts and laws of the physical history of 
man. 

In previous chapters it has been shown that the monu- 
ments of Egypt, though for the most part bearing an 
unequivocally native aspect in general style and work- 
manship, have, nevertheless, in their sudden transitions 
and entire absence of preparatory stages, a very exotic 
character as to origin. But nothing of this can be 
said of the region of facts into which we are now about 
to penetrate. ‘The archeology of Italy, Greece, and 
Asia Minor, presents us with a history without breaks, 
with a maturity whose early stages may be traced al- 
most to the birth. For although there be far older 
monuments in Europe than any which this classic soil 
can show, they belong to wholly other spheres of 
thought, and have in no way served as types to the 
styles or the structures on which repose the beautiful 
creations of Greeco-Italic genius. 

The oldest and rudest monuments which meet us in 
this part of Europe, have received the name of Cyclo- 
pean, from the gigantic character of their structure. 
Popular ignorance found an easy refuge from doubt in — 
attributing to mythic monsters of superhuman strength 
and size, erections which seemed incommensurate with 
the powers of current humanity ; and learned credulity 
found it easier or safer to refine on the popular tradi- 
tion than to supplant it with more accurate thought, 
and so the name has come down, and may now very 
well be preserved, since it distinguishes the group, 
without creating any risk of error for the modern in- 
quirer, for we are as little in danger of believing in the 
Cyclops at the present day, as of worshiping the gods 
against whom they warred. 

The Cyclopean structures, as they present themselves 
in Greece, Italy, and Asia Minor, consist, mainly, in 

170 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

their earlier form, almost exclusively of works of a de 
fensive character. They are walls, or fragments of 
walls, which originally encompassed cities or citadels, 
or helped to increase the strength of some place already 
strong by nature. Their essential characteristic is 
their strength and massiveness, and the contrast be- 
tween their rude simplicity, and the skill, labor, and 
appliances, which they otherwise evince. This con- 
trast is especially marked in the older ranges of these 
monuments. 

Three distinct styles of construction are discernable 
in the Cyclopean works, and these styles plainly im- 
ply three distinct eras in their erection. The first and 
second styles are especially distinct, the third -rises by 
easy gradations from the second, and thence passes into 
the later or Post-Cyclopean styles of classic times. 

In consonance with these distinctions, we name the 
Cyclopean structures as Primitive, Secondary, and Ter- 
tiary, as to style and era. 

The Primitive Cyclopean walls are composed, exclu- 
sively, of blocks of stone entirely rude, but ot so great 
a size that their mere weight, conjoined with the skill 
with which they are laid, and the general thickness 
of the wall, constitutes an erection of immense strength. 

Whoever has passed over a stony country, and no- 
ticed the rude walls which, instead of hedges, separate 
field from field, has had before him the rudimentary 
idea of a Cyclopean wall. To understand the reality, 
he must imagine that wall some twenty feet thick, and 
some thirty, forty, or even sixty feet high, the general 
size of its stones from three to seven feet, the largest 
being rocks of ten feet in length, with a corresponding 
breadth and thickness; and, finally, he must imagine 
these materials placed with consummate care and skill, 
and the interstices filled up with small stones, and he 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. ; 171 

will have an image before his mind of one of those 
gigantic structures, which have resisted, for thousands 
of years, the ravages of time, and which nothing but 
the earthquake’s shock, or the cannon’s play, or the de- 
liberate dismantling of a victorious enemy, would seem 
adequate to disturb. 

A brief description of one of these works will give 
a sufficient idea of the general character of all, the 
variations being little more than differences in the ex- 
teut of the space enclosed, or in the general thickness 
or height of the walls. 

Hamilton,* one of the travelers who has examined 
-these structures in Greece with great care, thus speaks 
of the walls of Tiryns, one of the very oldest of the 
Grecian cities. The walls of Tiryns “present a stu- 
pendous specimen of the most ancient mode of military 
building in Greece: even among the ancients it was 
reported, as well as Mycene, to have been the work of 
the Cyclops. It would seem from the dimensions of 
the space enclosed within these gigantic masses, which 
is no more than two hundred yards long and fifty wide, 
that the remains now seen, formed only the acropolis of 

the ancient city ; though the words of Pausanias hardly 
- warrant. the supposition. His description of the walls 
can only be explained by an inspection of them. They 
consist of vast irregular masses of rock, some of them 
equal in solid contents to a cube of six feet, and the 
least of which, Pausanias says, could not be moved by 
a yoke of oxen. The intervals between them are filled 
up, or as the same geographer calls it, harmonized by 
smaller masses, without any cement. The walls are 
twenty-five feet thick, of solid masonry, and where the 
upper part has not fallen, are forty feet in height.” 

* Remarks on the Fortresses of Ancient Greece. Archeologia, Vol. 
XY., pp. 320, 321. 

172 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

Dodwell, who has given exact drawings of these 
ruins as they now stand, states the dimensions of the 
space enclosed as 244 yards by 54, and the general 
thickness of ‘the walls as twenty-one feet—in some 
cases twenty-five. Their present height, where most 
perfect, is forty-three feet, and their original height, 
probably, was not less than sixty feet. The largest 
stones are between nine and ten feet long, by four in 
thickness, the usual size being from three to seven 
feet:* 

Walls of this kind, some of them enclosing exten- 
sive spaces, as at Norba, in the ancient Latium, are 
found in various parts of Greece, Italy, and Asia: 
Minor, and even beyond these centers in individual in- 
stances. In some cases they form considerable ruins, 
still in most they are now nothing more than the 
lower portions of walls of more recent date, which 
have obviously been erected on the site of ancient 
strongholds. But wherever they are found, in con- 
nection with other styles, they are never superposed. 
Like the granite, they underlie all other strata, some- 
times pushing up, as it were, between them, but in this 
case, more rigid than the granite, never resting on 
them. 

The second style differs from the first in a very re- 
markable manner. The stones are, as before, irregular 
and large, but now they are accurately cut and fitted— 
so that this second style consists of irregular polygons 
carefully cut and fitted, without cement. So careful is 
the workmanship in many instances, that numerous tray- 
elers have spoken of these walls with astonishment, and 
have described the working of the stones as so accurate 
that the point of a pen-knife could not be inserted be- | 
tween them. Small stones are naturally excluded from 

* Views in Greece. PI. II. toIV., pp. 3 and 4. 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 173 

these secondary walls, as they would but needlessly add 
to the labor, while diminishing the strength of the 
structure. 

This secondary style is more extensively diffused than 
the primary, is often superposed upon it, or is otherwise 
used in repairing, especially in gateways, the dilapida- 
tions made by war or time in walls of the primary 
style. 

In these two styles nothing like successive courses or 
strata in the laying of the stones is at all possible, and 
therefore they are distinguished from later styles as be- 
ing unstratified. 

A greater or less amount of stratification is the dis- 
tinguishing feature of the third Cyclopean style. In 
walls of this kind there is always a tendency to have the 
upper and lower faces of the blocks more or less paral- 
lel, while the lateral faces form with them angles of 
every degree of acuteness or obliquity. In this manner 
we see— first, a progressive tendency to form genuine 
strata; and parallel with this, though slower in devel- 
opment, a tendency towards the formation of regular 
rectangular parallelograms. This latter is the usual 
style in the classical era of purely Greek constructions. 
Roman works present the further advance of being often 
formed of absolutely cubical blocks. Thus we have in 
Greco-Italic art four eras and styles of construction, 
Primitive, Secondary, Tertiary, and Recent ; for classic 
architecture is truly but recent, when compared with 
the remote stretch of the older Cyclopean structures. 

Thus far, however, we have stated merely the general 
facts and results—we must now endeavor to show the 
special evidence which, justifies the deductions. implied 
by these results. 

First, then, it is obvious that the rude style here 
named primary, is the older of the four—first, because 

174, PRE-ADAMITE MAN, 

it is the one which would most naturally present itself 
to the mind in the infancy of art and knowledge, the 
more especially as it fully accomplishes the purpose in- 
tended ; secondly, because it often underlies the second 
style, while never overlying it, nor ever co-existing with 
it without implving priority in the circumstances of that 
co-existence ; thirdly, because it implies ignorance of 
the use of metal tools fitted for conveniently shaping 
and working blocks of stone, while the works of the 
secondary, and all subsequent styles, necessitate the 
knowledge and use of such tools ; and fourthly, because 
the secondary style acknowledges the pre-existence of 
the primary, by imitating its arrangements without ne- 
cessity, and often at great inconvenience, thus showing 
that it was an encroachment on pre-existing ideas, and 
that, like all such encroachments, it was a compromise 
between the new thought and the old, or a mere devel- 
opment of the latter. 

The first of these categories needs no special remark. 

bstractly considered, the rudeness of this primary 
style would be little more than a simple presumption 
in favor of its antiquity, but it becomes an argument of 
high importance when taken into connection with ulte- 
rior considerations. 

The second category speaks for itself. Hundreds 
of these monuments have been examined and de- 
scribed of late years, and we are not aware of the ex- 
istence of any fact that would even tend to militate 
against the statements here made. 

[The only traveler we know of who even seems to 
have spoken adversely to the sequence here insisted on, 
is Sir Charles Fellows, and he speaks vaguely, and 
under the bias of pre-existing views, for he was opposed 
to the Pelasgian theory of Petit-Radel, which first fixed 
modern attention on these Cyclopean structures, and 
therefore drawing no clear distinctions between the 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 175 

different styles, he often uses the words Cvclopean and 
Pelasgian in such a manner as to leave it uncertain 
whether he is speaking of the rudest or of the most 
advanced of them, or whether he is speaking of a 
Oyclopean style at all, for this term is often with him, 

as with several other writers, simply synonymous with 
gigantic. He seldom, for instance, distinguishes be- 
‘tween an original wall and subsequent repairs or im- 
provements. A Oyclopean wall of secondary or tertiary 
style, with gateways or buttresses of a more modern 
character, are with him simple contemporancousness, 
while an old erection on a rock with more recent fill- 
ings in beneath, in. the side of that rock, would be a 
sequence of the ruder over the more advanced, as would 
likewise be the case, if in a wall of regular polygons 
we found some gigantic masses of stone, less regular in 
shape, placed over gateways or other points where 
solidity was a higher consideration than regularity. 

Thus, valuable and precise as are the researches of Sir 
Charles Fellows, in the main, they very often want both 
precision and detail when he speaks of the present class 
of structures. The passage to which we have special 
reference, occurs in his description of the ruins of 
Pinara, in Lycia, and is as follows : 

“The walls and several buildings of the city were of 
the Cyclopean style, with massive gateways formed of 
three immense stones. I measured one over the portal, 
which was fourteen feet in length; the buttresses of 
the same walls were of regularly squared stones. 

“These modes of building were both used in the 
same works, and certainly at the same time ; the Cyclo- 
pean, which is generally supposed to be the older made, 
I have often seen surmounting the regular Greek squared 
stone walls. The whole city appears to be of one date 
and people, and, from its innumerable tombs, must have 
existed for a long series of generations, and from a 
very early period.”—Discoveries in Lycia ; 1840. pp. 
140, 141. 

With all deference, these are pre-geological state- 
ments, deficient in classification, ignoring the laws of 
sequence in thought, and the known ‘phenomena of 
existing life. But even were they true, they do not 

176 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

touch the point actually under consideration—viz., the 
invariable priority of the style here named primary. | 

The third category involves very important con- 
siderations, and must be considered in some detail. 

The primary style presents itself under circum- 
stances of a wholly unequivocal character. It is found 
exclusively in great public works, and those of a defen- 
sive kind—viz., walls of towns, citadels, or other 
strongholds. No rude, scattered, ignorant, or poor 
populations, could need, erect, or even defend the gene- 
rality of these constructions. They speak exclusively 
of populous, settled, organized, industrial, wealthy and 
intelligent nations, and, if so, they necessarily speak 
of the infancy of art and knowledge. These structures 
are very numerous, far too numerous to be needed by 
any but populous nations. They are widely distributed 
in Greece, numerous in Middle Italy, and met with in 
all the principal States of Asia Minor, as well as in 
several of the islands of the Archipelago, and they 
have the aspect of belonging to a distinct era, and that 
of long duration, as well as of clearly implying foreign 
intercourse and conquest. ‘They rapidly thin off, and 
soon cease altogether, as we advance to the north, 
either in Greece or Italy. In Italy, the Po seems to 
be their boundary. To the South, the African shore 
is their limit; here they are known in a single spot 
only—-viz., in the vicinity of Tunis, a Very old monu- 
mental site. Inthe west, they have possibly reached the 

eastern coast of Spain ;* but the statements given on 

* Most unfortunately, the celebrated Louis Petit-Radel, who may be 
_ said to have created all our knowledge of the Cyclopean monuments 
by first directing attention to their specialities, devoting his whole 
life to their study, and inspiring with a portion of his own enthusiasm, 
numerous travelers and learned men, adopted the theory of their be- 
ing all monuments of one era and people, the Pelasgian ; and this un- 
lucky assumption has introduced great vagueness, not only into his 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 117 

this pvint in Petit-Radel’s work are vague, and we have 
not been able to obtain access to the original accounts. 
The sites spoken of are Saguntum (now Murviedro), 
Tarrogona, and Toledo ; and on the coast of France, 
Marseiles and Aix are also mentioned. Eastward, 
they have probably reached Syria, if not even Persia.* 

This central multiplicity and progressive thinning off 

speaks unequivocally of empire and conquest, and all 

other circumstances confirm the indication. But a 
population requiring a multitude of walled cities thus 
distributed, means one which has something to preserve, 
which is warlike in character, and surrounded by war- 
like neighbors ; which is wealthy enough to devote a 
considerable share of its time, labor, and resources, to 
great public works ; which has distant communications 
by sea and land ; which has sufficient talent in its.ruling 
races to select the sites of its fortresses with consum- 
mate skill, and to transport and elevate immense quan- 
tities and heavy masses of stone in & manner that would 
considerably tax even the ingenuity and resources of 
modern times ; while a perfect uniformity of style and 
circumstances, in the great public works of several dif- 
ferent races and nations, is only intelligible under the 
circumstances of a unity In rule and era. We have 

here before us then,.in these primary Cyclopean struc- 

tures, the vestiges of an Empire, not of distinct na- 
tional, still less provincial, rules. But an empire situ- 
ated in this part of the world, and erecting such works 
as these, yet leaving behind no sign of temple or of 

own Statements and observations, but also into those of most of the 
writers who have adopted his views. We are, therefore, often unable 
to determine to which of two, or even three styles a particular monu- 

_ Ment may belong. The principal work of Petit-Radel is his Recher- 

cher sur les Monuments Cyclopéens. © Par. 1841. 
* Petit-Radel. Ibid. pp. 84, 98, 99 and 102. 

178 | PRE-ADAMITE MAN, 

palace, and no indication of ever having touched a 
metal tool, could not possibly be otherwise than very 
ancient. : 

National wealth and power mean agriculture, social 
organization, intelligence, enterprise, commerce, travel- 
ing. Great wealth and power mean all these things 
intensified. They also mean curiosity, and the power 
of giving and receiving knowledge. They mean a peo- 
ple acquainted with all its neighbors, visiting them, 
buying from them, selling to them, prying into their 
- concerns, sending and receiving embassies, quarrelling 
with them, fighting with them, invading and despoiling 
them, making peace, exchanging presents, interchang- 
ing curiosities, borrowing advantages and giving them ; 
and in a word, doing all those things which neighbor- 
ing nations now do, and ever have done, since nations 
came into existence. 

But the idea of a nation of any kind under these cir- 
cumstances, to say nothing of a great empire, building. 
walls like these when they could, with infinitely less 
labor, have built far better ones, or remaining ignorant 
of the use of metal instruments with the advanced civi- 
lizations of Egypt and Assyria blazing at their very 
doors, is simply ridiculous. Such conjunctions have no 
precedent, and would necessitate mental and physical 
pheaomena that cannot co-exist, since they directly ne- 
gative each other. ) 

We already* know that, somehow or other, metal 
tools found their: way into the rude sepulchres of 
Northern and Western Europe, and Eastern Asia, and 
that, with a uniformity of alloy which speaks of single- — 
ness of origin, they meet us in Greece as in Egypt, in 
Britain as in India, in Mexico as in Assyria. Do we 
not see, téo, that our own manufactures, our axes, and 
knives, and guns, now travel to every corner of the 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 17) 

earth, and to every recess of the great continents, pene- 
trating forests, crossing mountain chains, passing from 
hand to hand, and tribe to tribe, by the accidents of 
of war or barter, into regions where the white man’s 
foot has never trodden, or a civilized voice been heard 
for ages ? 

Besides, what could have prevented men, acquainted 
with the use of metal tools, from at least partially 
shaping their materials, especially in their gateways, 
which they have been forced to construct In a very in- 
erior style—small, narrow, and with sides sloping in- 
wards till they meet at a point? They could, too, 
have attained increased strength with less ponderous 
weights, and obviated the necessity of those fillings in 
of small stones. They could not have been indifferent, 
where they have taken so much pains, nor have minded 
rouble or expense, where they have encountered such 
un enormous amount of both, nor have been stupid, 
while displaying so much skill and resource, nor igno- 
rant, while the knowledge required, had it existed 
mong their neighbors, must have forced itself upon 
heir attention in a thousand different ways. They 
were, therefore, ignorant, solely by anteceding the era 
of that knowledge. 

Or what could have induced those who erected the 
secondary structures from squaring their blocks, as 
ater times have done, and thus obviating that infini- 
bude of lines, and that minuteness of fitting, which the 
style necessitates, were it not that their eyes were fa- 
miliarized with unstratified walls, while they had never 
beheld a regular one; that their fathers had built with 
irregular blocks, and that it was some amount of pre- 
sumption to differ at all from heroes and sages who 
had erected such mighty works as Tiryrs, and Lyco- 
sura, and Mycene, and Norba, and the hundred other 

= 

& 

180 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

wonders of these early times? The ever living laws 
of development, association, and conservatism, can 
alone account for these things, and they account for 
them fully. 

Here, then, rises before us a great primeval Ku- 
rope, growing and conquering, and passing away, 
while Egypt was still a blank, and Assyria a desert— 
while temple, and palace, and-column, and granite sta- 
tue, and sculptured slab, were ideas unborn, and the 
ring of a metal tool a sound whieh had never yet been 
heard upon this planet, and we go on believing in a 
history which ignores this grand old Europe, and heaps 
upon its venerable fossils the rubbish of its myriad 
fables. High time we should open our eyes, and ques- 
tion the guides that have led us into these abysses of 
gloom, these quagmires of inextricable contradictions. 
High time to remember that common sense is needed 
in history as well as in science, and that common sense 
has but one mode of working, whether it work in sci, 
ence, or in history, or in creed, or in business. 

oo 

TOPIC SECOND. 

THE FICTIONS OF CHRONOLOGY, ANCIENT 
AND MEDIEVAL. 

“ 

CHAPTER IV. 

In the chapters now presented to the reader under 
the above heading, we shall have to present a range of 
deductions which, if announced without preparation, 
would necessarily be received as not merely very rash, 
but even as altogether wild conclusions. We have all 
of us been so accustomed, in this direction, to move in 
beaten tracks, historical scepticism, even where it exists. 

; } 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 181 

has usually assumed such mild and cautious forms, that 
the demands here made upon the reader’s good sense, 
simple and natural as they are in themselves, will never- 
theless alarm him by their magnitude, as much as they 
startle him by their novelty. 

Yet such ought not to be the case. A moment’s re- 
flection ought to prove to him that his faith in history 
rests on no solid foundation. He accepted it as a 
child, when his credulity was eager, his knowledge im- 
perfect, his judgment immature, and his experience un- 
purchased; and he has continued to acquiesce in it as 
a man, not because he has since proved its truth, but _ 
simply because custom, association, or the want of 
special stimulants have left him without any motive for 
doubt, or without one sufficiently powerful to overcome 
the vis inertice which these circumstances are calculated 
to produce. 

The results here offered are certainly very strange, 

«when viewed in connection with the actual: state of 
opinion, but then they have been produced by mental 
processes the direct reverse of those usually employed 
in historical inquiries. Historic criticism has hitherto 
been, in the main, hypothetical criticism, and hypo- 

- thetical criticism can produce no better result than hy- 
pothetical certainty, which is no certainty at all. What- 
ever has gone beyond this has been the result of en- 
tirely different processes, but these processes have 
hitherto been applied only fractionally and incident- 
ally, and the great body of historic data still rests, 
after centuries.of research and criticism, on no better 
foundation than a tradition of which the stages can- 
not be traced, and of which the statements cannot be 
verified. - 

It will readily be admitted that history is something 

more than an amusement for a Icisure hour or a field 

4 : Poe 

182 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

of exertion for literary curiosity. It is either an im- 
portant truth, or a mischievous fallacy. In so far as it 
is true, it tends to give us correct ideas, not only of re- 
mote events, but also of human nature itself. In so 
far as it is false, it is an illusion in the one case, a snare 
in the other. The politician draws from it his illustra- 
tions, and bases upon it his arguments: the teacher de- 
duces from it rules of conduct for the formation of char- 
acter and the guidance of the young: and the philan- 
thropist builds upon it schemes of progress or regener- 
ation, which are to change the present and predeter- 
mine the future. It is, therefore, a very serious matter 
whether the materials of all these workings be substan- 
tial truths or idle dreams—the sports of fancy and the 
blunders of criticism. 

At the very outset, it must be observed, that there is 
one grave inconvenience attached to ancient history 
“which is far too little appreciated, and much too gener: 
ally ignored altogether. It is this: ancient history,, 
is mainly based upon statements which, even when true, 
cannot be proved to be true, as they do not admit of 
‘any present verification. This fact alone makes it ob- 
viously illogical to base upon such statements any argu- 
ment aiming at certainty. 

Many of the oldest known materials of both medi- 
eval and ancient history are rude chronicles, in which 
events are recorded without any attempt at proof, or 
any reference even to authorities. The more formal 
histories, with partial exceptions, add little in the way 
of evidence to the bald statements of, the chronicles, 
beyond the surmjses or conjectural criticism of the 
writer. Even the very existence and era of the writers, 
or supposed writers of these histories, are rarely mat- 
ters of demonstrable fact, but points decided upon in-— 
ferential evidence, often of the slightest and most ques — 

o<® 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN, 183 

tionable character ; so that what is generally viewed 
as contemporaneous history is usually as hypothetical 
as any other. Nay, even when statements are tested by 
a reference to actual monuments, the era of those monu- 
ments has usually been previously settled by the very 
history which they are subsequently called upon to test, 
so that the historical argument is usually an argument 
in a vicious circle, supporting one unproved statement 
by another unproved statement. 

This is, in all respects, a false position, and there is 
but one possible escape from it—that is, by cutting the 
Gordian knot, abandoning hypothetical reasoning al- 
together, and working exclusively with demonstrable 
facts : in a word, by substituting science for credulity, 
and rational deduction for insane attempts to reach 
certainty by means which cannot by any possibility lead 
to it. 

The moment we determine upon this course, we*ha 

»no longer to complain. of any dearth of genuine evi- 
dence. All the statements of history become at once, 
under this aspect, available, and unquestionable facts. 
Whatever their character otherwise, they are facts in so 
far as their simple existence is concerned ; they are the 
wrecks and fossils of ancient thought ; thay bear the 

impress of more or less ancient events ; let us use them 
as the geologist uses his wrecks and fossils, and, like 
him, we shall reproduce a history which requires no 

. credulity in its acceptance, and needs offer no statement 
unsusceptible of strict verification. 

We shall not tantalize the reader’s patience by car- 
rying him, in the first instance, through those prelimi- 
nary explanations and evidences which will be finally 
necessary for the full comprehension of the general ar- 
gument, but endeavor, at once, to enlist his interest in 
the inquiry, by laying before him a specimen of the 

184 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

results which this new mode of viewing an old sub- 

ject has already produced in the department of chro- 
nology. 
He is certainly not prepared, by his knowledge of 

real life, to expect that the important events of history — 

—the rise and fall of empires, and states, and dynasties, 
and creeds—are arranged by chance or Providence into 
minute accordance with certain standard periods, al- 
ways the same, however times and circumstances may 
vary, still less that these events often contrive to obey the 
laws of two or more conflicting periodicities. In. mod- 
ern times, certainly, such things do not occur; but if 
ancient and mediwval history be true, they have oc- 
curred formerly innumerable times—almost, indeed, as 
a universal rule. Either, then, the course of Nature has 
entirely changed within the last few centuries, or the 
far greater portion of general chronology is a system 
and.a theory, not a fact. 

The following details will give some idea of the evi- 
dences on which the foregoing statements are based, 
and of the degree to which they are likely to admit of 
verification. We have taken for illustration the Roman 
annals, as being familiar to most educated readers, and 
as offering one of the most continuous, sober, and mat- 
ter-of-fact-looking narratives which antiquity presents. 
What, in fact, can be expected to stand, if Roman story 
be found to mock our trust ? 

The following quotation from the iliustrious Niebuhr, 
with which we preface our exposition, has a special in- 
terest on this occasion, and we would remind those 

whose nature and habit of thought lead them to attach — 

ereat weight to authority and precedent, that we have 
merely endeavored to do universally—in regard to all 
epochs and all histories-—what Niebuhr has so well ac- 

complished in those insfances in which he has been able — 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 185 

to persuade himself, not only to reject baseless authori- 
ties and listen to the instincts of his own clear common 
sense, but also to curb that impetuosity of mind which 
has so often led him, while justly rejecting the assumptions 
and conjectures of his predecessors, to supply their 
place with assumptions and conjectures of his own :— 

“ Wherever in history,” says Niebuhr, “we see num- 
bers capable of being resolved into arithmetical propor- 
tions, we may say, with the greatest certainty, that they 
are artificial arrangements to which the history has 
been adapted, as the philosopher exclaimed when he 
saw mathematical diagrams on the sand, ‘I see traces 
of man.’ The course of human affairs is not directed 
by numerical proportions, and wherever they are found, 
we may, according to a law which Leibnitz would 
have laid down as an axiom, declare unhesitatingly 
that there is an arrangement according to a cer- 
tain plan. Such artificial arrangements we find in 
the Indian and Babylonian eras; large spaces are 
divided according to certain numerical proportions. 
Such, also, is the case with the history of Rome, from 
its foundation down to the burning of the city by the 
Gauls. For this period 360 years were assumed, which 
number was taken for granted by Fabius and Poly- 
bius, who copied it from a table (Greek, pinas). Of 
these 360 years, 240 were allowed to the kings, and 
120 to the commonwealth. In all Roman institutions 
the numbers ten, thirty, and twelve, play an important 
part; all numerical combinations connected with Rome 
arise out of multiples of three, which is most frequently 
multiplied by ten, as 30, 300, 3,000. Such, also, is the 
number of the 360 houses of Athens in its ancient con- 
stitution. Of the 240 years assigned to the kings, 120 
is the half, and hence the middle of the reign of Ancus 
Martius, the fourth king, falls in 120. He is the crea- 
tor of the plebeian order, and, consequently, 120 is the 
date of the origin of the plebeians. Thus we have three 
periods, each containing ten times twelve years; 120 
years previous to the existence of the plebeian order, 
120 with plebeians, and 120 without kings. How could 
it ever have happened that of seven kings, the fourth 

186 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

should just fall in the middle of the period assigned 
them, and that the period should be divided into two 
halves by the middle of the reign of the fourth king? 
Here is evidence for those who will judge with reason 
and without prejudice; even if there were not other 
circumstances in the history, which involve impossibi- 
lities, such as the statement that Tarquinius Superbus 
was a grandson of Tarquinius Priscus. For this whole 
period, then, down to the Gallic conquest, we have a 
made-up history, at least, with regard to chronology.”* 

The following facts will plainly show that the fabri- 
cation has not stopped short at the period in ques- 
tion :— 

The Roman annals always commence from the fall 
of Troy, as their natural starting-point, and the great 
epochs of the history are clearly. these—the building of 
the city—its destruction by the Gauls—the establish- 
ment of the empire—and the removal of the seat of 
_ government from Rome to Constantinople, Now this 
same 360 years is the exact interval which separates 
these five great events. From the fall of Troy to the 
building of the city. according to one of two main 
dates, is three hundred and sixty years,t and we have 
already seen that three hundred and sixty years is 
also the date of the Gallic catastrophe. The establish- 
ment of the empire is usually reckoned from the year 
of Rome 723, when Octavius triumphed over Antony 
and Cleopatra, at Actium. This event is just 360 
years from the destruction of the city, for the super- 
fluous three years belong to the pre-Gallic era, and de- 
pend on differences, among the authorities, relative to 
the exact date of the foundation of the city. Finally, 
from the establishment of the empire to the solemn dedi- 

* Lectures on the Hist. of Rome. Ed. by Schmitz, Vol.I., pp. 15-16. — 
Lect. III. Introduction. 
t Servius, “ Commentary on the Mneid,” Lib. I, v. 267. 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 187 

cation of Constantinople as the new seat of empire, in 
A. OC. 3380, is also exactly 360 years ; for 330 of Christ 
is 360 of the era of Actium. Besides, the “ Paschal 
Chronicle,” one of the most respectable of the Byzan- 
tine records, not only places this event in the year of 
Christ 330, but also in the year of Rome 1080 (three 
times 360), thus virtually rejecting the superfluous 
three years, and leaving 720 as the date of the empire, 
and 860 as that of the destruction of the city.* 

Thus, then, for 1080 years, Rome is a seat of domi- 
nion ; for 1080 years its old creeds rule the State ; 
then empire deserts the Eternal City, and a new;creed 
tramples on the primeval faith. In this year of the 
dedication of Constantinople, Paganism was abolished 
by Imperial edict, and Christianity established as the 
religion of the State.t Nor is this all; 1080 years is 
also the duration of the Consular dignity as a distinct 
magistracy. It began in 240 of Rome; it was finally 
merged into the Imperial privileges, and ceased as a 
distinct magistracy on the lst of January, A. C. 566, 
according to one set of reckonings, and 567 according 
to another, that is in 1319 or 1320 of Rome.t If we 
take 240 from 1820, the result is 1080. And even the 
number 1319 does not appear to be an accidental vari- 
ation, for it meets other coincidences which cannot he 
now touched upon. Thus Rome existed 240 years be- 
fore the creation of the Consular dignity, and this dig- 
nity continued 240 years after Rome had ceased to 

*« From the building of Rome to the year in which Constantinople 
was dedicated, are reckoned MLXXX. years,’’ is the formal statement 
of the “ Paschal Chronicle.” Vol. I., pp. 529-30, in the “Corpus 
Scrip. Hist. Byzantine.” 

} Cf. “ Paschal Chronicle,” ibid. p. 525 ; ees Cedrenus, Hist. Com-' 
pendium, in the Corpus Scriptorum, ibid. Vol. I, pp. 495-500. 

t Art de Vérifier les Dates dupuis Jésus-Christ,” tom. IV., p. 170; 
and Clinton, “ Fasti Romani.” Vol. I., pp. 818-22. * 

188 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

exist as a seat of empire. Neither do these adjust- 
ments stop even here. 

Neibuhr seems to have ame the number 360 as 
arbitrarily chosen, or as resulting simply from the mul- 
tiplication of certain favorite elements; but there is 
far more in the matter than this, for we are now able 
to speak upon this point with a degree of evidence and 
precision which no one could have foreseen at the time 
when Niebuhr wrote. 

Most of my readers are doubtless familiar with the 
extravagantly long periods involved in the mythic 
chronologies of the principal nations of antiquity, and 
many of them are also aware that modern research has 
thrown an unexpected light on the character and con- 
stitution of those periods, showing them to be as far 
removed from arbitrary extravagance, on the one hand, 
as they are from genuine chronology on the other. We 
find them, in fact, to be very regular and systematic 
formations, without any shadow of historical basis, but 
suggested, nevertheless, by important facts of another 
kind. 

Their fundamental idea, as well as that of the legends 
with which they are almost always associated, is the 
belief, almost universal in antiquity, that the events 
of the universe, by the laws of destiny, or the arrange- 
ments of the Divine will, are constantly passing through . 
great and perfectly regular cycles of change, commenc- 
ing with creation or renovation, and ending with de- 
struction or annihilation ; and it has been found that 
the subdivisions and numbers involved in these cycles 
always recognize the adjustments of the ordinary year, 
in one or other of the many forms which they have 
assumed in different periods cf human history. 

The most interesting of the numbers made use of in 
these cycles are the roots 360 and 432, with their tripli- 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 189 

cates 1080 and 1296 ; 120 and 12,000 are also import- 
ant periods, and 365 is a frequent, and 354 an occasional, 
substitute for 360. To these numbers, more or fewer 
ciphers are added, according to the grandcur or extray- 
agance of the notions entertained by the framers or 
adaptors of these legendary creations. 

_ Thus, for instance, the great cycle of China contains 
129,600 years, divided into 12 great months, each con- 
taining 10,800 years; and, of course, the four great sea- 
sons of such a year contain each 43,200 ordinary years, 
while each of its months contain three times 3,600 years.* 
The Persian cycle of the followers of Zoroaster contains 
12,000 years, and such also was the duration of one of 
the cycles of ancient Etruria referred to by Suidas,t 
120 Sari, or 432,000 years was the period contained in 
the antediluvian history of Chaldea, and this was also 
the measure of the Kali yuga of the Hindoo cycle, while 
the Maha yuga, or great age, contained 4,320,000 years, 
considered as 12,000 divine years, the Kalpa, or great 
cycle of all, containing 432,000,000 years.t And, finally, 
not to enter into superfluous details, the cycle of ancient 
Mexico contained 18,000 years and a fraction (18,028), 
as the ordinary year contained 18 months and a frac- 
tion (18, multiplied by 20, plus 5), while the great cycle 
of Egypt comprised 36,500, or 36,525 years, 25 times 
the ordinary cycle of 1,460, or 1,461 years, formed by 
the accumulation of the unallowed-for quarter day, in 
a year of 365 days only. 

These few facts will give a sufficient idea, for the 
moment, of the real character of the number 360, and 
of the mythic reason of its playing so important a part 
in the chronology of ancient Rome. 

* Livres Sacrés de l’Orient (Pantheon Litteraire), p. 20. 
t Lexicon, v. Tyrrhenia. 
¢ According to one authority. 

190 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

We must now give some evidence of the working of 
the great element 432, with its triplicate 1,296, and the 
reader will at once see that the only real difference be- 
tween the great mythic chronologies and these sober- 
looking periods of Roman story is that, in the one case, 
we have the intervals amplified by the addition of im- 
posing trains of ciphers, to speak in the language of 
modern numeration, while in the other these are rigidly 
lopped off as unsuitable to the facts of human expe- 
rience. The natural inference suggested by the preva- 
lence of such periods in any history is, that we have 
before us not genuine annals, but old mythic creeds, 
gradually criticised down into a semblance of realities, 

and ultimately mixed up with all that tradition or 
record had preserved of the real deeds of the nation. 
Criticised down, in fact, by those self-same processes of 
arbitrary assumption and metaphysical finessing, with 
which modern conservatism, in its often well-meant, but 
always most foolish, struggle with advancing science, 
is constantly defacing, perverting, and mutilating the 
grand old tales of remote antiquity. 

To return then to our main subject : it will be found, 
as regards the number 360, that, in the first cycle of 
Roman history, nearly all the divergencies of opinion, 
among the different ancient historians, lie between that 
number and its cyclical equivalent 365, and that of the 
two main dates assigned to the interval between the 
building of the city and the fall of Troy, the one is 
360, as already shown, and the other 432, as elabo- 
rately contended for by Dionysins of Halicarnassus, on 
the authority of Portius Cato, the tables of Eratos- 
thenes, and the chronology of the Alban kings.t 432 
years after the building of the city, occurred one of the 

os 

t Lib. 1., cap. 74. 

7 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 191 

greatest, calamities in the early annals of the staie, 
when the entire Roman army passed under the yoke of 
the Samnites ; 432 years was also the duration of the 
Republic, as measured from the expulsion of the kings 
to the deaths of Marius and Sylla, its principal des- 
troyers ; and it was likewise the interval during which 
the Temple of Janus stood constantly open, from the 
death of Numa, to the close of the First Punic War. 
This number, however, though it thus maintains its 
ground in special instances, is generally sacrificed to 
the period 360, the dominant element of the chrono- 
logy, but in medieval times it often comes into consider- 

able prominence. | 

We have seen that 360 years is the duration of the 
Empire as measured from the era of Actium to the 
dedication of Constantinople. It is also its duration 
as commencing with Julius Cesar, and the era of Phar- 
salia, B.C. 48, and coming: down to the death of Dio- 
clesian, the last of the supreme emperors in the purely 
Roman series. This event occurred in A.C. 312, and 
in this year Constantine, the founder of the new em- 
pire, entered Rome in triumph, and published edicts in 
favor of the Christians, of whom Dioclesian was the 
great persecutor. 

In like manner, the duration of the Empire, taken 
absolutely, that is, extended to the close of the West- 
ern Empire in A.C. 476, is similarly cyclical ; 476 of 
Christ is 1229 of Rome, according to the usual reck- 
onings, which range, for the building of the city, from 
the 4th year of the 6th to the Ist of the 8th Olympiad. 
But Timaus the Sicilian, referred to by Dionysius,t 
places the founding of Rome 38 years before the Olym- 
piads, which is 67 years before the Ist of the 8th. 

—— 

* Lib. I., cap. 74. 

io 
192 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

Now, 67 added to 1229 gives 1296, making the dura- — 
tion of the Roman dominion, in this sense, a great trip- — 
licate of three times 432 years, just as in another itis © 
a parallel triplicate of three times 360. And again, if 
we deduct from 1229, the first cycle of Rome, taken as 
365 years, we get, as the period from the destruction of — 
the city to the destruction of the Western Empire, 864 
years, twice 432 ; while, finally, 476 of Augustus, count- 
ing his reign, as many do, from the death of Julius, 
B. C. 44, is just 432 of Christ. It is manifest that such 
precise and manifold coincidences as these bear no re- 
lation to the accidents of genuine chronology, and are 
only possible in artificial schemes based upon common 
principles of adjustment. 

The elements of medieval chronology are so nume- 
rous and conflicting that it would be impossible, even — 
within far wider limits than those to which I now re- 
strict myself, to give any satisfactory account of the — 
cyclical combinations which everywhere present them- — 
selves in the latter section of the Roman annals; but — 
one or two illustrations of the manner in which con- 
flicting dates may not only be accounted for, but often 
also fully reconciled, by the application of these mythic 
data, will probably have some interest at the moment, 
as showing that these fictious combinations are by no 
means confined to the remoter history, but are equally — 
an inherent portion of medieval story. 

The destruction of Rome by Alaric, King of the_ 
Goths, is usually placed in A.C. 409, and its destruc: 
tion by Genseric, King of the Vandals, in A.C. 455, — 
The former date is 23 years less, and the latter 23 years — 
more than 432, and, as will presently be noticed, 23 
years is one of the rectifying numbers in medieval 
chronology ; 409 of Christ is 1162 of Rome, and i 
is twice 365 plus 432. 

ote 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 193 

Again : 1140 of Rome and 410, 425, and 426 A.C. 
are also dates of the capture of the city by Alaric; 
1144 is equal to 712 plus 432, and 712 is the date of 
the battle of Philippi, one of the natural starting-points | 
of the Augustan era; while 410 of Christ is 455 of the 
Julian era, as 425 of Christ is 455 of the ordinary Au- 
gustan era; 410, besides, differs 22 years from 432, 

which is the difference between the system of Marianus 

Scotus and the ordinary Dyonysian era, while the dif- 
ferences of the other two dates from 432 are trivial. 

Thus all these discrepancies of date accommodate 
themselves to determinate and important epochs, while 
most of them yield, with more or less of precision, the 
cyclical element 432. These interchanges, too, between 
409 and 455 seem plainly to imply that the two destruc- 
tions of Rome are but different versions of one story ; 
and, in point of fact, one of them is completely ignored 
by one set of writers, and the other by another. The 
British chronicles, universally we believe, ignore the 
destruction by Genseric, while some, at all events, of 
the Byzantine writers, equally ignore that by Alaric. 
Yet the British chronicles constantly synchronize the 
leading native events with Roman epochs, and especially 
emphasize the year 455 as that in which perished the 
last of the British kings, and in which the first of the 
Saxon invaders ascended the throne. 

These facts will sufficiently show the extent to which 
chronological discrepancies admit of reconciliation, but 
such reconciliations are, in the main, altogether fatal 
to the historic worth of the materials. Yet these are 
the results which constantly meet us in all departments 
of medieval chronology, as far as the matter has been 
investigated from the present point of view. Every- 
where,we find the leading events manifesting a marked 
tendency to fall into cyclical combinations, and often 

194 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

doing so with avsolute precision. Many of the coinci- 
dences are, no doubt, accidental, but others are syste- 
matic beyond all rational doubt, and if so, is it not ob- 
vious that these seeming histories but cover the vacuity 
which human forgetfulness has left in the story of an- 
cient times, or that they overlie, conceal, and distort, a’ 
more genuine record which, in part, may be still, per- 
haps, recoverable ? 

The learned reader who has been in the habit of look- 
‘ing at dates as they occur in our ordinary histories, or 
as they present themselves incidentally in more ancient 
Writings, will naturally be startled by the coincidences 
here pointed out, and naturally feel sceptical as to their 
genuineness. He does not find these repeated succes- 
sions of 360 and 1080, of 432 and 1296, on the surface 
of chronology, and he will, therefore, be inclined to 
fancy that the elements from which they are derived 
have been arbitrarily selected among conflicting dates. 
Such, however, is certainly not the case in the more im- 
portant instances given ; and where there is room for 
arbitrary selection the fact is either stated, or clearly 
implied in the very terms of our description. Had the 
Roman annals always dated, in all histories and chroni- 
cles, from one era—that of Rome, for instance—then 
these repetitions would be manifest, with occasional 
variations, even on the face of the history ; but when 
authorities differ as to the precise date of the starting- 
point, when, after the birth of Christ, the whole pre- 
vious reckoning is changed, sometimes into the Chris- 
tian era, variousiy reckoned, sometimes into the Impe- 
rial, viewed cither as Julian or Augustan, with various 
minor modifications, it is obvious tlat the cyclical 
period may really exist, and even in perfection, with- 
out being in any way graphically expressed in the or- 
dinary language of the chronology. It is only by a 

eae 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 195 

careful study, and comparison of different eras and 
systems of reckoning, that superficial discrepancies can 
be made to vanish, and the underlying cyclical periodi- 
city brought into clear view. 

That numerous and tantalizing discordances in dates 
everywhere present themselves in classical and medi- 
eval history, is obvious, but these discordances are far 
less the result of accident than would at first appear. 
The minor discrepancies, as just intimated, chiefly de- 
pend on different modes of estimating the starting-points 
of eras ; more considerable ones are often satisfactorily 
accounted for by supposing an unconscious confusion 
on the part of writers or transcribers between one era 
and another, while others again are found in the most 
precise accordance with the workings of different cycli- 
cal numbers. | , 

Thus the era of Rome may be viewed as commencing 
on the 11th of the Kalends of May, (April 21st.) on 
which day was commemorated the founding of the city, 
or on the preceding or succeeding first of January ; 
and according as one or the other is taken; a given 
event may fall in any one of three different years : and 
the same is true of many other eras. In the case of 
the Christian era the sources of ambiguity are especi- 
ally numerous and important, for under this term we 
haye four different eras included, that of the Incarna- 
tion, that of the Nativity, that of the Preaching, and 
that of the Passion. Here we have a source of confu- 
sion amounting to such considerable sums as thirty and 
thirty-three years, while even in the use of the vulgar, 
or Dionysian era, we are liable to an error of twenty- 
two or twenty-three years, as already intimated, owing 
to a theory adopted in the middle ages, and used by 
Marianus Scotus and his followers. 

Similar elements of confusion present themselves in 

196 PRE-ADAMITE MAN, 

the case of tlie Imperial era, which is sometimes dated 
from Julius, the actual founder of the empire, but mostly 
from the reign of Augustus, in whose person this new 
system of rule became a settled institution. The usual 
date of the Imperial era is the battle of Actium, in 
which Octavius, afterwards Augustus, finally triumphed 
over Anthony and Cleopatra, but other epochs in the 
life of this monarch are also occasionally selected, 
and, as a matter of course, most of them supply the 
minor elements of discrepancy already alluded to in 
the case of the era of Rome. We must, therefore, be 
prepared to expect fractional deviations from accu- 
racy in mythic coincidences, as well as in genuine 
dates. 

Two additional illustrations will bring this sketch 
to a natural conclusion, and show, besides, that cycli- 
cal combinations, and artificial chronological systems, 
are not’ matters which concern antiquity alone, but 
things which come down even to late medieval times. 

We have secn that one thousand and eighty years is 

the measure of purely Roman sway over the Republic 
and Empire; we have now to observe that one tlou- 
sand and eighty years has evidently been also viewed as 
the fitting duration of Roman dominion in its Hastern 
seat. 

The division of an empire into an Hastern and a 

Western, is placed, as we have seen, by varying au- — 

thorities, in 864 After Christ, under Valentinian and 
Valens, or in 395 A. C., under Honorius and Arca- 
dius; 364 A. C. may easily represent 365, and 365 of 
Christ is 395 of Augustus, so that these two dates may 
be altogether due to some confusion in the old authori- 
ties between the two eras, especially as there are many 
reasons for believing that the Augustan and Christian 
eras originally coincided in date. 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 197 

Constantinople fell under the power of the Turks in 
A. C. 1453, which, according to the ordinary dates, is 
2206 of Rome. This, from the division of the empire, 
gives 1089 and 1058, the former being nine years 
more, and the latter twenty-two less than 1080, and 
we have seen that twenty-two and twenty-three are 
rectifying periods in medieval history. And again, 
2206 of Rome is forty-six years more than twice 1080, 
and forty-five or forty-six years is the difference be- 
tween the Julian and Christian eras. In either case, 
then, we have 1080 years of dominion for Rome itself, 
and 1080 years of Hastern empire. There are conflict- 
ing systems at work, but they all bring out the cyclical 
coincidences. | 

Besides the destructions of Rome by Alaric and 
Genseric, another important calamity of the same kind, 
attributed to Totillas, king of the Goths, is placed in 
546, A. C. 1299 of Rome. This latter number is three 
years more than 1296, and it will be remembered that 
the ordinary reckoning of the Imperial, and conse- 
quently of the Christian era, is three years more than 
what has already been shown to be the true cyclical 
date of the empire. This event, therefore, really falls 
in 1296 of Rome, three times 482. 

Now, if we take the date of this destruction by 
Totillas, thus rectified to A. C. 548, and deduct it from 
1453, the era of the destruction of the Eastern empire, 
we get for the interval between the two catastrophes 
910 years, which is 46 years more than twice 432, and 
46 years, as ‘we have already seen, is the difference 
between the Julian and Christian eras. Thus while 
the general stream of the chronology is mainly based 
on the number 360, clear evidences of the working of 
the other great element are found both in remote 
and comparatively recent times; and while from the 

- 
198 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

foundation of the city to the advent of the Turks, we 
have two systems of 1080 years, so from the destruc- 
tion of Troy, to the same event, we have two systems 
of 1296, and most of their elements coincide with events | 
distinctly bearing the requirements of cyclical fable. 

Fyrom Troy to Rome, according to Dionysius, was 432 

years ; 432 years later the army was disgraced by the 

Samnites ; 432 years more only exceed by 16 years, 

even according to the usual reckonings, the era of the 

death of Domitian, the last of the twelve Cesars, a 

period presenting many striking characteristics of a 

mythic terminal epoch; then comes the catastrophe 

of Totillas giving a fourth 432, and, finally, a double 

period brings us to the fall of Constantinople. 

Can all this be simple accident? Five-and-twenty 
centuries of historic tradition, from Troy to Constanti- 
nople, from Achilles to the Turk, thus falling into the 
rank and file of cyclical arrangement, often with the 
precision of a mathematical formula! From Troy to 
Rome, from Rome to the Gauls, from the Gauls to the 
empire, always 360 years; 1080 for Rome, 1080 for 
Constantinople, 1080 for the consuls, 1080 for the 
ancient creed, 1080 for Christianity, now, in its turn, 
trampled upon by a new faith! and then an analogous 
set of coincidences with the element 432. If all this be 
accident, what shall we call intention? If it be inten- 
tion, what, then, is ancient history? For these coinci- 
dences do not apply to the Roman annals merely, but 
are equally presented by every ancient and medieval 
history which has been examined from the present 
point of view. There is surely enough, even in this 
first rude presentation of the facts, to fix attention, and — 
call for scrutiny and reconsideration. If chronology — 
be thus vitiated by mythic numbers, how vain the labor 
we bestow upon its rectifications and synchronisms | 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 199 

If antiquity have thus filed down its grand old cycles 
into dimensions suitable to the realities of ordinary 
existence, may it not likewise have exerted its inge- 
nuity in similarly reducing into human proportions the 
events and personages of those cycles? Or will any 
one, with those things before his eyes, be justified in 
rejecting the plain teachings of monumental facts, 
simply because they set aside the pretensions of chro- 
nological systems based upon dreams like these ? 

In studying nature, reverence should be the first of 
our feelings; in exploring human antiquity, the rever- 
ence of a modern is but manhood bowing to infancy. 
It is surely time for the world to remember that there 
is a sense in which yesterday is younger than to-day, 
and in which the “wisdom of antiquity” means little 
more than the prattle of childhood. | 

CHAPTER V. 

TEN THOUSAND YEARS OF ITALIC TRADITION, OR THE 
ERRORS AND ADJUSTMENTS OF THE ROMAN YEAR AND 
CALENDAR FROM ROMULUS TO POPE GREGORY. 

The history of the adjustments and aberrations of 
the Roman year and calendar, presents a series of facts 
of such curious and important interest, and one so inti- 
mately bearing on the topics discussed in another chap- 
ter, that I feel desirous of bringing it to the notice of 
my readers, for the same reasons that induced me to 
depart from strict. regularity of treatment in the former 
case, 

On a recent occasion I have endeavored to trace the 
gradual formation of the Roman year, in so far as the 
names of its months are concerned, and though I do 
not by any means pretend to eave given the precise 

200 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

history of those names, still the general plan of forma- 
tion, the laws of increasing complexity in the divisions 
and symbolism of the year, may be fully relied upon. 
since this plan is but an individual expression of 

arrangements pervading the whole of antiquity, and | 

placed beyond the reach of doubt by the revelations 
of mythonomy. That the primeval year of tradition 
was one of four solar divisions only, and so continued 
for a long series of ages, is a fact which admits of the 
clearest proof, for the oldest mythic traditions are ex- 
pressly based upon it, and owe their very origin to the 
pittorial symbulism employed for its representation ; 
and we know that these traditions are the oldest, from 
the fact that all others acknowledge their priority in 
various ways, and only become intelligible in propor- 
tion as they are understood; indeed, the very first myth 
which yielded to analysis, provéd, alsa, to be the basis 
of the whcle superstructure, the fountain head of the 
entire stream of mythology. 

Upon similar evidence—-an evidence infinitely 
stronger than any amount of direct testimony, since it 
is an evidence of demonstration—we also know that 
this form of year was finally succeeded by one of five 
divisions, then by one of seven, and subsequently by 
others of eight, nine, ten, twelve, &c. 

In the patch-work character of the Roman months, 
considered as a series of names, we have seen some 
curious evidences of most of these changes, evidences 
supported by snatches of tradition, all the more reliable 
from the fact that their transmitters totally misunder- 
stood their character, and therefore did not invent 
them. They merely gave the best expression they 
could to current legends or fragments of legends, or 
sought to explain by hypothetical reasoning traditional 
usages which had lost their true import. 

~—— a a 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN, 201 

We know that the four fundamental: names, Mar. 
tius, Aprilis, Maius and Junius, exactly correspond, 
both as to name and sequence, and to some extent also. 
as to actual symbolism, with the requirements of the 
primary form of year, and with one special presenta- 
tion of the planetary series, and that only as a series 
of four could all these conditions have been complied 
-with. This conjunction of facts gives a vast antiquity, 
if not to the four names themselves, at all events to the 
arrangements which they express, and absolutely nega- 
tives the idea of such arrangements being made in the 
-era to which tradition refers them: Roman history 
has given us the legends of the Roman race, and these 
legends, however recent in their ultimate forms, are 
extremely ancient in their primary aspects, and this is 
what we have here to consider. As matters of historic 
faith, these legends are, for the most part, beneath con- 
tempt, notwithstanding the infinite pains hestowed 
upon them by writers anxious to rationalize them, and 
thus reconcile credulity with common sense; but as 
wrecks of the past, as fossils of ancient thought, as 
materials for science to work upon, these same absurdi- 
ties become serious and important truths, and when 
diligently studied and compared, throw a marvelous 
light upon the darkness of antiquity. We shall here 
regard them under this two-fold aspect. We shall see 
them, as history, leading the narrators and critics into 
endless and most ridiculous absurdities; and, on the 
other hand, we shall see them as science, instantly 
falling into order and consistency, and yielding mean- 
ings which have no drawback but that of being sub- 
versive of existing opinion. 

We first learn from the traditions that the Roman 
year received its original form from Romulus, the first 
of the seven kings, and that it consisted of only ten 

5 

202 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

months ;* lunar months according to Ovid, but accord- 
ing to otherst composed alternately of 30 and 31 days, 
making in all 304 days. Plutarch differs from the 
other authorities, in assigning 12 months and 360 days 

to the year of Romulus. This year, he says, had neither 

measure nor order, some months consisting of fewer 
than 20 days, while some were stretched to 35, and 
others even to more. People had no idea of the differ- 
ence between the annual course of the sun and that of 
the moon, and only laid down this position, that the 
year consisted of 360 days !t 

Accounts so comectiigs and so individually incon-. 

sistent, do not represent the ordinary discrepancies of 
a common tradition, but rather inferences deduced 
from different materials, or from common materials 
viewed under different aspects. These months of 35 or 
more days, for instance, are just the sort of months to 
be expected in a solar year of 10 divisions, where ten 
times 36 would make the technical year of 360 days so 
general in remote antiquity, while these months of 20 
days and more, seem to be but a distorted expression of 
those supplementary months, occurring at the end of 
regular cycles, by means of which the civil year was 
periodically brought into harmony with the natural 
‘year. Thus, at the end of the Mexican cycle of 52 
years, there was an intercallary month of 13 days made 
up of the accumulation of the uncorrected quarter days. 
The civil year consisted of 360 days, divided into 18 
‘months of 20 days each, 5 days being intercallated an- 
nually, and the quarter day being allowed to accumu- 
late for 52 years, when it amounted to a month of the 

* Ovid, Fasti, i., v. 27—Censorinus, cap. 20. Macrobius, Saturnalia, 
cap. Y2—Solinus, cap. i. 

‘" Censorinus, Macrobius, Solinus, Ibid. 

t Life of Numa. 

Cn 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 203 

same length as those of the sacerdotal years. These 
arrangements were all based on technical conveniences 
and symbolic associations, and so far from being the 
patchwork of blundering ignorance, they exhibit the 
most precise and ingenious contrivances. They formed 
part of a cycleof four great divisions, representing the 
four seasons and the four ages of the great cosmic cycle, 
each division containing thirteen years, under the pre- 
sidency, so to speak, of one of four traditional symbols, 
Tochtli, the Rabbit, Acatl, the Cane, Tecpatl, the Flint 
(arrow-head,) and Calli, the House (or temple.) The 
five supplementary days were not considered as belong- 
_ing to the year, but as an interval between two distinct 
years. They were Nemontemi, empty days, unlucky 
days ; nothing of consequence was done upon them. 
They were an exact counterpart, in fact, of the Egyp- 
tian Hpagomence. ‘Thus there were four divisions like 
those of the great cycle, each containing thirteen years, 
like the thirteen days of the sacerdotal year, with five 
superadded days, in some sense recalling the five divi- 
sions of the month of twenty days, which were also re- 
presented by the same Tochtli, Acatl, Tecpatl, Calli, and 
a supplementary month of thirteen days, representing 
both the thirteen years of the cyclical divisions, and > 
the ordinary months of the sacerdotal year.* 

In presence of these adjustments so ingenious, elabor- 
ate, and perfect in their way, invented, or at all events 
thoroughly understood, and rigidly maintained for ages, 
by an American and semi-civilized race, what are we to 
say of those absurdities transmitted to us by the clas- 
' sical writers, and gravely re-echoed by modern commen- 

* These curious adjustments will be found described in most of the 
' principal works on Mexican history and antiquities, especially by 
Clavigero, Storia Antica del Messico ; Humboldt, Vues des Cordilliéres; 
Prescott, Conquest of Mexico, &c., &c. 

204 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

tators, relative to the impossible ignorance and blun- 
derings of the framers, correctors, guardians, and users 
of the Roman year and calendar? Romulus, we are 
told, was so ignorant of the length of the year, that 
he made his year consist of ten months of thirty or 
thirty-one days each. The Albans had similar years, 
and some other nations had years of six, four, three, or 
even two lunar months only! Numa, in introducing; 
his lunar year, made it consist of three hundred and 
fifty-five days instead of three hundred and fifty-four, 
simply because odd numbers were lucky, yet in managing 
his biennial intercallations he overlooked this added 
day, and made his intercallary month too long, and 
then to couceal his blunder from the nation, he had re- 
course to a clumsy periodic contrivance for rectifying 
it; but after his death the Pontiffs so managed the 
matter that they made the year sometimes longer and 
sometimes shorter, occasionally introducing an entire 
month when nobody expected it, so that by the time 

Julius Cesar became Pontifex Maximus, the year was — 

in discordance with the seasons to the amount of two 
months. These are some of the absurdities offered to 
us as history, absurdities which would require the 
Roman people to have been a nation of slaves and 
idiots, instead of one of high-spirited and intelligent 
men. } 

A year of ten lunar months has no conceivable ad- 
vantage, while it has all sorts of inconveniences ; and 
to attribute its institution to the gross ignorance of a 

Huropean nation in that period of the world, and in an ~ 
ancient seat of civilization, and ruled by a man who, — 
even according to the hypothesis of the history itself, — 

was a great and enlightened ruler, the descendant of a 
long line of civilized kings, the contemporary and im-_ 
mediate neighbor of the advanced intelligence of Greece 

. 

: 
| 
| 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 205 

and Etruria, is altogether preposterous. No nation, 
much less a civilized one, can remain ignorant of the 
true length of the year, within a moderate fraction, 
nor use any form of year not regularly and frequently 
adjusted to the natural one. .It is thé natural year 
alone which regulates the entire business of life ; agri- 
culture, commerce, war, all receive the laws of their 
periodicity from the sequence and variations of the 
seasons, and the prospects of the rude hunter, or no- 
madic herdsman are as much involved in the precision 
of return of annual phenomena as those of the civilized 
farmer, speculator, or warrior. Nor is the problem to 
be solved a difficult one till we descend into fractional 
details. The moon gives a convenient divisor, and a 
few rough averages, extending over a moderate number 
of years, would soon point out the number of the super- 
fluous days. To an intelligent nation even the quarter 
day would not be long in revealing itself. The addi- 
tion of a day in four years, would amount to a month 
in one hundred and twenty years, or to an entire season 
in three hnndred and sixty, and a nation with a fixed 
calendar and its apparatus of festivals and ceremonies, 
would soon be made conscious of an error of this 
amount. Imagine a nation celebrating the commence- 
ment of the spring, the budding of the trees, the open- 
ing of the flowers, and the loves of bird and beast: 
imagine it chanting snatches of ancient songs in which 
its forefathers spoke of the labors of agriculture, or 
the pleasures of the chase, or the dangers and glory of 
war in connection with these phenomena, and then sup- 
pose that these songs have to be sung and these festivals 
celebrated wlth all their apparatus of religious rites 
and social amusements, year after year, in the depths 
of winter, with the trees shivering leafless in the blast, 
the rivers, bound in ice, forest and plain in a robe of 

206 -PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

snow, and bird and beast struggling only for food and 
shelter ; would not the contrast between Present and 
Past be vividly impressed upon the attention, and con- 
tinue to excite curiosity, and to demand a solution, 
until the truth was at last reached, a due correction 
made, and the calendar again placed as of old, in har- 
mony with the seasons ? 

But in the case before us, there is far more than this 
to be said. At the era which history assigns to Romu- 
lus, Italy had been for thousands of years a center of 
civilization. Three great strata of Cyclopean structures 
reared their venerable ruins upon its soil, marking the 
sites of. perished cities, telling the tale of vanished 
greatness and wide-spread empire, and almost justify- 
ing the popular boast that the progenitors of the race 
had been gods and demigods. No rude gap breaks the 
sequence of these monuments : nothing tells that super- 
vening barbarisms had ever done more for eclipsing 
civilization, than subsequent barbarisms have done. 
The inference is, rather that even when power had 
passed away, intelligence and its acquisitions were still 
preserved, in some form or other, clouded and diminished 
doubtless, but not destroyed. 

At the era in question, Etruria was the great Italic 
power; her dominions embraced the greater part of 
northern Italy ; on the south, they were in the immedi- 
ate vicinity of the Roman territory ; and we know by 
direct evidence, still better than by tradition, what 
Etruscan civilization amounted to. In the painted — 
chambers of the sepulchres of this race, we see a 
polished people surrounded by all the appliances of an — 
advanced ancient civilization. Wesee them at their 
banquets elegantly attired, reclining on couches, waited 
upon by their attendants, served in those graceful cups 
and vases, whick even at the present day are justly re 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. , 207 

garded as models of elegance, as well in their forms as 
in the outline paintings which decorate them. We also 
see them witnessing the athletic sports of wrestling, 
boxing, and equestrianism, and in various other scenes, 
civil and religious, all bespeaking an advanced social 
organization, and no mean measure of acquired know- 
ledge. They had arts and a literature ; for there are 
their implements, their arms, vases, statuettes, paintings, 
and written characters, alluding in various ways to an 
elaborate mythology. They had the most intimate re- 
lations with Greece, for the legends of Greece are 
depicted on these graceful vases, and often given with 
the names of the personages in Greek letters. Nor 
were they ignorant of Egypt—as a commercial nation 
they could not be—for in some few instances these 
sepulchral frescoes plainly remind us of the Egyptian 
style. In a word, when we read early Roman history 
in presence of these facts, the utter absurdity of many 
of its statements becomes at once transparent. 

‘The writers on the calendar, then, have given us 
facts of which they knew not the import, and reasons 
of which we need not dispute the paternity. These 
years of ten, and six, and four, and three, and even 
two months, are simply the dying echoes of perished 
solar adjustments, and the only wonder is, that even 
an echo of such long-superseded systems should have 
; been heard in classic times. 

In view of these explanations, we can easily under- 
stand these contradictory and inconsistent statements 
of Plutarch on the one hand, and of Ovid and Censo- 
rinus on the other. A year of 360 days, with some of 
its months containing thirty-five days and more, and 
others twenty and less, evidently refers to a solar year, 
not, 1s Plutarch savs, of twelve, but of ten divisions. 
Such a year would naturally have equal months of 

* 

208 , PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

thirty-six days, while the supplementary five days would 
every four years amount to an intercallary month of 
twenty days, or to one of twenty-one days, if we take 
into account the extra quarter day. Analogous results 

-,! = | 

might be produced by other combinations, but this is a — 

simple and natural adjustment, and fully meets the re- 
quirements of the tradition, the statements of which 
are of too vague and general a form to demand a literal 
interpretation. 

On the other hand, a year with alternating months 
of thirty and thirty-one days, evidently means one of 
twelve, not of ten divisions; in fact, a year of three 
hundred and sixty-five days, like that subsequently at- 
tributed to Cesar. Thus Plutarch ought to have spo- 
ken of a year of ten months, and these authorities of 
a year of twelve, and the two accounts would then have 
been more self-consistent; but as they stand, it is as if 
two traditions had been beheaded, and the heads re- 
placed on the wrong shoulders. 

The year of Romulus, as it has been called, should 
have begun with March, and ended with December, as 
this is the tenth month, counting from March. But the 
statements given in our last chapter make it evident 
that all we have a right to conclude from such a tradi- 
tion is, that a year of twelve divisions, beginning with 
the vernal equinox, and the month of March was super- 
added to a year of eight, beginning with January and 
the winter solstice, and the account of Plutarch exactly 
meets the requirements of this superadition, when we 
substitute twelve for ten as the number of the months. 
The order of these syStems has evidently been inverted, 
for the months of January and February are obviously 
of older date in the Roman calendar, than those of 

September, October, November, and December; other-— 
wise, how should the former months exist in the calen-— 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 209 

dar of the Romano-Britons, which contains no trace of 
the latter? Thus it is the year of seven divisions 
which represent the regal period of Roman history, 
the year of eight the Republican, and the year of 
twelve the Imperial. But in this view the record 
ceases to be anything beyond an amalgamation of zodi- 
acal myths, and other like materials, mingled with lead- 
ing events of real occurrence, and gradually criticized 
and rationalized, as itis termed, into a quasi-history. 
And this is the view that will meet us at every turn in 
the course of these inquiries, until it be ultimately 
placed beyond the reach of doubt. 

The next step in the tradition informs us that the 
year of Romulus being found erroneous and inconve- 
venient, was reformed by Numa, the second of the 
kings, who made it lunar, and added to it the months 
of January and February, or rather February and 
January, as February is stated to have come between 
December and January, as the last month of the year, 
January, being now made the first. To this tradition 
I have sufficiently alluded already. 

The year of Numa, then, as lunar, ought to have 
consisted of three hundred and fifty-four days, with an 
alternating intercallation of twenty-two and twenty- 
three days every second year ; but Numa, to make it of 
more fortunate omen, added an extra day, making it 
consist of three hundred and fifty-five days. It would 
seem, however, that he had not the good fortune to 
perceive that, in adding his extra day, he was bound to 
subtract it from the intercallation ; so that towards the 
close of his reign, he had to introduce a contrivance 
for getting rid of it, and not having the honesty to con- 
fess his error, and his subjects being too stupid and 
ignorant to perceive it, he so managed matters as to in- 
vent a cycle of twenty-four years, in the latter inter- 

’ 

“210 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 
: 

callations of which he regularly dropped the superflu- 
ous days, which were always accumulated in the early 
ones. Thus, according to the commentators, he killed 
two birds with one stone, concealing his blunder, while 
removing its consequences. And all this trouble and 
complexity for a matter which a schoolboy could have _ 
settled, and about a blunder which an ordinary school- . 
boy would have been ashamed to make! In fact, the — 
commentators are in a worse predicament with the — 
calendar of Numa, than even with that of Romulus. | 

To argue against the possibility of such occurrences 
as these, seems like an insult to the reader’s judgment, 
yet they are related by the classical writers, and re- 
peated by modern commentators with the most earnest 
gravity, and without the faintest suspicion of their in- 
herent absurdity. In the actual world, we think it a 
lucky occurrence when kings and legislators are even 
up to the highest level of the intelligence and learning 
of their age; as to their going immensely beyond it, it 
is an event which we never contemplate, even in the 
case of the most distinguished monarchs ; but here, it 
is Romulus, and Numa, and Cesar, and Augustus, and 
so on, who know everything and do everything, while 
their subjects merely look on with stupid wonder, and 
accept the letter of their arrangements without any 
consciousness of their spirit. 

The adjustment of the calendar was a matter which 
concerned every intelligent man in the nation, and the 
adjustment in question was sufficiently simple to be 
universally understood. A man who knew the length 
of the lunar and solar years, and expressly added a 
day to the former for the sake of good fortune, could 
not have forgotten the necessity of allowing for that 
day, when settling his intercallation ; or had he done — 
so, those about him, who must have been cognizant of 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. ide 

all the facts, as well as of their motives, for the whole 
matter was necessarily patent and public, would natu- 
rally have pointed out the error. The whole nation 
could not have made the same oversight, still less could 
they have failed to perceive that the later arrange 
ments were intended asa correction of the initial error ; 
nor could they have failed to be indignant at the absur- 
dity and insult implied in a cycle, which constantly re- 
peated in its earlier arrangements an error which had 
as often to be corrected towards its close; and all 
this for the petty vanity of concealing an oversight, 
and with a dishonesty which, for such a motive, could 
cheat and inconvenience an entire nation; and this, 
too, done by the good and venerable and enlightened 
_ Numa! Such are the inconsistencies which credulous 
chroniclers and equally credulous critics are perpetu- 
ally creating or repeating, in their attempts to amal- 
gamate incongruous facts, and explain by conjecture 
what they cannot touch by analysis. And yet, many 
will deem it an impertinent presumption in a modern 
to drag into the light of day such venerable follies. 
The calendar of Numa, though, according to hy- 
pothesis, finally adjusted to the year of 365 days and a 
quarter, did not, however, keep in harmony with the 
seasons. In the time of Cesar, the latter were in ad- 
vance of the civil year to the amount of 67 days, and 
the correction of this error is stated to have been the 
object of his reformation. If we consult the historians 
as 10 the cause of this error, we get nothing but gra- 
tuitous and contradictory statements like those already 
alluded to. The charge of the calendar and the man- 
agement of the biennial intercallation was, we are told, 
in the hands of the College of Pontiffs, and the Pontifex 
Maximus of the day added or curtailed, inserted or 
omitted, at his pleasure, sometimes a portion, sometimes 

212 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

the whole of the intercallation, either because the times 
were prosperous or the reverse, or because he wished to 
spite or favor some particular magistrate, by shortening 
or lengthening the period of his office, the nation all 
the while knowing nothing at all about the matter. - 
And all this is gravely uttered relative to a people, like 
the old Romans, free, restless, clear-seeing, manly, and 
always engaged in ~yolitical antagonisms; and relative to 
an intercallation which a child might understand ; which 
took place every second year, generation after genera- 
tion, and century after century ; which always amounted 
to twenty-two or twenty-three days, and that every man 
in the country was obliged to take into special account 
in the arrangement of his affairs. The ancient nations 
of America could keep in perfect order calendars im- 
measurably more elaborate and intricate than that of 
Rome, and yet we must delieve that in this great focus 
of Kuropean intelligence and independence, the Pontiff 
of the day could lengthen or shorten the year, at his 
pleasure, for such motives as those just stated, and with- 
out senate or people being in the least the wiser! The 
Pontifex Maximus could as easily have stolen, unper- 
ceived, a letter from the alphabet as a day from the — 
calendar. 

The calendar of a people is part and parcel of the 
religion of a people, part and parcel of the daily life of 
anation. To disturb it in the least is to derange all 
festivals and interfere with all business concerns, and a 
chief Pontiff is one of the most unlikely persons in the 
world to trifle with religion or established usage, and 
the republican Romans, as described in history, were 
the least likely people to permit such interference. 

We have only to consider the opposition made al- 
most everywhere to the introduction of the Gregorian 
rectification to see how impossible was the occurrence 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 213 

of such tamperings as those in question. This correc- 
tion dropped 11 days in one vear, so as to bring the 
equinoxes and solstices to their ancient position in the 
calendar ; but in doing this it necessarily disturbed all 
chronological calculations, and evoked all the antagon- 
isms of party spirit. Catliolic countries, for the most 
part, readily adopted it as an arrangement decreed by 
the head of their church, but it met with the utmost op- 
position in the Protestant States. Its introduction into 
England was resisted for nearly two centuries, nor has 
Russia even yet accepted it. A recent writer well de- 
scribes the inconveniencies occasioned by this change, 
necessary as it was in other respects : 

“ A measure, of which the effect was to overturn the 
long established landmarks of time, and to substitute 
for them others, new and altogether strange to tradition 
and use, could not be supposed to pass without exciting 
many reclamations among persons of all classes from 
the peer to the peasant. Personal feelings were excited 
at the unceremonious perturbation of birth-days and of 
marriage anniversaries. Religious exasperation was 
produced by the arbitrary transposition of the most 
solemn festivals. Even the movable feasts already 
surrounded with some confusion, became, for the mo- 
ment, confusion worse confounded. Political celebra- 
tions and the dates of historical events shared in the 
general disturbance.’”* 

And yet the writer of these lines follows, mechani- 
cally, in the track of his predecessors when speaking of 
the year of Numa. 

“The supplementary month called Mercedonius,” he 
remarks, “had been the subject of constant maltreat- 
ment by the Pontiffs, having been abridged and extend- 
ed in the most capricious and arbitrary manner, so as 
completely to derange the position of the seasons, rela- 

tive to the commencement and close of the year.” 
(p. 162.) 

* Lardner’s Museum of Science, No. 64, p. 172. 

214 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

And all this without the shadow of necessity or util- 
ity, for petty party or even individual purposes, and by 
the very guardian of traditional usages! done, too, in 
the face of conflicting factions, or worse still, done 
without any man among an intelligent, and, in later 
times, an enlightened people being, in the least, aware 
of the cheat ! 

But the reader does not yet comprehend the full 
measure of absurdity implied in these random state- 
ments. February appears to have been for a long se- 
ries of ages the month of the intercallations, and judg- 
ing from the placing of the supplementary day in the 
Julian calendar, as well as from the terminal associa- 
tions implied in the feasts of the Terminalia and Regi- 
fugium, the place of the intercallary month, like that 
of the intercallary day, was between the 23d and 24th 
of February. Every second year, then, these two dates 
had to be separated by an entire month of twenty-two — 
or twenty-three days. We will suppose this separation 

to have taken place last year; this year, consequently, ._ 

the people expect to commemorate the flight of their 
kings on the day after the Terminalia, but just as they 
are thinking of these matters, and making their prepa- 
rations accordingly, an order comes from the Pontifex 
Maximus directing that the intercallation shall take 
place as usual. Would not the response to such an or- 
der be the universal cry “ We intercallated last year ?” 
Could an entire people forget such a fact? Or know 
nothing about the matter, as the historians would 
phrase it? Or, if the Pontiff pretended to have rea- 
sons for an irregular intercallation, would not these 
reasons be demanded and canvassed by a people like 
the old Romans? 

The result would be the same at whatever period of 
the year the intercallation was made, for the Roman 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 215 - 

calendar was full of festivals. What should we say at 
the present day if assured that the Archbishop of Paris, 
in France, or the Pope in Italy, were accustomed to 
intercallate slyly, from time to time, some twenty-two 
or twenty-three days between a certain Saturday and 
the succeeding Sunday, or rather say between Good 
Friday and Easter Sunday, or between the 24th of De- 
cember and Christmas Day, or between the 31st of 
‘January and New Year’s Day, no one but himself being 
the wiser? Or suppose, that in America, the Secre- 
tary of the Interior, to spite Mr. Welles, and oblige 
Gen. Fremont, were to lengthen the year by twenty- 
three days, just when Congress was about to dissolve, — 
or some important debate to come on! Let any of 
these things be fancied, and the reader will understand 
‘the supreme absurdity of these historical statements. 
Every day in the Roman year had a particular name; 
every month wus divided into three parts, by the 
Calends, Ides, and Nones, and every day on which one 
of these did not fall was either the first before them, or 
the second, third, fourth, and so on, before them. It is 
plain, then, that to displace or misname a Roman day, 
would be just the same thing as, with us, to put a Sun- 
day before a Saturday, or ‘separate Tuesday and Wed- 
nesday by some such interval as Baldursday, or Niwrds- 
7 et . 

And now we come to the climax of this chapter of 
asserted blunderings and tamperings. The calendar 
of Numa, we are told, was reformed by Julius Cesar, 
ata period when it was in discord with the seasons to 
the amount of sixty-seven days. Cesar substituted the 
solar for the lunar reckoning, and made the year con- 
sist of 365 days, distributed as in modern times, while 
the extra quarter-day was allowed for by intercallating 
one day in every four years, between the 5th and 6¢h 

216 | PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

of the Calends of March, the 23d and 24th of February. 
And to bring back the festivals into accordance with 
the seasons, he made one special year consist of 445 
days, being 365 for the year itself, the intercallary 
month of twenty-three days then due, and two months 
of thirty-three and thirty-four days each, being the 
amount of the aberration just spoken of—in all fifteen 
months and 445 days. This anomalous year was called 
“the year of Confusion.” 

Now the year of 365 days and a quarter, had been ~ 

known for ages in Egypt: it must equally have been 
known to the Romans, for the cycle of Numa took cog- 
nizance of it. Besides, had it not been allowed for in 
the intercallations, the seasons would have been con- 
stantly, and comparatively speaking, rapidly receding 
on the calendar, as in Egypt, at the rate of a month in 
120 years, a fact which could not have been left unre- 
corded among a people possessing such records as the 
Romans possessed, and which, nevertheless, has left no 
impression on the traditions, but, on the contrary, all 
the recorded aberrations of the Roman Calendar have 
been in one invariable direction, and that the opposite 
of the one in question. The seasons have always been 
in advance of the calendar, not the calendar in advance 
of the seasons. Yet in the face of these evidences, 
positive and negative, we are gravely told that the en- 
tire Roman Empire blundered for six-and-thirty years 
in reference to this very plain matter, nay, that they 
even contrived to misunderstand the simple numerical 

phrase, one day in every four years, and, while fancy- — 

ing themselves to be complying with it, were actually 
intercallating one day in every THREE years /* 

Cesar died the year after his rectification of the 

—_— 

* Macrobius, 1. i., c. 14; Solinus, c. 3; Pliny, 1. xviii, c. 25; Sue 
tonius, Life of Octavius, c, xxxi 

Ma. ae 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 217 

calendar, and though he was assisted by the Egyptian 
Philosopher, Sossigenes, and might naturally be sup- 
posed to have fully explained to all concerned, and 
especially to his subordinates in the College of Pon- 
tines, the nature of his new arrangements, yet we are 
told that his successor in the Pontificate managed to 
blunder in the manner stated. The apology for this 
_ blunder is thus expressed in the little work already 
quoted : 

The mistake is known to have arisen thus—in Roman 
counting, every fourth is our third, 

| 123 4 12 
A,B, 0, D, E, F, G, H, J, J, K, &e. 
123 4 123 4 

“Livy describes the cycle of 19 years as one which 
begins every twentieth year.” (P. 164.) 

Now the Romans must indeed have been a strange 
people if every fourth with them is a third with us, and 
it is somewhat singular that we have not had more 
specimens of their doings in this new style of arithme- 
tic. -But no; it was not the Romans who blundered, 
but the historians and critics, modern and ancient, who 
have recorded facets which they did not understand, 
and invented absurd reasons where they ought to have 
confessed ignorance. This “ fourth year incipient,” as 
others have expressed it, is a real third, and can only 
be called a fourth once in a series, unless indeed a man 
be nearly idiotic on the point of numbers, or have his 
head bewildered by a theory ; for unfortunately a head 
full of a false theory, even if placed on the shoulders of 
a philosopher, may think and speak any amount of non- 
sense on the subject of that theory. 

A Frenchman calls a week of seven days huit jours, 
because he includes the octave Sunday; but he does 
not call a fortnight seize jours, but quinze jours, fifteen, 

218 PRE-ADAMIYE MAN. 

not sixteen days ; neither does a musician when speak- 
ing of octaves, count sixteen notes in two octaves. 
twenty-four in three, thirty-two in four, and so on; but 
he gives either fourteen, twenty-one, and twenty-eight, 
as the nnmbers, or fifteen, twenty-two, and twenty-nine, 
just as he implies the repetition or otherwise of the oc- 
tave note; and as to this illustration from Livy, it is a 
very unfortunate one, for it tells the reverse of what 
the writer meant by it. Of course the cycle of nine- 
teen years begins every twentieth year ;- had Livy made 
it begin every nineteenth, the reference would have 
been in point. 

Historians and commentators usually speak of the 
single city of Rome, as if it were everything, and all 
the rest of the empire a mere passive, powerless mass. 
In the present case it is Rome ouly that is thought of 
in connection with this intercallation, and the Pontifex 
Maximus of the day is the only perscu who has to make 
the intercallation, or is supposed to understand any- 
thingy about it. The historians, forget for the moment, 
that the Julian rectification was an enormous innova- 
tion on the ancient usages, permanently distributing ten 
days among the months, introducing an intercallary day 
every fourth year, instead of the intercallary month of 
Numa every second year, and making one year—the 
year of confusion, consist of fifteen months and four 
hundred and forty-five days. Every man in the empire 
was personally interested in a change like this; every 
intelligent man in the empire must have been familiar 
with its nature, causes, and concomitants. Rome at 
that era was the great focus of European — nay, of Mun- 
dane civilization ; if must have held representatives of 
all the subject races, and of all the States in amity with 
it, and its intellectual classes must have been familiar 
with the corresponding institutions of all the enligh- 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN, 219 

tened nations around them. Precise orders relative to 
the change of system, the year of confusion, and the in- 
tercallation, must have been sené to all parts of the em- 
pire, wherever the State had a soldier or commerce a 
representative. It was not the Pontiff Lepidus alone 
who had to give an additional day to the month of Feb- 
ruary every four years; but this had to be done in 
every temple and office in the empire, and by every in- 
telligent man who happened to have ears and eyes, or 
any business arrangements with his neighbor. The 
blunder of Lepidus, therefore, to have been effectual, 
must have been made spontaneously and simultaneously 
over the entire empire. Is it not manifest that the at- 
tempt to carry out such a blunder, even in a single in- 
stance, would have made the unlucky Pontiff the laugh 
ing-stock of the whole Roman world? Here then, ob- 
viously, is another of those cases in which an important 
fact has been utter.y stultified and misunderstood, be- 
cause its true explanation is irreconcileable with the 
history which records it. 

The next time we hear of any error in the calendar 
is at the period of the Nicene Council in A. ©. 325 or 
330. It was then found that the vernal equinox had 
advanced from the 25th of March to the 21st, which 
occasioned irregularities in the celebration of Easter. 
The Council fixed the equinox to the 21st, but the equi- 
nox, nevertheless, would not stay there. It still ad- 
vanced, until it had gained ten other days, when its 

_ course was finally checked by the Gregorian rectifica- 
tion, introduced A. C. 1582, but, as already noticed, 
not adopted in England till 1752, it having required 
more than a century and a half of discussion before our 
sagely conservative ancestors could persuade themselves 

to accept of common sense from the Pope. We laugh 
at them for this, of course ; but we ourselves are all 

eS 

220 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

the while enacting similar absurdities, for the amuse- 
ment of our grand-children. 

And now we come to the denouement of this ee 
which, whether to call farce or tragedy, we know not, 
for it has its sad, as well as its ridiculous aspects. We 
hear not of the tamperings of Pontiffs, or of the stu- 
pidity of peoples in connection with these latter rectifi- 
cations, although the year went wrong, and went wrong 
in the old direction, and without a shadow of difference 
in the results—but then, in this last case of the series, 
men had found out a good reason for the fact, and, 
therefore, had no occasion to beat about for a bad one, 
and in the case immediately preceding, though no such 
reason was known, yet the Pontiffs of those times were 
the early Christian Fathers, who, of course, could not 
tamper; while the peoples of those times were the 
Faithful of the Church, who, of course, could not be 
- stupid ; and so the chroniclers, and historians, and 
commentators, and critics, having no good reason to 
offer, for once held their peace, and gave none. But 
Pagans were not so reverent. ‘lhey looked upon their 
ancesters: as men, not as religionists, and, therefore, 
when they thought them stupid, they said so. 

And why had the calendar been thus getting into 
disorder since the days of Augustus? Simply because 
the civil year of three hundred. and sixty-five days 
six hours, is eleven minutes and 10.46 seconds longer 
than the mean solar year, and the latter, consequently, 
was continually advancing on the calendar, at the rate 
of a day in about one hundred and twenty-nine years. 
Here is a perfectly satisfactory answer. ‘The er- 
ror was inherent in the calendar; it wanted nothing 
but time for its development: one thousand five hun- 
dred and eighty-two years were allowed it, and the 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. YMA 

minutes grew into fourteen days, without any aid from 
tamperings or stupidities. 

But this error was inherent in the Roman year, from 
first to last ; in the Imperial as in Christian times, in 
the Republican as in the Imperial, in the Regal as in 
the Republican—from Romulus to Pope Gregory. And 
has it not left its footprints on tradition? Five great 
re-adjustments ; sixty-seven days gained by the time of 
Cesar, three others by the time of Augustus, four more 
by the time of the Nicene Council, ten additional ones 
by the era of Pope Greg 
multiplied by one hundred and twenty-nine, give ten 
thousand eight hundred and thirty-six years of recorded 
Italic tradition! And this, probably, since the intro- 
duction of the year of eight divisions; leaving un- 
touched the depths of antiquity implied in the areas 
years of seven, five, and four divisions. 

The reader no longer requires to wonder at the non- 
senses uttered by ancients and moderns, relative to the 

adjustments and aberrations of the ancient Roman year — 

and calendar. How were they to recognize this grand 
sweep of ages in a history of some seven or éight cen- 
turies? eight thousand six hundred and forty-three 
years between Numa and Cxsar; three hundred and 
eighty-seven years between Julius and Augustus! How 

could they dream of facts like these? Will the reader 

himself receive them even when thus emphatically an- 

nounced and explained ? or will he not, rather than re-__ 
ceive such startling results, throw himself back again ~~ 

into the arms of those wise and venerable teachers who 
have told him these pretty tales about tamperi ing Pon- 
tiffs and stupid nations? 

At all events he will ask how it has hanpents d that 
these adjustments and rectifications were attributed to 

Wore 

222 rRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

the particular personages and times in question, rather 
than to others, if there were not some historic founda- 
tion for the attribution. The following conjunction of 
facts will, I think, satisfactorily answer this, by no 
means unreasonable, query. 

Romulus was the first of the kings, Julius the first of 
the emperors. Numa was the second of the kings, 
Augustus the second of the emperors. Romulus was 
the founder of the State, and of its leading institutions ; 
Julius the founder of the empire and of its special 
forms. Numa improved all that was incomplete, re- 
formed all that was defective, and created all that was 
still wanting in the institutions of the kingdom. Such 
did Augustus in the case of the empire. Romulus was 
a wise king, but, above all things, a distinguished war- 
rior. Julius was, similarly, one of the most accom- 
plished men of his age, and one of the greatest war- 
riors and conquerors of antiquity. Numa, on the other 
hand, was pre-eminently pacific, he was the type of re- 
ligion as Romulus was of war, and all the fundamental . 
religious institutions of the country are attributed to 
him. Auvustus, though from the elaborate and com- 
plicated character of the later traditions, he figures as 
a warrior in the early portion of his career, is, never- 
theless, as an emperor, the type of the pacific, the reli- 
gious, and the intellectual. As Numa was the Vener- 
able, Octavius is the August, and his name has become 
a designation for a specially intellectual period, while 
he further represents Numa by the multiplicity of re- 
forms and innovations which he introduced, both in civil 
and religious institutions. And, finally, as Romulus 
was slain and cut in pieces by his senators, while re- 
viewing his army, Julius fell pierced by the daggers of 
his senators, in the midst of the great council of the 
nation. 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN, F239 

In view of these coincidences, what more natural 
than to attribute the adjustments and re-adjustments of 
the year and calendar to those personages who are the 
types of all analogous phenomena ? : 

As Romulus then first arranges the year and calendar 
waich Numa re-adjusts and perfects, so Julius introduces 
the solar year, which Augustus re-establishes after it 

‘had fallen into disorder. Thirty-six years was the 
typica] duration of the reign of Romulus, and it may 
be viewed as the space of time which intervened between 
his adjustment and that of Numa, and thirty-six years 
is similarly the interval which separates the adjustment 
of Julius from the correction of Augustus. Nor is this 
all. 

The first of the chapters of the second part of this vo- 

- lume has exhibited the grouping of the great events of 
the history into cycles of three hundred and sixty and 
four hundred and thirty-two years, with an occasional 
substitution of three hundred and sixty-five for the for- 
mer number. Now the year of Numa was lunar, and a 
lunar year consists of three hundred and fifty-four days. 
As, then, two solar cycles of three hundred and sixty 
years are allowed from the building of the city to the 
establishment of the empire under Augustus, in the year ~ 
of Rome, 720, so just two lunar cycles of three hundred 
and fifty-four years are allowed from the same point, to_ 
the establishment of the new calendar by Julius, in the 
year of Rome, 708! Surely no one will be so infatu- 
ated as to cling to the notion of a genuine chronology 
in the face of such facts as these. Nor has the spirit 
of system stopped even here. 

The first allusion to the disorder of the calendar in 

_ Christian times, is made in connection with the Council 

: ot Nice, the first general Council of the Church. The 

equinox had then advanced from the 25th to the 2ist 

224 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

of March, thus again gaining four days on the civil 
year. Now as this advance of the seasons is at the 
rate of a day in somewhat more than 129 years, four 
times 129 make 516 years, while the council is placed 
in 325 or 330, nearly two centuries earlier than it ought 
to be according to this astronomical coincidence. Here 
is something for chronologists to settle, and for astro- 
nomers to pause upon, when they think of introducing 
these wild fictions of legendary dates into the sacred 
precincts of physical science—when they think of bene- 
fiting astronomy by the study of ancient eclipses and 
such like materials of a chronology always conjectural, 
even when not purely mythic. 

What concerns us, however, now, is the fact that the 
year 330 of Christ, is the year 360 of Augustus, the 
year of the solemn dedication of Constantinople as the 
seat of empire, by the first of the Christian emperors, 
the year in which Christianity was established by im- 
perial edict as the religion of the State, the year which 
completed the great cycle of Rome’s existence as a seat 
of dominion, the great 1080—three times 360—the 
year of the death of Paganism as a State creed, and of 
the birth of Christianity in the same character. It is 
in full consistency then with the system of these adjust- 
ments, that the first Christian fixing of the equinox 
should be assigned to a distinguished epoch, although 
the synchronism be wholly discordant ; but what are 
we to say of our early Christian chronology, if it has 
erred by nearly two centuries in fixing the date of the 
first of the great councils? 

And now to crown this history of systematic arrange- 
ments, we are finally told that the cause of the aberra- 
tion of the seasons relative to the calendar, was first 
pointed out by the Venerable Bede, in the year of 
Christ 730, twice the solar cycle of 365 (the variant 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 925 

of 360), as the Julian arrangement was twice the lunar 
eycle of 354 |* 

Here surely is a series of results which no one could 
have anticipated, and which no one can misunderstand. 
They are fatal to the history, such as ignorance and 
credulity have given it; but they open out vistas of a 
far grander story, which it will be the business of 
Science to restore. 

In speaking of Ten Thousand years of Italian tradi- 
tion, I simply offer a question to be examined, not a 
thesis to be proved. It is enough for the moment that 
an imposing theory is shaken to its very foundations, 
and the necessity of subjecting history to a new order 
of criticism made plain to every mind capable of rising 
above the prejudices of party and education. 

CHAPTER VI. 

So completely has the mind of the age been borne 
along by the current of tradition, that the most glaring 
historical inconsistencies lie perpetually before it witb- 
out awakening the slightest suspicion of their presence, 
or if a doubt does at any time present itself, it is in- 
stantly dismissed as one of the difficulties inherent in 
the subject, or explained away by the best conjecture 
that happens to offer itself for the occasion. 

Who, for instance, has noticed, except with a feeling 
of passing and unprofitable wonder, the unaccountable 
omissions which History presents in so-called contempo- 
raneous events; its marvelous silence sometimes, its 
gross ignorance at others, in regard to matters of the 
utmost interest and importance, matters that could not 
be unknown to contemporaries, or left unnoticed by his- 
torians cognizant of their existence ? 

* Brewsier’s Encyc) opeedia, article Chronology, p. 406. 

226 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

Let us look, for example, at the case of Egypt. Be 
tween that country on the one hand, and Greece and 
Italy on the other, there must have existed from remote 
times a constant commercial intercourse. A rich, pow- 
erful, and civilized kingdom like Egypt, could not be 
otherwise than a commercial -country, and therefore 
well acquainted with all its neighbors; nor could such 
neighbors as enlightened Greece and Italy be other 
than well acquainted with the history, creeds, literature, 
languages, and institutions of a country so remarkable 
as Egypt. Besides, we are specially told that Solon 
and Herodotus, and other Grecian sages and writers, 
visited Egypt for the express purpose of study and ob- 
servation; and to crown all, a Grecian monarch con- 
quered the country, and a dynasty of Greek sovereigns 
ruled there for nearly three hundred years, in the golden 
age of Hellenic enlightenment, and in part also in the 
meridian splendor of the Roman mind. During all 
this time Greeks poured into the country; their lan- 
guage was current there by the side of the native 
tongues; their lineaments and their styles of architec- 
ture meet us among the monuments, and their mummies 
are turned up in the catacombs sometimes pure in fea- 
ture, sometimes more or less Egyptianized. 

But more important still, during all this period Egypt 
had not ceased to be Egyptian. Its gods were the gods 
of old, its creeds the native faith, its hierarchies and 
forms of government were all modeled upon ancient 
standards, its language was the immemorial tongue of 
the people, and that tongue was written, as in the re- 
motest times, in the sacred characters peculiar to the 
race. 

All the monuments of the country, except the Pyra- 
mids, are covered with that character. There could be 
no secret in a style of writing publicly used for thou- 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 927 

sands of years, and alike impressed“on the temples of 
the gods, the mausolea of the kings, and the coffin of 
the private citizen ; nor could the priests of the country 
keep such a secret from the masters of the country, 
especially when those masters were themselves among 
the conservators and rulers of all sacred rites. The 
Greek sovereigns of Egypt appear on the monuments 
as priests and terrestrial gods, just as appeared the 
monarchs of old, and utter their invocations and offer 
their prayers and sacrifices in the native language and 
writing. | 

It is utterly impossible, then, that contemporaneous 
Greece could have been ignorant in anything of conse- 
quence relating to Egypt, and yet that which we call 
contemporaneous Greece, has told us nothing, or next to 
nothing, on the very points on which curiosity would 
have been sure to he most excited. 

A catalogue of kingly names is nota history, neither 
do temples and statues and emblems and innovations, 
however great their numbers, constitute a religion, It 
is in its creed and its legends that a religion truly con- 
sists ; remove these, and all else may be little better 
than meaningless or delusive symbols. Judging by 
these rules, what do we know of the religion of ancient 
Egypt? Searcely anything beyond what might be in- 
ferred. at any time from the monuments themselves. 
With the exception of a few fragments of myths that 
have reached us through comparatively late sources, 
the entire mythology of Egypt may be said to have 
perished. The speculations of the later Greeks are but 

_ dreams and philosophies. They speak of ancient Egypt, 

. 

much as we speak of the Druids or Chaldeans, and only 
prove how complete was the destruction, at the period 
in which they were written, of the faith which they at- 
tempt to commemorate. 

2. 

_ 

228 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. ~ 

A seat of civilization so ancient, with a people so 
superstitious, and a religious apparatus so elaborate, 
must have had a body of traditions of prcportionate 
imagnitude. Egypt could not bean exception to a uni- 
versal rule, and we have only to cast our eves on Greece 
or Italy themselves, on modern India, Brahminical or 
Budhistic, on China, Japan, Ceylon, Burmah, Thibet, 
MPartary, Persia, Scandinavia, Japan, Mexico, Peru, or, 
Medieval Europe, to see how necessary is the connec- 
tion between an elaborate creed and an elaborate reli- 
‘gious history. 

How, then, has it come to pass that the mythology of 
ancient Egypt has found no echo in the writings of 
classic Greece or Rome? The historian has not de- 
scribed it, the fabulist has not drawn from it, the poet 
has not made it the subject of metaphor or allusion. 
When Egypt is named it is spoken of as a thing of the 
past—great and mysterious ; and even when it is said 
to be described by an eye-witness, there is nothing told 
us that might not be written at a long subsequent 
period, while there is a total absence of that speciality 
and life which a work of actual observation always 
presents. Often, too, there is an ignorance which mo- 
dern research has found it impossible to account for 
with any degree of satisfaction. } 

How has it come to pass that, in the days of the 
Ptolemies, with the Greek city of Alexandria in meri- 
dian splendor, and filled with learned men of various 
nations, that no one has thought of giving us a bona 
fide translation of any of the curious mytks or histori- 
cal traditions of Egypt? If the work of Manetho were 
such a work, why do we not hear of it till Christian 
times? And why, even then, does it come to us ina 
form which leaves it little better than a barren cata- 

logue of names and dates? Names and dates, too, 
: 

. Foe 
= PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 229 

which it requires no small amount of special pleading 

_and critical torture to bring into anything like agree- 
ment with the monumental records, as deciphered by 
modern ingenuity. 

How e 3 it, too, that we are left in total ignorance 
of the language of Egypt, that we know no more of its 
manners and customs, than the monuments themselves 
reveal, that, as far as books are concerned, it is a 
grand dispute whether the people were black or fair, 
and that were it not for these same monuments the.en- 
tire ethnological character of the nation would be a 
complete blank for us? 

But above all, and before all, how comes it that we 
are left in entire ignorance of the mystery of Hiero- 
elyphics? Not a word, not a hint, till we reach the 
bald deductions of Harapollo Nilous; or the passing no- 
tice of the Christian writer, Clemens Alexandrinus, a 
notice not understood till the secret had been otherwise 

attained. Yet what so calculated to excite intelligent 

- curiosity as this elaborate and peculiar style so utterly 

unlike the graphic system of every neighboring nation ? 

Let any one try to imagine such things occurring at 
the present day, or at any time within the last four cen- 
turies, in any portion of Europe. Every one must feel 
that such results would be entirely impossible. And 

_ yet we are required to believe that they were possible 

_ in Greece and Italy in their most enlightened days. 

; We are. told, indeed, asa sort of explanation of this 

mystery, that the Greeks and Romans were incurious, 

and despised barbarians. But the classic writers _ 
never despised Egypt; on the contrary, they always 
speak of it with an almost superstitious respect, but 
they speak of it much as we speak of the Palestine or 

Mesopotamia of Biblical history. The Grecks and Ro- 

mans incurious? Curiosity is the very barometer of 

pA PEP ei fea 

230 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

intellect and civilization. It is only another term for 
the desire of knowledge, and every page of classic lit- 
erature, fabricated though it be, still bears intrinsic 
evidence of the inherent literary inquisitiveness of the 
Greco-Italic mind. Yet neither Solon, nor Socrates, 
nor Plato, nor Aristotle, nor the prying Herodotus, nor 
the all-learned Cicero, has a word to say on this curi- 
ous topic, for had they had such a word, one or other 
of them would infallibly have said it And when we 
mention names like these, the mind does not present to 
itself either the childish exclusiveness of China or the 
stolidity of Mahometanism ; but it sees before it Kuro- 
pean genius and taste, and eagerness, and enterprise, 
and cannot reconcile them with the silence and igno- 
rance in question. Sys 

There is but one means of untying the Gordian knot 
of this difficulty ; it will only yield to the sword. Call 
the entire classic literature a gigantic swindle, as far as 
history is concerned, and facts will speedily explain 
themselves. 

In the first chapter of the second part of this book, 
we have seen Roman history regularly arranging it- 
self into great epochs exactly measured by the cyclical 
numbers 360 and 482, and their triplicates 1080 and 
1296 ; and in the second we have seen the records of 
the calendar, with its aberrations and corrections, re- 
vealing facts of a still more extraordinary nature, facts 
which stretch out Italic tradition till even a portion of 
it spans the vast interval of some Ten Thousand years. 
The facts before us are a third emphatic indictment 
against the legacy of tradition, and they are but a 
small portion of those which go to make up the charge. 

How comes it, for instance, that history knows noth- 
ing of the wonderful civilization of Etruria, which, if 
records be true, must have existed in meridian splen- 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 231 

dor centuries after the foundation of Rome? Until the 
researches and accidents of modern times had laid bare 
its painted tombs and identified the sites of its cities, 
it was impossible to form the least idea of the real 
charactcr of this important hase of Italic life. Greece 
has told us nothing ; Rome, next to nothing. Yet these 
painted tombs furnish unequivocal evidence of the ex- 
istence of the most intimate commercial relations be- 
tween Etruria and the Greece of its day; for not only 
do we see clear evidence of a community of manners, 
but so similar, in all respects, are many of the produc- 
tions of art, that antiquaries have been sorely puzzled 
to determine whether the beautiful vases discovered in 
these tombs be of native or Greek manufacture, so en- 
tirely Greek are they in material, form, painting, taste, 
etc., even to the mythic personages represented on 
them, and the names in Greek characters which occa-— 
sionally accompany these representations. 

The Italy which the legend of early Rome brings 
before the mind is much like the Palestine of Abra- 
hamic times, while the Etruria of the tombs and monu- 
ments is a powerful and wealthy republic with the 
social organization, the luxury and refinements of an 
advanced civilization. If our histories be genuine, 
how comes it that they not only give no intimation of 
this state of facts, but are cast in a mold entirely 
inconsistent with it? How was it possible that a petty 
territory like Rome should contend successfully with a 
confederacy which reached from its vicinity almost, 
if not quite, to the foot of the Alps? And that even 
in its early infancy this single city, with its handful of 
men, should successfully wrest town after town from 
the grasp of such an antagonist? When in the tales 
of the nursery the pigmy slays the giant, we have at 
least cunning and intellect matched against muscle and 

232 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

bone; but here it is the half civilized which conquers 
the highly civilized, without any advantage that could 
compensate for the enormous disproportion of the 
forces. Rome, indeed, except in the legend of Porsena, 
is never represented as contending with Etruria. The 
contest is always a contest of city with city, petty State 
with petty State, and there is nothing whatever to inti- 
mate that Etruria, during these wars, was the Htruria 
of the sepulchers. Yet if dates count for anything, 
this must have been the case. They evidently, there- 
fore, in this instance, do not count for anything but 
that which they really are, elements of mythic cycles, 
to which tradition has been accommodated. 

Etruria had a peculiar language ; Rome has given 
us no account of it. The country is spoken of as emi- 
nently religious, and must therefore have had an elabo- 
rate mythology. Rome has suffered it. all to perish. 
It had power and enlightenment, and must have had a 
history—that history has not left a wreck amid the 
annals of Rome, neither has it among those of Greece, 
if we except some vague conjectures as to the origin 
of the race. What prevented Rome from preserving 
the writings of Etruria—or what prevented the Etrus- 
can cities from preserving them—as the Greece of the 
same era preserved its writings, and traditions, and 
- customs, and as it preserved them equally under Roman 
dominion? It is absurd to suppose that all could have 
perished utterly in the midst of the very circumstances 
that would have aided in their preservation—viz., the 
close proximity of intellectual neighbors. Who ever 
heard of a cultivated language spread over a consider- 
able. extent of territory, yet perishing wholly in the 
course of a century or two, without any extermination 
of the people speaking it, or any known efforts to sup- 
press it? How many centuries of conquest have passed 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 233 

over Wales, Ireland, Brittany, Greece, and many other 
regions, whose languages still survive, sometimes with- 
out the aid of literatures, and sometimes in the face 
of the most energetic attempts to suppress them? Is 
it not manifest that the sun of Etruria had set for ages 
before the star of Rome appeared upon the horizon, 
and that a deluge of conquest and barbarism had swept 
‘away thus completely the landmarks of ancient power, 
before the new one had commenced its special develop- 
ment? Between Etruria and Rome as a power, must 
stretch an interval long enough for the entire life of 
classic Greece, and other such intervals appear in 
various directions, although history has been at such 
pains to bridge them over 

What, too, does Grecian history know about Tyre, 
beyond its destruction by Alexander, the legend of 
Dido, the names of a few kings, and a faint echo of its 
power? Yet it ought to have known everything worth 
transmitting to posterity. And it ought to have had a 
similar knowledge of Carthage, too, respecting which 
its notices are still more meager. Even Rome has 
given us little in this: direction beyond a record of 
battles. 

The relations of Greece with Persia, if we are to 
believe history, must have been sufficiently important 
to have awakened a vivid curiosity in regard to all 
that was singular in the condition or institutions of 
this powerful and baffled foe. Yet, though the army 
of Alexander swept over Persia, and established Gre- 
cian kingdoms on the ruins of that great empire, though 
Aristotle, from Greece, was exchanging epistolary cour- 
tesies with his royal pupil, then sitting on the throne 
of Darius, though Ctesias wrote Persian histories, and 
Xenophon historic novels on the same theme, yet no 
one has thought of telling us anything about the cunei- 

234 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

form writing, although information on so singular a 
system must have been infinitely more acceptable to an 
intellectual Greek than a catalogue of long perished 
kings, or the details of an ordinary campaign. There 
is but one rational interpretation for this unanimity in 
silence and ignorance, and that has already been given. 

According to history, no deluge of barbarism, no 
casualties destructive to civilization, passed over Greece 
from the days of Alexander to the advent of the Turks, 
and yet Greek literature knows next to nothing of the 
specialities of countries that Greek armies had over- 
run, and in which Greek kingdoms were established 
for centuries; nothing of hieroglyphics, nothing of 
those wedge-shaped characters that covered the palaces 
of Persepolis and the slabs of Nimrond, and the bricks 
of Babylon, of those very things which have so vehe- 
mently excited the curiosity of modern times! It is 
just as if the England of the present day should trans- 
mit to posterity large sections of its literature, of its 
poems, songs, histories, plays, travels, tales, religious 
records, philosophical treatises, &c., &c., and yet leave 
in all this no intelligible account of the creeds or lit- 
erature of India, no allusion to the peculiar writing of 
the Chinese, to the pictorial symbols of the Mexicans, 
or to a host of other curious facis which the present is 
always ready to chronicle, and the future always 
thankful to receive. 

Let not the reader point, in reply, to the occurrences 
of medizval times, for they have to be subjected to 
the same criticism as antiquity, and yield results of 
an analogous kind; nor to the doings of Asiatic, 
African, or other non-European races, among which 
mind is usually stationary, and curiosity usually low. 
We are here criticising Huropean races, and, in phases 
of national life, only second to the civilization of the 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 235 

actual hour. They had not the press, it is true, but 
they had the pen, and they used it freely, as is obvious 
from innumerable references and lists of works. India 
had not the press either, and yet its literature, Brah- 
minical and Budhistic, is absolutely vast; so, also 
with China, Arabia, and many other countries, in vari- 
ous degrees. 

- Of course, when Egypt, and Persia, and Tyre, and 
Carthage, have been thus treated, we cannot wonder 
that Palestine has been left unnoticed, or that we know 
nothing of the creeds or languages of Spain, or that we 
have such meagre accounts of Gaul and Britain. Yet 
Rome was master of Spain in its palmiest days, and 
the Spaniards are inherently an intelligent and manly 
race, while their relation with Cyclopean Italy, with 
Tyre, Carthage, and Rome itself, must have called forth 
their native powers at various periods of their history. 
Languages and monuments testify to all this; it is his- 
tory alone which is silent. 

Gaul and Britain had been, for unknown ages, the 
seats of elaborate creeds and powerful hierarchies— 
nay, they even had their times, as existing monuments 
unequivocally testify, of wide-spread empire and rela- 
tive civilization, and yet all we have obtained from con- 
temporaneous Rome is the meagre notice in Cesar’s 
Commentaries, and two or three other allusions of less 
note. All of which imply a social condition wholly in- 
consistent with the antecedents of the race, while some 
of the details given, by their distinctly mythological 
character, show that the accounts in question have 
nothing about them of genuine contemporaneousness. 
These war-chariot and naked savages, painted blue, are! 
but readings off from mythic picture-writing-—a portion 
of the symbolic imagery of the north-west quarter of 
the universe. Contemporaneous Rome is represented 

236 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

as speaking of the conquest of Britain as that of a new 
world, as if Roman commerce could have been to this 
extent unacquainted with the outer sea, or as if Phe- 
nicia had never conquered ireland, or traded with the 
Casseterides, to say nothing of the fact that the Cyclo- 
pean styles of the so-called early Christian architecture 
of Ireland, and the absolute identity in model and con- 
struction of the Round Towers, with similar monuments 
recently discovered in the Grecian Isles, plainly speak 
of an ancient Greek conquest also, thus confirming the 
national traditions. 

What, too, are we to say of the curious fact that the 
calendar of the Cornish Britons has taken the names 
of the first eight months from that of Rome, while it 
has supplied the simply numerical names—September, 
October, November, December, with an entirely differ- 
ent series, proving manifestly that it received this 
calendar at a time when the Roman year had but eight 
(solar) months, a fact in full harmony with the gener- 
ally archaic character of Roman remains in Britain, 
and with their depth beneath the present surface of the 
soil? Showing, in fact, two different and widely sepa- 
rated Italic conquests, the first attributed to the mythic 
head of the empire, the second to more recent times. 
Rome has not given us the real histories of her north- 
western conquests ; but old tales criticised into his- 
tory, and such materials could not be given by con- 
temporaries. 

Of like character are those narratives in which we 
read of barbarian hosts overturning the mighty Roman 
empire ; of countless hordes of savages, or semi-savages, 
cohering without organizution, living and doing well, 
carrying on war and siege, conquering, and sustaining 
reverses, campaign also after campaign, year after 
year, without money, without established supplies, with- 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 937. 

out national resources to fall back upon, without even 
the idea of a commissariat—but all at the sole expense of 
the enemy! Such a thing asa barbarian army does not 
exist on the face of the earth at the present day ; with 
a moment’s reflection every man of sense must see that 
the thing is a physical impossibility ; and yet with all 
this before our eyes, we can go on believing in Bren- 
nus, and Attila, and Alaric, and Genseric, and the Ger- 
mans, and Gauls, and the painted and naked Britons, 
and the Kimbri, and the overflowing swarms of the 
frozen and barbarian north, and all that sort of thing! 
We have seen the giant power of Russia tottering with 
approaching exhaustion after two campaigns, and yet 
believe in Roman history, which is one eternal cam- 
paign from beginning toend! We have been children, 
cheated right and left—-effectually, because at all 
points. 

These extraordinary omissions, and these impossible 
narratives, cease to be mysteries the moment we cease 
to believe in written history. Let us allow facts room, 
and all becomes plain. Great gulfs of barbarism must 
have separated the principal civilizations of antiquity. 
Etruria, Athens, Macedon, Ptolemaic Egypt, Republican 
Rome, Imperial Rome, Constantinople—all must repre- 
sent distinct and widely separated epochs. There must 
have been ample time for forgetfulness. 

It will naturally be asked how, under such circum- 
stances, classic literature came to exist? But it may 
be asked, in turn, why should not Greek and Latin 
poems and histories, and speeches and letters and philo- 
sophic treatises, grow according to the same laws by 
which Vedas, and Puranas, and Mahabarrhatas, and 
Homeric ballads, and books of Zoroaster, and books 
of Confucius, and Eddas, Chronicles, and Medizval 
legends, grow and are transmitted from age to age, 

238 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

and become melted down, and transformed, and polished 
up, according to circumstances and national genius ; 
and why the one as well as the other should not ulti- 
-mately be fathered upon mythic and legendary names? 

These are but hints, and the subject is inexhaustible ; 
but these hints will gradually become demonstrations, 
and ere long will change the entire aspect of antiquity, 
and leave our legends and our beliefs, and our criticisms 
and our learning, in much the same relation with the 
real history of man, which the exploded dreams of Nep- 
tunists and Plutonists and Mosaical philosophers bear 
to the great truths of our present geology. 

The day is not far distant, wherein the common sense 
of civilized man will turn loathingly from the idle tales 
and ridiculous nonsense which unwise teachers have 
so long and so successfully imposed upon him under the 
borrowed garb of divine truth ; and in that day he will 
have emerged from childhood to thinking man’s estate. 
The story of Adam will be set down like all the other 
grand old Myths and pretty, ancient Dreamery, at its 
proper value; true religion achieve her final and ever- 
lasting triumph, and— 

“Tn that new childhood of the world, 
Life of itself shall dance and play ; 

Fresh blood through Time’s shrunk veins be hurled, 
And Labor meet Delight half-way. ; 

TOPIC THIRD. 
THE GENESIS OF NATIONS. 
CHAPTER VIL. 

THE progress of organization is progress in Indivi- 
dualization or Specialization. All progress, all life is 
an advance from the vague to the regular, from the 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 239 

chaotic to the elaborately arranged. The germ of even 
the highest life is a vagueness, in which we detect buta 
few faint shadows of future distinctions, but as growth 
advances, functions which at first were generalized, com- 
mon to the entire mass, become: progressively special- 
ized, and committed to the charge of distinct organs, 
and the number of these specializations is the measure 
of the rank and importance of the general organism. 
It is the economic law of the devision of labor carried 
out in organic mechanism, for here, as elsewhere, Nature 
has taken precedence of man, as well in application as 
in discovery. | 

Such is the law of Individual life, and the law of in- 
dividual life is the law of all life; the law of the race 
and species, the law of the genus and class, the law of 
the world and universe: for the plan of existence is 
everywhere the same. Low types develop few speci- 
alities, and reach their ultimate growth at relatively 
low stages ; high types become more and more complex, 
and ascend farther and farther in proportion to their 
destined rank, and young types also, as low in their own 
spheres, similarly exhibit less complexity than their cor- 
relative maturities. 
Man is a high organism,* but a young life, hence he 

* The question of the specific unity or diversity of the human fam- 
ily will be found adm‘rably and learnedly discussed in the recent 
work of M. de Quatrefages on the “ Unity of the Human Species,” 
[Unite de l’Espece Humaine, Par A. de Quatrefages, Membre de 1’In- 
atitut, (Academie des Sciences) 128 Par. 186i,] decidedly the most 
masterly, lucid, and well-sustained argument which Ethnology has 
yet produced. Still, though unanswerable on its own ground, this 
work is far from being decisive on the main points at issue, for, like 
almost all other writers on this subject, M. de Quatrefages has de- 
pended too exclusively on the study of details, and thus has lost 
sight of those great primary laws which alone can decide such a 
question, and which peremptorily settle ia a moment the greater por- 
tivn of its difficulties. 

240 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

shows neither classic, generic, nor even specific differ- 
ences, but an enormous amount of racial and subordi- 
nate distinctions, especially in his mental nature ; and 
the diversity is exactly proportionate to his social 
status. | 

When he is but one, when he is distinctionless, or 
only shows infinitessimal and unclassifiable differences, 
when, in a word, he enjoys the theoretic felicity of com- 
plete equality, of being naturally, as well as socially, 
on an exact level with all around him, he is a savage, 
and a savage of the lowest stamp, in proportion as he 
separates into distinct realms and nationalities, in pro- 
portion as each nationality develops distinction of type 
and class and capacity, in proportion as we can talk of 
artist and mechanist, of peasant and artisan, of mer- 
chant and manufacturer, of poet and orator, of states- 
man and soldier, of scientific and literary, &c., &c., and 
in proportion as these names become distinctions, not 
of scattered individuals merely, but of social groups, 
bound together by sympathies of instinct as well as 
considerations of interest, so does the nation rise in 
rank, in mind, in general nature, in civilization, in mun- 
dane influence, in genuine power. All other elevations 
are but shams in the presence of this real rank, mere 
artificial aggregations, whose principle is oppression, 
whose coherence force, whose stability is that of the 
mushroom, rising or vanishing with the individual des- 
pot, or the shifting interests of the dominant clique. 
It is in vain to think of creating nationalities, they must 
grow, and grow in accordance with time and plan and 
special character, and grow, too, like all other growths, 
JSrom the very germ, from a low, unspecialized type, from 
primitive savageism, in a word, and not from the frag- 
ments or the eclecticisms of any form of civilization. 
A nation must grow as one of the prescribed facts of 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 241 

mundane development, as a correlated phenomenon, as 
a portion of an organism, as one of a fixed number 
which can neither be increased nor diminished. The 
origin of nations belongs to the days of old, it is a 
geological event, an accomplished fact, which cannot 
again be repeated until, in due time, this planet enters 
into new cosmic conditions. . 

All genuine research carries us back to the savage ; 
the so-called historic migrations of nations are little 
better than hypothetic dreams, based upon fable in the 
the first place, and conjectural criticism in the second. 
Monuments, implements, ornaments, bones, fossils—these 
give us genuine facts, and only demand genuine reason- 
ing to give us also genuine conclusions. As we go 
back, we move towards infancy, as we approach infancy 
we approach lowness, simplicity, relative homogeneous- 
ness. What is this in the case of aggregate man, but 
an approach to unspecialized barbarism ? 

Beyond this point, it is not yet safe to go, but out of 
the fractional diversities of this early humanity must 
necessarily have arisen all existing nationalities, and im 
their present centers also, making due allowance for geo- 
logical changes, and the occasional pressure of border 
nations, for soil and climate are necessary conditions in 
national growth. [See Part II. present Volume.] 

These statements are the inevitabilities of law and 
plan, and when we turn to the sphere of special facts, 
we find nothing to contradict, but everything to bear 
them out. No nation has ever been known to repeat 
itself, nor are there two nations alike on the face of the 
globe ; yet dominant nations have constantly sought to 
repeat themselves, by colonization on the one hand and 
conquest on the other. As far, however, as any genu- 
ine evidence reaches, no conquest has ever yet perpetu- 

F ated a type, nor has any colony been enduring. The 

242 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

Persian, the Greek, and the Roman have vanished 
out of Egypt, without having left a living wreck be- 
hind them. The Ottoman but waits the advent of the 
next conqueror, and unless he presents himseif soon, he 
will disappear of himself. There is no Moor or Sara- 

cen in Spain, no Roman in Gaul or Britain. Neither 

is there a Saxon, Scandinavian or Norman in the go- 
called Anglo-Saxon nation, in the so-called Norman 
nobility, else why such entire difference in genius, char- 
acter, and destiny between the respective nationalities 
as now existing? Thus has it been everywhere and 
always, as far as the testimony of genuine facts can 
carry us. 

As with conquest, so with colonization. It has no- 
where reproduced the likeness of its parent—it has no- 
where remained as an enduring aggregate. I do not 
now speak of the spread of savage tribes; they are 
more or less germal, and we are at present discussing 
the movements of civilization. In various regions of 
the earth we find monuments which clearly point to 
foreign sources—sources which, in many cases, can be 
distinctly identified—but for any living memento of 
what must once have been a powerful sway, and a life 
of many centuries, we look around in vain. Egypt, 
Northern Africa, Western Europe, Syria, Arabia, 
Southern India, Java, Borneo, Peru, Central America, 
Mexico, the valley of the Mississippi, and many other 
spots, furnish testimony of this kind, unequivocal and 
instructive. Could conquest or colonization have per- 
petuated types, many a proud race would have been 
blotted out, and many a nation would be found re- 
peated. Savage tribes, indeed, have been exterminated 
even within living memory, but never nations, in the 
sense here implied, for many forms of savagcism have 
fulfilled their destined functions, and die out before our 

<a 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 243 

eyes even when we are most anxious to preserve them. 
But no national types perish without leaving successors 
somewhere; outlying tribes may be swept away, but 
their centers of formation keep up a ceaseless life, which 
defy alike the conqueror and the colonist. You may 
sweep Egypt, from the Delta to the Cataracts, but you. 
cannot clear Abyssinia, try as you please. The Indian 
‘of the northern woods and prairies makes way for you 
in all directions, but the Mexican and Central Amer- 
ican stands his ground. He will not vanish, and you 
cannot do without him. So itis everywhere ; courage, 
climate, local circumstances—even the very interests of 
conquerors make certain spots sacred to certain races. 
To be conquered is one of the conditions of their 
growth; it gives new blood, new thoughts, the acqui- 
sitions of other labors aud experiences, and out of the 
commingling springs a renovated and advanced nation- 
ality, and in the process, the conqueror gradually van- 
ishes—vanishes even when his name, his language, and 
his institutions remain. 

There are, however, human aggregations which cling 
to life with a strange tenacity, and which at first sight 
might seem to contradict the principles here laid down ; 
but the discrepancy is apparent only. The Jew is pre- 
eminently one of these; the Parsee may be cited as an- 
other. But the Jew is not a nation, but aclass—he is a 
merchant, and a merchant is no more a nation than an 
eye or an ear is an animal. The merchant is pre-- 
eminently one of the floating elements of humanity. He 
moves hither and thither, he marries here and there, he 
renovates his blood in various directions and degrees, 
and however far distant he may be, as a body, from the 
parent stock, he is constantly coming into contact with 
it through one or other of his members. All the Jew- 
ish communities, not divided by some schism in creed, 

244 ' PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

thus intercommunicate, while all look to the parent 
land. The type is preserved, but there is no national 
srowth, or if there be, it is so faint as to be altogether 
equivocal.* 

Similar remarks are applicable to the Parsee. He 
likewise is a merchant, a traveler ; he similarly commu- 
nicates with his native stock. Any fragment of nation- 
ality, kept pure in blood by stringent laws of creed or 
east, liviug in a climate reasonably congenial, and 
keeping up communication with the parent race, might 
possibly exist indefinitely, while these conditions were 
duly maintained, but there is no reason for supposing 
that, on any other terms, the phenomena in question 
could be exhibited. 

A nation, then, may be called an organism composed 
of locomotive elements ; an organism whose bonds are 
mental, whose particles are held together by common 
sympathies and wants, springing from a common na- 
ture. It cannot, therefore, be a fortuitous aggregation ; 
it cannot be a fraction or a selection ; it must be a 
totality of one order or other; and though foreign in- 
-gredients may mingle with it, not only without injury, . 
but often with the highest advantage, still they must 
not be too many to interfere with the aggregate 
power of control and absorption, otherwise the nation 
is in one of its convulsive periods. 

* A strange interest has of late been given to the question of Jew- 
ish Nationality. Dr. James Hunt, in an able and instructive paper on 
the “ Acclimatization of Man,” read at a late meeting of the British 
Association, and recently again before the Ethnological Society, has 
called in question the Asiatic origin of the existing Jews, conteuding 
that they are rather representatives of old European conquests in 
Syria than actual aborigines of that land, This seems at present an 
extreme opinion, but it has fixed attention on a very curious fact, for 
it is formally asserted that the Jew cannot live permanently in Pa- 
lestine, but would die out there if the population were not kept up hy 
immnigrations from the Jewish communities in other countries. 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 245 

Could a nation so colonize as to represent in due 
proportion all the social elements of the mother coun- 
try, then, indeed, it might repeat itself, for a time at 
least, but this cannot be done, for many of the social 
elements are too stationary. to be thus displaced in suf- 
ficient quantity. The aristocracy of a land have no 
occasion to expatriate themselves, the masses generally 
have their local and class attachments ; it is mainly the 
restless, the ambitious, the enterprising, and those 
pressed by circumstances, who sacrifice their home af- 
finities to the allurements of some great counterbal- 
anciny advantage. All colonization, therefore, amounts 
in the end to a practical eclecticism which is far from 
representing the full requirements of organic life and 
development. 

While a colony continues under the rule of the 
mother country, it partakes of its life, and grows with 
its growth ; it is simply in the condition of an outlying 
province, and the common blood flows through it, and 
it thinks and feels with the common thought and feel- 
ing; but the moment it is severed from the parent stem 
all is changed. If there be growth that growth is ab- 
normal, for the growth of a fragmentary organism is 
necessarily such, and abnormal growth continued is 
disorganization. 

Among the many illustrations that might. be given 
of these statements, two may be selected .as having 
special interest at the present moment. Lower Canada 
had the advantage of representing, with some approxi- 
mate fidelity, the social groupings of old France. Its 
population consisted of gentlemen, peasants, and a 
bourgeoisie in tolerably natural proportions. It has 
always cohered as one mass, without effort, and under 
considerable temptations to dispersal, because there 
was between all its members the irresistible sympathy 

246 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

of race, and of institutions born of race. But while 
old France has developed into the magnificent diver- 
sity of new France, Canada, cut off, remains precisely 
old France still, notwithstanding its advantages of 
space, neighborhood and freedom... Yet is it, in every 
ethnic sense, far more a nation than are these Amer- 
ican States, which were founded under different condi- 
tions, as well as by different races. While the origi- 
nal States of the Republic were colonies, they had na- 
tional attributes and coherence, but the moment they 
ceased to be such, that moment‘ the Republic felt a 
life of its own. It grew, indeed, but not as nations 
grow—slowly and organically—but rapidly, suddenly, 
by the mere absorption and multiplication of individuali- 
ties—grew, in a word, as mercantile companies grow, 
where the bond of union is simply interest, and the 
esprit du corps not that subtle tie whose power is over 
the heart. This, of course, was not wholly wanting; 
but it could not be a prominent feeling, where there 
was neither community of origin, nor distinction of 
class ; and, therefore, in the very pride of its early 
strength, when the young giant seemed destined to 
overshadow half the globe, when its spirits were most 
elastic, and its dreams the brightest, the first intestine 
pang has snapped the thread of its feeble life, and it 
divides—how ? Not organically, asa real nation would 
divide, but simply conventionally—by the line of a mer- 
cantile interest, and of a thermometrical range? The 
United States have never been truly such—have never 
been a really consolidated nation ; and never could or 
can be, so long as their Constitutional parchment ad- 
mits of diverse renderings and interpretations ; never 
could or can be so long as the interests of one section 
antagonizes the interests of another. The country is 
now passing through the ordeal that all nations must 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 247 

pass through, ou their way from adolescence to maturity. 
It is being tried by fire —it is undergoing the baptism 
ef blood ; but that it will successfully make the pas- 
sage, no sane mind, no man with the least practical 
statesmanlike faculty, can fora moment doubt. Human 
Slavery has unquestionably been the dividing acid that 
has hitherto prevented interfusion, and retarded the 
growth of a national spirit. Remove that, and forthwith 
will begin America’s real Unity—for that of the past 
has heen only such in seeming ; remove that, and forth- 
with will begin a chemico-national process, whose result 
will be the consolidation of these States, whose power 
may safely challenge the civilized world; remove that, 
and a national youth will go on toward a‘ maturity yet 
lying among the Possibilities of future centuries, and our 
country will reach an eminence whence she may dic- - 
tate laws to the habitable globe, and dictating, be 
obeyed! This is our destiny ; I feel it—I know it! 
Were Great Britain to fall to pieces, every one would 
see that its divisions would necessarily be what they 
have been all along—Ireland, Scotland, Wales, Eng- 
land, even down to the heptarchy or the county, if 
needs were ; but they would be ethnic to the last, and 
force alone could make them nrercantile. 

And such is the natural history of the great experi- 
ment; and thus must human hopes be dashed when 
they outrun experience ; and thus must the most elabo- 
rate calculations of the politician and the philanthro- 
pist be scattered to the winds when they choose to 
assume a knowledge of humanity in advance of the 
teachings of Science. 

The events of the day, as well as the experience of 
the past, read a lesson of profound significance to all 
outlying sections and colonies. Cut off from the heart, 
their doom is irrevocably fixed ; events may delay it, 

248 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

may even light up for the moment a deceptive splen- 
dor, and give a progress that shall simulate genuine 
growth, but the day of trial must come at last, and 
then will be seen the difference between a nation and 
a heterogenous mass. Anarchy or insignificance—these 
are the Scylla and Charibdis of every severed country, 
and to one or other must all such ever float ; and the 
end of both is extinction. This, indeed, is a fate which 
cannot be escaped in any case, for the mutability of 
human affairs will ultimately break the connection in 
one way or other, and then what climate does not 
effect, will be a@complished by the moral surround- 
ings ; the intruder will be gradually absorbed by some 
indigenous race which he has helped to elevate. If 
this be not the history of the past, then monuments, 
languages, creeds and traditions are things without a 
meaning. 

But if nations cannot be created by conventional 
arrangements, so neither can they be destroyed; they 
are parts of a plan over which man can only obtain 
even the most limited and indirect control by under- 
standing and respecting it. An oppressed nationality 
is a canker for which there is no cure but freedom, and 
that cure must come sooner or later, for it is inherent 
in the oppression itself. By infusing new blood into 
the vanquished, the conqueror restores the wasted ener- 
gies of the fallen, and in the end, the prostrate nation 
awakes into renovated life, and flings off the incubus 
which crushed and disgraced it. Even in the union of 
cognate races, even in the consolidation of the various 
sections of a common country, the local tribes still keep 
up their individuality of nature. Costume, language, 
forms of Government, all the accidents of nationality 
may vanish or amalgamate; but time, wmstead of obliter- 
ating, only deepens and multiplies all genuine ethnic traits. 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 249 

Britany is still Breton, and Wales, Welsh, and even to 
the end of the chapter, Ireland will be Irish, and Scot- 
land Scotch. And why should we wish things other- 
wise? Progress is specialization, unorganized com- 
mingling, chaos. In these seemingly useless or mis- 
chievous distinctions, nature is working for distant 
futurities even when she is not working for the actual 
‘moment. We may as well let her work in peace, for 
she will not be thwarted, do what we may. 

But whatever may be the evils which attend their 
progress, colonization and conquest are among the inevy- 
itabilities of national development. * Population must 
have room, energy must have a theater of action. 
Humanity is an organism, and its blood must circulate ; 
all its chief portions must, in due course, be centers of 
special action and development, and hence the fluctua- 
tions of power and the sequences of empire. While 
humanity is young, and reason feeble, the conflict of in- 
terests must arouse fierce passions; but a knowledge 
of the laws of life, and attention to the teachings of 
science, will enable us to minimize evil, and make the 
most of good. 

My limits will not permit me to pursue this interest- 
ing subject farther on this occasion. My object will 
be sufficiently attained if I fix attention on an impor- 
tant truth, though not with all the precision and dis- 
tinctness that can be given to it. This great ethnic 
truth is the growth of nations in the organic sense of 
the term; their systematic and correlated growth ; 
their growth in a sense which implies definiteness in 
number, determinate affinities and contrasts in charac- 
ter, and hierarchy in attribute and power. The terms 
of this growth may be thus summed up. :— 

Ist. That humanity divides into an Organic and an 
Inorganic section. The former comprises a determinate 

250 PRE-ADAMITE MAN, 

number of great groups or ethnic realms, each having a 
fixed number of distinctly characterized nationalities. 
These realms though, in the main, those pointed out in 
this work, have now to be presented in a different ar- 
rangement. Of course, a nationality, in the sense in 
which the term is here used, does not mean a single 
tribe, whether large or small, but an aggregate of cog- 
nate tribes all more or less differing in character. The 
inorganic section does not occupy a series of special 
realms like the organic, but partially surrounds and 
partially divides off the organic groups, each portion of 
it having special Sffinities to the particular realms which 
it thus encloses or separates. Thus the Esquimaux, 
Laps, Samoides, Fuegians, and Hottentots, may be men- 
tioned as extreme outside races of the inorganic sec- 
tion, while the races of Northern Africa separate the 
European from the Negro realm, as those of Western 
Africa—the Nubian, Abyssinian, &c., divide the latter 
from the Asiatic, and as the native tribes of Syria, 
Caucasus, and the Ural divide Europe and Asia. 

2d. ‘hat every true nationality has had its origin in 
a remote, and probably geologic epoch, and has gra- 
dually developed in such a manner as will ultimately 
give it a degree of snbdivision and specialization pro- 
portionate to the rank of its scale, and to its own place 
in that scale, so that the highest nations are those 
which will be the most diversified, especially in their 
mental attributes ; and such is the fact even already. 

3d. That neither conquest nor colonization, nor any 
other national interblendings, ever produce permanent 
mixed races, in the usual acceptation of the term, 
though they are aids, and seemingly indispensable aids 
in the production of new races and varieties within the 
bounds of nationality ; in other words, in the produc- 
tion of national specialization. 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 251 

4th. That all realms and nationalities originally, and 
all specializations of nationality subsequently, have 
been, and are produced by the regular action of chemi- 
cal laws, and that their production obeys the great pri- 
mary chemical necessity of determinate, harmonic, un- 
equal proportions. By this law, vague or indefinite in- 
terblending is absolutely impossible; partially congru- 
ous mixtures tend to destruction by disease, monstrosity, 
or barrenness, while only fully congruous combinations 
have an enduring vitality. 

All our knowledge of organic existence, whether 
vegetable or animal, will be found in «the strictest ac- 
cordance with these statements, while all other modes 
of explanation have but made confusion worse con- 
founded, and difficulties more formidable than before. 

CHAPTER VII. 
THE GORILLA US. MAN. 

HIS TRUE PLACE IN THE ANIMATE SCALE—IS HE BUT A 
GENUS AND ORDER OF THE CLASS MAMMALIA ?—oOR IS 
HE THE INITIAL TYPE OF A VASTLY HIGHER ORDER 
THAN HE YET IMAGINES? 

It is not pleasant to have it proved that one is in 
error, to be told that a discernment of which, perhaps, 
we are not a little proud, has been signally at fault ; 
neither is it agreeable to be moved from positions in 
which we find ourselves comfortable, and bidden to ad- 
just ourselves to new and imperfectly understood rela- 
tions. Hence, in the sphere of mind, Jnnovation is al- 
ways an ominous and hated word, and he who bears it 
on his standard is ever viewed as the disturber of re- 
pose, the cersurer of the present, and the calumniator 
of the past. 

No one ober to novelty as novelty ; only let it ac 

952 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

cord and fraternize with what has gone before—only 
let it come with a friendly smile, shaking hands and 
making itself at home, and it will be an ever-welcome 
guest, always received with open arms. But let it come 
with a frown and a reproof, as a censor and a master, 
ejecting and displacing, and what wonder that its ap- 
proach should be viewed as that of an intruder and a 
foe? Now the novelties of Science are very apt to be| 
lof this latter character—its great truths always are. 
‘Hence its progress is necessarily a warfare, and the 
ground it gains has often to be disputed, inch by inch. 
He who is engaged in a contest and feels himself 
weak, naturally looks around for an auxiliary, hence © 
the invariable appeal to authority, feeling, prejudice, 
interest, and, above all, and before all, to Religion, 
whenever a new truth claims recognition, and is felt to 
be strong. 
Religion, which, in these cases, rarely means any- 
thing more than Theology, is sufficiently plastic to yield 
to the torture of each individual interpreter, and suffi- 
ciently extensive in its relations to meet the ever-chang- 
ing aspects of advancing knowledge. Creeds are so 
numerous, their modifications so innumerable, that no 
truth has ever been uttered by Science which does not 
contradict, either in itself or in its consequences, some 
(form of creed, some modification of religious opinion. 
iHence the most sacred feelings of our nature are ever 
arrayed against the laws and facts of the universe, and 
la perpetual feud is kept up between the Word and the 
‘Works of God. 

And yet Science, when real, is but another term for 
Truth, and the sole aim of its genuine votaries is its 
pursuit by the best and most legitimate means. How 
then can it ever antagonize with religion, except on the 
assumption that religion is false? But Religion is the 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 258 

law of the heart, as Science is the law of the under- 
standing, and the one can no more err than the other. 
Normal: feeling is as infallible as normal perception, 
and both are as unerring as the great laws which have 
called them into being—as the Supreme Mind which has 
set those laws in operation. There never has been, 
then, and never can be, any real feud between Science 
and Religion. But Theology is another matter, and 
there are few who do not practically confound theology 
with religion. Yet theology is but the dress of religion, 
not the reality ; and while one is eternal and ever the 
same, the other is constantly changing with time, and 
circumstance, and grade of knowledge, and even with 
the whims and vices of men. Creeds rise and perish, 
the Revelation of to-day is the scorn of to-morrow, the 
gods of one faith the demons of another; but the same 
object, the same feelings, the same aspirations and 
yearnings underlie all the myriad aspects of this kalei- 
descope of opinion, and the pure heart is ever right, 
however wrong may be the head. 

Science cannot change law or fact to accommodate 
theology ; it is for Theology to suit herself to the re- 
quirements of advancing knowledge, as she has done 
with reference to Astronomy and Geology—as she will 
inevitably be compelled to do with reference to Mira- 
cles and. the Human Origines. She may struggle for 
a while, only to yield in the end! ‘Time out of mind 
she has had to do so; she will ever have to do so until 
she merges her interests in those of Science, and makes 
one with it. And why should not this happy union 
take place? Why must the heart be severed from the 
head, intellect from feeling? Not he who made both, 
and divinely fitted them to interact as minister and 
‘ruler, as counsellor and queen—not he, but the pride 

254 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

and petulance and ignorance of man, have willed their 
unnatural severance. 

There have been men in every age who have clearly 
perceived these fundamental truths, and who, therefore, 
in all seeming discords, have quietly pursued their 
course, fully persuaded that time and patience would 
bring everything into harmony. But these, unfortu- 
nately, are the exceptions to the rule, and, as far as the 
public is concerned, there has always been some current 
~ feud between theology and advancing knowledge. 

It is no more our duty to give adhesion to the cru- 
dities and rashnesses of science, than it is to listen to 
the prejudices of feeling, but where science has calmly 
studied, and maturely weighed ; where facts are abun- 
dant and unequivocal, and inferences clear and irresis- 
tible, even to prejudice itself, then opposition becomes 
not only folly but worse than folly, for it is a rebellion 
against the authority which God himself has given for 
our guidance—an authority, too, which must, after all, 
be obeyed, and from which there les no possible appeal. 
Only with his own mouth can a man eat, only with his 
own eye can he see, only with his own brain can he 
think or reason; is it not then the merest infatuation 
to pretend to have a higher standard of reason than 
that furnished by the only powers with which we can 
reason, or better means of perception than those fur- 
nished by the only instruments with which it is possible 
to perceive ? 

The great Battle of Science, in onr own days has been 
that which Geology has had to wage with the Cosmog- 
ony set forth in the book of Genesis. That battle is 

now virtually over ; all that geology has claimed has _ 

been fully surrendered, and it would be ungracious to 

the struggle while victors and vanquished are still upon 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 955 

the scene, were it not that the latter, untaught by ex- 
perience, still present a defiant front, and refuse to ac- 
knowledge defeat, even while conceding every point 
contested by their opponents. As Science would not 
come to the book of Genesis, the book of Genesis has 
been brought to Science, and heaven and earth set in 
motion to prove that the two records are not, and never 
have been, at real variance. Thus, though yielding in 
one direction, prejudice has not surrendered her weap- 
ons either of attack or defence, but stands prepared to 
encounter every fresh innovation with the very same 
arms, with which she made so vehement an effort to 
crush the rising strength of geology. These are my 
reasons for alluding to the subject in a formal manner, 
for while sophistry remains unexposed and fanaticism 
unchecked, the battle of science is simply removed from 
one field of action to another: from Astronomy to Ge- 
ology, from Geology to Ethnology, Archeology, Myth- 
onomy, and above-all, to the Science of sciences, Cos- 
mology. 

In the language of common life, in all the arrange- 
ments of practical existence, a wide gulf separates man 
from all other terrestrial beings: In the language of 
zoology, and in the classifications of the naturalist, man 
enjoys no pre-eminence beyond that of simply heading 
the long chain of organic types. Which is the correc- 
ter view of his nature and position—which brings him 
‘nearer to his true place in the animate scale—that 
‘which regards him as “ Lord of the Creation” and 
Ruler of the Earth, pre-eminent and apart, or that 
which treats him as a mere animal, a member of a group, 
every other member of which is a beast, and separated 
from these beasts by no broader line of demarcation 
than that which separates one group of beasts from an- 
other—a cat from a dog, a monkey from a squirrel, or 

256 PRE-ADAMILE MAN. 

a cow from a horse—-the line of an order? Which of 
these views is the more ndtural and accurate? ‘This is 
the question which we have here to discuss. 

In the first place, it is obvious that the language of 
common life is simply the expression of unquestionable 
facts. Man zs the lord of the creation ; he does stand 
pre-eminent and apart; there 7s a wide impassible gulf 
between him and all other creatures on this globe. It 
_ is not, then, the language of ordinary life, or the uni- 
versal sentiment of humanity, that is here called upon 
for a defence ; it is Science itself that we have to take 
to task—it is from the zoologist we have to demand 
how it happens that his arrangements as a naturalist 
do not accord with his acts and sentiments as a man, 
that he speaks one language in his closet, and a wholly 
different one in every other relation of life ? 

His books thrown aside, his study closed, the natu- 
ralist walks forth into the world as keenly alive to the 
dignity and pre-eminence of his nature as the least sci- 
entific of his brethren. He no more thinks of bringing 
himself down to the proximate level of the monkey or 
the dog, than he thinks of connecting himself with a 
bramble-bush. He looks around and beholds the al- 
ready great achievements of his race, infantile though 
it be—civilization, arts and sciences, mechanism, learn- 
ing; he looks within, and feels the swellings of lofty 
aspirations, the yearnings for something brighter and 
grander still, the half glimpses, the looming shadows 
of glories and achievements yet to come; and then 
from the proud heights to which his thoughts have 
borne him, he looks down upon the lowly subjects of 
his zoological realm, and asks what are their deeds and 
aspirations? The answer is—none; no creation, no 
aspiration, no change: it is the contrast of magnificent 
reality with the blank vacuity of negation. 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 257 

But his walk ended, his mind refreshed by air, and 
exercise, and change, the man of Science once more re- 
enters his study. Instantly the splendid vision has 
vanished, as if touched by the wand of an enchanter, 
and the refreshed brain is again busily at work, tortur- 
ing itself to discover some sufficient point of distinction 
in the hand, or leg, or arm, or face, or cranium, of some 
chattering monkey or hideous ape, to warrant the sepa- 
ration of the creature from man by some broader 
damarcation than the line of a genus! What is the 
meaning of this great contrast between theory and 
practice—between one phase of thought and another ? 
There must be some serious error here, for truth is con- 
sistency, and*this conduct is not consistent. 

The answer of the naturalist to these questions will 
be something to this effect. Anatomically, he will say, 
wian differs little from the beast—less, in fact, from 
some beasts, than they differ from many others. Man, 
too, is but a single genus—nay, even a single species ; 
where can he be put if not in the group which he most 
resembles? We cannot make a great primary division, 
or a separate class in any sense, for a single species ; 
there is no precedent for such an adjustment within the 
entire range of the organic world. Besides, everywhere 
else structure is the guide and criterion of classification ; 
why should it not be so here? 

This reply seems plausible, but it will not bear ex- 
amination. If man differ but little from the beast 
structurally, how does it happen that he differs much 
from him functionally? Function is but structure in 
action ; superior function but the action of superior 

structure. To say that there may be vast superiority. 

in the one, and little or none in the other, would be to 
say that an effect might be wholly disproportionate to 
its cause, which would be absurd. 

258 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

It matters nothing to this argument whether man’s 
superiority be partial or general, in one portion of his 
nature or in all. It is perfectly indifferent whether it 
lie in his hand or iu his foot, in his brain or in his soul ; 
it equally demands recognition in classification, and re- 
cecnition to the fullest extent. 

Apart from function, structure is valueless. » How, 
then, can a classification be rational which practically 
ignores that which is important, while duly empha- 
Sizing that which, without it, would be worthless; or 
which ignores the superior portion of a nature or 
structure, while giving infinitesimal attention to the 
inferior ? r 

Let it be assumed that man is wholly material in his 
nature ; then the whole, or some portion of his struc- 
ture, must be immeasurably superior to that of all other 
terrestrial existences, since it produces functions im- 
measurably superior. Let it be granted, on the other 
hand, that man is, in part, of a spiritual nature, and that 
his superiority entirely depends upon this portion of 
his being ; such an admission can furnish no reason for 
the neglect of so important a circumstance in our 
estimate of his relative position ia the scale of exis- 
tence. 

Whatever, then, be our theory as ta the immediate 
source of man’s intellectual superiority, we are equally 
bound to recognize in our arrangements the fact of this 
superiority. If anatomy fails us in the study of mental 
structure, we must look to physiology for light. If we 
cannot appreciate either the machinery itself, or its 
more immediate effects. we must look to remoter effects. 
Function is a reality as well as structure, for it is strue- 
ture in action; it has, therefore, to be estimated. 
Where anatomy is powerless, we must look to results, 
however remote, and judge of the nature and value of 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 259 

the cause by the nature and value of the effects. But 
such one-sided arrangements as those in question—ar- 
rangements which virtually ignore the superior half of 
a nature and structure, while giving infinitesimal at- 
tention to the inferior, are not only wholly indefen- 
sible, but would be wholly unaccountable, if we did 
not take into consideration the influence of associa- 
tion and routine, especially in infantile sciences, in 
which the mind is absorbed in the study of details, and 
the functions of the reasoner are discharged by the 
mere observer. 

We should hardly deem it avery brilliant feat of 
classification were an upholsterer gravely to persist in 
grouping upright pianofortes with chiffonniers, and hor- 
izontal ones with tables, on the simple ground of exter- 
nal form and material; yet this is precisely what we 
have all done or acquiesced in as naturalists and anat- 
omists. We have duly estimated the mahogany and 
rosewood, but quite forgotten all about the music. If 
we have not omitted the character of Hamlet, “ by ex- 
press desire,” yet Hamlet has forgotten to appear, and 
the audience has forgotten to call for him. 

It is quite true that, in external structure, a man dif- 
fers far less from a monkey than a monkey does from 
an elephant ; but it is equally true that a square piano- 
forte differs far less, in external structure, from a table, 
than a table differs from a harp or flute; yet the harp, 
flute, and piano belong to the same category of exist- 
ences, and the table to quite another. Could we duly 
estimate the finer chords of the living instrument, we 
should find that its superiority in tone, power, and 
character, was the simple result of its superiority and 
specialty, in material or in structure, one or both. On 
what else could it depend? Why, then, fail to recognize, 
in classification, this superiority when the very ob- 

260 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

ject of classification is to group things in due relation 
with the nature and amount of their resemblances and 
differences, their affinities and discrepancies, their ap- 
proximations and recessions in material, structure, 
function, rank, and all other qualities and aspects of 
their being ? 

But, it will be said, man is a single genus nay, even 
a single species; where then can he be put, if not in the 
eroup which he most nearly resembles? Supposing we 
had ten thousand silver and copper coins, and only a 
single gold eagle, should we not recognize that eagle 
as something distinct and apart in nature and value, 
however near its approach in size and shape to a quarter 
dollar? Or would the fact of its being one, and not 
many, make the least difference in our estimate? Man. 
is the sovereign of the organic world, distinct and 
apart. Why confound him with baser metal, because 
of resemblances in mere form and stamp ? 

If man be a single type he is also the most recent of 
all the great types; have we allowed him sufficient 
time to grow into complexity? The universal law of 
growth is from the low to the high, from the simple to 
the complex, from the one to the many. ‘The entire 
stream of geological evidence leads to the conclusion 
that every great group in the animal kingdom was once 
represented by a single type. This evidence is far 
from being complete, as a matter of positive observa- 
tion, but this is its entire tendency in every direction ; 
in all groups, great and small ; in kingdom and in class, 
as in genus‘and in species ; and, in principle, it could 
not be otherwise. 

Man, is younger, by millions of years, than the ini- 
tial type of the beast, to say nothing of the bird, reptile, 
fish, insect, ete. He is younger by hundreds of thou- 
sands of years than the mammalian type to which he 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 961 

most approximates—the monkey ; we cannot then ex- 
pect him to be much diversified. It is impossible that 
he should ferm an exception in the plan of the universe, 
or in the inevitable laws of development ; let us then 
clearly recognize his initial position, and allow time for 
his progress. And certainly, if we are to judge from 
the innumerable minor groups into which his species 
has already been split up, we must admit that he is at 
all events traveling on the high road to diversity. 

The errors of early science are less due to simple 
ignorance or precipitancy of deduction than they are 
to unsystematic reasoning. When there are no rules 
of guidance, and no criteria of accuracy, it is not only 
easy to err, but easy to err needlessly. Had natura- 
lists commenced their labors by distinctly formulating 
the obvious requirements of scientific classification, or 
had they subsequently placed before their eyes such a 
formula for testing the propriety of their adjustments, 
so serious an error as the one under consideration could 
never have been committed. What ts it that we aim 
at in scientific arrangement? Simply to place the ob- 
jects to be classed in such conjunctions as shall cor- 
rectly represent their relative rank, and their several 
relations of affinity and difference. Consequently :— 

In every consistent arrangement, all objects will be so 
placed as to approach to, or recede from, each other, in 
exact proportion to the number, nature, and fe pie 
of their affinities and differences. 

This simple and obvious law is primary, and, so to 
speak, innate. It belongs to the very nature of things, 
and applies with equal force to the highest generaliza- 
tions of science and the most familiar arrangements of 
every-day life. I< requires us to consider the rank and 
importance of attributes, the number and character of 
affinities and differences ; it requires us to embrace all 

262 -PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

and exclude none ; and, finally, it requires us to gra- 
duate strictly the rank of our divisions, so as to make 
them a clear mirror of the rank of our differences, be- 
cause every oversight or carelessness, in such cases, is 
a distortion of the true relations of things, and not only 
anerror, but a source of errors. 

~ With such a law as this before his eyes, it would 
have been impossible for the naturalist to have placed 
man in a group from which he is more widely severed, 
in all the higher attributes of his being, than that group 
is severed from any other, high or low, within the 
bounds of the animal kingdom. 

When we make the me of our divisions a clear 
mirror of the rank of our differences, we shall not base 
important lines of division on trivialities of structure, 
nor represent important differences of nature by divid- 
ing lines of minor rank. We shall not feel bound to 
expend volumes of learned controversy, and endless de- 
tails of minute anatomy, in emphasising the differences 
between the hand and foot of the monkey and the hand © 
and foot of man, in order to justify our separation of 
these two animals by the line of an order, nor shall we 
feel bound, on ‘the ground of relatively trivial resem- 
blances, to destroy the consistency of a great primary 
group, by forcing into it an element of an entirely dif- 
ferent rank. 

It is quite true that nature is so consistent in all her 
operations, and that mechanism of a high order re 
quires such minute relative adaptations in all its parts, 
that, absolutely speaking, the knowledge of the part is 
a key to the knowledge of the whole. But then we 
must have adequate intelligence, and patience to make 
the profound and careful deductions which this mode 
of procedure often demands; nor must we confound 
the means with the end, and come to view. our key as 

a 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. - 2638 

the very object we are in pursuit of, instead of being 
its simple index. Anatomy and physiology are con- 
fessedly most important guides and criteria in zoolo- 

gical classification ; all important, in fact, as far as 

they are fully available ; but then it must be remem- 

bered that there may be two grand departments of 

anatomy and physiology, the material and the spiri- 
tual, and that even if there be not, there is that which 
is equivalent to them. Now, spiritual structure is be- 
yond our reach ; but if we believe it to exist, it is a 
fundamental error to xzgnore it in our arrangements ; 
and if we do not believe it to exist, we must, at least, 
believe in an equivalent—namely, a refinement of ma- 
terial structure, capable of producing all the phenomena 
of mind ; and to ignore such a portion of our organiza- 
tion as this, is an error equally fundamental. Where 
anatomy fails us, we ought to seek aid from physiol- 
ogy, and the reverse. Physiology can aid us here; if 
we cannot dissect with the knife and see with the eye 
those ultimate textures and fluids on which mental phe- 
nomena immediately depend, we can study the phe- 
nomena themselves in their external manifestations, — 
and judge of the general nature and value of the cause 
by the nature and value of the effects. By practically 
neglecting all this, in the case before us, the naturalist 
has fallen into one of the gravest errors which it was 
well possible for a classifier to make ; he has brought 
into incongruous conjunction, and separated only by 
the mere line of an order, a being who, in all the 
higher attributes of his nature, demands not merely the 
separation of a great class, but even that of an entire 
kingdom. 

True, the affinities, the resemblances, must not be 
neglected, but such affinities everywhere present them- 
selves ip the case of initial types. It is difficult to dis- 

264 PRE-ADAMITE MaN. 

tinguish from vegetable structures the lowest animal 
forms, yet the humblest of these forms has a something 
in its nature of such vast superiority, that it lifts it not 
only into a new class, but even into a new kingdom. 
The lowest existing mammals approach, in many im- 
portant attributes, to the structure of the bird ; others, 
still lower, and more bird-like, have doubtless passed 
away. The lowest type of the bird may be now known 
as a saurian, the oldest reptile as a fish,and soon. At 
all events, even the lowest existing orders, in every 
_ class, have striking affinities with the next lowest class. 
All this speaks of plan and growth; but it does not 
justify the confounding of high and low, still less the 
entire neglect of the former. , 

The present is one of those many questions which 
present serious difficulties when viewed simply on the 
eround of mere observation and detail; none when 
examined on the higher ground of principle. All hesi- 
tation vanishes the moment we look to the necessities 
of rational arrangement. ‘The cause must be propor- 
tionate to the effect : if the effect be superior, so must 
be the cause. Function is the product of structure and 
nature: the superiority of the one is the superiority of 
the other. These truths are plain and immutable, and 
equally certain, whether our knowledge of causation 
be direct or inferential. The fundamental laws of ar- 
rangement require that objects should be grouped or 
separated in exact relation with the number and im- 
portance of their resemblances and differences ; there- 
fore, with reference to the totality of their nature ; 
therefore, in such a manner that the lines of separation 
shall be narrow or broad, just as are the differences 
little. or great. Now, the most important attributes 
of animal existences are mental attributes ; all others 
are valueless, except in so far as they can minister 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 265 

directly or indirectly to these ; therefore, all the major 
divisions of zoology, not to say all divisions whatever, 
must be based on mental attributes, and be broad or 
narrow as these are great and many, or few and trivial. 
These are the laws ; the application is simple. 

Man differs from the monkey and every other mam- 
mal by more numerous and vastly higher mental differ- 
ences tlran any one group of mammals differs from any 
other ; therefore the line that separates him from the 
monkey is not that of an order, but one much broader. 

Man differs as much mentally from every beast as the 
beast differs from the bird, the bird from the reptile, 
the reptile from the fish, and so on—as much, in fact, 
as any great primary group in the animal kingdom 
differs from the next in rank ascending or descending ; 
therefore, he cannot be separated from the beast by any 
narrower line than that of a great class. Whether his 
destiny be to continue,one, or to develop into many 

types, matters hothing » this argument—he equally 
forms, de jure and de facto, one of the great primary 
divisions of the animate world. 

But man differs far more from the beast in mind than 
the beast differs from the bird, or the bird from the 
reptile—more, in fact, than the beast differs from the 
worm. It is not, then, even the line of a great class 
which must separate him from the monkey, but one far 
broader and more important. From the mammalian to 
the articulate type is a descent of four great classic 
stages, yet no one will pretend that man, in his intel- 
lectual and moral nature, does not rise far higher above 
every other mammalian type than the highest of these 
types rises above the highest insect; and,*if so, his sepa- 
ration is not one of class simply. If we consider man 
in his very highest aspects, such as he appears in his 
‘4 highest races, and in the highest por tions of those 

. 266 PRE-ADAMII1E MAN. 

races, and then remember that he is an Initial and an 
advancing type—if we view him as the highest poet, 
the highest orator, the highest artist, mechanist, states- 
man, ruler, warrior—as the highest naturalist, mathe- 
matician, astronomer, etc., one and all, and then com- 
pare him with the lowest existing mammalian types, 
such as the opossum or ornithorhynchus, can we say 
that he differs less from these than they differ from the 
very lowest radiates ? 

But man’s nature is as yet but very partially de- 
veloped. He is very young, even as a genus, even as 
a species. We probably know little of what he is yet 
really capable. We are judging him as if he were the 
real man, when he is but the tiny infant of humanity, 
just awakening into the first shadowy consciousness of 
himself, and of the great universe around him. Yes- 
terday he was but the savage; the day before he was 
unborn. Let us wait, at least for his childhood, before 
we judge of his maturity. The oxnithorhyncus, on the 
other hand, is a very old animal, long past its maturity, 
just preparing, according to all appearances, to add the 
yet few remaining links to the fossils of its race. The 
comparison, therefore, is wholly unfair to man. We 
compare him not with the infancy of the first beast, but 
in all probability with the maturity of types several 
generic grades above the initial beast. 

We will not pursue this subject farther in the pre- 
sent work, but may have occasion to again resume it ; 
nor shall we seek to evade the difficulties, nor shrink 
from the logical consequences which the present view 
of the matter entails. The reader will see at a glance 
that this view opens out a great and exciting theme. 
A new Avngdom in nature is no trivial term. A king- 
dom whose lowest type is man, is something to rouse 
the dullest, and animate the coldest. It is either an- 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN, 267 

argumentative dream, or one of those great facts which 
from time to time startle Science into a new conscious- 
ness, opening out new spheres of thought and new fields 
of research 

A new kingdom, in the ascending scale of being 
means nothing less, according to all the known ana: 
logies of nature, than a series of great classic groups 
rising one above the other, mentally and physically, 
each with its numerous orders, genera, species, and in- 
dividualities. When we compare the extremes of the 
animal kingdom—the infusorial monad or a particle of 
sponge, with the elephant or the dog—what are we to 
say of a grand sweep of existences whose lowliest form, 
whose infusorial monad, whose first bit of sponge is 
Man! There is something here to confound as well as 
to dazzle, and yet is it not the old story? The reali- 
ties of nature immeasurably transcend the highest and 
the strangest dreams of man, and the progress of know- 
ledge is ever from marvel to marvel. 

A new kingdom in nature means millions of ages yet 
to come: a kingdom of this rank means a sphere of 
existence appropriate to both its dignity and import- 
ance. It means the infancy of the present and the 
past, the immeasurable stretch of the future ; progress 
everywhere, inorganic, vegetable, animal, Intellectual. 
It means, in a word, the turning over of a new page in 
the great book—the drawing aside of another fold of the 
mystic veil. Let us then neither delude ourselves with 
a dream, if this be a dream, nor frighten ourselves out 
of a great reality, if it be such, but let us calmly and 
resolutely scrutinize the conditions and necessities of 
this great problem, and then decide, in accordance with 
Jaw and evidence. We have to consider whether an 
anitial type does not necessarily mean a new growth, 
and whether a new growth does not mean a regular and 

268 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

pre-arranged advance to maturity and decay. We have 
to settle whether man’s type of structure rises above 
the nearest mammalian grade, by the stage of a genus 
or an order only, or by that of a class or a kingdom ; 
and whether an initiated genus must not necessarily 
mean one which is destined to develop into many spe- 
cies ; an initiated class, one which in due course present 
numerous genera and orders ; and an initiated king- 
dom, one which must, in time, exhibit a grand sweep of 
classic groups with their elaborate apparatus of subdi- 
visions ; and, finally, whether an initiated world can be 
other than in its merest infancy, when the very first of 
its intellectual inhabitants has but just oudded into be- 
ing. These are the questions which we have to deter- 
mine, and there are more resources for their settlement 
within reach than the reader is yet aware of. 

The three subjoined articles are quoted from’ the 
columns of newspapers, and are here presented, not for 
their fullness, or even suggestiveness, but as mere waifs 
from the literary atmosphere, showing clearly which 
way the wind is blowing, and demonstrating that there 
is a great and unappeasable appetite in the public mind 
for strouger food than it has hitherto subsisted upon. 
Indeed, it is plain that even the unread masses of the 
people are beginning to doubt the Adamic theory, and 
to demand a different explanation of the human genesis. 

One of the most exciting and interesting discussions 
of the session followed the reading of a paper, by Rich- 
ard Owen, D.C.L., F.R.S., “On the Zoological Signi- 
ficance of the Brain and Limb Characters of Man, with 
Remarks on the Cast of the Brain of the Gorilla.” 

The position which Mr. Owen endeavored to estab- 
lish was, that there is, between the brain and limbs of 
the gorilla and man, a much greater structural dis- 

tinction than there is between the gorilla and the animal 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 269 

next below it—the orang, for example—in the scale of 
-ereation. He argued that, in the ascending scale, from 
the lowest animal to the highest, there is a regular and 
gradual development of brain structure, but that be- 
tween the highest animal and man there is a remarka- 
ble and sudden enlargement of the brain, manifested 
more particularly in the extension of the cerebrum 
over the cerebellum; whereas in the gorilla, orang, 
ape, baboon, and monkey tribes, the cerebellar portion 
of the brain projects posteriorly far beyond the cerebral 
portion. The cerebellum is also proportionally larger 
in those animals than in man, and this disproportion is 
much greater between man and the gorilla than between 
the gorilla and the above-named animals. Other ana- 
tomical distinctions, though less noteworthy, were also 
pointed out. 

The positions advanced by Prof. Owen were warmly 
contested by Prof. Huxley, President of the Geological 
Section. Others took part in the debate, and there was 
much disagreement in relation to the anatomical facts 
as set forth by Prof. Owen. Prof. Huxley contended 
that the great difference between man and animals 
was psychical and moral, not anatomical, and that the 
alleged remarkable structural difference between the 
brain of man and that of the gorilla had no existence. 

The subject was discussed at much length, and seemed 
to involve the issue, whether man was a developed 
monkey, or whether monkey was a degraded man. It 
was amusing to hear learned professors of Comparative 
Anatomy, Physiology, Zoology,and Ethnology—M.D.’s, 
_ F.R.S.’s, D.D.’s, etc., discuss for a whole hour the na- 
ture of the distinction between the man immortal and 
the brute that perishes, without one uf them looking in 
the right direction for a solution of the problem. 

Instead of disputing about the posterior prolongation 
of the cerebrum, the relative development of the cere- 
bellum, the posterior cornu, the hippocampi, etc., they 
should have looked at the phrenological organs. There 
they would have found a structural differeuce and de- 
velopment quite sufficient to satisfy Prof. Owen, and a 
psychical and moral difference as immense as Prof. 
Huxley could desire. They would have seen that the 

270 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

real distinction is in kind, not in degree. Man is en- 
dowed with certain mental organs or powers which no . 
animal possesses the least trace of—hope, ideality, con- 
scientiousness, and spirituality. ‘These are the moral 
organs, and constitute the religious element of human- 
ity ; and it is this element which prompts the human 
being to look forward to a future existence, to improve 
his condition here from generation to generation, and 
to believe in and worship a Supreme Being. It is true 
that in the reflective portion of the intellectual faculties 
the difference between man and the gorilla is immense. 
both as to size and quality of brain structure ; and 
this, were it ten times as great, would only render man 

“superior animal.” But the superaddition of new 
organs renders. him another being entirely, and raises 
him quite out of the domain of the animal kingdom. 
“Tn the image of God” was man created. This is not 
true of mere animals. 

The Irish Times of October 10, 1862, revorts a 
meeting of the far-famed British Association for the 
Advancement of Science, then holding its sittings at 
Cambridge, England. The proceedings of Section D, 
Zoology and Botany, gave rise to a discussion on the 
gorilla and man. Among those present were the Duke 
of Devonshire, Mr. Walpole, M. P., Mr. Napier, and 
Mr. Whiteside, M. P. Some remarks having been 
made with reference to “ spontaneous generation”— 

Professor Owen exhibited two casts, one of the 
human brain, which had been hardened in spirits, and 
had therefore not preserved its exact form, but to all 
intents and purposes, it would serve as an illustration 
of the human brain. The other cast was taken from 
the interior of the cranium of the gorilla. From an 
examination of these, the difference between the brain 
of man and that of monkeys was at once perceptible. 
In the brain of man, the posterior lobes of the cere- 
brum overlapped, to a considerable extent, the small 
brain or cerebellum, whereas, in the gorilla, the poste- 
rior lobes of the cerebrum did not project beyond the 

a 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. QTL 

lobes of ‘the cerebellum. The posterior lobes in the 
one were prominent and well marked, in the other defi- 
cient. These peculiarities had been referred to by 
Todd and Bowman. From a very prolonged investi- 
cation into the characters of animals, he felt persuaded 
that the characters of the brain were the most stead- 
fast ; and he was thus induced, after many years of 
study, to propose his classification of the mammalia, 
based upon the differences in the development in their 
brain structure. He had placed man—owing to the 

_ prominence of the posterior lobes of his brain, the ex- 

istence of a posterior cornu in the lateral ventricles, 
and the presence of a hippocampus minor in the pos- 
terior cornu—in a distinct sub-kingdom, which he had 
called archancephala, between which and the other 
members of the mammalia the distinctions are very 
marked, and the rise was a very abrupt one. The 
brain, in his estimation, was a far better guide in 
classifying animals than the foot ; but the same differ- 
ence that existed between their brains was also observa- 
ble between their feet. The lecturer referred to dia- 
gram which represented the feet of the ave-aye, the 
gorilla, and man, pointing out the chief difference in 
the structure of the skeleton. The difference he con- 
sidered sufficiently great to elevate man from the sub- 
kingdom from which the monkeys belonged, and to 
place him in a distinct sub-kingdom by himself. 
Professor Huxley observed that the paper just laid 
before the Section appeared to him in no way to repre- 
sent the real nature of the problem under discussion. 
He would therefore put the problem in another way. 
The question was partly one of facts, aud partly one of 
reasoning. ‘The question of fact was, what are the 
structural differences between man and the highest 
apes? The question of reasoning, what is the syste- 
matic value of those differences? Several years ago 
Professor Owen had made three distinct assertions re- 
specting the differences which obtain between the brain 
of man and that of the highest apes. He asserted that 
three structures were ‘‘ peculiar to and characteristic” 

‘ of man’s brains—these being the “ posterior lobe,” the 

“posterior cornu,” aud the “ hippocampus minor.” Ina 

272 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

controversy which had lasted for some years, Mr. Owen 
had not qualified these assertions, but had repeatedly 
reiterated them. 
4 Professor Huxley, on the other hand, had contro- 
verted these statements, and affirmed, on the contrary, 
that the three structures mentioned not only exist, but 
are often better developed than in man, in all the higher 
apes. He, (Professor Huxley,) now appealed to the 
anatomists present in the Section, to say whether the 
universal voice of Continental and British anatomists 
had not entirely borne out his statements, and refuted 
those of Professor Owen. ‘lhe Professor then discussed 
the relations of the foot of man with those of the apes, 
and showed that the same argument could be based 
upon them as on the brain—that argument being, that 
the structural differences between man and the highest 
ape are of the same order, and only slightly different 
in degree from those which separate the apes, one from 
another. In conclusion, he expressed his opinion of the 
futility of discussions like the present. In his opinion, 
tle differences between man and the lower animals are 
not to be expressed by his toes or his brain, but are 
moral aud intellectual. 

Professor Rolleston said he would try to supply the 
members of the Association with the points of positive 
difference between the human and the ape’s brain. For 
doing this we had been abundantly shown that the 
hippocampus minor and the posterior lobe were insuffi- 
cient. As differentive they must be given up at last. 
But as much had recently been done for the descriptive 
anatomy of the brain by Gratiolet and others, as had 
been done for astronomy by Stokes and Adams, for lan- 
guage by Max Miiller, and that this had been ignored 
in this discussion was little creditable to British science. 
This analysis of the brain’s structure had established, as 
differentive between man and the ape, four great differ- 
ences—two morphological, two quantitative The two 
quantitative are thegreat absolute weight and the great 
height of the human brain ; the two morphological, the 
multifidity of the frontal lobes corresponding to the 
forehead, usually, popularly, and, as this analysis shows, 
correctly, taken asa fair exponent of man’s intelligence, 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 273 

and the absence of the external perpendicular figure. 
This had been abundantly shown by Gratiolet. No 
reference to these most important matters had been_ 
made by Professor Owen, and this omission could not 
fail to pnt the British Association’s repute for acquaint- 
ance with the work of foreign fellow-laborers at great 
disadvantage in the eyes of such foreigners as might be 
present. Professor Rolleston concluded by saying that 
if he had expressed himself with any unnecessary vehe- 
“mence he was sorrv for it, but that he felt there were 
things less excusable than vehemence, and that the laws 
of ethics and love of truth were things higher and bet- 
ter than were the rules of etiquette or decorous reti- 
cence... 

Mr. W. H. Flower, looking at the subject solely in 
an anatomical view asa question of fact, stated that 
the result of a considerable number of dissections of 
brains of various monkeys, was that the distinction be- 
tween the brain of man and monkeys did not lie in the - 
posterior lobe or the hippocampus minor, which parts 
were proportionately more largely developed in many 
monkeys than in man, and that if these parts were used 
in the classification of man and the monkeys, the series 
would be, first, the little South American marmosets, 
then would follow the baboons, the cercopithea, mac- 
aque, then man must be placed, followed by the antro- 
poid apes, the orang-outang, chimpanzee, and gorilla, ° 
and, last, the American howling monkey. 

Professor Owen replied. Professor Rolleston had led 
the meeting to conclude that he had not paid any atten- 
tion to the convolutions of the brain of mammals, and that 
the investigation of this subject was the exclusive pro- 
perty of the German anatomists, whereas he might be 
permitted to state that almost at the very time that Leu- 
ret wrote his memoir on this subject he had delivered a 
course of lectures on the couvolutions of the brain, which 
he regretted had not been published, owing to the pres- 
sure of other labors ; but the diagrams were still in exis- 
tence, as his successor could testify, in the Mnsenn of 
the Roy al College of Surgeons. 

Much has been said, and very loosely, on the saree 
of a connecting link between man and animals. In 

274 : PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

fact, there is no such thing as a connecting link between 
man and animals. Linking means interlocking, each 
taking in a part of the other, which, applied to the sub- 
ject before us, is a fallacy, a misnomer. Strata of 
being, like courses of brick in a wall, one above an- 
other, isa truth, and therefore a better simile. The 
“What Is It?” for years past on exhibition at Barnum’s 
Museum, has been seriously described to us by clergy- 
men and other educated men as a connecting link, as if 
it were half man and half beast. True, Barnum’s ad- 
vertisement used to read, “ Is it man ? is it beast? or is 
it both?” But the acute showman had the sagacity not 
to make the assertion. The gorilla, many specimens 
of which were on exhibition in New York, some years 
since, brought from Africa by M. Du Chaillu, was a 
subject of much speculation by persons who were not 
physicians, anthropologists, or ethnologists. 
_ Though monkeys, baboons, orang-outangs, and goril- 
las have clenching power to the hands (most of them 
also have the same to the feet) ; though some of these 
animals are in body, particularly in skeleton, consider- 
ably like the human, and though some apes have the 
rudiments of a nose, they differ in so many other points 
that the only verdict possible relative to them is animal, 
BEAST. As mind, including the higher reason and mo- 
ral sentiments, constitutes the strictly human peculi- 
arity ; the faculties which animals do not possess being 
added to those which are common to the lower animals, 
constitute human nature. When we examine the wide 
range of animated life and find perception and instinct 
in various degrees of development and perfection in the 
lower animals, and find nothing in them which can pro- 
perly be called reason or moral sentiment, we regard 
this as the true line which divides forever and thorough- 
ly animals from man. On this point the old Hdinburgh 
Review, which more than thirty years ago took ground 
against Phrenology, has of late indorsed the principle 
for which we now contend, as follows: “The brain is 
observed progressively to be improved in its structure 
and augmented in volume more and more, until in man 
we behold it possessing some parts of which animals are 
destitute and wanting none which they possess.” 

ll 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 215 

We have seen two views of the skull of the male 
gorilla. ‘The animal was over five feet in height, and 
in figure had the semblance of aman. He weighed 
nearly three hundred pounds, measured fifty-one inches 
round the breast under the arms, and, without a weapon, 
was probably able to master the unarmed assault of fifty 
common men. Nearly all the brain is above and about 
the opening of the ear. From it we can learn of the 
power of the gorilla ; and, judging from his tremendous 
jaws, we doubt not he would be able to grapple suc- 
cessfully with the bear. Is there anything human about 
these teeth? Those tusks look more like a tiger’s. The 
erinding teeth resemble those of a bear, adapted to crush 
fruits and nuts, and we see nothing human in that face. 
Behold those bony ridges about the eyes, and that ridge 
running backward from the center of the top of the 
skull, adapted to the attachment of muscles! All these 
are indices of a most powerful muscular system. 

A child three months old has more brain than the 
largest gorilla the world has seen, and nearly all the 
brain the gorilla has, is devoted to mere animal pro- 
pensity. 

It is an interesting fact, and, to these “ connecting. 
link” people, we think is a “stunner,” that this terrible 
beast, this human-shaped terror of the African forest, 
has less intellectual abilities, less instinctive skill, than 
several of the ape tribe that are not one-tenth his size ; 
and it is interesting to phrenologists, and ought to be 
to everybody, that these more skillful and intelligent 
chimpanzees have a more highly organized brain. In- 
deed, we have seen a chimpanzee that did not weiyh 
over forty pounds, perhaps less, whose brain was more 
than three-fourths as large as that of the largest gorilla, 
and, what is more, it was better developed iu the froa- 
tal or intellectual portion, but without moral. sentiment. 

The skull of an Australian dog indicates a much. 
greater likeness to the gorilla than the gorilla does to 
the human. Indeed, we utterly repudiate the idea that 
the gorilla skull has anything resembling humanity 
about it. The Australian dog is low, fierce, and has a 
small brain, as may be seen by the bulbous: portion 
above and back of the under jaw. 

2°76 PRKE-ADAMITE MAN. 

Whether the gorilla could be tamed and domesticated 
like the dog is doubted by those who have had most to 
do with him, though doubtless he might be improved. 

Notwithstanding his apparently human form, his teeth, 
face, and brain indicate him to be in all respects a 
beast—ferocious and savage in the last degree. 

Luke Burke says, in reference to this general subject, 
and I perfectly agree with him, that “he has seen with 
much pleasure that he does not stand alone in assign-: 
ing to man, zoologically, the supremacy which the com- 
mon sense of mankind has universally and always as- 
signed to him, on every other ground.” He finds in fact 
that he has even been anticipated on this point. 

In Professor Huxley’s paper, On the Relations of Man 
to the Lower Animals (Natural History Review. No. 
1, January, 1861), after referring to Professor Owen, 
who raises man to the rank of a sub-class in the animal 
kingdom, he adds—‘‘M. Terres* vindicates the dignity 
of man still more strongly, by demanding for the human 
family the rank of a kingdom equal to the Animalia or 
Plante ; while a countryman of our own. arrogates to 
his fellows so high a place in the aristocracy of nature 
as to deny that mankind can be thought of zoologically 
at all.” (p. 69) 

*«<Thomme ne forme ni une espéce in une genre comparable aux 
Primate. L’homme a lui seul constitue un regne & part—le Regne 
humain.’”’ Resumé des Legons sur l’Embryologie Anthropologique, 
Comptes Rendus, 1851. 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 21 

Hart Third. 

HORS EES MA: Ni. 

CHAPTER I. 

TESTIMONY OF THE ROCKS TO THE EXISTENCE OF PRE- 
ADAMITE MAN ONE HUNDRED THOUSAND YEARS AGO. 

Louis Agassiz, in speaking of geological time, says : 
“ Among the astounding discoveries of modern science 
is that of the immense periods that have passed in the 
gradual formation of the earth. So vast were the 
cycles of the time preceding even the appearance of 
man on the surface of our globe, that our own period 
seems as yesterday when compared with the epochs 
that have gone before it. Had we only the evidence 
of the deposits of rocks heaped above each other in reg- 
ular strata by the slow accumulation of materials, they 
alone would convince us of the long and slow maturing 
of God’s work on earth; but when we add to these 
successive populations of whose life this world has been 
the theater, and whose remains are hidden in the rocks 
into which the mud of sand or soil of whatever kind on 
which they lived has hardened in the course of time— 
or the enormeus chains of mountains whose upheaval 
divided these periods of quiet accumulation by great 
convulsions—or the chanées ofa different nature in the 
configuration of our globe, as the sinking of lands be- 
neath the ocean, or the gradual rising of continents and - 
islands above; or the slow growth of the coral reefs. 
those wonderful sea-walks, raised by the little ocean 
architects whose own bodies furnish both the building 
‘stone and cement that binds them together, and who 
have worked. so busily during the long centuries, that 
there are extensive countries, mountain chains, islands, 
and long lines of coast, consisting solely of their re- 
mains—or the countless forests that have grown up, 

278 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

flourished, died, and decayed, to fill the storehouses of 
coal that feed the fires of the hnman race—if we con- 
sider all these records of the past, the intellect fails to 
grasp a chronology of which our experience furnishes 
no data, and time that flies behind us seems as much an 
eternity to our conception as the future that stretches 
indefinitely before us.’ 

As with Agassiz; so with a host of others, not only 
in his own chosen, but other fields of iuquiry and re- 
search. Nott, Glydon, Calvert, De Wette, Gesenius, 
Kichorn, Ammon, Herder, Kavanagh, Rousseau, Tay- 
lor, and a host of equally brilliant suns in the scientific 
firmament, all testify to the same end and purpose, and 
declare that man is not the creature of a mere six 
thousand brief years, as the world has been accustomed 
to believe, and that, too, not on solid evidence, but npon 
the ipse dixit of some unlearned and prejudiced man. I 
say “unlearned,” because I deem that man truly so who 
has studied only in one direction, and mastered but a 
single principle of education. 

“ One science can but one single genius fit, 
So vast is art—so narrow human wit,” 
is a wise old saw, according to the wisdom of the past, 
and it may have once been true, but if so, such is not 
the case in these days. No man is competent to give 
a final and decisive opinion on a science or point which 
he may have studied for a lifetime, unless he be ac- 
quainted with its various cognates. For instance, we 
would think but little of the opinion of an astronomer— 
a mere Boston-Common star-gazer—who had no ac- 
quaintance with optics, or of that ofa political economist 
not familiar with climatology and agriculture. For 
the same reason ought we to be cautious of accepting 
the teachings of a preacher, whether lay or clerical, 
who, departing from his legitimate sphere, ignorantly 
attempts to settle any question of chronology, psychol- 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 279 

ogy, ethnology, or geology, with a text of Scripture or 

citation from the “ Fathers,” having no more real con- ~ 

nection with his legitimate business -—soul-saving — 

than Tiglath Pilaser had with Horace Greeley’s over- 
| land journey to California, or Speaker Raymond’s to 
- Solferino. 

In preparing this, as well as the other parts of my 
book, I have freely availed myself of all material, of 
whatever kind, from whatever source, that suited me, or 
had a legitimate bearing on the topic under treatmeut, 
consequently I claim no especial originality as regards 
the matter, but only in its application and arrange- 
ment; for my book is only for the purpose of shedding 
light on a subject heretofore involved in obscurity. 

* * *K * end 

The course of science is ever onward. Discoveries 
are continually being made, which are not only in them- 
selves startling and calculated to revolutionize all our 
previous opinions, but which prepare the way for re- 
velations even more marvelous than themselves, and 

_such as, had they been but hinted at a few centuries ago, 
would have been treated as the most extravagant specu- 
lations of a madman, or the dream of an Arab poet re- 
veling in the regions of fancy and romance. So many 
long-cherished theories have already given place to 
sounder and more correct views of nature, through the 
instrumentality of experiment and induction, that the 
Jhuman mind becomes in a manner prepared at any mo- . 
ment to unlearn the results of years of tuition, at the 
signal given by some known worshiper in the temple 
of Science. 

A few years ago, when the grand truths of geology 
first made themselves felt amongst the students of na- 
ture, the non-scientific world stood aghast at the bold- 
ness of the theories propounded, and the novelty of the 

280 —C- PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

facts upon wl.ich those theories were based. A quar- 
ter of a century later those doctrines had become uni- 
versally recognized ; all previous opinions regarding 
the chronology of the earth had been hurried away into 
the limbo of exploded hypotheses ; and geology had 
found its way into the education lists of the most ele- 
mentary schools. Young ladies talked learnedly of 
rocks and fossils, and’ geological implements became as 
well-known as children’s toys. The pulpits resounded 
with the new truths of the great antiquity of the world, 
and the press lent its aid in the diffusion of scientific 
knowledge. The statement of the Rev. Dr. Lightfoot, 
that the heavens and the earth were created exactly at 
six o’clock on Sunday: morning, in the month of Sep- 
tember, at the equinox of the year B. c. 4004, was very 
correctly looked upon as being quite akin to some of 
the whimsical theories with which schoolmen amused — 
themselves by discussing during the middle ages. The 
astronomer had said that there were stars so distant in 
the infinity of space, that since their creation a suffi- 
cient time had not elapsed to bring their light to our 
own small planet, and the geologist now proclaimed 
that the human imagination might wander back over 
periods vieing in duration with the distances of the 
heavenly bodies, and still be myriads of ages from that 
point in eternity when creation woke into being. The 
firm old earth upon which we tread, all recognize now 
as having commenced her career in a period so remote 
that human thought is paralyzed in its contemplation. 
Nor doesit apply simply to the inorganic part of nature. 
The organic kingdoms, with their superiority of form, 
and their wondrous endowment of life, are now known 
to stretch back in their existence through periods which 
even imagination fails to fathom. Animals of various 
kinds have lived and died myriads of ages ago, and the 

PRE-ADAMITF MAN. 281 

vestiges of their mortality are still preserved in those 
old rocks that have recently disclosed so many secrets. 
Plants of every grade and every shape have filled the | 
earth with a luxurious vegetation thousands of times 
over, each to flourish in its turn, and at last to return 
to the soil, and fix its impress there for the generations 
of men to observe and philosophize upon a million of 
ages afterwards. Sea, and air, and earth have each 
been inhabited, innumerable times over, with various 
forms of living things; whose whole race has perished 
in the lapse of ages, to give place to others, who,. in 
their turn, should also disappear. All this the merest 
tyro in science now knows, and no one can be found 
bold enough to dispute it. One reserve, and one only, 
has been, up to the present, placed upon this doctrine. 
Among organic beings, man, it has been held, is of re- 
cent origin. Between six and seven thousand years 
ago his superior organization made its appearance on 
the globe after an indefinite series of centuries had been 
spent in preparing the way for his coming, and the 
earth for his habitation. 

Within the last few years facts have been brought to 
light, however, which, if insufficient to demonstrate that 
the human race has existed on the earth for a longer 
period than is generally imagined, at least are caleu- 
lated to somewhat modify the views at present enter- 
tained with respect to this matter. Statements have 
recently been put forth on this subject which, although 
they may not be deemed conclusive, are certainly de- 
serving of candid investigation and mature consider- 
ation, both from the well-known standing of the men 
from whom they have issued, and also from the number 
and magnitude of the facts upon which they appear to 
be based. ‘That man is the very last creation that has 
yet appeared, there can be no kind of doubt ; the per- 

282 — PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

¢ 

fection of his organization, his position at the very top 
of the scale of animate beings, and the absence of his 
remains at least from the early rocks—all point to a 
comparatively modern origin; but that no traces of 
him existed until within six or seven thousand years 
ago may fairly be open to question. 

The principal argument relied upon in support of 
the commonly accepted theory has been the entire ab- 
sence of human fossils, even from the most recently 
formed deposits. Bones of human beings, it is admitted, 
have been often found, but nearly always under such cir- 
cumstances as allowed of their having found their way 
to the spot where they are discovered, at a very recent 
date, by some sudden and violent change taking place 
in the locality. Even as early as 1748, a human body 
in a fossilized condition was discovered at Gibraltar 
by some miners employed in blowing up “rocks, for 
the purpose of raising batterics, about fifty feet above 
the level of ‘the sea.” It is not at all surprising that, 
at that time, it excited no interest. Much more re- 
cently, a fossil human pelvis was picked up by Dr. 
Dickeson, at Natchez ; but any argument, based upon 
it, for the antiquity of the race, was at once disposed 
of by Sir Charles Lyell, who suggested that it had 
fallen from an Indian graveyard at the summit of the 
cliff. The same explanation was given of the discovery 
of a human skull, with other fossils, in a sandstone 
rock at Brazil; though, in this case, the difficulty of 
such a supposition was greater, because the place where 
wt was found must have sunk to the bottom of the sea 
subsequently, and again have been raised to the position 
in wiich it was then observed. 

Supposing an entire absence, as far as our knowl- 
edge extends, of human fossils from the most recent 
deposits, it still becomes a very important question 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 283 

whether the assumption that man did not live at the 
period when these deposits were formed, be not some- 
what illogical and unjustifiable. It must be remembered 
that, in the days of Cuvier, no fossil remains of mon- 
keys had been discovered, and that the great natural- 
ist himself looked upon their absence as a proof of re- 
cent origin. Now, fossil quadrumanes have since been 
found in England, France, India, and South America; 
and although the number at present brought to light 
is certainly not large, yet it is clearly sufficient to 
prove that these animals existed at a period much 
earlier than was previously imagined. Those discoy- 
ered in England are stated by Sir Charles Lyell to 
belong to the genus Macacus, and to an extinct spe- 
cies, and have been exhumed from the London clay, 
associated with crocodiles, turtle and nautili. Cuvier’s 
conclusions were probably correctly drawn from his 
data, but his premises were wrong. So that if no 
human fossils had been at present discovered, it still 
would not follow that there are none such deposited in 
the wide range of unexplored strata, to be brought to 
light by future industry and perseverance. : 

Moreover, there can be little doubt that large num- 
bers of animals have lived on the earth and have passed 
away, leaving behind them no trace of their ever havy- 
ing been in existence. But for the plastic nature of 
the sand on the river’s brink in the Connecticut Vale, 
the colossal birds which, at one period, wandered up 
and down beside the stream, would have disappeared, 
without leaving to subsequent generations the slightest 
record of their being. Some of these birds were at 
least twelve or fifteen feet high ; their footprints on the 
sand are all that remain of them. 

Still, as no deductions can be drawn but from what 
is known, it may not be amiss to glance at the discov- 

284 PRE-ADAMITE MaN. 

eries that are believed by many to contain positive evi- 
dence of the existence of the human race, at an earlier 
period than has been generally recognized. This evi- 
dence may be divided into two kinds. In the first 
place, there are the direct remains of man himself, said 
to have been met with in different parts of the world ; 
and, secondly, the traces of human labor, in the form of 
knives, arrows, and other productions of art, manufac- 
tured generally from flints. To these a third kind of 
proof has been added by some, more as a support to the 
others than as containing much evidence in itself, viz., 
that derived from the study of monuments, inscriptions, 
etc., many of which date their origin prior to the com- 
mencement of the historic period. 

Generally speaking, human fossils have been found 
in large caves which occur in the calcareous strata. 
These ossuaries or bone caverns, are met with in the 
diluvium or drift. Their floors are covered with a 
layer of diluvial clay, and over this a crust of stalag- 
mite has become deposited subsequently. Under this 
two-fold covering of lime and clay, the bones of innu- 
merable animals, some of which have long since disap- 
peared from among the living tribes, are met with ; 
and, intermingled with these, have been found the fossil 
remains of man. The Kirkdale cave, discovered in 
1821, about twenty-five miles from York, and referred 
to by Dr. Buckland in his Reliquie Diluviane, affords 
an excellent illustration. Itis situated on the declivity 
of a valley, and occurs in the formation called oolite. 
Itopens by an irregular, narrow passage, for a distance of 
250 feet into the hill, and at the end, expands into small 
chambers. The layer of stalagmite which covered the 
floors, and which has been formed by drippings from 
the roof, has beneath it a bed of sandy micaceous loam, 
of about two or three feet in thickness. In the lower 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 285 

part of this Jayer, innumerable bones were discovered, 
belonging to the tiger, bear, wolf, weasel, elephant, 
rhinoceros, hippopotamus, horse, ox, deer, water-rat, 
and mouse, most of them of extinct species. Dr. Buck- 
land concluded that this cave had heen inhabited by 
hyenas, and that the greater number of the remains of 
animals found there had been dragged in to serve the 
occupants of the cave as food ; and that in some cases, 
the hyenas had even preyed upon each other. Other 
bones, especially the smaller ones, he supposed to have 
drifted in by the current, or to have fallen into the 
chasm through fissures since closed up by the incrusta- 
tions of stalactite. This may serve as a general de- 
scription of a bone cavern; and the explanation haz- 
arded by the late lamented Dean of Westminster, if ac- 
cepted as satisfactory, effectually gets rid of any evidence 
of the great antiquity of the human race arising from 
the discovery of fossil remains of man in such a place. 
In the cave of Durfoil, in the Jura, situated in a calca- 
reous mountain three hundred feet above the level of 
the sea, human bones were discovered by Mascel de 
Serres, in a true state of fossil, and embedded in a c¢al- 
‘ careous matrix. The Rev. Mr. M’Enery collected flint 
knives and human bones from the caves of Torquay, 
where he discovered them among the remains of many 
extinct animals. In the Brixham cavern, Devonshire, 
human bones were found which had been evidently 
gnawed by hyenas. M. de Cuslobles discovered, and 
M. de Serres afterwards examined, remains of humanity 
intermingled with those of the rhinoceros, bear, hyena, 
and other animals, embedded in mud whinstone rock, 
at Pondres. A fossil human skeleton, dug out of the 
schist rock at Quebec, is still preserved in the museum 
of that town; while the Guadaloupe skeleton, in the 
British Museum is familiar to every one. In the “ Ca- 

286 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

verne de Engihoul,” examined by Dr. Schmerling, the 
bones of man occurred with those of extinct species of 

animals, and appeared to have found their way these at 

the same period and under similar circumstances. 'Tied- 
mann exhumed human bones from the caverns in Bel- 
gium, mixed with those of bears, hyenas, elephants, wild 
boars, and horses. The cave of Gailenruth, in Fran- 
conia, and those of Zahuloch and Kuloch, yielded the 
same products; and their great elevation places them 
beyond the reach of partial inundations. Many other 
cases of a similar kind might be quoted, all seeming to 
prove the same fact. To the whole of them it is, how- 
— ever, objected, that notwithstanding the circumstances 
under which these human remains appeared to have 
been deposited, still they were of recent date. 

There is one method by means of which some slight 
clue may be obtained to the age of a bone, not perhaps 
a very decisive one when we have to deal with such ex- 
tended periods as geology brings before us, but one 
which still may be of some value ; at all events it may 
be taken for what it is worth. It consists in treating 
the bone with dilute muriatic acid, which has the effect 
of dissolving the earthy portion, and leaving behind 
simply the gelatinous, or animal part. Ifa very recent 
bone be subjected to the action of this agent, the earthy 
matter is removed, and the animal part, which comprises 
about one-third of the whole bone, still preserves the 
original shape, but is flexible and elastic ; so much so, 
that in the case of a rib, a knot may be tied init. If, 
on the other hand, the bone be fossil, and, from the 
length of. time it has been exposed, has lost its gelati- 
nous matter, the muriatic acid will dissolve it entirely 
away, with effervescence. Now, in some of the cases 
already quoted, this test was applied both to the human 

and the other bones, the result arrived at being, that. 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 287 

the time of deposit of both was as nearly the same 
as could be discovered. Numerous instances are re- 
corded by Lieutenant-Colonel Hamilton Smith, in which ~ 
the bones of man were discovered, broken and worked 
up with those of the lower animals in the same breccia, 
where the strictest chemical examination could detect 
no difference in age. 
_ In Amevica, some very remarkable discoveries have 
taken place, which, if not conclusive, are, at all events, 
deserving of the most unbiased consideration. There 
is one in particular, described in Nott and Gliddon’s 
Types of Mankind, of the skeleton of a man found in 
the delta of the Mississippi, where, according to the 
conelusion arrived at in that work, it must have been 
reposing for a period of about fifty-seven thousand 
vears. ‘This supposition is arrived at as follows :—la 
excavating on the plain upon which the city of New 
Orleans is built, successive growths of cypress trees are 
met with. Such obstacles do these present.to digging 
to any depth, that on one occasion the Irish spadesmen 
relinquished their work, and the Kentucky axe-men had 
to be employed to hew their way downwards. ‘Ten dis-_ 
‘tinct cypress forests have been traced, by Messrs. 
Dickeson and Brown, at different levels below the pre- 
sent surface, they are afranged vertically above each 
other, and on the surfase over them all stand stately 
oaks, that have flourished for centuries. Between the 
growth of each of these ten cypress forests the plain 
must have been submerged, the soil on which the next 
forest was to grow being deposited during the submer- 
sion.- Dr. Bennet Dowler makes a calculation as to the 
period which must have elapsed since the last submer- 
sion of the site of the city :—‘ He divides the history of 
this period into three eras: 1. The era of colossal 

ie 
; 

288 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

grasses, trembling emp &c., as seen in the lagoons, * 
lakes, and sea-coast. 2. The he of the BY Png basins. 
8. The era of the Sieecnt live oak platform.” Existing 
trees, he maintains, show that the development occur- 
red in this order. It is, then, supposed that the eleva- 
tion has taken place at about five inches.in a century, 
that being the most rapid rate at which the accumula- 
tion of detritus in the Nile has ever been computed to 
have taken place. This will give 1,500 years for the 
era of aquatic plants, before the appearance of the first 
cypress forest. 4stimating the cypress trees at ten feet 
in diameter, Dr. Dowler concludes that their age would 
be about 5,700 years. “ Though many generations of 
such trees may have grown and perished in each cypress 
period,” he “has assumed only two consecutive growths,” 
giving 11,400 years. “The maximum age of the oldest 
tree growing on the live oak platform is estimated at 
1,500 years.” The following table is s arrived at :— 

Era of aquatic plants, years... ....sccsodeversescecs 1,500 
mre. of cypress; basin, years. 22.5 ..635 02 suas deen 11,400 
Era of live oak platform, years.................265 1,500 

Pj hlak eels pete eee 14,400 

Dr. Dowler then goes on to reckon ten other such 
elevations, which he supposes may have taken place, 
each of equal duration, yie!ding 158,400 years. The 
skeleton of a man, together with burnt wood, was dis- 
covered at the excavations for the gas works, “ at the 
depth of eighteen feet,” and “beneath the roots of a 
cypress tree belonging to the fourth forest level.” “The 
type of the cranium was that of the aboriginal Ameri- 
can race.” Reckoning, then, the present era at 14,406 
years, and allowing for three other eras of equal dura. 

* The lagoons of this part of America, which is for the most part 
little better than one huge swamp, are usually so zovered with aquatic 
plants and tall grasses as to resemble prairies. 

¢ 
‘ 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 289 

tion, that skeleton must have been deposited 57,600 
years ago, while a luxuriant flora must have adorned 
the country 100,000 years earlier. 

Exception will reasonably be taken to this calcula- 
tion, as it seems to be based on so much that is hypothe- 
tical ; still, the bare fact of human remains being found 
at such a depth, and under the roots of the cypress trees, 
_—-where they could not have found their way by means 
of a current, or any other accidental agency, at least 
except at avery remote period—will go far towards 

proving the great antiquity of the human race, even to 
 thosé who may feel disposed to dispute the statistics of 
Dr. Dowler. A far more satisfactory, and more moder- 
ate, calculation has been made by the celebrated A gas- 
siz, with regard to human “ jaws with perfect teeth, and 
portions of a foot,” discovered by Count F’. de Pourta- 
les, upon the shores of Lake Monroe, in Florida. Pro- 
fessor Agassiz entered elaborately into the matter in a 
lecture delivered at Mobile, in 18538, and arrived at the 
conclusion that 10,000 years ago, at the lowest compu- 
tation, mankind peopled that large continent. 

The second argument is, perhaps, equally important, 
and is certainly not less conclusive, being based on the 
discovery of the workmanship of man in positions that 
indicate its having been buried at a period prior to the 
historical epoch. As early as 1797, a memoir was pub- 
lished by Mr. John Frere, in which there is mention 
made of the discovery of some flint implements, in a bed 
of gravel, at Floxen, Suffolk, together with the bones 
of an animal now presumed to have been the mammoth. 
A series of most important discoveries of this kind 
were afterwards made by M. Boucher de Perthes. 
This celebrated archeologist pursued his researches 
for a great number of years at St. Acheul, near Abbe- 
ville, in the South of France, and succeeded in satisfy- 

ba “i 

- 290 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

ing himself that in the flint implements he discovered, 
there came to light the last vestige of the handiwork 
of a people who inhabited Western Hurope at a period 
antecedent to that to which any written record refers. 
No doubt can now possibly be felt, by any one investi- 
eating the matter, that the workmanship of man has 
been met with in the diluvian drifts among the detri- 
tus of older rocks, masses of sand and gravel, and 
bones of those extinct quadrupeds generally supposed 
to belong to an epoch prior to the creation of the hu 
man race. M. Boucher made numerous excavations in 
the departments of the Somme, the Pas de Calais, the 
Oise, the Seine, and the Seine Inferieure ; and although 
no human fossil rewarded his researches, he found what 
were, perhaps, equally important—utensils, weapons, 
figures, symbols, and other traces of human ingenuity— 
buried with the remains of elephants and mastodons, at 
a, depth where no traces of man had been previously 
suspected. In Celtic and Gaulish burial-places he dis- 
covered successive beds of bones and ashes, with cine- 
rary urns, belonging to a period immensely remote. 
Nor do these discoveries now depend simply on the 
judgment of M. Boucher, who, although a man of great 
scientific knowledge, patient investigation, and strict 
veracity, yet might, perhaps, be suspected of leaning too 
much to his favoritehobby. Others have now followed 
him into the same field. Dr. Rigollot, a celebrated 
French geologist, after a careful investigation of the 
whole subject, expressed his coneurrence in the views 
of his predecessor in the inquiry as’ to the age of the 
gravel—the only point open to doubt, since the fact 
that the implements were found there, was’ universally 
admitted. Dr. Rigollot, in a letter to M. Boucher, © 
dated the 26th of November, 1853, declares his assent 
to the opinion of the latter—that it was now clearly 

, S 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN, 291 

proved that the country had been inhabited by human 
beings before.“ the grand disturbance that caused the 
destruction of the elephants and rhinoceroses that lived 
there.” Others followed in the same field; and no 
longer ago than the 26th of May, last year, Mr. Prest- 
wich read a memvir before the Royal Society, upon the 
results of his own examinations. He confesses that he 
entered upon the subject full of doubt, but that, having 
examined the matter, his conclusions were the same as 
those of M. Boucher. The gravel beds of St. Acheul 
he describes as “ capping a low chalk hill”—“ one hun- 
dred: feet above the level of the Somme.” At the top 
were ten or fifteen feet of brick-earth, containing coins, 
old tombs, etc., but destitute of organic remains. Then 
came from two to eight feet of whitish marl and sand, 
full of recent shells, etc. , and underneath this, a layér 
of coarse, flint gravel , of from six to twelve feet in 
thickness, the whole deposit resting on chalk. Now, it 
was in neither of the upper layers, but in the gravel be 
low, that these flint implements were found in great 
numbers, and intermingled with the teeth and bones of 
the elephant, ox, deer, and horse. 

As to the age of this gravel there is no dispute. It 
is of the same period as that at Kast Croydon, Wands- 
worth, and many other places surrounding London, and 
dates back to a time long antecedent to that at which 
it is usually supposed the human race commenced its 
career upon the earth. MM. Herbert and Bateaux, 
French geologists, who have made the tertiary deposits 
a subject of special study, examined carefully the posi- 
tion of these beds, and reported that the implements 
were found “exclusively in the true diluvian—that is, 
the deposit which contains the remains of species be- 

_loiging to the epoch immediately preceding the cata- 

292 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

clysm by which they were destroyed. “There cannot,” 
they add, “be the smallest doubt as to the point.” 

These implements consist of arrow-heads, knives, 
spear-heads, axes, religious emblems, symbols, etc., and 
bear a very striking resemblance to those discovered 
by Mr. Squier in the western mounds of America. 
Many of them appear to have been so slightly fixed to 
their cases as to become detached whenever a blow was 
struck, and would, therefore, have been left in the 
wound. They are not always made of flint, but some 
times of granite, porphyry, basalt, serpentine jaspar, and 
almost every kind of hard stone. 

The conclusion, then, appears ‘obvious, unless some 
other explanation of these facts should hereafter be 
suggested, that man has existed on the earth much 
longer than we had been hitherto led to suppose. 
After all, this is but bringing us to the Chevalier Bun- 
sen’s theory, derived from sources of an entirely differ- 
ent character, “ that a concurrence of facts and tradi- 
tions demands for the Noachian period about ten mil- 
lenia before our era, and-for the beginning of our race 
another ten thousand years, or very little more.” It 
is very difficult to ascertain upon exactly what grounds 
the Chevalier has arrived at this conclusion ; but itisa 
conclusion very much in accordance with the results to 
which science seems to be leading us. 

A third class of evidence was alluded to above, 
namely, that arising from a study of monaments and 
other works of art. This is, perhaps, more valuable, 
taken in conjunction with the geological facts than as 
an independent guide. Stonehenge stands as a familiar 
example of a record of a very remote past—no one 
knows how remote ; but the lesson that it teaches is 
anything but definite and clear. Throughout HKurope 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN.. 293 

many other monuments of a similar character exist. 
Cajl them Celtic or Druidical—but what does that 
mean? That they were erected by those races? They 
were not. The ancient Druids may kave used them for 
religious worship, but were, in all probability, as igno- 
rant of their origin as we of the present generation 
are. Their early history is shrouded in obscurity, and 
we can learn little of them, further than that they have 
withstood the ravages of time for many centuries. 

In Egypt perhaps the prospect is clearer, clouds hay- 
ing recently broken and passed away; but even there 
we can learn little except by the aid of physical science. 
True, there stand those mighty monuments of the past, 
seemingly as eternal as the globe itself—the Pyramids; 
but a long interval must have elapsed after Egypt be- 
came inhabited by human beings ere such works as 
these could have been erected. It must have taken 
many centuries before a race of savage or nomadic 
tribes could have reached by self-tuition such a degree 
of civilization as would enable them to raise such en- 
during proofs of their skill. There is, therefore, a wide 
blank in chronology between the date at which Egypt 
was first inhabited by man, and that of the origin of 
the pyramids and tombs in the fourth Memphite dynasty 
—according to Lepsius, thirty-five hundred years B. C. 
From the year three thousand eight hundred and ninety- 
three B. C., everything appears tolerably clear from 
the monuments and hieroglyphics ; but before that time 
there is nothing but physical science to guide us.* 

Mr. Leonard Horner has thrown much light upon 
this subject. He made nineteen borings into the Nile 
mud near the site of the ancient city of Memphis, and 
seventy-eight other borings in other parts of the delta 
of the Nile. It had been previously computed that the 

* It will be seen that Lepsius differs with us on some points, 

-. 

pf 7 
294 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. y 
deposit of Nile sediment had taken p)» ~~ # rate of 
about five inches in acentury ; but, . © > .ring care- 
fully the depth at which acertain statue «nown date 
was buried, Mr. Horner found that the rate must be re- 
duced to three and a-half inches per century, at least for 
the neighborhood of Memphis—and yet in this neigh- 
borhood fragments of burnt pottery, pieces of carved 
stone, and other human remains, were brought up from 
a depth of thirty-nine feet, and must thus, on Mr. Hor- 
ner’s calculation, have been buried not less than 13,500 
years. In other parts of the delta of the Nile similar 
remains have been found at all depths down to seventy 
feet, borings deeper than seventy feet not having then 
been made. Many of these fragments of human work- 
manship were obtained from levels below the low-water 
mark of the Mediterranean, and must therefore have 
been “brought down by the river from the higher and 
inhabited part of the valley, at a tume previous to the 
formation of that part of the delta,” thus seeming to 
prove that the higher parts of the valley of the Nile 
were inhabited by civilized men before the sites of some 
of what we have been accustomed to regard as among 
the most ancient of the Egyptian cities, had yet emerged 
from beneath the waters of the Mediterranean! After 
all, therefore, the assertion of Plato, put into the mouth 
of an Egyptian priest, may underrate rather than over- 
rate the antiquity of the Egyptian nation :—“ And the 
annals even of our own city (Sais) have been preserved 
8,000 years in our sacred writing. I will briefly de- 
scribe the laws and most illustrious actions of those 
States which have existed 9,000 years.”— The Timeeus. 
“ And you will, by observing, discover that what have 
been painted and sculptured there (in Egypt) 10,000 
years ago—and I say 10,000 years not as a word, but 
as a fact—are neither more beautiful nor more ugly 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 295 

than those turned out of hand at the present day, but 
are worked off according to the same art.”— The Laws. 
Plato’s assertions on this point have long been disre- 
garded, in consequence of their supposed extravagance. 
Time may prove them to be quite within the bounds of 
truth, as I, the author of this book, most assuredly be- 
lieve they are. 

CHAPTER II. 

ProFressor WILson, of Toronto, in his recent work on 
“Pre-historic Man,” and to whom I am indebted for 
several things in this volume, says: .We eall this 
western hemisphere the New World, and fancy that, in 
its savage Indians, whom we designate aborigines, we 
are looking on a primitive condition of life. But the 
Indian of the American wilds is no more primeval than 
his forests. Beneath the roots of their oldest giants lie 
chronicled the memorials of older phases of a native 
civilization ; and while the naturalists of this continent 
dwell with peculiar interest on the persistency of a 
common type, and of specific and almost instinctive 
habits throughout all its widely-scattered tribes, they 
have been studying only the temporary supplanter of 
nations strange to us as the generations of extinct 
life in geological periods older than our own... Ab- 
rupt mountain chains divide and subdivide the elevated 
table lands of Central Asia into regions which have 
been for unrecorded ages the great hives of wild pas- 
toral tribes, which were, by unknown causes, made to 
overflow and pour themselves southward over the seats 
of a still more primitive Asiatic civilization, or west- 
ward into the continent of Europe.... We trace 
him (the nomade) back three thousand years; but had 

296 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

we no other knowledge to guide us, it would be quite 
-as easy to believe that these nomades had wandered 
over their desert homes for thirty thousand a as for three 
thousand years. 

It appears to the writer of this work that we have 
that “other knowledge” to guide us, and that, too, 
without looking very far. The Professor’s own book 
effectually settles any lingering doubt as to man’s an- 
tiquity, that might perchance arise in timid minds. 
These proofs I proceed to present to the reader. And, 
first, he gives us an account of a fossil man taken from 
concrete limestone, from the solid rock, in the Island 
of Gaudaloupe, one of the West Indian group. True, 
the Professor, in his Scotch Presbyterian zeal, after- 
wards tells us that this rock is but the hardened detri- 
tus of corals and shells of recent formation, but he 
forgets that a “recent” geological change may mean 
one hundred thousand or five hundred thousand years 
ago | 
_ In the Museum of the Philadelphia Academy of Sci- 
ences is the os innominatum of a human skeleton, taken 
from beneath the skeletons of the megalonyx and other 
fossil mammals ; and that the latter may safely claim an 
age of one hundred and twenty thousand years, I think 
no true geologist will pretend to dispute. 

The Danish naturalist, Dr. Lund, describes fossil hu- 
man bones, of vast antiquity, found with the remains of 
extinct species in the calcareous caves of Brazil. 

At the foot of the Grampian Hills, which no tide 
has laved for many a thousand years, discoveries have 
recently been made, that quite effectually settles the 
question concerning Pre-Adamite man ; and flint arrow- 
heads, stone battle-axes,. horn lances and harpoons, 
turned up on the Carse of Sterling, give additional 
testimony to the same point. In the year 1819, there 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 297 

was disclosed in the alluvium of the carse-land, where 
the River Forth winds its circuitous course, the skele- 
ton of a gigantic whale, with a perforated lance or har- 
poon of deer’s-horn beside it. They lay together near 
the base of Dunmyat, one of the Ochil hills, and twenty 
feet above the highest tide of the neighboring estuary. 
Over this was an accumulation of five feet of alluvial 
-soil, covered with a thin bed of moss. The locality 
- was examined at the time, and the levels noted by 
scientific observers, peculiarly competent to the task. 
Nor was the example a solitary one, for remains of 
those gigantic Baleenz have been repeatedly found, and 
one skeleton discovered in 1824—seven miles further wn- 
land than the first example-~-now lies in the Natural- 
History Museum of Edinburgh University, along with 
another primitive deer’s-horn harpoon found be it. 

What becomes of Adam and Moses in face of facts 
like these? When it isremembered that the recession 
of the sea, in this part of Scotland, was manifestly due, 
not to a sudden volcanic action, but to a gradual and 
slow upheaval of the ocean bed, and with it the land 
where its beach once was, it is patent that we must add 
at least two cyphers to the accustomed six thousand 
years, before we reach the period when those whales 
were run ashore, and butchered at leisure, by the pisca- 
tory Nimrods of Scotia’s early days. With these ex- 
amples alone before us, we are perfectly justified in 
assigning the human race, in that part of the world, 
an antiquity compared to which that of Egypt, Chaldea, 
China and Tartary, are but as of last week, and yet 
these are not the oldest by any means. 

Has the reader ever heard of the monstrous fossil 
elks found in Ireland, at the Curragh ; at Walton, in 
Essex ; and ir Folkstone, in Kent, England? If not, 
then I assure him that such there are, and myself have 

298 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

seen them, especially a gigantic one now set up com- 
plete in the British Museum—an animal which, when 
living, was as much larger than our Gommon deer, as 
a full-sized goat is larger than a common cat. I had 
the exact dimensions of the animal, but since my return 
from England have, unfortunately, lostit. These skele- 
tons were found associated with those of the fossil ox, 
rhinorceros, hippopotamus and hyena, every one of 
which animals of course must have existed alive where 
their dead bones are now found; and the question is, 
How long is it since the British Islands were possessed 
of a tropical climate? for, be it known, all these ani- 
mals belong to hot climates. The answer is, a period 
so distant that it must be counted by centuries and not 
by 8] years. Well, as long ago as when British 
fore sheltered and nourished these extinct beasts, 
so long a¢o was man also an inhabitant of those islands ; 
for his remains are found along with theirs; and along 
with them are also seen flint arrow-heads, stone hatch- 
ets and fragmentary pottery. One of these monster 
elks was found with an arrow-wound in one of its rib8. 
The evidence of ‘this fact is good, notwithstanding that 
Dr. Hart’s assertion that the fact was so, has been dis- 
puted by Professor Owen, in his British Fossil Mam- 
mals. Professor Jamieson and Dr. Mantell have seen 
and reported on a human body exhumed from under a 
peat-bog, eleven feet thick, in the county of Cork ; and 
it was wrapped in the skin of one of those enormous 
elks, both having been preserved by the peat from de- 
cay, just as the ices of the Northern seas preserved the 
entire body of a mastodon, concerning which we read 
so much a few years ago. 

Human remains have been found along with those of 
the great fossil ox—os prinugenius the skull of one 
of which, in the British Museum, measures a yard iu 

>. 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 299 

length, and pan of the horns forty-two inches—an 
animal that shame the prize oxen of these days. 

Mr. Frere, im £797, discovered, in Suffolk, flint wea- 
pons—unmistakable human weapons, along with the 
remains of elephants, imbedded in gravel, overlaid by» 
sand and brick earth, at a depth of eleven or twelve 
feet from the surface ; and some of these may be seen 

at this day in the Museum, in Great RussellStreet, Lon- 

‘don. It is a very long time since elephants roamed 

wild over British soil, or rather what now is such. 
Fossil human remains have also been found on this 
continent, along with those of the extinct Llephant, 
Mastodon, Megalonyx, Megalodon, E'reptocdon, and Equus 
Curvidens—an extinct species of American sand — 
Professor Holmes, in exhibiting a collecti 
from the post-pliocene of South Carolina 
Philadelphia Academy of Natural Sciences, 

‘Dr. Klipstein, who resides near Charleston, in digging 

a ditch to drain a swamp, discovered a Mastodon’s 

- tooth. He, (Professor Holmes,) with a select party of 

scientific friends, went there, and not only obtained 
other teeth and bones of the huge beast, but also an 
entire tusk, and, alongside of it, a beautiful fragment of 
pottery. Was that piece of pottery fashioned by the 
hand of an Adamite man? Verily, I think not. 

In the State of Kentucky there isa very extensive 
morass, know as the Big-bone Lick. Deep down in the 
blue clay bed of this great and ancient bog, was found 
the partial and complete skeletons of not less than one 
hundred Mastodons, and twenty Mammoths, besides re- 
mains of the Megalonyx, and, it is asserted, human 
skulls also ; though the evidence tosthat effect is not 
satisfactory. But whether the story be well founded 
or not, certain it is that, in the British Museum, is now 
a skeleton of a mastodon, found, along with many others, 

300 PRE-ANAMITE MAN. 

near the banks of Potatoe River, (Za P. 
a tributary of the Osage, Missouri. | se last were 
discovered by Mr. Albert Koch, and™were examined, 

in his presence, by Mr. Mantell, their describer, who 
ways that the bones were found in a brown sandy de- 
posit, full of vegetable matter, with recognizable re- 
mains of the cypress, tropical cane, palmetto stems, and 
swamp mosses, all of which were beneath a superim-, 
posed bed of blue clay and gravel, quite fifteen feet in 
thickness. Mr. Koch found a flint arrow-head beneath 

the lee-bones of the great skeleton, and several similar 
weapons in the same stratum. Another mastodon, and 
part of its hide, was found in Missouri, associated with 

sto heads, axes, knives, and arrows, under cir- 
hat rendered it almost certain that the 

ht d been entangled in the bog, and there. 
not toned and worried to death by its human _ 
foes, but also partially consumed by fire, as if they had ’ F 
piled flaming wood against the poor brute, and thus: 
roasted him, probably before he was dead. | 
In 1712 certain gigantic fossil remains were found in 
Claverack, in Massachusetts, probably those of the 
mastodon, but which the notorious Dr. Increase Mather 
described in his report thereon to the Royal Society ‘of 
London, as being decidedly human ; and giving it as 
his profound opinion that in the antediluvian world 
there lived men of prodigious stature, “as incontestibly 
proved by these remains, particularly a tooth, which 
was a very large grinder, weighing four pounds and 
three-quarters, with a thigh-bone seventeen feet long.”* 
The New England “must have been reading T'al- 
mudian descripti the venerable “Ogg, King of 
Bashan !” vai 
Along with the fossil mammals, including those of 

du Terre,) 

“ Philosophical Transactions, Vol. XXIV. 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 301 

the scelidotherium, glyptodon, and chlamydotherium, 

as well as thos@%of extinct carnivora, found in limestone 
eaverns, in Brazil, by Lund and Claussen, human remains 
were discovered. The rélics were taken from abed of ~* 
reddisb loam, covered over with a thick stalagmitic® 
flooring. Dr. Lund found there relics of human skele- 
tons, that must have belonged to men who flourished 
when those monsters did—that is, from one to two 
hundred and fifty thousand years ago. / 

From a depth of fourteen feet beneatl /, 
among the rolled gravel and gold-bearingy 
Grinell Leads, in Kansas, Mr. P. A. Se 
gent Canadian, exhumed a flint knife, a1 
able relic of human art. The locality if 
Range of the Rocky Mountains In dig; 
haft was sunk through four feet of ric © 
then through ten more feet of compa: oS 
ay, and rounded quartz, and there the knife was Bi sete: 
. The question is, not how it came there, but — 
en? and the answer is, certainly not-less than ninety 
housand years ago, taking geological indications as the — 
data of judgment. e 

Tn sinking a coal-pit at Misk, in Ayrshire, a tobacco- 

-* “ 
pipe was found a great many feet beneath the surface 
of the ground. I have already quoted Dr. Bennett 
Dowler’s discovery, in the delta of the Mississippi, from 
the “ Types of Mankind,” by which he concludes that 
men existed there fully 57,000 years ago. 

In a place in Scotland, called St. Enoch’s Croft, in 
1780, when digging for the f@ndation of a church, a 
“Clyde canoe,” hewn out of » oak, was found 
twenty-five feet beneath the geil $ primitive vessel 
rested horizontally upon 1 ly and*in it, near the .« 
bow, there was found a itifully finished stone axe ; 
thus, again, proving that/Deneath the ancient footprtiea 

302 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

of Scotia’s old people, rests the records of a vastly 
older human story. Pe 
According to the statistical accounts, in the vicinity 
_” of Falkirk, an ancient boat was found thirty feet below 
ethe surface of the same carse, whence a fossil-elephant 
was exhumed in 1821. In the earlier part of the pre- 
vious century, a sudden rise of the river Carron under- 
mined a portion cf its banks, and exposed to view an 
ancient canoe, of unusually large dimensions, lying im- 
bedded in the alluvial soil, at a depth of fifteen feet, 
K and covered by successive strata of clay, shells, moss, 
~ sand, and gravel. Sir John Clerk has described it 
with i minuteness, in the Bibliotheca Topographica 
4, aS an antediluvian boat. ‘This ancient 
s finely polished, and perfectly smooth, both 
nd out, and was formed from a single oak-treé, 
nted stem and square stern. In the same local 
~ ity, oh the authority of Dr. G. Hamilton, a humanSkul! 
was found, along with ancient canoes and fossil bones 
of the Hlephas primigenius, twenty feet below the sar 
face, in a bed of shell and gravel, by those who were 
digging the area of the large Grangemouth lock of the, 
Union Canal, on the 29th of June, 1843. 

The bones of the Bos primigenius, Bos longifrons, 
and fossil carnivora have been found marked with jave- 
lin wounds, and accompanied with human remains. 
Indeed, I might multiply such instances by the thou- 
sand, to say nothing of human skulls, and pottery of 
undoubted Pre-Adamite origin, now in my possession. 
But these instances willsuffice. We now pass to the 
consideration ofHlints in the Drift,” now agitating 
the European mi 4 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. | 303 

CHAPTER IIL 

“PLINTS IN THE DRIFT”—HUMAN REMAINS. 

Joun Exxiot, Hse., an able contributor to the Geolo- 
- gist, London, in a recent number of that excellent journal, 
remarks that in a deep ravine, surrounded by trees and 
brushwood growing in wild profusion, was, until lately, 
a caye, in that member of the carboniferous formation > 
locally called the “ Great Limestone,’ and situated 
about one mile and a quarter north from the town of 
Stanhope, in the county of Durham. The limestone is 
now being worked for the purpose of supplying the 
_ Weardale Iron Company with a flux used in tie Spera- 
tion of smelting their iron stone ; and consequently the 
~ eave has been laid bare to the light of day. 
_ The cave was much visited a few years ago, both by 
‘strangers and persons living in the locality, but prob- 
ably few of the visitors ever studied the excavating 
forces by means of which the cave was hollowed out of 
the solid limestone, and fewer still, if any, would think, 
that they were treading on a primeval burial-place. 
Doubtless the excavation must be mainly due to 
aqueous agency, but a reference to Sir Charles Lyell’s 
» “Principles of Geology,” Professor Phillips’s “ Treatise 
on Geology,” and Richardson’s “ Geology,” shows that 
our leading writers on this subject consider that the 
first cause of a cavern must have been a fracture in the 
limestone rock, consequent on the upheaval of the 
strata, and that water then finding access to the crack, | 
would wear it out to its present dimensions. 
Fractures in this case would most probably take | 

304 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

place when the “ Red Vein” was formed, which is only 
between two hundred and three hundred yards distant 
from the cave, and crosses the ravine nearly at right 
angles, This vein, which contains lead ore, iron-stone, 
etc., is a wide one, requiring a wide fissure, and the 
force necessary to produce such a fissure would be suf- 
ficient to cause rents and small dislocations in the rocks - 
at considerable distances. Besides this, there are two 
other veins crossing the ravine at lesser distances from 
the cave, and these would still further increase the 
probability of an original fissure. 

The cave must be very old if we suppose it to have 
been formed by the water running down the ravine, 
~ when on a level with its mouth or opening, seeing that 
the wa ourse is now worn down ten or twelve feet 
below the cave’s bottom. Again, if we suppose it to 
have been excavated by the attrition of the waves of 
the sea during some remote period, when the waters of 
the ocean stood on a level with the cave, it must. still 
have a very ancient origin, for the cave is situated up- 
wards of thirty miles from the sea, and upwards of 
eight hundred feet above its present level. This local- 
ity must have been submerged during the glacial. pe- 
riod, as we have evidence of, by the deposits of boulder- 
clay ; and if the sea on receding should have remained 
on a level with the limestone for a great length of 
time, the result would have been the wearing down of 
the rock, or the hollowing ont of crevices and caves in 
the exposed strata. , 

In a certain place of the cave-flooring, the workmen 
recently came upon a large sheet of stalagmite of vary- 
ing thickness, but averaging about four inches. This 
calcareous incrustation has been formed by the cease- 
less dropping of water holding lime in solution, from 
the roof of the cave. On removing this crust and a 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 305 

small portion of fine sand and silt, the workmen ex- 
humed a human skull and a quantity of bones, some 
undoubtedly human, and others belonging to the lower 
animals. The human skull, according to its phreno- 
logical development, seems to indicate a low intellec- 
tual capacity, the forehead being low, and the circum- 
ference under the average standard. There is also a 
fragment of a skull which seems to have belonged to a 
- tolerably large animal, as it measures three and a quar- 
ter inches from the medial line to the outside beside 
the ear, giving a breadth of six and a half inches for 
the whole skull ; then if the integuments, hair, etc., be 
added, we should have a physiognomy little short of 
nine inches wide, and this creature may have been 
one of the principal tenants of the cave, and -which 
probably devoured the others. Intermixed with the 
remains are very small pieces of bone, etc., partially 
cemented together by calcareous matter, and occurring 
in patches at different places; these have the appear- 
ance of coprolites. The bones are nearly all fragment- 
ary, and much broken; the fractures being of an an- 
cient date, thereby showing that the remains had been 
subject to violence and fracture before they were im- 
bedded in their calcareous tomb. 

How long these remains have lain ini the cave? by 

what means they had been carried and entombed. 
there? whether the animal-remains belong to existing . 

or to extinct species ? and how the fractured bones are 
to be accounted for? are all very interesting paleeon- 
tological problems. 

The cave has, in all probability, been occasionally. 

inhabited by wolves, foxes, etc., which would sally 
forth, seize their prey, and return to devour it, leaving 
the bones to be covered over by the stalagmite as we 
find them; the coprolites before mentioned seem to 

a 

306 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

point to this conclusion. There seems to be not so 
much mystery about the animal bones being found 
there; but the case is quite different as regards the 
human. There is always something strange and start- 
ling in such occurrences, when human remains are 
found otherwise than reposing in the silent and hal- 
lowed precincts of a regular burying-place. | 

During the interment of these relics of some of the 
perhaps earliest members of our race, the rippling of 
running water on the cavern floor, the monotonous 
drippings from the roof, the growling perhaps of - 
wolves, or the barking of foxes, and the bellowing of 
the wind through the gloomy chambers of the cavern, 
would form the only requiem. 

It ought to be observed, that the remains are depos- 
ited in a certain wing or chamber of the cave, about 
two feet above the floor where the water runs, so that 
they would lie dry, with the exception of the calca- 
reous droppings from the roof, or in the case of the 
cavern water being swollen above the capacity of the 
lower channel to contain it. 

Although a considerable portion of the cave has been 
destroyed by the quarrying operations, which are still 
going on, there remains yet a much larger extent un- 
disturbed, so that more remains will most likely be 
discovered. 

A In carrying on the quarrying operations from the 
point where they were suspended when the first dis- 
covered relics were sent to London, the workmen found 
numerous fragments of bones, also bone pins and knives, 
fragments of very rude pottery, portion of an armlet, 
boar-tusks, bronze snear-head, pins, celts, and armlet, 
two coins, some marine shells, cockle, limpet, and mus- 
sels, and large quantities of charcoal, etc., all deposited 
under an incrustation of stalagmite, varying from two 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 307 

to four, or at some places to eight inches in thickness, 
with the exception of one or two manufactured articles, 
which were found in the sand not covered by stalag- 
mite. ,The whole of the cave-deposits, with this trifling 
exception, were covered by a thick sheet of stalagmite, 
varying from a very dense, compact structure, to a 
highly crystalline, or to a more or less porous substance ; 
some portions easily fractured by the stroke of a ham- 
mer, others yielding only to most energetic blows. 

The bronze armlet and the two coins were found in 
sand uncovered by stalagmite ; but as they were de- 
posited in what had, not long ago, been the water-course, 
the stalagmite had either been denuded, or had been 
prevented from forming, at that particular place, by the 
action of the stream; the coins were under very little 
cover, and might have been imbedded very recently. 

The stream of water through the cave has evidently 
changed its course many times since the cave was ex- 
cavated to its present size, as we find accumulations of 
sand and gravel about three feet above the present 
water-level, and about two feet above the ancient water- 
course. 

There was also a hillock of angular blocks, covered 
by stalagmite, and upon this stalagmitic hillock were 
deposited bones, tusks, bone knives and pins, large and 
small snail shells, fragments of pottery, piece of an 
armlet, a cockle-shell, and large quantities of charcoal 
cemented together by calcareous matter. No sand or — . 
gravel was observed among them; there being con 
siderable interstices in some parts of the bed, plainly 
showing they had not been drifted there by water, but 
pointing to the conclusion that they had been purposely 
placed there by the animals or men that inhabited the 
cave. 

In this cave bones, bone pins, tusks, pottery, and 

308 PRH-ADAMITE MAN, 

charcoal were found in coarse sand and smooth peb- 
bles, and might have been drifted while im the cave ; 
but it is not at all probable that they were drifted into 
it, for every appearance connected with the deposits, 
such as the large quantities of charcoal found, and the 
numerous burnt stones, etc., lead to the belief that the 
cave had been inhabited for a considerable length of 
time ; and that fires had been burned at different places, 
the thick deposits of charcoal testify. 

The bronze implements found, were associated with 

a few bones, a limpet-shell, some mussel-shells, and a 
large quantity of charcoal, and were deposited in sand 
and gravel. 

The deposits throughout the cave are nearly on the 
same relative level, with the exception of the hillock 
already mentioned ; and the greatest part of them have 
only one stalagmitic covering. 

The “ Communion Table,” as it was called by the 
visitors to the cave, was a large pillar of the rock, 
around which the water had washed until it had un- 
dermined the base, when the pillar fell down, leaving 
a considerable space between its top and the roof of the 
cave, which had afterwards been partially refilled by 
pendulous stalactites from the roof, forming a junction 
with the stalagmitic bosses on the “ table,” and on the 
top of the “ table” there was found a tusk, some bones, 

some large snail-shells, and pieces of charcoal, under 
an incrustation of stalagmite. One of the workmen 
wondering what thickness the incrustation had attained 
on the “ table,” struck his hack into it, and exhumed the 
above-mentioned relics to his no small astonishment. 
Perhaps this is the first time that such a discovery has 
been made “on removing tie cover.” 

The appearances of the deposit and the great thick 
ness of the stalagmite—in places six and even eight 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 309 

inches thick—shows that portion must have taken a 
greater length of time to form than the rest, which was 
only two to four inches, while from the absence of any 
bronze implements, I am led to consider it of more an- 
cient date ; the probability also is, that bone imple- 
ments, would cease to be used when metal ones were 
introduced. 

The general appearance, on entering the cave before 
it was demolished, was very interesting and grand. 
The fine pendent stalactites from the roof; the various 
round bosses of stalagmite undulating over the floor ; 
the gurgling of the cave-stream ; and the momentary 
droppings of water from the crevices and joints of the 
rock, gave the place a very solemn and enchanting 
aspect. What changes in the manners and customs of 
the human race have taken place since the date of the 
cave-men! Were we to take a poetical or an imagina- 
tive view of the case, and picture to ourselves a few 
naked or half-naked human beings in the gloomy cavern, 
standing or sitting round a fire made of wood, and en- 
veloped in its stinking smoke, with perhaps an animal’s 
skin flung round their bodies and secured by one of 
these very bone-pins we have found ; making their rude 
repast of a boar which they had hunted down in the 
surrounding forest, and the flesh of which they may 
have boiled in one of these coarse earthen pots, of 
which we have found such numerous fragments, flayed 
too, probably, with those bone-knives which have thus 
strangely come down to us ; poor creatures, who lived 
and died so long ago, that no Hume has chronicled the 
career of their race, and who probably had_ perished 
long ages ago: picture their condition of want, priva- 
tion, and hardships, as compared with the plenty, the 
luxurious mode of living, and the high state of civiliza- 
tion which we now enjoy. What a contrast there is! 

310 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

But Science does not sanction the play of the imagina- 
tion, which is ever an unsafe guide. Well-ascertained 
facts and reliable observations are the data on which 
Science rears the structures on which she plants her 
standards. But one can scarce refrain from speculation 
on a theme like this. 

Professor Huxley, F.R.S., a British geologist of 
very high standing, in a brief article in the same jour- 
nal whence the foregoing account was taken, in speak- 
ing of the famed Muskham Skull, says that it is, like the 
animal bones discovered along with it, stained of a 
dark brown color; the whole of these parts of the 
cranial bones which bound the cranial cavity were 
well preserved; but the facial bones, with the excep- 
tion of a small portion of the nasals, were broken 
away, so as to expose the whole of the under surface 
of the base of the skull 

The considerable development of the frontal sinuses 
and of the different ridges and processes of the skull, 
shows it to be that of an adult, and the same charac: 
ters lead me to believe that it belonged to a male. 
Otherwise, it is small enough for a female, as its ex- 
treme length does not exceed 7:2 inches, its extreme 
breadth 5°4 inches, and its horizontal circumference 
203 inches. 

The skull has a very peculiar form. Ifa line drawn 
from the glabella to the superior curved line of the 
occiput be made horizontal, the highest point of the 
longitudinal median contour of the skull will be seen 
‘to be situated about the middle of the length of the 
sagittal suture, and from this point the contour shelves 
rapidly downwards, to the brow on the one hand, and 
to the center of the space between the apex of the 
lambdoidal suture and the occipital protuberance on 
the other. This last is the most prominent portion of 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 311 

the back part of the skull, the median contour below 
it bending forwards to the occipital protuberance, 
which is a very strong, projecting; triangular process. 
It follows from this description, that a line taken from 
the glabella to the occipital protuberance is shorter 
than one from the glabella to a point midway between 
this and the lambdoidal suture. The difference between 
the two is about 0°3 of an inch. I find that crania 
differ a good deal in this respect, the occipital protu- 
berance being in many, especially the lower races of 
mankind, the most backwardly situated part of the 
skull; when the glabello-occipital line is made horizon- 
tal, while in others, as in the present instance, the most 
posterior part of the skull is situated much higher up. 

The line of greatest breadth of the skull is situated 
nearly in the same plane as that of its greatest height, 
in the position indicated, and the auditory foramina 
may also be said, roughly, to be intersected by that 
plane. The forehead is low and narrow, but not re- 
treating. The supraciliary prominences are very well 
developed, and, by their form, indicate the existence 
of large frontal sinuses. ‘The space between the gla- 
bela and the nasal suture is not really very depressed, 
though on the side view of the skull it appears to be 
so, by reason of the projection of the eile: 
prominences. 

The vertical height of the skull from the center of 
the auditory foramen to the vertex is 4.8 inches, and. 
the center of the auditory foramen lies about 0°8 of an 
inch below the level of the glabello-occipital line. 

The mastoid and styloid processes are well devel- 
oped. 

The base of this skull is remarkable in several re- 
spects. The occipital foramen is placed far back, and 
its plane is directed more backwards than is usual in 

312 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

human skulls. When the base of the skull is turned 
upwards, and the glabello-occipital line is horizontal 
(its length being 6°7 inches), the anterior edge of the 
occipital foramen lies 1°5 inch above the line, and a 
perpendicular let fall from it would cut the line 3°9 
inches from its anterior end. A similar line let fall 
from the posterior edge would cut the glabello-occipital 
line at 5°3 inches from its anterior end, and that edge 
is only 0°9 of an inch above it. In a length of 1-4, 
the plane of the occipital foramen, therefore; has a fall 
of 0°6 towards the glabello-occipital line. 

In a well-formed European skull, whose glabello- 
occipital line measures 7:0 inches, while its extreme 
length is 7°25, the distance of the anterior edge of the 
occipital foramen from the glabella, measured in the 
same way along the glabello-occipital line, is 3°8 ; of 
its posterior edge, 5°3. The anterior edge is J*1 ver- 
tically above the line, and the posterior edge, 1°0 above 
it. Thus, in a length of 1°5, the occipital foramen has 
a slope of only 0.1 inch, so that, instead of being greatly 
inclined backwards, it is nearly horizontal. 

The skull from the Valley of the Trent belongs to a 
cranial type which seems at one time to have been 
widely distributed over the British Islands. I have 
seen skulls from rude stone tombs in Scotland with 
_ similar characters, and others obtained from the Valley 
of the Thames. There are skulls in the Museum of the 
- Royal College of Surgeons, exhibiting like proportions, 
from the remarkable tumulus at Towyn-y-Capel, Angie- 
sea, described by the Hon. W. O. Stanley, M. P., in 
the Archeological Journal (Institute) for 1846; and 
my friend, Mr. Busk, has shown me others from Corn- 
wall. But the skulls which most clearly resemble the 
Trent cranium are some, also from river beds, which 
I saw in the Museum of the Royal Irish Academy, and 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 313 

in the collection at Trinity College, Dublin, and of 
which my friend, Dr. E. P. Wright, the curator of that 
collection, has been good enough to supply me with 
excellent casts. Two of these skulls are from the bed 
of the Nore, in Queen’s county, and two from that of 
the Blackwater River, in Armagh, and one of the latter 
has the most extraordinary resemblance to the Trent 
skull, as the following table of measurements will show: 

. 
Trent. Blackwater 
Ee csi Seigials vs y + wa x4 Hn 1s C8 a ah 70 7-2 
Length of glabello-occipital line ..................- 6:7 7:0 
Greatest vertical height from center of auditory fora- 

men, the glabello-occipital line being horizontal 48 AT 
Distance of auditory foramen below glabello-occi- 

ee 5 ig EERE RK aeoeces | UC Oemnn 
Greatest transverse diameter ............000..... 5:4 5°65 
Transverse diameter at the lower edge of the coro- 

BTA OG a shred ot, micsint > ach eiltap <sieigadtte «gies 4:4 4:75 
BAGEIAMLAL CITCUIMICTONCE |. . oe « syns ses gp upees 20°5 20°75 
Transverse arc from one auditory foramen to the 

eh ERR BD Nas Ea eS AS 13:25 13:0 
Antero-posterior arc from glabella to occipital pro- 

EURO seals ob-g ilbuaibisiie he dianninic dh <a <aikceiks 12°5 12°5 
Antero-posterior arc from glabella to posterior edge 

Of the OCClpital foramen... ue cece teens 14:25 14-4 

The plane of the occipital foramen of the Black- 
water skull, however, is less inclined, so that this fea- 
ture may be accidental in the Trent skull. The frontal 
sinuses are also less developed in the Blackwater skull, 
but, in all other respects, the resemblance is very close. 
The other Blackwater skull, and one ef the Nore skulls, 
are also very like the Trent skull, but the remaining 
Irish skull from the Nore is much larger (having a 
length of 7:8 inches), and more depressed. It exhibits, 
in a very marked manner, however, the projection of 

» the superior part of the occipital bone beyond the occi- 
pital protuberance which characterizes the other skulls, 

314 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

and it retains a strong resemblance to them in its other 
peculiarities. 

The Trent skull was found associated with bones of 
the Bos longi/rons, goat, red deer, wolf and dog. 

I have dwelt thus long upon the Trent skull, because 
of its comparatively perfect condition, and because, so 
far as the imperfect condition of the fragments from 
Heathery Burn Cave allow me to judge, they appear to 
belong to the same race of rather small and lightly- 
made men, with prominent superciliary ridges and pro- 
jecting nasal bones. 

In a paper devoted to the crania of the most ancient 
races of men, Charles Carter Blake, Esq., another high 
authority on questions of this nature, says, in the Geo- 
logist of June, 1862, that the authenticated discovery 
of human remains in strata of high historical antiquity 
in the Heathery Burn Cave, near Stanhope, and at 
Muskham, in the Valley of the Trent, and the approach- 
ing discussion which “looms in the distance” of Pale- 
ontology, induces me to offer a few observations on the 
osteological nature of the evidences at present afforded 
to us of man contemporary with the mammoths, with a 
view, if possible, to determine the grade of the indivi- 
duals whose remains have been preserved in supraplio- 
cene strata. 

The deposits on the banks of the Somme, (Abbeville, 
St. Acheul, St. Roch,) at Grenelle, near Paris, at 
Hoxne, in Suffolk, at Brixham and Kent’s Hole, in the 
south-west of England, under Gray’s-Inn-Lane, in Mid- 
dlesex, at Macagnone, in Sicily, the Kjokkenméddings, 
in Denmark, and at Wookey Hole, in the Mendips, in- 
dicate to us the existence of man in a low state of civi- 
lization, as proved by his weapons, but of whom the 
osteological evidences have not yet been discovered. 
In these deposits the bones of extinct mammalia are 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 315 

found, as well as a more or less per centage of animals 
of existing species. 

At Engis, in Belgium, Massat, in France, Aurignac, 
in Gascony, Muskham, in the Valley of the Trent, the 
Lake habitations, in Switzerland, proofs of man have 
been found in strata contemporaneous with the most 
recently extinct animals. 

Human remains have also been obtained from the 
Neanderthal, from Plau, in Mecklenburg, Mewslade, in 
Glamorganshire, Sennen, in Cornwall, Montrose, Nether. 
Urquhart, in Fifeshire, Plymouth, East Ham, and Hea- 
thery Burn Cave, Stanhope, of which the antiquity, 
however undemonstrated by the association of extinct 
animals, has been advocated upon more or less amount 
of geological evidence. Many other instances, but of 
less authentic value, might be added to the above. 

I shall discusss seriatim, as briefly as possible, the 
recorded instances, before drawing those conclusions 
which seem to be capable of deduction from the facts 
before us. 

With respect to the Neanderthal cranium,* unques- 
tionably the most interesting of the evidences before us, 
I have briefly discussed in the Geologist, Vol. IV. p. 
395, the question of its grade of organization. I hoped 
that English geologists would have thrown light upon 
the question of its age, and that a discussion might 
have arisen which would have established it either as a 
skull of comparatively modern antiquity, or as possibly 
coeval with the deposits of the Somme valley.t The 

*This skull is figured in the London Geologist, Vol. IV., (1861,) 
plate xi., p. 396. 

Tt While obtaining material for this work, Professor Huxley, F.R.S.,, 
kindly permitted me to inspect the cast of the Neanderthal skull in 
his possession. I see sufficient grounds to infer its representing a . 
distinct race of men. 

316 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

apparent ape-like, but really mal-developed idiotic char- 
acter of its conformation is so hideous, and its alleged 
proximity to the anthropoid Simic of such importance, 
that every effort should be made to determine its prob- 
able date in time. That such efforts have not been 
made, and that the evidence at present in possession of 
English paleontologists, is wholly inadequate to enable 
us to draw any conclusion as to its being the represen- 
tative of any given type of mankind, living or extinct, 
is the object of the following observations. 

The fact has not yet been conclusively demonstrated 
to the satisfaction of English geologists that the Nean- 
derthal skull is of high antiquity. The time required 
for the deposition of the four or five feet of mud in the 
cave might have been accomplished in a comparatively 
short space of time. It is not stated at what height in 
the deposit the bones were found. 

Dr. Schauffhausen’s statement, “ that the bones ad- 
here strongly to the tongue, although, as proved by the 
use of hydrochloric acid, the greater part of the carti- 
lage is still retained in them, which appears, however, 
to have ‘indergone that transformation into gelatine 
which has been observed by Von Bibra in fossil bones,” 
is hardly precise enough to convince practical geologists 
of the antiquity of the skull. But of the Engis cra- 
nium no such evidence is afforded us. It is hardly ne- 
cessary to repeat the arguments made use of by Buck- 
land against Schmerling, at the meeting of German 
naturalists at Bonn, which proved the less degree of 
gelatine in the fossil hyena tones than in the human 
remains from the Belgian cave deposits. The condition 
of the Vale of the Trent skull, which has been apparently 
immersed in glue or some analagous liquid since its dis- 
interment, has deprived us of the only chemical evidence 
which could have decided the question of its antiquity. 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 317 

Prof. Huxley admitted to his audience at the Royal 
Institution (Feb. 7, 1862,) that, with respect to the 
Neanderthal cranium, “its great antiquity was not 
directly proved, although its date was undoubtedly very 
early.”* Professor Huxley said, that in the Museum 
of the College of Surgeons there are Australian skulls 
which closely correspond in configuration and develop- 
ment with those of the caverns of Engis and the Nean- 
derthal, the differences’ between which latter were 
“hardly greater than occurred between individuals of 
that race, while in form the ancient and Australian 
skulls presented many analogies.” 

Engis (Belgium.)—This skull was found by Dr. 
Schmerling, in the year 1833, in a cave, with the cave 
bear, cave hyena, elephant, etc., and has since proved 
the teterrima causa belli of paleontologists from the 
days of Buckland and Schmerling down to our own, 
exhibits a type of craniwm which, if attention had not 
been specially called to it, as that of an alleged con- 
temporary of the cave bear and mammoth, would have 
been the last to attract the attention of a craniologist. 

This most ordinary type exhibits a fairly-developed 
forehead, a full and high, but not shelving, occiput, su- 
praorbital ridges not prominent, and, generally speak- 
ing, analogous to dozens of Indo-European crania. In 
the Nepal collection, in the British Museum, there are 
several skulls which resemble the Engis cranium in 
their configuration. It is dolichocephalic, but does not 
approach to any of the boat-shaped (kumbecephalic,) 
skulls which have been afforded to us from graves in 
Scotland of the early “ Stone period.” 

Massat.—The remains from this bone-cave do not 
afford us any evidences which would Jead us to distin- 
guish their cranial type. Only a few teeth have been 

*‘London Medical Times,’ Feb. 15, 1862. 

318 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

discovered associated with remains of Felis spelea, 
Ursus spelceus, Hycena speleea, etc. 

Plau (Mecklenburg.)—The skeleton to which this 
skuil belonged was found in silicious sand, six feet be- 
low the surface, associated with bone implements made 
out of the osseous remains of stag and boar. Dr. 
Schauffhausen says: “A very high antiquity was as- 
signed to this grave, as it was wholly unprotected by 
any masonry, and afforded no trace of cremation having 
been practiced, nor any implements of stone, clay, or 
metal.” Similar arguments might be adduced in favor 
of the high antiquity of the soldiers buried at Antie- 
tam, who, tossed into a pit naked, or with a blanket 
round them, would afford no evidences of masonry, cre- 
mation, stone, or metallic implements. The cranial 
appearance of the skull is, however, truly remarkable, 
although it approaches very much to the configuration 
of the cranium from Montrose, to which I shall pre- 
senily allude. It is brachycephalic,* the occiput being 
high, and the supraorbital ridges well developed. The 
length from the glabella to the occiput is 6” 5’, the 
breadth across the parietal tubers 5” 5“. Dr. Schauff- 
hausen states: “ Notwithstanding the great similarity 
in the form of the forehead between this skull and that 
from the Neanderthal, the prominence of the supraor- 
bital ridges in the latter is more marked, and they are 
completely continuous with the orbital margin, which is 
not the case in the former. But the skulls are essenti- 
ally distinguished by their general form, which in the 
one is long-elliptical, and in the other rounded.” A 
portion of .the upper jaw, with the teeth, and the entire 
lower jaw, have been preserved, indicating that the 
Plau man was orthognathous. As in most of these 

* Brachycephalic—Flat, broad, retreating type of head 
Dolichoeephalic—Elongated crania, receding type of head, 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 319 

cases, the sole chemical evidence of the antiquity of the 
Plau skeleton is, that “the bones are thick, but very 
light, and adhere strongly to the tongue.” More exact 
analysis of their component parts is unrecorded by Dr. 
Schauffhausen. 

Aurignac (Gascony).—The human remains from this 
cavern, which were associated, but in a way not known, 
with those of Hlephas priniigenius, Rhinoceros tichorhi- 
nus, Megaceros, etc., after their discovery, fell into the 
hands of the mayor of Aurignac. Not regarding the 
interests of science, and in order to prevent the dissemi- 
nation of any hypotheses on the subject among the Gas- 
cons, he carefully collected all the bones together, 
amounting to seventeen individuals, and caused them 
to be reinterred in the parish burial-ground. Hight 
years afterwards, ‘not even the sexton retained any 
recollection of the precise spot at which these human 
remains had been deposited in a common trench.” Fu- 
ture paleontologists will rank Dr. Amiel, the mayor of 
Aurignac, with the trustees of the Ashmolean Museum, 
who destroyed the last specimen of the Dodo, in Oxford. 
His ignorance, or superstition, has deprived Palzontol- 
ogy of one of the most important links of evidence ever 
discovered. No information consequently exists of the 
appearance of the bones, as denoting the race to which 
they might possibly appertain. 

Mewslade (Glamorganshire).—This cranium Profes- 
sor Busk describes as “ probably that of a female, found 
together with less perfect skulls and numerous other 
bones belonging to six or seven individuals of different 
ages, from sixty or seventy down to three or four years, 
in a narrow fissure in a limestone quarry at Mewslade 
in Glamorganshire, and not improbably of the same pe- 
riod as the bones of animals. etc., found in the neigh- 
boring caverns in Gower, which have been described by 

>, * 

320 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

Dr. Falconer and others. This cranium is obviously of 
a wholly distinct type from that of the others, though 
still in some respects peculiar.” The frontal region is 
elevated, the supraorbital ridge being only moderately 
prominent. The alisphenoid and the parietal join. The 
skull belongs markedly to the dolichocephalic type, and 
slightly remmds us of the Engis cranium. 

Sennen (Cornwall).—In this cranium, which was dis- 
covered in a subterranean peat—bog or forest, thirty 
feet below the present level of the sea, at Sennen, near 
the Land’s End, Cornwall, and of which Prof. Busk re- 
marks that it “bears some resemblance to the Engis cra- 
nium of Dr. Schmerling,” the dolichocephalic character 
is strongly marked. ‘The frontal region is retrocedent ; 
the occiput shelving backwards. The alisphenoid and 
the parietal bones join for a greater extent than in 
most Caucasian skulls. The supraorbital ridges are 
less prominent than in the Plau, more so than in the 
Mewslade crania. The meatus auditorius exlernus is 
large ; the zygomatic arch strong and powerful. 

Montrose.—This, the most typical example of a Bri- 
tish brachycephalic skull, was found in a tumulus, sup- 
posed to belong to the later part of the Stone period. 
In the words of Professor Wilson, it “is square and 
compact in form, broad and short, but well balanced, 
and with a good frontal development. The supracili- 
aries are moderately elevated.” 

Nether Urquhart (Fifeshire).—This is one of the kum- 
becephalic or boat-shaped skulls which were found in a 
cairn in Fifeshire in 1835. It is supposed to belong to 
the early part of the Stone period. This period might 
be called the protolithic (from prétos, first, and lithos, 
stone). ‘The long, narrow and shelving occiput, the 
retrocedent frontals and the prominent supraciliaries, 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 321 

indicate the similarity of this skull to that from Sen- 
nen, to which I have already alluded. 

_ The researches of Professor Wilson lead him to the 
result that the kumbecephalic (dolichocephalic) races in 
Great Britain antedated the brachycephalic races in 
time ; those of Professor Nilsson, that the brachycepha- 
lic men in Scandinavia flourished before the dolichoce- 
phalic races. 

Plymouth—In this small portion of a cranium, 
“found in a limestone quarry at Plymouth, at a depth 
of about six feet below the present turf,” the retroce- 
dence of the forehead is very remarkable. The supra- 
orbital gidges project but slightly, and are discontinu- 
ous over the nasal bone. The fractured condition of 
the cranium precludes any observation on the form of 
the occiput or the length of the sphenoido-parietal 
suture. 

East Ham (Valley of Thames).—Mr. Cresy, at the 
mecting of the Geologists’ Association on April 7, 1862, 
exhibited this skull, as well as two others, of supposed 
less geological antiquity. The conditions under which 
it was found were detailed by him. The ‘“‘skull was 
found in excavating for the foundations of the North- 
ern Outfall Sewer, in East Ham Marshes, at a depth of 
fifteen feet below the surface, the strata being— 

2 feet grass and mould. 

5 “ yellow clay. 

5 “ peat. 

3 “ sand and gravel in which it was found. 

15 feet.” 

With it were discovered two “ celts’ (stone axes) 
_chipped on the surface, excepting the trenchant edges, 

322 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

which were ground, and the lower jaw of a cetacean 
animal. Having had the opportunity, through the kind- 
ness of Mr. Mackie, of examining this skull, I give the 
following table of measurements, taken with tape and 
rule, in the ordinary manner : 

INGHES. 
Longitudinal diameter from between supraorbitals to inion..... 6% 
Parietal diameter between parietal tubers.................00. 5} 
Frontal diameter, between anterior and inferior angles of parie- 

NT Se eS RL ES RAE et ae ATL 43 
Vertical diameter from fossa, between occipital condyles to top 

7 yori Be artes dep ite hbase te tries Bie tyhd bee yA yt ye 43 
Intermastoid arch, from one mastoid to the other, over the calva- 

PUOUE TD be s.cheidisdw,« ties} 0:4 boo hes > SS ch Us cat cae@ar bent 14} 
Intermastoid line, measured in a straight line, between the Re 

EMCEASEOIG PYOCCESES, ...,. os oces sccgaeas ise espe cen anad 4 

Occipito-frontal arch, measured by a tape on the surface of the 
cranium, from the nasal suture to the posterior margin of the 
PepeMORAIDOP OUI 25 oi5 cy 1 i ood >. a hdare esse nee 14 

Horizontal periphery, by a tape round the cranium, so as to touch 
the os frontis immediately above the superciliary ridges, and 
the most prominent part of the occipital bone........... 2. 203 

In the above fable, I have used the system of mea- 
surement proposed by Dr. George Williamson.* 

It appears from the proportion of this (a female) 
skull, that the breadth was to the length as 754: 10, 
and that it was consequently “ dolichocephalic.” The 
type is oval, the frontal being rounded, with a flat cal- 
varium, and the parietal tubers moderately developed. 
The occiput is oval, the inion being slightly protuber- 
ant; the lower half of the supraoccipital shelves 
gently downwards to the foramen magnum. The oc- 
cipital condyles are flattened. The alisphenoid and 
the parietal join on both sides of the head, with small 
oss, wormiana intercalated in the suture. ‘The frontal 

* « Observations on the Human Crania contained in the Museum of* 
the Army Medical Department, Chatham.” 8vo. Dublin, 1857, p. 73. 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 323 

suture is obliterated. Above the interorbital space is 
a slight projection, possibly coincident with, though not 
necessarily an indication of, the frontal sinus. Behind 
the coronal suture, the calvarium is slightly depressed. 
perhaps indicating the use of a constricting bandage 
compressing the cranium. From these characters it ap- 
pears that no distinctive points can be predicated of this 
cranium, as differentiating it from the skulls of the ex 
isting individuals who inhabit the valley of the Thames, 
To this skull was adherent a small amount of fine mud, 
apparently of the same chemical constituency as the 
clay-bed of the river Thames or Lea. The whole of 
the animal matter was present in the skull, which did 
not adhere when applied to the tongue. 

Borris (bed of Nore,) Lreland.—The supraorbitals 
here are slightly more prominent than in the Black- 
water, less so than in the Valley of the Trent skull. 
The lambdoidal suture is very complex, and develops 
many ossa wormiana on both sides. The fractured con- 
dition of the skull precludes any observation as to the 
junction of the parietals and alisphenoids, or as to the 
presence of a paroccipital tubercle. The opportunity 
of inspecting this skull at leisure has been afforded to 
me by Prof. Huxley. 

Bed of Blackwater River, Armagh (Ireland).—In 
this skull, which has been kindly lent to me by Prof. 
Huxley, the alisphenoid and the parietal join on the 
right side ; the apex, however, of the parietal impinges 
on the alisphenoid on the left: the supraorbitals are 
scarcely, if at all, prominent; the retrocedent frontal, 
and the calvarium sloping gently upwards to the center 
of the parietal bone, repeat here the characters of the 
Borris skull and the skull from the Valley of the Trent. 
eIn the cast, the paroccipital tubercle ‘s slightly promi- 
nent on the right side. 

324 PRE-ADAMITE MAN, 

Valley of the Trent.—This skull repeats many of the 
characters of the Borris and Blackwater skulls, from 
_ which, however, it is markedly distinct. The alisphe- 
‘noid and the parietal join on both sides. On the right 
the jugular eminence is pronouncedly distinct, and indi- 
cates a well-defined paroccipital tubercle. The left 
jugular eminence is, however, broken away. The digas- 
tric fossa is deep ; the inion is protuberant. Over each, 
orbit is a ridge, discontinuous over the nasal suture, 
and which projects forwards. This contains, on each 
side, large, distinct, and well-defined supraorbital fora- 
mina. Along the sagittal suture is a slight elevation, 
or crest, analogous to that often onserved in the Aus- 
tralian races. The low frontal bone reminds the ob- 
server forcibly of the Andaman skull,* which it does 
not exceed in regard to its frontal development. 

One of the most important differences which the cra- 
nium of the Z'roglodytes Gorilla presents to the human 
skull has been defined by Prof. Owen (Osteological 
Catalogue of the College of Surgeons) to be the more 
backward position of the foramen magnum, and its 
more oblique plane in relation to the base of the skull 
in the gorilla, than in man. The almost horizontal di- 
rection of the foramen magnum in the human species, 
co-related with the character (situs erectus) applied by 
the Linnzean definition to man, is modified in the Val- 
ley of the Trent skull, and such modification is in the 
direction of the inferior type. The angle made by a 
line drawn from the anterior to the posterior margins 
of the foramen magnum, with the plane of the basi- 
occipital, is more oblique than I have observed in any 
human skull, and markedly more so than in the so- 
called “ lowest” races of mankind, as e. g. the Austra- 
lians and Andaman Islanders. This character, coupled , 

* Owen, Trans. Ethn. Soc. 1862. 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 325 

with the powerful occipital spine, the ridged and crested 
surface of the lower half of the superoccipital, indica- 
tive of the action of powerful nuchal ligaments to keep 
the head from falling forwards, the presence of a “ par- 
occipital” process for the firmer attachment of the rectus 
capitis lateralis, and the slightly more backward posi- 
tion of the occipital condyles, seem to indicate that au 
entirely erect position was not the normal attitude of 
the pre-historical contemporary of Bos primigenius in 
the Valley of the Trent. 

The skull from the Valley of the Trent exhibits, on 
the right side of the upper half of the superoccipital 
bone, a partial retention of the suture dividing the 
squama occipitalis from the lower half of the superoc- 
cipital bone. This character, the “os Ince,” was first 
observed by Dr. Bellamy, in the skulls of the early 
Peruvians. Prof. Tschudi* considered it as a mark of 
the primeval distinction of the Peruvian race, the skulls 
of which, according to him, manifested this alleged 
“embryonic character” as in the lower mammalia. 
Morton observed it in a Chimu (called by him Chimu- 
yan), and ina Cayuga skull. In the British Museum is 
a large handsome skull, belonging to the “ Chincha” 
type, in which -the interparietal bone is manifest. In 
Mr. Edward Gerrard’s most useful and valuable cata- 
logue, recently published, the locality is marked as from 
Pasadama (7. e. Pachacamac), near Lima. | 

In the collection of the Royal College of Surgeons, 
on No. 5711 (a Laplander), Prof. Owen remarks, “ the 
suture between the exoccipital and supraoccipital is re- 
tained on the right side, and partially so on the left.” 
Here, however, there are numerous Wormian bones 
in the lambdoidal suture. On No. 5390 (a New Zea-_ 
lander), he says, “the upper half of the supraoccipital 

* Rivero and Tschndi, ‘Antiguedades Peruanas.’ 

326 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

has been developed as an interparietal from a separate 
center, and has united by a complex dentated suture 
with the lower half of the supraoccipital.” A similar 
conformation exists in a skull from the Roman burial- 
place at Felixstow, preserved in the Anatomical Mu- 
seum at Cambridge,* and in the cranium of a Bengalee. 
The law which regulates the repetition of similar char- 
acters in skulls of nations aboriginally distinct is termed 
by Prof. J. Aitken Meigs,t of Philadelphia-“ homoioke- 
phalic representation.” Analogous congenital varie- 
ties or imperfections may be seen in almost every ethnic 
type. Dr. Williamson has described them in the Al- 
banian, Singhalese, Timmani, Kosso, Krooman, Fanti, 
Ashantee, Calabar, Burmese (Malay), and Esquimaux ; 
whilst in the Limbu tribe from Nepal, an instance has 
been described ky Prof. Owen, in which the “ interpa- 
rietai” is divided into three distinct quasi-symmetrical 
portions. Dr. Spencer Cobbold has seen a true inter- 
parietal bone in a skull in the Edinburgh Museum ; and 
I have recently observed it in a skull belonging to the 
Ethnological Society’s collection, of which I am not yet 
satisfied as to the precise nation to which it belonged. 
A cursory examination of the bones found with the 
human skull, at the Valley of Trent, has afforded to me 
evidence of Bos longifrons, Bos primigenius, stag, wolf, 
goat and horse. Some of the horn cores of Bos longi- 
/rons appeared to me to be more curved than usual, but 
the majority exhibited the normal form. | 
Ktruria.—In the osteological department of the 
British Museum are four skulls, of presumed high his- 
torical antiquity, which were derived from caves in 
Etruria. I give the following table of their measure- 

* Davis and Thurnam, p. 29. 
+ Meigs, ‘Description cf Fragmentary Human Skull from Jerusa- 
salem.’ 8vo. Philad. p. 279. 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 327 

ments, taken in the same way as I have measured the 
East Ham skull. This table is necessarily defective, 
asin the skulls marked I. M. N. and +, the apical ex- 
tremities of the mastoid processes are broken away, and 
the horizontal periphery of the skull marked + cannot 
be computed exactly, by reason of the left squamosal 
having posthumously bulged out from the parietals. 

1 Ee 
« ae . . Gy + x 
dof Beals fy SB Me 
MEASUREMENT3. 5 Be E si 5 Z; a 2 a % “ 
Po) & + = # = o nce) Be} 
= AR RH |e] a |e se 
Longitudinal diameter..| 6% | 74] 7 74) Th | TEI 7h 
Parietal diameter...... 53) Sf] 54] 547 53] 5 5 
Frontal diameter.......| 5 44) 43 | 4% \— 41 | 48 
Vertical diameter...... 4 53] 441) 5 |— 531 5 
Intermastoid arch...... 14% | 144] 14% | 144 |— 143 “at 
Intermastoid line...... 4 44) 4 4, |— 4 4 
Occipitofrontal arch....| 144 | 144 | 144 | 144 (15 3 | 14 | 15} 
Horizontal periphery... 208 | 202 | 20° | 202 | 21 | 20 | 202 
Proportion of breadth to 
length, the latter be- 
ing estimated as 10... 8.518} 8.103) 7.321 7 7 | 6.879} 6.666 

In I. M. M. and I. M.N. the occiput is globular, and 
shelving gently downwards. In ¢ it is full and oval, 
the lower half of the supraoccipital being flattened. 
No undue prominence of the supraorbital ridge, or of 
the paroccipital tubercles, is observable. Small ossa 
wormiana are present in the lambdoid suture of I. M. 
‘M., but in L. M.N. the sutures are obliterated ; nor 
does t+ exhibit any peculiarity in this respect. The 
frontal suture, however, in I. M. N. is present. The 
inion is distinctly marked in I. M. M. and int; not 
so, however, in I. M. N. In all three skulls the alis- 
phenoid and parietal join. A slight depression of the 
vertex is indicated behind the coronal suture in the 
three skulls, and especially in I. M. M. No history 
of the specimens has heen preserved, nor is there any 

328 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

geological or antiquarian evidence demonstrating their 
antiquity. The contrast between the brachycephalic 
skull marked O, and the dolichocephalic one marked 
*, from the same locality, is significant. 

Switzerland.—Mr. Lubbock, in his memoir on the 
subject, has told us “ Human bones occur in the Pile- 
works (Pfallbauten) but very seldom, aud may no 
doubt be referred to accidents, especially as we find 
that those of children are most numerous. One mature 
skull was, however, discovered at Meilen, and has been 
described by Professor Hiss, who considers that it does 
not differ much from the ordinary Swiss type. And 
while his work was in the press, M. Riitimeyer received 
from M. Schwab four more skulls, two of which were 
obtained at Nidau Steinberg, one at Sutz, and one from 
Biel.” Mr. Lubbock proceeds to say: “ Whether the 
Drift race of men were really the aboriginal inhabi- 
tants of Europe, still remains to be ascertained. M. 
Riitmeyer hints that our geographical distribution 
indicates a still greater antiquity of the human race.” 
No general statement of facts is, however, adduced in 
support of M. Riitmeyer’s theory, while the negative 
evidence, which proves that human bones are as capable 
of preservation as those of mammalia, tends to refute, 
until observation and demonstration shall establish the 
greater antiquity of man. 

A human cranium belonging to the first age "of ir on, 
from Tiefenau, exhibited exactly the same profile as 
the craninm from Sanderumgaard. M. Morlot states 
that the height of the Swiss cranium is identically the 
same, and the length is a little (5 millimétres) longer 
than that of the Danish cranium. sali ‘ Etudes 
Géologico-Archéologiques,’ p. 317.) 

Objects of human art have been found at various 
depths in a tumulus near the Tiniére rivulet, which 

PRE-ADAMITR MAN. 329 

flows into the Lake of Geneva near Villeneuve. In 
order that my readers may understand more clearly M. 
Morlot’s reasoning, I transcribe his diagram and refer- 
ences. 

Actua SECTION oF THE “ CONE DE DEJECTION TORRENTIELLE DE LA 
TINIERE.”’ 

From A. Morlot, ‘Legon d’ouverture d’un Cours sur la haute Anti- 
quité, fait a l’Académie de Lausanne en Novembre et Décembre 
1860.’ 8vo. Lausanne, 1861. 

R. Bed of Roman age. 

B. Bed of the Bronze age, date 3000 to 4000 years ago. 

S. Bed of the Stone age, date 5000 to 7000 years, in which were found, 
at a, a piece of pottery ; at b, a human skeleton, which appeared 
to have been laid in a tomb, and of which the very small, round, 
and remarkably thick head presented the Mongolian or Turanian 

-“ brachycephalic” type, strongly marked ; at d, many fragments 
of very coarse pottery, much charcoal, and broken pieces of the 
bones of various animals—a proof that man had inhabited that 
precise spot. 

A. Central axis of the cone, transversely bisected by the railway. Itis 
here that the torrent flowed in ordinary times, before the dykes 
had been constructed. 

CC. Surface of the cone, when the torrent was commenced to be dyked. 
This line is, to a certain extent, ideal ; all the others are real, 
and have been actually observed as they are represented in the 
section. 

MN. The iron road. 

VY. Bridge acting as aqueduct to the torrent which crosses the rail- 
way. 

OPN. In this space exclusively all those distances are included 
which have served to establish chronological calculations. These 
distances, often repeated, are capable of being. taken here very 
exactly ; they can be considered as exact almost to balf an inch. 

The section has been interrupted at M, because it became indistinct 
here. Its southern extremity was complete in every relation. 

Kjokkenméddings (Denmark).—Numerous human 

330 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

skeletons from the ancient deposits of Denmark, in 
which the remains of extinct animals, with one excep- 
tion (Bos primigenius ), have not been found, have been 
afforded to us. The skulls are brachycephalic, and pos- 
sess well-defined supraorbital ridges. M. Morlot says 
“ that their front teeth did not overlap as ours do, but 
met one another, as those of the Greenlanders of the 
present day. This evidently indicates a peculiar man- 
ner of eating.” The value of this assumption could 
only be estimated by the illustration of a drawing, 
showing in what way such close juxtaposition of the 
incisor teeth was effected. This evidence, however, is 
not given to us, and those who are acquainted with the 
~ range of dental variation in man, however they might 
consider a conformation of this sort indicative of a 
peculiar description of food, will hardly affirm that the 
builders of the tumuli had “a peculiar manner of eat- 
ing.” M. Morlot, although he quotes the Greenland- 
ers, Egyptians and other nations as exhibiting the same 
dental peculiarity, the incisors being worn away so as ~ 
functionally to resemble molars, is evidently not aware 
of the fact that this conformation has been observed 
even among British sailors, and that it is due solely 
to the triturating action of the hard substances used by 
them as food. In the sepulchral edifices of the early 
Danes, carefully constructed of large hewn stones, M. 
Morlot has discovered numerous crania, of which, he 
says, the type can be established. “It is a small head, 
remarkably rounded in every way, but with .a rather 
large facial angle, and a forehead which does not bear 
- the mark of a slightly-developed intelligence. This 
type reminds one of that of the Laplander, but it can- 
not bé precisely affirmed to be identical with it.” One 
from Sanderumgaar@, of the Iron period, in the island 
of Fyen, is dolichocephalic, with a slightly retrocedent 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 331 

frontal. Practical cranioscopists are aware that the 
range of variation in the skulls of the Indo-European 
races is such as to exhibit many crania of these two 
types among the existing races of Europe and Asia. 
Palezontologists are under a lasting debt of obligation 
to M. Morlot, who has, by his researches on the later 
geological strata of Switzerland, furnished us with an 
almost inexhaustible mine of information on the con- 
-temporaneity of man with the extinct animals at both 
the Kjékkenméddings and Pfahlbauten.* Human osse- 
ous remains have not been demonstrated in the Kjiék- 
kenméddings themselves, according to the testimony 
of the latest observers of these shell-deposits. 

The broad ground may be admitted, that the earliest 
Briton skulls generally exhibit a supraorbital projec- 
tion, which attains in its development, however, nothing 
like the size of the ridge in the Neanderthal cranium. 
The majority of the British, Hibernian and Caledonian 
skulls figured by Messrs. Davis and Thurnam,t exhibit 
a large supraorbital ridge. This character is also 
present in a few of the Saxon skulls. 

* A. Morlot. 

1..* Legon d’ouverture d’un Cours sur la haute Autiquité, fait a la 
Académie de Lausanne en Novembre et Décembre, 1860.” 8yo, Lau- 
sanne, 1861. 

2. “ Remarques sur les formations modernes dans le Canton de 
Vaud.” (Bulletin de la Soci¢té Vaudoise des Sciences naturelles, 
tome v. No. 40.) 8vo. Lausanne, 1857. 

3. ‘ Etudes Géologico-Archéologiques en Danemark et en Suisse.” 
8vo. Lausanne, 1860. (Bulletin, etc., tome v. No. 46.) 

4, “On the Post-Tertiary and Quaternary Formations of Switzer- 
land.” 8vo. 

5. “ Recherches sur les Habitations lacustres des environs d’Esta- 
vayer;” par M. Biot de Vevay et Henri Rey, rédigées par M. Morlot. 
(Extrait des Mémoires de la Société des Antiquaries de Zurich, tome 
xiii.) 4to. 

¢ “Crania Britannica.” 4to and folio. London: 1856 

332 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

The supraorbital development of the Briton skull 
from Ballidon Moor* is fully equal to that of the Engis 
cranium. The Neanderthal skull, however, admittedly 
stands sw generis. 

The Museum of Natural History at Copenhagen con- 
tains skulls of the “Stone Period” in Denmark, with 
an excessive supraorbital projection. | 

Aboriginal American races of high antiquity often 
exhibit a large supraorbital development. This may be 
seen on examining Morton’st plates of the Peruvian 
from Pachacamac (“Temple of the Sun ”), plate 114, and 
the skulls of mound-builders from the Upper Missis- 
sippi (plate 52), Tennessee (plate 55), and Steubenviile, 
in Ohio (plate 68). 

The frontal development of the Australian race, ac- 
companied by an absence of the frontal sinus, has been 
frequently noticed, and several Australian skulls have 
the supraorbital ridge overhanging the origin of the 
nasals to the degree shown in the skulls from Engis 
and the Valley of the Trent. 

Supraorbital development in the Negro is far from 
being a constant character. It is undoubtedly present 
in many of the lower Negroes; but I have now before 
me a skull from Ashantee, which exhibits less supra- 
orbital development than many of the skulls from the 
“Stone Period” in Denmark. 

In India, the range of variation offered by the hill- 
tribes of Nepal exhibits the supraorbital ridge under a 
variety of aspects. The low-caste individuals, perhaps 
of all nations, have a greater tendency to repeat this 
character than the more elevated types. In Europeans, 
however, of high intellect, this conformation may fre- 

*“ Crania Brittannica.” 4to and folio. London : 1856. 
t+ ‘ Crania Americana.” Philadelphia: 1839. In a Pachacamac 
skull before me, there is a very slight supraorbital development. 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN, 333 

quently be remarked ; and I have observed it in more 
than one person with whom it was correlated, with a 
high degree of mental ability. 

The words of Professor Owen, applied to the Nepal 
crania, are also applicable to the remains from the 
Stone period. “There are not more than two or 
three skulls in the entire series which. would have sug-— 
gested, had they been presented to observation without 
‘previous knowledge of. their country, that they be- 
longed to any primary division of human kind distinct 
from that usually characterized by craniologists as 
Caucasian or Indo-European ; the majority might have 
been obtained from graveyards in London, Edinburgh, 
or Dublin, and have indicated a low condition of the 
Caucasian race. ... They present varieties in the pro- 
portion of length and breadth of cranium, in the devel-— 
opment of the nasal bones, in the divarication or prom- 
inence of the malar bones, in the shape of the forehead, 
in the degree of prominence of the frontal sinuses and 
projection of the supraciliary ridge, which would be 
found perhaps in as many promiscuously-collected skulls 
of the operatives of any of our large manufacturing 
towns, and which would be associated with correspond- 
ing diversities of features and physiognomy.”* 

The range of variation offered by the above skulls 
(the Neanderthal cranium excepted) is, on the whole, 
not greater than between a large series of the skulls of 
any given district—as e. g., Nepal. Neither in the 
size of the supraorbital ridge ; the extent of frontal 
development; the form of the occiput, whether shelv- 
ing, vertical, or globular ; the persistence of an inter- 
parietal bone ; the presence or absence of a sphenoido- 
parietal suture ; the position of the condyles; the de- 

* Owen, “Report on a series of Nepdlese Skulls.” Transactions 
of the British Association, 1859. 

334 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

velopment of sagittal or lambdoidal crests ; the size, 
shape, or position of the styloid or vaginal processes— 
have any of those differences—which so prominently 
characterize the Homo sapiens been departed from, nor 
any of the simial features superadded or retained as 
embryonal characters; nor have the latest published 
demonstrations of the anatomical characters of these 
ancient crania by the ablest advocates of the hypo- 
thesis of direct selective transmutation, afforded us any 
satisfactory evidence to break down the broad bridge 
of demarcation which still separates us from the infe- 
rior animals. 

The researches of Professor Steenstrup and others 
have led to the proposition of a series of periods, as ex- 
hibited in the annexed table, in which the propositions 
put forth by the advocates of the excessive antiquity of 
man are set forth ina tabular form. Direct contempo- 
raneity of e. g. the denizens of the Kjékkenméddings 
with the Natchez mound-builders is not inferred. “ It 
would have been very much better for geology if so 
loose and ambiguous a word as ‘contemporaneous’ 
had been excluded from her terminology, and if in its 
stead some term, expressing similarity of serial relation 
and excluding the notion of time altogether, had been 
employed to denote correspondence in position in 
two or more series of strata,’* and Professor Huxley 
uses the term homotawxis as expressing such relation. 
It has been further sought to show, that, as in Den- 
mark and some other localities, a regular scale of di- 
vision of the humatile strata into beech, oak, and pine- 
producing deposits prevails, each respectively coinci- 
dent with iron, bronze, and stone remains, that an anal- 
ogous distribution in time prevailed during the deposi-. 

* Huxley. Address to Geological Society, 21st February, 1862. 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN, 335 

tion of the extra-Huropean humatile strata. Neither 
observation nor analogy, however, demonstrates this 
assumption. In the whole American continent, although 
we have the chipped flints and celts from Natchez and 
Chiriqui,* the obsidian knives from Mexico, and the 
arrow-heads from Tierra del Fuego, the copper and 
gold implements from Peru and Chiriqui, the Ameri- 
can mind never devised the plan of smelting iron from 
the ore, and applying the metalliferous residue to a 
useful purpose. The so-called “Iron Age” never ex- 
isted in America. ; 

~ ‘Trees: 

Ae Rena = ce 
ede. Weap-ns. | (Denmark .) | Instances. At 
Beech. | Workers in Iron. | Dolichocephalic. | 
Workers in | : . . . 
Oak. | Tair riia) | Dolichocephalic. Switzerland. 
; Haichets not chip- Switzerland. 
Pine ‘ped, but groundin | Brachycephalic. | Kojkkenmoddings 
Stone. Natchez. 

ground but chip- 

Hatchets not fe 
ped in Stone. 

| Somme Valley. 

PLIOCENE. 

| 
fe alee 
icity 
| 

The division of rapa crania into “ brachycephalic” 
and “ dolichocephalic” originated with the late Profes- 
sor Retzius. Like the arbitrary and conventional di- 
visions of other anthropologists into “ orthognathous” 
and “ prognathous,” it was convenient as affording easy 
and intelligible descriptive terms for crania of diverse 
races. Asa test of distinction of race, however, it is 

| 
| 
MIOCENE. | 
| 

EocENE 

*W Bollaert and C.C. Blake on Antiquities from Chiriqui : Ethno- 
logical Society, March 18, 1862. 

336 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

an insufficient mark of distinction. The supporters of 
the theory have based on it the following classifica- 
tion.* 

As types of these two varieties of crania, Professor 
Huxley adduced the West Coast African Negro and 
the Turk. The typical cranium of the West Coast, Afri- 
can Negro is long and narrow, its transverse measure- 
ment being only six or seven tenths of the longitudinal, 
while the side to side diameter of the Turk’s skull is 
as much as eight or nine tenths of the fore and aft 
measurement. The facial angle of the skulls also was 
different, owing to the projection of the jaws in the Ne- 
gro: the dolichocephalic skull was prognathic, while 
the brachycephalic skull was orthognathic The most 
striking developments of these diversities were associ- 
ated with the greatest differences of climate and situa- 
tion. Ifa line be drawn from the center of Russian Tar- 
tary to the Bight of Benin, the north-eastern extremity 
of the line would represent the center or pole of the bra- 
chycephalic orthognathic variety, the south-western 
would be the center of the dolichocephalic prognathic 
type. The center of Russian Tartary was distin- 
guished by an arid climate and great diversities of 
heat and cold, and presented the strongest contrast 
with the hot, moist, reeking swamps of the Western 
Coast of Africa. Now, in whatever direction we di- 
verge from these dolichocephalic and brachycephalic 
centers, we find the type beginning to fade and to pass 
into the opposite. Thus diverging from the brachy- 
cephalic pole, if we pass eastward into China, we no- 
tice the population becoming more dolichocephalic and 
prognathic ; if we travel northward to the Aleutian 
Islanders, Esquimaux, and Greenlanders, we observe 

* On Fossil Man. Royal Institution. February 7, 1362. 

‘ PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 337 

them more or less long-headed, as compared with the 
Tartar type. The same divergence of type is seen on 
leaving the dolichocephalic center; the peculiarities 
of the Western African cranial conformation gradu- 
ally subside and approach in proportion the other type. 
Another line drawn across the center of the former 
from the British Islands to India, would mark a popu- © 
lation whose skulls may be said to be oval, presenting 
a medium between the dolichocepalic and brachyce- 
phalic conformation.” The question was then raised 
“whether the distribution of cranial forms had been 
the same in all periods of the world’s history, or whe- 
ther the older races in any locality, possessed a differ- 
ent cranial character from their successors.” 

The induction that, on the whole, the brachycepha- 
lic type of cranium is more ancient than the dolicho- 
cephalic is capable only of a limited application. The 
skulls from Sennen, Plymouth, and Mewslade, said to 
be of antiquity transcending human historical records, 
all, belong, as Professor Busk has stated, to the doli- 
chocephalic type. If brachycephalic-skulled men ex- 
isted before these, their remains have not been vouch- 
safed to us, here or in England at least. In the Conti- 
nent, on the contrary, the Engis skull, said to be “ the 
oldest relic of man on record,” exhibits a dolichocephalic 
type. So does the Neanderthal skull, “ the lowest in 
rank of any human being,” exhibit, as well as can be 
ascertained from its fragmentary state, a long-headed 
or dolichocephalic type. These two types, therefore, 
“the oldest” and “the most degraded,” according to 
the preconceived theory, belong to the so-called mod- 
ern or dolichocephalic type, said to be coeval with the 
bronze and iron periods of man. So far their craniol- 
ogical nature per se fails to demonstrate their anti. 

quity. 

338 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

General biological analogy would not lead us to sup- 
pose that short-headed races of men first existed on this 
planet. We almost invariably find the “lowest” races 
of animals first. The “dark races of man,”* compre- 
hending the Negroes and Australians, are the lowest in 
our classification. They, if any, offer most affinity to 
the anthropoid apes. They are dolichocephalic. It 
would be far more consonant with analogy to suppose 
that the “ dark races” once stretched over the tropical 
regions of the globe, and have left their modified 
descendants in Africa, Australia, and the Andaman 
Islands,t long previous to the introduction, origin, or 
derivation of the lighter races of the Old World, than 
to infer the existence of a supposititious race of short- 
headed men with or without simial supraorbital ridges, 
who flourished over the whole earth (America inclu- 
sive) antecedent to historical time. Speculation on 
this subject must be checked till we know what are the 
most ancient crania of the autochthonous tribes of the 
earth. In America, the mound-builders of the Missis- 
sippi valley are probably not the most ancient aborigines 
of North America. They are certainly brachycepha- 
lic to a degree transcending the existing American 
races. But the modern Quichua skullt (often termed 
Inca) is almost as short-headed, and the Quichua race 
has not the slightest claim to ethnological antiquity. 
Antecedent to the Quichua races, the “ Flat-heads” of 
Titicaca (not satisfactorily identified with the Ayma- 
ras) who peopled Bolivia and Southern Peru for ages 
of unrecorded duration, even giving due allowance for 

* Knox. Races of Men. 

t Possibly in Ceylon, according to Mr. Brayley, F.R,S.; Medical 
Times, May 10, 1862. 

{ Vide Etnnological Society’s Transactions, May 6, 1862, for C.C. 
Blake’s paper “On the Cranial Characters of the Pernvian Races.” 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 339 

distortion by artificial pressure, exhibit a long-headed 
or dolichocephalic type. A plausible hypothesis has 
even been mooted, that the Titicacan Flat-heads dis- 
torted their crania with a view to perpetuate the re- 
membrance of the dolichocephalic character of their 
ancestors. Retzius has attempted to identify the “ An- 
cient Peruvians” of Morton, and the so-called “ Huan- 
cas” of Tschudi, with the eastern dolichocephalic races 
of South America. This writer by no means coincided 
with those authors who consider the brachycephalic 
mound-builders of: Mississippi as the remains of the ty- 
pical American stock. He pointed out that in the 
eastern part of the American continent. from north to 
south, the dolichocephalic type predominated. The 
remains from the Brazilian bone-caves, described by 
Castelnau and Lund, with retrocedent and possibly 
flattened crania, are dolichocephalic, and according to. 
Retzius, represent the primeval population of Brazil. 
Whether the flattening of their skulls was artificial or 
natural, may well be doubted. If natural, the succes- 
sion of crania in Bolivia, Eastern Brazil, and Peru, 
would be as follows: 

Ist. Natural Dolichocephali. 
Brazilian bone-caves. © 
Oldest builders of Tia-huanaco (?) 
2d Artificial Dolichocephali. 
Titicacans, Aymaras. 
3d. Artificial Brachycephali. 
Pachacamac Quichuas, Incas, Atacamans. 
Changos. 

The mounds termed Koorgan or Bongor in the 
Government of Tomsk, of which the antiquity is un- 
ascertained, containing brachycephalic skulls, afford 
no evidence of bronze or chipped stone implements. 

x eee 

BIN CS ae A YB ee es ee a eS ee ee ee Ce 2 ere ae © i ar arr ari ard eC UW on SnQAL ' 
Sait TEESE puopionge snaiag 

| ) . ‘lrss* on inmanin snasag| 

eS ee eet bo es ee Sele Seles eriseoeopsesbsloaesiee esl so dbeloe so si ese beter oe stl uraetlsionse x x x Ce ee or fsisuauoulogy snasag' 

| | "Jorttiesssts ss lenupubnaopnasd * ata) 
sae ts eeoelesecleeeel!~seovfevesiecsesioede x& beet oe ester eels eerie ed slew en rft he esls eerie ous seretees sls En sa00/hbUOns SNALIO 

Co x ae 4 Ce Ce ee 2s re 2 x tow eloene x esos x ee oal ete rte we eelse we aeleoeos seelessssteouaavbaw 8NALlIaO 

@eeel errr sea rle ewe ee eee eerie eebicon esis seeeleoeesie eee eeesti ae etsioeeelseeeele estilo eee fe se oeluesesioee ove eee 

se@esete . eee ele eee eee rie ee eles eels eeel seas ee er| eee! sessile er selooesfsove ba Ce oe . 
a 

x x ee eele seston ve XK x x x x ee rle ee ee seeense syissof snub 
soeleens rose Lotus ododduyt 

serleo ses ee eeleo ere oie te sloreeliwoeeft te slseerevleses vrrcresssitenurysojday SOLIIOUINS 
BS ag il Pg SR i la MR a ber: i ot Ma = te, fsnurywoyorn SOLIDOUTU 

eee eeele ef . eeelewerieeees “se Isnnbyup spydayy 

ele weet sr Pebble eer ee eeleobheooiseesliseosbsloanas fe es elo wos see rleoeeeleees xk Ce 

visel a [ovselenee vfeees oe ’ “|e 5 a ed ‘lx fees wag Oe EE a a tsnoswd uosug 
[ . X >t ae oe oi] o 6 ere see. eesleeee bees oe bee ‘ . tetlawe teoorloeoee ect . ee . ‘t(¢) snsoquouf sog 
Pes afte» 4". ssl oy fees x Pe Ae eit PF yr ‘ OC] tall ana eh fe es Pesce . safe eeelereeseee tsuo.frbuo) sog 
x iX xX x eu x eoleeene . . ‘ x x ‘ ix | x x x s ee ° ee ‘tsnvuabruad sog 
5 4 ees te ae fF vie ke | par oo] oe are Lit Peeler erleee ‘ ’ x Be 6 Ok 648) 2 ok 0 1 ose e RA et . a 23 r sees *Luoasvajupbous "UIDYOVy]y 
' rae aliny 6 le g 5s He © af 80 oe eee e ar. ‘ t s X ae aL abe wlowas ‘ : Be eo sT 8 oe 2 Pe serteeesl  Ieuwapyp) SNPOLIDYIv IT 
| x x eps fans Rie spate das eten cfs oe veel we fy feet ge feeeeles TE A fal hee oh hs MD ver es Acti “spb a toajads puny 
Fey Koa nie Ber Sied is Sand? Sane Te TOK. Sted ee Slice 4 a [tees EE oes a 2 al a OR eo vefe ee sleees[secsleresoveees Snosiid SNs1Q 
Rents on Ce ia eras Cee Ge arin os 2d ae a cee a I Ges ios Oo ie oe ae Oa tsnajads snsuQ 
es ee oe x | Foe et OMe 418 0 Sip arg of ee eae vi keel coel y a oe > a RCPS I eee x oe, wie x eeorsl|eees| se eer erens *. pajads suag 
hp ae | Bet ete ee Be) Gea dt 10. On) ae | Se 1° OO ee Be lo er eee (<< e Ce 
| es | ee | — a in enn | ne | ates | memmeenenien | cates Seen | eceeedinteten | donee 
| « > - T| aod | 
eee ee fo | Ee | Ss oe a eae | me od et 
° = ~ ao — < J = =| 2 = o ey by = = mi}; e * S @ 
Ry a4 -S co) fe a om | ae | rm YS may} «ee -| By S|] 0 | ® © | oi1°o oO) @ | B 
o oe = | os 2 x S Ss vor D ™ <) o [= ¢ fe Oo i) < - Q 
Se: fe. fos cael me (wo. ta m | é a} el] mw | BY] 2 eoler|/Fl 4 
rh ae Sis BEI Be eee $ ° P28 ie i © ee ele a 

3 to . : ™ = . 
S/ plop} m1 F | orn} 2 2 
: os “ =a © ° 

aS” mre, es - 
is ree 

ty s[eunuy paywoysouog “f ousnojstejq “f viyetumesy oUPd0T|G “O SyIO,, “X SonOg -soyyey] Ur s Toods |Iss0q 
“VITVAWVW LNHOWA GNV LONTLXG AO SNIVWEHY 
HHL HLIM GOVE NVANH FAL JO SHONHGIAD LSHITYVE AHL AO NOLLVIOOSSY AHL DNIMOHS WIV 

| 

eeee 

eeevete 

ee aa ae ix ae a perenes x 4x Wella ad ta: se hintin lamas Senay 
xX Le nie Sale wi® C08 @eceleeoes|eere a Rekt SW eh ale omenayhye en este. ie oe 
pe 2 Va ee, 2 ‘| x yd Cae ae Oe o. 

: Pa ; x escelseee es eoreleere oa 
Bal 26 ib ee d x x ola} eeoeleeosi|eooe eee 
Re en epee Xe eee eee eeee eoeee ‘tm @ ° 
Fes Sans ‘lx Ares ree Ce ee ee 

x x eee eee eoeoee eee ee ee 
ok, at 1? x stare eecleececleese ee oe 

x Pe Cees (Cs Cd oe 
re x ae o eee x eoee ee me 
ewe vrter x eves eee 1X eee oe ad 
eer oe ¢ 

*K eee Pas eee oe ee oe 
ea ie aig sleceo|eeeeleceeteooel X& ee 
ae fees x oe aunle a * eeoeleecevi|eeeveieee? ee 
a ae Nae x Ceceleeselewceleceoisee?¢ oe 
4 My er, eeee eoslecve|seooeieere ee 
x atk x eoorsjeeee eesleaevijeeoei|s ee? eo 
who's) oe Peers Ce Perey ee es oe es eee 
*'< *“< »-¢ ° oo edeoe eoeleccelieocesiseee eee 
er Bi x . emeele se Balwe vale ca 6) ose > eee 
ht Ed he x ° eeovelteees x ecole eee eee 

\ 

. 
. 
ee eele 
. 

: 
: 

x 
eee 

x 
soeelecerleser] y 
x: 
x 

* 

eevee Beee er,eeee eeeoe 060° 
' 

HK KK A 

. 
- 
. 
. 

eovsleeooetoeeel*ee? 

x 

eore eee ey* 

esoesloeeoe oe 
seoeovleeee eee 
Pa ee ed eee 
eoe 
coeeolseeoe eee 
eee 

a ad ak aed 

sleeeolseoeei*ereirer® es oeslevesieo ve ,eoapie rer 

na kl'els o> Lee oe Ob SOO [ee © Ore ee mye oe weneoleeerleeee|oeerer 

coaolieecaleeeel(seaej,oe ve 

2 

e@eeeleeee seer 

eeevrleeeotores 

eeoersteoeooleeoe? 

x 

. 

Fi SSO eke {pcnTIse snub 
Pee snuibg 
selec evons *SLIBs[DA SNUDLOG 

ooee saesleceossoeoes 1907 1OJSBS) 
so ape © Se soeeessseninoldno snda'y 
seeveleeeoe seseer se SITTQBlIea sudo] 

eeeelevoe 

‘|e ++essgigneyeid BfOOIAly 
ssleeeeorensQIse BlOOLAIY 
‘cinurnbe ‘3 snqdopoulyy 
eee e eee ss SN DIUITY sndery 
-++seesnajods sfaosey 
eeeeeeoe *-sno1yealAs snyq 
ve eeeeeeees NX By SOTO 
ve eeeeeeeeegoqoI8 SIS) 
seeeeoeeee s+ RGQLIB BIAQ 
-eetgadevoidns adoiyuy 
soeeeeeres onosiy BldBy 
seeeeereeer sag] eideg 
-egniqrydue snepndéy 
**-snadoine sneovalg 
seeeeeesegBS[NA XA0S 
oweeoeere® *“Baloy Bla sn 
ve eeees egg Bul 819180 
seeee ee BoULUa BlaISO 
seeeeeeen1opnd Bla}suY, 
o mgs wae e+ oo obey PAL sl]aq 
veeeeeeeeees ponqeo Std 
srr eeee UetreTTMes SIU) 
soeeeeree ss sadina sluBg 
seeeeeeeeescsndny stung 
eoeeeveere ee *SLIVS[HA eijny 
soeeeeeeeonyu dss Bo0ud 
seeeeerereeey BIOIOS BUG 
w gene 4 (6) SRS ED ee SNAII() 
seeeeerenooidBo SNAIOD) 
e@eoeeeree re s90[8 snAlo—y 
sseeeees snydeya snAlo 

vere ee en pUBlBy SUALIOY 

342 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 
The foregoing table may be epitomized as follows: 

The dolichocephalic skulls are here marked D ; the brachycephalic, B 

f No. of | No. of 
Locality. extinct | recent | Total. 
species, | species. 

Pree PUD, nL) 54 ye ote e's tee 2 bs were 
SRM) lay ccc cs ts eaxts ye Ors 

PARNELL O04 5 dia paw Sr steele sti-w-o wes eowrd'e 
NECER Gee 8 o's akc antes e'b.cs op 
oe ign As a 

bt 
bat 

eet, See cs rc the aies ce eee e 

is*) 

PeMEEDIOIEANeS A. a So Spee eS : 
PCED OOED, SORT WD. Bee wie cide Hele 

neeeOr a Ish SS. 
mre PAN Ga De aes We a Bisse ate ein 

Peery ets. D... os som oe mec opt 
PERS LISS Sr esr ae see ee es ee 
EMC OMEDONG: Coorg odie h wis oS ces < wioein de wes 
> Kjokkenmoddings, &c.. B... 3.0.2.6. 
WaoRBy tole fyi. 

KS INTISOSOOOOCH HDR OOO OO Rm ATO OO 

bn 
eo 

— 
PRE TIROSCOCCOCOHPHENWHOOCOHOS 
bt es 

= G00 

4 

i=] 

es 

wm 

jo) 

— 

© 
fot _ 
ONNRPROWSOOCOCOCOHPNAWNONRAOOAS 

ro 

The weapons and other objects found by Meynier 
and Kichthal, in the tumuli, are either of bone or iron; 
the ornaments are of bone, melted silicate, polished 
quartz, or copper ; there were, moreover, in one of the 
tumuli fragments of pottery ; in another the remains cf 
a wooden vessel. All the tumuli, without exception, 
had some remnants of iron tools or weapons, but none 
of bronze, the metallic ornaments found being cast in 
copper, exactly like all others our travelers have met 
with in Siberia in the collections of dilettanti. The 
cranium bears in all the skeletons strong marks of re- 
lationship with those which Retzius has designated un- 
der the name of ‘ Brachycephali,’ their chief feature 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 343 

- [sic in orig.] being the rectangular form of the orbital 
cavity, a form common to all Mongolian races. MM. 
Meynier and d’Hichthal are, nevertheless, inclined to 
believe that severai different kinds of tumuli must be 
distinguished in Siberia, and that it would be prema- 
ture to consider all these tombs as pertaining exclu- 
sively to a single race,* 

Supporters of a derivative hypothesis of the human 
~ race from existing species of anthropoid apes, have 
drawn a parallel between the dolichocephalice chimpan- 
zee, and the dolichocephalic Negro of Western Africa, 
and. also between the brachycephalic orang-outang of 
Borneo and the brachycephalic Malay of the same lo- 
cality. Ethnic centers of specific dispersion in time 
. have been inferred from this geographical distribution. 
The remarkable alleged coincidence of the long-headed 
ape with the most long-headed man, and the short- 
headed ape with his short headed human representative, 
and inferred descendant, certainly seemed a fact which 
might lead anthropologists to admit a possible transmu- 
tation. Reference, however, to the simple facts of the 
case gives a totally different aspect to this surmise. 
When we examine the skulls of the young orang-outang 
and chimpanzee, side by side, before their typical cha- 
racters have been masked by superadded peculiarities 
connected with their functional needs, we see that 
the young orang-outang, gorilla, and chimpanzee have 
the transverse diameter of the skull proportionately 
equal,* and that the apparent length of the head in the 
chimpanzee is produced by the greater development of 
the supraciliary ridges than in the orang-outang. In the 
young gorilla, also an African ape, cvincident in its 
geographical distribution with races of dolichocephalic 
~ * Comptes Rendus, Acad. Sciences, 1862. 

f Sur Ie Gorilla, par Professeur Owen, avec six planches ajoutées 
par Eudés Deslongchamps. 8vo. Caen. 1861. 

5844 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

Negroes, the transverse diameter actually slightly ex-- 
ceeds in Deslongchamps’ 5th plate that of the orang- 
outang. For all practical purposes of classification, 
however, it may be said that in youth, before the action 
of the biting muscles has altered the typical outward 
aspect of the brain-case, the orang-outang, gorilla, and 
chimpanzee exhibit skulls of which it cannot be pre- 
dicated that each exceeds the others in the proportion 
of its transverse diameter. . 
Professor Deslongchamps says, “ Pour bien saisir les 
rapports souvent cachés, des étres, entr’eux, l’état adulte 
ne suffit pas toujours ; dans cet état, ce sont surtout les 
différences qui se prononcent ; dans les premiers ages, 
-les ressemblances sont plus accusées, les affinités sont 
moins masquées. I] est- utile, dans l’étude des animaux, 
d’imiter les botanistes, qui vont chercher les affinités 
des genres et des familles des végétaux dans les pre- 
miers rudiments des fruits de la graine, de l’embryon, ete. 
Le groupe des singes anthropoides est remarquable 
entre tous par les changements, je dirais presque par 
les métamporphoses, que subissent leurs tétes.”* The 
comparison of the skulls of the anthropoid simiz in their 
young state, made by the cautious and philosophical 
Dean of the Faculty of Sciences at Caen, therefore, 
may be accepted as evidence against the hypothesis of 
the coincidence and derivation of the short and long- 
headed races of men with and from the alleged brachy- 
and dolichocephalic genera of Asiatic and African apes. 
The foregoing table is drawn up with a view to ex- 
hibit generally the number and proportions of extinct 
and existing mammalia which have been found ina 
fossil state in deposits where the remains of man have 
also been discovered. With no pretensions to com- 

* See note on preceding page. 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 345 

-pleteness, it may yet serve as a convenient record, and 
may, to a certain extent, demonstrate the greater anti- 
quity of e. g. the Abbeville beds as compared with the 
Danish Kjékkenméddings, evinced by the greater pro- 
portion of extinct species in the former deposit. It 
must, however, be borne in mind that the mammalia of 
the Somme valley may not have attained a more north- 
.ern range during the post-pliocene age, while boreal 
species existing in England and Denmark at the same 
time, might leave no remains in post-pliocene strata in 
Gascony or Sicily. We know too little respecting the 
distribution of mammalia over limited areas in the 
later tertiary strata to entitle us to form any compre- 
hensive. generalization. | 

In the table, I have made use of the researches of 
M. Lartet (Geol. Journal, 1860, p. 471 and 491, and 
Natural History Review, 1862, p. 53;) Mr. Prestwich 
(Geol. Journal, 1860, p. 189, and Philos. Transact. 1860, 
p. 2773) Dr. Falconer (Geol. Journal, 1860, p. 99 ;) 
Dr. Schauff hausen (Nat. Hist. Review, 1861, p. 155 ;) 
Mr. Busk (Nat. Hist. Review, 1861, p. 172 ;) Mr. Lub- 
bock (Nat. Hist. Review, 1861, p. 489, and NV. H. Re- 
view, 1862, p. 26 ;)and Mr. Dawkins (Proceedings of the 
Geological Society, 1862.) 

In the diagram which accompanies Part Third, I have 
indicated the locality of some of the most authentic re- 
mains, the antiquity of which has been strongly advo- 
cated. It is not, however, intended to be conveyed 
that any of the remains, here indicated were contem- 
poraneous. The contemporaneity of some of them with 
the extinct mammalia is hitherto undemonstrated. It 
is certainly significant that so many instances should 
occur in the extreme south-west of England, to which 
the early Britons were driven by their Saxon conquer- 
ors, and where the traditions of British local history 

346 -PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

and the Cornubian dialect still survive. The remains 
from the Land’s End, Plymouth, and Mewslade, may 
have been those of early Britons, and their antiquity, 
unproven by any chemical or geological evidence, may 
not date further back than the period of the Saxon 
conquest. 

Not the least point of interest in the table on pp. 340- 
341, is the fact that in Gascony and Devonshire we 
have evidence of the contemporaneity of the horse and 
the ass, both animals domesticated by man, with the 
extinct mammoths, rhinoceri, cave lions, bears, and 
hyenas. The question then arises whether the fossil 
horses and asses are specifically distinct from the exist- 
ing, as, if identical, the commonly-received doctrine 
that the horses and asses were introduced from a 
warmer climate must be essentially modified. It might 
be supposed that the horses and asses of the post-plio- 
cene might have been domesticated by the early pre- 
Gascon or pre-Devonian, and have possibly aided them 
to exterminate the elephants and rhinoceri. The asso- 
ciation of human remains with those of Machairodus 
at Kent’s Hole is not a more remarkable fact than his 
association with Klephas antiquus and Hippopotamus- 
major in the Somme valley and in Sicily. Remains of 
Hippopotamus-major have also been found in Kent’s 
Hole. | 

Switzerland and the Kjékkenméddings, belonging 
to a later epoch in the so-called “Stone Period,” - 
afford us first evidence of man’s faithful companion, 
the domestic: dog; and the former locality indicates 
also the proof of goats and sheep, specifically indistin- 
guishable from the existing species. With these in 
Switzerland are associated remains of the Bos primi- 
genius, the Bos frontosus of Nilsson, and the Bos longi- 
Jrons. The latter species was domesticated by the 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN, 347 

early Kuropeans, and probably formed the souche primi- 
tive of our domestic oxen. Whether some primigenius 
blood may not possibly exist in our breeds, may be 
reasonably doubted ; but the conclusions of Professor 
Nilsson, who derives an existing breed of oxen from 
the Bos frontosus, will need further -discussion before 
their acceptance by palzxontologists. With these do- 
mesticated or domesticable species of ox, flourished in 
Switzerland the Bison priscus, a species which the most 
strenuous efforts of the early Kuropeans would not have 
rendered capable of serving as a docile, milk-producing 
beast.. The musk-buffalo Bubalus ( Ovibos) moschatus, 
which lived in glacial clay and drift in England con- 
temporary with the elephant and tichorhine rhinoceros, 
has not hitherto been found associated with the re- 
mains of man. 

Morton, in his posthumous manuscripts,**said, ** Why 
may we not discover the remains of man in the ter- 

tiary deposits, in the cretaceous beds, or even in the 
oolites ?”’—a supposition which, considering we have 
quite proved his existence in the post-pliocene, is pro- 
bable. [For the real origin of man we must go im- 
measurably further back from the time of the existence 
of man among the mammoths, and far into the great 
Pliocene or Miocene ages. 

That we shall find abundant human remains in the 
tertiary or secondary strata, I, the writer hereof, have 
no doubt ; although till then, perhaps, the negative eyi- 
dence which disproves the existence of monkeys, the an- 
cestors of man on the derivative hypothesis, in any 
stratum below the eocene rocks, may have a tendency 
to check our desire to anticipate the conclusions 
which future palwontologists may arrive at, through 

* Usher, in Nott and Gliddon, “ Types of Mankind,’’ p. 343, 

348 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

a slow and cautious process of induction and observa- 
tion. | 

With the broad question of the antiquity of the 
human race, the foregoing remarks have no necessary, 
or even contingent, connection. A higher and more 
satisfactory evidence than any which the geologist or 
the cranioscopist can bring to bear, is furnished us by 
the researches of those ethnologists and philologists, 
who have most studied the affiliations and relations of 
the most ancient languages of the globe. Upon the 
supposition that such languages as the Sanscrit, Graeco- 
Latin, Teutonic, Keltic and Lithuanian, have been de- 
rived from a once primeval “ Arian” stock, a vast lapse 
of time is necessary, during which their derivation and 
divergence from such parent stem took place. Upon 
the rejection of the “ Arian” hypothesis,* and the accept- 
ance of the” doctrine of diverse ethnié centers of lin- 
guistic origin, an equal or greater lapse of time is 
necessary during which such a language as the Greek 
could have improved by ascensive development from 
the simple utterances of a barbarous early tongue 
to the high grade of philological civilization when 
Homer wrote. Such a supposition would corroborate 
the conclusions to which @ priort analogy would lead 
the geologist ; but it would leave the problem of the 
origin of the inferior non-“ Arian” races of men still 
unsolved. The great question of the origin of these 
races, whether as our representatives in a state of ar- 
rested moral and mental development ; whether as the 
scanty remnants of inferior types which, called into 
being ages before the advent of the “ Arian” race, have 
passed the fore-ordained limit which “species” can at- 
tain, and are slowly succumbing before the superior 

* Crawfurd, “Antiquity of Man on the Evidence of Language.” 
Trans. Ethnological Socicty, 1862. 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 349 

mental force of their exterminators, “ the most exalted 
object of which we are capable of conceiving, namely, 
the production of the higher animals directly follow- 
ing’* the extirpation of the lower race, are specula- 
tions which cannot be solved by the inspection or 
measurement of any series of skulls, still less from so 
limited a number as those which I have noticed above. 

The question of the nature and date of anthropogen- 
esis, like that of cosmogenesis, will perchance not be 
solved for many generations yet to come, if indeed ‘they 
ever will. There are many difficulties in the way of 
the solution, and future research, and new tools to 
work with, can alone enable us to surmount the obsta- 

cles that beset our path at present, and may dissipate © 

the prevailing or. the proposed theories respecting the 
recent creation, or the vast antiquity of man. Till then, 
the constant observer of recorded facts follows his 
track through the devious labyrinth of anthropology, 
conscious that by a steadfast adherence to exactitude, 
he may possibly succeed in throwing some small light 
on the nature of the earliest evidences of the human 
race. 

CHAPTER IV.. 
ADDITIONAL TESTIMONY. 
PROCEEDINGS OF VARIOUS GEOLOGICAL SOCIETIES. 

LIvERPOOL GEOLOGICAL Soctmty.—-March 24th.— 
The President, Henry Duckworth, F.L.S., F. G8, 
read a paper “On Flint Implements from. the Drift ; 

* Darwin, “ Origin of Species, 1st edition, p. 480. 

‘ 

A 

350 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

being a description of a visit to Amiens and Abbeville 
during the summer of 1861.” 

Mr. Duckworth did not discover any worked flints 
himself, but he exhibited several very characteristic 
specimens, some of them being obtained from the quar- 
rymen, and others presented to him by Monsieur Boucher 
de Perthes and Monsieur Pinsard. Mr. Duckworth 
also exhibited a human skull, which he disinterred from 
the brick earth-bed, in what was stated to be a some- 
what unusual position. The paper was illustrated by 
drawings of sections, etc. In conclusion, Mr. Duck- 
worth remarked, that in examining these Drift-beds 
both at Amiens and Abbeville, but more especially at the 
former place, it seemed to him that they must have 
been deposited very rapidly. There is no evidence 
whatever, so far as he could judge, of any very slow or 
gradual formation ; and the impression left upon his 
mind was that they have been produced by some sharp 
and sudden catastrophe. 

GroLoaists’ AssociaTion.—-April 7, 1862.—Mr. 

Cresy read a paper “ On some ancient skulls and flint- 
implements found in the Essex marshes during the pro- 
egress of tne Northern Outfall Sewer of the Metropoli- 
tan Main Drainage Works.” 

The three skulls exhibited were found along the line 
of the sewer, one on the east, and another on the west 
side of the River Lea, aud the third, to which the 
greatest interest attached, in the Hast Ham marshes, 
A diagram was exhibited showing sections of the strata 
at various points. 

From one to two feet of surface soil, chiefly vegeta- 
ble mould, was first penetrated, then a bed of yellow or 
brown clay, three to five feet, then blue clay, two to 
four fect, this sometimes alternated with beds of peat. 

wie PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 351 
and then the gravel was reached. No shells of any 
kind have yet been found, nor is there any other evi- 
dence by which the age of the several deposits can be 
determined. 

The author did not assign the highest antiquity to 
any of the skulls exhibited, as the flint-tools found near 
them were not of the earliest or drift type; those ex- 
hibited were both polished and chipped. 

Previously to describing the skulls, the author enu- 
merated the most marked characteristics of the Orea- 
dian, Scandinavian, Ancient British, Roman, and Saxon 
skulls, comparing the one with the other, at the same 
time admitting the difficulty of an absolute classifica- 
tion, and pointing out the wide differences existing 
among individuals of the same race. Still, the causes 
of modification being fewer and less active among an- 
cient than among modern races, it was easier to ar- 
rive at more certainty of determination in ancient skulls 
than of those of our present mixed races. 

The author pointed out that the three skulls exhi- 
bited separate and well-marked types. That from the 
west side of the river Lea was comparatively small, and 
well-proportioned, and apparently of a young person. 

The second, from the east of the river Lea, was of 
large size, with immense posterior development, and 
was evidently that of a man past middle life. The 
‘large bony crest of the occipital bone was extremely 
marked by the former attachment of large and power- 
ful muscles. Altogether this skull showed great ani- 
mal development and had marked affinities with many 
of the skulls of the Celtic period. 

The third skull, from East Ham marshes, presented 
the greatest interest ; in its vicinity were found two 
flint-implements, and it was probably the earliest of 
the three. The frontal development was very low, 

i S 

302 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. TA 
the vertical aspect narrowing rapidly anteriorly, the: 
occipital region predominating considerably over the 
frontal ; the bony ridge of the occiput, too, was very 
marked ; the sutures were nearly obliterated, so it was 
an aged skull. The author compared it with a cast of 
the Engis skull, and believed there were points of re- 
semblance. 

Professor Busk, F.R.S., gave elaborate descriptions 
of the peculiarities of the skull. 

Mr. C. C. Blake pointed out the discrepancies be- 
tween the observations of those craniclogists who had 
assigned particular crania to particular periods, as e. g. 
between Steenstrup and Wilson, the former having, by 
his observations in Scandinavia, correlated the brachy- 
cephalic skulls with the date of the earliest known 
stone deposits in Denmark, while Wilson had demon- 
strated the existence of a long-headed (kumbecephalic) 
race of men from cairns at Nether Urquhart in Fife 
shire and elsewhere, prior to the brachycephalic races 
who have left their remains in the later Stone period 
at Montrose. He hoped that some solution might be 
offered for this apparent discrepancy. 

Mr. 8. J. Mackie, F.G.S., remarked that the geolo- 
gical conditions in the present case seemed to have been 
somewhat overlooked. The sections in some places 
exhibited three beds of peat, and these ought to be care- 
fully examined to see whether any vegetation existed 
in this country at the periods of their formation dif- 
ferent from that which is now indigenous. 

He did not think attention should be solely given to 
the form and other craniological characters of the ex- 
humed skulls, for craniologists seemed to be by no 
means certain of the distinctions they had drawn being 
typical. He thought it rather rested with geologists 
to prove by stratigraphical evidence the antiquity of 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 353 

such remains, and thus furnish a stable basis for the in- 
ferences of the craniologist and ethnologist. 

Royat Sootrty.—March 27.—* Theoretical Consi- 
derations on the Conditions under which Drift Depo- 
sits containing the remains of Extinct Mammalia and 
Flint Implements were accumulated, and on their Geolo- 
gical Time.” By Joseph Prestwich, Esq. In the paper 
which the author read before the*Society in 1859, it 
was demonstrated that the flint implements occurred 
in undisturbed gravels, commingled with the remains of 
extinct mammalia ; but the theoretical considerations 
of the subject were then omitted. The author now 
showed that in existing river-valleys, in parts of Eng- 
land and France, two lines or zones of gravels or drift 
deposits are met with ; one at from fifty to two hundred 
feet above the present streams, and usually forming a 
terrace: the other ranging along the bottom of the 
valleys. The elevated terraces are portions of former 
valleys, wider and more shallow than the present ones, 
scooped out by other and different causes than ordinary 
river-action. ‘They are above the reach of the highest 
floods, and no other mass of water than that flowing up 
an arm of the sea could fill them. The Seine, at its 
highest flood, has not exceeded twenty-nine feet, but it 
would require the present rivers to be of a hundred 
times that volume to fill the existing valley. That the 
terraces were originally connected is proved by the iso- 
lated patches of their gravels still lying at elevated 
spots between them. The author believed that the 
gravels were brought and distributed by ice and by the 
melting of the winter snows in spring pouring down 
great bodies of water, the gravels enclosing boulders 
of hard rock, brought often from long distances. He 
also attributed much importance to the action of ground 

304 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

ice. He pointed out contortions in the drift-bed at St. 
Acheul, as formed by the pressure and squeezing force 
of massive ice. The characters of the gravels were 
then considered, in reference to the climatal condition 
of the drift period, which the author argued were those 
of a more intense cold, by 20% or 25°, than the aver- 
age of our present winters. The bearings of the geo- 
graphical distribution of the animals of that period, 
and its comparison with those of existing forms of life, 
were also assumed to confirm this inference. The use 
assigned for some of the largest flint implements was 
that of making holes in the ice—the men of the drift- 
age, like the North American Indians and the Esqui- 
maux, being very often dependent upon winter supplies 
of fish. Since the formation of the high-level gravels, 
an elevation of the land has taken place, and the pre- 
sent valleys excavated, and the lower gravels deposited. 
The tendency of existing rivers was to cut deep gorges, 
and not valleys, with sloping sides, such as those con- 
taining the gravels. The large flint implements were 
nowhere so abundant in the valleys, as in the terrace- 
gravels. FF lint-flakes, on the contrary, were most com- 
mon in the valley-gravels—the climate of the valley- 
period being more lenient,.there was a diminished need 
of great flint chisels for breaking the ice. These dis- 
tributions, at two periods, of different forms of imple- 
ments, indicated a difference in the habits of the tribes 
by whom they were respectively used. 

In the questions of time and succession the value of 
probabilities must be considered. The antiquity of the 
flints was carried back through three geological ages— 
the loéss, terrace, and valley-gravels ; all long periods 
except the loéss, the duration of which was comparatively 
short. ‘The sand-pipes in the valley of the Somme were 
first considered as a standard of time-measurement ; and 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 355 

then the author commented npon the probable condi- 
tion, at those periods, of the British Channel, the for- 
mation of which, while a late geological event, he was 
not prepared to admit to be one of the last. Hven in 
the Pleistocene period the British Channel existed, al- 
though much narrower, and there was a line of cliffs 
running parallel with the present coasts. The sea be- 
_ ing narrower, was frozen over every winter, permitting 
the passage of men and animals. Some of the great 
effects of such a cold period might already be conceived, 
although it might not be in our power as yet to accu- 
rately define them. In looking at a distant mountain- 
chain we could judge of its great magnitude without 
waiting for a trigonometrical survey to be assured of 
its exact dimensions. The author then suggested as a 
possible measure of time the perturbations in the in- 
creasement of heat at various depths in the earth’s 
crust, arising from disturbances originating with the 
glacial period ; and he concluded by giving his im- 
pression that in the existence of this remarkable cold 
period preceding our own, we might possibly trace 
evidence of great and all-wise design by the circum- 
stance that, in this long glacial era, the earth’s crust 
would tend to acquire an earlier adjustment in its equi- 
librium, and obtain a rigidity and stability which should 
make it more fitting for the habitation and pursuits of 
civilized man. So thinks Carter Blake; so think we 
all! ; 
The prominent part which Mr. John Evans took, ina 

brave and consistent manner, at the beginning of the 
discussion on the important topic of the antiquity of 

the human race, which the early fossil flint-implements: 
evoked, gave him justly the leadership of British anti- 
quaries in this warfare against deeply-rooted prejudices 
and inculcated opinions, in the same way as Mr. Prest- 

356 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

wich took the lead among British geologists ; and, as 
we look to the latter for the narration and reduction 
of new geological facts, we look to receive from the 
former periodically the antiquarian view of all fresh 
details and novelties. I do not propose to use my 
pages, in expressing my sense of the valuable services 
rendered by Mr. Evans, however justly such enconiums 
nay be due, but I do prefer to economize my space by 
‘giving, without comment, a summary of the * finds” not 
hitherto recorded, or but slightly noticed. 

Paris.—Flint-implements have been found by M. 
Gosse, of Geneva. The pits in which: they were dis- 
covered are two—that of M. Bernard, Avenue de la 
Motte Piquet, No. 61-63 (Champ de Mars), and that 
of M. Etienne Bielle, Rue de Grenelle, No. 15; in 
beds of sand and gravel analogous to those of Menche- 
court, near Abbeville; the beds are not disturbed, 
their average thickness is twenty feet. The implements 
and flint-flakes were found in a bed at the base of the 
gravel from three to five inches in thickness, associated 
with bones of Bos primigenius, E'lephas primigenius, 
deer allied to reindeer, and a large carnivorous animal, 
probably the cave-tiger. These observations have been 
confirmed by M. Lartet and Mr. Myline. This place 
was signalized as a probable locality previous to M.: 
Gosse’s discovery by M. Boucher de Perthes, At 
Clichy, also, one implement has been found by M. 
Lartet. 

Creil.—aA flint-implement (hatchette) has been found, 
under similar circumstances, in a gravel-pit at Précy, 
near Creil, in the Valley of the Oise (between Amiens 
and Paris), with a tooth of an elephant. Exhibited to 
the French Society of Antiquaries, 16th May, 1860, by 
M. Peigné Delacourt. 

Rouen.—The Abbé Cochet reports two flintimple- .. 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 357 

ments in the museum there, which the curator, M. Pot- 
tier, states to have come from the sandpits of Sotte- 
ville in the neighborhood. This requires confirmation, 
as Mr. Evans could not find these implements in the 
museum, and M. Pouchet, the director, was not aware 
-of their existence. Mr. Evans states, however, the pits 
at Sotteville to be of “ precisely the character that ren- 
ders it probable that flint-implements may be discoy- 
ered in them.” 

Clermont.—In a valley leading into that of the 
Ariége, there is a deposit of gravel underlying brick- 
earth, at five hundred and forty feet above sea-level 
and thirty-three feet above the stream which now 
waters the valley. In this gravel, mixed with bones 
of Hlephas primigenius, Rhinoceros tichorhinus, Felis 
speloca, Cervus megaceros, Equus, and Bos, have been 
found manufactured “ pieces of quartzite.” Dr. Noulet 
says, “ One of them is four inches in length, two and a 
half inches wide, and its greatest thickness one inch. 
It has been formed into shape by chipping it on only 
one of its faces. The second is much more impor- 
tant; both its faces have been modified to bring it to 
the shape it now presents. The sidegud point, which 
is truncated, present a beveled edge; but the base, 
which is cut obliquely, has evidently been polished even 
with care. ‘This is also about four inches long, two and 
three-quarter inches wide, and one and one-quarter 
inch thick.’* Mr. Evans passes a comment on this 
statement. “if it be,” he says, “really the case that 
this is in part polished, and that this polish is not due 
to the natural fracture, it is certainly a singular fact in 

* See also an account of a very curious discovery, somewhat of the 
same nature, in M. Lartet’s “ Researches respecting the Co-existence 
of Man with the the Great Fossil Mammalia,” in the Aun. des Sei- 
~ ences Naturelles, 4th ser., tom. xv. 

358 PRE-ADAMITE MaN. 

connection with the implements of the Drift period, 
which have hitherto always been noé ground. Dr. 
Noulet, however, has paid some attention to this class 
of antiquities, as he draws a distinction, on account of 
their rude workmanship, between these implements and 
the haches gauloises ou celtiques. . . . Beside the chipped 
implements, round pebbles also occurred, which are 
considered by Dr. Noulet to have been used as ham- 
mers; and, though the account he gives of the whole 
discovery is not to my mind quite conclusive, it ap- 
pears to be a proper case for further inquiry.” 

Swalecliffe (1. of Sheppey).—At the end of Stud Hill 
Cliffs, near the Swalecliffe Coast-guard Station, Mr. 
Evans picked up a flint-implement of the oval-pointed 
form, stained by ochreous colors, from having lain in 
the gravel ; and in the Drift capping the highest point 
of the cliff, close to the farm-house at Stud Hill, a por- 
tion of a tooth of the Hlephas primigenius. 

Peasemarsh, Surrey.—One implement found by Mr. 
R. Whitbourn, F.S.A., of Godalming, twenty-five years 
ago, in a gravel-pit. “It was embedded in gravel, 
in a layer of sand about four or five feet from the sur- 
face, in apparently undisturbed ground.” Mr. Whit- 
bourn adds: “I have heard of remains of large ani- 
mals having been discovered in the same beds, but not 
in very close proximity to the spot where it was 
found.” The gravel-beds of this district have been ex- 
amined and described by Mr. Godwin-Austen, in Quart. 
Journ. Geol. Soc. vol. vii., p. 278, in which communi- 
cation he states that remains of Hlephas primigenius 
are frequently found in this gravel, and that at Pease- 
marsh there are traces of an old land-surface, with 
branches of trees and the bones of these animals unin- 
jured and lying together. 

Horton Kirby, Kent.—An implement of the round- 

- PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 359 

pointed form was found (N ovember, 1861) on the sur- 
face of the ground at the top of the hill, on the east 
side of the River Darent, about a mile E.S.E. of 
Horton Kirby, by Mr. Whitaker, of the Geological 
Survey.. 

PAST LIFE IN SOUTH AMERICA. 

- Mr. C. Carter Blake says: Minds accustomed to re- 
view the complex phenomena of geology and palzon- 
tology in the Old, are apt to neglect the equally inter- 
esting evidence afforded to them of past life in the New 
World. American paleontology is distinguished, not 
because the mighty hemisphere has not passed through 
analogous phases of life-stages to those presented by 
the elder continent; nor because the extinct fauna of 
America is less interesting than that of Europe, Asia, 
or Australia; nor that the most eminent men in both 
worlds have omitted to call attention to the stupendous 
monuments of bygone existence in the pampas of La 
Plata or on the shores of Patagonia ; but because the 
public mind has not yet sufficiently realized the idea, 
that, during the period while Eurvpe and Asia under- 
went the manifold and changing influences of geologi- 
cal time, like conditions were passed through in Ame- 
rica. . 
A tradition exists in the minds of all the earliest abori- 
_ ginal nations of America, on the banks of the Missouri, 
at Mantua, at Punta St. Elena, in Eucador, at Sauacha, 
in New Granada, at T'arija, ou the eastern slopes of the 
Andes, and at T'agua-tagua in the South of Chile, that 
a vast nation of colossal human beings existed before 
the present inhabitants. These giants, the credulous 
and imaginative minds of the natives supposed were 
destroyed by the deities, like the old race of Titans by 

360 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

the Olympian gods, or the Hrimthursar—the frost- 
giants of ice and snow—by the supporters of Odin and 
Atsir in the Norse mythology. It is instructive to 
trace these unhistorical narratives back to their physi- 
cal origin; it is suggestive to find that such origin is 
rational, and does not rest upon any purely mythical 
base. Such a colossal race of beings did exist in the — 
old times ; they were, however, the gigantic mastodons, 
etc., which man drove before him and exterminated. 
When M. Albert Koch, in the year 1842, carried the 
so-called Missourium skeleton to England, which after- 
wards was demonstrated to be identical with the Mas- 
todon Ohioticus, and now forms « conspicuous object in 
the British Museum, among many other dubious anec- 
dotes recounted by him, was one, that with the bones 
of the Mastodon had been found an arrow-head, proving 
apparently the existence of mankind in America con- 
temporaneous with this great elephantine animal. This 
marvelous story was ridiculed by English geologists in 
1842 as quite preposterous. Now, however, in 1863, 
we look at the subject with more cautious and less scep- 
tical eyes... We know that both in France and England, 
mankind either lived so far ago as the period when the 
hair-clad elephants and rhinoceroses existed in Nor- 
mandy and Gascony, or (which is nearly the same thing) 
the elephants and rhinoceroses lived down to the period 
when human life, in a state of barbarism, existed in 
Kurope. It is not more preposterous to believe that . 
man, at one time, hunted elephants in the United States, 
than to believe that he hunted rhinoceroses in Nor- 
mandy, and was himself the prey of hyzenas in Devon- 
shire. At all the places where a tradition like this ex- 
ists in America, evidence of the existence of a fossil 
Mastodon has been found. | ' 

In Brazil, proof has been afforded us of the existence 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 361 

of a tradition amongst the Indians of a large ape, 
termed by them Cayporé, which is the analogue of the 
gorilla and chimpanzee of Africa. As no man-like ape 
of any sort exists in South America at the present time, 
two theories may be suggested to account for this popu- 
lar belief. The Negro slaves may have carried their 
faith in the existence of a huge ape from Sierre Leone 
and the Gaboon to Brazil, in the same manner as we re- 
cognize still among the half-Christianized slaves of Ame- 
rica, the traces of the Obi-worship of their African fore- 
fathers. But the answer to this assumption is, that the 
tradition in question does not exist in the Negro, but in 
the Indian mind. None of the Indians, however, have 
actually seen a Cayporé, or rather none of those Indians 
who profess to have seen them, have undergone satisfac- 
torily, the ordeal of interrogation by such painstaking 
observers as Dr. Lund. 

A signification is afforded us of the meaning of this 
tradition, when we learn that a colossal ape, approach- 
ing in size the human stature, once existed in Brazil, . 
and that it was probably contemporaneous with the 
early human races. The Protopithecus Brasiensis was 
four feet high, surpassing far the dimensions of any ex- 
isting American monkey ; it nevertheless was a true 
platyrrhine, like all the simian forms of the New World. 
Found in the latter Pliocene, the possibility of its being 
contemporaneous with early man is rendered more pro- 
bable when we reflect that on the borders of Lake 
Lagoa Santa, and at Minas Geraes, human remains 
have been found, coupled with those of forty-four ex- 
tinct animals, among which was another large fossil 
ape, Callithrix primevus. 

_ The extinct elephants and horses of America afford 
an interesting source of contemplation to the reflective 
paleontologist. Existing elephants, as is well known, 

362 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

are but of three species, those of Africa, India, and 
Sumatra. Professor Owen has, however, pointed out 
that our knowledge has been expanded by fossil evi- 
dences, and that during the Pliocene period, elephants 
existed in Africa, India, Europe, China, and Australia 
Thus far there was little to surprise the practical obser- 
ver, who was accustomed to find a wider distribution 
of animal life in the later Tertiary times, than in the 
present day. But when we learn that two species of 
elephant (Hlephas primigenius and Texianus) and one 
species of J/astodon co-existed with each other, in warm, 
temperate, and cold latitudes in North America, and 
that two other so-called species of elephantine animal 
(Mastodon Andium and M. Humboldtii) browsed on 
the trees of South America, prior to the upheaval of 
the vast Andian chain of mountains, astonishment, al- 
most verges to incredulity. “ Well,” it may be said, 
“since we have thus evidence of American elephants, 
why may we not have evidence of American rhinocer- 
oses 2?” We have such proof of an animal closely allied 
to the rhinoceros and paleothere, discovered by Mr. 
Darwin in Patagonia, and which at the same time bears 
some points of analogy, but not of affinity, with the 
Hamas. This animal, the JMJacrauchenia, has also been 
found on the eastern slopes of the Andes at Tarija, and 
in the very heart of the Aymara country at Corocoro. 
Imagination can scarcely conceive the period when this 
bulky brate, with its long stiff neck, elevated straight 
upright, asin the guanaco, contested the pastures of 
Patagonia and Bolivia with the Hamas and_ horses 
around it. Some readers will say, “I understood that 
horses were first introduced on the American continent 
by the followers of Columbus, and that when the abori- 
ginal Americans first viewed the mounted Spaniards, 
they regarded them as centaur-like monsters, or almost 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 363 

as divinities.” The horse, however, of various species, 
had existed in the New World for countless centuries 
prior to the advent of the Spanish conquerors: whether 
its extinction dated previous to the human era is yet 
undemonstrated ; tradition even of its existence had 
passed away long before the Columbian epoch. Vari- 
ous species of these early American horses are known 
to us ; one from the States of North America ; another 
from Bolivia ; a third from Chile; and a fourth from 
Patagonia. The last species (Hquus Curvidens,) the 
best. known, because the first discovered, indicates a 
species differing only from the Huropean horse in the 
greater curvature of the molar teeth. These horses no 
doubt existed in herds, like the quaggas of South 

Africa, or like the wild asses of Central Asia. The 
same influences which promote the numerical increase 

of horses in South America at the present day, would 
have tended to promote a similar increase of the equine 
race in South America during the Pliocene period. 
The horse was first introduced in A. C. 1537, at Buenos 
Ayres ; forty-three years afterwards, in A. C. 1580, 
they were found at the Straits of Magellan. The cause 
why the horse, once numerous in America, became ex- 
tinct centuries before the time of Columbus, at present 
baffles speculation. More significant is the fact, that 
we find in the Old World a three-toed fossil horse 
(Hipparion,) which, by its annectant affinities to the 
earlier odd-toed herbivoras, has been supposed to 
be absolutely the ancestor of the present Hauus ca- 
ballus. In the New World, however no such form 
exists. Whence, then, on a derivative hypothesis, the 
horses of America? 

Two tapirs are found, the one mm the North, the other 
in South America; a dubious taperine form has also 
been found at St. Louis, in Missouri, associated with 

364 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

fossils “of unquestionable Secondary date!” Pomel 

has erected this very suspicious type into a new genus, 
termed by him Menodus. It is not surprising that we 
should find taperine forms in South America, when we 
reflect that the existing tapir, or d’anta, is found over 
the whole Brazilian and Argentine Confederation, and 
from Guatemala to Patagonia. In the Panama and 
Chiriqui countries, the woolly taper of the Andes, or 
Finchaqué, also exists, a species far more nearly allied 
to the extinet races than the other American, or than 
the Sumatran tapir. In the Andes of South America, 
above the line of six thousand feet, the existing tapir 
is not found. 

When Castelnau was at Tarija, surrounded by fossil 
remains of mastodons, horses, macrauchenes, schelido- 
theres, llamas, and other mammalia, he was struck with 
the state of “ fat, contented ignorance” in which the 
Franciscan monks had arrived in Geological knowledge. 
The remains which he saw were all, according to them, 
proofs of the existence of a gigantic race of men who 
existed prior to the deluge. Padre Osario, a Jesuit of 
Paraguay, had declared, in 1638, that he had seen with 
his own eyes, in the Gran Chaco, a race of men of the 
highest physical and mental cultivation, so tall that the 
Jesuit, with his upraised arms, could hardly touch their 
heads. Peradventure, these races belonged to the 
same stock with those Indians of California, immortal- 
ized by Padre Fray Pedro Simon, who had ears so large 
that they served for canopies, and under each of them 
five or six men could find ample shelter ; or they might 
be allied to those of a neighboring province, who, 
when in need of repose, used to go to sleep beneath 
the waters of a lake on the banks of which they lived. 
Even the giants whom Osario imagined, however, were 
far too small to have produced the mastodon bones of 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 365 

Tarija. When this argument was pressed on the monks, 
they replied, “that the bones had swelled since they 
were buried in the earth.” Castlenau naively remarks, 
that a like proof might demonstrate that the mastodon 
bones of Tarija might have belonged to dwarfs. This 
singular superstition is by no means confined to the 
monks. Don Francisco Antonio Casello gravely tells 
his readers that ‘‘the soil of the town of Tarija pos- 
. sesses the virtue of making bones grow beyond measure. 
If a body of ordinary size is buried, and is disinterred 
after the lapse of some time, we find the bones exces- 
sively swollen.” The American or English reader who 
scoffs at this ridiculous theory of the Tarijans may, 
however, recollect that, in the year 1863, there are still 
a few writers in America and England who speak of 
“an unknown mysterious force’ which has kept the 
species of animals distinct from each other throughout 
all time. We are not yetso far removed from the 
trammels of an adherence to unproven and undemon- 
strable assumptions in science to entitle us to ridicule 
the hypothesis which our less gifted friends in Bolivia 
may suggest to the world. 

MONKEY US. MAN. 

In England was lately published a letter from 
Professor King, of Galway, expressing the opinion to 
which that high authority has arrived, after years of 
due thought and consideration, on the probable method 
of operation of continuously-operating secondary laws, 
which have produced the species of animals successively 
or progressively throughout geological time. While 
paying the highest tribute to the candid manner in 
which this eminent geologist has treated his subject, I 
am led to suggest that the meaning of one passage in 
his admirable paper may be liable to misconstraction. 

366 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

- Professor King holds “ that an organism, whether it 
typifies a species, a genus, a family, an order, or a 
class, is an autotheogen, if it possesses a series of char- 
acters which isolate it from other equivalent groups ;” 
and that inherent and external forces may modify such 
organism, “ thereby resulting in geneotheonomous 
forms.” The limits within which autotheogeny can be 
predicated are, however, left unexplained by Professor 
King. 

A writer in 1830, reasoning from the philosophical 
standpoint of the state of knowledge in the time of 
Cuvier, would have confidently pointed to the horse 
as an “autotheogen.” Cuvier says, “ If species have 
gradually changed, traces of these gradual modifica- 
tions would be discovered ; and between the Palco- 
therium and the recent species, some intermediate forms 
would be seen, a fact yet undemonstrated. Why have 
not the bowels of the earth preserved the monuments 
of so curious a genealogy ?” etc., etc., (Cuvier, “ Dis- 
cours, Préliminaijre sur les Révolutions de la Surface 
du Globe,” 6th edition, 8vo, Paris, 1830, p. 122.) Here 
the absence of intermediate organisms, previous to the 
discovery of Paloplotheriwm, Anchithervum, and Hip- 
parion, is made the groundwork on which to base a 
theory of distinct specific origin, or “ autotheogeny.” 
That, “on psychological grounds alone, Man must be 
regarded as isolated from all other organisms,” may be 
conceded. As psychological grounds, however, are 
unsafe bases for a zoological classification, and as the 
extent of man’s isolation is the problem which biolo- 
gists are attempting to decipher, whatever position we 
may assign to man, whether with Owen in a distinct 
sub-class Archencephala, or with Huxley in a family 
Anthropint of the order Primates, we must at least 
admit that the anatomical characters of man are not 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 361 

more unlike those of the higher Gyrencephala than the . 
lower Gyrencephala are unlike the Lissencephala or 
Lyencephala, 1. e., that man is not more unlike the 
gorilla than the whale is like the rat or the opossum. 
I therefore would be slow to recognize that in is an, 
autotheogeneous species. 

I coincide with Professor King’s remarks that ‘nat- 
ural selection only holds the rank of a subordinate or 
_ ancillary agent,” but I am far from identifying the 
“other and higher principles involved” with the doc- 
trine of direct creation of animals through a fiat from 
a Primary Cause, even though such a fiat might op- 
erate through “a principle inherent in animated na- 
ture.” Such phenomena as unity of plan, partheno- 
eenesis, and successive development are far more prob- 
ably accounted for on secondary laws alone. “He 
must be a half-hearted philosopher who, having watched 
the gigantic strides of the biological sciences during 
the past twenty years, doubts that science will sooner 
or later make this further step, so as to become pos- 
sessed of the law of evolution of organic forms—of the 
unvarying order of that great chain of causes and ef- 
fects of which all organic forms, ancient and modern, 
are the links.” 

In Professor King’s bee ot remarks, no men- 
tion is made of the probabilities of a derivative origin 
of the lower races of man, as indicated by their physi- 
ological affinities to the higher apes. I commend the 
following extract from Dr. Biichner’s “Kraft and Stoff” 
(8vo, Frank., p 75, 1858) to Professor King’s consid- 
eration : 

“ An unbroken series of the most varied and multi 
farious transitions and analogies unites the whole ani- 
mal kingdom together, from its lowest to its highest 
unit. Even man, who in his spiritual pride thinks him- 

368 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

self raised high above the whole animal world, is far 
removed from being an exception to this law. The 
Hthiopic race unites him by a crowd of the most strik 
ing analogies with the animal kingdom in a very un 
mistakable way. The long arms, the form of the foot, 
the fleshless calf, the long slender hands, the general 
lankness, the but slightly protuberant nose, the project- 
ing teeth, the low retreating forehead, the narrow and 
posteriorly protuberant head, the short neck, the con- 
tracted pelvis, the pendulous belly, the want of beard, 
the color of the skin, the disgusting odor, the unclean- 
liness, the making of grimaces whilst speaking, the 
clear shrill tone of voice, and the ape-like character of 
the whole being, are just so many characteristic signs, 
which in all the corporeal forms and relations of the 
Negro uumistakably show the most decided approach 
to the monkey genus.” The same anthor goes on to 
say. ‘“ Without doubt, man in his earlier periods ap- 
proached, in his whole character, nearer to animals 
than he does in his present condition; and the oldest 
excavated human skulls indicate rough, undeveloped, 
and animal-like forms.” 

Such conditions as these, agitating, and seething in 
the minds of patient observers and reflective thinkers 
in France and Germany, are being forced upon the 
minds of scientists. Our best thinkers now refrain 
from offering any theological or metaphysical explana- 
tion of geological facts 

I trust that Professor King, whose valuable tabies of 
strata as recently published in the Geologist have had 
so beneficial an effect on science, may be ultimately 
“Jed to reject the unphilosophical theory of “ autothe- 
ogeny.” 

The doctrine of “Geneotheonomy,” or the “ Deriy- 
‘ ative” hypothesis of animal causation, is now fast con- 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 369 

verting the minds of all paleontologists. Among its 
supporters can be numbered Lamarck, Geoffroy St. 

Hilaire, Grant, Matthew, Rafinesque, Haldeman, the ~ 
author of the “ Vestiges of Creation,” D’Omalius d’Hal-~ ~ 

loy, Owen, Isidore Geoffroy St. Hilaire, Dr. Freke, 
Herbert Spencer, Naudin, Keyserling, Schauffhausen, 
Baden Powell, Wallace, Huxley, and Hooker. To these 
may be now possibly added those of Lyell, Fawcett, 
Lubbock, Mackie, Salter, Rupert Jones, Blake, Btich- 
ner, Schvarez, Knox, Burke, Hutton, King, and many 
others. 3 ' 

To accept, in 1863, the doctrine of the origin of spe- 
cies by creative fiat out of inorganic matter, is as un- 
philosophical as to believe in the theory of earthquakes 
given out by the Muyscas of New Granada, that the 
earth is supported by pillars of guavacwm, on the shoul- 
ders of the deity Chibchacum, who, being tired, shifts 
the weight from one shoulder to another ; or, to the 
Egyptian theory, that the earth, during earthquakes, is 
tossed from one horn to another of a gigantic cow. 
Such theories are fast disappearing in the minds of 
those who, correctly “substitute the study of laws for 
that of causes, the how for the why.” 

Human Remains In ALLUviuM.—The alluvium of 
the Kennet is a well-marked deposit, and forms large 
and valuable water-meadows. Dr. Buckland, who re- 
cords human remains in it, says it is “ much mixed with 
minute crystals of selenite and a small quantity of car- 
bonate of lime, and abounds with the bones and horns 
of oxen, red-deer, roebucks, horses, wild boars, and 
beavers. A human skull, of high antiquity, has also 
been found in it, ata depth of many fect, at the con- 

370 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

tact of the peat with a substratum of shell-marl. It 
was accompanied by rude instruments of stone. Along 
the northern edge of this peat-bog, there is a consider- 
able deposit of marl, mixed with calcareous tufa..... 

from two to ten feet in thickness, and frequently inter- 
stratified with beds of peat, varying from six inches to 
three or four feet in thickness.” In the neighborhood 
of Newbury the lower marl contains mammalian re- 
mains, which are said to be more plentiful towards the 
edge of the valley. The list of these comprises :—Bos 
primigentus, B. longifrons, Cervus capreolus, C. elaphus, 
Equus, Sus scrofa, Canis lupus, Lutra vulgaris, Ursus 
speleeus, Castor Huropeeus, Arvicola (water-rat). The 
peat is dug in places for fuel, and, with shell-marl, but 
not for manure: in it are found remains of oak, alder, 
willow, fir, birch, hazel, and of mosses, reeds, and 
equiseta. | 

A few miles from Thetford, are a number of natural 
ponds, or meres, varying in size, from twenty roods to 
fifty acres. Many of these are situated in the parishes 
of East and West Wretham, and one of them, known as * 
the West Mere, five or six acres in extent, was drained 
of the waters in 1851, by the proprietor, Mr. Birch, of 
Wretham Hall, . 

In this mere there was ordinarily about four feet 
of water, and beneath it about eight feet of soft black 
mud, partly held in suspension, and requiring to be re 
moved in scoops. When this mud was being cleared 
out, a great number of bones were discovered, chiefly 
deposited, as from its semi-liquid nature might have 
been expected, at the bottom. They were nearly all 
those of the red deer (Cervus elaphus), and of the now 
extinct long-faced ox (Bos longifrons). : 

Near the center of the mere, lying below the black 
mud, was found a ring, or circular bank, of fine white 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 371 

earth, outside of which, the bottom of the mere was so 
soft and deep as to be impassable. This ring, or bank 
was about twenty or thirty feet across, a foot wide, and 
about four feet in height, and near its inner circumfer- 
ence a deep hole, or well, was marked out by a circle 
of stout stakes. There was also, near by, the remains 
of a flint wall and traces of a rude ladder. 

The deer’s antlers and other bones had many of them 
cut-marks of rude tools. Many flint-disks, seemingly 
resembling what the Danish antiquaries call sling-stones, 
are said to have been found in this and other meres, 
but none of them have been preserved. 

A few years later, 1856, the largest of these meres, 
having an area of forty-eight acres, was emptied and 
cleaned out, and during the operation was visited by 
Sir Charles Bunoury, who has recorded his observa- 
tions in the Geological Society’s Journal (vol. xii.) Sir 
Charles incidentally states the presence of numerous 
posts of oak-wood, shaped and pointed by human art, 
standing erect in the mud. 

M. Troyon, in his ‘ Habitations Lacustres,’ recognizes 
the similarity of these Norfolk antiquities to the Pile- 
buildings of his own country—France. 

Human SKULLS—THE RIVER-BED SKELETON FROM 
LEICESTER. 

I have been asked to give a few supplementary re- 
marks on the fragmentary human remains from this 
cave, in addition to those made by Professor Huxley, 
(‘ Geologist,’ vol. v. p. 204). The observations made- 
by him led him to express an opinion that the Wear- 
dale remaius belonged “to the same race of rathe: 
small and lightly-made men, with prominent supercili- 

BYR PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

ary ridges and projecting nasal bones,” as the Musk- 
ham, Towyn-y-Capel, Sennen, Borris, and Blackwater 
skulls. In the spirit of these’ observations I cordially 
‘concur. : 

Particular description of the remains being, however, 
requisite, I proceed to remark that no perfect skull has 
hitherto been found in the Heathery Burn Cave. The 
most perfect, though not the most characteristic, is the; 
one of which Mr. Mackie has given an excellent draw- 
ing (in Geol.) and which I shall denominate A. An- 
other skull is only represented by the os frontis and a 
small part of the parietal, and is far more striking. I 
name this B for facility of description. 

The calvarium, or vertex of the skull, marked A. is not 
that of an aged individual. A large part of the frontal 
suture is persistent. The frontal region is low, but not 
markedly retrocedent. An even curve is continued 
backwards to immediately behind the coronal suture, 
when the same “ post-coronal” depression is visible, as 
in the Mewslade and Eastham skulls. The points of 
attachment of the temporal muscle are scarcely visible. 
The coronal suture is, however, complex at the spot 
where it crosses the temporal attachments—a character 

on which Messrs. Thurnam and Davis have laid stress 
in British skulls. The parietal tubers are moderately 
promiuent. The superciliary ridges are not unduly de- 
veloped, and the fractured condition of the skull war- 
rants us in affirming that the frontal sinuses were small. 
As far as measurement can be made, the length from 
the glabella to the apex of the lambdoidal suture is 7 
inches ; the breadth at the parietal tubers, 5} inches ; 
‘at the coronal suture 43 inches; above the orbits, 38 
‘inches, A fragment of right occipital condyle prob- 
ably belonged to the same young individual; a frag- 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 373 

ment of the mastoid bone appertained to an elder 
person. 3 

The fragment marked B is a most striking relic of 
antiquity. It is the frontal bone, with much of the 
right parietal attached: the pieces of which I have 
succeeded in joining together. The close similarity of 
it to the fragmentary skull from Plymouth, which Pro- 
fessor Busk has described in the Geologist, is very 
_ striking. Unlike, however, the Plymouth skull, the super- 
ciliary ridges are markedly conspicuous. The retro- 
cession of the forehead is very peculiar, and strongly 
resembles that in the skulls from Sennen and Muskham. 
Slight traces of the frontal suture can be seen. The 
frontal sinuses are present, though small. No traces of 
the post-coronal depression are visible. It is much to 
be regretted that no other pieces have been preserved 
of this curious skull. Many fragments, chiefly of pari- 
etal bones, were also obtained ; but their condition pre- 
cludes an opinion as to their nature. The vertebra and 
bones of the extremities did not offer any characters 
calling for especial notice. 

I believe the fragment marked B was the skull which 
Mr. J. Elliott, the careful explorer of the cave, stated* 
“may have been that of one of the principal tenants of 
the cave, and which probably devoured the others.” 
This evidence of “a tolerably large animal” rather ap- 
pears to be that of a human being, with forehead “ vil- 
lainously low,” and whose cranial characters were so 
‘striking as almost to excuse the error into which Mr. 
Elliott was unintentionally led. 

The skull from Leicester is in good condition, and 
retains much of its animal matter. It exhibits the even 
oval contour characteristic of the existing type of Eng- 

* Geologist, Vol. V.,p. 36, For cuts of fragments alluded to, see 
same journal. 

374 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

lishmen. By the smallness of the mastoid processes, 
the slenderness of the zygomata, and the slight degree 
in which the surface is pitted with muscular depressions, 
I conjecture it to have belonged to a female, and by 
the position of the wisdom-teeth in the alveoli, the 
individual probably did not exceed eighteen years of 
age. The following is a table of the principal admea- 
surements :— 

INCHES. 
Papnwadinal diameter . is). 04.0 ask de aside She So. 5 
SEBUIOVALMAURINGLED |< <-. 95: wicicia’s >. 500 bined cee this + eee cae 5 
SOUISALCRINOLCE .. So, on olin sia gah «i> cele wees Sens 5} 
BOPEMMALOUIAMIOUCL. < .i55 <6 te cigs s Chun eke sles va ehiage 46 
SMVErMONbOlG BLO OL See wees te eee bec eke eae 13} 
intermuatoid. line. 4... 0. 6y0 assess Re ek oleae 33 
PeeramibOtrOntal ATCH sa. die cao 9 dak un melee fee eee 14 
SeMEREURL DECINCLY. +. nk os oko ps st ge eee 19% 

The slope of the frontal and parietal bones is even 
and round, the occiput being full and globular, without 
any sign however of the “kumbecephalic” backward 
prolongation. 

Comparison of the base of the skull with that of a 
well-formed European of about the same age, exhibits 
the prognathism of the maxilla more distinctly. The 
incisor teeth are rather more oblique, and the extero-. 
internal breadth of the canines is greater than in the 
majority of existing European crania. The molar teeth 
do not exceed in size the average European proportions. 
Many of them were afflicted during life with caries to a 
large extent. ‘The frontal bone is moderately arched, 
the glabella prominent, with no sign of the supraciliary 
ridges. All the sutures exhibit the normal configura- 
tion. REE 
Tke ordinary junction of the alisphenoid with the 
parietal is present on both sides the skull. The mas- 
toids are small, and the supramastoid ridge is undevel- 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 375 

oped. No peculiarity exists in the form or position of 
the occipital foramen or of the condyles. The nasal 
bones are well developed and rather salient. 

The lower jaw does not exhibit any marked pecu- 

liarity. 

The appearance of the lower half of the supra- 
occipital bone is very different from that of the Musk- 
ham skull. The surfaces for attachment of muscles are 

_ less pronounced ; the furrow for the insertion of the 

obliquus superior muscle is less deep; the crest, and 
the superior and inferior linece semicirculares are less 
developed, and the occipital protuberance, or inion, is 
less distinct. A small paroccipital tubercle is visible 
on the right side. The upper half of the supraoccipital 
is full and globular, and in the rather complex lamb- 
doid suture are at least seven wormian bones, none of 
which, however, deserve the term interparietal. 

An examination of the nearly perfect spinal column 
did not disclose any peculiar characteristic. The bones 
of the extremities indicate a youthful individual, the 
epiphyses being in many cases separate. 

The animal remains said to be associated with this 
skull were Bos priumigenius and Hquus caballus. 

The following table is merely offered as a temporary 
and provisional arrangement. Many of the sections 
do not represent distinct races, and all the skulls from 
the river-bed deposits offer many points of analogy with 
each other. The difficulty of laying down any general 
system can only be appreciated by the practical in- 
quirer. In the meantime, the evidences appear to be 

‘capable of arrangement in something like the following 

order. [It will be seen that the “developments” of 
these skulls are such as to incontestibly prove that hun- 
dreds of thousands of years must have elapsed, even at 
the early day when those skulls encased human brains, 

376 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

since monkeys have merged into men. If the develop- 
ment theory be true, then millions of years have elapsed 
since “ Man became a living soul” : 

1. Dolichocephalic. 
{ A. Forehead retrocedent. 
a. Superciliary ridges very large, continuous over nasal 
| suture. Neanderthal. 
b. Superciliaries large. a. Foramen magnum abnormal. 
Muskham, 
B. Foramen magnum normal ? 
Sennen, Nether Urquhart. 
Heathery Burn, “ B.” 
c. Superciliaries small. 
Plymouth. 
Heathery Burn, ** A.” 
Blackwater. ¥ 
Borris (bed of Nore.) 
Engis. 
B. Forehead moderately developed. 
a. Superciliaries smal}. 
Mewslade. 
Eastham. 
lL Leicester. 
2. Brachycephalic. 
a. Superciliaries large. 
Plau. 
Montrose. 
| b. Superciliaries small. 
Etruria, O. 

A CHARLES CARTER BLAKE. 

Says the London Morning Star, of February 22d, 
1861, in its report of a meeting, held in London: 

A meeting of the Ethnological Society. was held on 
Tuesday evening for the purpose of discussing the sub- 
ject of the flint implements found with the bones of ex- 
tinct animals in the “ drift.” Many archeologists and 
geologists were specially invited to take part in the 
discussion, among whom were Sir Roderick Murchison, 
Professor Owen, Professor Quekett, Mr. Waterhouse 
Hawkins, Mr. Pengelly, Mr. Pettigrew, Mr. Planché, 
Mr. Savory, Dr. Lee, the Rev. J..Ridgway, Admiral 
Fitzroy, etc. Mr. Botfield, M.P., the President of the 
Archeological Association, took the chair, Mr. Craw- 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 3717 

ford, the President of the Ethnological Society, being 
on his right hand, and Sir Roderick Murchison on his 
left. The discussion was opened by Mr. Pettigrew, 
who explained how the subject was originally brought 
into consideration in this country by the presentation 
to the Archeological Association, in 1848, of a number 
of flint implements found in the drift near Amiens by 
M. Boucher de Perthés. Those implements, and a 
larger collection of others contributed by Dr. Hunt, by 
Mr. Mackie and Mr. Christie, were displayed on the 
tables. Mr. Wright said that he considered the flint 
implements exhibited were intended for the chase or 
for domestic use, and not for the purpose of war. Mr. 
Eyans explained the exact position of the stratum of 
gravel from which he had extracted some of these im- 
plements. It was a stratum of coarse fresh-water gravel, 
lying on chalk, and containing fossil bones of extinct 
animals, among which was the entire skeleton of an ex- 
tinct species of rhinoceros. Overlying the gravel was 
a stratum of sandy marl, containing shells of existing 
species, and above that was a thin stratum of brick 
earth. The flint implements were extracted at a depth 
varying from twenty to thirty feet from the surface, 
and he felt convinced that the gravel in whick they 
were found had not been disturbed. The same opin 
ion was formed by every one who had visited the spot, 
and there seemed to be no doubt whatever that the 
gravel and the flint implements were deposited at the 
same time. It was possible that the animals supposed 
to have become extinct before man was created might 
have continued to exist to more recent periods than 
had been supposed, otherwise it would appear that the 
implements were fashioned by a race of men that had 
also become extinct. Sir Roderick Murchison con- 
firmed Mr. Evans’s view of the great antiquity 6f the 

378 ; PRE-ADAMITE MAN. | 

stratum of gravel in which the implements were found, 
and observed that, without the presence of fossil bones 
of extinct animals, the surface of the country proved 
that there must have been an enormous lapse of time 

since the gravel, beneath which the human relics were | 

found, was deposited. [It is the opinion of many of the 
most eminent scientific men of Hurope, based on very 
careful examinations, that the race of “ extinct men” al- 
luded to, could not have lived less than one hundred 
and thirty-five thousand years ago, but probably more 
than double that length of time, or over two hundred 
thousand years ago.] The possibility of the continu- 
ance of species of animals supposed to have become 
extinct was, he said, rendered probable from the fact 
that there was now living in a forest in Poland, ani- 
mals which had previously been considered extinct. In 
the subsequent discussion, in which Admiral Fitzroy, 
Mr. Christie, Mr. Pengelly, and other gentlemen took 
part, it was stated that flint implements of the same 
character as those on the table, had been found in vari- 
ous parts of the world. Mr. Botfield, in concluding 
the proceedings of the meeting, expressed his convic- 
tion that the cause of religion would have nothing to 
fear, but everything to hope, from scientific inquiry. 

CHAPTER V. 

M. GRAS’ ATTACK ON THE EVIDENCE OF 
THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN. 

[Lond. Geol., Aug. 1862.] 

When the Antiquity of Man was first proclaimed 
from the discovery of the Abbeville flints by Boucher 
de Ptrthes, no one believed it. Everybody thought 

Be aS 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 379 

him like the mad man who swore all the world was 
mad ; and so it seemed, then, as if all the world had 
mental obliquity of vision, which made them declare 
the savant of Abbeville to be laboring under a delusion. 
When, however, Rigollet, Prestwich, Flower, Lyell, 
Kvans, and others of the goodly company of geologists 
—as unbelieving, however, as so many St. Thomases— 
went, saw, and returned believing, the fame of Boucher 
de Perthes’ discoveries gained ground: Some there 
were who hardened themselves in their unbelief, and 
hazarded wild theories of ocean-waves chipping out 
artificial forms, and of recent objects sinking down in 
the ground, and burying themselves, and other equally 
untenable notions, but these waxed fewer and fewer, 
not by dying out, but by becoming converts to the novel 
truths. Others there were who enthusiastically grasped 
at everything that came in their way, and attempted to 
send back half the antiquities of the historic period, 
to the Gravel age. These still exist, and if their labors 
be a little rash, they are not altogether useless. If 
they make a great many mistakes, they now and then 
drop on a new fact, and that covers a multitude of fail- 
ures. Others.there are, and these are the best of all, 
saving the real workers for science, who lose no chance 
of collecting anything they think may afford useful 
knowledge. The people, so common at one time, with 
the dreadful mental squint about the flint implements 
of the gravel age are now, as we have said, few and 
far between, but there are still some possessed of the 
dangerous slight cast of mental obliquity, if we mistake 
not—that is, if the obliquity does not lie with our- 
selves. We do not think it can, nobody ever does | 
The London Parthenon lately printed a translation from 
the French Comptes-Rendus, of a paper by M. Scipion 
Gras, who brings up a question we had thought com- 

380 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

pletely settled. We knew our best men had gone to 
see; we knew they had come back testifying to the 
facts. But M. Gras comes forward with an article 
“On the Insufficiency of the Arguments drawn from 
the Position of the Worked Flints of St. Acheul to 
show the Existence of Man during the Quaternary 
Period.” There is mental obliquity somewhere, that 
is certain ; we fear it rests with M. Gras, for he says 
he went to St. Acheul, “desirous of enlightening his 
doubts” as to the conclusion drawn from the position 
of the flint axes there. Of course we saw the notice 
of M. Gras’ paper in the Comptes-Rendus, where it ap- 
peared a short time before the Parthenon printed the 
translation. As the Parthenon has brought the paper 
before the public, which otherwise, perhaps, would never 
have heard at all of it, we cannot let M. Gras’ opinions 
pass without comment. He shall, however, have fair 
play. He begins :— 

“There are found at St. Acheul and its neighborhood 
(leaving out of question the more elevated plateaux) 
two diluvial deposits, which appear to be quite distinct. 
The more ancient one, immediately overlying the chalk, 
is essentially composed of light yellowish, or brown 
flints, for the most part rolled, disseminated through 
a whitish-gray calcareous sand. The relative propor- 
tion of the sana and flints varies; sometimes veins 
of almost pure sand alternate with flints, or cover 
them. It is not uncommon to find in the sand fresh- 
water shells, almost intact, in spite of their fragility 
—a fact which indicates a slow process of accumu- 
lation. Ferruginous infiltrations from above have of- 
ten stained the naturally clear color of this deposit. 
This diluvium has a very unequal thickness, owing to 
the numerous erosions which it has undergone. It 
shows itself at St. Acheul at a height of from thirty to 
forty métres above the Somme ; at the sand-pits of Mou- 
tiers, at the western extremity of Amiens, it descends 
all at once to the bottom of the valley ; finally, at 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 381 

Menchecourt, a suburb of Abbeville, it passes beneath 
the turf:beds. It results from this, that before the de- 
posit of this transported bed, the Somme had already 
hollowed out its channel in the bosom of the chalk, 
which is seen rising right and left toa great height. 
The valley was even then deeper than it is now ; it ap- 
pears to have been entirely filled up at the time of the 
arrival of the rolled flints. The second diluvial bed 
in the neighborhood of St. Acheul is an argillaceous- 
sandy stratum of a dark brown, of which the thickness 
is usually from a métre and a half to three métres ; it 
is almost everywhere dug for brickmaking. It shows 
usually at its base a thinnish layer of angular flints dis- 
seminated through a brown earth, rather more sandy than 
the rest of the mass. This argillaceous-sandy diluvium 
extends crosswise at once over the lower clear grey di- 
luvium and over the chalk ; it presents all the signs of 
complete independence. Its deposition probably coin- 
cided with the second excavation of the valley ; it is 
observed, in fact, at different levels corresponding with 
those at which the Somme has successively flowed be- 
fore withdrawing itself to its present bed.” 

In this account there are three topics which call forth 
observations. 1. There are (at least) two diluvial de- 
posits.—There is nothing new in this. Mr. Prestwich, 
one of the most inquiring and capable investigators of 
the subject, and one of the strongest believers in the 
correctness of Boucher de Perthes’ assignment of the 
chipped flint-implements to the Gravel age, has already 
shown that there isa “high-level gravel” and a low- 
level or “ valley-gravel ;’ and in his papers before the 
Royal Society has shown, also, why there are these de- 
posits, what are their relations to each other, the prob- 
able physical and meteorological conditions under which 
they were deposited, and their bearings in respect to 
the evidence of the flint-implements as a proof of the 
antiquity of man. 2. That it is not uncommon to find 
in the sand fresh-water shells, almost intact, in spite of 

382 PRE-ADAMITE MAN, 

their fragiity.—There is nothing extraordinary in this. 
The wonder would beif we did not find them. Mr. 
Prestwich has shown how much ice-action had to do 
with the bringing down, during the early spring floods, 
of the flints, rock boulders, and other heavy materials 
—probably often also the bones of animals; and if 
these heavier substances were frozen into the ice-floes, 
masses Of fine gravel, sand, and earth, enclosing fragile 
shells, would also be brought down in the same way. 
Moreover, the gravel deposits would chiefly be formed 
during the period of spring floods caused by the melt- 
ing of the ice; and consequently during the summer 
there would be a period during which mollusca might 
live under the influerce of the quieter river-actions, 
which actions would naturally intercalate beds and 
streaks of sand and clay with fresh-water shells among * 
the coarser gravels. 3. That the Valley of the Somme 
was even then deeper than it is now ; and appears to 
have been filled up at the time of the arrival of the rolled 
flints.—Al1l this has nothing to do with the question of 
man’s antiquity at all; besides there is no proof given 
by M. Gras. What he states as to the various depo- 
sits and their conditions go for nothing in this respect ; 
they simply do not bear upon the point at all. It mat- 
ters not whether the valley was hollowed out, whether 
it was filled up or not, before the “ rolled flints ” were 
brought in, so long as the gravel deposit containing the 
flint-implements can be proved to be of geological age 
—that is the point ; and M. Gras, if we do not misun- 
derstand him, admits the flint-implement-bearing beds 
are covered by other diluvial or alluvial deposits—a 
sufficient admission of their antiquity. 

As to a previous complete excavation of a valley be- 
fore any deposits collected in it, such a notion in the 
main would be a very fallacious one, for the scouring 

PRE ADAMITE MAN. 383 

action of water and rain-falls is as great beneath a de- 
posit as it is over its surface. Rains wash away visi- 
bly the fine soil on the surface, but the water that 
filters through, also washes away invisibly the fine dis- 
integrated surface of the rock on which the deposit lies ; 
so the whole mass of deposits gradually—slowly but 
surely—sinks into a greater and greater subterranean 
valley as age follows age. 

But to return to M. Gras—for he himself admits the 
position that the flint-implement gravel was covered 
over in the following passage :— 

“ By the help of these details a clear idea may be 

formed of the position of the worked flints ; they are 
found in the lower gray diluvium at variable depths, 
and often considerably below the surface of the soil. 
An attentive examination of the flinty mass which en- 
closes them yields no re-arrangement of materials. 
Moreover, everywhere above these flints there is a thick- 
ness of two or three métres of diluvium of the latest 
date, of a brown color. This itself appears to be per- 
fectly intact, and sharply separated from the grey dilu- 
vium ; which excludes the possibility of the introduc- 
tion of foreign objects vertically through the argilla- 
ceous-sandy earth.” 
But here follows what certainly shows either M. Gras’ 
obliquity of mental vision, or our own. If we err, 
however, fortunately we shall be in goodly company, 
for we shall be on the side of Prestwich, Rigollet, 
Lyell, Evans, and those many others who hold the like 
Opinions with ourselves upon the subjects M. Gras at- 
tacks. Let M. Gras however, speak his own argu- 
ments :-— 

“These different circumstances, in appearance so 

conclusive, are not however irreconcilable with the idea 
of diggings having been made, at a certain epoch, in the 
soil. Before demonstrating ‘this, I must dwell upou 
some important facts. The first is, the integrity and 

384 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

perfectly excellent preservation of the axes; they look 
as if just come from the hands of the workman. It has 
been inferred (the inference was unavoidable) that they 
were buried on the spot, or brought from very near lo- 
calitdes. A second fact, not less remarkable, is the 
truly astonishing multitude of these axes. The number 
of them found at St. Acheul, in the compass, of about a 
hectare (two acres). has been estimated at more than 
three thousand. ‘The rich collection of M. Boucher de 
Perthes alone contains more than a thousand. M. 
Albert Gaudry, who has caused diggings to be made, 
has seen nine of them disinterred, one after another, in 
close succession. The fact of the multitude of worked 
flints, joined to the entireness of their edges, shows 
clearly that there was formerly a considerable manufac- 
ture of these objects on the spot. If we adopt the hy- 
pothesis of those who would place this manufacture 
beyond historic times, it must needs be admitted that 
there existed on the banks of the ancient valley of the 
Somme a people of the quaternary epoch occupied in 
cutting axes by thousands. As evidently it could not 
use them all, it must doubtless have supplied them to 
other quaternary races of the neighboring countries. 
But if this were so, why has this industrial population 
of the ancient world left no other trace of its existence 
except these. rudely-fashioned flints? Why, above all, 
do we not tind human remains in the diluvium? ‘Their 
absence is the more astonishing, as it is not uncommon 
to find-there the remains of elephants, rhinoceroses, aud 
other animals. If men, so civilized as to occupy them- 
selves with commerce, lived on the banks of the Somme 
at the commencement of the quaternary period, they 
must have constructed habitations there, and these 
would be seen now in the mass of diluvium which at a 
later period flled up the valley ; they would even be 
perfectly preserved in it. Now this deposit has never 
presented the least vestige of a habitation, nor even of 
other products of human industry, excepting flint ob- 
jects. Another consideration strengthens all these 
grouads of doubt; worked flints, similar to those 
which are claimed as diluvian, have been found in such 
a position, that it has been necessary to attribute to 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 385 

them a modern origin. M. Toillez, an archeologist 
and engineer of Mons, possesses a collection of four 
hundred axes, which for the most part are rough, and 
do not differ sensibly from those of St. Acheul ; never- 
theless, they have all been collected at the surface of 
the soil. Is it admissible to suppose that products so 
similar were manufactured, the one set at the com- 
mencement of the quaternary period, the other during 
the now existing period, seeing that an immense interval 
of time separates the two epochs? ” 

Here again we select the points of attack :—1. The 
perfect preservation of the axes.—“ ‘They look as if they 
had just come from the hands of the workmen.” Say 
“some look,’ and then we shall reply, Quite right, M. 
Gras ; some do look as if they had just come from the 
hands of the workmen. Assuredly they do—and very 
naturally too, seeing they have in reality just come from 
the hands of the workmen. We have seen abundance 
of forgeries, both from the valley of the Somme and 
from Yorkshire. There are indeed plenty of forgeries. 
Nevertheless there are some real; these however are 
comparatively few. No one ought to mistake the real 
geological flint-implements from the forgeries. No one 
who is used to break flints but ought to tell readily 
whether a flint was broken with an cron instrument or 
not. A modern hammer will not crack or flake a flint 
in the same way that a stone will. Try it, reader, and 
see for yourself. 

Setting aside forgeries, there is even then no reason 
why the flint-implements should not be in good preser- 
vation. If first frozen into a mass of ice, then trans: 
ported, enveloped in, and protected by that ice-casing, 
then dropped on the floor of the wide-spread river-flood 
by the melting of the ice, then covered over perchance 
by the soft materials of the summer stream, or left on 
the verdant marshy tract during the interval between 

386 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

the periodical floods, what was there to weather or 
otherwise injure so hard a substance as flint? Nothing 
that we know of. Moreover, the truth is, that as far 
as our experience goes—and we have seen more than a 
few of the fossil flint-implements—they are by no means 
all always so wonderfully perfect. Some are decidedly 
worn—even as much so as the gravel in which they are 
found. 

2. The astonishing multitude of these axes.—Surely, 
no one thinks one man made the lot, or that they were 
all made at once. Geologists always cry out for “ plenty 
of time.” They ask for plenty of time—a whole geolo- 
gical age—for the formation of the gravel deposits. So 
therefore the primitive men had a whole age to chip 
flints in. The very quantity of elephant, and other 
bones, found in the gravel-beds shows nature did take 
an age to form them, unless we suppose a supernatural 
increase and growth of living beasts, followed by an 
equally supernatural and wholesale destruction. But 
in reality, how common are the true worked flints ? We 
have seen one only from all the great gravel-beds round 
and under London, and miles of them have lately been 
cut through for the sewer-works. We have seen, may 
be, half a dozen from Suffolk, a like number from Bed- 
ford, two or three from Kent, and less than a dozen 
more from all parts of England. As to the Yorkshire 
specimens, we must know more about them, and where 
they came from, before we can say much about them. I 
suppose, however, whether ancient or modern, not more 
than a hundred exist from that, the largest county in 
Hngland, and numbering as many acres as there are 
words in the Bible. M. Gras says, however, that in 
the rich collection of M. Boucher de Perthes, there are 
more than a thousand; that M. Toillez, of Mons, pos- 
sesses four hundred ; and that at St. Acheul the num 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 387 

ber found in the compass of a hectare (two acres) has 
been estimated at more than 3,000! Now, does M. 
Gras mean that at St. Acheul two acres of gravel have 
been excavated for flint-implements ? or does he mean 
that in proportion to the quantity ef gravel actually 
excavated there, an estimate has been made of the prob- 
able number of 3,000 as existing in two acres of gravel ? 
How many feet thick? There’sa rub. Two acres, 30 
- feet thick, would contain some millions of tons of gra- 
vel, this proportion of flint-implements to the number 
and quantity of unworked flints and pebbles in which 
would be very small indeed. Take the total of 3,000 
in another way, and suppose each man of a tribe num- 
bering a hundred males to make or lose one new weapon 
every two years, from the age of twenty to the age of 
forty, after which period of lifetime we will suppose 
every man to be either useless, superannuated, or killed 
in battle or by wild beasts in the chase. Thenit would 
only take three generations of this tribe to make or lose 
the quantity M. Gras thinks so enormous. 

Really there is nothing wonderful in this total after 
all. When we come to look into it, we only wonder 
it is not more. 

3. That the worked flints were manufactured on the 
spot.—Many might have been; certainly not all. We 
have already disposed of the assertion of the universal 
preservation of their perfect sharp edges. The sharp 
edge of a newly-broken flint will cut your fingers—try 
it ; we have never seen the edges of a flint axe or even 
a fossil flint flake that would. 

Some, we have said, were probably ice-borne down 
the annual floods. If Mr. Prestwich be right in his 
supposition of their being ice-chisels, in some localities 
where the primitive men had fishing-stations, many 
might be dropped through the holes they were used in 

388 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

breaking out. As to the commercial aspect which M. 
Gras suggests, it would neither make for, nor militate 
against, the antiquity of man. We are sorry to say, 
however, that we have not so high an opinion of the 
intellectual capacities of these our primitive ancestors 
-—if our ancestors they really were, and perhaps they 
were not—as to believe them capable of commercial 
enterprises at all. Morever, the traffic in flint weapons 
pre-supposes the means of international communication ; 
we doubt very much if the flint-implement men, who 
could do no more than chip stones—who did not know 
even how to grind them—had any means for this. The 
Veddahs of one tribe at this hour do not know the Ved- 
dahs of another tribe, their next neighbors; less than 
fifty miles of mere territory part them. For our own part, 
we think so poorly of the flint-implement men as to be ~ 
scarcely inclined to fecl any more pride in a pedigree 
from them, than from the much abused and hirsute 
gorilla. ) 

4. Why has this industrious population of the ancient 
world left no other trace of its existence? Why, above 
all, do we not find human remains ?—How many skel- 
etons of all the known species of fossil monkeys all 
over the globe, have been exhumed from their stony 
tombs? Are there a hundred fragments in all the col- 
lections of all the museums and naturalists in every re- 
gion and part of the earth? And have we found every 
kind of fossil monkey yet? No sane man will assert 
it. Human teeth have been found in Pleistocene strata 
as old as the gravel-beds; negative evidence we have 
seen too often to wean nothing, to trust it in a question 
like this. Human remains dave been found with bones 
of the mammoth, and fossil deer and bear, although 
these are ignored. Those as yet found, we admit, may 
not be the remains of the flint-implement-making men. 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 389 

“Wait patiently, they will yet be found.” But will 
M. Gras declare that there are not in the gravel-beds 
of the Somme seams of brittle ignite ; and will he ven- 
ture to assert that these may not be the charred remains 
of huts ? 

Take another view. The beast, when he sickens to 
die, goes to some retired spot, and leaves his inanimate 
carcase on the soil. There it may become embedded, 
or the floods may lift and strand it on some shal- 
low bank. Nature buries it or moulders it, and re- 
turns it dust to dust in her own way. When a man 
dies, tbe case is different. The cow weeps not for the 
death of the bu!l, the lion sheds no tears for the loss of 
the lioness, the hippopotamus scrapes no hole in the 
earth to bury its lifeless mate, the gorilla lights no fire 
to burn to ashes the mother of its progeny. The lowest 
of human beings must have had human passions and hu- 
man feelings. Tie primitive wife, little sensible, as we 
can but conceive, of anything like fine sensations, would, 
degraded as ever we could possibly conceive her, nat- 
urally weep for the loss of her husband; and though 
no priest performed a marriage ceremony, in such rela- 
tionship, notwithstanding, ever stood the union of hu- 
man beings. The man would mourn for the loss of his 
helpmate. Death to human beings would always have 
had a different aspect to what death has to the beast. 
In the human heart there would be the innate desire to 
lay the lifeless corpse or its ashes where its resting- 
place could be visited. If the flint-implement men 
were human, such must have been, even in the first of 
this pristine race, the feelings which death would 

Pd 

evoke; and if such the feelings, burials or burnings . 

must have disposed of the mass of that primitive race. 
If burials, we must look elsewhere than to the débris of 
floods or the alluvia of river-beds for human bones, 

390 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

We may search for a later but still early race near 
where the great monoliths and the gigantic stones of 
so-called Druids’ temples exhibit their weather-beaten 
forms ; but if cremation were practiced, then for all 
traces of the flint-implement makers, other than their 
works, we must trust to chance alone. 

The massive bones of the great beasts could not es- 
cape the eye; the teeth and skulls of smaller animals 
would at once attract attention; but what notice would 
a few fragments of calcined bones among the débris 
and broken fragments obtain ? 

What explorer of caves, what digger in gravel-pits, 
has searched over the beaps of bone-bits always thrown 
aside as waste? In this respect we have followed the 
common way; but we are not without suspicion that 
more than once we have missed our chance. 

5. That worked flints, similar to those claimed as di- 
luvial, have been found in such a position that it has 
been necessary to attribute to them a more modern 
origin.—No instances are stated by M. Gras ; we can- 
not, therefore, refute any cases to which he alludes by 
_ statements of the facts. Besides which, if such speci- 
mens exist under such circumstances, they may be for- 
geries ; Or they may be relics—and this is not at all 
unlikely—preserved by more modern tribes. We know 
that the savage races of the present day do sometimes 
treasure the weapons of their ancestors ; and there are 
many other ways in which such occurences may be 
explained when the actual circumstances are given. 

6. That M. Toillez’s axes have been collected at the 
surface of the soil.—This is put as a“ poser” by M. 
Gras ; but strong as he thinks it, it goes down at once 
before a simple question. It is slaughtered by a 
breath. Do we not not find ordinary gravel-flints in 
myriads on the surface of the soil? Can you go 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 391 

through any field, over any downs, across any chalk 
country, and not pick up, if you please, tons upon tons, 
or cart-load upon cart-load? If one sort, why not the 
other? Is the proportion of flint-implements to un- 
worked stones likely to be less in the disintegrated 
eravel-bed, strewn over the soil, than in the solid un- 
touched stratum lying intact in the earth? Andif not, 
are we less likely to find flint-implements on the sur- 
‘face of the soil than in the gravel-beds beneath it? 
We are sure we need not reply to these questions—our 
readers will have answered for themselves. 

1. Is it admissible to suppose that products so similar 
were manufactured, the one set at the commencement of 
the quaternary period, the other during the now existing 
period, seeing that an immense interval of time separates 
the two epochs ?—Supposing the facts to be true—but 
the facts are not stated by M. Gras, as already observed 
—it might be so, if it be admissible to believe that 
small tribes or scattered individuals of a nation or race 
of mankind could lve on after the destruction or distri- 
bution of the great bulk or mass of the nation or race. 
Just as some modern uncivilized tribes are presumed to 
be the descendants of once numerous and powerful peo- 
ples. Just as British and Celtic articles may be met 
with in Saxon and Roman graves ; just as medieval re- 
lies are still treasured in our houses, so may we always 
expect to find some relics of more ancient races among 
the relics of the more modern ones. The case put how- 
ever by M. Gras is a presumption, and it is futile to fill 
these pages with suppositions in reply to suppositions. 
Let us go on therefore to consider M. Gras’ final sum- 
mary :— 

“To all these difficulties, one single fact only can be 

opposed, that, namely, of the absence of all apparent 
disturbance in the diluvium ; but this fuct is not a per- 

392 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

emtory reason, for it may be explained in a plausible 
manner. 

‘“ Let us refer the manufacture of axes, which every- 
thing proves to have formerly been carried on in the 
valley of the Somme, to the origin of historic times. It 
is certain that the men occupied in this employment 
were not obliged to go very far to procure the first 
material that was necessary for them. By digging in 
the soil to a moderate depth, they found a great choice 
of flints ready to be cut. ‘This was probably even the 
reason why this kind of industry sprang up in the coun- 
try. The digging of flints might take place in two 
ways, by pits or by galleries. The first means was the 
most costly, since it was necessary to pass through the 
brown argillaceous-sandy diluvium before arriving at 
the flints, and because the removal of tke rubbish must 
take place vertically. The digging by horizontal gal- 
leries opened on the side of the valley, taking advan- 
tage of the steep banks, was evidently preferable. The 
excavation of these ancient galleries is so far from be- 
ing unlikely, that even at the present day such are still 
made for the extraction of gravel. I have seen one at 
St. Acheul, and I measnred its dimensions approxi- 
mately ; it was six métres in length by one métre ninety 
centimétres in height, and two métres in breadth. This 
gallery supported itself well without props. It may be 
admitted that in former times the excavations were less 
in breadth and height, which would render them yet 
more solid. 

“The flints freshly extracted, and not deprived of 
their quarry moisture, are much easier to work than 
those of which the drying has proceeded to some length. 
It is probable, consequently, that the ancient miners 
roughly formed in the interior of the galleries the axes 
destii.ed to be polished. After this first labor, a selec- 
tion was doubtless made ; the least shapely pieces, con- 
sidered improper for sal, were rejected and left on the 
spot. When, after a length of time, the galleries, 
which had served at once as shops for mining and for 
rough hewing, had crumbled down, the chipped flints 
left on the floor were enveloped on all sides by the soil 
from whence they had been extracted. Supposing that 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 393 

the subsidence of the galleries was propagated up to 
the surface, the upper sand of argillaceous diluvium 
must have sunk a little, parallel to itself, without be- 
coming mixed in any way with the grey flinty diln- 
vium. If this was the real course of events, it is cer- 
tain that at the end of some time all trace of disturb- 
ance must have been completely effaced. This expla- 
nation agrees well with the rude fourm of the flints 
disinterred—so rude, that it is difficult to understand - 
how they can have been put to use in this state. It is 
confirmed by another peculiar circumstance, which had 
been held to be unimportant, but which, nevertheless, 
has much import. M. Albert Gaudry, who has been 
cited above, remarked that the nine worked flints dis- 
covered in his presence, lay nearly all palpably at the 
same level. Was not this level that of the floor of an 
ancient gallery ?” 

This is how the learned Professor looks at the ques- 
tion from his own point of view, after, as he presumes, 
he has demolished his adversaries, After De Perthes, 
Prestwich, Lyell, Evans, we, of the oblique vision in 
M. Gras’ opinion, have been out-argued and convicted 
of erroneous interpretations of the facts! Well! so, 
for the nonce, let us suppose the case. Is M. Gras, 
then, right in the views he promulgates in this sum- 
mary? <Assuredly not. If we are wrong, according to 
him, on one side of the barrier of facts, he is wrong on 
the other. If our geological interpretations do not 
agree with the evidence of facts, his historical specula- 
tions certainly do not. 

Whatever eyes M. Boucher de Perthes has for look- 
ing at gravel beds—and being the first to pick out the 
flint implements would cause us to give him credit for 
sharp ones—we can for a certainty speak of the capa- 
bilities of Mr. Prestwich’s organs. We have been 
over very many miles of gravel and drift deposits with 
him ; over country, every lane and turning in which 

394 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

is quite familiar ; and we do know, from experience, 
that if there be anything to be’ seen, he will see it. 
For more than twenty years of his life he has been in- 
cessantly studying over England and France, as a 
favorite speciality, these very quaternary beds ; and if 
any man’s knowledge or judgment is to be relied upon 
_ for an opinion as to the age or nature of such deposits, — 
assuredly it is his. Cautious in the extreme in adven- 
_ turing conclusions, and fastidiously painstaking in col- 
lecting facts and testing the accuracy of his observa- 
tions, no cooler intellect could discuss and put in intel- 
ligible order such intricate conditions as the gravel 
beds to the inexperienced present. Those who have 
read his masterly communications to the Royal Society 
of London will need no comments of ours to satisfy 
them of the accuracy of the views expressed, and of 
the ability of their author. But, to reply to M. Gras’s 
suppositions. Referring the flint-implements to historic - 
times for their origin, M. Gras states :—1l. That the 
makers were not obliged to go very far for their mate- 
yial.—True, they were not obliged, 7/—and the. whole 
summary involves a constant use of the little conjunc- 
tion—7/ they did make the implements on the gravel- 
banks in which they have been imbedded. This is by 
no means certain: but one thing is quite sure, we have 
ourselves seen—and handled—a veritable flint imple- 
ment from the valley of the Somme, which, although 
found in the gravel-bed, was undoubtedly and unmis- 
takably made out of a flint-nodule taken directly out 
of the chalk rock. 

In this case, therefore, the primitive manufacturer 
went at least to the side of the valley to get material 
which, according to M. Gras, he had, and quite as good, 
on the gravel-bank under his feet. If the manufacturer 
could be supposed to have worn breeches, he might be 

PRE-ADAMITE. MAN. 395 

supposed to have pocketed a fine nodule which he 
chanced to fall in with on a pieasure-ramble ; but as he 
cannot be presumed to have so clothed his lower ex- 
tremities, that presumption is untenable. 

As a rule, we fancy that very many of the imple- 
ments were made of flints directly taken from the chalk ; 
such flints would be preferable, generally, to gravel- 
flints, although suitable specimens could undoubtedly 
be collected from the gravel-beds, but not so abundantly 
as M. Gras infers. That some implements were made 
of large quaternary flint pebbles, the specimens from 
Herne Bay are indubitable evidence. 

2. The digging of the jlints by means of pits or gal- 
leries.—Setting aside the improbability of men digging 
for what they could find without labor on the surface, 
what, in the name of all mysteries, had those poor 
primitive savages to dig with? Flint-implements? It 
strikes us forcibly that, with one of those poor pointed — 
tools, a man would soon be tired of the attempt to dig 
a hole in gravel, much less a gallery. Half a dozen 
strong men—and this supposes the ancient manufac- 
turer to have kept a staff of workmen, unless he got 
voluntary help from his tribe—would make but sorry 
progress with those pointed flints. Even our stalwart 
miners would strike trom such work with such tools. 
But 7/—we must use the little conjunction again—7/ 
the pits and tunnels were dug, were actually made, it 
is not true to suppose we should have no evidence of 
their former existence. The gravel would not sink into 
the excavations, and show no difference of structure at 
those spots which had been hollowed out of the beds; 
for even such unsorted and heterogeneous deposits as 
vravel-beds are, they do distinctly show traces of 
former disturbances. We have clearly traced, by their 
appearances, disturbances made in gravel-beds by the 

396 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

Romans and Saxons in forming their graves, or in dig- 
ging for foundations of walls or pits; and what is 
likely to be distinctly apparent after the lapse of a 
thousand or more years, may be presumed to be at least 
detectable after the lapse of far longer ages. More- 
over, 7/ this explanation of M. Gras be acceded to, it 
involves the corresponding necessity of our finding the 
flint-implements in heaps or in narrow lines—where the j 
pits and galleries have been—and not disseminated here 
and there, as they are, at least most usually, if not in- 
variably. Supposing, as M. Gras does, that the sub- 
sidence into the galleries extended to the roof, there 
would be a furrow left at the surface, in which more 
recent deposits would accumulate, and if there were any 
sub-superficial coating of brick earth under the soil, 
that would bulge downwards in concentric, curved 
laminge, such as we constantly see exposed in stone 
quarries when surface-clays have sunk down into fis- 
sures, and as we constantly observe in the sand and 
gravel pipes of the chalk districts, in which, too, we 
often find patches of older Tertiary clays, containing 
shells that have been imbedded in the overlying qua- 
ternary drifts. 

1. Lhe rudeness of the implements suggestive of rough 
hewing for an after-fimshing for sale—Rude as they 
are, and this is one of the points we dwell upon in 
proof of their antiquity, they were used in the state in 
which we find them, for otherwise we should find the 
Jimshed examples elsewhere, which as yet, at any rate, 
we have done nowhere. We find stone and flint celts, 
polished and ground ; but these, as we before observed, 
were used by the broad flat end. The large fossil flint- 
implements were all worked to a point, and which 
point, contrary to anything we know of the use of any 
other stone tool, ancient or modern, was the part used. 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 397 

There is thus, besides the absence of chipping, one posi- 
tive character at least which separates the fossil imple- 
ments entirely from any other effort of savage industry. 
Will M. Gras assert he has ever seen a pointed weapon 
either ground or polished ? 

M. Gras further lays great stress on M. Gaudry 
having found nine worked flints on the same level. We 
might speak of levels in regularly stratified deposits, 
what levels are there in a gravel-bed ? 

Taking it for granted, however, nine were found on 
one level, is that number so large as to cause surprise ?- 
Jf—why may we not indulge in conjunctions ?—if there 
were a fishing-station on the spot, would nine be a 
large number to be presumed to be lost during the so- 
journ of the fishermen there? Or is there not an’ in- 
finity of incidents which might bring together so trifling 
a lot? 

Finally, to close our comments, may we not justly 
ask M. Gras if the flint implements belong to historic 
times? Who were the men that used them ? 

Just now the gentlemanly Secretary of the Working 
Men’s College, has handed me the London Cornhill — 
Magazine, for August 1862, from the pages of which I 
take the following :—Is the human race making a new 
step on Darwinian principles toward the acquirement 
of some new organs, for which preparations are being 
made, and which may land us in the ten, or hundred 
thousandth generation in the possession of wings, or 
whatever other account of the fact is to be rendered ? 
Certain it is that cases of late have occurred of the pre- 
sence in the human subject, of SUPERNUMERARY MUSCLES 
OF THE CHEST! Very remarkable instances of three 
such supernumerary muscles, now for the first time ob- 
served and described, are given in the Transactions of 

398 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

the Imperial Academy of St. Petersburg, recently pub: 
lished on the authority of Doctor Wenzel Gruber. 
The most important and conspicuous of them rejoices 
in the euphonious name of “Tensor Semi Vagineze Ar- 
ticulationes Humero Scapularis,” and connects the 
upper portion of the sternum (breast-bone) with the 
upper end of the humerus, near the acromion. It is by 
no means a feeble muscle, and must: evidently impart 
material additional strength to the inward contraction - 
of the shoulders. The other two are comparatively in- 
significant. 

Meismer and Auerbach have also recently discovered 
. a complete nervous apparatus lying under the mucous 
layer of the intestines, and another and more import- 
ant nervous plexus lying between the muscular walls of 
the whole intestine from the pylorus dowawards—a 
plexus of nerves and ganglia of most extraordinary 
formation, and doubtless function also. 

The mearing of all these will be given in full in the 
Second Volume of this Series, which volume is intended 
to treat of The Human Body and the Human Soul— 
their Origin, Nature, Constitution and Destiny, on the 
‘Earth and off it. When it is ready (probably within 
a few months,) it will be duly announced in the North, 
as well as in the South, and will, it is believed, solve 
several heretofore difficult problems. 

CONCLUSION. 

Mr. J. W. Jackson, of Scotland, a member of that 
erand coterie of Thinkers now arising, and most as- 
—suredly destined, in the end, to totally revolutionize the 
world of thought, both as to its methods and its results, 
speaks eloquently in the #'u¢ture, and of the future. Ha. 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 399 

maintains that History is not a mere chronicle of con- 
flicting and isolated events, but a record of phenomena, 
developed in strict accordance with certain laws. 
Hence the possibility of attaining to the philosophy of 
it. Rousseau and some of his followers assert that the 
“natural condition of man is savageism, but if so, he must, 
many millenia since, have emerged from his imper- 
fect and primal state. On the verge of authentic his- 
tory, and extending far away into the dim vista of tra- 
dition, we see the sublime shadows, vaguely looming in 
the distance, of great and already ancient nations, each 
with a language, religion, and political constitution, 
more or less peculiar to itself, and demonstrative of an 
origin even then long buried in a remote and. forgotten 
antiquity. In addition to this, we have monumental evi- 
dence of a grandly-developed system of pre-historic 
civilization, not only from Britain to India, but also 
on the American Continent, from Canada to Peru. 
Of this Past, history is but a faint, and, in many in- 
stances deceptive echo. We are the heirs of long- 
buried generations, whose mighty labors and heroic 
deeds have left no trace upon the written page, and 
whose records, if they exist at all, are monumental, not 
literary. Judging by these, their minds must have 
been great, and their purposes grand ; for their public 
works, in proportion to the resources at their command, 
far transcend anything that later ages have accom- 
plished. Such are the earth-works of America, the Cy- 
clopean remains of Greece and Italy, and, lastly, the 
time-endtring pyramids of Egypt, which, however old, 
are probably among the latest tide-marks of this prime- 
val period. Descending to the more recent age of tra- 
dition, we find society in India, Assyria, and Egypt, 
under hierarchical organization, with knowledge, and 
consequently power, especially concentrated in the 

400 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

hands of a few sacred and learned priesthoods, the 
holy miisters of religion, the revered administrators 
of the law, the skillful practitioners of medicine, and 
learned expositors of history and science. The clerisy 
of every order were then the clergy ; such were the 
Brahmins of Hindostan, the Magiof Babylon, and the 
priests of Mizraim. Such a system of civilization was, 
as we have said, concentrative and centripetal, wonder- 
fully intensified as culture in a few favored minds, but 
leaving the masses wholly dependent upon the exoteric 
teaching and early tuition of these their divinely ap- 
pointed and sacerdotal masters. This comparatively 
close and corporate system had undergone considerable 
modification among the classic nations of European 
antiquity ; philosophy, more especially among the 
Greeks, supplying the place of religion, and the philoso- 
phic sage superseding the saintly devotee. In such 
characters as Pythagoras, we see the process at the 
stage of transition; in Socrates and Plato it has attained 
to completion. The philosophy is, however, still moral 
rather than physical, and its principles are a priora 
rather than @ posteriori, the master minds of that age 
descending from law to fact, rather than ascending from 
phenomena to the causes which have produced them. 
Intellectual culture, however, in its higher forms, was 
still the appanage of the favored few ; for only those 
peculiarly blessed by fortune or genius, could hope to 
obtain any considerable amount of knowledge, when 
every book was in manuscript, and a library of a hun- 
dred volumes would have purchased an estate of twenty 
farms. With Christianity in the West, and previously 
with Budhism in the East, a new era in civilization was 
inaugurated ; the old system of caste was ignored ; 
clergy and laity, prince and peasant, bond and free, 
were by these humanitarian faiths held equally amen- 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 401 

able to the moral law, and regarded as equally heirs 
of eternal beatitude. Both synchronize with the 
emergence of the human mind out of the sacerdotal 
thraldom, the religious formalism and the caste pre- 
judices of a previous era itself the product of an un- 
lettered, traditional, and purely oral form of culture. 
Budhism emerged out of Brahminism, the Judaism of 
the farther East, as Christianity emerged out of Juda- 
ism, which, conversely, may be termed a modified form 
of the Brahminism of the West. 

A few words here upon the Genesis of Faith, which 
is ever a result of the union between an old creed as 
the male, and a new or strange philosophy as the female 
element in human culture. Thus this same Judaism 
was the product of Patriarchal or Abrahamic theology, 
the monotheism of the desert, combining with Kgyptian 
wisdom or philosophy in the exalted person of Moses, 
the Menu or great law-giver of the Israelites: While, 
later again, Judaic monotheism as a male combined with 
the Piatonic philosophy of Greece as a female to pro- | 
duce Christianity, which, philosophically regarded, is: — : 
an adaptation of the Mosaic system to the wantsandré- 
quirements of the European mind. So we may feel as- 
sured that the Faith of the Future will be the result of 
a union between the old Theology of (Judaic) Chris- 
tlanity, and that Science of Nature which constitutes our 
existing philosophy, and which has never, during the 
historic period at least, been embodied in any creed. 
Of this faith Poets will be the Prophets, and sages the 
Priests, and under it. Nature, as the Bride-Divine and 
Universal Mother, will have due and honorable recog- 
nition among the Celestial Powers. 

In the Middle ages we see the attempted reproduction 
of a primeval time. There is a highly organized hier- 
archy in the Papal Church which, fortunately, was cele- 

402 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. y 

bate, and so could not be made hereditary, like the cor- 
responding priesthoods of India and Egypt in former 
times, or like the contemporaneous feudal nobility, the 
Cashatrya or Rajpoot caste of the West, where heredi- 
tary power and prestige are only now slowly on the 
wane. The Dark Ages, as they are commonly termed, 
were, of necessity, a compromise between the concen- 
trative tendencies of a former past, and the diffusive 
tendencies of an advancing future. Power and know- 
ledge were still in a few hands, the privileges of birth, 
everywhere except in the Church, and often even there, 
predominated over the richest endowments of genius, 
and for a long period it seemed that the world was once 
more to be given up to the spiritual and temporal lead- 
ership of a favored few. Let us, however, do justice 
to these Middle Ages, which were a grand period of re- 
edification, during which the moral and physical temple 
of humanity was rebuilt, and the foundation was laid 
for that great start, which the human mind obtained at 
the revival of learning. We under-estimate the civi- 
_ lization of the past, perhaps in part because it differs 
from our own. Thus, for example, the men who reared 
~ our Gothic cathedrals, and built our beautiful abbeys, 
could not have been barbarians, but must have had 
architectural taste and skill of the highest order, the 
possession of which implies much else in correspondence 
with it. The Papal faith and Aristotelian philosophy 
_ of this time were in perfect harmony with each other 
—-that is, they were both a priort, and each taught with 
an authority that dominated over independent reason. 
The expansive tendency, however, was too strong, and 
humanity burst its fetters, theologically, in the Refor- 
mation; philosophically, by the triumph of induction ; 
and geographically, by the discovery of America and 
the way to the East round the Cape of Good Hope ; i 

PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 40% 

these liberalizing tendencies being confirmed and rein- 
forced by the diffusive aptitudes for intellectual culture 
placed at our command by the discovery of printing. 
Luther and Bacon, Columbus and Guttenburg, co-oper- 
ated in the one grand work of enfranchisement, which 
is still proceeding, and of which Reformation and Re- 
volutions are unavoidable results. The spirit of the 
Middle Ages was synthetical, conservative, and a priori. 
It built up and preserved all that it had inherited from 
the past. It was an age of authority, not of reason ; 
of religion, rather than of philosophy. Our Protestant 
era is the very reverse of all this ; it is analytical, dis- 
integrative, and even destructive. It pulls down the 
strongholds of authority, and despises tradition. It is 
ever appealing to reason against authority, and encour- 
ages the independence of the many, in place of sanc 
tioning the power of the few. It discourages belief, 
and is even prone to place philosophy above religion. 
Strictly speaking, it is not a positive age at all, but 
simply a revolutionary period of transition, between 
two great eras of edification and conservation. Its re- 
sult is natural philosophy, and its religion is the wor- 
ship of nature, under the form of scientific culture. 
The object of its higher idolatry is knowledge ; the god 
of its more vulgar worship is money ; and both are 
revered because each in its way is PoweER. The 
providential result of such an age, with its criticism 
and its scepticism, its merchandise and its science, is 
obviously to be—first, the sweeping away of old errors, 
prior, doubtless, to the promulgation of new truths ; 
and, secondly, the accumulation of material resources, 
and the development of practical instrumentalities, to 
be used under the higher spirit, and with the grander 
aims of the future time. Pricsts and princes are alike 
alarmed at the tendencies now becoming resistless and 

oe 
404 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

all-pervasive of this disintegrative and destructive era. 
And they may well be so, for should the flood continue 
to rise, the ultimate submerging, both of the throne and 
the altar, would be a question, not of circumstance, but 
simply of time. The logical terminus of the movement 
is a universal Pyrronism, under which faith and loy- 
“alty would utterly perish, and society be dissolved into 
its elements, preparatory to its entire reconstruction. 
France, at the latter end of the last century, approxi- 
mated to this condition of things ; and, in her terror, 
took refuge under the protection of a military despot- 
ism. No humanitarian movement, however, really 
reaches this terminus, but is brought up by resistance 
many stages short of so dire an ultimate. Thus it is 
that we already see the symptoms of reconstruction, 
restoration, of synthesis and re-edification already at 
work. In religion we have our Mormonisms, Spiritu- 
alisms, Revivalisms, ana other convulsions of returning 
life, which, under a certain aspect, are but the contor- 
vions of a galvanized corpse; and yet, under another, 
are the pangs and rivings of birth taking place beneath 
the ribs of death. In philosophy the leading minds are 
becoming weary of the insignificance of mere facts, 
and are beginniug to demand the exercise of that rea- 
soning power by which they may be harmoniously sys- 
tematized, and thus converted from a weltering chaos 
of phenomena into the order, beauty, and ONENESS of 
a true creation. ‘T’o accomplish this, more than mere 
observers are required ; we must have thinkers—that 
is, intellectual organizers, men of such grasp that they 
can use the accumulated knowledge of the centuries as 
mere subject-matter for their intellectual manipulation, 
and who will, doubtless, succeed in eliminating from 
this stupendous mass of experimental knowledge, those 
profounder principles and grander views, which it 

PRE-ADAMITR MAN. 405 

should legitimately produce, and of which, viewed from 
the causal sphere, it is the result. Let us not, however, 
esteem too lightly the incalculable benefits which mo- 
dern science confers, and is conferring, upon mankind. 
Its grander benefits must be universal, and can never, 
as of old, bé confined to a class, or become the speci- 
ality of a few. Already the printing-press places the, 
grandest utterances of the profoundest wisdom at the 
service of the simplest peasant. The Railway carries 
the artizan from town to town ata rate to which roy- 
alty, with all its couriers, could not even have ap- 
proached in the last generation, while the Mail carries 
the letter of the humblest citizen with a rapidity and 
certainty to which the missive of monarchs never pre- 
viously approached. 

But let not the most timid Conservative take need- 
less alarm ; the good already overbalances the evil. 
The forces of destruction are at work only upon error. 
The tide of revolution will sweep down nothing but in- 
justice ; and criticism, however searching, and scepti- 
cism, however hostile, will destroy nothing but un- 
truth. Already the roseate dawn of a second day is 
distinctly visible on the distant horizon; a great and 
sublime day of spirituality in religion, and of synthesis 
in philosophy, a day that doubtless will be as richly 
provided with its prophets and apostles, its poets and 
philosophers, as any that the world has yet seen, and 
in which not a favored few, but the countless millions 
of universal man will partake of the privileges, and 
share in the enlightenment of their instructions. 

I began this book with a quotation from the Tribune 
—I end it with another from the same journal, Decem- 
ber 16, 1863, which, beside being apropos, is also very 
suggestive, in more respects than its implied doubt of 
the correctness of the ordinarily accepted chronology : 

“ Music was the last of the arts to be perfected, and 
is the only romantic art left, for statues and temples 
were magnificently built four thousand or ten thousand 
years ago; and in the very heart of what is called the 
dark ages was the miracle of grandeur in architecture 
—the Cologne Cathedral : and now the statue means 

406 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

nothing—it has lost the hallowed signification which it 
enjoyed when it petrified virtue, and courage, and ge- 
nius, and divinity —and architecture, too, has no longer 
any aoly significance, it being a mere matter of more or 
less square feet, and more or fewer bricks, slabs, and 
tiles. Now, the idea of a church is a cosy library-sort 
of an affair, with pews and carpets—anti-asthmatie and 
anti-consumptive, and very comfortable and agreeable. 
The place carries no more sublime inspiration with ‘it 
than a drawing-room. ‘The age is simply one of anti- 
vastness, as applied to. churches; and the sanctity of sym- 
bolism is, every day, more and more merged into secular 
actualities. But the ancient Egyptian walked through 
the enormous avenues to the temples, flanked with gods 
of stone—whose strength and size defy the ravages of 
years—and felt himself in a divine presence. The 
statue and the temple—to his simple idea was heaven 
on earth. And the Greek, so particular in selecting 
the site, the shape, the statues, and the various decora- 
tions of his temple, was wafted up to the Glorious 
Apollo or the Thundering Jove, as he sought the sacred 
shrine. So, too, the Christian of the Middle Ages, in 
entering sulLlime Cathedrals— whose marvelous gran- 
deur cannot be fathomed by hearsay, but must be seen 
to be judged of—was exalted by their physical vast- 
ness and harmonious forms and colors, up to the sev- 
enth heaven of the apostle. But all that has passed 
away—the statue and the building no longer breathe 
super-mundane language, because of their beauty, 
portion and vastness. But music cannot be so cheap- 
ened, when on a pure, grand scale. With the advance 
of the epoch in mechanical means, it grows more and 
more into proportions, which are heroic, romantic—de- 
spite all the wonder-murdering tendencies of the age. 
So exalted has music become on a grand scale in Eng: 
land, above all other countries, that on a recent occa- 
sion five thousand performers—the body of singers 
being over four thousand, executed at the Sydenham 
Palace choral mnsic, with an effect that all competent 
auditors and judges agree in saying, was preternatural 
for its largeness, its immensity—and -bore comparison, 
musically, with other performances, as does Niagara 
with an ordinary little waterfall. It was, at turns, as 

i 

eer" PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 407 

vast as the undying chorus of nature on the sea-side, or 
lashed itself into a hell of declamatory vehemence and 
force, {oo great almost for the nerves of the auditors— 
and yet it was not noise, not dishevelled sounds, but 
topes in sequence and in combination as exactly meas- 
ured and poised as the mathematics of the spheres, and 
as true evidences of the majesty of the Creator.” 

The same paper, in an abstract of a lecture on “ The 
Lost Arts,” by Wendell Phillips, reports him as saying’ 
that : 

“We, as a people, were like the German, who al- 
ways pulled off his hat when he spoke of himself. If 
we look back upon the past we may see the evidence 
that there is little that is new under the sun. He 
wished to show what the ancients had achieved. 
When England was a land of savages, art flourished in 
Asia. In one respect we have no conceit. We are 
willing to sit at the feet of the ancient poets. He 
heard the Italians say, that our artist, Powers, of Ver- 
mont, reminded them of Phidias. We are indebted to 
the past—even many of our newspaper jokes date Lack 
further than the days of Joe Miller. But he desired 
to call attention to the Useful Arts. Glass is a use - 
ful article, and the ancients knew more about it than 
we eve fact is shown by the manner in which it 
was moulded and colored. He complimented Edward 
Everett’s description of the telescope, but denied that 
Gakilgthwas the first person to discover its use. He 
furnished facts to show that the ancients must have 
used telescopes, microscopes, and opera-glasses. The 
paintings of the past show that we cannot mix paints 
as well as the ancients could. In manufacturing metals, 
the ancients were our superiors. ‘The orator spoke of 
a sword, so exquisitely made, that it could be put into 
a sheath, cviled up like a snake, without breaking. <A 
Negro had tempered steel with an art which died 
with him, and it was not revived until a hundred 
years aiter. The ancients, it appears, had the steam- 
boat and the canal, aud they had the art of moving 
immeuse masses of rock—masses weighing three thou- 
sand tons each. Europe says, ‘I made the canal.’ 
Olina says, ‘Il made it a thousand years ago.’ Leypt . 

408 PRE-ADAMITE MAN. 

growls from her granite lips, ‘Keep quiet, children, I 
made it five thousand years ago.’ Stevens says he 
found railroads (built thousands of years ago) whose 
grooves were coated with iron. The use of guano is 
not new. Auimal magnetism may be traced to the 
middle ages.* Cold water, as a remedial agent, is not 
new. Revolving pistols and breech-loading cannon 
are at least three hundred years old. Sherry coblers 
are of ancient date, as is the fashion of drinking them 

through straws. The balloon and the telegraph even 
belonged to the past, Western wit, which consists of: 

exaggeration, such as Lowell delights in, is old.- The 
stereoscope is two hundred years older than Cliris- 
tianity, and the mowing-machine was used centuries 
ago. Why did he speak thus of the wisdom: of the 
ancients ? Because art was hidden in the bosom of 
the aristocracy. In the printing-press, the only dis- 
covery of modern times, we see hope for the future. 

lron and fire cannot save civilization. Sublime and ° 

noble principle, guided by wisdom and humanity, can 
save it, if God intends to save it.” 
And now, reader, for a time, farewell. If I, by se- 

lection or otherwise, have added one ray of light to 

your mind, I am well repaid for my labor—for labor, 
indeed, it has been—necessitating an amount of t@vel, 
reading, and research, and expense, that would seareely 
be credited. I leave the subject, then, by now a 
exhausted, but at a point whence other men are called 
to carry it on. Still, itis believed that the testimonies 
herein adduced, especially in Part Third, are of such 
an unimpeachable character, that no one rising from 
their perusal and examination, but will concede that 
we have clearly established the fact that this world 
was once peopled by PRE-ADAMITE MEN! 

* An error! for it was known in both Egypt and Nimroud, Syria, 
and Nineveh, thousands, instead of hundreds of years ago, as 1s proved 
by sculptures and paintings innumerable, some of which represent 
the curative process, others those of inducing magnetic somnolence ; 
others. still, the act of delivering dreamy oracles, a la the modern, 80- 
called, “ clairvoyants.” = 

4 
i 
: 
‘ 
j 
d 
; 

oa 

sie 

Lim 

Gate * 
ae tat 
; 

a 

Le » 
4 Vb at 

ie - lak a ie Tk i" TP pce, } y und ae . ah : 
sf ‘ ; Yo - Da ; ; y 

ath Es 
3 eae Rika ic 
ARR as ee 
ye mde cap hikes 
6 

ne) ve ogi 

aa Ra 
oS 

7 

ans 

4 » eae 
x 

eo oat 

4 

ee 
Are. 
2G. 

La - er y 
“eal 

oats 
Pd 

a 

oF ae 

4 

n Public Library 

Bosto 
y> Copley Square 

Central Librar 

Division of 

and Research Services 

Reference 

ry 
vt crs nao 2 

BOSTON PUBLIC L 

Al |! I I I iil Ly 

10101 338 90 

n awe “ ” terete aXe” yn Oe ere at Co. 
; 8 ba es 4 2 a ; ’ = A ei eS etarere gen nee are Oe Oe aS roca 
Ttae eto hterryreter setae sreray waters Sie Betas 
. er Ftoraer a e ers OS: 
& 

eer aries 5 Cerweeated beter te 
petri es ~ ri oasis Steet neers 
ea ee Ae ¥ “i Fe rere” th tee oka ae 
AP rer ear eer) 5 iS A ee nane ere YS netasare o> 9 
aewapeeest es bees: Saat eee pemes rete 
Woe rem te bones . Ph th therm 9 sh i ons aA: rears 
. He vi wn hey Lee am ane meee ke Ree 
ee sian ee ees arety: - , ae ate $ . it Recetas eat yepsenaone ererae 3 ety aa 
SI ay PE Semmes % ere : y ; ; - th tet Ste tie te IN 
SANE DA hk Sa bea ew as 7 iw" pam rf + oe a A Se = poareren tt ee anuey are vey 
yr Reeser 2 ye 4g ~ : ¢ ate the ; z rh oN eter rete 
wetowe toate es fi ea 2 atl Solatateraters er A: ts . en ae | Mitre eee Ft ni slonees Sitoters 
ee re Sater . retet: panes “ perecie-theth terete > or ‘ recone on Y bos on oe re prey ware Coe, 
aot mete tyres ‘ erry , w yeipace rie ae Sees : eed ee he ee Ss ater eitheetatar etter ~. 
ators : : x x s ae Staten? 
yay 5 .! Y Sty erat 7 2 " hated ie aa ae aia ah me tee eee A ek ante ae the 
a ewes y , hes e reat’ ee ed Moe rw oS yea Aare w Sons ereyre™ sete ote 
ratte lina 7 te Se Pe Bi rf ¥ ny Sy ot a. A ¥ < > * Miele vterecs 
Seamer eee i Ante at etyiesery : re Sk ae S ee a aye Se ct mttaer seyret ne . - erence ence i wet eaten 
Parone were Se statetatotp toto Cony tury na erte Sy he Pye ae Yerw tuna tetes i$ reece Causa titire erutatetars Bs fo OS ie Ret Bdge * ¥ - A incite uci 
atone Se Shien te ty Sh pe Fert hte Re Pe OS Sa te tates i taren i 3 baie thon 4 : ees for bry” ie 
SS oarae eee S Sane fy Rpaene eee Parton y eter te Aap ne eSB TR ONES * az ‘ -. - nati eee rarer oa Aetna 
Se cle te te ie th Peta et ay Bi a ah ee ae oa wrtneores . 4 bs 9 os fide thao a te . os - fe 
Sonar e en nearer em “y te \ oyster ie pet ne sth a aes ee 
ee tes eet pet yo tates: Srertorghatys sy saree ~ fot why oterere - oe. hope a a. 
Mates to tote arewe alete a ertena ts whenrarespaatenoe a telntereente “ Rotaer 5 tt EL Meck wth tech hy ee 
Sat ee ee Se ee : Gee ef hace neta eon eee ga 
: ate . . = 
SE ER Eur y ayer re aye aw Rene oiety toutes ¥ babe : ores Seo ries Bs ery ee te otetergtetis eet tte 
. neers err ereeg Tce Sein astra mm bmi ee : ? Fk were = Renee eid tere wiry te eee gy ere oat ore graces Renee 
a as ee Oe ie ener e tyne tonw gsene te Wists eran reme ty sretz ior ph %, , ty Say ee ene ate oe e yt x iw ry States - 3 ¥ 
eS ieroaee cee ene TNS me Seer : = Besar Ses erat ; 
Tete toN oh SS " sey oe Sao, ae ; 
: Pra tn a by 49 ua “ 5 ~ > : viet 2 r e 
cS 

2 ¥ 3 m he uty Sue 
~ . - Feterututus, Lototetetntatetetes ESica aie soy 
Feet Feet poe? an ag ag wing ers Fe ee 
rH he . : » a AN. ta 48 wt 4 rae a pict oe 
seoare 4 * an 
Tenet 

< 
het 

Bye rate tare wee hte tet utat, ean ah aka to a eat 
es euitahy ey ere Rea onthe rho 3 panes Pel wh ey he Sete twine 
oe roe Resear aia re tarast tare aetytetcte nee SCTE 
i ee a ied “ 

- Soren wy roe Bit 16 a eth 

2 tones %s 
wapereeniescaite Ss j 
vs Sey ee * 

ae es Setys oe er ~ 
sO ae Nieterveletyt ; ar at a a a 
Seiciemmenns Sects reistokaletsteery et te oe 
A cA xs 

poy wer ea wi wey’ Siete : SS arararerore mre 

“ Pa <r ere 

Serta tee mt ath 

ay er le 2 ron 

Me tedese mien 
Aer tyn tere nt ie et im 
Sete ded 

Sh ere 

aes Patera ay otey pete Spee: 

wr yan ss r ore on rotentes on 
Reset 
~ pan Seow R a need 
Suse ed Wrordret Stk oom mah ne lire am, vetetore: Pylusemereene 
vhs hte eras Sree tranea pray eta tage were ewes 
we we er erenee OE eee we signtates are te <5 ot aw 
: haa teme me Pon ay moet mean a mee « =e 

forth rh etree o ah bat hy Dp 2 * i 
Tieton hth Oe 8 rarer 

ee pops eye 

Se 

io eH ve gly eet a de eae e 
~ sei intwr sae 1 

a 
ney fe 

aah a me i 
Seer alperoretete ms oes say Site ate 
tte a Sere eR IT i Soe eee ut 

w He vO : 
rs ~ i ~~ a L * 
iieaeaede ee a0. 10 ¢ om 
Mena ead ee inary, » 4 - 
I ae 
eee ae nS 

erry: “s 
merase ee eee 
~~ 

3, 

~~ Shen wet ‘ 
oe Seer iota 
tatatwreetureto te: S : z : 7. er ha 

~ 
a at 
ist 3 
ar ap tentig ee! Easement drain ek tone 
ch 2: te fe rer Tee ye eee 
ater aso we Renmin aon " 

* 

: 
e-eru day! onprere te: 
: cata tante sateen 

* we 
soe tote actatete tte teres 

: Sooty eee ees 
ne Spestarestoreee i 

Wotan atorosee ete 
patente om 

S 
SAAR. ae PU
