4911,

i Nes eg

The Library

~SCHOOL OF THEOLOGY
AT CLAREMONT

WEST FOOTHILL AT COLLEGE AVENUE
CLAREMONT, CALIFORNIA

poaee
hn

7 ' ee a
’ =

es ea Tia

ba S. a 7
ae
a I

Le
Ss vs

ee HISTORY

REFORMATION IN GERMANY.
Deut ‘cial = yea ES 5 my ete ae der
Wakorwret! evi

BY

LEOPOLD RANKE.

SECOND EDITION.

—"

TRANSLATED BY SARAH AUSTIN.

VOL. I.

LONDON:
LONGMAN, BROWN, GREEN, AND LONGMANS,

PATERNOSTER-ROW.

1845.

Theology Library

SCHOOL OF THEOLOGY.

AT CLAREMONT
foe

Lonpon:

Printed by A. Srorriswoopr, |
New-Street-Square.

CONTENTS

OF

THE SECOND VOLUME.

BOOK III.

ENDEAVOURS TO RENDER THE REFORMATION NATIONAL
AND. COMPLETE. 1521—-1525. - -

; CHAP. I.
Disturbances at Wittenberg — October, 1521, to March,
1522. - - - - -
CHAP. II.

Temporal and spiritual Tendencies of the Council of
Regency, 1521—1523. - “ -

CHAP. II.
Diffusion of the new Doctrines, 1522—1524. - -

CHAP. IV.

Opposition to the Council of Regency.—Diet of 1523-24.
CHAP. V.

Origin of the Division in the Nation - -
CHAP. VL

The Peasants’ War - ~ - .
CHAP. VII.

Formation of the adverse religious Leagues. — Diet of
Augsburg, December, 1525. - - -

Page

1

43

74

114

163

202

260

iv CONTENTS.

BOOK IV.
Page
Forrign RELATIONS. — FOUNDATION OF THE NATIONAL
CHURCHES OF GERMANY. 1591 to28s F - 287
CHAP: L
French and Italian Wars, down to the Ligue of Cognac,
1521—1526. - - - - 289
CHAP. IL
Diet of Spire, a.D. 1526. - ot - 389
CHAP. III. ;
Conquest of Rome, A. D. 1527. - - - 417
CHAP. IV.
Occupation of Bohemia and Hungary - - 453
CHAP. V.

Foundation of Evangelical States - - - 483

BOOK III,

ENDEAVOURS TO RENDER THE REFORMATION
NATIONAL AND COMPLETE.

1521—1525.

> VOL. 11. B

a we a

et Se BOTT. ny wire wae ee
Ae a hi to star
; s “<5 Hes

An }a thal

oe

HISTORY

Or THE

REFORMATION IN GERMANY.

BOOK III,

ENDEAVOURS TO RENDER THE REFORMATION
NATIONAL AND COMPLETE.

1521—1525.

Tue peculiar character and form which the Latin

church had gradually assumed gave rise, as we
_ have already seen, to the necessity for its reform ;
—a reform demanded by the state of the world,
and prepared by the national tendencies of the Ger-
man mind, the advancement of learning, and the
divergencies of theological opinion. We have
likewise remarked how the abuse of the traffic in
indulgences, and the disputes to which it gave
birth, led, without design or premeditation on the
part of any concerned, to a violent outbreak of
opposition.

While we regard this as inevitable, we cannot
proceed further without pausing to make some
observations on its extreme danger.

B 2

4 INTRODUCTION. Boox IIL.

For every member and every interest of society
is enlinked with the whole established order of things
which forms at once its base and its shelter ; if
once the vital powers which animate this mass are
thrown into conflict, who can say where the vic-
torious assailants will find a check, or whether every
thing will not be overwhelmed in common ruin ?

No institution could be more exposed to this
danger than the papacy, which had for centuries
exercised so mighty an influence over the whole
existence of the European nations.

The established order of things in Europe was,
in fact, the same military-sacerdotal state which
had arisen in the eighth and ninth centuries, and,
notwithstanding all the changes that had been
introduced, had always remained essentially the
same— compounded of the same fundamental ele-
ments. Nay, even those very changes had gene-
rally been favourable to the sacerdotal element,
whose commanding position had enabled it to
pervade every form of public and private lie,
every vein of intellectual culture. How then would
it have been possible to assail it without producing
an universal shock; to question it, without. endan-
gering the whole fabric of civilisation ?

It must not be supposed that so resistless a
power of persuasion resided in a merely dogmatic
faith, wrought out by the hierarchy and the schools.
The establishment of this would, on the contrary,
have excited incessant controversy, which, though
generally confined within the region of received
ideas, would sometimes have been carried beyond

Boox III. INTRODUCTION. 5

that limit. But the intimate connexion which the
papacy maintained with all established authorities
had defeated every attempt at opposition. How,
for example, could an emperor have ventured to
take under his protection religious opinions op-
posed to the dominant system of faith, not on
particular and unimportant points, but profoundly
and essentially ? Even as against a pope on whom
he was making war, he could not have dared to
do it; he must have feared to undermine the spiri-
tual basis on which his own rank and power were
founded; to be the first to break through the
circle of ideas and associations by which the minds
of men were bounded. The civil authorities felt,
at every moment, the indissoluble nature of their
connexion with the hierarchy, and generally made
themselves the instruments of the persecution of
all who dissented from the faith prescribed by the
church.

It was now also to be considered that projects
and attempts of the most dangerous kind had been
connected with the more recent attacks on the
doctrine and discipline of the church of Rome.

A century and a half had elapsed since John
Wicliffe had engaged in a similar contest with the
papacy in England (with nearly the same weapons,
and supported by the same national impulses) to
that which Luther now entered upon in Germany ;
this was instantly accompanied by a tumultuous
rising of the lowest classes of the people, who, not
content with reforms in the creed, or an emanci-
pation from the see of Rome, aimed at the abolition

B 3

6. INTRODUCTION. Boox IIL.

of the whole beneficed clergy*, and even at the
equalisation of the nobleman and the peasant ;
i. e. at. a complete overthrow of Church and State.
It is uncertain whether Wicliffe had any share in
these proceedings or not. At all events, the re-
sentment they excited fell upon him, and he was
removed from Oxford, the scene of his labours,
- whence he might have exercised a singular in-
fluence over England and the world, to the narrow
and obscure sphere of a country parish.

The disorders in Bohemia, which broke out in
consequence of the teaching and the condemnation
of Huss, at first related exclusively to the spiritual
matters whence they arose+; but the severity
with which they were repressed soon excited an
extremely dangerous fanaticism. The Taborites
not alone rejected the doctrines of the Fathers of
the church equally with those of later times, but
they demanded the destruction of all the books in
which those doctrines were contained. They de-
clared it vain and unevangelical, nay, sinful, to
prosecute studies and to take degrees at the uni-

* See Prioris et Capituli Cantuarensis Mandatum, Sept. 16.
1881, in Wilkins’s Concilia Magne Britannie, iii. p. 133.

t One chief cause of this movement which is commonly over-
looked, is mentioned by the well-informed Hemmerlin in his tract
De Libertate Ecclesiastica. I will give this in his own words.
“In regno Bohemiz quasi omnes possessiones et terrarum
portiones et portiones portionum quasi per singulos passus fuerunt
occupate, intricate et aggravate per census, reditus et proventus
clero debitos. Unde populares nimis exasperati — insultarunt

in clerum et religiosos — et terram prius occupatam penitus
liberarunt.”

Boox III. INTRODUCTION. 7

versities *; they preached that God would destroy
the world, and would only save the righteous men
of five cities +; their preachers deemed themselves
the avenging angels of the Lord, sent to execute
his sentence of annihilation. Had their power
corresponded with their will, they would have
transformed the earth into a desert in the name of
_ the Lord.

For a thirst for destruction is inevitably excited
by successful opposition, and is the more violent,
the more powerful the enemy with whom it has
to contend.

Was not then, we must now inquire, a similar
storm to be feared in Germany, where the pope
had hitherto wielded a portion of the imperial
power ?

The nation was in a state of universal ferment ;
a menacing revolt against the constituted author-
ities was already stirring in the depths of so-
ciety ; would not this be called into action by an
attack on the highest of all acknowledged earthly
authorities? Would not the destructive forces
which every society harbours in its bosom, and
which this sacerdotal-military state had certainly
not been able to neptralise or, destroy, now rear
their heads ?

The whole future destiny of the German nation
was involved in the question whether it could

_* Formula fidei Taboritarum apud Laur. Byzynium (Brze-
zina) : Ludewig Reliquie MSS., tom. vi. p. 191.
+ Byzynii Diarium belli Hussitici, ib. p. 155. sq.

B4

8 INTRODUCTION. — Boox ITI.

withstand this danger or not; whether it would
succeed in severing itself from the papacy, without
imperilling the state and the slowly won treasures
of civilisation in the process; and what form of
constitution — for without political changes the
separation was impossible — the nation would then
assume. On the answer to these questions rested,
at the same time, the possible influence of Ger-
many on the rest of the world. '
The immediate course of events assumed a most
menacing and dangerous character.

~

CHAPTER I.

DISTURBANCES AT WITTENBERG— OCTOBER, 1521, To
MARCH, 1522.
>

Once more had the supreme temporal power in Ger-
many allied itself with the papacy, and this at first
could not fail to make a deep impression. The
edict of Worms was published in all parts of the
empire; and in some places the confessors were
instructed by the bishops to refuse absolution to
every one who should be guilty of avowing Lutheran
tenets. Luther’s own sovereign could only save
him by seizing him on his way through the Thu-
ringian forest, and carrying him, in feigned cap-
tivity, to the safe asylum of the Wartburg. A
report was spread that an enemy of the elector had
imprisoned and perhaps killed him.

It soon, however, became manifest how little had
been effected by these severities.

In the towns of the Netherlands in which Charles
happened to be residing, Luther’s writings were
collected and publicly burned; but the emperor
might be seen to smile ironically as he passed these
bonfires in the market-place, nor do we find any
trace of such executions in the interior of Germany.
On the contrary, the events of the diet and the new
edict only. gained fresh partisans for Luther’s cause.
It appeared a powerful argument for the truth of

10 DISTURBANCES AT WITTENBERG. Boox III.

his doctrines, that when he publicly avowed his
books at Worms, and declared that he was ready to
retract them if any one could confute him, no one
had ventured to accept the challenge.* ‘‘ The more
Luther’s doctrine is pent up,” says Zasius, “ the
more it spreads.” If this was the experience of
the university of Freiburg, where the orthodox
party was so strong, what must it haye been else-
where? The Elector of Mainz did not think it
expedient to grant the Minorites the permission
begged by their provincial, to preach against Luther
in his diocese, fearing that it would but increase
the agitation of the public mind.{ In despite of
the new regulations for the censorship contained
in the edict, pamphlet after pamphlet appeared in
favour of the new doctrines. These were mostly
anonymous, but Hutten ventured to put his name to
a direct attack on the pope’s nuncio, Aleander, the
author of the edict. In this he asks him whether he

* « Bin schoner dialogus und gesprech zwischen eim Pfarrer
und eim Schulthayss, betreffend allen iibelstand der Geystlichen,”
&e. “A fine dialogue and conversation between a parish priest
and a sheriff touching the ill condition of the clergy,” &c., doubt-
less written immediately after the meeting of the diet; in which
are these words: “ Warum hand ir dan nit Doctor Luther mit
disputiren yez zw Worms tiberwunden.” “ Why did you not
then overcome Doctor Luther in the disputation now held at
Worms?” This is the argument with which the sheriff brings
over the parish priest to his views.

+ Epp. i. 50.

+ Capito ad Zwinglium Hallis, iv. Aug. 1521. (Epp. Zw., i.
78.) He required sermons, “ citra perturbationem vulgi, absque
tam atrocibus affectibus.”

Cuap. I. DISTURBANCES AT WITTENBERG. 11

imagines that he can crush religion and freedom by
means of a single little edict, artfully wrung from
a youthful prince; or that an imperial command
had any power against the immutable word of God.
Were not rather the opinions of a prince subject to
change? The emperor, he believed, “would learn
to think very differently in time.”* The agents of
Rome themselves were astonished to find of how
little avail was the edict they had obtained with
somuch difficulty. The ink, they said, was scarcely
dry with which the emperor had signed it, when
already it was violated on every side. They are
said, however, to have consoled themselves with the
reflection, that if it had no other results, it-must
lay the foundation for inevitable dissension among
the Germans themselves.

It was a most significant circumstance that the
university of Wittenberg was as little affected by
the imperial edict as it had been by the papal bull.
There the new doctrines had already taken root and
flourished independently of Luther’s personal in-
fluence, and thither the flower of the German youth
flocked to receive and adopt them. It made indeed
but little difference whether Luther was present or
not ; the lecture rooms were always crowded, and
his doctrines were defended with the same en-

* Invectiva in Aleandrum. Opera, iv. p. 240.

+ Spalatini Annales, 1521. October. “ Scholastici, quorum
supra millia ibi tum fuerunt.” Nevertheless, in the course of
the winter, the electors of Brunswick and Brandenburg forbade
their subjects to attend this University. Mencken, Script. ii.
611. The number of matriculations fell off considerably during
the winter term. Sennert, p. 59.

12 DISTURBANCES AT WITTENBERG. — Boox III.

thusiasm, both orally and in writing. In short, this
infant university now took the boldest ground.
When the Sorbonne at last broke silence, and de-
clared itself against Luther, Melanchthon thought
himself not only bound to undertake the defence of
his absent friend, but he even dared to fling back
the accusation upon the university of Paris, the
source of all theological learning, the parent stem
of which the German universities were branches,
the Alma Mater to whose decision the whole world
had ever bowed, and to charge her herself with falling
off from true Christianity. He did not hesitate to
declare the whole of the doctrines current at the
universities, especially the theology of the schools,
false and heretical when tried by the standard of
Scripture.* The highest powers in Christendom
had spoken, the pope had issued an anathema,
and his sentence had been confirmed by that of the
great mother university, and, finally, the emperor
had ordered it to be executed; and yet, in the
small town of Wittenberg, which a few years before
was hardly known, a professor little more than
twenty years of age, in whose slight figure and
modest bearing no one could have detected any
promise of heroism. or boldness, dared to oppose
all these mighty powers, to defend the condemned
doctrines, nay, to claim for them the exclusive
glory of Christianity.

* Adversus furiosum Parisiensium theologastrorum decretum
Phil. Melanchthonis pro Luthero Apologia. Corp. Reformato-
rum i, 398,

Cuap. I. DISTURBANCES AT WITTENBERG. 13

One cause of this singular phenomenon was, that
it was well known that the appearance was more
formidable than the reality : —the motives which
had determined the course taken by the court of
Rome (chiefly dominican influence), and the means
by which the edict had been extorted from the em-
-peror, and the manner of its publication, were no
secret. The three men from whom the condemn-
ation in Paris originated were pointed out, and
called by the most opprobrious names.* The re-
formers, on the other hand, were conscious of pure
motives, and a firm and impregnable foundation for
their opinions. The influence of their prince, who
afforded them undoubted though unacknowledged
protection, was a safeguard against actual violence.

But those who ventured to take up so independ-
ent and imposing a position, at variancewith all esta-
blished authorities, and supported only by opinions
which had not yet attained their full development
nor acquired a precise form, obviously incurred an
enormous weight of responsibility. In carrying out
the principles professed, it was necessary to be the
pioneers of a numerous, susceptible and expecting
crowd of sympathising spirits. Here, where all the
elements of a state at once military and sacerdotal
’ were to be found as abundantly as elsewhere, the
experiment was to be tried, how far the authority

* Glareanus ad Zwinglium Lutetie 4 non. Julii, 1521. Beda,
Quercus, Christophorus: Bellua, Stercus, Christotomus. Epp.
Zw. p. 176. The work of Glareanus, p. 156., in which the death
of Leo X. is mentioned, does not belong to the year 1520, but
to the following year.

14 DISTURBANCES AT WITTENBERG. Boox II.

of the priesthood might be destroyed without en-
dangering the safety of the state.

It was, however, become impossible to remain
stationary. Men’s minds were too much excited
to be content with doctrines alone. On’ the faith
which was now so profoundly shaken, were founded
practices that influenced every day and hour of
common life ; and it was not to be expected that an
energetic generation, conscious of its own power,
and impelled by new and mighty ideas, should do
violence to its own convictions and submit to ordi-
nances it had begun to condemn. |

The first remarkable incident that occurred was
of a purely personal nature. Two priests in the
neighbourhood, Jacob Seidler and Bartholomew
Bernhardi, both professing the doctrines of Witten-
berg, solemnly renounced their vows of celibacy.
Of all the institutions of the hierarchy, this, indeed,
was the one which, from the strong taste for domestic
life inherent in the nation, had always been most
_ repugnant to the German clergy, and, in its conse-
quences, most profoundly offensive to the moral
sense of the people. The two priests declared their
conviction that neither pope nor synod were entitled
to burden the church with an ordinance which en-
dangered both the body and the soul.* Hereupon
they were both claimed for trial by the spiritual
authorities ; Seidler alone, who resided in the ter-
ritory of Duke George of Saxony, was given up to

* “ Quid statuerint Pontificii canones, nihil refert Christia-
norum.” — Epistle from the Theologians of Wittenberg to the
Bishop of Meissen, Corp. Ref. i. 418.

Cuapr. I. DISTURBANCES AT WITTENBERG. 15

them, and perished in prison; the Elector Fre-
deric refused to lend his authority to the Bishop
of Magdeburg against Bernhardi; he refused, as
Spalatin expresses it, to let himself be employed
as a constable. Carlstadt now took courage to
attack the institution of celibacy in a work of
considerable length.

As the vow of celibacy was originally confined to
the monastic orders, and had subsequently been ex-
tended to the whole priesthood, its dissolution neces-
sarily affected the whole idea of the monastic system.
In the little Augustine church which had been the
scene of Luther’s first appearance, Gabriel Zwilling,
one of his most able fellow-labourers, preached a se-
ries of fervent discourses, in which he attacked the
very essence of monachism, declaring that it was not
only lawful but necessary to renounce it; for that
‘‘ ynder the cowl there was no salvation.” Thirteen
Augustine monks left the convent at once, and took
up their abode, part among the students and part
among the townspeople. One of them who under-
stood the trade of a cabinet-maker, applied for the
right of citizenship and proclaimed his intention of
marrying.* This was followed by a general dis-
turbance: the Augustines who had stayed in the
convent thought themselves no longer safe; and the
Carmelite convent in Wittenberg had to be pro-
tected every night by a strong guard.

Meanwhile Brother Gabriel made another, still

* Report of Gregorius Bruck to the Elector, Oct. 11. Corp.
Ref. i. 459.

16 DISTURBANCES AT WITTENBERG. Boox III.

- more formidable attack upon the Catholic church.
He carried Luther’s doctrines about the sacrament
so far as to declare the adoration of it, and even
the celebration of the mass without communicants,
simply as a sacrifice (the so-called private mass), an
abuse and a sin.* In a short time the prior of
the convent was compelled by the general agitation
to discontinue the celebration of private masses in
his church, in order, as he said, to avoid still greater
scandal. This of course produced a great sensation
both in the town and university. On the 3d of
December, 1521, when mass was going to be sung
in the parish church, several of the students and
younger burghers came with knives under their
coats, snatched away the mass books and drove the
priests from the altar. The town council summoned
the offenders subject to its jurisdiction, and showed
an intention of punishing them; upon which the
townspeople rose tumultuously and proposed terms
to the council, in which they demanded the liberation
of the prisoners in a tone almost amounting to

open rebellion.

* Report from Helt the prior of the Augustines to the
Elector, Nov. 12. Corp. Ref. p. 483.

+ The Council of Wittenberg to the Elector. Dec. 3. and 5.
Corp. Ref. p. 487. The impression made by these innovations
in distant countries is remarkably displayed by a passage in
vol. xxxii. of the Venetian Chronicle of Sanuto, in the Archives
of Vienna. ““ Novita di uno ordine over uso de la fede christiana
comenzada in Vintibergia. Li frati heremitani di S. Augus-
tino hanno trovato e provato per le St. Scripture che le messe
secondo che se usano adesso si é gran peccato a dirle o a odirle
(thus it appears that the whole innovation was looked upon as

Cnar. I, DISTURBANCES AT WITTENBERG. Li?

All these were attempts made without plan or
deliberation to overthrow the existing form of di-
vine worship. The Elector, to whose decision such
affairs were always referred, wished, as was usual
with him, to take the opinion of some constituted
authority.

His first step was to summon to Wittenberg
a council of Augustines from the provinces of
Meissen and Thuringia. These monks all more
or less shared Luther’s opinions and regarded his
cause as their own. Their judgment, as he after-
wards declared, coincided with his own, even during
his absence; they did not go so far as Brother
Gabriel, who denounced the monastic vows as sin-
ful, but they no longer acknowledged them to be
binding. Their decision was as follows: “ Every
creature is subject to the word of God, and
needs not allow himself to be oppressed by bur-
densome human institutions; every man is at
liberty to leave the convent or to remain in it*;
but he who leaves it must not abuse his freedom

an invention of the Augustine order) e dapoi el zorno di S.
Michiel, 1521, in qua ogni zorno questo hanno predichado e
ditto, e stanno saldi in questa soa oppinione, e questo etiam con
le opre observano e da poi la domeniga di S. Michiel non hanno ~
ditto piu messe nella chiesia del suo monasterio, e per questo é
seguito gran scandalo tra el popolo li cantori e canonici spirituali

”

e temporali

* Decreta Augustinianorum. Corp. Ref. i. 456. This
meeting is not to be placed in the month of October, but rather
in December or the beginning of January, as is remarked by
Seckendorf (Historia Luther. i. s. 54. § 129.) on the authority of
a contemporary letter. See Spalatini Ann. 610.

VOL. II. Cc

18 DISTURBANCES AT WITTENBERG. Boox TIL.

according to the lusts of the flesh; he who prefers
to stay, will do well to wear the cowl and render
obedience to his superiors from choice and affection.”
They determined at the same time to desist from the
practice of begging, and to abolish votive masses.

Meanwhile the prince had called upon the uni-
versity to pronounce an opinion on the mass in
general. A commission was accordingly chosen, of
“which Melanchthon was a member, and which de-
cided for the entire abolition of the mass, not only
in Wittenberg but throughout the country, be the
consequences what they might.* When, however,
the moment arrived for the whole corporation to
confirm this sentence, they absolutely refused to
do so; several of the most influential members
~ stayed away from the meeting, declaring that they
were too insignificant to undertake to reform the
church.

Thus as neither the Augustine order nor the
university declared themselves distinctly in favour
of the innovators, the Elector refused to move any
further in the matter, saying that if even in Wit-
tenberg they could not agree, it was not probable
that the rest of the world would think alike on the
proposed change: they might go on reading, dis-
puting and preaching about it, but in the mean
while they must adhere to established usages.{

The excitement was, however, already too great

* Epnstlich Handlung der Universitit, &c. Corp. Ref. i. 465.
+ Report of Christian Beiers, Dec. 13. ib. 500.
+ Instruction of the Elector, Lochau, Dec. 19. ib. 507.

f

Cuap. I. DISTURBANCES AT WITTENBERG. 19

to be restrained by the command of a prince whose
leniency was so well known; and accordingly Dr.
Carlstadt announced, in spite of it, that on the
feast of the circumcision he should celebrate the
mass according to a new rite, and administer the
Lord’s Supper in the words of the Founder. He
had already attempted something of the kind in
the month of October, but with only twelve com-
municants, in exact imitation of the example of
Christ. As it seemed probable that difficulties
would be thrown in his way, he determined not to
wait till the day appointed, and on Christmas Day,
1521, he preached in the parish church on the ne-
cessity of abandoning the ancient rite and recelving
the sacrament in both kinds. After the sermon he
went up to the altar and said the mass, omitting
the words which convey the idea of a sacrifice, and
the ceremony of the elevation of the host, and
then distributed first the bread and next the wine,
with the words, “ This is the cup of my blood of the
new and everlasting covenant.” This act was so
entirely in harmony with the feelings of the con-
gregation that no one ventured to oppose it. On
New Year's Day he repeated this ritual, and con-
tinued to do so every succeeding Sunday; he also
preached every Friday.*

Carlstadt belonged to a class of men not uncom-
mon in Germany, who combine with a natural turn
for deep speculation the boldness to reject all that

* Zeitung aus Wittenberg account of what took place in
1521, &c. ; in Strobel’s Miscellanien, v. 121.
c 2

x

20 DISTURBANCES AT WITTENBERG. Boox III.

has been established, or to maintain all that has been
condemned; yet without feeling the necessity of first
arriving at any clear and precise ideas, or of resting
those ideas upon arguments fitted to carry general
conviction. Carlstadt had at first adopted the doc-
trines of the schoolmen; he was afterwards urged by
Luther to the study of the sacred writings, though
he had not, like him, patience to acquire their ori-
ginal languages ; nor did he hesitate at the strangest
and most arbitrary interpretations, in which he fol-
lowed only the impulse of his own mind. This
led him into strange aberrations; even at the time
he was preparing for the disputation at Leipzig, he
used the most singular expressions with regard to
the Holy Scriptures, applying to them as a whole
that which has generally been understood of the
law only; viz. that they lead to transgression,
sin, and death, and do not afford the true conso-
lation the soul requires. In the year 1520 he en-
tertained doubts whether Moses was really the
author of the books which bear his name, and
whether the Gospels have come down to us in
their genuine form; speculations which have since
given so much occupation to learning and cri-
ticism, presented themselves at this early period to
his mind.* At that time he was overawed by the
presence and authority of Luther; now, however,
he was restrained by no one; a wide arena for
the display of his ambition lay before him, and he

* See extracts from his works in Léscher’s Historia Motuum,
dela.

Cuar. I. DISTURBANCES AT WITTENBERG. ih

was surrounded by an enthusiastic public. Under
these circumstances he was himself no longer the
same; the little swarthy sun-burnt man, who for-
merly expressed himself in indistinct and am-
biguous language, now poured forth with the most
vehement eloquence a torrent of mystical extrava-
gant ideas, relating to a totally new order of things,
which carried away all imaginations.

Towards the end of the year 1521 he was joined
by allies who had entered on a similar career from
another direction, and who pursued it with still
greater audacity.

Tt is well known that at the beginning of the
Hussite troubles, two strangers, Nicolas and Peter
of Dresden, who had been banished by the Bishop
of Meissen and found an asylum in Prague, were
the persons who, during the absence of Huss and
Jerome, instigated the populace to demand a change
of the ritual, especially in the administration of the
sacrament ; and that various other fanatical opinions
were quickly combined with these.*

Whether it was that these opinions re-acted on
the country in which they originated —or whether
they had from the first taken deeper and more
lasting root there, — the same spirit which had for-
merly directed the movement at Prague, now re-
vived at Zwickau (a town in the Erzgebirge, where .
Peter of Dresden had for some time resided), and

* 'The notice of this is very remarkable in Pelzel’s Wences-
las, ii. (Urkunden, nr. 238. ex MS. cowvo capituli.) They
declared at the very beginning “ quod papa sit antichristus
cum clero sibi subjecto.”

(allie

22 DISTURBANCES AT WITTENBERG. Boox III.

appeared likely to guide the agitation now prevail-
ing at Wittenberg.

This spirit was remarkably displayed in a sect
which congregated round a fanatical weaver of
the name of Claus Storch, of Zwickau, and pro-
fessed the most extravagant doctrines. Luther
did not go nearly far enough for these peo-
ple. Very different. men, -they said, of a much
more elevated spirit, were required ; for what
could such servile observance of the Bible avail ?
That book was insufficient for man’s instruction ;
he could only be taught by the immediate-inspira-
tion of the Holy Ghost.* Their fanaticism soon
rose to such a pitch as to convince them that this
was actually granted to them; that God spoke to
them in person, and dictated to them how to act
and what to preach.t On the strength of this im-
mediate inspiration from Heaven, they pressed for
various alterations in the services of the church.
Above all, they maintained that a sacrament had
no meaning without faith, and therefore entirely
rejected the baptism of infants, who are incapable of

« A report sent from Zwickau to the elector, of which he
informs the university, gives this account of their opinions.
Acta Einsiedelii cum Melanthonio, C. R. p. 586. The state-
ments in Enoch Widemann Chronicon Curix, in Mencken,
Scriptt. R. G., iii. 744., show a somewhat later developement
of the fantasies of Storch. Tobias Schmidt’s Cronica Cygnea,
1656, is not without its value for the events of the thirty years’
war, but is insufficient for the times of the Reformation.

+ Official Report of Melanchthon, Jan. 1. 1522. C. R., 1.5383.,
from which it is evident that half a year before, these people
had not begun to boast of this communion with God.

Cuar. L DISTURBANCES AT WITTENBERG. " 125

faith. But their imaginations took a much wilder
flight. They asserted that the world was threat-
ened with a general devastation, of which the Turks
were perhaps to be the instruments; no priest was
to remain alive, not even those who were now
contracting marriage, nor any ungodly man; but
after this bloody purification the kingdom of God
would commence, and there would be one faith
and one baptism.* They seemed well inclined to
begin this work of violent convulsion themselves.
Finding resistance from the moderate portion of
the citizens and town council of Zwickau, they
collected arms in the house of one of their party,
with the design of falling suddenly on their oppo-
nents and putting them all to death. Fortunately
they were anticipated by Wolf of Weissenbach, the
chief magistrate of the place; he arrested a num-
ber of the misguided men, kept the peace and com-
pelled the ring-leaders to quit the town.t The
fanatics hoped to accomplish abroad what they had
failed in at home. Some of them went to Prague
with a view to reviving the old Taborite sect
‘there, —an attempt which proved abortive. The
others, of whom it is more especially our business
to speak, came to Wittenberg, where they found
the ground admirably prepared for the seed they
had to sow, by the universal restlessness of minds
craving for some unknown novelty, not only among

* Zeitung aus Wittenberg, p. 127.
+ According to 'G. Fabricius, Vita Ricii, in Melchior Adam,
Vite Philosophorum, p. 72.
c 4

QA DISTURBANCES AT WITTENBERG. Boox III.

the excitablé class of students, but even among the
townspeople. We accordingly find that after their
arrival in Wittenberg the agitation assumed a
bolder character.

Carlstadt, with whom they immediately allied
themselves, introduced more striking innovations
every day. The priestly garments were abolished
and auricular confession disused. People went to
receive the sacrament without preparation, and ima-
agined that they had gained an important point,
when they took the host with their own hands
instead of receiving it from those of the priest. It
was held to be the mark of a purer Christianity to
eat eggs and meat on fast days especially. The
pictures in the churches were now esteemed an
abomination in the holy place. Carlstadt disre-
garded the distinction which had always been made
between reverence and adoration, and applied all
the texts in the Bible directed against idolatry to
the worship of images. He insisted upon the fact
that people bowed and kneit before them, and
lighted tapers, and brought offerings; that, for ex-
ample, they contemplated the image of St. Chris-
topher, in order that they might be preserved
against sudden death; he therefore exhorted his
followers to attack and destroy ‘ these painted
gods, these idol logs.” He would not even tole-
rate the crucifix, because he said men called it
their God, whereas it could only remind them of
the bodily sufferings of Christ. It had been de-
termined that the images should be removed from
the churches, but as this was not immediately

Crap. I. DISTURBANCES AT WITTENBERG. 25

executed, his zeal became more fiery *; at his in-
stigation an iconoclast riot now commenced, simi-
lar to those which half a century afterwards broke
out in so many other countries. The images
were torn from the altars, chopped in pieces and
burnt. It is obvious that these acts of violence
gave a most dangerous and menacing character to
the whole controversy. Carlstadt not only quoted
the Old Testament to show that the secular au-

* Von Abtuhung der Bylder. Und das keyn Betdler unther
den Christen seyn soll. Carolstatt in der christlichen Statt
Wittenberg. Bog. D. (Concerning the Abolition of Images.
And that there should be no Worshipper among Christians.
Carlstadt in the Christian Town of Wittenberg. Sheet D.)
The decree was made on Friday after St. Sebastian, Jan. 24.
1522. The dedication to the paper on the first sheet, which
also was first printed, is dated Monday after the conversion of
St. Paul, 27th Jan. Carlstadt then had the greatest hopes. The
date shows how zealous he was. When he came to the fourth
sheet, he plainly saw that matters would not proceed so rapidly.
“Ich hette auch gehofft, der lebendig got solt seine eingegeben
werk das ist guten willen tzu abtuhung der bilder volzogen und
yns eusserlich werk gefurt haben. Aber ess ist noch kein exe-
cution geschehen, vileicht derhalben, das got seinen tzorn vber
vns lest treuffen yn meynung seynen gantzen tzorn ausszuschu-
den, wu wir alsso blind bleiben ynd fiirchten vns vor dem dass
vns nicht kan thun. Das weiss ich das die Obirsten deshalb
gestrafft werden. Dan die schrifft leugt ye nit.”—“ I had also
hoped that the living God would have carried into execution
and openly brought to bear his appointed work, that is, good will
towards the abolition of images. But no execution has yet taken
place, perhaps because God lets his anger drip upon us, intend-
ing to pour out all his wrath, if we remain thus blind, and fear
not that which he is able todo. Thus much I know, that they
in high places will be punished therefore. For the Scripture
lieth not.”

26 DISTURBANCES AT WITTENBERG. Boox III.

thorities had power to remove from the churches
whatever could give scandal to the faithful, but
added, that if the magistrates neglected this duty,
the community was justified in carrying out the
necessary changes. Accordingly the citizens of
Wittenberg laid a petition before the council, in
which they demanded the formal abolition of all
unbiblical’ ceremonies, masses, vigils, and proces-

sions, and unlimited liberty for their preachers.
- The council was forced to concede these points one
after the other *; nor did even these concessions
satisfy the innovators. Their project was to realise
without delay their own conception of a strictly
Christian community. The council was called upon
to close all places of public amusement, not only
‘those which the law prohibited, but those which it
had sanctioned; to abolish the mendicant orders
who, they said, ought not to exist in Christendom,
and to divide the funds of the religious communities,
which were pronounced to be altogether mischievous
and corrupt, among the poor. To these suggestions
of a bigoted fanaticism, ‘blind to the real nature
and interests of society, were added the most perni-
cious doctrines of the Taborites. An old professor
like Carlstadt suffered himself to be carried away
by the contagion to such a degree as to maintain
that there was no need of learned men, or of a course
of academic study, and still less of academic honours.
In his lectures he advised his hearers to return home
and till the ground, for that man ought to eat his

* Strobel, v. 128.

Cnap. I. DISTURBANCES AT WITTENBERG. id

bread by the sweat of his brow. One of his most
zealous adherents was George Mohr, the rector of
the grammar school, who addressed the assembled
citizens from the window of the schoo]-house, ex-
horting them to take away their children. Of
what use, said he, would learning be henceforth ?
They had now among them the divine prophets
of Zwickau, Storch, Thomii, and Stiibner, who con-
versed with God, and were filled with grace and
knowledge without any study whatsoever. ‘The
common people were of course easily convinced
that a layman or an artisan was perfectly qualified
for the office of a priest and teacher.

Carlstadt himself went into the houses of the
citizens and asked them for an explanation of ob-
scure passages in Scripture; acting on the text
that God reveals to babes what he hides from wise
men. Students left the university and went home
to learn a handicraft, saying that there was no
longer any need of study.*

The conservative ideas to which Luther had
still clung were thus abandoned; the idea of
temporal sovereignty, on which he had taken
his stand to oppose the encroachments of the
priesthood, was now rejected with no less hos-
tility than the spiritual domination. Luther had
combated the reigning faith with the weapons
of profound learning ; one of the rudest theories
of inspiration that has ever been broached now

* Fréschel: Tractat vom Priesterthum (Appendix), 1565.
Reprinted in the Unschuldigen Nachrichten, 1731, p. 698.

28 DISTURBANCES AT WITTENBERG. Boox III.

threatened to take its place. It is evident, however,
that its success was impossible. All the powers of
the civilised world would have risen against such a
wild, destructive attempt, and would either have
utterly crushed it, or at all events have driven it back
within the narrowest limits. Had such anarchical
dreams ever become predominant, they must have
destroyed every hope of improvement which the
world could attach to the reforming party.

In Wittenberg there was no one capable of
resisting the general frenzy. Melanchthon was
then too young and inexperienced, even had he
possessed sufficient firmness of character. He held
some conferences with the prophets of Zwickau;
and finding not only that they were men of talent,
but well grounded in the main articles of a faith
which was likewise his own; being also unable to
refute their arguments concerning infant baptism,
he did not feel himself competent to enter the lists
against them. We find disciples and friends of Me-
lanchthon among their adherents.*

The elector was equally incapable of offering any
efficient resistance. We are already acquainted with
the character of this prince, — his temporising policy,
his reluctance to interfere in person, his habit of
letting things take their own course. His was the
most peaceful nature produced by this troubled
and warlike age; he never had recourse to arms;
when advised to seize Erfurt, on the plea that

* e, g. Martin Borrhaus (Cellarius) of Stuttgard had set on
foot a private school for Melanchthon. Adam, Vite Theolog.
p. 191.

Cuav. I. DISTURBANCES AT WITTENBERG. 29

he might aceomplish it with the loss of only five
men, he replied, “One were too many.”* Yet his
quiet, observant, prudent and enlightened policy
had ever been crowned with ultimate success.
His pleasure was to adorn his own _ territories,
which he thought as beautiful as any on earth,
with castles, like those of Lochau, Altenburg, Wei-
mar and Coburg; to decorate his churches with
pictures from the admirable pencil of Lucas Kra-
nach, whom he invited to his court; to keep up
the high renown of ‘his chapel and quire, which
was one of the best in the empire, and to improve
the university he had founded.

Although not remarkable for popular and ac-
cessible manners, he had a sincere affection for the
people. He once paid back the poll-tax which had
been levied, when the purpose to which it was to be

applied was abandoned. “ Truly,” said he of some-
body, ‘he isa bad man, for he is unkind to the poor
folk.” Once, when on a journey, he gave money

to the children who were playing by the road-
side: “one day,” said he, “they will tell how a
duke of Saxony rode by and gave each of them
something.” We read of his sending rare fruits
to a sick professor.} The elector was now in years ;
most of the older German princes with whom he
had lived in habits of intimacy, “his good comrades
and friends,” as he called them, were dead, and he
had many annoyances and vexations to bear. He

* Tuther to John Frederic and Moritz, 1542.
+ Epistola Carlstadii ad Spalatinum in Gerdes Scrinium, vii.
i. 345.

30 DISTURBANCES AT WITTENBERG. Boox ILL.

was in doubt and perplexity as to-the real in-
clinations of the young emperor. “ Happy is the
man,” he exclaimed, “ who has nothing to do with
courts!” The disagreement between himself and
his nearest neighbour and cousin, the turbulent
Duke George, became more and more serious and
evident. “Ah, my cousin George!” said he,—“ truly
I have no friend left but my brother;”— and
to him he gradually confided the greater share of
the government. The protection he afforded to
Luther had arisen naturally out of the course of
events; at first, partly from political motives, then
from a feeling of duty and justice.* Nor was this
all; he conscientiously shared the profound, _un-
questioning veneration for the Scriptures incul-
cated by Luther. He thought that every thing
else, however ingenious and plausible, might be
confuted; the word of God alone was holy, ma-
jestic, and truth itself: he said that this word
should be “pure as an eye.” He had a deep
reverential fear of opposing or disobeying it. The
basis of all religion is this sense of what is sacred —
of the moral mystery of the universe; this awe of
offending against it under the momentary influence
of impurer motives. Such was eminently the re-

* Tis counsellors in Wittenberg declared, on the 2d Jan. 1522.
«“§. Ch. G. hatt sich Doctor Martinus Sachen bisher nicht an-
ders — angenommen, denn allein weil er sich zu Recht erboten,
dass er nicht bewiltigt wiirde.’—“ His Christian grace, the
elector, had as yet taken up Dr. Martinus’s cause in no other
way beyond offering to see that he had justice, and was not
overpowered by force.”—Corp. Ref. p. 537.

Cuar. I. DISTURBANCES AT WITTENBERG. 51

ligion of Frederic the Wise, and it had withheld him
from interfermg decidedly and arbitrarily in Lu-
ther’s behalf; but it also hindered him from ex:
erting his power to put down these new sec-
tarians in Wittenberg, displeasing as they were
to him. He did not venture, any more than Me-
lanchthon, to pronounce an absolute condemnation
of them. After listening to the doubts and scruples
of his counsellors and learned. men at Prettin on
this subject, he appeared perplexed and _ over-
powered at the idea that these people might possibly
bein the right. He said that as a layman he could
not understand the question; but that, rather than
resist the will of God, he would take his staff in his
hand and leave his country.*

It certainly might have come to this. The
movement that had begun could lead to nothing
short of open rebellion,—to the overthrow of civil
government in order to make room for a new
Christian republic; violence would then certainly
have called forth violence, and good and evil would
have perished together.

How much now depended on Luther! Even
these disturbances were the offspring or the con-
sequence of ideas that he had set afloat, or were
closely connected with them: if he sanctioned them,
who would be able to stem the torrent? if he op-
posed them, it seemed doubtful whether his oppo-
sition would have any effect, or whether he himself
would not be overwhelmed in the common ruin.

* Spalatin, Leben Friedrichs des Weisen. Vermischte Ab-
handlungen zur sichsischen Gesch. B. v.

32 DISTURBANCES AT WITTENBERG. Boox III.

During the whole of this time he was in the
Wartburg, at first keeping closely within the walls,
then venturing out timidly to gather strawberries on
the castle hill, and afterwards, grown bolder, riding
about as Junker George, accompanied by a groom.
He once even ventured into Wittenberg, trusting
to the disguise of his long hair and beard, and
completely cased in armour. But though his mode
of life and his accoutrements were those of a Reiter,
his soul was evér in the heat of ecclesiastical war-
fare. ‘ When hunting,” says he, “ I theolo-
gized:” the dogs and nets of the hunters repre-
sented to him the bishops and stewards of antichrist
seeking to entrap and devour unhappy souls.* In
the solitude of the castle he was again visited by
some of the struggles and temptations which had
assailed him in the convent. His chief occupation
was a translation of the New Testament, and he
likewise formed the project of giving to the German
nation a more correct translation of the Bible than
the Latin church possesses in the Vulgate.f Whilst
endeavouring to fortify his resolution for the ac-
complishment of this work, and only wishing to be
in Wittenberg that he might have the assistance of
his friends, he heard of the excitement and dis-
order prevailing there. He was not for a moment
in doubt as to their nature. He said that nothing
in the whole course of his life had given him greater
pain; all that had been done to injure himself

* To Spalatin, 15th Aug. D. W., ii. 43.
¢ To Amsdorf, 13th Jan, p. 123.

Cuar. I. DISTURBANCES AT WITTENBERG. 33

was nothing in the comparison. The pretensions
of these men to the character of divinely inspired
prophets and to immediate communion with God,
did not impose on him; for he too had fathorned
the mysterious depths a the spiritual world, and
had gained a far deeper insight into it, and a
far too exalted conception of the divine nature,
to allow himself to be persuaded that God Rio
appear visibly to his creatures, converse with them,
or throw them into ecstasies. “If you want to
know the time and place and nature of the divine
communications,” writes he to Melanchthon *,
“hear; ‘ Like as a lion he hath crushed my bones;’
and, ‘I am cast out from before thy countenance,
my soul is filled with heaviness, and the fear of hell
is upon me.’ God spake by the mouths of his
prophets, because if he spoke himself we could not
endure it.” He wishes his prince joy of the cross
which God has laid upon him, and says that the Gos-
pel was not only persecuted by Annas and Caiphas,
but that there must be a Judas even among the
apostles; he also announces his intention of going
to Wittenberg himself. The elector entreated him
not to leave his retreat so soon, saying that as yet
he could do no good, that he had better prepare his
defence for the next diet, at which it was to be
hoped he would obtain a regular hearing.t But
Luther was no longer to be restrained by these
arguments; never had he been more firmly con-

* 13 Jan. 1522. to Amsdorf, p. 125.
+ Instructions to Oswald, Corp. Ref. i. 561.

VOL. II. D

34 DISTURBANCES AT WITTENBERG. Boox III.

vinced that he was the interpreter of the divine
word and that his faith would be a sufficient pro-
tection; the occurrences in Wittenberg seemed
to him a disgrace to himself and to the Gospel.*
He accordingly set out on his way, regardless of
the pope’s excommunication or the emperor's ban,
bidding his prince have no care about him. He was
in a truly heroic state of mind.

A party of young Swiss who were on their ‘way
to the University of Wittenberg stopped to dine at
the sign of the Black Bear at Jena. On entering
they saw a horseman who sat at the table resting
his right hand on the hilt of his sword, with a
Hebrew psalter before him; this horseman, as they
afterwards discovered, was Luther, and we read in
the notes of one them, how he invited them to dine
with him, and how gentle and dignified was his
deportment.t On Friday 7th of March he arrived
at Wittenberg; on the Saturday the same Swiss
found him surrounded by his friends, inquiring
minutely into all that had occurred during his
absence. On Sunday he began to preach, in order
immediately to ascertain whether his popularity and :
‘nfluence were still sufficient to enable him to allay
the disturbance. Small and obscure as was the scene
to which he returned, his success or failure was an
event pregnant with important results to the whole
world ; for it involved the question, whether the

* To the elector, 5th March, ii. 137.
+ From the Chronicle of Kessler, in Bernet, Leben Kesslers,
p- 27.

Cuar. I. DISTURBANCES AT WITTENBERG. 35

doctrine which had forced itself on his conviction
from its own inherent weight, and which was
destined to give such an impulse to the pro-
gress of mankind, had also power to subdue the
elements of destruction fermenting in the public
mind, that had already undermined the found-
ations of society and now threatened it with total
ruin. It had now to be tried whether it were pos-
sible to reform without destroying; to open a fresh
career to mental activity, without annihilating the
results of the labours of former generations. Lu-
ther’s view of the question was that of a preacher
and pastor of souls; he did not denounce the
changes that had been made as utterly pernicious,
nor the doctrines from which they had sprung as
fundamentally bad, and he carefully refrained from
any personal attacks on the leaders of the new sect.
He merely said that they had acted with pre-
cipitation, and had thus laid a stumbling-block in
‘the way of the weak and transgressed the com-
mandment of charity. He allowed that there were
practices which undoubtedly ought to be abolished;
such, for instance, as private masses; but that these
reforms ought to be effected without violence or
scandal. As to a number of other usages, he
thought it indifferent whether a Christian observed
them or not. That it was a matter of very small
importance whether a man received the Lord’s
Supper in one kind or in both, or whether he pre-
ferred a private confession to the general one, or
chose rather to remain in his convent or to leave it,
to have pictures in the churches, and to keep fasts,
D2

36 DISTURBANCES AT WITTENBERG. Boox III,

or not; but that to lay down strict rules concerning
these things, to raise violent disputes, and to give
offence to weaker brethren, did more harm than
good, and was a trangression of the commandment
of charity.

The danger of the anarchical doctrines now
broached, lay in the assumption that they were an
indispensable part of true Christianity; an as-
sumption maintained with the same vehemence and
confidence on the side of the anabaptists, as the
divine and thence infallible origin of every decree of
the church was on that of the papists.

These doctrines, therefore, like those of the papacy,
were intimately bound up with the whole system of
morals, and the whole fabric of civil life. It was
therefore most important to show that religion recog-
nised a neutral and independent province, over which
she was not required to exercise a direct sway, and.
where she needed not to interfere in the guidance
of every individual thought. This Luther did with
the mildness and forbearance of a father and a guide,
and with the authority of a profound and compre-
hensive mind. These sermons are certainly among
the most remarkable that he ever preached; they are,
like those of Savonarola, popular harangues, not
spoken to excite and carry away his hearers, but to
arrest them in a destructive course, and to assuage
and calm their passions.* How could his flock resist

* «“ Sieben Predigten D, M. L. so er von dem Sontage In-
vocavit bis auf den andern Sontag gethan, als er aus seiner .
Pathmos zu Wittenberg wieder ankommen.” (‘ Seven sermons
of Doctor Martin Luther, delivered by him during the week

Cuap. I. DISTURBANCES AT WITTENBERG. a7

the well-known voice, the eloquence which carried
the conviction it expressed, and which had first
led them into the way of inquiry? The con-
struction commonly put upon moderate councils,
namely, that they arise from fear of consequences,
could have no place here. Never had Luther ap-
peared in a more heroic light ; he bid’ defiance to
the excommunication of the pope and the ban of
the emperor, in order to return to his flock; not
only had his sovereign warned him that he was un-
able to protect him, but he had himself expressly
renounced his claim to that protection ; he exposed
himself to the greatest personal danger, and that.
not (as many others have done) to place himself at
the head of a movement, but to check it; not to
destroy, but to preserve. At his presence the
tumult was hushed, the revolt quelled, and order
restored; a few even of the most violent party
leaders were converted to his opinions and joined
him. Carlstadt, who could not be brought to
confess his error, was condemned to silence. He
was reproached with having intruded himself un-
called into the ministry, and was forbidden to enter
the pulpit again. Some approximation took place be-
tween the moderated opinions now maintained by
Luther, and those of the civil authorities, who were
delivered from the danger that had threatened the
state. A treatise of Carlstadt’s, written in the same
spirit as heretofore, part of which was already

between the Sunday Invocavit and the following Sunday, when
he returned from his Patmos to Wittenberg.” — Ald. ii. 99.
D3

38 DISTURBANCES AT WITTENBERG. Boox III.

printed, was suppressed by the university, and a
~ yeport of it sent to the elector. The Zwickauers
once more sought an interview with Luther ; he
exhorted them not to suffer themselves to be de-
ceived by the illusions of the devil; they answered,
that as a proof of their divine mission, they would
tell him what were his thoughts at that instant ; to
this he agreed, upon which they said that he felt a
secret inclination towards themselves. “ God rebuke
thee, Satan!” exclaimed Luther. He afterwards ac-
knowledged that he had, indeed, been conscious of
such a leaning ; but their guessing it, he held to be
a sign of powers derived from Satan rather than
from God*; he accordingly dismissed them with
a sort of challenge to their demon to resist his God.
If we soften the coarseness of his language, this
struggle between two antagonist spirits, the one
destructive, the other tutelary, is the expression of
a mighty and profound truth.

Wittenberg was now once more quiet; the mass
was as far as possible restored, preceded by con-
fession, and the host was received as before with
the lips. It was celebrated in hallowed garments,
with music and all the customary ceremonies, and
even in Latin; nothing was omitted but the words
of the canon which expressly denote the idea of a
sacrifice. In every other respect there was perfect
freedom of opinion on these points, and latitude as

* Camerarius, Vita Melanchthonis, cap. Xv.
+ “ Luther von beider Gestalt des Sacraments zu nehmen.”
— Alienb.ii. p. 126.

Cuap. I. DISTURBANCES AT WITTENBERG. 39

to forms. Luther himself remained in the convent
and wore the Augustine dress, but he offered no
opposition to others who chose to return to the
world. The Lord’s Supper was administered in
one kind or in both; those who were not satisfied
with the general absolution, were at full liberty to
require a special one. Questions were continually
raised as to the precise limits of what was absolutely
forbidden, and what might still be permitted. The
maxim of Luther and Melanchthon was, to condemn
nothing that had not some authentic passage in the
Bible, —‘“‘ clear and undoubted Scripture,” as the
phrase was, —against it. This was not the result of
indifference ; religion withdrew within the bounds
of her own proper province, and the sanctuary of
her pure and genuine influences. It thus became
possible to develope and extend the new system of
faith, without waging open warfare with that already
established, or, by the sudden subversion of existing
authorities, rousing those destructive tendencies,
the slightest agitation of which had just threatened
such danger to society. Even in the theological
exposition of these doctrines, it was necessary to
keep in view the perils arising from opinions sub-
versive of all sound morality. Luther already began
to perceive the danger of insisting on the saving
power of faith alone; already he taught that faith
should show itself in good conduct, brotherly love,
soberness and quiet.*

* Eberlin of Giinzberg quotes aremarkable passage from one
of his sermons: “ Vermanung an alle frumen Christen zu
p4

40 DISTURBANCES AT WITTENBERG. Boox III.

The new religious opinions, in assuming the
character of a distinct creed, threw off from
themselves all that was incongruous, and as-
sumed a more individual, and at the same time
a more universal character, — the character in-
separable from its origin and tendency. As early
as December 1821, in the heat of the disturbances,
appeared the first elementary work on theology,
founded onthe new principles of faith—Melancthon’s
‘Loci Communes.’ This was far from being a
complete work; indeed it was originally a mere
collection of the opinions of the apostle Paul con-
cerning sin, the law, and grace, made strictly in
accordance with those severe views to which Luther

Augsburg am Lech :”—“ Ich hab gehort,” says he, “von D. Martin
Luther in ainer Predig ain gross war wort, das er sagt: wie
man die sach anfacht, so felt unrat darauf: predigt man den
glauben allein, als man thon sol, so unterlesst man alle zucht und
ordnung, predigt man zucht und ordnung so felt man so gantz
darauff das man alle selickait darein setzt und vergisst des glau-
ben; das mittel aber were gut, das man also den glauben yebte
das er ausbreche in zucht und ordnung, und also iibte sich in
guten siten und in briederlicher liebe das man doch selickait
allein durch den glauben gewertig were.” —“ An Exhortation to
all pious Christians at Augsburg on the Lech :”—“ [have heard
in one of Luther’s sermons a great and true saying : that as you
- stir up the matter, some mischief arises; if a man preach faith
alone, as he should do, he omits all soberness and order ; if he
preach soberness and order, he insists upon them alone, and
places all salvation therein, forgetting faith ; the middle course,
however, would be the best, that man should so use faith that it
should break out in soberness and order, and that they should so
exercise themselves in good habits and in brotherly love, as to
look for salvation only through faith.”

e

Cuap. I. DISTURBANCES AT WITTENBERG. 41

had owed his conversion, but remarkable on account
of its entire deviation from all existing scholastic
theology, and from being the first book which had ap-
peared for several centuries in the Latin church con-
taining a system constructed out of the Bible only.
Sanctioned by Luther’s approbation, it had great
success, and in the course of repeated editions it was
recast and perfected.* The translation of the New -
Testament by Luther, which he corrected with Me-
lanchthon’s assistance on his return to Wittenberg,
and published in September 1522, had a still more
extensive effect, and acted immediately on the
people. Whilst with one hand he emancipated
them from the forms imposed on religion by the
schools and the hierarchy, with the other he gave
to the’ nation a faithful, intelligent and intelligible
translation of the earliest records of Christianity.
The national mind had just acquired sufficient ripe-
ness to enable it to apprehend the meaning and
value of the gift: in the most momentous stage of
its development it was touched and penetrated to
its very depths by the genuine expression of un-
veiled and unadulterated religion. From such
influences everything was to be expected. Luther
cherished the noble and confident hope that the
doctrine alone would accomplish the desired end ;

* The original composition of this book is to be seen by a
comparison of the first sketch of it in 1520 (which appears
written by many different hands, in Strobel’s Neuen Beitragen,
y. 323.) with the first edition of 1521, printed in V. D. Hardt’s
Hist. Lit. Ref., iv.

42 DISTURBANCES AT WITTENBERG. Boox III.

that wherever it made its way, a change in the out-
ward condition of society must necessarily follow.
The course pursued by the authorities of the
empire, in the altered form they had meanwhile
acquired, not only justified this hope, but led to
results calculated to give it still greater assurance.

43

CHAPTER II.

TEMPORAL AND SPIRITUAL TENDENCIES OF THE
COUNCIL OF REGENCY.

1521—15238.

Ir is a remarkable and striking coincidence, that
the mighty national movement we have just been
considering was exactly coeval with the institution
of that representative (stdéndisch) form of govern-
ment which had been the object of such various and
persevering exertions.

The Emperor, powerful as he was, had been
forced to grant it as the condition of his election;
the plan was agreed upon at Worms, and was carried
into execution in the autumn of 1521. The electors
and the circles severally elected deputies, who, as
we find, were freed from their feudal obligations,
and exhorted to attend only to the general welfare
of the empire. The old acts of the Imperial Cham-
ber, weighing many hundred weight, and containing
the pleadings in about 3500 long pending and yet
undecided suits, and a vast number of fresh plaints
on which no proceedings had yet been taken,
were transported to Niirnberg.* One by one the

* Hans v. d. Planitz to Friederich v. Sacksen, 18 Oct. 1521,
according to communication made by Adam vy. Beichlingen.
The correspondence of Planitz, in two volumes, and a smaller
pamphlet in the Archives of Weimar, are the authorities for
the following. Harpprecht and Miiller (Staats Cabinet, i.),
give very superficial information.

44 COUNCIL OF REGENCY. Boox III.

deputies arrived; those from the emperor, the last
of all. During the course of the month of Novem-
ber they got so far as to open first the Council of
Regency, and then the Imperial Chamber.

At first they had to endure a great deal from
the interference of the imperial councillors*; the
same, for the most part, with whom the states had
had such frequent disputes under Maximilian, and
who were still unwilling to give up any of their lu-
crative privileges, and still, as formerly, accused of
taking bribes. Very strange things occurred ;
among others, the Bishop of Wiirzburg had seized
- the person of a certain Raminger, who was furnished
with a safe conduct from the emperor, and kept him
prisoner. The Council of Regency very properly
took the injured man under their protection. Their

* Planitz says, as early as the 18th October, “ Churfiirsten
Firsten und Andre so itzund allhie vorhanden haben Beisorge,
es werde bei etzlichen Kaiserischen gefleissigt, ob siilch Vorne-
men des Regiments in Verhinderung oder Aénderung gestellt
werden mecht.”—“ The electors, princes, and others, at this
present here assembled, have a fear that some of the imperial
court are busied in endeavours to hinder, or at least to alter,
this project of the Council of Regency.” On the 14th of May he
mentions a certain Rem, who after long imprisonment succeeded
in obtaining an imperial absolution. “ Ist vermutlich, weil das
Regiment die Sach zu sich forderet und die Sach den Hofretten
nicht gestatten wollte, hierin zu handeln, das sie die Absolution
gefiirdert, damit das Regiment auch nichts daran haben solt.”—
“ It is probable, since the Regency brought the matter within
its own jurisdiction, and did not allow the imperial councillors
to actin it at all, that the latter furthered the absolution, in order
to take it out of the hands of the Regency.” The letters are full of
similar expressions.

Crap. IT. COUNCIL OF REGENCY. 45

surprise may be conceived when a declaration
arrived from the emperor, that he had given the
safe conduct without reflection, and that it could
not be supposed that the Bishop of Wiirzburg
had violated a real imperial safe conduct. It made
no difference whether the States supported the
Regency or not. The states met in March 1522,
and both bodies jointly interceded for the Bishop
of Hildesheim, who complained of the ban which
had been pronounced against him and his friends,
without any previous summons and trial. But the
emperor would not endure any interference with
“his affairs,” and rejected the intercession with
some short unmeaning answer.

Towards the end of May the emperor quitted
the Netherlands. His presence was required in
Spain to quiet the disturbances of the Comunidades,
and his mind fully occupied with the perplexities of
the war he had begun in Italy, and with the extra-
ordinary conquests and discoveries made on a dis-
tant continent by a handful of fortunate and intelli-
gent Castilian adventurers serving under his banner.
Even the German councillors who accompanied
him could not possibly influence the details of the
administration of Germany from so distant a country
as Spain. At this time, therefore, the Council of
Regency first acquired complete independence.
The young emperor’s presence had been needed to
confer upon it the authority which his absence now
left it at liberty to exercise.

Let us first consider the temporal part of its
administration.

46 Diet OF 1522.- Boox III.

Several very important matters had come under
consideration ; above all, the executive ordinance, on
the plan proposed in the year 1512, and then so vio-
lently resisted by Maximilian, was determined upon;
namely, that the circles should elect their own cap-
tains or governors. The affairs of Turkey and Hun-
gary also urgently demanded attention. Whilst the
two principal rulers of Christendom inflamed their
natural jealousy into bitterer antipathy in the
Italian wars, the potentate of the Osman empire
led out his armies, fired by hatred of the Christians
and love'of conquest, and took possession of Bel-
grade, the ancient bulwark of Christendom which
was but feebly defended on that frontier. Germany
was not insensible to the danger: the States met
expressly on this account in the spring of 1522%,

* The summons is dated Feb. 12.: for the Sunday Oculi
(March 23. 1522), so as to allow time to arm. On March 28. a
number of the States were present, and processions and prayers
were ordered: “ Damit S. géttlich Barmherzigkeit den Zorn, ob
und wie wir den durch unsre Schuld und Missethat verschuldet
hitten, von uns wende.”—* In order that the Almighty mercy
may turn from us the wrath which we have brought upon ourselves
by our guilt and misdeeds.” The Proposition was made on the
7th of April: the emperor therein declared that he gave up the
supplies voted for his expedition to Rome to be applied to the war
against the Turks. The States determined to vote three-eighths
thereof to the war,—not, however, in men, but in money: every
thing was done in haste, as a better method of equipment was
to be arranged in a conference with the Hungarian commissioners.
The Frankfurt deputy thought that little would be effected, but
“aufs fiirderlichste wieder zum Thor hinaus.”—“ That they would
be out of the gate again as fast as possible.” The chief delay was
caused by the disputes in the sessions of the colleges. “Der Sachen

Cuar. I. COUNCIL OF REGENCY. 47

and again in the autumn; a part of the supplies
which had been granted to the emperor for his expe-
dition to Rome were, with his permission, appro-
priated to the succour of the Hungarians. Schemes
for the complete equipment of an army, to be kept
always in readiness for the same purpose, were pro-
posed and discussed. The main point, however,
on which every thing else depended, was the se-
cure establishment of the form of government itself.
Every day showed the inconveniencies of allowing
the salaries of the members of the Imperial Chamber
‘and the Regency to be dependent on the matricular
taxes, which were granted from year to year, and
were always difficult to collect ; neither would it do
to leave these salaries to be paid by the emperor, as
it was justly feared he would then raise a claim to
appoint the members himself. Many other expe-
dients were proposed, such as the application of
the annates to this purpose ; a tax upon the Jews ;
or finally, the re-imposition of the Common Penny,
in connection with a permanent war establishment.
But all were alike impracticable. For the annates, a
previous agreement with the see of Rome was
necessary, and that was not so easily made. The
towns which had obtained from earlier emperors
the right of taxing their own Jews (a right which

halber bleiben andre Handel unausgerichtet und wir verzehren
das Unsre ohne Nutzen.”—“ For the sake of these, other affairs
remained undetermined, and we eat up our substance without
profit.” The order is dated May 7. (Frank. A.) At the fol-
lowing diet, in Dec. 1522, two-fourths more of the money in-
tended for the expedition to Rome were voted for this service.

48 DIET OF 1522. - Boox III.

they had lately maintained in opposition to the
imperial fiscal) absolutely refused to surrender it.
As to a return to the Common Penny, it did not get
beyond a mere project, and was not even seriously
debated. Under these circumstances, the Council of
Regency adopted a plan which had formerly been
entertained, and which, in itself, must have been
productive of very important national consequences,
besides being connected with other views of the
administration of the empire well worthy of our
attention.

Among the charges and complaints which the
several classes of the community made against each
other in those times, one which was urged with the
greatest frequency and vehemence was directed
against the merchants.

Commerce still travelled along its accustomed
roads; the Hanse Towns still enjoyed most of their
privileges in foreign countries; peace had restored
the markets of Venice; but the splendour and im-
portance of this traffic was eclipsed by the brillant
and adventurous commerce across the seas, to
which the discovery of both the Indies had given
rise. Some of the great commercial houses of
Upper Germany placed themselves in immediate
communication with Lisbon, or shared in the West
Indian enterprises of the Spaniards. — Antwerp
owed its prosperity chiefly to being the emporium

of German maritime trade.
~ In Germany, however, no one was satisfied; the
stricter part of the community disapproved the
importation of new luxuries and wants; others

Cuar. II COUNCIL OF REGENCY, 1522. A9

complained of the quantity of money sent out of
the country, and almost all were discontented at the
high prices of the wares. During the years 1516
to 1522, especially, a general rise in prices was
observed. Cinnamon cost upwards of a gulden the
pound, sugar from twelve to twenty gulden the
cwt., and some of the East Indian spices had risen
to four times their former price.* Several causes
might conduce to this effect; such as increased
luxury and consequent demand ; the Venetian war,
which had interrupted the course of trade, and a
diminution of the value of money, arising from the
importation of precious metals from America,
which began to be felt, though far from what it

* J have extracted the following tables from a decree of the
Select Committee on Monopolies in 1523 (Frank. A.) :—
The best saffron from Catalonia,
which in 1516 cost 3 g. 6 kr., cost, in 1522, 49.15 kr.

Second rate do. 1519. 2g.2lto27kr  — 48.

Cloves 1512 19 schill. — — 2g,

Stick cinnamon 1516 lg. 18kr. — 15182 ¢. 8 ort.

Short do. 1515 3 ort. — 15191 g. 21kr,

Nutmeg TS19” 27 ker, — 1522 8g. 28 kr.

Mace 1518 lg6kn — — 4g.6kr.

Bast pepper in } 1518 18 kr. Heit age
the husk

Ginger, formerly from 21 to 24 kr. — 15161g¢g.3 kr.

Galingal — 1 g. 36 kr. — — lg. 89 ky,

eager, the net: 1516 lltol2g. — 1518 20¢,
dred weight

Sugar candy 1516 16tol7g. — 1522 20to21g¢.

Venetian almonds hi 518 8 2. an rae MOP
the cwt.

Do. raisins 1518 5 g. — —- — Q¢g.

Do. figs 1518 3 g.2sch. — — 4g. 1 ort.
VOL. II. H

%

50 PROJECT OF A SYSTEM Boox IIL.

afterwards became. At that period, however, the
cause was chiefly sought, and perhaps not without
justice, in the system of monopoly arising from the
combination of the great commercial houses ; a prac-
tice which had continued to increase, in spite of the
repeated enactments of the diets. They were al-
ready, it was alleged, possessed of such an amount
of capital and such numerous and extensive fac-
tories, that no one could possibly compete with
them. They were willing to give the King of
Portugal higher prices even than he had previously
asked, only on condition that he would demand still
higher from those who came after them. It was
calculated that every year 30,000 cwt. of pepper
and 2000 ewt. of ginger were imported into Ger-
many, and that within a few years, the first had
risen in price from 18 to 32 kreutzers per lb., and
the second from 21 kreutzers to 1 gulden, 3 kreut-
zers; this must, of course, have afforded an enor-
mous profit.
As Rome was constantly assailed for her sale of
indulgences, and the knights for their robberies, -
so the merchants and commercial towns were now
incessantly inveighed against for their extortions.
At all events, the Frankfurters attributed the
disfavour shown them for some time past in their
transactions with the Estates of the empire, al-
most exclusively to the unpopularity of monopo-
lists.

At the diet of 1522-23, the resolution was taken
to interdict all companies possessing a capital of
more than 50,000 gulden: they were to be allowed

Cuap. II. OF IMPORT DUTIES. 51

a year and a half to dissolve their partnership. It
was hoped that this would enable the smaller com-
mercial houses to enter into competition with the
great ones, and would also have the effect of pre-
venting the accumulation of money and merchan-
dise in few hands.

Overlooking the enormous advantages afforded by
foreign commerce, however carried on, the diet con-
ceived the idea of covering the general deficiencies of
the state by a tax upon trade. It was notorious that
each individual prince drew the greater part of his
revenues from the tolls, the right of levying which
had been granted to him by former emperors ; and
as it was evident that no direct tax could be col-
lected, a plan was adopted for an indirect one,
in the form of a general system of import duties to
be levied for the use of the empire.

This project is worthy of a moment’s attention ;
if carried into execution it must have produced in-
calculable results; but it is remarkable that it could
even be entertained. So early as the year 1521 it
was discussed; the Elector Joachim I. of Bran-
denburg adopted it with great eagerness and con-
tinually recommended it.

In the spring of 1522 the States were really
resolved to accede to it, principally because it did
not appear burdensome to the common people;
but in order to make sure of carrying it into effect,
they determined to ask the previous consent of the
emperor, before taking any further step.

This consent having been received from Spain,

E2

52 PROJECT OF A SYSTEM Boox II.

accompanied, however, with the condition that the
further provisions should be again submitted to_
him for approbation, a commission was appointed at
the diet of 1522-23, by the general vote of the
States, to work out the plan in detail.”

The commission went on the principle of leay-
ing all the necessaries of life duty-free. Under
this head were classed corn, wine, beer, cattle for
draught and slaughter, and leather. All other
articles were to pay both an import and export
duty, not to be regulated either by weight or by
a tariff, which would have occasioned a great deal
of troublesome investigation, but by the price at
which the article was bought, to be stated by the
purchaser ; upon this, the duty was to be four per
cent.

The whole extent of the Roman empire inha-
bited by the German race was to be surrounded by
a line of custom-houses, which was to begin at
Nikolsburg in Moravia, and thence pass towards
Hungary through Vienna and Griitz to Villach or
Tarvis; thence to extend along the Alps towards
Venice and Milan. Custom-house stations were to
be erected in Trent, Brunegg, Insbruck, and Feld-
kirchen. The frontier of Switzerland, which re-
fused to submit to the imposition of the duty, was
to be guarded by custom-houses; the line was then
to cross the Rhine and run through Strasburg,

* “ Ordnung ains gemainen Reichs Zolls in Ratschlag verfast.”
— Fr. Ar. vol. xxxviii. “ Ordinance for customs’ duties for
the whole empire,” — a document which I intend to give in the
Appendix.

Cup. IL. OF IMPORT DUTIES. 53

Metz, Luxemburg, and Treves, to Aix-la-chapelle ;
which would bring it near the coast and within the
region of maritime commerce. The Netherlands
were without hesitation considered as part of the
empire; Utrecht and Dordrecht, as well as Cologne
and Wesel, were proposed as custom-house stations
for inland trade; Antwerp, Bruges and Bergen-
op-zoom, for maritime trade, especially that with
England and Portugal. The line was thence to
follow the coast northward and eastward. To-
wards Denmark, which according to public law
was still regarded as a permanent confederate of
the empire, the Hanse towns, from Hamburg to
Danzig inclusive, were to be the custom-house
ports; towards Poland, Kénigsberg in the New-
mark and Frankfurt on the Oder, besides a few
other towns in Silesia and Lusatia.

Much was still left undetermined in this pro-
ject; for instance, it was immediately proposed
that the frontiers should be surveyed, in order
to ascertain whether better places could not be
found for the prevention of smuggling, than those
already named: it was still a matter of doubt
whether Bohemia could be included, and neither
Prussia nor Livonia had yet been taken into con-
sideration; but all these were mere details which
could easily be determined when the project was car-
ried into execution ;—the main point was seriously
resolyed upon.

As might have been expected, the whole com-
mercial body thought it would be injured by this
measure, which it attributed merely to the hostility

E 3

54 COUNCIL OF REGENCY, 1522. Boox III.

generally shown towards itself, and accordingly
raised numerous objections to it, more or less well
founded. An attempt was made to answer all
these objections at length. The example of neigh-
bouring kingdoms was cited, where much heavier
restrictions existed, and where, nevertheless, trade
was most flourishing. It was argued that the
duty by no means fell on the merchant, but on the
consumer; and that it would be a prodigious
advantage to commerce if, by means of this tax,
the disturbances in the empire could be put down,
and general security restored.

At all events, it cannot be denied that this
project might have been the means of producing
the most important results for the future fate
of Germany. The establishment of accurately
defined and well guarded frontiers, the entire
circumference of which were closely bound to a
common active centre, would in itself have been a
great advantage; this alone would have at once
awakened a universal feeling of the unity of the
empire. Besides the whole administration would
have assumed a different character. The most im-
portant national institution, the Council of Regency,
the formation of which had eost so much labour,
would by this means have acquired a natural and
firm basis, and sufficient power for the maintenance
of order. As yet there was no peace throughout
the country; all the roads were unsafe; it was”
impossible to reckon on the execution of any
sentence or decree. But had this ordinance been
vigorously carried into effect, the Regency would

Cuar. II. COUNCIL OF REGENCY, 1522. 55

have had the means of paying the governors and
councillors in the circles, so often discussed, and
of maintaining a certain number of troops under
their own orders and those of the subordinate
authorities.

In the spring of 1523 it seemed as if this point
would certainly be achieved: the plan was again
sent for final confirmation to the emperor, who was
already bound by his former consent.

It is evident that the Council of Regency enter-
tained the project of constituting itself a powerful
central government, and, in conjunction with the
States, resorted: to every possible expedient to
accomplish this end, in spite of all opposition.

*Hence the question, what course this rising
power would take with respect to the religious
movement, acquired additional importance.

At the beginning of the year 1522 the feelings
of the Council of Regency were much opposed to
the innovation. Duke George of Saxony was pre-
sent, in whom a natural attachment to traditional
opinions*, the various old quarrels with his cousins
of the Ernestine line, and a personal dislike to the
bold and reckless monk, combined to raise a violent

* Duke George said to our informant Planitz: “ Wenn S.F.
Gn. nicht mit der Tatt und Gewalt dazu thit, wiird S. Gn. Land
schyr gar ketzerisch: wollten alle die behemische Weis an sich
nemen, und sub utraque communiciren: er gedicht es aber mit
Gewalt zu weren.”—“ Tf his princely grace did not interfere
with might and deed, his grace’s subjects would soon become
sheer heretics, for they all wanted to follow the Bohemian
fashion, and 1o communicate sub utraque ; but that he intended
to prevent it by force.” — Letter of the 2d Jan. 1522.

gn 4

56 COUNCIL OF REGENCY, 1522. — Boox IIL,

and active hostility to the new doctrines. The distur-
bances in Wittenberg happened opportunely to give
more weight to his accusations; and he actually
obtained an edict in which the Regency exhorted
the neighbouring bishoprics of Naumburg, Meissen,
and Merseburg not to allow the innovations to be
forced upon them, but to maintain the customary
rites and practices of the church.*

But in the course of the next three months, when
news arrived that the disturbances had ceased, the
feelings of the Council of Regency underwent a
total change. One subject of discussion, of course,
was Luther’s return to Wittenberg, by which he
had openly bidden defiance to the imperial ban,
and Duke George even proposed an appeal to the
immediate intervention of the emperor ; this, how-
ever, merely wounded the self-love of the Council
of Regency. John of Planitz, the envoy of Elector
Frederic, would not hear his master blamed for
permitting Luther to remain in Wittenberg; nor
would he allow it to be said that the monk’s
doctrine was heresy. “The receiving the sacra-
ment in both kinds, the marriage of a few priests, and

* Resolution und Decisum, &e., 20th Jan. 1522. Walch xv.
2616. The Appendix No. 10. is remarkable: “ Bis so lang
durch Versehung der gemeinen Reichsstiinde, christliche Ver-
sammlung oder Concilia solcher Sachen halben, eine bediichtliche
wohlerwogene gegriindete gewisse Erkliirung — vorgenommen
werde.” — “ Until such time as, by the care of the general Estates
of the empire, a christian assembly, or council for such matters,
shall have made a prudent, deliberate, well grounded, and
certain declaration of faith.” From this passage we may perceive
the existence of another tendency, although as yet vague.

Cuar. IL. COUNCIL OF REGENCY, 1522. eae

the desertion of the convent by a few monks, could
not, he said, be called heresies; these acts were
merely opposed to regulations established not long
since by popes and councils, and which would per-
haps be eventually abolished. If, on the other hand,
Luther were banished, imitators of him would arise,
but animated with a different spirit; who, instead
of preaching only against the dogmas of the church,
might declaim against Christianity and God him-
self; and not only a rebellion, but complete unbelief
might be the result.” This envoy was a man of
talent, equally resolute and dexterous: he was
strongly in favour of Luther, less indeed from
religious belief, although in the main their opinions
were the same, than from the conviction that
Luther’s cause was equally the cause of his prince,
of the Council of Regency, and of the empire.

In the summer of 1522 it was the turn of the
Elector Frederic to attend the Council of Regency
in person. He was one of the few who remained
of the old school of princes, to whom that body
owed its establishment, and he had lately taken
the most active part in the firm settlement of its
constitution. He had already been frequently con-
sulted concerning questions of form. His calm
judgment, his well-known experience, and the uni-
versal respect paid to his acknowledged integrity
and talents for business, invested him with singular
authority.* He might indeed at this time be said to

* The Elector of Treves hearing that Frederic was ill, sent
him word through his minister, “ E. Ch. Gn. solten vest halten,
nicht krank werden noch abgehen, denn man hett im Reich E.

58 COUNCIL OF REGENCY, 1522. Boox III.

govern the empire, in as far as it could be governed
at all.

Under these circumstances, it is evident that
Luther, who enjoyed so fully the favour of this
prince, had nothing to fear from the Council of Re-
gency. Duke George continued to attack him before
that assembly: he repeatedly complained of the
monk’s violence, and of the abuse which he poured
forth against the princes of the empire, the emperor
and the pope. Never perhaps was a more evasive
answer given than that which he received from the
Council of Regency, to one of these accusations.
‘“We perceive,” they write on the 16th of August,
“that your grace feels displeasure at insults to the
pope’s holiness and the emperor’s majesty, and we
thereupon make known to your grace, that we
would not patiently endure insult or injury to the
emperor’s majesty, wherever we should see or hear
of it.”* No wonder that, when the duke after-
wards complained of this answer to the lieutenant
of the empire, Count Palatine F rederic, he replied

Ch. Gn. nye als wol bedurft als itzund, nachdem E. Ch. Gn.
wusste, wye es allenthalben im Reiche stiinde.”—“ Your Elec-
toral Grace must stand firm, and not fall sick nor die, for
your Electoral Grace was never so greatly needed by the em-
pire as now, for your Electoral Grace knows how matters
stand in the empire.”— Planitz, 1st Nov. 1521.

* Instruction to the Regency at Niirnberg. Answer to the
same ; letter from Duke George, dated the Tuesday after the
Nativity of the Virgin (9th Sept.), and from Otto Pack to the
duke, the Monday before the XImille Virginum (20th Oct.).—
Dresden Archives.

Crap. II. DIET OF 1522-293, 59

that at that time there was nothing to be done in
matters of this kind.

An independent party favourable to Luther was
now forming in the Council of Regency. It was, it
is true, subject to fluctuations from the entrance of
new members every quarter of a year; but from the
permanent operation of principles once imbibed, it
always regained the upper hand, and, in fact, con-
stituted a majority. Here was, indeed, a wonderful
change in the aspect of affairs!_In 1521 the
emperor published sentence of ban against Luther,
and in 1522-23, the body which represented the
imperial power, took him, though still under ban,
under its protection, and even approximated to
his opinions. That body was, of course, not affected
by the political combinations which had influenced
the emperor.

The bias it had received was all the more im-
portant, since the States had assembled during the
last months of the one year and the first of the
ensuing; and at the instigation of the new pope,
Adrian VI., were to come to a decision concerning
the Lutheran affairs.

Adrian VI. was undoubtedly an extremely well-
intentioned man. He had formerly been professor
at Louvain, and had even then zealously reproved
the arrogance of the priesthood, and the waste and
misapplication of church property.* He subse-

* Extracts from his “Commentary in Quartum Senten- »
tiarum,” in the letter of Joh. Lanoy to Henr. Barillon;
Burman’s Vita Adriani, p. 360,

60 Hie Ori j222232— Boox III.

quently became tutor to Charles V., and took
part in the administration of the affairs of Spain,
where he imbibed a thorough disgust of the
worldly tendencies of the papacy. He was there-
fore strongly disposed to attempt some reform.
He declared that he had only bent his neck under
the yoke of the papal dignity, in order to restore the
defiled bride of Christ to her original purity. At
the same time he was a decided opponent of Luther,
and belonged to those ‘ Magistri nostri’ of Louvain,
who had so long waged war against the innovating
literature and theology ; he had expressed unquali-
fied approbation of the opinions professed by that
university. The orthodox dominican tendency,
which, as early as 1520, had once more formed a
close alliance with the court of Rome, had now
obtained a temporary sovereignty in his person.

In conformity with these sentiments were the
instructions which Adrian gave to his nuncio
Chieregati, whom he sent to the German diet. He
looked upon the spread of Lutheran doctrines as a
punishment for the sins of the prelates. ‘We are
aware,” said he, “ that, some years ago, many abo-
minations took place in this chair: every thing
was turned to evil, and the corruption spread from
the head to the members, from the pope to the pre-
lates.” Whilst he now declared himself willing to
reform the existing abuses, he at the same time ex-
horted the States of Germany to offer a determined
resistance to the diffusion of Luther's opinions*;

* “Expergiscantur, excitentur — et ad executionem sententix
apostolice: ac imperialis edicti praefati omnino procedant. Detur

Cuap. IL. DIET OF 1522-23. 61

and brought forward eight arguments in favour of
that course, which he thought of irresistible cogency.

An answer to these propositions of the pope had
now to be given, and a resolution to be formed
- upon them. This duty devolved on the Council of
Regency.

At the first appearance of the nuncio, a trial of
strength ensued between the two parties in that
body. The orthodox minority brought forward
a complaint from the nuncio, concerning two or
three preachers who proclaimed the Lutheran
tenets under the very eyes of the Regency, to their
and his serious offence. Archduke Ferdinand, who
then filled the office of lieutenant of the empire,
and the Elector of Brandenburg, who was the next
in succession for the ensuing quarter, declared
themselves in favour of the nuncio. The majority
however, led by Planitz, resolutely opposed. them.
This gave rise to several violent discussions. Fer-
dinand exclaimed, “I am here jn the place of the
emperor.”—“ Yes, certainly,” rejoined Planitz, “but
in conjunction with the Council of Regency, and .
subject to the laws of the empire;”—and, in ac-
cordance with his suggestion, the affair was referred
to the States*; i.e. indefinitely adjourned. It is easy
to imagine that this increased the boldness and
vehemence of the Lutheran preachers. ‘“ Even if

venia iis qui errores suos abjurare voluerint.”— Instructio pro
_Cheregato.

* Planitz relates this himself, on the 4th Jan. 1523, The
States answered, that it was a grave matter which required much
consideration: they asked for copies of the brief and of the
instruction, and wished “ etzliche dariiber verordnen, die die

62 DIET OF 1522-23. Boox III.

the pope,” exclaimed one of them in the church of
St. Lawrence, “ had a fourth crown added to the
three he already wears, he should not make me for-
sake the word of God.” Thus was defiance hurled
from the pulpit against the pope, before the very
eyes of his nuncio.

Under these circumstances the Council of Regency
appointed a committee to draw up the answer
which the States should give to the nuncio. This
committee, like the Regency itself, contained repre-
sentatives of both parties; some of its members be-
longing to the clergy, and others to the laity, and
for a time it was doubtful which side had the ma-
jority. This was however very soon decided.

The most influential member was undoubtedly
Johann von Schwarzenberg, the Hofmeister of
Bamberg, who was now advanced in life. In his
early youth he had quitted the dissipation of a
court which had threatened to hurry him along in
its vortex, and, in consequence of his father’s ad-
monition, had formed earnest and effectual resolu-
tions of a virtuous life; from that time he had
devoted himself with untiring perseverance to
study and to the service of the state. We have
translations of some of Cicero’s works, bearing his
name, in which he has carefully adopted the purest
and most intelligible forms of the language of

Sach mit Fleiss bewegen.” “In der Stadt ist gross Murmeln,
will nicht rathen, das man einen gefangen annehme”—“ To ap-
point certain people who should manage the matter with dili-
gence.” “Tn the town is much murmuring. I cannot advise
that any person should be imprisoned.”

Cuap. IT. SCHWARZENBERG. 63

his age.* The first criminal code for Bamberg,
if not entirely his work, was at least in great
measure constructed by him. In this he evinces
as much capacity for appreciating the value of
traditional and local usages, (for he adheres in
the main to the old customary law of the city of
Bamberg,) as the scientific merits of the Roman
law. Wherever he applies the principles of the
latter to supply some deficiency, he does it in a
manner corresponding with existing maxims.
He was, as we see, a man of original and produc-
tive talent, both in literature and in politics: he
expressed his wonder how any one could find the
time too long. He eagerly embraced the Lutheran
cause at its very first appearance, finding in it
the scientific and practical tendencies of his own
mind exalted by an alliance with religious senti-
mentsand aims. He accordingly exchanged several
very serious letters on the subject with one of his
sons, and removed one of his daughters from her

* e.g. De Senectute. Neuber’s was revised and collated with
the text by Hutten, and put into Hoffrinkisch Deutsch by
Schwarzenberg. Neuber’s translation of the De Officiis was put
into “zierlicher Hochteutsch,”—“ elegant High German,”—by
Schwarzenberg, and then revised by a third person to see “ obs
dem Lateyn gemess sey,” — “whether it were according to
the Latin.” Christ praises it for the “emergens e stilo nativa
et vere Germanica simplicitas.” De Amicitia was translated
“yon Synnen zu Synnen, nicht von Worten zu Worten,” —
“ from sense to sense, not from words to words.” — See Degen,
Literatur der Ubersetzungen, i. 55.

+ Zopfl das alte Bamberger Recht als Quelle der Carolina,
pp. 166. 170.

64 REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE. Boox III.

convent ; indeed his mind was entirely engrossed
by the new opinions.* With all the force of a full
and well-grounded conviction, armed against every
objection, he adopted them, and, partly perhaps
owing to the high and important station he filled, he
carried with him the minds of his colleagues ; some
because they already inclined to those opinions — like
Sebastian von Rotenhan and Dr. Zoch, and others,
like the Bishop of Augsburg, because they knew not,
just then at least, what resistance to offer. Those
who did not share these opinions, such as Dr. v. Wer-
thern, the envoy from Duke George, and the Arch-
bishop of Salzburg, found it better to stay away
from the assembly. Thus, with very slight opposi-
tion, this committee, which now represented the cen-
tral government of the empire, agreed upon a re-
port in a spirit of decided opposition to the papacy,
and of the greatest importance to the whole future
progress of the new doctrines.

This report was based on the admissions and
promises of reform made by the pope, which the
committee accepted, but without giving in return the
promise which the pope demanded, —to unite with
him in the endeavour to crush the Lutheran doc-
trines. On the contrary, it declared that these
admitted abuses rendered it impossible to carry
into execution the bull of Leo X. and the edict of
Worms, for that Luther had been the first to
expose these abuses, and any display of rigour

* There is a notice of him in Strobel Vermischte Beitrige,
1775, No. 1. Heller, Reformationsgeschichte yon Bamberg,
p. 45.

Cuar. II. REPORT OF THE COMMITTER. 65

towards him would make every one believe that it
was the object of the government “to suppress the
truth of the Gospel by tyranny, and to maintain
unchristian abuses, wherefrom nothing could arise
but resistance to authority, sedition and heresy.”
The pope was exhorted to adhere to the concordats,
to redress the grievances of the German nation,
and above all, to abolish annates: it was not
indeed pretended that these reforms would now
suffice to put an end to the schism; that, it was
said, could only be effected by a council. The
convocation of a council, which would occupy men’s
minds for half a century, had already been the
subject of a serious conversation between the
nuncio and Planitz, and was now officially agitated
by the committee of the Council of Regency.
Some of the conditions were at once stated by it:
they were as follows: — The council to be con-
voked by the pope’s holiness, with the assent of
the emperor’s majesty, as befitted the respective
privileges of the two sovereigns; to be held at a
convenient neutral town without delay ; to begin
within a year, and under a form materially dif-
fering from any previous council. One important
innovation was, that the laity were to be allowed
a seat and a voice in it, and all present were to be
absolved from every obligation which might re-
strain them from bringing forward whatever might
be of service in “ godly, evangelical, and other
generally profitable affairs.” An assembly thus
constituted would have answered to the Lutheran
ideas respecting the Church, and would have been
VOL. II. F

66 DIET OF 1522-23. Boox IIL.

totally different from what the Council of Trent
afterwards was. In answer to the inquiry, what
course would be pursued till the council had given
its decision, the committee answered, that they
should hope, in case the pope agreed to their
proposals, to prevail on the Elector Frederick and
on Luther, that neither the latter nor his followers
should write or preach any thing which might
oceasion irritation and disorder; they should only
teach the Holy Gospel and the authentic Scriptures
according to the true Christian sense. These last
conditions were of course the most important; all
the rest was vague and remote, but these would
serve as a rule of conduct for the present moment.
They were, as may be easily perceived, entirely in
accordance with the opinions which prevailed at Wit- _
tenberg and at the court of Saxony, and were evi-
dently proposed with the intention of promoting the
free development of the doctrine embraced there.
The 13th January, 1523, was the day on which
this ever-memorable decision of the States was an-
nounced for further discussion. Hans von Planitz —
joyfully sent it to his master on the very same day.*

A great fermentation, and sharp collisions between
the clerical and lay members began moreover to
be observable in the States. It had indeed at first
appeared as if both intended to make common cause

* « Wess der Ausschuss zu pepstlicher Heiligkeit Antwurdt
den lutherischen Handell betreffen verordnet derhalb gerath-
schlagt hat.”—“ What the committee argued and decided with
respect to his papal holiness’s answer concerning the Lutheran
affairs."—Frankf. R. A. A., tom. xxxviii. f. 99.

Cuap. II. DEBATES. 67

against Rome, and at Worms the bishops had stated
their own peculiar grievances in addition to those
of the German nation; yet it was there that the
division began; the clergy found that their inte-
rests were touched by the complaints of the laity,
and resolved to defend their prescriptive rights.
Several outbreaks of this animosity had already
taken place in that assembly. A memorial from the
cities, full of the most violent invective, was read,
and the head of the German clergy, the Elector
of Mainz, warmly expressed his displeasure at it.
Tt appeared, he said, as if the clergy were to be
treated like criminals, and not to be secure from
personal violence. But even the most zealously
catholic lay princes demanded reforms; and if a
prince had given no instructions on the subject
himself, his councillors of their own accord inclined
to that side. The grievances of the nation were
again recapitulated ;—this time indeed without the
participation of the clergy, but with much more ve-
hemence, and with many additions, chiefly directed
against the clergy themselves; for the thousand-
fold abuses enumerated, no reform was more strongly
urged than the separation of the spiritual from the
temporal jurisdiction.

Nothing could be more calculated to drive these
two hostile parties into open warfare than the
report which the committee of the Council of Re-
gency had sent in to the States.

The clergy did, however, succeed in introducing
some modifications into it.

First of all, the admissions quoted from the

¥ 2

68 DIET oF 1522-23. Boox III.

papal brief were only allowed to stand as far as
they regarded the pope himself: the words re-
lating to priests and prelates were struck out.*
Then no mention was made of the claims of the
laity to a seat and voice in the council. A single
phrase was frequently the cause of violent disputes ;
for instance, the clergy would not admit the word
‘ evangelical” into the article concerning obliga-
tions; whereupon such offensive expressions were
used by the lay party, that the Elector of Mainz
left the assembly and rode home to his lodging. In
the end however the majority decided in his favour,
and the word was omitted.

Whatever were the changes made in particular
expressions, the main point was left unaltered ; the
States declined to carry into execution the edict of
Worms; a council was demanded, which was to

* In the rough draft it is stated: “Ist von Ppl. Heilig-
keit.. . woll angezeigt dass solches von wegen der Sund beschee
und dass die Sund des Volks von den Sunden der Priester und
Pralaten herfliessen, und dass darum dieselben zufoérderst und
am ersten als die endlich Ursach solcher Krankheit von der
Wurzel geheilt gestraft und abgewendet werden soll.” — “ It is
well shown by his holiness the pope that such things happen on
account of sin, and that the sinfulness of the people flows from the
sins of the priests and prelates ; that these therefore should,
first and foremost, as the ultimate cause of such evil, be cured
from the root upwards, and should be cured, punished and turned
from their evil ways.” This passage is wanting in the answer
which was really sent to the papal nuncio.— See the reprint in
Walch, xv. p. 2551. No. 8.

+ This was expressed in the following manner in the answer
given to the nuncio: “ Majori namque populi parti jam pridem
persuasum est ... nationi Germanice a curia Romana per

Cael DEBATES. 69

begin, if possible, within a year, in a German town,
and with the co-operation of the emperor: a sug-
gestion was even made to alter the form of such
an assembly, and the participation of the temporal
states in it was tacitly assumed; both clergy
and laity were to be relieved from all obligations
restrictive of the free utterance of opinion. In
short, the party which strove to alter the entire
constitution of the Church had now decidedly the
upper hand in both estates of the empire. The
clergy were aware of the necessity of a change, and
the laity eagerly pressed for it; — it is said that even
Duke Louis of Bavaria insisted upon it, in spite of
the opposition of the adherents of Rome.*

The only points that now remained to be dis-
cussed—and for the present the most important
—were, the conduct of affairs in the interval be-
fore the convocation of the council, and the degree
of liberty of speech and action which was to be
allowed to writers and preachers.

On this question the clergy succeeded in intro-
ducing still further restrictions. They insisted

certos abusus multa et magna gravamina et incommoda illata
esse : ob id, si pro executione apostolice sedis sententiz vel im-
peratorie majestatis edicti quippiam acerbius attemptatum esset,
mox popularis multitudo sibi hanc opinionem animo concepisset
ac si talia facerent pro evertenda evangelica veritate et sustinen-
dis manutenendisque malis abusibus, unde nihil aliud quam gra-
vissimi tumultus populares intestinaque bella speranda essent.”
—Fr. A.

* Planitz names him as early as on the 18th Jan. with
Schwarzenberg and. Feilitzsch.

F3

70 DIET OF 1522-23. Boox II.

that the elector should be requested not alone to
prohibit whatever might lead to disorder, but to
allow nothing whatever to be written, printed or
done by Luther or his followers; and also that the
request should be made immediately without wait-
ing for the pope’s consent to the council. The
Saxon envoy to the diet, Philip von Feilitzsch,
endeavoured to maintain the terms proposed by
the Council of Regency, and failing in this, pro-
tested that “ his prince could not consider himself
bound by this resolution, and would always know
how to act in a christian, praiseworthy and irre-
proachable manner.”

Thus we see that in this contest the victory
inclined first to.one side and then to the other.
The two parties collected all their forces for the last
point at issue, which was, perhaps, still more im-
portant than the preceding one, as it was to decide
the latitude to be allowed to preaching ; a matter
which immediately concerned the mass of the
people. The clergy were not satisfied with merely
directing the preachers to confine themselves to
the Gospel and to writers approved by the Church,
-but required a more accurate specification of what
was meant by the latter, and wished to include
the four great Latin fathers, Jerome, Augustin,
Ambrose and Gregory, to whom they ascribed
canonical authority. This is the more remarkable,
since a century earlier the more explicit of the
Hussite doctrines had been regarded mainly as a
departure from these four founders of the Latin
church. But the nation was now so deeply im-

Cuap. II. DEBATES. et

bued with the spirit of Luther’s teaching, that it
would no longer be bound by the particular form
and character assumed by the Latin church; the
common sense of the people revolted against the
imputing to St. Paul less authority thanto Ambrose.
The time was past in which the clergy could
carry their point. After a great deal of debating
a resolution was passed, which was in reality only
a more complete expression of the meaning of the
original proposition. It was decreed, that nothing
should be taught but the pure, true and holy Gos-
pel; mildly, piously and in a Christian spirit, accord-
ing to the doctrine and interpretation of writings
approved and accepted by the Christian church.*
Perhaps the adherents of the established faith were
satisfied by the decision, because it recognised the
authority of the expositions of the Latin fathers;
but this recommendation was couched in vague, ge-
neral and uncertain language; whereas that of the
evangelical doctrine was precise, decided and em-
phatic, and therefore was alone likely to make an
impression. |
Thus, after all, the answer went back to the
Council of Regency, having undergone a few
partial changes, but agreeing in the main with the
spirit of the original plan. Contrary to all ex-
pectation, it caused another very stormy debate

* « Quod nihil preter verum purum sincerum et sanctum
evangelium et approbatam scripturam pie mansuete christiane
juxta doctrinam et expositionem approbatz et ab ecclesia chris-
tiana recepte scripture doceant.” This is the passage in the
answer given to the papal nuncio.

FA

4 DIET OF 1522-23. Boox III.

in that assembly. Some of the members (among
whom was the Bishop of Augsburg) who had
repented of the part they had taken in the original
scheme, made another attempt to retain the express
mention of the four fathers of the Church. Planitz
reports that he had to endure many proud and
wicked words, and to resist a violent storm on this
question. He expresses the greatest indignation at
the apostasy of the bishop, whom, he says, God had
raised out of the dust and made a ruler over his
people, and who in return persecuted the Gospel.*
However, with resolution and patience, and the
assistance of Schwarzenberg, he succeeded in main-
taining the form which had at last been decided
upon, and the answer was delivered to the nuncio
as it had been returned from the assembly of the
States. f

* Planitz, 4th Feb.: “Ich will aber Patienz und Geduld tragen.
Es haben die Stande obangezeigte Wort (he has inserted them in
his letter) haben wollen und nit die vier Doctores zu benennen
und sulchs dem Regiment anzeigen lassen, dabei es blieben.” —
“ T will, however, have patience and temper. The States would
have the words I have before mentioned, and would not allow
the four doctors to be named or specified to the Council of Re-
gency, so it remained as it was.”

t Planitz, 9th Feb.: “ Die Schrift ist dem piipstl. Nuntius auf
die Mass iibergeben wie ich E. Chf. G. zugeschickt. Der ist der
nicht zu frieden und hat darauf replicirt. . . . Er will den Kayser
dabei nit haben, so gefillt ihm auch nit dass es so gar frei seyn
soll wie begehrt.”— “ The paper is handed over to the papal
nuncio, on the whole much as I have sent it to your electoral
grace. ‘The nuncio is not satisfied with it, and has replied, he
will not allow the emperor to be mentioned in it, nor does he
like that there should be so much freedom as is demanded.”

Crap. IL. DEBATES. 73

The nuncio did not attempt to conceal his as-
tonishment and vexation. Neither the pope nor
the emperor, nor any other sovereign, he said, had
expected such a decision from them. He renewed
his request for the execution of the edict of Worms
and the establishment of an episcopal censorship ;
but it was impossible to persuade a body which
moved so slowly and with so much difficulty, to
think of retracting a resolution once formed, and
all his endeavours were fruitless.

The substance of the answer was published in
an imperial edict. The Elector of Saxony and
Luther himself were highly pleased with it ; Luther,
indeed, thought that the ban and excommunication
which had been proclaimed against him were vir-
tually revoked. by it.

It is indisputably true that these decisions of the
diet of Niirnberg were exactly the contrary of those
passed at Worms. The important step which had
been expected of Charles V., namely, that he would
place himself at the head of the national movement,
was now actually taken by the Council of Regency.
The political opposition which had so long been
gathering its forces, offered a more vigorous re-
sistance than ever to the pope: allied with it, and
protected by the representatives of the imperial
power, religious discussion was now left to its free
and unfettered course.

74 DIFFUSION OF . Boox I.

CHAPTER III.
DIFFUSION OF THE NEW DOCTRINES.
1522—1524.

No new arrangement needed to be made, no plan
to be concerted, no mission to be sent: like the
seed which shoots up on the ploughed field at the
first genial rays of the sun in spring, the new
opinions, the way for which had been prepared by
all the events and discussions we have endeavoured
to trace, now spread abroad through the whole land
where the German language was spoken.

A religious order was destined to afford the first
common centre to the various elements of opposition.

The Augustines of Meissen, and of Thuringia
generally, had made the first step towards emanci-
pation, by a formal resolution. Among them were
old friends of Luther’s, who had followed the same
career of studies and of opinions as he had: even
among the more distant Augustine convents, there
were few in which similar questions had not been
agitated, and similar changes of opinion mani-
fested ; indeed, a list is still extant, of those who
took part in the movement at Magdeburg, Osna-
briick, Lippe, Antwerp, Regensburg, Dillingen,
Niirnberg and Strasburg *, and in the territories of

* According to Eberlin’s, “ Syben frumme aber trostlose
Pfaffen,” “ Seven devout but comfortless Priests,” Dr. Caspar
Amon, “ ain erwirdig Man,” “a reverend man,” taught at Dil-
lingen. This is doubtless the same person who in 1523 published

Cuap. III. THE NEW DOCTRINES. 75

Hessen and Wiirtemberg. Many of these reformers
were men advanced in life, who had held these
doctrines ever since the time of Johann Proles, and
who now exulted to see them attain a fuller deve-
lopment and greater power: others again, were
youthful and fiery spirits, inspired with admiration
for their victorious brother of Wittenberg. Jo-
hann Stiefel of Esslingen beheld in him the angel
of the Apocalypse flying through the heavens, and
holding in his hand the everlasting Gospel; he
composed a mystical and heroic poem in his praise.*
This body, moreover, had the glory of being the
first to draw down persecution on itself. Two or
three Augustine friars at Antwerp were the first
martyrs of the new faith. Jean Chatelain of Metz
was soon afterwards condemned to the flames for

a Psalter done into German from the genuine text in the Hebrew
tongue, —“ geteutscht nach warhaftigem text der hebreischen
zungen.” The dedication of this book is dated Lauingen. Pan-
zer, li. p. 1381.
_ * Von der christférmigen rechtgegriindeten Lehre Doctoris
Martini Luthers :
“ Er thut sich worlich fyegen zu Got in rechten mut,
Gwalt mag ihn auch nit biegen: er geb er drum sein blut.
Zu Worms er sich erzeyget: er trat keck auf den plan.
Sein feynd hat er geschweyget : keiner dorft ihn wenden an.”
“ Concerning the Christian-like well-grounded doctrine of
Doctor Martin Luther :
“ He trusted truly in God with a good courage,
Force could not bend him: for it (the cause) he would have
spilled his blood.
He proved himself at Worms ; stepping boldly into the field.
He silenced his enemies : none could answer him.”

See Strobel’s Neue Beitrige, i. p. 10.

76 DIFFUSION OF Boox. IIL.

the attacks he had made on the prerogatives of the
clergy in the Advent of 1528, and the Lent of 1524.

A number of Franciscans, not, like the Augus-
tines *, supported by their order, but separating
themselves entirely from it, and, as we may infer
from that act, men of more energetic temper, were
the next to join the new sect. Some of these were
learned men, like Johann Brismann of Cottbus, who
had been for many years devoted to the study of
the schoolmen and had become doctor of theology,
but who now, like Luther, drew from their works
entirely opposite opinions.t Others were spirits
full of deep religious yearnings, which the conven-
tual rule and discipline failed to satisfy ; such was
Friedrich Myconius. Itis related that on the night
following his investiture, he dreamed that whilst
wandering in steep and tortuous paths, he was
met by a holy man, baldheaded, and clothed in
an antique dress, as St. Paul is painted, who led

* The Reimchronik of Metz speaks very favourably of this
Augustine monk.
“ A Metz prescha ung caresme,
devant grand peuple homme et femme,
qui en sa predication
avoient grande devotion.”
His persecutor says to him, —
“Tu as presché de nostre estat,
je te hai plus qu’un apostat :
as tousché sur le gens d’eglise :
maintenant te tiens a ma guise.”
Calmet, Histoire de, Lorraine, ii., Preuves cxix.
{ Extract from his sermons in Seckendorf, Historia Luther-
anismi, i. p. 272.

Cuap. III. THE NEW DOCTRINES. (7

him first to a fountain whose waters flowed from
a crucified body, whereat he slaked his thirst,
and then through endless fields of thick standing
corn, in which the reapers were making ready
for the harvest.* This vision is sufficient to
show the turn of his mind; and we may easily
infer from it the impression which must have
been produced on him by the revival of the apos-
tolical doctrine, and the prospect of an active
co-operation in its diffusion. Others again were
men who in the various intercourse with the lower
classes, to which the duties of a Franciscan con-
vent leads, had perceived the pernicious effects of
the doctrine of justification by works, and now at-
tacked it with all their might: among these were
Eberlin of Giinzburg, and Heinrich of Kettenbach,
who came out of the same convent at Ulm, and who
both possessed in an extraordinary degree, the gift
of popular oratory. Eberlin’s opponents said of him,
that he alone had power to mislead a whole pro-
vince; so great was the effect of his eloquence on
the common people. Among them were found the
most steadfast champions, like Stephen Kempen,
whose brave and warlike bearing was worthy of his
name. The Franciscans were almost every where
among the first reformers: Kempen was the founder
of the new doctrines in Hamburg, where he de-
fended them nearly single handed for three years
against all opponents.

But there was not, perhaps, a single religious order

* Adami Vite Theologorum, edition of 1705, p. 83.

78 DIFFUSION OF Boox III.

which did not furnish partisans to the new opinions,
many of whom were among its most celebrated
champions. Martin Butzer had been appointed pro-
fessor of the Thomist doctrines by the Dominicans ;
but he dissolved his connexion with that order by
a kind of lawsuit, and from that time forward took
a most active aa successful part in the establish-
ment of the new system of faith. Otto Brunnfels
came out of the Carthusian convent at Mainz and
became the follower of Hutten, whose labours he
shared with rival ardour. The young reading-
master of the Benedictine abbey of Alperspach,
P. Ambrosius Blaurer, was incited by the general
ferment to the study of the sacred writings, and
formed opinions which soon rendered a longer
residence in the convent impossible to him. (&co-
lampadius, who had but lately taken the vows in
the convent of St. Bridget at Altomiinster, raised
his voice in favour of the new views: he had hoped
to find in the convent undisturbed leisure for the
learned works he purposed to write ; but the con-
viction which soon forced itself on his mind hurried
him into an eager participation in all the mental
conflicts of the times. The brothers of Our Lady
of Mount Carmel at Augsburg declared themselves
for Luther from the very first, with the prior at
their head; and to them belanpeels for a time at
least, Urban Regius*, one of the most devoted and
favourite disciples of Johann Eck, whom he now,

* Braun, Geschichte der Bischéfe von Augsburg, iii. 239.
He is also called a Carmelite in Welser’s Augsburger Chronik.

Crap. IIT. THE NEW DOCTRINES. 79

however, deserted for the new cause*: he supported
it with great effect, first in Upper, and afterwards
still more successfully in Lower, Germany. Here
he was, after a while, assisted by Johann Bugen-
hagen, who had also for a long time followed a very
_ different course of studies and opinions, in a con-
vent of Premonstratenses at Belbuck in Pomerania.
Bugenhagen, as his history of Pomerania, written in
1518, and vigorously attacking the abuses prevail-
ing in the Church, shows, was even then convinced
of the necessity of a complete change in the body
of the clergy +; but he was no less strongly op-
posed to Luther; and when Luther’s book on the
Babylonish captivity was brought to him one day
as he sat at dinner, he exclaimed, that since the
Passion of Christ a more pernicious heretic had
never existed. But this very book wrought a com-
plete revolution in his mind: he took it home with
him, read it, studied it, and became convinced that
the whole world was in error and that Luther
alone saw the truth. Of this change of senti-
ments he informed his colleagues at the conventual
school over which he presided, his abbot, and
all his friends.{ Similar conversions took place
in all the religious orders. The superiors were

* There are a few letters which passed between them in
Adami, p. 35. Eck is violent and bitter. Regius (Konig), in
spite of the firmness of his opposition, never forgets the accus-
tomed reverence towards his master.

} J. H. Balthasar, Preefatio in Bugenhagii Pomeraniam, p. 5.

t Chytrei Saxonia, p. 287. Lange, Leben Bugenhagens,
1731, contains nothing of importance.

80 DIFFUSION OF Boox IIL.

often the most strongly impressed, like the priors
of the Augustine and Carmelite convents, of whom
we have spoken: among others were Eberhard
Widensee, provost of the convent of St. John at
Halberstadt, and by his influence, Gottes-Gnaden
and St. Moritz, provosts of Neuenwerk and Halle,
and Paul Lemberg, abbot of Sagan, who openly
declared that if any one of his monks felt his con-
science burdened by remaining in the convent, so
far from attempting to keep him there, he would
rather carry him out of it on his own shoulders.*
On a careful examination, I do not find, however,
that love of the world, or any licentious desire to be
freed from the restraints of the convent, had much
effect in producing these resolutions; at all events, —
in the most conspicuous cases, where motives have
been recorded by contemporaries, they were al-
ways the result of a profound conviction; in some,
gradually developed, in others, suddenly forced on
the mind, sometimes by a striking passage in the
Bible: many did not leave the convent of their
own accord, but were driven out of it; others,
though of a most peaceful nature themselves, found
their abode between the narrow walls embittered
by the frequent disputes which arose out of the
state of men’s minds. The mendicant friars felt
discust at their own trade: one of them, a Francis-
can, entered a smithy at Niirnberg with his alms-
box in his hand, and was asked by the master why

* Catalogzus Abbatum Saganensium, in Stenzel’s Scriptt.
Rer. Siles., i. p. 457.

Crap. IIT. THE NEW DOCTRINES. 81

he did not rather earn his bread by the work of
his hands: the robust monk immediately threw off
his habit and became a journeyman smith, sending
back his cowl and box to the convent.

‘There is no doubt that the monastic institutions
of the West were originally founded in imitation of
the Hindu penitents, who live in lonely forests,
clothed in the bark of trees, eating only herbs and
drinking only water, free from desires, masters of
their passions, beatified even in this life, and a sure
refuge to the afflicted.* But how widely had the
recluses of Europe departed from their model! They
took part in all the pursuits, dissensions and troubles
of the world, and their main object was the mainte-
nance of a dominion at once temporal and spiritual,
aided by masses actuated by the same sentiments
and working to the same ends; they were held to-
gether by servile vows, frequently taken from inter-
ested motives, and, as much as possible, disregarded.
No sooner, therefore, had the validity of these vows,
and their religious efficacy to the soul, become
doubtful, than the whole structure fell in pieces;
nay more, the institution on which the Western
Church mainly rested, sent forth the most sturdy
antagonists to its further hierarchical development.

This general movement among the regular clergy
was now seconded by all ranks of the secular
priesthood.

There was one even among the bishops, Polenz
of Samland, who openly declared himself for Lu-

* Nalas, twelfth song.
VOL. II. G

82 DIFFUSION OF . Boox III.

ther, occasionally preached his doctrines from the
pulpit at Kénigsberg, and took care to appoint
preachers of his own way of thinking to a number
of places in his diocese. Luther was overjoyed at
this; such a peaceable and lawful change was ex-
actly what he desired.*

A few other bishops were also supposed to be
favourably inclined to the new doctrine. Johann
Eberlin of Giinzburg mentions the Bishop of Augs-
burg, who did not conceal that ‘the life and con-
versation of the Lutherans were less sinful than
those of their adversaries;” the Bishop of Basle,
who was pleased when Lutheran books were brought
to him, and always read them diligently ; the
Bishop of Bamberg, who no longer opposed the
preaching of Lutheran doctrines in his city, and the
Bishop of Merseburg, who sent for the writer to
consult him concerning the reforms which were
wanted. He assures us that several others sent
their canons to study at Wittenberg. Most of the
names which we find in the list of Reuchlin’s
patrons appear among those who took part in the
religious innovation.

They were also joined by the patrician provosts
of the great towns, such as a Wattenwyl in Berne,
and a Besler and Bémer in Niirnberg, under whose

* © Tutheri Dedicatio in Deuteronomium: Reverendo.. .
Georgio de Polentis vere episcopo. Tibi gratia donata est, ut
non modo verbum susciperes et crederes, sed pro episcopali autori-
tate etiam palam et publice confessus doceres docerique per tuam
diocesim curares, liberaliter his qui in verbo laborant provisis.”—
Opp. iii. p. 75. Hartknoch’s Preussische Kirchengeschichte, i.
p. 273.

Cuap. III. THE NEW DOCTRINES. 83

protection the evangelical preachers were esta-
blished in the churches of their respective cities.
Even without this encouragement, a great number
of the officiating priests and preachers in Lower,
and still more in Upper, Germany, declared them-
selves converts to Luther’s opinions. The name of
Hermann Tast, one of the twenty-four papal vicars
in Schleswig, is well known. In the churchyard
at Husum stood two lime-trees, which were called
the Mother and the Daughter; under the largest of
the two, the Mother, Tast used to preach, escorted
to and from the place of meeting by his hearers,
who went armed to fetch him and conduct: him
home. At Emden, in East Friesland, Georg von
der Dare was driven out of the great church when
he began to preach Luther's doctrines; but the
people, after flocking to hear him for some time in
the open air, at length obtained re-admittance for
him into the church. Johann Schwanhiuser,
custos of St.Gangolph in Bamberg, declaimed, in
the language of a Carlstadt, against the adoration |
of the saints.* The parish priest of Cronach was
one of the first who married. At Mainz, it was
the preacher in the cathedral, Wolfgang Képfl (for
a long time the confidential adviser of the elector) ;
at Frankfort, the preacher in the church of St. Ca-
tharine, Hartmann Ibach ; at Strasburg, the parish
priest of St. Laurence, Matthew Zell; at Mem-
mingen, the preacher of St. Martin’s, Schappeler,
who were the first to propagate the new doctrines.

* Extracts from his sermons in Heller, p. 62.
G2

84 DIFFUSION OF Boox III.

In the imperial city of Hall, Johann Brenz, a mere
youth, but deeply impressed with the. doctrines of
St. Paul, and an imitator of the apostle’s style of
speaking, pronounced his sermon of trial in Sep-
tember, 1522, and drove his antagonists, the guar-
dian and the reader of the Minorite convent, out of
the field without further contest, by the doctrine
of the sole merit of Christ.* In the Kreichgau, a
_ band of village priests, united by similarity of
opinion, collected around Erhard Schnepf, under
the protection of the Gemmingen. In Basle, at the
procession of the Corpus Christi, Réubli, the priest of
St. Alban’s, carried a splendidly-bound Bible instead
of the host, declaring that he alone bore the true
Holy of holies. Next followed, at the minster of
Ziirich, the great secular priest, Ulrich Zwingh,
equally courageous and influential in politics and
in religion, and in whom the vicar of Constance
soon thought he beheld a second Luther. We may
follow these movements even into the lofty regions
of the Alps. The leading men of Schwytz often
timed their rides so as to arrive at Freienbach,
where a friend of Zwingli’s preached, at the time of
divine service, after which they stayed and dined
with him.f It made no difference that they were
Swiss, for in those days the feeling of nationality
had not yet separated them from Germany ; indeed
the people of the Valais called the territory of the
confederate cities, Germany. The new doctrines

* Hartmann and Jiiger, Johann Brenz, i. 43. 59.
+ Hottinger, Geschichte der Eidgenossen.

Cuap. III. THE NEW DOCTRINES. 85

then followed the course of the mountains as far as
the valley of the Inn, where Jacob Strauss first
expounded them to many thousand converts; then
to Salzburg, where Paul von Spretten made the ca-
thedral resound with them, and finally into Austria
and Bavaria. At Altendttingen, where there was
one.of the most popular miraculous pictures, the
regular priest, Wolfgang Russ, had the courage to
declaim against pilgrimages.

It may be concluded that all these changes were
not brought about without stout resistance and a
hard struggle. Many were compelled to yield, but
some persevered, and at all events the persecution
did no harm to the cause. When that zealous Ca-
tholic, Bogislas X. of Pomerania, destroyed the
protestant society at Belbuck, and confiscated the
property —for the seizure of church lands began on
that side—the only result was, that one of their
teachers accompanied some young Livonians, who
had been studying there, to Riga, and thus scat-
tered the seed of the Word over the most remote
parts of Germany.*

Paul von Spretten was expelled from Salzburg,
after which we find him preaching in St. Stephen’s
church at Vienna, and when driven thence, at

* Andreas Cnoph von Cistrin. “ Er hat viel herrlicher und
geistreicher Lieder, darin die Summa von der Lehre von der
Gerechtigkeit, dem Glauben und desselbigen Friichten .. .
verfasset.” —‘“* He has composed many most beautiful and in-
genious songs, wherein is contained the essence of the doctrine
of righteousness — faith and its fruits.” — Hidrn, Liefléindische
Gesch., book v. p. 193.

a3

86 DIFFUSION OF Boox IIL.

Iglau in Moravia: there also he was in imminent
danger, and at last found a safe asylum in Prussia.
With this scene of action, the ardent Amandus was
not content; he soon left it and went to Stolpe,
where he challenged the monks to a disputation on
the truth of the old or the new system: he told
them they might prepare a stake and faggots, and
burn him if he was overcome in argument; and
that if he obtained the victory, the sole punishment
of his opponents should be conversion.

As yet no attention was paid to the place where
the Gospel was preached. It is almost symbolic of
the ecclesiastical opposition, that at Bremen it was
a church standing under an interdict, in which two
or three Augustine friars who had escaped the
stake in Antwerp, first assembled a congregation.
At Goslar the new doctrine was first preached in a
church in the suburbs; and when that was closed, a
native of the town who had studied at Wittenberg
proclaimed it on a plain covered with lime-trees
(the Lindenplan), whence its adherents were there
called Lindenbriider (brothers of the lime-tree).*
In Worms a moveable pulpit was put up against the
outer walls of the church. The Augustine monk,
Caspar Giittel of Hisleben, at the request of the in-
habitants of Arnstadt, preached seven sermons in
the market-place there, according to ancient custom.
At Danzig the people assembled on a height out-
side the town, to hear a preacher who had been
driven from within its walls.

* Hamelmann, Historia renati Evangelii. Opp. Hist. Gen.,
p- 869.

>.

Guar. IIL. THE NEW DOCTRINES. 87

But even if none of the clergy had embraced the
new faith, it would have found many proclaimers
and defenders among the laity. At Ingolstadt,
under the very eyes of Dr. Eck, an enthusiastic
journeyman weaver read aloud Luther's writings to
assembled crowds; and when, in the same town,
a young Master of Arts, called Seehofer, who had
begun to teach from Melanchthon’s pamphlets, was
forced to recant, his defence was undertaken by a
lady, Argula von Staufen, whose attention having
been directed by her father to Luther’s books, she
had, in conformity with their precepts, devoted her-
self exclusively to the study of the Scriptures. Be-
lieving herself fully able to compete with them in
knowledge of the Bible, she now challenged all
the members of the university to a disputation,
and hoped to maintain the superiority of her own
faith in the presence of the prince and the whole
community.* It was in this intimate acquaintance
with Scripture that the leaders of the religious
movement trusted. Heinrich von Kettenbach ex-
ultingly enumerates countries and cities — Niirn-
berg, Augsburg, Ulm, the Rhenish provinces, Swit-
zerland and Saxony — where women and maidens,
serving men and artisans, knights and nobles, were
more learned in the Bible than the high schools.

There was indeed something very extraordinary

* Winter, Gesch. der evang. Lehre in Baiern, i, 120. F
+ “ Ein new Apologia ynnd Verantwortung Martini Luthers
wyder der Papisten Mortgeschrey, die zehen klagen wyder jn
ussblasiniren so wyt die Christenheyt ist, 1523.”—“ A new
Apology and Answer of Martin Luther against the Papist’s Cry
G4

88 DIFFUSION OF Boox IIL

in this simultaneous and universal conviction, un-
questionably religious in its origin, rising up in
opposition to forms of ecclesiastical and political life
which had been revered for centuries, though now
men could see in them only their wide departure
from true primitive Christianity, and their subser-
vience to an oppressive and odious power.

As every effort on the one side was followed by a
re-action, and every attack by persecution, it was of
great importance that there should be one spot in
Germany where such was not the case: this spot
was the electorate of Saxony.

In the year 1522 the neighbouring bishops made
another attempt to re-establish their power here also,
in consequence of the favourable tone of the first
proclamation of the imperial government; and the
Elector Frederic offered no opposition to them so
long as they promised to send preachers who should
combat the Word with the Word.* When, however,
not content with this, they demanded that the priests
who had married or dared to administer the Lord’s
Supper in both kinds, and the monks who had
quitted their convents, should be given up to them,
he declared, after brief consideration, that the

of Murder, who trumpet forth Ten Complaints against him
throughout Christendom.”

* Frederic instructs his officers, “ An Verkiindigung des
Wortes Gottes nicht zu hindern.” — “ Not to hinder the
preaching of the Word of God.” He takes for granted, “ sie
wirden die Ehre Gottes und die Liebe des Nichsten suchen”
— “that they would seek the honour of God and the love of
their neighbour.”

Cuap. III. THE NEW DOCTRINES. 89,

imperial edict did not oblige him to this.* By
withdrawing his countenance from them, he of.
course annihilated their influence.

This naturally induced all those who were forced
to fly from other places, to take refuge in his do-
minions, where no spiritual authorities could reach
them. Eberlin, Stiefel, Strauss, Seehofer, Ibach
from Frankfurt, Bugenhagen from Pomerania,
Kauxdorf from Magdeburg, Mustzeus from Halber-
stadt, where he had been barbarously mutilated f,
and numbers more, flocked together from all parts
of Germany ; they founda safe asylum, and in many
cases temporary employment, and then went forth
again confirmed in their faith by intercourse with
Luther and Melanchthon. Wittenberg was the
centre of the whole movement; without the ex-
istence of such a centre, the unity of direction, the
common progress, which we observe, would have
been impossible; we may add, that the admixture
of foreign elements was of great importance to the
development of the public mind of Saxony. The
university especially thus acquired the character of
a national body, — incontestably the true character

* Geuterbock, St. Lucastag. The very remarkable corre-
pondence in the Sammlung vermischter Nachrichten zur siich-
sischen Geschichte, iv. 282.

+ What cruelties then took place! “ Aliquot ministri canoni-
corum capiunt D, Valentinum Musteum,” —“ with the sanction
of the burgher-master he had preached the Gospel in Neustadt,”
“ et vinctum manibus pedibusque, injecto in ejus os freno, de-
ferunt per trabes in inferiores ccenobii partes ibique in cella
cerevisiaria eum castrant.” — Hamelmann, |. ¢. p. 880.

90 DIFFUSION OF Boox III.

of a great German high school. Both teachers and
hearers resorted from all parts of Germany, and
went forth again in all directions.

Wittenberg became equally important. as a me-
tropolis of literature.

It was the agitation of these important questions
which first obtained for the German popular litera-
ture general circulation and influence. Up to the
year 1518 its productions were far from numerous,
and the range of its subjects very narrow. During
the last twenty years of the fifteenth century there
appeared about 40 German works; in 1513 about
35; mm 1514,47; in 1515, 46; in 1516, 55; in
1517, 37: these were chiefly mirrors for the laity,
little works on medicine, books on herbs, religious
tracts, newspapers, official announcements, and
travels, — in short, the books fitted to the compre-
hension of the many. The most original produc-
tions were always those of the poetical opposition
— the satires which we have already noticed. The
increase in the number of German publications
which followed Luther’s appearance before the
public was prodigious. In the year 1518 we find
71 enumerated; in 1519, 111; in 1520, 208; in
1521,.211; in 1522, 347; in 1523, 498. If we
inquire whence this wonderful increase emanated,
we shall find it was from Wittenberg, and the chief
author, Luther himself. In the year 1518 we find
20 books published with his name ; in 1519, 50; in
1520, 133; in 1521, when he was interrupted by
his journey to Worms, and hindered by a forced
seclusion, about 40; in 1522, again 130; and in

Guar. III. THE NEW DOCTRINES. . 91

1523, 183.* In no nation or age has a more auto-
cratic and powerful writer appeared ; and it would ©
be difficult to find any other who has united so
perfectly popular and intelligible a style, and such
downright homely good sense, to so much original-
ity, power and genius; he gave to German literature
the character by which it has been ever since dis-
tinguished, of investigation, depth of thought, and
strenuous conflict of opinions. He began the great
discussion which has been carried on in Germany
through all the subsequent centuries; though often
grievously interrupted by acts of violence and by the
influences of foreign policy. In the beginning he
stood quite alone, but by degrees, especially after the
year 1521, disciples, friends, and rivals began to ap-
pear in the field. In the year 1528, besides his own
works, there were published 215 by others, in favour
of the new opinions; that is, more than four fifths
of all that appeared, while we do not find above 20
decidedly catholic publications. It was the first time
that the national mind, uninfluenced by foreign
models, and manifesting itself purely in the form
impressed on it by the great events of the times, and

* T rely upon Panzer’s Annalen der iiltern Deutschen Litera-
tur, 1788—1802. That his information, useful as it is, is not
quite complete, is a defect this has in common with most statistical
works. We can, however, gather from them the general facts,
which is all we here have to do with. According to Adam,
Vite Jurisconsult., p. 62., it was Schneidewin’s father-in-
law —ex honorata familia, que nomen gentilitium Turingorum
habuit, agnomen vero Aurifabrorum — who established the
first printing-press at Wittenberg, socio Luca pictore seniore.
This is another of Lucas Cranach’s merits.

92 DIFFUSION OF Boox III.

the high destinies to which Germany was called,
found a general expression; moreover this expres-
sion regarded the most important interests that can
occupy the attention of man, andits very first ut-
terance was prompted by ideas of religious freedom.

It was a singular felicity, that at the very instant
of full intellectual awakening, the Holy Scriptures,
both of the New and Old Testament, were laid open
to the nation. It is true that the Bible had long
been known in translations; but it is impossible to
conceive, without reading them, how full of errors,
how rude in style, and how unintelligible these ver-
sions are. Luther, on the contrary, spared no labour
to obtain an accurate knowledge of the meaning of
the original, and gave it utterance in German, with
all the clearness and energy of which that language
is capable. The imperishable records of the earliest
ages of the world, characterised by the freshness of
the youth of mankind, and the sacred writings of
later date, in which true religion appears in all its
childlike candour, were now put into the hands of
the German people in their own vernacular tongue,
piece by piece, like a periodical work which relates
to the immediate interests of the day, and were
devoured with equal avidity.

There is one production of the German mind
which owes its origin directly to this concurrence of
circumstances. In translating the Psalms, Luther
conceived the project of making a paraphrase of
them for the purpose of congregational singing * ;

* Luther’s preface to Johann Walter’s Hymns recalls “ das
Exempel der Propheten und Kénige im alten Testament, die mit

Cuap. IIT. THE NEW DOCTRINES. 93

for the idea of a-Church, such as he had described
and begun to call into existence, supposed that the
congregation should take a far more considerable
part in the service than it had ever done before.
In this case, however, as in some others, a mere
paraphrase did not suffice. The devout spirit,
tranquil in the conviction of possessing the revealed
Word of God; elevated by the strife and danger in
which it was placed, and inspired by the poetical
genius of the Old Testament, poured forth lyrical
compositions, at once poetry and music; words
alone would have been insufficient to express the
emotions of the soul in all their fulness, or to excite
and sustain the feelings of a congregation. This
could only be done by the melody which breathed
in the solemn old church music, and the touching
airs of popular songs. Such was the origin of the
evangelical hymns, which we may date from the
year 1523.* Detached hymns by Luther and
Spretten acquired immediate popularity, and lent

singen und klingen, mit dichten und allerlei Seitenspiel Gott
gelobet haben,” —“ the example of the prophets and kings in
the Old Testament, who, with songs and music, with verses and
all manner of stringed instruments, praised God.”—Altenb. A.,
ii. p. 751.

* Riederer, “von Einfiihrung des deutschen Gesanges,”
p. 95. The remarkable letter to Spalatin concerning the trans-
lation of the Psalms into German verse, in De Wette, ii. p. 490.,
is doubtless earlier than that dated 14th Jan. 1524, ibid. p. 461.
In it we see what the. Musz Germanicx, about which De Wette
seems to be in doubt, really meant. It appears from the letters
to Hausmann, that Luther was employed in November and
December, 1523, in the composition of the liturgy.

Y4 DIFFUSION *OF Boox III.

their aid to the earliest struggles of the reform-
ing spirit; but it was many years later that the
German mind displayed its whole wealth of poeti-
cal, and still more of musical, productions of this
kind. |

The popular poetry also devoted itself in other
ways to the new ideas with that spirit of teachable-
ness, and at the same time resistance to arbitrary
power, which characterised it. Hutten published
his bitterest invectives in verse; Murner depicted
the corruption of the clergy in long and vivid
descriptions: to this feeling of censure and repro-
bation was now added, if not in Murner himself,
at any rate in most others, a positive conviction of
the truth of the new doctrine, and a profound admi-
ration of its champion; the man who maintained the
righteous cause among crimson barrets and velvet
caps was celebrated in verse. The pope was brought
on the stage in carnival farces; he congratulates
himself that, in spite of his knavery, men continue
to ascribe to him the power of admitting them into
heaven or binding them in hell, which brings many
birds to his net to be plucked; that he reaps the
fruits of the sweat of the poor man’s brow, and can
ride with a retinue of a thousand horses — his
name is Entchristelo; there also appear, uttering
like sentiments, Cardinal Highmind (Hochmuth),
Bishop Goldmouth Wolfsmaw (Goldmund Wolfs-
magen), Vicar Fabler (/abeler), and a long list of
personages held up to ridicule and contempt under
such names: the last who enters is the Doctor,
who expounds the true doctrine very much in the

Cwap. IIT. THE NEW DOCTRINES. 95

tone of a sermon.* Under the influence of these
impressions was educated Burckhardt Waldis, who
afterwards made such a happy application of the old
fable of the beasts to religious controversies. The
greatest German poet of that day warmly embraced
Luther’s cause. Hans Sachs’s poem, the Nightin-
gale of Wittenberg, appeared in 1523; he compares
the faith which had prevailed for four hundred
years, to the moonlight which had led men astray
in the wilderness; now, however, the nightingale”
announces the rising sun and the light of day, while
she herself soars above the dark clouds. Thoughts
emanating from a sound understanding, instructed
by the infallible Word, and confident of its own:
cause, form the basis of the many ingenious, gay,
and graceful poems — not the less attractive for a
slight smack of the workshop — with which the
honest master delighted all classes of the nation.

In Germany, the proper aim of art—to teach by
giving a sensible form to ideas — had never been
lost sight of. Hence, there is no less fancy dis-
played in her symbols, than earnestness in her cha-
racter. It so happened that one of the great
masters of the time, Lucas Kranach, went to live
at Wittenberg, and, in a constant familiar inter-

* « Bin Fassnachtspyl, so zu Bern uf der Hern Fassnacht in
dem MDXXII. Jare von Burgerssonen offentlich gemacht ist,
darinn die warheit in Schimpftswyss vom Pabst und siner Priest-
erschaft gemeldet wiirt.”—“ A Carnival Play, the which was
publicly enacted in the Lord’s carnival of the year 1522, at

“Bern, by the sons of burghers, wherein the truth is satirically
told of the pope and of his priesthood.” Newly printed by Grii-
neisen. — Nicl. Manuel, p. 339.

96 DIFFUSION ‘OF Boox III.

course with Luther, became thoroughly imbued with
the modes of thinking of the reformers, and con-
secrated his talents to embodying them. He some-
times entered the ranks as a combatant. Some of
his smaller pictures, such as the Passion of Christ
and Antichrist, in which the lowliness and humility
of the Founder, and the pride and pomp of his
vicegerent, are contrasted, are protests against
Catholicism; and accordingly woodcuts of them
were inserted into Luther’s writings. It may be
imagined that his chaste pencil was employed in no
works but such as harmonised with the evangelical
faith. The grace and loveliness with which he had
formerly adorned groups of beatified female saints,
he now shed over the little children receiving the
blessing of our Saviour. ‘The mysteries shadowed
forth in early art, were now expressed in repre-
sentations of the sacraments retained by Luther,
which were sometimes painted on one canvass,
and of the sublime work of Redemption. The
eminent statesmen and divines by whom he was
surrounded, presented forms and features so re-
markable and characteristic, that he had no tempt-
ation, except in the cause of religion, to strive
after the ideal. Albert Diirer, though his genius
had already reached maturity, was powerfully
affected by the prevailing spirit: the most perfect,
perhaps, of all his works,—the evangelists Mark
and John, and the apostles Peter and Paul, — were
produced under the impressions of these times.
There exist studies for these pictures with the date
1523: they reflect the image suggested by Scripture

Cuap. IIT. THE NEW DOCTRINES. 97

(now rendered accessible to new views), of the
wisdom, devotedness and energy of these first wit-
nesses of the Christian church. Vigour and gran-
deur of conception manifest themselves in every
feature.*

The general development of the German mind
was closely connected with the new ideas; the
same spirit was stirring in the learned, as in the
popular branches of ental activity.

Wittenberg was far from being the only uni-
versity in which the course of shidies was changed.
At Freiburg, where Luther was detested, ne
Aristotelian philosophy ceased to be studied and |
inculcated as hitherto. “ Petrus Hispanus,” says
Ulrich Zasius, “has had his day; the books of
Sentences are laid aside; our theologians are some
of them reading Matthew and others Paul; nay,
even the very beginners, those who are but just
arrived, crowd to these lectures.” Even Zasius
himself, one of the most distinguished German
jurists of that time, gives a remarkable testimony
to the universal diffusion of the reforming’ spirit.
He complains that his lecture-room is deserted; that
he has barely half a dozen hearers, and they, all
Frenchmen; and at the same time he can find no
better mode of recommending his own exertions in
the cause of learning, than by comparing them to

* How Pirkheimer and Diirer disputed about the question of
the Lord’s Supper in Melanchthon’s presence: related by
Peucer in Strobel’s “ Nachricht von Melanchthons Aufenthalt
in Niirnberg,” p. 27.

+ Zasii Epistole, i. 63.

VOL. II. H

98 DIFFUSION OF Boox III.

the labours of Luther. The glossators of the ge-
nuine texts whom he was engaged in combating,
appeared to him in the same light as the schoolmen
on whom Luther was waging war; he laboured to
restore the Roman law to its original purity, just as
Luther strove to revive the theology of the Bible.
Of all departments of learning none, however,
stood more in need of a similar reform than history.
There existed an immense accumulation of ma-
terials ; but the earlier periods were obscured by the
learned fables which were continually receiving
fresh and more circumstantial additions; while the
later were known only in fragments dressed up to
suit the interests of the dominant party: the most
important parts had been intentionally falsified, in
consequence of their necessary connection with the
great ecclesiastical fiction. It was impossible to
arrive at a true, lively and connected view of his-
tory; even minds thirsting for real information
shrank from such insuperable masses of reading.
An attempt to penetrate them was, however, made
just about this time by Johann Aventin, who, at
an earlier period, had sympathised in the literary
tendencies of the new school of thinkers, and now
followed its religious direction with the liveliest
zeal. In writing his Bavarian chronicle, the con-
tents of which are interesting to Germany gene-
rally, and even to the world, he spared no pains
in searching libraries and archives in order to sub-
stitute genuine records for the shallow and im-
probable traditions hitherto current. He puts the
reader on his guard against the representations of

Cuap. III. THE NEW DOCTRINES. 99

the ignorant; especially “ people who have seen
nothing of mankind, who know nothing of cities
and countries, have no experience of earthly or
heavenly matters, and yet pretend to judge of every
thing.” His endeavour is to understand history in
its true and necessary aspect, “ such as it should
be.” The spirit of the national opposition to the
papacy is powerfully at work withm him: when-
ever he strives to depict the simplicity of the
Christian doctrine, or alludes to its origin, he never
fails to contrast with it the spiritual power in its
rise, progress and operation. His history of Gre-
gory VII. is even now the best extant: he takes
a very comprehensive view of the results arising
from the dominion of the hierarchical principle,
though he had not the peculiar talent requisite to
place them distinctly before the reader. His works
are indeed generally unfinished; but he was the
first labourer in that field of profound and pene-
trating research into universal history, which in
our day occupies so many minds.

For a time, it seemed as if the interest in theolo-
gical questions would absorb all others. Erasmus
complains that nothing was read or bought but pub-
lications for or against Luther; he fears that the
study of the humanities, which was but just esta-
blished, would be stifled under a new system of
school learning. The chronicles of the time describe
how the contempt into which the clergy had fallen
re-acted on learning: the proverb, “ Die Gelehrten,
die Verkehrten,” (the more learned, the more
wrongheaded,) was in every body’s mouth, and

H 2

100 — _ DIFFUSION OF Boox III.

parents hesitated to devote their children to studies
which offered so doubtful a prospect. This, however,
was only a momentary aberration ; the mind, roused
to a desire for authentic knowledge, could not reject
the very instrument which had awakened it. In
the year 1524 Luther published a letter to the
“burghermasters and councillors of all the towns
on German ground,” exhorting them “ to establish
Christian schools.”* He means by this, especially
for the training of priests; for, he says, it is only by
the study of languages that the Gospel can be pre-
served in its purity, to which end it was delivered
down to us in writing; otherwise there would be
nothing but wild and perilous disorder, and an
utter confusion of opinions. Yet he does not by
any means confine his recommendation to eccle-
siastical schools; far from it: he deplores that
schools have been so exclusively calculated for the
education of the clergy, and his chief object is to
free them from this narrow destination, and to found
a learned class among the laity. He holds out the
education of the ancient Romans as an example to
Germany; and says that instructed men well versed in
history are absolutely necessary for the government
of the state; he also insists upon the establishment
of public libraries, not only to contain editions and |
expositions of the sacred writings, but also orators
and poets, whether heathen or not; besides books on

* Altenb. edition, ii. p. 804. Eoban Hess caused the letters
which he had received on this subject from Luther, Melanchthon,
Jonas, Draco and others, to be printed collectively in 1523, in
the pamphlet, “ De non contemnendis Studiis humanioribus.”

Cuap. III. THE NEW DOCTRINES. 101

the fine arts, law and medicine, chronicles and_his-
tories ; ‘‘ for they be profitable for the learning of the
wonders and works of God.” This letter had as great
an effect on secular learning, as his book addressed to
the German nobility had on the general condition of
the laity. Luther first conceived the idea of that
learned body of official laymen which has exercised
such an incalculable influence over the social and
political condition of Germany; he advocated the
popular cultivation of knowledge for her own sake,
apart from the church ; it was he who laid the first
stone of that edifice of learning in northern Ger-
many, which succeeding labourers have reared to
sucha height. In this he was vigorously seconded by
the indefatigable Melanchthon, who was the author
of the Latin grammar used in the schools throughout
the North of Germany, till the beginning of the
eighteenth century.* He completed it in the year
1524, beginning from some notes made for the
private instruction of a young Niirnberger; at the
same time, the Greek grammar, of which he had
previously drawn up the plan, received the form in
which it was taught for centuries afterwards.
Teachers were formed under Melanchthon’s dis-
cipline, who adopted all his ideas, and became the
founders of the German school-training. The most
remarkable of these was Valentine Trotzendorf,
who was called from Wittenberg to Goldberg in
Silesia, in the year 1523, and who was said to be

* The editions most worthy of note till 1737 are enumerated
» in Strobel, Von den Verdiensten Melanchthons, um die Gram-

matik ..., neue Beitriige, ii. iil. p. 43.
H 3

102 “DIFFUSION OF Boon Lik

born a schoolmaster as much as Casar was born a
general, or Cicero an orator. Innumerable German
schoolmasters were formed by him.

A large and coherent survey of all these facts
suffices to convince us that the Reformation was by
no means confined to theological dogmas; a whole
circle of aspirations and thoughts of a peculiar
character, and pregnant with a new order of things,
had arisen; closely connected, it is true, with the
theological opposition, and partly developed under
that form, but the existence of which is neither to
be ascribed to, nor confounded with, that phe-
nomenon. ‘The opposition was itself merely one
manifestation of this spirit, the future workings of
which were entirely independent of it.

The first object of the awakened mind un-
doubtedly was, deliverance from that mighty power
which claimed the right of retaining it captive.

In examining more closely the course of this
struggle, as it displayed itself in all parts of Ger-
many, we shall fall into error if we expect to find
the same points of variance which exist between
the later Protestant and the revived Catholic sys-
tems. The ideas and intellectual powers which
were then arrayed against each other, stood in a far
more distinct, broad and intelligible opposition.

One of the most violent conflicts was that con-
cerning faith and good works. We must not
understand by this the more deep and abstruse con-
troversy which has since arisen out of the subtilty
or the obstinacy of the schools. At that time the
question was very simple: on the one side, by good

Cuap. III. THE NEW DOCTRINES, 103

works were meant those ritual observances through
which men then really hoped to merit reward, both
in this world and the next—such as pilgrimages,
fasting, the foundation of masses for the souls of
the dead, the recital of particular prayers, the
reverence paid to certain saints, and the gifts to
the churches and the clergy which formed so im-
portant a part of the piety of the middle ages. To
this perversion of the idea of moral obligation, which
had been so culpably allowed to gain currency and
strength, the other party opposed the doctrine of the
efficacy of faith without works. But— especially
after the troubles in Wittenberg—no one now ven-
tured to inculcate an ideal, abstract, inactive faith.
We still possess many of the sermons of that period,
and it would be difficult to find one in which faith
and charity are not spoken of as indissolubly united.
Gaspar Giittel earnestly inculcates the doctrine,
that the conduct which a man pursues towards his
neighbour for the love of God is the one essential
thing.* The preacher blamed those who spent
their substance in enriching the clergy, decorating
the image of a saint, or going on distant pilgrimages,
and at the same time forgot the poor.

The same thing took place with respect to the
opinions concerning the church. The reformers
entirely refused to recognise the holy church of
Christ, out of whose pale there is no salvation, in

* Schutzrede wider etzlich ungezemte Clamanten. The very
sermons preached at Arnstadt: printed in Olearii Syntagma
Rerum Thuringicarum, ii. 274.; an edition which Panzer does
not mention in his Annals, ii. p. 93.

H 4

104 DIFFUSION OF Boox III.

the persons of the pope, his prelates and priests;
they considered it profane to say that the Church
commands or possesses any thing; they distin-
guished that ecclesiastical institution, which,. by its
scandalous government, gave the lie to the principles
on which it was founded, from the mysterious exist-
ence of that holy fellowship which appears not out-
wardly, which, according to the words of the Symbol,
is a pure object of faith, and which unites heaven
and earth indeed, but without the intervention of
the pope.* “Far be it from us to suppose,” said
Pastor Schmidt, in a sermon he preached with great

* Ain Sermon oder Predig von der christlichen Kirchen
welches doch sey die hailig christlich Kirche, davon unser
Glaub sagt, geprediget zu Ulm von Bruder Heinrich von Ket-
tenbach, 1522. —“ A Sermon or Preaching touching the
Christian Church—which is the holy Christian Church of
which our belief speaketh? Preached at Ulm by Brother Henry
of Kettenbach.” Johann Brenz took up this doctrine very ve-
hemently. He will not allow that the church is to be believed
because it received Christ. “ Juden und Heiden die haben
Christum angenommen — und sind nachfolgends die diusserliche
christliche Kirche geworden, und hat die Kirche ihren Ursprung
von den frommen Christenmenschen und ist nachfolgends die iius-
serliche christliche Kirche worden, doch nit dass die Menschen
ihre Seligkeit haben von der fiusserlichen Kirche. . . . Dieweil die
Kirche ein geistlicher verborgener Leib ist und nit von dieser
Welt, so folgt, dass in diesem Leib kein weltlich iusserlich noch
sichtbar haupt ist.” — “ Jews and Pagans received Christ, and
thereupon. became the outward Christian church, and the church
has its origin from pious Christians, and is thereafter become
the outward Christian church, not that men receive salvation
from the outward church. . . . For since the church isa spiritual
hidden body, and not of this world, it follows that this body can-
not have a worldly, outward and visible head.” ;

Cuap. III. THE NEW DOCTRINES. 105

effect at Kiissnacht, ‘‘that the Christian church can
acknowledge a head so spotted with sin as the pope ;
and thus forsake Christ, whom St. Paul so often
calls ‘ the head of the church.’ ” *

In like manner the institution of the Lord’s
Supper, freed from all priestly intervention, was
contrasted with the compulsory obligation of con-
fessing every individual sin,—an obligation which
led and still leads to all the odious abuses of the
confessional, and to the despotism of a stern and
tyrannical orthodoxy. The discretionary power of
the priest to grant absolution was denied, together
with the doctrine of the actual presence; and
people were even dissuaded from too nice a ponder-
ing over particular sins, as tending to stimulate the
desires anew, or to produce despair: nothing was
required but an undoubting, cheerful, steadfast
reliance on the mercy of God, and faith in his
present favour. f

But perhaps the most strongly and totally op-
posed were the opinions as to creeds of human
origin and the pure word of God. Here again the

* Myconius ad Zwinglium. Epp. Zw. p. 195.

+ “ Eyn verstendig trostlich Leer tiber das Wort St. Paulus :
Der Mensch sol sich selbst probieren und alsso von dem Brott
essen und von dem Kelch trinken: zu Hall in Innthal von D.
Jacob Strauss geprediget, MDX XII.” — “ A reasonable and
comfortable Doctrine concerning the Word of St. Paul: ‘ But
let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that bread, and
drink of that cup.’ Preached by D. Jacob Strauss, 1522, at
Hall, in the valley of the Inn.” The body and blood of Christ
are taken as the surest sign of his merciful promises to forgive -
us our sins, if we have faith. This contradiction appears in
some later writings of this author.

106 DIFFUSION OF . Boox III.

dispute was not concerning tradition, as it has been
defined by the. more ingenious and enlightened
controversialists of modern times; that is to say,
little more than the Christian spirit propagat-
ing itself from generation to generation, — the
Word living in the hearts of the faithful.* What
the reformers combated, was the entire system
of the Latin church, developed in the course of
centuries by hierarchical power and school learn-
ing, and claiming absolute authority. They re-
marked that the fathers of the church had erred,
Jerome often, and even Augustin occasionally ; that
those-holy men had themselves been well aware of
it; and that nevertheless a system from which no
deviation was allowed, had been based on their
decisions, and spun out with the aid of heathen
philosophy. Thus it came to pass that they had
given themselves up to human devices, and that
there was not a teacher among them who led his
hearers to the true understanding of the Gospel.
And to this human doctrine, which neither satisfied
the reason nor consoled the heart—which was con-
nected with all sorts of abuses—they now opposed
the eternal word of God, “‘ which is noble, pure,
cordial, steadfast and comfortable, and should
therefore be kept unadulterated and undefiled.” +

* Mohler Symbolik, p. 361. ;

+ Das hailig ewig Wort Gots was das in im kraft, sterke,
frid, fred, erleuchtung und leben in aym rechten Christen zu er-
wecken vermag —zugestelt dem edlen Ritter — Hern Jorgen
von Fronsperg ; von Haug Marschalk der genennt wirt Zoller

zu Augsburg, 1523, —“ The holy eternal word of God, what
strength, power, peace and joy, light and life itis able to awaken

Cuap. III. THE NEW DOCTRINES. 107

They exhorted the laity to work out their own
salvation; to gain possession of the word of God,
which had now come forth in full splendour from
its long concealment, to take it as a sword in their
hands, and to defend themselves with it against the
preachers of the contrary faith.*

' Such were the questions concerning which the
warfare of popular literature — preaching, was main-
ly carried on. On the one side, certain external eccle-
siastical observances were deemed meritorious; the
idea of a Church was identified with the existing
hierarchy; the mystery of the individual relation to
God, which is expressed in absolution, was made de-

~ pendent on absolute obedience to the clergy. These
opinions belonged to the system of faith which de-
fended its authority with fire and sword. On the
other side, was the obligation of faith and love; the
idea of the unity of an invisible Church consisting ina
community of souls; the forgiveness of sins through
faith in the redemption, and reception of the sacra-

in a true Christian. Addressed to the noble Knight George
von Fronsperg, by Haug Marshalk, who was named tax-master
at Augsburg in 1523.” In his preface he praises the knight,
“ dass Eur Gestreng yetzumal so hoch benennt und gepreist
wird, dass das edel rain lauter und unvermischt Wort Gottes, das
heilig evangelium bey eur gestreng statt hat, und in eur ritter-
lich gemiit und herz eingemaurt und befestiget,” &c. — “ that
your worship is now so highly famed and praised, for that the
noble, clear, plain and pure word of God, the holy Gospel, has
an asylum with your worship, and is enclosed and made fast in
your knightly spirit and heart,” &c.

* Cunrad Distelmair von Arberg: ain trewe Ermanung,
&c. 1523.

108 DIFFUSION OF . Boox III.

ment without the necessity of confession; and,
finally, belief in the Bible alone as a rule of faith
and doctrine. We are not now treating of the
modifications given to their opinions by individual
theologians, but simply of the prevalent trains of
ideas which were at war in every part of Germany.

So early as the year 1521, a little work was
published, containing the allegory of this contest,
under the name of “ The old and the new Gods.”
On the title-page we see, as representatives of the
new God, the pope, some of the fathers of the
church, Aristotle, and, at the bottom of the leaf,
Cajetan, Silvester, Eck and Faber ; on the opposite
page, the true and ancient God in his triune form,
the four evangelists, St. Paul grasping a sword,
and lastly, Luther. The contents of the book
were quite in character with the frontispiece.*
With the ceremonies, rites, and articles of faith
which had grown up under the protection of the
rising hierarchy and its bloody sword, and turned
Christianity into a kind of Judaism, is contrasted the
old God, with his authentic word, and the simple
doctrine of the redemption, of hope, faith, and love.

*° Panzer, ii) p.20.

t See the preface by Hartmann Dulich, printed in Veesen-
meier’s Sammlung von Aufsiitzen, p. 135. The following pas-
sage in Eberlin of Giinzburg’s Fraindlicher Vermanung, p. iii.,
shows how much the purpose of the whole movement was recog-
nised in these its most prominent tendencies : “Ich halt, Luther
sey von Gott gesandt zu seubern die Biblia von der lerer ausle-
gung vnd zwang, die gewissen zu erlésen von banden der mensch-
lichen gebot od’ bapstgesetzen, und den gaistlichen abziechen den
titel Christi un seiner kirchen, dz fiirohyn nit mer sollich gross

Cuap. III. THE NEW DOCTRINES. 109

These coarse and naked expressions suffice to
show that the nation felt what were the real points
in debate. The German mind became conscious
that the hour of its maturity was come; boldly
resisted the tyranny of those accidental forms
which had governed the world, and returned to the
only true source of religious instruction.*

Considering the vast agitation, the strong feel-
ing of conflict, which prevailed, it is doubly re-
markable how much control men had over them-
selves, and with how much caution they often
acted.

Heinrich of Kettenbach continued to assume
that the Church—by which however he understands
an invisible community—possessed the treasure of
the merits of Christ, of the Virgin Mary, and of all
the elect.

Eberlin of Giinzburg, whilst writing from Wit-
tenberg to exhort his friends in Augsburg to

biiberey —strafflos sey und’ dem heyligen namen Gottes . . . auch
ist der Luther gesant dz er lere das creutz vnd glauben, welche
schier durch alle doctores vergessen seindt; darzu ist Luther
beruft von Got vnd Got gibt im weysshait, kunst, vernunft,
sterke, vnd herz dazu.”—“I hold that Luther was sent by
God to free the Bible from the empty expositions and re-
strictions of the teachers, to release the conscience from the
bondage of human commands or popish laws, and to strip
ecclesiastics of the title of Christ and of his church, so that in
future such great knavery should no longer remain unpunished
in the holy name of God. Luther is likewise sent to teach the
cross and the faith, which are clean forgotten by all the doctors.
Hereunto was Luther called by God, and to this end has God
given him wisdom, knowledge, prudence, strength and courage.”
* Sermon von der Kirche, at the very beginning.

110 DIFFUSION OF Boox IIL.

procure for themselves each a copy of the New
Testament, even if they had to save the price of it
out of their food or raiment, admonishes them at
the same time not to be too hasty in condemning
the opinions of their fathers. There were many
things, he said, which God in his wisdom had kept
secret, and which they needed not to inquire about;
such as purgatory, and the intercession of saints.
He adds, that even Luther condemned nothing
that had not some distinct passage of Scripture
against it.
_ A young Bohemian critic brought forward a
whole train of arguments to prove that it was very
doubtful whether St. Peter had ever been in Rome;
and the Catholic party clearly perceived that if this
question was decided in the negative, the whole
doctrine of the primacy would be overthrown. But
the theologians of Wittenberg did not allow them-
selves to be dazzled by the brilliant results to which
this line of argument would lead; they pronounced
it to be of no avail* towards furthering faith and
piety ; and, indeed, in a work wherein this question
is treated at length, and the ill effects of the abuse
of the doctrine of primacy set forth with great
earnestness, a hope is expressed that the new Pope,
Adrian VI., would renounce all existing errors, and
confine himself entirely to the precepts of the
Bible—which some passages in his writings seemed
to promise; and that then not only the present
differences would be healed, but also the old schism

* Luther to Spalatin, 17th Feb. 1520, in De W., i. 559.

Cuap. III. THE NEW DOCTRINES. lil

ended, and that even Greeks and Bohemians would
return to the bosom of the Church.*

Others who were less sanguine, were yet of opi-
nion that all violent measures were to be avoided,
and that the abolition of abuses should be left to
the government. Some, indeed, exhorted their fol-
lowers to free themselves from the dominion of the
priesthood, as the Israelites did from that of Pha-
raoh. But even such men as the vehement Otho
Brunfels opposed, them, saying, that “the Word
had power to improve the state’ of the world
without trouble or the sword; and that things
rashly and inconsiderately begun never ended

well.” }
This was Luther’s opinion also; and for a long
time it was acted on throughout the whole empire.

* Apologia Simonis Hessi adv. dominum Roffensem Epise.
Anglicanum super concertatione ejus cum Vlrico Veleno.
Julio mense, 1523. The author maintains chiefly, “ quod gen-
tiliter et ambitiose pro Petri primatu a multis pugnetur, cum
hinc nihil lucri accedat pietati : quod impie abusi sint potestate
sua Romani pontifices in statuendis quibusdam articulis seditiosis
magis quam piis.” The passage of Adrian, in titulo de Sacram.
baptismi, is: “ Noverit ecclesia se non esse dominam sacra-
mentorum sed ministram, nec posse magis formam sacramentalem
destituere aut novam instituere quam legem aliquam divinam
abolere vel novum aliquem fidei articulum instituere. Spero
fore,” he then proceeds, “si ille perstat in sua sententia, ut
tota catholica ecclesia, que nunc in sectas videtur divisa, in
unam fidei unitatem aggregetur, adeo ut et Bohemos et Gra-
cos dexteras daturos confidam bene presidenti Romano pon-
tifici.”

+ Vom evangelischen <Anstoss, Neuenburg in Breisgau
Simonis und Judi, 1523.

112 DIFFUSION OF Boox III.

Every thing might yet be hoped from the guid-
ance of the Council of Regency; for in directing
that the pure word of God should be preached, and
in avoiding all reference by name to the fathers of
the Church, who were looked upon as the corner-
stones of modern Romanism, the Council of Re-
gency had adopted the most important ideas of the
reformers.

In the year 1523 it took the cause of reform
more expressly under its protection.

‘When Faber, the vicar of Constance, received a
commission from Rome to preach against Luther,
and applied to the Council of Regency for protection
and safe conduct, they gave him a letter purporting,
indeed, to have that effect, but conceived in such
terms that, as Planitz says, he would gladly have

_had a better.

Duke George made fresh complaints to the Re-
gency of Luther’s violent attacks, and several
members of that body were of opinion that the
elector should be admonished to punish him. This,
however, was opposed by the majority. Count Pa-
latine Frederic, the emperor’s leutenant, proposed
that the duke’s letters should, at any rate, be sent
to the elector. “Sir,” said Planitz, ‘ the voice of
the majority decides that my gracious master shall
not be written to;” and the duke was told that he
might make the application to the elector himself.

In the convocation of a fresh diet, care was taken
to make no allusion to the religious troubles.*

* Letter from Planitz, dated 28th Feb., 3d March, and 18th
August, 1523.

Cuap. IIT. THE NEW DOCTRINES. 113

The main point, however, was that no step what-
ever was taken towards the execution of the edict
of Worms; but the new doctrines were allowed
freely to take their course, in expectation of the
ecclesiastical council which had been demanded.

It is evident of what importance to the State as
well as to the Church was the question, —whether
a government in which sentiments of this kind
predominated, would be able to maintain itself or
not.

Vola i. I

114 OPPOSITION TO THE REGENCY. Boox FILE.

CHAPTER IV.

OPPOSITION TO THE COUNCIL OF REGENCY.—DIET
oF 1523-24.

Two great ideas occupied the mind of the whole
German nation; that of a national, representative,
and at the same time, powerful government, and
that of a complete renovation of the religious con-
dition of the country: both these ideas were now,
to a considerable extent, represented ; each received
support from the other; and, united, they seemed.
to promise a future equally important in a political
and intellectual point of view.

All endeavours, however,- which are directed to-
wards ends so vast and comprehensive inevitably
provoke strong and various opposition from many
quarters.

Not that the connexion between these two im-
portant objects was so close as to be evident to all
minds, or that the antagonists of the opposition
were fully aware of both its bearings; but each of
them roused the peculiar antipathies of a class. It
by no means followed that those who opposed the
Council of Regency were hostile to the reformation
of the Church.

We are generally inclined, in our views of the
past, to fall into the error of ascribing too soon an
exaggerated influence, to a new element of social
and political life. However powerful it may be,

Car. IV. SICKINGEN AND HIS ADVERSARIES. 115

there are other influences at work which it cannot
immediately overcome, and which continue to ex-
ercise their own independent action.

The hostility to the Council of Regency arose
from two causes fundamentally opposed. In the
first place, that body seemed destined to become a
powerful and efficient government, —a prospect
which was far from welcome to every one. In the
second, it was at present very feeble; it possessed
no executive power. Hence the first obstacle it
encountered was disobedience.

SICKINGEN AND HIS ADVERSARIES.

It was not to be expected that the Public Peace
proclaimed by Charles V. would be better observed _
than those of former reigns. Two imperial coun-
cillors, Gregory Lamparter and Johann Lucas, the
master of the treasury, were attacked and taken
prisoners on their way to Augsburg from Worms,
where they had assisted at the closing of the diet.
Niirnberg, the seat of government and of the courts
of law, and at this time in a certain sense the capital
city of the empire, was surrounded on all sides by
the wildest private wars. Hans Thomas of Abs-
berg, doubly irritated by the resolutions taken
against him by the Swabian League, assembled again,
in 1522, the most daring and reckless reiters
from all the surrounding districts: fresh letters of
challenge were brought to Niirnberg every day, or
were found stuck on the whipping-post in the

12

116 SICKINGEN. . -Boox If.

neighbouring villages; the roads east and west
became unsafe. There was a lonely chapel at
Kriigelsten, in the territory of Bamberg, where
mass was said three times a week. Here, under
colour of hearing it, all the bands of robbers and
their scouts met together. Woe to the company of
merchants that fell in their way, for they not only
plundered them of all their wares, but had now
adopted the barbarous practice of cutting off the
right hands of their prisoners: it was in vain that
the wretched sufferers implored them at least to
cut off the left and leave the right. Hans Thomas
of Absberg thrust the right hand of a shopkeeper,
which he had chopped off, into the bosom of the
unfortunate man, and told him that when he got to
Niirnberg he might give it to the biirgermeister in
his name.*

The Frankfurt Acts of 1522 present a very
striking example of the general insecurity. Philip
Fiirstenberg, who was sent by the town of Frank-

* Miillner’s Niirnberger Annalen for the years 1522 and 15238
contain this and many other details ; for example, Riidigkheim
und Reuschlein “ haben im Junio 2 Wigen mit Kupfer beladen
zwo Meil yon Frankfurt angenommen und die Fuhrleut un-
gescheut bendthiget, dass sie das Kupfer in das Schloss Riicking,
dem von Riidigkheim zugehérig, fihren miissen.”—“ Riidigk-
heim and Reuschlin did in June take, two miles from Frankfurt,
two waggons loaded with copper, and in the most shameless
manner constrained the drivers to convey the copper to the
castle Riicking, which belonged to Riidigkheim.” Riidigkheim
wrote to the burgher of Niirnberg, to whom the copper be-
longed, that if he wished to have it back, he might come and
buy it of him. They were exasperated because the citizens of
Niirnberg had complained to the emperor.

Guar. IV. SICKINGEN. 117

furt to the Council of Regency to take part in the
government of the empire, found the road he had
to travel from Miltenberg to Wertheim so unsafe,
that he quitted his carriage, and joining a party
of some ’prentice tailors whom he met, assumed
their garb, and took a by-road on foot. The car-
riage was attacked by several horsemen with bent
cross-bows. In order to reach Wertheim he was
forced to take an escort of five or six men armed
with firelocks or cross-bows.* ‘The Reiters are
angry,” says he: “what they are about I know not.”
In this state of things, when the Council of
Regency could not even protect its own members,
there broke out a private war, more violent than
any that had disturbed the peace of the empire
during Maximilian’s reign. In August, 1522,
Franz von Sickingen, with a well-armed force of
infantry, cavalry and artillery, ventured to attack
an elector of the empire, the Archbishop of ‘reves,
in his own country and strongly fortified capital.
In the main this was merely a private war
(Fehde) like many others, originating in a personal
quarrel (this same elector having once earnestly
entreated the assistance of the empire against Sic-
kingen’s outrages in Hessen) ; the pretext for which
was some doubtful legal claims, — especially con-

* Fiirstenberg writes from Wertheim on St. Peter’s and
Paul’s day, 1522 : “ also hab ich meyn gnedigen Herrn gebeten,
uns gen Wirtzburg zu verhelfen: ist er willig, Gott helf uns
furter.”—“ I have then besought my gracious Lord to assist us
in our journey to Wiirzburg: if he be willing, God help us
further.”

13

118 SICKINGEN. Boox III.

cerning a fine which had been transferred from
the archbishop to Sickingen ; and the real object,
the plunder and, if possible, the conquest of the
fortified towns. There exists a most interesting
letter from an old confidential friend of Sickingen’s,
in which the writer dissuades him from the en-
terprize, and lays before him all the chances of
success or failure. *

Other motives were also at work, which gave
public importance to this undertaking : success in
a hostile enterprise was no longer Sickingen’s ulti-
mate aim; he had an eye to interests of far greater
moment.

First of all, to those of the whole body of the
Knights of the Empire. We have seen how great
was their discontent at the state of public affairs
at that time: at the Swabian League, which took
upon itself to be at once accuser, judge and exe-
cutor of its own sentences; at the Imperial Cham-
ber, whose proceedings were only directed against
the weak, and left the strong to their own guid-
ance; at the encroachments of the princes, their
courts of law, taxes and feudal privileges. In the
spring of 1522 the nobility of the Upper Rhine
met at Landau, and resolved that they would only
allow their feudal affairs to be judged before feudal
judges and vassals, according to old custom; and
their differences with those of other classes, before
_ tribunals composed of impartial judges, of knightly

* Balthazar Schlér’s letter to Sickingen, without date, but
immediately before the outbreak of hostilities, in Gtinther’s
Codex Diplomaticus Rheno-Mosellanus, v. p. 202.

Cuapr. LV. SICKINGEN. odiS

rank* ; and that they would come to the assistance
of every man to whom this was refused. They
elected Franz von Sickingen their leader in this
matter. An address to the imperial towns, written
by Hutten and dated 1522 f, is the manifesto of
the opinions entertained by Sickingen and his fol-
lowers. Never were the sovereign princes more
vehemently accused of violence and injustice; the
towns were invited to accept the friendship and
alliance of the nobility, and above all, to destroy
the Council of Regency, which Hutten looked upon
as the representative of the princely power.

The religious dissensions gave, of course, a
strong additional impulse to hostilities undertaken
against one of the most powerful of the spiritual

princes. The Ebernburg was, in fact, the first

* «|. wo der Kleger den Antwurter erfordert vor sein des
Antwurters Genoss, oder ungefehrlich dem etwas gemess oder
dariiber, unparteilichs Rechten oder Austrags, vor die, so inlen-
disch der Sachen gesessen oder gelegen seyn.”—“where the
plaintiff cites the defendant before a tribunal composed of his
own and the defendant’s peers (or nearly so), and having juris-
diction over affairs occurring in the country.”

+ “Beklagunge der Freistette deutscher nation.” — “ Com-
plaints of the free cities of the German nation.” — The date is
ascertained by these words : —

“ Der (Kaiser) zeucht nun von uns wider Mher ;
Sie wollen nit, dass er widerkheer.”
“ The emperor now leaves us again ;
They wish he may not come back.”

These ideas prevailed in the following year also, as we learn
from a writing by. Kettenbach: “ Practica practicirt,” &c.
(Panzer, ii. 190.) wherein the cities are exhorted not to involve
themselves in the disputes between the nobles and the princes.

14

120 SICKINGEN. Boox IL. .

place in which the evangelical service was regularly
celebrated in its new form. Sickingen’s followers
went further than the school of Wittenberg. They
considered the administration of the Lord’s Supper
in both kinds not alone lawful, but absolutely
necessary. John Cicolampadius was the first who
condemned as pernicious, the spiritual satisfaction
which the people felt at listening every day to
the unintelligible muttering of the mass, being
present at the ceremony of benediction, and com-
mending themselves to God without much expen-
diture of time or attention; and he accordingly
read the mass only on Sundays, omitting the ele-
vation of the host, and using none but the Ger-
man language.* There is a letter extant written
by Sickingen himself, in which he inveighs against
the use of pictures in churches, and pronounces
them better fitted for the decoration of stately
halls; he also declaims against the invocation of
saints. The marriage of Johann Schwebel, one of
his preachers, was arranged by him. One of his
friends was Hartmuth von Kronenberg, who may
be considered as the earliest specimen of a pious
and earnest Lutheran in the style of more modern
times. TF

The connexion with these mighty elements gave
unwonted importance to Sickingen’s enterprises.

* Cicolampadii Epistola ad Hedionem in Gerdesius Historia
Evangelii, tom. i. Monumenta, p. 166.

t Letters from Kronenberg to the four mendicant orders,
25th June, 1522, and to the inhabitants of Kronenberg ; Miinch’s
Sickingen, ii. pp. 145. and 158.

Cuar. IV. SICKINGEN. 121

The majority of the whole knighthood of the em-
pire was on his side, and exerted itself in his
favour; he also called on Luther, to whom he had
formerly offered protection, for his support. And
assuredly it would have been no mean alliance,
had the. monk, whom the nation honoured as a
prophet, taken up his abode with the brave and
puissant knight, and lent to the formidable bands
of the Ebernburg the powerful aid of his word.
But Luther had the great good sense to avoid all
political connexions, to attempt no violence, and
to trust solely and entirely to the might of his
doctrines. Sickingen received nothing from Saxony
but dissuasions. Nevertheless, his manifesto to the
inhabitants of Treves shows how much he reckoned
on the prevailing national inclinations; for he pro-
mises that ‘‘he will deliver them from the heavy.
antichristian yoke of the priesthood and lead them
to evangelical freedom.” * The ideas and sentiments
of a warlike noble, who feels himself a match even
for a powerful prince; of the head of the whole
_ order of knighthood ; and of a champion of the new
religious opinions, were all blended in his mind.
It is a significant fact that Hutten, in one of his
dialogues, puts into the mouth of Sickingen an
ardent panegyric on Ziska, the invincible hero
who cleared his country of monks and idle priests,
employed their property for the general good, and
put a stop to the depredations of Rome. f

* Extracts from the manifestoes in Meiner’s Leben Huttens,

p. 307.
t Monitor Secundus Opp., iv. p. 144.

(vy) SICKINGEN. Boox IIL.

On the 27th of August, 1522, Sickingen declared
war against the archbishop, chiefly for those things
“wherein he had acted against God and the em-
peror’s majesty.” Secretly assisted, rather than
hindered, bythe Elector of Mainz, he arrived
before Treves on the 7th of September, having
taken St. Wendel. He crossed the Marsberg with
1500 horse, 5000 foot, and a considerable body of
artillery *; and we have reason to believe that he
expected to be joined at this point by his friends,
Rennenberg, who was recruiting for him in Cleves
and Juliers; the bastard of Sombreff, who was doing
the same in the archbishopric of Cologne; and
Hanz Voss, who was arming in the territory of
Limburg ; Nickel Minkwitz, too, was to join him
with 1500 men out of Brunswick. In Sickingen’s
camp, it was rumoured that he would soon be
elector; nay, perhaps something even greater still.
The eyes of the whole empire were turned upon
his movements; the delegate of Duke George of
Saxony wrote to his master that nothing so dan-
gerous to the princes of the empire had been at-
attempted for centuries. Others affirmed that
affairs were in such a state, that before long it
would be impossible to know who was king or
emperor, prince or lord.

The turbulent and anarchical power of the
knights thus once more threatened the peace and

* This number, smaller than that which is usually given, is
taken from the Flersheimer Chronik, in Miinch’s Sickingen,
iii, p. 215.

{ Letter in the Royal Saxon Archives.

e

Cuap. IV. SICKINGEN. 123

security of the whole empire. It is not easy to
imagine what would have been the result had they
been successful.

It is scarcely credible that a tolerably well or-
ganised government could have been formed out
of the several knightships which were now become
absolute and independent sovereignties; or that
the wild and arbitrary courses of men who were
accustomed to look to their swords for right and
security, could easily have been restrained by the
sermons of the reformers: it is at least certain that
(Ecolampadius found a hard and ungrateful soil
on Sickingen’s mountain fortress. Moreover, the
elements of which this body was composed were of
the most heterogeneous natures: the knighthood —
one of the most peculiar products of the middle ages
—arose out of, and existed in, the disorganisation:
of the powers of the state: whereas the declared ten-
dency of the new religious system was to renovate
and confirm those powers. The position of Sickingen
himself was anomalous: the forces which he led
were by no means of a chivalrous kind ; he was at
the head of a hired army which could only be
held together by money, and furnished with the
apparatus for a kind of warfare essentially opposed
to all knightly modes of combat. Strange spec-
tacle!—the forces which decided the fate of the
world in two different ages were here in contact,
and it was imagined that they could be brought to
unite and co-operate! We, in our days, can see
how impossible was such a union ; for it is only by
keeping pace, sincerely and energetically, with the

124 SICKINGEN. Boox III.

progress of society, that any thing permanent can
be effected. Even at that time, however, it was
perceived, that if the power of the princes were
overthrown, and the constitution of the empire
(which was as yet by no means firmly established)
broken up, nothing was to be expected but an ex-
clusive, violent, and at the same time self-conflicting
rule of the nobles.

The question then was, who should undertake
the defence of public order, thus fearfully me-
naced.

The Council of Regency did all that was in
its power. Remonstrances were sent to Sickingen,
and mandates to all the neighbouring princes,
enjoining them to resist his attempts. On Sickin-
gen, the warnings from the Regency made little
impression: he replied, that he himself intended to
introduce a new order of things into the empire.*
He utterly refused to submit to a decision of the
Imperial Chamber, and said that he had a court of

* Planitz to the Elector Frederic, 13th Sept.: “ Sickingen
habe gesagt, ér wolle sich eines Thuns unterstehn, dessen sich
kein rémischer Kaiser unterstanden. 28th Sept. er habe den
Boten des Regiments gesagt: er wisst vorwar, sein Herr der
Kaiser werde nicht ziirnen, ob er den Pfaffen ein wenig strafet
und ihm die Kronen eintrinkt, die er genommen hitte.” —
“ Sickingen had said he would dare to do a deed which no
Roman emperor had yet dared. 28th Sept. he said to the mes-
senger of the Regency, he knew for certain that his lord the em-
peror would not be angry because he punished the priest a little,
and paid him off for the crowns he had taken.” People really
began to believe that the emperor might have some understanding
with him. The emperor afterwards said, Franz had not served
him well enough to induce him to connive at matters of this sort.

Cuapr. IV. SICKINGEN. 195

justice of his own, composed of soldiers who argued
with muskets and carronades. It is very probable
that his whole army did not think as he did; at
any rate, the Council of Regency asserted that
Franz’s following and power were greatly dimi-
nished in consequence of their efforts. But a far
weightier authority was required to force him to
submission, and every thing depended on the re-
sistance he would find from the elector and his
allies.

Richard von Greiffenklau, Archbishop of Treves,
had made the best possible preparations. He
had burned down the convent of St. Maximin, on
which the enemy reckoned for stores, bringing in
his own hand the first torch that fired it: in the
town, his presence kept down the disturbances
which certainly had begun. The clergy mounted
guard round the cathedral, the citizens in the
market-place, the mercenaries on the walls and in
the towers; and the conduct of the war was en-
trusted to the native nobles who had not deserted
the cause of the see.

While Sickingen, who had calculated on making
a coup-de-main, now met with an unexpected and
determined resistance, it so happened that all his
friends and allies, whose arrival was necessary to
the completion of his force, were either detained or
beaten. The Duke of Cleves and the Elector of
Cologne ordered all the horsemen who had been
recruited in their territories, to stay at home,
under pain of forfeiture of their fiefs, and even of
their lives. The young Landgrave of Hessen suc-

126 SICKINGEN. Boox IIT.

ceeded in defeating Minkwitz’s troops as they were
marching from Brunswick; taking their leader,
with all his papers, prisoner, and finally inducing
the soldiers to enter his own service.* All these
reverses deterred the Liineburg and Westphalian
troops from taking the field at all.

On the other side, the Elector Palatine, Sic-
kingen’s former patron, as well as his old and bitter
enemy the Landgrave of Hessen, took arms and
hastened to the assistance of their neighbour and
ally, the Elector of Treves.

Sickingen, deprived of the support he had |
expected, and encamped before a bravely-defended
town, in an open country, among a people ex-
asperated by his devastations, did not dare to await
the conjunction of forces so superior to his own;
besides this, he himself did not evince that energy
and those resources of talent and bravery, without
which no one can venture with impunity on such
hazardous enterprises. On the 14th of September
he was compelled to abandon Treves.f+

That one week sufficed to give a turn to the
whole destiny of Germany.

The three sovereigns who represented the
threatened princely power, were thus triumphant

* Letter from Landgrave Philip to the Elector of Treves,
5th Sept. 1522, in Rommel’s Geschichte von Hessen, vol. v.
p- 858.

{ These events at Treves are described by Latomus and
Browerus, Annal. Trev. ii. 340., who has also quoted Latomus
Gesta Trevirorum in Hontheim’s Prodromus, p. 858., Chronicon
S. Maximini, ibid. p. 1035.

Cuar. IV. SICKINGEN. 137

over the rebellious knights and their leaders. They
were not content with clearing the archbishopric
of its enemies; and though, strange to say, they did
not pursue Sickingen, they immediately attacked
his allies.

The Elector of Mainz, who was accused of
allowing a detachment of Sickingen’s horse to pass
the Rhine unmolested, was forced to buy his peace
at the cost of 25,000 gulden.*

Hartmuth von Kronenberg, whom the landgrave
wanted above all to punish for the share he had
taken in Sickingen’s foray on Darmstadt, was
beleaguered in his castle near Frankfurt. The
landgrave would not hear of pardon or conditions ;
he helped to point the cannon with his own hand.
The knight escaped but just in time, for his fortress
was forced to surrender on the 16th of October.
The three princes received in person the oaths of
allegiance from the inhabitants, and the town was
for a long time treated as Hessian.

They next marched against Frowen von Hutten,
“because he had taken part in the rebellion, and
received. proclaimed outlaws in his house:” his
castle of Saalmiinster was taken.

The same fate was shared by Philip Waiss of
Haussen in the Mark of Fulda, and by Rudeken in

* The delegate of Duke George says that this is one of the
reasons: “ Die andern stecken in der Feder.”—“ The others
stick in the pen.” ,

+ Tendel: “ Beschreibung der Belagerung von Kronenberg.”
— Minch, iii. p. 28.

°128 ; SICKINGEN. _~ Boox IIT.

Rukingen; others endeavoured to save themselves
by negotiation.

A similar storm threatened Sickingen’s allies
in distant parts of the country. The Franconian
nobles had not, it is true, directly assisted him, but
they had encouraged him in his project, and had
generally adhered to his faction: the Swabian
League, on the contrary, had made common cause
with the princes, especially with the Elector Pala-
tine, and now summoned the Franconian knights
before its tribunal, to stand their trial for certain
breaches of the Public Peace. The knights did
not consider themselves bound to obey this citation,
and, accordingly, met at Schweinfurt to protest
against it: they were still determined to defend
themselves. ‘The vassals of the Bishop of Wiirz-
burg, who had. been the last to join the League,
were so exasperated at his tardiness, that, in the
beginning of the year 1523, they deprived him of
all his offices. This threw all Swabia and Fran-
conia into confusion. From the very superior
strength of the League, the result of the struggle
was easily foreseen, unless the Council of Regency
had. power to prevent it.

Events indeed now acquired a totally different
character and importance, from their effect on this
supreme administrative body of the empire.

Its authority was formerly resisted and con-
temned by Sickingen and his friends, for which,
on the accusation of the procurator of Treves, Sic-
kingen had been outlawed on the 8th of October,
contrary to the laws of the empire, without sum-
mons or trial. Now, however, his enemies placed

Cuapr. IV. SICKINGEN. 129

themselves in an attitude of equal defiance, and
of equal peril to the Council of Regency : instead of
pursuing the outlaw himself, they attacked his
supposed allies, frequently without proof of their
guilt, and took their fortified dwellings. The
Swabian League, which already declared that it had
only acquiesced in the creation of the Council of
Regency on the supposition of its union, now
openly usurped part of the functions of the Imperial
_Chamber by the citations before its own tribunal to
which we have alluded; and it did not deign even
to return an answer to an admonition, not to molest
people about the Public Peace. :

Men’s pretensions naturally rise with their power.
As the attempts of Sickingen, and the insubordinate
spirit of the Franconian nobility had not been put
down by the Council of Regency, but by the superior
force and: the arms of their neighbours, it was
natural that the latter should now continue the
struggle with a view to their own interests, with-
out much regard to the supreme authority of the
empire.* "

Hence it happened that the Council of Regency
soon took under its protection the very men it had
but just before treated as its enemies. Frowen
von Hutten, after the opinions of the most con-
siderable members of the Imperial Chamber had
been heard, obtained without much trouble a
mandate wherein the princes were required to
restore all his castles to him; and shortly after a

* See the letter from the Elector of Treves, 2d Nov. 1522, in
Miinch, iii. 33.
VOL. II. K

130 SICKINGEN.  __ Boox HIE.

formal judgment was given in his favour. At the
same time, the Council of Regency pressed the
princes to release the Elector of Mainz from the
conditions so arbitrarily imposed on him.* These
princes had wished for the aid of the empire to put
down the outlawed Sickingen; but this they found
it impossible to obtain, either from the Regency or
from the Estates assembled in the beginning of the
year 1523; if the sentence of outlawry had not
already been pronounced, we may safely assume _
that it would not have been pronounced at all.7
Some members of the Swabian League proposed
that all meetings and associations among the order
of knights should be forbidden, but to this the
Regency could not now be brought to consent; on
the contrary, it proclaimed its intention of protecting
all the knights, except those who had committed
any offence against the Public Peace.

It appears to me that the knights as a body now
first became of real importance to the organisation
and progress of the empire. Their wild project
of founding an independent power was at an end.
The Council of Regency was their sole support,
and they found themselves under the necessity of
making common cause with it. The union of these
two bodies, essentially distinct, was rendered more

* Planitz, 4th Feb. 1523, says, they should release him from
his obligations, and give Sickingen an amicable hearing.

+ Planitz thought on the 24th Nov. that sentence of out~
lawry would not be pronounced against Sickingen, “ man hatte
ihn denn citiert; aber geschehn ist geschehn” — “ without.
citing him to appear ; but what is done is done.”

Cuap. IV. SICKINGEN. 31

strict by the circumstance that the knights and the
Regency had both embraced the evangelical doe-
trines. For the same reason, the Elector of
Saxony, who was the main prop of the Regency,
entered into a kind of alliance with the knights.
In the second quarter of the year 1523, when the
duty of personal attendance at the Council of
Regency fell upon the Elector of Mainz, his place
was filled by his cousin, the grand master, Albert of
Prussia, whose sole purpose was to maintain the
dominion of his order, 7. ¢. the Teutonic knights,
and especially those of Swabia and Franconia, in
their own country, and to set the whole powers
of the empire in motion to that effect.

Little as it had been to be desired a year ago, that
Sickingen should conquer Treves, it was of great
importance that he should be able to defend him-
self against the attacks which were preparing against
him in the spring of 1523.

Thus, by a strange turn of fate, the safety
of the knight who had so often disturbed the
Public Peace, and committed so many deeds of
violence, became now, after he was outlawed, inex-
tricably bound up with the interests of order in the
empire. .

Nor did he by any means give up his cause: he
expected to receive assistance from Lower Germany,
and from the Upper Rhine; to be joined by the
Bohemian and Franconian knights, and to be sup-
ported by the Lutherans. From his fortress of
Landstuhl, where he was then living, he one day
descried horsemen among the distant underwood ;

K 2 ;

132 SICKINGEN. Boox It

he flattered himself that they were Lutherans
who were coming to see what he was about, but
they came no nearer, and tied their horses to the
bushes.* What he saw was the advanced guard of
the enemy who were approaching to besiege him.

Meanwhile he had noapprehension. He had just
repaired his fortress; and had no doubt that he
would be able to stand a siege of three months at
least, in which time his allies would come up and
relieve him.

But the event proved that he had not rightly
calculated the improvement that had taken place in
the engines of war during the preceding century. He
had no other means of defence than those used by
the knights of old: it remained to be seen whether
the lofty situation, the vaulted towers—solid as the
rocks they stood on—and the massive walls, could
afford protection against artillery. It was soon
evident that the old defences were far too weak for
the modern arts of war. On the 30th of April
1523, the princes began to bombard the castle with
carronades and culverins, well supplied with ammu-
nition and well served. The young landgrave, who
appeared in the dress of a landsknecht, showed
courage and skill}: the great tower, which com-

* Hubert Th. Leodius, Acta et Gesta Francisei de Sickingen
in Freher Script. Rer. Germ. iii, p. 305.

+ Lettera: da Ispruch a di 12 Mazo, 1523, al S* Meh. di
Mantoa. “ Il Landgrafio si é portato magnanimamente, essendo -
sempre stato de li primi, in zuppone con le calze tagliate et in
corsaletto da Lanzichenech, et  giovane di 18 anni.”—Sanwio’s
Cron. Ven., vol. xxxiv.

Cuar. IV. DEATH OF SICKINGEN. 133

manded and threatened their camp, fell the same
day: the newness of its walls made them less
able to withstand the shock of the cannon-balls.
Sickingen seeing this unexpected misfortune, went
to a loophole, and leaning on a battering engine,
sought to get a view of the state of things, and of
what was to be done. A culverin happened at the
moment to be pointed in that direction with but too
sure an aim; the implements of defence were scat-
tered in all directions, and Sickingen himself was
hurled against a sharp beam and mortally wounded
in the side,

The whole fortress was a ruin: in the only vault
which remained standing, lay the lord of the castle,
bereft of all hope. No help appeared in sight.
“ Where now,” said Sickingen, “ are those gentle-
men, my friends, who promised me so much?
Where is Fiirstenberg ? where are the Swiss and
the Strasburgers ?” He was at last forced to capi-
tulate.*

The princes having refused to allow him liberty
to evacuate the castle, as, according to custom, he
proposed, he said, “I will not be their prisoner
long.” He had scarcely strength enough left to sign
the conditions, and lay dying when the princes en-
tered the donjon.

The Elector of Treves said, “‘ What charge had
you to bring against me, Franz, that you attacked
me and my poor subjects in my see?” “ And
what against me,” said the landgrave, “ that you
_ * Aecount of what occurred in the wars of Franz Sickingen ;

Spalatin, Sammlung zu Siichs. Gesch., v. p. 148.
Kk 3

134 DEATH OF SICKINGEN. Boox III.

invaded my land in my nonage?” Sickingen re-
plied, ‘‘ I have now to render an account toa greater
sovereign.”

His chaplain Nicolas asked him whether he wished
to confess, but he answered, “‘ I have already con-
fessed to God in my heart.”

The chaplain addressed to him some last words
of consolation, and held up the host; the princes
bared their heads and knelt down: at that moment
Sickingen expired, and the princes said a paternoster
for his soul.*

Sickingen’s memory will live for ever; not on
account of any great achievements productive of
lasting results, nor even on account of his extraor-
dinary bravery, or of any eminent moral qualities
he evinced, but for the novelty and importance of
the position to which he gradually attained. The
first step in his rise was his connexion with the
Elector Palatine, who employed him against his
enemies, opened a career to him, and afforded him
support and assistance both publicly and in secret.
Thus ina short time, from an inconsiderable knight,
possessor only of two or three mountain castles, he
became a powerful Condottiere who could bring a
small army into the field at his own charges. The
more considerable he became, themore he felt tempted
to pursue his own line of policy, and justified in
doing so. The Wiirtemberg war was the first occa-
sion on which he separated himself from the elector,
who did not cordially approve that enterprise.

* The Flersheimer Chronik contains the most authentic ac-
count. Munch, iii. 222.

Cuap. IV. SICKINGEN. 135

He did not, however, on that account join the
Swabian League; on the contrary, he soon entered
into the closest alliance with the Franconian knights,
with whom that body was at enmity. This it was
that rendered his position so imposing. We have
seen how a few years before, Wiirtemberg, the
Palatinate, and Wiirzburg opposed the Swabian
League with the aid of the knights. Now, however,
the princes had been forced to join the League, and
Wiirtemberg had been subdued ; so that Sickingen
and the knights maintained the opposition single-
handed. Visions of reviving the ancient inde-
pendence of the nobility; of freeing themselves
from the territorial jurisdiction of the temporal
and spiritual princes, and of opening the way
for the spread of the new religious convictions,
floated before their minds. Never was there a
more singular combination: in the midst of the
deeds of violence that were committed, there was
a lively and ready apprehension of great ideas:
it is this strange union which characterises the
nobility of that time. Meanwhile they had neither
the intellectual power nor the political influence
necessary to carry out projects of such a nature.
When Sickingen at last decidedly attacked the
princely authority, mightier powers took the field
against him; the Palatinate not only abandoned
him, but combined with his enemies for his destruc-
tion.* He then discovered that he was not so

* Contemporaries saw it in this light, as is shown by the dia-
logue between the Fox and the Wolf: “ Wolf: Wie mainstu hat
der Pfalzgraff gethon, wir wolten gut feiste Bolz erlangt han?

Kk 4 f

136 SICKINGEN. Boox III.

strong as he believed himself to be, that he did not
owe his elevation to his own powers alone, and that
those which had helped to raise, were now turned
against him. In this conflict he perished.

The taking of Landstuhl was a victory of the
order of princes (Ftirstenthum) over that of knights
( Ritterthum); of the cannon over the stronghold, and
in so far, of the new order of things over the old ;
it fortified the newly-arisen independent powers of
the empire.

All the castles belonging to Sickingen and his
friends now fell into the hands of the princes. They
were twenty-seven in all, including those taken in
the course of the autumn. Those on the right
bank of the Rhine fell to the share of the landgrave,
those on the left, were divided between the elector
palatine and the archbishop. In the Ebernburg,
the only castle that defended itself for any time,
rich booty was taken,—splendid jewels and plate,
both for worldly and religious purposes ; but above
all, thirty-six pieces of artillery, the finest of which,
—the Nightingale, cast by Master Stephen of Frank-
furt—measured thirteen feet and a half, weighed
seventy hundred weight, and was decorated with the
figures of the knight and his lady, their respective
ancestors, and the saint for whom they had formerly
had a peculiar devotion — St. Francis.* This was

Fuchs : es ist bei Got war, derselb hat uns allein den Schaden
thon des wir uns nit versehen.” —“ The Wolf: How thinkest
thou, has the elector palatine done—should we have received good
large cross-bow bolts? The Fox: It is true, by God; he alone
has done us the mischief against which we had not guarded.”

* Report in Spalatin, p. 151.

Cuar. IV. FRANCONIAN KNIGHTS. LB7

part of the landerave’s share. The princes bound
themselves to aid each other to keep what they had
won in common, after which, on the 6th of June,
they separated.

At the same moment the Swabian League held
a meeting at Nordlingen, to which all the Fran-
conian knights accused of a breach of the Public
Peace were summoned for trial. Some of them suc-
ceeded in clearing themselves from suspicion ; others
appeared, but failing to prove their innocence, they
_ were not admitted to their oath. Many altogether
disdained to present themselves before the council-
lors of the league.* Against the two last classes,
an army of 1500 horse and 15,000 foot assembled on
the 15th June, at Diinkelspiel, under the command
of George Truchsess: the cities of Augsburg, Ulm,
and Niirnberg provided the artillery.f Such an
army as this was far too powerful to be resisted by the
Franconian nobles. Bocksberg, near Mergentheim,
was considered the strongest castle in Franconia,
and upon it, on the advice of the Niirnbergers, the
march was first directed. The Rosenbergs, to whom
it belonged, had originally meant to defend them-
selves, and had hired a troop of Landsknechts and
musketeers to serve their guns; but when they
saw such an overpowering force, they gave up all

* Letter from Nérdlingen in the Dresden Archives, beginning
of June, 1523, “ der Bund geht teglich zwir in Rath.”—“ The
league meets in council every day.” Chiefly from Miillner’s
Annalen, which contains a journal of the whole expedition.

+ Niirnberg gave 2 cannon, 2 carronades, 2 nightingales,
2 culverins, 6 rabinets, 6 mortars, 60 pole-axes.

138 HUTTEN. Boox III.

idea of defence, and surrended their castle with
its stores. This example put an end to all resist-
ance. The castle of Absberg was burnt, and nothing
left standing but the bare walls. In the Kriigelstein
there stood a tower, the walls of which were eight
feet thick, even at the top; this was blown up with
gunpowder. Waldstein, in the midst of its wilder-
ness, whither many a prisoner had been dragged,
was blown up and destroyed by Wolf von Freiberg,
the captain of the city of Augsburg: twenty-six
castles are enumerated, all of which were seized, and
most destroyed. Some of these were Bohemian
fiefs; and at first the Bohemians had made a show
of resistance in the neighbourhood of the mountains;
but the League ordered its commander to act up
to his instructions, without regard to the Bohe-
mians, who accordingly retreated, leaving him to
fulfil his terrible commission.

The independent knights were utterly crushed.
Just as they had caught the inspiration of religion,
and had hoped by its influence to open a new
career for themselves, their power was broken for
ever. We must not fail to observe a fact intimately
connected with this event. The man who first
brought the warlike spirit of knighthood into
contact with the religious agitations of the times,
Ulrich von Hutten, was involved in the common
catastrophe. He had given to Sickingen’s enter-
prizes the incalculable aid of a zealous counsellor
and encouraging friend: he was, therefore, na-
turally struck with consternation at his fall. He
dared not endanger the safety of his relations by

Cuap. IV. DEATH OF HUTTEN. 139

his presence ; andin Upper Germany he was equally
obnoxious to the vengeance of the spiritual, and
of the victorious temporal authorities; he took
refuge in Switzerland, as others had done in Saxony.
There he fell again into the same bitter and de-
sponding state of mind which he had once laboured
under in his youth. Nor, even here, did he al-
ways find a welcome; he wandered from place to
place, under the unhappy necessity of asking money
and assistance of his literary friends, many of
whom shunned him as dangerous. Erasmus, who
carefully kept up his connexions among the great,
‘was frightened at the idea of receiving a visit from
him, and avoided and repulsed him. In addition to
this, his old disease broke out again in a dreadful
manner, Yet the veteran combatant did not lose
his courage; once more he poured forth all the
vehemence of his rhetoric against Erasmus, whom
he looked upon as an apostate. But he had now
no longer strength to bear such violent emotions
and exertions, and before he could receive the
answer of Erasmus, disease put an end to his life : —
he died at Ufnau, on the lake of Ziirich, where he
had gone at Zwingli’s advice to consult a priest
skilled in the healing art.*

Tt was fortunate for Luther that he had made
no closer alliance with the knights; as both he and
the doctrine he preached would have been involved
in their evil destiny.

* Zwinglius to Wolfhardt, 11th Oct., “ libros nullos habuit,
supellectilem nullam preter calamum.” — Epp., p. 313.

140 OPPOSITION OF Boox III.

If we now return to the point whence we started,
we shall clearly perceive, that the whole turn of
affairs was unpropitious, and even dangerous, to the
Council of Regency. It would indeed have been
unable to do any thing for Sickingen, having tied
its own hands by declaring him an outlaw; it
would however gladly have afforded protection to
the knightly order; but what resistance could it
possibly make to two such powerful armies as those
of the League and of the princes? Moreover these
two powers, emboldened by conquests, assumed an
attitude of still great defiance, and even hostility.
The princes declared the judgment in favour of
Frowen von Hutten invalid and illegal*, and re-
jected the proceedings of the Regency in that and
all other cases. | ‘

To this dangerous hostility another no less
formidable was soon added.

THE CITIES AND THE IMPERIAL COURT.

Under the circumstances we have been de-
scribing, the establishment of the proposed import
duties, by which the power of the Council of
Regency must have been materially increased,
could not have failed to produce important results.

* Planitz, 22d July. He thinks that, under such circum-
stances, the Council of Regency could not last long : “ Denn der
dreier Fiirstent und des Bunds Vornehmen will sich mit unsern
gethanen Pflichten gar nicht leiden.” —“ The intentions of the
three princes and of the league will not square with our duties.”

Cuar. IV. THE CITIES. 141

There ought to have been no hesitation on the
subject ; the States had resolved on it ; the emperor
had given his consent beforehand. A messenger
from the lieutenant of the Empire had already
carried the acts and the Recess of the diet to
Spain.

But we have already remarked how much the
cities thought themselves injured and endangered.
by such an interference with commerce : they were
determined not to submit to it without resistance.

They had also many other grievances to allege.

In the year 1521, the decree concerning the
levies for the expedition to Rome had been passed
without summoning the cities, according to ancient
usage, to the deliberation. The cities immediately
complained, whereupon an explanation was’ given
which satisfied them for the moment.

Since then, however, the attempts made to
meet the exigencies of the empire by taxes which
would have fallen most heavily on the cities;
their determined resistance; the attacks on the
monopolies on the one side, and the obstinate
maintenance of them on the other, had been con-
tinually augmenting the ill-will between the cities
and the higher classes; and at the diet of 1522-3
it openly burst forth.

A general meeting of the States was announced
for the 11th of December, 1522, in order to hear and
discuss the proposals to be made by the Council of
Regency and the committee, for succours to be
granted to the Hungarians. It had formerly been
customary for the Council of Regency after sub-

142 OPPOSITION OF Boox III.

mitting a proposition, to retire and leave the
three colleges to deliberate thereupon. On this
occasion, however, the Regency did not retire: the
electors and princes assented to its proposal without
separating, and it was then laid before the cities.
The cities, which were peculiarly interested in
questions of this kind, and always rather hard to
satisfy, asked time for consideration — only till the
afternoon. Hereupon they received an answer
which they little expected: they were told, that
“the usage in the empire was, that when a thing
was determined on by the electors, princes and
other Estates, the cities should be content to abide
by it.” The citizens, on their side, contended, that
if they were to share weal and woe with the other
States they ought also to have a voice in the de-
liberations; in short, that those who took their
purses must be fain to take their counsel. The
subsidies in money were what they particularly
objected to; like the other States, they would only
furnish men. But no attention was paid by the as-
sembly to a resolution they drew up to this effect.
A mandate was issued, requiring them to furnish
contributions which they had never voted: they
asked fresh time for deliberation, but were again
‘told that it was not the practice: they were pre-
paring to. reply when it struck eleven, and the
sitting was dissolved.*

The cities were the more confounded at this

* Letter from Holzhausen to Frankfort, Dec. 1522. Frankf.
Arch., vol. xxxvi., particularly f. 110. Die Supplik der Stiidte,

“Cuar. IV. THE CITIES. 148

proceeding, on being told that it was by special
favour that two of their deputies were received
into the committee, whereas the counts had only
one: they thought this betrayed an intention of
excluding them from the committees altogether.
In the year 1487, they had given up the oppo-
sition which, as a body, they had long maintained,
because the Elector Berthold of Mainz had, as we
saw, obtained for them a practical share in the
deliberations; and we know how powerfully this
was sometimes exercised: they now supposed that
the intention was to strip them of all their rights,
at the same time that the fulfilment of their obli-
gations was strictly enforced.

As measures which threatened to be extremely
injurious to their trade and manufactures were
now resolved on with reference to monopolies and
import duties, and as a fresh petition, in which all
their grievances past and present were set forth,
had proved as ineffectual as the preceding ones,
they determined to resist with all their might.

They steadily withheld their assent to the de-
cisions of the diet, and obstinately refused to grant
a loan which they were called upon to advance,
and which was to be repaid out of the proceeds of
the tax for the Turkish war. Hereupon the.
princes took care to let them feel their displeasure.
“Phe imperial towns,” writes the deputy from
Frankfurt *, “ are departing under heavy disgrace :

* Holzhausen, 25th, 26th, 29th Jan., 1528. Vol. xxxvii. of
the Frankf. A. is here my chief authority.

144 THE CITIES AND Boox IIIf. |

time alone can show what will be the result; but
my journey home is a sad one.”

It was fortunate for the cities that the decisions
of the States did not immediately acquire the force
of law, but had first to be sent to Spain to receive
the emperor’s ratification. Their only hope lay in
this. In March, 1523, the cities assembled in Spire,
and resolved to send an embassy of their own to
Spain, to represent to the emperor the injury they
apprehended from the proposed duties, as well as
their other grievances. .

The report of this mission is fortunately still
extant, and we will pause over it for a moment, as
it affords us a curious specimen of the manner in
which the affairs of Germany were conducted at
the Imperial court in Spain.

The journey was extremely long and fatiguing.
On the 15th of June, the delegates met at Lyons,
and it was not till the 6th of August that they
reached Valladolid: the chief cause of delay was
the oppressive heat, which even caused some of the
party to fall sick.

They began by visiting Markgrave Johann of
Brandenburg, the high chancellor, and above all the
councillors to whom the affairs of Germany were re-
‘ferred; Herr von Résch, Hannart, Provost Mirklin
of Waldkirchen, and Maximilian von Zevenberghen.

Hereupon, on the 9th of August, the empefor
gave them a formal audience in the presence of a
brilliant assembly of grandees, bishops and am-
bassadors: they addressed him in Latin, and were
answered inthe same language by the chancellor, -
in the emperor’s name.

Cuar. IV. THE IMPERIAL COURT. 145

A commission was then appointed to discuss
affairs with them, consisting only of the four
German councillors we have named above: the
proceedings commenced on the 11th of August.

The delegates had drawn up a statement of their
grievances under six heads ;— administration of
justice, tolls, subsidies, Public Peace, monopolies,
and other things of less importance. These they laid
before the commissioners in German and Latin, and
then went through them together, which gave them
an opportunity of expressing their wishes orally.

The councillors at first appeared unfavourably
inclined. They thought it unjust that the question ©
-of the jurisdictions should not have been brought
forward till now, when a young emperor had just
ascended the throne: they complained that no
class in the empire would do its part, although
neither the Council of Regency nor the courts
of justice could be maintained without supplies
from the several Estates: they exhorted the cities
to submit for a short time longer, and not to-re-
fuse their share of the contributions voted by the
diet on the part of the whole empire, in aid of the
Hungarians. A draught of a ratification of the
decree of the diet had actually been prepared at
the instigation of another imperial councillor,
Doctor Lamparter. But the delegates were not so
easily put off: they declared that the cities were
ready to contribute their share; for example, to
pay two members of the Imperial Chamber, and
even to pay the contributions, at the rate determined
at the diet of Constance; but that they had no

VOL. Il. L

146 / THE CITIES AND) - Boox III.

intention of submitting to the unjust demands
attempted to be enforced against them. They
supported their declarations with a few very acute
and stringent remarks. ‘‘ Who can foretell,” said
they, “what will become of the revenues raised
from these import duties? It is reported that a
scheme has already been proposed by the princes
for sharing the proceeds amongst themselves ; and
even if this be not true, there is a project of
electing a king of the Romans, who would be able
to maintain his power out of the revenue thus
raised.” In short, they made it appear that the
duty would be dangerous to the emperor himself;
remarking, at the same time, that the Council of
Regency was not composed in the manner most
favourable to the interests of the emperor. They
also promised the councillors, personally, “‘ to make
a grateful return to them for their trouble.”

The cities had thus hit upon the means by which
any thing was to be accomplished at the imperial
court.

At the next meeting the Provost of Waldkirchen
gave them to understand, that the emperor, finding
how unpopular it was, was not inclined to impose
the duty in question; neither was it his intention
to continue the Council of Regency; but he must
then ask, what the cities were prepared to do for
his imperial majesty, if he took the government into
his own hands? ‘The delegates replied, that if the
emperor granted their petition, and then made any
reasonable suggestion to them, they would show
themselves grateful and obedient subjects. Wald-

Cuap. LV. THE IMPERIAL COURT. 147

kirchen reminded them that it appeared from the
old registers, that the last emperors on their accession
had received a gift of honour from the cities; and
asked, why this had been omitted for the first time
with the young emperor, who, he said, placed his
whole confidence in the cities, and, were it not for
the wars, would take a straightforward and royal
course with regard to them.

Another matter next fell under discussion. The
pope’s nuncio had complained that in Augsburg,
Strasburg, and Niirnberg, Luther’s doctrines were
received, and his works printed. The delegates,
on being called to account for this, denied the
fact. They declared that not a syllable of Luther's
writings had been printed in their towns for se-
veral years; nay more, that foreign itinerant ven-
ders of his books had been punished; and that,
however much the common people might thirst
after the Gospel and reject human doctrines, it was
not from the towns that Luther found protection:
it was well known who his defenders were; the
cities, for their part, were resolved, hereafter as
heretofore, to remain Christian members of the
Christian church. |

Hereupon the two parties came to an agreement.
on the most important points. Another conference
between the whole commission and the delegates
was held on the 19th of August, and attended also
by the Count of Nassau. The doors having been
carefully closed, the delegates were informed, that
the emperor intended to take the government into
his own hands, to appoint a valiant lieutenant, and

L2

148 THE CITIES AND Boox HI.

a noble and dignified Imperial Chamber, and not to
allow the imposition of the import duties. The
amount of the sum to be offered to him was left to
the discretion of the delegates; but they promised
to come to an agreement on the subject with Han-
nart, who was to go to Germany as the imperial
commissioner.

The delegates were also to treat concerning the
monopolies; not exactly on the part of the cities as
a body, but in the name of the great mercantile
companies. The omnipotence of money and its
possessors soon helped them to the attainment of
their object. It was settled that the Council of
Regency was to be directed to pass no resolution
with regard to the monopolies, without again asking
the consent of his imperial majesty. *

Their commission being thus satisfactorily exe-
cuted, the delegates quitted Spain. At Lyons
they had an audience of Francis I., who vented
upon them his anger against the emperor. In De-
cember they reached Niirnberg, where a fresh diet
had just assembled.

The final result then was, that the imperial
court had entered into .a combination with the
cities, against the existing form of government in
the empire, and especially against the Council of
Regency.

* « Der gemeynen Frey und Reichs Stadt Potschafften Hand-
lung bei Romisch Kayserl. Majestadt zu Valedolid in Castilia.”—
“ The Negotiation of the Embassy of the united, free, and im-
perial Cities, with his Roman Imperial Majesty at Valladolid in
Castile.” In the monthof August, anno 1523. In the Frankf.
Arch., tom. xxxix, fol. 39—56,

Cuapr. LV. THE IMPERIAL COURT. 149

And, indeed, it was only natural that the im-
perial councillors, who had always been in com-
petition with this administrative body, should take
advantage of any internal dispute to rid themselves
of it.

Another and a still stronger motive existed.
The idea had really arisen in Germany, as the
towns had hinted, of electing a king of the Romans.
Ferdinand of Austria, the emperor’s own brother,
was the man pointed out by the public voice. It
was believed, as far as I can discover*, that he
would govern in concert with the Council of
Regency, according to the forms of the consti-
tution which had just been established ; and it is
manifest that this could only have attained its
completion, had Germany possessed a sovereign of
limited power, and dependent on constitutional
forms. No wonder that the mere suggestion
should be very ill received in Spain; in fact, it
almost implied an abdication on the part of the
emperor.

Moreover, Ferdinand was very unpopular there.
He was constantly making fresh demands, while
frequent complaints were preferred against him;
besides the Spaniards believed his most confidential
adviser, Salamanca, to be equally ambitious and
selfish. When Hannart went to Germany, he was
commissioned, if possible, to effect Salamanca’s

* T extract from a roll of the Weimar Archives, which
contains a number of scattered papers written by the chief
councillors of the archduke to Elector Frederic, of which I
intend to give some further account in the Appendix.

L3

150 Diet OF 1524. Boox III.

dismissal, and to counteract all his ambitious
schemes.

pIET OF 1524.

If in a former chapter we have endeavoured
to show what weighty interests of church and
state were involved in the existence of the Coun-
cil of Regency, we must now turn our attention
to the mighty and determined opposition arrayed
against it.

Three warlike and victorious princes ; the Swa-
bian League, which wielded such formidable forces ;
wealthy cities; and finally, though as yet in secret,
the Emperor, whose whole hope of regaining un-
limited authority rested on the overthrow of this
representative body.

The Council of Regency was not, however,
destitute of suport. Archduke Ferdinand promised
not to consent to its overthrow, and some of his
councillors were its decided adherents, as might be
expected, from the prospects it held out to him and
to them. The Elector of Saxony, to whom it
chiefly owed its existence, attended the diet in
person in order to defend it. The Elector of
Mainz, who had suffered from the oppression of the
three princes alluded to, together with the whole
house of Brandenburg, were among its champions.
The Regency also enjoyed the whole sympathy of
the knightly order (whose only hopes were founded
upon it), and of the partisans of the religious
innovations.

Cuap. IV. Dirt orl 1524. 151

Thus it still stood on firm ground: in spite of
all the changes of individual members, the majority
once established, remained: those who did not be-
long to it, like the Chancellor of Treves, Otto Hundt
of Hessen, staid away.* The imperial fiscal com-
menced the proceedings against the great mercan-
tile companies, and a judgment against the three
princes. was prepared. Several most important
questions were laid before the diet, which opened
on the 14th of January, 1524, concerning the means
of maintaining the government and the admini-
stration of justice ; the execution of decrees of the
diet, the code of criminal procedure f, &c.

It is a calamity for any power to have produced
no great results; and under this disadvantage the
Council of Regency laboured. It had been unable
to maintain the Public Peace, or to control either
Sickingen or his adversaries. The great scheme of
customs’ duties, on which all the resources for carry-
ing on the government depended, had come to no-
thing. It was now assailed by blow upon blow.

On the Ist of February the attorney of the three
princes, Dr. Venningen, appeared before the general
assembly of the States, and made a long, bitter, and

* Otto von Pack to Duke George of Saxony, the Friday after
St. Lucia (Dresden Arch.), thinks that they were driven out.
“ Darnach wissen E. F. Gn. wer die andern seint, welche alle
E. F. Gn. Abwesen wol erdulden kénnen.” — “ Your princely
grace will by this know who the others are, that can all well
bear your grace’s absence.”

+ Frankfurter Acten, vol. xxxix., in which are these docu-
ments, and vol. xl., containing the letters of Holzhausen con-
cerning this diet:

L 4

152 DIET OF 1594, Boox II.

insulting speech against the proceedings of the
Council of Regency.

A mandate from the emperor was produced, by
which the proceedings already commenced against
the commercial companies were stayed. The court
of Spain demanded to have the documents relating
to the case laid before it.

Hannart next arrived, and from the first took part
with the opponents of the Regency — the Elector
of Treves, in whose company he came, and the cities,
from whom he had received a present of 500 gul-
den.* At his first interview with the archduke he
did not pay him the respect which that prince
expected, nor did he attempt to conceal that the
emperor wished for the dissolution of the existing
form of government.

Such were the circumstances under which the
assembly of the states began their deliberations:
the debate on the grant necessary to the mainte-
nance of the Council of Regency must, of course,
bring the matter to a decision.

The Regency was, after all, the expression of the
power of the several states of the empire; was it then
credible that the States would themselves assist in
its dissolution ?

We have seen that the Regency obtained a ma-
jority in the former diets of the empire; though
after laborious efforts and with precarious results.
A host of new antipathies were now added, arising
out of the interests of the sovereign princes and
the free cities; of money and of religion. The

® Letter of Ferdinand’s in Bucholtz, ii. p. 46.

Cuapr. IV. DIET OF 1524. (153

influence of the great capitalists was enormous
even in those times. The Fuggers were instru-
mental in the election of Charles V.; and, in all
probability, in the publication of the bull of Leo X.
against Luther. They brought about the alliance
between the court and the discontented towns;
and it was: mainly by their influence that the
projected system of duties was abandoned; and
now they had the audacity to turn the affair of
the monopolies, which had called forth so many
decrees of the diet against themselves, into a sub-
ject of accusation against the Council of Regency ;
alleging that that body had assumed judicial
powers which properly belonged to the Imperial
Chamber alone.* The Bishop of Wiirzburg ac-
cused the Council of Regency of openly favouring
the new creed: he said that it had set at liberty
two members of his chapter whom he had brought
before the ecclesiastical court on the charge of
contracting marriage, and that it had given a
safe-conduct to a canon whom he had banished for
Lutheran opinions. The imperial commissioner
was informed that most of the members of the
Council of Regency were zealous Lutherans.f The

* Holzhausen, 12th Feb. 1524. It appears from this that
only Augsburg offered any resistance to the imperial edicts in
the matter of the monopolies. All the other towns were in
favour of their abolition. Dr. Rolinger had inserted the ar-
ticle touching monopolies of his own accord in the instruction
given to the delegates sent to Spain.

+ Hannart to the emperor, 14th March:— “ Et certes je me
suis pour vray averty, la pluspart du régiment sont grands
Luthériens:; car en beaucoup de choses et provisions quils ont

154 DIET OF 1524. Boox III.

majority which had hitherto been in favour of
that body was not compact enough to resist such a
multitude of hostile influences, and after some
debate and vacillation, turned against it. The
States did not, indeed, go so far as to propose its
total abolition, but resolved not to meet on the
20th of February to consider the means for its
maintenance, unless its members were previously
changed; and declared they could by no means
consent to its continuanee, composed as it then
was.

This was, however, decisive. The important
point was, the establishment of a vigorous govern-
ment, chosen out of the body of the States; but
what could be expected for the future, if the pre-
sent members, who had been really earnest in the
performance of their duties, and had actually begun
to govern, were to be deprived of office, without
any charge worthy of a moment’s discussion being
brought against them? Was it likely that
their successors would show any courage or inde-
pendence ?

It was once more rendered evident, that the
powerful separate elements, of which the empire
was compounded, could never be controlled by one
central government.

Frederic the Wise of Saxony felt the whole
significance of this decision. He now, at the close
of his life, saw the idea of a representative go-

fait, ils eussent bien peu user de plus grande discretion et
moderation quils n’ont (usé).

Cuap. IV. Diet oF 1524. 155

vernment, which had been the object of his whole
existence, completely wrecked. He said, that he
had never witnessed such a diet *: he left it on
the 24th of February, and never appeared at one
again.

Archduke Ferdinand, it is true, still refused his
assent to the decision; he even used His personal
influence to win over the cities’to the side of the
Council of Regency; but in the course of a short
time, observes the Saxon ambassador, his coun-
cillors were no longer of the same opinion: it
seemed as if Hannart, instead of destroying Sala-
manca’s power, had gained him over ; at all events,
he never delivered the letter in which the emperor
desired the Elector of Saxony to assist in getting
rid of Salamanca. These causes at length produced
their effect on Ferdinand: “ after holding out
resolutely for nine weeks,” writes the Saxon am-
bassador, on the Ist of March, “ he has suddenly
fallen away.” He consented that not a single
member of the old Council of Regency should be
admitted into the new. T

* At all events the provost of the cathedral of Vienna ex-
cused him with these words, to Campeggi, who asked the
cause of his absence. Letter from Wolfstal, 14th March,
Weimar Arch. The Italians thought he had gone away because
the legate had come. “ Assai sdegnato,” as the Venetian Ziani
expresses himself, Disp. 29 Martio. The same person re-
marks that Niirnberg had already entirely fallen away from
Catholicism : “ Di qui é totalmente scancellata la sincera fede.”

+ According to a letter of Wolf von Wolfstals, Ferdinand,
even on the 17th of April, said, “ Dass Hannart ihn sampt ihm
selbst verfiihrt, wie wenn ein Blinder den andern fuhrt.”—

156 DIET OF 1524. Boox III.

The Imperial Chamber underwent the same sort
of purification. No inquiry was made as to whe-
ther the members had been attentive or negligent,
capable or incapable ; but merely whether they had
supported the nobles against the princes, or aided
the fiscal in the prosecution of monopolists. Their
conduct as to religious matters was also taken into
consideration. Dr. Kreutner, the assessor for the
circle of Franconia, was dismissed for having eaten
meat on a fast-day, without considering that he had
a claim for upwards of 1000 gulden, arrears.

This brings us to the main question, — how
far these great changes re-acted on the conduct of
spiritual affairs. The cause of the Council of Re-
gency and that of the religious reformation were,
as we see at every step, connected, though not
indissolubly: the question now was, whether the
States, which had. abandoned the Regency to its
fate, would be equally unfavourable to the new
faith.

After the early and unexpected death of Adrian
VI., the purer and severer spirit which he had
introduced and exemplified, disappeared. Cle-
ment VII., who next ascended the papal chair,
was, like his predecessors, exclusively bent on main-
taining the papal privileges; and on applying the
temporal forces of the states of the church to per-
sonal or political ends, without troubling himself
seriously about the necessity of reform. He sent

“ That Hannart had deceived him, as well as himself, like as when
the blind lead the blind.”

Cuar. IV. DIET OF 1524. 157

to the German diet a man of his own way of
thinking, — Lorenzo Campeggi.

Campegei found Germany, which a few years
before he had traversed, surrounded with the halo
of an unshaken and sacred authority, in a state of
complete apostasy. In Augsburg he was assailed
with derision and mockery when, at his entrance
into the town, he raised his hand to give the cus-
tomary benediction. After this he was advised by
others, and thought it most prudent himself, to
enter Niirnberg without any ceremony whatever.
He did not wear his cardinal’s hat, and made no
' sign of benediction, or of the cross; and instead of
riding to the church of St. Sebaldus, where the
clergy were assembled to receive him, he rode
straight to his lodging. *

His presence, instead of damping the zeal of the
reforming preachers, seemed to inflame it to the
utmost. The pope was characterised as antichrist,
before the face of his legate. On Palm-Sunday no
palms were strewed ; and in Passion- Week the cere-
mony of laying down the cross and raising it again,
was omitted: thousands received the sacrament
in both kinds}, and not only among the common

* The Regency recommended him “ dass er seinen Segen und
Kreuz zu thun vermeyd, angesehen wie es deshalb jetzund stee.”
— “To avoid making the sign of the cross or the benediction,
seeing how matters then stood.” — Feilitzsch to Frederic of
Saxony, 11th March.”

+ Planitz (28th March) reckons 4000. “ Ist deshalb Mtihe
und Erbett, und sunderlich, dass es des Regiments Personen eines
Theyls also genommen.” — “ On this account is trouble and

158 DIET OF 1524. Boox IIL.

people; several members of the Council of Regency
were among the communicants, and even the sister
of the archduke, Queen Isabella of Sweden, partook
of the cup at the castle of Niirnberg.

It is very possible that these public demonstra-
tions produced in the mind of Ferdinand, on whom
the new doctrines had made no impression, and
who had been brought up in all the rigour of Spa-
nish catholicism, the determination to abandon the
Council of Regency; and it is also likely enough that
the pope’s legate had some influence in the same
direction. At all events, the fall of the Council of
Regency, which had taken the new doctrines under
its protection, would necessarily be very favourable
to the maintenance of catholicism.

Perhaps the legate founded on this a hope of
obtaining from the States a decision agreeable to
his wishes on religious affairs generally. He com-
plained of the innovations which were made before
his eyes. He reminded the States of the edict pub-
lished at Worms, and expressed his astonishment
that. ordinances of this kind were so imperfectly
enforced in the empire. Hannart also demanded
the execution of the edict in the emperor’s name.

On this occasion, however, it became manifest
that religion had by no means decided the course
of affairs, however it might have influenced the

labour, and especially as the persons of the Regency have in
part received it thus.” He remarks that Ferdinand was very
angry at such a manifestation of his sister’s opinions. “ Nicht
weiss ich wie es gehn will.”—“ I know not how it will end.”

Cuap. IV. DIET OF 1524. 159

conduct of some individuals. Had no political mo-
tives existed, the councillors of the Regency would
never have been dismissed on account of their reli-
gious inclinations. The complaints of the legate
made no impression. ‘ Some,” writes Planitz,
‘are indignant, but most only laugh.” The cities, |
which had contributed so greatly to the overthrow
of the Council of Regency, were furious at the men-
tion of the edict. They declared that the common
people were so eager for the word of God, that to
deprive them of it would cause rebellion, bloodshed
and general ruin; and that the resolutions of the
preceding year must be absolutely adhered to. In
short, with regard to religious affairs, those who
were hostile to Rome still constituted the majority
in the States. The legate was reminded soon after
his arrival of the hundred grievances of the nation
which had been sent to Rome by his predecessor.
This had been foreseen in Rome ; and the legate had
been instructed to feign that the memorial con-
taining these complaints had not been delivered in
the names of the princes.* Accordingly Campeggi
answered with a perfectly untroubled countenance,
‘ that no official announcement of those grievances
had reached Rome; that three printed copies had
been sent thither, it was true, one of which he had
seen himself, but that he could not bring himself
to believe that any thing so beyond measure ill-
written could be produced by the diet.” This was

* Pallavicini, i. p. 222.: “ che dissimulasse che la scrittura si
fosse ricevuta per nome dei principi.”

160 DIET OF 1524:°— Boox III.

certainly not at all calculated to satisfy the temporal
Estates, who had been extremely in earnest with
regard to the grievances, the statement of which
had cost so much trouble and deliberation.

Moreover, the personal behaviour of the legate,
who was accused of sordid avarice, and of revolting
oppression towards the poorer sort of German
priests, was far from favourable to the success of
his negotiations. *

When the decisive discussion on religious affairs
arrived, the order necessary to the transaction of
public business and the presence of the imperial
commissioner so far influenced the States, that they
did not deny the obligation they lay under to carry
the edict of Worms into execution; but to this
admission they added a clause to a directly con-
trary effect; namely, that they would execute
it “ as far as was possible,” — a modification of so
vague a nature that it was left to the discretion of
each individual to do what he pleased. The cities
had already represented at length that it was not
possible. At the same time the demand was re-
newed, that the pope should convene a council in
the German dominions, with the emperor’s consent.
This the legate undertook to advocate faithfully
to his holiness.

* A detailed contemporary account of the manner in which
the legate induced the learned but poor Schoner to present to him
his mathematical instruments, on the promise of a benefice, and
then neither procured. him the benefice nor paid him for his
instruments. Strobel, Nachricht vom Aufenthalt Melanchthons,

in Nurnberg, p. 18.

Cuap. IV. DIET OF 1524. 161

It was, however, questionable whether this was
sufficient to tranquillise men’s minds; or whether,
in such a state of fermentation, they would wait
patiently for so remote an event as the convocation
and decision of an ecclesiastical assembly: lastly,
whether the German nation would so far renounce
the unity of its anti-Romish tendencies, which had
taken so deep a root, as to consent to abide by the
results of a council composed of all nations.

No sooner were the representatives of the re-
forming principles dismissed from the Council of
Regency, than the necessity of supplying the place
of their labours in some other manner was doubly
felt. This aroused the champions of the new doc-
trines to unite in forming a most remarkable de-
termination.

The question which had once before been so
important was still unanswered ; namely, what was
to be done in Germany in the interval till the
council met. Spite of all opposition, a resolution
still more extraordinary, and of which the results
were still more incalculable than that of the former
year, was adopted on this point. It was determined
that, in the month of November of the current
year, a meeting of the States should be convened
at Spire, and should there hold a definitive deli-
beration. To this end, the sovereign princes were
to direct their councillors and learned clerks to
draw up a list of all the disputed points which
were to be discussed and decided. Besides this,
the grievances of the nation and means for their
redress were to be considered anew. Meanwhile

VOL. II. M

162 OPPOSITION TO THE REGIMENT. Boox III.

it was resolved, as the year before, that the holy
Gospel and God’s word should be preached. *

It is indeed true that the party favourable to
Rome, emboldened by the overthrow of the Council
of Regency, had regained somewhat of its influ-
ence at this diet, but still it was kept in check by
a large majority: the German nation asserted its
claim more strenuously than ever, to complete in-
dependence in ecclesiastical affairs, as against the
pope and the unity of the Latin church.

* Decree of the Diet of Niirnberg, 18th April, 1524. When,
after this decree, we read Luther’s paper, — “ Zwei kaiserliche
uneinige und widerwiirtige Gebote” (Altenb. ii. 762.), “Two
imperial contradictory and incompatible Orders,”— we are as-
tonished that he was so ill satisfied. The cause of this, however,
is, that in the mandate founded on the Recess, the article pre-
scribing the teaching of the holy Gospel was omitted, while, on
the other hand, great stress-was laid on the observance of the
edict of Worms. The clause “so viel méglich,” indeed, is
there; but almost disappears under the constant reiterations of
the edict of Worms; hence we perceive the influence which
the imperial chancery obtained after the abolition of the old
Council of Regency. Luther does not appear to have been
aware of the Recess, and still less of the preceding nego-
tiations. The imperial delegate, Hannart, and the papal legate,
took a far more complete view of the matter. They thought it
a great gain that at any rate the name of national council had
been avoided. Nevertheless, Hannart concludes his letter of the
16th April with the words, “que cependant se fera ung concil
national d’ Allemagne.”

Cuap. V. DIVISION IN THE NATION. 163

CHAPTER V.

ORIGIN OF THE DIVISION IN THE NATION,

Tere are probably few reflecting men, however
well-disposed on other grounds to the cause of
ecclesiastical reform, who have not occasionally felt
inclined to join in the usual condemnation of it,
as the cause of the separation of Germany into two
parts,—often at open war and never thoroughly
reconciled ; —to impute to the adherents of the
new opinions all the blame of. having broken
up the unity, not only of the church but of the
empire.

So long as we regard the facts from a distance
they doubtless wear this aspect ; but if we approach
nearer to them and contemplate the events which
brought about this division, the result we shall
arrive at will, if I mistake not, be far different.

No man, to whatever confession he may belong,
can deny, what was admitted even by the most
zealous Catholics of that day; viz. that the Latin
church stood in need of reform. Its thorough
worldliness, and the ever-increasing rigidity and
unintelligible formalism of its dogmas and obsery-
ances, rendered this necessary in a religious view;
while the interference of the papal court, which was

M 2

164 ORIGIN OF THE Boox III.

not only oppressive in a pecuniary sense, by con-
suming all the surplus revenue, but destructive of
the unity and independence of the nation, made it
not less essential to the national interests.

Nor can it be alleged, either on religious or
national grounds, that any unjustifiable measures
were resorted to to effect this change.

Independently of all the more precise articles of
the protestant creed, which were gradually con-
structed and accepted, the essence of the religious
movement lay in this, — that the spirit of Christi-
anity, so deeply implanted in the German mind, had
been, by degrees, ripened to a consciousness of its
own independence of all accidental forms ; had gone
back to its original source, —to those records which
directly proclaim the eternal covenant of the God-
head with the human race, —and had there become
confident in its own truth, and resolute to reject
all untenable theories and subjugating claims.

No one could shut his eyes to the peril im-
pending over the whole existing order of things
in the nation, from a departure from those esta-
blished ecclesiastical forms which had such mighty
influence over domestic as well as public life. We
have, however, seen with what care all destructive
elements were rejected, with how much self-control
every violent change was avoided, and’ how pa-
tiently every question was still left to the decision
of the empire.

Let it not be objected that discord had already
arisen, and that, as we have remarked, action was
encountered by re-action ; no momentous crisis in

Cuap. V. DIVISION IN THE NATION. 165

the life of a great nation was ever unaccompanied
by this stormy shock of conflicting opinions. The
important point is, that the divisions should not
have sufficient power to overthrow the paramount
and acknowledged supremacy of the principle of
unity.

Such was the tendency of affairs in Germany in
the year 1524.

The adherents of the new faith had hitherto
always submitted to the constitutional government
of the empire; in the hope of obtaining from its
proceedings and favour a reconstruction of the ec-
clesiastical institutions, in accordance both with
the wants of the nation and the commands of the
Gospel.

The majority in the Council of Regency, as we
have seen, influenced the States in this spirit. In
spite of all the efforts of opponents, and of the va-
rious external difficulties, a majority was formed in
the diet, favourable to the reformation. ‘Two Re-
cesses were drawn up and agreed to in its favour.
Even after the fall of the Regency, this majority
maintained itself, and resolved that a national
assembly should be convened at an early date, and
should occupy itself exclusively with the endeavour
to bring the religious affairs of the empire to ‘a de-
finitive conclusion.

A nobler prospect for the unity of the nation, and
for the further progress of the German people in
the career they had already entered upon, certainly
never presented itself.

To form some notion of the degree to which it ‘

M 3

166 ORIGIN OF THE Boox III.

occupied the minds of men, we have only to exa-
mine the state of Franconia, where, during the
summer of 1524, six opinions or reports, destined
to be laid before this assembly, appeared, all con-
ceived in the spirit of the evangelical party. Lu-
ther felt contented and happy when he saw the
judgment of the learned men of Brandenburg; he
said that this was coin of the right stamp, such
ias he and his friends at Wittenberg had long dealt
withal. That of Henneberg was not so completely
in accordance with his opinions. Luther’s doctrine
concerning free will was combated in it; but in all
other respects it was soundly evangelical, and con-
demned the invocation of saints, the seven sacra-
ments, and the abuses of the mass. ‘The reports of
Windsheim and Wertheim were particularly violent
against the saints; that of Niirnberg, against the
pope. One of the two parties which divided Rothen-
burg sent in an opinion favourable to the evangelical
side.* The other party, however, which was more
faithful to the ancient doctrine, was no less active.
Ferdinand required his universities of Vienna and
Freiburg to send in full and minute explanations
of the disputed points. At the former university,
the faculties immediately prepared to draw up their
report, and that of theology exhorted the others to
abstain from all mutual offence.t It is evident

* Extracts from v. d. Lith Erlauterung der Frank. Reforma-
tionshist, p. 41.

+ Raupach Evangel. Oestreich, ii. p. 29. Struve mentions a
similar exhortation from the elector palatine to the University
of Heidelberg in his Pfiilzische Kirchenhistorie, p. 19.

Cuap. V. DIVISION -IN THE NATION. 167

that the most various modifications of opinion must
have been in agitation and in conflict at Spire.
What results might not have been anticipated,
had it been possible to execute the project of hold-
ing a peaceful and moderate discussion,—of en-
deavouring to sever the good from the bad!

It is true that another evangelical majority, like
that with which the proposal originated, was fully
to be expected; but this was the inevitable con-
sequence of the present state of things: the nation
had no alternative; it must resist the encroach-
ments of Rome, or fall; the religious movement
could no longer be suppressed, it could only be
guided. This was the part assigned to the national
assembly ; nor can it be said that the unity of the
nation was thus endangered ; on the contrary, had it
attained its object, it would have given to that
unity a much more solid foundation.

In order to discover who it was that, at this
decisive juncture, broke the bond of the national
unity, we must examine how it happened that an
assembly for which such solemn preparation had
been made, never took place.

The See of Rome naturally opposed it; for in
proportion as the prospect it afforded was full
of hope and promise to the German nation, it was
threatening and disastrous to the court of Rome.

We have the report of a congregation held at this
crisis by Pope Clement VII., at which means were
discussed for carrying into effect the bull against
Luther, and the edict of Worms, in spite of the

mM 4

168 CONNEXION OF Boox IIL.

Recesses by which they were counteracted. A vast
variety of schemes were suggested ; such as, that
Frederic of Saxony should be deprived of his
electorate, — a measure proposed by Aleander ; or
that the kings of England and Spain should be
prevailed on to threaten to put a stop to all com-
merce with the German towns, from which the
pope anticipated great results. The only conclu-
sion they came to, however, was to oppose the
meeting at Spire, both to the emperor and the
States, whom the legate was instructed to use
every means to prejudice against that assembly.*

The question for immediate decision — a question
which we must here examine — was, whether there
could be found estates in Germany who would
prefer joining with the pope to awaiting the
decisions of a general assembly.

The papal court had already found means to
secure to itself allies in Germany: it had won
over one of the most powerful of the sovereign
houses — that of the dukes of Bavaria.

The government as well as the people of Bavaria
had formerly shared the common aversion of the
German nation to the ascendency of Rome; neither
the bull of Leo X. had been carried into effect, nor
the edict of Worms observed.t The dukes had
been as much displeased at the encroachments made
by the spiritual on the temporal jurisdiction, as

* Pallavicini, lib. ii. c. x. p. 227.
+ Winter, Geschichte der Schicksale der evangelischen
Lehre in und durch Baiern, i. pp. 62. 76.

Cuar. V. THE POPE WITH BAVARIA. 169

any other princes; and Luther’s doctrines spread
among the learned, the clergy, and the commons,
as rapidly and as widely as in other parts of the
empire. |

But as early as the end of the year 1521 the
dukes began to incline towards Rome, and had ever
since been becoming more and more decided parti-
sans of the old faith.

Contemporary writers ascribed this to the great
power and extensive possessions of the regular
clergy in Bavaria*; and certainly this had an in-
fluence, though rather of a different kind from that
supposed.

The first symptom of an intimate connexion
between Rome and Bavaria was a draft of a bull
which Leo X. caused to be prepared on the 14th
Nov. 1521, wherein he authorises a commission of
prelates, before’ proposed by the dukes, to visit
the convents and restore order and discipline in
them.¢ He died before this bull was finished ;
but not before he had thus pointed out to the Ba-
varian government what might be done in this

* Pamphlet of Reckenhofer touching the affairs of Sechofer :
“Denn sobald du fir Miinchen herauskompst auf drey Meyl
gegen Burg, und fragst wes ist der Grund, Antwort: ist meines
gnedigen Herrn von Degernsee, Chiemsee, Saunersee, also dass
mer denn der halb Teyl des Bayrlandes der Geistlichen ist.”—
« For as soon as you leave Munich, about three miles toward
Burg, and ask whose is the land ? the answer is, It belongs
to my Lord of Degernsee, Chiemsee, Saunersee, so that more
than half of Bavaria belongs to the clergy.” — Panzer,
No. 2462.

+ Winter, ii. p. 82,

170 CONNEXION OF Boox ILL

direction. A standing commission, independent of
the bishopric, and under the influence of the so-
vereign, was charged with the superintendence of
spiritual affairs. . |

About this time the university of Ingolstadt was
almost broken up by a pestilential disease. When
the contagion had ceased, and the professors re-
assembled, they found that it would be impossible
to maintain their strict catholic discipline without
other support than that of the spiritual jurisdiction ;
and that a ducal mandate would be necessary to
help them to withstand the innovations which
threatened to invade even their own body. The
three most resolute champions of the old system,
Franz Burckhard, Georg Hauer, and Johann Eck,
who had again been at Rome in the autumn, joined
in urgent representations of the necessity of such a
measure*; of which Duke William’s chancellor,
Leonhard von Eck, one of the most active and
influential statesmen of that time, was fully con-
vinced.f

The dukes were soon won over to the same
opinion ; probably the report of the riots which
had just then broken out at Wittenberg (but
which Luther so quickly tranquillised) made them
anxious to prevent similar disturbances in their own
territories.

* He could not have gone thither before October, as he was
still at Polling during the months of August and September.
Leben des berithmten Joh. Eckii in the Parnassus Boicus, i. ii,
p- 521.

{ Winter, passim, p. 81.

Cuar. V. THE POPE WITH BAVARIA. 171

On Ash Wednesday, 5th of March, 1522, the
dukes issued a mandate *, wherein they commanded
their subjects, under heavy penalties, to adhere to
the faith of their forefathers. That which had been
considered necessary for the university, was thus
extended to the whole nation. The dukes’ officers
were directed to arrest all refractory persons, eccle-
siastics as well as laymen, and to report upon their
offences.

In spite of the rigour which was used, these
measures had not, at first, the anticipated effect.
In Saxony the temporal power refused to lend its
arm to support the episcopal authority; in Ba-
varia, on the contrary, the bishops, who had a
vague perception of the danger which must accrue
to their independent authority from such an alli-
ance, did not second the efforts of the temporal
power with much zeal. The followers of Luther,
arrested by the civil officers, often escaped free and
unpunished, from the ecclesiastical court which had
jurisdiction over them.

When Dr. Johann Eck returned to Rome in the
summer of 1523, at the invitation of Pope Adrian f,
he was commissioned by the dukes to make a
formal complaint against the bishops on this head,
and to request an extension of the ducal authority

* “ Erstes baierisches Religionsmandat, Munchen am
Eschermittiche angeender Vassten.” — Idid. p. 310.

+ “Er entbot denselben durch zwei Brevia nach Rom.”—
“ He summoned him by two briefs to Rome.” — Parnassus
Boicus, ii. i. p. 206.

172 CONNEXION OF — Boox IIf,

in the proceedings against heretics.* It was im-
possible to refuse the demand of the orthodox
doctor, who took part in the most secret consulta-
tions on religious affairs. Pope Adrian therefore
published a bull empowering a spiritual commission
to degrade ecclesiastics who should be convicted of
heresy, and to deliver them over to the temporal
criminal tribunals, even without the concurrence of
the bishops. Adrian added only the limitation,
that the bishops were to be once more admonished
to perform their duties within a given term; but
this was subsequently disregarded.

Thus we see that it was not the independent
authority of the great institutions of the church,
that the dukes took under their protection: they
raised up a collateral authority, standing under their
own immediate influence, and empowered to inter-
vene in the most peculiar sphere of ecclesiastical
rights and duties.

Dr. Eck is not to be regarded only as one of
_Luther’s theological opponents. He exercised an
extraordinary influence on the state, as well as the
church in Bavaria; and to him principally is to be
attributed that alliance between the ducal power,

* “ Fragmentum libelli supplicis, quem Bavarie Ducis ora-
tores, quorum caput celebris ille Eckius, Adriano VI. Rome
obtulerunt anno 1521,” ap. Cifele, ii; 274. The date is
wrong, as Adrian was not pope in 1521. The bull, which
was prepared according to the words of the petition, is dated
June, 1523. The Bavarian bishops first appealed against it in
December, 1523, so that there can be no doubt that that is the
proper date.

Cuar. V. THE POPE WITH BAVARIA. 173

the university of Ingolstadt, and the papal autho-
rity, which checked the progress of the national
movement in that country.

Nor was it the authority alone of the church
that was assailed; claims were soon advanced to
her possessions.

Pope Adrian granted to the dukes one fifth of
all the revenues of the church throughout their
territories; ‘‘ for,” said he, “ the dukes have de-
clared their readiness to take arms against the
enemies of the true faith.” ** When Pope Clement
VII. came to the tiara, he revoked all grants of this
nature ; nevertheless he saw reason to confirm this
one for the three following years: since then, it has
been renewed from time to time, and has always re-
mained ‘one of the chief foundations of the Bavarian
financial system. f

On this occasion the university was not forgotten.
Adrian consented that in every chapter in Bavaria,
at least one prebend might be conferred on a
professor of theology, “for the improvement of
that faculty, and for the better extirpation of the
heresies that had arisen in that, as well as in other
German countries.”

* Bull of the lst of June. It is there said of the dukes,
«“ Ad arma contra perfidos orthodoxe fidei hostes sumenda sese
obtulerunt.” — Ibid. 279. The Turks were also included in
this.

+ See Winter, ii. p. 321.

t 30th of August, CEfele, p. 277. In Mederer, Annales,
Acad. Ingolstadt, iv. 234., is to be found the bull of Clement VI.
concerning this matter; by this bull the dukes of Bavaria are
entitled always to promote one of their professors of theology at

174 CONNEXION OF Boox III:

Thus, before any form of government constituted
according to evangelical views, could be thought of,
we find an opposing body organised expressly for
the purpose of supporting catholic principles, which
gradually became of immense importance to the
destinies of Germany.

We have already shown that the disturbances of
those times mainly arose out of the struggle
between the spiritual and temporal power. The
rising temporal sovereignties naturally sought to
defend themselves against the encroachments of
their ecclesiastical neighbours. With this tendency,
Luther’s views of government exactly coincided ;
he advocated a total separation of the two powers.
The dukes of Bavaria, however, found that such a
separation was not the only way to attain the
desired end; they took a directly opposite course,
which was both shorter and more secure. What
others were striving to wrest from the pope by
hostile measures, they contrived to obtain with his
concurrence. By this means they at once gained

Ingolstadt to a prebendal stall in the chapters of Augsburg,
Freisingen, Passau, Regensburg, or Salzburg. They gave out :
‘quod ecclesie predicte a Ducibus Bavarie fundate yel dona-
tionibus aucte fuerunt.” The reason assigned was, that they
wished to have theologians “ hoc tempore periculoso, quo Lu-
theriana et alie plurime hereses contra sedem apostolicam ...
propagantur, qui se murum pro Israel exponant et contra hereses
predictas legendo predicando docendo et scribendo eas confutent
dejiciant et exterminent.” This is the more important, because
in the years immediately after the plague, the university, as is
mentioned by the statutes of the faculty of jurists, wa’ almost.
entirely reconstituted.

_ Cxar.V. THE POPE WITH BAVARIA. 175

possession of a large share of the ecclesiastical
revenues, and an authority, sanctioned by the papal
see, over the surrounding bishops, even in the most
important branch of the spiritual jurisdiction ; an
authority which was very soon manifested in the
proceedings of the Bavarian council for religious
affairs. These were advantages which the ad-
herents of the new faith could not yet so much as
contemplate.

There was still, however, this immense distinction ;
— that, while the latter were the representatives of
the tendency of the nation to emancipate itself from
Rome, Bavaria fell into much more absolute sub-
jection to that power, from whom she held all the
privileges she now enjoyed.

Under any circumstances, however, so decisive a
step, taken by one of the most powerful houses of
Germany, and the example of the advantages result-
ing from a renewed connexion with Rome, could
not fail to have a great effect on all its neighbours.

We find from a very authentic source, the trans-
actions of the Archbishop of Salzburg with his
states, that a compact had already been entered
into between Bavaria and Austria, “against the
Lutheran sect.” * ;

It is certain that Archduke Ferdinand had like-
wise formed a closer connexion with the see of
Rome, and had obtained thence, in behalf of his
defence against the Turks, the enormous grant of a
full third of all the ecclesiastical revenues.

* Zauner, Salzburger Chronik, iv. 359.

176 CONGRESS OF REGENSBURG. Boox III.

Rome did not neglect to conciliate the more
influential spiritual, as well as temporal, princes.
The long contested appointments to the bishoprics
of Gurk, Chiemsee, Seckau, and Lavant, were
granted to the Archbishop of Salzburg, even during
the disputed months.

By these means the papal see succeeded in
regaining a party in the States: no doubt it is to be
attributed to these and similar causes, that catholic
opinions were more strongly represented at the diet
of 1524 than they had been the year before.

Still, as we have already seen, they were not
triumphant at that diet. A number of bishops
even, offended by the support given by the pope to
the claims of the temporal sovereigns, offered a de-
termined resistance to every suggestion emanating
from Rome.

The legate Campeggi plainly saw that nothing
could be gained from a general assembly in which
Lutheran sympathies so greatly predominated.
He complained that he could not here venture to
speak freely.*

On the other hand, as he saw around him a
number of friends holding the same opinions, he
hoped that he should be able to effect more com-
pletely all he wanted at a provincial meeting, where
only these partisans would be present.

Accordingly, even at Niirnberg, where the na-
tional assembly at Spire was resolved on, he pro-
posed another which, in spirit, was directly at

* From a letter of Ferdinand’s, dated Stuttgard, 19th May,
in Gemeiners Regensburger Chronik, iv. vi. p. 514.

‘Cuar. V. CONGRESS OF REGENSBURG. 177

variance with it. He made no secret that his
object was to obviate the danger which must ensue
from an assembly convoked with the avowed in-
tention of listening to the voice of the people.*

This proposal was first agreed to by Archduke
Ferdinand and a few hiakior and then by the
dukes of Bavaria. At the end of June, 1524, the
meeting was held at Regensburg. The pee the
archduke, the legate, the Archbishop of Salzburg,
the Bishop of Trent, who came in the retinue of
the archduke, and the administrator of Regensburg,
were present. Delegates appeared for the bishops of
Bamberg, Augsburg, Spire, Strasburg, Constance,
Basle, Freising, Passau, and Brixen: thus not only
Bavaria and Austria, but the Upper Rhine and a
considerable portion of Swabia and Franconia, took
part in it.

The legate opened the meeting with a dines
on the perils with which the cle ae troubles
threatened both estates: he exhorted them to
abandon their disputes, and to unite in measures
“for extirpating the heretical doctrines, and
making men live after the ordinances of the
Christian church.” Archduke Ferdinand supported
the proposal, and strongly insisted to the assembly
on the pecuniary grants he had obtained.

The prelates then divided into three commissions :
the first of which was to consider the disputes
between the clergy and laity; the second, the re-

* From the letter of the legate, dated 8th se. Winter, i i
p- 156.
VOL. II. N

178 CONGRESS OF REGENSBURG. Boox II.

forms to be immediately undertaken, and the third,
the measures to be taken with respect to doctrine.*

The conference lasted for sixteen days in the
town hall at Regensburg, and sittings were held
before and after noon. The grave course of affairs
was on one occasion interrupted by a festive dance.

The affair of the pecuniary grant was the first
settled.

The bishops plainly perceived that the popular
ferment, which, from its first origin, had been
constantly increasing in strength and impetuosity,
must be far more dangerous to them, than any
supremacy of the temporal sovereign. There were
few among those we have named who had not had
to struggle with a growing opposition in their own
capitals. A year before, Cardinal Lang had found it
necessary to bring six troops of veteran soldiers into
Salzburg. He himself rode at their head habited
in a red slashed surcoat, under which glittered a
polished cuirass, and grasping his marshal’s baton ;
and thus compelled the corporation to sign fresh
declarations of submission. Perhaps, too, a few
such prelates may have been favoured with fresh
concessions from the pope; we find many decided
partisans of .Rome among their delegates, for
example, Andreas Hanlin of Bamberg, who was
once himself vicerector at Ingolstadt +; Eck and

* Letter from Ebner and Niitzel to the Elector Frederic,
wherein they inform him, “ was eine Schrift enthilt, die ihnen
vom Hofe fiirstlicher Durchleuchtigkeit (Ferdinands) zugekom-
men ist,”—‘“ of the contents of a letter which had reached them
from the court of his Royal Highness (Ferdinand),” 8th July,

1524. — Weimar. A.
+ Heller, Reformationsgesch. von Bamberg, p. 70.

Cuap. V. CONGRESS OF REGENSBURG. 179

Faber also were present. The spiritual lords
ended by making a virtue of necessity; those of
Bavaria consented to pay to the temporal power
(as near as I can discover) a fifth part of their
revenues, and those of Austria a fourth.*

They next proceeded to consider the points of
doctrine and life.

The most important result of this consultation
was a decision which it had been found impossible
to carry at the meeting of the States of 1523. The
preachers were directed to refer principally to the
Latin fathers of the church for the interpretation of
difficult passages in Scripture; and (which could
not be accomplished on a former occasion) Am-
brose, Jerome, Gregory and Augustin were specified
as the patterns of faith. In former days, this might
have been looked upon as a concession to the
literary tendencies of the time, since it relaxed the

* Planitz, who had been at Esslingen, writes to the Elector
Frederic, Niirnberg, 26th July : “ Die Geistlichen in des Erz-
herzogs Landen haben bewilligt, ihm den vierten Pfennig zu
geben, 5 Jahr lang, und die Geistlichen unter den Herrn von
Baiern geben ihren Fiirsten den 5ten Pfennig 5 Jahr, allein
dass sie in ihren Fiirstenthumen die lutherische Lehr nicht
zulassen und vest iiber ihnen halten wollen.” — “ The eccle-
siastics in the archduke’s dominions have agreed to give him the
fourth penny for 5 years, and the ecclesiastics under the lords
of Bavaria will give to their princes the fifth penny for 5 years,
but on condition that they shall not suffer the Lutheran doc-
trines in their dominions, and that they will keep them down
with a strong hand.” I have not been able to discover whether
Planitz was rightly informed as to the duration of this impost.
According to Winter, ii. p. 322., it was continued for several
years longer.

N 2

180 CONGRESS OF REGENSBURG. —_ Boox III.

fetters of the scholastic system ; but now, it mainly
betokened opposition to Luther and to the majority
of the States of the empire, by sanctioning, at any
rate, the authorities on which rested the later sys-
tems of the Latin church. It was resolved that
divine service should be preserved unaltered ac-
cording to the usages of former generations, and an
attempt was made to put an end to Luther’s in-
fluence. His books were once more forbidden, and
all subjects of the allied princes were interdicted,
under pain of forfeiture of their patrimonies, from
studying at the university of Wittenberg.

At the same time, steps were taken towards the
removal of those abuses which had occasioned such
a general ferment. All the extortions of the
inferior clergy which raised so much discontent
among the common people, the enforcement of
expensive ceremonies, the burdensome fees, the
refusal of absolution on account of debts, were
abolished. The relation of the clergy to their
flocks was to be put on a fresh footing, by a com-
mission composed of clerical and lay members.
The reserved presentations were diminished, the
number of holydays materially lessened, the prac-
tice of stations abolished. The assembly pledged
itself for the future to a more careful consideration
of personal merit in the appointment of ecclesiastics.
The preachers were admonished to show greater
earnestness, and to avoid all fables and untenable
assertions; and the priests, to follow a chaste and
irreproachable course of life.*

* « Constitutio ad removendos abusus et ordinatio ad vitam
Cleri reformandam per Rev“ D™ Laurentium,” &¢. — Ratis-

Caap. V. CONGRESS OF REGENSBURG. 181

Weare, I believe, warranted in looking on these
resolutions as the first effects of the principles of the
reformation in reviving the profounder spirit of ca-
tholicism. As the alliance of the sovereign princes
with the papal see fulfilled the political demands, so
this attempt supplied (at first indeed very inade-
quately) the religious wants, which had given birth —
to the reforming spirit. These attempts at regener-
ation were unquestionably more important and ef:
fective than has been supposed, even by the catholic
party itself; and, indeed, modern catholicism is
in great measure based upon them; but neither in
depth of religious intuition, in the genius which
produces a permanent impression on remote nations
and ages, or in force and intensity of enthusiasm,
could they be compared to those movements which
took their name from Luther, and of which he was
the centre. His opponents offered nothing original;
the means they adopted, and by which they thought
to keep their ground, were mere analogical imi-
tations of what he had already done. ‘Thus, at
Campeggi’s suggestion, Dr. Eck published, as a
corrective to Melanchthon’s ‘ Loci communes,” a
handbook of the same kind*, and Emser made a

pone Nonis Julii, in Goldast, Constitutt. Impp., iii. p. 487.
What is given by Strobel (Miscel. ii. p. 109, &c.), from an old
printed book, which is also before me, by no means embraces
the whole contents of the Constitution. The abolition of a
great number of holydays in the 21st article, which differs but
little from the later protestant regulations, is very remarkable.
* “ Enchiridion, seu Loci Communes contra Hereticos :”
printed in 1525, and, according to Eck, composed, “ Hortatu
Cardinalis de Campegiis, ut simpliciores, quibus cortice natare
N 3

182 ORIGIN OF THE Boox III.

translation of the Bible, as a rival to that of
Luther. The works of the Wittenberg teachers
had issued forth in the natural course of their own
internal development: they were the product of
minds goaded by a resistless impulse, pressing for-
ward in their own peculiar path, and were filled
with the vigour and originality that forces con-
viction: the catholic books, on the contrary, owed
their existence to external motives ;—to the cal-
culations of a system which looked about for any
means of defence against the danger pressing upon
it from every side.
But those who adopted such a line of conduct,
thus cut themselves off from the great and vigorous
expansion which the mind of the German nation was
now undergoing. The questions which ought to
have been discussed and determined at Spire, with _
a view to the unity and the wants of the nation, were
disposed of by the allied powers in a narrow and
one-sided manner. It was said that a single nation
had no right to decide on the affairs of religion, and
of Christendom generally: this was easily asserted ;
but what was the nation to do if, from the peculiar-
ities of its constitution and character, it was the
only one that had fallen into this state of ferment?
At first it had petitioned for the immediate convo-
cation of a council; but as the hope of this grew
fainter and more remote, it felt the necessity of
taking the matter into its own hands. This is suf-

opus est, summarium haberent credendorum, ne a pseudopro-
phetis subverterentur.”

Cuap. V. DIVISION IN THE NATION. 183

ficiently proved by the ordinances issued at Regens-
burg. The difference was this—at. Spire, in all
probability, resolutions would have been taken in
opposition to the Pope of Rome; whereas at Regens-
burg it was thought expedient, from a thousand
considerations, to form a fresh alliance with him.
This was the origin of the divisions in the nation.
The national duty of awaiting the decisions of a
general assembly which was already fixed; of taking
part in its deliberations; and, let us add, of influ-
encing them to wise ends, was sacrificed to the narrow
and partial expediency of an alliance with Rome.

One part of the projects of the congregation at
Rome being thus executed with unhoped-for success,
Campeggi next pointed out the necessity of endea-
vouring to accomplish the other; which was, to
induce the emperor to give the cause his cordial
support.*

Not a moment was lost at Rome in gaining over
Charles V. Whilst the official proclamations from
Regensburg dwelt only upon such points in the
Recesses as were favourable to the papacy, and
affected to consider them as mere confirmations of
the edict of Worms, it was at the same, time repre-
sented to the emperor in Spain how greatly his
authority must suffer by his edict being limited
by two following Recesses; nay, by an attempt
having actually been made to revoke it, —a measure

* He complained : “non haver quella causa (Luterana) di
cost2 (della Spagna) il caldo che bisogneria, fa che d’ogni pro-
visione che si faccia si trahe poco frutto.”—-Giberto Datari agli
Oratori Fiorentini in Spagna, Lettere di Principi, i. f. 133.

N 4

184 ORIGIN OF THE Boox III.

which he himself could not have ventured upon:
it was evident, they said, that the people of Ger-
many were preparing to throw off all obedience,
both to temporal and spiritual authority. And
what insupportable insolence was there in fixing a
meeting in that country, to decide on matters of
faith, and the affairs of Christianity at large; as if
the Germans had a right to prescribe laws to his
imperial majesty and to the whole world! *

Similar arguments were vehemently pressed upon
Charles’s ally, Henry VIII., who had entered into
a literary warfare with Luther, to induce him to
use all his credit with Charles V. in support of
the pope’s exhortations.

The state of political affairs generally was highly
favourable for promoting the influence of the papal

* We have not indeed the very letter from the pope to the
emperor, but there is a sufficient account of it in the despatch
from the papal datarius to the nuncio in England, Mar-
chionne Lango, Lettere di Principi, i. 124. “N. S™ ha di cid
scritto efficacemente alla M™ Ces, accioche la consideri, che
facendo quei popoli poco conto di dio tanto meno ne faranno alla
giornata della M* S. e degli altri Signori temporali :... Pabsenza
della M“ Cesarea ha accresciuta I audacia loro tanto che ardis-
cono di ritrattar quell’ editto, cosa che Cesare proprio non faria.”
On the other hand, in the edict given at Regensburg, it is stated,
“ Darumb so haben wir auf des hochwirdigsten Herrn Lorenzen,
etc. Ersuchen uns vergleycht, dass wir und unser Principal obge-
melt Kaiserlich Edict zu Worms, auch die Abschied auf beyden
Reichstiigen zu Nurnberg deshalb beschlossen . .. vollziehen.”—
“ Wherefore we have, at the request of the most worshipful
master Lorenzo, &c., agreed, that we and our principal should
execute the above-named imperial edict of Worms, and the
recesses of both diets at Nurnberg confirming the same.

Cuar. V. DIVISION IN THE NATION. 185

power over the emperor. War had been formally
declared against Francis I., in May, 1524, and was
now raging with the utmost violence. The emperor
attacked the king in his own territory, from the side
of Italy. It would therefore have been extremely
dangerous to offend the pope, who was in his rear,
and who did not quite approve the invasion ; or to
refuse him a request which, moreover, was conso-
nant to the catholic education he had himself
received in his youth.

Charles V. did not hesitate a single moment. On
the 27th of July, he despatched a proclamation to
the empire entirely in favour of the pope, and ex-
pressed with unwonted vehemence. He complained
that his mandate from Worms was disregarded, and
that a general council had been demanded, without
even the due decorum of consulting him. He de-
clared, that he neither could nor would allow the
intended assembly to take place; that the German
nation assumed to do what would be permitted to
no other, even in conjunction with the pope, —to ~
alter ordinances which had been so long held sacred.
He pronounced Luther’s doctrines to be inhuman,
and, like his master, Adrian, he compared him to Ma-
homet. In short, he forbade the assembly, on pain
of being found guilty of high treason, and incurring
sentence of ban and reban.*

* Frankf. A. It appears from a letter from the Elector of
Saxony to Ebner, dated Oct. 1524, Walch, xv. 2711., that, in
the letter which had been sent to him, the expression, “bei Ver-
meidung criminis lese majestatis, unser und des Reichs Acht,” ~
&e. — “on pain of being found guilty of high treason, and of
our ban and that of the empire,” &c., had been omitted.

186 ORIGIN OF THE Boox III.

Thus did the court of Rome succeed in gaining
over to its cause not only several powerful members
of the empire in Germany, but even its supreme
head in Spain, and by their means, in putting a
stop to the dangerous resolutions of the diet: this
was its first energetic interference with the eccle-
siastical affairs of Germany.

The main cause of this was, that the emperor,
residing in Spain, followed a line of policy, on
which the character and the opinions of Germany
had not the slightest effect, and suggested solely by
his relations with other countries. His government
during the first years of his reign exercised merely
a negative, decomposing influence. Without taking
any serious steps for the redress of the grievances
charged upon Rome, he allowed himself to be in-
duced. by his political position to issue the edict of
Worms, which, after all, could not be carried into
effect ; while on the one hand, it inflamed the an-
tipathy of the nation to the utmost, and, on the
other, put fresh arms into the hands of the ad-
herents of the curia. He first checked the growing
consolidation of the Council of Regency, by reject-
ing the system of import duties to which he had
at first consented, and then thought it advisable
to overthrow that body entirely. Another Council
of Regency was, it is true, formed at Esslingen ;
but it took warning from the fate of the former, and
neither enjoyed authority, nor even made the least
attempt to acquire any ; — it was the mere shadow
of a government. We have already shown what
prospects in favour of religion and of national unity

Cuap. V. DIVISION IN THE NATION. oy -

were connected with the projected assembly at
Spire. This assembly was forbidden by the court
of Spain, as if it were criminal.

The unity of Germany has ever depended, not
so much on forms of government, or decisions of
the diet, as on an intimate understanding among
the more powerful sovereigns. Maximilian had
found, during the latter half of his reign, what it
was to have offended and alienated the Elector of
Saxony ; and it was only by healing this breach, and
entering into a close alliance with the Ernestine line
of Saxony, that the election of Charles V. could be
secured; from that time the Elector Frederic had
always been treated, in externals at least, with
the confidence and consideration due to a powerful
and undoubted ally. This intimate connexion the
emperor now broke off. He thought it more ad-
vantageous, and more suitable to his own station
amongst the powers of Europe, to marry his sister
Catharine to John III. of Portugal, than to the
nephew of the Elector of Saxony, to whom he had
betrothed her. Hannart was commissioned to com-
municate this resolution to the court of Saxony.*

* Miiller, Geschichte der Protestation, gives the particulars
of this event. Hannart’s letter to the emperor, dated 14th March,
shows that the affair was to have come before the diet, which
Ferdinand now purposely avoided. “Tl asemblé 4 mon dit S*
par plusieurs raisons que ne debvai parler & M" de Saxen de la
matiére secréte, que savez, que jusque apres la fin de cette journée
impériale.” These letters altogether show a better under-
standing between Hannart and the archduke than the Saxon
documents would lead one to imagine.

188 ORIGIN OF THE Boox IIL.

We may remember how flattering the proposal had
been to Duke John, Frederic’s brother; the ob-
jections which he raised from mere modesty, and his
ultimate joyful acquiescence. Hannart’s communi-
cation was proportionally mortifying to him. The
Saxon court was deeply offended. Such of the
-elector’s friends as were about the archduke, wanted
him to use his influence to prevent so silane a
proceeding *; but as he had at first taken no per-
sonal share in the negotiation, neither did he now
say one word,. but suppressed his vexation. Duke
John was less reserved. With wounded pride he
rejected every communication, every offer, ten-
dered to him on the subject : he expressed to those
about him that nothing during the whole course
of his life had ever hurt his feelgs so deeply.
With the other sovereign princes, too, Austria
stood but ill, The house of Brandenburg, which
had supported the first Council of Regency for the
sake of the interests both of Prussia and Mainz, was
much disgusted by its overthrow, and concealed
that feeling so little, that overtures were made to
the Grand Master, Albert, by France, though indeed

* Among the secret correspondence between Frederic’s and
Ferdinand’s councillors, there is a note in which one of them
says, “ S. Furstl. Durchlaucht begeren sonderlich, das der
Heirath vollzogen werd, damit S. F. Gn. desto mer Fug und
Statt hab, 8. Chf. Gn. als irn angenommenen Vatern um Rath
teglich anzusuchen.”—“ His princely highness greatly desires
the consummation of the marriage, so that his princely highness
may have more excuse and reason for daily asking counsel of his
electoral grace as his adopted father,”—a wish which =
scarcely have been shared by the whole court.

Cuap. V. DIVISION IN THE NATION. ~ 189

he did not accept them. In the month of August,
the Rhenish electors held a congress, from which
Archduke Ferdinand said he expected no good
either to himself or his brother.* The electoral
councillors did not attempt to disguise from the
imperial commissioner that people were extremely
discontented with the emperor; that his capitu-
lation would be laid before the meeting ; and as he
had not fulfilled the conditions contained in it, they
would proceed to the establishment of a new form
of government, either under a lieutenant, the vicars
of the empire, or a king of Rome, whom it was
intended to elect. This project was discussed at
a great cross-bow match at Heidelberg, where
several princes were met together, and the palatine
house of Bavaria was particularly busied with
negotiations to that effect. The bond of catholicism
between Bavaria and Austria was not strong enough
to prevent Duke William of Bavaria from con-
ceiving the idea of obtaining the crown for himself.

Thus the unity of the government of the empire
was again dissolved, almost before it had felt its -
own purposes or destinies. At. a crisis so im-
measurably eventful, in which all the energies
of the nation were rushing with boundless activity
into untried regions, and eager for a new state of
things, all directing power was wanting.

Hence it happened that the local powers pro-
ceeded to act upon the principles which severally
predominated in them.

* Letter from Ferdinand, Bucholtz, ii. p. 68.
+ Letter from Hannart, ib. p. 70.

190 5 PERSECUTIONS. Boox III.

Persecution began in those countries which had
combined to pass the resolutions of Regensburg.

In Bavaria we find priests ejected or banished, and
nobles driven from their estates, till they consented
torecant. The tempestuous, oppressive atmosphere
of the times is most strikingly exemplified in the
fate of an officer of the duke, Bernhard Tichtel von
Tutzing. He was travelling towards Niirnberg on
the duke’s business, when he was joined on the road
by Franz Burkhard, one of the orthodox professors
of Ingolstadt : they put up together at Pfaffenhofen,
and after supper, the conversation turned on re-
ligious matters. Tichtel perhaps knew who his
companion was ; he reminded him that conversations
of this kind were forbidden by the new edict, to
which Burkhard answered that that did not signify
between them. Hereupon Tichtel did not conceal
his opinion that the edict could not be carried into
effect, and would merely be a disgrace to the dukes;
he even went so far as to speak somewhat equivocally
of purgatory and of the obligation to fast; sangui-
nary punishments for differences of opinion he con-
demned altogether. On hearing these sentiments,
Burkhard, who had advised the dukes to all the
most odious measures, was seized with the savage
fury of a persecutor: he said, in so many words,
that decapitation was the proper punishment for
Lutheran villains, and at the same time called
Tichtel himself a Lutheran. At parting he affected
to be reconciled to him, but he hurried to denounce
the crime he had detected. Tichtel was arrested
and confined in the Falkenthurm, subjected to an

~ Cuapr. V. PERSECUTIONS. 191

inquisition, and compelled to recant: it was only
by dint of great exertions and powerful intercession,
that he escaped a most degrading punishment
which had been suggested to the duke.*

In the territory of Salzburg a priest arrested for
Lutheranism was on his way under guard to
Mittersill, where he was to remain imprisoned for
life, and while the constables were carousing, was
set free by two peasants’ sons. For this offence the
poor youths were, by order of the archbishop,
secretly beheaded without public trial, early in the
morning, in a meadow in the Nonnthal outside the
town—a place never used for execution. Even
the executioner had scruples, because the condemned
prisoners had not had lawful trial; but the bishop’s
officer said, ‘‘ Do what I command you, and let the
princes answer for it.” f

A citizen of Vienna, one Caspar Tauber, who
had expressed anti-catholic opinions respecting the
intercession of saints, purgatory, confession and
the mystery of the communion, was condemned to
make a recantation. On a great holyday —the
nativity of the Virgin Mary —two pulpits were

* Another of the same party, the Chancellor Leonhard vy.
Eck, had proposed that the duke should follow the merciful
course “ (den barmherzigen Weg ”), viz. that Tichtel should only
be placed in the pillory, his crimes be there read aloud, and then by
him be orally confessed and renounced : he sbould then, as a mark
of his heretical backsliding, be branded on both cheeks ; after this
he was to be conveyed back again to the Falkenthurm, and kept
there until further orders from the duke. See the Extracts from
the Acts, Winter, i. pp. 182—199.

+ Zauner, iv. p. 381.

192 PERSECUTIONS. Boox III.

erected for this purpose in the churchyard of
St. Stephen’s; one of these was for the precentor,
the other for Tauber, to whom the form of re-
cantation which he was to read was given. But
whether it was that he had never promised this,
or that an opposite conviction suddenly forced
itself more strongly than ever on his mind, he
declared from the pulpit whence the assembled
multitude was expecting to hear his recantation,
that he did not consider himself to have been
refuted, and that he appealed to the Holy Roman
Empire. He must have been well aware that this
would not save him: he was beheaded shortly after,
and his body burnt; but his courage and firmness
left a lasting impression on the people.*

There were some other people arrested with
Tauber, who, terrified by his fate, made the re-
cantation demanded of them, and escaped with
_banishment.f

The same severity was practised throughout the
Austrian dominions. The three governments of
Insbruck, Stuttgart, and Ensisheim appointed a
commission at Engen, whose especial business it
was to suppress the movement in their provinces.

* Ein warhafftig Geschicht, wie Caspar Tawber, Burger zu
Wien in Osterreich fiirein Ketzer und zu dem Todt verurtaylt
und aussgefiirt worden ist.” 1524, — “ The true History how
Caspar Tawber, a burgher of Vienna in Austria, was condemned
and executed as a heretic.” The execution took place on 17th
Sept.

+ Sententia contra Joannem Vzesel —one of the condemned
— ult. Septembr, 1524. Raupach Evangel. Oestreich. Erste
Fortsetzung ; Beilage, No. V.

Cuapr. V. PERSECUTIONS. 193

The people of Waldshut gained nothing by dis-
missing their preacher, Balthasar Hubmaier: the
Engen commission declared that they should be
punished, or, as it was coarsely expressed, “ that
the Gospel should be banged about their ears till
they were fain to hold their hands over their
heads.” The weeds were to be pulled up by the
roots; and already the other towns had been
summoned to furnish subsidies of artillery and
infantry for the attack on Waldshut, when a body
of Swiss volunteers, principally from Ziirich, came
to the assistance of the town, and caused the
commission to pause awhile.*

Kenzingen did not escape so well; the little
town was actually taken and invested.

Sunilar disturbances were going on in all parts of
the country, though sometimes the measures taken
stopped short of bloodshed; Luther’s books were
forbidden, and his adherents were not endured in
the pulpit or the councils of the princes, but were
exiled from their country. The government of
Wiirtemberg wanted to break off all communication
with Reutlingen, because it tolerated evangelical
preachers. Neither were the most barbarous
executions wanting. We read of preachers nailed
to the pillory by the tongue, so that in order
to get free they were forced to tear themselves
away, and were thus mutilated for life. The
fanaticism of monkish bigotry was awakened, and

* Letter from Balthasar Hubmaier in the Taschenbuch fiir
Siiddeutschland, 1839, p. 67., from the Archives of Switzerland
and the Upper Rhine.
= WAOD ga dille O

194 DIVISION OF THE NATION. Boox III.

sought its victims in Lower as well as Upper
Germany. The most awful example was made of
the wretched Heinrich of Ziitphen, at Meldorf in
Ditmarsch. A small congregation had formed
itself there, which had invited this Augustine monk
from Bremen to join them for a time: they had
obtained permission from the governors of the
country, the Forty-eight, that until the meeting
of the expected ecclesiastical assembly, the Gospel
should be preached pure and unchanged. But
their opponents, the prior of the Dominicans of
Meldorf and the Mimorites of Lunden, were far
more powerful; and in combination with the vicar
of the bishop’s official, they obtained a contrary
sentence, which delivered the poor man into their
hands, alleging that he had preached against the
Mother of God.* A drunken mob, headed by monks
bearing torches, went one night in January to the
parsonage and dragged forth the preacher, whom
they put to death by the most atrocious tortures,
executed with equal cruelty and unskilfulness.

Meanwhile the other party was aroused to a
sense of the necessity of taking more decisive
measures.

Immediately after the congress at Regensburg, the

* Neocorus, edited by Dahlmann, ii. p. 24. The judgment of
the magistrate runs thus: “ Desse Bosewicht hefft gepredigt
wedder de Moder Gadess und wedder den Christen Gloven, uth
welkerer Orsake ick ehn verordele van wegen mines genedigen
Herrn Bischops van Bremen thom Vuere.” — “ This miscreant
hath preached against the mother of God and the Christian faith,
for which reason I condemn him to the fire, in the name of my
gracious Lord Bishop of Bremen.”

Cuapr. V. CITIES AND NOBLES. 195

cities, seeing the danger that threatened them from
the support which their bishops appeared to receive
from the princes, held a great town meeting
at Spire, and resolved, in direct Opposition to
that adherence to the Latin fathers of the church
which had. been enjoined, that their preachers
should confine themselves wholly to the Gospel and
the prophetic and apostolic Scriptures.* At that
time they still expected that the assembly would
be held at Spire, and their intention was to pro-
pose some common resolution, When, however,
this meeting was forbidden by the emperor, and
it seemed as if another serious attempt would be
made to carry into effect the edict of Worms, they
assembled towards the end of the year at Ulm,
in order to aid each other in resisting all measures
proposed with that view. Weissenburg, Landau,
and Kaufbeuren, which had already received some
rebukes, were admonished as to their future
conduct.

The towns were joined by a part of the nobility.
Count Bernhard of Solms appeared at the meeting,
in the name of the counts on the Rhine and the Eifel,
of the Wetterau, the Westerwald, and the Nieder-
land; and asked the towns their opinion concerning
a proposed levy and tax of the empire for an expe-
dition against the Turks, and also concerning the
Lutheran matter. The towns judged rightly that
this combination with the nobles would be very

* Town meeting at Spire, St. Margaret’s day, 1524. Sum-
mary extract in Fels Zweiter Beitrag, p. 204.

o 2

196 DIVISION OF THE NATION. Boox III.

advantageous to them; and after interchanging a
few letters, the affair was concluded, and a resolu-
tion was taken on the spot at Ulm, “ not to act
separately in affairs of such weight, and during such
perilous times.” *

The most important event of all was, that a
considerable number of the princes declared their
complete dissent from the compact of Regensburg.

Markgrave Casimir of Brandenburg, who had
certainly never shown any great religious enthu-
siasm, could no longer withstand the aroused and
declared convictions of his whole country: he re-
jected the proposal of becoming a party to that
compact, alleging the general expectation of the
assembly at Spire. When this meeting was for-
bidden by the emperor, he passed a decree in con-
cert with his estates, that, in his own territories at
least, nothing should be preached but the Gospel
and the word of God of the Old and New Testa-
ment, pure and undefiled, and according to the
right and true interpretation. Such was the
tenour of the recess of the Brandenburg diet of
the Ist of October, 1524. His brother George,
who lived at the Hungarian court at Ofen, was not
satisfied even with this. He thought that the word
of God ought not only to be preached, but to

be implicitly obeyed, in defiance of all human ordi-
nances. f

A most unlooked-for change now took place in

* Fels Zweiter Beitrag, p. 206. Nicolai, 1524.
+ Von der Lith, pp. 61—65.

Cnap. V. LUTHERAN PRINCES. 197

Hessen. It was expected that the three warlike
princes who had conquered Sickingen and over-
thrown the Council of Regency, would also combat
the reforming ideas which their enemies had sup-
ported. The most energetic of the three, however,
very soon followed an exactly contrary course.

In May, 1524, one day as Landgrave Philip
of Hessen was riding to a cross-bow match at
Heidelberg, he met, near Frankfurt, Melanchthon,
whose fame was well-known to him, and who was
then returning from a visit to his home in the
Palatinate, accompanied by a couple of intimate
friends who had been there with him. The land-
grave stopped him, made him ride some distance
by his side, and asked him several questions which
betrayed the deep interest he felt in the religious
dissensions; and, at last, he only dismissed the
surprised and embarrassed professor, on condition
that he should send him, in writing, his opinion
on the most important points under discussion. *
Melanchthon executed this task with his usual
mastery of his subject ; his letter was short, logical,
and convincing, and produced a strong impression.
Not long after his return from the festivities, on the
18th of July, the landgrave issued a mandate (also
in manifest contradiction to the resolutions of Re-
‘-gensburg), wherein, among other things, he com-
manded that the Gospel should be preached pure
and unadulterated. From day to day he became

* Camerarius Vita Melanchthonis, cap. 26. Strobel’s Neue

Beitriige, iv. 2. p. 88.
o 3

198 DIVISION OF THE NATION. Boox IIL.

more deeply imbued with the peculiar opinions of
the new creed: at the beginning of the following
year, he declared that he would sooner give up his
body and life, his land and his people, than forsake
the word of God.

It appears as if some general understanding
had been come to at Heidelberg on the subject of
religion ; for, at first, Philip of Hessen fully ex-
pected that the Elector Palatine would follow his
example; and although it was not in the nature of
that prince to take so decided a part as the land-
erave, at least he did not allow himself to be hurried
into any acts of persecution.

The banished Duke of Wiirtemberg, too, might
already be regarded as a convert to the cause.
Lutheran preachers resided with him at Miimpel-
gard, and in October, 1524, Zwingli expressed his
wonder and joy that this Saul was become a Paul.*

Duke Ernest of Liineburg, the nephew of
Frederic of Saxony, who had studied at Wittenberg,
showed a similar leaning to the doctrines of the
reformers, and was strengthened in his opposition
to Austria by the affair of Hildesheim. The first
beginnings of the reformation at Celle under his
protection, date from the year 1524.+

He was joined by Frederic I. of Denmark, who,
a year before, had become sole master of Silesia and,
Holstein. His son Christian had attended the Diet

_ * Zwinglius Gicolampadio, Tiguri, 9th Oct. Epp. Zwinglii,
i, p. 163.
t Hiine, Geschichte von Hannover, i. p. 747.

Cuap. V. LUTHERAN PRINCES. 199

at Worms, with his tutor Johann Ranzau: they
both returned home filled with admiration of Luther,
and deeply imbued with his doctrines. They in-
vited Peter Suave—the very man who had accom-
panied Luther on that journey—to Denmark ; by
degrees the duke himself was won over to the same
cause. While bloody persecutions were set on foot
in so many places, Frederic I. published an edict,
dated the 7th August, 1524, wherein he made it a
capital offence to molest or injure any one on ac-
count ofhis religion: every one, he declared, ought
so to order his conduct in that behalf, as he could
best answer it to Almighty God.*

A still more important circumstance for the
prospects of Lutheranism was, the secession of a
powerful spiritual prince, the Grand Master Albert
of Prussia, from the doctrines of the papacy. At
the diet of Niirnberg he had been much impressed
by Osiander’s preaching; and having examined the
Scriptures himself, he felt convinced that the order
to which he belonged was not in accordance with
the word of God.f Another motive probably was,
that the fall of the Council of Regency, and the
depressed state of the nobility in general, deprived
him of the last hope of obtaining assistance from
the empire against Poland. What then must have
been his feelings when no hope was left of success-
fully resisting his old enemies, while at the same

* Minter, Kirchengeschichte von Diinemark, ii. p. 565.
t+ Memorandum of a conversation between Markgrave Albrecht
and Achatius v. Zemen. Beitriige zur Kunde Preussens, vol. iv.
o 4

200 ORIGIN OF THE Boox II.

time his mind was agitated by doubts of his own
condition and calling. He returned to Saxony in
the company of Planitz, the Saxon assessor to the
Regency, with whose sentiments we are well ac-
quainted. Here he saw Luther. This intrepid and
resolute man, who considered all things with
relation to the intrinsic necessity, rather than the
outward pressure which enforced them, advised
him to forsake the rules of his order, to marry, and
to convert Prussia into an hereditary principality.
The Grand Master had too much of the discretion
and reserve befitting a prince, to express his assent
to this suggestion: but it was easy to read in his
countenance how strongly he inclined towards it.*
We shall see how, impelled by the situation of his
country, and by the course which his negotiations
took, he soon proceeded to the execution of this
project.

Such were the results of the prohibition of the
national council, the announcement of which had
excited such ardent hopes.

It cannot be affirmed that violence was met by
violence, or that the tenacity with which the old
doctrines were maintained was opposed by an
equally resolute adoption of the new.

How little such was the case, is shown by the
example of the Elector of Saxony, who in spite of
Luther’s continual and violent expostulations,
caused the mass to be celebrated throughout the
whole of the year 1524, in his chapel of All-Saints,

* Letter from Luther to Brismann in de W., ii. 526.

Crap. V. DIVISION OF THE NATION. 201

and continually reminded the chapter of their
clerical duties.

The state of things may rather be summed up
as follows. ‘The empire had determined to hold a
general deliberation on the important affair which
occupied the whole mind of the nation. The pope
succeeded in preventing the execution of this pro-
ject, and in drawing a certain number of the Ger-
man sovereigns into a partial combination in his
own favour; but the others still pursued the
path they had entered upon conformably with the
laws of the empire. They were indeed forced to
renounce the general assembly, since the emperor
so peremptorily forbade it; but they were not so
easily persuaded to eee the old decrees of the
empire. They determined to abide by the pro-
visions of the Recess of 1523, which, in spite of
a few additions and amendments, had in the main
been confirmed in 1524. Indeed all the various
mandates of that year have fundamentally the same
character and purport.

Such was the origin of a division which has never
since been healed; which has constantly been kept
open by the same foreign influences that originally
caused it. It is very remarkable that all the dif-
ferent party leanings which have lasted through
successive centuries, manifested themselves thus
early. We have still to observe their establishment
and further progress; but the first moment of their
existence revealed the incalculable amount of the
danger with which they were pregnant.

202

CHAPTER VI.

THE PEASANTS’ WAR.

Pustic order rests on two foundations—first, the
stability of the governing body ; secondly, the con-
sent and accordance of public opinion with the
established government ; not, indeed, in every par-
ticular, which is neither possible nor even de-
sirable, but with its general tenour.

In every age and country there must be disputes
concerning the administration of the government;
but so long as the foundations of public confi-
dence remain unshaken, the danger is not great.
Opinions are in perpetual flux and _ perpetual
progress; so long as a strong government is
actuated by the same general spirit, and feels the
necessity of moving in the same direction, no vio-
lent convulsion need be feared.

But when the constituted powers doubt, vacil-
late, and conflict with one another, whilst at the
same moment opinions essentially hostile to the
existing order of things become predominant, then,
indeed, is the peril imminent.

The first glance will suffice to show us that such
was now the state of Germany.

The government of the empire, which it had
cost so much labour to constitute, and which
certainly enjoyed the general confidence of the

Cuar. VI. PEASANTS’ WAR. 203

nation, was now broken up, and its place filled by
the mere shadow of a name. The emperor was at a
distance, and recently the authority he had exercised
was merely negative; he had only prevented the ex-
ecution of whatever was resolved on. The two hier-
archies, the spiritual and the temporal, which had
been the work of past centuries, were now separated
by a deep and wide chasm. The good under-
standing of the more powerful sovereigns, on which
the unity of the empire had always depended, was
destroyed. On the most important affair that
had ever presented itself, all hope of framing
measures in concert was at an end.

This, of course, re-acted very powerfully on the
state of opinion. A sort of understanding, with
regard to which it was unnecessary to fix any
precise terms, had hitherto been evinced in the
tendencies of the imperial government, and the
moderated tone adopted by Luther; and this it
was that had enabled them to crush the destructive
opinions which arose in 1522. But now that all
hope of further change being effected by a decree
of the empire was over, Luther could no longer
maintain the authoritative position he had assumed,
and the anarchical theories he had helped to stifle
broke out afresh: they had found an asylum in the
territory of his own sovereign —in electoral Saxony.

In Orlamiinde, one of the cures which had been
incorporated with the endowments of Wittenberg
for the benefit of that University, Carlstadt now
preached. He had entered into possession of the
cure in an irregular manner, in opposition to the

204 PEASANTS’ WAR. Boox III.

proper patrons of it, partly by means of a certain
claim which he raised as belonging to the chapter,
but mainly, by the election of the parishioners.
He now removed the pictures, performed divine
service after his own fashion, and promulgated the
most extraordinary opinions concerning the doc-
trines of the church, and especially the obligations
of the Mosaic law. We find mention of a man
who, by Carlstadt’s advice, wanted to marry two
wives.* His rash and confused mind led him
entirely to confound the national with the religious
element of the Old Testament. Luther expected
that before long circumcision would be introduced
at Orlamiinde, and thought it necessary seriously
to warn the elector against attempts of this nature.

At Eisenach, Johann Strauss had already struck
into a like crooked path. He was particularly
violent against the practice of receiving interest on
a loan. He declared that the heathenish laws of
the jurists were not binding, and that the Mosaic
institution of the year of jubilee, ‘ wherein every
man shall return unto the inheritance he had sold,”
still continued to be a valid commandment from
God; thus calling all vested rights of property in
question.

* Letter of Luther to Briick, 13th Jan. 1524. (De W., ii.
No. 572.)

+ “Dass wucher zu nemen und geben unserm christlichen
Glauben entgegen ist, 1524.”—“ To give and take usurious in-
terest is against our Christian faith.” C. iii, it is said: “So
dann in der Ordnung des Jubel Jars im Text offenbarlich auss-
gedruckt wirt das Gebot, das die notiirfftig bruderlich Lieb for-

Cuapr. VI. PEASANTS’ WAR. 205

Not far from thence, Thomas Miinzer had
founded a church on the doctrines which had been
suppressed at Zwickau and Wittenberg. Like the
former propagators of those doctrines, he assumed
as its sole basis, those inward revelations to which
alone he attached any importance; and he far
surpassed them in the vehemence with which he
preached the Taborite doctrine, that unbelievers
were to be exterminated with the sword, and that
a kingdom should be established, composed of the
faithful only.

These doctrines could not fail to find a welcome
and an echo in all parts of Germany. In Wiir-
temberg, too, the Israelitish year of jubilee was
preached to the peasants. “Oh, beloved brethren!”
said Dr. Mantel, ‘‘oh, ye poor Christian men, were
these years of jubilee to arrive, they would indeed
be blessed years!”* Otto Brunfels, who had pre-
viously been very moderate in his language, in
1524 published at Strasburg a series of essays on
tithes, wherein he declared them to be an insti-
tution of the Old Testament, which was abrogated
by the New, and entirely denied the right of the
clergy to them.f

dert, muss alle Einrede still halten und allen Christen desgley-
chen zu thun gebotten ungezweyffelt seyn.”—“ Seeing, then, in
the text, ordaining the year of jubilee, the command requiring
brotherly love is clearly expressed, so all disputes must cease ;
and there can be no doubt that all Christians are commanded
to do likewise.”

* Sattler, Wiirtenbergische Geschichte, Herz, ii. p. 105.

+ “ De Ratione Decimarum Ottonis Brunfelsii Propositiones.”

206 PEASANTS’ WAR. Boox III.

While new champions of these opinions started
up in various parts of Germany, Nicolas Storch
re-appeared at Hof, where he found believers in his
revelations, and gathered round him twelve apostles
who were to disseminate his doctrine throughout
the nation.*

The exile of Miinzer and Carlstadt from Saxony,
which was partly effected by Luther’s influence f,
greatly contributed to the spread and the force of
the agitation. They both went to the Upper
Rhine, where Carlstadt began by unreservedly pro-
claiming his doctrine of the Lord’s Supper; and,
however untenable was his own exposition of it,
the excitement he thus occasioned was most violent,
and productive of incalculable results. Miinzer pro-
ceeded through Niirnberg to Basle and the frontier
of Switzerland, where he was soon surrounded by
fanatics who called themselves “the young Miin-
zers,” as Carlstadt was, by men of learning. He
confirmed them in the rejection of infant baptism,

Among others, prop. 115.: “ Proditores Christi sunt Juda
pejores et sacerdotibus Baal, qui pro missis Papisticis et
Canonicis preculis decimas recipiunt.”

* Widemann, Chron. Curiense: Mencken, iii. p. 744.

+ Who has not read the scenes in Jena, where Luther
is said to have given Carlstadt a gulden to write against him,
and to be his enemy? Acta Jenensia, Walch, xv. 2422. Lu-
ther always complained of the malignity of these stories. That
they are received in Luther’s works does not prove their truth,
as Fuessli says in his Life of Carlstadt, p. 65. Luther was
placed in a false position by hinting that Carlstadt’s opinions
were seditious, like those of Miinzer, which could not be clearly
proved.

Cuapr. VI. PEASANTS’ WAR. 207

which by degrees was become the watchword of
the party that meditated a universal revolution.

Thus, to the disorganisation of the supreme
authorities, was added the general revolt of opinion
against all existing institutions; a state of the public
mind, which opened a boundless vista of possible
changes in the order of things.

The result was inevitable.

We have already seen in what a state of ferment
the peasantry of all parts of the empire had been
for more than thirty years; how many attempts
they had made to rise ; how violent was their hatred
to all constituted authorities. Long, however,
before the Reformation had been even thought of,
their political schemes were tinged with a religious
character: this was shown in the case of the
Capuchins at Eichstadt, in that of Hans Behaim
in the Wiirzbiirg dominions, and of the peasantry
in Untergrumbach. Joss Fritz, who in 1513
renewed the Bundschuh at Lehen, in the Brisgau,
was encouraged in his purpose by the parish priest,
“because justice would be furthered by it: God
approved the Bundschuh, as might be shown from
the Scriptures; it was, therefore, a godly thing.” *
Poor Kunz of Wiirtemberg declared, in 1514,
“that he would stand up for righteousness and
divine justice.” It was immediately after a sermon
of a former very orthodox professor of catholic

* Confession of Hans Hummel; Schneider, Bundschuh zu
Lehen, p. 99.

208 PEASANTS’ WAR. Boox III.

theology, Dr. Gaislin, that the tumult first broke
out on the banks of the Glems.*

It was the manifest and inevitable tendency of
the reforming movement, which shook the authority
of the clergy from its very foundations, to foster
ideas of this kind; but it is not less clear that the
evangelical preaching, which was undertaken with
far different views and aims, was likely to be affected
by an excitement already so powerful. The political
excitement was not produced by the preaching, but
the religious enthusiasts caught the political fever.
For all had not the sound sense and the penetration
of Luther. It was now taught that as all were the
children of one father, and all equally redeemed by
the blood of Christ, there should no longer be any
inequality of wealth or station.f To the complaints
of the misconduct of the clergy, were added the
old accusations against lords and rulers: their
wars; the harsh, and often unjust administration of
their ministers and subordinates, and the oppres-
sions under which the poor groaned; in short, it
was asserted that if the spiritual power was anti-

* Heyd Herzog Ulrich von Wiirtenberg, i. p. 243.

+ “ Kurz das es zugang auff Erden, wie mir Theutschen von
Schlauraffenland, die Poeten de Insulis fortunatis, und die Juden
von ihres Messias Zeytten dichten, also auch zum Tayl die
Junger Christi gedachten vom Reych Christi.” —“ In short, that
it should be on earth, as we Germans romance of the Schlauraf-
fenland (a sort of pays de Cocaigne), poets, de Insulis fortunatis,
and the Jews of the times of their Messiah ; so some of the dis-
ciples of Christ thought about the kingdom of Christ.”— Eberlin
von Ginzburg, Ein Getrewe Warnung an die Christen in der
Burgau.

Crap. VI. PEASANTS’ WAR. 209

christian, the temporal was no less so. Both were
accused of heathenism and tyranny. ‘Things
cannot go on as they have done,” concludes one of
these writings; “the game has been carried on
long enough, and both citizens and peasants are
tired of it; every thing will alter—omnium rerum
vicissitudo.” *

The first disturbances broke out in the same
district in which most of the -former commotions
had begun, —in that part of the Schwarzwald which
divides the sources of the Danube from the upper
valley of the Rhine. Several causes concurred to
render this the scene of peculiar discontent : — the
vicinity of Switzerland, with which that part of
Germany stood in various and close relation; the
peculiar severity with which the Austrian govern-
ment at Ensisheim and the commission at Engen
pursued even the most blameless preachers of the
new doctrine; the personal share taken in these
measures by the Count of Sulz, governor of
Insbruck, and hereditary judge at Rothweil, who,
as well as the Counts of Lupfen and Fiirstenberg,
was distinguished for his hatred of Lutherans and
peasants; the presence of Duke Ulrich of Wiir-

* Kin ungewonlicher und der ander Sendtbrieff dess Bauern-
feyndts zu Karsthannsen.”—“ An uncommon and another mis-
sive of the peasants’ enemy to Karsthannsen,” towards the end:
printed by Johann Locher of Munich. Panzer (ii. No. 2777.)
mentions a previous letter of Karsthannsen, dated 1525. In
the second, I find no mention of the peasants’ war, and it must
have been written, at latest, during the latter half of the year
1524.

VOL. II. P

210 PEASANTS’ WAR. Boox IIl.

tenberg at Hohentweil, who beheld his most for-
midable enemies in these noble partisans of Austria,
and used every means to irritate the people against
them; lastly, perhaps, the consequences of a hail-
storm which, in the summer of 1524, destroyed all
hopes of the harvest in the Kletgau. The insurrec-
tion broke out in the Stiihlinger district, the domain
of Count Sigismund of Lupfen. If it be true, as the
contemporary chronicles affirm, that the immediate
cause of the revolt was a strange whim of the
Countess of Lupfen, for winding yarn upon snail-
shells which her subjects were forced to collect,
it is certain that never did a more trifling and
fantastic cause produce more serious and violent
effects.™

On the 24th of August, 1524, Hans Miiller of
Biilgenbach, a Stihlinger peasant and soldier, went
to the anniversary of the consecration of the
church at Waldshut, followed by a considerable troop

* Extract from the Villinger Chronik ; Walchner, Ratolph-
zell, p. 89. According to Anshelm, vi. p. 298., the subjects of
the Counts Von Lupfen and Fiirstenberg complained, “ Dass sie
am Fyrtag miussten Schneggenhiissli suchen, garn winden,
Erdbeer, Kriesen, Schlehen-gewinnen, und ander dergleichen
thun, den Herren und Frouwen werken bei gutem Wetter, ihnen
selbs im Ungewetter: das gejiigd und @ hund liiffent ohne Ach-
tung einigs Schadens.” — “ That on holydays they were obliged
to hunt for snails, wind yarn, gather strawberries, cherries, and
sloes, and do other such like things; they had to work for their
lords and ladies in fine weather, and for themselves in the rain.
Their huntsmen and hounds ran about without regarding the
damage they did.” The matter was laid before the Kammer-
gericht, but the people did not wait for the decision.

Car. VI. PEASANTS’ WAR. Pt

of insurgent peasants, bearing a black, red and
white flag: but resistance to a single count was far
too mean and trifling an object for him; he an-
nounced his intention of founding an evangelical
brotherhood for the purpose of emancipating the
peasantry throughout the German empire.* A small
contribution paid by the members was destined to
pay emissaries who were to extend the confederation
over all parts of Germany. ‘This project did not
originate with himself. It was suggested by
Thomas Miinzer, who had long kept up a corre-
spondence with this district, and now arrived there
in person. He staid a few weeks in Griesheim, and
then traversed the Hegau and the Kletgau,—for he
could find no permanent resting-place t,— preaching
wherever he went the deliverance of Israel, and
the establishment of a heavenly kingdom upon
‘earth. The subjects of the Counts of Werdenberg,
Montfort, Lupfen, and Sulz, of the Abbot of
Reichenau and the Bishop of Constance, gradually
joined the Stiihlingers. Those of Sulz previously
consulted the inhabitants of Ziirich, in which town
their lord possessed the rights of citizenship; and
although the latter did not, as they assured the count,
approve the insurrection, they did not hesitate to
make the toleration of evangelical preachers one of
the conditions of their obedience.{ \ It would be well

* Schreiber, Taschenbuch fiir Siiddeutschland, i. p. 72.
+ “certis de causis.” Bullinger adversus Anabaptistas, and
his Reformations-geschichte, p. 224.
t Fiiesslins Beitriige zur Historie der Kirchenreformation,
vol. ii. p. 68.
Pa

ys PEASANTS’ WAR. Boox III.

worth while to examine the course of these move-

ments more narrowly than has yet been done. The’
various motives which concurred to produce the

peasants’ war were more distinguishable at this,

than at any other period ; for this was the moment

at which they assumed the form of those general

ideas, which from that time to this have possessed

such a singular power of inflaming and attaching

-the minds of men.

The lords vainly called upon the Swabian League
for aid in their peril. Here and there a band of
insurgents was induced by its persuasions and
promises to return home; but wherever a serious
engagement took place, the peasants. maintained
their ground.

Hearing that a body of the infantry and cavalry
of the League was advancing against them under
Jacob von Landau, they took up a strong position,
from which it was impossible to dislodge them.*
Nor could the most zealous efforts of well-inten-
tioned mediators bring about any reconciliation.
The peasants drew up a statement of their
grievances in twelve articles, which they did not
hesitate to lay before the Council of Regency at
Esslingen. If, however, the lords refused to enter
‘on the discussion of the whole of these collectively,
the peasants were equally determined not to con-
cede any point: they had indeed far more extensive
schemes in reserve. At the end of the year 1524,
and the beginning of 1525, the peasants were

* Walchner, Geschichte von Ratolphzell, p. 92.

Cuar. VI. PEASANTS’ WAR. a

masters of the whole land.* The lords and their
ministers were at length compelled to seek safety
behind the massive walls of Ratolphzell, defended
by its devoted townsmen.

Meanwhile, however, similar disturbances had
‘broken out in larger districts. .

Nowhere were the complaints of the people
better grounded than in the dominions of the
Abbots of Kempten. These ecclesiastical rulers
continually vexed their subjects with fresh taxes,
which they spent in building or travelling. As long
ago as the year 1492, riots had broken out in con-
sequence, but had led to no redress of the people’s
wrongs. The free peasants, who were very nume-
rous in the Abbacy, were continually ground down
to the station of Zinsersf, and those again to that
of villeins{; while the latter were compelled to
perform services that rendered their condition
more intolerable. Free lands were taken possession
of; tithe-free estates subjected to tithes ; the money

* The instruction given by Archduke Ferdinand to Veit
Suiter (Walchner and Bensen, p. 558.) shows the state of lawless
violence produced under these circumstances.

+ The Zinser, or Zinsmann, occupied, as the context shows,
an intermediate station between the free peasant and the villein.
As the idea is a very complex one, and involves a number of
conditions to which we have nothing analogous, any attempt to
translate the word could only mislead. Grimm (D. R. A. p. 358.)
says, “ Zins is the Latin census.” The word which seems most
nearly to express its meaning, in the cases he cites, is dues. —
TRANSL.

+ Haggenmiiller, Geschichte der Stadt und Grafschaft
Kempten, p. 505., says, that four hundred cases of this kind are
recorded in the Rotula of the Provincial Acts.

. PrP 3

214 PEASANTS’ WAR. Boox ILI.

paid by the peasants for protection and defence
was raised twentyfold; the popular courts of justice
held at markets or fairs were suppressed; the
revenues of the communes or villages were seized ;
occasionally, even, the spiritual power was applied
to carry through these oppressions. It was not
surprising, therefore, that, in the year 1528, when a
new Abbot, Sebastian von Breitenstein, entered on
the government, the peasants refused to do homage,
except on condition that he would redress their
grievances. At first he held out the hope that he
would comply with their demands ; thirteen sittings
were held to consider of them, but all in vain; the
Abbot at length exclaimed that he would leave things
as he found them; if his subjects would not obey
him, George von Frundsberg should come and teach
them. This was assuredly a most ill-timed stretch
of the spiritual rights of supremacy, just when all
men were refusing their belief in the basis on which
those rights were founded —the divine authority of
the clergy. As the Abbot made this appeal to force,
his subjects thought it time to prepare for defence.
On the 23d of January, 1525, the seceders ( Gottes-
hausleute—God’s house people) held a meeting at
their old place on the Luibas. They determined to
pursue the matter legally before the judges and
councillors of the League, and if they could get no
redress, to sound the tocsin, and repel force by force.

Already they beheld allies rising around them on
every side. Similar, if not equal, wrongs; the force
of example, and the hope of success, set the pea-
santry all over Swabia in motion.

Cuar. VI. PEASANTS’ WAR. 215

In February, the people of the Allgau, led by
Dietrich Hurlewagen of Lindau, rose against the
Bishop of Augsburg, and formed a strict alliance
with the villages of Kempten. On the 27th of
February, the two districts held a meeting on the
Luibas. If any inhabitant of them refused to join
the association, a stake was driven into the ground
before his door, as a token that he was a public
enemy. At their call, the peasants all along the
Lake of Constance, and across the Alps to Pfullen-
dorf, joined them, led by Eitelhans of ‘Theuringen,
whom his followers celebrate as “ a good captain
of the Lord, who kept a faithful hand over them.”
No bells could be tolled for divine service; the
sound of them instantly gave the alarm, and all the
people rushed to the place of meeting at Berma-
‘ tingen.* A third party, consisting of the subjects
of the Abbot of Ochsenhausen, the Baron of Wald-
burg, and many other lords and cities, rose on the
Ried. The villages that refused to join them were
threatened with fire and sword}; the people on

* Salmansweiler’s description in Oechsle, Beitrige zur Ges-
chichte des Bauernkriegs, p. 485.

+ See the account of the treaty of Hegéwisch, Walchner,
p. 298.: “Wie wol es den Frommen und Erbaren nit lieb,
sonder ein gros beschwiird was. Niitt dester minder so was der
Jungen und auch deren die niemen nutz; so vil das die Allten
und auch die Frommen mit innen miisten ziichen, oder sy im
der nit ziechen willt ein Pfal fiir sin hus schlugent, unnd im
darby tréwtend.”—“ Although, indeed, to the honest and godly
it was not welcome, but rather a grievous burthen ; nevertheless,
not only the young, and those who were of no use to any man, but
also the old and godly men even were forced to go along with

ep 4

916 PEASANTS’ WAR. Boox Ift-

the Iller hastened to unite with them. Their
centre of operations was at Baldringen.

Thus united, and grown to a formidable force,
the peasantry now again laid their grievances be-
fore the Swabian League. In the course of March,
negotiations were again set on foot in Ulm with
the three insurgent bands. But it may be doubted
whether it was not the character of the League
itself which caused these discontents ;—the incessant
wars, the expenses of which were either thrown
directly on the subjects, or raised by an increase
of all the established burthens; the support it gave
to the several lords individually; being itself com-
posed of the very sovereigns against whom the
complaints were made. It now clearly appeared
how great a calamity it was for the country that
the Council of Regency had recently lost so im- -
mensely in power and consideration. It sent, m-
deed, two of its members to command peace, and
to try to bring about a reconciliation; and they
proposed to erect a court of arbitration,—each party
to nominate one prince and three cities, who should
hear the complaints and adjudge the remedy.
But the Council of Regency was far too. weak to
obtain a hearing for even these moderate pro-
posals. For a moment (in February and March)
the invasion of his own land by the Duke of Wiir-
tenberg had occupied the attention of the League.
It is difficult to say what would have happened if
the Confederation, on whom this prince again relied,

‘them. And if any man would not, they thrust a stake into the
earth before his door, and threatened him thereat.”

Cuapr. VI. PEASANTS’ WAR. 217

had adhered firmly to his cause, as it appeared
its interest to do. For it seemed consistent enough
that the Swiss, in opposition to whom the Swabian
League was originally formed, should support the
duke who attacked, and the peasants who revolted
against it; and it was this danger which had
induced the councillors of the League to enter into
negotiations. But on this occasion, as on former
ones, other considerations preponderated with the
Swiss diet; and when the duke had already forced.
his way into the outskirts of Stuttgart, they re-
called their troops from him with the greatest
urgency *, and he was compelled to retreat without
gaining any solid advantage.

The League was thus at hberty to act against the
peasantry. Without further hesitation, it required
them first to lay down their arms, after which it
would treat with them. + As the peasants had gone

* Hans Stockar’s Heimfahrt und Tagebuch, p.131.: “ und
dye Botten, die miantend uns ab, das wier hiam zugend mit
Mund und mit Brieffen, by Lib und by Leben, ain Eren und
Gutt, by Verliirn unser Vatters-land, und ckemend wier, so wet-
tind sy uns aller Straff ledyg lon, und erzalttend uns von dem
Schaden, den wier zu Mialand und der Frantzoss Kiing hatt
aimpfangen. Und also warend wir unseren Heren und Oberen
gehorsam, und brachen in der Nacht uff.”—“ And the messen-
gers warned us to depart to our homes by word of mouth and by
letter, as we loved our lives and limbs, our honour and goods, and
feared to lose our country; and if we went there they would
forgive us all punishment. And they told us of the losses we had
suffered in Milan, and those of the French king. And accord-
ingly we obeyed our lords and masters, and set out that same
night.”

t Haggenmiiller, Kempten, p. 522. A. book which I have

218 PEASANTS’ WAR. Boox ILL,

much too far to agree to these conditions, the
League, well prepared for war, determined on an
immediate resort to force. But it was destined
again to find a wholly unexpected resistance.
Detached bands were easily routed and dispersed,
and a few small places quickly reduced; but this
had no effect on the main body. The duke’s en-
terprise had so far been of use to the peasants, that
it had given them time to assemble in masses which
kept even such a commander as George Truchsess
in check. Many of these men had borne arms in the
field. While the League had excited the insurrec-
tion by grinding taxes and religious persecutions, it
had also made the insurgents capable of self-defence,
by its continual wars. The feeling of their own
power of defending themselves was, indeed, one
chief motive to the revolt. The foot-soldiers of
the League, who had not unfrequently served under
the same banners with these peasants, had a na-
tural fellow-feeling with them. And now, from
the time that the last negotiations had proved
abortive, the disorder began to assume a really
serious character.

The twelve articles had appeared, and every one
knew what he had to expect, and why he had taken
arms. These articles contained three different
kinds of demands; first of all, the liberty of the
chase, of fishing, and of hewing wood, and the pre-

constantly found very useful. Iam surprised to find the move-
ment at Kempten so falsely represented, even in contemporary
works, and hence, of course, in all subsequent ones. Cochliius
seems to be the originator of the errors.

Cuar. VIL PEASANTS’ WAR. 219

vention of or compensation for the damage done by
the game :—demands and complaints reiterated by
the peasantry of all countries ever since the rise
of feudal societies: as early as the year 997,
we find them urged in Normandy.* Secondly, the
peasants pressed for relief from some newly-imposed
burthens, new laws and penalties, and for restora-
tion of the property of the parishes which had been —
abstracted, as we remarked in speaking of the usur-
pations of the lords. Lastly, the desire for religious
reform was mingled with these secular motives.
The peasants were determined no longer to be
serfs, for Christ had redeemed them also with his
precious blood; they would no longer pay the
small tithe, but only the great one t, for God had

* Gulielmus Gemeticensis, Hist. Norm., lib. v. 2.: “ Juxta
suos libitus vivere decernebant, quatenus tam in sylvarum com-
' pendiis quam in aquarum commerciis nullo obsistente ante sta-
tuti juris obice legibus uterentur suis.”

+ This is shown in the following passage from Miillner’s
Annals. The council at Niirnberg caused it to be proclaimed
from all pulpits, “dass aller lebendige Zehent, als Fiillen
Kalber Limmer, &c., desgleichen der kleine Zehent, den man
nennt dan todten Zehent, als Heidel Erbeiss Heu Hopfen, &c.,
ganz todt und abseyn solle, aber den grossen harten Zehenten
von hernach benanntem Getreide, so man die fiinf Brand nennt,
nemlich von Korn Diinkel Waitzen Gerste habern, sollte-‘man zu
geben schuldig seyn.” — “ That all tithes on living things, such
as foals, calves, lambs, &c., likewise the small tithes called the
dead tithes, such as buck-wheat, pasture, hay, hops, &c., should
be entirely abolished; but the people should be bound to pay
the great hard tithes on the following sorts of grain, viz. rye,
spelt, wheat, barley, and oats.” (According to custom, the
fifteenth, twentieth, or thirtieth sheaf.)

220 PEASANTS’ WAR. Boox ITI,

ordained that alone in the Old Testament. Above
all, they demanded the right to choose their own
preachers, in order to be instructed by them in the
true faith, “without which they were mere flesh and
blood, and good for nothing.” The characteristic
feature of these articles is a mixture of spiritual and
temporal demands, a derivation of the latter from
the former, which is certainly at variance with the
sentiments of Luther, and with the pure and un-
mingled tendencies of the reformation; but which
is also far removed from all schemes of general con-
vulsion, and not. at variance with common sense
and humanity. As to the political demands, the
local and particular interests are far less prominent
than those of a general or a universal character, —as
was indispensable where various bands of men were
to combine: the author of them, be he who he may,
gave evidence of sagacity and address. For thus
alone could the articles obtain general approbation,
and be regarded as the manifesto of the whole body
of the peasantry.* But further demands were by
no means withdrawn in consequence.

* “Dye grunlichen und rechten Hauptartikel aller Bauerschafft
und Hyndersessen : ” printed among others in Strébel’s Beitriige,
iil. p. 9. Among the editions, one in Panzer, No. 2705. has this
addition : “ des monadts Martii.” According to Haggenmiiller,
p. 513., their first appearance in the form of a document was
during the negotiation between the three united bodies of
peasants and the Swabian League, in February and March, 1525,
in which case they must have been drawn up by a preacher who
had joined the peasants. According to the unanimous opinion
of contemporaries, among whom was Melanchthon, Christopher
Schappeler was the author. Even in the Florentine History of

Cuar. VI PEASANTS’ WAR. 29.1

All the people of the Black Forest, from Wutach-
thal to Dreisamthal, now flocked together under
Hans Miiller of Bulgenbach. This leader journeyed
from place to place, brilliantly attired in a red cloak
‘and cap, at the head of his adherents; the great
standard and the battle flag followed him in a cart
decorated with leaves and ribbons—a sort of car-_
roccio.* A herald, or messenger, summoned all the
parishes, and read the twelve articles aloud. Nor
did their commander stop here; he declared them
the symbol of the evangelical brotherhood, which
he intended to found; whoever refused to accept
them should be put under temporal ban by the
union. Already had this been declared against the
lords of castles, the monks and priests in convents
and chapters: though even these men might be ad-
mitted into the association, if they chose to enter
it, and to live for the future in common houses
like other people; every thing should then be
granted them which was their due according to the
laws of God. Miiller’s first vague idea of an evan-

Nardi (viii. p. 187.), he is called, “ uno scellerato rinnovatore
della setta degli anabattisti chiamato Scaflere.” Schappeler,
however, always denied this (Bullinger, p. 245.); and, indeed, it
seems to have been an error. It was afterwards supposed, and
from his own confession (see Strobel, ib. p. 76.), that Joh.
Heughlin, of Lindau, was the real author, yet his confession
relates only to the articles which were granted to the peasants
of Sernatingen, to prevent their joining the other peasants: the
famous twelve articles would have been mentioned in another
manner.

* Schreiber der Breisgau im Bauernkriege, Taschenb. fiir
Siiddeutschland, i. p. 235.

222 PEASANTS’ WAR. Boox III.

gelical brotherhood thus assumed a very distinct
form. A radical change in political and even
in social relations was the object now clearly
aimed at.

In the course of April, 1525, it really appeared

likely to come to this.

Tt is a very remarkable circumstance that while
Miinzer was fomenting the disorders in Upper
Swabia, Dr. Carlstadt, a Franconian by birth, was
equally active in Franconia. Compelled to quit
Strasburg and to return home, but there subject
to incessant persecution, and regarded with double
horror in consequence of the notoriety of his doubts
as to the sacrament, he at length found an asylum
at Rothenburg on the Tauber, where his opinions
were regarded with sympathy. The citizens of
the guilds demanded that the church reform
which had just been begun should be carried
through, which the patrician families (die Ge-
schlechter), whose domination was, moreover, not
wholly legal, opposed. The guilds had a most
powerful ally on their side, in the sturdy war-
like peasants of the Landwehr, who were also
vexed with exorbitant and illegal charges, and who
claimed the liberty of the Gospel. We are too well
acquainted with the character of Carlstadt not to
know that he would approve all the objects of the
people. Already banished by the council, but
secretly protected by certain powerful members of
it, he suddenly appeared near the crucifix in the
great burial-ground, in his peasant’s coat and hat of
rough white felt, and exhorted the country people

Cuar. VI. PEASANTS’ WAR. 223

not to desist from their endeavours.* It may
easily be imagined, however, that the movement was
not confined to religious innovations. In the last
week of March disturbances broke out, first in the
country, and then in the town, in which a committee
‘of the guilds seized on all the power ; while the rural
communes formed themselves into a great associ-
ation, set forth their grievances—which had indeed
spiritual grounds, but were by no means of an ex-
clusively spiritual nature —and took up arms to
compel redress.

In Franconia the slumbering fires of discontent
burst forth with still greater rapidity than in Swa-
bia; either in consequence of the combinations
formed by the emissaries sent by Hans Miiller, or by
the excitement produced in the minds of the disaf-
fected ringleaders by the example of their neigh-
bours. A few thousand peasants, excited by the
twelve articles, which had fallen into their hands,
assembled in a valley of the Odenwald, called the
Schiipfergrund, and chose for their leader George
Metzler, the inn-keeper at Ballenburg, in whose
house the first arrangements had been made,—a bold
man, whose life had been passed in the noisy revels
of a frequented tavern. Similar meetings were

* Bensen der Bauernkrieg in Ostfranken, p. 79. According
to the sentence passed on Stephan von Menzingen, this leader of
the town movements, an adherent of Duke Ulrich of Wiirten-
berg, associated frequently with Carlstadt. See Anfang und
Ende des Bauernkriegs zu Rothenburg, Walch, L. W. xvi. 180.

+ According to Hubert Thomas Leodius, this occurred about
the middle of Lent, at Liitare, 26th March.

224 PEASANTS’ WAR. Boor III.

held at Béckingen, Mergentheim, and many other

places. The first thing usually was to break the

fasts; a banquet was held at which the most eloquent

and the most disaffected spoke; the twelve articles

were brought out, read, and approved; a leader was

chosen, and the alarm bell sounded. Such was the

beginning of the riot, the first act of which, in

almost every case, was to seize upon a flour store

or a wine-cellar, or to drag a seigneurial fish-pond.

The newly-chosen commanders might be seen riding

about with an air of authority, mounted upon the

priest’s pony. But though these tumults seemed

contemptible enough in their beginnings, they

became more and more formidable as they advanced.

On an appointed day the several bands repaired to-

gether from every side, not exactly at the customary
meeting-place, but at some convent they had doomed
to destruction, as for example, at Scheflersheim,

where they swore to pay neither tax, rent, nor tithe
to any lord, temporal or spiritual, till they would
come to some terms ; and in future, as they had only
one God, to acknowledge only one master. It was

as if the insurgents were led by some secret
guidance to one predetermined end. Their object:
was in the first place to emancipate themselves from
their lords, but then to unite with them and take
measures in concert against the clergy, and, above
all, against the spiritual princes.

To accomplish this work by forcible means, two
troops marched into the field, one called the Black
from Rothenburg, under Hans Kolbenschlag, the
other, the White, from the Odenwald, under George

Cuapr. VI. : PEASANTS’ WAR. 225

Metzler. The lords were compelled to accept the
twelve articles, of which the Odenwald band pub-
lished a distinct declaration, wherein the abolition
of the punishment of death, of the lesser tithes,
and of villeinage were especially insisted on, with-
out omitting such local modifications as should
Seem necessary, and holding out the prospect
of further reforms.* This band had not, like
the Swabian, the forces of the League to deal with ;
there was nobody capable of resisting them. The
Counts of Hohenlohe and Lowenstein, the com-
mander of the Teutonic Order at Mergentheim, and
the Junker of Rosenberg, were forced in succession
to subscribe to the conditions laid before them by
the peasants, and to submit beforehand to. the
reforms they purposed to introduce. The Counts
George and Albert of Hohenlohe consented to
appear before the peasants’ army at Griinbiihl.
‘‘ Brother George and brother Albert,” said a tin-
ker of Ohringen to them, “come hither and swear
to the peasants to be as brothers to them, for ye are
now no longer lords but peasants.” Terrible, in-
deed, was the fate of those who ventured to resist,
like Count Helfenstein at Weinsberg. The natural
rudeness of peasants was inflamed by the first
opposition into the wildest and most wanton blood-
thirstiness: they swore that they would kill every
man that wore spurs; and when Helfenstein had

* Explanation of the 12 articles. Ochsle, p- 572. and Bensen,
p. 526.

7 Letter from Count George to the city of Hall. Tuesday
after Palm Sunday. Oechsle, p. 271.

VOL. II. Q

226 PEASANTS’ WAR. Boox III

fallen into their power, it was in vain that his wife,
a natural daughter of Emperor Maximilian, threw
herself at the feet of the leaders with her little son
in her arms: a lane was formed, and the victim
‘brought out, preceded by a peasant playing on a
pipe; Helfenstein was then driven on the spears of
his peasants amidst the sound of trumpets and horns.
Hereupon every one gave way: all the nobility,
from the Odenwald to the Swabian frontier, sub-
mitted to the laws of the peasants, — those of Winter-
stetten, Stettenfels, Zobel, Gemmingen, Frauenberg,
and the Counts of Wertheim and Rheineck; those
of Hohenlohe now even gave up their artillery to
the peasants.* In order to bring the matter to
a conclusion, both bodies now marched against
the most powerful lord in Franconia, who bore the
title of duke there, —the Bishop of Wiirzburg.
-On their way, they had not alone enriched and
strengthened themselves, but had also secured
distinguished commanders of the knightly class.
Gotz von Berlichingen had undertaken the com-
mand of the Odenwald troop; partly because it
would have: been dangerous to refuse ; partly at-
tracted by the prospect of active war, which was
the sole object and passion of his life, and in
which he was the more ready to engage, as it was
directed against his old enemies of the Swabian
League.t Florian Geier led the Rothenburgers.
On the 6th and 7th of May these bands ap-

* Chronik der Truchsessen, ii. p. 195.
+ Lebensbeschreibung des Gotz, p. 201. See his Apology in
the Materialien, p. 156.

Cuap. VI. PEASANTS’ WAR. B2t

proached Wiirzburg in opposite directions, and were
joyfully received by the inhabitants of the town,
who hoped to gain the privileges of a free imperial
city*; the citizens and the peasants swore not to
forsake each other till they had conquered the
Frauenberg, in which the last remaining forces of
the princes and knights of F ranconia, who’ were
now united, had assembled.

At the same moment (the end of April and be-
ginning of May, 1525) a similar state of things
began throughout Upper Germany. Disturbances
broke out in all directions, and every where they
were in effect successful.

The Bishop of Spire had been forced to submit
to the conditions imposed by the peasants F ; the
Elector Palatine had met them in an open field
near the village of Horst, and promised to redress
their grievances on the conditions laid down in the
twelve articles.{ In Alsatia, Zabern, the residence
of the bishop himself, had fallen into the hands of

* Johann Reinhards Wirzburgische Chronik in Ludwig,
Wiirzb. Geschichtschr., p. 886.

t+ Gnodalius, ii. p. 142. -

{ Letter from the Elector to Melanchthon: “ Haben uns mit
ihnen den 12 Artikel wegen eines Landtags vereinigt, dergestalt
wes wir uns derselben mit ihnen vergleichen mochten, das hat
seine wege, wes wir uns aber nicht vertragen kénnen, das solt
stehen zu Thirfursten Fiirsten und Stinden deg Reichs.”—-“ We
have agreed with them about a diet to consider the 12 articles;
in such wise that whatever we could arrange with them was to
stand, but what we cannot settle was to be referred to the
electors, princes, and states of the empire.” This was the
principle of most of the arrangements that were made. (Mel.
Epp. i. p. 743.)

QZ

228 PEASANTS’ WAR. Boox II.

the insurgents; the inhabitants of the small towns
declared that they had no spears wherewith to
pierce the peasants ; for a time their leaders, Schlem-
merhans and Deckerhans*, were all-powerful.
On Markgrave Ernest of Baden refusing to accept
the terms offered by the peasants, his castle was
taken and he was forced to fly. The knights of the
Hegau were surrounded and besieged by them in
the town of Zell on the Untersee. Even the
powerful Truchsess, at the head of the forces of the
Swabian League, was compelled to come to terms
with the peasants of the Allgau, See and Ried, and,
with the mediation of the cities, to promise them
relief from their oppressions, before they would
submit. It was unusual good fortune when they
would thus consent to wait for future arrange-
ments. In Wiirtemberg they would not hear of
any more diets of the duchy (Landtdge), but in-
sisted on instantly placing everything in the hands
of their Christian brotherhood, which had already
spread over the chief part of the country. Each
place sent a certain number of people into the field.

The Bishop of Bamberg, the Abbot of Hersfeld,
and the coadjutor of Fulda, had already made con-
cessions of a spiritual, as well as temporal kind.
The last-named of the three agreed to these changes
with peculiar readiness, and immediately allowed
himself to-be saluted Prince von der Buchen ; his
brother, the old Count William of Henneberg, also
entered into the peasants’ league, and promised to

* Two names, equivalent to Jack the Guttler and Jack the
Tiler, — TRANSL.

Cuar. VI. _ PEASANTS’ WAR. 229

leave in freedom “all whom God Almighty had
made free in Christ his son.”* The boldest’
attempt at a complete change in all the relations of
life was perhaps that made by the inhabitants of
the Rheingau. They once more assembled on
the old traditional meeting-place, the Liitzelau, at
Bartholomewtide f, and agreed to demand, above
all, the restoration of their ancient constitution,
the Haingericht (Bush Court) t subsisting under
their old law, and the Gebick, which converted
the country into a sort of fortress: besides this
they insisted on the participation of the lords,
both spiritual and temporal, in the burthens borne
by the community at large, and the application of
conventual property to the use of the country.

* The formula of the League. Ludwig, p. 879.

t According to Bodmann’s Rheingauischen Alterthiimern,
p- 461., Vogt’s assertion, that the juniper-tree was the ancient
place of meeting, is erroneous.

¢t Grimm, in his Deutsche Rechtsalthiimer, p. 793., says,
“ The ancient Gericht was invariably held in the open air,
in a wood, under shady trees, on a hillock, or near a spring:
the assembled multitude could not have been contained in any
moderate building, and pagan ideas required that the Gericht
should be holden in a holy spot, on which sacrifices were of-
fered, and the judgment of heaven appealed to. Christianity
abolished the sacrifices, but left the old Gerichtstatten undis-
turbed.” I have sought in vain for any explanation of the
word Gebick. It has been suggested to me that it is something
like a Mark (district), or rather the lines by which each Mark
was enclosed. These were chiefly formed by forest, and also
by rivers, ditches, and other natural boundaries. See Grimm’s
account of the primitive territorial divisions of Germany
(book iii. p.491.). —- TRANSL.

Qa 3

230 PEASANTS’ WAR. _ Boox ILL.

They encamped on the Wachholder at Erbach,
and actually in open rebellion, compelled the go-
vernor, dean and chapter to grant their demands.*
At Aschaffenburg too, the governor for the Arch-
bishop of Mainz was forced to submit to the con-
ditions of the peasants.

The whole Swabian and Franconian branch of
the German nation was thus in a state of agitation
which seemed likely to end in a complete overthrow
of all. the éxisting relations of society; a great
number of towns were already infected with the
prevailing spirit.

The small towns were the first to join the cause of
the peasantry,— Kempten, Leipheim, and Giinzburg
on the Danube (which, indeed, soon received severe
chastisement) ; the nine Odenwald towns in the see
of Mainz, and the towns in the Breisgau, in some of
which the town clerk himself opened the gates to
the peasants ; none of these, indeed, were in a con-
dition to resist, and most of them groaned under
the same oppressions as the peasantry. ‘The people
of Bamberg conceived the bold project of compelling
the surrounding nobles to come and live within the
walls of their town and to become burghers; nearly _
fifty castles were stormed in this neighbourhood.f
The Abbot of Kempten being forced to surrender
his castle of Liebenthann to the peasants, and to
seek refuge in the town, the burghers took advyan-
tage of the favourable moment to bring him to an

* Artikel gemeiner Landschaft: Schunk, Beitrige zur Mainze
Gesch. i. p. 191.
+ Lang’s Geschichte von Baireuth, i. p. 187. Heller, p. 88:

Cuap. VI. PEASANTS’ WAR. aL

agreement they had long desired, for the release
of all his rights of sovereignty. Some of the free
imperial towns of the second and third classes
were next drawn into the league by persuasion or
by force: these were Heilbronn, Memmingen, Diin-
kelspiel, and Wimpfen; Rothenburg entered into
an alliance with the peasantry for a hundred and
one years, which was ratified at a solemn assembly
heldin the parish church: Windsheim was only re-
strained from the same course by the dissuasions
of Niirnberg. Even in the great cities a ‘similar
spirit manifested itself. Mainz claimed the restitu-
tion of its rights as an imperial city, of which it had
been deprived since the last disturbances. The
council of Treves not only demanded that the
clergy should be called upon to bear their share in
the burthens of the citizens, but even laid claim to
a part of the spiritual revenues accruing from the
relics in the cathedral.* The council of Frankfurt
was forced to agree to the articles laid before it by
the commonalty, word by wordy; alleging as an
excuse that the same thing had happened in several
other imperial cities. It was remarked that Stras-
burg received the insurgents as citizens, and that
Ulm supplied them with arms, and Niirnberg with
provisions. A learned writer of this period states
it as his opinion, that the movement had originated
even more with the towns than with the peasantry,
and that the former had been originally stirred up

* Scheckmann : Additamentum ad Gesta Trevirorum in Wyt-
tenbach’s Edition of the Gesta, ii. Animadv. p. 51.
+ Lersner’s Frankfurter Chronik.
a 4

yh PEASANTS’ WAR. Boox III

by Jewish emissaries: he believes that the intention
of the towns was to shake off the authority of the
princes altogether, and to live like Venice, or the
republics of antiquity.*

Unfounded as was this opinion —for we know
how zealously many of the imperial towns, Niirn-
berg for example, strove to suppress the rising dis-
orders in their own dominions, and we have seen
that the disturbances in the towns which corre-
sponded to those of the peasants were only called
forth by circumstances, — yet we cannot but per- .
ceive what force and extension must have been
given to the rebellion by the addition of this second
element, and how wide and threatening the danger
was become.

The ideas to which this crisis gave birth were
most remarkable.

The Franconian peasants formed projects for the
reform of the whole empire.

So deeply rooted was this purpose in the very
heart of the nation. That which the princes had
vainly endeavoured to accomplish at so many diets,
—which Sickingen and his knights had attempted
three years before to execute after their fashion, —
the peasants now believed they could effect ; — of
course in the manner most calculated to raise their
own condition.

The first object was to give a general direction
and guidance to the present tumultuous movement.
A common office for the business of all the separate

* Conradi Mutiani Litere ad Fridericum Electorem, 27th
April, 1525, in Rubles s Beitriige, i. 270.

Cnap. VI. PEASANTS’ WAR. ; 233

bands, in fact a sort of central government, was to
be established at Heilbronn. The masses were to be
ordered to return home to their daily work, leaving
only a certain levy in the field, whose duty it would
be to compel all who still remained unsubdued to
accept the twelve articles.

In the further attempts to create some positive
institutions, the predominant idea was that of
freeing the peasantry from the burthen of all the
oppressive privileges of the lords, both spiritual
and temporal. To accomplish this, it was deter-
mined to proceed at once to a general secularisa-
tion of the ecclesiastical property. As this would
involve the abolition of the spiritual principalities,
means would thus be obtained for giving compensa-.
tion to the temporal sovereigns for the loss of their
rights, for which some indemnity was thought due.
The amount of church property was so enormous
that the people hoped still to have enough left to
satisfy all the public exigencies of the empire. All
duties and tolls were to be taken off, and all charges
for safe conduct; and only every tenth year a
tax was to be levied for the Roman emperor *, who
was in future to be the sole protector and ruler of
the country, and to whom alone the people were to
owe duty and allegiance. The courts of law were

* They refused to acknowledge Markgrave Ernest of Baden as
their sovereign, and were determined to be governed in future
by the Emperor and his deputy alone. They also meant some-
thing similar by the divine right which they conceded to the.
Duke of Wirtenberg. The chief ground of their recognition
of the Emperor (Kaiser— Cesar) was that he was named in the
New Testament.

234 PEASANTS’ WAR. ~ Boox III.

to be remodelled and popularised on one com-
prehensive principle. There were to be sixty-
four free courts (Freigerichte*) in the empire, with
assessors of all classes, even the lowest; besides
these, sixteen district courts (Landgerichte), four
courts of appeal (fHo/gerichte), and one supreme
court (Kammergericht) ; all organised in the same
manner. The members of the Kammergericht
were to be as follows ; —- two princes, two reigning
counts, two knights, three burghers of the im-
perial towns, three from the princely residencies,
and four from all the communes of the empire.
These were plans which had often been sug-
gested, and are, for instance, to be found in
-a work which appeared as early as 1523, called
““ Need of the German Nation” (‘“ Nothdurft deut-
scher Nation”) — they were now adopted and de-
veloped by two clever and daring peasant leaders,
Friedrich Weigant of Miltenberg, and Wendel
Hipler, formerly chancellor of Hohenlohe.; The

'* Grimm says, in his Deutsche Rechts Alterthiimer (p. 829.),
“ Originally almost every Gaw or Merkgericht might be called
a Freigericht. Later, however, when the sovereignty of the
princes gained force and consistency, this term acquired a
peculiar meaning, Particular districts which maintained their
independence, and remained immediately subject to the empire,
bore the name of Freigerichte, just as immediate cities were
called Freistiédte.” (See further, note at p. 267.) Courts called
Freigerichte, of which the lord of the soil appoints the presi-
dent, and the peasants the assessors, exist, I am told, in the
German provinces of Russia. — TRANSL.

+ See the plans of the peasants in Ochsle, p. 163., and in
the Appendix. It has already been remarked by Eichhorn

~
Cuap. VI. PEASANTS’ WAR. 236

doctors of the Roman law were especially hated by
the peasantry ; they were not to be admitted into
_ any court of law, and only to be tolerated at the uni-
versities, in order that their advice might be taken
in urgent cases. All classes, too, were to be made
to return to their original vocation; the clergy
were to be only the shepherds of their flocks; the
princes and knights were to dccupy themselves
in defending the weak, and to live in brotherly
love one with another. All the commons were
to undergo a reformation consonant to the laws of
God and of nature: only one sort of coin was to
be current, and uniform weights and measures
were to be introduced.:

Ideas more radically subversive than were ever

(Deutsche Staats und Rechtsgesch. iii. p. 119. 4th ed.) that
these designs throw a new light on the so-called Reformation of
Frederick III. Goldast does not indeed deserve the blame
which Eichhorn attributes to him: he has not given this
little work as a reformation of the Emperor’s. The old work
he quotes. bears the title “'Teutscher Nation Notturft: die
Ordnung und Reformation aller Stend in Rém, Reych, durch
Kayser Friedrich III. Gott zu Lob, der ganzen Christenheit
zu Nutz und Seligkait firgenommen.” (Panzer, ii. p. 226.)
— “The Needs of the German Nation: the ordering and re-
formation of all the classes of the Roman empire by the Emperor
Frederick III., undertaken for the glory of God, and for the
benefit and salvation of all Christendom.” But this, no doubt,
is a mere author’s fiction. The paper breathes throughout the
spirit of the first years of the reformation. The calamity at
Erfurt, which is there mentioned among those communes which
owed their ruin to self-interest, refers, no doubt, to the destruc-
tive riots of 1510, and not to any previous and less remarkable
events.

-

236 PEASANTS’ WAR. Boox III.

again proclaimed till the time of the French Revo-
lution.

But bold and anarchical as they were, they
were not without a considerable prospect of being
realised. The contagion spread every instant : it
had already seized on Hessen, whence it threat-
ened to extend its conquests over the Saxon race;
as from upper Swabia over the Bavarian, and from
Alsatia over that of Lorraine. Corresponding dis-
turbances took placein Westphalia; for example, at
Miinster, where the town demanded the same con-
cessions from its chapter as at Treves, and the
bishop already feared that he should see the whole
country hurried away by the storm.* It also broke
out on the Austrian frontiers, where all that offered
resistance were put under ban by the peasantry ;

* « Alle und semptliche Artikel durch die van Munster by
sick solvest upgericht.” — “ All and every article drawn up for
themselves by those of Munster,” and especially the letter of the
Bishop Frederic, dated 8th of May, in Niesert, Beitriige zu

.einem Miinsterschen Urkundenbuch,” i. p. 113.“ So juw vor-
gekommen, was grotes uprores jtzont im hylligen Ryke und
daitscher nation weder alle Christliche Ordenunge Obericheit
geistlich und weltlich vorhanden is— werden wy berichtet —das
sulchs allhier in unserm Gestichte unser Obericheit und inson-
derheit dem geistlichen Stande zi gyner geringen Verhonynge
Inbrock und Besweringe im Deile och vorgenommen und
betenget.” — “ And it has come to our knowledge what great
uproar there now is throughout the holy empire and German
nation, against all Christian order and all rulers, both spiritual
and temporal; and we are informed that, in our diocese, this has
been the cause of no little contempt, resistance, and complaining
against our magistrates, and especially against those of the
ecclesiastical order.”

Cup. VI. ’ PEASANTS’ WAR. DAB |

all the Alpine districts were in the same state:
in Tyrol, Archduke Ferdinand found himself com-
pelled, in manifest contravention of the decrees of
Regensburg, to concede to the committees of the
states of Inn and Wippthal that the Gospel should
in future be preached “ pure and plain, according
to the sense borne by the text;”* in the see of
Brixen, the bishop’s secretary, Michael Geissmayr,
headed the insurgents; at Salzburg, the miners
flocked to the churches at the sound of the alarm-
bell ; even between Vienna and Neustadt the la-
bourers in the vineyards talked of a combination
which would enable them to send about ten thou-
sand men into the field within a few hours.
Meanwhile, the rebellion had broken out in Thu-
ringia, and had there assumed another character.
It appears probable that in Thuringia and the
Harz, traditions of the fanaticism of the flagellants,
the effects of which may be traced down even to the
end of the 15th century {, had prepared the ground

* Excerpts in Bucholtz, viii. p. 330. Bucholtz shows a
want of knowledge of the language of this period in assuming
that by these concessions the difficulties were avoided.

+ Schreiben von Hofrath und Renntkammer, Bucholtz, viii.
‘p. 88. -

t According to Johann Lindner’s Onomasticon (Mencken, ii.
p- 1521.) this sect prevailed chiefly in Aschersleben and San-
gerhausen. In a document which is quoted by Forstemann
in his Provincialblittern fur Sachsen (1838. No. 232.) we find
an inquisition at Castle Hoym against one of these flagel-
lants, in the year 1481. It was perhaps a point of union that
they too looked upon their preacher as a prophet, and thought
that in him they beheld the judge at the day of judgment. But,
indeed, the whole is dressed up with metaphor.

238 PEASANTS’ WAR.—MUNZER. Boox III.

for the insurrection of the peasantry. At all events
motives arising out of religious enthusiasm were
much more powerful there than political causes.
The opinions which Luther had overcome at
Wittenberg, and which he had warned his prince
not to suffer to take root in Thuringia, were now
eagerly listened to by a numerous and excited
population. Miimzer had returned to Thuringia;
he had been received at Miihlhausen, where, as at
Rothenburg, a change of the constitution and of
the council had been brought about by the co-oper-
ation of the lower class of burghers with the
country people ; and from hence he soon spread the
ferment far and wide around him. He scorned,
as we are already aware, the “fabulous gospel”
“preached by Luther, his ‘“honeysweet Christ,” and
his doctrine that antichrist must be destroyed by
the Word alone, without violence: he maintained
that the tares must be rooted out at the time of
harvest ; that the example of Joshua, who smote
the people of the promised land with the edge of the
sword, must be followed.* He was moreover

* Auslegung des andern unterschyds Danielis dess propheten
‘gepredigt aufm Schloss zu Alstedt vor den tetigen thewren
Herzogen und Vorstehern zu Sachsen dur¢h Thomas Miinzer,
1524.” — “ Explanation of the other distinction of the Prophet
Daniel, preached at the Castle of Alsted, before the active and
beloved dukes and governors of Saxony, by Thomas Miintzer.”
Certainly one of his most remarkable productions. He takes
great pains to prove the difference between genuine revelations
and false visions, e.g. that the former descends on a man in a
joyful amazement (“in eyner frohen Verwunderung ”), A man
must be free from all temporal comforts of the flesh (“ abges-

Cuar. VI. PEASANTS’ WAR. —MUNZER. 239

dissatisfied with the compacts made by the peasants
in Swabia and Franconia. His views went much ~
farther ; he deemed it impossible to speak the
truth to the people so long as they were governed
by princes. He declared it intolerable that all
creatures had been converted into property, — the
fish in the water, the birds in the air, and the plants
on the earth; these creatures must be free to all
before the pure Word of God could be revedled.
He utterly rejected all the principles on which the
idea of the State rests, and acknowledged nothing
but revelation; ‘ but this,” he said, ‘ must be ex-
pounded by a second Daniel, who will lead the
people like Moses.” At. Muhlhausen he was re-
garded as amaster and a prophet; he had a seat in
the council, and gave judgment in the court of law
according to revelation; under his direction con-

chieden sein von allem zeitlichen Trost seines Fleisches”). The
' work of visions should fiow not from human endeavours, but
simply from the unchangeable will of God (“ nit rausser quel-
len durch menschliche anschlege, sondern einfaltig herfliessen
nach Gottes unvorrucklichen Willen”). It is clear that he does
not go nearly so far as Ignatius Loyola; at the same time he
combats Luther’s more moderate theory, which he ascribes to
“imaginary goodness” (“ einer getichten Gite”). He says quite
openly, that the ungodly should not be suffered to live. “ Isay
with Christ that ungodly rulers, more especially priests and
monks, should be put to death” (“ Ich sage mit Christo, &e. das
man die gotlosen regenten, sunderlich pfaffen und ménche tédten
sol”). Princes are to exterminate the ungodly, or God will take
the sword from them. “Oh, my dear masters, how finely will
the Lord smite the old pots with an jron rod!” (“ Ah lieben
Herren, wie hubsch wirt der Herr unter die alten Topf
schmeissen mit einer eysern stangen.”) -

240 PEASANTS’ WAR, ——MUNZER. ’ Boox III.

vents were suppressed, and their property confis-
cated; cannon of prodigious calibre founded, and
warlike enterprises executed. The priests’ houses
in the territory of Duke George were first at-
tacked, and then the convents stormed, with the
assistance of the enraged populace; in the Harz
and throughout the great plain of Thuringia, up to
the edge of the forest. The monuments of the old
Landgraves at Reinhardsbrunn were defaced, and
the library destroyed.* The next step was to attack
the castles and farms of the lords, both in Eichsfeld
and in Thuringia. We no longer find any mention
of conditions and treaties, or of a future reform-
ation ; the object of these fanatics was a general and
pitiless destruction. ‘“ Beloved brethren,” writes
Minzer:to the miners at Mansfeld ; ‘ do not relent
if Esau gives you fair words; give no heed to the
wailings of the ungodly. Let not the blood cool on
your swords ; lay Nimrod on the anvil, and let it ring
lustily with your blows; cast his strong tower to
the earth while it is yet day.” ‘ Know then,” he
writes to Count Ernest of Heldrungen, “ that God
has commanded us to cast thee from thy seat with
the might that is given to us.” | When the country
people of Schwarzburg, also in league with the small

towns, rose against the count, and assembled in —

considerable force at Frankenhausen, Miinzer feared
nothing but the conclusion of a treaty; ‘a fraud,”
he calls it, “under colour of justice:” he left his

* Thuringia Sacra, i. p. 178.
¥ Letter in Strobel: Leben, Schriften und Lehren Thome
Miinzer, p. 95.

Cuap. VI. PEASANTS’ WAR. 241

stronghold of Mihlhausen in order to prevent this
and to attack “ the eagle’s nest” in person. He
proved from the Apocalypse that the power was to be
given to the common people. “Come and join in
our measure,” he writes to his friends at Erfurt,
“it shall be right fairly trod ; we will pay the blas-
phemers back all that they have done to poor Christ-
endom.” He signed himself “ Thomas Miinzer, with
the sword of Gideon.”

Fanatic as he was, Minzer still occupied a most
formidable position. In him the mystical notions
of former ages were blended with the tendencies
toward ecclesiastical and temporal reform which
had just arisen. Out of this combination he
formed a set of opinions which addressed them-
selves immediately to the common people; incited
them to rise and annihilate the whole existing
order of things, and prepared the way to the ab-
solute sway of a prophet. The people assem-
bled in troops all around on the hills of Meissen
and Thuringia*, awaiting the first decisive result
of his enterprize, in order to join him immediately
after it. The popular current would then have
flowed in this direction from all parts of Germany.

At length, therefore, the results which might
long have been anticipated, appeared. No sooner
were the authorities which constituted the State
in Germany at variance with themselves and each
other, than the elementary forces on which it rested
arose. The lightnings flashed from the ground,

* PauliLangii Chronica Nurnburgensia, in Mencken, ii. p. 67.
VOL. II. R

242 PEASANTS’ WAR. Boox III.

and the streams of public life left their accustomed
channels: the storm which had so long been mut-
tering underground now poured out all its fury
on the upper regions, and everything seemed to
threaten a complete convulsion.

If we examine more closely this great elemental
strife of the German State in all its bearings, we
shall be able to distinguish several different steps
in its progress.

Its origin was, no doubt, to be found in the
oppression of the peasantry, which had _ been.
gradually increasing during the preceding years;
in the imposition of fresh taxes, and, at the same
time, the persecution of the evangelical doctrines
which had seized on the minds of the common
people more strongly than any intellectual influence
before or since, and had more effectually stimulated
them to individual exertion. Had the peasants
been content with resisting all arbitrary claims,
and securing the liberty of hearing their own
doctrine preached, they would have avoided calling
up against them the whole strength of the existing
order of things, and might have secured to them-
selves a long course of peaceful and lawful im-
provement.

Nay, even more might have been obtained; in
many places, treaties were concluded by which the
lords gave up the most oppressive of the rights
they had formerly acquired ; it was probable that
these would be observed on both sides, and that
a lawful and well-defined relation would thus be
established between the classes.

Cuap. VI. PEASANTS’ WAR. 243

But it is not in human nature to rest content
with moderate success; it is vain to expect reason
or forbearance from a conquering multitude. Here
and there a confused tradition of some ancient rights
of the commons was revived, or the people found
themselves a match for the knights in the field ; —
indeed the rebellion must be considered partly as a
symptom of the revived importance of infantry ; —
but for the most part, they were goaded by long-
cherished hatred and lust of revenge, which now
found vent. While some of their chiefs boasted
that they would introduce a better order of go-
vernment into the empire, the wildest destruction
was carried from castle to castle, from convent to
convent, and even threatened the towns which
had refused to join the rebellion.. The peasants
thought they ought not to rest while a dwelling
was left standing in Germany superior to a pea-
sant’s cottage.* Their fury was inflamed by the

* According to Miillner’s Annalen, the peasants, in anger
at receiving some refusal, declared to the council of N irnberg,
that the council might stand in greater need of the peasants
than the peasants of the council: “ darauf sind sie mit einem
solchen Trutz und Hochmuth abgescheiden, als wann die Welt
ihr eigen wiire ; haben sich auch ingeheim gegen etliche ver-
nehmen lassen, sie gedenken kein Hauss in ganzen Land zu
gedulden, das besser sey denn ein Bauernhaus : ” — thereupon
they departed with such insolence and pride, as though the
world were their own: they also in private gave many to
understand that they were resolved to suffer no house to stand
which was better than a peasant’s hut.” In the ordinance
made by Michel Geismair in 1526 (« Lanndsordnung, so
Michel Geismair gemacht hat, im 1526 Jar,” Bucholz, ix. 651.),
the fifth article is, “alle Rinkmauern an den Stetten, dergl.

R 2

244 PEASANTS’ WAR.——LUTHER. Boox III.

ravings of fanatical preachers, who justified the
work of destruction, and thought it a duty to shed
blood ; and, following the inspiration of the moment,
which they called divine, to erect a new kingdom
of heaven. Had this movement been successful,
there must of course have been an end of all
peaceful progress, according to the laws which have
ever governed the human race. Happily, it could
not succeed; Miinzer was far indeed from being
the prophet and hero required to execute so gi-
gantic an enterprise; besides which, the existing
order of things was too firm to be so completely
overthrown. Moreover, the strongest and most
genuine element of the reforming party was op-
posed to it.

Luther had not allowed himself to be hurried
into in any political enterprise by Sickingen and
the knights; nor had the insurrection of the pea-
santry any attractions for him. At the beginning,
ere it assumed its more frightful form, he exhorted
them to peace: while he rebuked the lords and
princes for their acts of violence and oppression, .
he condemned the rebellion as contrary to divine
and evangelical law, and as threatening destruc-
tion to both spiritual and temporal authorities, and

alle Geschlisser und Bevestigung im Lannd niedergeprochen
werden und hinfur nimmer Stitt sonnder Dérfer sein, damit
Unterschied der Menschen (aufhére), und ain gannze gleichait
im Lannd sei” —“ That all walls round towns, likewise all
castles and fortified houses in the country, should be thrown
down, and thenceforth there were to be villages but no towns,
so that all distinction among men should cease, and a complete
equality should prevail in the land.”

Crap. VI. PEASANTS’ WAR.—LUTHER. 245

hence to the German nation.* But when the
danger so rapidly increased, when his. old enemies,
the “murder prophets and mob spirits,” took so
prominent a part in the tumult, and when he
really began to fear lest the peasants should prove
victorious (a state of things which he thought
could only be the precursor of the day of judg-
ment), the whole storm of his indignation burst
forth. With the boundless influence which he
possessed, what must have been the consequences
had he taken part with the insurgents! But he
remained a staunch advocate for the separation
between the spiritual and the temporal, which was
one of the fundamental principles of his whole
system ; and to the doctrine that the gospel gives
freedom to the soul, but does not emancipate the
body from restraint, or property from the control of
the laws. The origin of the rebellion has been often
ascribed, to preaching, but this is not confirmed
by the facts. Luther now, as three years before, did
not for one instant hesitate to brave the storm, and
to do every thing in his power to prevent the
general destruction which he clearly foresaw. A
pious christian, said he, should rather die a hun-
dred deaths than give way one hair’s breadth to
the peasants’ demands. The government should
have no mercy; the day of wrath and of the sword
was come, and their duty to God obliged them to
strike hard as long as they could move a limb:

* « Krmanung zum Friede auf die 12 Artikel der Baur-
schaft in Schwaben.” — Altend. iii. p. 114.

R 3

246 PEASANTS’ WAR. — LUTHER. Boox III.

whosoever perished in this service was a martyr of
Christ. Thus he supported the temporal order of
things with the same intrepidity that he had dis-
played in attacking the spiritual.”

The secular authorities, too, aroused themselves,
and took courage in this, the greatest peril that
had ever threatened them.

The first who rose was the same man who had
done the best service against Sickingen, —the young
Philip of Hessen: towards the end of April he as-
sembled his knights and his most trusty subjects of
the towns in Alsfeld; he promised them that no
new burthens should be laid on the peasants F;
while on their part, in answer to his inquiry, they
swore with outstretched hands to live and die with

* Wider die riubischen und mérdischen Bauern.— Against
the robbing and murderous peasants.— Jbid. p. 124. See the
letter to Rihel, ii. p. 886. Melanchthon came to his aid on this
occasion with his convincing, dogmatical, and clear conclusions;
e. g. to Spalatin, 10th April, 1525, chiefly to be understood as
directed against the introduction of the Mosaic laws, but also to
be understood generally : “ Rationi hamanze commisit Christus
ordinationes politicas:...debemus uti presentibus legibus.”
(Corp. Ref. i.733.) It is necessary to have a front of brass to
persist in affirming, as Surius and Cochleus have done, that
Luther abandoned the peasants when he saw that they were
beaten. I don’t know whether the partial successes of George
Truchsess, gained at a great distance, were really known to
Luther ; it is, however, certain that they decided nothing : the
revolt of the peasants had just taken full possession of Thuringia
and Saxony, when Luther, at his own personal risk, opposed it.

+ This information is afforded by a declaration of Landgrave
William at the Diet of 1576. Rommel, Neuere Geschichte von
Hessen. p. 255, 848.

Cuar. VI. DEATH OF FREDERIC THE WISE. 247

him. His first care was to defend his own frontiers;
he tranquillised Hersfeld and Fulda, not, indeed,
without violence, though his cruelties have been
fabulously exaggerated ; and then crossed the moun-
tains and marched into Thuringia to the assistance
of his Saxon cousins, with whom he stood in here-
ditary alliance.*

Just at the moment that these disorders reached
their height in that district, the Elector Frederic
died. How striking was the contrast between the
fierce intestine discord which raged throughout
Germany, and the quiet chamber at Lochau in
which Frederic, calm and collected in the midst of
agonizing pain, was awaiting the approach of death!
“You do well,” said he to his preacher and secre-
tary Spalatin, who after long hesitation had taken
courage to demand an audience of hit, “ you do
well to come to me, for it is right to visit the sick:”
he then caused the low chair in which he reclined
to be rolled to the table, and laying his hand in
that of the intimate friend and adviser of his latter
years, he once more talked of the things of this
world, of the peasants’ rebellion, of Dr. Luther,
and of his own approaching death. He had ever
been a gentle master to his poor people, and he
now exhorted his brother to act prudently and
leniently +; he was not frightened at the danger of
the peasants becoming masters, serious as he be-

* Haarer, Warhafftige Beschreibung des Bawernkriegs, c. 49.,
in Gobel’s Beitrigen, p. 189. Rommel, i. 108.
+ His letters of the 14th of April, and 4th of May, in Walch,
L. W. xvi. p. 140.
R 4

248 DEATH OF FREDERIC THE WISE. Book III.

lieved it to be; for if it were not the will of God,
it could not happen. This conviction, which had
guided and supported him through the whole
course of the Lutheran movement, was doubly
strong in his last moments. None of his relations
were with him ; he was surrounded only by servants.
The spirit of opposition which every where else
divided rulers and their subjects, had not yet
reached them. ‘‘ Dear children,” said the prince,
‘if I have ever offended any of you, I pray you to
forgive me for the love of God; we princes do
many things to the poor people that we ought not
to do.” He then spoke only of the merciful God
who comforts the dying. For the last time Fre-
deric strained his failing eyes to read one of his
friend Spalatin’s consolations ; he then received the
sacrament in both kinds from the hands of a clergy-
man to whom he was attached. The new doc-
trine, which had flourished under his prudent and
sheltering care, now no longer appeared to him in
the light ofa power of this world which had to fight
for its existence, and the herald of a new order of
things;—he only saw in it the true Gospel, the true
christian faith, piety, and comfort to thesoul. The
dying man leaves the world to itself, and withdraws
entirely within the circle of his own relations to
the Infinite, —to God, and eternity. Thus he died
on the 5th of May 1525. “He was a child of
“peace,” said his physician, “ and in peace he hath
departed.” * |

* Spalatin, Leben Friedrichs des Weisen, p. 60.

Car. VI. DEATH OF MUNZER. 249

His successor, now the Elector John, ascended
the throne in the midst of the wildest and most
formidable confusion. Concessions were no longer
to be thought of ; there existed the same Brernae
between eeGdieie and John as between Luther’s
first and second book; between doubt and cautious
counsel and dasviciglat hostility. Philip of Hessen
came to his assistance at the right moment; Duke
George and Duke Henry took the field eee the
same time, and four princes thus marched with
their sae to meet the peasants.

Miinzer had taken up a position on the rising
ground above Frankenhausen, which eortiaaes
ae whole length of the valley ; the spot was well
chosen for preaching to assembled multitudes, but
offered no advantages whatever for defence. He
_ Showed utter incapacity: he had not even provided
powder for his laboriously cast guns ; his followers
were miserably armed, and had only entrenched
themselves behind a feeble barricade of waggons.
The prophet who had said so much about the force
of arms, and who had threatened to destroy all the
ungodly with the edge of the sword, was now
reduced to reckon on a miracle, which he saw an-
nounced in the portent of a coloured circle round
the sun at noon. At the first discharge of the
enemy’s artillery the peasants sang a hymn; they
were totally routed, and the greater number killed.
Hereupon the panic which accompanies a half ac-
complished crime seized the whole country. All
the troops of peasants dispersed, and all the towns
surrendered ; even Miihlhausen attempted hardly

250 PEASANTS’ WAR. Boox. II.

any resistance.* Miinzer was executed in the
camp before Miihlhausen, where for a time he had
reigned. He seemed possessed by a savage demon
up to his last hour. When, under the pangs of
torture, he was reminded of the countless number
he had led into destruction, he burst into a loud
laugh, and said it was their own desire. When he
was led out to death he could not remember the
articles of faith.

At this conjuncture movements were made in
all directions for attacking the forces of the pea-
sants.

Duke Antony of Lorraine came with the various
garrisons from Champagne and Burgundy, and a
few companies of German landsknechts and reiters,
to the assistance of the Landvogt of Mérsperg in
Alsatia. He cut off some scattered troops in the
open field, after which, those who had assembled in
Zabern capitulated ; they were, however, accused
of having made a subsequent attempt to gain over
the landsknechts, and were attacked and slaugh-
tered to the number of seventeen thousand, as they
were leaving the fortress on the morning of the
17th of May.f

_ Thus Wiirtemberg once more fell into the hands
of the Swabian League, whose general, Truchsess,

* Die Histori Thoma Muntzers des Aufengers der Dérin-
gischen Urfur.” Hagenaw.—This book contains the well-
known narrative of Melanchthon, also to be found in Luther’s
works. (Altenb. iii. 126.)

+ Bellay, No. II. Account by Rappoltstein. in Vogt’s
Rheinisch. Gesch. vol. iv. p. 49.

Cuapr. VI. PEASANTS’ WAR. 251

having in a great degree secured his rear by a treaty
with the peasantry around the lakes, marched upon
the Wiirtemberg insurgents, whom he encountered .
at Sindelfingen, and having first thrown them into

disorder with his field artillery, he charged and

cut them down with his numerous and well-armed

cavalry. Having then taken and garrisoned a suc-

cession of towns and cities, he marched on Fran-

conia. There he was joined by the other two

princes who had fought against Sickingen, — the

Electors of. Treves and the Palatinate, who marched —
to meet him from Bruchsal, which had just fallen

into their hands. The two armies united on the

29th of May, in the open field between Helspach

and Neckarsulm. They made up together a force

of two thousand five hundred horse, and eight

thousand foot, and marched on into Franconia.*

It was a most important advantage to them that
the castle of Wiirzburg still held out against two
powerful bodies of Franconian peasants. At first,
indeed, the garrison would have consented to accept
the twelve articles, and had already received au-
thority from ‘the bishop to do so; a part of the
peasants were anxious to come to terms, which
would enable them to go to the assistance of
their allies, hard pressed on all sides. But the
citizens of Wiirzburg, determined to get rid of the
castle, which had always been a bridle in their jaws,
contrived that the conditions offered to the garrison

* The autograph diary of the Count Palatine Otto Heinrich,
in Frejberg’s Urkunden und Schriften, iv. p. 367., gives these
numbers

252 PEASANTS’ WAR. Boox ITI.

should be such as it was impossible it should accept.
Hereupon the latter resolved to resist to the utmost.
Sebastian von Rotenhan, who had so greatly pro-
moted the interests of the Lutheran doctrines in the
Council of Regency, had supplied the fortress with
every requisite, even with powder mills; erected
chevaux-de-frise within the ditches, and palisades
all round the castle, and had induced the garrison
to swear with uplifted hands that they would stand
the storming bravely and faithfully. On the 15th
of May, the day of the battle of Frankenhausen, the
peasants began the storm at nine o’clock at night.
to the sound of trumpets and fifes, with loud
shouts and flying colours. Pitch, brimstone, and
other combustibles were thrown down on them
from the castle, and incessant firing kept up from
every loop-hole in the walls and tower. The lonely
castle reared its head in haughty grandeur amid
the many-coloured glare of the fire with which it
kept off the wild hordes that had overrun Franconia,
and now threatened all Germany. The artillery ~
decided the victory here, as at Sindelfingen and
Frankenhausen ; at two in the mortiing the pea-
sants retreated.*

A second assault was entirely out of the ques-
tion; they received news of the defeat of their
- friends on all sides, and the storm impending over
themselves became every moment more near and
threatening.

They made one more effort to save themselves by

* Johann Reinhard, in Ludwig, 889.

Cuap. VI. PEASANTS’ WAR. 253

negotiating ; they again offered the twelve articles
to the acceptance of the garrison of Wiirzburg, and
invited Truchsess, the general of the League, who
was marching upon them, to appoint time and place
for an interview for the purpose of negotiation. In
a general address to the States of the empire, they
endeavoured to set their views and objects in a
favourable light; and called upon the Franconian
states especially, to send delegates to Schweinfurt,
that they might take counsel together with them,
“for the establishment of the word of God, of
peace and of justice.”* But all this was now
too late. They had never had confidence in their
own strength, and now fortune had deserted them:
they must either remain masters of the field or
perish.

The united army advanced against them without
delay; all the places it passed in its march sur-
rendered unconditionally. On the 2d of June it
fell in with the first troop of peasants at Konigs-
hofen: it was the band from the Odenwald which
had had the courage to advance against the vic-
torious enemy. But it consisted of not more than
four thousand men,f, and all their measures were
thoroughly ill-concerted. The peasants had neg-
lected to guard the fords of the Tauber, and had

* Proclamation in Ochsle, of the 27th of May, p.302. The
meeting was fixed for the 31st day of May. .

+ I hold these to be the true number, as the report of
Secretary Spiess, who accompanied the army (Ochsle, p. 197.), —
and the Journal of the Elector, p.368., agree on this point,
Others mention far greater numbers.

254 PEASANTS’ WAR. Boox III.

encamped round their baggage, within a barricade
of waggons, on the Miihlberg; and it would have
been well for them if they had awaited the attack ,
of the enemy even there; but, terrified by the
superior force which gradually presented itself,
they endeavoured to reach a neighbouring ‘forest,
and thus invited an immediate assault. The ca-
valry fell upon their exposed flank,the princes them-
selves helping to cut them down; in the twinkling
of an eye, before even the landsknechts could
come up, the whole body of peasants was entirely
broken and routed.* A false rumour of victory
induced the Rothenberg troop to quit its position
near Wiirzburg, and on the 4th of June that also
fell into the hands of the cavalry in an open field,
between Sulzdorf and Ingolstadt, and was com-
pletely dispersed. Both victories were accom-
panied by the most barbarous massacres. Of six
hundred peasants who attempted to defend them-
selves in a fortified house near Ingolstadt, all but
seventeen were put to the sword.

A third band which was connected with the
Thuringian insurgents was overthrown and routed,
after a short conflict, on the Bildberg near Mei-
ningen, where they had entrenched themselves
behind waggons, by Elector John of Saxony.f
The mild and placable prince promised safety to

* Brower, Annales Trevirenses, lib. xx. p. 853.

+ Spalatin, see Menken, ii. 1114. The peasants had one
carronade, sixteen cannons and mortars, four arquebusses, and
matchlocks, Their waggons were buried in the earth.

Cuap. VI. PEASANTS’ WAR. 255

all who would surrender themselves to his pro-
tection.

Thus the great Franconian bands, which had
thought to reform the whole of Germany, were
destroyed like those of Alsatia, ‘Thuringia, and
Wiirtemberg ; and, like those provinces, Franconia
was now garrisoned and chastised by its former
masters.

On the 7th of June, Wiirzburg was forced to
surrender at discretion. The’aged members of the
town council assembled in the market-place and
bared their grey heads to salute the leaders of the
army of the League; but they found no mercy
from Truchsess, who declared that they were all
perjured and dishonoured, and had forfeited their
lives. In Wiirzburg alone, sixty rebels from the
town and country were hanged: the executions
were equally frequent and terrible throughout the
whole bishopric; two hundred and eleven were put
to death in different ways; all arms delivered up,
new services imposed, and heavy contributions ex-
torted: the ancient ceremonies of the church were
restored. Meanwhile Markgrave Casimir of Bran-
denburg, having taken possession of all the rest of
Franconia, of Bamberg, Schweinfurt, and Rothen-
burg, without encountering any serious resistance,
proceeded to take vengeance on the insurgents in
his own territories.

All that now remained was, to subdue the
remnant of the insurgents who still kept their
ground on the Upper and Middle Rhine.

The army of Treves and the Palatinate, on

256 PEASANTS’ WAR. Boox III.

their homeward march, fell in with the insurgents
of the Middle Rhine at Pfeddersheim*, and as on
all former occasions, the peasants were dispersed
and cut down; the warlike archbishop is said to
have slain several with his own hand. These
districts hereupon submitted ; and even the people
of the Rheingau had to give up their arms, and to
pay contributions. Mainz was forced to resign
the liberties it had ‘but just regained; while the
people of Treves, happy that they had not made
any serious demonstration, readily dropped all the
projects they had entertained.

The great army of the League on the Up-
per Rhine found a far more arduous task; it
was there that the rebellion had originated and
taken the deepest root, and nothing decisive had
yet been accomplished towards its suppression.
The men of the Allgau reappeared in the field;
they had occupied a very strong post on a steep
hill, at the foot of which is the river Luidas, and
on either side, large ponds: a considerable number
of experienced landsknechts fought in their ranks.
They were able to keep their ground against even
the artillery of Truchsess, and indeed had some
intention of beginning the attack. Fortunately
for Truchsess, the veteran and successful leader,
George Frundsberg, came to his assistance in time.
It is highly probable} that he exercised a personal

* Haarer, c. 84—89. I intend to give in the Appendix
whatever is necessary to illustrate the relation in which the
Latin stands to the German text, as well as that subsisting -
between Gnodalius and Leontius and Haarer,

1 Reisner, Kriegsthaten der Frundsberge.

Cuar. VI. PEASANTS’ WAR. 257

influence on many of the peasant chiefs, his old
comrades and followers. Contemporary writers
positively affirm that he bought over Walter
Bach, who treacherously persuaded the peasants to
abandon their strong position. Perhaps, however, -
their stores failed; at all events they separated,
and retreated towards the mountains. Truchsess
hastened in pursuit of them, and began to burn
their farms and villages. -This was in direct
violation of the orders of the League, at which he
only laughed ; he, he said, a peasant himself, under-
stood his business better; he knew that this was the
way to make every man think of his own home.
He kept his troops together, and thus easily beat the
separate bands of peasants whenever he met with
them. He was not, however, so absolutely master
as at Wiirzburg. George Truchsess was at last
obliged to enter into a compact with the large body
of rebels who held together on the Kolenberg, by
which redress of the local grievances of their several
villages was promised them. Not till then did
they lay down their arms and give up their ring-
leaders.*

At the same moment, Count Felix of Werden-
berg put to the rout the peasants of the Hegau,
Kletgau, and all that remained in the Schwarzwald
—for many were gone home to their harvest —and
compelled them to lay down their arms. f

Thus was arrested the great movement which
threatened the total subversion of the whole existing

* Haggenmiiller Kempten, p. 540.
t Walchner Ratolphzell, p. 109.

WOLcr rr. 5

258 PEASANTS’ WAR. - Boox III.

order of things in Germany: all the schemes for
reconstituting the empire from the groundwork
of society upwards, or still more, for visionary
changes in the order of the world under the
guidance of a fanatical prophet, were now for ever
at an end.

Wherever the matter had been decided by arms,
the laws of war were enforced. The most bar-
barous executions took place; the severest con-
tributions were exacted; and in some places, laws
more oppressive than ever were imposed.

It was only in districts where the peasants had
not sustained a total defeat, that, after all their
former vague and ambitious projects had spon-
taneously died away, some alleviation of their
burthens and sufferings was granted them.

The Count of Sulz and his subjects agreed to
refer their differences to arbitrators chosen in
common, and Archduke Ferdinand consented to
appoint a chief umpire.*

To the people of the Breisgau, Ferdinand promised
in his own name that due regard should be paid by
magistrates and government officers to the com-
plaints of the subjects.— The states of Upper
Austria would not allow contributions to be levied
upon the people.{

In Tyrol, steps were taken under the influence of

* The treaty which the people of Zurich helped to negotiate
is to be found in Bullinger’s Reformations-geschichte, i. p. 249.

+ The treaty of Offenburg : extract in Schreiber’s Taschen-
buch, p. 302.

} Declaration of the Stainde, Bucholtz, viii. p. 104.

Crap. VI. PEASANTS’ WAR. 259

the disturbances, towards drawing up a code of
laws, whereby the subjects were relieved from all
taxes that could not be proved by authentic docu-
ments, to have existed for more than fifty years;
likewise from the lesser tithes in kind, and a variety
of other dues and services; and the right of fishing,
and even of shooting and hunting, granted them.
Archduke Ferdinand also made concessions as to
religion. Towns and councils were empowered to
appoint their own clergy, and the Gospel was to be
preached according to the letter.*

Salzburg was the only country in which the
peasants kept the field against the advance of a
regular army; and even when they were forced
to bend before the might of the Swabian League,
they began by making singularly advantageous
terms.f

These events belong, however, to another state
of things, which immediately followed the dis-
turbances, and to which we will now turn our
attention.

_* Excerpts from the proceedings of the diet, Bucholtz, viii.

p- 337.
{ Zauner, Chronik von Salzburg, iv. p. 429.

s 2

260 FORMATION OF Boox III.

CHAPTER VII.

FORMATION OF THE ADVERSE RELIGIOUS, LEAGUES. —
DIET OF AUGSBURG, DECEMBER, 1525.

Tur conflict between the elements of German
society was now at an end; the rebellious pea-
santry, and that portion of the population of the
towns which took part with them, were subdued,
as the knights had been before them. The local
powers which had arisen during the course of ages
had again withstood all the storms by which they
were assailed: aided by the emperor or the Council
of Regency, they had stood fast amidst the ruin of
all central authority.

Nevertheless, peace was by no means restored,
nor was one of those great questions which had so
long occupied public attention decided.

The rebellion had been put down without any
reference to religious creed; friends and foes of the
new doctrines had taken up arms with equal eager-
ness against the common enemy; but as soon as
that enemy was subdued, the old antipathies broke
out with fresh violence.

The Regensburg members of the Swabian League,
who at this time exercised the chief influence in
that body, seized upon this opportunity of carrying”
into execution by main force the measures which
had been concerted at that city. The victories of

Cuap. VII. RELIGIOUS LEAGUES. 261 -

the League were every where followed by religious
persecutions. Among those who were beheaded at
Wiirzburg, many were condemned, not for the re-
bellion, in which they had taken no part, but for
the crime of professing the evangelical faith. Nine
of the most wealthy burghers were executed at
Bamberg, and it is asserted that some of them were
remarkable for their peaceable conduct, and had
rather tried to prevent than to encourage the attack
of the country people on the bishop’s palace ; they
were punished, as was openly proclaimed, for their
adherence to the evangelical party.* Their posses-
sions were, by an unexampled exercise of arbitrary
power, given to certain individuals, among whom
was a secretary of Truchsess. All who professed the
evangelical doctrines immediately fled out of both
bishoprics. But even in all other territories, spirit-
ual as well as temporal obedience was enforced on
the peasantry; the Lutherans stood—under that
title—first on the list of those excluded from par-
don. The bitterest persecution was directed against
the preachers. A provost-martial of the name of
Aichili traversed Swabia and Franconia in all direc-
tions at the head of a band of reiters, in order to
carry into effect the executions that had been
decreed ; it is calculated that within a small district,
he hung forty evangelical preachers on trees by the
roadside.f This was the first restoration of Catho-
licism by violence in Upper Germany.

* Detailed account in Miillner’s Annalen.

+ Bullinger’s 140th cap. treats of Provost Aichili (“ von
Profossen Aichili”). Anshelm also mentions him (vi. p. 291.)
; s 3

262 FORMATION OF Boox II.

Similar attempts were now made also in the
north.

After the taking of Miihlhausen, the allied princes
had agreed on common measures against the pea-
sants. Duke George relates, that one morning, as
his son-in-law Philip was just setting off on a
journey, he (Duke George) went to him once more,
and entreated him not to attach himself to Luther’s
cause, ‘‘in consideration of the evil which had
flowed therefrom ;” that he repeated this warning
to the Elector of Saxony within the same hour, and
that it was kindly received by both of them. Duke
George hoped to exercise great authority over his
cousin John after Frederic’s death, as well as over
Landgrave Philip, to whom he stood in the relation
of an affectionate father-in-law.

These three princes had agreed:at Miihlhausen
to communicate their resolutions to their neigh-
bours; and Duke George had an interview as early
as in July with the electors of Mainz and Bran-
denburg and the Duke of Brunswick, at Dessau.
These princes still adhered to the Catholic faith, and
they allowed their belief, that the insurrection owed
its existence to the new doctrines that had been
preached, to influence their resolutions. Though
we have no authentic document as to the nature of
these resolutions, there is sufficient evidence that
they were in the highest degree unfavourable to the

as being peculiarly active against the Lutheran parsons: he
seized, plundered, mulcted, and hanged them. ‘“ Er war sun-
derlich gflissen, uf die lutherischen Pfaffen, fiengs’ beroubts’
schatzts’ und henkts’.”

Cuar. VIL. RELIGIOUS LEAGUES. 263

religious changes. Duke George communicated
them to his cousin and his son-in-law, expressing at
the same time his persuasion that they had ceased to
entertain any Lutheran ideas.* At all events he
did not suffer himself to be deterred by any con-
sideration for them, from condemning his own
subjects to the severest punishments. At Leipzig
two citizens were beheaded for no other reason than
that some Lutheran books had been found in their
possession.

It appeared probable that the Lutheran move-
ment, from the time it was associated with an in-
surrection of the peasantry, would, like that of

* The only authentic notice of these meetings is to be found
in a letter from Duke George in the Dresden Archives. Ac-
cording to that, the determination was “ to stand by each other
in case the Lutherans attacked any one of them, in order to
remain at peace from such rebellion.” — “ sich bei einander
finden zu lassen, wenn die Lutherischen einen von ihnen augrei-
fen wiirden, um solches Aufruhrs vertragen zu bleiben.” It is not,
however, easy to perceive from whom they expected an attack,
if they really believed Philip and the Elecjor John to have been
re-converted ; and, indeed, Duke George says, “ otherwise he
would not have made them a party to the treaty, for he well knew
that one could not beat Swiss with Swiss.” —“ denn sonst
wirde er ihnen den Vertrag nicht mitgetheilt haben, er wisse
wohl, dass man Schweizer mit Schweizern nich schlage.” The
explanation is, that in those times a defensive form was given to
all alliances, even when there was no intention of abiding by mere
defence. Duke Henry said to the emperor, that he had signed
a treaty with his friends, “ against the Lutherans, in case they
should attempt by force or cunning to gain them over to their
unbelief,” —“ wider die Lutherischen, ob sie sich unterstiinden,
sie mit List oder Gewalt in ihren Unglauben zu bringen.”

¢ Gretschel: Leipzigs kirchliche Zustiinde, p. 218.

s 4

-

26h FORMATION OF Boox III.

Wicklyffe, be encountered by a reaction which
would end in its entire suppression.

But the reform set on foot by Luther stood on a
far wider and firmer basis than that of Wicklyffe,
and had already found resolute and powerful
supporters both in North and South Germany.

Landgrave Philip even brought an evangelical
preacher with him to Miihlhausen; and Duke
George, while in the act of expressing his con-
viction of his son-in-law’s altered sentiments, was
struck with surprise at the appearance of this man.
From that time Philip had become more and more
deeply imbued with Lutheran opinions. We have
only to read the letters he wrote to Duke George
during this year, —%in which he controverts the
doctrine of the canon and the mass, the received
idea of the Church, and the obligation of vows, —in
order to see with what lively and yet earnest zeal
he adopted the new doctrines, and what accurate
and extensive knowledge he had acquired of the
scriptural grounds on which they rested.*

The same state of things existed in Saxony. Far
from forsaking the path trodden by his predecessor,
the new elector advanced in it with far more decided
steps than Frederic had done. On leaving Weimar in
August 1525, he once more assembled the priest-
hood of that district — on the 16th of that month—
and, after causing their minds to be prepared by
two sermons, he announced to them that in future
they were to preach the pure word of God, without

* Rommel’s Urkundenbuch, p. 2.

Cuar. VII. RELIGIOUS LEAGUES. 265

any human additions.* Some old priests who were
‘present having expressed the opinion that this
would not be inconsistent with their saying masses
for the dead and consecrating salt and water, they
were told that the same rule applied to ceremonies
as to doctrines. ,

In consequence of the recess of Miihlhausen,
the elector had an interview with Markgrave
Casimir of Brandenburg at Saalfeld, at which the
evangelical tendencies predominated as much as
the catholic had done at Dessau. These princes
did not indeed form a regular alliance, but Mark-
grave Casimir declared that he would hold fast by
the word of God.t

At the very time when the military force of the
Swabian League was employed in checking the
progress of the reformation, some of its most
powerful members, the very towns in which it had
originated, — Augsburg, and above all, Niirnberg
— organized their churches according to evan-
gelical principles. We shall return to this subject
in another place. .

The territory of Wiirtemberg, which had been

* “Das man das lauter rayn evangelion on menschliche
Zusatzung predigen soll, fiirstlicher Befelch zu Weymar besche-
hen.” — “ That the pure Gospel should be preached without
any human additions. Sovereign command issued at Weimar.”
—Circular from the minister Kisswetter at Erfurt to Master
Hainrich at Elxleben, a.d. Gera,” 1525.

+ According to a description by Casimir himself in a letter
from Schrauttenbach to the Landgrave Philip, dated 27th Dee.
1525, in Neudeckers Urkunden, p: 16.

266 FIRST ATTEMPTS Boox III.

conquered by the League, and could hardly have
been imagined capable of taking any resolutions of
its own, now declared itself on the same side; the
Estates expressed their conviction that the tran-
quillity of the country could only be maintained by
preaching to the people the pure word of God,
unalloyed by the selfishness and vain conceits of
men.

Already the evangelical preachers began formally
to emancipate themselves from the authority of the
bishops. At Wittenberg, in May 1525, they de-
termined to give ordination themselves. Melanch-
thon justifies this, on the ground that the bishops
neglected their duties.¥ The preachers now
asserted their underived vocation as against the
bishops, in the same manner as those had done
against the pope. Melanchthon says that the
princes could not be called upon to support a
jurisdiction of whose abusive and corrupt nature
they were convinced. In Hessen and Brandenburg,
too, even in the towns, the clergy began to eman-
cipate themselves from the episcopal jurisdiction.

We perceive that the two opposite tendencies
came out of the conflict with the peasants, exactly.
in the same state in which they entered into it; only
with increased activity on either side.

The papal party had the advantage, in so far as
in a great part of the empire, the penal power, of
which it made such fearful use, was in its hands;
but on the whole, the evangelical party had gained
still more in the struggle.

* De Jure Reformandi. Corp. Reform., i. p. 765.

Cuap. VII. AT SECULARIZATION. 267

Never had the aversion to the spiritual pat of
the constitution of Germany been so general and
so avowed. The clergy were accused of those acts
of grinding oppression which had mainly caused
the revolt. The hostility of the people was specially
_ directed against them; the peasants of the Allgau,
for example, who were besieging Fiissen, raised the
siege as soon as that town threw off its allegiance
to its lord, the Bishop of Augsburg, and hoisted
the banner of Austria. On the other hand, though
the ecclesiastical princes had contributed very little
to extinguish the flame of rebellion, they now made
the most tyrannical and merciless use of the victory
won by others.

Hence it happened that the evangelical party
found it so easy to shake off the episcopal authority ;
itis, however, more remarkable that an analogous
effect was produced in the catholic party. If the
one side questioned the spiritual, the other no less
vigorously attacked the temporal jurisdiction.

We must here again recur to the events of Tyrol
and Salzburg. Archduke Ferdinand had taken up
the most remarkable position in the world.

At the diet of Tyrol, which we have already
mentioned, there were assembled only the nobles,
the cities, and rural districts (Gerichte*) ; the eccle-

* Gericht here means a certain community. Grimm
(Deutsche Rechts Alterthiimer, p.755.) says, “By Gericht we
now understand a tribunal for the decision of litigated matters,
or the punishment of offences. Originally, however, the pre-
dominant idea was that of a popular assembly (concilium), in —
which all the public business of the Mark, the commune, or the
district was discussed, disputes settled, and fines adjudged.

268 FIRST ATTEMPTS Boox III.

siastical body did not appear. The anti-ecclesiastical
temper which this produced was very strongly ex-
pressed in the resolutions that were passed. In the
recess of this diet it was proclaimed, that the appoint-
ment to the inferior situations in the church should
be rendered totally independent of the bishops; in
future, cities and rural districts (Gerichte) should
have the right of presentation, which the sovereign
of the country should confirm, and all eomplaints of
the clergy should be addressed by the former to the
latter.* The petition of the Bishop of Trent for
leave to call in foreign troops to punish the in-
surgents within his see, was refused; for the
common people were of opinion, says Ferdinand,
that the clergy ought to have no jurisdiction what-
ever in temporal affairs ; weré such a permission
granted to the bishop, the nobles would complain
that he was goading the people to a fresh revolt,
which would bring trouble and ruin upon them
also.t This was even carried much further. The
Bishop of Brixen proving himself incapable of re-
storing order in his see, where one of his secre-
taries and toll collectors was the leader of the
revolt, the T'yrolese determined not to afford him.
the least assistance, but at once to secularize the
see. Archduke Ferdinand took possession of it,
and committed the government to one of his coun-

The main element of the Gericht is now the judges ; but then,

it was the congregated free men..... All judicial power was
_ exercised by the community of free men under the presidency
of an elected or hereditary head.” — Transit.

* Bucholtz, viii. p. 338.
} Ferdinand to Bishop Bernhard of Trent, Inspruck, 9th July,
1525, Bucholtz, ix. p. 640,

Cuap. VII. AT SECULARIZATION. 269

cil, “till some future council, or the reformation
of the empire;” he received the homage from all
the vassals and the official persons of the see.* The
captain of Ehrenberg, which was garrisoned by Ty-
rolese, would not go to the succour of the town of
Fiissen till it surrendered itself as an hereditary fief
to the house of Austria, and did homage to the
Archduke.t The Zillerthalers were thus enabled
to throw off their allegiance to Salzburg, to attach
themselves to Tyrol, and to accept the Archduke,
who had already high authority over them, as
their lord and sovereign.t Nay, even in Bavaria,
similar notions prevailed. When Matthew, Arch-

* Patent of occupation, 21st July. “ Auf Beger und mit
Rat ainer ersamen Landschaft dieser unsrer f. G. Tirol, — zu
furkumung nachtail schadens und geferlichait, so dieselben
unser Grafschaft und dem Stift zu Brichsen, des Vogt Schirm
und Schutzherr wir dann sein, enstehen mechten.”— “ At the
request and with the advice of the honourable province of this
our free county of Tirol— for the prevention of loss, damage,
and danger, which might accrue to our country and the see of
Brichsen, whereof we are bailiff, lord, and protector.”

{ Martin Furtenbach, the town notary at Fiissen: report on
the insurrection of the peasants, in Oechsle’s Beitrage, p. 478.
“ Das Volk schrie Hei Oestreich damit wir nicht gar verderbt
werden, der Hauptmann nahm die Erbhuldigung auf ein Hinter-
sichbringen an.” — “ The people cried, ‘ Hey Austria,’ so that
we might not be entirely ruined: the governor received our he-
reditary homage on a hint given him.”) The delegates of the town
went to Inspruck, and were there well greeted (wohl begriisst),
Ferdinand declared that he would soon go there himself and
receive the homage in person.

{ Instruction to Liechtenstein and Stockel, “was sy mit dem
Pfleger zu Kropfsberg, mit der Nachparschaft im Zillerthal
reden sollen.” —- “ what they should say to the parish priest at
Kropfsberg, and to the neighbourhood in Zillerthal.”— Bucholtz,
ix. p. 630.

270 FIRST ATTEMPTS Boox III.

bishop of Salzburg, was besieged in his citadel by
the peasants, and reduced to the greatest extremity,
Doctor Lesch, a Bavarian chancellor, presented
himself before the archduke and proposed to him
to sequester the archbishopric in common; so
that the part lying on the confines of Bavaria
should be taken possession of by the dukes, and
that bordering on Austria by the archduke. Fer-
dinand joyfully acceded to the proposal; he autho-
rized the commissioners he had sent to the peasants
to use all their endeavours (but with the knowledge
of the archbishop) that the see might be given up
to Austria and Bavaria.* In Bavaria, however,
this was only a transient thought; the plan here
pursued was that of an unconditional restoration,
from the accomplishment of which the dukes might
justly expect a still greater degree of authority
than they had already acquired, over the neigh-
bouring bishoprics. They therefore furnished aid
in every direction. In Tyrol, on the other hand,
the province had agreed’ with the prince on the
concessions to be made to the rebels; by a resolute
postponement of spiritual interests, they thought
they should at once allay the tumults and enhance
their own liberty and power. The Bavarians, con-
sequently, soon abandoned the plans above men-
tioned, and resolved to come to the assistance of
the archbishop in this exigency with the forces of
the Swabian League. The motives which deter-
mined the dukes were not, however, of a very

* Instruction of Ferdinand to the mediating commissioners,
Bucholtz, p. 621.

’ Cuap. VIL. AT SECULARIZATION. 271

disinterested nature; they calculated on this op-
portunity of securing the succession to the arch-
bishopric for their brother, Ernest of Passau ;
which they preferred to contributing to place the
greater part of it in the hands of Austria, and
thence in a hostile relation to themselves. In vain
the states of Tyrol made an attempt to restrain the
Swabian League from its intended campaign, by re-
presentations of the ancient privileges and alliances
of Salzburg.* At Insbruck a strong desire prevailed
to secure the succession to Don George of Austria,
natural son of Emperor Maximilian, and a disposi-
tion to afford protection to the peasantry.f But
the dukes had already the advantage. Duke Louis
of Bavaria, the general in chief of the Swabian
League, led its armies against Salzburg at the end
of August. He too deemed it expedient, and
strongly urged George Frundsberg, who was general
of the county of Tyrol, at first to grant the peasants
a favourable treaty — afterwards, indeed, they
were as severely dealt with here as elsewhere—as
a means of attaining all their other objects. The
chapter of the cathedral promised the succession to
the bishopric of Salzburg to the Bavarian prince
Ernest, to whom the archbishop also made some
concessions ; the lordships of Laufen, Geisfelden,
Titmanning, and Mattsee were mortgaged to the

* “Die vom Ausschuss der dreier Stiinde — an Hauptleute
und Rithedes Pundts zu Schwaben 31 Juli.”— Jb. ix. p. 624.
— “ The committee of the three estates to the governors and
councillors of the Swabian League.

} Excerpts from a rescript of Ferdinand, ib. viii. p. 109.

272 FORMATION OF Boox III.

dukes for the expenses of the war. In short, they
obtained a general ascendency in Salzburg; nor
was it till some time afterwards that the archbishop
took courage timidly to admonish them to demand
nothing of him at variance with the rights and
dignities of his see.*

Thus, as we see, the plans of the League triumphed
over the inclinations of the people of Tyrol. The
archduke was also forced to cede Fiissen again to
Augsburg, and the Zillerthal to Salzburg.

Notwithstanding this, Ferdinand did not relin-
quish the ideas he had once conceived. When the
Wiirtemberg territory made the demands we have
mentioned, and pointed very unequivocally to a
secularization of the church lands, as a means of
meeting the exigencies of the country, Ferdinand
showed not the smallest displeasure: he permitted
that country to send deputies to the approaching
diet at Augsburg, and promised that whatever
should there be determined in regard to a reforma-
tion of the clergy, should be carried into effect, as
well in Wiirtemburg as in his other dominions.
The views entertained on these points by Archduke
Ferdinand entirely coincided with those of the
evangelical party, who, with perfect justice, regarded
the revocation of- the summons for the meeting at
Spire as the immediate cause of the recent tumults.
In the autumn of 1525 the project of settling the

* Zauner, Salzburger Chronik, v. p. 225. 133.

+ Extractus landschaftlicher Schlusserklirung bei Sattler,
Herzoge, Beilagen zum zweiten Theil nr. 124., and Landtags-.
abschied, 80th Oct. 1525, nr. 125. (iii. i. 4.)

Cnap. VIE. RELIGIOUS LEAGUES. . 273

religious differences at an assembly of the empire
and of there proceeding to a thorough reformation,
was once more universally stirred.

In addition to the meetings in Dessau and Saal-
feld, there was a third and corresponding one
between the Landgrave Philip and the Elector
Palatine, at Alzey. They agreed “ that things
must be put on an equitable footing :” every means
must be employed to bring about union among the
States.*

Markgrave Casimir proceeded from Saalfeld to
Auerbach, to a conference with the Count Palatine
Frederic, who governed the Upper Palatinate in
the name of his nephew. They determined, in the
first place, to lighten the burthens of the common
people as much as possible; and in the next, again
to petition the emperor to hold an eclesiastical
council in the German nation, “in order to come to
some common understanding as to the exposition
of the divine word.”

In September the cities held a meeting, and
Ferdinand thought he had reason to fear very hos-
tile and objectionable resolutions on their part ; but
their decision only amounted to this: to urge anew
upon himself and the emperor the necessity of in-
troducing a clear and uniform order into the whole

-* Letter from the Elector Louis of the Palatinate, in Neu-
deckers Actenstiicken, i. p. 16. From the words, “ von E. L. und
unserm Freund, von ir und uns,”—from E. L, and our friend,
from him and from us,” we may conclude that the Elector of
Treves was also there present.

VOL. II. 2

274. SCHEME OF SECULARIZATION.—1525. Boox Il.

empire, with respect to the ceremonies of the
ehurch.

In the universal discussion of these subjects,
every possible change was suggested, and thus
ideas and plans of the most extraordinary nature
became current.

In a project drawn up towards the end of the
year 1525, and discussed at one or two meetings of
the empire, it is assumed in the outset, that the pro-
perty of the church is no longer of any use or be-
nefit either to religion or to the empire: that some
change in the disposition of it is therefore indispens-
able; that this must not, however, be left to the
common people, but must be undertaken by the
supreme authorities; 2. ¢. by the emperor and the
temporal Estates.

People no longer scrupled to propose the secu-
larisation of all ecclesiastical property.

So much might, they said, be assigned to the spi-
ritual princes and prelates as was necessary for the
maintenance of a suitable mode of living; nor
should any thing, for the present, be taken from the
canons, but both they and their superiors should be
allowed gradually to die out. Of the convents, .a
few might be retained for young women of noble
birth, but with full right and liberty to quit them.

With the funds thus obtained, the first care must
be to supply the new spiritual wants; to appoint
pastors and preachers ; to nominate in every circle a
pious and learned man as bishop, with a fixed salary,
but wholly without temporal functions, and solely a
superintendent of the other ministers of the church ;

Cuar. VII. SCHEME OF SECULARIZATION.—1525. 275

and, lastly, to establish a high school in every circle,
in which the languages and the exposition of the
Holy Scriptures according to their true sense, should
be taught.

But the party which suggested these reforms
also entertained the hope that they should thus
acquire strength to give a new form to the whole
secular constitution of the country.

The proposal to that effect contained in this
project is, to establish a particular Council of
Regency, or administrative body, in each circle;
consisting of twelve councillors, three from each of
the four estates, sovereigns, princes, — counts and
lords (nobles ),—and imperial cities; and a chief or
president, chosen from the states of the circle, but
approved by the emperor, with nearly the same
powers as the governors and the councillors of the
Swabian League. This body was to put in execu-
tion all the plans determined on by the States;
to form a supreme court of judicature, and, above
all, to maintain the public peace, and for that
purpose to keep a standing force of horse and foot
_ always in the field. The young nobility were to
serve in the army, instead of occupying the posts
in the chapters. With these troops any succours
granted by the emperor and the empire could then
be rendered effective, without imposing burdens on
any body. They would constitute so great a per-
manent force as no emperor had had at his com-
mand since the birth of Christ.*

* “ Rathschlag was man mit geistlichen Giitern zu gemeinem
und des Reichs Nutz furnemen und handeln soll.” — « Opinion
eae

276 FORMATION OF Boox HI.

The particular provisions of this project are far
less important and interesting than the general
ideas upon which it is founded :—the secularization
of ecclesiastical property; the empire represented
exclusively by temporal estates (the constitution of
which was mainly based upon the extension of the
functions of the circles); a standing army spe-
cially for the advantage of the young nobles: —
all things which, in their mature and finished form,
gave their character to the succeeding centuries,
- and constituted modern Germany. The most distant
results were boldly contemplated, but the way that
led to them was long and arduous.

The ecclesiastical princes were yet far too strong ;
and it may easily be imagined that plans of the
kind above mentioned, which could not remain
concealed from them, would make them feel the
necessity of collecting all their strength. The clergy
already complained that they were kept out of pos-
session of many things, of which they had been
robbed during the late commotions; and even that
their enemies proceeded in depriving them of their
accustomed jurisdiction ; they showed a determina-
tion not to await the attack at the next diet, but to
press for a complete restitution of their rights and
possessions. To this course they were emboldened
by a rescript of the emperor, in which mention was

as to what should be done with ecclesiastical property for the
common good and that of the empire.” In the Weimar Records.
Tt is indeed true that this is among the acts of 1526, but as the
diet of Augsburg is mentioned in it, it was doubtless originally
intended for that.

Cuar. VIL. RELIGIOUS LEAGUES. Wed

made of the suppression of all things that threat-
ened the destruction of our holy faith, and in
such severe terms as seemed to imply that an
entire restoration of the old order of things was
contemplated.* The Council of Regency which
was sitting in Esslingen, and of which we now
hear once more, prepared to propose measures
in the same spirit.f The course taken by the
Swabian League was nearly the same. At a meet-
ing held by that body in November, it received a
letter from Pope Clement, exhorting it to show the
same zeal in the completion of the work, that had
inspired the first undertaking of it, and to finish
the most glorious deed that had been done for
centuries.{ The sovereigns of eastern Germany
felt in the same manner; the instruction given by
Duke George to his delegate at the diet is still
extant. After vehement complaints of the enormous
mischief done by the Lutheran Gospel, he demands

* Tolleten in Castilien, 24th May, 1525. (W. A.)

{ Feilitsch, Esslingen, Monday after St. Martin’s day: “ Er
halt genzlichen dafiir, dass von denen die sich der Aufruhr
theilhaftig gemacht, auch denen die Kirchen und Kloster
gewaltig zerstért, denselbigen Giiter eingenommen und davon
wieder geben was ihnen gefallig, dass wider diese auf dem
Reichstag gehandelt werden soll.” —‘“ He was entirely of
opinion that the property should be taken from those who had
been parties to the seditious movements, and who had violently
destroyed churches and convents, and that such of it should be
restored as they thought fit. Proceedings against these persons
should be taken at the diet.”

t Papal Brief, delivered in November. Oehsle, p. 305.

T 3

278 FORMATION OF Boox III.

that no change shall be made in the traditional or-
dinances without the sanction of a general council ;
adding, that even if an angel should come down
from heaven he was not to be obeyed, unless in a
full Christian assembly.* Moreover a papal nuncio
was sent to attend the diet.

The idea of a change was, it is true, as widely
diffused as it was comprehensive; but the opposite
tendency, towards the maintenance of the existing
ecclesiastical institutions, or rather towards their
restoration in their complete integrity, was still
exceedingly powerful. Even while the partisans
of the new faith cherished the most sweeping
schemes, they could not disguise from themselves
that the diet might very possibly take a turn
highly unfavourable to their wishes. Some believed
that the good and the bad would be destroyed
together ; that truth would be suppressed together
with falsehood; that a rule of faith and life would
be established in accordance with the old law, and
that those who did not receive it willingly would
be compelled by violence to conform to it.

As Elector John and Landgrave Philip had de-
clared themselves most openly for the new doctrines,
they had the greatest reason for fear, The land-
grave, because his territory was surrounded on all
sides by puissant ecclesiastical princes; the elector,
because already there was an idea of depriving him

* Instruction to Otto v. Pack in the Dresden Archives.
It also contains some censure of Luther’s marriage ;—“ that he
and his Kate wanted as much for themselves alone as the whole
Augustine convent had formerly required.”

Cuapr. VIL RELIGIOUS LEAGUES. 279

of his electorate as a seceder from the Church of
Rome; he was advised to place himself on a better
footing with his neighbours — doubtless especially
with Duke George, — for that many intrigues were
on foot against him in that direction.

It was less the view of effecting any change, than
the dread of danger to themselves, and the neces-
sity of maintaining the position which they had
taken up, that determined these two princes to
enter into a closer alliance with each other.

Landgrave Philip made the first advances in this
matter by sending his chamberlain, Rudolf of
Waiblingen to Torgau, where Elector John was
holding his court, charged with the proposal to
combine with him in making a common resistance
at the next diet, to any measures that might be
attempted in support of abuses, or for the suppres-
sion of truth; to accede to no ordinance at vari-
ance with the word of God, and to unite steadfastly
to that end with all who held the same opinions.
This commission was received with great joy by
the elector, with whose sentiments and convictions
it so fully harmonised. At the beginning of No-
vember his son John-Frederic, set out to hold a
conference with the landgrave, and to concert the
course they were to pursue. *

The interview took place at the strongly defended
hunting-seat of Friedewalt, in the Sullinger forest.

* Instruction in Rommel’s Urkundenbuch, p. 10. Credentials
of the same date (5th Oct.) in the Weimar Records. There
is also a note of the answer that Waiblingen was to deliver to
Torgau, 13th Oct.

r4

280 RELIGIOUS LEAGUES. Boox IIL.

The two young princes perfectly understood each
other. There is in the Weimar archives a note of an
opinion “ of our dear cousin and brother the land-
grave,” in the hand-writing of John- Frederic himself,
which is, without doubt, the result of this convers-
ation. Its contents do not show that any actual treaty
as yet existed; the resolutions were such as the cir-
cumstances of the moment called forth: such as,
that the contracting parties should come to a fuller
understanding as to the evangelical cause, and should
induce as many princes, counts, and cities of si-
milar views as possible to join them (they had even
the hope of gaining over the Elector of Treves) ;
and should then enter a common protest against the
expressions contained in the rescript, which were
favourable to old usages, but pernicious to the word
of God; and that they should stand as one man for
the evangelical cause. The electoral court did not
only approve these conditions, but thought it good
to extend the agreement to other things, “ in which
one might be worse treated than the other.” *

* “ Verzaichniss des Bedenkens unsres lieben Vetters und
Bruders auf die vertreuliche Unterrede, so wir mit S. L. jetzo
allhie gehabt, so vil das h. gottl. Wort belangen thut. Friede-
walt Mitw. nach Bernardi (8th Noy.).” —“ Note of the opinion
of our dear cousin and brother, expressed at our confidential
meeting held here, so far as they concern the holy word of God.
Friedewalt, Wednesday after St. Bernard’s day, 7. e. 8th Nov.”
The copy which was made in Torgau differs from the paper
written in the prince’s own hand in this respect : — the prince
had only written that they would make an alliance together for
the sake of the Gospel; but in the copy the words above quoted are
added :—-“‘ Auch sunsten in andern Sachen, do eyner vor dem

Cuar. VII. DIET OF AUGSBURG, 1525. 281

In the beginning of December the hostile parties
thus met at Augsburg, furnished with directly con-
trary instructions.

The same disagreement which prevailed among the
deputies, manifested itself in the imperial commis-
sion. This consisted (independently of Archduke
Ferdinand, whose behaviour was necessarily am-
biguous) of Duke William of Bavaria, the leader
and champion of the papists, and Markgrave Casimir
of Brandenburg, who had so long been attached to
_ the evangelical party. Casimir declined indeed to
enter into the compact proposed to him by the
envoys of Hessen and Saxony; but he declared that
he would advocate his own convictions in the com-
mission, and thus, he urged, do more service to the
cause than he could by joining a formal alliance.

Had the princes been present in person, the strug-
gle must now have become vehement, earnest, and
decisive; it would soon have been clearly seen to
which side the majority inclined.

But neither party was at bottom sincerely re-
solved on bringing matters to an issue. Each saw
too clearly what might be the consequences of such a
decision: they wished to assemble all their forces,
and to secure to themselves every kind of support.
The princes at Friedewalt thought it expedient to
remove the diet of the empire immediately to Spire
or to Worms. On the other side, the arrival of the
Mainz deputy, without whom no step could be
taken, inasmuch as he brought with him the imperial

andern Recht leyden kunt, ausgeschlossen gegen den, so in der Er-
beynung sind.” I intend to make ample extracts in the Appendix.

282 DIET OF AUGSBURG, 1525. Boox III.

chancery, was unduly delayed. No prince as yet
appeared in person; even the commission was not
complete, and a great number of the deputies were
still missing.

The first preliminary meeting was held on the
eleventh of December. Archduke Ferdinand be-
sought those who were assembled to have patience
awhile, till a larger number arrived, and promised to
report to the emperor the good dispositions of those
present.*

But some ripe elapsed, and their numbers were
little augmented: on the renewed application of the
States, the commissioners at length held a definitive
meeting on the 30th December.t

It was evident to every body that, considering the
incompleteness of the assembly of the States, and the
importance of the questions at issue, no permanent
result could be obtained. Duke William suggested
whether it would not be better to adjourn the diet.
The three colleges separated, and were unanimously
of that opinion. They adjourned the diet to Spire,
on the first of May; there, however, they said, every
prince must appear in person; ‘“‘there they would
with greater dignity treat of the holy faith, of peace
and justice.”

In order, however, to have done at least something,
and in consideration of the continued ferment among
the people, a committee was appointed to.draw up
a Recess.

* Letter from Feilitsch to the Elector John, 24th December.
Weimar Records.
+ Feilitsch und Minkwitz to the Elector John, 2d Jan. 1526.

Cuapr. VIL. : RELIGIOUS LEAGUES. 283

The only remarkable circumstance as to this is,
that the ordinances of the foregoing diets of 1523
and 1524—that the Gospel should be preached pure
and intelligible, according to the interpretations of
the received expositors—was repeated, without any
-mention of the Fathers of the Latin Church, or of
the edict of Worms. The States mutually agreed
to hold themselves prepared to put down instantly .
every attempt at insurrection ; and so far restored to
their rights and station those who had been de-
clared infamous on account of their participation in
the disturbances, that the latter were allowed to
take part in the sittings of the courts of justice.*
They were so numerous that the village tribunals
would otherwise have been entirely at a stand.

The whole attention of the public, as well as its
active measures of preparation, were now directed
towards the approaching meeting, which, indeed,
proved to be decisive.

Saxony and Hessen had not as yet found the
sympathy they expected in their scheme of an evan-
gelical league ; in fact, the Niirnberg deputies alone
had really shown an earnest inclination towards it:
but this discouragement did not induce those princes
to abandon the idea: the two ambassadors were of
opinion that the affair must be undertaken with

* Recess (Neue Samml.), ii. 271. §§ 1.4. This was then
looked upon as a victory obtained by the Protestants. Letters
from the Niirnbergers, quoted by Hortleder, i. viii. 1. Spalatin
Annales in Mencken, ii. 652.: “Concidit spes sperantium, eo
conventu totum Baalem restitutum iri.”

284 FORMATION OF Boox III.

redoubled vigour, in a personal interview between
their respective masters.

Meanwhile the other party also concentrated its
forces. The chapter of the cathedral of Mainz
brought forward its long-forgotten metropolitan
powers, and summoned the chapters of its suffra-
gans to an assembly at the mother-church. The
attention of this meeting was called to the danger
which threatened the clergy generally ; and the reso-
lution was passed, to send a deputation who should
lay before the emperor and the pope a complaint
that the spiritual jurisdiction was invaded by the
temporal authorities ; to remind them of the services
which the spiritual princes had, from the earliest
times, rendered to the empire and the church; and
to declare that they were ready to perform similar
and yet greater services in future, but that, in
return, they should expect their ancient privileges
to be protected. They thought it most expedient
to entrust this protection to certain princes who had
not fallen off from the faith, whom they specified.*

The wishes of these princes seemed to tend to the
same point. Duke George of Saxony and Duke
Henry of Brunswick met at the residence of the
Elector of Mainz at Halle. A few days after, we find
them again at Leipzig, together with the Bishop of
Strasburg; they too determined to address them-
selves to the emperor. They represented to him
that, seeing the uninterrupted progress of the

* Letter from Count Albert of Mansfeld, sent with a copy of
the treaty, to the Elector of Saxony, in the Weimar Records.
Letter from Waldenfels to Vogler in vy. d. Lith, p. 160.

Cuap. VIL. RELIGIOUS LEAGUES. 285

“damnable Lutheran doctrine,” nothing could be
expected but a repetition of the rebellion ; nay, even
an open war, between the princes and lords them-
selves; that attempts were daily made to draw them
too over to the Lutheran party; and, since these
were not likely to succeed by amicable means, it
seemed as if it were the design of the Lutherans to
force them into it, by instigating their subjects to
revolt. Against these attempts they now called
upon the emperor for support.* Immediately
after the meeting, Duke Henry of Brunswick went |
to Spain, thus throwing the weight of his personal
solicitations into the balance.

Every thing was thus prepared for the decisive
battle. If the adherents of innovation found
their strongest support in the sympathy of the
nation, and in the mighty movement of the public
mind generally; on the other hand, the champions
of the papacy were sustained by the natural
strength of established institutions, and the resolute
aversion of some powerful princes to all change.

But they now likewise sought to engage in their
behalf the active interference of the two supreme
authorities whose dignity was so intimately bound up
with the spiritual constitution of the empire. They
did not doubt that these potentates would bring all
their influence to their aid.

But they thus came into contact with two
great political powers which stood in very different

* Excerpt from a judgment given at Leipzig, quoted by
Schmidt in his Deutsche Geschichte, viii. p. 202. Yet I know
not whether this meeting took place at Leipzig or at Halle.

286 RELIGIOUS LEAGUES. Boox III.

relations to each other, from that which subsisted
between them in Germany ;—a relation subject at
every moment to be changed by the great events of
Italy, and the course of European policy.

We shall be unable to understand the affairs of
Germany, if we do not first devote our attention to
these events: they are also important, as exhibiting
another phase of the character and condition of
the German people.

BOOK IV.

FOREIGN RELATIONS.—FOUNDATION OF THE
NATIONAL CHURCHES OF GERMANY.

1521—1528.

Be ae = aS ad bes

Ae sr

y¥i AD a

ET WO yor canner BHOUT AAS FEE
i" THA Mest. soe ”. GAH SHO TABOR.

Fg Avat.-7€al

ion ah

289

BOOK IV.

FOREIGN RELATIONS.—FOUNDATION OF THE
NATIONAL CHURCHES OF GERMANY.

1521—1528.

CHAPTER I.

FRENCH AND ITALIAN WARS, DOWN TO THE LIGUE
OF COGNAC, 1521—1526. .

Iv the tenth century, when the peoples of the
West, just. struggling into intellectual life and
culture, were exposed on every side to attacks from
mighty and hostile forces, the first great victory
was won by the Germans. In defending themselves,
they rendered inestimable service to all others. They
restored security and independence to the West;
their successes in arms revived the idea of a
western empire; two thirds of the great Carolingian
heritage devolved upon them.

In the eleventh and twelfth centuries the. majesty
and supremacy of the empire were recognised by
all the surrounding nations, north and south, east
and west.

Arles and Lyons, Milan and Pisa, were included
within its dominions. At the end of the twelfth,
and the former half of the thirteenth century, we
find the emperors of Germany founding a strong
domestic power in Italy: more than once the idea

VOL. II. U

290 FOREIGN RELATIONS. Boox IV.

of annexing the eastern empire to that of the
west suggested itself to them. Meanwhile wide
tracts of country in the north and east were covered
with settlements ; and as outposts in the far dis-
tance, those great colonies of military orders were
established, which were unquestionably the best
constituted and strongest power in the north.

For a while the conquests of the empire continued
to advance, although the imperial government no
longer retained its pristine energy ; but at length the
dissolution of internal order, and the annihilation of
the real independence of the imperial throne, was
felt on its frontiers: the empire was no longer able
to maintain its lofty station.

The spoliation began with the pope, who wrested
Rome, the States of the Church, and Avignon
from the empire. In alliance with him, the French
crown got possession, noiselessly and bit by bit, of
the kingdom of Arles ; shortly after, the rising power
of Poland and Lithuania gained a decisive victory
over the Teutonic order, no longer adequately sup-
ported. In the fifteenth century, Bohemia made
herself independent; the states of Italy scarcely
preserved their allegiance to the empire even in
name ; and, lastly, the principle of separation reacted
even on the races of German blood and language

who inhabited the Alps and the Netherlands. The
contemplation of so many disasters awoke that
sorrowful indignation in the hearts of true patriots
to which we have already alluded.

As yet, however, no definitive act of cession had
been made on the side of the empire; excepting on

Cuap. I. FOREIGN RELATIONS. 291

some points, in favour of the pope, with whom, how-
ever, the boundary line of their respective powers
had not yet been very firmly settled: it was still
open to every kind of suggestion or discussion.

Never, above all, had the project of giving up the
north of Italy been entertained. As early as the
beginning of the fifteenth century, Rupert, King of
the Romans, made a resolute attack on Milan: in
the middle of it, after the Visconti became extinct,
a party arose in Milan disposed to place the city
under the power of the emperor ; and we have traced
the life-long attempts of Maximilian to conquer
Lombardy. He did not, it is true, succeed: after
many fluctuations in the fortunes of war, the
French at length kept possession of Milan and
Genoa; but the ancient claims were held in the
liveliest remembrance; and Francis I., who, more-
over, had never received investiture of the fief, was
by no means regarded in the empire in the light of
a legitimate possessor.

On Charles V.’s accession to the throne, the
magnificent prospect of a recovery of all its rights
once more opened on the empire.

We must remember, that this was the point of
view which immediately presented itself to men’s
minds, on the first approximation of Burgundy and
Austria. When Charles the Bold sent to offer his
alliance to Frederic III., he told him that he would
make him more formidable than any emperor had
been for three hundred years: he represented to
him what an irresistible power must result from

u 2

292 FOREIGN RELATIONS. Boox IV.

the union of their possessions and privileges.* The
youthful prince who now ascended the throne was
the great grandson and heir of both those sovereigns,
and his principalities and kingdoms extended be-
yond the farthest limit that any imagination
could at that time have reached. How, then, was
it possible that ideas of this kind. should fail to
arise within him?

Of all the nations of Western Beart the German
was, without doubt, the best prepared for war.
The nobles of that country were the first to throw
off the use of the lance —that chivalrous weapon
which the new art of war had rendered nearly
useless: lords and vassals fought in the same
ranks.¢ The foot-soldiers, or landsknechts, who
were peasants, had no equals except among the
Swiss, —also of German race. The citizens were
masters in the use of fire-arms; nor could any
other nation in the world have measured its naval
forces against those of the Hanse towns and the
Netherlands combined.

All these elements of strength had been paralysed
by the want of an emperor endued with energy
enough to put them in motion. Such an one had
never yet arisen; but a new era now appeared at
hand. The landsknechts hailed its advent in a song;
the burden of which is, that they had now a prince

* The only account which may, however, be considered au-
thentic, is given by Schmidt from the Imperial Archives, book
vil. cap. 24.

} A passage from Pasqualigo’s narrative will explain this
further.

Cuar.I. BREAKING OUT OF WAR WITH FRANCE. 293

who would be able to pay them, and to keep them in
the field. At the diet of Worms, the reconquest of
the lost or ceded dominions of the empire was dis-
cussed with great earnestness. But here again we
must not for a moment lose sight of the fact, that
the augmentation of the imperial power was not
the offspring of any essential change in the sen-
timents of the nation. The nation was not disposed
to grant to Charles V. greater rights than it had
granted to his predecessors ; nor to rally round him
with greater unanimity. The difference consisted
in the union of power, such as had never before
centred in one house, with the rights and powers
of the empire. But the former included elements so
heterogeneous that it could never be amalgamated
with the power conferred by the imperial throne.
The -position of Charles V. was twofold ; hence it
must of necessity in time give birth to difficulties
as peculiar as its own nature, and might become
perilous to the rights of the German empire in so
far as they were distinct from those of the indivi-
dual then wearing the imperial crown.*

Even the origin of his wars is to be traced far
more to the aggregate of his various relations than
to the peculiar interests of the empire.

We have already alluded to the revival of the
old hostility between France and Burgundy.

In the beginning of the year 1521 the declared
enemies of the emperor were favourably received
and advanced at the French court. Francis I.
formed.a connexion with the revolted communes in

* See translator’s note, vol. i. p. 112.
vu 3

294 BREAKING OUT OF WAR Boox IV.

Castile; in-Germany, also, the emperor continually
thought he detected traces of his enemy’s machina-
tions: letters and schemes of the most hostile na-
ture reached him from Italy *: in May, Francis I.
made an attempt to restore Navarre by force to
Albert. When the English expressed their pacific
views and wishes, he replied that he could not
allow himself to be stopped in his victorious
career.t He openly took under his protection
Robert de la Mark, who, in order to avenge a
violation of his jurisdiction on the part of the
Chancellor of Brabant, was proceeding to acts of
violence against Luxemburg.

On the other hand, the emperor now concluded
his treaty with Pope Leo X., to whom the as-
cendency of the French in Italy was extremely
oppressive, and any augmentation of it, intolerable.{
The alliance was destined to revive and restore the
rights of the papacy and the empire conjointly, and
even remote contingencies were not forgotten. The
emperor promised to assist in establishing the

* 'Tractat de subtrahendis omnibus Cxsaris amicis, — solicitat
licet frustra sacri imperii electores, —concitat et literis et nunciis
turbatos Hispaniz populos. From these and similar complaints
in the Refutatio Apologize Dissuasorie in Goldast Polit. Imp.
p- 870. is seen what especially irritated the emperor in addition
to the direct attacks.

+ Extracts from the despatches of Fitzwilliam, the English
minister in Paris, dated 18th Feb. and 29th of May: Raumer,
Letters from Paris, vol. i. p. 237.

t{ This motive, which the Italians seem afterwards to have
forgotten, is very apparent in a conference held by Henry VIII.
with the French minister: “ fere off extreme subjection.” —
State Papers, Henry VIIL, i. p. 18.

Cuap. I. WITH FRANCE. 295

pope’s claims on Ferrara; the pope, those of the
empire on Venice.* But they first determined
jointly to conquer Lombardy. Parma and Pia-
cenza were to fall to the share of the pope; Milan
and Genoa, to be governed by native rulers who
were to acknowledge the emperor as their sovereign
lord. There is frequent reference in the treaty
to the legitimate subjection of all princes to the
pope and the emperor, from whom God would here-
after demand an account of the state of the Christian
republic.

In Germany well-meaning people were anxious to
bring about a reconciliation between the king and
the emperor. The electors drew up a sort of me-
morial, exhorting the King of France to a peaceful
demeanour, and a recognition of the rights of the
empire. But the emperor was not pleased at their
interference ; he forbade the Elector of Mainz to
send this paper; his chancellor declared to the
Elector of Treves that no negotiation would have
any effect with the king, who would keep the peace
only when restrained by force.f

The purposes, moreover, which had dictated the
treaty with the pope were wholly irreconcilable
with an accommodation of the differences with the
king of France.

* « Omnibus viribus suis spiritualibus et temporalibus.” Art.
19. — Dumont, iv. iii. p. 99.

+ “Wurde keine Handlung leiden, er sey denn dermaassen
zugericht, dass er das Friedens begere. ”—“ He would hear Lg
no negotiations unless he were in a condition to ask for peace.”
From the mouth of the Elector of Treves: Planitz to Frederic

of Saxony. Nov. 1. 1521.
iy te

296 BREAKING OUT OF WAR Boox IV.

In August, 1521, it is true, delegates from the
emperor and the king, together with plenipotentiaries
from Rome and England, met again in Calais; but
from the first, little was to be anticipated from this
conference. Of the mediators, one was already in
alliance with the emperor, while the other had long
been negotiating with him, with a view to a stricter
alliance. They went over the old treaties, article

“by article; each party maintaining that it was the
other who was chargeable with the breach of it.
The greatest impression was produced by a letter
of Francis to the Count of Carpi, which had fallen
into the hands of the imperialists, and in which the
king spoke very plainly of the assistance he gave to
Robert de la Mark, and of his views on Naples and
Sicily. When at length a renewal of these treaties
was proposed, the emperor’s grand chancellor,
without the slightest hesitation, refused; alleging
that the basis on which they were constructed was
unsound; the emperor having ancient claims on
France, of which they contained no mention. He
not only denied, as might be expected, the suzerainty
of France over Flanders and Artois, which he pro-
nounced a mere momentary concession; but de-
manded that the inheritance of Charles the Bold
should be given back entire and undiminished ; he
reminded the mediators what the throne of Aragon,
and what the empire was entitled to claim in the
south of France :*—pretensions which, in fact,

* Garnier, Histoire de France, xxiii. p. 359., from the MSS.
of Bethune, which, however, he does not mention, gives a very
unsatisfactory account of the matter. At the time of the first

Cuap. I. WITH FRANCE. 297

expressed nothing less than a resolute determin-
ation to try the fortune of war; and which it was
impossible for Francis to admit unless he had suf-
fered a defeat.

From this congress at Calais, Charles V. reaped
one advahtage—he won over the King of England.
Henry VIII. had before solemnly engaged to de-
clare himself against the one of his neighbours who
should first break the peace. The intercepted
letter in question convinced him that the blame
rested with Francis I.* He had, therefore, no
hesitation in espousing the side of the emperor, .
from whom he carefully obtained security for com-
pensation for whatever pecuniary injury might
arise to him from his rupture with France. His
plenipotentiary, Cardinal Wolsey, proceeded from
Calais to Bruges, where the stricter alliance, which
had formerly been discussed, was concluded.

edition, I remarked that in time something material should be
done (which would be easy enough) in France for the authentic
elucidations of this history. Since then a beginning has been
made by the publication of the papers of Cardinal Gravella. In
the first volume, p. 125—241., we find a Précis des Conférences de
Calais, a report written by the Grand Chancellor of the empire
in Latin, and put into the “ langue Valonne ou Frangoise ” (so
he calls it) by Claude de Chassey.

* «“QLetters sent unto Rome by the Frenshe King to the
Counte de Carpye signed with his hande and subscribed by
Robt. Tett (Robertet), which I have seen, conteyning the hoole
discourse of his intended enterprise, as well by Robt. de la
Marche in those parties, as the commotion of Italie and dis-
turbance of Naples, wherby the invasion of his partie evidently
apperithe.” Wolsey to King Henry.— State Papers, i. 27,
From the answer of Pace, p. 35., it appears that the king thought
this testimony decisive.

298 CAMPAIGN oF 1521-22. Beckie

The emperor really wished not to engage in the
war without full justification. As, in consequence
of the ambiguously worded article in the treaty of
peace, there was a doubt which party was in the
right in the affair of Navarre, he was rather glad
than otherwise when he heard the news of the serious
demonstrations of the French in favour of Robert
dela Mark. ‘God be praised!” exclaimed he ; “‘it
is not I who begin the war; God affords me an oc-
casion for defending myself.” He was the more
determined to pursue the enterprise to the end.
‘“‘T must be a miserable emperor,” said he, “or he
shall become a pitiable king of France.” *

Such was the beginning of the war between
Charles V. and Francis I.

It was, in fact, a direct continuation of the
ancient hostilities between Burgundy and France.
At the same time, it was immensely important to
the Germanic empire, to which, for the first time,
a well-grounded prospect of re-establishing its
rights and authority was re-opened. The war, with
the political changes consequent upon it, would then
incessantly react on its internal condition; as we
have already remarked, and shall soon more dis-
tinctly perceive.

CAMPAIGN OF 1521, 1522.

It seemed at first as if the struggle would be
decided on the ancient theatre of the Burgundian

* Aluigi Aleandro de’ Galeazzi, Brusselles 3. Luglio, 1521.
Lettere di principi, i.93. That is doubtless the meaning of
this speech.

Cuap. I. CAMPAIGN OF 1521. 299

wars — the border country of France and the Ne-
therlands.

From the territory of Robert de la Mark, which
had been subdued without much difficulty, a
stately imperial army, under the command of the
Count of Nassau, Sickingen, and Frundsberg
marched upon the French frontiers, conquered
Mouzon, besieged Mézitres, and Gueciesed the
whole of Champagne. In the mean time, however,
Francis assembled his best forces, and had soon
so confident a feeling of his own superiority, that
he declared that God himself was evidently on the
side of France. The imperialists were compelled
to raise the siege of Mézicres, and when they met
the French near Valenciennes, esteemed themselves
happy to escape without a beating. George Frunds-
berg regarded this retreat as one of his most glo-
rious achievements ; and it did, in fact, in some.
degree, restore the aoe of mR the French
took some strong places in Artois; the imperialists,
Tournay; but these momentary successes led to
no great efforts or important results.*

In Italy, on the other hand, events unexpectedly
advanced to a crisis. ;

This was mainly brought about by the Swiss
Confederation, which, though still retaining the form
of subjection to the empire, and receiving its pay,
enjoyed, in fact, political independence, and had
for many years been principally instrumental in

* The Memoirs of Bellay and of Fleuranges on one side, and
of Pontus Heuterus and Sandoval on the other, describe this
war. I shall insert a very unpoetical, but instructive historical
song, in the Appendix.

300 CAMPAIGN OF 1521. Boox IV.

deciding all the great struggles in the north of Italy.
Recently (a.p. 1512) the Swiss had reconquered
Milan for the Sforzas, and its loss, determined in a
most bloody battle, was entirely the result of their
divisions. In the year 1516, Maximilian had un-
dertaken, with their aid, a second expedition into
Lombardy, the failure of which was attributed solely
to his defective conduct of it. Now, too, both the
pope and the emperor, in all their plans, reckoned
on the assistance of these neighbouring, brave and
warlike troops, as indispensable to the success of
their arms. Their intention was to march 16,000
Swiss across the Alps and to advance upon Milan,
at the same time that an imperial fleet appeared
before Genoa, and a combined papal and Neapolitan
force on the Po.*

It seemed hardly possible to entertain a doubt of
‘the success of their efforts. The Confederation had
espoused the part of the House of Austria at the
election, and was closely allied with the See of
Rome. In the beginning of the year, some thousand
Swiss had entered Leo’s service, and their captains
had been decorated by that pontiff with chains of
gold.

But there was another party in Switzerland
attached to France. This party had been the
cause of the division in the army in 1515; had
afterwards concluded the permanent peace with
France; and though it did not actually support the
pretensions of the king to the imperial crown
(which would have given him legitimate claims to

* This plan is adopted in the treaty of alliance. Art. 9.

Cuap. I. CAMPAIGN OF 1521. 301

their services), being now free from any anxiety on
that score, manifested the liveliest desire to enter
into a strict alliance with him. The French left
nothing undone that could secure or strengthen the
attachment of this party. Their means were simple
and infallible. They openly promised pensions, and
secretly administered bribes. Anshelm declares
that not only the members of councils and the bur-
gesses were bribed, but all the loudest village
orators ; that many were bought with ten gulden,
while not less than three thousand found their way,
by different channels, into some houses.* Opposition
was, indeed, not wanting. It was remarked that
the contracting parties bound themselves to a most
unequal obligation in engaging mutually to defend
each other’s territorry ; the Confederation, the ex-
tensive dominions of the king on either side the
Alps; the king, the narrow territory of Switzer-
land: it was said that Francis, by means of pen-
sions, bribes, and promises, would become almost
absolute master of the Confederation f ; but as ma-
jorities are generally swayed rather by interests
than by arguments, these representations had no
effect.

The reply was, that the Confederation wanted
something to fall back upon in unexpected emergen-
cies ; and where could a better connexion be found?
that while the only sacrifice demanded of them was

* Anshelm, Berner Chronik, vi. p. 25.

+ Arguments on the other side are to be found, especially in
the address of the city of Zurich to the canton, quoted by Bul-
linger, i. p. 42.

302 CAMPAIGN OF 152]. Boox IV.

to let their hot-blooded youth, whom they could not
keep in order, flock to the king’s standard, they
would derive great advantages from him in return.
In Zurich alone a firm resistance was offered — the
result in part of more profound religious convic-
tions; but all other parts, — even at last Schwyz
and Glarus, which held out the longest— gave way.
On the 5th of May, 1521, just as these plans were ma-
turing, the alliance was ratified at Lucern, according
to the terms of which, the king raised the pensions
already granted to the Confederation by one half *;
while the Swiss, on their side, promised to come to
his aid whenever any part of his dominions was
attacked, with a force of from six to sixteen thou-
sand men. ‘This is the basis of every subsequent
treaty between France and Switzerland. How great
a weight in Europe would the renewal of that re-
lation to Milan which had subsisted from 1512 to
1515 have given to Switzerland! But this she
disregarded; she sold her arm and her strength—
the whole of that warlike power by which she had
won herself aname among the nations— to the crown
of France, and became the hired instrument of its
designs. She advanced another step in the career
of separation from the empire, to which she was
bound by the ties of nationality and of history, and
sustained by which, she might have assumed a lofty
station among the powers of Europe. In July, 1521,
a solemn deputation repaired to Dijon, to deliver to

* “ Ut cognoscant intimum amorem, liberalitatem, benevolen-
tiam, et affectionem dicti Christianissimi regis in eos.”— Dumont,
iv. i. p. 334,

Cuar. L. CAMPAIGN OF 1521. 303

Francis I. the sealed copy of the treaty; and the
king’s mother was delighted at the marks of reve-
rential homage addressed to her son at this cere-
mony; immediately after which, bands of Swiss
joined the king’s troops both in Picardy and in
Italy.

It is evident how. completely this must have
thwarted all the plans of the pope and the em-
peror.

In Italy, the breaking out of hostilities was
hastened by a very ill-concerted “attack of the
French on the town of Reggio, where they in-
tended to carry off some Milanese emigrants. In _
July, 1521, Prospero Colonna, to whom the supreme
command over. the combined papal and imperial
forces was given, left Bologna to attack Parma; a
fleet was sent to sea against Genoa; in Trent, Ger-
man foot-soldiers flocked to the standard of Fran-
cesco Sforza, son of Luigi il Moro; while the exiled
Ghibellines appeared with a few boats on the Lake
of Como, where they had always carried on a sort
of banditti warfare.*

But to what could all these detached efforts lead,
when the force from which the grand attack on the
Milanese was expected had now made common
cause with the enemy, whose confidence was thus
raised at all points? The enterprises against
Genoa and Como completely failed. It was for-
tunate, that at least the Germans from Trent found

* Benedictus Jovius Historia Novocomensis in Gravii Thes.
Ital. iv. p. 71., names, as leader, Johannes a Brinzia, cognomento
stultus ; that is, Matto da Brinzi, as he is otherwise called.

304 CAMPAIGN OF 1521. Boox IV.

means to effect a junction with the army before
Parma, where the troops which had been destined
for the attack upon Genoa now likewise collected ;
but, even with this addition, they did not feel
ctinolves strong enough for a serious and decisive
attack: on the 12th of Sepa the siege was
raised.*

The French at this time possessed an unques-
tioned superiority over their enemies. The Vene-
tians had sent into the field five hundred men-
at-arms, and six thousand foot soldiers; the Duke
of Ferrara, who was not blind to the danger
impending over him, fell upon the papal territory ;
the Swiss came down from their mountains in
detachments, at their head the Bernese, led by the
most ardent partisans of the French. The historian
Guicciardini, who was with the allied armies as
papal commissioner, declares, that if the French
had attacked them at that moment, when also
discords and disorders had broken out among them,
they would have obtained an easy victory.

But just at this moment, hope of succour and of
safety dawned in the very point whence the danger
had arisen.

Imperial and papal envoys had arrived in Swit-
zerland, richly provided with money and all the

* The somewhat contradictory details of the raising of this
siege are to be found in Guicciardini, Capella, Jovius (Vita
Pese, ii, 300. Leonis Xmi, iii. 100.) See also Nardi, Storie
fiorentine, vi. p. 170.

+ Guicciardini, xiv. p. 408. Se fosse sopravenuto Lautrech,
gli metteva facilissimamente in fuga.

Cuap. I. CAMPAIGN OF 1521. 305

means of corruption, and had again found a soil very
favourable to the fulfilment of their commission.
By pressing on the Swiss their old obligations
towards the emperor and Austria, and especially
towards the pope, they brought into full and dis-
tinct light the extent of the danger into which the
Confederation had rushed. They were bound by
ancient treaties to defend part of the territories of
Austria (7.¢. Franche Comté), and all those of
the Church; yet in the teeth of these, they had en-
tered into a new treaty, a special clause of which
declared that they were to take the field against all
parties specified, and especially against Austria and

the pope, if they should attack the king’s dominions.
' There were still some Swiss in the papal armies,
who had taken part in the attack on Parma, while
others of their countrymen co-operated, under Lau-
trec, in the relief of that place ; and it was not easy to
see what would be the result of their coming in con-
tact. The French alliance was the work of a party,
and nothing was more natural than that another
party should be formed in every place to oppose it.
The disorderly and ill-timed departure was also a
ground of complaint and reproach; in some places
the whole labour of getting in the harvest had
been left to women. Ziirich, which had rejected
the French alliance by an unanimous resolution
of the council in the city and the communes
in the country, was determined at all events to
maintain that with the pope. All these various
inclinations and passions were now laid hold of,
and turned to account by the old master of Swiss

VOL. Il. s

306 CAMPAIGN OF 1521. Boox IV.

intrigues, Cardinal von Sitten. In Ziirich he was
allowed to levy 2700 men, though under the con-
dition that they were to be employed solely for the
defence of the papal possessions, and on no account
for the attack on Milan: these troops however
formed a mere rallying point around which parti-
'gans of the pope and emperor gathered from all
parts ; the cardinal granted still higher pay than
the French plenipotentiaries : we find that a banner
or company, which had been recruited for the ser-
vice of France, went over in a body, with the
single exception of its captain, to that of the pope:
above 6000 men mustered in Coire, towards the
end of September, and were quickly joined by troops
from the Grisons and the Pays de Vaud.*

The pope was already in great dismay and per-
plexity at the ill results of his undertakings, when
he received these tidings. His nuncio Ennio assured
him that the clause in the agreement with Ziirich
would not restrain the troops of that canton from
attacking Parma, Piacenza, and even Ferrara,
though they belonged to the Church ; nay, that he
was confident that if he did but distribute money
among some of the leaders, he could induce them
to undertake any thing he wished.f

* The offers made by the imperial and papal party are to be
seen in Anshelm. Bullinger is more explicit as to the affairs
of Ziirich, cap. 24—26. See Hottinger, Geschichte der Eidge-
nossen (Miiller’s continuation), i. p. 55. 63.

+ Galeacius Capella gives, p. 180., an extract from the letter :
“* Demum pecunia facile esse duces, corrumpere, qui milites quo
res postularet technis suasionibusque impellerent.”

Cuap. I. CAMPAIGN OF LSBs 307

This revived the almost extinguished hopes of
the allies. It was evident that the mere appear-
ance of so strong a Swiss force in the combined
army must cripple the strength of the enemy,
which mainly consisted of the Swiss in his service.
The only question was, how to effect a junction, and
to accomplish this the army set itself in motion.
Cardinal Giulio de’ Medici had just arrived from
Florence, and had appeased all the quarrels of the
leaders and secured the good will of the troops by
the Florentine gold of which he was the bearer;
he had thirteen sumpter mules in his train, all said
to be laden with money. On the first of October,
Prospero Colonna crossed the Po at Casal Maggiore
and marched up the river Oglio. Meanwhile the
Swiss who had come down from the Alps across
the Morbegno arrived from Chiavenna. Neither
mountain nor flood, neither the warnings of their
countrymen nor the hostilities of the French, had
power to deter them. At the end of October they
too appeared on the other side the Oglio.

It was evident that the safety of the French
depended on preventing the junction of these two
bodies of troops. Prospero Colonna had taken up
a position near Rebecca, so little advantageous,
that even the cautious Venetians were tempted
to attack him; the Swiss were urgent to do so:
they wanted to fight before their countrymen
reached the scene of warfare; and in a council
of war which was held, the voices were nearly
unanimous for the attack. The commander-in-
chief, Lautrec, alone was not to be induced to

x 2

308 CAMPAIGN oF 1521. Boox IV.

comply with their wishes.* Many motives for his
refusal were assigned; the most generally received
was his want of resolution: he was not a general
fitted for enterprising warfare. He chose rather to
strengthen the garrisons in the nearest fortified
towns, and to take up a strong position behind the
Adda. Prospero Colonna soon after joined the
Swiss at Gambara without any impediment. A
part of them, as the nuncio had predicted, were not
reluctant to advance with him upon Milan. The
more conscientious, who could not be induced by
any promises to do so, marched upon Reggio,
whence they were to make an attack on the papal
cities of Parma and Piacenza.

The allied army thus acquired an incontestable
superiority. The Swiss in the French service, dis-
contented ~at not having earned the bounty dis-
tributed after a battle; dissatisfied with Lautrec,
who preferred his German guard to them; and
exhorted by messengers from Switzerland, for
God’s sake not to fight their brother confederates, de-
serted the ranks and returned home in troops. If,
therefore, in 1515, the dissensions of the Swiss had
essentially facilitated the conquest of Milan to the

* The version which Leferron (v. p. 130.) quotes from the
mouth of an eye-witness — that Lautrec had really intended to
make the attack on the following day, but was prevented by the
Venetians— is a mere pretext. Bellay says: “ La tardiveté
de nos chefs fut cause de les nous faire perdre.”— Coll. Univ.,
tom. xvii. p. 180. The particulars are mentioned by the most
trustworthy Italians, such as Galeazzo. We may judge of the
effect of this event from the Chronicles of Rabbi Josef: he says
of the French, “ They are a nation voyd of counsel.”

Cuap. I. CAMPAIGN OF 1521. 309

French, the consequences of those dissensions now
mainly occasioned their disasters. The allies, at
this moment, reinforced by fresh troops from the
Grisons, effected their passage across the Adda with
equal skill and success. Lautrec found himself
entirely confined to the fortified towns.

But these had long been the scene of hostile
ferment. The Ghibellines hated the French govern-
ment; nor were the Guelphs treated by it with all
the consideration they expected ; their most eminent
leader, the aged Trivulzi, whose authority had for a
time been superior to that of the French governor,
had, on that account, fallen into the disfavour of the
king, which had terminated only with his life. To
these causes of discontent were added the acts of
extortion and violence which generally render the
domination of the French hateful to every country
subject to their sway. On Lautrec’s arrival in

“Milan, he found so great an agitation, that he thought
it necessary to put it down by severe military exe-
cutions; he caused the aged Christofero Pallavicini,
a near relation of the House of Medici, and one of
the chiefs of the Ghibelline faction, to be beheaded
in the castle.* It is easy to imagine what was the
impression produced by this cruelty, combined with
the spectacle of a defeated army and the report of
the approach of an enemy of overwhelming force.
Upon the state of the public mind resulting from
such causes, Prospero and Cardinal Giulio had all
along placed their hopes.t Francesco Sforza had

* Cronaca Grumello, in Verri, iii. p. 221.
+ Sepulveda, Prefatio in Aristotelem de parvis Naturalibus
5 x 3

310 CAMPAIGN OF 1521. Boox IV.

fostered this by proclamations, breathing nothing
but clemency and mildness, and promising the
paternal rule of a native prince, which were read
with avidity. As the allies approached Milan, they
were urged to advance without delay and to venture
on an attack ; the whole city, it was said, would rise
in their favour. It was in November, the weather
and the roads as bad as possible; but under these
adverse circumstances they marched forwards. On
the evening of the 19th they reached Milan, and
immediately pitched their camp before it. Mean-
while, a small party of light horsemen having re-
ported the bad state of the entrenchments which
Lautrec had hastily thrown up round the city, the
Marquess Pescara, commander of the Spanish infan-
try, said, ‘‘ We must find quarters in the suburbs ;”
‘and instantly placing himself at the head of sixty
Spanish riflemen, advanced on the Porta Romana,
followed by an irregular troop of Landsknechts.
The event which was to decide the fate of Italy for
centuries, began like an adventure undertaken in
wantonness and sport. Prospero Colonna, unwill-
ing to be outdone, collected another party of Germans
and Spaniards, and marched on the Porta Ticinese.
The entrenchments were easily forced; but, as nearly
the whole of, the enemy’s army lay in the city, and

(Cf. Sepulvede Vita et Scripta, p. evii.), says, of Giulio: “ Non
ignarus, in uno Mediolano cetera oppida expugnari.” Vettori
admirably describes the change of circumstances. “ In Milano
in facto la parte Ghibellina @ superiore assai, i popoli sono
sempre desiderosi di mutazioni: chi lascia la campagna e si
retira dentro alle mura, perde di riputazione.”

Cuap. I. CAMPAIGN OF 1521. oul

rallied in haste to make resistance, the affair was
still doubtful, and a part at least of the assailants
held it expedient to retire. At this crisis the
population rose ;. the streets resounded with the cry
“the Duke! the Empire for ever! down with the
French!” a universal insurrection appeared immi-
nent, and as the main body of the allied army at
this moment approached, and the Landsknechts,
wading up to their belts in water through the
ditches, mounted the entrenchments, Lautrec
thought the defence of the city desperate, and
retreated through the Porta Comasina on the
opposite side. The Venetians were easily disarmed.
The Swiss officers would not abandon the French,
and hurried after them. In less than two hours
the city was taken.* On entering it, the impe-
rialists found all the streets brilliantly ilbetteniete
The same evening it was publicly proclaimed that
the emperor and pope had determined to restore to
the Milanese their hereditary sovereign, Duke
Francesco Sforza. Geronimo Morone, the confi-
dential councillor of that prince, who had kept alive
the connection with the Ghibelline families, and
had contributed more than any other individual to
the success of the enterprize, took the reins of
government.

* A letter of the Marquis of Mantua to his mother, dated
21st Nov. 1521, and printed in the thirty-second volume of
Sanuto’s Chronicle, contains the best and the most trustworthy
account of this event. I shall give it in the Appendix, as well
as a letter of the Legate, Giulio Medici, written between the
evening of the 19th and the morning of the 20th.

x 4

312 CAMPAIGN OF 1521. Boox IV

Pavia and Lodi, on the one side the Po, Parma
and Piacenza on the other, followed the example of
Milan. The latter cities received very welcome
assistance from the Swiss of Zug and Ziirich, who
had not accompanied the army to Milan.

The matter was, however, by no means at an
end. The French army had not dispersed, as was
expected; it took up a strong position in Cremona,
whence it menaced Milan on the one side and
Parma and Piacenza on the other; it was still in

‘possession of a number of castles; Novara, Trezzo,
Pizzighetone, in the Milanese ; the strongholds in the
passes of the Alps ; Domo d’Ossola and Arona, with
all the others on the Lago Maggiore. The sudden
death of Leo X., whom fate summoned away just
as he received the first favourable tidings, compelled
the allied commanders to be frugal, and to discharge
as many of their troops as they could possibly spare.
For the moment, at least; they could not reckon
on any further support from the Tuscan or Papal
dominions, which were distracted by troubles of

their own; while the French had at their disposal

the resources of Venice and Genoa. The most im-

portant thing, however, was that, after this disaster,
of which they were themselves the sole cause, the

Swiss acted with greater concert. The emperor in-

vited them to enter into alliance with him ; the Coun-
cil of Regency reminded them of their duties as mem-
bers of the empire; an embassy from Milan offered
them a subsidy; but all was in vain: the French
party, reinforced by the powerful captains who

Crap. I. CAMPAIGN OF 1522. ale

were returned from Italy, asserted its superiority * ;
its adversaries themselves were struck by the danger

_ which threatened the Confederation from opposition
to the will of the majority. Ziirich now recalled her
citizens from Italy, and the twelve cantons granted
the king a levy of 16,000 men: they gave leave to

, the French plenipotentiary to inspect them himself,
which had never been granted before; and at the
end of January, 1522, whilst falling snow still
covered the roads with fresh drifts, they marched
across the Alps.

By this event the whole political face of things
assumed a new and most complicated aspect.

The Swiss being thus opposed to the claims of
the emperor and the empire, they were only to be
maintained (if indeed it was possible to maintain
them at all) by purely,German resources: no union
of hereditary possessions, no negotiation, availed
the emperor further; he had nothing to look to but
the strong arm and the tried faith of his Lands-
knechts.

A considerable body of these troops were already
collected in the Milanese. ‘They had been levied
the preceding year in Tyrol and Swabia, chiefly
with the pope’s money: it appears from extant
documents that the Wiirtenberg government or-
dered its servants to let every man go who would

* On the 29th November, we find the French agent, Galeazzo
Visconti, in Lucern: “ Queste lige,” he says, “sono in grosso
dixordine, — ma a tuto spero troverase bono recapito, etiam
che cum faticha et spexa.”—Molini, Doe. i. p. 132.

314 CAMPAIGN OF 1522. | Boox IV.

be better out of the country than in it.* Francis
of Castelalt had raised five companies.f The most
renowned of German captains, George of Frunds-
berg, now set himself in motion. He was per-
sonally acquainted with Francesco Sforza, who had
once paid him a visit at his castle of Mindelheim:
another Italian pretender, Geronimo Adorno, who,
aspired at regaining his power in Genoa, and
had rendered important service at the conclusion
of the treaty, appeared in Germany well provided
with money; the drum was beat in the streets
of Augsburg, and in a very short time twelve
companies of Landsknechts flocked to the standard
of George Frundsberg, and marched under his
orders from Glurns on the 12th of February.
He had to contend with all the difficulties of the
season, and under their severest form; the Grisoners ~
would not allow him to pass over the Valtelline, so
that he was obliged to take a much worse road,
which the labour of two hundred peasants was re-
quired to clear and level, over the Wormser Joch
to Lovere and the Lago d’Iseo; notwithstanding
which he arrived at the right moment, just as the
Swiss and French were about to attack Milan from
Monza.t

A third German army, 6000 strong, had also

* Avvisi da Trento, dated 9th July, 1521; Molini, i. p. 99.
On the 15th the order was published in Wiirtenberg. —-- Sattler,
pons '

+ Jovius, Vita Alfonsi, p. 185., names him.

+ Reissner, Historia Hern Georgen und Hern Casparen von ~
Frundsberg.

Cuar. I. - CAMPAIGN OF 1522. 315

assembled at Trent, under the command of Fran-
_ cesco Sforza; Adorno, whose personal hopes and
interests all hung on the issue of this campaign,
hurried back to lead on these troops to the scene of
action.

The French made an attempt on Milan; but
Prospero had put himself in an excellent state of
defence, both against the castle within, and the
enemy without. He belonged to the classical
school of Italy of that time, and it was affirmed
that Ceesar’s defence of Alesia had served as a
model for his operations.*

The French and Swiss took Novara, Vigevene,
and some other places; but — what was much more
important—they wereunable to prevent the junction
of Francesco Sforza with Prospero: on the 4th of
April, after an absence of twenty-two years, the new
duke entered Milan, amidst the ringing of bells, the
incessant firing of guns, and the joyous shouts of .
the whole population: a foreign yoke had now
taught them the value of a prince of their own race
and country; and they deemed that such an one
would be more solicitous for their welfare, and
more attached to their persons and interests than
a stranger. Francesco Sforza lay under the un-
fortunate necessity of beginning his reign with
demands ; nevertheless, his people vied with each

* Jovius: Pescara, p. 316. If he must have an example,
that of the Thebans when they besieged the Cadmeia, and en-
deavoured at the same time to defend themselves against Alex-
ander (Arrian, i. 7.), would be more appropriate.

316 BATTLE OF BICOCCA. Book IV.

other in the zeal with which they complied with
them. High and low brought money and money’s
worth; every body strove to show him affection,
and to obtain his favour.* An Augustine friar,
Andrea da Ferrara, fostered this spirit in the
people, by the fervid eloquence of discourses in
which he represented the French as enemies of
God.

The imperialists were thus once more in a con-
dition to appear in the field. After relieving
Pavia they took up a strong position at Bicocca,
before Milan, in the hope that their impetuous
enemy would attack them here.

Nor did they long expect in vain. As usual, the
error last committed was that now most anxiously
avoided. It was the unanimous opinion in the
French army that nothing had been wanting the
preceding autumn at Rebecca but a resolute attack,
to have ensured the victory: the Swiss, in par-
ticular, were convinced of this; they determined
not to let the opportunity slip by again, and loudly
urged their leaders to lead them on to the enemy.
Lautrec had lost his judgment and presence of
mind. Though he did not entirely approve of
the proposition of the Swiss, he did not dare re-
solutely to oppose them; he suffered himself to be
over-ruled. On the morning of the 27th of April
the Swiss and the French moved upon Bicocca.

The imperialists had encamped in a spot enclosed
by morass, hollow ways, hedges, and ditches; had en-

* Grumello, quoted by Verri, p. 223.

Cuar. I. BATTLE OF BICOCCA. OL

trenched themselves here according to the rules of
art, as in a fortification, and placed their guns on
lofty breastworks. The army consisted of the
German companies, which occupied the front under
George Frundsberg and Rudolf Hal; of Spanish
infantry, especially arquebusiers, who had remained
in Italy ever since the former wars, and had fought,
under Gonsalvo di Cordova, by the side of the
Germans ; and, lastly, of Italian Ghibellines, who
wished to see the power of the empire restored, in
order that they might avail themselves of its pro-
tection to obtain the mastery over their adversaries.
It was an army which fully represented the substan-
tial powers of Spain and Germany, as united under
the wearer of the imperial crown. Francesco Sforza,
whose interests were most immediately at stake, the
very next morning occupied a bridge which would
‘have afforded access to the camp, with Milanese
troops, horse and foot. He was accompanied by a
monk of San Marco, who proclaimed that heaven
had decreed the victory to the new duke. This
patriotic excitement was another ally of the impe-
rial cause.

On the other hand, the troops of the Confede-
ration stood now undivided on the side of the French.
As often as this had been the case before, they had
turned the scale of victory, and they were enflamed
with confidence in their present success.

Their tactic had hitherto always consisted in a
headlong, furious, straightforward onset on the camp
or the artillery of the enemy ; and this was the mode
of attack they now adopted. They formed into two

318 BATTLE OF BICOCCA. Boox IV.

large bodies; the one out of the country parts,
under Arnold von Winkelried of Unterwalden ; the
other from the cities, under Albrecht von Stein. They
would submit to no intermixture with the foreigner,
and responded to the exhortations of their leaders,
who sought to moderate their impetuosity, with
shouts and curses; according to the plan of attack,
the body from the villages was to have made the
first onset, and that from the cities the second; but
they advanced nearly in line, so as to form a right and
left wing; the Junkers, pensioners and camp fol-
lowers were forced by the cries of the multitude
to advance into the foremost ranks. Inspired by
the ferocity of savages rather than by the noble
enthusiasm of heroes, they trusted only to them-
selves and despised all discipline and guidance.
They knew that they were mercenaries, but. every
one of them was bent on doing his duty: their only
thought was to fight out the matter hand to hand;
to earn the storming money (Sturmgeld), and to con-
quer their old foes, the Swabians—the Landsknechts.

But the camp upon which they were now ad-
vancing was in a better state of defence than any
they had before attacked. As they moved forward,
their left flank experienced a fearful reception from
the enemy’s well-posted infantry, and the order of
battle was disturbed from that moment; the country
troops pressed upon those of the towns. As these,
however, did not give way, the former recovered
their ranks, and, in spite of the incessant fire of the
arquebusiers, both bodies at once charged the lines
of the imperial entrenchments.

Cuap. I. BATTLE OF BICOCCA. 319

Seeing the enemy approach, George Frunds-
berg alighted from his horse, took a halberd, and
placed himself in the ranks of the landsknechts.
They fell on their knees and prayed. Meanwhile,
the Swiss came on. ‘“ Be it so,” cried Frundsberg,
‘¢in a good hour, and in God’s name.” The lands-
knechts sprang to their feet; the Swiss advanced
in deep columns through the ditches and hollow
ways against the landsknechts, and began the
fight. ‘‘ Ha! do I meet thee there, old comrade?”
exclaimed Arnold of Winkelried, as he caught
sight of George of Frundsberg, with whom he had
formerly served; “ then by my hand must thou
die.” “ God willing,” replied Frundsberg, “ thou
by mine.” Frundsberg received a stab in the thigh ;
Winkelried was struck to the earth by a shot. The
combatants rushed forward into each other’s lines,
and were mingled in one common struggle. The
valour of Rudolf Hal and of Castelalt; of the
standard-bearer Brandesser and of Striilin’s troop,
were celebrated in song and story. But the Swiss,
too, kept their ground, which was the more re-’
markable, as they were not yet out of the range
of the artillery; they still hoped to overcome the
enemy, spite of his present advantages.

Meanwhile, the French cavalry had made an
attack on the bridge, and had been repulsed; their
retreat had borne along the troops in the rear. The
cry arose, “ The rear is running!” To the effect
of the artillery, the impossibility of carrying the
entrenchments, and the obstinate resistance of the
enemy, was now added the danger of being aban-

320 BATTLE OF BICOCCA. Boox IV.

doned. The retreat of the Swiss was characterised
by the same impetuosity as their onslaught. They
left two or three thousand men dead on the field,
but they retreated in tolerably good order.

The Italian cavalry and the Spanish infantry
now rushed out upon them from behind the en- ©
trenchments, but without doing them much injury.

Frundsberg, too, was urged to pursue them; but
he was satisfied with the repulse of so powerful an
enemy: he said that he had earned honour enough
for one day: he felt too sensibly the importance
of the victory to endanger it by a tumultuous
pursuit.*

As the military chest of the French was ex-

* In the account of this battle I have adhered to the oldest.
and simplest sources: Anshelm among the Swiss, Galeazzo
Capra among the Italians ; the historical song which I shall
publish in the Appendix, and Reissner’s Historia der Frunds-
berge, among the Germans. I am not ignorant of the ob-
jections made, especially by Bullinger, against certain passages
of the latter. The Swiss would not allow that they had been
beaten by the landsknechts, but replied to the songs in which
the Germans celebrated their deeds, others in which they de-
fended their own. One song (reprinted by Griineisen, p. 400.)
by Nicholas Manuel, which is grossly false, is very well known.
But even there it is not positively denied, as Bullinger will have
it, that the combatants fought hand to hand. According to the
information brought the next day by a Venetian spy, about
1000 men fell on the side of the imperialists. The state-
ment of Ugo Foscolo, in Sanuto’s Chronicle, vol. xxxiii., is
by no means clear. “Non si sa,” he finishes by saying,
“ chel causasse, nostri si misseno a ritirare in gran desor-
dine.” His description certainly leaves the matter in complete
obscurity.

wap, I. CONQUEST OF GENOA. 321

hausted, the Swiss were no longer to be kept in
the field; they betook themselves to their homes.
The French too now gave up the campaign as lost.
At different points, they found their way back
across the Alps. The whole Milanese territory
fell once more into the hands of the Sforzas, and
acknowledged the emperor as its feudal lord. —

This rendered it impossible for the French party
to retain its footing in Genoa. Unfortunately,
however, though powerless for any effectual resist-
ance, it was powerful enough to prevent the con-
clusion of a treaty, while it was yet time. The city
was taken and given over to pillage. The Adorni
now attained the end which they had aimed at from
the first, and got possession of the government.

In the Italian historians the share taken in this
event by the Germans appears less prominent than
it really was. The historical ballad*, however,
-circumstantially relates, “ how the eagle was once
more let loose, and many a one who had borne his
head high must now cower before it; how George
Frundsberg led an army at the Emperor’s command
towards the sea-coast to attack Genoa: willingly
do the landsknechts follow him; the Genoese feel
that they cannot withstand the imperial crown,
but the arrival of French succours under Peter
Navarra leads them to attempt it: then the cannons
are brought into the field, and are cheerily served

* « Kin Hiipsch neii lied von der Stat Genna und wie sy die
Lantzknecht erobert haben.” — “ A pretty new song of the city
of Genoa, and how it was conquered by the Landskpechie\ =e
See Varese, Storia di Genova, iv. p. 315.

VOL. II. : Y

oon CONQUEST OF GENOA. Boox IV.

by the landsknechts; there is a skirmish under
the walls; the storming party and the battle are
a sport to the Germans; it is they who conquer
the city.” There is no allusion whatever to any
foreign co-operation, to any foreign leader. It is
certain that they had the largest share both in the
victory and the plunder. ‘“ They measured the
broad cloth with their spears; they clothed them-
selves in silk and in velvet.” A number of the
wealthier families of Genoa bought an exemption
from pillage. Frundsberg was much displeased
that treasure which would have sufficed to main-
tain the army in the field for months, fell into
their hands in so disorderly amanner. He selected
out of the booty a beautiful mariner’s compass for
himself, as a memorial of the day. Great as was
the loss of the Genoese, it did not seem to affect
them much; .they had feared the far more serious
evil of a shock to their credit.*

Thus were these dependencies of the Imperial
Chamber, Genoa and Milan, after long separation, re-
annexed : a victorious imperial army, more powerful
than any that had existed since the time of Henry
VL, placed over them rulers recommended by their
hereditary claims, and by their attachment to the
empire. The result was in fact greater than the
emperor expected— greater than he would even
have ventured to aim at. At the beginning of the
year, he had aspired only to gain over the Swiss, or
even to buy their services with a yearly pension ;

* Polydorus Virgilius, Hist. Angl. 27. 64.

Crap. I. HOSTILE DESIGNS ON FRANCE. 323

now, they were defeated and repulsed. The forces of
Central Germany, which were far more at the
emperor’s command, had fought the battle and
completed the conquest.

And at this moment the prospect and the induce-
ment to enterprizes of far wider reach presented .
themselves to his view.

CAMPAIGN OF 15238, 1524. ATTACK ON FRANCE.

Tur claims of the empire extended not alone to
Italy ; they also embraced a large part of the south
of France, nor had this portion of them by any
means fallen into oblivion. The Elector of Treves
still bore the title of arch-chancellor of Arles ; in
the year 1401, Rupert had destined his son to fill
the post of vicar of that kingdom ; in 1444, Fre-
deric had summoned the dauphin to his assistance
“ag the kinsman and vicar of the Holy Roman
Empire.” At a later period, it had often been
remarked that France had neglected. to renew its fief
as feudatory of the empire.

It was likewise to be considered that Charles NG
was not merely emperor; as prince of Burgundy,
he possessed other rights which he had never re-
nounced ; he never ceased to demand the restitu-
tion of the French possessions which had been wrest-
ed from his house; the, blood and the spirit of one
of the ancient vassals of France still lived in him.

For his schemes on this’ side the Alps, Charles
now found as powerful an ally in Henry VIII. of

y 2
’

DIA: DESIGNS OF ENGLAND. Boox IV.

England as, for those on the other, in the pope.
Henry, too, had not forgotten the ancient claims of
his predecessors on France; he still retained the
title which expressed them, ana Calais was still in
the hands of the English. Immediately after the
conclusion of the treaty at Bruges, in which the em-
peror and the king mutually promised to maintain
their claims by force of arms, with combined efforts
by sea and land, Wolsey laid before his master a
long list of provinces, towns, and castles which he
meditated wresting from the French.* In the
correspondence of the king with the cardinal, it is
seriously proposed that he should invade France in
person } ; and this project is given as a reason for
endeavouring to keep the Scottish border at peace.
At one time, the English were inclined to confine
themselves within the part of France nearest to
them, from Calais to the Somme, as being easier to
maintain than the more distant Guyenne; but oc-
casionally the idea of placing the crown of France
on his own head floated before Henry’s imagination.

On hearing a report of the bad state of ittisa's in
that country, he exclaimed that “ they were making
a way for him there, as King Richard III. had
done for his father in England {: he trusted he

* Pace to Wolsey, 10th Sept. 1521. State Papers, i. 52.

t Wolsey to Henry, Sept. 1522. Ibid., p. 107.

{ More to Wolsey, p. 111. “ The kinges grace saied thathe
trusted in God to be theyre governour hym selfe, and that they
shold by thys meanys make a way for hym, as King Richard did
for his father.” 21st Sept. 1522. No one will believe that
this was the first time such an idea crossed his mind.

¥

Cuar. I. DESIGNS OF ENGLAND. 325

should govern France himself.” These thoughts
were sedulously fostered by Leo, who caused a
draft of a bull to be prepared, in which he formally
released the subjects of Francis I. from their oath
of fidelity.* On the other hand, the king, as well
as the emperor, promised him aid against the he-
retics.t It forms a link in this chain of circum-
stances, that Henry VIII.—like his cardinal, a
zealous adherent of Thomas Aquinas—broke a lance
with Luther, in behalf of that great teacher of the
church: he was delighted with the favourable re-
ception his book experienced in Rome f, and with
the title of Defender of the Faith which it procured
him.

In March, 1522, Henry VIII. caused war to be
proclaimed against the King of France, by his
herald. Already the English merchants had left
the ports, and the English students the uni-
versities, of France; very little English property
fell into Francis’s hands. In June, Lord Surrey,
admiral of both the imperial and the English fleets,
made an attack on the coast near Cherbourg; in Sep-
tember, an army from England and the Netherlands
joined and invaded Picardy ; but no considerable
results ensued either there or elsewhere: a few

* « Excommunicatio lata per Leonem Papam X. contra Fran-
ciscum I... . qua etiam subditos ejus plenissime absolvit ab
omni fidelitatis nexu etjuramento. 4th Sept. 1521.”—Du Mont,
Supplement, iii. p. 70.

+ Herbert, Life of Henry VIIL, p. 118.

t Pace to Wolsey, 27th Oct. 1521. “ Itt is to Hys Graces
grete contentacion and comforte.”

Tare

326 BOURBON. Boo. LY:

towns were plundered, and some small districts
laid waste; then came the unfavourable time of
year, and the troops retreated.

Much more brilliant were the prospects which
opened on the campaign of the following year
(1523). As in the earlier times of the monarchy,
a powerful vassal of the French crown took part
with its foes. The constable Bourbon, the second
man in the realm, proffered his assistance to the
emperor and the king. This fact is of so general
an interest, that we may be excused for dwelling
upon it somewhat at length, even in a German
history.

Louis XI., who had already found means to
reduce to subjection so many of the territories of
the great vassals, had also meditated a scheme for
bringing about the escheat of the possessions of the
house of Bourbon to the crown. On the marriage
of his daughter with Pierre de Bourbon-Beaujeu,
he extorted from that prince a promise that,
in default of male issue, he would leave to the
crown all the possessions of his house which were
alienable.* A younger branch of the house still
flourished in the person of the Count de Mont-
pensier, whom it was the king’s intention to ex-
clude from the succession.

After some time, the event which had been fore-

* « En tant qu'il le touchoit ou pourroit toucher, que tous les
duchez, contez et vicomtez de la Maison de Bourbon, advenant
qiil n’eust enfans masles de son mariage, appartinssent au Roi.”
—Extract from the original document in Pasquier, Recherches
de la France, vi. ¢. xi.

Cuap. I. BOURBON. . 327

seen actually occurred ; Duke Peter died and left
only one daughter, Countess Susanna.

Meanwhile, however, Louis XII. had ascended
the throne, and was not inclined rigidly to enforce
the claims of the crown, acquired by such question-
able means. He recognised the feudal rights of
the house of Montpensier, nor did he contest
certain of the hereditary claims of the surviving
princess; in order to prevent all dispute, he
brought about a marriage between the young
Count Charles de Montpensier and Countess Su-
sanna, and their rights were completely blended by
a mutual donation founded on a prudent and equit-
able basis.

Such was the origin of the vast power of Charles,
Duke of Bourbon. He united in his person two
principalities, two duchies, four counties, two vis-
counties, and seven considerable lordships ; his in-
eome was reckoned at 120,000 crowns; far more
than the richest of German princes then possessed.
He had strong places garrisoned by his troops; he
convoked his states, and levied taxes; to crown
all, King Francis revived the dignity of constable
in his person. He was brave, bountiful, and af-
fable; and since he had succeeded in repulsing
Maximilian’s attack on Milan in the year 1516, he
enjoyed the universal respect both of the army and
the nation. Even then his thoughts took the
highest flights ; the lineal succession to the throne
was by no means secure ; he hoped in time to ascend
+t himself. The family of Alengon, indeed, pos-
sessed nearer claims; but he flattered himself that

y 4

328 BOURBON. Boox IV.

these had been forfeited by the former rebellion of
that line. He even went so far as to solicit the
support of the republic of Venice, in case of the
king’s death.*

Events however took a totally different course.
The succession to the throne became more secure ;
the government was entirely in the hands of the
confidential servants of the king and his mother.
Bourbon was recalled from Milan, and excluded
from any share in affairs of state at home; in the
very next campaign, that of the Netherlands, the
privileges of constable were no longer granted him.
He might already be regarded as leader of the nu-
merous malcontents created by the disorders in the
government of Francis I., when, in the year 1522, his
proud and splendid station was threatened by over-
whelming danger.

His wife, Susanna, died without issue; and
although she had confirmed by fresh acts the dona-
tions made to him at her marriage, the most
formidable pretensions to her inheritance were im-
mediately put forward.

The king’s mother, Louisa of Savoy, ‘niece of
Duke Peter, and hence a member of the elder line,
made a general demand to enter upon all the rights
enjoyed by Susanna ; but scarcely was her suit

* Notes taken especially from Badoer, Relatione di Milano,
in Sanuto’s Chronicle. Bourbon explained these claims to the
envoy, adding, — “ perho in quel caso la ser™ Signoria volesse
ajutarlo.” Badoer describes him thus: “ Prosperoso, traze un
pallo di ferro molto gaiardamente, teme dio,  devoto, piatoso,
humano e liberalissimo.”

Cras TK BOURBON. 329

commenced, when the Crown itself came forward
with still more sweeping claims ; alleging not only
the promise made by Count Peter, but a multitude
of other very plausible titles. The more clear and
incontestable of these were soon declared valid ; and
even with regard to the others, the parliament
could give no other advice to the duke than that
he should endeavour to come to some arrangement
with the adverse party.* The constable saw him-
self in imminent danger of sinking to the rank of an
insignificant Count of Montpensier. But to this he
was determined not tamely to submit. He addressed
himself to that house which was then preparing to
avenge on the crown of France the violated and
oppressed rights of the great vassals. It was not
the emperor who sought him; the first advances
were made by Bourbon; and at the same moment
in which his suit began, in the month of August,
1522, he sent Adrian de Beaurain to the court of
the Netherlands, where the only surprise expressed
by Margaret was, that he had so much confidence
in so young aman.f The more perilous and un-
certain the aspect of his legal affairs, the more
earnestly did he prosecute this negotiation. To

* Gaillard (Histoire de Francois I.) has given a fuller de-
scription of the passion said to be entertained by Louisa for the
Constable Bourbon. His remarks on the suit itself in the
Appendix have somewhat more value ; yet even on this subject
he is far surpassed by Garnier, vol. xxiv. p. 17. Neither does
Sismondi make the real motives sufficiently clear.

+ Notices from the Austrian Archives in Hormayr’s Archiy.
for the year 1810. No. 6.

530 ATTACK ON FRANCE, 1523. — Boox IV.

the emperor and king nothing could be more
welcome. Beaurain went backwards and forwards
several times, and, at a later period, Sir John
Russell visited the constable in disguise, on the
part of Henry VIII.* It was agreed that a German
army should invade Burgundy, a Spanish, Lan-
guedoc, and an English, Picardy, at the same
moment, and that Bourbon should declare himself
independent. He flattered himself that he should
be able to bring into the field 500 men at arms and
10,000 foot soldiers. The emperor promised to
give him his sister in marriage, and to raise him to
the kingly rank; while he, on his side, promised to
acknowledge the king of England as his suzerain, if
the emperor should desire it.

Francis I. had just formed the determination,
since his general had been so unfortunate, to make
another attempt in person on Milan. A magnificent
army was assembled, and Admiral Bonnivet, who

* Herbert, Records, p.119. According to the extracts
in Hormayr (p. 27.), the matter was not officially announced
to the English court before the lst June, 1523 ; and, if I am
not mistaken, it was to this that Wolsey’s undated letter
among the State Papers refers (No. 78. p.148.). For what
else can the “ mervailous fordell” mean, the like of which was
not to be expected, “for the atteynyng of Fraunce?” The
league was signed the beginning of August (letter of De Praet,
dated 9th August. Ibid.). It were much to be wished that the
authentic instrument itself could be produced. The letters of
Wolsey to the English envoys in Spain, Sampson and Jerning-
ham, in Fiddes’ Collection, appended to his Life of Wolsey,
No. 69. and 70., give, in greater detail, the plans of that period.
The precise terms of the treaty I have, however, sought there
in vain.

Cuar. I. ATTACK ON FRANCE, 1523. 331

commanded the vanguard, had already advanced
to occupy the passes of the Alps: the king set out
to follow him. The allies intended to put their
plan in execution as soon as he should have left
France.

But the affair was already known to too many
not to transpire. The court of the Netherlands
feared it might get wind from England; the
English court, from the Netherlands: even in
France itself, the conspirators had been compelled
to communicate it to some not perfectly trustworthy
persons. In short, the king’s suspicions were ex-
cited, and Bourbon had to esteem himself fortunate
that he was able to escape. The king was induced
by these circumstances to commit the army of Italy
to the sole command of the admiral, and to remain
at his post, to take measures of defence against the
various dangers with which his kingdom was
threatened, from within as well as from without.

Bourbon fled through Besangon to the country of
Pfirt, whence he projected making an immediate
descent upon France. A few thousand Lands-
knechts under the Count of Fiirstenberg entered
Champagne, and occupied some fortified towns in
the neighbourhood of Chaumont and Langres * ;
Bourbon’s idea had always been that the English
should, at the same time, advance as far as possible
into the heart of the kingdom, carefully abstaining
from plunder, and appearing only in the character

* Bellay, Mémoires, i. p. 294. Petri Martyris Epp., No. 790.,
who thinks that attempts were made to bribe the German
commanders.

352 CAMPAIGN IN ITALY, 1524. Boox IV.

of liberators from the tyranny of Francis I. Then
he thought, every town would open its gates to
them.* But the landsknechts were soon compelled
to retreat, by want of money and provisions; the
combined army of English and Netherlanders con-
tinued its marchthrough Picardy, and, for amoment,
struck terror into Paris: but its leaders followed
the traditional mode of warfare, and it could no
where obtain a firm footing. The warlike ardour of
the Spaniards expended itself before Fuenterrabia,
which the French had taken. Bourbon perceived
that he could accomplish nothing for the present
on this side the Alps, and repaired to Italy.

Italy was destined to be again the field where
the fortune of war was to be decided.

When Bonnivet appeared in Lombardy with the
fine army which the king had raised to revive his
fame and regain his conquests (it was estimated at
30,000 foot and 4000 horse), the imperialists were
unable to contest the passage of the Tessino, or to
meet it in the open country. Prospero Colonna
was compelled to confine himself to the defence of
the four most important fortified towns— Como,
Cremona, Milan and Pavia.

Fortunately he had now nothing to fear from the
Italian states usually in alliance with France. Im-
mediately before the arrival of the French army,

* More to Wolsey, 20th Sept. St. P. p. 139. “ The-duke
adviseth that the Kinges army shall in the marching proclayme —
libertie, sparing the cuntre fro burnyng and spoile. The king
thought that they would soon exclaim, ‘Home! home!” if
they should also forbere the profite of the spoile.”

‘Cuap. I. CAMPAIGN IN ITALY, 1524. 330

the emperor had concluded an anti-French alliance
with the Italian powers. It was of great advan-
tage to him that his old preceptor, Adrian, now
filed the papal chair: and as he entirely dis-
claimed all the plans of conquest of his prede-
cessors—for example, the designs upon Ferrara
—the emperor on his side renounced all views
on Venice: the Venetians entered into alliance
with the emperor, the pope and the king of Eng-
land*, and promised to protect Sforza in his duchy.

Every thing now depended on the Milanese, and
it was deemed expedient, as the French were ad-
vancing, to learn their dispositions. They again
declared their entire devotion to the duke and the
empire. At the first sound of the bells on the 22d
of September, they flocked in as great numbers as
ever to the appointed place of meeting; most of
them in full armour, many who had come in haste,
unarmed.f The duke rode among the assembled
crowd. He told them he would govern them with
the mildness and magnanimity of his forefathers ;
and they, on their side, declared their willingness
to defend his cause. The aged Prospero Colonna
was a man exactly formed to keep alive these senti-
ments. He enjoyed the reputation of being equally

* We see in Paruta, p. 217., that regard to England on com-
mercial grounds had considerable effect here. Wolsey said
plainly to his master that the treaty had come to pass, “ by your
mediacion and moost for your sake.”— State Papers, No. 66.

+ Lettera di Milano, narra quelli successi de di 16 Stt. a di
22. Sanuto’s Chronicle, vol. xxxv.

334 CAMPAIGN IN ITALY, 1524. Boox IV.

zealous for the happiness of his country, and for the
power and glory of the empire. Amidst the horrors
and calamities of war, he had ever appeared in
the character of protector of the citizen and the
peasant. Now, too, he was intent upon the com-
mon good. There had been time to lay in abun-
dant stores for the winter; handmills and windmills
had been erected within the walls, and there was
wine in profusion. The fortifications, spite of
the great circumference of the city, were in ad-
mirable order. Sorties were daily made, and rarely
without the capture of prisoners: the people were
grown so daring that they often begged for leave
to go out in a mass to attack the French.*

Even independently of these adverse circum-
stances, Bonnivet saw himself compelled by frost and
snow to raise the siege, and already other and far
more formidable forces were gathering around him.

By degrees the newly recruited Italian infantry
arrived; Lannoy, the Viceroy of Naples, brought
up light and heavy cavalry; the Venetians ap-
peared in the field; but the most important re-
inforcement consisted of 7000 landsknechts, whom
the Archduke Ferdinand} had taken infinite pains
to get together under Ludwig von Lodron and

* Lettera di Gratiani, 21 Ott. in Sanuto. “ Tanto stimano
Francesi e Sguizari come se fussero tante puttane.” As to the
mention of scarcity in Milan alluded to, this could only refer
to the first days, before every thing was fully arranged.
See Gal. Capella and Carpesanus, p. 1356.

+ For this the emperor afterwards thanked him. Letter in
Bucholtz, ii. p. 264.

Cuap. I. CAMPAIGN IN ITALy, 1524. : 385

Eitelfritz von Zollern. George Frundsberg had
remained at home, but had sent his son Caspar in
his place. Some enterprising chiefs like Schiirtlin
von Burtenbach, came at their own charges. The
Marquis of Pescara, too, who commanded the
Spanish infantry with the same singular and instinc-
tive talent as Frundsberg the German, came again.
Fortunately, he arrived just at the moment of
Prospero’s death, in consequence of which the con-
duct of things devolved mainly upon him.

If, however, the imperial army was once more in
a condition to meet the enemy in the field, it had
not a moment to lose; since he too expected rein-
forcements which would restore to him his former
superiority. The king had concluded a new treaty
with the Grisons; the Bernese aided him with
money, and considerable bodies of men were on
their way from both countries.

Nevertheless, the imperialists and their allies did
not yet deem it expedient to venture on a battle ;
the Venetian Provveditore was especially opposed
to it. “I do not believe, however,” said the gene-
ral-in-chief. of the Venetians, the Duke of Urbino,
to the Provveditore, Pier da cha Pesaro, “I do
not believe that the republic maintains so many
caparisoned horses, so large a body of infantry, and
all these arms which glitter around us, for any
other reason than to do battle when it is needful.”
‘““ My lord,” replied the Provveditore, ‘what ad-
vantage would it be to the republic if we fought ?
A defeat would endanger all her possessions: vic-
tory cannot escape us if we do not fight. Were

336 CAMPAIGN IN ITALY, 1524. Boox IV.

the emperor here in person he would not give
battle.” This opinion, which convinced the general,
prevailed in every council of war from that time.
It was agreed not to attempt to oyercome the
enemy by open attack, but by strategy.

While one division of the army posted itself in
the territory of Como and Bergamo to keep off the
Grison troops, the main force, accompanied by
Bourbon, who was now invested with the rank of
Lieutenant of the empire, crossed the Tessino near
Pavia, and, by an unexpected attack, took the fortress
of Garlasco which commanded all the surrounding
country. This compelled Bonnivet to retreat across
the Tessino, and to abandon his strong encampment
of Abbiate-Grasso, that he might at least defend
Vigevene, and the fertile plains of the Lomellino,
whence he drew his provisions.* The imperialists
immediately crossed the Gogna and took Sartirana.
Whilst Bonnivet, menaced in his new position, as
he had been in his former one, prepared to drive
them thence, they got possession of Vercelli, by the
favour of the Ghibelline faction of the town, and
by that means obtained a footing on the other side

* Galeazzo Capella, lib. iii. p. 191., from whom most other
writers have drawn their information. Even Du Bellay’s is only
a version of Capella’s text, with some French additions. Anshelm
introduces some particulars about the Swiss, and Sandoval
some, but very few, about the Spaniards. In other respects they
both merely translate him. It is a great pity that no one who
knew the deeds of the Landsknechts took the trouble of
supplying the deficiencies in his narrative. Hence we know
nothing more of them in this campaign than what we gather
from the life of Sebastian Schirtlin.

Crap. I. DEATH OF BAYARD. SOC

the Sesia, so as to cut off the admiral from the base
of his operations. He had now nothing left but to
retreat to the Upper Sesia, towards Gattinara,
where a new body of Swiss were just arrived from
Ivrea. He still did not relinquish the hope, with
this reinforcement, of turning round upon the
enemy and once more offering him battle. But
even on his road he found the smaller places
occupied by the imperialists. When he reached
the banks of the Sesia, the Swiss refused to cross
to him, and he was obliged to take measures for
transporting his troops over the river. While
thus engaged, he was attacked by Pescara; uni-
versal confusion ensued ; the bridge broke down;
Gattinara was in flames; and, insignificant as was
the number of the imperialists on the other side the
river (about a thousand light horse and the same
number of foot), the loss of the French was im-
mense; nothing remained for them but once more
to abandon Italy. It was evident that the mode of
warfare by which they had, within the last thirty
years, obtained such brilliant triumphs in Italy, was
no longer available. Single deeds of arms, momen-
tary advantages, chivalrous bravery, no longer
decided the fortune of a war. The awakened
national antipathy rendered a more obstinate and
regular system of defence possible: in the field, the
calculations of strategy and the skilful use of the
arquebuss carried all before them. In this retreat
fell, among other distinguished men, the good
knight—the knight without fear and without re-
proach — Bayard, who united in his own person all
VOL. I. Z

538 DEATH OF BAYARD. Boox IV

the fair and glorious qualities of knighthood, and
presented them, for the last time, to the admiration
of friend and foe. He had always hated the arque-
busiers with all his heart, and reluctantly granted
quarter to one who fell into his hands: he was
doomed to receive his death from a bullet.* There
is something at once symbolical, and ominous of
universal change in this death, which has been
dwelt on emphatically by so many historians ; and,
indeed, in the defeat of this chivalrous army alto-
gether. Like the fall of Sickingen, they were ex-
pressions of a great revolution in human affairs.
The coat of mail was conquered by the musket, and
the massive wall of the castle fell prostrate before
the cannon.

The landsknechts took a very active part in
the pursuit. Sebastian Schiirtlin relates that for
three days and three nights they followed the enemy
to the foot of St. Bernard; they dragged the

* T will not dwell long on the circumstances attending his
death; the rather, because they appear to me doubtful. The
French (Bellay, 342.) relate that Bourbon spoke to him during his
last moments, and that Bayard reproached him with his treason.
Tt is remarkable that we find nothing of this in the life of
Bayard, Coll. Univ. xv. p. 412. But in Italy exactly the re-
verse was related, —that he died lamenting the injustice of the
king and the disorders prevailing in the French government.
Carpesanus, p. 1375.: ‘ Questus de injusta in Borbonium ira, de
fortuna et male animatorum hominum factione cuncta in Gallia
permiscente.” His feelings may have vibrated between, the two
sentiments here expressed, and both may be true. Lastly, the
Spaniards make him praise God that he died, “ en servicio de su
rey y a manos de la mejor nacion del mundo.” — Batalla de
Pabia. MS. Alb.

Cuap. I. ATTACK ON FRANCE, 1524. 339

cannon they had taken, crowned with garlands, from
the valley of Aosta to the camp. All the places
which the French still possessed in Italy imme-
diately surrendered ; their defeat was as complete
as it was possible to imagine.

As a sort of necessary consequence, the thought
immediately arose in the minds of the conquerors
that the attack on France, which had failed a year
ago, might now be attempted with greater prudence
and success. Bourbon found the imperial army in
admirable order, while his bravery excited their
respect and confidence.

The state of Italy, too, seemed to render aggres-
sive measures necessary. Either peace must be
obtained (of which there seemed little prospect) *,
or employment must be found for the King of
France. Lannoy wrote to the emperor, that the
Duke of Milan would be a costly bargain to him, if
he could not succeed in clipping the wings of his
restless neighbour. The emperor reflected that it
would be better to seek the enemy in his own
country than to await him in Italy, where the
army must be kept together at great expense, and

gave his consent.
On this occasion, as formerly, the idea of attack-

* The Instruction secréte, &c., in Bucholtz, ii. p. 503., cannot
deceive us on this point. The multitude of suggestions — and
there are no less than nine — shows how impracticable each was.
Peter Martyr observes this very justly in his Epp. 798. p. 472.
July, 1524: “Temperate hujus tam incompositi psalterii chordas.
... Dira ferri acies et humano cruore fluentes rivi has diriment
querelas.”

Z 2

340 ATTACK ON FRANCE, 1524. Book IV.

ing France at various points was entertained, but
after the experience of the former year, was quickly
abandoned. None of the parties concerned had
money enough. They esteemed themselves fortu-
nate if they could raise sufficient funds to keep the
army of Italy quiet for a few months. Bourbon
hoped to accomplish the most brilliant achievements
with this alone.

‘© Your affairs, sire,” says he, in a letter to the
emperor, ‘‘will prosper. If we are able to give
battle to the King of France, and win it, as I hope,
you will be the greatest man that ever lived, and
will give laws to the world.” *

In July, 1524, Bourbon therefore led the imperial
army, 5000 Germans under Zoilern and Lodron,
3000 Spaniards under Pescara, and a number of
Italians from Italy, into France. Francis: had no
inclination to meet these warlike and victorious
bands in the open field. Bourbon met with no re-
sistance, invested Antibes, Frejus, Hieres, andé
Toulon, and caused them to do homage to him.
He bore the title of Count of Provence, but had
taken the oath of vassalage to the King of Eng-
land.f On the 9th of August, he took Aix,

* Extract in Bucholtz, ii. p. 263.

+ Guicciardini says indeed (xiv. p. 448.), “Borbone con-
stantemente ricusd di riconoscere il re d’Inghilterra.” It is
nevertheless not the less certain that he did take the oaths, as is
stated by Herbert (p. 133.), and as we learn beyond a doubt
from a letter of De Praet in Hormayr (p. 27.). The King of
England was besides fully in the secret of the undertaking.
Richard Pace told the Venetian Suriano, that his monarch had
empowered him, by a letter of the 28th June, to strengthen
Bourbon in his intentions; indeed, that Cardinal Wolsey had

Cuap. I. ATTACK ON FRANCE, 1524. d41

the chief town of the province, and on the 19th
arrived before Marseilles, well knowing that all
his other successes were useless if he did not
obtain possession of that fortified city. He felt
of what incalculable value it would be to the em-
peror to command a harbour of such importance
between Barcelona and Genoa. Marseilles would
form the true defence of Italy, and an incomparable
basis for all future operations against France.
Beaurain had entertained the design of putting
Toulon in a state of defence for the emperor, but he
was utterly without the means.* These things
increased the ardour with which the army engaged
in the siege of Marseilles.

Now, however, it became evident how greatly
times had altered in France. Italians who knew
the country, such as Ludovico Canossa, Bishop of
Bayeux, had always predicted this change.f Spite

offered on the 28th Sept. to cause a landing to be attempted, if
that might be of any assistance. Pace excuses himself for not ac-
curately stating the amount of the succours, on the ground that the
emperor had not always done so. In the mean while we know that
John Russell brought 20,000/. into the camp before Marseilles.
That Pace went very honestly to work, is evident from this; that,
spite of all appearances, he expressed a certain suspicion of the
good intentions of the Cardinal, who, he said, was a bad man :—
“attenta la pessima natura del ditto Cardenal.” Whatever may
be the case, it is certain that the result of the expedition was
anxiously expected in England. Bourbon acknowledged no
other king than Henry VIII.
* The letter in Hormayr. He imagines that he could ac-
complish this with 10,000 ducats.
+ E.g. Lettere di Principi, i. 132. “ E siate certo che Fran-
cesi adorano il loro re, e non vi fondate nelle ribellioni altre
z 3

342 ATTACK ON FRANCE, 1524. Boox IV.

of the many causes of discontent afforded by the
king, it yet appeared that he was the object of
general adoration. On the other hand, Bourbon
had lost all credit by his treason. It must be
considered that Bourbon’s influence, powerful
as he was, had not been of sufficient duration
to acquire much strength: in most of his posses-
sions he was a new master; nor was there any
man of importance so independent of the crown as
to venture to embrace his cause. This conjunc-
ture suffices to prove to what an extent the conso-
lidation of France had been silently advancing to
its completion. - Not alone did no one rise in Bour-
bon’s favour, but the attack secured to the king
more implicit obedience and more cordial loyalty
than had been yielded him before. He was able to
levy three extremely heavy taxes, amounting in allto
five millions, one after the other. ‘The clergy con-
sented to raise contributions; the good cities granted
voluntary aids; even the nobility was fain to submit
to forced loans. What could the tardy and doubtful
payments, laboriously obtained from Spain or from
England, effect against such abundant pecuniary
resources ?* Francis. brought an army into the
field which might vie with any former one in mag-
nificence ; two thousand men-at-arms, seven thou-
sand French infantry, principally composed of the
warlike peasantry of Dauphiné, and six thousand
Swiss. In the present low state of the German go-

volte seguite in Francia, perche non vi sono pit di quei tali
principi che le causavano.”
* Garnier, xxiv. p. 102. Sismondi, xvi.

Cuap. I. ATTACK ON FRANCE, 1524. 343

vernment he had even found no difficulty in tempt-
ing a body of landsknechts to enter his service by
the offer of high pay.

While these troops assembled in the country
round Avignon, the imperialists carried on the
siege of Marseilles with great pertinacity: they
brought up the cannon fit for service, which they
had found in the places they had taken from the
French ; they excavated mines with immense diffi-
culty, and erected a battery from which they made
breaches in the walls. Pescara was conspicuous
above all in the skirmishes, in his singular dress.
He wore a red vest and hose, over which was a short
black coat without sleeves, and a hat like those
of the landsknechts, but with large waving plumes. ~
The eyes of the men followed him like a banner.
His nephew Guasto vied with him in enterprising
valour. The army was in the highest spirits up to
the middle of September ; on the 21st they intended
to storm the city. Pescara drank to his Spaniards,
and put them in good humour ; Bourbon promised
royal gratitude; the soldiers prepared themselves
for the last extremities by confession. On the other
hand, the garrison, commanded by Renzo da Ceri,
an Italian of the Orsini faction, was undaunted, and
had put the city in an excellent state of defence.
At the first preliminary attempts, the imperialists
saw with whom they had to deal. They learned
from their prisoners that mines filled with powder
were dug behind the breaches, cannon planted at
the corners of streets, and the troops posted at all

Z 4

344 ATTACK ON FRANCE, 1524. Boox IV.

the most exposed points, armed and ready for action.”
Suddenly Pescara changed his mind. ‘He who hasa
mind to eat his supper in hell,” said he, “‘may storm
the city.” A council of war was called, im which not
only the probability of a defeat before Marseilles,
but even the danger to Italy of a longer delay, were
weighed and discussed. The suspicion began to be
entertained that the king might, without troubling
himself about Marseilles, march directly upon Italy.
“Sirs,” exclaimed Pescara, ‘let him who would
preserve Italy to the emperor follow me.” Bourbon
reluctantly abandoned the hope of once more gaining
a footing in his own country; but the German
leaders, Zollern and Lodron, sided with Pescara.
On the 28th of September the siege was raised.

We shall not attempt to decide whether the
king really entertained the design attributed to him:
thus much at least is certain, —that as soon as he
heard of Bourbon’s retreat, he seized on this idea
with the greatest eagerness, and, in defiance of
any representations, determined to lead the noble
army he again beheld around him, across the Alps
without delay. He was determined to strain every
nerve for the reconquest of Milan. On the sleeves
of his body-guard were embroidered the words,
‘Once more, and no more.” + !

The two armies rivalled each other in the

* Sandoval, lib. xi. p. i. p. 598. In this place a mere literal
repetition of an old narrative entitled La Batalla de Pabia, by
which Sandoval must be here and there corrected; as, for ex-
ample, for Pisarmo, read Pisajio.

{ Carpesanus, lib. x. in Martene, v. p. 1379.

Cuar. I. FRANCIS I. IN ITALY, 1524. 345

rapidity with which they crossed the Alps. The
imperialists marched as light as possible. They
took only a part of their cannon, which they dis-
mounted and placed on mules ; the rest were buried
or sent to Toulon. They advanced in two columns,
but along the same road, so that the first always
left their quarters before the other arrived. One
day a few of the Germans had got drunk and
could not march. Pescara set fire to the house in
which they lay, without pity, and burned them in
it ; he would not leave one man in the hands of the
peasants, whose vengeance he feared to irritate.
Thus they passed Nice, Ventimiglia, and the
Maritime Alps, considerably reduced in external
appearance, but not dispirited: they had suffered
no defeat: they were followed by a long baggage-
train, consisting of all the spoils of the wars of pre-
ceding years.

Meanwhile Francis I. marched at the head of his
fresh and brilliant army across the Upper Alps,
Briangon, Pignerol, &c.; and so, without halting, to
the plains of Lombardy. He hoped still to be
beforehand with the imperial army.

A Milanese chronicle affirms that the two armies
crossed the Tessino on the same day; the French
at Abbiate Grasso, the imperialists in the neigh-
bourhood of Pavia.*

Be that as it may, the imperialists were at a great
disadvantage. They could not take possession of
Milan, where the plague had broken out. Fran-
‘cesco Sforza said he was not a bird to let himself

* Martino Verri, in P. Verri, iii. p. 241.

346 SIEGE OF PAVIA. Boox IV.

be shut up in that cage. They left a garrison in
the castle only; the other troops were divided —
between Pavia, Lodi, and Cremona. The powerful
body of troops which a few months before appeared
about to make the emperor lord of the world,
had suddenly vanished from the field. Maestro
Pasquino published an advertisement at Rome,
setting forth that an imperial army was lost in the
Alps; the honest finder was requested to bring it
to the owner, and a handsome reward offered. The
French were undisputed masters of the country.
They prepared to conquer the fortified towns, and
in the first place, Pavia. The attack on France,
which was to banish Francis to the other side of the
Alps, had only served to knit together all the
energies of his kingdom, and to secure to him the
ascendancy in Upper Italy.

BATTLE OF PAVIA.

The affairs of the emperor were not, however, in
so desperate a condition as they appeared to be.
He had now, as before, Germans in his service, and
could without difficulty procure more.

In forming the design of laying immediate slege
to Pavia, Francis I. was actuated by the hope
that he should be able to seduce the Germans who
formed the garrison to desert to his side. But
he was destined to become better acquainted with
their character. The two colonels, Zollern and
Lodron, were under manifold obligations to the

Cuar. I. SIEGE OF PAVIA. 347

House of Austria, and even the captains had passed
a considerable time under the imperial banner. I
shall not attempt to say what course they would
have pursued had they now had to take service for
the first time ; but itis certain that not one of them
was disposed to abandon the cause which he had
espoused.* Nor was the Ghibelline city of Pavia
at all the place to suggest thoughts of such a kind.
There, women of high rank might be seen taking a
part in the labours on the fortifications; the wealth-
iest citizen, Matteo Beccaria, had raised a com-
pany at his own cost, and of his own retainers ;
when scarcity began already to be felt elsewhere,
he gave the officers a splendid feast, and even the
common soldiers never wanted “ white bread and
cool wine.” Antonio Leiva, the imperial com-
mander, in praising the young Caspar Frundsberg,
who had now risen to the rank of captain, says
that he had kept him himself in good spirits.
Antonio Leiva, too, was exactly fitted for emer-
gencies of this kind; equally prudent and resolute,

* Sandoval, indeed, mentions that Zollern had meditated
treason, and had been therefore poisoned at a feast. This is also
alluded to by G. Capella, yet with the addition, “ multi exis-
timavere,” which has also been repeated by others, with more or
less qualification. According to the account of Txgius, phy-
sician and knight, who remained in Pavia during the siege (De
Obsidione Urbis Ticinensis, ed. Pez, p. 9.), Zollern died “ post
longas vigilias et assiduos labores ex tabida febre xvi. Cal. Febr.”
It was said in Pavia that he was related to the imperial family :
“ aliquali effinitate cum Cesare conjunctus.” He is celebrated
in the songs of the time as the person who took the most active
part in the defence of the town.

348 SIEGE OF PAVIA. Boox IV.

devoted to the emperor’s cause, and capable of
any sacrifice; he took the gold chain from his
own neck and gave it to be coined into ducats.
The Germans derived great advantage from their
skill as miners*; while the river opposed an in-
superable obstacle to the king, the attempt to
turn the course of the Tessmo having totally failed,
as might indeed have been expected. In short,
in January, 1525, he found that he could do no
more than surround the town, with a view to
starve it into submission.t He despatched some
thousand men under the Duke of Albania with
orders to attempt a diversion in central or lower
Italy.

Meanwhile fresh troops descended the Alps from
Germany. Bourbon had sold the jewels which he
had saved in his flight, and had then gone to In-
sbruck and to Augsburg. Supported by Archduke
Ferdinand, he now brought eighteen companies of
landsknechts under Marx Sittich of Ems over the
mountains. Count Nicholas of Salm accompanied
them with two hundred horses of the retainers of
the court. At the same time the viceroy of
Naples sold every thing for which he could find a,

* Carpesanus ascribes the destruction of a bridge, “Germanis,
ingeniosis viris.” 'Tsgius gives high praise on this account to
Gliirns, who “ instrumentis ferreis mirabili arte in medio re-
scindit” this same bridge.

+ Lettera di Pavia, 10 Genn. Chr. Ven. MS. It was under-
stood, ‘“ che il re X™° avea deliberato di non voler pit: dar bat-
taglia a Pavia per non far morir gente, ma volea tener quella
assediata et in simil modo averla.”

Cuar. I. SIEGE OF PAVIA. 349

purchaser, and sent a messenger with the money
directly to George Frundsberg, who regarded the
emperor’s Italian power (which he himself had
helped to establish) with the most intense interest ;
and who had a yet stronger motive in the thought
that it was his own son whom he was going to
relieve. The day after Christmas he mustered
eleven companies at Meran: he was surrounded by
twenty-five distinguished captains and brother-
soldiers of good family ; — younger sons, or gentle-
men without inheritance, followed by a retinue of
peasants’ sons, who, like themselves, could find no
employment at home. On the 21st of January,
the two divisions joined the Italian army at Lodi.*

They saw the necessity of taking the field im-
mediately. In spite of all the exertions that had
been made, there was not money enough forth-
coming to keep the troops quiet for any con-
siderable time. Most of them had received nothing
but their marching money, and had only engaged
to serve for a certain fixed period without
pay. Pavia, too, must be relieved. On the 4th of
February, the army arrived in the neighbourhood
_of that city, threw into it a few troops with
munitions of war, and did every thing they could
to provoke the king to quit his strong encampment.

These efforts were, however, vain. The king
would not abandon the strong position he had
taken up in the park near Pavia: it was well

* Reissner, Historia Herrn Georgen und Herrn Casparn von
Frundsberg, p. 38. See G. Barthold’s Frundsberg.

350 BATTLE OF PAVIA. Boox IV.

fortified *, the army was in comfortable quarters,
and abundantly supplied with provisions. He
thought it more advantageous to wait for an attack,
as at Marignano, than to make it, which had
proved so disastrous to his army at Bicocca.

On the other hand the imperialists were forced
by want, both of money and provisions, to resolve
on attacking.t They thought it as disgraceful
to disperse in sight of the enemy, as to suffer a
defeat. “God grant me a hundred years’ war,
and not one battle,” said Pescara ; “ but now there
is no escape.” He went into the midst of his
Spaniards, and represented to them that they had
not a foot of land they could call their own, nor a
bit of bread for the morrow; “ but there, before
you,” added he, ‘is the camp, where there is bread
in plenty, and meat and wine and carp from the
Lago di Garda. We must have it; we must drive
out the enemy; we will make St. Matthew’s day
memorable.” Already had George Frunsdberg
addressed his Germans in a similar strain. With
uplifted hands they had promised him to do their

* Extrait des lettres écrites en Allemand A Monseigneur
PArchidue Ferdinand par Messire George de Fronsberg. Ur-
kundenbuch zu Buckholtz, Ferdinand, i. p. 1.

} In an anonymous account of that time, Lettere di Principi, i.
p.153., and from thence transferred by Sismondi to his Hist. de
France, xvi. p. 282., it is said indeed, that, two days before the
battle, 150,000 scudi reached the camp from Spain: this, how-
ever, must be a false statement. In Pescara’s despatch it is ex-
pressly said, “De ninguno canto nostra necessidad tenia rimedio.”
He had foreseen “que deshazer el exercito a lavio del enemigo
era tan mal como perdillo con batalla.”

Cuar. I. BATTLE OF PAVIA. 351

best against their splendid foe, and to succour their
brethren in Pavia.

This was not likely to be one of those brilliant
battles in which two chivalrous armies were wont
to contend for the prize of honour; a needy band
of mercenaries, urged by hunger and _privation,
and counting the days of the service they had con-
tracted for, must be led on to the assault, or they
would disperse. Their objects were, to plunder
the rich camp of the enemy, to relieve their brothers
in arms, and once for all to secure the possession of
the often conquered land. Circumstances were
most unfavourable to them. .“ Either,” writes
Pescara to the emperor, “ your majesty must gain
the desired victory, or we shall fulfil by our death
the duty of serving you.”

Pescara’s plan was to surprise the enemy by night.
In the middle of the park was the farm of Mirabella,
where the market of the camp was commonly held;
and a part of the cavalry was posted at this point.
He wished, if possible, to effect a junction with the
garrison of Pavia. About midnight they began to
pull down the walls of the park. Two thousand
Germans of the regiments of Frundsberg and of Ems,
and a thousand Spaniards, with linen shirts over
their coats of mail, were to fall on the camp. But
the walls were stronger than they thought ; it was
daylight before they had made breaches sufficiently
large to pass through. When, at length —on the
morning of the 24th of February —the troops
pressed through, the French were fully prepared,

=

ooe BATTLE OF PAVIA. Boox IV.

and in motion.* One point was gained,—namely,
that they left their strong position and came out
into the open ground on the heath; but the im-
perial army itself incurred the greatest danger. The
division of the landsknechts, as they were marching
up, were within range of the very superior artillery of
the French, and suffered great loss; the light cavalry,
too, were in disorder. King Francis, who rushed
into the thick of the fight at this point and killed a
brave knight with his own hand, was delighted
when he saw some companies broken and fleeing
before him. ‘‘ To-day,” said he to his companion,
reining up his horse to let him recover breath, “ I
call myself Lord of Milan.” His army advanced in
the best order, the artillery keeping up an uninter-
rupted fire.

But the moment which seemed that of victory,
was, in fact, but the beginning of the battle. Pescara
had rallied round him the three thousand men, who
were now unable to effect any thing, in consequence
of the non-appearance of their friends from Pavia ;
and they were gradually joined by the two large
bodies under the command of George Frundsberg,
and Marx Sittich of Ems. Frundsberg, with his
companions, the Counts of Ortenburg, Hag, Virne-
burg, and the Lords of Losenstein and Fleckenstein,

* « Hpitre du Roy traitant de son partement de France et de
sa prise devant Pavie,” in Lenglet and Gobel, p. 30. :
“ Au matin ils feirent leur entrée...
Et nous aussi estions ja en bataille.”
+ Lettera di Paulo Luzasco al S" Marchese di Mantua, ac-
cording to a statement of the king himself, in the Appendix.

Cuap. I. BATTLE OF PAVIA. 300

and by his side Marx Sittich, now formed the left
wing*; Pescara, with his Spaniards and two thou-
sand Germans, the right. The cavalry near him
had also recovered its order. As it was manifestly
no match for the French, Pescara and Frundsberg
ordered fifteen hundred arquebusiers to support it. ’
The viceroy, who had always been of opinion that
they might entrench themselves opposite to the
enemy in the park, now clearly perceived that this
was impossible. ‘There is no help but in God’s
mercy,” said he: “Sirs, do as I do;” so saying, and
crossing himself, he put spurs to his horse and
charged the enemy.
The mélée thus began on the right wing, where
a part of the French men-at-arms, the king at their
head, fought with the Spanish-Italian horse, and
Saln’s reiters; in the centre, but somewhat further
off, other French horsemen under Alencon advanced
with twenty-eight companies of Swiss: against Pes-
cara and Guasto with their Spaniards and Germans,
the black companies (as the Germans from Gueldres
and Lorraine in the king’s service were called), ad-
mirably supported by artillery, moved upon the

* “This appears from the despatch of Frundsberg, “ Moy
et ma bande tirasmes 4 la main senestre vers le dite Marchsith
contre les dits Francois.” There is also to be found the number
of arquebusiers, who were generally supposed to amount to
500, ‘Tegius mentions as many, but it may have been only the
Spaniards. That the landsknechts were armed with arquebusses
is proved, among other things, by the line of the song — “ Fire
into them, you good landsknechts” (“ Schiesst Drein, schiesst
Drein, ihr frumme Landsknecht”),—Soltau, p. 250.

VOL. Il. AA

354 BATTLE OF PAVIA. Boox IV.

left wing of the imperialists, consisting of the two
great bodies of landsknechts.

On this point the first decisive stroke was struck.
The Germans in the service of France, and the im-
perialists, were those between whom the bitterest
and most determined hatred prevailed. An Augs-
burger, named Hans Langenmantel, stepped from
the ranks of the former, and challenged the two
German colonels to single combat. But he was
held unworthy to do battle with them, in conse-
quence of his having taken service under the French,
and was instantly felled to the ground and killed.
A landsknecht held up his hand, severed from the
body and covered with rings of gold, as a trophy.
Upon this the combat became furious. Marx Sittich,
by a rapid evolution, threw himself on the flank of
the black companies.* They made a most gallant
defence, and were killed almost to a man. Their
cannon fell into the hands of the imperialists.

Meanwhile the centre had advanced. Already

* «“ Kin schéns netiwes Lied von der Schlacht newlich vor
Pavia geschehen ” — “ A beautiful new song of the battle lately
fought before Pavia,” by no means poetical, but very accurate,
which is proved by its accordance with Frundsberg’s despatch :
“Da das ersachen die Lanntzknecht, bey dem Frantzosen, mer
kendt rechtt, zugendt vnns vnnder augen, Herr Jérgen Hauff
gryffenn sie an, vnnd thitten in nitt fragenn. Da dz ersach
Herr Marxen hauff an disem orth, gryffen sie drauff gar tapfferlich
durchtrungen.” — “When the landsknechts perceived this
among the French, taking good note and marching past us, the
Lord George’s troop attacked them without asking their leave.
When the Lord Marx’s troop saw this at this place, they at-
tacked right bravely, and forced their way through.”

Crap. I. BATTLE OF PAVIA. 355

the arquebusiers had made a fearful impression on
the men-at-arms, for no armour was stout enough
to resist the fire of their matchlocks, when Pescara,
at the head of his Spanish veterans, attacked the
Swiss.* The fight now became general; the fury
of the attack, the effect of the fire-arms on the
cavalry, the sight of the defeat of the black com-
panies, and the rush of the victorious squadron of
the imperial Germans, threw the French centre
into confusion. Alencon was the first of the men-
at-arms who took to flight; a part of the Swiss
were hurried along with him; a part had their
ranks broken: at this moment the garrison of
Pavia appeared in the rear of the disordered French
troops, and an universal flight followed.

The gallant king was spurring his charger along
the right wing, under a heavy fire from the arque-
busiers, when he looked round and saw his people
in full retreat. “My God, what is this?” ex-
claimed he. He thought, at least, to rally the
Swiss, and hastened after them. But the decided
superiority of the enemy rendered this impossible.
Even he himself was borne along with the retreating
torrent. He wore on his arm an embroidered scarf,
given to him in happier days in France by the lady
of his love, to whom, in return, he had vowed

* His own despatch, agreeing with the statement of the king
in Luzasio. When he says that he sent Guasto with the Ger-
mans against the king’s landsknechts, it is only to be under-
stood that Guasto had a share in Sittich’s onslaught. The
German accounts prove that he and Frundsberg contributed
greatly to the success of this attack.

AA 2

356 BATTLE OF PAVIA. Boox IV.

never, under any circumstances, to give way before
the enemy.* True knight as he was, he retreated
as slowly as possible, and not without continually
facing round in an attitude of defence ; he was now
overtaken by the pursuing Germans. Nicholas
von Salm stabbed his horse under him; the king fell,
and was compelled to surrender. At this moment
the viceroy came up, reached out his hand to him
respectfully, and took him prisoner.

Within an hour and a half, the most magnificent ,
army that the world could then behold was annihi-
lated. It was calculated that ten thousand men were
left dead on the field, or drowned in the waters of
the Tessino: among them many Swiss, the ancient
fame of whose arms, established in the Burgundian
wars, was now obscured for ever. The leaders of
the French, with few exceptions, were killed or
taken prisoners: above all, their puissant monarch
had fallen into the hands of the enemy. Never was
a victory more complete and triumphant.f

* <« T/heureux présent, par lequel te promys
point ne fuir devant mes ennemys.— Epitre du Roi.”

+ In this account of the battle, I have not thought myself
bound to adhere exclusively to the earlier historians, such as
Capella, Guicciardini, Jovius, and Bellay. I have also avoided
all that Reissner has borrowed from Jovius, as we are now
enabled to draw more authentic information from the despatches
of the commanders themselves: 1. those of Frundsberg in
Bucholtz, identical with an old German edition. “ Wahrlicher
Bericht,” &¢e. (“ True Account,” &c.) which, however, I never
saw: 2. those of Pescara in the Appendix: 3. those of Francis I.
in the letters of Luzasco in the Appendix and in the Epitre.
Besides these, there exists a detailed Spanish account, which

Cuap. I. CHARLES V. out

The victors seized on the plunder of the camp,
to satisfy their most pressing wants. They were
at length lords and masters in the state of Milan,
and had no fresh attack to fear. The Italian
powers who, so long as things were in suspense,
maintained a very doubtful attitude, now called to
mind their old engagements, and consented to pay up
the arrears of subsidies they had promised, so that
the army at last gradually received its well-earned
pay.

But the fears of some, the hopes of others, and
the attention of all, were now turned upon the
young emperor, for whom this victory had been |
won; while he, in tranquil retirement in Castile,
had been slowly recovering from the quartan ague
which had long tormented him.

Charles V. was standing in a room of the palace
in Madrid, talking of the state of things in Italy, and
of the situation of his army, which he still felt to
be very dangerous, when a courier from that army
arrived. Without announcing to any one the
tidings with which he was charged, he walked
in: he chose to deliver them first to the emperor
in person. “ Sire,” said he, “there has been
a battle before Pavia. Your Majesty’s troops
have gained the victory: the French army is de-
stroyed ; the king himself is a prisoner, and in your
majesty’s power.” Great and unexpected good
fortune has at the moment the same effect as a

has been used by Sandoval, and which contains some remarkable

passages. The song before quoted, which I intend to print in the

Appendix, is a bulletin in verse, and therefore worthy of credit.
AA 3

358 CONSEQUENCES OF THE Boox IV.

sudden calamity. While Charles listened to these
words, the blood seemed congealed in his veins,
and for a few moments he did not speak. When
at length he found utterance, he only repeated,
“The King of France is in my power — the
victory is mine!” Hereupon he retired into the
adjoining chamber, where his bed stood, and kneeling
down before an image of the Holy Virgin, tried
to raise his thoughts to God and to the greatness
of his vocation. He caused processions to be made
and prayers to be offered up, that God would be
pleased to grant him still higher favour in the
war he meditated with the infidels. He spoke
of an expedition against Constantinople and Jeru-
salem.*

Projects of this kind, however, were yet at a
vast distance. The immediate concern was to
improve the present moment.

The first idea which presented itself was, that
the great victory could in no way be turned to so
much advantage as by a renewal of the so-often-
attempted invasion of France.

The Duke of Bourbon began immediately to
make preparations for carrying this into execution.

The King of England was urgent in his per-
suasions to the same effect. The instructions
drawn up by Henry VIII., for an embassy which
he sent to the emperor in consequence of the battle
of Pavia, are extremely curious, and show how
far that monarch’s views extended. He expresses

* Letter of the Mantuan envoy Suardin to the Margrave of
Mantua, 15th March, 1526. Sanuto, vol. xxxviii.

Cuap. I. BATTLE OF PAVIA, 359

his opinion that the King of France should, under
no conditions, be reinstated on the throne ; — there
are none, he says, that Francis will observe: he
requires that he should be absolutely deprived of
the crown. With regard to a successor, there can,
he says, be no question as to Bourbon, who could
neither plead any defensible claim, nor afford the em-
peror any satisfactory guarantee ; on the other hand,
the King of England had the best and most incon-
testable right to the French crown,—a right, indeed,
already recognised by the emperor. In the course
of the next summer, Charles might attack France
in person from the side of Spain, while he would
do the same from that of England: he would assist
him with large subsidies; no formidable resistance
was now to be feared, and he hoped to meet his
imperial majesty in Paris. If he were once
crowned in that city, he would accompany the
emperor to Rome to be present at his coronation.
All that had been wrested from the House of Bur-
eundy or the empire should be restored to him;
nay, even eventually France and England itself, if,
in conformity with the existing treaties, he married
the youthful Princess Mary. At first he had affected
to raise difficulties on this head, but in the end he
consented to give his daughter, who was yet a child,
into the guardianship of the emperor till she should
be of age to marry.*

* Fiddes, in his Life of Wolsey, 346—352., quotes at length
the instruction to Tunstall and Wingfield. Herbert, p. 168.,
gives avery imperfect notice of it. Robertson, vol. iv., who had
only read Herbert and not Fiddes, treats it all as a sort of pre-

AA 4

360 CONSEQUENCES OF THE Boox LV

From time to time, projects like this are revived
-in Europe,— either of the universal dominion
of a single nation, or of a partition of power be-
tween two preponderant states; but though at a
distance they seem to threaten universal convul-
sion, they are invariably wrecked against the massive
strength of existing institutions.

Young as the emperor was, he was of far too
sedate a character to be carried away by such
extravagant propositions. Nor had England by
any means afforded him such a degree of assistance
in the war, as would have warranted her claiming
- so large a share of the fruits of victory. The secret
negotiations which the cardinal had carried on with
France were well known in Spain.

Chancellor Gattinara advised the emperor to
answer, that it would be unseemly to make war
upon an enemy who could not defend himself; and
that neither did the interests of peace require any
such proceeding. He thought that if the King of
England resolved to try his fortune, the best way
to thwart his schemes were to send him no assist-

text. But it is only necessary to read Wolsey’s letter to the
king, dated 12th Feb., 1525 (State Papers, p. 158.), where he
already reckons on victory, to be convinced that people promised
themselves honour .and advantage from this course. “ The
matters succeeding to the advantage of the imperiallis, the thanke,
laude, and praise shal comme unto Your Grace.” It is impossible,
however, to agree with Fiddes, who denies that any arrangement
with France had been already entered into. The same letter
throws light upon this. If France were victorious, Wolsey says
he had provided against that event “ by such communications
as be set furth with France aparte.”

Cuap. I. BATTLE OF PAVIA. 361

ance. He esteemed a union of France and Eng-
land in the highest degree dangerous to the empire
and to Europe: his idea was to maintain the
independence of the throne of France, but at the
same time to establish for ever the supremacy of
Austria. A project drawn up by his hand, which
is to be found in the Austrian Archives*, goes di-
rectly to the same decisive object which he already
contemplated in the year 1521. The king was to
renounce all his claims on Italy, both on Milan and
Naples; further, to restore Burgundy to the house
to which it appertained ; and, lastly, to acknowledge
the rights of the empire over the south of France.
To Provence he made a direct claim, as ‘an ap-
purtenance of the empire:” the-emperor’s intention
was to grant this in fee to the Duke of Bourbon.
Dauphiné, too, might be demanded back, because
the renewal of the investiture had so long been
neglected; but the emperor was disposed to leave
this to the successor to the throne of France, pro-
vided always that he married a princess of the
house of Austria. If Francis I. accepted these
conditions, he would certainly be too much sunk
and enfeebled to be an object of dread. The
emperor’s supremacy would then be establised on
an immutable basis: he would have no rival re-

maining who could attempt to measure himself
against him. A feeling pervaded the whole West,
that the emperor was the predestined ruler of

* In Bucholtz, ii. p. 280. ‘To the same intent are the de-
mands which occur in a letter of the emperor to the king’s
mother. Papiers d’état de Granvelle, i. p. 264.

362 MISUNDERSTANDINGS BETWEEN Boox IV.

Europe. <A Neapolitan description of the battle of
Pavia concludes with the words, “ Thou hast
placed the world under his feet.” ‘ Now,” said
Wolsey, to one of Charles’s ambassadors, ‘“ your
master will be emperor no longer in title, but in
fact also.” ‘‘ The counsels of God,” exclaims a
minister of the pope, ‘‘ are a deep abyss.”

Such a prospect was not, however, welcome to
all. No man had ever yet assumed a station of
this kind in Europe without exciting the animosity
and the resistance of all that had a feeling of
independence. The King of England was, of course,
offended by the emperor’s refusal to accede to his
proposals, and every moment increased the coolness
between them. But this was not all. In another of
the emperor’s allies—the Papal States— opposition
to his schemes arose. Indeed, the exclamation
of a papal minister which we have just quoted
savours more of the terror of one who feels himself
menaced, than of the sympathy of an ally. For
some time past misunderstandings of a very serious
nature had arisen between the pope and the em-
peror. They originated, indeed, merely in a question
of territory, but soon assumed the character of one
of the most important features in the affairs of the
times.

MISUNDERSTANDINGS BETWEEN THE POPE AND THE
EMPEROR.

When Leo X. concluded his alliance with the
emperor, it was, as we have seen, with a view of

Cuap. I. THE POPE AND THE EMPEROR. 363

getting possession of all the countries which were
still claimed by the see of Rome, especially Ferrara:
in this the emperor promised him his assistance.

On the sudden death of Leo, the Duke of Ferrara
caused a medal to be struck, with the inscription,
“The lamb rescued from the jaws of the lion.”
But he was not only rescued; he found occasion,
during the vacancy of the Holy See, to get pos-
session of Reggio and Rubiera. Over Adrian VI.
he gained such an influence, that that pontiff
renewed his fief, in spite of these encroachments.

Adrian’s successor, however, Clement VII., was
of a totally different way of thinking: no sooner
were the French driven out of Italy in 1524, than
he asked the imperialists to assist him against the
duke, and, in the first place, to expel the latter
from Reggio.

This, however, they did not consider themselves
bound to do. Their thoughts were exclusively
bent on the invasion of France, and they wished to.
excite no troubles in their rear. The viceroy
answered, that if the pope loved the emperor, he
ought rather to complete his satisfaction by giving
him back Modena.* ‘
This suggestion was deeply offensive to the pope.
If he had not latterly contributed much to the
success of the common cause, the share which he

* Giberti agli oratori in Spagna 22 Ott. 1524. The duke’s —
retreat, after having made a short advance, was ascribed entirely
to the imperialists : “Che tal mutatione del duca e determinatione
di non rendere & processa del vicere.”—Sanga, 21 Nov.
Lettere di principi 21 Nov.

364 MISUNDERSTANDINGS BETWEEN Boox IV.

had personally taken in the conquest of Milan was
still fresh in his memory. Was this now to turn
exclusively to the profit of the empire ? was the
papacy not only not to obtain the extension of ter-
ritory it desired, but to give up cities it had for-
-merly possessed ?

So long as the imperial arms were successful in
Provence, Clement was silent; but scarcely could
he have received the news of the retreat of Bourbon
from Marseilles, than he sent an envoy (the same
Geronimo Aleander who is already well known to
us) to the King of France *; and*as soon as Francis
touched the soil of Italy, Giberti, the pope’s most
confidential minister, who had always been regarded
as in the French interest, went to meet him; in
order, as his credentials set forth, “to negotiate
concerning things and plans which touch the honour
and advantage both of the pope and the king.” +
The course and the result of their negotiations are
not accurately known; but thus much is certain,
that a treaty was agreed on, the basis of which was,
that the king should retain possession of Milan.
In this case the king promised not to demand the
restitution of Parma or Piacenza ; to import the salt
for the consumption of Milan from the papal salt-
works (a source of considerable revenue to the
apostolic chamber), and to support the pope against

* His credentials, dated 14th Oct. 1524, are to be found in
Molini, i.177. “ Magnis de rebus christianeque reipublice
hoc tempore non solum salutaribus sed etiam necegsariis.”

} For Montmorency, dated 30th Oct. Ibid. p.178. “Mit-
tentes Gibertum ad regem pro rebus ac consiliis utriusque
nostrum honorem et commodum spectantibus.”

Cuap. I. THE POPE AND THE EMPEROR. 365

his rebellious vassals; —meaning, no doubt, Ferrara.*
On Giberti’s return, people remarked that he never
went to the pope without the head-dress which
then distinguished the French; the pages of the
palace were dressed in the French fashion, and
French officers were allowed to recruit in Rome
in aid of the Duke of Albania, who had undertaken
an expedition against Naples: the Germans at the |
papal court were persuaded that the pope had even
made a grant of Sicily and Naples to the king.+
This was an error: it was impossible that the
sovereignty of the French in Naples could be
agreeable to the pope. His view, doubtless, was
- only to favour a diversion which promised to restore
the balance of power in Italy{; but even this de-
sign, his whole demeanour, his undeniable defection
in the moment of danger, awakened the hostility of
the imperial commanders. They rejected his offers
of mediation with disdain. ‘He who is not for
me,” writes the viceroy to him, “is against me.”

* The articles of this treaty have never been published in an
authentic form; nevertheless the pope communicated them
to the Archduke Ferdinand, and in this form Spalatin has pre-
served them. Annales in Mencken Scriptt., ii. p. 641.

+ Ziegler Historia Clementis VII. in Schellhorn Amecenitates,
ii. p. 872. Ziegler was then present at the court.

t Fr. Vettori says that the treaty made by the mediator of
Alb. Carpi had reference only to the free passage of the troops.
« Solo a questo che il papa la (gente) lasciasse passare, pagando
quello aveva bisogno ; et il papa stimo certo, che chome questa
gente del re si metteva in camino, che gli imperiali si dovessino
ritirare verso Napoli, onde seguirebbe che Francesco divente-
rebbe Signore di Milano... . et ciascuno di loro avrebbe cura
che Yaltro non diventassi maggiore in Italia.

3866 MISUNDERSTANDINGS BETWEEN Boox IV.

Frundsberg drove a papal agent out of his presence
at the point of the sword, and anxiety as to the
effect of the papal intrigues certainly hastened on
the battle: the imperialists threw on the pope the
whole blame of the dilatoriness of the Venetians in
fulfilling their engagements.*

This state of things sufficiently explains the
painful impression made at Rome by the news of
the king’s defeat ; and indeed Frundsberg actually
recommended making an immediate attack on the
pope in person. Letters were received in the eccle-
siastical States from the other generals, full of
threats, and imperial troops instantly invested the
territory of Piacenza. Clement. VII. avowed that
he had been influenced solely by this sort of coer-
cion to pay the imperialists 100,000 ducats, and
to conclude a fresh treaty with them.f

Unfortunately, too, we have no authentic copy
of this treaty; but from the state papers which
were afterwards exchanged, it appears that in some
articles the pope stipulated for the same conditions
as had been granted to him by the king. He de-
manded the monopoly of salt in the Milanese, the
recognition of his claims on Reggio, and assistance
in the prosecution of them. He did not doubt that
the emperor would accede to these demands.

But one of them was no longer possible. Arch-

* Contarini Relatione di Spagna, 1525. Al papa davano
principalmente la colpa, che V. Celsitudine fosse andata cosi ri-
tenuta con §. M’.

} Instruttione al C'. Farnese. Fiirsten und Volker, iv. App.
15, (Ranke’s History of the Popes, vol. iii. App. p. 32.)

Cuap. I. THE POPE AND THE EMPEROR. 367

duke Ferdinand, who had conducted himself so
meritoriously in the last expedition, had taken
advantage of the favourable moment to conclude a
treaty with Francesco Sforza, in virtue of which
Milan was to purchase its salt from Austria.* This
was the first solid advantage Austria derived from
her sovereignty in Lombardy.

Nor would the emperor accede to the other con-
dition. He had no mind to make a forcible attack
on the Duke of Ferrara. Moreover, the feudal
rights of the empire came into collision, on this
ground, with those of the See of Rome. These the
emperor would on no account surrender. He
accepted the treaty in the main, but these particular
articles he refused to ratify.

“As our sovereign lord now saw,” says a sub-
sequent papal instruction, “that he was betrayed ;
that, contrary to all expectation, his footing with
the emperor was worse and worse, he lent an ear
to the old assertion, that the emperor’s design was
entirely to subjugate Italy; he, therefore, deter-
mined to ally himself with those who had a com-
mon cause with him, in order to avert the danger
which threatened him. t

It is evident, therefore, that the real questions at
issue related to the north of Italy. The pope put
forward financial claims on Milan, and territorial
ones on Ferrara; and these the emperor refused to
admit.

* Rescriptum ad criminationes.
{ The fore-mentioned Instruttione, (Ranke’s History of
the Popes, App. p. 32.)

368 MISUNDERSTANDINGS BETWEEN Boox IV.

Let us examine the conduct of Charles V. By
his treaties of 1521, he was bound to make an
attack both on France and on Ferrara. His allies,
on their side, thought themselves warranted in
claiming a share of the advantages of the victory.
But their co-operation had been trifling, their be-
haviour, latterly, equivocal; and hence the emperor
thought himself exonerated from all these obli-
gations. The victory was due to his arms alone,
and alone he would reap the fruits of it: what
inducement could he have to expose himself to new
dangers in order to aggrandise allies of so doubtful
a kind ?

The situation of the pope was in effect the same
as that of England ; it marks the spirit of the age,
that the pope was the first who had the courage to
oppose the rising power which threatened to become
universal. He was afraid the empire might once
more become too powerful for the church ; and the
idea of the independence of Italy haunted him as
it had done Julius Il. The popes had hitherto
always given the impulse which led to great poli-
tical changes, and their views had generally been
carried out. Clement VII. ventured to present
himself as the centre of the opposition to Charles V.

His first object necessarily was to bring about a
reconciliation between England and France. Ags
early as the 8th of March, Ludovico Canossa, in
concert with Giberti*, began to move in this

_ * See a later letter of Giberti, Lett. di pr. i, 171.

Crap. I. THE POPE AND THE EMPEROR. 369

affair in France. On the 16th of March, the latter
exhorted the papal nuncios in England to use all
their influence with Henry VIII. and Wolsey, to
effect an amicable arrangement with France.* In
April, the negotiations were already known in the
Netherlands. They were attended with little diffi-
culty; especially since the emperor’s reluctance to
fulfil his engagement to marry the king’s daughter,
became more and more obvious; whereas Francis I.
declared that he would enter into no agreement
without the good counsel of the King of England. +
On the 14th of July, Wolsey, according to Gi-
berti’s report, appeared not only inclined to a re-
conciliation with France, but inflamed with ardour
for it.f On the 30th of June, the nuncios declared
that all hesitation was at an end.

Another important circumstance was, that the
Italian powers once more assumed an attitude cal-
culated to inspire respect. To this end, the pope
had sought to renew the ancient alliance with Swit-
zerland, that he might be able to command the
prompt succour of eight or ten thousand men, in
case of need. He had already established a good
understanding with the Duke of Milan and the
Venetians. The fortified places belonging to the

* Lettere di Principi, 157.

+ Instructions to Tonstall and Wyngfield : Herbert, 168.

{t In Wolsey’s own handwriting to the king (St. P. No. 88.),
the demands of the emperor in reference to France as well as to
Milan are declared to be exorbitant; his offers to England,
to be “lytel or nothing to your commodite, proufit, or be-
nefit.”

VOL, <1, BB

370 PESCARA. Boox IV.

former, the fine army maintained by the latter,
(1000 lances, 500 light horse, and 16,000 foot, )
formed an admirable basis for the schemes in agi-
tation.* An alliance with France was necessary,
and was desired; but the first condition of the
treaty was to be, a renunciation on the part of that
power of all its Italian claims; of those on Milan
in favour of Sforza, and of those on Naples in
favour of the pope. Then would Italy —for that
name appears once more — bring a magnificent
army into the field for the deliverance of Francis I.

The persons by whom the pope was surrounded
really indulged the hope that it would be possible
to keep the French for ever at a distance; to drive
out the Spaniards, and to raise Italy to the state
in which she was before the year 1494. The
feeling of nationality, which had often given signs
of its existence, and especially in the unrivalled
culture of letters and art, which was the pride
and the distinction of Italy, now took possession of
all minds. The pope was strongly inclined to place
himself at the head of the enterprise.

Meanwhile a prospect of reaching the goal of
their wishes with unhoped-for rapidity now opened
upon the papal party.

Immediately after the battle of Pavia, misunder-
standings had broken out between the imperial
commanders. Lannoy who, on that eventful day,
had done the least, received the greatest proofs of
personal favour, and at length presumed, in direct

* Paruta Storia Venetiana, v. p. 243.

Cuar. L PESCARA. 371

opposition to the decision of all the others, to take
the royal captive on his own authority to Spain.*
This gave general disgust. Pescara, who felt that
his services were not duly acknowledged or re-
quited, begged for his dismissal; in order, as he
said, to close his life in some obscure corner of the
earth, “far from suspicion and from war.” +

This was known to the Italians, and it was,
indeed, no very far-fetched idea to ground a scheme
upon the discontent of such a leader. Had not the
first knight and captain of France lately set an
example of defection? Was it impossible to lead
Pescara to a similar course? He, too, was born
in Italy, and was, in the exactest sense of the
word, an Italian.

The consequences which would result from gain-
ing over such a man were incalculable: He was
the most experienced and the ablest. of all the
emperor’s generals; in every campaign the most
signal and successful actions had been his; the
Spanish infantry were absolutely devoted to him.
If they could succeed in gaining over the general,
the best part of the army was-sure to follow him,
and the rest would easily be destroyed.

* Letter of Bourbon, 10th June, in Raumer’s Briefen, i. p. 244.
It is, however, officially asserted in the Refut. Apologiw, that the
journey was undertaken by the king’s own proposal, “ inscio
atque inconsulto Cesare.”

+ Sepulveda, Hist. vi. 1. According to Jovius he wished to
retain Carpi or Sora, but was put off with empty words. Ac-
cording to Sandoval, i. p. 671., the right which he claimed of
exacting ransom from the King of Navarre whom he had taken

prisoner, was contested.
BB 2

372 PESCARA. Boox IV.

And magnificent was the prize they had to offer
him. The Spaniards were to be driven out of
Naples and Sicily. Now it was impossible for the
pope to administer and to defend these countries
himself, and the thought suggested itself, to re-
ward the defection of Pescara with this crown.
The very act would have bound him closely to the
Italian powers. The unity and the freedom of
Italy would have been obtained at one stroke.

Geromino Morone, the confidential minister of
Sforza, who had evinced so much prudence in pre-
paring, and so much energy in effecting, the restora-
tion of his master; who also held all the threads of
the intrigues now going on in his hand, one day
took courage to open the matter to the marquis;
first extorting from him a solemn -promise, not to
disclose to any human being what he was about to
say to him. Having fully discussed the political
state of Hurope, he touched on the possibility of
freeing themselves from a foreign yoke which now
offered itself to the Italians (among whom he in-
cluded Pescara): he spoke of the confidence he
inspired ; of the great deed expected from him, and,
lastly, he mentioned the prize by which that deed
was to be rewarded.*

* How far matters went is shown by the often-quoted answer
of the emperor: “Cum audivisset marchio nuncium ad id per
Vestram Sanctitatem transmissum, eidem sui parte, ut ait, offe-
rentem sub cujusdam apostolici brevis credentia reeni nostri
Neapolitani investituram et possessionem..... ut inde Sancti-
tas Vestra nos etiam ab omni imperiali dignitate deponeret,”—
Goldast Pol. Imp. 997.

Cuap. I. PESCARA. 310

Such a proposal was calculated to excite a storm
of contending emotions in the breast of Pescara.
The prospect opened to him was. brilliant and
boundless, and he had just causes of displeasure with
the court: on the other hand, he was incensed at
the treachery of the Italians, and his old Spanish
blood rose in his veins. He instantly saw the ne-
cessity, and felt the desire, to come to the bottom of
the affair. The crafty warrior who had so often
surprised the enemy at the right moment, and had
never in his life laid himself open to attack, showed
all his wonted caution and self-command on this
oceasion. “It is a great thing which you say to
me,” replied he to Morone; “and it 1s not less great,
that you say it to me.” He admitted that he had
cause to be dissatisfied ; “ but no dissatisfaction in
the world,” continued he, “could induce me to act
contrary to the laws of honour. If I quit the em-
peror’s service, it must be done in such a manner
that the best knight in the world could not have
behaved otherwise. I should do it only to show
the emperor that I am of more importance than
certain people whom he prefers before me.” * - Ex-
pressions in which Morone thought he perceived
a leaning but slightly veiled, and by no means
dubious. This opinion, coinciding with the favour-
able intelligence from France and England, gave
wings to all these projects. “ I see the world ut-
terly changed,” exclaimed Giberti; ‘Italy will

* Personal narrative of Pescara in a document dated 30th of
July, 1525, in Hormayr’s Archiv. for 1810, pp. 29, 30.

BB 3

OLe" PESCARA. Boox IV.

arise out of the deepest misery to the highest
felicity.”* Writers were employed completely to
remove Pescara’s scruples; couriers were despatched
to make communications to the allied courts : —the
commencement of the work was impatiently ex-
pected.

But, we may ask, were the means contemplated
really of a nature to lead to the desired end?
_ The independence of a people is so vast a good,
that, when once lost, it can only be regained by
straining every physical power and every moral
faculty. In the present case, the need of it was
first felt by the literary class alone; the mass of
the nation were unconscious of it: they had no
military point of honour to wound, nor had they
to complain of violated legal or political rights ;
the right of the emperor was of the highest an-
tiquity, and was incontestable. Hence, therefore,
the leaders did not rely on the nation, in the
proper sense of the word. They thought chiefly
of the favourable conjuncture of circumstances, of
foreign aid, and of this unlooked-for defection of
Pescara: a lucky political combination was to effect
the whole.

But. this soon appeared doubtful. As early as
the September of 1525, Giberti remarked} that
the intention of the French was only to take ad-
vantage of the connexion with Italy, in order to
obtain favourable terms from the emperor.

* Lettera a Ghinucci. Lettere di Principi, i. 170. How
then could Giovio (Vita Piscar., p. 408.) maintain that Giberti
warned the pope against these things ?

+ Al vescovo di Bajusa 4, Sett. Ibid.

Cuap. L. PESCARA. me 5)

Whilst the French party continued to reckon on
the defection of the imperial general, they learned
that the fortified towns in the Milanese were
repairing. A courier who had been despatched
to France had disappeared in that territory ; nay,
declarations reached them from the Spanish court,
which seemed to contain some allusions to the mat-
ter. People knew not what to think. Was Morone
a traitor ? But what advantage could he propose to
himself, that would outweigh the detestation he
had to expect from Italy? Or was Pescara playing
a double game? “I cannot believe it,” says
Giberti. ‘What he has done for the emperor, a
kingdom could not requite; can he mean to use
this occasion to crouch before him again, and beg
for his favour anew? It were a sin to imagine
that so base a thought could find place in so noble
a soul.” *

And yet this was the fact. | Pescara was born
in Italy, but he had the soul of a Spaniard. All
his forefathers had devoted their lives to the one
object of establishing the Aragonese sovereignty in
Italy. His ereat-grandfather, Ruy Lopez di
Avalos, had attached himself to the person and
fortunes of Alfonso V.; his son, Inigo, had been
that king’s confidential adviser ; and. his son, Alonzo,
had. perished by the hand of a Moor, in the attack
of the French}; the existence of our hero was
bound up with the prosperity of the same cause.
His whole soul was devoted to the command of the

%* To Domenico Sauli. Ibid., p. 174.
+ Zurita Anales de Aragon, v. 59. b.

BB 4

376 PESCARA. Boox IV.

Spanish infantry, which was entrusted to him: he
knew every one of his men by name; was indulgent
to all their offences, even their forbidden pillage,
and spared them whenever it was possible. It was
enough for him if they fought bravely at the
critical moment; and in this they never failed
him. When he marched at their head, with his
broad shoes of German make, his waving plumes on
his hat, and holding his drawn sword straight before
him in both hands, he was at the height of his felicity
and glory. The Italians, on the contrary, he hated ;
he held them for cowardly and untrustworthy ; there
had even been examples at the conquest of a city,
of his ordering all the Italian soldiers to be
. massacred. People asked him, ‘ Why,—since they
are your countrymen?” “ For that very reason,”
replied he; ‘they are my countrymen, and yet
serve the enemy.” As, in his capacity of general,
he curbed his natural intrepidity by prudence and
caution, so was he ambitious, high-spirited and
arrogant, but always within the bounds of loyalty
and honour. ‘ The character of the soul is deter-
mined, more than is commonly imagined, by the
contemplation of some Ideal. To ideas like those
which were prevalent in Italy from the study of
classical antiquity, Pescara was an utter stranger ;
but the notions and feelings of personal devoted-
ness and fidelity which form the basis of a feudal
state, and from which Italy was the first to
emancipate herself, governed all his thoughts and
feelings. He had grown up in intercourse with
the heroes of Spanish romance; perhaps he com-

Cuap. I. PESCARA. werd

pared himself to the Cid, who, though offended and
repulsed by his king, remained inflexibly true to
him, without bating, for.a single moment, one jot
of his haughty bearing. Chivalrous feeling and
feudal honour were thus opposed to the spirit of
Italy, whose national feeling was the offspring of
classical culture, and who had thrown off the
political morality of the middle ages. That
morality did indeed make one more struggle
for existence; but in doing so, it betrayed how
much it had already been affected ‘by contact
with the world of which Machiavelli was the
organ and the representative. Pescara had not
the refined moral culture which would have led
him to reject the proposals made to him with the
disgust and scorn they merited. He thought,
indeed, while listening to them, that Morone
deserved to be thrown out of the window; but he
reflected that it was necessary to learn the whole
plan in order to counteract it effectually. While,
therefore, he kept up a good understanding with
Morone, he communicated the affair, from the very
first day, to the imperial commissioners, and to his
brother commanders, Bourbon and Leiva: he wrote
instantly to Insbruck for succours, and sent a
courier with the intelligence to Spain. While Gi-
berti was amused with dreams of the dawn of a
new freedom for Italy, he was already betrayed.

In September the emperor gave the marquis full
powers to act in the matter before him as he should
think necesary.*

378 PESCARA. Boox IV.

Nothing was, however, more necessary than to
get a firm footing in Milan, and to annul all the
claims of the Sforzas.. The imperial generals
thought that without the concurrence of the
marquis they should all have been lost.*

The first step was to secure the person of
Morone. On the 14th Oct. 1525, when he paid a
confidential visit to Pescara, Leiva was con-
cealed behind the tapestry for the purpose of over-
hearing the conversation, and on Morone rising to
take his leave, he was arrested. Pescara, however,
requested the emperor to grant him the liberty of
this man, who might still be of great use if an
occasion offered for employing him.

Pescara now required the duke to deliver up the
strong places of the duchy to the imperial troops —
a measure demanded, as he said, by the interests of
the emperor's service. The duke, robbed of his
minister, and consious of his own treacherous
conduct, did not venture to refuse; especially since
the two strongest, Milan and Cremona, were left
him.

But these were passed over in silence only so
long as the others were not taken possession of: as
soon as that was the case, Pescara demanded the
surrender of the citadels of Cremona and Milan.
The duke made representations. Pescara replied,
that he knew from the letters of Domenico Sauli,
the duke’s plenipotentiary in Rome, that his excel-
lency had offered the aid of his person and his state

* Letter of Leiva in Hormayr, 29, 30.

Cuar. I. PESCARA. 379

in the liberation of Italy from the imperial troops ;
and insisted that at least the commanders of the
castles should take an oath of fidelity to the
emperor.* As Sforza refused to yield to these
demands, Pescara had no hesitation in employing
force. He took possession of Cremona, and
advanced to besiege the citadel of Milan, which
employed three thousand Germans. He immedi-
ately impeached the duke of felony. He announced
to the emperor, that God and the world, and the
dictates of common sense, required him to keep
Milan in his own hands. The emperor declared
his resolution of letting the prosecution take its
course, and abiding by the sentence of the judges ;
though indeed of the nature of this there could be
no doubt.

Such was the result of this first attempt of the
Italians to shake off the yoke of foreign armies.
As the principal clement of their calculation was
the treason of Pescara, their enterprise was ren-
dered abortive by the fidelity with which he
adhered to the emperor. Charles could now
reasonably entertain the project of keeping Milan
in his own hands.

But the matter was not yet decided. The uni-
versal hatred entertained for the imperial troops

* Pescara to Ferdinand, 4th Nov. Bucholtz, iii. 14.

+ Custode. Continuation of Varri from the national chro-
niclers, p. 29. “

t Sandoval, i. 668., asserts that he saw the instruments of
infeudation which were already drawn up for Bourbon ; nay, that
he had actually been invested with the fief with all due forms.

380 CONDUCT OF THE EMPEROR. Boox IV.

(who lived at the charge of the inhabitants) all
over Lombardy, and the obstinacy with which the
citadel of Milan defended itself, afforded a hope
that what had not been accomplished by cunning
might still be effected by force. Another favour-
able circumstance was, that at this juncture the
general, who had always inspired the most fear,
and now with good reason the bitterest hate—
Pescara—died. Above all, the great questions
at issue between the emperor and the King of
France were treated in a manner that justified the
most confident anticipations of fresh commotions
throughout Europe.

It was clear, that the emperor, though he did
not enter into the English plans, overrated the
advantages which might accrue to him from the
king’s captivity. I shall not enlarge on his want
of magnanimity ; though I hold it to be perfectly
true, that the power of freely and cordially forgiv~
ing his enemies was not in his nature; but it may
also be said that his conduct arose from a defect of
judgment. He had conquered Milan and Genoa,
and he, probably, thought that he might take ad-
vantage of the king’s captivity to induce him to
renounce his Italian claims. He had gained no-
thing whatever from France itself; his attack on
that kingdom having been completely repulsed.
He nevertheless demanded, obstinately and_pe-
remptorily, the cession of Burgundy. Neither
the illness into which Francis fell from vexation
and anxiety, nor the negotiations of his sister, who
had travelled to Spain on purpose to obtain her

Guar. I. PEACE OF MADRID. 381 |

brother’s liberation, nor the arguments of his
own councillors, made the slightest impression on
Charles.* He would hear of no indemnity; he
would have back the heritage of his fathers, whence
he derived the name and the arms he hore. But
his victory was far from being complete enough
for this. The principle of unity and nationality
which daily became more and more powerful in
France, had remained unshaken and unharmed,
even by the defection of the constable ; it was but
slightly affected by the disasters in Italy. Ardently
as the king’s mother desired her son’s return, she
declared that it were better that he should remain
in prison for ever, than that the kingdom should
be dismembered.

On the other hand, purer conceptions of mo-
rality and dignity would have taught the king
rather to endure his imprisonment than to assent
to conditions which he was predetermined not to
adhere to. But this would have been asking too
much of him: he felt his situation insupportable,
and was ready to purchase freedom at any price.

At length, on the 14th of January, he signed the
conditions submitted to him by the emperor. He
promised to renounce all his claims on Italy, on
the suzerainty of Flanders and Artois, and his
alliances with the enemies of the emperor in Ger-

* We see from the Refutatio Apologia, p. 877., that the em-
peror was angry because the Duchess of Alencgon, with a view
to the machinations going on in Italy, would not agree to all
that the king had before pledged himself to ; chiefly because
she wished to assist him in making his escape.

382 CONDUCT OF FRANCIS I. Boox IV.

many, Wiirtemberg, and Gueldres; he consented to
give up Burgundy. He did not reject the supposi-
tion that these concessions were to put an end for ever
to all disputes, and contracted himself in marriage
with the emperor’ s sister, the widowed Queen of Por-
tugal: — but in the same day — the same hour —
nay, one moment before —he had secretly signed
a protest, in which he declared that he accepted the
treaty only under the pressure of compulsion; that
all the stipulations contained in it were, and would
remain, null and void; and that he intended never-
theless to maintain all the rights appertaining to
his crown. *

His ideas of religion did not prevent him from
taking an oath at the solemn celebration of the
mass, and with his hand on the Gospels, never to
break the treaty all the days of his life.

He now let the papal legate know that he did
not mean to observe the treaty +, while he himself
made overtures towards an alliance with the Italian
powers: at the same time, he went to Illescas to
celebrate his betrothal with the emperor’s sister,
which rested on the presumption that the treaty
would be executed.

The emperor and the king now saw each other
more frequently, rode out together, were carried in
the same litter, and called each other brother.
They took leave near Dlescas, beneath a crucifix
which stands at the point where the roads to

* Treaty and protest in Du Mont, iv. 1. 399, 412.
} Giberti to the Bishop of Bajusa, Lettere di Principi, ii.
p. 31. b.

Cuap 1 CONDUCT OF FRANCIS I. 383

Madrid and Toledo divide. ‘“ Brother,” said the
emperor, “ think on what we have promised each
other.” The king replied, ‘I could repeat the
articles, without missing a word.” “ Tell me the
truth,” said Charles, ‘are you minded to keep
them ?” ‘“ Nothing in my kingdom shall hinder me
from doing so,” replied Francis. The emperor then
said, ‘‘ One thing, I pray you; if you mean to
deceive me in any thing, let it not concern my
sister, your bride; for she,” added he, “ would not
be able to revenge herself.” *

We see the lowering tempest which slumbered
behind this appearance of confidence.

Immediately after, in a bark on the Bidassoa,
Francis was exchanged for his two sons, the dauphin
and the future king Henry II., who were to be left
as hostages for the performance of his engagements.
“ Sire,” said Lannoy, “ your highness is now free ;
fulfilnow what you have promised.” ‘ All will be
fulfilled,” said the king, and sprang into the French
boat. He was now once more among his own
people, and saw himself received with all the marks
of respect of which he had so long been deprived:
he felt completely himself again. Mounting, as soon
as he touched land, a Turkish horse that stood ready
caparisoned, he exclaimed, “I am the king, the
king!” and galloped off.f

This was the moment for which the Italians had
been waiting. .

When the terms of the peace of Madrid were re-

* Narrative in Sandoval, i. 717.
+ Report in Sandoval, i. 788.

384 LIGUE OF COGNAC. Boox IV.

ported to the pope, he declared that he approved
them, provided the king did not observe them: the
only difference would then be, that the emperor
would have the king’s sons in his custody, instead of
the king, which would avail him little.* He now ab-
solved the king from his oatht; he caused it to be
represented to him in common with the Venetians,
what an excellent army was already in the field ;
that it would not be very difficult to extort better
terms; that if he was but resolute, and would take
up arms for the relief of his sons and the deliverance
of Italy, the Italians too would show themselves
men, and would not yield themselves up to the will
of the emperor.

For a moment the king paused: he hesitated
to enter into this alliance. He convoked the
notables of Burgundy ; and resting on their declar-
ation, that the King of France, in virtue of the
ancient compacts of the province with the crown,
had no right whatever to cede itt, he repeated to
the emperor his former proposal of giving an in-
demnity for itim money. He probably thought the
ferment in Italy would induce Charles to accept
this offer.§

* The Bishop of Worcester to Wolsey, 12th Jan. 7th Feb.
Raumer, i. 247.

+ Sandoval, i746. “Embié el papa al rey de Francia re-
laxacion del juramento que avia hecho :”— There is in Rainaldus
a similar release from an oath, dated 3d July, 1526. xx. 460.

{ The emperor did not much regard this declaration: Apologia
dissuasorie Refutatio, p. 884. “ Satis plane constat, eos duntaxat
vocatos quos rex ipse antea stipendiarios et juratos habebat,”

§ Official information in the Oratio ad Proceres Germanie in

-

Cuar. I. LIGUE OF COGNAC. 385

Let us pause to examine the situation of the
emperor. At his court and among his most faith-
ful servants the treaty had experienced great op-
position, not on account of the exorbitance of its
demands, but of the slender security afforded for
its ee they said the conditions were very
good as child’s play, but nothing more: neverthe-
less, suppressing a secret anxiety which he too felt,
he ed concluded it :— he had already appointed
a governor of Burgundy who was on the way
thither his sister waited in Vittoria for the ex-
Sem of the treaty in order to enter France as
queen ; — and now he received this proposal, — the
same he had before rejected. He saw that Francis
thought he should compel him by the fear of hos-
tilities in Italy: the consciousness that he had
not conducted the affair well, the vexation at
being deceived, the wounded feeling of knightly
honour, the pride of power—all arose at once
within him. He answered the king, that if he was
prevented from fulfilling the conditions of his
freedom, he had better return to his captivity,
where a fresh agreement might then be made.*

In earlier ages this would have been done; but
those times were past. The king did not hesitate
to conclude his treaty with the Italian states on the
22d May, 1526, at Cognac. The terms proposed

conventu Ratisbon 1527, in Goldast. Polit. i. p.902. “Condi-
tionem ultro sibi delatam tantisper accipere sustinuit, dum lega-
tis rursus missis ultimum experiretur.”

* Charles relates this himself in the before quoted Refu-
tation.

VOL. II. CC

386 LIGUE OF COGNAC. Boox IV.

were, that the emperor should be required to give
up the French princes for a ransom, cede Milan to
Francesco Sforza, and restore the States of Italy in
general to the condition in which they were before
the breaking out of hostilities ; further, on his pro-
gress to his coronation he was to be escorted by no
more troops than the pope and Venice thought fit
to permit: they thought to treat him as they had
formerly treated Maximilian. They determined to
lay these conditions before him as soon as they had
equipped a powerful army, andif he refused to
accept them, which did not admit of a doubt, to
drive hin out of Naples, the subsequent disposal of
which the pope reserved to himself.*

It was a combination of the whole of Western
Europe to counteract the consequences of the battle
of Pavia; to check the preponderance, the views
and the fortune of the house of Burgundy. These
objects had the concurrence of England. The king
and the cardinal exhorted Francis not to fulfil
engagements which would make him the servant of
Spain.t They did every thing in their power to
promote the Ligue}, though Henry VIII did not
deem it expedient to become a member of it.

* Traité de conféderation, appellé la Sainte Ligue, in Dumont,
iv. i, 451.

{ Extract from Cheney’s Instructions, in Fiddes, 380.

{ “ That the leegge shold be, by all meanys possibyll, sett
forwardys.” Clerk to Wolsey, 31st May, St. P., p.164. Ina
paper of the 9th Oct. (p.180.), Wolsey ascribes the league
especially to the king. “Your Highness, by whois counsaile
this liege had been begon.”

Cuar. I. LIGUE OF COGNAC. 387

At the court of Rome, the ideas which had been
cherished a year before, now revived with redoubled
strength. There was no longer a question of a
struggle for the sovereignty of Italy between the
two princes. Francis demanded no more than Asti
and the feudal superiority of Genoa; and hopes were
really entertained that Italy would be restored to the
state in which she was in 1494. The Venetians
showed an enthusiasm not inferior to that displayed
at Rome: their ambassador, Francesco Foscari,
boasts that it was he who had held the pope fast to
his resolutions; the Republic promised to do wonders.
The Florentines were completely at the pope’s dis-
posal, and it was reported from Piedmont that the
duke wished to emancipate himself from the imperial
domination. The papal party thought themselves
secure of the assistance of the French, as the king
had so strong a personal interest in the war; and
they reckoned with greater certainty than ever on
the Swiss, whose diets would be subject to the
combined influence of the courts of France and of
Rome; the King of England, it was hoped, would
accept the protectorate of the alliance, which was
offered him, or at least consent to advance money.
Could the imperial army possibly withstand so
many united forces? Francesco Sforza still held
out in the castle of Milan; the people were ripe
for insurrection; they thought they could destroy
the flower of the imperial troops on the spot.* The

* Gibertito Don Michele de Silva, Ist July. Lett. di Princ.,

i. 230. See Provisioni per la guerra che disegno Pp. Clemente

VII. contra Vimperatore. Inform, Politt. tom. xii. no. 46, It
co 2

388 LIGUE OF COGNAC. Boox IV.

letters of the Datarius Giberti, who at length saw
himself in the position he had always desired,
breathe all the determination which a grand and
noble enterprize inspires. In June, 1526, the empe-
ror proposed the mildest and most moderate con-
ditions to the pope. Clement VII., having already
joined the Ligue, rejected them without hesi-
tation.*

Open war once more broke out between the two
greatest powers-of Europe. But, in the situation
of things and the stage of civilization which now
prevailed, it became evident that the emperor had
other weapons within his grasp than had ever been
wielded by his predecessors. These he determined
to employ.

appears from this that there was an intention of acting at the
same time against Milan, Genoa, Naples, and Sienna, where
the imperialist party prevailed ; — in Sienna with the aid of the
exiled party ; in Naples with the aid of the Orsini; they were
determined to suffer no assemblage of Spaniards in the towns,
and no correspondence with Spain. _They were to accept the
offer of the Duke of Savoy, so that the cause might appear
to be that of the whole of Italy.
* Sanga to Sambara, 19th June. Ibid., 210.

389

CHAPTER II.

DIET OF SPIRE, A.D. 1526.

Tue events of Italy necessarily reacted with no
inconsiderable force on Germany.

The attack on the emperor was an attack on
the rights of the empire; and Charles, with great
dexterity and tact, pointed the public attention to
the fact that no mention was made of the empire
in the treaty of Cognac; it seemed to be regarded
indeed as already dispossessed of all its rights. In
all former years, it was its German forces which
had decided its conquests in Italy. In the present
war, more perilous than any preceding, it was to
them it must look for efficient support. It could
not be a matter of indifference to the nation whether
the empire should have any significance in Italy, or
none.

Weighty, however, as this consideration was, it
was in truth the less important side of the matter.

The mind and heart of the nation was incom-
parably more actively engaged in the spiritual in-
terests,—in the great questions which embraced
the whole moral and intellectual futurity of the
world. We know how mighty an influence political
affairs had from the first exercised on the emperor's
conduct with regard to these questions: the edict
of Worms, the revocation of the summons for the

oO. Ss

390 DUKE HENRY IN SPAIN. Boox IV.

assembly at Sines had been the fruits of his al-
liance with the pope: to please him, he had as-
sumed an air of strict adherence to the ancient
church ; it remained to be seen whether he would
maintain it.

In the spring of 1526, there was still every
appearance that he would not depart from it a
hair’s breadth. Henry of Brunswick, who had just
then arrived in Spain, obtained from the emperor
declarations which sounded as decided as ever.

In fact he had arrived in a moment the most
favourable that could be conceived for the proposal
he had to make in his own name and the names
of his friends.

The peace of Madrid was souehiaene and the
court was persuaded that the great aiapute with
France was thus settled for ever.* Hence the views
of the government were rather directed towards
Germany. If we examine this peace more nearly,
we shall find that it involved not only the adjust-
ment of personal and political disputes, but also
an agreement upon a common enterprise against
the Turks, and “ against heretics who have severed
themselves from the bosom of the holy church ;”
the two contracting princes already entreat the pope -
to co-operate with them by ecclesiastical conces-
sions.f It was left to the good pleasure of the

* “Nach dem langen Triibsal und Krieg,” writes Heinrich
von Nassau from the Spanish court to his brother in Dillenburg,
“hat uns Gott den heiligen Frieden wiedergegeben.” — “ After
the long misery and war, God has again given us blessed
peace.” Toledo, 22d Jan.: Arnoldi, p. 203.

} Pour dresser tous les moyens convenables pour les dites

Guar. IT. IMPERIAL ADMONITION. 391

emperor with which of these undertakings to begin,
and when to set about them. It was Francis’s own
voluntary offer, that if the emperor would make
war either upon the infidels or the Lutherans, he
would bear half the cost and accompany the army
in person.*

In the days in which people still believed in the
execution of this treaty,—when the king returned
to his kingdom, Leonora prepared to follow him,
and Orange to take possession of Burgundy, — that,
in the midst of all the magnificent solemnities of the
church with which the marriage of the emperor
with a princess of Portugal was celebrated at
Seville, the proposals of Duke Henry were brought
under discussion in that splendid and stately court.
They were extremely welcome, and he received the
most encouraging answer. On the 23d of March,
15264, the emperor issued an admonition to certain

emprises et expeditions tant contre les dits Tures et infidéles
que contre les dits hérétiques aliénés du greme de la sainte
église. Art. 26.

* Apologize Dissuasoriz Refutatio, in Goldast. Pol. Imp. 884.
“ Quod inquit (autor apologia), quocumque proficisceretur Caesar,
illuc etiam maxima cum militum manu regi eundum erat,” —“ on
the part of the French this was one motive for refusing to carry
out the treaty,” — “ hic profecto se proprio gladio percutit, quum
potissime rex ipse id obtulerit, ut si Cesari adversus hostes
fidei eundum esset aut in Lutheranos movendum, is dimidium
impensee sustineret, et si Casari gratum esset, cum eo per-
sonaliter adesset, quam oblationem Cesar pro Christiane re-
ligionis augmento respuendam non censuit.”

+ The exchange of Francis I. took place on the 16th March.
The first letters must have arrived about the 23d: in these
Francis still promised to hold to the treaty. Even in Cognac,

cc 4

ag2 IMPERIAL ADMONITION. Boox IV.

princes and lords of the empire, to remain steadfast
in the old faith, and to use their influence with
their neighbours, that the heretical doctrines which
were the cause of all the disturbances might be
wholly eradicated. In this document he commends
the anti-Lutheran alliance which had been concluded
between Duke Henry, Duke George, Elector Albert,
and some other princes. He announces his inten-
tion of shortly going to Rome; after which he
would resort to every measure for the radical extir-
pation of heresy. Admonitions of this sort were
addressed to the Counts of Nassau and K6nigstein,
to the Bishop of Strasburg, and Duke Erich of
Calenberg. The two former were to communicate
with the counts on the Rhine, in the Westerwald,
and the Netherlands; the bishop with the princes of
Upper, and the duke with those of Lower Germany.*
The emperor, as we perceive, entirely shared the
ideas of the orthodox party in Germany, which
indeed was observed to display unwonted spirit and
boldness from the time of Duke Henry’s arrival.
Duke George was reported to say that if he liked
he could be elector of Saxony.f His chancellor one
day in Torgau expressed himself to the effect, that

Francis I. said to the viceroy, Lannoy, that the protest of the
Burgundians was of no importance. Refutatio Apologize.

*In the Weim. Arch. See Rommell, Urkundenbuch, p. 13.

+ See Rommel, Ind. p.22. From Duke George’s answer, it
appears that he had only said that the councillors could be
electors of Saxony if they willed it, 7. e. they could administer
the affairs of the electorate. It appears as if he merely sought
to explain away what he had said.

Caap. IT. ’ TREATY OF GOTHA. 393

the Lutheran affair would not last long; people
had better take care what they were about.

This however necessarily obliged the opposite
party to rally all their forces, towards which,
indeed, they had already taken some steps. The
alliance which had been talked of at the end of the
former year was now really brought to bear.

It is commonly called the league of Torgau, but
it was only ratified on the side of Saxony in
Torgau; it was concluded about the end of Fe-
bruary 1526 at Gotha.

Here, in pursuance of the arrangement made by
their several envoys at Augsburg, the Elector of
Saxony and the Landgrave of Hessen met, and
agreed to stand by each other with all their might,
in case they were attacked on account of the word
of God, or the removal of abuses. According to
the first draft, the union was to subsist only “ until
a Christian and equitable adjustment should be
effected at the next diet of the empire.” It seems,
however, that this clause was afterwards thought
too restrictive, and it was omitted. It was also
specified that they would afford each other the
needful help “ at their own cost and damage.” As
the reigning princes treated in person, no pro-
tocol was taken of their conferences; but thus
much is clear,—that in the course of their delibera-
tions the ties between them were gradually drawn
closer.*

But the alliance of two princes, although among

* The documents in the Weim. Arch. ‘The ratification at
Torgau took place on the.4th March. See Hortleder, i. viii. 1.

394 ‘TREATY OF GOTHA. Boox IY.

the most powerful in the empire, could effect little:
they immediately determined, according to their
former intentions, to try to induce other states of
the empire to join them. Each of them accord-
ingly began with his near friends and old allies;
Philip, with those of the Oberland, Elector John,
with the Low Germans.

Their success was very unequal. In the Ober-
land, public opinion was not yet favourable to
a positive league. The Niirnbergers had shown
themselves well disposed at the last diet, but in
Gotha they declared, “they would respectfully
await the time of his Imperial Majesty and the
next diet.” They feared the emperor might con-
ceive displeasure against them and abandon them
to their enemies. The Landgrave then applied to
Frankfurt, but the council declined the proposal;
and an alliance with the people, who, the Land-
grave was assured, would find means to force the
council to do as they would have it, would have
been a dangerous precedent. The Elector of
Treves was out of the question; he abandoned, at
this very moment, the place in the opposition
which he had hitherto held, and accepted a pension
of 6000 gulden from the emperor and his brother:*
It was impossible to bring the Elector Palatine to
a resolution: at a fresh interview with the Land-
grave, he declared, indeed, that he would venture
person and property in the cause, but he did not
accept the proffered alliance; he only held out

* Excerpt of the treaty in ‘Bucholtz, ix. 5,

Car. MEETING AT MAGDEBURG. 395

the hope that he would join it at the diet; he
also raised some objections to the draft of the
treaty.*

On the other hand, the negotiations of the
Elector of Saxony in Lower Germany were emi-
nently successful. There were a number of princes
who had always been attached to the house of
Saxony, some of whom were nearly akin to it.
After some preliminary negotiations, Duke Ernest
of Liineburg, Philip of Grubenhagen, Henry of
Mecklenburg, Prince Wolf of Anhalt, and Count
Albert of Mansfeld, repaired, on the invitation of
the elector, to Magdeburg.f On the appointed
day, 9th June, Elector John with his son and his
cousin also arrived at Liineburg. All were alarmed
at the admonition issued by the emperor from
Seville, which had only now come to their know-
ledge. On the 10th of June the proceedings were
opened; Electoral Saxony spoke first: he reminded
the assembled princes of the danger which threat-
ened them from the alliance formed at Mainz, and
from the document in question ; and of the necessity

* “Da wolle man, sagte er, die Notel weiter stellen.” — “Tt
was intended, he said, to extend the terms.” Letter of the
Landgrave to the Elector, Wednesday after Palm Sunday, 28th
March. W. A.

+ It runs thus: “ In Meinung und in Sachen des gottlichen
Wortes, damit, so der Reichstag Fortgang gewonne, die Sache in
christlichen Bedenken zuvor berathschlagt wiire.” “In the opi-
nion and cause of the Word of God, so that as the diet proceeded,
the affair should first be subjected to Christian deliberation.” In-
struction for Caspar v. Minkwitz, which was sent to George of
Brandenburg, who, however, did not appear. W. A. i

396 MEETING AT MAGDEBURG. Boox IV.

of giving in an unanimous declaration at the next
diet. The compact entered into by Saxony and
Hessen was then laid before them, together with
the proposal to join it. They were all willing: on
the 12th of June they signed the treaty, as it had
been drawn up at Gotha and ratified at Torgau,
and appended their several seals to it.*

It is especially remarkable that the princes did
not disdain to receive into their alliance a city,
which, it is true, enjoyed great franchises, but had
by no means the rank or character of an imme-
diate imperial city — Magdeburg, where their meet-
ing was held.¢ It was important to them as a
central point for all the States of Lower Germany ;

* Handlung uf den Tag zu Magdeburg. The Proceedings
at the Diet at Magdeburg, — properly, instructions for the pro-
ceedings at this meeting. “Ferner ist bedacht, das Bundniss
so uns. gn. Herr mit dem Landgrafen zu Gotha aufgericht, den
Fiirsten freundlich und vertraulich zu zeigen, und wo I. F.
Gn. auch darein willigen und schliessen wollten, als u. gn. Hr.
sich genzlichen versehen auch frundlich bitten thite, sollt alsdann
solch Bundniss durch eine Beschreibung immaassen mit u. eos
Herrn vorgemeldt (dem Landgrafen) auch aufgericht und voll-
zogen werden.” “Further it is intended to show in friend-
ship and confidence to the princes, the treaty which our gracious
lord has made with the landgrave at Gotha; and should the
princes agree and be willing to enter into it, as our gracious
lord fully expected and cordially requested, then should this
treaty be concluded and ratified, by a written contract to that
intent with our gracious lord aforementioned (the landgrave).”

t “ At your humble seeking, prayer, and request,” says the
elector, “we have included the burghermaster, councillors, and
guildmasters of the old city of Magdeburg in this Christian
agreement, because we know-that by God’s grace they are well
inclined to the godly word.” *

Gas ir DIET OF SPIRE, 1526. 397

and moreover it was desirable for them that it
should be able to maintain itself against the arch-
bishop without their aid. |

Such was the first formation of a compact
evangelical party; in presence of the imminent
danger which threatened them from the union of
the emperor with their antagonists, they united
to defend the truth they acknowledged, and above
all, to prevent the passing of any hostile resolution
at the ensuing diet. It was an extension of the old
Saxon alliance from religious motives.

Such were the preparations made on either side
for a decisive struggle, when, in the summer of
1526, the diet was convoked at Spire. The Pro-
position was laid before the diet on the 25th of
June, and brought the affairs of the church im-
mediately under discussion.* It was couched in
terms which might be satisfactory to both parties.
The States were herein exhorted to consult as to
ways and means, “whereby -Christian faith and
well-established good Christian practice and order
might be maintained until the meeting of a free
council.” Measures were proposed for insuring
obedience to the imperial edicts and the decrees
which were now about to be passed. It is remark-
able how gently the edict of Worms is alluded to
in this last passage. T

The deliberations began in the Colleges of the
Princes, and in them too the first resolutions were

* According to the report of Esslingen of the 1st of April, sign-
ed, “ Ferdinandus Archi. Aust. C. in Imp. Locit.” F. A. vol. xl,
+ Extract in Neudecker’s Actenstiicken, p. 21.

398 DIET OF SPIRE, 1526. Boox IV.

indifferent. It was laid down as a principle that,
in affairs of faith, no decision should be come to,
and that the old established good customs should be
observed ;—a principle which each party might in-
terpret in its own sense. But it was different when
they came to speak of the abuses which must be
reformed. The clergy required that this matter
should be referred to a council; it could not, they
said, be within the competence of a diet to separate
the good from the evil. On the other hand, the
laity did not choose to be again put off: they de-
clared that the common people were so far in-
structed that they would no longer suffer themselves
to be led with the same simple credulity as here-
tofore. ‘They had on their side the cogency of
circumstances, the reasonableness of their purpose,
and even the words of the Proposition — that good
customs should be maintained and evil ones severed
from them and rejected. In spite of the vehement
resistance made by the clergy, who appeared in great
numbers, it was at length resolved to discuss the
reformation of abuses, and to enforce universal obe-
dience to whatever might beagreed on. The clergy
had the consolation of thinking that they would
have their share of influence in determining what
the abuses were which it was desirable to remove.*

* The judgment in the Frankf. Acten, vol. xlii. Otto von Pack
gives to Duke George of Saxony an account of the proceedings,
Vis. Mar. 2d July. (Dresden Arch.) “Ist daruf gestanden,
dass der einig Artikel den Reichstag solt zutrennt haben, wenn
dy Geystlichen nicht bewilligt das sy von den Missbrauchen
wollten handeln lassen.” “It is agreed, that the only circum-

Cuap. I. DIET OF SPIRE, 1526. 399

But it instantly became evident that they were
at a great disadvantage even here.

The cities to fchich: the resolution of the princes
was communicated on the 30th of June, received it
with joy; but the interpretation which they in-
stantly affixed to it was quite unequivocal. In
their answer they declared that, by good customs
no other could be understood but such as were not
contrary to faith in Christ. But it was notorious
to all how many directly opposed to this, had, to
the universal corruption, crept into the church. It
was a great joy to them to learn that these were
to be abolished.*

On the 4th of July, when the bishops took their
seats in the council of princes, they opposed the
reception of this declaration: they maintained that
the disturbed state of the people arose not from the
alleged abuses, but from seditious writings and
discourses; in the heat of debate, one of them let
fall the expression, that it would be better if all the
books that were printed were burned every eighth
year. Such exaggeration and violence could of
course injure only themselves ; they were reproached
with wishing to stifle all science, art, and reason.
The answer of the cities was accepted as it stood.

Upon this the whole diet of the empire was now
broken up into various commissions, for the re-

stance which should have power to dissolve the diet should
be, the clergy not consenting to any arrangement concerning the
abuses of the church.”

* The answer of the cities, printed by Kapp and Walch,
xvi. 246.

400 DIET OF SPIRE, 1526. Boox IV.

form of spiritual abuses ;— one of electors, one of
princes, and one of cities — in the same manner
as had been formerly adopted at Worms, for the
discussion of the charges against the papal see.
The sentiment of dislike and distrust of the
clergy which reigned in the nation became also the
prevailing one in the diet. ‘“ The clergy,” says
the Frankfurt envoy, ‘‘ seek nothing but their own
advantage, and neglect. the public good.”* We
find the same complaints in the’ letters of the envoy
of Ducal Saxony, notwithstanding the strict ca-
tholicism of his master. “ The greater part of the
clergy,” he says, “ have’only their own aggrandise-
ment in their eye; they cannot deny the mischief
created by the abuses that have crept into the
church, yet they will eradicate none. There is
more solicitude for the true interests of Christianity
to be discerned among the laity than among the

clergy.” f

* Hammann von Holzhusen, Ist ed.: “Die Geistlichen bear-
beiten sich heftiglich um iren eignen und vergessen den gemeinen
Nutzen.”—“ The clergy exert themselves vehemently for their
own, and forget the common interests.”

} Otto von Pack. «Ist am Tage, wenn die Geystlichen ge-
meyne Christenheit also meinten wy dy Laien, so blib Gottes
Ehr, alle gute christliche Ordnung, und bliben darzu sye selbst
mit aller irer Hab Ehr und Gut, denn ich hab bisher keyn
Leyen vermerkt der da wolt ein Buchstaben von den guten
Kirchenordnungen abthun adder der Geystlichen Giiter um
einen Pfennig schmiilern. Nicht weiss ich was der Churfiirst
von Sachsen und Hessen bringen werden.” “It is evident that
if the clergy meant the same common Christianity as the laity,
the honour of God and good Christian order, as well as they
themselves with all their wealth, honour and property, would

Cuap. IT. DIET OF SPIRE, 1526. 401

It may be easily imagined how greatly this
disposition of the public mind was heightened by
the arrival of the allied princes of the evangelical
party.

The Elector of Saxony appeared with the state
befitting the most puissant prince of the empire.
He rode in at the head of a numerous retinue of
horsemen: seven hundred persons lived daily at
his charge, and his followers boast how well they
fared in his service. He was good humoured and
magnificent. One day he gave a banquet, at which
twenty-six princes dined with him; they were
seated at four tables, their nobles and councillors
at separate ones; some went away early, others
stayed till ten o’clock, and played high. The Land-
grave, on the other hand, with his earnest and
learned zeal, made a great impression: he showed
himself more deeply versed in the Scriptures than
any of the bishops.* Both these princes had ad-
monished their people, that, since they had taken a
name after the Gospel, they should abstain from all
levities.. They had preaching in their houses every
other day, which, on Sundays and holydays, thou-
sands resorted to hear. The armorial bearings
over their doors were encircled with the words,
‘“¢ Verbum Dei manet in eternum.”

Such were the influences under which the reports

remain unhurt; for I have as yet seen no layman who wished
to take away an iota.from the good discipline of the Church, or
to diminish its possessions by one penny. I know not what the
Elector of Saxony and Hessen will bring about.”

* Annales Spalatini in Mencken, 659.

VOL. II. DD

402 DIET OF SPIRE, 1526. Boox IV.

of the committees of the diet were made. All the
old complaints and charges against the encroach-
ments of Rome were revived; among others, that
it exacted far too much subservience from the
bishops, since they were also councillors of the
empire; against commendams and annates, the
monstrosity of the mendicant orders, &c. It was
thought that never had language so free been di-
rected against the pope and the bishops. The cities
pressed especially for a better provision for the
parishes out of the funds of the church, and the
right of every civil government to appoint priests
to officiate in them; they demanded that the
clergy should be subject to the civil burdens and
tribunals. *

But by far the most remarkable thing was the
report which issued from the committee of the
princes, consisting of the bishops of Wiirzburg,
Strasburg, Freisingen, and of George ‘Truchsess
for the spiritual; and of Hessen, the Palatinate,
Baden, and the Count of Solms for the temporal
bench.+ Ihave not been able to discover which
of them had the predominant influence, whether
the well-known moderation of the Bishop of Frei-
singen, or the ardent earnestness of the young
landgrave, turned the scale; be that as it may,
in the discussions of this committee, the original

* Memorial of the free and imperial cities against the clergy,
in Holzhusen’s handwriting in the Frankf. A., vol. xlii.

+ Report of the Hessian delegate, Schrauttenbach, Thursday
after St. Udalric (5th July), in the acts of the diet, Weimar

Archives. They are in other respects very confused, and afford
but little information for this year.

Cuar. IT. DIET OF SPIRE, 1526. 403

idea of erecting one norm or standard equally
binding on both parties was kept steadily in view ;
and was, in fact, realised in a resolution passed
to that effect. There was as yet, spite of all the
struggles between the ruling powers, no actual
division in the nation itself.” The different races of
Germany stood on nearly the same stage of civil-
isation : all without exception— as we had lately
occasion to observe of ‘T'yrol—whether in the north
or the south, had the same tendency to reform,
though their ideas respecting the means by which
it was to be effected might differ. But since these
were not yet fixed, they might still be moulded
into more than one form. It might be imagined
that a well-conceived endeavour to establish a
good understanding throughout the nation might
yet perhaps destroy those elements of discord,
and reconcile those wide divergences of opinions,
which lay in the league of Regensburg and its
consequences. In such a spirit of conciliation
were these propositions conceived. They particu-
larly insisted on the expediency of permitting
the marriage of the clergy, and granting the cup
to the laity. It was proposed to leave every
man free to receive the Holy Sacrament in one
kind or in both; and it was represented to the
emperor that it were better for the priesthood to
contract matrimony than to live with women of ill
fame.* The committee proposed that the severity

* “ Zuzulassen, dass die Empfahung des hochwiirdigen
Sacraments unter einer oder beiderlei Gestalten eines Jeden
Gewissen und freiem Willen heimgesetzt wurde, — dass mit-

DD 2

404 DIET OF SPIRE, 1526. Boox IV.

of fasts and confession should be mitigated, private
masses abolished, and at the ceremonies of baptism
and the Lord’s Supper, the Latin and German
languages be used jointly; that the other sacra-
ments should not, indeed, be discontinued, but be
administered gratuitously. In regard to preaching,
the formula of 1523 was repeated;—that God’s
word should be preached according to right and
sound understanding, and according to the inter-
pretation of the expositors acknowledged by the
Christian church; but with an addition which
evinced a still stronger inclination to reform and
to the sentiments of Luther; viz. that Scripture
must always be explained by Scripture.*

Such were the propositions which issued from a
commission composed of an equal number of spi-
ritual and temporal members. We clearly perceive
that if the Council of Regency formerly showed
itself favourably inclined to reform, this was not
the effect of caprice, nor even of choice: the ne-
cessity of this step arose out of the situation of
things, and the strength of that universal con-
viction from whose influence no-man can withdraw
himself.

lerzeit gegen den ehelichen Priestern yon keyner Uberkeyt
geistlichs oder weltlichs Standes etwas streflichs werd fiirgenom-
men.”— “'To concede, that the reception of the most venerable
Sacrament under one or both kinds should be allowed to every
one according to his conscience and free will,—that mean-
while no punishment should be inflicted on married priests,
either by the ecclesiastical or temporal authorities.”

* Judgment of the eight commissioners in the Dresden
Archives.

Cuap. II. | DIET OF SPIRE, 1526. 405

After so many abortive attempts and dangerous
agitations, the nation once more showed the possi-
bility of preserving its unity on the most important
concern that can occupy the mind of man.

On the Ist of August, a committee chosen from
all the States was appointed to submit this project
to final discussion —a discussion that promised
to be of the greatest interest. There is no doubt
that the project would have experienced much
opposition, since the evangelical party protested
against retaining the four sacraments, about which
nothing is to be found in Scripture *; nor were
the catholics satisfied. Duke George remarked
that the worst abuses were yet untouched; the
origin of all the evil lay in the bad manner in
which the prelates found entrance to the church
—by the right door or the wrong — by the help
of powerful kindred: in short, the most vehement
debates would have taken place f; but there is no
ground for doubting that there would have been a
decided majority, and that it would have passed
definitive resolutions, binding on the whole empire.

It was a crisis like that which had occurred two
years before, when universal preparation was made
for a national assembly. The difficulties were
now greater, because on both sides independent
forms of thought and culture had begun to take

* Treatise in Walch, xvi. 258. ee reply to the principles laid
down by the eight commissioners, partly agreeing with, and

partly combating, them.
+ Letter of Duke George in the acts of the imperial diet,

Dresden Archives.
DD 3

406 DIET OF SPIRE, 1526. Boox IV.

root; but it was the more important to oppose
some check to their growth, and it was yet possible
to do so.

Again, however, did that power intervene which
had forbidden the national assembly, and had
so often thwarted the resolutions of the collective
empire. The emperor seemed determined to adhere
inflexibly to his old policy.

At the same time that he published the catholic
admonition, which we have already mentioned, at
Seville, he issued instructions to his commissioners,
commanding them to assent to no resolution of the
diet that might run counter to the established doc-
trine or practice of the church, and again urged the
execution of the edict of Worms.* This affair is
involved in some obscurity. The instructions must _
have arrived long before, for a considerable time
had elapsed since Duke Henry’s return; and it is not
easy to see how the commissioners could, neverthe-
less, feel themselves authorised at first to produce
others ; — unless we suppose that they did so in
pursuance of a hint subsequently given to the
archduke. Be this as it may, it was not till this ad-
vanced stage of the business that the instructions
in question were produced, at the instigation, as
it was asserted in Spire, of certain powerful ec-
clesiastics, and not without corruption and intrigue
(“Finanz und Hinterlist”): they created an extraor-
dinary sensation. The great committee preserved
its firmness and composure: it declared that it
would adopt such a course as it could answer to

* Commission of the 23d March in the Fr. A. vol. xlii. p. 82.

Cuap. IT. _ DIET OF SPIRE, 1526. 407

the world; but it seemed impossible to effect any
thing, since every new ordinance they might frame
would be met by the clear, express words of the
emperor.

There was a general persuasion that nothing more
whatever was to be accomplished. Many declared
they would not stay a moment longer: the evan-
gelical party feared that recourse would be had to
force. For this cause mainly, the cities now inclined
to the union with Saxony and Hessen, in order to
have a support and defence in case violence should
be resorted to against them.* Niirnberg, Strasburg,
Augsburg and Ulm, now gave their assent to the
proposal of the princes.

The complication was most singular. Whilst in
Italy the pope was employing every means of attack
on the emperor, and stirring up an European war
against him, the imperial power was once more
rendered subservient to the maintenance of the
authority of the papal see in Germany.

But such a relation was too wide a departure from
the ordinary nature and course of human affairs to
endure long.

In Germany people had already ceased to believe
in the sincerity of the opinions expressed in the
instructions. Though their attention was chiefly
engrossed by internal affairs, they knew of the

* Then would “solch Ansuchen und Fulgung zu grossem Nutz
gereichen”— “ such applications and following be of great use.”
Letter of Holzhusen, 21st August. The other cities had their
answer by the 25th August. They waited to see what the
deputies would accomplish before they came to a final decision.

pp 4

408 DIET OF SPIRE, 1526. Boox 1V

treaty of Cognac, and of the misunderstandings be-
tween the pope and the emperor.. The cities first
remarked how very remote was the date of the m-
structions. At that time, indeed, the emperor and
pope were on a good understanding, but now the
pope’s troopg were in the field against the emperor.
They were told that every improvement must be
reserved for the decision of a general council; but
how, under the present circumstances, was it pos-
sible to expect one? Were the emperor present, he
would see that they could not observe his edict, if
they would.

It was rumoured that a caution had been sent to
the Lady Margaret in the Netherlands, to handle
all matters connected with the evangelical religion
gently. In the persuasion that they were acting in
accordance with the emperor’s real sentiments, the
cities therefore proposed to send a deputation which
should represent to him the state of affairs, and pray
him, either to grant a national council, or at least
to recall the order that the edict of Worms should
be executed. This proposal found a ready hearing
in the great committee, in which an anti-eccle- -
siastical majority had instantly declared itself.
During ‘the discussion of the grievances of the
common people, the abuses of the clergy had, in
spite of their opposition, been expressly designated as
the chief cause of the late insurrection. People now
called to mind that the imperial edict had been ac-
cepted, only in so far as it should be found possible
to execute it; — but it was found utterly impossible.
Nobody was forthcoming who had executed it, nay,
whose conscience would allow him to execute it,

Cuar. IL. DIET OF SPIRE, 1526. ’ 409

according to the letter.* And how were they
to furnish succours against the Turks, if they saw
danger impending over them at home? The
great committee assented to the proposition of
sending a deputation to Spain; and immediately
drew up instructions for it, wherein it ascribed
the religious divisions of the country more es-

* A rough draft of the instruction in the Dresden Archives
proves that these were the motives alleged: the petition runs
thus: “ Der Kaiser wolle die Execution der Peen und Straf
desselbigen Edictes bis uf ein kiinftig Concilium in Ruw stehn
lassen, Ursach es haben die Stennd das Edict night anders ange-

-nommen dan so vil In miiglich, wie die kaiserliche Instruction
selbs mit ir bringt, und nachdem Etlichen unmiiglich gewesen
das Edict zu halten, so seyen sie auch nicht in die Peen gefallen,
zum andern so man die Buchstaben besieht, so ist kain Fiirst
oder Bisehof der das Edict gehallten oder der nicht ein Ent-
setzen hat dasselbige ad literam zu halten.”—- “The emperor
wished to let the execution of the pains and penalties im-
posed by this edict rest until a future council; therefore the
estates did accept the edict only so far as it was possible
to carry it out, as was set forth in the imperial instruction ;
and as some had found it impossible to enforce the edict,
they were not subjected to the penalties :—— on the other
hand, if the letter of the edict be looked to, it were impossible
that any prince or bishop could enforce it, or not have a
horror of enforcing it ad literam.” 'Then follows the in-
struction itself. The Frankfurt deputies say, in a letter written
from this diet, “So wollen wir auch E. F. W. nicht bergen,
dass auch das kais. Edict so ad 21 zu Worms ausgangen,
allhie auf diesem Reichstag von Fiirsten Grafen Herrn und
Stedten hochlich und fast als unméglich in allen Puncten zu
halten angefochten wird.” “We will not conceal from your
princely worships that the imperial edict published at Worms,
anno 21, will be opposed at this diet by princes, counts, lords,
and cities, as being almost impossible to be enforced in all
points.”

410 - DIET OF SPIRE, 1526. Boox IV.

pecially to the prohibition of the national assembly,
and prayed the emperor as soon as possible to calla
council of the nation at least ; and, until then, gra-
ciously to suspend the execution of the edict, which,
to some, was impossible on conscientious grounds ; to
others, because they had reason to fear it would
cause a rebellion among their subjects; and to a
third party, for these reasons combined.

It is very remarkable that while such were the
resolutions come to in Germany, they were met by
corresponding ideas from Spain.

We know the point of view from which the
imperial court from the first regarded the Lutheran
opinions. It had opposed them so long as it was
in alliance with the papacy; but its devotion to
the church did not go the length of requiting the
war which Clement VII. made upon it in Italy,
with friendly offices in Germany. Immediately
after the battle of Pavia, when it first became
apparent how little reliance could be placed on the
pope’s good intentions, the Grand Chancellor, Gat-
tinara, proposed to demand a council; not, as he
said, really to convoke it, but only to force the pope
to shew a more compliant spirit in his negotiations.*
England, at the same time, begged Clement to con-
sider how easily any partiality shown to France might
cost him the obedience of that portion of the States
of the empire which yet adhered to the church.}

* The decree in Bucholtz, ii. p, 281.

} Extract of a letter from Wolsey to the Bishop of Bath im-
mediately before the battle of Pavia (before Parma, is doubt-
less a clerical error). Fiddes, Life of Wolsey, 82. Wolsey

Cuar. II. DIET OF SPIRE, 1526. 41]

But the hostility to him had now become far more
decided. From Germany itself he had been apprised
that the diet would be more unfavourable than ever to
his cause: he himself indeed expected nothing else.”
Long —almost too long —did the emperor hesitate
to declare himself. At length, however, after the
latest negotiations had failed, he assumed a more
resolute bearing. After many consultations in the
council of state which he had just then constituted
for affairs of Spain and Germany, he wrote to his
brother on the 27th July, that a proposal which he
now subjoined had been submitted to that body,
for abolishing the penal clauses of the edict of
Worms, and for submitting the truth of the evan-
gelical doctrines to the decision of a council. The
pope would not have cause to complain, since it
was only the secular, and not the spiritual punish-
ments that it was proposed to abolish. It was to
be hoped that the emperor might then obtain efli-
cient succours, in horse and foot, against the Turks
or against Italy, for the good of Christendom.f

thought that the course adopted by Campeggi promised to lead
to the desired end, but “that Germany being now so much
infected with the Lutheran heresy, such members of it as still
continue in the communion of the church, may be provoked to
withdraw their obedience, should his holiness appear to act in
favour of the French king against the emperor.”

_* Albert da Carpi au Roi de France, 24th June, 1526, in
Molini Docum. stor. i. p. 208.: “ que @ cette heure se feroit le
tout le pis que se pourroit contre luy et la ste. siege.” From a
declaration of the Elector of Treves of the 9th June.

+ Extract in Bucholtz, iii. 371. “In his council a draft of a
well-constructed and well-grounded edict was. made, the fruit
of which was to be, that those who adhered to the errors of

412 DIET OF SPIRE, 1526. Boox IV.

Under these circumstances—the emperor him-
self having made the concession which Germany
urgently demanded — who would not have expected
that it would be definitively granted and _ pro-
claimed? It appears from the original documents
that Markegrave Casimir of Brandenburg, one of
the imperial commissioners, zealously advocated
this abolition of penalties.* It unquestionably
depended on Ferdinand alone; but he was not
favourable to it.

His chief ground of opposition was doubtless
the fear of displeasing those states of Germany
which were inclined to the ancient faith. Charles,
indeed, had remarked in the letter above men-
tioned, that a part of his council thought it ex-
pedient to put off the repeal of the edict, which
might otherwise convert the adversaries of Luther-
anism into enemies of his government.} Ferdinand
doubtless knew even better than his brother how
necessary it was to conciliate'them. The idea had
at this moment been suggested at Rome of offering
the Roman crown to some antagonist of the em-
peror {: and Duke William of Bavaria had already

Luther were to be drawn away from them by mildness and
leniency ; and a way be afforded them by which the truth of
the evangelical doctrine might be decided by a good council,
which the pope now feared; at the same time they would
support Ferdinand against the Turks or against Italy, for the
common good of Christendom.”

* See the Lith. Erliinterung, p. 172.

+ Cause, “d’estre mauvais avec les aultres.” Bucholtz, 372.
Pity the whole letter is not printed.

t In the Provvisioni per la guerra di Clemente VII. (Inform.
polit.) this is described as a desirable measure.

Cuar. II. DIET OF SPIRE, 1526. 413

begun to canvass the most influential electors with
a view to obtaining that dignity. To wrest from
the catholic princes the edict upon which they
principally based their persecution of the Lutherans,
might have converted them into the most resolute
and dangerous enemies. He too thought it prudent
to suspend the repeal of the edict of Worms. He
thought that when the emperor was once more
within the limits of the empire, and had established
_his power there on a solid basis, this measure might
be carried into effect with advantage, and without
any shock to the established religion: then too he
might obtain a good sum of money from the Luthe-
rans in return for this act of grace and lenity.*
But if he was not disposed to hasten the revocation
of the edict of Worms, he had just as little inclina-
tion or power to urge its general execution. A
complete triumph of the pope’s adherents would
have been extremely injurious to the house of
Austria.

As, therefore, it seemed neither expedient to exe-
cute the edict nor to repeal it; as no proposals of a
middle course had any chance of acceptance; a
principle came into action which had already in-
fluenced the course of events, though rather beneath
the surface, and without as yet exciting general
attention: The principle of the development
of the several territorial powers now prevailed

* Excerpt of a letter from Ferdinand, 22d Sept. There is
no question that the letter of 27th July arrived in the middle
of August. Letters from Spain were generally a fortnight on
the road.

A414 DIET OF SPIRE, 1526. Boox IV.

even in the affairs of religion. I find that the cities
were the first to bring this into public notice and
discussion. They alleged that it was no longer
possible to re-establish entire the cereinonies of the
church: that in many places these had been
altered, in others, had been left wholly untouched ;
that each party thought that his way was the right;
that it was impossible in this case to resort to force;
and that nothing remained but to leave every man
to the form of religion he had adopted, till such
time as a free council should be able, by the
help of the divine word, to decide the matter * : —
A proposal fundamentally at variance with the
nature of a diet of the empire, which represented
unity, and with the former decrees of the empire,
which had always been of universal application and
validity ; but which was imperiously commanded by
the state of things. It was equally impracticable
to withdraw the edict of Worms from the catholic
states, or to impose it on the evangelical: the
thought of granting to every district and every
state the independence in regard to religion*which it
had, in fact, begun to enjoy, speedily gained ground.
It was the most easy and natural solution of the
difficulty ; nobody had any thing better to advise.
The impulse towards religious separation which had —
grown up since 1524, triumphed over all attempts
to preserve and to cement unity by means of reform.
The committee decreed that “ each state should act
in such wise as it could answer it to God and the

* Memorial of the cities. Frankf. A. A. vol. xii.

Cuar. I. DIET OF SPIRE, 1526. 415

emperor ;””—that is to say, it should do as it thought
expedient. The committee immediately inserted
this resolution in the instructions for the deputation
to the emperor.

There is a moment at which all the interests of
Europeat large, and Germany in particular, converge
and become implicated with each other ; a moment |
which, though it appears unimportant, was in fact
the point at which the early history of Germany
ends and the modern begins :—the moment when the
Archduke Ferdinand accepted the report of the
committee, sanctioned the sending of the deputation,
and approved the instructions drawn up for it.
It was ordered in the Recess, that until the general
or national assembly of the church, which was prayed
for, should be convoked, each state should, in all
matters appertaining to the edict of Worms, “so live,
rule, and bear itself as it thought it could answer it
to God and. the emperor.” *

* «Demnach haben wir (die Commissarien) auch Chur-
fiirsten Fiirsten und Stiinde des Reichs und derselben Bott-
schafter uns jetzo allhie auf diesem Reichstag einmiithiglich
verglichen und vereiniget, mittler Zeit des Concilii oder aber
Nationalversammlung nichts desto minder (d.i. ohne die Riick-
kunft der Gesandtschaft zu erwarten) mit unsern Unterthanen
ein jeglicher in Sachen, so das Edict, durch Kais. Mt. auf dem
Reichstag zu Worms gehalten ausgangen, belangen mochten, fiir
sich also zu leben, zu regieren und zu halten, wie ein jeder solches
gegen Gott un Kais. Mt. hoffet und vertrauet zu verantworten.”
_“ Thereupon have we (the commissioners), also the electors,
princes, and estates of the empire, and the ambassadors of the
same, now here at this present diet, unanimously agreed and
resolved, in the midst of the sitting of the council or national
assembly (é. e. without waiting for the return of the deputa-

416 DIET OF SPIRE, 1526. Boox IV.

The reader must pardon the repetition of these
words, in consideration of the infinite importance
they afterwards acquired. They contain the legal
foundation of the constitution of the national
churches of Germany, and at the same time they
involve (although leaving open the possibility of
a future re-union) the separation of the nation
into two great religious parties. They are the
words which decided the fate of Germany. Ca-
tholicism would not have been able to maintain
itself if the edict of Worms had been formally re-
pealed. The evangelical party would not have
been able to constitute itself legally, if the em-
peror and the States had insisted on the execution
of that edict. The future existence and develop-
ment of both hung on this point.

Generally considered, it was the immediate and
necessary consequence of the division between the
emperor and the pope. Their alliance had pro-
duced the edict of Worms: that alliance being
broken, the emperor and his brother revoked the
edict in so far as its revocation was consistent with
their own interests.

tion) with our subjects, on the matters which the edict pub-
lished by his imperial majesty at the diet holden at Worms
may concern, each one so to live, govern, and carry himself as
he hopes and trusts to answer it to God and his imperial
majesty.” — New Collection of Recesses, ii. 274.

CHAPTER III.

CONQUEST OF ROME, A.D. 1527.

Wurtz these deliberations were going on in Ger-
many, in Italy war had already broken out.

The allies had taken the field in June; unques-
tionably not with the necessary promptitude and
_ decision ; since the imperialists had gained time
sufficient to put down the insurrection of the Mi-
lanese, and had at length succeeded in taking the
citadel. On the other hand, however, the allies
took Lodi and Cremona; the Swiss, so long ex-
pected in vain, at length arrived in considerable
numbers, and a brilliant corps of French men-at-
arms joined the army. In September the Ligue
were evidently masters of the country, while the
imperialists, cooped up in a city inclined to re-
bellion, ill paid, and almost cut off from the sur-
rounding country, found themselves in a very cri-
tical situation. *

But the emperor had means of resistance and of
retaliation at his command, even in Italy itself.

In June he once more made overtures of peace
to the pope; at the same time charging his pleni-
potentiary, Ugo Moncado, in case he received a

* From a letter of Guicciardini to the Datarius, 24th Sept.,
1526, it appears that there was an idea of making a new
attempt to drive the imperialists out of Milan.

VOL. II. EE

418 ASSAULT ON ROME Boox IV.

refusal, to find means of diverting the forces of the
enemy from Milan.* This was not difficult to
accomplish ; the state, the city, nay, the Vatican
itself, was filled with partisans of the empire.
When. the imperial envoy, the Duke of Sessa, rode
home from the last fruitless audience, he took a
fool behind him on his horse, who by a thousand
antic tricks and buffooneries gave the people to
understand that there was nothing to be done. f
The pope’s open enemies held meetings under
his own eyes in the houses of the Colonnas. In
order to fulfil the intentions of the emperor, they
resorted to what we may be permitted to call the
lowest cunning. They began to make warlike pre-
parations on the frontiers of Naples, in the do-
minions of the Colonnas; upon which the pope too
took up arms. They then offered to enter into a
treaty with him. Clement consented, and was now
so devoid of all solicitude, that he discharged a
great number of his troops in Rome. This was
exactly the moment they waited for. Having lulled
him into security, they determined to attack him.
Pompeo Colonna —the warlike cardinal who had
once rent his stole and gone forth to decide a
quarrel by single combat— who had always dis-
played a bitter personal hatred to Clement, now
made common cause with Don Ugo, as Sciarra
Colonna had done with Nogaret. On the 19th
of September, the troops of Colonna appeared

* Letter from Charles: Bucholtz, nu, 52s
+ Albert da Carpi to Francis I. Molini, Documente, i. 205.

Cuap. III. BY COLONNA. 419

before the walls of Rome, and entered without re-
sistance. The city was utterly defenceless: the
people did not stir ; they were curious to see whe-
ther Colonna would really do what he said — take
possession of the Vatican in the name of the Roman
emperor.* There was no one to prevent his
fulfilling this threat; and the pope, who had fled
to the castle of St. Angelo, was compelled, in order
to have his palace restored to him, to consent to a
truce, not only with Naples and the Colonnas, but
with Milan and Genoa; in short, in respect of all
his own troops by land or sea. + It was only on
these terms that Colonna’s army left the city, from
which it carried off a booty of 300,000 ducats.
Clement must surely now have perceived the
feebleness of his resources and the magnitude of
the danger; he must have heard the voice that
foretells the fall of the avalanche; but again
he was under the dominion of exasperation and
vengeance. ‘The obligations which he had so go-
lemnly and publicly taken upon himself were, as
his plenipotentiary, Guicciardini, wrote to him, far
more sacred than these conditions, extorted from
him by force {; nor was he disposed to observe the

* Contemporary account, in Buder, Sammlung, ungedruckter
Schriften, p. 563. Negri to Micheli, 24th Sept. Lettere di
Principi, i. 234. (The date in the printed copy is wrong.)

+ Conventione di Clemente VI. con Ugo di Moncada in
Molini, i. 229.

t Guicciardini to Datarius, 27th Sept. Lett. di Prin. ii.
14. He expressed himself very characteristically: “Nell
osservare la triegua veggo vergogna, non si fugge spesa et si.

EE 2

420 WARLIKE PREPARATIONS Boox IV.

truce an hour longer than expediency required * ;
no sooner was he in some degree prepared, than ne
attacked the Colonnas and the Neapolitan territory;
in a short time he received French and English
subsidies in money, and the celebrated defender ~
of Marseilles, Renzo da Ceri, undertook to lead the
papal army into the Abruzzi. Meanwhile his other
troops served against Milan and Genoa, just as they
had done pofeue the truce.

' At this moment, however, a new and far greater
danger arose in another quarter: the emperor had
forces at his disposal of a very different character
from any that Italy could produce.

In that letter of the 27th July, 1526, which was
so decisive for the issue of the diet, Charles had
invited his brother either to go to Italy in person,
(in which case he meant to give him no instructions,
but merely full powers, as his alter ego,) or at least
to fit out and send a strong army.f

Ferdinand was prevented from going in person
by the affairs of Hungary, which urgently de-
manded his presence ; but he addressed himself to
the man who had always led the Landsknechts in
Italy to victory—George Frundsberg of Min-
delsheim, who was ready once more to devote all

augumenta il pericolo: perche quanto all’ honore, pit é obligato
N. S™ ad una lega fatta volontariamente et con tante solennita
per salute publica, che ad un’ accordo fatto per forza et con
ruina del mondo.”

* Excerpt of a letter wherein Clement declares that the treaty
is not binding on him.

+ Excerpt in Bucholtz, i. 42.

Cuap. ITI. IN GERMANY. ; 491

the vigour that age had left him to the service of
the emperor. The great difficulty was to raise
money.* Ferdinand gave his plenipotentiaries full
powers to mortgage land and people, castles and
cities; he declared himself ready to send his jewels
to pawn in Augsburg. Frundsberg, too, pawned
his wife’s jewels, and offered his own lands to
mortgage.f The Italian commanders, who declared
that they could only hold out for a short time
unless they received succours, sent some ready
money ; at length enough was got together to give
the men at least their marching money and half a
month’s pay. Hereupon the drum was beat in all
the imperial cities of the Oberland, and troops
flocked to the standard from all quarters.

We run no risk of error in affirming that it was
not mere martial ardour that now drew them
together; they knew that they were to march
against the pope.

* From the report of Otto von Pack, who was sent to
Insbruck to collect money for Duke George, we see what diffi-
culties he encountered: the Welsers were not in funds; the
' Fuggers wanted the cash that was in their hands in order
to dissolve their partnership after the death of Jacob Fugger
(Dr. A.). According to a letter of Ferdinand’s to Charles,
98th October, 1526, (Gevay, Documents and Acts, parti. p. 22.)
it appears as if nothing whatever was to be obtained from the
money changers.

+ “Voire que luy mesmes a voulsu engaiger et mectre ez
mains des fouckres les terres et biens quil a a lentour daugs-
purg, ne luy a este possible sauoir deulx ny autrement recouurer
argent....- Neantmoins affin que le tout ne se perde... non
obstant mes grans affaires iay enuoye audict messire george ce
dargent quay peu finer, tellement que de ceste heure il passe

; EE 8 :

429 WARLIKE PREPARATIONS Boox IV.

This had been foreseen in Rome.  Giberti
remarked, in the preceding July, that numerous
bodies of men might easily be collected in Germany,
“on account of the natural hatred which they
cherish against us, and of the hope of plunder.”

The emperor’s exhortations were conceived in
the most insidious terms. His brother, he said,
had only to give out that the army he was levying
was to march against the Turks: every body
would know what Turks were meant. In a
manifesto published by the emperor in September,
1526, he expressed himself in a manner which no
follower of Luther would have needed to disown:
he testified his surprise that the pope should be
willing to cause bloodshed for any possession what-
soever; a thing wholly at variance with the doc-
trine of the Gospel.* In October he begged the
cardinals to remind the pope that he was not raised
to the pontifical throne ‘in order to bear arms, nor
for the injury of the people of Christendom:” he
again proposed a council, and urged the cardinals,
if the pope continued to refuse it, to call one in his
stead: he declared that he at least would be
guiltless, “if injury should accrue to the Christian

audict ytalie auec X™ bons pietons et vne bonne bande dartil-
lerie.

* Rescriptum ad Pape Criminationes. “Quod tamen St y=
non placuit, it is said (Goldast, Constit., i. 489., nr. 19.), licet
credere non possemus, eum qui Christi vices in terris gerit, vel
unius gutte humani sanguinis jactura quamcunque secularem di-

tionem sibi vendicare velle, cum ad ab evangelica doctrina
prorsus alienum videretur.”

Crap. 1. | IN GERMANY. 423

republic from its denial.”* As to Frundsberg,
there is no doubt that he had for some time
cherished evangelical opinions, and had, moreover,
conceived the bitterest hatred against the pope
during the late war.t Immediately after the battle
of Pavia, he had proposed to march into the States
of the Church, and attack him on his own ground.
He was encouraged in this way of thinking by his
secretary and companion, Jacob Ziegler, who had
long been resident at the court of Rome, and
whose biography of Clement VII. is still extant.
From this we learn what the Germans there
thought and said among themselves of the pope ; —
of his illegitimate birth, which ought from the first
to have excluded him from the priesthood; his
cunning and craftiness, and his insatiable and
scandalous rapacity. They accused him of a con-
nexion with poisoners, and of the most shameful
vices. They caught up and repeated all the rumours
of the court, true or false, to feed the national an-
tipathy of which they were themselves full. These
stories, combined with the hostility shown by Rome
to the emperor, which was esteemed most unjust,
awakened in the Germans, both leaders and com-
mon men, the same politico-religious zeal against
the pope, which had been fatal to so many bishops
+n the Peasants’ War. George of Frundsberg was
thoroughly imbued with itt; added to which, he

* Epistola Caroli ad Collegium Cardinalium VI" Octobris.
Goldast, Pol. Imp., p. 1013.

+ See the passage quoted at p. 96.

+ Schelhorn, de Vita et Scriptis Jacobi Ziegleri, §21. He

EE 4

4QA4 FRUNDSBERG’S MARCH. Boox IV.

was sorry, he said, for “ the good honest fellows”
who were besieged in Milan and Cremona.* He
declared that he was resolved “to make an end of
the affair, and to do the pope a mischief, if he could
get him into his hands.”

If the emperor’s policy seconded the religious
efforts of the Germans, the religious spirit by which
those efforts were prompted was favourable, on the
other hand, to the policy of the emperor. No sooner
did he show the smallest leaning to the inclinations
of the people than they tendered their whole powers
to his assistance.

In November nearly 11,000 men assembled on
the mustering g ground at Mioiaci and Botzen f: they
were joined in Trent by the garrison which had
just evacuated Cremona, under Conradin of Gliirns:
they were all willing, spite of the poor pay they
received: about 4000 more joined them on their
march without any pay whatever ; “a choice army,

refers to an unprinted work of Ziegler’s, “magnanimo heroi,
G. F° in expeditione Italica versanti eum fuisse vel a consiliis
vel ab epistolis.”

* Letter from Frundsberg to Margaret, 19th Sept., 1526,
“. .. where the want of money was such a hinderance to such help
and succour, that it was to be feared the good honest fellows
would be abandoned, and no, only the duchy of Milan lost, but
Naples, Calabria, and Sicily also; and likewise that the
hereditary and other dominions of his imperial Majesty must be
reduced to great extremity.”

} From the diary in Hormayr’s Archiy., 1812, p. 424., we see
that the army consisted of 10,650 men, and required for its main-
tenance, and that of the various officers and followers attached
to it, 25,900 gulden (with the exchange, 34,842 gulden). The
commissaries lent Frundsberg 2000 ; ulden, “ that he might have
something in hand.” He accepted 2 “with overflowing ‘eyes.”

Crap. III. FRUNDSBERG’S MARCH. 425

such as had not been beheld in Italy in the memory
of man.”

The great and immediate difficulty was to get
there; to cross the Alps, and then to effect a junc--
tion with the troops in Milan.

Frundsberg had no mind to waste his time and
strength on the well-garrisoned fortress of Verona:
he took the far more difficult road over the Sarka
mountain, towards the domains of his brother-in-
‘law, the Count of Lodron. Here, again, two roads
lay before him: the one on the right practicable for
an army, but commanded by the fortress of Anfo;
the other on the left, a mere footpath between preci-
pices and chasms, which a single peasant could have
rendered completely impassable, but which the
enemy had not observed. Along this path Frunds-
berg began his march on the 17th of November. His
brother-in-law, who knew every pass and defile of
the: neighbourhood of his hereditary castle, gave
him escort for three miles, up to the summit of the
mountain. They could take but very few horses,
and even of these some fell over the precipices: of
the men, some perished in the same manner, and
the boldest did not venture to cast his eyes into
the abyss below. A few sure-footed landsknechts
forming a sort of railing ‘with their long spears,
guarded the steps of their veteran leader ; and thus
holding on one before him and pushed on by
another, he traversed the terrific pass. They
- reached Aa in the evening, and on the 18th arrived
at Sabbio without encountering any resistance.
On the 19th they appeared at the foot of the Alps,

426 FRUNDSBERG’S MARCH. Boox IV.

at the village of Gavardo, in the territory of Brescia.
Their provisions were just exhausted, but here they
found good Farnazig wine; and having driven to-
gether 8000 head of cattle, they made merry after
their long privations.*

Their intention had been to effect an immediate
junction with the army at Milan. But the enemy
was far too strong in the field to allow this. The
Duke of Urbino, comander-in-chief of the Ligue, ap-
peared on their right flank, and kept them off from -
Oglio. They saw the impossibility of attacking any
of the neighbouring cities, which were all in a good
state of defence, while they themselves were without
artillery: nothing remained but to endeavour to
cross the Po, where the enemy was not so strong,
and where Bourbon might in time be able to join
them. Thither Frundsberg took his way, in three

* Reissner Frundsberge, 86. Thun, in Hormayr, 428. Very
minute details of this whole enterprise are to be found in Jacob
Ziegler’s unprinted work, Acta Paparum Urbis Rome, of
which I intend to give a fuller account in the Appendix. I
shall only remark here, that it is the main source whence
Reissner has taken his book, which it surpasses in brevity and
distinctness. It says of the march upon Mantua: “ Vnd dieweil
gfirlich vnd schwiir fur die grosse stett press ynd Bergom vber
die grossen wasser, die allenthalb verlegt durch die gwaltigen
hauffen der feind, den nechsten auf Mailand zuziehen, hat er
sich auf Mantua gewendt.”—“ And then with danger and diffi-
culty, past the great cities Brescia and Bergamo, across the
great water, which was obstructed on all sides by the strong
bands of the enemy ; in order to take the nearest way to Milan,
he turned upon Mantua.”

t Bourbon wrote to Frundsberg that he could not fix a route
for him. Frundsberg was determined, if necessary, to fight, but
otherwise “to put himself in no peril.” Letter in H. p. 424.

* Guar. IT. FRUNDSBERG’S MARCH. 427

close columns. The allies had not yet courage to
make a serious attack on him; they merely annoyed
him with their light cavalry, or with their mus-
keteers, who lay in ambush behind hedges or in
ditches.* Once only he was in serious danger.
As he entered the fortifications round Mantua, over
a long and narrow dam, the enemy attacked him in
the rear, and at the same time moved forward to
occupy the bridge over the Mincio, which he had
to pass at Governolo. He would have been lost if
he had suffered himself to be hemmed in in this
most unfavourable place. Frundsberg, however,
though chiefly conspicuous for his rough soldier-
like bravery, was by no means without a simple
and efficient system of tactics. He had secured
this bridge exactly at the right moment: the at-
tack in his rear was repulsed by the musketeers ;
and, just as a considerable body of, the enemy’s
troops appeared on the other side of the river and
seemed about to contest the passage with him, for-
tune favoured him so far that one of his first shots
inflicted a mortal wound on their captain, Giovanni
de Medici}, in whom the Italian soldiery put im-

* Leoni; Vita di Francesco Maria d’Urbino, p. 364.

+ The incident that this was exactly the first shot out of the
falconet just, arrived from Ferrara, is first found in Ziegler.
Reissner also used Jovius (Vita Alfonsi, p. 189.) and Guicciar-
dini (b. 27. p. 34.), who- expresses more clearly what Ziegler
tells somewhat obscurely : “he (Giov. de Medici) had one leg
shot off at the knee, by a shot from a falconet.” “ Roppe una
gamba alquanto sopra al ginocchio.” According to the diary in
Hormayr, two falconets and two culverins arrived from the duke, _

428 JUNCTION OF THE Boox IV.

plicit trust. He was a man completely after the
tastes and opinions of Italy at that period —accom-
plished, prudent, addicted to all the vices and de-
baucheries of the south, but at the same time ener-
getic and daring, and gifted with every other quality
of a good leader. Hereupon Frundsberg crossed the
Po at Ostiglia, and marched up the right bank as far
as the Trebbia. On the 28th of December he ar-
rived in the neighbourhood of Piacenza. ‘“ Here we’
are,” he writes to Bourbon; “ over the high moun-
tains, and the deep waters, through the midst of
the enemy, in hunger and want and misery, we
have arrived safe and sound. What shall we do ?”
Bourbon required the whole of January to reduce
Milan to such a state of tranquillity as that he could
entrust it toa part of his troops, and march with
the remainder to join the German forces. On the
12th January the junction was effected near Firen-
zuola.* ‘There could be no doubt as to the course
which it was expedient for them to pursue. We
are already acquainted with the dispositions of
Frundsberg ; nor can it be matter of wonder that
Bourbon now hated the pope more than any man
living; since the emperor’s demand that he should
be created Duke of Milan, to which Clement would

together with 1000 gulden. “ Had J,” says Frundsberg, “ had
400 or 500 horse, I would, with God’s help, have won no slight
honour for his imperial majesty and his princely highness.
You may, in short, believe that I never in my life saw a more
hurried retreat.” The enemy lost five hundred horse.

* Frundsberg was very discontented at the long delay. He
began to suspect treachery: what is told him, he believes “like
St. Thomas.” Letter passim, 430.

Crap. IIL. IMPERIAL ARMIES. 429

never accede, was the condition which had hitherto
rendered all negotiations abortive. Their sole ally
in Italy was the Duke of Ferrara, who cherished
a bitter hatred to the pope, having been incessantly
menaced, even in his hereditary domains, both
by Leo and by Clement: he supplied the troops
with provisions on their march, and urged. their
leaders not to lose a moment, and to seek their
common enemy in Rome itself.* On the 22d Feb-
ruary the combined army, 20,000 strong, in six
divisions, with some cannon and a small body of
light horse, broke up their camp at Firenzuola and
took the high road to Rome. Leaders and men
were equally persuaded of the fact that the pope
had begun the war afresh: they knew very well
that if the emperor allowed them to be without pay
it was only from want of means, and they determined
to go and seek it for themselves in-Rome. Religious
antipathy, and the desire to avenge the emperor—
perhaps to re-establish the ancient power of the
empire in Italy + ;—the just notion that a war is only

* As early as November, the Duke of Ferrara had advised
him to establish the Bentivogli in Bologna: if that was im-
possible, “to undertake the campaign against the pope; if
Bourbon could raise no money, then to levy contributions on
the towns and villages for the support of the landsknechts.”

{ Ziegler: “Desshalben aus manigfaltiger getrungner not
alle einhellig beschlossen, das sie eilends den papa, den anfaher
dess kriegs vnd dieser bundtnus, vberfallen, daselbs bezalung
suchen welten ; wann das haubt bezwungen, so wurden sich die
stett vnd das land selbs ergeben, wo es ihnen dann gluckhen
vnd dem kaiser geliebt sein wurd, so wolten sie gantz Italia
wieder zum reich bringen.”—“ Therefore from manifold urgent
need, all unanimously determined, that they would suddenly fall

430 MUTINY IN THE CAMP. Boox IV.

to be concluded in the enemy’s capital; the eagerness
to get possession of their well-earned pay, and the
rumour of treasures: brought from all parts of the
globe and accumulated in Rome for centuries, —all
these various feclings and motives were blended
into one mass of passionate determination to conquer
and to plunder Rome.

At the very first obstacle that placed itself in
their way, this temper — now become independent
and untameable — burst out with the most violent
explosion.

At the end of February and the beginning of March
the papal troops had gained some advantages in the
Neapolitan territory, and the viceroy had actually
determined to conclude a truce with the pope; in
which, however, the sum of money that was to be
contributed to the support of the army was either
not mentioned at all, or very vaguely ; though its
retreat into Lombardy was wimiings stipulated.*
upon the pope, the paeaner of the war, and upon this league, and
would there seek pay : when the head was subdued, the city
and the country would surrender of themselves; if they had
luck, and the emperor ae hai they would bring back the whole
of Italy to the empire.”

* Treaty in Bucholtz, iii. 605. The contents of this treaty as
given by Guicciardini (xviii. 5. ) do not exactly correspond with
this; e.g. there is no mention in Bucholtz of the 60,000 ducats
which according to Guicciardini, were to be paid. Ziegler
says, too, “ Er welt sechtzig tausent ducaten, iedem knecht, das
sie aus dem land ziehen, ainen monatsold geben ;”— “he would
give sixty thousand ducats—the amount of a month’s pay for all
the landsknecht whom they brought out of the country,” which
is adopted word for word by Reissner, p. 103... I am inclined to
think, however, that there were some secret articles, as in the
Ligue of Cognac. Vettori speaks of 65,000 ducats.

Cup. III. MUTINY IN THE CAMP. 431

It was not very likely that this treaty would be
ratified by the emperor, or accepted by the leaders
of the army ; nor, indeed, that it would be executed
by the papal general; since the army of the Ligue
threatened in that case to separate itself entirely
from the papal troops.* But the mere rumour of
such a thing, the sight of an envoy coming from
Rome and returning thither directly, threw the
whole army into agitation. The Spaniards mur-
mured first. They threatened that they would go
over to another master who would satisfy their
claims better; an empty threat — for whom
could they find? Since the emperor owed them
eight months’ pay, nothing remained but to stand
by their leader. It was fortunate for Bourbon that
he was able to make his escape ; his tent was plun-
dered, and his best garment found the following day
in a ditch. The Spaniards instantly communicated
_ their own mutinous spirit to the Germans: their in-
cessant ery was, Lanz! Lanz! Geld! Geld! (Lance!
Lance! Money! Money!) this was all the German
they knew; it was like the inarticulate cry of
passion. Frundsberg, however, did not as yet see:
any ground for fear ; he still trusted to his well-
tried personal influence over the landsknechts.
He ordered the drums to beat, a ring to be
formed, and had the courage to go into the middle

* These uncertainties reduced the papal agents to despair.
“ Si & sempre consigliato lo accordo, ma s’ intendeva un accordo
che fusse fermo e non dubio e intrigato, come questo che si é
fatto in Roma e non osservato in Lombardia.” __

+ Sepulveda, vi. 1.

432 MUTINY IN THE CAMP. Boox IV.

of it, accompanied by the Prince of Orange (who
had followed the army from Germany) and the chief
commanders: he thought he should still be able to
effect something by means of a few words of reason.
He called upon them to remember how he had al-
ways been their friend*, and had never left them
in good times or in evil: he promised that he would
always be true to his good landsknechts; he re-
minded them that they had sworn to stand by one
another in life and in death, till they should all be
paid and satisfied ; then he meant to stop: the em-
peror’s foe, the beginner of the war, he would carry
off with them.t | But reason has little power over
congregated masses of men, nor is their violence
to be controlled by any arguments. The rational
address of their leader, whom every man of them
individually loved and honoured, they answered
with the cry, Money! Money! which ran like the
muttering of a storm through their ranks: they
levelled their lances against the commanders in
their centre as if they meant to transfix them.
Never could such a moment have presented it-
self to the imagination or the fears of Frunds-
berg. It was with him that the organization

* In a former letter from the army it is said, “Die Knecht
sind vast wohl mit im zufrieden: er ritt auch unter ihnen um
wie ein Held, und ist allweg der fordriste beim Haufen.”
Wittenbach, 4th Feb. 27. in Hormayr’s Oestreichischer Plu-
tarch, xiii. 112.

+ Reissner Frundsberge, 104. (Barthold’s Frundsberg, I
presume.) True and short account in Buder, p. 526.; and in
Goldast, Polit. Reichshindel, p.448.: there are some small
differences which can hardly be reconciled,

Cuar. III. GEORGE FRUNDSBERG. 433

and tactics of the landsknechts had mainly ori-
ginated; they called him, and with justice, their
teacher and father. He had fought at their head in
almost all the wars of the house of Austria during
that century; he had conquered the most powerful
enemies, spite of every inferiority of numbers or
disadvantage of position. His reputation did not
rest on the mere animal courage of a soldier; he
commanded respect by his coolness and presence
of mind in the midst of danger; by the promptitude
with which he took a salutary resolution, and the
dauntless valour with which he executed it. His
homely sayings are very characteristic: “ Kriegs-
rath mit der That” (Counsel in war, with action) ;
“Viel Feinde, viel Ehre” (Many enemies, much
honour) ; they inspired both the officers and
men who served under him with boundless confi-
dence. His command fully justified their obedience.
He still hoped by their aid to effect every thing;
he did not even despair of beating the Turks,
and of driving them to the frontiers of Europe.
Like a true partisan and servant of the empire, he
embraced with a glance Rome and Constantinople.
His loyalty never wavered, although, spite of all his
services, he was sometimes ill at court; he gave
vent to his dissatisfaction in a few rhymes, and at
the next trouble or disaster that befel his master,
he took down his armour from the wall: he held to
the great Idea of the empire with unshaken con-
stancy. He had now to encounter this unlooked-
for resistance. He was a man of extraordinary
personal strength ; on one occasion he had pushed
VOL. II. FF

434 GEORGE FRUNDSBERG. Boox IV.

aside a very powerful adversary with one finger, as
if in sport; fear he knew not, nor had any sud-
den mishap ever had power to throw him off his
guard ; — but that those should rebel against him
whom he had made what they were, — that they
should turn against him the spears which he had
taught them to wield — this was too much for him.
lis effect was such as no one could have antici-
pated; in the same moment —at one stroke —
he lost utterance and consciousness, and sank
down upon a drum; he had reached the goal of his
heroic career. Singular catastrophe! He died on
the field, but not by the hands of the enemy ; not
in the heat of the battle which he had come forth
to wage: his simple heroic spirit, which had striven,
with all its honour and all its earnestness, to stem
the rising torrent of rebellion in the troops by whom
he had so long been ‘implicitly obeyed, sank when
he saw that the tempest was ungovernable — the
passion of revolt triumphant ; — it was a sight that
struck him with instant death. It has been affirmed,
that the crafty enemy who was now advancing
against him had stirred up the fire of mutiny by
secret, practices and emissaries. And as against
himself, no other weapon was needed. If, however,
the pope thought to gain any thing by these means,
he was greatly in error. The re-action produced
in the army by this sudden calamity was violent
as had been the conduct that caused it. It ef-
fected what no persuasion, no reason could have
done. The lances were taken up again, the wild
tumult was stilled; the words of the chiefs once

Cuar. III. MARCH ON ROME. : 435

more found a hearing; the whole disorderly mass
dispersed. Four days after, Frundsberg recovered
his speech, but he could no longer lead the army.
He could only beg the Duke of Bourbon not to
draw back: hitherto, he said, God had guided
them; he would not abandon their cause to the
end. Some money arrived from Ferrara for the
Spaniards ; the landsknechts had ceased to clamour
for it; they themselves entreated Bourbon to lose
no more time;— all they asked was to be allowed
to march.

Had Bourbon intended to retreat, he could no
longer have induced the army to do so.*

The violence of the hatred entertained against
the pope by his enemies, was equalled by the cool
indifference manifested by his friends. The army
of the Ligue followed the imperialists at a distance,
and seemed rather intended to obstruct their re-
treat than their progress. All the great towns of
the Ecclesiastical States were in as good a state of
defence as those of Lombardy, while the army pos-
sessed nothing but the road along which it marched ;
yet it found no obstacles save those presented
by inclement weather and alpine passes: it en-
countered no enemy. Bourbon advanced slowly:
on the 5th of April we find him at Imola, after

* According to Macchiavelli, Speditione a Francesco Guicci-
ardini lettera XIV. 29 Marzo, Bourbon expressed to the le-
gate, “quanto egli ha desiderato la pace, e la fatica ch’ egli ha
durata per far contenti quelli soldati a questa tregua, e che in
effetto non ha potuto fargli contenti, mostrando che bisogna pit
danari, né dice il numero.”

FF 2

436 MARCH ON ROME. Boox IV.

taking and plundering smaller towns. He then
turned to the right towards the Alps, and took the
road of Val di Bagno.* The larger guns he sent
to the Duke of Ferrara, the smaller were dragged
up the mountains ; there was sometimes a scarcity
of bread, but never of meat and wine; the heights
were ascended without much toil in the neighbour-
hood where the Sapio, Folia, Metora, and several other
tributaries of the Arno rise, and where numerous
springs meet and form the sources of the Tiber.f On
the 18th of April the imperialists appeared at Pieve
di San Stefano, whence they threatened at the same
time the valleys of the Arno and the Tiber, —Flo-
rence and Rome; and left it impossible for the ene-
my to decide on which side they would first direct
their attacks. The whole of this region was panic-
stricken.

The pope now perceived that the treaty he had
concluded with Lannoy was too favourable to be
executed. He could no longer refuse what the
imperialists had always demanded of him—money
to satisfy the troops. He saw that his own safety
depended on their dispositions. He commissioned

* Foscari, Relatione di Fiorenza, 1527, says that Bourbon
could pass either the Val di Lamone, or the Via della Maria, from
Rimini or the Val di Bagno. Only the middle and easiest road
was fortified. The others might also have been fortified with
very little trouble, “si fata deum, si mens non leva fuisset.”
From Macchiavelli’s letters it appears that when the army broke
up its quarters at San Giovanni it was thought that it might
still return, and take the road to Lucca, or attack Ravenna.

+ Plinius, Hist. Nat., iii, 175. ed. Lugd. Flavius Blondus,
Italia illustr., p. 344.

Crap. III. MARCH ON ROME. 437

Lannoy to repair to Florence to see what could be
raised there. Lannoy obtained the assurance of
150,000 scudi, to be paid at stated terms, and
hastened towards the Alps, in order if possible to
induce the army by this promise to retrace its
steps.*

On the 21st of April he arrived at the camp,
where he staid three days. He was seen to eat
and drink with Bourbon; all their misunderstand-
ings were at an end; but it was clear that the
offer of the Florentines was not sufficient for their
wants; they declared that they must have at least
240,000 scudi to induce the army to return.

Whether even then they would have found this
possible—whether they would have seriously at-
tempted it, —is, I think, extremely questionable.
The tumults of that camp were too fresh in men’s
minds. Nor do I find that they received any
encouragement from the emperor.

The situation of the emperor, we must remark,
is once more extremely singular. ‘

The expressions of paternal kindness and filial
obedience which are traditional in the Catholic
world, had been frequently and ostentatiously ex-
changed between him and the pope; the emperor
still occasionally spoke of the extirpation of the
Lutherans ; in respect of Italy, he gave assurances
of which the pope said, he would have given the
whole world and his own soul into the hands of the

* Instruction of Lannoy in Hormayr’s Archiv. 1812, p. 377.
The Excerpts in Bucholtz, p.71. are taken from the same
papers.

FF 3

438 MARCH ON ROME. Boox IV.

emperor upon the faith of them.* But Charles’s
directions to his generals have a totally different
tendency. Lannoy was admonished in February,
by no means to allow himself to be the dupe of
any treaty whatever; if he supported Colonna’s
party on the one side, and if, on the other, Bourbon
came up with his German troops, many great and
good things might be accomplished. “ We see
clearly,” says he in a letter, “ that they (in Rome)
will do no good unless they are well thrashed.
It will be necessary to cut thongs out of foreign
leather (é. ¢. to raise money to pay our troops)
wherever we can lay our hands on it; and we
must not forget Florence, which has also deserved
a good castigation.”t These are nearly the
opinions which prevailed in the army. The letters
to Bourbon are-in the same tone. The emperor
tells him to do every thing he can to make up the
accounts of the war. ‘ You see, the game lasts
long; you will neglect no means of bringing it to a
close.”t He did not, it is true, break off the nego-
tiations; he even caused a ratification of the truce,
and full powers for concluding a peace, to be drawn
up; but he at the same time commanded the vice-
roy to deliver up the ratification only in case no
change in the state of affairs had been brought
about in the mean time by the army, which might
render it possible to make better terms. At the

* Tnstruttione a Farnese, Ranke’s History of the Popes,
vol. iii, Appendix, p. 19.

+ Excerpts in Bucholtz, iii. 57.

¢ 14th Feb. and 31st March. Bucholtz, p. 67.

Cuap. III. MARCH ON ROME. 439

distance at which he was, his instructions could
only arrive very late and produce a general effect.
But it is most remarkable that on the very same
day when Lannoy and Bourbon were together—on
the 23d of April — after Charles must have known
of the truce—he did not say a single word to his
commander-in-chief about observing it. “I see,
cousin, that you are advancing on Rome,” said he,
carefully avoiding any expression of disapprobation ;
on the contrary, he insinuated that a truce or a peace
might best be negotiated there ; that he would not
send him the full powers, although his was the first
name that occurred in them, in order that it might
not appear as if he came to sue for peace, so that
people might know he would compel it by force.*
In one word, the emperor was well content that his
army marched on Rome to extort its pay there as
it could, and to dictate a peace to the enemy.

Let us observe, too, that at this moment, the pope
was no longer inclined to observe the truce which
separated him from his allies. At the very same
time—25th April—whether it be that he had al-
ready learned the new demands of the army, and had
thought them such as it was impossible to comply
with, or that he was determined by the general
aspect of politics—he concluded a new alliance with
the Ligue, the terms of which were kept secret, but
which, we learn from his own declaration, contained
much that was unfavourable to the emperor.

* Extract in Bucholtz, p. 67.
+ Instruttione al C’' Farnese, App. p.81.: “consentendo a
molte conditioni che erano in pregiudicio della M“ Cesarea.”

FR 4

440 CONQUEST. OF ROME. -Boox IV.

In short, both the emperor and-the pope were
determined to try their fortune in war.

The imperialists, who had felt their hands tied
by the former truce, were now set at liberty.
Bourbon delayed not a moment to take advantage
of this change. After some demonstrations against
Florence and Arezzo, in which he was supported
by Siena, on the 28th of April he took that high
road to Rome which for centuries had been trodden
alternately by hostile armies and pious troops of
pilgrims from the north. The cavalry of the
Ligue was close at his heels, but before him he
found no obstacle. On the 2d of May he was in
Viterbo, where he was welcomed by the German
leaders ; on the 4th he drove the first papal troops
that encountered him, under Ranuccio Farnese, out
of Romiglione; on the 5th he traversed the Cam-
pagna, and appeared towards evening, from the side
of Monte Mario, before the walls of the Vatican.*

The German army thus reached Rome in the
same state as it had quitted Tyrol and Swabia,
without having encountered the slightest resistance,
and having seen all its enemies disperse before it ;
its hatred exasperated by the Spaniards and Italians
who had joined it, and who sought in Rome pay
and vengeance; led by a general who had already
quitted the usual path of the morality and policy

* In the 21st hour (between 4 and 5 o’clock). The Com-
mentarius capt urbis says, that the army arrived before Rome
on the 4th. A part of it must indeed have appeared there at
that time, if it is true that it was exposed for a day and two
nights to the fire of the Roman artillery.

Cuap. III. CONQUEST OF ROME. 441

of his age and country, and who hated in the pope
the most formidable opponent of all his claims and
projects.

It would be utterly inexplicable how it hap-
pened that the prudent Clement did not seek by
every possible means to avert this storm, were it
not clear that he always believed himself to be the
stronger. In Naples he had gained ground, in
Lombardy he had lost none; the enemy’s unresisted
advance he imputed to his own imprudence in con-
cluding a truce which had perplexed his allies: now,
as he had recalled this measure and renewed the
Ligue, he did not doubt that its army, which was
already in Tuscany, would still come to his assist-
ance in time: till then, he thought, Rome would
be in no danger; the walls were well furnished
with cannon, and five thousand arquebusiers were
taken into pay: the defence of the city was en-
trusted to the very captain who had so successfully
repulsed the same leader with a similar army from
Marseille.

It remained to be seen how the event would
justify his security. Bourbon summoned the pope
to open the city, over which, he said, the bishop had
no right, to the emperor, to whom, as head of the
Roman empire, it had of all time belonged. The
pope sent for answer to the trumpet, that if he did
not instantly be gone, he should be shot.

Hereupon a council of war was called, the issue
of which could not be doubtful. The leaders saw
very clearly, that they must. not allow themselves
to be overtaken before these walls by the well-

~

4492 CONQUEST OF ROME. Boox IV.

commanded enemy who was marching on their
rear. They resolved to commend themselves to
God, and at once without delay to storm Rome ;
even though the victory should be dearly bought.

During the night they did not neglect to keep
the enemy in breath by incessant alarms. Mean-
while every thing was prepared for storming.

Bourbon gave his confessor a commission which
affords us a tolerable insight into the sphere of ideas
in which his mind moved. He desired him to tell
the emperor, in the first place, for the future to keep
his troops in good humour — especially the Ger-
mans, without whom he could not hold Italy in
check: in the second, to cause himself to be crowned
in Rome, which would be very advantageous to
him for securing peace with the pope, and obe-
dience from the princes of the empire. As to him-
self, he declared that his intention was only to force
the pope to grant him a loan for the payment of
his troops, and to prepare the coronation of the
emperor. It is evident that he felt himself entirely
a soldier of the emperor; he thought to hold Rome
garrisoned by his victorious and contented army,
and to procure for his master the rank and dignity
of an emperor of antiquity.

It is a remarkable fact, that the sentiments of
a portion of the population within the walls were of
the same kind. Rome possessed no compact body
of citizens, held together by hereditary rights,
such as was at that time to be found in almost
every other city in Europe; the mass of the inha-
bitants were recent settlers from other parts, who

Cuap. ID. CONQUEST OF ROME. 443

lived upon the business of the court. As there
had been a great and continual falling off in its
consideration and revenues, they would not have
been sorry to see the government of the priests
_ superseded by the court of a puissant emperor,
which would have afforded them the same or greater
advantages. *

On the morning of the 6th of May — on a Mon-
day — the imperialists advanced to the assault of
the walls surrounding the Vatican. They had got
a quantity of trellises from the gardens, which they
had converted into scaling ladders by binding them
together with willow rods. The right side, to-
wards the Porta Santo Spirito, was to be stormed
by the Germans ; the left, towards the Porta Per-
tusa, immediately behind St. Peter’s church, by
the Spaniards. A thick fog rendered it impossible
for the enemy to direct his fire from the distant
castle of St. Angelo against them, or even to see
their approach. At the point of their attack, the
walls were low and the intrenchments thrown up
in haste. Meanwhile the fire of the carronades,
culverines and falconets which were planted on the
fortifications was ‘so effective that the first assault
of both troops was repulsed. They, however, in-
stantly prepared for a second. The Germans were
animated by the exhortations of Philip Stumpf,
who led them to a more favourable spot. Bourbon

* Vettori: Sacco di Roma, scritto in dialogo. “ Gli Romani
si persuadevano che Y imperatore avessi a pigliare Roma e farvi
la sua residenza, e dovere avere quelle medesime comodita e
utile che avevano dal dominio de’ preti.”

444 CONQUEST OF ROME. Boox IV.

himself was seen to lead on the Spaniards, upon
whom the first repulse had made some impression,
and to seize a ladder with his own hand. The
forlorn hope of the Germans, though under a heavy
fire of musketry, now succeeded in carrying the
mound and the entrenchments. From this time
they encountered no resistance. Claus Seiden-
sticker, a veteran captain, was one of the first to
mount the walls with his huge battle sword in his
hand; Michael Hartmann, with a few comrades,
leaped down; at last they found so little steady
resistance that they themselves hardly knew how
they had got over; in their fanatical ardour, they
thought that God had gone before them in the
mist.

The task of the Spaniards was not so easy.
Their leader, Bourbon, was struck at the moment
in which he was mounting the ladder by a bullet,
whether from the hand of an enemy, or an acci-
dental shot of one of his own troops, 1s uncertain.*
He was destined only to conduct events to the point
at which they might be left to their own spontaneous
movement ; they now passed over him, following
their own unaided and ungoverhed courses. But
the fury of the Spaniards was roused by the loss of
their leader to a pitch which nothing could with-
stand; shouting Espafia, they too scaled the walls.
The papal guns were easily taken, and the gates

* According to the Ferrarese account in Hormayr, 487.,
Bourbon fell either the first or the third: a musket ball broke
his ribs, and penetrated the intestines; in half an hour he
was dead.

Cuar. II. CONQUEST OF ROME. 445

and sally-ports opened to the crowd that pressed on
behind; a few hundred Swiss, who here too were
opposed to the landsknechts, were routed without
difficulty ; the Borgo was conquered before the
pope actually knew that the attack had begun: he
had only just time enough left to seek refuge in
the Castle of St. Angelo.* The original text of one
of the oldest accounts statesthat Bourbon was carried
still living, in front of St. Peter’s Church; here he
must have felt the full sense of victory—and here
he breathed his last. ‘The body was carried into
the Sixtine Chapel.

The army was sufficiently well disciplined to
preserve its order after his death; to abstain at
first from plunder, and to propose further terms to
the pope.} A few months before, Lannoy had. de-
manded 200,000 scudi; and Bourbon, a few days
before, 240,000. The generals now, under the eyes
of the pope, demanded 300,000; and, as security
for payment, the Transteverine city. The pope,

* Vettori, Storia d’ Italia, relates what he witnessed as follows.
“ La mattina delli sei appresentd (Borbone) la battaglia tra il
portone del borgo, che é drieto alla casa del C! Cesis, e quello di
S. Spirito, dove ne’ pitt di luoghi non é muro, ma bene vi era
facto qualche poco di riparo. Era la mattina nebbia grande,
che causava che Vartigliria non si poteva in modo indirizzare
che nocesse alli inimici i quali dettono la battaglia, e quelli di
drento si difendevano gagliardamente, ma furono tanti quelli di
fuori che con le mani guastavano i ripari, che erano di terra e
deboli, e si ridussono a combattere a piano.” See Sepulveda,
who was also present, and fled into the castle with Alberto
Carpi, vii. 7.

+ The Ferrarese account relates that only the camp followers
plundered at this moment. The attack had cost 200 men.

AAG SACK OF ROME. Boox IV.

who lived in the hope that every moment would
bring the army of the Ligue—some pretended
they already descried its advanced guard —and that
the city, properly so called, would be able to hold
out till its arrival, even at this moment rejected
all proposals.

After four hours’ delay, the troops once more
set themselves in motion to bring their work to
a conclusion. They took the Trastevere without
drawing a sword; the fire of the matchlocks suf-
ficed to clear the battlements, and some blocks
that served as battering rams, to force the gates
off their hinges; the bridges that led to the interior
of the city were feebly defended: the conquerors
advanced unopposed through the deserted. streets ;
the inhabitants had all taken refuge in their howard
At an hour after sunset the whole city was in their
hands. Until midnight they remained in the order
‘in which they had been posted; the mass of the
Spaniards remained on the Piazza Navona; that
of the Germans, on the Campofiore,—at that time
the most frequented part: at length, as no enemy
appeared either in the city or near it, they rushed
forth to plunder the houses.

For the last seventy or eighty years, uncounted
treasures had flowed in a continual stream into
Rome: ecclesiastical revenues from every country on
earth; gifts of pilgrims; proceeds of jubilees; in-
comes of benefices held by the prelates: the money for
which every spiritual favour had been bartered* :

* Francesco Vettori, Storia d’ Italia, MS., adds: “ Romani
vendevano tutte le loro entrate care et affittavano le loro case

Cwap. III. SACK OF ROME. 447

and all these riches now fell into the: hands of
naked, hungry, rapacious soldiers, who had so long
been only kept in heart by the hope of this hour.

Within the first day or two, twenty thousand
persons paid contributions: those of the imperial
party, Ghibellines, were as little spared as the
Guelfs ; the churches as little respected as private
houses. The great basilics before the gates of San
Lorenzo and San Paolo were plundered ; the tomb
of Saint Peter was ransacked, the ring torn from
the body of Julius H.: it was calculated that the
value of ten millions of gold had fallen into the
hands of the army.™

The Spaniards made the richest booty; they
might be said to scent gold; they showed equal
skill in discovering the most hidden treasures, and
in extorting them by torture.

The Neapolitans were personally yet more fero-
cious and malignant.t Fortunately, after some
days Pompeo Colonna arrived; he strove to protect

a gran pregj né pagavano alcuna tassa o gabella,” He also
mentions the profit of each calling: “li artigiani, il popolo
minuto, le meretrici. Never was a richer city plundered.

* Nova quomodo Roma capta sit relatio in Schardius, ii.
611. “Per decem integros dies ecclesias gynecia monachos
moniales et cardinales episcopos prelatos bancarios spoliarunt,
deditos ceperunt, libros et registra lacerarunt,” &c. Vettori :
“La uecisione fu poca, perche rari si uccidono quelli che non
si vogliono defendere, ma Ja preda fu inestimabile di danari
contanti, di gioie, d’ oro e d’ argento lavorato, di vestiti, d’arazzi,
paramenti di case, mercantie @ ogni sorte e di taglie.”

+ An Italian, Jovius, Vita Pompeji Column, pp. 191, 192.,
draws this distinction.

448 SACK OF ROME. Boox IV.

the Roman nobles, at least from the most revolting
outrages, and opened a sort of asylum in his house.

The Germans were satisfied with having once
more enough to eat and drink; where they found
no resistance, they were rather good-natured than
otherwise.* They allowed the Jews to make their
profit without grudging. There was much gam-
bling in Campofiore; men had grown so suddenly
rich, that they staked hundreds of guiden on a
throw. Many came laden with vases of gold,
which they lost to more successful players. Or they
feasted Simon Battista, who had been imprisoned
by the papal government for prophesying the pil-
lage of the city. But though they had set him at
liberty, he predicted no good to them; he told
them that soldiers’ riches and priests’ lands went
the same way. “ Take. all you can, plunder and
spoil,” exclaimed he, “you will soon lose it all
again!” Their anti-catholic feelings vented them-
selves in unseemly jests. Soldiers dressed as car-
dinals, with one in the midst bearing the triple
crown on his head and personating the pope,
rode in_solemn procession through the city, sur-

* In the Sacco di Roma, ascribed to Francesco Guicciardini,
or to one Jacopo Buonaparte, these details are given at length.
At first I did not venture to make use of them, as I was not
quite sure as to the origin of the work; but after further in-
vestigation, I think the facts may be as related. I shall give,
in the Appendix, my views as to the author of this writing, as
well as of the book called “Memorie storiche dei principali
avvenimenti politici d’ Italia seguiti durante, il pontificato di
Clemente VII. opera di Patrizio de’ Rossi, Roma, 1837.”

Cuap. III. CONQUEST OF ROME. 449

rounded by guards and heralds: they halted before
the Castle of St. Angelo, where the mock pope,
flourishing a huge drinking glass, gave the car-
dinals his benediction ; they then held a consistory,
and promised in future to be more faithful ser-
vants of the Roman empire: the papal throne they
meant to bestow on Luther.*

Occasionally discords broke out between the
several nations. A committee was then chosen,
consisting of three Spanish and three German
_ officers, who patroled the streets all night on horse-
back to keep order. ;

The leaders lay in the Vatican; the Prince of
Orange occupied the pope’s chamber. Every man
kept his horse as near him as possible that it might
not be stolen. |

Meanwhile, the viceroy had arrived in Rome and
renewed the former negotiations. For a time, the
pope hoped for succour; the Duke of Urbino
appeared in the neighbourhood, and three times
every night signals were made from the castle that
the garrison still held out. But he appeared to
fear that the Germans would defend themselves

* Reissner. Wahrhaftiger Bericht. Much more violent ef-
fusions of Griinewald’s against the pope, “ who acts contrary to
the word of God,” are related by Cochlzus, and repeated by
Rainaldus.

ft “Adwore Rome, in Hofmann, Nova Collectio, p.535. The
Germans would not allow the Spaniards to commit their abomin-
able outrages, —for example, on the persons of female children ;
the Spaniards, on the other hand, forbade the Germans to mock
at the priests, which they declared one of the most ungodly of
sins.

VOL. II. GG

450 CONQUEST OF ROME. Boox IV.

with more vigour than would be shown in attacking
them.*

Nor was it likely that he would be inclined to
incur any great danger for the sake of the pope,
since, but a few years before, he had been involved
in a struggle for life and death with the house of
Medici, and driven by them out of his own
dominions. He retreated again without making
the slightest attempt at a rescue. The pope was
at length compelled to accept, in a greatly ag-
gravated form, the terms he had so often rejected.
He now promised to pay 400,000 scudi by in-
stalments: as a pledge, he allowed the allies to
garrison some of the strongest places which still
held out; in Lombardy, Modena, Parma and
Piacenza, and in his own states, Ostia and Civita
Vecchia. On the 15th June this treaty was con-
cluded, and the following day Spanish and German
soldiers mounted guard in the Castle of St. Angelo.
Two hundred of the handsomest and _ stoutest
landsknechts were picked out to do duty about
the person of the pope.

The emperor now thought his designs on Italy ac-
complished. He doubted not that his army would
be able to make an advantageous convention with the
Florentines, who, in the general confusion, had driven
out the house of Medici and deserted the cause of
the pope: it was then to march against Venice and

* The Germans, at least, were much inclined to march against
him. Schwegler writes (Hormayr, passim ; p. 446.), in the camp
of the enemy there is hunger and discontent: if they come
nearer, we will seek them in the field.

Cuar. III. CONQUEST OF ROME. 451

encamp in the territory of the republic, in order to
compel that state also to make peace. In this enter-
prise the assistance of Ferrara would be valuable.*

The title of apostolic, was already exchanged in
Rome for that of imperial, chamber.

The Germans had here an opportunity of seeing
distinctly how the empire had been the prey and
the dupe of the popes; people showed them the
ruins of the emperor’s palace, and explained to
them all the stratagems by which he had been
stripped of the country and the city, and even of
his own imperial residence within its walls. But
they consoled themselves with the thought, that
the man who had exalted himself to the station of
a god on earth would now be brought low by the
might of the jealous and offended God of heaven.
They were persuaded that He had opened to them
a way across the Alps, over the steep rocks which
they had climbed like the wild goat; He had
preserved them unhurt at Mantua, where their
enemies had thought to catch them as in a net; He
had commissioned the first shot to lay prostrate the
pope’s ablest captain; and, lastly, having led them
by all the large cities, in face of the enemy, and once
more over the trackless mountains, safe and sound,

* Letter of Charles’s of the 30th of June, in Hormayr, 1812,
381. His intention was to appoint the Duke of Ferrara captain
general : Milan, Charles could not promise to any body, but must
wait till Sforza’s process was decided. In a letter of Angerer’s
of the 1st of July, it is said, if 6000 men were but now sent to
the assistance of Leiva, “all Italy would be won and con-

quered.”
GG 2

452 CONQUEST OF ROME. Boox IV.

to Rome, He had gone before them in the mist
across the strong walls. Thus did the mighty God
strike Antichrist with the lightnings of his judg-
ment.* They indulged the hope that: now times
were changed, and the beloved young emperor
Charles would rule by his mild virtues according
to the word of our Redeemer alone.

* Ziegler’s Acta Pp. contain these reflections.

+ Words of the Wahrhaftiger Bericht. (True Report.) It
concludes, “In order that our souls, over which God is Lord, at
our temporal departure may be taken to eternal joy, therefore
did the Lord Jesus come down into this world, and died on the
cross for the love of all men. This may the Lord God grant
us !”

453 ,

CHAPTER IV.

OCCUPATION OF BOHEMIA AND HUNGARY.

At the moment of this signal success, the warlike
power of Germany, taking another channel, poured
itself over Hungary; and here also, for the ag-
grandisement of the house of Austria.

If we would form a clear conception of the origin
and import of this event, we must bear in mind,
above all, that the three eastern monarchies of
western Christendom,— Hungary, Bohemia, and
Poland, had only attained to a somewhat stable
government, and to ashare in the benefits of Chris-
tianity and civilisation, by German influence under
various forms. At the end of the fourteenth cen-
tury, it once more seemed as if this connexion
were indissolubly restored. The most powerful
house of Germany, that of Luxemburg, possessed
Bohemia and Hungary; while the heiress of Poland
was educated as the affianced bride of an Austrian
prince. .

But in all these countries there also existed
tendencies opposed to German interference. The
most formidable enemy of the Germans, the Grand
Prince Jagjel of Lithuania, succeeded in driving the
Duke of Austria from the throne of Poland; he

G@ ¢

454 FALL OF HUNGARY. Boox IV.

afterwards sent his nephew, Koribut, to Bohemia,
and his son obtained the crown of Hungary. ‘The
race of Jagellon thus consolidated its power
throughout the east of Europe; on the one side
it presented a bulwark against the incursions of the
Ottomans, and on the other, excluded all German
influence: in spite of many turns of fortune, it still
maintained itself in the beginning of the 16th
century. Sigismund J. ruled over Poland and Li-
thuania ; Wladislas IT. over Bohemia and Hungary.

But it no longer possessed any internal strength.
Wladislas I. was by no means the man to curb the
stormy nobles of Hungary.* He was fitted only for
the simplest private life. Those about him re-
marked that he spoke of the affairs of daily life with
a certain degree of good sense, but that this deserted
him as soon as the discourse fell on matters of state.
He would not believe any thing bad that was told
him of any man, and could with difficulty be
brought to sign a sentence of death +; every body,
therefore, did what he liked. Under King Matthias
the public revenues had exceeded 800,000 ducats;

* They would fain have driven away Matthias too. The
Relatio Nuncii apostolici of 1480, in Engel, ii. 14, says ex-
pressly, “Li Baroni cercano di cacciarlo del reame.”

+ Relatione di Sebastian Zustignan venuto orator di Hon-
garia in Sanuto, iv., 1503. “Tlreé homo grande di persona
e di degnissima genealogia: devoto e religioso, e si dice, nun-
quam habuit concubitum cum muliere, e mai si adira, mai dice
mal di niun, e se niun dice mal di qualcuno, dicit rex: forsan
non est verum.... Dice assa oration, alde tre messe al zOrno,
ma in reliquis 6 come una statua.... Est pit presto homo
rectus quam rex.”

Cuar. IV. FALL OF HUNGARY. 455

under Wladislas they gradually fell off to 200,000 ;
soon after his death, there was not money enough
to pay the expenses of the royal kitchen. LEvery
thing fell into ruin and decay. ‘“ Two things,” it
is said in the Maxims of Tolna of the year 1518,
“are required for the maintenance of every king-
dom—arms and laws ; in our kingdom of Hungary
we have neither the one nor the other.* .

Under these circumstances, the Jagellons gradually
saw the expediency of attaching themselves again
to the nearest and most powerful German family
—to the house of Austria. The Emperor Maxi-
milian, who, as he said, had never for a moment lost
sight of “ his own rights and those of the German
nation” on Hungary and Bohemia, had at length, in
the year 1515, the singular satisfaction of receiving
both kings—Sigismund and Wladislas—at his
court, and of concluding the strictest alliance with
them. Wladislas betrothed his son and daughter
to a grand-daughter and grandson of the emperor ;
Sigismund promised to marry Bona Sforza, who
was also related to the house of Austria. The year
after, Wladislas died, and Louis Il. ascended the °
throne, under the joint guardianship of Maximi-
lian and Sigismund. By degrees a German party
took firm root at the court; especially after the
marriage between Louis and the grand-daughter of
Maximilian, Mary of Austria, had actually been
concluded (A. D. 1521). All was, however, still in
the greatest confusion. Heberstein cannot find words

* Ex Ludovici Il. decretis Tolnensis conventus in Katona

Hist. crit. Ungarie, xix. p. 89.
Ga 4

456 JOHN ZAPOLYA. Boox IV.

to describe how the great nobles, spiritual as well
as temporal, vied with each other in insolence*; how
the frontiers were without defence, while their armed
bands obstructed the streets of the capital; how
the loud trumpets called the magnates to dinner,
while the king sat almost alone ;—all places were
distributed by favour, and the currency was dete-
riorated. At length the intelligent queen, at least,
formed, plans for reviving the authority of the
state; but already had a power arisen capable of
opposing a formidable resistance to the court.
Under King Matthias the house of Zapolya, so
called from a Slavonic village near Poschega,
whence it originated, rose to peculiar eminence.
To this house, in particular, King Wladislas had.
owed his accession to the throne; whence, however,
it thought itself entitled to claim a share in the
sovereign power, and even a sort of prospective
right to the throne. Its members were the wealth-
iest of all the magnates; they possessed seventy-two
castles}; the chief seat of the family being Trentsin,
a fortress perched on a steep rock overhanging the
Waag, adorned with the most beautiful gardens,
watered from wells dug a hundred fathoms deep by
Turkish prisoners, and defended by strong fortifi-
cations. It is said that a prophecy early promised
the crown to the young John Zapolya. Possessed
of all the power conferred by his rich inheritance,

* Rerum Moscoviticarum Commentarii, Basil, 1571, p. 146.

J According to Turnschwamb (Engel, i. p- 1938.) many of them
were confided only to trusty hands, such as Father John and
Stephen Zapolya.

Cuar. IV. JOHN ZAPOLYA. 457

Count of Zips, and Woiwode of Transylvania, he
soon collected a strong party around him. It was
he who mainly persuaded the Hungarians, in the
year 1505, to exclude all foreigners from the throne
by a formal decree ; which, though they were not
always able to maintain in force, they could never
be induced absolutely to revoke. . In the year
1514 the Woiwode succeeded in putting down an
exceedingly formidable insurrection of the peasants
with his own forces ; a service which the lesser no-
bility prized the more highly, because it enabled
them to reduce the peasantry to a still harder state
of servitude.* His wish was, on the death of
Wladislas, to become Gubernator of the kingdom,
to marry the deceased king’s daughter Anne, and
then to await the course of events. But he was
here encountered by the policy of Maximilian.
Anne was married to the Archduke Ferdinand ;
Zapolya was excluded from the administration of
the kingdom; even the vacant Palatinate was re-
fused him and given to his old rival Stephen
Bathory. He was highly incensed: indeed at
the’ meeting of the Rakosch, in 1518, the emperor
kept a few thousand men ready to come to the aid
of the Hungarian government in case of any
violence on the part of Zapolya.t But it was not

* The revolt was directed precisely against the nobility.
Zeckel called himself, in one of his proclamations, “ Regis Hun-
garie tantummodo subditus et non dominorum.” — Katona,
xviii. 720. Z

+ Maximilian’s Instructions to Heberstein in Senkenberg’s
Sammlung ungedruckter Schriften, iv. p. 26.

458 JOHN ZAPOLYA. Boox IV.

till the year 1525 that Zapolya got the upper hand
at the Rakosch. The king having nevertheless re-
jected his proposals, his followers summoned an
extraordinary diet at Hatwan, at which they made
an attempt to exclude all strangers, to alter the
whole government and take it into their own
hands. They deposed the palatine, Bathory, and
elected in his stead the Woiwode’s most intimate
friend, Stephen Verbécz. As to Zapolya, no one
entertained a’ doubt that he aimed at the throne.
“The Woiwode,” says a Venetian report of 1523,
“has a good head, he is very clever, and universally
beloved: he would be glad if the kingdom suffered
some disaster; he would then reconquer it with
his own forces and make himself king.”* “ He
strives,” says another, of the year 1525, “ with
all the powers of his mind after the crown, and
prepares every thing so that he may be able to
seize it.”

In order to arrest these hasty and undisguised
strides of a vassal towards the final goal of his am-
bition, his opponents, who had every thing to fear
from his success, rallied more closely round the
court ;° declared, at a national assembly, the decrees
of Hatwan null and void, reinstated Bathory, and
requested the king at length to exert his authority.
This the queen was fully prepared to do. She de-
manded complete liberty in the administration of
the finances, and the direct dependence of the

* Relatione del S‘d’Orio, 12th Dec. 1523. “ Saria contento
che quel regno si perdesse e poi lui con il favor de Transilvani
ricuperarlo e farsi re.”

Cuar.IV. INVASION BY SOLIMAN, 1526. 459

frontier troops on the government. She warned the
papal nuncio not to put too much fuel on the fire.
But before any thing was accomplished —on the
contrary, just as these party conflicts had thrown
the country into the utmost confusion, the mighty
enemy, Soliman, appeared on the frontiers of Hun-
gary, determined to put an end to the anarchy.
Ottomans and Jagellons had long stood opposed
to each other on the eastern verge of Europe:
the propitious moment had at length arrived, in
which the Sultan might hope, at least as far as
Hungary was concerned, to fight out this long
pending duel. Five years before, he had conquered
Belgrade; which, it was said, had fallen, partly
because the Hungarian government could not raise
the fifty gulden necessary for the transport of the
ammunition lying ready at Ofen. Since then,
the strong places on the frontier of Croatia had
fallen into the hands of the pachas, and the plain
country was laid open to a great blow. Such an
one the sultan now felt himself encouraged to strike,
both by the internal state of Hungary and the ge-
neral distraction of Europe. In his prison at
Madrid, Francis I. had found means to entreat the
assistance of Soliman; urging that it well beseemed
a great emperor to succour the oppressed. Plans
were laid at Constantinople, according to which the
two sovereigns were to attack Spain with a combined
fleet, and to send armies to invade Hungary and
the north of Italy.* Soliman, without any formal

* Narrative of Ibraim (the Imberi-Wascha) in the Report by
Lamberg and Jurischitsch in Gevay’s Urkunden und Acten-

460 INVASION BY SOLIMAN, 1526. Boox IV.

treaty, was by his position an ally of the Ligue,
as the king of Hungary was, of the emperor. On
the 23d of April, 1526, Soliman, after visiting the
graves of his forefathers and of the old Moslem
martyrs, marched out of Constantinople with a
mighty host, consisting of about a hundred thousand
men, and incessantly strengthened by fresh recruits
on its road. He understood the art of keeping his
troops under the severest discipline. His diary
shows that he ordered men to be beheaded for having
driven the horses of the peasantry, or destroyed the
standing corn in a village.* Still in the bloom of
youth, he displayed those brilliant qualities of
energy and love of conquest which had raised his
ancestors to greatness.

What power had Hungary, in the condition we
have just described, of resisting such an attack ?

Ibrahim Pacha had already laid siege to Peter-
wardein before the Hungarians had taken any
measures for defence. The troops had not long
before been called out, but none had appeared :
contributions had been demanded, but scarcely any
thing had been raised. With great difficulty, Anton
Fugger had been induced to advance fifty thousand
gulden on the Neusohler mines. The young king
took the field with a following of not more than
three thousand men.

stucken zur Geschichte der Verhiiltnisse zwischen Oesterreich
Ungern und der Pforte, 1530, p. 42. ;

* Hammer’s Geschichte der Osmanen, v. iii. p. 639.

} Broderithus: Descriptio cladis Mohaczianz in appendice
Bonfinii ed Sambucus, p. 558. See Turnschwanb, p- 204.

Cuar. 1V. BATTLE OF MOHACZ. 461

Ibrahim had conquered Peterwardein, and had
welcomed his sovereign on the Hungarian soil with
an offering of five hundred heads. The Ottoman
army was now nearly three hundred thousand
strong, and had begun to ascend the Danube:
Soliman caused it to be proclaimed through his
camp that his object was Ofen. Meanwhile the
troops of some Gespannschafts (counties) and a
few magnates collected around the king; a few
companies hired by the pope, and a few by Poland,
also joined him. On his arrival in Tolna, he
might have from ten to twelve thousand men.*

The most pressing necessity was to defend the
passage of the Drave, whither the palatine, who
was certainly not deficient in zeal, now hastened.
But a number of magnates refused to advance
‘ without the king. Soliman thus gained time to
build a convenient bridge, over which his army
marched without interruption for five days. King
Louis said, “I see my head must be stuck up
instead of yours; well then, I will carry it thither
myself!” He proceeded to the fatal plain of Mohacz,
fully resolved with his small band to await in the
open field the overwhelming force of the enemy.

The troops of the kingdom were as yet far from
being assembled ; the two mightiest vassals, the Ban
of Croatia and the Woiwode of Transylvania, were
still missing; the Bohemian and Moravian allies
had not yet arrived ;—with all its recent additions,
the army in Mohacz amounted to from twenty to

* Among them, 4000 foot. Brod. 559. He does not state
the exact number of the cavalry.

462 BATTLE OF MOHACZ. Boox IV.

twenty-four thousand men. Few of them had ever
seen a pitched battle. The command was intrusted
to a Muscovite friar, Paul Tomory, Archbishop of
Colocza, who had formerly distinguished himself in
a few marauding expeditions. Spite of all these
disadvantages, the Hungarians still indulged the
most extravagant self-confidence. It would have
been impossible to induce them to retreat *; they
~ would not even form a barricade of their waggons.
As soon as the enemy descended the hills in front of
them, into the plain where they lay encamped, with-
out a moment’s pause they rushed upon him.
But Soliman was as prudent as he was daring.
The Hungarians thought to decide the battle by an
impetuous charge; “‘ they trusted in their harness
of the blue steel.” Ill provided with infantry or
artillery, they made war in the spirit and manner
of the past century. On the other hand, Soliman,
barbarian as he might otherwise be, knew how
to avail himself of the most recent improvements
in the advancing art of war; he had planted
three hundred cannon behind the heights we
have mentioned, and his janizaries were as well
skilled in the use of the matchlock as any sol-
diery in the world. The Hungarians found no
difficulty in dispersing the advanced Turkish
squadrons and occupying the hill. Already they
thought they had conquered, but here they

* Ongari si havea potuti ritrar salvo verso Buda. Copia di
un aviso avuto da Constantinopoli in Hammer’s Wiens erste
aufgehobene tiirkische Belagerung App., No. viii.: a simple but
good statement.

Cuar. IV. BATTLE OF MOHACZ. . 463

first beheld the boundless camp of the Osmans.
They rushed forward headlong, as if the im-
possible were possible to their valour, and were
received by a tremendous fire; the right wing,
from the artillery, the centre from the musketry
of the janizaries, while the Sipahi horse attacked
them on both flanks. Here personal valour
could avail nothing. The Hungarians were im-
mediately thrown into disorder*, their best men
fell, the others took to flight. The young king
was compelled to flee. It was not even granted
him to die in the field of battle; a far more miserable
end awaited him. Mounted behind a Silesian
soldier, who served him as a guide, he had already
been carried across the dark waters that divide the
plain; his horse was already climbing the bank,
when he slipped, fell back, and buried himself and
his rider in the morass.f ‘This rendered the de-
feat decisive. ‘The leader of the nation—the king
—and a great part of the magnates had fallen.}
For the present, no further resistance could be
thought of. The land was ravaged far and wide;

* Extract from the Heiduck Nagy’s History of the Cam-
paign of Mohacz, preserved in Petschewi’s Ottoman History (the
singular example of a really useful Oriental narrative from an
Oriental work): communicated by Hammer, in Hormayr’s
Archiv. for 1827, No. 15.

+ This account (in Nagy and others) is confirmed by the
letter in Katona, xix. p. 697., concerning the discovery of the
body.

{ Katona, p.703. ‘Magna dehinc rerum conversio secuta
fuit, pluribus et presulibus et proceribus una hac dimicatione
exstinctis.”

464 CLAIMS TO THE SUCCESSION. Boox IV.

the keys of Ofen were carried to the sultan, who
celebrated the Beiram there.

Soliman had gained one of those victories which
decide the fate of nations during long epochs. The
great power at the head of which he stood, the
power which had carried the principles of Islam,
such as they had been established in Asia under
Tartar influence, into the other quarters of the
globe, had been raised by him to complete ascend-
ency in eastern Europe. Who was strong enough
to overturn it? roubling himself little about
the defence of the places he had taken, he turned
back and placed the trophies of Ofen on the Hip-
podrome and the mosque of Aja Sofia.

That two thrones, the succession to which was

not entirely free from doubt, had thus been left
vacant, was an évent that necessarily caused a great
agitation throughout Christendom. It was still a
question whether such a European power as Austria
would continue to exist ;—~a question which it is
only necessary to state, in order to be aware of its
vast importance to the fate of mankind at large,
and of Germany in particular. Before the nature
of the relations which might subsist between Europe
and the Ottoman empire could even be discussed,
this great question had to be decided.

The claims of Ferdinand to both crowns, un-
questionable as they might be in reference to the
treaties with the reigning houses, were opposed in
the nations themselves, by the right of election and
the authority of considerable rivals.

In Hungary, as soon as the Turks had retired,
John Zapolya appeared with the fine army which

»

Cuar. IV. PLANS OF THE DUKES OF BAVARIA. 465

he had kept back from the conflict: the fall of the
king was at the same time the fall of his adversaries.
The faction which had framed the resolutions of
Hatwan was now omnipotent ; and, at an assembly
at Tokay, they determined that, as nothing could
be undertaken without a king and ruler, they would
immediately proceed to elect one, and to that end
convoke a diet at Stuhlweissenburg.* Even in
Tokay, however, John Zapolya was saluted as king.

Meanwhile, the dukes of Bavaria conceived the
design of getting possession of the throne of
Bohemia: in this they were encouraged by several
obsequious nobles of that country; and in Sep-
tember they despatched their councillor Weissen-
felder to Prague, who found their prospects so
promising that they determined to send a solemn
embassy to Bohemia.

Nor was it in the two kingdoms alone that. these
pretenders had a considerable party. The state of
politics in Europe was such as to insure them
powerful supporters abroad.

In the first place, Francis I. was intimately con-
nected with Zapolya: in a short time a delegate
from the pope was at his side, and the Germans in
Rome maintained that Clement assisted the faction
of the Woiwode with money.f Zapolya sent. an

* Among the contradictory accounts of the chroniclers, the
only trustworthy document is the answer of the King of Poland
to the invitation sent to him from Tokay. Dogiel and Katona,
xix. p. 748.

{ Ziegler, Vita Clem. VII., in Schelhorn’s Ameenitates, ii.

308.: “Ea pecunia (he is speaking of exactions) Trentschinii
factionem contra Ferdinandum regem aliquamdiu juvit.”

VOL. Il. Hoe

466 PLANS OF THE DUKES OF BAVARIA.  Boox IV.

agent to Venice with a direct request to be ad-
mitted a member of the Ligue of Cognac.

In Bohemia, too, the French had long had
devoted partisans. We find that, in the year 1523,
they had the project of attacking Austria from the |
side of Bohemia, and had carried on a corre-
spondence with an ancestor of Wallenstein, with
that object.* As the King of Poland, who had for
some time withdrawn himself from the Austrian
- alliance, and likewise set up pretensions to the
throne of Bohemia, found he had no chance of
success, the Polish as well as the French envoys
promised their support to the agents of Bavaria.

By this political combination Duke William of Ba-
varia was encouraged to form still more ambitious
plans.

We have already observed, that Rome felt the
necessity of placing a king of the Romans by the
side of, or rather in opposition to, the emperor
Charles: Meanwhile Duke William, one of the most
devoted adherents of the Curia, had already con-
ceived the thought of raising himself to this high
station, and had actually taken steps in consequence.

At the same diet of 1524, in which the Council
of Regency was overthrown, the houses of Bavaria
and the Palatinate, engaged in a common struggle
against the nobles, laid aside their old hostilities
and concluded a new hereditary alliance. Leon-
hard Eck addressed amicable reproaches to the

* Lettera di Franc. Massario in Sanuto, tom. xxxv., calls him
“ Waldestein, barone e gran capitano di Bohemia, volentier.
veniria a servir la S™ n™ cum 10, 20, 30™ persone. Questo é
quel capitano che 71 re X™° voleva condurre.”

Cuap.IV. PLANS OF THE DUKES OF BAVARIA. 467

elector, that at the last vacancy of the imperial
crown, he had forgotten his own pretensions, and
had subsequently ceded his right to the Vicariate
to the Council of Regency.*

Shortly afterwards, when the princes met at the
cross-bow match at Heidelberg, which we have al-
ready mentioned, Duke William no longer concealed
that he aspired to the Roman crown for himself.

At an-interview at Ellwangen, soon after, they
again discussed the matter. Duke William ap-
peared willing to give the precedency to the
elector; but as that prince had taken no measures
towards the accomplishment of such an object, he
commenced negotiations without scruple on his
own account. In the autumn of 1526, overtures
were also made to the Elector of Saxony, though
without success, since that prince belonged to a
party professing opinions radically different.

The consequences that must have resulted, had
this scheme succeeded, are so incalculable, that it is
not too much to say they would have completely
changed the political history of Europe. The
power of Bavaria would have outweighed that of
Austria in both German and Slavonian countries,
and Zapolya, thus supported, would have been
able to maintain his station; the Ligue, and with

** Mémoires de la Vie et des Faicts de Fréderic I. (Comte -
Palatin), in Hoffman’s Sammlung ungedruckter Nachrichten, |

ch. xlii.
+ “There are traces,” says the Bavarian Staatsarchivar

Stumpf, “that Pope Clement VII. and the King of France
tried to forward the duke’s designs.”
HH 2

468 ELECTION TO THE Boox IV.

it high ultra-montane opinions, would have held
the ascendency in eastern Europe. Never was
there a project more pregnant with danger to the
growing power of the house of Austria.

Ferdinand behaved with all the prudence and
energy which that house has so often displayed in
difficult emergencies. .

For the present, the all-important object was the
crown of Bohemia.

His situation as husband of a Princess of Hun-
gary and Bohemia, and as brother of the widowed
queen, brought him into frequent personal contact
with the most puissant nobles. He perfectly under-
stood the art of turning to his own advantage every
favourable disposition arising out of these circum-
stances, and of extinguishing every germ of anti-
pathy by favours. The influential High Burgegrave,
Léw von Rozmital, received the assurance that the
account which he was bound to render of his admi-
nistration would either be altogether dispensed with,
or very slightly inspected. Important concessions
were also made to Schwanberg, Schlich, Pflug, and
the Duke of Miinsterberg. The Chancellor Adam
von Neuhaus had hastened in the retinue of the
Austrian envoy, to use his influence in favour of
Ferdinand. While a certain number of Bohemian
nobles were quickly induced by these measures to
declare that they would acknowledge no other

master than the archduke*, no means were neglected
of conciliating the mass of the population.. Though

* Extract froma letter of Weissenfelder in Stumpf, Baierns
Polit. Gesch. i. p. 39.

Crap. IV. THRONE OF BOHEMIA. 469

thoroughly convinced that his wife (and therefore he
himself) had an unquestionable hereditary right to
the throne, he carefully avoided offending the pride
which the nation felt in the belief that, in a case
like the present, it had absolute freedom of election.
He let it appear that his claim was by no means the
chief motive for his offering himself to their choice.

At first he thought of at once assuming the title
of king, but this project he dropped at the advice of
his envoys. He acceded to the demand of the Bo-
hemians, that he would take upon himself a part of
the public debt, inconvenient as that was in the
straitened state of his finances. Nor did he disdain to
give the most careful answers to all the objections
which his envoys said were urged against him.*

In a word, all his measures were taken with such.
skill and prudence, that on the day of election, |
though the Bavarian agent had, up to the last mo-
ment, not the slightest doubt of the success of his
negotiations, an overwhelming majority in the three
estates elected Ferdinand to the throne of Bohemia.

This took place on the 23d October, 1526. A
solemn embassy proceeded to Vienna to invite him
to take possession of his new kingdom ;—one of the
fairest in the world, including, as it did, Silesia and
Lusatia.

A very important question, deserving a more ac-
curate inquiry, here suggests itself; —what influence
religious considerations had in this election.

All the countries subject to the Bohemian crown

* Extract from the Instructions and the Ambassador’s Corre-

spondence, Bucholtz, ii. p. 407.
HH 3

470 ELECTION TO THE Boox IV.

were filled with anti-papal elements. In Silesia and
the Lusatias, the evangelical doctrines were widely
diffused ; in Bohemia and Moravia, the Utraquists
formed a most powerful community. It is hardly
probable that, in the choice of a king, the interests
of these different confessions were disregarded.

‘In this point of view, Ferdinand was infinitely to
be preferred to a duke of Bavaria. The dukes were
unqualified adherents of the papacy, and fierce per-
secutors. ‘The archduke, on the contrary, however
strict a catholic himself, however careful to appear
so (for in all the countries in question there was
still a very considerable catholic party), had for some
time showed great moderation in his hereditary do-
minions. We have seen how little he was inclined to
favour the secular claims of the clergy, and what
equivocal decrees the German diet had passed under
his influence. Moreover, he was at this moment at
open war with the pope; the Bohemian election took
place while the recruiting for Frundsberg’s army
was going on.

We find no traces of the negotiations which were
probably carried on with relation to religious affairs ;
but from the Recesses it appears that Ferdinand ac-
ceded to very remarkable concessions.

It is well konwn that the court of Rome never
fully recognised the Compactata of the Council of
Basle (a line of policy it afterwards pursued with
reference to many treaties unfavourable to itself),
and, since the time of Pius I., had expressly refused
to confirm them.

Ferdinand now promised to give their full effi-

Cuap. IV. THRONE OF BOHEMIA. 471

cacy to the Compactata*, and to assume, in treat-
ing with the pope, that they were confirmed.y

One of the greatest grievances of the Utraquists
was, that they had long been without bishops to
ordain their priests, and that they had been reduced
to many strange and even hurtful expedients to
supply this want. Ferdinand promised to procure
for them an archbishop who should put in force
the Compactata in relation to both spiritual and
temporal affairs. In short, he solemnly undertook
not only to protect the Utraquists, but to obtain for
them a fresh recognition of their privileges.

This was, perhaps, rendered less difficult by the
fact, that a party hostile to Luther was now formed
among the Utraquists themselves ; notwithstanding
which, however, they were still treated as heretics.

Nor were the general abuses and errors of the
church entirely forgotten. Ferdinand promised the
Bohemians to take measures to promote a Christian
union and reformation—a promise which, indeed,
either side might interpret in its own favour, —but
which, as it related only to the conduct of the
emperor, not to that of the pope, —to some assem-
bly, of whatever nature, not to a general council in
which all the nations of Christendom were to take
part [, could, in fact, hardly be understood in any

* “ Quod rursum ad suum vigorem pervenirent.” Ferdi-
nandi Literw, 15th Dec. 1526, ap. Dumont, iv. pp. 1. 469.

+ “ Promisimus, cum summo Pontifice illud tractare, ac si
Bohemis ac Moravis illa (compactata) cum effectu essent con-
firmata.”

+ Excerpt of the article inserted in the Landtafel, Bucholtz,
ii. p. 420.

HH 4

472 ELECTION TO THE Boox IV.

other sense than that intended by the German
diets.

The Silesians expressed themselves still more
plainly and unequivocally.

At a meeting of the States at Leobschiitz, on the
4th December, 1526, after they had recognised
Ferdinand’s hereditary right—though not without
keeping up the appearance of a certain freedom, —
they commissioned the delegates who were to be
the bearers of this recognition to Vienna, (among
whom were princes greatly inclined to evangelical
opinions,—for example, Frederic of Liegnitz and
George of Brandenburg,) to call the attention of
the new king and archduke to the putting an end
to religious dissension, “ according to the gospel
and word of God.”* In conformity with these
instructions the delegates entreated the king to

* The words of the instruction in Buckisch, Religionsacten,
MS., tom. i. p. 206. are as follows : — “Und nachdem der allm.
Gott aus seiner gottlichen Verordnung geschickt und verliehen,
dass wir S. Kén. Mt. zu unserm Erbkénige eintriichtiglich
angenommen, welcher einmiittigen und tréstlichen Meinung
wir s. Allmichtigkeit billig Lob und Dank sagen, so befinden
wir nun in Notturft unser Seel und Leibs glickseliger Wolfahrt,
die jetzige vorfallende Irrung und Zwiespalt, so sich in dem h.
christl. Glauben zugetragen, bei S. K. M. anzuregen, damit
dieselb aus solchem Irrthum und Zertrennung erhaben, und nach
Verordnung der h. christl, Kirchen dem Evangelio und Worte
Gottes gemiiss nach S. K. Mt. Ausssatz und durch unser aller
einmuthig und freundliches Vergleichen in recht christ]. Bestand
und gleichférmigen Gebrauch gebracht wurde, welches E. L. ihn
_und E. F. Gn. bei S. K. Mt. alles in Unterthiinigkeit bitten
werden, auf dass S. K. Mt. dasselbe als ein christl. Konig zu -
Trost und Heil unsrer Seelen Seligkeit, auch zu Dempfung
erfoleenden Unraths nach dem h. Evangelio gniidiglich zu ver-

Crap. IV. THRONE OF BOHEMIA. 473

take into consideration the establishment of a
Christian ordinance according to the standard of
the gospel; that so all might live together in peace
and unity. Ferdinand replied, he would do all
that could conduce to christian unity and the praise
of Almighty God.*

As opposed to the traditional opinion, it may
sound like a paradox to affirm —what however
the general combination of events warrants us in
concluding, — that the bearing which the house of
Austria had at this crisis assumed,'—opposed to
Rome in its political, and moderate in its religious
views, contributed to secure to it the obedience
of these countries, which were filled with such va-
rious elements of opposition to Rome.

By a singular concatenation of circumstances,

- ordnen und zu verschaffen geruhe.”—“ And since Almighty
God, in his divine providence, has ordained and granted that
we have unanimously accepted H. R. M’. to be our hereditary
king, for which unanimous and comfortable opinion we give
due praise and thanks to the Almighty, we now find it needful
for the welfare of our souls and bodies to bring the errors and
divisions which now preyail in the holy Christian faith before
H. R. M’., whereby the same may be raised out of such error
and’ division, and atcording to the ordinances of the holy
Christian church, and agreably to the gospel and the word of
God may, conformably with H. R. M”’s pleasure, and by our
unanimous and amicable agreement, be brought to a true
Christian understanding, and a uniform practice. Your
princely graces will, in all submission, pray H. R. M’., in order
that H. R. M®., as a Christian king, may be pleased graciously
to order and procure the same to be done according to the
Holy Gospel, for the comfort and benefit of our souls, and for
the prevention of future troubles.”

* Petition and Resolution, in Schickfuss, Schlesische Chronik,
iii. 171. Also in the Appendix to Bucholtz, ii. 523.

474 OCCUPATION OF HUNGARY. Boox IV.

the high Romanist opinions, of which Bavaria was
the champion, contributed, from the very first, to
the defeat of her plans.

On his brother’s birth-day, the 24th of February,
1527, Ferdinand was crowned at Prague; on the
11th of May he received the act of homage and
allegiance in the market-place in Breslau, and
the German princes hastened to accept from the
new suzerain a renewal of the fiefs which they held
of the Bohemian crown. A Muscovite ambassador,
who happened to be then at the court, expressed
his surprise that so magnificent a kingdom should
have passed into the hands of a new lord without a
sword being drawn. *

The affairs of Hungary were not so easily or so
peacefully settled.

That country offered a certain analogy to Bo-
hemia in a religious point of view. Queen Mary,
around whom the Austrian party gathered, was
esteemed a friend of the new opinions: she did not
keep the fasts, read Lutheran writings, and had
followers of Luther at her court. In N ovember,
1526, Luther dedicated a psalm to her, for con-
solation under her misfortune. On the other hand,
Zapolya’s partisans affected strict orthodoxy: their
chief organ, Verbiez, passed among the Lutherans
for a great hypocrite; he had caused a covered
way to be constructed from his own house to the
neighbouring Capuchin convent, that he might enjoy
uninterrupted communication with it.f

* Herberstein R. M. C., p. 154.
+ Turnschwamb, in Engel, i. 197. Stephen Verbécz ami-
cus S**.” Relatio Actorum; Engel, ii. p. 55.

Cuap. IV. OCCUPATION OF HUNGARY. 475

The political consequences of these conflicting
opinions were, however, not very obvious in Hun-
gary. The inclinations in favour of a church
differing in form from that established, were as
yet too scattered, too insignificant, to produce
any sensible effect. Ferdinand, who had been re-
proached with surrounding his wife with Germans,
who, it was said, were all Lutherans*, carefully
endeavoured to maintain his reputation as a good
catholic. On the Good Friday of 1527 he took
occasion to admonish his sister concerning her re-
ligious leanings.t On Corpus Christi day of the
same year, he was seen following the procession
through the streets of Vienna, in regal ornaments,
with a sword girt at his side and a missal in his
hand, looking around to see that every body paid
due reverence to the holy elements. From time to
time he issued mandates for the maintenance of the
ancient practices of the church. tr

But in Hungary, superiority of force was at that
time more important than questions of religion.

Jt could not be said that the whole nation was
split into two hostile parties; rather, that two
political tendencies existed in its bosom; the one
inclining to the court and the palatine, the other,

* Diarium in Comitiis Pesthanis, in Engel, ii. 51. “ Dedit
ei Germanos qui omnes fuerunt Lutherani.” In Katona, xix.
515. Art. v. “ Fukkarii ablegentur: oratores Cesareus et
Venetus (the latter only for the sake of the former, as the
Venetian Relation expresses) exmittantur: Lutherani etiam
omnes de regno extirpentur, —ubicumque reperti fuerint, libere
comburantur.”

{ Correspondence in Bucholtz, ix.

476 OCCUPATION OF HUNGARY. Boox IV.

to the opposition and Zapolya. After the disaster
of Mohacz they stood in the same relation to each
other as before ; the preponderancy of either was de-
pendent on the momentary assent of the majority,
who had attached themselves decidedly neither to
the one party nor the other.

At first, when Zapolya came forward, full armed
and powerful out of the general desolation, he had
the uncontested superiority. The capital of the king-
dom sought his protection, after which he marched
to Stuhlweissenburg, where his partisans bore down
all attempts at opposition*: he was elected and
crowned (11th of November, 1526); in Croatia,
too, he was acknowledged king at a diet; he filled
all the numerous places, temporal and spiritual,
left vacant by the disaster of Mohacz,. with his
friends. We have mentioned the negotiations he
set on foot in all directions. In Venice and Rome,
in Munich and Constantinople, we find *his agents.
When some one showed him an address of Fer-
dinand’s, exhorting the Hungarians to abandon
him, he smiled, and said, “kingdoms were not con-
quered in that manner.” :

But Ferdinand soon had recourse to other ex-
pedients.

The party of the former court had still sufficient
strength and importance to convoke a diet on behalf

of Ferdinand, the husband of a Jagellon, who had

* So at least the Bishop of Nitra, Podmanizky, excused him-
self for placing the crown on Zapolya’s head. He says he
should have been in danger of his life if he had refused, —
Diploma Ferdinandi; Katona, xix. p. 752.

Cuap. IV. OCCUPATION OF HUNGARY. _ ALE

so many ancient treaties in his favour. It was held

at Presburg —also in November, 1526— and elected

him king. Stephen Bathory and Alexis Thurzo,

the Bishop of Wesprim, were extremely active in his

service. Thereis a diploma of Ferdinand’s, in which

he names his adherents, expresses his gratitude to.
them, and promises his supporters the best posts

and offices hereafter.* Nor did he neglect to try

the efficacy of gold; mindful of the hint of his sister

Mary, that he could accomplish more with a gulden

now, than in future perhaps with a large sum.

Heavily as they pressed upon him, his gifts were

still insufficient to put an end to the waverings of
the magnates. Ferdinand saw indeed —for he had

too much good sense to indulge in any illusions —

that the grand thing was superiority in arms. The

acquisition of the crown of Bohemia gradually

enabled him to obtain the necessary force, and he

received some pecuniary aid from his brother. If
he hesitated to reject the negotiations which the

King of Poland set on foot at Olmiitz, it was, as he

expressly says in an extant letter, merely in order

to gain time for his preparations. At length he had

proceeded far enough. f

* Katona, xx. 19. “Prelaturas et dignitates et beneficia ec-
clesiastica ac bona et jura hereditaria et officia que ad colla-
tionem nostram regiam — devolventur, preefatis consiliariis et
his qui nostras partes sequentur, pro suis cuique meritis ante
alios donabimus.”— Ferdinand describes the circumstances of
both elections in a letter to his brother, of 8lst Dec. 1526.
(Gevay, p. 30.) He asserts that he was elected by a vast
majority.

+ Ferdinand to Mary, 7th April. “ Combien que nay nulle-

478 OCCUPATION OF HUNGARY. Boox IV.

On the 31st July, 1527, Ferdinand reached the
half-ruined tower on the high road between Vienna
and Ofen, which marks the boundary between Austria
and Hungary: he was received by the palatine and
a few Hungarian horsemen. As soon as he touched
the soil of Hungary, he alighted from his horse and
“swore to maintain the privileges of the kingdom.
He had brought a noble army into the field. The
grants of his new kingdom had enabled him to
raise an excellent body of infantry: he was pre-
ceded by Katzianer; and he now distinguished
himself by the most rigorous discipline, which he
enforced even on the Bohemians. Rogendorf,
who had returned from Spain, and the veteran
captains, Marx Sittich and Eck von Reischach,
had brought up the most experienced lands-
knechts. Besides these, the king’s new vassals,
Casimir of Brandenburg, George of Saxony and
the aged warrior, Erich of Brunswick, had been in-
duced to send some squadrons of German reiters
to his aid. Casimir, notwithstanding that he had
adopted decided, though moderate, evangelical
opinions, was invested with the chief command.
Nicholas von Salm, whose name we met with at
the battle of Pavia, and Johann Hilchen, the com-
panion of Sickingen, were with this army. It
amounted to 8000 foot and 3000 horse. The king
was advised not to expose his person to danger, lest

‘ment en voulente —riens traicter ny-conclure, neantmoings —
pour entretenir les affaires jusques a ce que soie de tout prest
pour me mectre aux champs, ... ie luy (au Roi de Pologne) ay
bien voulu accorder icelle journée.” — Gevay, p. 60.

Car. IV. OCCUPATION OF HUNGARY. 479

he should share the fate of his predecessor; but as
at this moment he received the intelligence that a
son was born to him, and the succession thus se-
cured, he insisted on accompanying the expedition.*

Nor did this assume a very formidable aspect. -
The first fortified places, Comorn, Tata, and Gran,
fell without much resistance : the excellent artillery,
the red-hot cannon balls, quickly reduced the garri-
son to despair. The Germans advanced without
interruption; and as soon as it appeared possible
that Ferdinand might be successful, Zapolya’s fol-
lowers began to desert him. The fleet in the
Danube went over first, —the military importance
of which was equal to its moral effect ; next the Ban
Bathyany, who had already changed sides more
than once, returned to that of Ferdinand. Peter
Pereny, who is regarded as the first evangelical
magnate in Hungary, and Valentine Torék, sus-
pected of being actuated by the desire to retain
possession of some sequestrated church lands, ap-
peared with splendid retinues.t The example of

* Ursinus Velius de Bello Pannonico, ed. Kollar. From the
collations in Katona, who has inserted this work entire, it is
evident how inferior is Isthuansi and even Zermegh to these
contemporaneous and circumstantial accounts.

+ Gebhardi Gesch. v. Ungarn, ii. 287. In Bucholtz, ix. 323.,
there is a document concerning the submission of Pereny, which
probably relates to this matter, and is extremely remarkable.
Pereny represents the following as his first demand: —“ Inprimis
cupit D. Petrus per S. M'™ assecurari, ne a religione sua
unquam prohibeatur, quandoquidem verum et bonum Chris-
tianum se profiteatur et scientem fidem Ch™™ per Christum
jucta evangelium.” FYerdinand answers: “ Concedit M. S. uti

480 OCCUPATION OF HUNGARY. Boox IV.

these great men was followed by innumerable ob-
scurer ones. Zapolya saw that his antagonist was
the stronger, and neither ventured to meet him in
the field, nor even to hold the capital against him,
but retreated to his own dominions. On the 20th
August, St. Stephen’s day, Ferdinand made his
entry into Ofen.

Whilst the States of the kingdom assembled
about him in that city, the German reiters under
Nicholas yon Salm — Markerave Casimir -having
died at Ofen— pursued the Woiwode across the
Theis. Never did the German troops display more
bravery and constancy.* They had often neither
meat nor bread, and were obliged to live on such
fruits as they found in the gardens: the inhabitants
were wavering and uncertain—they submitted, and
then revolted again to the enemy; Zapolya’s troops,
aided by their knowledge of the ground, made se-
veral very formidable attacks by night; but the
Germans evinced, in the moment of danger, the
skill and determination of a Roman legion: they
showed, too, a noble constancy under difficulties and
privations. At Tokay they defeated Zapolya and
compelled him to quit Hungary; after which they
had the honour to escort their royal leader and

se gerat verum et bonum Ch*™™ ut cujusque erga deum pietas
fidesque nostra vera et catolica dictare et postulare videtur.”
A concession which, though very equivocal, seems to have
satisfied Pereny. Without doubt, he thought himself also in
possession of the fides vera et catholica.

* Velius : “ Haud unquam alias Germani_ wmilitis virtus et
patientia in bello magis enituit.”

Cuap. IV. OCCUPATION OF HUNGARY. 481

countryman to Stuhlweissenburg in silken and em-
broidered surcoats over their glittering armour.
On the 3d N ovember, 1527, Ferdinand was crown-
ed’in Stuhlweissenburg : only five of the magnates
of the kingdom adhered to Zapolya. The victory
appeared complete.

Ferdinand, however, distinctly felt that this
appearance was delusive. « Monseigneur,” he
writes. in the same November to his brother, “I
do not doubt that the nature of the Hungarians, —
the fickleness of their will, is known to you.* They
must be held in with a short rein if you would be
sure of them.” It was not without great hesitation
that he could resolve to leave Hungary again at
this moment.

In Bohemia, too, his power was far from secure.
His Bavarian neighbours had not relinquished the
hope of driving him from the throne at the first
general turn of affairs.

The Ottomans, meanwhile, acting upon the per-
suasion that every land in which the head of their
chief had rested belonged of right to them, were pre-
paring to return to Hungary; either to take possession
of it themselves, or at first, as was their custom, to
bestow it on a native ruler— Zapolya, who now
eagerly sought an alliance with them—ag their
vassal. .

This was a state of things in which the most
important events often hang on the fate of a battle.

* « Leur muable et fragille vouloir.” Gevay, p. 120. Bu-
choltz, iii. 114.
VOL. IL. ony

482 HUNGARY. Boox IV.

The house of Austria had no other means of
maintaining the position it had reached, than the
assistance of the empire, to which it was compelled
incessantly to appeal.

On the Germans now devolved the defence of
Christendom against the Ottoman power.

CHAPTER V.

FOUNDATION OF EVANGELICAL STATES.

So important, in respect of the foreign relations of
Germany, were the consequences of the events which
coincided with the meeting of the diet at Spire.

But that assembly.at the same time gave rise to
other consequences, affecting the internal affairs of
the empire and the church, which, comparatively
insignificant as they at first appeared, were intrinsi-
cally, and with relation to the whole future condition
of Germany, of far higher and more unequivocal
importance than any external acquisitions. Those
of the States inclined to evangelical opinions under-
took to form new ecclesiastical establishments in
their territories, on the basis laid down by the Recess
of the empire: they proceeded to sever themselves
definitively from the world-embracing hierarchy of
the Latin church.

But as it usually happens that, at the beginning
of radical changes, the principles most strongly
opposed to the existing order of things are the
most prominent and influential, so, in the present
case, the extremest objects were those most anxi-
ously aimed at; and the ideas most in favour
were those most at variance with the absolute
dominion of the papacy.

Luther, at an earlier period, had contributed

rE 2

484. NEW IDEA, OF THE Boox IV.

to this result. In the year 1523, the Bohemians,
having fallen into intolerable confusion and per-
plexity, in consequence of their adherence to the
necessity of episcopal ordination, he advised them
to choose their pastors and bishops themselves
without scruple. “First prepare yourselves by
prayer,” said he, “and then assemble together in
God’s name and proceed to the election. Let the
most eminent and respected among you lay their
hands with good courage on the chosen candidate,
and, when this has taken place in several parishes,
let the pastors have a right to elect a head or
superintendent to visit them, as Peter visited the
first Christian communities.”* Ideas of this kind
were at that time very popular and widely dif-
fused, both in Switzerland and Germany. We find
even an obscure congregation declaring to its new
pastor, that he is not their master but their
servant and minister; peremptorily forbidding him
to apply to the bishop concerning any one of his
congregation, and threatening him with dismissal,
if he does not adhere to the single and eternal word
of God.f The congregations began to regard them-

* JT. de instituendis Ministris Ecclesize ad clarissimum Se-
natum Pragensem. Opp. Jen. ii. p.554. “ Convocatis et con-
venientibus libere quorum corda Deus tetigerit, ut vobiscum
unum sentiant et sapiant, procedatis in nomine Domini et eligite
quem et quos volueritis, qui digni et idonei visi fuerint, tum
impositis super eos manibus illorum qui potiores inter vos
fuerint, confirmetis et commendetis eos populo et ecclesiz seu
universitati sintque hoc ipso vestri episcopi ministri seu
pastores. Amen.” :

+ Dorfmaister und Gemaind zu Wendelstains Firhalten den

*
Cup. V. CONSTITUTION OF A CHURCH. 485

selves as the sources of spiritual power. _ Had these
principles become universal, the edifice of a new
church must have been raised on a purely demo-
cratical basis.

_ And, in fact, the experiment was tried in one
large principality of Germany.

There is nothing in the history of these times
more remarkable than the decree of the synod which
Landgrave Philip of Hessen held with the spiritual
and temporal estates of his dominions at Homberg.
The objection raised by the guardian of the Fran-
ciscans of Marburg—that at so small an assembly
no decision could be taken on affairs which properly
belonged to a general council —was easily over-
ruled ; since even at the diet the impossibility of
waiting for such a council had been admitted. On
the other hand, Francis Lambert succeeded in esta-
blishing the contrary principle — that every Chris-

Amptleuten zu Schwobach iren newangeenden Pfarrherrn gethan
Mittw. nach Galli, 1524. Abgedruckt in Riederer’s Nachrichten
zur Biichergeschichte, &c. ii. 334. “ Nachdem ainer christlichen
Gemain gebiirt, einhellig in sich in die Gemaind zu greifen
nach einem erbarn unverleumpten Mann,...welchen auch
dieselbe Gemaind Macht hat wieder abzuschaffen. Der Wider-
christ, der sie in der babylonischen Gefangenschaft halte, habe _
ihnen auch diese Freiheit entzogen,” &c.— The master (magis-
trate) and parish of Wendelstain’s charge to the functionaries at
Schwobach, as to their new priest, Wednesday after Galli, 1524.
Printed in Riederer’s Nachrichten, &e., 3384. “ Afterwards it
is incumbent on a Christian congregation to look out unani-
mously for an honest and blameless man, ... whom the same
congregation has power to dismiss again. ‘The antichrist who
holds you in Babylonish captivity has robbed you of this liberty
among others,” &e. -
Ir 3

486 NEW IDEA OF THE Boox IV.

tian is participant in the priesthood; that the true
church consists only in their fellowship, and that
it is for this church to decide, according to God’s
word, upon articles of faith.* The idea was formed
of constituting a church consisting solely of true
believers. The following was the scheme drawn up _
to that effect. f

It was proposed that, after a sermon, a meeting
should be held, and every one should be asked whe-
ther he was determined to submit himself to the
laws, or not. Those who refused should be put
out and regarded as heathens. But the names of
those who chose to be in the number of the saints,
should be written down ; they must not be troubled
if, at first, they should be few, for God would
soon increase their number: these would constitute
the congregation. The most important business ~
of their meetings would be the choice of their
spiritual leaders (here simply called bishops). For
this station any citizen of irreproachable life and
competent instruction should be eligible, whatever
were his profession; but he should be allowed to
retain it only so long as he preached the genuine
word of God. Each parish or congregation should
‘ have some members who should perform military

* Paradoxa Francisci Lamberti in Scultetus, Annales Evang.
p. 68. Titevi. §6. Tit. iii. § 1.

+ Reformatio ecclesiarum Hassie juxta certissimam sermo-
num Dei regulam ordinata in venerabili synodo per clem™™
Hassorum principem Philippum ad 1526. d. 20th Oct. Hom-
bergi celebrata cui ipse princeps interfuit. Schmincke Monu-
menta Hassorum, ii. p. 588. Bickell Zeitschrift des Vereins fiir
hessische Geschichte i. 63-69. .

Cuar..V. CONSTITUTION OF A CHURCH. 487

service, and a common chest or treasury, to which
all should contribute, and out of which the poor,
and. those who had been driven from their homes
for the Gospel’s sake, should receive assistance.
The right of excommunicating, it was affirmed, is
inherent in every man: the crimes which draw
down this punishment are specified: absolution
can only be granted after sin has been confessed
and repented of. [We see that the most rigid
church discipline is united with the fullest inde-
pendence of the several religious communities.
The pretensions set up are sanctified by the pro-
found earnestness of spirit which dictates them. ]
Every year the churches, represented by bishops
and deputies, should assemble in general synod,
where all complaints should be heard and doubts
resolved. A committee of thirteen should be ap-
pointed to prepare the business and lay it before
the meeting, to be decided according to God’s
word. At the general synod, the meeting of which
was permanently fixed for the third Sunday after
Easter, three visitors were to be chosen, who were
to examine the state of each individual church.

It is very remarkable that the man who worked
out these ideas into so complete a scheme of church
government, was a foreigner—a Frenchman of
Avignon—who, converted by Zwingli, had become
deeply imbued with evangelical doctrines in the
school of Luther. The ideas are the same on which
the French, Scotch, and American churches were
afterwards founded, and indeed on which the ex-
istence and the development of North America

rr 4

A488 PRINCIPLE OF THE -— Boox IV.

may truly be said to rest. Their, historical im-
portance is beyond all calculation. We trace them
in the very first attempt at the constitution of a
church; they were adopted by a small German
synod.

It was another question, however, whether they
could be carried into execution in Germany ge-
nerally.

Luther at least had already renounced them.

In the first place, he found them attended with
almost insurmountable difficulties. Throughout the
whole of his labours, he had found a powerful
ally in the desire of the higher secular ranks to
emancipate themselves from the immediate super-
vision of the clergy. People would not now
consent to have an equally galling yoke laid upon
them in another form. Moreover, Luther found
that he had no men fitted for an institution of this
kind. He was often highly incensed at the stub-
born indocility of the peasants, who could not even
be prevailed on to maintain their clergy. He said
“the ordinances of the church fared as they might
do if they had to be practised in the market-place,
among Turks and heathen: the greater part stood
and gaped, as if they were only looking at something
new.”* In short, the whole state of things was not
adapted to such institutions. If these ideas, which
we may describe as ecclesiastically democratic,
afterwards triumphed in other countries, it was

* Preface to the Book on the German Mass. Altenb. iii:
468.

Cuar. V. EVANGELICAL ECCLESIASTICAL LAW. 489

because the new church rose in opposition to the
civil power ; its real root and strength were in the
lower classes of the people. But it was far other-
wise inGermany. The new churches were founded
under the protection, the immediate influence, of
the reigning authorities, and its form was naturally
determined by that circumstance.

For the ideas which find their way into the
world are modified by external circumstances.
The moment of their production has an inevitable
and permanent effect on their whole existence ;
they live on under the same conditions which at-
tended their birth.

It is worth while, at the point at which we are
arrived, where we have to examine into the found-
ation of the evangelical church, to endeavour to
acquire a precise and comprehensive notion of the
circumstances under which it took place. We
shall thus be able to form a more exact estimate
of the lawfulness of the measures adopted. The
principle of the ecclesiastical law of the evangelical
church, on which the whole structure is founded,
may, if I mistake not, be arrived at by an historical
deduction.

The first and most important consideration
which presents itself is, that the real origin of the
movement is to be found in the internal divisions of
the church; that the secession took place within
her own proper domain. A university, with those
nurtured in its bosom, set the example; the lower
clergy through a great part of Germany followed;
they were the men who changed the opinions of

490 PRINCIPLE OF THE Boox IV.

all classes, the lowest as well as the highest—
who carried all along with them. In innumer-
able places the established form of worship fell of
itself.

It was the immediate business of the spiritual
power to repress this movement ;— but it was unable
- todo so. . The pope’s bulls were not executed. In
one portion of the empire the secular power no
longer lent its arm to enforce the ordinances of the
bishops. The new opinions were become so strong
in a number of the princes of the empire, that they
no longer regarded this as their duty.

Hence the ecclesiastical power had addressed it-
self to the emperor, and an edict had been published
in its favour; but as this did not spring from any
intrinsic necessity but from partial political con-
siderations, it had been found impossible to carry
it into execution. After all the ebbs and flows of
the religious agitation, the diet had at length de-
termined not to revoke it, but to leave to the dis-
cretion of every member of the empire, whether he
would execute it or not.

What under these circumstances could be the re-
sult in the territories infected with the ideas of the
reformation? Should their princes seek to restore
an authority with which they had incessantly been .
at bitter strife, which had drawn upon itself the
hatred of the whole nation, and whose ministry they
deemed unchristian? The Recess of the diet did
not. enjoin this upon them. It said, that no man
must be robbed of his goods or his revenues; the
re-establishment of the spiritual jurisdiction was

Cuar. V. EVANGELICAL ECCLESIASTICAL LAW. 491

purposely passed over in silence. Or were they to
wait till a council should be convened, and should
restore order? It was impossible to foresee when _
, that might take place ;—the diet itself had found it.
impossible. Nor could things be left to their own
undirected course, or tochance. If the nation were
not to be given up to a wild anarchy, the existing
lawful authorities must take measures for the
restoration of order.

If it be asked, how the princes of Germany were
empowered to act thus, their warrant must not be
traced to a sort of episcopal authority; at least not
at the beginning. It was on this occasion that
Luther expressly declared, “ that the temporal
power was not commanded to govern spiritually.”
Another opinion then put forward is more plau-
sible; namely, that the church actually existing
committed to the sovereign of the country the office
of supervision. Luther, however, who maturely
weighed all these things, and would do nothing
without full certainty, only said, “ that people
prayed the princes, out of love and for God’s sake,
to take upon themselves this affair.” The new
church was not yet itself constituted ; it is quite
certain that it did not esteem itself competent to
confer a right on others. |

The right, properly so called, is derived, if I mis-
take not, from another source.

It were hardly possible to question the competency
of the empire, in the prevailing state of confusion,
to frame ordinances respecting ecclesiastical, as well
as civil affairs, at a regular assembly like that in-

499 PRINCIPLE OF THE Boox. IV.

tended to be held at Spire. It.is true that scruples
were urged from more than one quarter, but these
scruples were at a subsequent period removed.
Otherwise we must call in question the legality
of the Religious Peace, as well as of the peace of
Westphalia, neither of which was ever acknowledged
by the papal power.

Nor was the validity of the Recesses of 1523 and
1524, which were so important to the cause of re-
ligion, ever doubted in Germany.

Had the assembly of the empire, proceeding in
this course, used its unquestioned right, and organ-
ised a reform for all classes, a total revolution must
have been the result. :

The meeting of the empire could not, it is true,
come to any such unanimous decision; but it did
not on that account relinquish its powers, as is
proved by the way in which it subsequently used
them. At the time we are speaking of, the diet
deemed it expedient —for that is the point on which
the whole depends—to entrust the exercise of its
rights to the territorial rulers.

For what other interpretation can be put upon
the liberty granted by the diet to the princes, to
agree with their respective subjects whether or
not they would obey the edict of Worms? —a
matter necessitating the most decisive and sweep-
ing measures.* What the assembly of the empire

* “Das ist je die Wahrheit, dass das kais. Edict anders
nichts innen hilt, denn die Sachen unsern h. Glauben und

Religion, auch die Irsallehren und Missbrijuch so daraus ent-
Sprungen seyn, belangend. So denn an denselben, nemlich wie

Cuar. V. EVANGELICAL ECCLESIASTICAL LAW. 493

was not unanimous or determined enough to ex-
ecute, it left to be executed by the several States.
Thus the matter was understood by Landgrave
Philip, when he invited his “ subjects of spiritual
and temporal estate” to repair to Homberg, “ in
order to come to an agreement with them in affairs
relating to the holy faith.” Markgrave Casimir of
Brandenburg takes the same ground, when, as a
god-loving prince (as he calls himself) and a
dutiful subject of his imperial majesty, he makes
an arrangement with the deputies of his dominions,
the spirit of which, notwithstanding a certain dis-
ereet reserve, is unquestionably evangelical. We
possess a little treatise of that time, in which not
only the competency, but the duty of princes to
make regulations conformable with the standard of
the Divine Word, concerning the whole Christian

und was man glauben, was man lehren predigen und halten,
was man auch in solchem flichen und vermeiden soll, ein
ganz christlich Leben und unser einige Seligkeit ohne Mittel
gelegen ist, .. . so folget gewisslich, dass der angezeigte Artikel
auf ein ordentlich christlich Leben Regiment und Wesen muss
gezogen werden. Die hineingebrachten Wort des KEdicts
machen auch den Artikel viel liuterer.” (Worte der gleich
anzufiihrenden Schrift.) — “ That is the truth, that the im-
perial edict contains nothing but what concerns the affairs of
our holy faith and religion, and the false doctrines and abuses
that have sprung out of it. So then, as upon this, —namely how
and what we must believe, what should be taught and preached
and held, also what should be eschewed and avoided,—a wholly
Christian life and our own salvation immediately depend, so
it of a certainty follows that the above-mentioned article must

extend to the rule and nature of a proper Christian life. The
words of the edict make the article much clearer.” (Words of
the writing in which the above edict is quoted.)

494 LUTHER’S IDEA OF THE CHURCH. Boox IV.

life and conversation (since the edict was intended
to extend to them also), is deduced from the words
of the Recess.* To this Luther alludes when he
mentions that the Emperor Constantine found him-
self constrained, during the prevalence of the Arian
troubles, to interfere, at least so far as to summon
a council in order to put a stop to further disorders.

In a word, it was the incontestable right of the
highest power in the state, on the breaking out of
these dissensions in the church, to take measures
for putting an end to them—the right of the whole
collective body of the empire, transferred to the
several States, —in virtue of which the evangelical
princes proceeded to carry through the reform in
their own dominions.

Hence the democratical ideas we have mentioned
could not gain ascendency; the existing facts did
not tend that way; the church did not constitute
itself from below. Nor had that community of
true believers, answering to the idea of the invisi-
ble Church, to which the right of giving laws to
itself might have been committed, any actual exist-
ence. Luther continued to regard the Church as
a divine institution to be supported by all temporal
authorities (as heretofore) ; instituted not for the

* “Kin christlicher Rathschlag . . . welcher gestalt sich alle
christliche Personen von Obern und Unterthanen halten sollen,
dass sie das nach Anzeigung eines sondern Artikelsim Abschied
des jiingstgehaltenen Reichstagszu Speier ...mdgen yerant-
worten.”—“ A Christian counsel . .. what conduct all Christian
persons, rulers, or subjects should observe, that they may answer

it, according to the admonition of a particular article in the re-
cess of the last held diet at Spire.” — Hortleder, b. i. c. 2.

Crap. V. SAXON VISITATION. 495

purpose of representing the great Mystery, but above
all, for the instruction of the people; “as a public
incitement,” as he expresses it, “ to faith and Chris-
tianity.”. Whilst he denounced the bishops who
had suffered the people to remain in such a state of
barbarous ignorance, that they had not even learned
the Lord’s Prayer or the Ten Commandments, and
knew nothing of the Christian faith, he, at the same
time, combated the notions of some reformers, who
thought that education being rendered more access-
ible and general, the priesthood might be entirely
dispensed with: in his view, the Church is a living,
divine institution, for the maintenance and the dif-
fusion of the Gospel by the ministering of the sa-
craments, and by preaching: his idea is, as he says,
“to drive the doctrine of the Scriptures into the
hearts of men; that so present and future genera-
tions may be replenished with it.”

These were the ideas which presided over the
ecclesiastical institutions of the Saxon dominions.

The elector had nominated certain Visitors who
should examine the state of each parish as to doc-
trine and life. Instructions drawn up by Melanch-
thon, and approved, nay edited, by Luther, were
sent in their name to the respective clergymen.

These are well worthy of attention.

The opposition to the papacy, vehement as was
the struggle still pending, had already fallen very
much into the back-ground ; it was admitted that
this was not a fit topic to be debated in the pulpit
and before the people. The preachers were ad-
monished not to use reproachful language con-

496 SAXON VISITATION. Boox IV.

cerning the pope or the bishops, but to keep
solely in view the wants of the many—the im-
planting of the evangelical doctrine in the minds of
the common people. The greatest respect for all
that was traditional and established was shown.
It was not thought necessary positively to forbid
the use of Latin for the mass: the administration
of-the sacrament in one. kind was even deemed
allowable, where any one from scruples of con-
science was unwilling entirely to throw off the
ancient ritual; though the compulsion to auri-
cular confession was rejected as unauthorised by
the Holy Scriptures, it was declared salutary for
every one to confess the sins by which he felt his
conscience burdened, and about which he needed
counsel: nor were even all the festivals of the

saints abolished; it was enough if they were not

invoked or their intercession prayed for.

The idea which we have already frequently ex-
pressed—that the reformers rejected only the preten-
sions to infallibility and to exclusive saving power,
which were the growth of later centuries, but by

no means abandoned the ground on which the

Latin church stands, —here presents itself again in
great distinctness. They sought only to get rid
of the load of perplexing traditions, to free them-
selves from hierarchical usurpations, and to recover
the pure meaning of the Holy Scripture—the re-
vealed Word.* Whatever could be retained con-

* See Luther’s Vorrede auf das Biichlin des Herrn Licen-
tiaten Klingenbeil, 1528. Altenb. iv. 456. “ Wir haben die
Schrift fiir uns, dazu der alten Viiter Spriiche und der vorigen

Cuap. V. SAXON VISITATION. 497

sistently with this, they retained. They took care
not to perplex the minds of the common people
with difficult controversial doctrines, especially
those concerning good works and free will. Not
that they had in the least degree fallen off from the
convictions they had come to; — from the funda-
mental doctrine of justification by faith; from the
conflict with the error of seeking salvation in the
observance of human ordinances: on the contrary,
they repeatedly proclaimed these principles with all
possible clearness, but they required at the same time
penitence, contrition and sorrow, shunning of sin
and piety of life. For it is unquestionably in the
power of man to flee from evil and to do that
which is right; the impotence of the will means
only that it cannot purify the heart or bring forth
divine gifts; these must be sought from God
alone.* ‘The end they proposed to themselves was,
to lead men to inward religion, to faith and love,
. to blameless conversation, honesty and good order.
Far from departing on any point whatsoever from
genuine Christianity, they made it their chief merit

Kirehen Gesetze, dazu des Papsts selbst eigenen Brauch da
bleiben wir bei: sie aber haben etlicher Viiter Gegenspriiche,
newe Canones und ihren eignen Muthwillen ohn alle Schrifft
und Wort Gottes.” — “ We have the Scripture for us, and also
the maxims of the old fathers and the laws of the early church,
and likewise the usage of the pope ‘himself — by that we abide:
but they have the contrary maxims of some fathers, new canons,
and their own wantonness, without any Scripture and word of
God.”

* Instructions of the Visitatores to the parish priests of the
Elector of Saxony. Altenb. iv. 389.

VOL. II. KK

498 SAXON VISITATION. Boox IV.

to imbue the minds of their hearers more and more
deeply with its principles. Luther deems it his
highest praise that he applies the maxims of the
Gospel to common life. He made it his especial
business to instruct the several classes of society
in their duties, on religious grounds: the secular
authorities and their subjects, the heads of families
and their several members. He displayed a match-
less talent for popular teaching. He tells the
clergy how to preach with benefit to the common
people ; schoolmasters how to instruct the young in
the several stages of learning, — how to connect
science with religion, and to avoid exaggeration ;
masters of families how to keep their servants in
the fear of God: he prescribes to each and all texts
for the good ordering of their lives; the pastor and his
flock, men and women, aged people and children,
men-servants and maid-servants, young and old;
he gives them the formula of the Benedicite and
the Gratias at table; of the morning and evening
benediction. He is the patriarch of the austere and
devout discipline and manners which characterise
the domestic life of Northern Germany. What
countless millions of times has his “‘ Das walt Gott*,”
reminded the tradesman and the peasant, immersed
in the dull routine of the working day, of his relation
to the Eternal! The Catechism, which he published
in the year 1529,— of which he said, that he repeated
it himself with devotion, old doctor as he was, —is as

* Literally, that God rules or disposes ;— or, as we should
say, As it please God. — TRANSL.

CiiaWe SAXON VISITATION. 499

childlike as it is profound, as intelligible as simple
and sublime. Happy the man whose soul has been
nourished with it, and who holds fast to it! I
contains enduring comfort in every affliction,
and under a slight husk, the kernel of truths able
to satisfy the wisest of the wise.

But, in order to insure stability to this tendency
towards popular instruction, —this substitution
of preachers for priests, — a new external establish-
ment of the churches was immediately necessary.

We must here bear in mind that the property of
the church was menaced from every side. We have
already remarked how the first dissolution of con-
vents originated in the high catholic party, and
what claims were made by the Austrian government
on the secular administration of the episcopal
domains: these arbitrary acts daily acquired a
more open and violent character. Luther said, the
papist Junkers were in this respect more Lutheran
than the Lutherans themselves ; he thought it his
duty to complain of the measures of the Elector
of Mainz against his convent in Halle.* Landgrave
Philip, too, remarked that people began to scramble
among themselves for the conventual lands: every

* Bericht an einen guten Freund aufs Bischofs von Meissen
Mandat. Altenb. iii. 895. “Man nehme den. Kléstern und
Stiftern ihre Barschaft und Kleinodien, greife den Geistlichen
in ihre Freiheit, beschwere sie mit Schatzungen, laure auf ihre
liegenden Griinde.”— Report to a good Friend on the Mandate
of the Bishop of Meissen. (Alt. iii. 895.) “ They strip the
convents and abbeys of their money and jewels, assail the
freedom of the clergy, oppress them with contributions, and lie
in watch for their lands.”

KK 2

500 SAXON VISITATION. Boox IV.

man stretched out his hand after them, though in
other respects they would not be called evangelical.*
This disposition however was not confined to Ger-
many ; it showed itself all over Europe. In the two
years 1524 and 1525, Cardinal Wolsey dissolved
more than twenty convents and abbeys in England,
in order to endow with their funds the New College
in Oxford, by which he hoped to immortalise his
name.t We must fully understand the general
temper of the times, which was connected with the
attempts at reform, before we can be competent to
judge the steps taken in the evangelical territories.
In Saxony a great number of convents had dis-
solved of themselves; the monks had dispersed,
and the neighbouring nobles already stretched out
their hands towards the vacant lands and houses.
Luther’s opinion was, that this ought not to
be permitted. He said that as the lands were
originally designed for the support of God’s service,
they ought in futureto be applied to that destination.
He required, above all, that the rural parishes,
which were very poorly endowed, and, in con-
sequence of the great falling off in the fees, could
not maintain a priest, should be enriched from the
funds of the vacant benefices. Whatever remained
might be given to the poor or used for the exigences
of the state. It was only to the highest power,

* Letter from Philip to Luther, 1526. Rommel Hess. Gesch.
v. p-861.; es sey “ viel Rappens um die geistlichen Giiter,” —
there was “ much snatching at the church property.”

{ Catalogue in Fiddes’s Collection, No. 76. There are es-
pecially many Augustin convents.

Chip. Vi SAXON VISITATION. 501

‘the supreme head,” as he expresses it, that he
ascribed “the right, and at the same time the duty,
of ordering these things after the papal yoke had
been removed from the land.” He once forced him-
self into the apartments of his elector, to impress
upon him the duty of protecting the church property
from the rapacity of the nobles.*

The Visitors were now commissioned to order
the new establishments conformably with these
views. It must be acknowledged that they pro-
ceeded with great moderation. The abbeys and
chapters which had become evangelical, as for
example, those of Eisenach and Gotha, remained
untouched. In Hensdorf and Weimar, nuns were
tolerated and allowed to adhere strictly to the old
ceremonies. The Franciscan convents in Altenburg
and Saalfield, which had made a violent resistance.
to the new doctrines, were yet suffered to remain ;
they were only admonished, and, as the original
report expresses it, “‘commended to God” (Gott
befohlen).f I have not found any trace of the
actual abolition of subsisting institutions. The
commission only disposed of the estates of benefices
already fallen vacant; these were applied to in-
creasing the endowments of parish churches and
schools; the existing chapters were compelled to
contribute to the same objects. Some of the
prelates, for example, the Abbot of Bosan, were

* Letter of Luther to the Elector, 22d Nov. 1526, in De
Wette, iii. p. 137.; an Spalatin, 1st Jan. 1527, ibid. 147. See
p- 158.

+ Extracts from the Visitation Acts; Seckendorf, ii. p. 102.

KEK 3

502 SAXON VISITATION. Boox IV.

very well inclined to this; with others it was
necessary to use severe compulsion. Instead of
censuring this employment of power, we have only
to wish it had been from the first more decisive—
more large and sweeping in its plans and operations.
In the first freshness and vigour of the religious
impulse, much more extensive and _ beneficial
changes might have been effected than could be
attempted at a later period. What then might not
have been achieved for the cause of religion and of
civilisation, had the empire itself undertaken the
guidance of this mighty revolution! As things
now stood, the reformers were forced to content
themselves with bringing matters to a tolerable
condition, not inconsistent with the simple existence
of the new church.
Nevertheless, even these institutions contained
the germ of a vast development.
_ In the centre of Latin Christendom — go essen-
tially hierarchical—a new form of Church and
State, emancipated from every kind of hierarchy,
arose. If, on the one hand, an alliance had been
formed in. Bavaria between the civil sovereignty,
the university and the papacy, which exercised
supervision and control over the regular hierar-
chical authorities, on the other, a union was here
effected between the prince, the university and the
inferior clergy, which completely excluded the
episcopal jurisdiction. The lower clergy acquired
great independence. They might be said to govern
themselves, by means of the superintendents whom
the sovereign chose out of their ranks, and to whom

Cuap, V. REFORMATION IN HESSEN. 503

some of the functions of bishops were committed.
By rejecting celibacy, they secured a new influence
over the mind of the nation. The body of married
clergy became a nursery for the learned professions
and civil offices; the centre of a cultivated middle
class. It is to the greater care which the tranquillity
of a country life enables parents to bestow on the
education of their children, and which the dignity
of their calling in some measure imposed upon the
country clergy, that Germany owes some of its
most distinguished men. The suppression of
monasteries and the restoration of their inhabit-
ants to social life, gradually led to a very sensible
increase of the population. In the year 1750,
Justus Méser reckoned that from ten to fifteen
millions of human beings in all countries and
regions of the globe owed their existence to Luther
and to his example, and adds, “A statue ought to
be erected to him as the preserver of the species.” *

Institutions of the kind we have been describing
were far more consonant with the situation of
Germany and the natural course of events, than
the rash and subversive ideas, ill suited to the
state of things, which had been put forth at Hom-
berg. As the instructions to the Saxon Visita-
tores were adopted in Hessen, as early as the year
1528, the Saxon ordinances very soon followed ;
in 1531, Landgrave Philip nominated six superin-
tendents.f It was only in relation to church pro-

* Lettre 3 Mr. de Voltaire Osn. 6th Sept. 1750, in Abeken’s
Reliquien von Justus Moser, p. 88.
{ Rommel Landg. Philipp, ii. pp. 128, 124.

KK 4

504 REFORMATION IN HESSEN. Book IV.

perty, that the measures employed in Hessen were
more sweeping and uniform than in Saxony. Land-
grave Philip was still inflamed by the first ardour of
religious and patriotic ideas: “I will help Hessen,”
exclaimed he once with enthusiasm; yet he did not
disguise from himself the danger that “he might
be overcome: by the flesh, and led away from the
right path.” He conceived the design of placing
the monasteries under an administration dependent
on the prince and states conjointly,—providing both
for those inmates who chose to remain, and for
those who quitted them; and of applying the surplus
to the public wants, especially of a spiritual nature :
he himself would not have the right to touch this
fund without the consent of the states.* The
interests of the country were here peculiarly
powerful.

As a motive for the confiscation of conventual
property, it was alleged, that perhaps only a fourth
part of the monks and nuns were natives; the
rest were foreigners, and therefore such property
was of no advantage to the country. Some mo-
nasteries which had embraced the evangelical faith
were suffered to remain, but by far the greater
number were suppressed ; some, because they drew

* “Das eine Oberkeit zu dem Kasten nit kommen kont one
Verwilligung der Landschaft, sonst so verkompt das Gut, und
der Oberkeit oder Landt wurd es nit gepessert.” — “ That no
one of the authorities should be able to touch the fund without
the consent of the country ; otherwise the property would be
spent, and the government or the country not be the better for
it.” — Letter to Luther in Rommel, v. p. 862.

Cuar. V. REFORMATION IN HESSEN. 505

their funds from alms, which nobody would now
contribute; others, because the members dispersed,
either from Christian motives, as they express it, —
from conscientious scruples, —or because some fa-
vourable opportunity presented itself. They accepted
compensation in money or in kind; the surplus
was, according to the regulations of a diet held in
October, 1527, to be given in part to the nobility*,
in part to an university which it was determined
to found at Marburg, and the remainder to form a
fund for the use of the prince, the nobles, and the
cities; but only to be resorted to with their joint
consent. Many of these dispositions were altered
in the course of the slow and gradual execution of
them. Yet some great institutions were really
founded: two endowments for young ladies of
noble birth, four large public hospitals, and, above
all, the university of Marburg, with its Seminarium
theologicum. For this newly founded evangelical

* « S, F. Gn. wollen 830 Mannspersonnen (vom Adel), 15 im
odern, 15 im nidern Fiirstenthumben, mit etlicher Steuwer an
Frucht Korn und Habern Fiirsehung thun, damit sie sich in
Riistung erhalten und auf Erforderung desto stattlicher dienen
modgen.” —“ His princely grace will provide 30 men (no-
bles), 15 in the upper, and 15 in the lower principality, with
certain dues in wheat, rye and oats, that so they may hold
themselves in readiness and serve in more noble wise when
called out.” — “ Was der durchleuchtige First... Hr Philips

. mit den Glosterpersonen Pfarrherren und abgittischen
Bildnussen vorgenommen hat.” — “ What the most illustrious
prince—the Lord Philip — has done and provided as to monks,
parish priests, and idolatrous figures.” Hortleder, i. v. ii. § 11.
—*“TIt recalls the ideas which dictated the Augsburg scheme
of secularisation, 1525.” f

506 BRANDENBURG. Boox IV.

university was more especially a theological school ;
the other faculties were only slight and incomplete
beginnings. The synod of Homberg had decreed
that nothing should be studied there which might
be “ contrary to the kingdom of God;” and every
member was obliged to take an oath on his admis-
sion, that he would attempt no innovation contrary
to God’s word. It was of great importance that
another centre of evangelical theology thus arose
by the side of the school of Wittenberg; at first,
indeed, without the imperial privilege, but. this
was afterwards granted.

The influence of these events was felt in the
Franconian principalities of Brandenburg, though
affairs were here more complicated. Of the two
princes who governed conjointly, the one, Mark-
grave Casimir, married to a Bavarian princess and
allied to the house of Austria, adhered as closely
as he could to the established party; while the
other, Markgrave George, who resided in Silesia,
cherished and avowed decidedly evangelical opi-
nions. In October, 1526, Markgrave Casimir held
a diet of his estates at Anspach, on occasion of the
Recess of Spire, in which resolutions of a still more
ambiguous nature were passed than those embodied
in the Recess itself. It is impossible to doubt of
their evangelical tendency : in the very first article
it is ordained, that the preachers throughout the
country shall preach the pure Gospel and word of
God, and nothing contrary to it; nor are the con-
cessions as to the ritual to be judged with rigour,
when it is remembered how tolerant even Luther

Cuar. V. BRANDENBURG. 507

was on that point. To many, doubtless, it must have
appeared shocking, that Markgrave Casimir ordered
the mass to be said in Latin ; that he prayed, though
he did not command, his subjects to keep the fasts,
and even thought it expedient to maintain the en-
dowed masses for the dead, and the vigils.* Mark-
grave George was extremely dissatisfied: the letter
which he sent his brother, together with the copy
of these resolutions, is full of bitter remarks. The
whole country remained in a state of doubt. And as
the neighbouring bishops refused their approbation
—refused to consent to the loss of their jurisdiction,
and still made attempts to present to livings, which
were not repressed with sufficient energy, — every
thing fell into confusion. Under these circum-
stances it was an event of great importance that

* Recess and Opinion, Onolzbach, Wednesday after St. Fran-
cis (in 1526, St. Francis’s day fell on a Wednesday, 4th Oct.).
Hortleder, i. i. 8. The extract in Lang entirely effaces the
evangelical character. e.g. According to Lang, it was said that
the holy sacrament should in no case be given in both kinds,
and that nothing should be taught contrary to the doctrine of
transubstantiation. In fact, however, we find there (No. 5.
Hortleder, p. 39.), “ Wéollen uns versehen, dass sich ein jeder
mit Empfahung des Sacraments also halte, wie er das gegen
Gott und Kais. Mt. verhoff zu verantworten.” — “ We will take
care that every one carry himself so as to the receiving of the
Sacrament, as he may hope to answer it to God and his
imperial majesty,” which, however, involves complete freedom.
“ Eg soll auch wider das hochw. Sacrament, — als ob in dem h.
Sacrament der Leib und das Blut nicht gegenwertig wiire, nit
gepredigt werden.” — “There shall also be nothing preached
against the holy Sacrament,—as if the body and the blood
were not present in the holy Sacrament.” Between the pre-
sence and transubstantiation, however, what a difference !

508 NURNBERG. Boox IV.

Casimir died in the Hungarian campaign, and
Markgrave George took upon himself the sole go-
vernment of the principalities. With his acces-
sion, the zealous evangelical councillors, Hans von
Schwarzenberg and George Vogler acquired unob-
structed influence. At another diet at Anspach,
Ist of March, 1528, an explanation of the former
Recess, dictated by purely evangelical opinions,
was given; and now, too, nothing contrary to
God’s word was to be tolerated in the ceremonial
of the church. A visitation, on the model of
that of Saxony, was immediately appointed in
connexion with the city of Niirnberg; and by its
agency an evangelical church constitution was
established in both territories.

For the reform had meanwhile been carried
through in Niirnberg. We have already men-
tioned the great leaning which the burghers of
that city had shown from the first to the new doc-
trines, and the support they experienced from their
two provosts — patricians of Niirnberg—in the
appointment of evangelical preachers. Here, too,
no changes were at first made, except those strictly
necessary. In the year 1524, for example, the bap-
tismal service was first read in the German tongue.
Although an admonition to that effect had been pub-
lished a year before by Luther, the N iirnbergers
chose rather merely to translate the entire formula
of the Bamberg Agenda into German: the custom
of putting salt into the mouth of the child, of
breathing thrice on its eyes, and anointing its breast
with oil, was still adhered to; nor was one of

Cuapr. V. NURNBERG. 509

the traditionary formule of exorcism discontinued.*
It deserves to be noticed, as an illustration of the
transition going on, that the rector of St. Sebaldus
altered the ancient form, ‘“ Ave Regina, mater
misericordiz !” into, ‘‘ Ave Jesu Christe, rex miseri-
cordiz!”+ The most important changes were, the
administration of the Lord’s Supper in both kinds,
and the omission of the canon; the abolition of vigils,
masses and anniversaries for the dead, and particular
hours of the day for prayer. But it will be readily
concluded that this was far too much for their
ordinary, the Bishop of Bamberg. He at length
excluded the two provosts from the community of
the church, declared their offices vacant, and re-
quired those with whom it rested, to proceed to a
new election. But things were totally altered since
the year 1520. Then, it was still necessary to
come to a compromise with the papal commis-
sioners, distant as they were; now, the excom-
munication of a neighbouring and powerful bishop
made no impression. The provosts appealed from
him to “a free, sure, Christian, and godly coun-
cil.”{ The most active members of the council
gradually adopted their way of thinking. Jerome
Ebner, a man distinguished alike for the rigour of

* History of Exorcism in the Church of Niirnberg ; Strobel
Miscell., iv. p. 173.

+ Instead of “ advocata nostra” it is, “ mediator noster :” in-
stead of “Jesum benedictum fructum ventris tui nobis post hoc
exilium ostende,” it is, “O Jesu benedicte faciem patris tui nobis
post hoe exilium ostende.”

+ Appeal and Petition of the Provosts and the Prior of the
Augustines at Niirnberg ; Strobel Miscell., iii. p. 62.

510 NURNBERG. Boox IV.

his conscience and the mildness of his temper,
Caspar Niitzel, Christopher Scheurl, Jerome
Baumgiirtner, and Lazarus Spengler, secretary to
the council, who united the liveliest interest in
questions of religion and church government ge-
nerally, with extraordinary talents for business.
At all the meetings of the cities, from the August
of 1524, the council of Niirnberg boldly asserted
its evangelical opinions, whether against members
of the Swabian League, the States of the empire,
or the emperor and his representatives. Niirn-
berg was one of those cities which caused Charles
to declare, that he could not act otherwise than he
did, on account of the temper of the citizens. But
let us not forget that it also gained great political
advantages by this conduct. Church reform was
the only means of putting an end to the disorders
and insubordination of the clergy, with which the
civil power had so long had to contend. The Niirn-
bergers turned the insurrection of the peasants to
account for this purpose. They urged the clergy
to remember their own critical position ; the danger
that threatened them from the mob, and their
pressing need of protection; and at length actu-
ally succeeded in persuading the whole body to
yield duty and obedience to the civil authorities.
Even the Commander and Spital-master’of the
Teutonic Order submitted, with the consent of the
Franconian House-commander, to the obligation of
paying taxes.“ The council was thus, for the first

* Extract from an apologetic Address of the Council of Niirn-
berg in Miullner’s MS. Annals. “Es sind aber,” adds the
author, “die Hausscommenthurm mit nachfolgenden Conditionen

Cuap. V. _ NURNBERG. 511

time, master within its own walls. The monasteries
were compelled to appoint evangelical preachers,
and to promise to admit no new members: they
soon dissolved, or were closed. The jurisdiction
of the bishop had no longer an object. To all his
complaints the council answered, that it only per-
formed the duties of a Christian government and
executed the orders of the Recess of the empire. It
did not scruple to unite with the markgrave in the
visitation of the churches ; ‘since the bishop had
never been in the habit of visiting the churches.”

It is obvious how vastly this course of affairs
must have tended to encrease the independence of
the secular power, as well of the cities as of the
princes.

Let us here call to mind the primitive organisa-
tion of the church of Germany under Charlemagne,
founded on the combined power and agency of the
bishops and counts.

zu Biirgern aufgenommen worden, 1.) dass sie Biirgerpflicht
thun und hinter die Viertelsmeister schworen sollten, 2.) dass sie
den deutschen Hof mit seinen zugehérigen Giitern diesseit des
Wassers gelegen verlosungen sollten, 3.) sollen sie von allem
Getrank so im Hof und Spital einglegt wird, das Umgeld
zahlen, 4) sollen sie mit dem Holze auf des Reichs Boden sich
bescheidentlich halten.”—‘‘ The House Commanders were,
however, admitted citizens under the following conditions :
Ist, that they should perform all civic services and duties, and
swear behind the Viertel meister (literally, quarter-master, 7. e.
magistrate of a quarter of the city); 2d, that they should sell the
Deutscher Hof (German House), with the lands appertaining on
this side of the water ; 8d, that they should pay the duty on all
drink brought into the Hof or the Spital; 4th, that they should
bear themselves modestly as to the wood on the imperial lands.”

512 BRANDENBURG AND NURNBERG.  BooxIV.

While, in those remote ages, the bishops had
succeeded in getting into their own hands the se-
cular authority, at least in a part of the territories
subject to their spiritual sway, and in constituting
themselves sovereign lords; at the time we are
treating of, on the other hand, the temporal autho-
rities who exercised, though under another form,
the rights and privileges formerly held by the
counts, excluded the bishops from all participation
in the temporal government of their sees.

We should be misled by appearances, were we
to regard this simply as an extinction of the ec-
clesiastical principle. For it cannot be denied
that the episcopal authority had been chiefly ex-
erted for the maintenance of all sorts of exemp-
tions, dues, and claims, which had little in common
with religion. It was, for example, one of the
chief causes of quarrel between Bamberg and
Niirnberg, that the city, during the revolt of the
peasants, had omitted to pay the small tithes, which
the bishop absolutely refused to give up. The
temporal power could never have accomplished its
purpose, had it not taken upon itself to represent
the truly ecclesiastical, 7. e. the religious principle ;
for example, to make better provision for the reli-
gious instruction of the parishes. A deputy of the
congregation was summoned out of each parish in
Brandenburg and Niirnberg, to give true inform-
ation as to the life and teaching of the clergyman.
The governments were determined to put an end
to the disgraceful state of the inferior clergy, to

Cuar.V. BRANDENBURG AND NURNBERG. 513

whom no bishop seriously paid any attention. It
was impossible to deny that the higher clergy had
left the formation and interpretation of doctrine to
the universities; and the office of preaching the
Word to ill-paid and ill-governed hirelings. It can
excite no wonder that, after the high schools had
so long acted the part of champions of the clerical
" claims, one of them at length adopted doctrines of
a contrary tendency; or that, in those who had
devoted themselves to the proper service of the
church, there arose a disgust at so contemptible
and already contemned a state of things, a feeling
of the peculiar importance of their calling, and a
fervent zeal for reform, springing from a conviction ”
of the exclusive authority of the Gospel. The
temporal power did nothing more than avail itself
of the authority given to it by the Recess, to
secure freedom for the development of these en-
deavours which were manifestly of a spiritual
nature. It is absurd to say that the church was
thus become the slave of the state. If by the
church is understood the influence of religious
principles, it would be more just to say that it
only now arose into power; for never were those
principles more powerful and efficacious, than
in the times which immediately followed those of
which we are speaking. What was begun by the
evangelical governments, was carried on in an ana-
logous manner by the catholic. But it is at the
same time clear, that the efficacy of the evan-
gelical church did not rest on wealthy endowments,
high rank, or the pomp of hierarchical ordinances ;
VOL. IL. LL

514 CITIES OF THE OBERLAND—LUNEBURG. Boox IV.

but on inward energy, pious zeal, and the free cul-
ture and growth of the intellect. On no other
foundation can the church ever be established in
Germany ; and this is the source of her strength.

The same events which had taken place in Niirn-
berg, occurred also in many of the cities of the
Oberland; first in Augsburg and in Ulm, —indeed
meetings of these three cities were frequently held
and measures agreed on: in the year 1528, there
was again a talk of a new alliance between all the
imperial cities; then followed Strasburg, and above
all, the towns of Switzerland; in the year 1528,
Berne adopted the religious changes. But we must
' leave the events in these countries till our next
volume, where we have devoted closer attention to
the modifications which the doctrine underwent in
Switzerland.

The whole of Lower Germany, on the other hand,
adhered to the forms established under Luther’s
influence in Saxony. ‘The slight variations which
they underwent, depended only on the difference
of the civil constitution or the form of sovereignty
in each country.

In Liineburg the change took- place in conse-
quence of a union of the prince and the nobles at
the diet at Scharnebeck in the year 1527. The
prelates had refused to appear at previous meetings,
and at their instigation the aged prince, who had
abdicated and gone to France where he remained
true to the catholic faith, came back to oppose the
innovations. But it was now too late. At that
diet the reigning duke and his subjects promised

Cnar. V. EAST FRIESLAND. 515

each other to cause the Gospel to be preached, pure,
clear, and plain; they resolved that the prelates
should be compelled to do the like in their churches
and convents, although they were permitted, in
regard to ceremonies, to act as they thought they
could answer it to God.* From this time the reform
gradually spread over the whole country. The
Chancellor Klammer rendered the same services
here as Briick had done in Saxony, Feige in Hessen,
Vogler in Anspach, and Spengler in Niirnberg.

In East Friesland the power of the count was still
too new to enable him to decide in affairs so delicate
and so dependent on the most intimate convictions.
When Count Etzard, who at first had been much
impressed by the Lutheran opinions, had afterwards
come to the determination to hold fast to the exist-
ing form of the church, a chieftain, Junker Ulrich of
Dornum, took upon himself the conduct of the cause.
At his suggestion a solemn disputation was held at
Oldersum. It began in a very characteristic man-
ner. ‘Say the Lord’s prayer,” exclaimed Henry
Arnoldi, the champion of the Lutherans; “and
an Ave, Maria,” added Prior. Laurence, the Domi-
nican who defended the catholic side; and the
controversy turned chiefly on the worship of the
Virgin Mary. But as the Lutherans persisted in
carrying on the argument solely with passages from
Scripture, the Dominicans were left without an.
answer. Nor was this all; desertion soon crept into

* Extract from the ducal edict in Pfeffinger, Historie des
Braunschweig Liineburgischen Hauses, ii. 347. See Schlegel’s
Kirchengeschichte, ii. 50.

LL 2

516 SCHLESWIG AND HOLSTEIN. he ae

their own ranks. On the New Year’s day of 1527,
Resius, a Dominican, ascended the pulpit in the
church at Norden, to defend certain Lutheran pro-
positions which he had already advanced ; a single
antagonist arose who, however, was soon reduced to
silence; whereupon the Dominican, in sign of his
conversion, laid aside his cowl in the very pulpit.*
In the year 1527, Lutheranism was the prevailing
religion in almost all the parishes. In the year
1528, the East Friesland churches published a full
confession of faith.
Fortunately for Schleswig and Holstein, the
bishops of the dioceses of Schleswig and Liibek
offered no strenuous opposition to the Reform-
ation, while on the other hand the government
afforded it protection, and left the revenues of its
clerical adherents untouched. The transition from
the one confession to the other was here peculiarly
easy. As one of the four and twenty papal vicars,
Hermann Tast had been the first to preach evan-
gelical doctrines: his colleagues easily accommo-
dated themselves to the change ;—premising always
that their incomes were to be secured to them for
their lives. Many of the country priests adopted
the reformed faith without a struggle; they readily
accepted the articles laid before them. In the
towns there was almost as much resistance opposed
by the anabaptists as by the adherents of the pa-
pacy. The immediate disciples of Luther, for ex-
ample Marquard Schuldorf, of Kiel, lent efficient

* Ubbo Emmius Rerum Frisciarum Hist., lib. liv. p. 839.

Cuap. V. SILESIA. 517

help against both antagonists.* Here, too, the ec-
clesiastical institutions were gradually placed on
the footing of those of Saxony.

In Silesia, too, as we have already mentioned,
the evangelical doctrine had made early and mighty
progress. This country, indeed, differed from other
parts of Germany, inasmuch as it was not an
immediate dependency of the empire, and could
therefore ground no pretensions on the Recess of
Spire. But the circumstances were nearly akin;
its chief city and its princes assumed a scarcely less
independent posture with regard to the crown of
Bohemia, to which they belonged, than the States
of the empire had done towards the emperor: every
fluctuation of opinion in central Germany was here
immediately answered by an analogous movement.
Breslau, which no long time before, in the affairs of
Podiebrad, had held with unshaken firmness to the
side of the pope, now took the lead in the struggle
against him. Here, too, the inclinations of the
council and citizens had received an anti-clerical bias
from a great number of circumstances. They would
no longer have a Bernardine convent, because
they thought themselves injured by its connection
with the king’s court. They were discontented at
the disgraceful scenes carried on in the parish of
St. Mary Magdalen, where one pretender to the
benefice was continually driven out by another. f

* Miinter’s Kirchengeschichte von Diinemark, iii. p. 584. con-
tains a laborious collection of these very scattered notices.
+ Schutzred des erbarn Raths und ganzen Gemeind der K.

bier ea!

518 SILESIA. Boox IV.

There were a thousand causes of bickering with the
canons in the city. The Lutheran tendencies, there-
fore, found the ground well prepared. In the year
1523 the citizens of Breslau ventured to appoint to
the parish in question, of their own authority,
Dr. Johann Hess, one of the most intimate friends of
Luther and Melanchthon, who had just come from
Wittenberg ; upon which matters took the same
course here as elsewhere. ‘The new principles were
triumphantly maintained in a solemn disputation ;
the people were gained over; the reformers began
by altering the ceremonies, keeping as close as
possible on various incidental points to the tra-
ditionary ritual of the see of Breslau. The Bern-
ardines had quitted the city rather than submit
to be united to the Jacobites, as was proposed to
them: the monasteries now dissolved themselves ;
the council offered no impediment to the monks
and nuns who quitted them and married. But it
must not be imagined that the Lutheran clergy,
who unquestionably owed their ascendency to the
council, were absolutely at its disposal. In April,
1525, Dr. Hess suddenly left off preaching, upon
which the council sent to ask him the cause. He
answered, that he saw the blessed Lord Christ
lying before the church doors, and that he could
not walk over him. What he meant was this ;—
he had often exhorted the council to provide for
the beggars who filled the city, and lay during the
time of service before the church doors; but always

Stadt Breslau bei Schickfuss, Neuvermehrte Schlesische Chron.,
iii, p. 58.

Car. V. SILESIA. 519

In vain. This earnest demonstration, however,
made an impression. The really indigent were
separated from the idle, and placed in six different
hospitals. In the year 1526 the first stone of the
great spital was laid by Hess himself; the opulent
citizens gave the materials, and the various artisans
their labour; so that the building was finished
in a year—a genuine work of the new-born evan-
gelical zeal. Hess was strongly and actively sup-
ported by the town-clerk, John Corvinus, who
had taken part in the earlier literary movement,
and had taught in some of the first schools
of poetry. There was a general consent and
co-operation: the councillor declared to the court
that he had never seen a more obedient com-
munity.* If this was the case with regard to
those who had opposed Podiebrad, what was to be
expected from his adherents ? The son of his son,
Duke Charles, ruled over Miinsterberg, Ols and
Frankenstein; the son of his daughter, Duke Fre-
deric II. of Liegnitz, had united Brieg and Wolau
with that domain. It may easily be imagined what
opinions they held. Duke Charles wished to see
the memory of his grandfather restored to honour
by Luther. Duke Frederic not only gave a ready
ear to the prayers of his nobles and cities, that he
would grant them a freer exercise of their religion,
but gradually became inspired by the most ardent

* Die Jahrbiicher der Stadt Breslau von Nicolaus Pol. Bd.
iii. die Jahre, 1521—1527. Compared to the veracious ac-
counts of this simple chronicler, the stories of Bukisch, who
borrowed from him, are often like bad caricatures.

LL 4

520 SILESIA. os Boox IV.

zeal in the same cause*; he conceived the design of
founding another evangelical university, and had
not the doctrines and followers of Schwenkfeld
caused. troubles in his dominions, would have or-
ganised one on a noble and comprehensive plan.
Just then Markgrave George of Brandenburg had
acquired Jiigerndorf, and of course allowed the Lu-
theran doctrines free course there. The young duke
Wenceslas Adam of Teschen, was soon deeply im-
pressed with the new opinions. All these things
passed without any serious opposition, either from
the spiritual or the temporal authorities. Jacob of
Salza, bishop of Breslau, saw very clearly that
Christianity did not consist in the presence or
absence of a few ceremonies more or less. The
evangelical doctrine found powerful protectors at
the court of King Louis. King Ferdinand, as we
have seen, at least did not venture to reject the
demands regarding religion which were laid before
him at his election ; and if he occasionally published
mandates which sounded zealously orthodox, he
was not in a condition to give them effect. The
Breslauers once represented to him in so lively a
manner the impossibility of returning to the an-
cient practices, that he no longer ventured to press
it: “Well, then,” said he, at length, “only keep
the peace, and believe as you think you can answer
it to God and the emperor.” { He at the same time

* Des Erlauchten, &c. Herzog Friedrichs IL Grundursach
und Entschuldigung auf etlicher Verunglimpfen in Schickfuss
S. 65.

} Thebesii Liegnitzische Jahrbiicher, iii. p. 29.

t Nic. Pol. iii. p, 52.

Gap. V. PRUSSIA. 521

extended to his own province the concessions made
to the empire. ' Thus was formed in Silesia the
constitution which for a century prevailed there,
as well in the Austrian, as in all other dominions:
evangelical states strenuously maintained their po-
litical and religious privileges, and the government
was compelled to use leniency and toleration.

By far the most remarkable and sweeping change
took place, however, in Prussia.

Various causes had contributed to prepare this
event.

The political importance, nay in effect also the
position of the Teutonic Order relatively to the
Prussian government, had been annihilated for
more than half a century. At the peace of Thorn,
in the year 1466, the Order had been compelled to
cede the larger half of its territory, with all its
richest and most powerful cities, to Poland; and
for the smaller, which was left in its possession, to
recognise the king of that country as its feudal lord.

If we inquire how this came to pass, we shall
find that it was not so much the consequence of
the military superiority of Poland, which, though
indisputable, would never have sufficed to produce
such results; but of the internal situation of the
country, — the misunderstandings between the
order and the territory over which it ruled.

Prussia was a colony which had gradually risen
to independence. The order, which was no longer
inspired by the ancient impulses of religion, honour,
or love of war, and came into the country only to
govern and to enjoy, was most oppressive to the

522 PRUSSIA. Boox IY.

inhabitants. They complained that they were
allowed no share in the administration; that they
were treated like serfs, subjected to acts of violence,
and denied all right and justice. The relation
which arose between them was like that between
the Creoles and Chapetons im South America;
between the Pullains and the Fils Arnaud in
Jerusalem; in\short, such as must arise in every
colony as its civilisation advances. At first the
“country sought to protect itself by its great union
of 1440 ; but as this was opposed by the emperor,
it turned to Poland. It was the native population
of Prussia that put those arms into the hands of the
King of Poland against the grand master, by means
of which the former gained the victory, and extorted
so advantageous a peace as that of Thorn. The
city of Danzig had expended 700,000 marks in
this cause. In return, the King of Poland granted
to the allies, for the first time, the blessing of self-
government, which the knights had steadily refused
them.*

In the smaller division of the country which had
remained in the possession of the order, but which
had also taken part in the league and in the war,
similar tendencies continued, as may easily be
imagined, to show themselves. We find that the
states, whose business it was to grant the taxes,
more than once refused them. They demanded the

* His very first promise is, “ut in mutatione principum
commutatam etiam aut sublatam deprehenderent oppressionem.”
Litter Casimiri Regis, in Dlugoss Historia Pol., ii. p. 188. See
Voigt Preuss. Gesch., viii. p. 378.

Cuap. V. PRUSSIA. HoS

right of appointing, jointly with the grand master,
a lieutenant to act for him during his absence; a
post we sometimes find occupied by a burghermaster.
In a scheme for the defence of the country drawn
up in the year 1507, fifteen governors, or chiefs of
districts, were nominated; and of these fourteen
belonged to the native nobility, and only one to
the order.*

Not only was the order thus checked and con-
trolled in its functions, but its peculiar republican
character was gradually superseded by one more
monarchical. It was found expedient to choose
native princes as grand masters; for example, in
1498, Frederic of Saxony, and in 1511, Albert of
Brandenburg; and in order to secure to them a
state and maintenance suited to their rank, whole
commanderies were confiscated. These princes en-
trusted the public affairs to chancellors who did
not even belong to the order, and to their own par-
ticular councillors, after the manner of the German
courts. Their position became more and more like
that of hereditary rulers, in consequence of the
necessity they lay under of granting a great degree
of independence to their subordinates out of the
country —both the Master in Livonia, and the Teu-
tonic Master (Deutschmeister) ; in fact, of eman-
cipating the former from all important obligations
and services. In the place of the wide general

* Baczko Preussische Gesh. iv. p. 142.
+ Albert mentions (Schiitz Hist. Rer. Pruss., p. 331.) “was er
sich gegen den beiden Meistern verschreiben und obligiren

s

524 PRUSSIA. Boox IV.

relations of the order, arose narrow territorial
interests.

The only question now was,—one which in-
volved a remote and permanent change—whether
they should submit to the peace of Thorn, or not.
The last grand masters refused to do homage as
their immediate predecessors had done; they de-
manded a revision of the terms of the peace, ‘ ac-
cording to natural and Christian laws ;” they made
incessant claims on the assistance of the empire (es-
pecially of the knightly body), which was afforded
to this possession of Prussia. At length, in the
year 1519, the grand master (Markgrave Albert of
Brandenburg) had once more recourse to arms. But
what had been injurious to his predecessors, proved
disadvantageous to him. The cities and districts
which had fallen off from the order, no longer lent
- their aid to the support of its power; it was indeed
to the cities of Danzig and Elbingen, and to the
families of the lords of the league, that the public
opinion of that time attributed the breach of the
peace ; their intention was to strip the order alto-
gether of its territory and subjects*; it was they who
urged on the war with the greatest energy and suc-
cess. From Germany, on the other hand, the order
received no efficient help. The grand master was

miissen; damit sie sich denn ganz und gar aus dem Gehorsam
gezogen,”—“ to what he must subscribe and bind himself to-
wards both Masters ; wherewith they then withdrew themselves
entirely from their obedience.”

* « Kyn newes Geticht von dem negstvorgangenen Krieg zu
Preussen.” Beitriige zur Kunde Preussens Bd., ii. p. 287.

Cuar. V PRUSSIA. 525

again compelled to cede eleven towns with their ter-
ritories, and to consent to a truce for four years,
during which affairs were to be definitively ar-
ranged, under the mediation of the Emperor and
the king of Hungary.

Albert went to Germany, in order once more to
try in person what he could obtain from the states
and nobles of the empire. Had victory declared
on the side of Sickingen, with whom he had long
been connected, Prussia might have reckoned on
assistance. But Sickingen fell; the knights of the
empire suffered great losses; they were unable to
maintain their independence at home, much less
to attempt- enterprises abroad. The Council of
Regency, too, on which some of its hopes were
placed, was overthrown. The emperor was so far
from holding out any expectation of assistance,
that he rather favoured the claims of the Jagellons.
The promised mediation was not even attempted.
The grand master had nothing left but either to
do homage agreeably to the treaty of Thorn, or to
abdicate. And indeed the abdication was seriously
discussed. It might either take place according to
the views of the order, in which case Duke Erich
of Brunswick was suggested as successor; or to
those of the country and of Poland, in which case
it would have been in favour of Sigismund; the
king sent an ambassador to Niirnberg in 1524, in
the hope of inducing the grand master to consent
to this latter scheme.”

* Memorial of the Grand Master Albert, given by Faber,
Beitr. zur Kunde Preussens, iv. 83.

526 PRUSSIA. Boox IV.

The Order and its government in Prussia, were
doubtless the most singular product of the hier-
archical and chivalrous spirit of the preceding
centuries in the German nation; but to what had
it sunk! The greater part of its territory gone;
in what remained, powerful and growing states ;
the internal unity in which its strength lay, broken;
its tie to the mother country relaxed and feeble i—
submission was become inevitable —its time was
over. It was however not easy at present to see what
could or ought to be done; there existed no clue by
which to escape from the labyrinth of such difficult
contingencies. Such were the circumstances under
which the new religious doctrine appeared in the
country. In no part of the world was it more
wanted—in none more welcome. People saw
that the institution, so long revered as intrinsi-
cally religious, by no means stood in that profound
and inward relation to the idea, or the original
spirit of Christianity, which had been presumed.
The states seized with joy a doctrine which justified
their old opposition, on higher grounds. The
bishops, who were elsewhere almost universally its
opponents, lent a glad ear to it: under the direc-
tion of the bishop of Samland, fasts were abolished,
mass said in German, the ceremonies altered, and
the monasteries cleared.* Even the members of the

* How Rome stirred against and thought to overthrow it.
Voigt Preussische Geschichte, ix. pp. 782. 737. That he sub-
scribed himself only, by the grace of God, without mentioning
the apostolic see, was there regarded as apostacy. This had,

Crap. V. PRUSSIA. 527

Order could not withstand the universal current of
opinion. ‘They were seen attending the sermons of
the Lutheran preachers; many laid aside their
cross; some determined to marry. Their number
was indeed no longer great, and at last only five
remained faithful to the institution. At length
the sermons of Osiander, the society of men like
Planitz, and the private conversation he held with
Luther, imbued the mind of the grand master him-
self with the evangelical opinions prevalent in
Saxony and in Niirnberg. On the one hand, he
was convinced that his profession had not the merit
which had been imputed to it, nor even conformity
with the word of.God. On the other, people repre-
sented to him that he could not abdicate, since he
had duties to perform to the country from which
he could not so lightly withdraw himself. The
country required him to lay to heart its desolation
and its weakness, and to procure for it a lasting
peace; to grant it preachers of the pure word of
God, and to abolish whatever was repugnant to
that ; most probably including, in that expression,
the vow of the Order.* Albert though he still ad-
hered to it, had doubtless in his heart determined

too, an influence on the safety of the grand master, who was
moreover attacked by the ‘Teutonic master.

* << Sind darum aus geistlichem Suchen und Begern derselben
Landschaft zw diefer Verenderung und Vertrag mit der Kron
Polen kommen.” — “ Are thereupon come to this alteration and
agreement with the crown of Poland, in consequence of the
spiritual request and desire of that country.” Albert’s answer
to the proposals of Griifendorf, the Saxon ambassador. W. A.

528 PRUSSIA. Boox IV.

on the course he meant to pursue, when he set on
foot new negotiations with Poland.

In Poland the diet of Petricau had just then
come to the resolution that the grand master should
either do homage or be driven out of Prussia, to-
gether with his order.*

It was therefore very fortunate for Markgrave
Albert that in Silesia, which in all the previous
troubles had adhered to the king, he had two of his
nearest relations; his brother, Markgrave George,
and his brother in law, Frederic of Liegnitz —both
like himself, nephews of the king— who undertook
once more to conciliate Sigismund, and to procure
for Albert favourable conditions..

The king had gone to Cracow with a committee
of the diet. Here the two princes, both, as we
are aware, zealous partisans of the evangelical faith,
went to meet him: they adopted the principles
laid down by the diet; but at the same time re-
marked that no arrangement with the Order would
be of any avail, since the government was in the
hands of so many that no reliance could be placed
on its actions. They proposed to the king that
the grand master should be declared hereditary
duke of Prussia.}

* Liter regiz ad sedem apostolicam: “alioquin hee tra-
gedia nullum unquam finem habere potuisset, presertim cum
subditi mei omnes a me exigerent modis omnibus neque ab hoc
instituto dimoveri potuerint in conventu generali regni mei no-
vissimo, vel cogendum tandem magistrum Prussiz ad preestan-
dam obedientiam et omagium mihi et regno meo debitum vel
illum ac ordinem ex terris illis exturbandum.”

+ “ Literzs Andree Critii Episcopii Presmiliensis ad Joan-

Cuar. V. PRUSSIA. 529

The king said, he would take into consideration
what was to be done, and what Albert’s kinsmen |
required of him.* He acquiesced with joy.

When the affair was brought before the royal
council of Poland, some voices indeed were raised
against it on religious grounds; but to these others
replied, that no injury was inflicted on Catholicism,
since the Order had already gone over to Lutheran-
ism, and held nothing in greater abhorrence than
the name of the popef; they ought rather to thank
God that it had fallen of itself. The diet decided
in favour of the king’s project.

Meanwhile, negotiations were carried on in
Beuthen, whither plenipotentiaries of the Order
and of the States had repaired to meet the Mark-
grave. The envoys of the Order, who were un-
questionably the most important, spoke first. They
entirely approved the proposition, and only urged
their claim to certain advantages due to them from
Poland. The delegates of the States were chiefly
solicitous lest they should be attacked by the
remnant of the order in Germany, and by the

nem Antonium Puleonem (he should be called Burgonem, for
J. A. v. Burgo was then nuncio in Hungary) lib. Bar. et nun-
cium apostolicum. Principes ingenue e vestigio et citra ullas
ambages id quod attulerant proposuerunt.”-— Samuelis Nakielska
Miechovia sive Promtuarium, &c., p. 609.

* Litere regis: “condictis conditionibus que pro tempore
fieri potuerunt, et quales mutua nostra necessitudo postulavit.”

+ “ Luteranismum apud ordinem ipsum sacrosanctum, Roma-.
nam vero ecclesiam et ejus ritus execrabiles esse (nihil apud eum
nomine pontificis contemptibilius esse), plerosque commendato-

“res et sacrificos nubere,” &c. &c.

VOL. II. MM

530 PRUSSIA. Boox IV.

empire, and not sufficiently defended by Poland.
They demanded of their new sovereign a promise
that he would rather increase than diminish their
privileges, and appoint no foreigner to a public
office: though he did not accede to the latter sti-
pulation, they were on the whole satisfied with his
declarations.* The envoys of the Order too were
content, on the king consenting to restore the for-
tified places taken from it in the last war, and
granting a small revenue for the new princes.

All parties thus easily and gladly combined to
bring about this great change. The King of
Poland saw his suzerainty at length willingly
acknowledged, and the descendants of his sister
established within his extended frontiers. The
country acquired the independence of foreign in-
fluence it had so long aspired after. The Order,
which had secularised itself, thus secured pro-
tection ; it associated itself with the natives of the
country whom it had hitherto opposed. Mark-
grave Albert’s aim, in short, was not alone to
found a hereditary sovereignty, he thought he
served his country by securing for it peace, and
the free diffusion of evangelical opinions.

* The negotiations are to be found in the last pages of
Schiitz. The duke declared to the deputies of the states, who
were in fact not specially commissioned for that purpose, “er
werde ihnen dermaassen beweisliche Urkunden mitgeben, dass
sie den Ihren entschuldigt seyn gsollten,’—“that he would give
them such authentic documents that they should stand excused
to their constituents.” This was shown immediately on the
duke’s return.

Cuap. V. PRUSSIA. OL

On the 10th of April, 1525, the solemn infeu-
dation took place at the Ring at Cracow. The
king, in his sacerdotal ornaments, surrounded by
his bishops, delivered to the new duke, by the
symbol of the banner (which Markgrave George
also grasped, in sign that the investiture extended
to the whole line of Brandenburg), ‘“ the whole
land in Prussia which had been held by the Order.”
Albert took the oath of homage and allegiance in
a formula in which no mention was made of the
saints.

At his entrance into Konigsberg, he was greeted
by -an evangelical preacher with a religious dis-
course. He was received with all the festivities
and honours which could be offered to an hereditary
prince; the bells were rung, the houses hung with
tapestry, and the roads strewed with flowers.

The States, of course, did not hesitate to approve
the negotiations of their delegates ; they confirmed
the treaty of Cracow, and took the oath of alle-
giance. The original document, by which Albert
had confirmed ‘the privileges, franchises, and
praiseworthy customs” of the country, was de-
livered into the keeping of the magistrate of the
Altstadt of Konigsberg. In the place of the
great officers of the Order now appeared Marshal,
Landhofmeister, Oberburggraf * and Chancellor ; all
which offices were in future to be filled by natives.
The courts of justice were newly constituted with
the advice and assistance of the nobles.

* Titles of offices to which we have none corresponding. —

TRANSL.
MM 2

Hoe PRUSSIA. Boox IV.

Only one of the knights of the order offered
any persevering resistance; Erich of Brunswick, in
whose favour Albert had thought of resigning,
held out in Memel; he was afterwards provided
for by means of a small pension.

The religious establishments were formed without
difficulty: the bishops themselves, as we have said,
were in their favour. At the very first assembly,
Bishop Polenz of Samland abdicated the temporal
part of his authority, alleging that the service of
the Gospel alone belonged to a bishop, not the
enjoyment of worldly honours; he gave his power
into the hands of the duke, who took the states
to witness this voluntary tradition. This example
was soon followed by Bishop Erhard Queis of Pome-
sania. Their spiritual authority was left entire —
the more so, since now, as before, they adminis-
tered it by officials.* They introduced a liturgy
in which they still kept as close as ‘possible to
traditional forms: the convents were turned into
hospitals: the efforts to spread Christianity in the
lowest regions of society and those hitherto the
least touched by its influence, here found a wide
sphere of action among the Slavonian population,
which still occupied a great portion of the land ;
functionaries called Tolken, 7.e. interpreters, were
attached to the parish priests, and repeated every
sentence of the sermon in the ancient language of
Prussia. In order to keep the clergy themselves

* Bock Leben Albrechts, i. palsie
+ Hartknoch Preussische Kirchengeschichte, p. 277.

Cuap. V. PRUSSIA. 533

in the right way, the Markgrave caused the Pos-:
tilles* to be brought twice a year from Wittenberg,
two hundred of each at a time. Lucas Cranach
had a general commission to send him all the good
and valuable books that appeared.

Duke Albert’s marriage with Dorothea, Princess
of Denmark, which took place in the year 1526,
- appears like the consummation and bond of all
these things.. Alliances cemented by this kind of
uniformity of opinion are now almost universal
among the crowned heads of Europe. The duchess
gradually gave evidence of as strong evangelical con-
victions, ‘as firm a faith and trust in our Saviour,”
as her husband. Nor was she less fitted to render
domestic life happy. He dwells with untired
delight on her noble and amiable qualities; and
adds that, had she been a poor serving girl, she
could not have borne herself with more lowliness and
truth, with more unchanging love, to him unwor-
thy.{ Her brother Christian, afterwards King of
Denmark, having married a princess of Lauenburg,
out of which house Gustavus Vasa of Sweden after-
wards took his wife, all these new evangelical
powers of the North were united by the closest bonds.

Let us observe the general direction of the policy
of the North, of which these events formed the con-

* A book containing expository sermons on the Gospels and
Epistles. — TRANSL.
+ Letter to Cranach, and his account, inserted by Voigt in
the Beitriigen zur Kunde Preussens, iii. p. 246.
{ Faber Ciniges iider die Herzogin Dorothea. Beitr. z. K.
Preussens, iii. p. 126.
MM 3

534 PRUSSIA. Boox IV.

summation. In the year 1515, Maximilian had
thought to connect all the northern territories of
Slavonic and Germanic tongue, in one great alliance,
of which he was to be the head. Poland severed
itself first; then Christiern II. was driven out of
Denmark and Sweden; and now Albert, who had
hitherto remained attached to Christiern, formed
an alliance of amity and marriage with the new -
king. Erich of Brunswick was removed from
Memel, because he persisted in keeping up an in-
tercourse with Severin Norby, the admiral of
Christiern.* The position which Albert acquired at
his first reception among the northern powers, was
extremely strong and advantageous.

The evangelical princes of Germany also afforded
him support from another side.

Even at the time when Elector John of Saxony,
and his neighbouring co-religionists, were nego-
tiating about the meeting at Magdeburg, he sent to
Prussia to propose to the new duke, that if he were
agerieved in any thing relating to the evangelical
faith, he would.stand by him steadfastly. This
message was most welcome to the duke. He sent
the Bishop of Pomesania, who had the general
conduct of his foreign affairs, and had arranged the
relations with Poland and Denmark, to Breslau,
in 1526, where he was met by Hans von Minkwitz
on the part of Saxony. Here a formal agreement
was concluded.| The duke had observed that

* See Albert’s Instruction, 18th April 1525. Beitr. z. K.
Pr., iv. p. 3895., and an essay by Faber, vi. p. 539.
+ Recess of Konigsberg, 5th July 1526. W. A.

Cuap. V. PRUSSIA. 5a5

Prussia was so exhausted in the last war, that he
could not engage to furnish more than a hundred
armed horsemen. Elector John was satisfied and
promised the duke an equal number in case he was
attacked. The party sending assistance was to pay
the troops and bear the losses ; the party receiving
it, to provide them with necessaries. In December
1526, the ratification arrived at Weimar. The.
duke and his bishop had a design of extending this
alliance to’ the states of Silesia, the Markgrave
George of Jiigerndorf, the Duke of Liegnitz, and ,
the city of Breslau* : some deliberations had already
taken place about a common and more intimate
concert with Denmark, for which the elector
evinced perfect readiness.

It has often been said, and with perfect truth,.
that the empire sustained a great loss by the act
of homage to Poland. But this was inevitable.
The Polish diet had taken the determination to
proceed no further on a middle course, and, if
necessary, to decide the matter by force; the
country, was wholly incapable of resistance, and no
help was to be expected from the empire. Had
the Order not yielded, it would have been driven
out of Koénigsberg, as it had been out of Danzig;
the territory would have become a Polish province,
like the kingdom of Prussia. Under these circum-

* Letter from Minkwitz, Leipzig, Sunday after St. Francis’s
day :, “ Trost, es soll kein Mangel haben.” — “Take comfort,
there shall be no want.” I do not. find, however, that any
resolution was come to. The Landgrave of Hessen, too, thought -
the mutual obligations too insignificant.

536 CONCLUDING REMARKS. Boox IV.

stances, it is unquestionably to be regarded as one
of the most fortunate events for the maintenance
of the Germanic principle in those countries, that
a duchy—an hereditary German sovereignty — was
erected. If we compare this province with Livonia,
we see that though there, too, the Reformation
had penetrated, though the powerful Grand Master
, Plettenberg, who was now absolutely independent,
protected it, and found means still to keep the
Order in existence for a time,—it was but for
a time; the country was afterwards secularised
like the rest, but fell under a foreign yoke, and
soon lost its sympathy with the German nation.
Nor did royal Prussia reap any advantage from
having no prince at its head; the influence of
Poland became overwhelming, and the country
had to endure indescribable oppressions, both of a
political and religious kind. The progress of
German civilisation was not only arrested, but
forced back. On the other hand, ducal Prussia pra-
dually became completely German ; by its family
alliances with a powerful German house, it re-
mained in strict and indissoluble political con-
nection with the great fatherland. Amidst all the
distraction of the theological and literary contro-
versies which followed in the train of the Reform-
ation, here was an independent centre of German
culture, from which the grandest developments of
German nationality have sprung.

We cannot contemplate Germany at this mo-
ment, without a deep sense of the grandeur of her
character and position.

Cup. V. CONCLUDING REMARKS, 537

Belgium and the Netherlands, Bohemia and the
neighbouring countries, might once more -be
reckoned as parts of the German empire. German
arms had wrested Italy from the influence of France,
as well as from that of Switzerland, which had now
severed itself from the empire: they had restored
the name of the empire in Italy, and in its ancient
metropolis: more than once they had made threat-
ening advances from the south and east into
France; and in the west, they had aided the Spa-
niards to reconquer the lost border fortresses, and
to vanquish the Moors of Valencia. They had
just gained possession of Hungary. With the
assistance of the German maritime cities, they had
put the two northern monarchs in possession of their
crowns. If Poland had reaped the advantage,
she was indebted for it solely to the instigation
and the assistance of the German provinces,
which sufficiently shewed that thiswas a state of
things that could not last. In Livonia, the at-
tacks of the Russians were repulsed in successive
engagements, and, in the year 1522, peace was ob-
tained on very advantageous terms.

And all this had been accomplished in the ab-
sence of any vigorous central government, — amid
the storms of the most violent internal dissension.
But these very storms were the symptoms of a far
wider tendency — one which was destined to em-
brace the world. It was reserved for the mind of
Germany to sever the intrinsic truth of Christianity
from the accidental forms which, in later ages, had
grown around it under the influences of the papacy,

538 CONCLUDING REMARKS. Boox IV.

and with equal moderation and firmness to secure
to it a legal adoption in its extensive territories.
In one electorate, two or three duchies, the largest
landgravate, the largest county of the empire, one
or two markgravates, and a great number of cities,
the new doctrine had become predominant, and
had pervaded the populations with whose cha-
racter and turn of mind it had a natural affinity.
In order to bring vividly before our minds the
original views of a positive and negative kind,
we should compare the written confessions of
faith which had now been published at so many
places; the articles of the Visitation of Saxony and
Hessen, and still more those of Brandenburg and
Niirnberg ; the Confession of East Friesland; the
Instructions to the preachers of Schleswig-Hol-
stein; the Apologies of the States of Silesia; the
Synodal Constitutions of Prussia. In all these
documents we perceive the same feeling of an obli-
gatory return from the accidental to the essential ;
a resistless conviction, not yet indeed defined in arti-
cles of faith, but assured of its truth. It is manifest
that since the development of these opinions took
place in narrow territories, the infant church could
not enter into the most distant rivalry as to ex-
ternal grandeur and splendour with the established
hierarchy, in which was expressed the unity of an
aggregate of great kingdoms: its essence and its
worth consisted in its intellectual depth and
strength. The office it had taken on itself was that
of bringing the principles of Christianity home to
the minds of the common people ; of expounding its

e

Cuar. V. CONCLUDING REMARKS. 539

meaning and spirit, freed from all disguises of
foreign forms and rites; that so it might at
length be brought home to the consciousness of all
the nations of the earth. Already was the new
doctrine proclaimed in almost every tongue. We
mentioned the interpreters of the Prussian clergy:
in Breslau Doctor Hess caused the Gospel to. be
read in Slavonic; Luther’s disciples preached it in
Denmark and Sweden; one of the first names in-
“scribed at the university of Marburg, was the
founder of the Scottish church; in 1527 a society
of men inclined to Lutheran opinions, was founded
in Corpus Christi College, Oxford, which may be
regarded as the seminary of the new opinions.*
Meanwhile from the year 1528, an immediate effect
had been produced on Geneva and the Roman
world. In Italy, the doctrine pervaded the old
literary associations; in Spain, it soon laid hold of
the Franciscans; in France, it found a powerful
patroness in the Queen of Navarre. Luther, who
was a stranger to ambition — who had not even a
genuine zeal for proselyting ¢ and expected every
thing from the silent inborn force of conviction—yet
remarked that his efforts to restore the preaching of
the Gospel would some time or other form the sub-
ject of a church history. But at present he was
occupied with higher hopes. “It will draw the

* Fiddes, Wolsey, p. 416.

ft See his letter to the people of Erfurt. in de W., iii. p. 227.
“ Wer uns nicht héren will, von dem sind wir leicht und bald
geschieden.”—“ He who will not hear us, from him are we
easily and quickly departed.” ,

540 CONCLUDING REMARKS. Boox IV.

cedars of Lebanon to itself,’ said he. He applied
to it the words of Isaiah *, ‘I will say to the North
give up, and to the South keep not back; bring
my sons from far, and my daughters from the end
of the earth.”

* « Hine schéne herrliche und tréstliche Vorrede D. M. L.
auf das Biichlin der gottseligen Firstin F Ursulen Herzogin
zu Minsterberg.”—“ A fair, noble, and comfortable preface of
_Dr. Martin Luther to the little book of the godly princess the
Lady Ursula, Duchess of Minsterberg.” Altenb., iv. p. 416.

END OF THR SECOND VOLUME.

Lonvon:
Printed by A. Srorriswoovr,
New-Street-Square.

THEOLOGY LIBRARY
CLAREMONT, CALIF.

6473

ef

&< Aa e.
> ee
a bl a y
a
: hea
=|

he ge
2
a a -
: : oi. A
‘ F
+ le
A i :
Hing’ % el *
F nae
. cote
P ~
ot 2
a Psu
er
ce |
. ~s f
is
ae ae «
.
'
*
la

6973

|

BR
DOS
K3/3
a
V.2  myROLOGY LIBRARY

5CHOOL OF THEOLOGY AT CLAREMONT
CLAREMONT, CALIFORNIA

6772

Ca

i Bee BU
HEHE Ae chee area erally :
int if FTAA INL fl i
