BR
805
mig HISTORY

OF THE

REFORMATION IN GERMANY. |
Deutsche Geschichte in LeiTalier den Retermat ews

BY

LEOPOLD RANKE,

SECOND EDITION.

TRANSLATED BY SARAH AUSTIN.

~~
VORVL
LONDON:
LONGMAN, BROWN, GREEN, AND LONGMANS,
PATERNOSTER-ROW.

1845.

‘Theology Library
SCHOOL OF THEOLOGY

AT CLAREMONT
California

Lonvon :
Printed by A. Srorriswoone,
New-Street-Square.

-

TRANSLATOR’S PREFACE.

Tue work, of which a part is now laid before
the public, consists of five volumes. It may,
according to the view expressed to me by
the Author, be divided into three epochs.
Of these, the first is contained in the two
following volumes; the second, in the third
volume ; and the last, in the fourth and fifth.

It is, perhaps, necessary to offer some apo-
logy for the space occupied by the notes, in ~
consequence of the plan I have adopted in
respect of a large portion of them. The
German authorities cited are chiefly cotem-
poraneous —many of them unprinted, and
drawn from different parts of the vast empire
through which the German tongue is spoken.
They abound in obsolete and provincial
forms —if indeed the word provincial can
be applied to any of the varieties of a lan-
guage, no one of which then claimed a metro-
politan authority,—and present difficulties,

I

iv TRANSLATOR’S PREFACE.

which even a German, if unprepared by spe-
cial studies, often finds, to say the least, ex-
tremely perplexing.

To secure the reader, therefore, against
any errors I may have fallen into, and in
order that, if important, they may be
pointed out, I have placed the original within
reach. I hope the translations may give
some idea of the light these notes throw on
individual as well-as- national character. We
find in them one source of the vigour and
animation of the portraits, and the dramatic
vivacity of the scenes, with which this his-
tory abounds. We see that the author has
lived with his heroes, and listened to their
own homely and expressive language.

I have much greater need of the indulgent
construction of the reader in behalf of some
few notes which I have ventured to add.
Nothing but my own belief, and the as-
surance of others, that they were absolutely
necessary. to the understanding: of certain
passages in the work, would have induced
me to risk such a departure from my proper
‘province. Names of institutions and of of-
fices scarcely ever admit of a translation.
Words analogous in form, or allied in origin,

TRANSLATOR’S PREFACE. Vv

generally express a totally different set of
acts or functions in different countries, and
can therefore only mislead. And if such
names convey false ideas, others again con-
vey none at all. Being compelled to en-
deavour to affix some tolerably distinct no- -
tions to the words of this class which I had
to interpret, I ventured to think that the
little information I had gathered for myself
might not be unacceptable to the less learned
of my readers. The scanty nature of it
will hardly surprise them, and will I hope
be pardoned. I have at least sought it
in the most authentic and unquestioned
sources. ;

I may perhaps be allowed to say, in ex-
tenuation of any defects in the translation,
that I have found it by far more difficult
and laborious than any I had before at-
tempted: indeed, had I clearly foreseen all
the difficulty and labour, it is probable I
should not have undertaken it, especially
when cut off from the assistance and the
resources which England or Germany would
have afforded me. ‘Those who are acquainted
with the original will, I am sure, be dis-
posed to regard my attempt to put it into

A 3

vi TRANSLATOR’S PREFACE.

English with indulgence ;— and of those who
are not, I must ask it. While the gravity
and importance of the subject demanded an
unusually scrupulous fidelity, the difficulty
of combining that fidelity with a tolerable
attention to form, has been far greater than I
ever encountered. If in translating the “ His-
tory of the Popes,” I was anxious not to dis-
colour, in the slightest degree, the noble
. impartiality which distinguishes that work,
I have felt it equally incumbent on me
not to heighten or diminish by a shade the
more decidedly protestant tone which the
_author has given to his “ History of the
Reformation.” Whatever therefore might be
my desire to offer to the English public a
book not altogether uncouth or repulsive
in style, it has always been inferior to my
anxiety not to misrepresent the author, as
much as that has been subordinate to my
sense of the reverence due to the subject,
and to truth.

S. A.
Paris, December 6. 1844.

AUTHOR'S PREFACE.

From the first ten years of the fifteenth
century to the beginning of the thirty years’
war, the constitution and political condition
of Germany were determined by the period-
ical diets and the measures there resolved on.

The time was long past in which the public
affairs of the country were determined by one
supreme will; but its political life had not
yet (as at a later period) retreated within
the several boundaries of the constituent
members of the empire. The imperial as-
semblies exercised rights and powers which,
though not accurately defined, were yet
the comprehensive and absolute powers of
sovereignty. They made war and peace;
levied taxes; exercised a supreme super-
vision, and were even invested with ex-
ecutive power. ‘Together with the deputies

A 4

Vill AUTHOR’S PREFACE.

from the cities, and the representatives of the
counts and lords, appeared the emperor and
the sovereign princes in person. It is true
they discussed the most important affairs of
their respective countries in their several
colleges, or in committees chosen from the
whole body, and the questions were decided
by the majority of voices. The unity of the
nation was represented by these assemblies.
Within the wide borders of the empire
nothing of importance could occur which did
not here come under deliberation ; nothing
new arise, which must not await its final
decision and execution here.

Spite of all these considerations, the his-
tory of the diets of the empire has not yet
received the attention it deserves. The
Recesses * of the diets are sufficiently well

e

* The Recess (Abschied — literally, Departure; called by the
jurists of the empire, Recessus), was the document where-
with the labours of the diet were closed, and in which they
were summed up. All the resolutions of the assembly, or
the decisions of the sovereign on their proposals or petitions,
were collected into one whole, and the session, or, according to
the German expression, day (Tag), was thus closed with the
publication of the Recess. Each separate law after having passed
the two colleges, that of the electors and that of the princes, re-
ceived the emperor’s assent or ratification, and had then the force
of law. It was called a Resolution of the Empire (Reichsschluss

AUTHOR’S PREFACE. _ ix

known ; but who would judge a deliberative
assembly by the final results of its deliber-
ations? Projects of a systematic collection
of its transactions have occasionally been
entertained, and the work has even been
taken in hand; but all that has hitherto been
done has remained in a fragmentary and in-
complete state.

As it is the natural ambition of every
man to leave behind him some useful record
of his existence, I have long cherished the
project of devoting my industry and my
powers to this most important work. Not
that I flattered myself that I was competent
to supply so large a deficiency ; to exhaust
the mass of materials in its manifold juridical

or Reichsconclusum). 'The sum of all the decisions or acts of a
diet was called the Reichsabschied.

The correspondence of this with the English term Statute,
will be seen in the following extract: “ For all the acts of one
session of parliament taken together make properly but one
statute; and therefore when two sessions have been held in one
year we usually mention stat. 1. or 2. Thus the Bill of Rights
is cited as 1 W. & M. st. 2. c. 2. ; signifying that it.is the second
chapter or act of the second statute, or the laws made in the
second session of parliament in the first year of King William
and Queen Mary.”—Blackstone’s Comment. vol. i. p.85. 15th ed.

The earliest Recesses of the empire are lost. Since the
year 1663, as the diet remained constantly sitting down to
1806, no recess, properly so called, could be published. — Transt.

x AUTHOR’S PREFACE.

bearings ; my idea was only to trace with
accuracy the rise and development of the
constitution of the empire, through a series
(if possible unbroken) of the Acts of the
Diets.

Fortune was so propitious to my wishes
that, in the autumn of 1836, I found in the
Archives of the city of Frankfurt a collection
of the very kind I wanted, and was allowed
access to these precious documents with all
the facility I could desire.

The collection consists of ninety-six folio
volumes, which contain the Acts of the Im-
perial Diets from 1414 to 1613. In the
earlier part it is very imperfect, but step by
step, in proportion as the constitution of the
empire acquires form and development, the
documents rise in interest. At the beginning
of the sixteenth century, from which time
the practice of reducing public proceedings
to writing was introduced, it becomes so rich
in new and important materials, that it lays
the strongest hold on the attention. There
are not only the Acts, but the reports of the
deputies from the cities — the Rathsfreunde,
—which generally charm by their frankness
and simplicity, and often surprise by their

AUTHOR’S PREFACE. xl

sagacity. I profited by the opportunity to
make myself master of the contents of the
first sixty-four of these volumes, extending
down to the year 1551. A collection of
Imperial Rescripts occasionally afforded me
valuable contributions. :

But I could not stop here. A single town
was not in a condition to know all that passed.
It is evident that the labours of the electoral
and princely colleges were not to be sought
for in the records of a city.

In the beginning of the year 1837, I re-
ceived permission to explore the Royal
Archives of the kingdom of Prussia at
Berlin, and, in the April of the same year,
the State Archives of the kingdom of Saxony
at Dresden, for the affairs of the empire
during the times of Maximilian I. and
Charles V. They were of great value to me ;
the former as containing the records of an
electorate; the latter, down to the end of
that epoch, those of a sovereign principality.
It is true that I came upon many documents
which I had already seen at Frankfurt ; but,
at the same time, I found a great number of
new ones, which gave me an insight into
parts of the subject hitherto obscure. None

Xl . AUTHOR’S PREFACE.

of these collections is, indeed, complete, and
many a question which suggests itself re-
mains unanswered ; yet they are in a high
degree instructive. They throw a completely
new light on the character and conduct of
such influential princes as Joachim II. of
Brandenburg, and still more, Maurice of

Saxony. :

Let no one pity aman who devotes himself
to studies apparently so dry, and neglects for
them the delights of many a joyous day.
It is true the companions of his solitary
hours are but lifeless paper, but they are the
remnants of the life of past ages, which gra-
dually assume form and substance to the eye
occupied in the study of them. For me (in
a preface an author is ‘bound to speak of him-
self — a subject he elsewhere gladly avoids)
they had a peculiar interest.

When I wrote the first part of my His-
tory of the Popes, I designedly treated the
origin and progress of the Reformation with
as much brevity as the subject permitted.
I cherished the hope of dedicating more
extensive and profound research to this most
important event of the history of my country.

This hope was now abundantly satisfied.

AUTHOR’S PREFACE. Xl

Of the new matter which I found, the greater
part related, directly or indirectly, to the
epoch of the Reformation. At every step I
acquired new information as to the circum-
stances which prepared. the politico-religious
movement of that time; the phases of our
national life, by which it was accelerated ;
the origin and working of the resistance it
encountered.

It is impossible to approach a matter origin-
ating in such intense mental energy, and ex-
ercising so vast an influence on the destinies
of the world, without being profoundly
interested and absorbed by it. I was fully
sensible that if I executed the work I pro-
posed to myself, the Reformation would be
the centre on which all other incidents and
circumstances would turn.

But to accomplish this, more accurate in-
formation was necessary as to the progress
of opinion in the evangelical * party (es-

* Jt is, perhaps, hardly necessary to remark, that I have re-
tained this word throughout the following work in its original
acceptation ; viz. as denoting the party which, at the time of
the Reformation, adhered to the Confession of Augsburg; the
party which declared the Gospel the sole rule of faith. In our
own age and country it has been assumed by a party which

stands in nearly the same relation to the Church of England as
the party called pietistical (pietistisch) to the Lutheran church

XiV AUTHOR’S PREFACE.

pecially in a political point of view), ante-
cedent to the crisis of the Reformation,
than any that could be gathered from
printed sources. The Archives common to
the whole Ernestine line of Saxony, de-
posited at Weimar, which I visited in August,
1837, afforded me what I desired. Nor can _
any spot be more full of information on the ~
marked epochs at which this house played so
important a part, than the vault in which its
archives are preserved. The walls and the
whole interior space are covered with the
rolls of documents relating to the deeds and
events of that period. Every note, every
draft of an answer, is here preserved. The
correspondence between the Elector John
Frederic and the Landgrave Philip of
Hessen would alone fill a long series of printed
- volumes. I endeavoured, above all, to make
myself master of the two registers, which
include the affairs of the empire and the
Schmalkaldic League. As to the former,
I found, as was to be expected from the
of Germany. But this did not seem to me a sufficient reason
for removing it from its proper and authorised place in German
history. The word protestant hardly occurs in the original

volumes; and-as it suggests another train of ideas and senti-
ments, I have not introduced it. — TRAnst.

AUTHOR’S PREFACE. a <.

nature of the subject, many valuable details ;
as to the latter, I hence first drew infor-
mation which is, I hope, in some degree
calculated to satisfy the curiosity of the
public.

I feel bound here publicly to express my
thanks to the authorities to whom the
guardianship of these various archives is
entrusted, for the liberal aid — often not
unattended with personal trouble — which
I received from them all.

At length, I conceived the project of un-
dertaking a more extensive research into the
Archives of Germany. I repaired to the
Communal Archives of the house of Anhalt
at Dessau, which at the epoch in question
shared the opinions and followed the ex-
ample of that of Saxony; but I soon saw
that I should here be in danger of encumber-
ing myself with too much matter of a purely
local character. I remembered how many
other documents relating to this period had
been explored and employed by the in-
dustry of German inquirers. The work of
Bucholz on Ferdinand [. contains a most.
copious treasure of important matter from
those of Austria, of which too little use is

Xvi AUTHOR'S PREFACE.

made in that state. The instructive writings
of Stumpf and Winter are founded on those
of Bavaria. The Archives of Wiirtenberg
were formerly explored by Sattler; those of
Hessen, recently, by Rommel and Neudecker.
For the more exclusively ecclesiastical view
of the period, the public is in possession of
a rich mass of authentic documents in the
collections of Walch, and the recent editions
of Luther’s Letters by De Wette; and still
more in those of Melanchthon by Bret-
schneider. The letters of the deputies from
Strasburg and Niirnberg, which have been
published, throw light on the history of par-
ticular diets. It is hardly necessary for me
to mention how much has lately been
brought together by Forstemann respecting
the Diet of Augsburg of 1530, so long the
subject of earnest research and labour.

Recent publications, especially in. Italy
and England, lead us to hope for the pos-
sibility of a thorough and satisfactory ex-
planation of the foreign relations of the
empire.*

* Researches and publications of this kind have been going
on ever since the first edition of the two first volumes of this

-AUTHOR’S PREFACE. XVil

I see the time approach in which we shall
no longer have to found modern history on
the reports even of contemporaneous his-
torians, except in so far as they were in pos-
session of personal and immediate knowledge
of facts; still less, on works yet more re-
mote from the source; but on the narra-
tives of eye-witnesses, and the genuine and
original documents. For the epoch treated
in the following work, this prospect is no
distant one. I myself have made use of a
number of records which I had found when
in the pursuit of another subject, in the
Archives of Vienna, Venice, Rome, and es-
pecially Florence. Had I gone into further
detail, I should have run the risk of losing
sight of the subject as a whole; or in the
necessary lapse of time, of breaking the unity
of the conception which had arisen before my
mind in the course of my past researches.

And thus I proceeded boldly to the com-
pletion of this work; persuaded that when
an inquirer has made researches of some

work were published ; I have availed myself of them as far as
was possible in the second. Nor have I neglected to introduce
the additional matter which presented itself to me in Brussels
and in Paris. (Note to the second edition.)

VOL. I. a

XVHl AUTHOR’S PREFACE.

extent in authentic records, with an earnest
‘spirit and a genuine ardour for truth, though
later discoveries may throw clearer and
more certain light on details, they can only
strengthen his fundamental conceptions of
the subject : — for truth can be but one.

CONTENTS

or

THE FIRST VOLUME.

INTRODUCTION.
Page
Virw or THE Earty History or GERMANY - 1
BOOK I.
ATTEMPT TO REFORM THE CONSTITUTION OF THE EMPIRE.
1486—1517. - - ° - 86
BOOK ILI.
Earty History ov Luruer anp or Cuaries V.
1517—1521. - - - - 248
CHAP. L. .
Origin of the Religious Opposition - - 245
CHAP. IL.
Descent of the Imperial Crown from Maximilian to
Charles V.—- - - “ - 3849
CHAP. III. =
First Defection from the Papacy, 1519-20. - - 427
CHAP. IV.

Diet of Worms. A.p. 1521. “ - - 496

a . o se P4: | ase a ? a Ps -
ee
oe a. loa .

— ee mai
> sae
les ; ~ : bs >
2 id oe” a ak oe Re Se eee | sf

coe ; y; ie ae ae exe + - . ems 7
es res Taaee .

i
; = f
ib. - .
i. eee
‘ Siew “ : bs
_. ares
e : = om wr

Te,
:
- <
‘
~ “es
a
he ‘
ms
—. .

> a HISTORY

_ OF THE

REFORMATION IN GERMANY.

INTRODUCTION.
VIEW OF THE EARLY HISTORY OF GERMANY.

. For purposes of discussion or of instruction, it may
be possible to sever ecclesiastical from political
history; in actual life, they are indissolubly con-
nected, or rather fused into one indivisible whole.

As indeed there is nothing of real importance in
the moral and intellectual business of human life, the
source of which does not lie in a profound and more
or less conscious relation of man and his concerns to
God and divine things, it is impossible to conceive a
nation worthy of the name, or entitled to be called,
in any sense, great, whose political existence is not
constantly elevated and guided by religious ideas.
To cultivate, purify and exalt these, —to give them
an expression intelligible to all and profitable to
all, _—to embody them in outward forms and public
acts, is its necessary as well as its noblest task.

It is not to be denied that this process inevitably
brings into action two great principles which seem
to place a nation at variance with itself. Nation-
ality (2. e. the sum of the peculiar qualities, habits,

VOL. I. B

4

Z INTRODUCTION.

and sentiments of a nation) is necessarily restricted
within the bounds marked out by neighbouring
nationalities ; whereas religion, ever since it was
revealed to the world in a form which claims and
deserves universality, constantly strives after sole
and absolute supremacy.

In the foundation or constitution of a State, some
particular moral or intellectual principle predomi-
nates; a principle prescribed by an inherent neces-
sity, expressed in determinate forms and giving
birth to a peculiar condition of society, or character
of civilisation. But no sooner has a Church, with
its forms of wider application, embracing different
nations, arisen, than it grasps at the project of ab-
sorbing the State, and of reducing the principle on
which civil society is founded to complete subjec-
tion: the original underived authority of that prin-
ciple is, indeed, rarely acknowledged by the Church.

At length the universal religion appears, and, after
it has incorporated itself with the consciousness
of mankind, assumes the character of a great and
growing tradition, handed down from people to
people, and communicated in rigid dogmas. But
nations cannot suffer themselves to be debarred from
exercising the understanding bestowed on them by
nature, or the knowledge acquired by study, on an
investigation of its truth. In every age, therefore,
we see diversities in the views of religion arise in
different nations, and these again react in various
ways on the character and condition of the State.
It is evident, from the nature of this struggle, how
mighty is the crisis which it involvés for the desti-

INTRODUCTION. 3

nies of the human race. Religious truth must
have an outward and visible representation, in order
that the State may be perpetually reminded of the
origin and the end of our earthly existence ; of the
rights of our neighbours, and the kindred of all
the nations of the earth; it would otherwise be in
danger of degenerating into tyranny, or of harden-
ing into inveterate prejudice, — into intolerant con-
ceit of self, and hatred of all that is foreign. On
the other hand, a free development of the national
character and culture is necessary to the interests
of religion. Without this, its doctrines can never
be truly understood nor profoundly accepted: with-
out incessant alternations of doubt and conviction,
of assent and dissent, of seeking and finding, no
error could be removed, no deeper understanding
of truth attained. Thus, then, independence of
thought and political freedom are indispensable to
the Church herself; she needs them to remind her
of the varying intellectual wants of men, of the
changing nature of her own forms; she needs
them to preserve her from the lifeless iteration of
misunderstood doctrines and rites, which kill the
soul.

It has been said, the State is itself the Church,
but the Church has thought herself authorised to
usurp the place of the State. The truth is, that
the spiritual or intellectual life of man—in its in-
tensest depth and energy unquestionably one — yet
manifests itself in these two institutions, which come
into contact under the most varied forms; which
are continually striving to pervade each other, yet

B 2

4 INTRODUCTION.

never entirely coincide ; to exclude each other, yet
neither has ever been permanently victor or yan-
quished. In the nations of the West, at least, such
a result has never been obtained. The Califate
may unite ecclesiastical and political power in one
hand; but the whole life and character of western
Christendom consists of the incessant action and
counter-action of Church and State; hence arises
the freer, more comprehensive, more profound
activity of mind, which must, on the whole, be
admitted to characterise that portion of the globe.
The aspect of the public life of Europe is always
determined by the mutual relations of these two
great principles.

Hence it happens that ecclesiastical history is not
to be understood without political, nor the latter
without the former. The combination of both is
necessary to present either in its true light ; and if
ever we are able to fathom the depths of that pro-
founder life where both have their common source
and origin, it must be by a complete knowledge of
this combination.

But if this is the case with all nations, it is most
pre-eminently so with the German, which has be-
stowed more persevering and original thought on
ecclesiastical and religious subjects than any other.
The events of ten centuries turn upon the struggles
between the Empire and the Papacy, between Ca-
tholicism and Protestantism. We, in our days,
stand midway between them.

My design is to relate the history of an epoch
in which the politico-religious energy of the Ger-

CAROLINGIAN TIMES. 5

man nation was most conspicuous for its growth
and most prolific in its results. I do not conceal
from myself the great difficulty of this under-
taking ; but, with God’s help, I will endeavour to
accomplish it. I shall first attempt to trace my
way through a retrospect of earlier times.

CAROLINGIAN TIMES.

One of the most important epochs in the history of
the world was the commericement of the eighth
century; when, on the one side Mahommedanism
threatened to overspread Italy and Gaul, and on
the other, the ancient idolatry of Saxony and Fries-
land once more forced its way across the Rhine.
In this peril of Christian institutions a youthful
prince of Germanic race, Karl Martell, arose as
their champion; maintained them with all the en-
ergy which the necessity for self-defence calls forth,
and finally extended them into new regions. For,
as the possessor of the sole power which still re-
mained erect in the nations of Roman origin — the
Pope of Rome — allied himself with this prince and
his successors; as he received assistance from them,
and bestowed in return the favour and protection
of the spiritual authority, the compound of military
and sacerdotal government which forms the basis
of all European civilisation from that moment arose
into being. From,that time conquest and conver-
sion went hand in hand. “As soon,” says the
‘author of the life of St. Boniface, ‘‘as the autho-
B3

6 INTRODUCTION.

rity of the glorious Prince Charles over the Frisians
was confirmed, the trumpet of the sacred word
was heard.” It would be difficult to say whether
the Frankic domination contributed more to the
conversion of the Hessians and Thuringians, or Chris-
tianity to the incorporation of those races with the
Frankic empire. The war of Charlemagne against
the Saxons was a war not only of conquest but of
religion. Charlemagne opened it with an attack on
the old Saxon sanctuary, the Irminsul; the Saxons
retorted by the destruction of the church at Fritzlar.
Charlemagne marched to battle bearing the relics
of saints ; missionaries accompanied the divisions of
his army; his victories were celebrated by the esta-
blishment of bishoprics; baptism was the seal of sub-
jection and allegiance; relapse into heathenism was
also a crime against the state. The consummation
of all these incidents is to be found in the investi-
ture of the aged conqueror with the imperial crown.
A German, in the natural course of events and in
the exercise of regular legitimate power, occupied
the place of the Caesars as chief of a great part of
the Romanz world; he also assumed a lofty sta-
tion at the side of the Roman pontiff in spiritual
affairs ; a Frankic synod saluted him, as “Regent
of the true religion.” The entire state of which he
was the chief now assumed a colour and form
wherein the spiritual and temporal elements were
completely blended. The union between emperor
and pope served as a model for that between count
and bishop. The archdeaconries into which the
bishoprics were divided, generally, if not universally,

CAROLINGIAN TIMES. vi

coincided with the Gauen, or political divisions of
the country. As the counties were divided into
hundreds, so were the archdeaconries into deaneries.
The seat of them was different; but, in respect of
the territory over which their jurisdiction extended,
there was a striking correspondence.* According
to the view of the lord and ruler, not only was
the secular power to lend its arm to the spiritual,
but the spiritual to aid the temporal by its excom-
munications. The great empire reminds us of a
vast neutral ground in the midst of a world filled
with carnage and devastation; where an iron will
imposes peace on forces generally in a state of
mutual hostility and destruction, and fosters and
shelters the germ of civilisation; so guarded was it
on all sides by impregnable marches.

But every age could not produce a man so
formed to subdue and to command ; and for the de-
velopment of the world which Charlemagne founded,
it remained to be seen what would be the mutual
bearing of the different elements of which it was
composed ; whether they would blend with or repel
each other, agree or conflict: for there can be no
true and enduring vitality without the free motion
of natural and innate powers and propensities.

It was inevitable that the clergy would first feel
its own strength. This body formed a corporation
independent even of the emperor: originating and
developed in the Romanz nations, whose most re-

* See Wenck, Hessische Landesgeschichte, ii. 469.
B 4

8 INTRODUCTION.

markable product it had been in the preceding

century, it now extended over those of Germanic

race; in which, through the medium of a common

language, it continually made new proselytes and
_ gained strength and consistency.

Even under Charlemagne the spiritual element
was already bestirring itself with activity and vi-
gour. One of the most remarkable of his capitularies
is that wherein he expresses his astonishment that
his spiritual and temporal officers so often thwart,
instead of supporting each other, as it is their duty
to do. He does not disguise that it was the clergy
more especially who exceeded their powers: to
them he addresses the question, fraught with re-
proach and displeasure, which has been so often
repeated by succeeding ages—how far they are
justified in interfering in purely secular affairs ? He
tells them they must explain what is meant by re-
nouncing the world; whether that is consistent with
large and costly retinues, with attempts to persuade
the ignorant to make donations of their goods and
to disinherit their children; whether it were not
better to foster good morals than to build churches,
and the like.*

But the clergy soon evinced a much stronger pro-
pensity to ambitious encroachment.

We need not here inquire whether the pseudo-
Isidorian decretals were invented as early as the

reign of Charlemagne, or somewhat later; in the

ets Capitulare interrogationis de iis que Karolus M. pro com-
muni omnium utilitate interroganda constituit Aquisgrani 811.”
— Monum. Germanie Histor. ed. Pertz, iii. p. 106.

CAROLINGIAN TIMES. 9

Frankie church, or in Italy: at all events, they
belong to that period, are connected with a most
extensive project, and form a great epoch in our
history. The project was to overthrow the exist-
ing constitution of the church, which, in every
country, still essentially rested on the authority of
the metropolitan ; to place the whole church in im-
mediate subjection to the pope of Rome, and to
establish a unity of the spiritual power, by means
of which it must necessarily emancipate itself from
the temporal. Such was the plan which the clergy
had even then the boldness to avow. A series of
names of the earlier popes were pressed into the ser-
vice, in order to append to them forged documents,
to which a colour of legality was thus given.*

And what was it not possible to effect in those
times of profound historical ignorance, in which
past ages were only beheld through the twilight of
falsehood and fantastic error? and under princes like
the successors of Charlemagne, whose minds, instead
of being elevated or purified, were crushed by reli-
gious influences, so that they lost the power of
distinguishing the spiritual from the temporal pro-
vince of the clerical office ?

It is indisputable that the order of succession to
the throne which Louis the Pious, in utter disre-
gard of the warnings of his faithful adherents, and

* A passage from the spurious Acts of the Synods of Pope
Silvester is found in a Capitulary of 806. See Eichhorn, Ueber
die spanische Sammlung der Quellen des Kirchenrechts in den
Abhandll. der Preuss. Akad. d. W. 1834. Philos. Hist. Klasse,
p. 132.

10 INTRODUCTION.

in opposition to all German modes of thinking, esta-
blished in the year 817*, was principally brought
about by the influence of the clergy. “ The empire,”
says Agobardus, ‘‘must not be divided into three ;
it must remain one and undivided.” The division
of the empire seemed to endanger the unity of the
church: and, as the emperor was chiefly deter-
mined by spiritual motives, the regulations adopted
were enforced with all the pomp of religious cere-
monies, — by masses, fasts, and distributions of
alms; every one swore to them; they were held to
be inspired by God himself.

After this, no one, not even the emperor, could
venture to depart from them. Great, at least,
were the evils which he brought upon himself by
his attempt to do so, out of love to a son born at a
later period of his life. The irritated clergy made
common cause with his elder sons, who were al-
ready dissatisfied with the administration of the
empire. ‘The supreme pontiff came in person from
Rome and declared in their favour; and a uni-
versal revolt was the consequence. Nor did this
first manifestation of their power satisfy the clergy.
In order to make sure of their advantage, they
formed the daring scheme of depriving the born
and anointed emperor, on whom they could now
no longer place reliance, of his consecrated dignity
—a dignity which, at any rate, he owed not to them,
—and of bestowing it immediately on the successor

* Fauriel, Histoire de la Gaule Mérid. iv. 47., examines this
point more in detail.

CAROLINGIAN TIMES. 11

to the throne who had been nominated in 817, and
who was the natural representative of the unity of
the empire. If, on the one hand, it is indisputable
that, in the eighth century, the spiritual authority
contributed greatly to the establishment of the ©
principle of obedience to the temporal government,
it is equally certain that, in the ninth, it made
rapid strides towards the acquisition of power into
its own hands. In the collection of capitularies of
Benedictus Levita, it is treated as one of the leading
principles, that no constitution in the world has
any force or validity against the decisions of the
popes of Rome; in more than one canon, kings
who act in opposition to this principle are threat-
ened with divine punishment.* The monarchy of
Charlemagne seemed to be about to be transformed
into an ecclesiastical state.

I do not hesitate to affirm that it was mainly
the people of Germany who resisted this tendency ;
indeed, that it was precisely this resistance which
first awakened Germany to a consciousness of its
own importance as a nation. For it would be
impossible to speak of a German nation, in the
proper sense of the word, during the preceding
ages. In the more remote, the several tribes
had not even a common name by which they
recognised each other: during the period of their

* Benedicti Capitularia, lib. ii. p.322. “Velut prevaricator
catholic fidei semper a Domino reus existat quicunque regum
canonis hujus censuram permiserit violandam.” Lib. iii. 346.
“ Constitutiones contradecreta presulum Romanorum nullius
sunt momenti.”

12 INTRODUCTION.

migration, -they fought with as much hostility
among themselves as against the stranger, and
allied themselves as readily with the latter as with
those of common race. Under the Merovingian
kings they were further divided by religious enmi-
ties; the Saxons, in presence of Frankic Chris-
tianity, held the more pertinaciously to their forms
of government and to their ancient gods. It was
not till Charlemagne had united all the Germanic
tribes, with the exception of those in England and
Scandinavia, in one and the same temporal and
spiritual allegiance, that the nation began to ac-
quire form and consistency; it was not till the
beginning of the ninth century, that the Ger-
man name appeared as contra-distinguished from
the Romanz portion of the empire.*

It is worthy of eternal remembrance, that the ~
first act in which the Germans appear as one
people, is the resistance to the attempt of the
clergy to depose their emperor and lord.

The ideas of legitimacy which they had in-
herited from their past political life and history,
as members of tribes, would never have led them
to derive it from the pretended grace of God,
—that is to say, from the declaration of the
spiritual authorities. They were attached to Louis
the Pious, who had rendered peculiar services to
the Saxon chiefs; their aversion to his deposition
was easily fanned into a flame: at the call of

* Rihs Erliiuterung der zehn ersten Capitel von Tacitus

Germania, p. 103.; Mone Geschichte des Heidenthums im
Nordlichen Europa. Th. ii. p. 6.

CAROLINGIAN TIMES. 13

Louis the Germanic, who kept his court in Bavaria,
the other tribes, Saxons, Swabians, and Franks, on
this side the Carbonaria, gathered around his ban-
ner; for the first time they were united in one
great object. As they were aided by an analogous,
though much feebler, movement in the south of
France, the bishops soon found themselves com-
pelled to absolve the emperor from the penance
they had imposed, and to acknowledge him again
as their lord. The first historical act of the united
nation is this rising in favour of their born prince
against the spiritual power. Nor were they any
longer inclined to consent to such a deviation from
their own law of succession, as was involved in the
acknowledgment of a single heir to the whole
monarchy. When, after the death of Louis the
Pious, Lothair, in spite of all that had passed, made
an attempt to seize the reins of the whole empire,
he found in the Germans a resistance, at first
doubtful, but every moment increasing, and finally
victorious. From them his troops received their
first important defeat on the Riess, which laid the
foundation of the severance of Germany from the
great monarchy.* __

Lothair relied on his claims recognised by the
clergy; the Germans, combined with the southern
French, challenged him to submit them to the
judgment of heaven by battle. ‘Then it was that
the great array of the Frankic empire split into

* In Retiense. (Annales Ruodolfi Fuldensis; Monumenta
Germanie Hist. i. p. 352.) According to Lang (Baierische
Gauen, p.78.), belonging to the Swabian territory.

14 INTRODUCTION.

two hostile masses; the one containing a pre-
ponderance of Romanz, the other of Germanic
elements. The former defended the unity of the
Empire; the latter demanded, according to their
German ideas, its separation. There is a ballad
extant on the battle of Fontenay, in which one of
the combatants expresses his grief at this bloody
war of fellow-citizens and brethren; “on that
bitter night in which the brave fell, the skillful in
fight.” For the destiny of the West it was decisive.*
The judgment of heaven was triumphantly pro-
nounced against the claims of the clergy; three king-
doms were now actually established instead of one.
The secular Germanic principles which, from the
time of the great migration of tribes, had extended
widely into the Romanz world, remained in pos-
session of the field: they were stedfastly main-
tained in the subsequent troubles.

On the extinction of one of the three lines in
which the unity of the empire should have rested,
dissensions broke out between the two others, a
main feature of which was the conflict between the
spiritual and secular principles.

The king of the French, Charles the Bald, had
allied himself with the clergy ; his armies were led
to the field by bishops, and he abandoned the ad-
ministration of his kingdom in a great measure to
Hinkmar, archbishop of Rheims. Hence, when the
throne of Lotharingia became vacant in the year
869, he experienced the warmest support from the
bishops of that country. ‘“ After,” say they, “ they

* Angilbertus de bella que fuit Fontaneto.

CAROLINGIAN ‘TIMES. 15

had called on God, who bestows kingdoms on whom
he will, to point out to them a king after his own
heart ; after they had then, with God’s help, per-
ceived that the crown was of right his to whom
they meant to confide it,” they elected Charles the
Bald to be their lord.* But the Germans were as
far now as before from being convinced by this
sort of public law. The elder brother thought
his claims at least as valid as those of the younger;
by force of arms he compelled Charles to consent
to the treaty of Marsna, by which he first united
transrhenane Germany with that on the right bank
of the Rhine. This same course of events was
repeated in the year 875, when the thrones of
Italy and the Empire became vacant. At first,
Charles the Bald, aided now by the pope, as here-
tofore by the bishops, took possession of the crown
without difficulty. But Carlmann, son of Louis
the Germanic, resting his claim on the right
of the elder line, and also on his nomination as
heir by the last emperor, hastened with his Bava-
rians and high Germans to Italy; and in spite of
the opposition of the pope, took possession of it as
his unquestionable inheritance. If this were the
case in Italy, still less could Charles the Bald
succeed in his attempts on the German frontiers.
He was defeated in both countries ; the superiority

* « Caroli Secundi Coronatio in Regno Hlotharii, 869.”—Mo-
num. iii. 512.

+ “Papa invitante Romam perrexit. Beato Petro multa et
pretiosa munera offerens, in imperatorem unctus est.” —Annales
Hinemari Remensis, 875 et 876; Monum. Germ. i. 498.

16 INTRODUCTION.

of the Germans in arms was so decisive that, at
length, they became masters of the whole Lotha-
ringian territory. Even under the Carolingian sove-
reigns, they marked the boundaries of the mighty
empire; the crown of Charlemagne, and two thirds
of his dominions, fell into their hands: they main-
tained the independence of the secular power with
dauntless energy and brilliant success.

SAXON AND FRANKIC EMPERORS.

THe question which next presents itself is, what
course was to be pursued if the ruling house either
became extinct, or proved itself incapable of con-
ducting the government of so vast an empire,
attacked on every side from without, and fermenting
within.

In the years from 879 to 887, the several nations
determined, one after another, to abandon the
cause of Charles the Fat. The characteristic dif-
ferences of the mode in which they accomplished
this are well worthy of remark.

In the Romanz part of Europe the clergy had a
universal ascendancy. In Cisjurane Burgundy it
was ‘the holy fathers assembled at Mantala, the
holy synod, together with the nobles,” who “ under
the inspiration of the Holy Spirit,” elected Count
Boso king.* We find from the decretal for the elec-
tion of Guido of Spoleto, that “the humble bishops

* “Nutu Dei, per suffragia sanctorum, ob instantem neces-
sitatem.”—FElectio Bosonis ; Monum. iii. 547.

CAROLINGIAN TIMES. 17

assembled together from various parts at Pavia
chose-him to be their lord and king*, principally
because he had promised to exalt the holy Roman
church, and to maintain the ecclesiastical rights
and privileges.” The conditions to which Odo of
Paris gave his assent at his coronation are chiefly
in favour of the clergy: he promises not only to ~
defend the rights of the church, but to extend them
to the utmost of his information and ability.
Totally different was the state of things in Ger-
many. Here it was more especially the temporal
lords, Saxons, Franks and Bavarians, who, under
the guidance of a disaffected minister of the em-
peror, assembled around Arnulf and transferred
the crown to him. ‘The bishops (even the bishop
of Mainz) were rather opposed to the measure ;
nor was it till some years afterwards that they
entered into a formal negotiationt with the new
ruler: they had not elected him; they submitted to
his authority.

The rights and privileges which were on every oc-
casion claimed by the clergy, were as constantly and
as resolutely ignored by the Germans. They held
as close to the legitimate succession as possible; even

* « Nos humiles episcopos ex diversis partibus Papiz conveni-
entibus pro ecclesiarum nostrarum ereptione et omnis Christiani-
tatis salvatione,” &c.—Llectio Widonis Regis, Monum. iii. 554.

+ Capitulum ‘Odonis Regis. Ibid.

t “De collegio sacerdotum gnaros direxerunt mediatores ad
prefatum regem,” &¢.—Arnulfi Concilium Triburience, Monum.
iii. 560. He says, “Nos, quibus regni cura et solicitudo ecclesi-

* arum commissa est.”

VOL. I. C

18 INTRODUCTION.

after the complete extinction of the Carolingian
race, the degree of kindred with it was one of the
most important considerations which determined
the choice of the people, first to Conrad, and then
to Henry I. of Saxony.

Conrad had, indeed, at one time, the idea of at-
taching himself to the clergy, who, even in Ger-
many, were a very powerful body: Henry, on the
contrary, was always opposed to them. They took
no share in his election; the consecration by the
holy oil, upon which Pepin and Charlemagne had
set so high a value, he declined; as matters stood
in Germany, it could be of no importance to him.
On the contrary, we find that as in his own land of
Saxony he kept his clergy within the strict bounds
of obedience, so in other parts of his dominions he
placed them in subjection to the dukes*; so that
their dependence on the civil power was more com-
plete than ever. His only solicitude was to stand
well with these great feudatories, whose power was
almost equal to his own, and to fulfil other duties
imperatively demanded by the moment. As he
succeeded in these objects, — as he obtained a de-
cisive victory over his most dangerous enemies,
re-established the Marches, which had been broken
at all points, and suffered nothing on the other
side the Rhine that bore the German name to be
wrested from him, — the clergy were compelled by

* “Totius Bajoariz pontifices tu subjaceant potestati,” is
the promise of Liutprand the king to Duke Arnulf. Buchner,
Geschichte der Baiern, iii. 38., shows what use the latter made
of it. See Waiz, Henry L, p. 49,

CAROLINGIAN TIMES. 19

necessity to adhere to him: he bequeathed an undis-
puted sceptre to his house. It was by an agreement
of the court and the secular nobles that Otho was
selected from among Henry’s sons as his successor
to the throne. The ceremony of election was at-
tended only by the dukes, princes, great officers of
state, and warriors; the elected monarch then re-
ceived the assembled body of the clergy.* Otho
could receive the unction without scruple; the
clergy could no longer imagine that they conferred
a right upon him by that ceremony. Whether
anointed or not, Otho would have been king, as
his father had been before him. And so firmly was
this sovereignty established, that Otho was now in
a position to revive and carry through the claims
founded by his Carolingian predecessors. He first
completely realised the idea of a Germanic empire,
which they had only conceived and prepared.
He governed Lotharingia and administered Bur-
gundy ; ashort campaign sufficed to re-establish the
rights of his Carolingian predecessors to the su-
preme power in Lombardy. Like Charlemagne, he
was called to aid by a pope oppressed by the fac-
tions of Rome; like him, he received in return for
his succour the crown of the western empire (2d
February, 962). The principle of the temporal
government, the autocracy, which from the earliest

* Widukiveli Annales, lib. ii. ‘“ Duces ac praeefectorum prin-
cipes cum cxtera principum militumque manu —fecerunt eum
regem; dum ea geruntur a ducibus ac cetero magistratu, pon-
tifex maximus cum universo sacerdotali ordine prestolabatur.”

c 2

20 INTRODUCTION.

times had held in check the usurpations of eccle-
siastical ambition, thus attained its culminating
point, and was triumphantly asserted and recog-
nised in Europe.

At the first glance it would seem as if the rela-
tion in which Otho now stood to the pope was the
same as that occupied by Charlemagne; on a closer
inspection, however, we find a wide difference.

Charlemagne’s connexion with the see of Rome
was produced by mutual need; it was the result of
long epochs of a political combination embracing
the development of various nations; their mutual
understanding rested on an internal necessity, be-
fore which all opposing views and interests gave
way. ‘The sovereignty of Otho the Great, on the
contrary, rested on a principle fundamentally op-
posed to the encroachment of spiritual influences.
The alliance was momentary; the disruption of
it inevitable. But when, soon after, the same
pope who had invoked his aid, John XII., placed
himself at. the head of a rebellious faction, Otho
was compelled to- cause him to be formally de-
posed, and to crush the faction that supported him
by repeated exertions of force, before he could
obtain perfect obedience; he was obliged to raise
to the papal chair a pope on whose co-operation he
could rely. The popes have often asserted that
they transferred the empire to the Germans; and
if they confined this assertion to the Carolingian
race, they are not entirely wrong. The coron-
ation of Charlemagne was the result of their free
determination. But if they allude to the German

CAROLINGIAN TIMES. a1

emperors, properly so called, the contrary of their
statement is just as true; not only Carlmann and
Otho the Great, but their successors, constantly had
to conquer the imperial throne, and to defend it,
when conquered, sword in hand.

It has been said that the Germans would have
done more wisely if they had not meddled with the
empire; or at least, if they had first worked out
their own internal political institutions, and then,
with matured minds, taken part in the general
affairs of Europe. But the things of this world
are not wont to develop themselves so methodically.
A nation is often compelled by circumstances to
increase its territorial extent, before its internal
growth is completed. For was it of slight impor-
tance to its inward progress, that Germany thus
remained in unbroken connexion with Italy ?—the
depository of all that remained of ancient civilisa-
tion, the source whence all the forms of Christianity
had been derived. The mind of Germany has
always unfolded itself by contact with the spirit of
antiquity, and of the nations of Roman origin. It
was from the contrasts which so continually pre-
sented themselves during this uninterrupted con-
nexion, that Germany learned to distinguish eccle-
siastical domination from Christianity.

For however signal had been the ascendancy of _
the secular power, the German people did not de-
part a hair’s breadth either from the doctrines of
Christianity, the ideas upon which a Christian
church is founded, or even from the forms in which
they had first received those doctrines and ideas.

c 3

22 INTRODUCTION.

In them the nation had first risen to a consciousness
of its existence as a united body; its whole intel-
lectual and moral life was bound up with them.
The German imperial government revived the
civilising and Christianising tendencies which had
distinguished the reigns of Charles Martell and
Charlemagne. Otho the Great, in following the
course marked out by his illustrious predecessors,
gave it a fresh national importance by planting
German colonies in Slavonian countries, simultane-
ously with the diffusion of Christianity. He ger-
manised as well as converted the population he had
subdued. He confirmed his father’s conquests on
the Saale and the Elbe, by the establishment of the
bishoprics of Meissen and Osterland. After having
conquered the tribes on the other side the Elbe in
those long and perilous campaigns where he com-
manded in person, he established there, too, three
bishoprics, which for a time gave an extraordinary
impulse to the progress of conversion.* In the
midst of all his difficulties and perplexities in Italy
he never lost sight of this grand object; it was
indeed while in that country that he founded the
archbishopric of Magdeburg, whose jurisdiction
extended over all those other foundations. And
even where the project of Germanising the popula-
tion was out of the question, the supremacy of the -
- German name was firmly and actively maintained.
In Bohemia and Poland bishoprics were erected
under German metropolitans; from Hamburg

* Adami Brem. Histor. Ecclesiastica, lib. ii, c. 17.

CAROLINGIAN TIMES. Zo

Christianity found its way into the north; mission-
aries from Passau traversed Hungary, nor is it
improbable that the influence of these vast and
sublime efforts extended even to Russia, The
German empire was the centre of the conquering
religion; as itself advanced, it extended the eccle-
siastico-military State of which the Church was an
integral part ; it was the chief representative of
the unity of western Christendom, and hence arose
the necessity under which it lay of acquiring a
decided ascendancy over the papacy.

This secular and Germanic principle long retained
the predominancy it had triumphantly acquired.
Otho the Second offered the papal chair to the abbot
of Clugny; and Otho the Third bestowed it first on
one of his kinsmen, and then on his instructor
Gerbert. All the factions which threatened to
deprive the emperor of this right were overthrown ;
under the patronage of Henry III., a German pope
defeated three Roman candidates for the tiara.
In the year 1048, when the see of Rome became
vacant, ambassadors from the Romans, says a con-
temporaneous chronicler, proceeded to Saxony,
found the emperor there, and entreated him to give
them a new pope. He chose the Bishop of Toul,
(afterwards Leo IX.), of the house of Egisheim,
from which he himself was descended on the ma-
ternal side. What took place with regard to the
head of the church was of course still more certain
to befall the rest of the clergy. Since Otho the
Great, in all the troubles of the early years of his
reign, succeeded in breaking down the resistance

c 4

-

24 INTRODUCTION.

which the dtichies were enabled by their clan-like
composition to offer him, the ecclesiastical appoint-
ments remained without dispute in the hand of the
emperor.

How magnificent was the position now occupied
by the German nation, represented in the persons
of the mightiest princes of Europe and united
under their sceptre; at the head of an advancing
civilisation, and of the whole of western Christen-
dom; in the fulness of youthful, aspiring strength!

We must here however remark and confess, that
Germany did not wholly understand her position,
nor fulfil her mission. Above all, she did not
succeed in giving complete reality to the idea of
a western empire, such as appeared about to be
established under Otho I. Independent and often
hostile, though Christian powers arose through all
the borders of Germany; in Hungary, and in Po-
land, in the northern as well as in the southern
possessions of the Normans; England and France
were snatched again from German influence. Spain
laughed at the German claims to a universal supre-
macy; her kings thought themselves emperors ;
even the enterprises nearest home — those across
the Elbe—were for a time stationary or retrograde.

If we seek for the causes of these unfavourable
results, we need only turn our eyes on the internal
condition of the empire, where we find an incessant
and tempestuous struggle of all the forces of the
nation. Unfortunately the establishment of a fixed
rule of succession to the imperial crown was con-
tinually prevented by events. The son and grand-

CAROLINGIAN TIMES. 95

son of Otho the Great died in the bloom of youth,
and the nation was thus compelled to elect a chief.
The very first election threw Germany and Italy
into a universal ferment; and this was shortly suc-
ceeded by a second still more stormy, since it was
necessary to resort to a new line—the Franconian.
How was it possible to expect implicit obedience
from the powerful and refractory nobles, out of
whose ranks, and by whose will, the emperor was
raised to the throne? Was it likely that the Saxon
race, which had hitherto held the reins of govern-
ment, would readily and quietly submit to a foreign
family? It followed that two factions arose, the
one obedient, the other opposed, to the Franconian
emperor, and filled the empire with their strife.
The severe character of Henry III. excited uni-
versal discontent.* A vision, related to us by his
own chancellor, affords a lively picture of the state
of things. He saw the emperor, seated on his
throne, draw his sword, exclaiming aloud, that he
trusted he should still avenge himself on all his
enemies. How could the emperors, thus occupied
during their whole lives with intestine dissensions,
place themselves at the head of Europe in the
important work of social improvement, or really
merit the title of supreme Lords of the West?

It is remarkable that the social element on which
they propped their power was again principally the
clergy. Even Otho the Great owed his triumph

* Hermannus Contractus ad an. 1053. “ Regni tam primores
quam inferiores magis magisque mussitantes, regem se ipso de-
teriorem fore causabantur.”

26 INTRODUCTION.

over intestine revolt and discord, in great measure
to the support of the bishops; for example, of his
brother Bruno, whom he had created Archbishop of
Cologne, and who, in return, held Lotharingia in
allegiance to him: it was only by the aid of the
clergy that Otho conquered the Pope.* The em-
perors found it expedient to govern by means of
the bishops; to make them the instruments of their
will. The bishops were at once their chancellors and
their counsellors; the monasteries, imperial farms.
The uncontrollable tendency, at that time, of all
power and office to become hereditary would natu-
rally render the heads of the church desirous of com-
bining secular rights, which they could dispose of at
pleasure, with their bishoprics. Hence it happened,
that just at the time when the subjection of the clergy
to the imperial authority was the most complete, their
power acquired the greatest extension and solidity.
Otho I. already began to unite the temporal powers
of the count with the proper spiritual authority of
the bishop. We see from the registers of Henry II.
that he bestowed on many churches two and three
countships; on that of Gandersheim, the countship
in seven Gauen or districts. As early as the
eleventh century the bishops of Wiirzburg succeeded
in totally supplanting the secular counts in their
diocese, and in uniting the spiritual and temporal
power; a state of things which the other bishops
now strove to emulate.

It is evident that the station of an emperor of

* Rescriptum patrum in concilio, in Liutprand, lib. vi. con-

tains the remarkable declaration: “ Excommunicationem ves-
tram parvipendemus, eam potius in vos retorquebimus.”

EMANCIPATION OF THE PAPACY. 2%

Germany was no less perilous than august. The
magnates by whom he was surrounded, the pos-
sessors of the secular power out of whose ranks he
himself had arisen, he could hold in check only by
an unceasing struggle, and not without force. He
must find a prop in another quarter, and seek
support from the very body who were in principle
opposed to him. This rendered it impossible for
him ever to attain to that predominant influence in
the general affairs of Europe which the imperial
dignity would naturally have given him. How
strongly does this everlasting ebb and flow of con-
tending parties, this continual upstarting of re-
fractory powers, contrast with the tranquillity and
self-sufficiency of the empire swayed by Charle-
magne! It required matchless vigour and fortitude
in an emperor even to hold his seat.

In this posture of affairs, the prince who pos-
sessed the requisite vigour and fortitude, Henry HL.,
died young (A.D. 1056), and a child, six years old,
in whose name the government was carried on by a
tottering regency, filled his place: — one of those
incidents which turn the fortunes of a world.

EMANCIPATION OF THE PAPACY.

Tun ideas which had been repressed in the ninth
century now began to revive; and with redoubled
strength, since the clergy, from the highest to the
lowest, were become so much more powerful.
Generally speaking, this was the age in which

28 INTRODUCTION.

the various modifications of spiritual power through-
out the world began to assume form and stability ;
in which mankind found repose and satisfaction in
these conditions of existence. In the eleventh cen-
tury Buddhaism was re-established in Thibet; and
the hierarchy which, down to the present day, pre-
vails over so large a portion of Eastern Asia, was
founded by the Lama Dschu-Adhischa. The Califate
of Bagdad, heretofore a vast empire, then took the
character of a spiritual authority, and was greatly
indebted to that change for the ready reception it
met with. At the same period, in Africa and Syria
arose the Fatimite Califate, founded on a doctrine
of which its adherents said, that it was to the
Koran what the kernel is to its shell.

In the West the idea of the unity of the Chris-
tian faith was the pervading one, and had taken
strong hold on all minds (for the various conversions
which awakened this or that more susceptible nation

to fresh enthusiasm belong to a later period). This
idea manifested itself in the general efforts. to
crush Mahommedanism : inadequately represented
by the imperial authority, which commanded but
a limited obedience, it now came in powerful aid
of the projects and efforts of the hierarchy. For
to whom could such an idea attach itself but
to the bishop of the Roman Church, to which, as
to a common source, all other churches traced back
their foundation ; ‘which all western Europeans re-
garded with a singular reverence? Hitherto the
Bishop of Rome had been thrown into the shade by
the rise and development of the imperial power.

EMANCIPATION OF THE PAPACY. 29

But favouring circumstances and the main course of
events now united to impel the papacy to claim
universal and supreme dominion.

The minority of the infant emperor decided
the result. At the court of Rome, the man who
most loudly proclaimed the necessity of reform —
the great champion of the independent. existence
of the church —the man ordained by destiny to
make his opinion the law of ages, — Hildebrand,
the son of a carpenter in Tuscany, acquired supreme
influence over all affairs. He was the author and
instigator of decrees, in virtue of which the papal’
elections were no longer to depend on the emperor,
but on the clergy of the Church of Rome and the
cardinals. He delayed not a moment to put them
in force; the very next election was conducted in
accordance with them.

In Germany, on the contrary, people were at this
time entirely occupied with the conflicts of the fac-
tions about the court; the opposition which was
spread over Italy and Germany (and to which Hil-
debrand also belonged) at length got a firm footing
in the court itself: the adherents of the old Saxon
and Salic principles, (for example, Chancellor Gui-
bert) were defeated; the court actually sanctioned
an election which had taken place against its own
most urgent interest; the German rulers, plunged
in the dissensions of the moment, abandoned to his
fate an anti-pope who maintained himself with con-
siderable success and who was the representative of
the ancient maxims

Affairs, however, changed their aspect when the

30 INTRODUCTION.

youthful Salian, with all his spirit and talents, took
the reins of government into his own hand. He
knew his rights, and was determined to assert them
at any price. But things had gone so far that he
fell into the most perilous situation at the very out-
set of his career.

‘The accession to the throne of a young monarch,
by nature despotic and violent, and hurried along
by vehement passions, quickly brought the long-
fermenting internal discords of Germany to an open
breach. The German nobles aspired after the sort

of independence which those of France had just ac-

quired. In the year 1073 the Saxon princes re-
volted; the whole of Saxony, says a contemporary,
deserted the king like one man. Meanwhile at
Rome the leader of the hostile party had himself
gained possession of the tiara, and now advanced
without delay to the great work of emancipating
not only the papacy but the clergy from the control
of the emperor. In the year 1074 he caused a law
to be proclaimed by his synod, the purpose and
effect of which was to wrest the nomination to
spiritual offices from the laity ; that is, in the first
place, from the emperor.

Scarcely was Henry IV. seated on his throne
when he saw its best prerogatives, the crown and
consummation of his power, attacked and threat-
ened with annihilation. He seemed doomed to
succumb without a contest. The discord between
the Saxons and Upper Germans, which for a time
had been of advantage to him, was allayed, and.
their swords, yet wet with each other’s blood, were

EMANCIPATION OF THE PAPACY. 31

turned in concert against the emperor ; he was com-
pelled to propitiate the pope who had excommu-
nicated him, to travel in the depth of winter to do
that penance at Canossa by which he so profoundly
degraded the imperial name.

Yet from that very moment we may date his
most strenuous resistance.

We should fall into a complete error were we to
represent him to ourselves as crossing the Alps in
remorse and contrition, or as convinced of the right-
fulness of the claims advanced by the pope. His
only object was to wrest from his adversaries the
support of the spiritual authority, the pretext
under which they threatened his highest’ dignity.
As he did not succeed in this, —as the absolu-
tion he received from Gregory was not so com-
plete as to restrain the German princes from all
further hostilities*,— as, on the contrary, they
elected another sovereign in spite of it, —he
plunged into the most determined struggle against
the assumptions of his spiritual as well as of his
temporal foes. Opposition and injury roused
the man within him. Across those Alps which
he had traversed in penitential lowliness, he hur-
ried back burning with warlike ardour; in Ca-
rinthia an invincible band of devoted followers
gathered around him. It is interesting to follow
him with our eye, subduing the spiritual power in

* Lambertus Schaffnaburgensis: (Pistor. i. p. 420.) “ His
conditionibus absolutus est ut... . accusationibus responderet
et ad papx sententiam vel retineret regnum .... vel xquo
animo amitteret.”

32 INTRODUCTION.

Bavaria, the hostile -aristocratical clans in Swabia;
to see him next marching upon Franconia and
driving his rival before him; then into Thuringia
and the Meissen colonies, and at length forcing him
to a battle on the banks of the Elster, in which he
fell. Henry gained no great victories; even on the
Elster he did not so much as keep the field; but he
was continually advancing; his party was conti-
nually gaining strength; he held the banner of the
empire aloft with a steady and vigorous grasp.
After a few years he was able to return to Italy
(A.D. 1081). The empire had been so long and so
intimately allied with the episcopal power that its
chief could not be without adherents among the
higher clergy: synods were held in the emperor’s
behalf, in which it was resolved to maintain the old
order of things. The excommunications of the pope
were met by counter-excommunications. Chan-
cellor Guibert, who had suffered for his adherence
to Salic principles, was nominated pope under the
auspices of the emperor ; and after various alterna-
tions of success in war, was at length conducted in
triumph to Rome. Henry, like so many of his
predecessors, was crowned by a pope of his own
creation. The second rival king whom the Saxons
opposed to him could gain no substantial power,
and held it expedient voluntarily to withdraw his
pretensions.

We see that the emperor had attained to all that
is attainable by war and policy, yet his triumph was
far from being as complete and conclusive as we
might thence infer; for the result of a contest is

EMANCIPATION OF THE PAPACY. oo

not always decided on a field of battle. The ideas
of which Gregory was the champion were inti-
mately blended with the most powerful impulses of
the general development of society; while he was
a fugitive from Rome, they gained possession of the
world. No later than ten years after his death his
second successor was able to take the initiative in
the general affairs of the West — a power which was
conclusive as to results. One of the greatest social
movements recorded in history —the Crusades —
was mainly the result of his policy ; and from that
time he appeared, as the natural head of the Ro-
mano-Germanic sacerdotal and military community
of the West. To such weapons the emperor had
nothing to oppose. ;

The life of Henry, from this time till its close,
has something in it which reminds us of the antique
tragedy, in which the hero sinks, in all the glory
of manhood and the fulness of his powers, under
an inevitable doom. For what can be more like
an overwhelming fate than the power of opinion,
which extends its invisible grasp on every side,
takes complete possession of the minds of men,
and suddenly appears in the field with a force
beyond all control? Henry saw the world go over,
before his eyes, from the empire to the papacy. An
army brought together by one of the blind popular
- impulses which led to the crusades, drove out of
Rome the pope he had placed on the throne: nay,
even in his own house he was encountered by hostile
opinions. His elder son was infected with the zeal
of the bigots by whom he was incited to revolt

VOL. I. D

34 INTRODUCTION.

against his father; the younger was swayed by the
influence of the German aristocracy, and, by a
union of cunning and violence, compelled his own
father to abdicate. The ace warrior went broken-
hearted to his grave. :

I do not think it necessary to trace all the various
alternations of the conflict respecting the rights of
the church.

Even in Rome it was sometimes deemed impos-
sible to force the emperor to renounce his claims.
Pope Paschal at one time entertained the bold idea
of giving back all that the emperors had ever
granted to the church, in order to effect the radical
separation of the latter from the state.*

As this proved to be impracticable, the affairs of
the church were again administered for a time by
the imperial court under Henry V., as they had
been under Henry IV.+

But this too was soon found to be intolerable ;
new disputes arose, and after long contention, both
parties agreed to the concordat of Worms, accord-
ing to which the preponderant influence was yielded
to the emperor in Germany, and to the pope in
Italy ; an agreement, however, which was not ex-

* Heinrici Encyclica de Controversia sua cum Papa. Monum.
iv. 70. The emperor asked, most justly, what was to become
of the imperial authority, if it were to lose the right of investi-
ture after the emperors had transferred so large a share of their
privileges to the bishops.

{ Epistola Friderici Coloniensis archiepiscopi: Codex Vdal-
rici Babenbergensis, n. 277. “ Synodales episcoporum conventus,
annua consilia, omnes denique ecclesiastici ordinis administra-
tiones in regalem curiam translata sunt.”

THE PAPACY AND THE PRINCES. oD

pressed with precision, and which contained the
germ of new disputes.

But though these results were little calculated to
determine the rights of the contending powers, the
advantages which gradually accrued to the papacy
from the course of events were incalculable. From
a state of total dependence, it had now attained
to a no less complete emancipation; or rather to
a preponderance, not indeed as yet absolute, or

defined, but unquestionable, and every moment
acquiring strength and consistency from favouring
circumstances.

RELATION OF THE PAPACY TO THE PRINCES OF
THE EMPIRE.

THE most important assistance which the papacy
received in this work of self-emancipation and ag-
grandisement arose from the natural and tacit
league subsisting between it and the princes of the
Germanic empire.

The secular aristocracy of Germany had, at one
time, made the strongest opposition, on behalf of
their head, to the encroachments of the Church;
they had erected the imperial throne, and had
invested it with all its power: but this power had
at length become oppressive to them; the supre-
macy of the imperial government over the clergy,
which was employed to keep themselves in subjec-
tion, became their most intolerable grievance. It
followed that they at length beheld their own ad-
vantage in the emancipation of the papacy.

D 2

36 INTRODUCTION.

It is to be observed that the power of the German
princes and that of the popes rose in parallel steps.

Under Henry JII., and during the minority of
his successor, both had laid the foundation of their
independence: they began their active career to-
gether. Scarcely had Gregory VII. established the
first principles of his new system, when the princes
also proclaimed theirs ;—the principle, that the em-
pire should no longer be hereditary. Henry IV.
maintained his power chiefly by admitting in de-
tail the claims which he denied in the agegre-
gate: his victories had as little effect in arrest-
ing the progress of the independence of the great
nobles as of the hierarchy. ven as early as the
reign of Henry V. these sentiments had gained
such force that the unity of the empire was re-
garded as residing rather in the collective body
of the princes than in the person of the emperor.
For what else are we to understand from the decla-
ration of that prince—that it was less dangerous to
insult the head of the empire than to give offence
to the princes ? *—an opinion which they themselves
sometimes expressed. In Wiirzburg they agreed
to adhere to their decrees, even if the king refused
his assent to them. They took into their own
hands the arrangement of the disputes with the
pope which Henry found it impossible to termi-
nate: they were the real authors of the concordat
of Worms.

In the succeeding collisions of the papacy with

* “Unius capitis licet summi dejectio reparabile dampnum est,

principum autem conculcatio ruina regni est.” Fragmentum de
Hoste facienda. — Monum. iv. 63.

THE PAPACY AND THE PRINCES. 3

the empire every thing depended on the degree of
support the emperor could, on each occasion, cal-
culate on receiving from the princes.

I shall not here attempt to give a complete view
of the times of the Welfs and the Hohenstaufen ;
it would not be possible, without entering into a
more elaborate examination of particulars than is
consistent with the object of this short survey: let
us only direct our attention for a moment to the
grandest and most imposing figure with which
that epoch presents us — Frederic I.

So long as Frederic I. stood well with his
princes he might reasonably entertain the project
of reviving the prerogatives of the empire, such as
they were conceived and laid down by the empe-
rors and jurists of ancient Rome. He held himself
entitled, like Justinian and Theodosius, to summon
ecclesiastical assemblies; he reminded the popes
that their possessions were derived from the favour
and bounty of the emperor, and admonished them
to attend to their ecclesiastical duties. A dis-
puted election. furnished him with a favourable
occasion of acquiring fresh influence in the choice
of a pope.

His position was, however, very different after the
fresh rupture with his powerful vassal, Henry the
Lion. The claims of that prince to.a little town
in the north of Germany, —Gosslar in the Harz,
— which the emperor refused to admit, decided
the affairs of Italy, and hence of the whole of west-
ern Christendom. In consequence of this, the em-
peror was first stripped of his wonted support ;

D3

38 INTRODUCTION.

he was beaten in the field; and, lastly, he was
compelled to violate his oath, and to recognise the
pope he had rejected.

It is true that, having turned his arms against
his rebellious vassal, he succeeded in breaking up
Henry’s collective power: but this very success again
was advantageous to the princes of the second rank,
by whose assistance he obtained it, and whom, in
return, he enriched with the spoils of his rival ;
while the advantage which the papacy thus gained
was never afterwards to be counter-balanced.

The meeting of Frederic I. and Alexander III.
at Venice is, in my opinion, far more important
than the scene at Canossa. At Canossa, a young
and passionate prince sought only to hurry through
the penance enjoined upon him: at Venice, it was
a mature man who renounced the ideas which he
had earnestly and strenuously maintained for a
quarter of a century ; he was compelled to acknow-
ledge that his conduct towards the church had
been dictated rather by love of power than of
justice.* Canossa was the spot on which the com-
bat began; Venice beheld the triumph of the
church fully established.

For whatever might be the indirect share which
the Germans had in bringing about this result, both
the glory and the chief profit of the victory fell
entirely to the share of the papacy. From this
moment its domination began.

* «Dum in facto ecclesiz potius virtutem potentie quam ra-
tionem justitie volumus exercere, constat nos in errorem merito
devenisse.” Oratio Imperatoris in Conventu Veneto. — Monum.
iv. 154.

THE PAPACY AND THE PRINCES. 39

This became apparent on the first important in-
cident that occurred; viz., when, at the end of the
twelfth century, a contest for the crown arose in
Germany.

The papacy, represented by one of the most able,
ambitious, and daring priests that ever lived, who
regarded himself as the natural master of the world,
_—AInnocent III., did not hesitate an instant to
claim the right of deciding the question.

The German princes were not so blinded as
not to understand what this claim meant. They
reminded Innocent that the empire, out of reve-
rence for the see of Rome, had waived the right
which it incontestably possessed to interfere in the
election of the pope; that it would be an un-
heard-of return for this moderation, for the pope
to assume an influence over the election of the
emperor, to which he had no right whatever. Un-
fortunately, however, they were in a position in
which they could take no serious steps te pre-
vent the encroachment they deprecated. They
must first have placed on the throne an emperor
equally strong by nature and by external circum-
_ stances, have rallied round him, and have fought
the papacy under his banners. For such a course.
they had neither the inclination, nor, in the actual
state of things, was it practicable. They had no love
for the papacy, for its own sake; they hated the
domination of the clergy ; but they had not courage
to brave it. Innocent’s resolute spirit was again.
victorious. In the struggle between the two rivals,
the one a Welf, the other a Hohenstaufe, he at

p 4

40 INTRODUCTION.

first supported the Welf, because that family was
well inclined to the church; but when, after the
accession of this prince to power, and his ap-
pearance in Italy, he manifested the usual anti-
pathy of the empire to the papacy, Innocent did
not hesitate to set up a Hohenstaufe in opposition
to him. He had contended against the Hohen-
staufen with the resources of the Welfic party: he
now attacked the Welfs with those of the Hohen-
staufen. It was a struggle in which the agitations
of the rest of Europe were mingled. Events, both
near and remote, took a turn so favourable, that
Innocent’s candidate again remained master of the
field.

From that time the papacy exercised a leading
influence over all German elections.

When, after the lapse of many years, Frederic II.,
(the Hohenstaufe whom he had raised to power,)
attempted in some particulars to restore the inde-
pendence of the empire, the pope thought himself
justified in again deposing him. Rome now openly
avowed her claim to hold the reins of secular as
well as spiritual authority.

‘We command you,” writes Innocent IV. to
the Gerinan princes in, 1246, “since our beloved
son, the Landgrave of Thuringia, is ready to take
upon himself the office of emperor, that you pro-
ceed to elect him unanimously without delay.” *

He formally signifies his approbation of those
who took part in the election of William of Hol-

* Ex Actis Innocentii. Monum. iv. 361.

THE PAPACY AND THE PRINCES. Al

land; he admonishes the cities to be faithful to
the newly-elected emperor, that so they may merit
the apostolical as well as the royal favour.

In a very short time no trace of any other order
of things remained in Germany. Even at the
ceremony of homage, Richard of Cornwall was
compelled to dispense with the allegiance of the
cities, until it should be seen whether or not the
pope might choose to prefer another aspirant to
the throne. ;

After Richard’s death Gregory X. called upon

the German princes to prepare for a new election:
he threatened that if they delayed, he and his
cardinals would nominate an emperor. The
election being terminated, it was again the pope
who induced the pretender, Alfonso of Castile, to
abandon his claim and to give up the insignia of
the empire; and who caused the chosen candidate,
Rudolf of Habsburg, to be universally acknow-
ledged.*
. What trace of independence can a nation retain
after submitting to receive its head from the hands
of a foreign power? It is manifest that the same
influence which determines the elections, must be
resistless in every other department of the state.

The power of the princes of Germany had, it is
true, been meanwhile on the increase. In the
thirteenth century, during the struggles between
the several pretenders to the throne, and between
the papacy and the empire, they had got possession

* Gerbert, Introductio ad Cod. Epist. Rudolfi, c. iv. n. 30.

42 INTRODUCTION.

of almost all the prerogatives of sovereignty ; they
likewise took the most provident measures to pre-
vent the imperial power from regaining its vast
preponderance. At the end of the thirteenth and
the beginning of the fourteenth century the em-
perors were chosen almost systematically out of
different houses. Consciously or unconsciously,
the princes acted on the maxim, that when power
began to be consolidated in one quarter it must be
counterbalanced by an increase of authority in
another; as, for example, they curbed the already
considerable power of Bohemia by means of the
house of Habsburg, and this again, by those of Nas-
sau, Luxemburg, or Bavaria. None of these could
attain to more than transient superiority, and in
consequence of this policy, no princely race rose to
independence: the spiritual princes, who conducted
the larger portion of the public business, were almost
of more weight than the temporal.

This state of things tended greatly to increase
the power of the papacy, on which the spiritual
princes depended; and to which the temporal be-
came very subordinate and submissive. In the thir-
teenth century they even made the abject declaration
that they were planted in Germany by the church
of Rome, and had been fostered and exalted by her
favour.* The pope was, at least, as much indebted
to the German princes as they were to him; but he
took good care not to allude to his obligations, and

* Tractatus cum Nicolao III. Papa, 1279. “Romana ecclesia
Germaniam decorayit plantans in ea principes tanquam arbores
electas.”—Monum. iv. 421.

THE PAPACY AND THE PRINCES. 43

nobody ventured to remind him of them. His
successive victories over the empire had been gained
by the assistance of many of the temporal powers.
He now possessed, uncontested, the supreme so-
vereignty of Europe. Those plans of papal aggran-
disement which were first avowed in the ninth
century, and afterwards revived in the eleventh,
were, in the thirteenth, crowned with complete
success.

During that long period a state of things had
been evolved, the outlines of which may, I think,
be traced in a few words.

The pretensions of the clergy to govern Europe
according to their hierarchical views—pretensions
which arose directly out of the ecclesiastical insti-
tutions of Charlemagne—were encountered and
resisted by the united body of the German people,
still thoroughly imbued with the national ideas of
ancient Germania. On this combined resistance the
imperial throne was founded. Unfortunately, how-
ever, it failed to acquire perfect security and stability ;
and the divisions which soon broke out between the
domineering chief and his refractory vassals, had the
effect of making both parties contribute to the ag-
grandisement of that spiritual power which they had
previously sought to depress. At first the emperors
beheld in a powerful clergy a means of holding their
great vassals in check, and endowed the church with
liberal grants of lands and lordships; but after-
wards, when ideas of emancipation began to pre-
vail, not only in the papacy but in all spiritual
corporations, the temporal aristocracy thought it

44 INTRODUCTION.

not inexpedient that the emperor should be
stripped of the resource and assistance such a
body afforded him: the enfeebling of the imperial
authority was of great advantage, not only to the
church, but to them. Thus it came to pass that
the ecclesiastical element, strengthened by the divi-
sions of its opponents, at length obtained a decided
preponderance.

Unquestionably the result was far different in
the twelfth and thirteenth centuries from what it
would have been in the ninth. The secular power
might be humbled, but could not be annihilated; a
_purely hierarchical government, such as might have

been established at the earlier period, was now no
longer within the region of possibility. The na-
tional development of Germany had been too deep
and extensive to be stifled by the ecclesiastical spirit ;
while, on the other hand, the influence of ecclesi-
astical ideas and institutions unquestionably con-
tributed largely to its extension. The period in
question displayed a fulness of life and intelli-
gence, an activity in every branch of human in-
dustry, a creative vigour, which we can hardly
imagine to have arisen under any other course of
events. Nevertheless, this was not a state which
ought to satisfy a great nation. There could be
no true political freedom so long as the most
powerful impulse to all public activity emanated
from a foreign head. The domain of mind, too,
was enclosed within rigid and narrow boundaries.
The immediate relation in which every intellectual

OPPOSITION TO THE PAPACY. 45

being stands to the Divine Intelligence was veiled
from the people in deep and abiding obscurity.

Those mighty developments of the human mind
which extend over whole generations, must, of ne-
cessity, be accomplished slowly; nor is it always
easy to follow them in their progress.

Circumstances at length occurred which awakened
in the German nation a consciousness of the posi-
tion for which nature designed it.

FIRST ATTEMPTS AT RESISTANCE TO THE
ENCROACHMENTS OF THE PAPACY.

Tue first important circumstance was, that the
papacy, forgetting its high vocation in the pleasures
of Avignon, displayed all the qualities of a prodigal
and rapacious court, centralising its power for the
sake of immediate profit.

Pope John XXII. enforced his pecuniary claims
with the coarsest avidity, and interfered in an un-
heard-of manner with the presentation to German
benefices: he took care to express himself in very
ambiguous terms as to the rights of the electoral
princes ; while, on the contrary, he seriously claimed
the privilege of examining into the merits of the
emperor they.had elected, and of rejecting him if
he thought fit; nay, in case of a disputed election,
such as then occurred, of administering the govern-
ment himself till the contest should be decided *:

* « Attendentes quod imperii Romani regimen, cura et admi-
nistratio (another time he says, imperii Romani jurisdictio,

46 INTRODUCTION.

lastly, he actually entered into negotiations, the
object of which was to raise a French prince to the
imperial throne.

The German princes at length saw what they
had to expect from such a course of policy. On
this occasion they rallied round their emperor, and
rendered him real and energetic assistance. In
the year 1338 they unanimously came to the cele-
brated resolution, that whoever should be elected by
the majority of the prince-electors should be re-
garded as the true and legitimate emperor. When
Louis the Bavarian, wearied by the long conflict,
wavered for a moment, they kept him firm; they
reproached him at the imperial diet in 1334 with
having shown a disposition to accede to humiliating
conditions. A change easily accounted for; the pope
having now encroached, not only on the rights of
the emperor, but on the prescriptive rights of their
own body— on the rights of the whole nation.

Nor were these sentiments confined to the princes.
In the fourteenth century a plebeian power had
grown up in Germany, as in the rest of Europe, by

regimen et administratio), tempore quo illud vacare contingit,
ad nos pertineat, sicut dignoscitur pertinere.”—Litere Johannis
in Rainaldus, 1319; and Olenschlager, Geschichte des Rom.-
Kaiserthums, &¢., in der ersten Hilfte des 14ten Jahrhunderts,
p. 102. In the year 1323 he declares that he has instituted a suit
against Lewis the Bavarian; “super eo quod electione sua per
quosdam qui vocem in electione hujusmodi habere dicuntur, per
sedem apostolicam, ad quam electionis hujusmodi et personz
electe examinatio, approbatio, admissio ac etiam reprobatio et
repulsio noscitur pertinere, non admissa,” &¢. —Olenschlager,
Ork. n. 36.

OPPOSITION TO THE PAPACY. 47

the side of the aristocratic families which had
hitherto exercised almost despotic power: not only
were the cities summoned to the imperial diets, but,
in a great proportion of them, the guilds, or trades,
had got the municipal government into their own
hands. These plebeians embraced the cause of
their emperor with even more ardour than most of
the princes. The priests who asserted the power
of the pope to excommunicate the emperor were
frequently driven out of the cities; these were then,
in their turn, laid under excommunication; but
they never would acknowledge its validity; they
refused to accept absolution when it was offered
them.*

Thus it happened that in the present instance
the pope could not carry the election of his candi-
date, Charles of Luxemburg; nobles and commons
adhered almost unanimously to Louis of Bavaria :
nor was it till after his death, and then only after
repeated election and coronation, that Charles IV.
was gradually recognised.

Whatever he might previously have promised
the pope, that sovereign could not make concessions
injurious to the interests of his princes: on the con-
trary, he solemnly and firmly established the rights
of the electors, even to the long-disputed vicariate
(at least in-all German states). A germ of resist-
ance was thus formed.

This was fostered and developed by the disorders
of the great schism, and by the dispositions evinced
by the general councils.

* e.g. Basel. Albertus Argentinensis in Urstisius, 142.

48 INTRODUCTION.

It was now, for the first time, evident that the
actual church no longer corresponded with the
ideal that existed in men’s minds. Nations as-
_ sumed the attitude of independent members of it;
popes were brought to trial and deposed; the aris-
tocratico-republican spirit, which played so great a-
part in the temporal states of Europe, extended
even to the papacy (the nature of which is so com-
pletely monarchical), and threatened to change its
form and character.

The ecclesiastical assembly of Basle entertained
the project of establishing at once the freedom of .
nations and the authority of councils; a project
hailed with peculiar approbation by Germany. Its
decretals of reformation were solemnly adopted
by the assembly of the imperial diet*: the Ger-
mans determined to remain neutral during its
controversies with Eugenius 1V.; the immediate
consequence of which was, that they were for
a time emancipated from the court of Rome.}
By threatening to go over to his adversary, they
forced the pope, who had ventured to depose two
spiritual electors, to revoke the sentence of de-
position.

Had this course been persevered in with union
and constancy, the German Catholic church, esta-
blished in so many great principalities, and splen-

* Johannes de Segovia: Koch, Sanctio pragmatica, p. 256.

{ Declaration in Miiller, Reichstagstheater, unter Fred. ITI,
p- 31. “In sola ordinaria jurisdictione citra prefatorum tam
pape quam concilii supremam auctoritatem ecclesiastice politize
gubernacula per dioceses et territoria nostra gubernabimus.”

OPPOSITION TO THE PAPACY. 49

didly provided with the most munificent endow-
ments in the world, would have acquired a perfectly
independent position, in which she might have re-
sisted the subsequent polemical storms with as
much “firmness as that of England.

Various circumstances conspired to prevent so
desirable a result.

In the first place, it appears to me that the dis-
putes between France and Burgundy reacted on
this matter. France was in favour of the ideas of the
council, which, indeed, she embodied in the pragma-
tic sanction; Burgundy was for the pope. Among
the’German princes, some were in the most intimate
alliance with the king, others with the duke.

The pope employed by far the most dexterous”
and able negotiator. If we consider the character
of the representative and organ of the German
opposition, Gregory of Heimburg, who thought
himself secure of victory, and, when sent to Rome,
burst forth at the very foot of the Vatican into
a thousand execrations on the Curia;—if we
follow him there, as he went about with neglected
garb, bare neck, and uncovered head, bidding defi-
ance to the court,—and then compare him with the
polished and supple Atneas Sylvius, full of profound
quiet ambition and gifted with the happiest talents
for rising in the world; the servant of so many
masters, and the dexterous confidant of them all ;
we shall be at no loss to divine which must be the
successful party. Heimburg died a living death
in exile, and dependent on foreign bounty ; Aineas
Sylvius ended his career, wearing the triple crown

VOL. I. EB

50 INTRODUCTION.

he had so ably served. At the very time we are
treating of, Auneas had found means to gain over
some councillors, and through them their sovereigns,
and thus to secure their defection from the great
scheme of national emancipation. He relates this
himself with great satisfaction and self-complacency ;
nor did he disdain to employ bribery.*

The main thing, however, was, that the head of
the empire, King Frederic III., adhered to the
papal cause. The union of the princes, which, while
it served as a barrier against the encroachments of
the church, might have proved no less perilous to
himself, was as hateful to him as to the pope.
Atineas Sylvius conducted the negotiation in a man-
ner no less agreeable to the interests and wishes of
the emperor than to those of the pope: the imperial
coffers furnished him with the means of corruption.

Hence it happened that on this occasion also the
nation failed to attain its object.

At the first moment, indeed, the Basle decretals
were accepted at Rome, but under the condition
that the Holy See should receive compensation for
its losses. This compensation, however, was not
forthcoming; and Frederic III., who treated on the
part of the empire, at length conceded anew to
‘Rome all her old privileges, which the nation had
been endeavouring to wrest from her.f It would
have been impossible to carry such a measure at

* Historia Friderici IT. ap. Kollar, Analecta, ii. p. 127.

} In the second half of the foregoing century attention had
been strongly drawn to the assertion, that all the decrees of the
council of Basle, which had not been expressly altered by the

ALTERED CHARACTER OF THE EMPIRE. 51

the diet; the expedient of obtaining the separate
consent of the princes to this agreement was there-
fore resorted to.

The old state of things was thus perpetuated.
Ordinances which the papal see had published in
1335, and which it had repeated in 1418, once
more formed, in the year 1448, the basis of the
German concordat. It is hardly necessary to say
that the opposition was not crushed. It no longer
appeared on the surfacé of events; but deep below
it, it only struck root faster and acquired greater
strength. The nation was exasperated by a con-
stant sense of wrong and injustice.

ALTERED CHARACTER OF THE EMPIRE.

Tue most remarkable fact now was, that the im-
perial throne was no longer able to afford support
and protection. The empire had assumed a posi-

concordat, acquired legal validity in virtue of the same. Against
this, Spittler has made the objection, that the brief runs thus :
‘donee per legatum concordatum fuerit vel per legatum aliter
fuerit ordinatum ;” and, assuming that an “aliter” is wanting in
the first part of the sentence, has concluded that the whole of
the decrees had only been suffered to hold good tll the conclu-
sion of the concordat. (Werke, viii. p.473.) But in the rela-
tion of A®neas Sylvius in Koch, Sanctio pragmatica, p. 323. the
' “aliter ” missed by Spittler stands expressly next to “ concorda-
tum ;” “usque quo cum legato aliter fuerit concordatum.” (Vide
Koch, ii. § 24.) The sense of these words cannot therefore
be doubted. For in no case can it be supposed that “aliter ” had
been left out with any sinister design.

EZ

52 INTRODUCTION.

tion analogous to that of the papacy, but extremely
subordinate in power and authority.

It is important to remark, that for more than a
century after Charles IV. had fixed his seat in
Bohemia, no emperor appeared, endowed with the
vigour necessary to uphold and govern the empire.
The bare fact that Charles’s successor, Wenceslas,
was a prisoner in the hands of the Bohemians, re-

-mained for a long time unknown in Germany: a
simple decree of the electors sufficed to dethrone him.
Rupert the Palatine only escaped a similar fate by
death. When Sigismund of Luxemburg, (who, after
many disputed elections, kept possession of the
field,) four years after his election, entered the
territory of the empire of which he was to be
crowned sovereign, he found so little sympathy
that he was for a moment inclined to return to
Hungary without accomplishing the object of his
journey. The active part he took in the affairs
of Bohemia, and of Europe generally, has given
him a name; but in and for the empire, he did
nothing worthy of note. Between the years 1422
and 1430 he never made his appearance beyond
Vienna; from the autumn of 1431 to that of 1433
he was occupied with his coronation journey to
Rome; and during the three years from 1434 to
his death he never got beyond Bohemia and Mo-
ravia*: nor did Albert II., who has been the

* The acts of his reign are dated from Ofen, Stuhlweissen-
burg, from Cronstadt “in Transylvanian Wiirzland,” from the
army before the castle of Taubenburg in Sirfey (Servia).
Haberlin, Reichsgeschichte, v. 429. 439.

ALTERED CHARACTER OF THE EMPIRE. 53

subject of such lavish eulogy, ever visit the do-
minions of the empire. Frederic III., however,
far outdid all his predecessors. During seven-and-
twenty years, from 1444 to 1471, he was never
seen within the boundaries of the empire.

Hence it happened that the central action and the
visible manifestation of sovereignty, inasfar as any
such existed in the empire, fell to the share of the
princes, and more especially of the prince-electors.
Jn the reign of Sigismund we find them convoking
the diets, and leading the armies into the field
against the Hussites: the operations against the
Bohemians were attributed entirely to them.*

In this manner the empire became, like the
papacy, a power which acted from a distance, and
rested chiefly upon opinion. The throne, founded
on conquest and arms, had now a pacific character
and a conservative tendency. Nothing is so tran-
sient as the notions which are handed down with
a name, or associated with a title; and yet, espe-
cially in times when unwritten law has so much
force, the whole influence of rank or station de-
pends on the nature of these notions. Let us turn
our attention for a moment to the ideas of Empire
and Papacy entertained in the fifteenth century.

The emperor was regarded, in the first place, as
the supreme feudal lord, who conferred on property
its highest and most sacred sanction; as the su-

* Matthias Doring in Mencken, iii. p. 4. “ Kodem anno prin-
cipes electores exercitum grandem habentes contra Bohemos se
transtulerunt ad Bohemiam.”

E 3

54 INTRODUCTION.

preme fountain of justice, from whom, as the ex-
pression was, all the compulsory force of law
emanated. It is very curious to observe how
the choice that had fallen upon him was an-
nounced to Frederic III.,—by no means the mighti-
est prince in the empire; how immediately there-
upon the natural relations of things are reversed,
and “his royal high mightiness” promises con-
firmation in their rights and dignities to the very
men who had just raised him to the throne.*
All hastened to obtain his recognition of their pri-
vileges and possessions; nor did the cities perform
their act of homage till that had taken place.
Upon his supreme guarantee rested that feeling of
legitimacy, security and permanence, which is ne-
cessary to all men, and more especially dear to Ger-
mans. “Take away from us the rights of the
emperor,” says a law-book of that time, ‘and who
can say, this house is mine, this village belongs to
me?” A remark of profound truth; but it fol-
lowed thence that the emperor could not arbitrarily
exercise rights of which he was deemed the source.
He might give them up; but he himself must en-
force them only within the narrow limits prescribed
by traditional usage, and by the superior control of
his subjects. Although he was regarded as the head
and source of all temporal jurisdiction, yet no tribu-
nal found more doubtful obedience than his own.
The fact that royalty existed in Germany had
almost been suffered to fall into oblivion; even the

* Letter of the Frankfort, Deputies, July 5. 1440. Frank- .
furter Arch,

ALTERED CHARACTER OF THE EMPIRE. 55

title had been lost. Henry VII. thought it an
affront to be called King of Germany, and not, as
he had a right to be called before any ceremony of
coronation, King of the Romans.* In the fifteenth
century the emperor was regarded pre-eminently
as the successor of the ancient Roman Cesars,
whose rights and dignities had been transferred,
first to the Greeks, and then to the Germans
in the persons of Charlemagne and Otho the
Great; as the true secular head of Christendom.
Emperor Sigismund commanded that his corpse
should be exposed to view for some days; in order
that every one might see that “‘the Lord of all the
world was dead and departed.” +

“¢ We have chosen your royal grace,” say the
electors to Frederic III. (a. p. 1440), “to be the
head, protector, and governor of all Christendom.”
They go on to express the hope that this choice
may be profitable to the Roman church, to the
whole of Christendom, to the holy empire, and
the community of Christian people.f Even a
foreign monarch, Wladislas of Poland, extols the
felicity of the newly-elected emperor, in that he
was about to receive the diadem of the monarchy
of the world.§ The opinion was confidently en-
tertained in Germany that the other sovereigns

* Henrici VII. Bannitio Florentic, Pertz, iv. 520. “ suppri-
mentes (it is there said) ipsius veri nominis (Regis Romanorum)
dignitatem in ipsius opprobrium et despectum.”

+ Eberhard Windeck inMencken, Scriptt. i. 1278.

} Letter of the Prince-Electors, Feb. 2. 1440, in Chmel’s
Materialien zur Oestreich. Gesch. No. ii. p. 70.

§ Liter Vladislai ap. Kollar Anal. ii. p. 830.

E4

»

56 INTRODUCTION.

of Christendom, especially those of England, Spain,
and France, were legally subject to the crown of
the empire: the only controversy was, whether
their disobedience was venial, or ought to be re-
garded as sinful.* The English endeavoured to
show that from the time of the introduction of
Christianity they had never been subject to the
empire.f The Germans, on the contrary, not
only did what the other nations of the West were
bound to do—they not only acknowledged the
holy empire, but they had secured to themselves
the faculty of giving it a head; and the strange
notion was current that the electoral princes had
succeeded to the rights and dignities of the Roman
senate and people. They themselves expressed this
opinion in the thirteenth century. ‘“ We,” say they,
‘‘ who occupy the place of the Roman senate, who
are the fathers and the lights of the empire.” t
....In the fifteenth century they repeated the

* Petrus de Andlo de Romano Imperio: an important book,
not indeed with reference to the actual state of Germany, but to
the ideas of the time in which it was written. It dates from
between 1456, which year is expressly mentioned, and 1459, in
which year happened the death of Diedrich of Mainz, of whom
it speaks. The author says, ii. c. 8: “ Hodie plurimi reges
plus de facto quam de jure imperatorem in superiorem non re-
cognoscunt et suprema jura imperii usurpant.”

t+ Cuthbert Tunstall to King Henry VIII, Feb. 12. 1517, in
Ellis’s Letters, series 1. vol. i. p. 186. ‘“ Your Grace is not nor
never sithen the Christen faith the kings of England wer sub-
giet to th’Empire, but the crown of England is an Empire of
hitself, mych bettyr than now the Empire of Rome: for which
cause your Grace werith a close crown.”

t Conradi IV. electio 1237: Pertz, iv. 322.

- ALTERED CHARACTER OF THE EMPIRE. BT

same opinion.* ‘ The Germans,” says the author
of a scheme for diminishing the burthens of the
empire, “who have possessed themselves of the
dignities of the Roman empire, and thence of the
sovereignty over all lands.” +... . When the prince-
electors proceeded to the vote, they swore that
“¢ according to the best of their understanding, they
would choose the temporal head of all Christian
people, z.e. a Roman king and future emperor.”
Thereupon the elected sovereign was anointed and
crowned by the Archbishop of Cologne, who en-
joyed that right on this side the Alps. Even when
seated on the coronation chair at Rheims, the King
of France took an oath of fealty to the Roman.
empire. {

It is obvious in what a totally different relation
the Germans stood to the emperor, who was elevated
to this high dignity from amidst themselves, and
by their own choice, from that of even the most
puissant nobles of other countries to their natural
hereditary lord and master. The imperial dignity,
stripped of all direct executive power, had indeed
no other significancy than that which results from

* P. de Andlo ii., iii. “ Isti principes electores successerunt,
inlocum senatus populique Romani.”

+ Intelligentia Principum super Gravaminibus Nationis Ger-
manice. MS. at Coblenz. See Appendix.

+ “neas Sylvius (Historia Friderici II. in Kollar’s Anal. ii.
288.) tries to make a distinction between the three crowns, and
to assign them to the different kingdoms; but in this case
we do not ask what is true, but what was commonly thought.
The opinions which he disputes are exactly those of importance
in our eyes; namely, those generally entertained.

58 INTRODUCTION.

opinion. It gave to law and order their living
sanction; to justice its highest authority; to the
 sovereignties of Germany their position in the
world. It had properties which, for that period,
were indispensable and sacred. It had a manifest
analogy with the papacy, and was bound to it by
the most intimate connection.

The main difference between the two powers
was, that the papal enjoyed that universal recog-
nition of the Romano-Germanic world which the
imperial had not been able to obtain: but the
holy Roman church and the holy Roman empire
were indissolubly united in idea; and the Germans
thought they stood in a peculiarly intimate relation
to the church as well as to the empire. There is
extant a treaty of alliance of the Rhenish princes,
the assigned object of which was to maintain their
endowments, dioceses, chapters, and principalities,
in dignity and honour with the holy Roman empire
and the holy Roman church. The electors lay
claim to a peculiar privilege in ecclesiastical affairs.
In the year 1424, and again in 1446, they declare
that the Almighty has appointed and authorised
them, that they should endeavour, together with
the Roman king, the princes, lords, knights, and
cities of the empire, and with all faithful Christian
people, to abate all crimes that arise in the holy
church and Christian community, and in the holy
empire.*

Hence we see that the German people thought

* Miller Rtth. Fr. iii. 305.

ALTERED CHARACTER OF THE EMPIRE. 59

themselves bound in allegiance to the papal, no less
than to the imperial authority» but as the former
had, in all the long struggles of successive ages,
invariably come off victorious, while the latter
had so often succumbed, the pope exercised a far
stronger and more wide-spread influence, even in
temporal things, than the emperor. An act of
' arbitrary power, which no emperor could ever have
-so much as contemplated —the deposition of an
electoral prince of the empire— was repeatedly
attempted, and occasionally even accomplished, by
the popes. They bestowed on Italian prelates
. bishopries as remote as that of Camin. By their
annates, pallia, and all the manifold dues exacted
by the curia, they drew a far larger (Maximilian I.
said, a hundred times larger) revenue from the
empire, than the emperor: their vendors of indul-
gences incessantly traversed the several provinces
of the empire. Spiritual and temporal principalities
and jurisdictions were so closely interwoven as to
afford them continual opportunities of interfering
in the civil affairs of Germany. The dispute be-
tween Cleves and Cologne* about Soest, that
between Utrecht and East Friesland about Gri-
ningen, and a vast number of others, were evoked
by the pope before his tribunal. In 1472 he con-
firmed a toll, levied in the electorate of Treves}:
like the emperor, he granted privilegia de non
evocando.

Gregory VII.’s comparison of the papacy to the

* Schiiren, Chronik von Cleve, p. 288.
+ Hontheim, Prodromus Historiz Trevirensis, p. 320.

60 INTRODUCTION.

sun and the empire to the moon was now verified.
The Germans regarded the papal power as in every
respect the higher. When, for example, the town
of Basle founded its high school, it was debated
whether, after the receipt of the brief containing the
pope’s approbation, the confirmation of the emperor
was still necessary; and at length decided that it
was not so, since the inferior power could not con-
firm the decisions of the superior, and the papal
see was the well-head of Christendom.* The pre-
tender to the Palatinate, Frederic the Victorious,
whose electoral rank the emperor refused to acknow-
ledge, held it sufficient to obtain the pope’s sanction,
and received no further molestation in the exercise
of his privileges as member of the empire. The
judge of the king’s court having on some occasion
pronounced the ban of the empire on the council
of Liibeck, the council obtained a cassation of this
sentence from the pope.t

It was assuredly to be expected that the emperor
would feel the humiliation of his position, and
would resist the pope as often and as strenuously
as possible.

However great was the devotion of the princes
to the see of Rome, they felt the oppressiveness of
its pecuniary exactions; and more than once the
spirit of the Basle decrees, or the recollections of .
the proceedings at Constance, manifested themselves
anew. We find draughts of a league to prevent

* Ochs, Geschichte von Basel, iv. p. 60.
+ Sartorius, Gesch. des Hanse, ii. p. 222.

ALTERED CHARACTER OF THE EMPIRE. 61

the constitution of Constance, according to which
a council should be held every ten years, from
falling into utter desuetude.* After the death
of Nicholas V. the princes urged the emperor to
seize the favourable moment for asserting the free-
dom of the nation, and at least to take measures
for the complete execution of the agreement en-
tered into with Eugenius; but Frederic III. was
deaf to their entreaties. Aineas Sylvius persuaded
him that it was necessary for him to keep well with
the pope. He brought forward a few common-places
concerning the instability of the multitude, and
their natural hatred of their chief; — just as if the
princes of the empire were a sort of democracy:
the emperor, said he, stands in need of the pope,
and the pope of the emperor ; it would be ridiculous
to offend the man from whom we want assist-
ance.t He himself was sent in 1456 to tender
unconditional obedience to Pope Calixtus. This
immediately revived the old spirit of resistance.
An outline was drawn of a pragmatic sanction, in
which not only all the charges against the papal
see were recapitulated in detail, and redress of
grievances proposed, but it was also determined what
was to be done in case of a refusal; what appeal
was to be made, and how the desired end was to be

* e.g. Resolution of the spiritual Electors, &c.: Properly, a re-
port upon the means of restoring tranquillity to the empire, and
upon the necessity of a council, of about the year 1453, in the
archives of Coblenz. See Appendix.

+ Gobellini Commentarii de Vita Pii, ii. p. 44.

62 INTRODUCTION.

attained.* But what result could be anticipated
while the emperor, far from taking part in this
plan, did every thing he could to thwart it? He
sincerely regarded himself as the natural ally of
the papacy.

The inevitable effect of this conduct on his part
was, that the discontent of the electors, already
excited by the inactivity and the absence of the
emperor, occasionally burst out violently against
him. As early as the year 1456 they required
him to repair on a given day to Niirnberg, for that
it was his office and duty to bear the burthen of
the empire in an honourable manner: if he did not
appear, they would, at any rate, meet, and do what
was incumbent on them.f As he neither appeared
then nor afterwards, in 1460 they sent him word
that it was no longer consistent with their dignity
and honour to remain without a head. They
repeated their summons that he would appear on
the Tuesday after Epiphany, and accompanied it
with still more vehement threats. They began
seriously to take measures for setting up a king of
the Romans in opposition to him.

From the fact that George Podiebrad, king of —
Bohemia, was the man on whom they cast their
eyes, it is evident that the opposition was directed
against both emperor and pope jointly. What
must have been the consequence of placing a

* Enex Sylvii Apologia ad Martinum, Mayer, p. 710; and
the above-cited Intelligentia.

} Frankfurt, Sep. 10. 1456 ; a hitherto unknown and very
remarkable document. Frankf. Arch.

ALTERED CHARACTER OF THE EMPIRE, 63

Utraquist at the head of the empire? This in-
creased the zeal and activity of Pope Pius II. (whom
we have hitherto known as Adneas Sylvius), in con-
solidating the alliance of the see of Rome with the
emperor, who, on his side, was scarcely less deeply
interested in it. The independence of the prince-
electors was odious to both. As one of the claims
of the emperor had always been, that no electoral
diet should be held without his consent, so Pius II.,
in like manner, now wanted to bind Diether, Elector
of Mainz, to summon no such assembly without the
approbation of the papal see. Diether’s refusal to
enter into any such engagement. was the main
cause of their quarrel. Pius did not conceal from
the emperor that he thought his own power endan-
gered by the agitations which prevailed in the
empire. It was chiefly owing to his influence, and
to the valour of Markgrave Albert Achilles of Bran-
denburg, that they ended in nothing,

From this time we find the imperial and the
papal powers, which had come to a sense of their
common interest and reciprocal utility, more closely
united than ever.

The diets of the empire were held under their
joint authority; they were called royal and papal,
papal and royal diets. In the reign of Frederic, as
formerly in that of Sigismund, we find the papal

legates present at the meetings of the empire, which
were not opened till they appeared. The spi-
ritual princes took their seats on the right, the
temporal on the left, of the legates: it was not till
a later period that the imperial commissioners were

64 INTRODUCTION. |

introduced, and proposed measures in concert with
the papal functionaries.

It remains for us to inquire how far this very
singular form of government was fitted to satisfy
the wants of the empire.

STATE OF GERMANY IN THE MIDDLE OF THE
FIFTEENTH CENTURY.

We have seen what a mighty influence had, from
the remotest times, been exercised by the princes
of Germany.

First, the imperial power and dignity had arisen
out of their body, and by their aid; then, they had
supported the emancipation of the papacy, which
involved their own: now, they stood opposed to
both. Although strongly attached to, and deeply
imbued with, the ideas of Empire and Papacy, they
were resolved to repel the encroachments of either :
their power was already so independent, that the
emperor and the pope deemed it necessary to com-
bine against them.

If we proceed to inquire who were these mag-
‘nates, and upon what their power rested, we shall
find that the temporal hereditary sovereignty, the
germ of which had long existed in secret and
grown unperceived, shot up in full vigour in the
fifteenth century; and (if we may be allowed to
continue the metaphor), after it had long struck
its roots deep into the earth, it now began to
rear its head into the free air, and to tower above
all the surrounding plants.

THE EMPIRE IN THE 15TH CENTURY. 65

All the puissant houses which have since held
sovereign sway date their establishment from this
epoch.

In the eastern part of North Germany appeared
the race of Hohenzollern; and though the land its
princes had to govern and to defend was in the last
stage of distraction and ruin, they acted with such
sedate vigour and cautious determination, that they
soon succeeded in driving back their neighbours
within their ancient bounds, pacifying and restoring
the marches, and re-establishing the very pecu-
liar bases of sovereign power which pee existed
in the country.

Near this remarkable family arose that of Wettin,
and, by the acquisition of the electorate of Saxony,
soon attained to the highest rank among the princes
of the empire, and to the zenith of its power. It
possessed the most extensive and at the same time
the most flourishing of German principalities, as
long as the brothers, Ernest and Albert, held their
united court at Dresden and shared the govern-
ment; and even when they separated, both lines
remained sufficiently considerable to play a part in
the affairs of Germany, and indeed of Europe.

In the Palatinate we find Frederic the Victorious.
It is necessary to read the long list of castles, juris-
dictions, and lands which he won from all his
neighbours, partly by conquest, partly by purchase
or treaty, but which his superiority in arms ren-
dered emphatically his own, to form a conception
what a German prince could in that age achieve,
and how widely he could extend his sway.

VOL. I. F

66 INTRODUCTION.

The conquests of Hessen were of a more peaceful
nature. By the inheritance of Ziegenhain and
Nidda, but more especially of Katzenelnbogen, a
fertile, highly cultivated district, from which the
old counts had never suffered a village or a farm to
be taken, whether by force or purchase, it acquired
an addition nearly equal to its original territory.

A similar spirit of extension and fusion was also
at work in many other places. Juliers and Berg
formed a junction. Bavaria-Landshut was strength-
ened by its union with Ingolstadt; in Bavaria-
Munich, Albert the Wise maintained the unity of
the land’ under the most difficult circumstances ;
not without violence, but, at least in this case, with
beneficial results. In Wiirtemberg, too, a multitude
of separate estates were gradually incorporated into
one district, and assumed the form of a German
principality.

New territorial powers also arose. In East
Friesland a chieftain at length appeared, before
whom all the rest bowed; Junker* Ulrich Cirksena,
who, by his own conquests, extended and consoli-
dated the power founded on those of his brother
and his father. He also conciliated the adherents
of the old Fokko Uken, who were opposed to him,
by a marriage with Theta, the granddaughter of
that chief. Hereupon he was solemnly proclaimed
count at Emden, in the year 1463. But it was to
Theta, who was left to rule the country alone during

* Junker, literally, the younger son of a noble house, became
the title of the lesser aristocracy of Germany. It corresponds
pretty nearly to squire in its common English acceptation.—
TRANSL.

THE EMPIRE IN THE L5DTH CENTURY. 67

twenty-eight years, that the new sovereignty chiefly
owed its strength and stability. This illustrious
woman, whose pale, beautiful countenance, brilliant
eyes and raven hair survive in her portrait, was
endowed with a vast understanding and a singu-
lar capacity for governing, as all her conduct and
actions prove.

Already had several German princes raised them-
selves to foreign thrones. In the year 1448,
Christian I., Count of Oldenburg, signed the de-
claration or contract which made him king of Den-
mark: in 1450, he was invested with the crown of
St. Olaf, at Drontheim; in 1457, the Swedes ac-
knowledged him as their sovereign; in 1460, Hol-
stein did homage to him, and was raised on his
account to the rank of a German duchy. These
acquisitions were not, it is true, of so stable and
secure a character as they at first appeared; but,
at all events, they conferred upon a German princely
house a completely new position both in Germany
and in Europe.

The rise of the princely power and sovereignty
was, as we see, not the mere result of the steady
course of events; the noiseless and progressive de-
velopment of political institutions; it was brought
about mainly by adroit policy, successful war and
the might of personal character.

Yet the secular princes by no means possessed
absolute sovereignty ; they were still involved in an
incessant struggle with the other powers of the
empire.

These were, in the first place, the spiritual prin-
cipalities (whose privileges and internal organi-

F 2

68 INTRODUCTION.

sation were the same as those of the secular, but
whose rank in the hierarchy of the empire was
higher), in which nobles of the high or even the
inferior aristocracy composed the chapter and filled
the principal places. In the fifteenth century,
indeed, the bishoprics began to be commonly con-
ferred on the younger sons of sovereign princes:
the court of Rome favoured this practice, from the
conviction that the chapters could only be kept in
order by the strong hand and the authority of
sovereign power *; but it was neither universal, nor
was the fundamental principle of the spiritual prin-
cipalities by any means abandoned in consequence
of its adoption.

There was also a numerous body of nobles who
received their investiture with the banner, like the
princes, and had a right to sit in the same tribunal
with them; nay, there were even families or clans,
which, from all time, claimed exemption from those
general feudal relations that formed the bond of
the state, and held their lands in fee from God and
his blessed sun. They were overshadowed by. the
princely order; but they enjoyed perfect indepen-
dence notwithstanding. —

Next to this class came the powerful body
of knights of the Empire, whose castles crowned
the hills on the Rhine, in Swabia and Fran-
conia; they lived in haughty loneliness amidst
the wildest scenes; girt round by an impreg-
nable circle of deep fosses, and within walls four-
and-twenty feet thick, where they could set all

* “Si episcopum potentem sortiantur, virgam correctionis
timent.”—4ineas Sylvius.

THE EMPIRE IN THE 15TH CENTURY. 69

authority at defiance: the bond of fellowship
among them was but the stricter for their isolation.
Another portion of the nobility, especially in the
eastern and colonised principalities in Pomerania
and Mecklenburg, Meissen and the Marches, were,
however, brought into undisputed subjection ;
though this, as we see in the example of the Prieg-
nitz, was not brought about without toil and
combat.

There was also a third class who constantly re-
fused to acknowledge any feudal lord. The Craich-
gauer and the Mortenauer would not acknowledge
the sovereignty of the Palatine, nor the Békler
and Léwen-ritter *, that of Bavaria. We find that
the Electors of Mainz and Treves, on occasion of
some decision by arbitration, feared that their nobles
would refuse to abide by it, and knew not what
measure to resort to in this contingency, except to
rid themselves of these refractory vassals and with-
draw their protection from them.t It seems, in
some cases, as if the relation of subject and ruler
had become nothing more than a sort of alliance.

* In 1488 Albert IV., of Bavaria, imposed a tax instead of
personal service. The Order of Knights, having vainly pro-
tested against this, formed the association called the Lion League
(Léwenbund), and entered into alliance with the Swabian
League. The other associations were probably of a similar
kind. — TRANSL.

+ Jan. 12. 1458. Document in Hontheim, ii. p. 432. “So
sall der von uns, des undersaiss he ist, siner missig gain und ime
queine schirm, zulegunge oder handhabunge widder den anderen
yon uns doin.”—“ Then shall that one of us, whose vassal he is,
abandon him and yield him no protection, support or defence
against the rest of us.”

EF 3

70 INTRODUCTION.

Still more completely independent was the atti-
tude assumed by the cities. Opposed to all these
different classes of nobles, which they regarded as
but one body, they were founded on a totally dif-
ferent principle, and had struggled into importance
in the midst of incessant hostility. A curious
spectacle is afforded by this old enmity constantly
pervading all the provinces of Germany, yet in
each one taking a different form. In Prussia, the
opposition of the cities gave rise to the great
national league against the supreme power, which
was here in the hands of the Teutonic Order. On
the Wendish coasts was then the centre of the Hanse,
by which the Scandinavian kings, and still more the
surrounding German princes, were overpowered.
The Duke of Pomerania himself was struck with
terror, when, on coming to succour Henry the
Elder of Brunswick, he perceived by what powerful
and closely allied cities his friend was encom-
passed and enchained on every side. On the
Rhine, we find an unceasing struggle for muni-
cipal independence, which the chief cities of the
ecclesiastical principalities claimed, and the Electors
refused to grant. In Franconia, Niirnberg set
itself in opposition to the rismg power of Bran-
denburg, which it rivalled in successful schemes of
agerandisement. Then followed in Swabia and
the Upper Danube (the true arena of the strug-
gles and the leagues of imperial free cities), the
same groups of knights, lords, prelates and princes,
who here approached most nearly to each other.
Among the Alps, the confederacy formed against

THE EMPIRE IN THE 15TH: CENTURY. 71

Austria had already grown into a regular con-
stitutional government, and attained to almost
complete independence. On every side we find
different relations, different claims and disputes,
different means of carrying on the conflict ; but on
all, men felt themselves surrounded by hostile pas-
sions which any moment might blow into a flame,
and held themselves ready for battle. It seemed
not impossible that the municipal principle might
eventually get the upper hand in all these conflicts,
and prove as destructive to the aristocratical, as
that had been to the imperial, power.

In this universal shock of efforts and powers,—
with a distant and feeble chief, and inevitable divi-
sions even among those naturally connected and
allied, a state of things arose which presents a some-
what chaotic aspect ; it was the age of universal pri-
vate warfare. The /ehde* is a middle term between

* Some resemblance in sound probably led to the use of the
word feud (feodum), as the equivalent of Fehde (faida), a con-
fusion which, however sanctioned by custom, I have thought it
better to avoid. Eichhorn (Deutsche Staats und Rechtsge-
schichte, vol. i. p. 441.) says : —“In case of robbery, murder, &c.,
the injured party, or his heirs, was not bound to pursue the in-
jurer at law; but private help or self-revenge (Privathiilfe und
Selbstrache) — Fehde (faida), was lawful; and the Befehdete
(faidosus) could only escape this by paying the appointed fine.”
For the earliest mention of this fine, he refers to Tacitus (Germ.
21.). It is remarkable too that the authority from which he
quotes these terms is, the laws of Friesland, a country where,
as is well known, feudalism never existed. And indeed the
parties by whom diffidations (Fehdebriefe) were often sent,
were obviously subject to no feudal relations. Although we
appear to have lost the English cognate of the Anglo-Saxon

F 4

72 INTRODUCTION.

duel and war. Every affront or injury led, after
certain formalities, to the declaration, addressed to
the offending party, that the aggrieved party would
be his foe, and that of his helpers and helpers’-
helpers. The imperial authorities felt themselves
so little able to arrest this torrent, that they endea-
voured only to direct its course; and, while impos-
ing limitations, or forbidding particular acts, they .
confirmed the general permission of the established
practice.*

The right which the supreme, independent power
had hitherto reserved to itself, of resorting to arms
when no means of conciliation remained, had de-
scended in Germany to the inferior classes, and
was claimed by nobles and cities against each other ;
by subjects against their lords, nay, by private
persons, as far as their means and connections per-
mitted, against each other.

Feehthe (capitalis inimicitia), it is found in the Scotch fed,
fede, feyde (see Gawin Douglas, Jamieson’s Dict., &c.), and in
most of the Teutonic languages. — TRANSL.

* e.g. the “Reformation” of Frederic III. of 1442 orders,
“ dassnymand dem andern Schaden tun oder zufiigen soll, er habe
ihn denn zuvor —zu landlaufigen Rechten erfordert.”—* that
none should do, or cause to be done, injury to another, unless
he have previously challenged him, according to the customary
laws of the land.” The clause of the golden bull, de Diffida-
tionibus, is then repeated.

* The clause is as follows :—“ Eos qui de cetero adversus aliquos justam
diffidationis causam se habere fingentes, ipsos in locis, ubi domicilia non
obtinent aut ea communiter non inhabitant, intempestive diffidant ; declara-
mus damna per incendia, spolia, vel rapinas, diffidatis ipsis, cum honore suo
inferre non posse.” Bulla Aurea, cap, xvii.— TRANSL,

THE EMPIRE IN THE 15TH CENTURY. 73

In the middle of the fifteenth century this uni-
versal ‘tempest of contending powers was arrested
by a conflict of a higher and more important
nature— the opposition of the princes to the em-
peror and the pope; and it remained to be decided
from whose hands the world could hope for any
restoration to order.

Two princes appeared on the stage, each of them
the hero of his nation, each at the head of a
numerous party; each possessed of personal qua-
lities strikingly characteristic of the epoch —
Frederic of the Palatinate, and Albert of Bran-
denburg. They took opposite courses. Frederic
the Victorious, distinguished rather for address
and agility of body than for size and strength,
owed his fame and his success to the forethought
and caution with which he prepared his battles and
sieges. In time of peace he busied himself with
the study of antiquity, or the mysteries of alchemy ;
poets and minstrels found ready access to him, as in
the spring-time of poetry; he lived under the same
roof with his friend and songstress, Clara Dettin of
Augsburg, whose sweetness and sense not only cap-
tivated the prince, but were the charm and delight
of all around him. He had expressly renounced
the comforts of equal marriage and legitimate heirs ;
all that he accomplished or acquired was for the
advantage of his nephew Philip.

The towering and athletic frame of Markgrave
Albert of Brandenburg (surnamed Achilles), on
the contrary, announced, at the first glance, his
- gigantic strength: he had been victor in countless

74 INTRODUCTION.

tournaments, and stories of his courage and warlike
prowess, bordering on the fabulous, were current
among the people ;—how, for example, at some siege
he had mounted the walls alone, and leaped down
into the midst of the terrified garrison ; how, hurried
on by a slight success over an advanced party of
the enemy, he had rushed almost unattended into
their main body of 800 horsemen, had forced his
way up to their standard, snatched it from its
bearer, and after a momentary feeling of the des-
perateness of his position, rallied his courage and de-
fended it, till his people could come up and complete
the victory. Aineas Sylvius declares that the Mark-
grave himself assured him of the fact.* His letters
breathe a passion for war. Even after a defeat he
had experienced, he relates to his friends with
evident pleasure, how long he and four others held
out on the field of battle; how he then cut his way
through with great labour and severe fighting, and
how he was determined to re-appear as soon as pos-
sible in the field. In time of peace he busied himself
with the affairs of the empire, in which he took a
more lively and efficient.part than the emperor him-
self. We find him sharing in all the proceedings
of the diets; or holding a magnificent and hospi-
table court in his Franconian territories; or directing
his attention to his possessions in the Mark, which
were governed by his son with all the vigilance dic-
tated by the awe of a grave and austere father.

* Historia Friderici IIL, in the part first published by Kollar,
Anal. ii. p. 166.

THE EMPIRE IN THE 15TH CENTURY. 75

Albert is the worthy progenitor of the warlike
house of Brandenburg. He bequeathed to it not
only wise maxims, but, what is of more value, a
great example.

About the year 1461 these two princes embraced,
as we have said, different parties. Frederic, who as
yet possessed no distinctly recognised power, and
in all things obeyed his personal impulses, put him-
self at the head of the opposition. Albert, who always
followed the trodden path of existing relations,
undertook the defence of the emperor and the pope* :

* In the collection of imperial documents in the Frankfurt
Archives, vol. v. there is a very remarkable report by Johannes
Brun of an audience which he had of Albrecht Achilles in Oct.
1461. He had to entreat him for a remission of the succours
demanded. Markgrave Albrecht would not grant this: “ Auch
erzalte er, was Furnemen gen unssen gn. Herrn den Keyser
gewest wire und wy ein Gedenken nach dem Ryche sy, auch
der Kunig von Behemen ganz Meynung habe zu Mittensommer
fir Francfort zu sin und das Rych zu erobern, und darnach wie
u. g. H. der Keiser yne, sine Schweher von Baden und Wirten-
berg angerufen und yne des Ryches Banyer bevolhen habe,
iiber Herzog Ludwig, um der Geschicht willen mit dem Bischof
von Eystett, den von Werde und Dinkelsbol und umb die Pene,
darin er deshalben verfallen sy ; — in den Dingen er uf niemant
gebeitet oder gesehen, sondern zu Stund mit den sinen und des
von Wirtenberg mit des Rychs Banyer zu Feld gelegen und
unsern Herrn den Keyser gelediget und die Last uf sich genom-
men, darin angesehen sine Pflicht, und was er habe das er das
vom Ryche habe, und meyne Lip und Gut von u. H. dem Keiser
nit zu scheiden.”—“He also recounted what manner of enter-
prise there had been against our gracious lord the emperor, and
how there was a design upon the empire; also how the king of
Bohemia had the full intention of being at Frankfort at mid-
summer, and of getting possession of the empire; and how,

76 INTRODUCTION. :

fortune wavered for a time between them. But at
last the Jérsika, as George Podiebrad was called,
abandoned his daring plans. Diether of Isenburg
was succeeded by his antagonist, Adolf of Nassau ;
and Frederic the Palatine consented to give up his
prisoners: victory leaned, in the main, to the side
of Brandenburg. The ancient authorities of the
Empire and the Church were once more upheld.
These authorities, too, now seemed seriously
bent on introducing a better order of things. By
the aid of the victorious party, the emperor found

thereupon, our gracious lord the emperor had summoned him,
his brothers-in-law of Baden and Wirtenberg, and committed the
banner of the empire to him rather than to Duke Ludwig, by
reason of the affair with the bishop of Eystett, those of Werde
and Dinkelsbdl, and of the punishment he had incurred on that
account: in these things he had tarried or looked for no one,
but forthwith taken the field with his men and those of him of
Wirtenberg, with the banner of the empire, and relieved our
lord the emperor and taken the burthen upon himself, and had
therein beheld his duty ; and that what he had, he had from the
empire, and had no thought of separating his life and lands from
the cause of the emperor.” As to the prayer of the cities,
he says :—“wywol yme das Geld nutzer wiire und er mer
schicken wolle mit den die er in den Sold gewénne denn mit
den die in von den Stiidten zugeschicket werden, -ye doch so
stehe es ime nit zu und habe nit Macht eynich Geld zu nehmen
und des Keisers Gebote abzustellen.” “ Although money was
needful to him, and he should spend more with troops he took
into his pay than with those the cities should send him, still it
would not become him, and he had not power anyhow to take
money and to set aside the emperor’s command.” Dispositions
such as befit a prince of the empire. It were much to be wished
there were some one capable of giving a more full and accurate
account of the life and deeds of this remarkable prince.

THE EMPIRE IN THE 15TH CENTURY. Ce

himself, for the first time, in a position to exercise
a certain influence in the empire; Pope Paul II.
wished to fit out an expedition against the Turks:
with united strength they proceeded to the work
at the diet of Niirnberg (a. p. 1466.).*

It was an assembly which distinctly betrayed the
state of parties under which it had been convoked.
Frederic the Palatine appeared neither in person nor
by deputy; the ambassadors of Podiebrad, who
had fallen into fresh disputes with the papal see,
were not admitted: nevertheless, the resolutions
passed there were of great importance. It was de-
termined for the next five years to regard every
breach of the Public Peacet as a crime against the

* Proceedings at the papal and imperial diet held at Nirn-
berg on account of the Turkish campaign, in the 4th vol. of the
Frankfort Acts of the Diet of the Empire, as published by
Schilter and Miller, with some small variations.

+ Landfriede—Peace of the land. The expression, public peace,
which, in deference to numerous-and high authorities I have
generally used in the text, is liable to important objections. A
breach of the public peace means, in England, any open disorder
or outrage. But the Landfriede (Pax publica) was a special act
or provision directed against the abuse of an ancient and esta-
blished institution,—the Fehderecht (jus diffidationis, or right of
private warfare). The attempts to restrain this abuse were, for a
long time, local and temporary ; as for example, in the year 1382,
Markegrave Sigismund of Brandenburg, and some of the neigh-
bouring princes concluded a Landfriede for six years. In such
cases tribunals called Peace Courts (Priedensgerichte), for try-
ing offences against the Landfriede, were instituted and expired
together with the peace. The first energetic measure of the
general government to put down private wars was that of the
diet of Niirnberg (1466).

Peace of the realm, internal or domestic peace (as distinguished

78 © INTRODUCTION.

majesty of the empire, and to punish it with
the ban. It was found that the spiritual tribunals
must come in aid of the temporal sword; and ac-
cordingly the pope denounced the heaviest spiritual
penalties against violators of the Public Peace.
The emperor formally adopted these resolutions at
an assembly at Neustadt, in the year 1467, and for
the first time revoked the articles of the Golden
Bull and the Reformation of 1442, in which private
wars were, under certain conditions, permitted.*
A peace was proclaimed, ‘“ enjomed by our most

from foreign or international), would come nearer to the meaning
of Landfriede. It is sufficient, however, if the reader bears in
mind that it is opposed not to chance disorder or tumult, but
to a mode of voiding differences recognised by the law, and
limited by certain forms and conditions; as, e. g. that a Befeh-
dete (faidosus) could not be attacked and killed in church
or in his own house. See Eichhorn, Deutsche Staats-und-
Rechtsgeschichte, vol. ii. p. 453. — Transu.

* The constitution of the 18th of August, 1467, in Miiller
Rtth. ii. 293. The provisions for the maintenance of peace
contained in those laws were not to be annulled, “dann allain
in den Artickel der giilden Bull, der do inhellt von Widersagen,
und in den ersten Artickel der Reformation, der da inhellt yon
Angreifen und Beschedigen ; dieselben Artickel sollen die obge-
meldten funf Jar ruhen,—auf dass zu Vehde Krieg und Auf-
rur Anlass vermitten und der Fride Stracks gehalten werde.”
“Then alone in the article of the Golden Bull, concerning chal-
lenges, and the first article of the Reformation, concerning
assaults and damages: these articles shall remain unaltered the
above-mentioned five years,—that all occasion of challenge, war,
and disorder be avoided, and peace be thoroughly maintained.”
Unluckily the worthy Miiller read Milbenstadt for Neuenstadt
in this important passage,—a mistake which has found its way
into a number of histories of the empire.

THE EMPIRE IN THE 15TH CENTURY. 79

gracious lord the king of the Romans, and con-
firmed by our holy father the pope,” as the electors
express themselves.

Sometime afterwards—at Regensburg, in the
year 1471 —the allied powers ventured on a se-
cond yet more important step, for the further-
ance of the war against the Turks, which they
declared themselves at length about to undertake :
they attempted to impose a sort of property tax on
the whole empire, called the Common Penny*, and
actually obtained an edict in its favour. They
named in concert the officers charged with the col-
lection of it in the archiepiscopal and episcopal
sees; and the papal legate threatened the refractory
with the sum of all spiritual punishments, exclu-
sion from the community of the church.

These measures undoubtedly embraced what was
most immediately necessary to the internal and ex-
ternal interests of the empire. But how was it
possible to imagine that they would be executed ?
The combined powers were by no means strong
enough to carry through such extensive and radical
innovations. The diets had not been attended by
nearly sufficient numbers, and people did not hold

* Das gemeine Pfennig.—I have not been able to find in
any French or English writer the literal translation of this
name given to the first attempt at general taxation in the
empire; but I have retained it as characteristic of the age, and
of the nature of the tax. —TRANSL.

+ The Duke of Cleves was named executor for Bremen,
Miinster, and Utrecht ; Duke Ludwig of Bavaria, for Regensburg
and Passau.

80 INTRODUCTION.

themselves bound by the resolutions of a party. -
The opposition to the emperor and the pope had
not attained its object, but it still subsisted : Fre-
deric the Victorious still lived, and had now an
influence over the very cities which had formerly op-
posed him. The collection of the Common Penny
was, in a short time, not even talked of; it was
treated as a project of Paul II., to whom it was not
deemed expedient to grant such extensive powers.
The proclamation of the Public Peace had also
‘produced little or no effect. After some time the.
cities declared that it had occasioned them more an-
noyance and damage than they had endured before.*
It was contrary to their wishes that, in the year
1474, it was renewed with all its actual provisions.
The private wars went on as before. Soon afterwards
one of the most powerful imperial cities, Regens-
burg, the very place where the Public Peace was
proclaimed, fell into the hands of the Bavarians. -
The combined powers gradually lost all their con-
sideration. In the year 1479 the propositions of
the emperor and the pope were rejected in a mass

* “Dass die erbb. Stidte und die jren in Zeitten sollichs
gemainen Friden und wider des Inhalt und Mainung mer Un-
gemachs Beschiadigung verderblicher Rost Schaden und Unfrid
an jren Leuten Leiben und Guten gelitten, dann sy vorher in vil
Jaren und Zeytten je empfangen.” ‘“ That the hereditary cities
and their people, in times of such common peace, and contrary
to the intent and meaning, had suffered under more inconve-
nience, damage, cost, mischief, and disturbance, to the persons
and possessions of their inhabitants, than had been undergone
before during many years and seasons.”—Proceedings at Re-
gensburg, 1474. Frankfurter AA,, vol. viii.

THE EMPIRE IN THE 15TH CENTURY. 81

by the estates of the empire, and were answered
with a number of complaints.

And yet never could stringent measures be more
imperiously demanded.

I shall not go into an elaborate description of the
evils attendant on the right of diffidation or private
warfare (Fehderecht): they were probably not so
great as is commonly imagined. Even in the cen-
tury we are treating of, there were Italians to whom
the situation of Germany appeared happy and secure
in comparison with that of their own country, where,
in all parts, one faction drove out another.* It was
only the level country and the high roads which
were exposed to robbery and devastation. But
even so, the state of things was disgraceful and
insupportable to a great nation. It exhibited the
strongest contrast to the ideas of law and of reli-
gion upon which the Empire was so peculiarly
founded.

One consequence of it was, that as every man
was exclusively occupied with the care of his own
security and defence, or could at best not ex-
tend his view beyond the horizon immediately sur-
rounding him, no one had any attention to bestow
on the common weal; not only were no more great
enterprises achieved, but even the frontiers were

* 7Eneas Sylvius, Dialogi de Autoritate Concilii, introduces in
the second of these dialogues a Novanese, who calls out to the
Germans: “Bona vestra vere vestra sunt: pace omnes frui-
mini et libertate in communi, magisque ad.naturam quam, ad
opinionem vivitis. Fugi ego illos Italie turbines.”——Kollar,
Anal. ii. 704.

VOL. I. G

82 INTRODUCTION.

hardly defended. In the East, the old conflict be-
twéen the Germans and the Lettish and Slavonian
tribes was decided in favour of the latter. As the
King of Poland found allies in Prussia itself, he
obtained an easy victory over the Order, and com-
pelled the knights to conclude the peace of Thorn
(A. D. 1466), by which the greater part of the
territories of the Order were ceded to him, and the
rest were held of him in fee. Neither emperor nor
empire stirred to avert this incalculable loss. In
the West, the idea of obtaining the Rhine as a
_ boundary first awoke in the minds of the French,

_ and the attacks of the Dauphin and the Armagnacs
were only foiled by local resistance. But what the
one line of the house of Valois failed in, the other,
that of Burgundy, accomplished with brilliant
success. As the wars between France and England
were gradually terminated, and nothing more was
to be gained in that field, this house, with all its
ambition and all its good fortune, threw itself on
the territory of Lower Germany. In direct defiance
of the imperial authority, it took possession of Bra-
-bant and Holland; then Philip the Good took
Luxemburg, placed his natural son in Utrecht, and
his nephew on the episcopal throne of Liege;
after which an unfortunate quarrel between father
and son gave Charles the Bold an opportunity to
seize upon Guelders. A power was formed such as
had not arisen since the time of the great duchies,
and the interests and tendencies of which were
naturally opposed to those of the empire. This
state the restless Charles resolved to extend,

THE EMPIRE IN THE 15TH CENTURY. 83

on the one side, towards Friesland, on the other,
along the Upper Rhine. When at length he fell
upon the archbishopric of Cologne and _ besieged
Neuss, some opposition was made to him, but not
in consequence of any concerted scheme or regular
armament, but of a sudden levy in the presence
of imminent danger. The favourable moment for
driving him back within his own frontiers had
been neglected. Shortly after, on his attacking
Lotharingia, Alsatia, and Switzerland, those coun-
tries were left to defend themselves. Meanwhile,
Italy had in fact completely emancipated herself.
If the emperor desired to be crowned there, he
must go unarmed like a mere traveller; his ideal
power could only be manifested in acts of grace and
favour. The King of Bohemia, who also possessed
the two Lusatias and Silesia, and an extensive
feudal dominion within the empire, insisted loudly
on his rights, and would hear nothing of the cor-
responding obligations.

The life of the nation must have been already
extinct, had it not, even in the midst of all these
calamities, and with the prospect of further imminent
peril before it, taken measures to establish its in-
ternal order and to restore its external power ;—
objects, however, not to be attained without a revo-
lution in both its spiritual and temporal affairs.

The tendency to development and progress in
Europe is sometimes more active and powerful in
one direction, sometimes in another. At this
moment temporal interests were most prominent ;
and these, therefore, must first claim our attention.

G 2

cated ne tut abe e sess vinta
SPP Aiscet ty ead . 3 er eee

tan: oe] init we ie Ea ote he sume
Piriid orithop iuiacegip Gi Her wpey iy Sere ve: ship
reghrstvoen ove wrepattas: iesternty: Sen toenanis) 1 peertoee gt
saree onset ah oer & whet qthilisnoatt y Mids Scomtatete
‘ peer dines - neat undiowat ie =) _
| ; d atl gait) =
het sel stesech Pie
fined! eens bel =
; ‘i } : agit? ry Oe ei cent mia a
‘ihacaddd frat sermritos hot diaideciealinis tb cheating eh
gfe gerne bono cut ‘ome ieabsada! srw fome eee
dntshei- ait}; tated at menat” secede baw Ufiett O rs

ri hee one: ahi ehainh hate ttsince wil pftodtel nose “ail
tm , , sf r aire Five fc Denes <i ooiath . —
hepgeeniite sep Peete citi bes entree ht wrt add
S - seilamacst Sroa a alt sete hf sealing wa fis 7
; yePrails eat ‘tds wb ual Dini Leaheiee wag iter,
-, — ei arial ira tides peer»
ail name adr if ia) tues wht lee

sis hase ark aeterre ius (Ptainy steal
iu Wetneet! srsepplogb ano

aeveiir ast en alti: A Sipulett irae opt tort Sarenwen ai

‘ | asian be rodieastebitak Paley Sad ts

ae macro f benvteionigelas
_ Teli eetephbetde “an

oka bit Om A

pes te] rind

mi Tie -‘igtals di

BOOK I,

ATTEMPT TO REFORM THE CONSTITUTION
OF THE EMPIRE.

1486—1517.

G 38

“s
: sl AOOM ne wee

e wotrerry hax an? MROTI OT 2 he
Jape aE WO

oS
a ke

Tiak-—Oebb. fie

87

BOOK I.

ATTEMPT TO REFORM THE CONSTITUTION OF
THE EMPIRE,

SIMILAR disorders, arising from kindred sources
and an analogous train of events, existed in all the
other nations of Europe. It may be said, that the
offspring and products of the middle ages were en-
gaged in a universal conflict which seemed likely
to end in their common destruction.

The ideas upon which human society is based
are but partially and imperfectly embued with the
divine and eternal Essence from which they ema-
nate; for a time they are beneficent and. vivify-
ing, and new creations spring up under their breath.
But on earth nothing attains to a pure and _per-
fect existence, and therefore nothing is immortal.
When the times are accomplished, higher aspirations
and more enlightened schemes spring up out of the
tottering remains of former institutions, which they
utterly overthrow and efface; for so has God ordered
the world.

If the disorders in question were universal, the
efforts to put an end to them were not less so.
Powers called into life by the necessity of a change,
or growing up spontaneously, arose out of the
general confusion, and with vigorous and unbidden
_ hand imposed order on the chaos.

This is the great event of the fifteenth century.
The names of the energetic princes of that time,
a 4

88 ATTEMPT TO REFORM ~ Boox I.

whose task it was first to awaken the nations of
Europe to a consciousness of their own existence
and importance, are known to all. In France we
find Charles VII. and Louis XI. The land was
at leneth delivered from the enemy who had so long
held divided sway in it, and was united under the
standard of the Lilies; the monarchy was founded
on a military and financial basis ; crafty, calculating
policy came in aid of the practical straightfor-
ward sense which attained its ends, because it
aimed only at what was necessary; all the daring
and insolent powers that had bid defiance to the
supreme authority were subdued or overthrown :
the new order of things had already attained to
sufficient strength to endure a long and stormy
minority.

Henry VII. of England, without attempting to
destroy the ancient liberties of the nation, laid the
foundation of the power of the Tudors on the
ruins of the two factions of the aristocracy, with
a resolution nothing could shake and a vigour
nothing could resist. The Norman times were
over;—modern England began. At the same time
Isabella of Castile reduced her refractory vassals to
submission, by her union with a powerful neigh-
bour, by the share she had acquired in the spiritual
power, and by the natural ascendency of her own
grand and womanly character, in which austere
domestic virtue and a high chivalrous spirit were so
singularly blended. She succeeded in completely
driving out the Moors and pacifying the Penin-
sula, Even in Italy, some stronger governments

Boox J. THE CONSTITUTION OF THE EMPIRE. 89

were consolidated; five considerable states were
formed, united by a free alliance, and for a while
capable of counteracting all foreign influence. At
the same time Poland, doubly strong through her
union with Lithuania, climbed to the highest pin-
nacle of power she ever possessed; while in Hun-
gary, a native king maintained the honour and the
unity of his nation at the head of the powerful
army he had assembled under his banner.

However various were the resources and the
circumstances by which it was surrounded, Mon-
archy —the central power— was every where
strong enough to put down the resisting inde-
pendencies ; to exclude foreign influence; to rally
the people around its standard, by appealing to
the national spirit under whose guidance it acted ;
and thus to give them a feeling of unity.

In Germany, however, this was not possible.
The two powers which might have effected the
most were so far carried along by the general ten-
dency of the age, that they endeavoured to intro-
duce some degree of order; we have seen with
what small success. .At the very time in which all
the monarchies of Europe consolidated themselves,
the emperor was driven out of his hereditary states,
and wandered about the other parts of the empire
as a fugitive.* He was dependent for his daily
repast on the bounty of convents, or of the burghers
of the imperial cities; his other wants were sup-

* See Unrest, Chronicon Austriacum; Hahn. 660—688.
Kurz, Oestreich unter Friedrich IIL, vol. ii.

90 FOUNDATION OF Boox I.

plied from the slender revenues of his chancery: ©
he might sometimes be seen travelling along the
roads of his own dominions in a carriage drawn by
oxen; never—and this he himself felt—was the
majesty of the empire dragged about in meaner
form: the possessor of a power which, according to
the received idea, ruled the world, was become an
object of contemptuous pity.

If any thing was to be done in Germany, it must
be by other means, upon other principles, with
other objects, than any that had. hitherto been con-
templated or employed.

FOUNDATION OF A NEW CONSTITUTION.

Ir is obvious at the first glance, that no attempt
at reform could be successful which did not originate
with the States themselves. Since they had taken
up so strong a position against the two co-ordinate
higher powers, they were bound to show how far
that position was likely to prove beneficial to the
public interests.

It was greatly in their favour that the emperor
had sunk into so deplorable a situation.

Not that it was their intention to make use of
this to his entire overthrow or destruction; on the
contrary, they were determined not to allow him to
fall. What for centuries only one emperor had ac-
complished, and he, in the fulness of his power and
by dispensing extraordinary favours (viz. to secure
the succession to his son), Frederic III. achieved in
the moment of the deepest humiliation and weakness.

Boox I. A NEW CONSTITUTION. 91

The prince-electors met in the year 1486, to choose
his son Maximilian king of the Romans. In this
measure, Albert Achilles of Brandenburg, took the
most prominent and active part. Notwithstanding
his advanced age, he came once more in person to
Frankfurt: he caused himself to be carried into the
electoral chapel on a litter, whence, at the close of
the proceedings, he presented the sceptre; he was
in the act of performing his high function as arch-
chamberlain of the empire, when he expired. It
could not escape the electors, that the claims of the
house of Austria to the support of the empire were
greatly strengthened by this event. Maximilian,
the son-in-law of Charles the Bold, who had under-
taken to uphold the rights of the house of Bur-
gundy in the Netherlands, encountered there
difficulties and misfortunes not much inferior to
those which beset his father in Austria, and must,
on no account, be abandoned. His election could
hardly be regarded as fully accomplished, until the
countries which had hitherto maintained a hostile
attitude were subjected to him, and thus restored
to the empire. It was precisely by determining to
send succours in both directions, that the states
acquired. a two-fold right to discuss internal affairs
according to their own judgment. They had ren-
dered fresh services to the reigning house, which
could not defend its hereditary possessions without
their aid, and their voices must now be heard.

At this moment, too, a coolness arose between
the emperor and the pope. There was a large party
in Europe which had always regarded the rise of

92 FOUNDATION OF Boox I.

the Austrian power with dislike, and was now
greatly offended at the election of Maximilian to
the Roman throne. . To this party, in consequence
of the turn Italian affairs had taken, Pope Inno-
cent VII. belonged. He refused the emperor aid
against the Hungarians, and even against the
Turks. The imperial ambassador found him, as
Frederic complained to the diet, “very awkward to
deal with” (gar ungeschickt*), and could do nothing
with him. There was also a difference with the
pope about the nomination to the see of Passau, as
well as about a newly-imposed tithe. In short, the
intervention of the Roman see was, for a moment,
suspended. For the first time, during a long
period, we find numerous assemblies of German
princes without the presence of a papal legate.

Under these circumstances the deliberations of
the States were opened with a better prospect of
useful results.

It was evidently not necessary to begin from the
beginning; all the elements of a great common-
wealth were at hand. The diets had long been
regarded as the focus of legislation and of the
general government: peace (Landfriede) had been
proclaimed throughout the realm ; an imperial court
of justice existed; as long ago as the Hussite war
a census had been taken with a view to the ge-
neral defence of the empire. Nothing remained
but to give to these institutions that steady and
pervading action which they had. hitherto entirely
wanted.

* Miller, Rtth. unter Friedrich III. v. 122.

Boox I. A NEW. CONSTITUTION. 93

To this effect deliberations were incessantly held
from the year 1486 to 1489. Ideas embracing the
whole land of the German people, and directed to the
restoration of its unity and strength, were in active
circulation. In order to obtain a more complete
and accurate conception of the several important
points, we will consider them, not in their historical
connection either with each other or with con-
temporaneous events, but each separately.

The first was the Public Peace, which had again
been broken on every side, and now, proclaimed
anew in 1486, had been rendered clear bysome more
precise provisions annexed in 1487; yet it differed
little from those which had gone before it. The
execution of it was now, as heretofore, left to the
tumultuous levy of the neighbourhood within a
circle of from six to ten miles (German); nay, the
declaration of 1487 expressly declares that a party
in whose favour sentence had been pronounced
might use force to secure its execution.* The only
difference was that the co-operation of the pope
was no longer invited. There was no further men-
tion of sending papal conservators with peculiar
powers of executing justice, in order to the: main-
tenance of the Public Peace. This, however, ren-

* Miiller, Rtth. Fr. VI., 115. “Wo aber der, der gewaltige
Tate fiirneme und iibe, das thete uf behapte Urtheil, so solt dar-
iiber nyemant dem Bekriegten das mahl Hilf zuzuschicken
schuldig seyn.” ‘When, however, any one, undertaking and
exercising acts of violence, does so upon judgment received
in his favour, then shall no one be bound to send help there-
upon to him who is attacked.”

94 FOUNDATION OF Boox I.

dered it doubtful whether the clergy, to whom the
pope and the church were much more proximate
and formidable than the emperor and the state,
would choose to regard themselves as bound by the
peace. No other means could be found to obviate
this evil than that the emperor should declare, as the
bishops had done in regard to their own nobility,
that he would put the disobedient out of the favour
and protection: of the law, and would not defend
them from any aggression or injury.

We see what a state of violence, insubordination,
and mutual independence still prevailed, and even
manifested itself in the laws; and how necessary it
was to establish internal regulations, by the firm-
ness and energy of which arbitrary power might be
held in check, and the encroachments of an au-
thority which, at the very first meeting of the
estates, was regarded as foreign, might be repelled.

The most essential point was to give to the im-
perial diets more regular forms and greater dignity ;
and especially to put an end to the resistance offered
to their edicts by the cities.

The cities, which were so often hostilely treated
by the other estates, and which had interests of
so peculiar a nature to defend, held themselves
from the earliest period studiously aloof. During
the Hussite war they were even permitted to send
into the field a separate municipal army under a
captain of their own appointment.* In the year
1460 they declined going to council with the

* In the 1431. Datt de Pace Publica, 167.

Boox I. A NEW CONSTITUTION. 95

princes, or uniting in a common answer to the
emperor's proposals.* In the year 1474 the depu-
ties refused to approve the Public Peace concluded
by the emperor and princes, and obstinately per-
sisted that they would say nothing to it till they
had consulted their friends.t In 1486 the princes
having granted some subsidies to the emperor to
which the cities were called upon to contribute,
they resisted, and the more strenuously, since they
had not even been summoned to the meeting
at which the grant was made. Frederic replied
that this had not been done, because they would
have done nothing without sending home for in-
structions.

It was evident that this state of things could not
be maintained. ‘The imperial cities justly deemed
it an intolerable grievance that they should be
taxed according to an arbitrary assessment, and
a contribution demanded of them as if it were a
debt; on the other hand, it was just as little to be
endured that they should obstruct every definitive
decision, and send home to consult their constituents
on every individual grant.

* Protocol in Miiller, i. p. 782: with this addition, however,
«‘ Sie wolten solch friindlich Fiirbringen ihren Friinden bert-
men.” * They would commend so friendly a proposition to their
friends.”

+ The answer given by them in Miiller, ii. p. 626., is vague
and obscure. In the Frankfurt Archives (vol. viii.) it runs thus:
«“ Als die des Friedens nothurftig und begerlich sind, setzen sy
(die Stiidte) in kein Zweifel, E. K. M. (werde) gnediglich
darob und daran seyn, dass der vestiglich gehandhabt und ge-
halten werde: dazu sy aber irenthalb zu reden nit bedacht sind,

96 FOUNDATION OF Boox I.

So powerful was the influence of the prevailing
spirit of the times, that, in the year 1487, the cities
came to a resolution to abandon the course they
had hitherto pursued.

The emperor had summoned only a small number
of them to the diet of this year; they determined,
however, this time to send the whole body of their
deputies, and not to require them to send home for
instructions. The Emperor Frederic received them
at the castle at Niirnberg, sitting on his bed, “ of a
feeble countenance,” as they express themselves*,
and caused it to be said to them that he was glad to
see them, and would graciously acknowledge their
coming. ‘The princes too were well satisfied there-
with, and allowed the cities to take part in their
deliberations. Committees were formed — a prac-

auch kein Befel haben, unterteniglich bittend, das S. K. M. das
also in Gnaden und Guten von in versten und sy als ir allergne-
digster Herr bedenken wolle.”—“ As they have need, and are
desirous of peace, they (the cities) make no doubt, your Im-
perial Majesty will graciously strive to bring about that it be
firmly maintained and kept; but beyond this they have no
thought of speaking on their own behalf, nor have any com-
mand ‘so to do, submissively entreating, that his Imperial Ma-
jesty will therefore take this in good and gracious understanding
from them, and think of them like their most gracious master.”
It is evident that their acceptance is only very general, and that
they would not suffer the more essential resolutions to be
pressed upon them; the emperor at last concedes the point re-
lating to the instructions.

* Dr. Ludwig zum Paradeis of Frankfurt, Monday after
Judica, April 2. 1487. With this diet of the empire begin the
detailed reports of the Frankfurt deputies. The earlier ones were
more fragmentary. —As. A., vol. xii.

Boox I. A NEW CONSTITUTION. 97

tice that afterwards became the prevailing one —
in which the cities too were included. The first
which sat to deliberate on the Public Peace consisted
of six electors, ten princes, and three burghers.
From the second,—to consider the measures to be
adopted against the Hungarians,—the cities were
at first excluded, but afterwards were summoned at
the express desire of the emperor. Our reporter,
Dr. Paradies of Frankfurt, was one of the members
of this committee. Nor was the share taken by
the burgher delegates barren of substantial results ;
of the general grant of 100,000 gulden, nearly
the entire half, (49,390 gulden) was at first assessed
to them: they struck off about a fifth from this
estimate, and reduced it to 40,000 gulden, which
they apportioned to each city at their own dis-
cretion.

At the next diet, in 1489, the forms of general
deliberation were settled. For the first time, the
three colleges, electors, princes, and burghers, se-
parated as soon as a measure was proposed; each
party retired to its own room, the answer was
drawn up by the electoral college, and then pre-
sented for acceptance to the others. Thenceforth
this continued to be the regular practice. At this
juncture there was a possibility of the constitution
of the empire assuming a form like that which arose
out of similar institutions in other countries, viz.
that the commons, who regarded themselves (in
Germany as elsewhere) as the emperor’s lieges
(Leute),—as in an especial manner his subjects, —
might have made common cause with him against

VOL. I. H

98 FOUNDATION OF Boox I.

the aristocracy, and have formed a third estate, or
Commons’ House. Sigismund was very fond of
joining his complaints of the princely power with
theirs; he reminded them that the empire had
nothing left but them, since everything else had
fallen into the hands of the princes; he liked par-
ticularly to treat with them, and invited them to
come to him with all their grievances.* But the
imperial power was far too weak to foster these
sympathies to any practical maturity, or to give a
precise and consistent form to their union; it was
incapable of affording to the cities that protection
which would have excited or justified a voluntary
adherence to the head of the empire on their part.
The German Estates generally assumed a very dif-
ferent form from all others. Elsewhere the lords
spiritual and temporal used to meet separately: in
Germany, on the contrary, the electors, who united
the spiritual and temporal power in their own per-
sons, had so thoroughly defined a position, such
distinct common privileges, that it was not possible
to divide thern. Hence it happened that the princes
formed a single college of spiritual and temporal
members: the committees were generally composed
of an equal number of each. The cities in Ger-
many were not opposed, but allied to the magnates.
These two estates together formed a compact cor-
poration, against which no emperor could carry

* See Sigismund’s Speech to the Friends of the Council
at Frankfurt. Printed by Aschbach, Geschichte Kaiser Sig-
munds, i. 453. He there says, he will discuss with them “was
ir Brest (Gebrechen) sy,” — “what may be their wants.”

Boox I. A NEW CONSTITUTION. 99

any measure, and which represented the aggregate
power of the empire.

In the consciousness of their own strength and
of the necessity of the case, they now made a pro-
posal to the emperor, which, however moderate in
its tone, opened the widest prospect of a radical
change in the constitution.

It was obvious that if order and tranquillity were
really restored, and all were compelled to acknow-
ledge him as the supreme fountain of justice, the
emperor would necessarily acquire an immense
accession of power. ‘This the estates were little in-
clined to concede to him ; the less, since justice was
so arbitrarily administered in his tribunal, which
was therefore extremely discredited throughout the
empire. As early as the year 1467, at the moment
of the first serious proclamation of the Public Peace,
a proposal was made to the emperor to establish
a supreme tribunal of a new kind for the enforce-
ment of it, to which the several estates should
nominate twenty-four inferior judges* from all parts
of Germany, and the emperor only one as president.
To this Frederic paid no attention: he appointed
his tribunal after, as he had before, alone; caused it

* The passage, as Harpprecht, Archiv.i. par. 109. gives it,
is quite unintelligible, for instead of urtailsprecher (utterer of a
sentence), urthel sprechen (to pronounce sentence) is printed,
just as if the states themselves were to sit in judgment. It is
more exact and connected in Konig von Konigsthal, ii. p. 18.

+ The words in the text are Urtheiler and Richter. As
Urtheil is judgment or decision, and Recht, law or right, these
titles seem to imply some analogy with the offices of the English
jury and judge. — TRANSL.

H 2

100 FOUNDATION OF Booxtl

to follow his court, and even decided some causes
in person; revoked judgments that had been pro-
nounced, and determined the amount of costs and
fees at his pleasure. He of course excited universal
discontent by these proceedings ; people saw clearly
that if any thing was to be done for the empire, the
first step must be to establish a better administration
of justice. The subsidies which they granted the
emperor in the year 1486 were saddled with a con-
dition to that effect. The estates were not so
anxious to appoint the judges of the court, as to
secure to it first a certain degree of independence ;
they were even willing to grant the judge and his as-
sessors a right of co-optation for the offices becoming
vacant. The main thing, however, was, that the
judge should have the faculty of sentencing the
breakers of the Public Peace to the punishment
upon which the penal force of the law for the pre-
servation of that peace— the punishment of the
ban —mainly rested, as well as the emperor himself ;
and also that it should rest with him to take the
necessary measures for its execution. So intolerable
was the personal interference of the emperor es-
teemed, that people thought they should have
gained every thing if they could secure themselves
from this evil. They then intended in some degree
to limit the power of the tribunal, by referring it
to the statutes of the particular part of the empire
in which the particular case arose, and by having
a fixed tax for the costs and fees.*

* Essay on an Ordinance of the Imperial Chamber ; Miiller,
vi. 29.

Boox I. A NEW CONSTITUTION. 101

But the aged emperor had no mind to renounce
one jot of his traditional power. He replied, that
he should reserve to himself the right of proclaiming
the ban, ‘ in like manner as that had been done of
old” (tmmaassen das vor Alters gewesen). The ap-
pointment of assessors also must in future take
place only with his knowledge and consent. Local
statutes and customs should only be recognised by
the court in as far as they were consistent with the
imperial written law, 7.e. the Roman (a curious
proof how much the Idea of the Empire contributed
to the introduction of the Roman law): with re-
gard to taxing the costs and fees, he would be un-
restrained, as other princes were, in their courts
of justice and chanceries.* He regarded the su-
preme tribunal of the realm in the light of a
patrimonial court. It was in vain that the electors
observed to him that a reform of the supreme court
was the condition attached to their grants; in vain
they actually stopped their payments, and proposed
other and more moderate conditions: the aged
monarch was inflexible.

Frederic III. had accustomed himself in the
course of a long life to regard the affairs of the
world with perfect serenity of mind. His cotempo-
raries have painted him to us;—one while weighing
precious stones in a goldsmith’s scales ; another, with
a celestial globe in his hand, discoursing with learned
men on the positions of the stars. He loved to mix
metals, compound healing drugs, and in important

* Moruta Cesareanorum; Miller, vi. 69.
-
H3

102 FOUNDATION OF Boox I.

crises, predicted the future himself from the aspects
of the constellations: he read a man’s destiny in
his features or in the lines of his hand. He was a
believer in the hidden powers that govern nature
and fortune. In his youth his Portuguese wife,
with the violent temper and the habitual opinions
of a native of the South, urged him in terms of
bitter scorn to take vengeance for some injury : he
only answered, that every thing was rewarded, and
punished, and avenged in time.* Complaints of the
abuses in his courts of justice made little impression
on him: he said “ things did not go quite right or
smooth anywhere.” On one occasion representations
were made to him by the princes of the empire,
against the influence which he allowed his councillor
Priischenk to exercise: he replied, “‘ every one of
them had his own Priischenk at home.” In all the
perplexities of affairs he evinced the same calmness
and equanimity. In 1449, when the cities and
princes, on the eve of war, refused to accept him as
a mediator, he was content: he said he would wait
till they had burnt each other’s houses and destroyed
each other’s crops; then they would come to him of
their own accord, and beg him to bring about a re-
conciliation between them ;— which shortly after
happened. The violences and cruelties which his
hereditary dominions of Austria suffered from King
Matthias did not even excite his pity: he said they
deserved it ; they would not obey him, and therefore

* Griinbeck, Historia Friderici et Maximiliani in Chmel,
Oestreichischer Geschichtsforscher, i. p. 69.

Boox I. . A NEW CONSTITUTION. 103

they must have a stork as king, like the frogs in the
fable. In his own affairs he was more like an ob-
server than a party interested; in all events he saw
the rule by which they are governed,—the universal,
inflexible principle which, after short interruptions,
invariably recovers its empire. From his youth he
had been inured to trouble and adversity. When
compelled to yield, he never gave up a point, and
always gained the mastery in the end. The main-
tenance of his prerogatives was the governing prin-
ciple of all his actions; the more, because they
acquired an ideal value from their connection with
the imperial dignity. It cost him a long and severe
struggle to allow his son to be crowned king of the
Romans; he wished to take the supreme authority
undivided with him to the grave: in no case would
he grant Maximilian any independent share in the
administration of government, but kept him, even
after he was king, still as ‘“‘ son of the house ;”* nor
would he ever give him anything but the countship
of Cilli: “ for the rest, he would have time enough.”
His frugality bordered on avarice, his slowness on
inertness, his stubbornness on the most determined
selfishness: yet all these faults are rescued from vul-
garity by high qualities. He had at bottom a sober
depth of judgment, a sedate and inflexible honour ;
the aged prince, even when a fugitive imploring
succour, had a personal bearing which never allowed
the majesty of the empire to sink. All his pleasures

* Letter from Maximilian to Albert of Saxony, 1492, in the
Dresden Archives.
H 4

104 FOUNDATION OF Boox I.

were characteristic. Once, when he was in Niirn-
berg, he had all the children in the city, even the
infants who could but just walk, brought to him in
the city ditches; he feasted his eyes on the rising
generation, the heirs of the future; then he ordered
cakes to be brought and distributed, that the children
might remember their old master, whom they had
seen, as long as they lived. Occasionally he gave
the princes his friends a feast in his castle. In
proportion to his usual extreme frugality was now
the magnificence of the entertainment: he kept his
guests with him till late in the night (always his
most vivacious time), when even his wonted taci-
turnity ceased, and he began to relate the history of
his past life, interspersed with strange incidents,
decent jests and wise saws. He looked like a
patriarch among the princes, who were all much
younger than himself.

The Estates saw clearly that with this sort of
character, with this resolute inflexible being, nothing
was to be gained by negotiation or stipulation. If
they wished to carry their point they must turn
to the young king, who had indeed no power as yet,
but who must shortly succeed to it. On his way
from the Netherlands, whence he was hastening to
rescue Austria from the Hungarians, for which end
he had the most urgent need of the assistance of
the empire, they laid their requests before him and
made a compliance with these the conditions of
their succours. Maximilian, reared in the constant
sight of the troubles and calamities into which his
father had fallen, had, as often happens, adopted

Boox I. A NEW CONSTITUTION. 105

contrary maxims of conduct; he looked only to
the consequences of the moment: he had all the
buoyant confidence of youth; nor did he think the
safety of the empire involved in a tenacious ad-
herence to certain privileges. His first appearance
in public life was at the diet at Niirnberg, in 1439,
where he requited the support granted him by the
empire with ready concessions as to the adminis-
tration of justice. He could indeed only promise
to use every means to induce his father to have the
Imperial Chamber (Kammergericht) established as
soon as possible on the plan proposed. In this, as was
to be expected, he did not succeed ; but he was at
all events morally bound to fulfil the expectations
he had raised: it was a first step, though the con-
sequences of it lay at a distance. This promise
was registered in the recess of the diet.*

This was the most important point of the adminis-
tration of the empire. All internal order depended
on the supreme court of justice. It was of the
highest moment that it should be shielded from the
arbitrary will of the emperor, and that a considerable
share in the constitution of it should be given to
the States.

Maximilian too now received the succours he
required for the restoration of the Austrian power.
While one of the bravest of German princes, Albert
of Saxony, called the Right Arm of the empire,
gradually, to use his own expression, “ brought the

* Miiller, vi. p.171. A register of this imperial diet in the
Frankfurt Archives, vol. xiii.

106 FOUNDATION OF Boox TI.

rebellious Netherlands to peace,” * Maximilian him-
self hastened to his ancestral domains. Shortly
before, the aged Archduke Sigismund of Tyrol
had allowed himself to be persuaded to give the
emperor’s daughter, who had been confided to him,
in marriage to Duke Albert of Bavaria-Munich ;
and had held out to that prince the hope that he
would leave him Tyrol and the Vorlande as an in-
heritance. But the sight of Maximilian awakened
in the kindhearted and childless old man a
natural tenderness for the manly and blooming
scion of his own race; he now dwelt with joy on
the thought that this was the rightful heir to the
country, and instantly determined to bequeath it
to him. At this moment King Matthias of Hun-
gary, who was still in possession of Austria, died.
The land breathed again, when the rightful young
prince appeared in the field surrounded by the
forces of the empire and by his own mercenaries ;
drove the Hungarians before him, delivered Vienna
from their hands, and pursued them over their own
borders. We find this event recorded, even in the
journals of private persons, as the happiest of their
lives ¢ : — a district that had been mortgaged raised
the mortgage money itself, that it might belong
once more to its ancient lords.

* From a letter of Albrecht to his son, in Langenn, Duke
Albert, p. 205.

} Diarium Joannis Tichtelii, in Rauch, Scriptt. Rer. Austria-
carum, ii. 559. He writes the name of Maximilian four times,
one after the other, as if unable to write it often enough for his
own satisfaction.

Boox I. A NEW CONSTITUTION. 107

Such was the vast influence of the good under-
standing between Maximilian and the States of the
empire, on the re-establishment of the power of
Austria. It had, at the same time, another great
effect in conducing to the conciliation of one of the
most eminent of the princes, and to the consolidation
of all internal affairs.

The Dukes of Bavaria, spite of the family
alliance into which they had been forced with the
emperor by the marriage above mentioned, adhered
to the opponents of Austria —the Roman see, and
King Matthias.* They would hear nothing of
furnishing aids to the emperor against the king;
they refused to attend the diets, or to accept their
edicts: on the contrary, they made encroachments

* In Lent, 1482, Albert and George determined, “with their
several states, that, without the countenance of the holy father,
_ help should not be given to King Matthias against the em-
peror.” “Mit ihr beder Landschaft dass man ohne Gunst des
h. Vaters dem Kaiser wider Kénig Matthias nit helfen sollte.”
Anonymous contemporary Chronicle in Freiberg’s Collection
of Historical Papers and Documents, i. 159. All these cir-
cumstances deserved a closer examination. For the modern
relations and political system of these states did not begin so
late as is believed. From Hagek, Béhmischer Chronik, p. 828.,
it appears that the Bohemians would not put up with their
exclusion from the election of Maximilian. They entered into
a league with Matthias, drawing Poland into it also, (Pelzel.
Geschichte von Bohmen, i. 494.) The deputies of Matthias
tried to set the Italian princes in motion. (Philippus Bergomas,
Supplementum Chronicorum.) France likewise belonged to this
party. The reason why Bavaria joined it is evident. The eyes
of her dukes were always turned either towards Lombardy
or the Netherlands. Freiberg: Geschichte der Baierischen
Landstande, i. 655.

108 FOUNDATION OF Boox I

on the domains of their neighbours, enlarged the
jurisdiction of their own courts of justice, and
threatened neighbouring imperial cities—for ex-
ample, Memmingen and Bibrach. Regensburg had
already fallen into the possession of Duke Albert of
Munich.*

Immediately after the renewal of the Public Peace,
in the year 1487, it became evident that there was
no chance of its being observed if these partial and
turbulent proceedings were not. put an end to.

This was the immediate and pressing cause of
the Swabian league, concluded in February 1488, by
the mediation of the emperor f, and some of the more
powerful princes. The order of knights, who the
year before had renewed their old company of
St. George’s shield, quickly joined the league, as
did also the cities. They mutually promised to
oppose a common resistance to all strangers who
sought to impose foreign (7. e. not Swabian) laws
upon them, or otherwise to injure or offend them.
But in order to secure themselves from disputes or —
disorders among themselves, and at the same time
to observe the Public Peace— for this general
object was, from the very first, included among the

* Pfister, Geschichte von Schwaben, v. p. 272.

+ In his very first address the emperor declares the object of
the league to be, that the states, “bei dem heiligen Reiche und
ihren Freiheiten bleiben,” “should remain in adherence to the
holy empire, and in possession of their liberties."—Datt, de Pace
Pub. 272. Who could believe, that for the history of this most
important of all early leagues we have still to refer chiefly to
Datt?

Boox I. A NEW CONSTITUTION. 109

more particular ones, and gave the whole union a
legitimate character, — they determined to settle
their mutual differences by the decision of arbi-
trators, and appointed a council of the league, com-
posed of an equal number of members chosen from
each body. In avery short time the league was
joined by neighbouring princes, especially Wiir-
tenberg and Brandenburg, and formed, as contra-
distinguished from the knights and the cities, a
third body, taking equal share in its council,
submitting to the decisions of the arbitrators,
and promising, in case of a war, to send the con-
tingent agreed upon into the field. Here, in the
very focus of the old quarrels, a firm and compact
union of the several classes arose, affording a noble
representation of the Ideas of the constitution of the
empire, and of public order and security ; though
its main and proximate object was resistance to the
encroachments of Bavaria. Nevertheless, Duke
Albert held himself aloof in haughty defiance,
while the emperor, relying on the league, would
hear of no reconciliation till the pride of the Duke
was humbled. At length resort was had to
arms. In the spring of 1492 the troops of the
league and of the empire assembled on the Lechfeld.
Frederic of Brandenburg, ‘‘ whose doublet had long
been hot against Bavaria,” carried the banner of
the empire ; Maximilian was there in person. At
this moment Albert, abandoned by his kinsmen, at
strife with his knights, felt that he could not with-
stand such an overwhelming force ; he relinquished
the opposition which he had hitherto maintained,

110 FOUNDATION OF A NEW CONSTITUTION. Boox I.

consented to give up Regensburg, and to abandon
all claims founded on the assignments made by
Sigismund. By degrees even the old emperor was
appeased, and received his son-in-law and his grand-
daughters with cordiality. After some time Albert
himself found it expedient to join the Swabian
league.

We see that the reign of Frederic III. was by no
means so insignificant as is commonly believed.
His latter years especially, so full of difficulties and
reverses, were rich in great results. The house of
Habsburg, by the acquisition of Austria and the
Netherlands, had acquired a high rank in Europe.
A short campaign of Maximilian’s sufficed to es-
tablish its claims to Hungary.* The intestine wars
of Germany were almost entirely suppressed. The
Swabian league gave to the house of Austria a
legitimate influence over Germany, such as it had
not possessed since the time of Albert I. The
diets had acquired a regular form, the Public Peace
was established and tolerably secured, and important
steps were taken towards the formation of a general
constitution. What form and character this should
assume, mainly depended on the conduct of Maxi-
milian, on whom, at the death of his father (Au-
gust 19, 1493), the administration of the empire
now deed vot

* The treaty of Oedenburg, 1463, July 29, had already se-
cured the succession to the house of Austria, upon the extinction
of the Hunniads. The new treaty, 1491, Nov. 7, the Monday
after the feast of St. Leonard, renewed this right in case of
failure of male issue from Wladislas.

Boox I. DIET OF woRMs, 1495. 111

DIET OF WORMS, 1495.

Ipgas had long been universally current, and
schemes suggested, pregnant with far more extensive
and important consequences than any we have yet
contemplated.

Among the most remarkable were those put forth
by Nicholas yon Kus, whose capacious and pro-
phetic mind was a storehouse of new and just views
on the most various subjects. At the time of the
council of Basle he devoted himself with earnest zeal
and perspicacious judgment to the internal politics
of the empire. He began by observing that it was
impossible to improve the church without reforming
the empire; since it was impossible to sever them,
even in thought.* He therefore urgently recom-
mends, though an ecclesiastic, the emancipation of
the secular authority. He is entirely opposed to
the right claimed by the papacy, of transferring the
empire to whom it will: he ascribes to the latter a
mystical relation to God and Christ, absolute inde-
pendence, and even the right and the duty of taking
part in the government of the church. He desires
that the confusion arising from the jurisdiction of the
spiritual and temporal courts be put anend to. He
proposes a plan for superior courts of justice, each
provided with three assessors, chosen from the nobles,
clergy, and citizens respectively +, and empowered

* Nicolai Cusani de Concordantia Catholica, lib. iii. Schar-
dius, Sylloge de Jurisdictione Imperiali, f. 465.
+ Lib. iii. c. xxxiii.: “ Pronunciet et citet quisque judicum

112 DIET OF worms, 1495. Boox I.

not only to hear appeals from the inferior courts, but
to decide the differences between the princes in the
first instance: it was only by such means, he thought,
that the legal practice could be brought into greater
harmony with the principles of natural justice.
Above all, however, he looked to the establishment of
yearly diets for the revival of the authority, unity,
and strength of the empire (Reich); for he clearly
perceived that no such results were to be expected
fromthe power of the emperor (Kazserthum) alone.*

secundum conditionem disceptantium personarum, nobilis inter
nobiles, ecclesiasticus inter ecclesiasticos, popularis inter popu-
lares: nulla tamen definitiva feratur nisi ex communi delibera-
tione omnium trium. Si vero unus duobus dissenserit, vincat
opinio majoris numeri.” It is not to be believed that the cus-
toms of German law also had not given rise to many complaints.
It is here said: ‘‘ Sepe simplices pauperes per cavillationes
causidicorum extra causam ducuntur, et a tota causa cadunt,
quoniam qui cadit a syllaba, cadit a causa: ut sepe vidi per
Treverensem diocesim accidere. Tollantur consuetudines que
admittunt juramentum contra quoscunque et cujuscunque numeri
testes.” —iii. ¢c. 36.

* This is one passage among many in which the want of two
words corresponding to Reich and Kaiserthum, both Englished by
empire, is grievously felt: Reich, and its numerous derivatives
and compounds, Reichstag, Reichsabschied, &c., always relate
to the great Germanic body called the Empire. Kaiserthum,
the office and state of Kaiser, relates to the personal dignity,
power, functions, &c., of the individual occupying the imperial
throne. As it is impossible every time these words occur to
resort to a long paraphrase, the meaning is often lost or obscured.
Reich is also applied to a monarchical state, and then stands in
a like relation to Kénigthum (the kingly office or state) ; some-
what as realm does to royalty. The title of a former section
presents a difficulty of a somewhat similar nature,—it is, Papst-

Boox I. DIET OF worms, 1495. 113

Either in May or in September he would have a
general meeting of the Estates held at Frankfurt, or
other convenient city, in order to arrange any ex-
isting dissensions, and to pass general ieses to which
every prince should affix his signature and seal,
and engage his honour to observe them. He strenu-
ously contends that no ecclesiastic shall be exempted
from their operation; otherwise he would want to
have a share in the secular power, which was to be »
exercised for the general good. He goes on to
remark that, in order seriously to maintain order
and law and to chastise the refractory, it is necessary
to have a standing army; for to what end is a law
without the penal sanction? He thinks that a part
of the revenues of the numerous tolls granted to
individuals might be kept back by the state, and a
fund thus formed, the application of which should
be every year determined at the diet. There would
then be no more violence; the bishops would devote
themselves to their spiritual duties; peace and pros-
perity and power would return.

It is clear that the reforms suggested by this
remarkable man were precisely those which it was
the most important to put in practice; indeed the
ideas which are destined to agitate the world are
always first thrown out by some one original and Iu-
minous mind. In the course of time some approach
was made, even on the part of the authorities of
the empire, to the execution of these projects.

thum and Fiirstenthum—-Popedom and Princedom: for the
former we have Papacy; for the latter abstraction, nothing. —
TRANSL.

VOL. I. I

114 DIET OF worms, 1495. Boox I.

Even during their opposition to Frederic III. in
—1450—1460, the Electors were of opinion that
the most salutary measure for the empire would
be, when they were with the emperor in person —
for example, in an imperial city, —to form a sort
of consistory around him, like that of the car-
dinals around the pope, and from this central
point to take the government of the empire into
their own hands, and to provide for the preservation
of public order. It was their notion that a per-
manent court of justice should be established, like
that of the parliament of Paris, whose judgments
should be executed by certain temporal princes in
the several circles of the empire; the ban should be
pronounced by the emperor according to justice and
conscience, and should then be duly executed and
obeyed.*

Similar suggestions appeared from time to time.
In the archives of Dresden there is a report of a
consultation of the year 1491, in which dissatisfac-
tion is expressed with the plan of a supreme court of
justice, and a scheme of a general government and
military constitution for the whole empire, not unlike
that of Nicholas von Kus, is proposed; an annual
diet for the more important business of the general
government, and a military force, ready for service
at a moment’s notice, proportioned to the six circles
into which it was proposed to divide the. empire,
and under twelve captains or chiefs.

With the accession of a young and intelligent
prince, a tendency to improvement and a leaning

* Final Edict of the spiritual Electors. See p. 58. n. 1.

Boox I. DIET OF worms, 1495. 115

towards innovation took the place of the invincible
apathy of the old emperor ; and these dispositions,
both in the chief of the empire and the Estates, were
strengthened by other circumstances attending the
new reign.

Maximilian had received some offences of an en-
tirely personal nature from the King of France.
According to the terms of a treaty of peace, that
prince was to marry Maximilian’s daughter, and,
till she reached years of maturity, she was confided
to French guardianship: Charles now sent her back.
On the other hand, Maximilian was betrothed to the
princess and heiress of Bretagne, an alliance on which
the people of Germany founded various plans reach-
ing far into the future, and hoped to draw that pro-
vince under the same institutions as they intended to
give tothe empire. Charles VIII., however, got the
young princess into his power by violence, and forced
her to accept his hand.* The rights of the empire
were immediately affected by these hostile acts.
Whilst Maximilian was preparing to go to Rome to
be crowned, and cherished the hope of restoring
the imperial dignity and consideration in Italy, the

* The old emperor says in his proclamation of the 4th of June,
1492, “Rather would we depart in peace and blessedness from
this world, than suffer so unchristianlike and foul a deed to re-
main unpunished, and the Holy Empire and German people to
put up with this scandalous and irreparable injury under our
rule.” “ Wir —lieber von dieser Welt seliglich scheiden, dann
einen solchen unkristlichen snoden Handel ungestrafft beleiben
und das heil Reich und deutsche Nation in diesen lesterlichen
und unwiederpringlichen Vall bei unserer Regierung wachsen
lassen wolten.” ’

12

116 DIET OF worms, 1495. Boox I.

French, anticipating him, crossed the Alps, marched
unchecked through the Peninsula from north to
south, and conquered Naples. We cannot affirm
that Charles VIII. had any positive design of
seizing the imperial crown; but it is undeniable
that a power, such as he acquired throughout Italy
by the nature and the success of his enterprise, was
calculated to oppose a direct obstacle to the revival
of the authority of the German empire.

Irritated by such reiterated wrongs, and deeply
impressed with the necessity of making a stand
against French aggression; availing himself of his
incontestable right to demand succours from the
States for his journey to Rome; urged likewise by
his Italian allies, Maximilian now appeared at
Worms, and on the 26th March opened his diet with
a description of the political state of Europe. “If we
continue,” exclaimed he, ‘‘ to look on passively at the
proceedings of the French, the holy Roman Empire
will be wrested from the German nation, and no man
will be secure of his honour, his dignity, or his
liberties.” He wished to invoke the whole might
and energy of the empire to take part in this
struggle. Independent of a hasty levy to keep
alive the resistance of Italy, he likewise demanded ~
a permanent military establishment for the next ten
or twelve years, in order that he might be able to
defend himself, ‘‘ wherever an attack was attempted
against the Holy Empire.” He pressed for it with
impetuous earnestness; he was in a position in
which the interests of the public were identical
with his own.

Boox I. DIET OF woRMS, 1495. 117

The Estates also, which had assembled in un.
usual numbers, were fully impressed with the ne-
cessity of resisting the French. But in the first
place, they regarded affairs with more coolness
than the young emperor; and, secondly, they -
deemed the accession of a new sovereign who had
already pledged himself to them and was now in
need of considerable assistance, a moment well
adapted for the prosecution of their schemes of
reform and the introduction of order into their
internal affairs. They-met the warlike demands
of the king with one of the most comprehensive
schemes ever drawn up for the constitution of the
empire.

They too assumed the necessity of a strong
military organisation, but they found the feudal
system, now in its decline, no longer available ;
they deemed it better to impose a general tax,
called the Common Penny. This tax was to be
levied not according to the territorial extent, but
the population of the several parts of the empire.
The application of it was not to devolve on the
king, but to be entrusted to a council of the empire
composed of members of the States, the cities
included. This council was to be invested with
large general powers. It was to execute the laws,
to put down rebellion and tumult; to provide for
the reintegration of any domains that had been
subtracted from the empire; to conduct the defensive
war against the Turks and other enemies of the
Holy Empire and of the German nation; in short,

13

118 DIET OF woRMS, 1495. Boox I.

it is evident that it was to have the sum of the
powers of government in its hands* ; and certainly
a large share of independence was to be awarded
to it for that purpose. The weightiest affairs it
was bound to lay before the king and the electors, _
subject to the revision of the latter; but in all
other respects the members were to be freed from
the oath whereby they were bound to the king
and the Estates, and act only in conformity with
the duties of their office. f

The ideas by which this project was dictated
show a very strong public spirit; for it was by no
means the king alone whose power was limited.
The general interests of the country were repre-
sented in a manner which would admit of no
division or exclusion. How utterly, for example,
is the idea of a general tax, to be collected by the
parish priest, and delivered under his responsibility
to the bishop, at variance with any further augment-
ation of the influence of the territorial lords!

* See the first scheme which the elector of Mainz communi-
cated first to the king, and then to the cities. Protocol in Datt,
de Pace Pub. p. 830. The protocol is the same with that oad
in the Frankfurt Acts, vol. xv.

+ The latter is a provision of the larger draft, p. 838. nr. 17.
“Sollen dieselben President und Personen des vorgemeldten
Rathes aller Geliibd und Aide—damit sie uns oder inen
(denen von welchen sie gesetzt worden) verbunden oder
verstrickt wiren, genntzlich ledig seyn.” ‘The same president
and persons of the before-mentioned council shall be wholly
freed from all promise and oath, having the effect of binding
them to, or connecting them with, us or them” (those by whom
they had been appointed).

Boox I. DIET OF worms, 1495. 119

Which among them would have been strong enough
to resist a central national power, such as this must
have become ?

The first result, however, would have been that
_the power of the monarch — not indeed that which
he exercised in the usual troubled state of things,
but that which he claimed for better times— would
have been limited.

It remained now to be seen what he would say
to this project. The fiefs which he granted out, the
knightly festivities devised in his honour, or given
by him in return, the manifold disputes between
German princes which he had to accommodate, oc-
cupied him fully. It was not till the 22d of June
that he gave his answer, which he published as an
amendment of the project. On closer examination,
however, its effect was in fact entirely to annul it.
He had said at the beginning that he would accept
the project with reservation of his sovereign pre-
rogatives ; now, he declared that he thought these
assailed in every clause. I will give an example of
the alterations he made. According to the project,
the council of the empire was charged to see that .
no new tolls were erected without the previous
knowledge of the electors; a precaution suggested
by the tolls continually granted by Frederic and
Maximilian. The clause, in its altered state, set
forth that the council of the empire should itself
take care to erect no toll without the previous
knowledge of the king.

Strange that such a complete reversal of an
original scheme should be announced as an amend-

14

120 DIET OF WORMS, 1495. Boox L

ment! but such were the manners, such the cour-
tesy of that time. The opposition in temper and
opinion was not the less violent on that account.
A visible irritation and ill-humour prevailed at the
diet. The king one day summoned to his presence
the princes on whose friendship he could most con-
fidently rely, — Albert of Saxony, Frederic of Bran-
denburg, and Eberhard of Wiirtenberg, to consult
them on the means of maintaining his sovereign
dignity.*

So directly opposed were the views of the mon-
arch and those of the States at the very commence-
ment of this reign. Both parties, however, made
the discovery that they could not attain their ends
in the way they had proposed to themselves.
Maximilian clearly perceived that he should obtain
no subsidies without concessions. The States saw
that, at present at least, they would not be able to
carry through their scheme of a general govern-
ment.t While trying, however, to hit upon some
middle course, they came back to experiments at-
tempted under Frederic II.

* Notice in the Archives of Berlin, which contains, however,
only fragmentary remarks upon this imperial diet.

t Later Declaration of the Elector Berthold of Mainz in Datt,
p- 871. “ Daruf wire erst fiirgenommen ain Ordnung im Reich
aufzurichten und Sr. ko. Mt. furgehalten, darab S. M. etwas
Beswirung und Missfallens gehabt, hetten. die Stende davon
gestanden.” ‘ Thereupon it was first determined to establish a
regular government in the empire and submitted to his Royal
Majesty, so that if H. M. had any objection or dislike to it, the
States would have desisted from it.” Whether Miiller, Rtth. unter
M. (i. 329.), be right in maintaining that a second scheme of a

Boox I. DIET OF worRMS, 1495. 121

In the first place, they settled the basis of that
Public Peace which has rendered this diet so cele-
brated. On amore accurate examination, we find
indeed that it is in detail rather less pacific than
the former ones ; as, for example, it restores a right,
lately abrogated, of the injured party to make forcible
seizure of a mortgaged estate; the only advantage
was, that this peace was proclaimed, not as before
for a term of years, but for ever. By this act the
law, in fact, ceased to contemplate the possibility of
any return to the old fist law (Faustrecht).

The question of the Imperial Chamber (Kammer-
gericht), or supreme court of justice for the empire,
was next discussed. Maximilian had hitherto treated
this tribunal exactly as his father had done: he made
it follow his court ; in 1493 it accompanied him to
Regensburg, in 1494 to Mechlin and Antwerp, in
1495 to Worms. We have, however, seen that he was
bound by the concessions he made in 1489 to reform
the administration of justice. When, therefore, the
proposals formerly laid before his father were sub-
mitted to him, he felt himself compelled to accept
them. Under what pretext, indeed, could he have
rejected an institution, the establishment of which
he had so solemnly undertaken to promote with all
his might ? This, however, was one of the most
important events in the history of the empire.
Maximilian gave his assent to the maxim that the

similar kind had also been presented, whereupon Maximilian had
offered to appoint, instead of the imperial council, a court council,
I must leave undetermined. It would, in fact, have been but
another evasive proposition.

122 DIET OF wWoRMS, 1495. Boox I.

statute law should have force in the supreme court,
and that no more than the regular fees should be ex-
acted; above all, he ceded to the judge the office of
proclaiming the ban of the empire in his name; nay,
he bound himself not to remove the ban when pro-
nounced, without the consent of the injured party.
When we reflect that the judicial power was the
highest attribute of the imperial crown, we feel all
the importance of this step. Nor was it only that the
supreme court of the empire was secured from the
arbitrary interference which had hitherto been so
injurious to it—its offices were also appointed by the
Estates. The king nominated only the president
(Kammerrichter); the assessors were appointed by
the Estates ; and the cities, to their great joy, were
invited to propose certain candidates for that
office: a committee was then appointed to examine
and decide on the presentations.* Later jurists
have disputed whether the court derived its penal
sanction solely from the emperor, or from the
emperor and the princes: but thus much is certain,
that it changed its whole character; and from a
simply monarchical institution, became dependent
on the whole body of the States. It followed, of
course, that it was no longer an appendage to the
court and a companion of the emperor’s travels ;
but held its stated sittings in one fixed spot in the
empire. .

This great concession was met by the States with

* Notice from a document of later date in Harpprecht, Staats-
archiv. des Reichskammergerichts, ii. p. 249.

Boox I. ‘DIET OF woRMS, 1495. 123

a grant of the Common Penny, on the produce of
which they allowed the king, who seemed intensely
desirous of it on account of the state of his affairs
in Italy, to raise a loan. The tax itself is a com-
bination of poll-tax and property-tax, not very
different from that formerly levied by the kings of
Jerusalem, and also occasionally proposed in Ger-
many; for example, in the year 1207, by King
Philip. In the fifteenth century, frequent mention
of such taxes is made as being applied sometimes
to the maintenance of the Hussite, sometimes of the
Turkish war. The Common Penny was levied on
the following plan: — Half a gulden was levied on
every five hundred, a whole one on every thousand,
gulden ; among persons of small means, every four-

and-twenty above fifteen years of age, without ex- :

ception, men and women, priests and laymen, were
to contribute one gulden; the more wealthy were
to pay according to their own estimate of their pro-
perty. The idea of taxation was still in some degree
mixed up with that of alms*; the priests were to
admonish the people from the pulpit to give some-
thing more than what was demanded. The whole
plan was still extremely imperfect. Its import-
ance consisted only in its being (as the whole
course of the transaction proved) a serious attempt
at, a general systematic taxation of the empire,
destined for purposes both of peace and war, for
the maintenance of the supreme court of justice,

"* So the taxes levied by the contemporary King of England,
Henry VIIL., were called benevolences. — TRANSL.

Sa

124 DIET OF worMS, 1495. Boox I.

the payment of the Italian allies, and the equipment
of an army against the Turks.

It was in accordance with this character of a
general tax that the choice of the treasurer of the
empire, whose office it was to receive the money
from the commissioners or collectors stationed in
all parts of the country, was also entrusted to the
States. Maximilian engaged to levy the Common
Penny in the Austrian and Burgundian dominions
upon the same plan, and to set the example herein
to all other sovereigns.

But if the collection of the money could not safely
be entrusted to the king, still less could its appli-
cation. After the proposal for a council of the
empire had been suffered to drop, the idea of a
yearly meeting of the Estates of the empire for
the purpose of controlling the public expenditure,
first suggested by Nicholas von Kus, and then
proposed in the project of 1491, was revived. This
assembly was to meet every year on the first of
February, to deliberate on the most important
affairs, internal and external. To this body the
treasurer of the empire was to deliver the money
he had received from the taxes; and in it was to
be vested the exclusive power of deciding on the
application of the same: neither the king nor
his son was to declare war without its consent ;
every conquest was to accrue to the empire.* To
this body was also committed a peremptory au-
thority for the maintenance of the Public Peace.

* Maintenance of Peace and Law established at Worms.
Miiller, Rtth. Max. i. p. 454.

Boox I. DIET OF worms, 1495. 125

The question was, when this tribunal (thus ren-
dered independent of the crown and emanating
from the Estates) should have pronounced the ban,
to whom the execution of it was to be entrusted.
The king of the Romans wished that it should be
left to him. The States, true to the principle on
which their legislation was founded, committed. it
to the annual assembly of the empire.

It is obvious that the States, though they gave
up their original plan, kept constantly in view the
idea on which it was founded. In the conflict of
the interests of the monarch and those of the
States, the balance clearly inclined in favour of the
latter. Maximilian had cause to complain that he
was made to feel this personally ; that he had been
forced to withdraw, and to wait before the door,
till the resolution was passed. He was often in-
clined to dissolve the diet; and it was only the
want of a fresh subsidy (which he then obtained)
that restrained him.* On the 7th of August, he
accepted the project in the form last given to it.

* This second grant amounted to 150,000 gulden. “ Damit
S. Kénigl. Gnad unserm h. Vater Papst und Italien, bis der
gemein Pfennig einbracht werde, dester stattlicher Hiilfe thun
mochte.” ‘In order that his Royal Grace may be so much the
more able to give more liberal help to our holy father the pope
and Italy, until the common penny be collected.” To collect
the loan, the king despatched emissaries to single states; e.g.
Prince Magnus of Anhalt and Dr. Heinrich Friese to the fol-
lowing ; the Abbot of Fulda, contributing 300 gulden ; the
two Counts of Hanau, 500; the Count of Eisenberg, 300; the
city of Freiberg, 400; and the city of Frankfort, 2,100. In-
struction in Comm. Archiv. at Dessau.

126 DIET OF WORMS, 1495. Boox I.

There is a grand coherency in its provisions.
All Germans are once more seriously and prac-
tically regarded as subjects of the empire; and the
public burthens and public exertions were to be
common to all. If the States thus lost something
of their independence, they received in compen-
sation (according to their ancient organisation and
their respective ranks) a legitimate share in the
supreme administration of justice, as well as of the
government. The king submitted himself to the
same ordinances, and to the same community. He
retained undiminished the supreme dignity, the
prerogatives of a sovereign feudal lord; but in the
conduct of public business, he was to be regarded
only as president of the college of the Estates of
the empire. The constitution proposed was a
mixture of monarchical and federal government,
but with an obvious preponderance of the latter
element; a political union, preserving the forms of
the ancient hierarchy of the empire. The question
whether these projects could be carried into exe-
cution, was now of the highest importance to the
whole future destiny of Germany.

Resolutions of so comprehensive a kind can be
regarded as views only ;—as ideas, to which an
assembly has expressed its assent, but to the exe-
cution of which there is a long way yet to be
traversed. It is the ground-plan of a building
which is intended to be built; but the question
remains whether the power and the means will
correspond with the intention.

Boox I. DIET OF LINDAU, 1496. 127

DIFFICULTIES. — DIET OF LINDAU, 1496.

A GREAT obstacle to the execution of the resolu-
tions of the diet. occurred at once in the defective
nature of its composition. A large number of
powerful Estates had not been present, and as the
obligatory force of the resolutions of an assembly
upon those not present was as yet far from being
determined, it was necessary to open separate ne-
gotiations with the absent. Among others, the
Elector of Cologne was commissioned to negotiate
with the bishops in his neighbourhood, those of
Utrecht, Miinster, Osnabriick, Paderborn, and Bre-
men; the Elector of Saxony with Liineburg,
Grubenhagen, and Denmark; and it was by no
means certain what would be their success. Here
again we find the possibility that some one might
not choose to be included in, or to consent to, the
Public Peace, assumed.*

A still more important organic defect was, that the
knightly order had taken no part in the diet. It is
manifest that the mighty development which a go-
vernment composed of different estates: (eine stdnd-
ische Verfassung) had reached in England, mainly
rests on the union of the lower nobility and the cities
in the House of Commons. In Germany it was not
the ancient usage to summon the nobility to the diet.
The consequence of this was, that the nobles refused
to conform to the resolutions passed at it, especially

* Recess and ordinances in Miiller, 459.

128 DIET OF LINDAU, 1496. Boox I.

when (as in the present case) these related to a
tax. The Franconian knights assembled in De-
cember at Schweinfurt, and declared that they
were free Franconians, nobles of the empire, bound
to shed their blood, and in every war to guard the
emperor’s crown and sceptre at the head of all
their youth capable of bearing arms; but not to
pay taxes, which was contrary to their liberties,
and would be an unheard of innovation. This
declaration had the assent of all their compeers.
Unions of the same kind were formed in the several
circles.*

We observed how much stress was laid at an
earlier period on the spiritual authorisation. The
consequence of the want of it now was that the
abbots of the empire refused to recognise the
authority of so purely secular a tribunal as the
Imperial Chamber.

There were yet other Estates whose obedience
was very doubtful. The Duke of Lorraine de-
clared that, beyond the jurisdiction of his own
tribunals, he was amenable to no other authority
than that of the king in person. The Swiss con-
federates did not indeed as yet dispute the sove-
reignty or the jurisdiction of the empire, but at
the first exercise of it they were offended and
irritated into resistance. The king of Poland de-
clared that Dantzig and Elbing were Polish cities,
and rejected all claims made upon them on the
part of the empire. As the first effect of a
vigorous medicine is to set the whole frame in

-

* Miiller, Rtth. 688, 689.

Boox I. DIET OF LINDAU, 1496. 129

agitation, so the attempts to organise the Germanic
body had the immediate result of calling into
activity the hostile principles hitherto in a state
of repose.

But if so strong an element of resistance existed
on the side of the States, to whom the resolutions
were clearly advantageous, what was to be ex-
pected from the king, whose power they controlled,
and on whom they had been forced? In contriving
the means for their execution, every thing had
been calculated on his sympathy and co-operation ;
whereas he incessantly showed that he set about the
task with repugnance.

He certainly organised the Imperial Chamber
according to its new forms. It held its first sit-
tings at the Grossbraunfels at Frankfurt-on-Main *,
on the 3rd of November. On the 21st of February
it exercised its right of pronouncing the ban for the
first time: the judge and his assessors, doctors

* Excerpta ex Collectaneis Jobi de Rorbach; Harpprecht, ii.
216. In the Frankfurt Imp. Archives, a letter is still extant
from Arnold Schwartzenberg to the council of Frankfurt, dated
on the Friday after the Feast of the Assumption (Aug. 21.) :
“Ttem uf Samstag ULF. Abend hat Graf Hug von Wernberg
nach mir geschickt, und vorgehalten, das Kammergericht werde
gelegt gen Frankfurt, wo man ein Huss dazu bekommen mocht
und ein Stuben daneben zum Gespreche.” “Also upon the
evening of Saturday, the feast of Our Blessed Lady, Count
Hugh of Wernberg sent to me and represented, that the Imperial
Chamber was transferred to Frankfurt, where it might be pos-
sible to get a house, and a room close to it for conferences.”
The price of meat and fish was to be determined, and the citizens
were to be admonished to behave in a seemly and discreet
manner (“zimlich und glimpflich ”) towards the members.

VOL. I. K

130 DIET OF LINDAU, 1496. Boox I.

and nobles, appeared in the open air; the procla-
mation of the ban, by which the condemned was
deprived of the protection of the law*, and all
and every man permitted to attack his body and
goods, was publicly read and torn in pieces. Yet
the king was far from allowing the court of justice
to take its free course. On more than one occasion
he commanded it to stop the proceedings in a cause ;
he would not suffer his fiscal, when judgment was
given against him, to pay the usual fine of the de-
feated party: he sent an assessor from the Nether-
lands whom his colleague refused to admit, because
he had not been regularly appointed ; he made no
provision for the pay of the assessors as he was
bound at first to do: after appointing Count Eitel-
friedrick of Zollern, against the will of the States,
who preferred another}, he very soon removed
him, because he wanted him for other business. _
Nor did he take any measures for collecting the
Common Penny in his own dominions, as he had
promised. The meeting had been, as we saw,
fixed for the 1st of February, but he did not
appear, and consequently it did not take place.t

It is a matter of astonishment that the reputa-

* “ Ans dem Frieden in den Unfrieden gesetat ” — literally,
put out of the peace into unpeace.— TRANSL.

} To the Prince Magnus of Anhalt, he says in one of his own
notes, “ Conventus me elegerunt, sed revocavit rex.”

{ In the Frankfurt Archives, we meet with several letters
from Jiilich, Célln, Mainz, &c., bespeaking a lodging, but also
a letter dated from Frankfurt itself on the Saturday after
Tnvocavit, to the effect that no one had as yet appeared.

Boox I. DIET OF LINDAU, 1496. 131

tion of founder of the constitution of the empire has
so long and so universally been given to a sovereign,
on whom the measures tending to that object were
absolutely forced, and who did far more to obstruct
than to promote their execution.

There is no doubt that all attempts at reform
would have been utterly defeated, had not the
king’s designs been counteracted by a prince who
had embraced most of the opinions on which it
was founded; who had been the chief agent in
bringing it thus far, and was not inclined now to
let it drop— Berthold, Elector of Mainz, born Count
of Henneberg.* Even under Frederic III., whose
service he entered at an early age, he had taken an
active share in all attempts to introduce better
order into the affairs of the empire. In 1486, he
became Elector of Mainz, and from that time
might be regarded as the most eminent member of
the States. There are men, whose whole existence
is merged in their studies or their business: there
we must seek them if we wish to know them;
their purely personal qualities or history attract
no attention. To this class of men belonged Ber-
thold of Mainz. Nobody, so far as I have been
able to discover, has thought it worth while to give
to posterity a description of his personal appearance
or characteristics: but we see him distinctly and
vividly in the administration of his diocese. At
first people feared his severity ; for his administra-

* Of the Rémhilde line, born in 1442, Diplomatische
Geschichte des Hauses Henneberg, p. 377.
K 2

1382 DIET OF LINDAU, 1496. Boox I.

tion of justice was as inexorable as it was impartial,
and his economy was rigorous ; but in a short time
every body was convinced that his austere demea-
nour was not the result of temper or of caprice,
but of profound necessity: it was tempered by
genuine benevolence; he lent a ready ear to the
complaints of the poorest and the meanest.* He
was peculiarly active in the affairs of the empire.
He was one of the venerable men of that age, who
earnestly strove to give to ancient institutions which
had lost their original spirit and their connection
with higher things, the new form adapted to the
necessities of the times. He had already conducted
the negociations of 1486; he next procured for
the towns the right of sitting in the committees;
it was mainly to him that Germany owed the pro-
mises made by Maximilian in the year 1489, and
the projects of Worms were chiefly his work. In
every circumstance he evinced that serene and
manly spirit, which, while it keeps its end steadily
‘in view, is not self-willed as to the means or manner
of accomplishing it, or pertinacious on merely inci-
dental points; he was wearied or discouraged by no
obstacles, and a stranger to any personal views: if
ever a man bore his country in his inmost heart, it
was he.

In the summer of 1496, at the diet of Lindau,
this prince acquired a degree of independent power
such as he had not enjoyed before.

In the midst of the troubles of that summer, Maxi-

* Serarius, Res Moguntina, p, 799.

~

Boox I, DIET OF LINDAU, 1496. 153

milian thought he discerned the favourable moment
in which he needed only to show himself in Italy,
in order, with the help of his allies there, to re-
establish the supremacy of the imperial power.
He summoned the States to repair to Lindau,
whither they were to bring the amount of the
Common Penny, together with as many troops as
it would suffice to pay, and whence they were
immediately to follow him; at the same time de-
claring that he would not wait for them, but must’
cross the Alps without delay with what force God
had given him.

While he put this in execution, and, equipped
rather as for some romantic enterprise of knight-
errantry than for a serious expedition, rushed on
to Italy, the States of the empire gradually as-
sembled in Lindau. They brought neither troops,
money, nor arms; their attention was directed
exclusively to internal affairs. How greatly in
acting thus, they relied on Elector Berthold is
shown (among other documents) by the instructions
to the ambassador of Brandenburg, ordering him
implicitly to follow the course pursued by that
prince.*

* In the Berlin Archives there is a Convolute concerning this
Diet of the Empire, which, along with the Instruction, contains
lst, the letters received up to the time of the arrival of the
deputies, and the propositions made by the foreign deputies ;
2nd, the protocol of the proceedings on the Friday after the
feast of St. Dionysius, Oct. 14. What is especially remarkable
in this protocol, is, that the most distinguished of the plenipo-
tentiaries, Erasmus Brandenburg, parish priest of Cotbus, was
a member of the committee, and is the reporter of its trans-

actions. The greater part is in his handwriting.
K 3

4

134 DIET OF LINDAU, 1496. Boox I.

On the 31st of August, 1496, the princes, as
many as were assembled, embarked in boats and
fetched the king’s son, Archduke Philip of Bregenz,
across the river ; on the 7th of September, the
first sitting was held. The Elector of Mainz took
his place in the centre; on his right sat the princes,
the archduke, for the first time, amongst them ;
on his left, the ambassadors or delegates of those
who did not appear in person; in front of him
stood the deputies of the cities. In the middle
was a bench for the king’s councillors, Conrad
Stiirzel and Walter von Andlo.

The Elector conducted the proceedings with un-
questioned authority. If he absented himself, which
was never but for a short time, they were stopped ;
when he returned, he was the chief speaker, whether
in the assembly or the committee; he brought
forward the propositions, demanded the grants, and
found means to keep the plenipotentiaries steady
to them. He did not conceal the grief he felt at
seeing the empire in such astate of decline. ‘ Even
in the time of Charles IV. and Sigismund,” exclaimed
he, “ the sovereignty of the empire was acknow-
ledged in Italy, which is now no longer the case.
The king of Bohemia is an elector of the empire,
and what does he do for the empire? has he not
even wrested Moravia and Silesia from it ? Prussia
and Livonia are liable to incessant attacks and
oppression, and no one troubles himself about
them ; nay, even the little which remains to the
empire is daily wrested from it, and given to one
or the other. The ordinances of Worms were made

Boox I. DIET OF LINDAU, 1496. 135

to preserve the empire from decay ; but the union
and mutual confidence which alone could sustain
it are wanting. Whence comes it that the Con-
federation enjoys such universal respect ? that
it is feared by Italians and French, by the pope,
nay, by every body? The only reason is that it is
united and of one mind. Germany ought to follow
the example. The ordinances of Worms should be
revived, not to prate about, but to execute them.” *

Berthold’s was that powerful eloquence which is
the expression of convictions founded on actual ex-
perience. The committee resolved to look into the
matter, and to see that the empire was better or-
dered. On the motion of the Brandenburg ambas-
sador, the members examined their credentials, and
found that they were sufficient for that purpose.
Such being the dispositions of the States, affairs
now took a decisive turn.

The Imperial Chamber, which had closed its
sittings in June, was induced to open them again in
November. It was determined to appropriate the
tax which was to be levied on the Jews in Regens-
burg, Niirnberg, Worms, and Frankfurt, to the
payment of the assessors. The Elector insisted that
the sentences of the court should be executed, that no
sovereign should recal his assessor, and that the
cities should have justice against the princes. It was

* These words were spoken by the Elector on the 28th Nov.
A similar effusion is cited in Scherer’s extract, and in Fels,
Erster Beitrag zur Reichsgesch. Preface, §7. In these con-
tributions is to be found the protocol of Lindau, contained in the
Frankf. A. A. vol. xvi.

kK 4

136 DIET OF LINDAU, 1496. - Boox L

resolved to transfer the chamber to Worms: the
reason assigned for which was, that it was easier
from thence to reach the four universities of
Heidelberg, Basle, Mainz, and Cologne, whenever it
was necessary ‘‘ to ask the law.”

On the 23d of December, the edict for levying the
Common Penny was renewed in the most stringent
form. The knights (Ritterschaft) who complained of
the demand made upon them by the king, were re-
minded that it was not the king who imposed this
tax, but the empire ; that it was the most equal and
the least oppressive that could be devised, and would
be of advantage to their Order, if they would only
get to horse and endeavour to earn the pay for
which this fund was in part raised.

Another meeting of the States was appointed to
consider of the disbursement of the Common Penny.

Other points were discussed ;—the necessity of
instant and effective succours for the attacked; new
regulations of the courts of justice and of the mint ;
above all, the firmest determination was expressed
to maintain unaltered the measures passed at
Worms. Should any attempt be made to thwart
or oppose them or those of the diet of Lindau,
the matter was to be referred to the Archbishop of
Mainz, who should be authorised thereupon to
convoke other members, in order that an answer
from the whole body of the States might be given,
and public order and tranquillity be defended by
them in concert.*

* In order to avoid the appearance of a conspiracy, it had
been previously resolved, “ Die Handhabung, zu Worms ver-

Boox I. DIET OF WORMS AND FREIBURG. 13%

- Allthese resolutions the Archbishop carried with-
out much difficulty. If there was occasionally some
attempt at opposition on the part of the envoys of
the princes, those of ‘the electors and of the cities
always supported him and compelled the former to
give way. They were, therefore, incorporated in the
Recess; the usual practice as to which was, that
each member should first write out for himself
the resolutions which had been passed: these were
then compared in the assembly, a fixed formula
was determined on, and signed by the whole body.

On the 10th of February 1497, the diet of
Lindau was closed. The States thanked the Arch-
bishop for the trouble he had taken, and entreated
his pardon for their negligences. The Elector, on
the other hand, excused himself for having, perhaps,
sometimes addressed them with too great earnest-
ness, and exhorted them faithfully to enforce the
resolutions that had been passed, each in his own
territory or sphere, that so the empire might be
profited.

DIET OF WORMS AND FREIBURG, 1497, 1498.

Tur matter was, however, but half settled; the
difficulties which had arisen among the States had

sigelt, vorzunehmen und aus derselben ain Grund und Einung
und Verstendniss zu nehmen und was des zu wenig seyn will
zu erweitern.” To take the declaration sealed at Worms, and
from it to construct a groundwork, union, and agreement, and
in those respects where it may come short, to enlarge it.” —
Brandenburg Protocol.

138 DIET OF WORMS Boox I.

been removed, but as yet no influence had been .
obtained over the king, whose co-operation and
executive power were indispensable.

Maximilian’s romantic enterprise had ended as
was to be expected: the same excitable fancy which
had flattered him with exaggerated hopes, had pre-
vented him from perceiving the true state of
affairs. After a short time the allies, whose as-
sistance was all he had to rely on, had quarrelled
among themselves; he had returned to Germany
filled with shame, disgust and vexation. Here he
found the finances of his hereditary domains ex-
-hausted and in the utmost disorder; the empire in
an attitude of defiance and sullen reserve, and dis-
astrous tidings following each other in quick suc-
cession. When Louis XII. ascended the throne
in 1498, Maximilian hoped that troubles would
arise in France, and that his allies would support
him in a fresh attack upon that power. The very
contrary took place: Louis, by pacific and prudent
measures, won from his subjects a degree of con-
sideration such as no king had ever before possessed ;
the Italian league endeavoured to bring about an
accommodation with him: but the most unexpected
thing was, that Maximilian’s own son, Archduke
Philip, instigated by his Netherland councillors,
without consulting his father entered into a treaty
with France, in which he promised not to agitate
any of his claims on Burgundy so long as Louis XII.
lived, and never to attempt to enforce them by arms,
or otherwise than by amicable and legal means.
The only consideration in return for this vast con-

Boox I. AND FREIBURG, 1497-8. 139

cession was the surrender of a few strong places.
Maximilian learned this when he had already begun
his preparations for war; in June 1498, in a state
of the most violent irritation, he summoned the as-
sembly of the empire which he could no longer do
without.

The assembly had opened its sittings, as had
been determined, in Worms*, but had transferred
them at the king’s request to Freiburg. Although,
in consequence of the proceedings at Lindau, affairs
were inamuch better state than before, — the Com-
mon Penny began to be really collected, the Imperial
Chamber at Worms held its regular sittings for the
administration of justice, and the diet itself exer-
cised an uncontested jurisdiction as between the
several Estates, in the more weighty and difficult
cases ; yet it was daily felt that so long as the king
remained in the equivocal and half hostile attitude
he had assumed, nothing permanent would be ac-
complished. Before the very eyes of the assembled
States, Elector John of Treves, with the help of his

* Transactions of the States of the Holy Empire at the Royal
Diet at Worms, Fr. A. vol. xvii. We see by them, amongst
other things, as a matter of complete certainty, that Maximilian
did not appear at Worms. As Hiberlin (Reichsgeschichte,
ix. 84.), however, assumes that he did, he must have been
deceived by certain documents which were only laid before the
Imperial Diet in the King’s name. At Freiburg, July 3rd, the
Tuesday after the Visitation of the Holy Virgin, Maximilian
made excuses for not having appeared at Worms: “ he had been
obliged to establish an excellent government (Regiment) in his
hereditary states,” &c., “it had been commented on as folly in
him,” &c., “ but now he was present.” (Brand. Protocol.)

140 DIET OF WORMS Foon et

secular neighbours, Baden, the Palatinate, Hessen
and Juliers, invaded the town of Boppard, and forced
it to submit and to do homage to him. The Swiss
resisted a sentence of the Imperial Chamber against
St. Gall, held the most insolent language, and were
very near issuing formal diffidations. The States ~
pointed out to the king, in remonstrances incessantly
reiterated, that, without his presence, neither the
Public Peace could be maintained, nor the law
executed, nor the taxes duly collected.

At length, on the 8th June 1498, he arrived in
Freiburg, but neither with the views, nor in the tem-
per, that his subjects wished. His soul was galled
by the failure of all his plans;—deeply wounded
by the defection of the Netherlands, and ardently
excited by the thought of a war with France; the
more, I think, from a feeling of the difficulty, nay,
impracticability of it. At the very first audience
(28th June) ‘he vented all this storm of passion
upon the princes. He said that he did not come to
ask their advice, for he was resolved to make war
upon France, and he knew that they would dissuade
him: he only wished to hear whether they would
support him as they were bound to do, and as they
had promised at Worms. It was possible that he
might accomplish nothing decisive; but, at any rate,
he would give the king of France a slap in the face
(Backenstreich), such as should be remembered for
_ ahundred years. ‘ Lam betrayed by the Lombards,”
said he, “I am abandoned by the Germans: but
I will not allow myself again to be bound hand and
foot and hung upon a nail, as I did at Worms. War

Boox I. AND FREIBURG, 1497-8. 141

I must make, and I will make, let people say what
they may. Rather than give it up, I would get a
dispensation from the oath that I swore behind the
altar at Frankfurt; for I have duties not only to
the empire, but to the House of Austria: I say this,
and I must say it, though I should be forced on
that account to lay the crown at my feet and trample
on it.”

The princes listened to him with amazement.
‘Your Majesty,” replied the Elector of Mainz,
‘is pleased to speak to us in parables, as Christ did
to his disciples #’ They begged him to bring his
proposals before the assembly, which would then
proceed to deliberate upon them.* Strange meet-
ing of this monarch with this assembly! Maxi-
milian lived in the interests of his House; in the
contemplation of the great political relations of
Europe; in the feeling that he was the bearer of
the highest dignity of Christendom, which was now
in jeopardy: he was ambitious, warlike, and needy.
The States, on the other hand, had their attention
fixed on internal affairs; what they desired above
all things was a government of order and law;
they were cautious, pacific, frugal: they wanted
to check and control the king; he to excite and
hurry on the States.

Nothing less than the singular prudence, mode-
ration, and sense which distinguished the Arch-

* The Brandenburg protocol, our chief source of information
regarding the Diet of Freiburg, adds, the king spoke “with
many marvellous words and gestures, so as to be completely
obscure and incomprehensible.”

142 DIET OF WORMS Boox I.

bishop of Mainz were necessary to prevent a total
breach between them.

He conciliated the king by placing before his eyes
the prospect of the revenue likely to accrue from the
Common Penny. He prevailed on the assembly to
offer the king immediate payment of the sum
formerly promised at Worms ; on the understanding
that Maximilian should himself contribute to the
fuller and more exact collection of the tax by his
own example and assistance. This brought on a more
distinct explanation. Every individual was called
upon to state how much of the Common Penny he
had collected. A slight review of these statements
will give us an insight into the situation of the
German princes of that day.

Elector Berthold of Mainz has collected and paid
in the tax; but some persons in his dominions had
resisted. ‘To these he has announced that they sub-
jected themselves to the ban of the empire, from
which he would not protect them.— Cologne and
Treves have received only a part of their share of
the tax: they have met with not less refractory
subjects, who excused themselves with the delays
of the Netherlands.—The Electors of Brandenburg
and of Saxony have collected the greater part of the
tax, and are ready to pay it in; but there are cer-
tain lords in Saxony of whom the Elector says, he
can do nothing with them ; he does not answer for
them.*— The ambassador of the Elector Palatine,

* In the Instruction of the Elector of Brandenburg it was
further said, “ Scarcely half of the Common Penny had been
got in, on account of the great mortality. His electoral Grace

4

Boox I. AND FREIBURG, 1497-8. 143

on the other hand, has not even instructions to give
any distinct explanation ; George of Landshut, too,
gave only an evasive answer. Albert of Bavaria
expressed himself better disposed, but he com-
plained of the great number of recalcitrants he
met with. Nor was this to be regarded as a
pretext: the Bavarian states had, in fact, made
great difficulties ; they had enough to do with
the wants of their own country; they thought. it
strange that the empire, also, should make claims
upon them.* The resistance in Franconia was not
less vehement ; the Margraves of Brandenburg
were forced in some cases to resort to distraint. —
The cities, already prepared for contributions of
this kind, had a much easier task. Only three out
of the whole number were still in arrear— Cologne,
Miihlhausen, and Nordhausen; the others had paid
in their whole contingent.

Although the matter was, as we see, far from
being perfectly accomplished, it was put into a good
train, and Maximilian was highly satisfied with the
result. He now condescended to give a report of
what his own hereditary dominions had raised.
From Austria, Styria, and Tyrol he had collected
27,000 gulden; in the Netherlands, on the con-
trary, great resistance had been made. “ Some,”
says the king’s report, ‘‘ those of the Welsch
(i.e. foreign, not German) sort, said they were not
under the empire. Those who hold to the German

would either deliver up what had been hitherto received, sepa-
rately, or would be responsible for the whole together.”
* Freiberg, Gesch, der Baier. Landst. i. 568. 663.

144 DIET OF WORMS -Boox I-

nation, on the other hand, declared that they would
wait and see what their neighbours on the Rhine
did.”

Unfortunately it is impossible, from the reports
before us, to arrive at any statistical results. The
payments were too unequal, and the accounts are
generally wanting.

It was, however, for the moment a great point
gained, that the States could either pay the king
the money he required immediately, or at least pro-
mise it with certainty. He was thus induced, on
his side, to devote his attention and interest to the
affairs of the empire.

The Public Peace was guarded with fresh se-
vere clauses, especially against the abettors of the
breakers of it. The president of the Imperial Chamber
was empowered, in peculiarly weighty and dangerous
cases, to call together princes of the empire at his
own discretion, and to require their help. A former
proposition of the Imperial Chamber, viz. to confer
the right of representation on the heir, was at length
carried, in spite of the objection that a third part
of the nation held to the rules of the Sachsenspiegel
(Mirror of Saxony), which were at direct variance
with that right.* A regular criminal procedure was

* A very important protocol, which serves to complete the
others, in Harpprecht, ii. p. 341. In the Berlin Archives, we
find the document, which Miiller, ii. 442., gives under the title
“ An Explanation of the Imperial Chamber,” with some additions,
however; e.g. “with respect to the article concerning the
succession of daughters and grandchildren, this article has been
deferred till the arrival of the king’s majesty.” The presence of
the king himself was needful to bring the affair to a conclusion.

Boox I. AND FREIBURG, 1498. 145

taken into consideration, chiefly on account of the

frequent illegal infliction of the punishment of death,

In order to put a stop to the confusion in the cur-.
rency, it was resolved to coin all gulden of the size

and form of the gulden of the Rhenish electors. In

short, this diet of Freiburg, which opened so storm-

ily, gradually despatched more business of various

kinds than any that had yet met.

The question now remained what view the States
would take of European affairs. The French had
made the proposal that Genoa and Naples should
be ceded to them, in which case they would not
disturb Milan, and would conclude a permanent
peace on all other points;—a proposal which, if sin-
cere, had much to recommend it, and was especially
agreeable to the German princes. They argued
that Genoa was little to be depended upon in any
case, and was seeking a new master every day ;
and what had the empire to do with Naples and
Sicily ? It would, in fact, be far more advantageous
to them to have a powerful prince there, who could
hold the Turks in check. The sovereignty of Italy
was a matter of indifference to them; they declared
themselves generally opposed to all alliances with
the Welsch (non-Germans). Such, however, was
not the opinion of the electors, and least of all,
the ecclesiastical. They reminded their opponents
that Genoa had been called by Frederic I. a cham-
ber of the empire; that Naples was a fief of the
papal see, and must therefore be held by the King
of the Romans, the steward of the church. But
above all, that they must not suffer the King of

VOL. I. L s

146 EVENTS OF THE WAR. Boox’ I.

France to become too powerful, lest he should at-
tempt to get possession of the empire. They would
not abate a single iota of the idea of the Germanic
empire, with which indeed their own importance was
indissolubly associated. These sentiments, which
rendered them at once partisans of the king, were at
length triumphant: the negotiations which Fre-
deric of Saxony had set on foot with Louis XII.
fell to the ground: at the moment when the States
had placed the institutions of the empire on some-
thing like a firm footing, they were forced into a
war.

Two great conflicting tendencies had been at
work from the beginning of this reign; that of the
king, to hurry the nation into warlike enterprises;
and that of the States, to establish its internal
tranquillity. They now seemed resolved on con-
cession, union, and concert. The king had con-
firmed and established the proceedings of Worms,
which were disagreeable to him; and the States
acceded to his desire to defend the majesty of the
empire by arms.

EVENTS OF THE WAR.

Ir remained however to be asked, whether either
party had distinctly conceived, or maturely weighed,
what they were about to undertake.

There may be governments to which war is a
source of strength; but it can never be so to those
which have a strong federative element, yet in

Boox I. EVENTS OF THE WAR, 1498. 147

which the danger attendant on failure is not common
to the whole body. For Germany, nothing was
more necessary than peace, in order that institutions
yet in their infancy might be allowed tranquil
growth, and identify themselves with the habits
of the people; and the scarcely recognised prin-
ciple of obedience have time to take root. The
collection and expenditure of the Common Penny
needed above all to become habitual. But the diet
at which these measures had been concluded was
hardly closed when the nation rushed forth to war.

Nor was this all. The power they were about
to attack was the earliest and the most com-
pletely consolidated of any in Europe; a new
sovereign, who had long enjoyed universal con-
sideration, had assumed the reins of government
and commanded the entire and cordial obedience of
his subjects. Such was the monarch, and such
the kingdom, which Maximilian, in daring reliance
on the assistance of the empire, now proceeded in
person to attack. After having regained for his
troops the advantages they had lost in Upper
Burgundy ™*, he fell upon Champagne with a con-
siderable army. A truce was now offered by the
enemy, which he declined.

I do not doubt that the leading princes saw the
danger of the course Maximilian was taking ; but

* The Fugger MS. relates at length that the Germans had
kept the advantage in a skirmish, Sept. 22. 1498, and had re-
conquered castles they had previously lost. It is incredible
that Maximilian, as Zurita asserts, should have had 25,000 in-
fantry, and 5000 horse in the field.

m2

148 EVENTS OF THE WAR, 1498. Boox I.

they could not prevent it. The agreement they
had come to at Freiburg was obtained solely by
the consent of the States to assist him in his
campaign:—they must let him try his fortune.

The great superiority of the political position
which Louis XII. had contrived to acquire, now
manifested itself. He had gained over the old
allies of Maximilian in Spain, Italy, and even the
Netherlands. Milan and Naples, which he had
resolved to attack, had no other allies than the
King of the Romans himself.

But even in Germany itself, Louis found means
to excite enmities sufficient to furnish Maximilian
with occupation. The Palatinate had always
maintained a good understanding with France ;
active negotiations were set on foot with Switzer-
land and the Grisons. Duke Charles of Gueldres,
(of the house of Egmont, deposed by Charles the
Bold, but which had never renounced its claims, )
was the first to take up arms.

Maximilian was driven out of Champagne by
incessant rain and the overflow of the rivers.
He turned his arms upon Gueldres, and, with
the assistance of Juliers and Cleves, gained some
advantages; but they were not decisive: the
country adhered faithfully to Duke Charles, who
had secured its attachment by granting it new
privileges. Hence it happened, that Maximilian
could not attend the assembly of the empire fixed
to be held on the eve of St. Catherine (November
21st) at Worms, indispensable as that was to
the completion and execution of the ordinances

Boox I. EVENTS OF THE WAR. 149

agreed on: this meeting, where, if he had been
present, resolutions of the utmost practical im-
portance would probably have been passed, broke
up without doing any thing.* But, besides this,
the troubles in Switzerland now broke out in the
form of regular war. The empire was as yet far
from renouncing its sovereignty over the con-
federated cantons: it had cited them before the
imperial chambers, nor had any objection been
taken to the legality of such a proceeding; the
Common Penny had been levied in them; so lately
as at the diet of Freiburg, the resolution was
passed, “to keep the powerful cities of the Con-
federation which bear the imperial eagle in their
arms, in their duty and allegiance to the empire,
and to invite them again to attend the meetings of
the States. But these invitations could have no
effect in a country where the want of internal
peace was not felt, because they had secured it
for themselves and were already in possession of
a tolerably well-ordered government. <A_ party
which had always been hostile to the King of
the Romans, and which found it more expedient
to earn French money than to adhere to the
empire gained the upper hand. In this state of
things, the Grisons, who were threatened by Tyrol
on account of the part they had taken injurious
to the peace of the empire, by sheltering persons

* Letter from Maximilian to Bishop Henry of Bamberg:
Harpprecht, ii. 399. The king invited the assembly to meet at
Cologne, where, however, many of the members did not appear,
as their instructions only spoke of Worms.

L3

150 EVENTS OF THE WAR, 1499. Boox I.

under the king’s ban, found immediate assistance
from the confederates. In one moment the whole
frontier, Tyrol and Grisons, Swabia and Switzerland,
stood in hostile array.

Strange that the measures taken to introduce
order into the empire should have had results so
directly contrary to the views with which they
were undertaken! The demands of the diet and of
the imperial chamber set the Swiss Confederation
in a ferment; the summoning of the Grisons to
deliver up a fugitive under ban occasioned their
defection. If, on the other side, the city of Con-
stance, after long hesitation, joined the Swabian
league, this act was regarded with the utmost
disgust by the Swiss, because the city possessed
the jurisdiction over the Thurgau, a district of
which it had obtained possession some years before.
Independently of this, there existed, ever since the
formation of the league, a hatred between Swabia
and Switzerland which had long vented itself in
mutual insults and now broke out in a wild war
of devastation.

The constitution of the empire was far from
being strong enough—its unity was far from having
sunk deeply enough into the mind and conscious-
ness of the people — to allow it to put forward its
full strength in the conflict with France: the States
convened, or rather huddled together in the utmost
hurry at Mainz, passed partial and infirm reso-
lutions; it was, in fact, only the members of the
Swabian league who supported the king, and even
these were not inclined to risk their lives in a battle
with sturdy peasants.

Boox I. DIET OF AUGSBURG, 1500. 151

Under these circumstances, the empire was in no
condition to make a successful resistance to those
designs of King Louis upon Italy which Maxi-
milian had vainly desired to prevent. Whilst the
Upper Rhine was torn by private wars, the French
crossed the Alps and took Milan without difficulty.
Maximilian was compelled to make a very disad-
vantageous peace with the Swiss, by which not
only the jurisdiction of the Thurgau was lost, but
their general independence was fixed on an im-
movable basis.

A successful war would have strengthened the
constitution of the empire: the inevitable effect of
these reverses was to overthrow or, at the least, to
modify it.

DIET OF AUGSBURG, AND ITS CONSEQUENCES.

THE immediate result of this assembly was that
the authority of the king was even more limited
than before; the principle of representative govern-
ment (stiindische Princip) gained another victory,
by which it appeared to have secured a fresh and
lasting ascendency. *

* Stindische Princip is not literally “representative prin-
ciple,” or rather, it is that and something more. Stdndisch, the
adjective of Stand, (status, class, order,) as applied 1o govern-
ment, signifies representation of the several states or orders of
the nation. The English and the Swedish constitutions are
stindisch ; the American, though representative, is not stdn-
disch at all, since there are no Stdénde to represent. I may here
point out another difficulty arising out of the double and often

L4

152 DIET OF AUGSBURG, Boox I.

At the diet which was opened at Augsburg on the
10th of April, 1500, it was agreed that the means
which had been hitherto adopted for the establish-
ment of a military organisation and a more regular
government were insufficient. The prospect of col-
lecting the Common Penny was too remote; events
succeeded each other too rapidly to allow of the
possibility of the States constantly assembling first
for the purpose of guiding or controlling them.
Adhering to the idea which had got possession of
their minds, they now resolved to try other means to
the same end. They proposed to collect the forces
they wanted by a sort of levy. Every four hun-
dred inhabitants, assembling according to their
parishes, were to furnish and equip one foot soldier,
—a method which had been tried some time before
in France: the cavalry proportioned to this infantry
was to be raised by the princes, counts, and lords,
according to a certain scale. A tax was to be
laid on those who could not take an active share
in the war, — clergy, Jews, and servants, and the
amount was to form a fund for the war; proposi-
tions which, as it will be seen, are immediately con-
nected with the former ones, and which assume an
equally complete and comprehensive unity of the
empire. Maximilian embraced them with joy; he

equivocal use of the word state, which represents both Staat
and Stand —two words of totally different meaning. Staat,
the state, is the whole civil and political body of the nation ;
Stand (status) is a class or order of the nation. The United
States of America are Staaten ;. the States of the Empire were
Stdnde,—'TRANSL.

- Book I. AND ITS CONSEQUENCES, 1500. 153

made his calculations, and gave the Spanish am-
bassador to understand that he would shortly have
30,000 men in the field. On the other hand, he
adopted a plan which he had rejected five years
before, and which must have been odious to a man
of his character ; he now acknowledged the neces-
sity of having a permanent imperial council, which
might relieve him and the States from incessant
recurrence to the diets, and to whose vigilance and
energy the execution of the ordinances when
issued might be entrusted.* A committee was
formed for a fresh discussion of this institution,
and its suggestions were then submitted to the
general assembly of the States. Every member
had the right of proposing amendments in writing.

The business was treated with all the gravity it
deserved. There were two points to be considered;
the composition, and the rights and functions, of the
proposed council. In the first place, a position
suited to their high rank, and to the influence they
had hitherto possessed in the country, was assigned
to the electors. Each of them was to send a dele-
gate to the council; one of them, according to
regular rotation, to be always present. The much
more numerous college of princes was less favour-
ably treated. The intention had at first been to
let the spiritual side be represented according to

* Protocol of the Imperial Diet of Augsburg, in the Frankfurt
Archives, vol. xix., unfortunately not so circumstantial as might
be wished; e.g. the objections which the cities had made, con~
tained in three bills or advertisements, are not inserted, “as
every city deputy knew them.”

154 DIET OF AUGSBURG, Boox I.

the archbishoprics; the temporal, according to the
so-called countries, Swabia, Franconia, Bavaria, and
the Netherlands* ; but these divisions neither cor-
responded with the idea of a compact and united
empire, nor with the existing state of things; and
the assembly now preferred to include spiritual
and temporal princes together within certain cir-
cles or districts. Six of these were marked out,
and were at first called provinces of the German
nation, Franconia, Bavaria, Swabia, Upper Rhine,
Westphalia, and Lower Saxony; they were, how-
ever, notas yet called by these names, but were dis-
tinguished according to the several states which
inhabited them.t The interests whose disseverance
would, in any case, have been absurd and purpose-
less, were thus more closely united. Counts and
prelates and cities were all included within these
circles. It was also determined that one temporal
prince, one count and one prelate should always
have a seat in the council. Austria and the Ne-
therlands were to send two delegates. Little notice
had at first been taken of the cities; nor, indeed, in
spite of the original intention, had they at a later
period been admitted to a place in the imperial
chamber ; but they thought this extremely injurious
to them, and the more unjust, since the burthen of
raising the funds for the expenses of the States must

* These are Salzburg, Magdeburg, Bremen, and Besancon ;
the electorates were of course excluded; the Netherlands on the
Maass were instead of Saxony. Datt, de Pace Publica, p. 603.

+ Order of the Regency (Regiment) established at Augsburg,
in the collections of the Recesses of the Imperial Diets.

Boox I. AND ITS CONSEQUENCES, 1500. 153

fall mainly upon them ; and at length they succeeded
in obtaining the right of sending two members to
the imperial council, The cities which were to enjoy
this privilege in turn were immediately named:
Cologne and Strasburg for the circle of the Rhine;
Augsburg and Ulm for the Swabian ; Niirnberg and
Frankfurt for the Franconian ; Liibeck and Gosslar
for the Saxon: the delegates were always to be sent
by two of these districts.* A curious illustration
of the old and fundamental principle of the Ger-
manic empire, —that every right should be attached
as soon as created, in a certain form, to a certain
place ; so that the general right wears the air of a
special privilege.

Thus the three colleges of which the diet con-
sisted were also the component parts of the imperial
council, which may, indeed, be regarded as a per-
manent committee of the States. The king had no
other right there than to preside in person, or to
send a representative (Statthalter). The prepon-
derance was doubtless on the side of the States,
and especially in the hands of the electors, who were
now so firmly united and so strongly represented.

This council, the character of which was so de-
cidedly that of class representation (stdéndisch),

* Chiefly from the letter of Johann Reysse to the City
of Frankfurt, Aug. 17. 1500. “So die Fiirsten kainen von
Stetten zu Reichsraidt verordnet hatten, so haben die Stette
bedacht,” &e. As the princes had appointed none of the
cities to the council of the empire, the cities had therefore
bethought themselves,” &“c. He further remarks, that the
princes immediately caused three candidates to be proposed to
them from each city, out of whom they chose one.

156 DIET OF AUGSBURG, Boox I.

was immediately invested with the most im-
portant powers. Every thing that regarded the
administration of justice and the maintenance of
public tranquillity; every thing relating to the mea-
sures of defence to be taken against the infidels and
other enemies ; foreign as well as internal affairs, lay _
within its domain; it had power “ to originate, to dis-
cuss, to determine.” It is evident that the essential
business of the government was transferred to it,
and indeed it assumed the title of the government
or regency of the empire* (Reichsregiment).f

It seemed now as if not only the judicial but
the legislative and administrative parts of the
government must assume a thoroughly represen-
tative stdndisch character.

If Maximilian suffered himself to be persuaded

* That this was regarded as a sort of abdication is shown by
the expression of the Venetian ambassador. Relatione di S.
Zaccaria Contarini, venuto orator del re di Romani 1502: in
Sanuto’s Chronicle, Vienna Archives, vol. iv. “Fo terminato
et fo opinion del re rinontiar il suo poter in 16, nominati il
senato imperial, quali fossero quelli avesse (i quali avessero) a
chiamar le diete e tuor le imprese.”

+ The translation commonly in use for Reichsregiment (council
of regency) does not convey any definite or correct idea to
the mind of the reader, nor does any better suggest itself. Das
Regiment, is as nearly as possible, the government, according
to the common and inaccurate use of the word, but that is far
too vague and general. What its powers and functions were
we see in the text. Eichhorn (vol. iii. p. 127.) says: “ This
institution was agreeable neither to the emperor nor to the
States. For the former it was too independent, and for the
latter, too active; and hence it remained only two years assem-
bled.”—Transt.

Boox I. AND ITS CONSEQUENCES, 1500. 157

to make such large concessions in Augsburg, it
was, doubtless, only because the preparations for
war depended upon them; because he hoped by
this means to obtain from the States a durable,
voluntary, cordial and effective support in his
foreign enterprises. On the 14th of August, after
every thing was concluded, he urged the States to
take example from him, and to do something for
the empire, as he had done. He worked himself up,
as it were intentionally, to the expectation that this
would take place; he wished to believe it; but his
hopes alternated with secret fears that, after all, it
would not take place, and that he should have sur-
rendered his rights in vain. He betrayed the
greatest agitation of mind; a feeling of impending
danger and of present wrong, as he himself ex-
pressed it. Whilst he reminded the assembly of
the oaths and vows by which each of them was
bound to the holy empire, he added that unless
more and better was done than before, he would
not wait till the crown was torn from his head, he
would rather himself cast it down at his feet.*

Very little time elapsed before he got into various
disputes with the States. He was obliged to con-
sent to publish an edict against the disobedient,
the penalties attached to which were of a less se-
vere nature than he deemed necessary.

A Captain-general of the empire, Duke Albert of
Bavaria, was appointed, with whom Maximilian
speedily felt that he could never agree.

* Letter from Reysse, Aug. 17

158 DIET OF AUGSBURG, . Boox I.

The armament of the succours agreed upon did
not proceed, in spite of the new council of the
empire, which assembled in the year 1500. In
April, 1501, the lists of the population of the
several parishes, which were the necessary basis of ©
the whole levy, were not yet sent in.

Lastly, the imperial council assumed an attitude
utterly disagreeable to the king. Negotiations were
set on foot, and a truce concluded, with Louis XII.
of France, whom Maximilian had thought to crush
with the weight of the empire. The council was
not averse to grant the king of France Milan as a
fief of the empire, at his request.*

At this the whole storm of anger and disgust which
Maximilian had so long with difficulty restrained
burst forth. He saw himself thralled and fettered
as to internal affairs, and as to external, not sup-
ported. His provincial Estates in Tyrol remarked to
him how insignificant he was become in the empire.

He appeared for a moment at the Council of
Regency in Niirnberg, but only to complain of the
indignities offered him}, and of the increasing

* Miller Reichstagsstaat, p. 63.

{ In this Maximilian was not entirely wrong. It is not to
be believed to what lengths the French Ambassador went. He
said without reserve, that the reason why Maximilian took
the part of Naples so warmly was, that he had been paid 30,000
ducats, though the negotiator of the affair had pocketed one half
of the sum, and the remainder only had come into the hands
of the emperor. He said the King of France had no thought of
injuring the empire. But if they made war on him, then the king
would find his way into the enemies’ quarters as readily as they
into his—And yet to this ambassador the council of the empire

Boox I. AND ITS CONSEQUENCES, 1502. 159

disorders of the empire. He remained but a few
days.

It had been determined that the Council of
Regency should be empowered to summon an
assembly of the States in cases of urgency. The
state of things now appeared to that body highly
urgent, and it did not delay to use the right con-
ferred upon it. The king did every thing he
could to thwart it.

Another ordinance bound the king not to grant
the great fiefs without consulting the electors. As
if to punish the States for their negotiations with
Louis XII., he now granted, of his own sole
authority, the fief of Milan to this his old enemy.*

But if the king had not power enough to enforce
order in the empire, he had enough to trouble that
which was as yet but imperfectly established. In
the beginning of the year 1502, every thing that
had been begun in Augsburg had fallen into a state
of utter dissolution. The Council of Regency and the
assessors of the imperial chamber, who neither
received their salaries nor were allowed to exercise
their functions, dispersed and went home. To the .
king, this was rather agreeable than otherwise.
He erected a court of justice exactly similar to
that of his father, with assessors arbitrarily ap-

gave a testimonial, to the effect that if he had not accomplished
the king’s object, the fault lay not in him but in circumstances.
Recreditive, May 25. 1501 ; Miiller, p. 110.

* Contarini alleges the following very peculiar motive: — ~
“ Lo episcopo di Magonza voleva per il sigillo 80™ duc. onde
parse al re di Romani d’acordarsi et aver lui questi danari.”

160 DIET OF AUGSBURG, Boox I.

pointed, over which he presided himself. It is
evident from one of his proclamations that he medi-
tated establishing in like manner a government
(Regiment) nominated solely by himself, and, by
its means, carrying into execution the plan of a mi-
litary organisation determined on in Augsburg.
This conduct necessarily excited a universal
ferment. A Venetian ambassador, Zaccharia Con-
tarini, who was in Germany in the year 1502, was
astonished at the great unpopularity of the king,
—how ill people spoke of him, how little they
respected or cared for him. Maximilian himself
said, ‘‘ He would he were Duke of Austria, then
people would think something of him; as King of
the Romans he received nothing but indignities.” *
Once more did the electors resolve jointly and
resolutely to oppose his will. On the 30th of June,
1502, at a solemn congress at Gelnhausen, they
bound themselves to hold together in all important
affairs ; to act as one man at the imperial diets, and
always to defend the wishes of the majority; to
allow of no oppressive mandates, no innovations,
no diminution of the empire; and, lastly, to meet
four times every year, for the purpose of de-
liberating on the public affairs and _ interests.
It does not distinctly appear whether they really,
as was reported, came to the resolution to dethrone

* Relatione, 1. c. of 1502. ““Tl re é assa odiato, a poca obe-
dientia in li tre stadi: questi senatori electi é venuti nimici del
re: adeo il re dice mal di loro e loro del re. Il re a ditto pit
volte vorria esser duca d’ Austria, perche saria stimato duca, che
imperator é vituperato.” .

Boox I. AND ITS CONSEQUENCES, 1502. 161

the king; but what they did was in fact the same
thing. Without consulting him, they announced a
meeting of the empire on the Ist of the November
following; every member communicated to the
one seated next him the topics on which they
were to deliberate. They were the same which
had formed the subject of all former deliberations
of the Germanic body: the Turkish war, the re-
lations. with the pope, the public expenditure, but,
above all, the establishment of law, tranquillity and
order; with a view to the maintenance of which,
some new ordinances were presently inserted, to
come into force after the Imperial Chamber and
Council of Regency should cease to exist.*

The Elector Palatine, who had rather opposed
the former measures of the diet, now that it had
come to a breach with the king, distinguished him-
self by his active and zealous co-operation.

Maximilian was in the greatest perplexity. While
he complained that attacks were made on the so-
vereignty which was his of right as crowned king
of the Romans, —while he sought to take credit for
having of his own accord established the Council of
Regency and the Chamberf, he did not feel himself
strong enough to forbid the proposed assembly of the
empire; he therefore took the course of proclaiming

* T found them in the Archives of Berlin and Dresden; to the
Duke of Saxony they had sent the united electors of Bran-
denburg and Saxony. Miiller has but a very unsatisfactory
notice of the subject. “

+ Letter from Schwiibischwerd, Nov. 2. Frankf. R. A.,
tom. xx.

VOL. I. M

162 ‘DIET OF AUGSBURG, Boox I.

it himself; announcing that he would be present at
it, and would take counsel with the princes and elec-
tors on an expedition against the Turks; the neces-
sity for which daily became more urgent. This was,
in truth, not very unlike the conduct of King Rupert,
or the manner in which, at a later period, the kings
of France put themselves at the head of factions
which they could not subdue.

But the electoral princes of Germany would not
even make this concession. Some had already ar-
rived at Gelnhausen for the proposed diet; among
them a papal legate ; and many others had bespoken
dwellings, when a proclamation of the Elector Pa-
latine of the 18th October was circulated, putting
off the diet.*

To compensate for this they held an extraor-
dinary meeting in Wiirzburg, at which they re-
newed their opposition, and announced a general
assembly of the empire for the next Whitsuntide.

Maximilian, who was about to set out on a journey
to the Netherlands, issued a proclamation, in which
he invited the States to repair to his court, and to
consult with him concerning the Turkish war and
Council of Regency. F

* Hinsburg, near Frankfurt, Oct. 20. (Thursday after Galli.)
Gelnhausen sent to Frankfurt the letter of the elector Berthold,
which arrived on the 19th, wherein the latter also declared “the
diet appointed at Gelnhausen was delayed from special causes,
and removed to another place.”

+ Antorf, April 7. Fr. A. “ Des Reichsregiments wegen der
Personen so daran geordnet seyen wir dann nit so pald erlangen
haben miigen und dadurch wiederum in Anstand kommen ist.”
—“ As to the Council of Regency, on account of the persons

Boox I. AND ITS CONSEQUENCES, 1502. 163

Of the meeting summoned by the king there
exists not a trace; that appointed by the electors,
however, certainly took place in June 1503, at

_. Mainz, though we are unable to discover whether

it was numerously attended. Maximilian’s mea-
sures were here opposed, on the ground that they
were injurious to the empire. As there was nothing
to be feared from his Council of Regency (since he
was obliged to confess that he had been unable to
find fitting members), the meeting contented itself
with attacking his tribunal. They declared to him
that no prince of the empire would consent to sub-
mit to its decisions. They reminded him of the
ordinances passed at Worms and sugebaeey and
urged him to adhere to them.

Such was the result of the attempts made in the
year 1503 to constitute the Germanic body.

The authority of the empire was restored neither
in Italy, nor in the Swiss Confederation, nor on the
eastern frontier, where the Teutonic knights were
incessantly pressed upon by the Poles and Russians.
At home, the old disorders had broken out new.
Not only had the attempt to establish a firm and
durable constitution for war and peace utterly
failed, but there was no longer any tribunal of
universally recognised authority.

The highest powers in the nation, the king and
his electors, had fallen into irreconcilable discord.
In Elector Berthold, especially, Maximilian beheld
a dangerous and determined foe. It had already

fitted for it, we have not been able to create it so auiekly, and
accordingly it is again delayed.”
M 2

164 DIET OF AUGSBURG. * Boox I.

been reported to him from Augsburg that Mainz
had spoken contemptuously of him to the other
princes; and obsequious people had given him a
list of not less than twenty-two charges which the
Elector brought against him. Maximilian had
stifled his anger, and had said nothing; but the
impression now made upon him by every opposition
he encountered, by every consequence of the Augs-
burg constitution that he had not anticipated, was
the more profound; he ascribed every thing to the
crafty schemes of the sagacious old man. A hostile
and bitter correspondence took place between the
king and the arch-chancellor.* Maximilian re-
torted upon his adversary a list of charges, twenty-
three in number;— one more than those brought
against himself by Mainz, which he still kept con-
cealed, but with whose contents he only fed his re-
sentment the more constantly in secret. f

A state of things most perilous to himself.

The other Electors adhered firmly to Berthold,
who, in the midst of all these troubles, had formed a
fresh and strict alliance with the Palatinate. The
cities clung to him as closely as ever. There was a
general feeling through the nation that the fate of
Wenceslas was impending over Maximilian ;—that
he would be deposed. It is said that the Elector

* Gudenus IV., 547. 551.

+ ® Konig] Maj Anzeigen, item die Ursach darumb des Reichs
Regiment und Wolfart zu Augspurg aufgericht stocken beliben
ist.” Declarations of his Royal Majesty, also the cause why the
government and welfare of the empire established at Augsburg
have stood stock-still."—Frankf. A. A.

Boox I. IMPROVED FORTUNES OF MAXIMILIAN. 165

Palatine had formally proposed this measure in the
electoral council ; that shortly after, the king arrived
one day unexpectedly at a castle belonging to that
prince where his wife was residing, and that during
their morning’s repast, he gave her to understand
that he was perfectly acquainted with her husband’s
designs. Such, however, was the grace and charm
of his manner and the imposing dignity of his
person and bearing, that the project was aban-
doned.* However this may be, his affairs were
in as bad a situation as possible. The European
opposition to Austria once more obtained that in-
fluence on the interior of Germany, formerly ac-
quired through Bavaria, and now through the
Palatinate, which maintained a close connection
with France and Bohemia.

Yet Maximilian had still powers and resources
in store; and it was the Palatinate which soon
afforded him an opportunity to rally and to apply
them.

IMPROVED FORTUNES OF MAXIMILIAN. DIET OF
COLOGNE AND CONSTANCE; 1505 anv 1507.

In the first place Maximilian had connected
himself with one of the most powerful houses of
Europe. The marriage of his son Philip with
the Infanta Johanna of Spain not only directly
opened very brilliant prospects to his family, but
indirectly afforded it a defence against the ag-
gressions of France, in the claims, the policy, and

* Anecdote in Fugger, the truth of which, however, I will

not warrant.
M 3

166 IMPROVED FORTUNES OF MAXIMILIAN. Boox I,

the arms of Spain. After a momentary good un--
derstanding in Naples, a war had just broken out
between these two powers, the results of which
inclined in favour of Spain; so that the consider-
ation of France began to decline in Germany, and
the public confidence in the fortunes of Austria,
to revive.

Moreover, Maximilian had (which was much
more important) a party at home among the
States. If the electors and the cities in alliance
with Mainz were hostile to him, he had won over
devoted friends and adherents among the princes,
both spiritual and temporal.

For the name and state of King of the Romans
was not an empty sound. In the general affairs
of the realm his power might be controlled; but
the functions and the sacred dignity of sove-
reign head of the empire still gave him consider-
able influence over individual families, districts
and towns. He was exactly the man to turn this
influence to advantage.

By means of unremitting attention and timely
interference he gradually succeeded in getting a
certain number of bishoprics filled according to
his wishes. We find among them the names of *
Salzburg, Freisingen, Trent, Eichstiidt, Augsburg,
Strasburg, Constance, Bamberg: all these sees were
now, as far as their chapters would permit, par-
tisans of Maximilian, and favourers of his projects.*

* Pasqualigo, Relatione di Germania (MS. in the Court
Library at Vienna), to whom I am indebted for this remark,

Boox I. PARTISANS OF MAXIMILIAN. 167

In these ecclesiastical affairs his connection with
the pope was especially useful to him. For ex-
ample, when a prebend of the cathedral of Augs-
burg became vacant in 1500, it was the papal
legate who conferred it on the king’s chancellor,
Mathew Lang (the vacancy having occurred in a
papal month). The chapter raised a thousand ob-
Jections; it would admit no man of the burgher class,
and, least of all, a son of a burgher of Augsburg:
but Maximilian said, one who was good enough to
be his councillor and thancellor was good enough
to be an Augsburg canon. At a solemn mass
Matthew Lang was unexpectedly placed among the
princes, and afterwards seated within the altar.
At length the canons were satisfied, upon Lang’s
promising them that if he delegated to another the
business of the provostship, he would appoint no
one whom the chapter did not approve.

Still more direct was the influence which Maxi-
milian gained over the secular princes. In most
eases he attached them to his cause, partly by
military service, partly by the favours which he
had to dispense as head of the empire. Thus the
sons of Duke Albert of Saxony were indissolubly
bound to the Netherland policy of Austria by the
possession of Friesland, which Maximilian granted
to their father as a reward of his services. Albert's
son-in-law, too, Erich of Calenberg, connected
through him with the house of Austria, gained

says of the bishops: “ Li quali tutti dependono dal re come sue
fatture, e seguono le voglie sue.”
M 4

168 IMPROVED FORTUNES OF MAXIMILIAN.  Boox I.

fame in the Austrian wars: the whole house of
Welf was attached to Austria. Henry der Mittlere*
of Liineburg, as well as his cousins, won new pri-
vileges and reversions of estates in the service of
the king. In the same position stood Henry IV.
of Mecklenburg.f Bogislaw X. of Pomerania did
not indeed accept the service offered him at his re-
turn from the East; nevertheless Maximilian thought
it expedient to conciliate him by the grant of the
tolls of Wolgast and other favours.{ The granting
of tolls was, indeed, with Maximilian, as with his
father, one means of carrying on the government:
Juliers, Treves, Hessen, Wiirtenberg, Liineburg,
Mecklenburg, the Palatinate even, and many others,
acquired at different times new rights of toll.
Other houses transferred to Austria their ancient
alliances with Burgundy. Count John XIV. of
Oldenburg alleged that a secret treaty had existed
between his ancestors and Charles the Bold, in
consideration of which the king promised to support
him in his claims on Delmenhorst.$ Count Engil-
bert of Nassau fought by the side of Charles at
Nancy, and of Maximilian at Guinegat, for which
he was made Stadtholder-General of the Nether-
lands in 1501. From this moment we may date
the firm establishment of the power of that house
(which shortly after gained possession of Orange)

* Der Mittlere — the mid-brother of three. — TRranst.

+ Liitzow, Geschichte von Meklenburg, ii. p. 458

{ Kanzow, Pomerania, ii. p. 260. Barthold im Berlin Kal.
1838, p. 41.

§ Hamelmann, Oldenb. Chronik. p. 309.

Boox I. PARTISANS OF MAXIMILIAN. 169

in the Low Countries.* Hessen and Wiirtenberg
were won over by Maximilian himself. He at
length determined to grant the Landgrave of Hessen
the investiture which he had always refused his
father. At the diet of 1495 he presented himself in
front of the throne with the great red banner, upon
which, round the arms of Hessen, were displayed
not only the bearings of Waldeck, but of Katzen-
elnbogen, Diez, Ziegenhain, and Nidda: the banner
was so splendid that it was not torn up, as was
usual on such occasions, but was borne in solemn
procession and consecrated to the Virgin Mary.f
Such was the investiture of the house of Hessen;
and we find that William der Mittlere took an
ardent share in Maximilian’s campaigns.

Still more intimate was the connection of Wiir-
tenberg with Austria. Maximilian put the seal
to the acquisitions of centuries made by the counts
of that house by consolidating them into a duchy ;
from that time he took a warmer interest in the
affairs of that state than of any other: in the year
1503, in defiance of the law, he declared the young
Duke Ulrich of age when only in his sixteenth
year, and thus secured his entire devotion. The
Markgraves of Brandenburg were still true to the
ancient allegiance of their founder. Later his-
torians complain bitterly of the costly journeys and
the frequent campaigns of Markgrave Frederic,

* Arnoldi, Gesch. v. Oranien, ii. 202.

+ The ballad on this subject, which Miller, Rtth, unter
Max. I. 538., has inserted, is of later date; the thing itself is
correct. :

170 IMPROVED FORTUNES OF MAXIMILIAN. Boox L

whose succours always far exceeded his contingent.
We find his sons also, from the year 1500, com-
manding small bodies of men in the Austrian
service. ,

. These princes were, for the most part, young men
who delighted in war and feats of arms, and at the
same time sought profit and advancement in the
king’s service. The gay and high-spirited Maxi-
milian, eternally in motion and busied with ever-
new enterprises, good-natured, bountiful, most
popular in his manners and address, a master of
arms and all knightly exercises, a good soldier,
matchless in talents and inventive genius, was
formed to captivate the hearts and to secure the
ardent devotion of his youthful followers.

How great was the advantage this gave him, was
seen in the year 1504, when the Landshut troubles
broke out in Bavaria. Duke George the Rich
of Landshut, who died on the 1st of December, 15038,
in defiance of the feudal laws of the empire and the
domestic treaties of the house of Bavaria, made a
will, in virtue of which both his extensive and
fertile domains, and the long-hoarded treasures of
his house, would fall, not to his next agnates,
Albert and Wolfgang of Bavaria-Munich, but to
his more distant cousin, nephew, and son-in-law,
Rupert of the Palatinate, second son of the- elector,
to whom, even during his lifetime, he had ceded his
most important castles.

Had the Council of Regency continued to exist, it
would have been empowered to prevent the quarrel
between the Palatinate and Bavaria which this inci-

Boox I. BAVARIAN DISPUTES, 1504. 171

dent rekindled with great violence ; or had the Impe-
rial Chamber still been constituted according to the
decrees of Worms and Augsburg, members of the
States of the empire would have had a voice in the
decision of the question of law: but the Regency
had fallen to nothing, and the court of justice was
constituted by the king alone, according to his own
views ; he himself was once more regarded as “ the
living spring of the law,”* and every thing was re-
ferred to his decision.

His conduct in this case is extremely character-
istic. He insisted upon the preservation of peace:
he then appeared in person, and presided at long
sittings of the diet, in order to preserve a good
temper and understanding: he did not shrink from
the labour of hearing both parties, even to the
fifth statement of each; and, lastly, he summoned
the judge and assessors of his chamber to assist
him in forming a just and lawful decision.¢ But
in all these laudable efforts he had chiefly his
own interest (he calls it himself by that name) in
view.

He now called to mind all the losses he had sus:
tained on account of Bavaria;—for example, how the
expedition to the Lechfeld had caused him to neglect
the defence of his rights in Brittany and Hungary.
He found, on the one side, that Duke George had
incurred heavy penalties by his illegal will; on the

* Expression of Lamparter in his address to the States at
Landshut ; Freiberg, ii. p. 178. Gesch. der baier. Landstinde,
ii. p. 38.

+ Harpprecht, Archiv des Kammergerichts, ii. p. 178.

172 IMPROVED FORTUNES OF MAXIMILIAN.  bBoox I.

other, that Albert’s claims, founded on family con-
tracts, were not incontestably valid, since those
contracts had never been confirmed by the emperor
or the empire. Hereupon he himself set up a claim
to one part of the land in dispute, and a not incon-
siderable one.

Duke Albert, the king’s brother-in-law, was
quickly persuaded to acquiesce, and at length pub-
lished a formal renunciation of the disputed dis-
tricts. This was not surprising; he was not yet
in actual possession of them, and he hoped by
this compliance to establish a claim to still larger
acquisitions. On the other hand, the Count Pala-
tine Rupert was utterly inflexible. Whether it
were that he reckoned on his father’s foreign alli-
ances, or that the hostile spirit of the electoral
college towards the king gave him courage,—he
rejected all these proposals of partition. Maximilian
had an interview with him one night, and told him
that his father would bring ruin on himself and his
house: but it was all in vain ; Rupert immediately
afterwards had the audacity to take possession in
defiance of the king.

Upon this Maximilian lost all forbearance. The
lands and securities left by Duke George were
awarded by a sentence of the Chamber to the Duke
of Bavaria-Munich; the crown fiscal demanded the
proclamation of the ban, and on the same day
(23d April, 1504) the King of the Romans uttered
it in person in the open air.*

* Freiberg, passim, ii. p. 52.

Boox I. BAVARIAN DISPUTES. we;

The neighbours of the Palatine attached to the
king’s party only waited for this proclamation to
break loose upon him from all sides. The recol-
lection of all the injuries they had been compelled
to endure from “ that wicked Fritz” (so they called
Frederic the Victorious), and the desire to avenge
themselves and redress their wrongs, was aroused
within them. Duke Alexander the Black of Veldenz,
Duke Ulrich of Wiirtenberg, Landgrave William
of Hessen, who led the Mecklenburg and Bruns-
wick auxiliaries, fell with- devastating bands upon
the Rhenish Palatinate.* In the territory on the
Danube, the troops of Brandenburg, Saxony, and
Calenber® joined the magnificent army which
Albert of Munich had collected. The Swabian
league, once so dangerous an enemy, was now his
most determined partisan; Niirnberg, which in-
deed wished to make conquests for itself, sent
succours to the field four times as great as had
originally been required of it.t The King of the
Romans first appeared on the Danube. It added
not a little to his glory, that it was he who had
gone in quest of a body of Bohemian troops — the
only allies who had remained faithful to the Count
Palatine—and had completely defeated them behind
his own Wagenburg, near Regensburg. He then

* Trithemius, Zayner, and others, describe this devastation -
minutely. See Ranke, Gesch. der romanisch-german. Volker,
p- 231.

+ In the true historical account of the cities usurped by
Niirnberg, &c., 1791, par. 15, this reproach is again brought
against that city.

174 IMPROVED FORTUNES OF MAXIMILIAN. Book I.

marched on the Rhine; the bailiwick of Hagenau
fell into his hands without resistance. Here, as on
the Danube, his first care was to take possession of
the places to which he himself had claims. The
Palatinate, in any case little able to withstand so
superior and general an assault, was now totally
incapacitated by the death of the young and war-
like Count Palatine, the author of the whole dis-
turbance, who fell in battle. The old elector was
obliged to employ another son (whom he had sent
to be educated at the Court of Burgundy) as his
mediator with Maximilian. An assembly of the
empire, which had been talked of in the summer of
1504, had at that time been evaded by the king.
It was not till the superiority of his arms was fully
established in February, 1505, that he concluded a
general truce, and summoned a diet at Cologne
(which assembled in the June of that year), for the
settlement of all the important questions arising
out of this affair, and now once more referred to
his decision.*

2

* One of the strangest reports of these occurrences is to be
found in the Viaggio in Alemagna di Francesco Vettori, Paris,
1837, p. 95., from the mouth of a goldsmith at Ueberlingen.
First, the Count Palatine is in league with the Swiss and the
French ; even the Swiss war is brought about by him: here-
upon Maximilian concludes a treaty with France at Hagenau,
in 1502 (it took place, as we know, in 1505), and forthwith
attacks the Count Palatine, who calls upon the Bohemians for
help, but then leaves them himself in the lurch, so that they get
beaten. This is another example how rapidly history turns
into myth; every detail is incorrect, while the whole is not
entirely devoid of truth. Vettori himself finds the statements of

Boox I. DIET OF COLOGNE, 1505. 175

How different was his present from his former
meeting with the States! He now appeared among
them at the close of a war successfully terminated,
with added renown of personal valour, surrounded
by a band of devoted adherents, who hoped to retain
by his favour the conquests they owed to their own
prowess; respected even by the conquered, who
surrendered their destiny into his hands. Nor
was this all. The affairs of Europe were propitious.
Maximilian’s son Philip was become King of Cas-
tile, upon the death of his mother-in-law. Many a
good German cherished the hope that his mighty
and glorious chief was destined to chase the Turks
from Europe, and to add the crown of the Eastern
empire to that of the West. They thought that
the united force of the empire was so great, that
neither Bohemians, Swiss, nor Turks could with-
stand it.*

The first matter discussed at Cologne was the
decision of the Landshut differences. The king had
the power of determining the fate of a large German
territory. He recurred to the proposals which he
had made before the beginning of the war: for the
issue of the Count Palatine Rupert, he founded the
new Palatinate on the other side the Danube, which
was to yield a rent of 24,000 gulden; the con-

the goldsmith wanting in order, and not to be depended on;
but he readily admits them into his book, which has more the
air of the Decameron than of a Diary of a Journey.

* The sentiment of the admirable song, “die behemsch
Schlacht” (the Bohemian Fight), 1504, by Hormayr, from some
publication of the day, and repeated by Soltau, p. 198.

176 IMPROVED FORTUNES OF MAXIMILIAN.  Boox I.

stituent parts of it were calculated to produce that
amount. Landshut now, indeed, devolved on the Mu-
nich line, but not without considerable diminution:
the dukes themselves had been compelled to pay by
cessions of lands for the succours they had received ;
the king kept back what he had advanced to others
before the sentence was pronounced : not only did he
not sacrifice, he promoted, his own interests. The
Palatinate sustained still greater losses; the loans,
the claims to ceded lands, and the king’s claims, were
more considerable .in that territory than in any
other. It availed little that the old elector could
not bring himself to accept the terms offered him ;
he was only the more entirely excluded from the
royal favour: some time later his son was obliged
to conform to them. If the possessions of the two
houses of Wittelsbach were regarded as a whole,
it had suffered such losses by this affair as no house
in Germany had for ages sustained; and it left so
deep and lasting a resentment as might have proved
dangerous to the empire, had not their mutual
animosity been enkindled anew by the war, and
rendered all concert between them impossible.

The position of Maximilian was, however, ne-
cessarily changed, even as to the general policy of

the empire, by the course things had taken.
_ The union of the electors was broken up. The
humiliation of the Palatinate was followed by the
death of the Elector of Treves in the year 1503, to
whose place Maximilian, strengthened by his al-
lance with the court of Rome, succeeded in pro-
moting one of his nearest kinsmen, the young

Boox I. DIET OF COLOGNE, 1505. 177

Markgrave James of Baden*; and, on the 21st
December, 1504, by the death of the leader of the
electoral opposition, Berthold of Mainz. How
rarely does life satisfy even the noblest ambition !
It was the lot of this excellent man to live to see
the overthrow of the institutions which he had
laboured so earnestly to establish, and the ab-
solute supremacy of the monarch on whom he
had sought to impose legal and constitutional
restraints.

Maximilian had now a clear field for his own
enterprises. It seemed to him possible to.use the
ascendancy which he felt he had acquired, for the
establishment of organic institutions. Whilst he
endeavoured to ascertain why the measures taken at
Augsburg had failed (the blame of which he mainly
attributed to Berthold of Mainz), he published a
plan for carrying them into execution, with certain
modifications. T

His, idea was, at all events, to form a govern-
ment (Regiment) composed of a viceroy, chancellor,
and twelve counsellors of the empire; and for their
assistance, and under their supervision, to appoint
four marshals, each with twenty-five knights, for
the administration of the executive power in the
districts .of the Upper and Lower Rhine, the

* Browerus, p. 320. He saw the Brief by which the Pope
recommended the candidate of the King of the Romans.

+ Protocol of the Imperial Diet in the Frankfurt Acts, which
adds considerably to the particulars found in Miller’s Reichs-
tagsstaat. :

VOL. I. N

178 DIET OF COLOGNE, 1505. Boox I.

Danube, and the Elbe. The imposition of the
Common Penny was again expressly mentioned.

But a glance is sufficient to show the wide dif-
ference between this scheme and the former. The
king insisted on having the right of summoning
this governing body to attend his person and
court; it was only to be empowered to decide in
the more insignificant cases; in all matters of im-
portance it was to recur to him. He would him-
self nominate a captain-general of the empire, if he
could not come to an understanding with Albert of
Bavaria.

In short, it is clear that the obligations and bur-
dens of government would have remained with
the states ; the power would have fallen to the lot
of the king.

His ascendancy was, however, not yet so great
as to induce, or to compel, the empire to accept
such a scheme as this at his hands,

Was it indeed possible to revert to institutions
which had already proved so impracticable? Was
not the sovereignty of the lords of the soil far too
firmly and fully developed to render it probable that
they would lend or even submit themselves to such
extensive and radical changes? The only con-
dition under which this could have been imagined
possible was, that a committee chosen from the
body of the princes should be invested with the
sovereign power; but that they would voluntarily
abandon their high position in favour of the king,
it would have been absurd to expect.

The diet of Cologne is remarkable for this— that

Boox I, DIET OF COLOGNE, 1505. 179

people began to cease to deceive themselves as to
the real state of things. The opinions which pre-
vailed during the last years of Frederic’s and the
first of Maximilian’s reign; the attempts made to
establish an -all-embracing unity of the nation, —a
combined action of all its powers,—a form of govern-
ment which might satisfy all minds and supply all
wants, are to be held in eternal and honourable
remembrance ; but they were directed towards an
unattainable Ideal. The estates were no longer to
be reduced to the condition of subjects, properly so
called: the king was not contented to be nothing
more than a president of the estates. It was there-
fore necessary to abandon such projects.

The estates assembled at Cologne did not refuse
to afford succours to the king, but neither by a
general tax (Common Penny) nor by an assessment
of all the parishes in the empire, but by a ma-
tricula.* The difference is immeasurable. The
former plans were founded on the idea of unity,
and regarded the whole body of the people as
common subjects of the empire; the matricula, in
which the States were rated severally, according to
their resources, was, in its very origin, based on
the idea of the separateness of the territorial power
of the several sovereigns.

They declined taking any share in a central or

* The Matricula partook of the nature both of census and
rate or assessment. It was the list of the contingents, in men
and money, which the several States were bound to furnish to
the empire, and was founded on their population and pecuniary —
resources respectively. — TRANSL.

N 2

180 DIET OF COLOGNE, 1505. Boox I

general government (Reichsregiment) of the em-
pire. They said his majesty had hitherto ruled
wisely and well; they were not disposed to impose
restraints upon him.

Public opinion took a direction far less ideal, far
less satisfactory to those who had cherished as-
pirations after a common fatherland, but one more
practical and feasible.

Maximilian demanded succours for an expe-
dition against Hungary; not against the king,
with whom, on the contrary, he was on a good
footing, but against a portion of the Hungarian
nobles. The last treaty, by which his hereditary
rights were recognised, had been agreed to only by
a few of them individually; it was not confirmed
at the diet. The Hungarians now began to declare
that they would never again raise a foreigner to the
throne, alleging that none had consulted the interests
of thenation. A resolution to this effect, which was
as offensive to their monarch as it was injurious to
the rights of Austria, was solemnly passed and sent
into all the counties.* This Maximilian now re-
solved to oppose. He observed that the main-
tenance of his rights was important not only to
himself but to the Holy Empire, for which Bohemia
had been recovered, and with which Hungary was,
through him, connected.

In a proclamation, in which the edicts concerning
the Council of Regency (Regiment) and the Com-
mon Penny were expressly repealed, Maximilian

* Istuanffy, Historia Regni Hungarici, p. 32.

Boox I. DIET OF COLOGNE, 1505. _ * $89

asked for succours of four or five thousand men
for one year. He expressed a hope that this might
perhaps also suffice for his expedition to Rome.
The States assented without difficulty: they granted.
him four thousand men for a year, raised according
to a matricula. The levy was to consist of 1058
horse, and 3038 foot. Of these, the secular princes
were to furnish the larger proportion of horse,
namely, 422; the cities the larger of foot, — 1106:
on the whole, the electors had to bear about a se-
venth, the archbishops and bishops a half, the pre-
lates and counts not quite a third; of the remaining
seven parts, about one half was borne by the secular
princes, the other half by the States.

These more moderate levies had at least one
good result—they were really executed. The troops
which had been granted, were, if not entirely (which
the defective state of the census rendered impos-
sible), yet, in great measure, furnished to the king,
and did him good service. His appearance on the
frontier at the head of forces armed and equipped by
the empire, made no slight impression in Hungary ;
some magnates and cities were quickly reduced
to obedience. As a son was just then born to King
Wladislas, whereby the prospect of a change of
dynasty became more remote, the Hungarian nobles
determined not exactly to revoke their decree, but
not to enforce it. A committee of the States re-
ceived unconditional powers to conclude a peace,
which was accordingly concluded in July 1506
at Vienna; Maximilian having again reserved to
himself his hereditary right. Although the recog-

n 3

182 DIET OF CONSTANCE, 1507. Boox I.

nition of the states of Hungary expressed by ac-
cepting this treaty is only indirect, Maximilian
thought his own rights and those of the German
nation sufficiently guaranteed by this treaty.

He now directed his attention and his forces
upon Italy. Till he was in possession of the crown
and title of emperor he did not think he had at-
tained to his full dignity.*

It was evident, however, that he would not be
able to accomplish his purpose with the small body
of men that followed him from Hungary.

Louis XII., with whom he had shortly before
concerted the most intimate union of their res-
pective houses, was led into other views by his
States. He no longer thought it advisable to
permit the ambitious, restless Maximilian, sustained
by the power of a warlike nation, to get a footing
in Italy. In this the Venetians agreed. At the
moment when Maximilian approached their fron-
tiers, they hastened (favoured by a revolt among
the Landsknechts, which gave them time) to or-
ganise a very strong defence. Maximilian saw
that, if he would obtain the crown, he must con-
quer it by force of arms and in strenuous warfare.
He hastened to summon a new diet.

Once more, in the spring of 1507, the States as-

* In his declaration to the states, Maximilian designates the
convention of Vienna as a treaty “whereby his Imperial
Majesty and the German nation, God willing, might suffer no loss
of their rights in the kingdom of Hungary, when the crown
becomes vacant :” — “dadurch I. K. Mt. und deutsche Nation
ob Gott will, an ihrer erblichen und andern Gerechtigkeit des
Konigreichs Ungern, wenn es zu Fiillen kommt, nicht Mangel
haben werde.”

_Boox I. DIET OF CONSTANCE, 1507. 183

sembled, in the plenitude of their loyalty and de-
votion to the king, They were still under the in-
fluence of recent events; strangers were astonished
at their unanimity, and at the high consideration
the king of the Romans enjoyed among them. A
remark made by the Italians is not without founda-
tion —that a calamity which had befallen the king
had been of advantage to him in the affairs of Ger-
-many.* His son Philip had hardly ascended the
throne of Castile when he died unexpectedly in Sep-
tember, 1506. The German princes had always re-
garded the rising greatness of this young monarch
with distrust. They had feared that his father
would endeavour to make him elector, or vicar of
the empire, and, after his own coronation, king of
the Romans; and this first idea of a union of the im-
perial authority with the power of Burgundy and of
Castile had filled them with no little alarm. The
death of Philip freed them from this fear; the sons
he left were too young to inspire anxiety. The
princes felt disposed to attach themselves the more
eordially to their king ; the more youthful hoped
to conquer new and large fiefs in his service.

On the 27th of April, 15077, Maximilian

* Somaria di la Relatione di Vic. Querini, Doctor, ritornato
dal Re di Romani, 1507, Nov. Sanuto’s Chronicle, Vienna
Archives, tom. vii. He is of opinion, that the Elector of
Saxony indulged the hope of one day getting possession of the
crown. “Il rea gran poder in Alemagna,” he also says, “é
molto amato, perche quelli non l’ ubediva é morti.”

+ Tuesday after the feast of St. Mark. Letter from Eitelwolf
von Stein to the elector of Brandenburg, April 6. 1507, in the
Berlin Archives. The previous accounts are incorrect,

n4

184 DIET OF CONSTANCE, 1507. Boox I.

opened the diet at Constance, in the immediate
neighbourhood ‘of Italy. Never was he more
impressed with the dignity of his station than at
this moment. He declared, with a sort of shame,
that he would no longer be a little trooper (kein
kleiner Reiter), he would get rid of all trifling
business, and devote his attention only to the great
affairs. He gave the assembly to understand that
he would not only force his way through Italy,
‘but would engage in a decisive struggle for the
sovereignty of Italy. Germany, he said, was so
mighty that it ought to receive the law from no
one; it had countless foot soldiers, and at least
sixty thousand horses fit for service; they must
now make an effort to secure the empire for ever.
It would all depend on the heavy fire-arms; the
true knights would show themselves on the bridge
over the Tiber. He uttered all this with animated
and confiding eloquence. ‘I wish,” writes Eitel-
wolf von Stein to the elector of Brandenburg, “ that
your grace had heard him.”

The States replied, that they were determined
to aid him, according to their several means, to gain
possession of the imperial crown.*

* Answer of the States, Frankf. A. A., tom. xxiii. : “They
had appeared at this Imperial Diet, at his majesty’s request,
as his lieges fully inclined to advise, and according to their
ability to aid in obtaining the imperial crown, and to offer
resistance to the design of the King of France, which he is
practising against the holy empire.”—“ Sie syen uf diesen
Richstag uf irer Mt. Erfordern als die Gehorsame erschienen,
ganz Gemiits zu raten und ires Vermégens die kaiserliche Krone
helfen zu erlangen und des Kénigs von Frankreich Fiirnemen,
des.er wider das h. Reich in Uebung steht, Widerstand zu tun.”

Boox I. DIET OF CONSTANCE, 1507. 185

There remained, indeed, some differences of opi-
nion between them. When the king expressed his
determination of driving the French out of Milan,
the States dissented. They were only disposed to
force a passage through the country in defiance of
them, for a regular war with France was not to
be engaged in without negotiations. Nor would
they grant the whole of the supplies the king at
first demanded. Nevertheless, the subsidy which
they assented to, in compliance with a second pro-
posal of his, was unusually large. It amounted to
three thousand horse, and nine thousand foot.

Maximilian, who doubted not that he should
accomplish some decisive stroke with this force,
now promised, on his side, to govern any conquests
he might make according to the counsels of the
States. He hinted that the revenue she might derive
from these new acquisitions would perhaps putin
to defray the charges of the empire.*

* In the declaration in which he asks for 12,000 men, he
adds: “ And if the States now show themselves in such mea-
sure ready and prompt with help, then is his imperial majesty
willing to act after their counsel, with respect to what money,
goods, land and people will be requisite, how the same should
be managed and applied, how also the conquered domains and
people are to be treated and supported by the empire, so that
the burdens in all future times may be taken off the Germans,
and, according to what is reasonable, laid upon another nation ;
also, how every king of the Romans may be supported honour-
ably in due state without heavily burdening the German
nation.”——“ Und wo sich die Stend des Reichs jetzo dermaassen
dapferlich mit der Hilf erzaigen, so ist k. Mt. willig jetzo nach
irem Rat zu handeln, was von Geld Gut Land und Liiten zuston
wird, wie dasselb gehandelt und angelegt werden soll, wie auch

186 DIET OF CONSTANCE, 1507. Boox I.

The States accepted this offer with great satis-
faction. Whatever, whether land or people, cities
or castles, might be conquered, was to remain for
ever incorporated with the empire.

This good understanding as to foreign affairs,
was favourable to some progress in those of the
nation. The diet of Cologne, while it gave up all
the projects of institutions founded upon a complete
community of interests and of powers, had continued
to regard a restoration of the Imperial Chamber as
necessary. This, however, they had never been
able to accomplish: the Chamber which Maxi-
milian had established by his own arbitrary act
had held no sittings for three years; the salaries
of the procurators had even been stopped.* Now,
however, the diet assembled at Constance resolved to
re-establish the Imperial Chamber according to the
edicts of Worms. In the nomination of the members
of it the electors were to retain their privileges ;
for the other estates, the division into circles
which had been determined on in Augsburg was
adopted, so that it was not entirely suffered to
drop: no notice was taken of the cities. The
question now was, how this tribunal was to be
maintained ? Maximilian was of opinion that it
would be best that each assessor should be at

die eroberte Herrschaften und Lut by dem Rich zu hanndhaben
und zu erhalten syn, dadurch die Biirden in ewig Zeiten ab den
Deutschen und der Billichait nach uf andre Nation gelegt, auch
ein jeder romisch Konig eehrlich und statlich on sunder Be-
swerung deutscher Nation erhalten werden még.”

* Harpprecht, ii. § 240., § 253.

Boox I. DIET OF CONSTANCE, 1507. 187

the charge of the government which had ap-
pointed him: he would take upon himself that
of the judges and the chancery of the court.
Unquestionably however the States were right in
desiring to avoid the predominancy of private
interests which this arrangement would have
favoured *: they offered to tax themselves to a small
amount in order to pay the salaries of the law
officers. They did not choose that the court
should be stripped of the character of a tribunal
common to the whole body of the States, which
had originally been given to it. With this view
they determined that every year two princes, one
spiritual, the other temporal, should investigate its
proceedings, and report upon them to the States.
If we pause a moment and reflect on what pre-
ceded the diet of Constance, and on what followed
it, we perceive its great importance. The ma-
tricular assessment (or register of the resources
of the empire) and the Imperial Chamber were,
during three centuries, the most eminent insti-
tutions by which the unity of the empire was re-
presented; their definitive establishment and the
connexion between them were the work of that
diet. The ideas which had given birth to these
two institutions were originally founded on op-

* «Es sy not, das Cammergerichte als ain versampt Wesen
von ainem Wesen unterhalten und derselbtige underhaltung nit
zerteilt werden.” —“ It is needful that the imperial chamber, as
a collective body, be maintained by one body, and that the
maintenance of the same be not divided.” — Protocol of the
Imperial Diet in Harpprecht, ii. 443.

188 DIET OF CONSTANCE, 1507. Boox I.

posite principles; but this was exactly what now
recommended them to favour; the independence of
the several sovereignties was not infringed, while
the idea of their community was kept in view.

Another extremely important affair, that of
Switzerland, was also decided here.

Elector Berthold had been desirous of in-
corporating the Swiss in the diet, and giving them
a share in all the institutions he projected. But
exactly the reverse ensued. The Confederates had
been victorious in a great war with the King of the
Romans. In the politics of Europe they generally
adhered to France, and they continued to draw one
city after another into their league; and yet they
pretended to remain members and subjects of the
empire. This was a state of things which became
manifestly intolerable when disputes with France
arose. Whenever war broke out with France and
Italy, a diversion was to be feared on the side of
Switzerland, the more dangerous because it was
impossible to be prepared for it.

The diet resolved to come to a clear under-
standing on this point. An embassy was sent by
the States of the empire to Switzerland for that
purpose.

The members of it were, however, by no means
confident of success. ‘God send his Holy Spirit
upon us,” exclaims one of them: “if we accomplish
nothing, we shall bring down war upon the Swiss,
and be compelled to regard them as our Turks.”

But. the Confederates had already, in the course
of their service, fallen out with the French, so

Boox I. DIET OF CONSTANCE, 1507. 189

that the ambassadors found them more tractable
than they had expected. They recalled all their
troops still in Italy at the first admonition. They
promised without the slightest hesitation to remain
faithful to the empire. A deputation from them
appeared at Constance, and was most graciously
received by the king, who kept them there at his
own expense and dismissed them with presents,
after entering into an agreement to take into pay,
in the next war, six thousand Swiss under the
banners of the empire.

On the other hand, Maximilian made a most
important concession to them. He formally
emancipated them from the jurisdiction of the im-
perial courts; declaring that neither in criminal
nor in civil causes should the Confederation, or any
member of it, be subject to be cited before the im-
perial chamber or any other royal tribunal.*

This measure decided the fate of Switzerland to
all succeeding ages. At the very time when the em-
pire agreed to subject itself to a general assessment
and enrolment, and to the jurisdiction of the imperial
chamber, it abandoned all claim to impose them
on the Swiss: on the contrary, it took their troops
into its pay and renounced its jurisdiction over
them. They were, as Maximilian expressed him-
self, “‘ dutiful kinsmen of the empire,” who however
must be kept in order when they were refractory.

Although it is not to be disputed that the
real political grounds of these concessions was

* Fryheitsbull bei Anshelm, iii. 321.

190 DIET OF CONSTANCE, 1507. Boox I,

the increasing inclination of the Swiss to a se-
paration from the. empire, still it was the most
fortunate arrangement for that moment. The
quarrel was for a time appeased. Maximilian
appeared more puissant, more magnificent than
ever. Foreigners did not doubt that he would
have, as they heard it affirmed, thirty thousand
men to lead into the field: the warlike preparations
which they encountered in some of the Swabian
cities filled them with the idea that the empire
was rousing all its energies.

Maximilian indulged the most ambitious and
romantic hopes. He declared that with the noble
and efficient aid granted to him, he hoped to reduce
to obedience all those in Italy who did not ac-
knowledge the sovereignty of the holy empire. But
he would not stop there. .When he had once re-
duced that country to order, he would confide it
to one of his captains, and would himself march
without delay against the infidels ; for he had
vowed this to Almighty God.

The slow march of the imperial troops, the pro-
crastination of the Swiss, the well-defended Venetian
passes, doubly difficult to force in the approaching
winter season, were indeed calculated to rouse him
from these dreams of conquest, and turn his atten-
tion on what was really attainable. But his high
spirit did not quail. On the 2d of February he
caused a religious ceremony to be performed in
Trent, as a consecration of his intended expedition
to Rome. Nay, as if the very object for which he
was going thither was already accomplished, he as-

Boox I. DIET OF CONSTANCE, 1507. 19E

sumed, on the very same day, the title of elected
emperor of the Romans.* Foreigners always called
him so, and he well knew that the pope, at this
moment his ally, would not oppose it. He was
led to this act by different motives: on the one
side, the sight of the formidable opposition he had
to encounter, so that he already feared he should
not succeed in getting to Rome; on the other,
the feeling of the might and independence of the
empire, for which he was anxious at all events
to rescue the prerogative of giving a supreme
head to Christendom: the mere ceremony of coro-
nation he did not regard as so essential. To
Germany, too, his resolution was of the utmost
importance: Maximilian’s successors have always
assumed the title of Emperor immediately after
their coronation at Aix-la-Chapelle ; though only
one of the whole line was crowned by the pope.

* There is a closer examination of this point in the Excursus
upon Fugger.
+ The title of Emperor, though commonly given to Maxi-
-milian, belonged, of right, only to those who had been crowned
at Rome by the hands of the Pope, — conditions which, as we
shall see, Maximilian was never able to fulfil. At the head of
the “ Holy Roman Empire (Reich) of the German Nation,”
stands the King, elected by the German estates of the empire,
who, however, by his election and his coronation in Germany (at
Aachen) obtains only the rights and title of King of the Romans
(Roémischen KG6nigs), and acquires the rights and title of Roman
Emperor (Rémischen Kaisers) only by his coronation at Rome ;
to which all the vassals of the empire must accompany him, and
which the Pope, if he be lawfully and duly elected, cannot refuse
him. His successor bears the title of King of the Romans.
Eichhorn, Deutsche Staats-und Rechts-geschichte, vol. ii. p.365.
— TRANSL.

192 VENETIAN WAR. Boox I.

Although Pope Julius appeared well pleased at
this assumption, it was, in fact, a symptom of the
emancipation of the German crown from the papacy.
Intimately connected with it, was the attempt of
Maximilian at the same time to revive the title of
King of Germany, which had not been heard for
centuries. Both were founded on the idea of the
unity and independence of the German nation,
whose chief was likewise the highest personage in
Europe. They were expressions of that supremacy
of the nation which Maximilian still asserted: a
supremacy, however, which rapidly declined.

VENETIAN WAR. DIET OF WORMS.

Ir had been debated at Constance whether the
imperial forces should first attack the French or
the Venetian possessions in Italy. Whatever con-
quests might be made, it was not the intention of
‘the diet to grant them out as fiefs (Milan had not
even been restored to the Sforza), but to retain
them in the hands of the empire, as a source of
public revenue.

Among the princes some were advocates for the’
Milanese, others, who like the dukes of Bavaria had
claims against Venice, for the Venetian, expedition.
Even among the imperial councillors, difference of
opinion prevailed. Paul von Lichtenstein, who
was on good terms with Venice, was for atterckcti
Milan; Matthew Lang and Eitelfritz of Zollern, on

Boox I. DIET OF WoRMS, 1508. 193

the other hand, deemed it easier to make conquests
from the Venetians than from the French.*

The latter opinion at length prevailed. The
Venetians were not to be brought to declare that
they would not take part against the king of the
Romans: on the other hand, France held out hopes
that if no attempt was made upon Milan, she would
offer no obstacle to the steps taken by the empire for
the assertion of its other claims in Italy.f Strongly
as the Alps were defended, Maximilian was not to
be deterred from trying his fortune there. At first
he was successful. ‘‘ The Venetians,” he says, in a
letter to the Elector of Saxony, dated the 10th of
March, “ paint their lion with two feet in the sea,
one on the plain country, the fourth on the moun-
tains; we have nearly caught the foot on the Alps;
there is only one claw missing, which, with God’s
help, we will have in a week ; and then we hope to
conquer the foot on the plain.f{

* Relatione di Vicenzo Quirini. He mentioned some of the
council by name as nostri “ capitali inimici :” for a time, Max-
imilian said: “ I Venetiani non mi a fato dispiacer e Franza si.
E su queste pratiche passa il tempo.”

+ Pasqualigo, Relatione. “ Non saria molto difficil cosa che
la (S. M.) dirizzasse la sua impresa contra questo stato, mas-
sime per il dubbio che li é firmato nell’ animo che le Ecc* Vo-
stre siano per torre l’arme in mano contra a lei quando la fusse
sul bello di cacciar li Francesi d’Italia, et a questo ancora I’ in-
clineria assai li onorati partiti che dal re di Francia li sono con-
tinuamente offerti ogni volta che la voglia lassar la impresa di
Milano e ricuperar le altre jurisditioni imperiali che ha in
Italia.”

+ Letter from Sterzing, March 1., accompanied by a letter
from Hans Renner of the same date. He also has the best hopes.

VOL. I. O

194 VENETIAN WAR. Boox I.

But he had engaged in an enterprise which was
destined to plunge his affairs in general, and those of
Germany in particular, into inextricable difficulties.

In Switzerland, spite of all treaties, the French
faction, especially supported by Lucern, soon re-
vived*; the confederate troops hung back. This
so greatly weakened the German forces (the em-
peror having intended to draw two thirds of the
infantry from Switzerland), that the Venetians
soon had the advantage of the imperialists. They
did not rest satisfied with driving the Germans
from their territory, they fell on the emperor’s own
dominions, just where he was least prepared for an
attack. Gérz, Wippach, Triest, and forty-seven
places, more or less strongly fortified, rapidly fell
into their hands.

Germany was struck with astonishment and
consternation. After subsidies which had appeared
so considerable, after the exertions made by every
individual for the empire, after such high-raised
expectations, the result was shame and ignominy.
It was in vain that the emperor alleged that the
levies had not been furnished complete; the fault
of this was in part ascribed to himself. The Duke
of Liineburg, for example, had never received the
estimate of his contingent. But, putting that
aside: To set out without having the least as-

* In the Relatione della Nazione delli Suizzeri 1508, In-
formm. politiche, tom. ix., the different persons who brought
about this change are mentioned, but their names are difficult to
decipher in our copy: “ Amestaver at Zug, Nicolo Corator
at Solothurn, Manforosini at Freiburg.” Lucerne was the
centre of the whole movement.

Boox I. DIET OF WORMS, 1508. 195

surance of success!—to risk his whole fortunes
on the levies of a Swiss diet! The common lot —
loss of reputation for one abortive undertaking —
now fell with double and triple force on Maximilian,
whose capacity and character had always been
doubted by many.

Compelled to return immediately to Germany,
Maximilian’s first act was to call the electors to-
gether. The elector palatine he did not include
with the rest; Brandenburg was too far; he con-
tented himself with sending a messenger to him.
But the others assembled in the beginning of May
1508, at Worms. Maximilian declared to them that
he called on them first, on whom the empire rested
as onits foundations, for their aid in his great peril:
he craved their counsel how he might best obtain
valiant, safe, and effective succours; but, he added,
without employing the Swabian league, whose help
he should stand in need of elsewhere; and without
convoking a diet of the empire.”

Among the assembled princes, Frederic of Saxony
was the most powerful. By his advice they de-
clined the emperor’s invitation to meet him in
Frankfurt ; principally because they found it im-
possible to come to any resolution without a previous
conference with the other states of the empire.f

'* The instruction for Matthias Lang, Bishop of Gurk; Adolf,
Count of Nassau; Erasmus Dopler, prebendary of St. Sebaldus at
Niirnberg ; and Dr. Ulrich von Schellenberg, is dated the last
day of April, the feast of St. Wendel, 1508. (Weimar Archives. )

+ The Archives at Weimar contain the advice of Frederic,
and the answer. (May 8. Monday after Misericordia.)

0 2

196i VENETIAN WAR. | Boox I.

Maximilian replied that he was in the most perilous
situation in the world; if the troops of the empire,
whose pay was in arrear, were now to withdraw,
his country of Tyrol was inclined to join the French
and the Venetians, out of resentment against the
empire, by which it was not protected: he could
in no case wait for a diet; the loss of time would
be too great; the utmost that could be done would
be hastily to call together the nearest princes.*
The electors persisted in demanding a diet. They
would not believe that the Swabian league enter-
tained the thought of separating itself from the other
states ; to grant any thing on their own responsibility
and in the absence of the others, said they, would
bring hostility upon them, and be useless to the
king.t They were worked upon by the pressing
and obvious exigency of the case, only so far as to
facilitate a loan of the emperor’s, by their inter-
cession and guarantee.

The consequences of war must, in every age
‘ and country, have an immense influence on the
current of internal affairs. We have seen how all
the attempts to give to the empire a constitution
agreeable to the wishes and opinions of the States
were ultimately connected with the alliance by

* Letters of Maximilian from Linz, May 7., and from Sieg-
burg, May 10. (Weimar Archives.)

t Answer, dated May 13., Saturday after Misericordia.
(Weimar Archives.) In return for their guarantee, they desired
some security from the emperor. The latter replied, “he
could bind himself to nothing further, than to release them from
their guarantee within a year’s time, upon his good faith.”

Boox I. DIET OF WoRMS, 1508. 1OF

which Maximilian was elected king of the Romans,
Austria and the Netherlands were defended, and
Bavaria reduced to subjection. On the other hand,
at the first great reverse—the unfortunate combat
with Switzerland,—that constitution received a
shock from which it never recovered. The position
too which the king himself assumed, rested on the
success of his arms in the Bavarian war. It was
no wonder, therefore, that after the great reverses
he had now sustained, the whole fabric of his power
tottered, and the opposition which seemed nearly
subdued arose in new strength. Success is a bond
of union; misfortune decomposes and scatters.
Nor was this state of the public mind changed
by the circumstance that Maximilian, favoured by
the diseust which the encroachments of the Vene-
tians had excited in other quarters, now concluded
the treaty of Cambrai, by which not only the
pope and Ferdinand the Catholic, but the King
of Bavaria, against whom he had just made war,
combined with him against Venice.* This hasty
renunciation of the antipathy to France which he
had so loudly professed, this sudden revolution in
his policy, was not calculated to restore the confi-
dence of the States.
Matthias von Gurk informs the elector Frederic, Sept. 24.,
that he was going with certain councillors and the daughter of
the emperor to a place on the French frontier, in order to treat
concerning the peace with the Cardinal de Rohan, who was also
to come thither. “ Frau Margareta handelt und muet sich mit

allem Vleiss und Ernst umb ain Frid.” “ The Lady Margaret
negotiates and exerts herself with all industry and earnestness

for a peace.”
0 3

198 VENETIAN WAR. Boox I.

Perhaps the present might really have been the
moment in which, with the co-operation of such
powerful allies, conquests might have been made
in Italy; but there was no longer sufficient con-
cert among the powers of Germany for any such
undertaking. On the 21st of April, 1509, the
emperor made his warlike entry into the city of
Worms (where, after long delays, the States had
assembled*), armed from head to foot, mounted on
a mailed charger, and followed by a retinue of a
thousand horsemen, among whom were Stradiotes
and Albanians. He was destined to encounter
such an opposition as never awaited him before.

He represented to the States the advantages which
would accrue to the empire from the treaty just con-
cluded, and exhorted them to come to his aid with
a formidable levy of horse and foot as quickly as
possible, at least fora year.f The States answered

* By a letter of summons, Cologne, May 31. 1508, after the
above-mentioned meeting of the electors, “ ein eilender Reichs-
tag,” “a speedy diet of the empire” was announced for July 16. ;
deferred at Boppart, June 26., “ bis wir des Reichs Nothdurft
weiter bedenken,” — “ till we have further considered the neces-
sities of the empire,” at Cologne, July 16., fixed for All Saints’
day ; at Brussels Sept. 12. this term is once more resolved upon ;
at Mechlin, Dec. 22. the reason of the fresh delay is explained,
viz. the negotiations with France ; at last, March 15. 1509, the
emperor renews his letter of summons, and fixes the term for
Judica. Fr. Ar., vols. xxiv. and xxv.

t Verhandelung der Stennde des h. Reichs uff dem kaiser-
lichen Tage zu Worms ao dni 1509. Frankft. Ar. vol. xxiv.
Address of his majesty, Sunday, April 22. at one o’clock. “Wo
S. Heiligkeit nit gewest, hiitte Kais. Mt. den Verstand und

Boox I. DIET OF WorRMS, 1509. 199

his appeal with complaints of his internal adminis-

tration. A secret discontent, of which the fiery
impetuous Maximilian seemed to have no suspicion,
had taken possession of all minds.

The chief complaints arose from the cities ;—
and indeed with good reason.

Under Elector Berthold they had risen to a very
brilliant station, and had taken a large share in the
general administration of affairs. All this was at
end since the dissolution of the Council of Regency
(Regiment.) Nor were any municipal assessors
admitted into the Imperial Chamber. Neverthe-
less, they were compelled to contribute not only to
all the other taxes, as wellas to the expenses of the
administration of justice, but the rate imposed on
them at Constance was disproportionately high.
Even at Cologne they were not spared, as we saw;
they were compelled to furnish nearly two sevenths
of the subsidies; but at Constance a full third of the
whole amount of foot soldiers and of money was levied
upon them.* Nay, as if this was not enough, imme-
diately after the diet the emperor caused the pleni- -
potentiaries of the cities to be cited before the
fiscal of the empire, who called them to account
for the continuance of the great merchants’ com-

Practica nit angenommen.” Had it not been for his holiness,
his imperial majesty would not have accepted the treaty. Yet
he remarks, the affair “ werde sich liederlich und mit kleinen
Kosten ausfiihren lassen,” — “ might be executed easily and at
little cost.”

* Accounts in the genuine Fugger. It appears to me that
the sum amounted to 20,000 gulden. See Jiiger, Schwabisches
Stadtewesen, 677.

0 4

200 VENETIAN WAR. Boox I.

pany, which had been forbidden by previous impe-
rial edicts, and demanded a fine of 90,000 gulden
for carrying on unlawful traffic. The merchants
loudly protested against this sentence; they said
that they were treated like serfs; it were better
for them to quit their native country, and emigrate
to Venice or Switzerland, or even France, where
honourable trade and dealing was not restricted ;
but they were forced at last to compound by means
of a considerable sum. The cities were not so weak,
however, as to submit quietly to all this; they ae
held town-meetings (Stddtetag) and had dcetiniiee
to put chomesiyesid in an attitude of defence at the
next imperial diet* ; the members of the Swabian
league as well as the others. They had not the
slightest inclination to strain their resources against
a republic with which they carried on the most
advantageous cominercial intercourse, and which

* The resolutions of these municipal diets deserve much more
accurate examination. A ‘letter from the Swabian league,
Oct. 21. 1508, calls to mind, “welchermaass auf vergangen
gemeinem Frei und Reichsstett-Tag zu Speier der Beschwerden
halben, so den Stettboten uf dem Reichstag zu Costnitz begegnet
sind, gerathschlagt und sunderlich verlassen ist, so die Rém.
Konigl. Mt. wiederum ein Reichstag fiirnehmen wird, dass alsdann
gemeine Frei und Reichsstette gen Speier_beschrieben werden
sollten.”-——“ In what manner, at a former common diet of the
free and imperial cities held at Spires by reason of complaints
with regard to the treatment the deputies of the cities had met
with at the imperial diet at Constance, it had been discussed
and specially resolved on, in case his majesty, the King of the
Romans, should again propose a diet of the empire, that then

the free and imperial cities should be convened in common at
Spires.”

Boox I. DIET OF WORMS, 1509. 201

they were accustomed to regard as the model and
the natural head of all municipal communities.*

Among the princes, too, there was much bad
blood. The demands of the imperial chamber,
the irregularities in the levies of men and
money which we shall have occasion to notice
again, had disgusted the most powerful among
them. ‘The Palatinate was still unreconciled. The
old Count Palatine was dead; his sons appeared
at Worms, but they could not succeed in ob-
taining their fief. The warlike zeal which had
recently inflamed many for the emperor, had
greatly subsided after the bad results of his first
campaign.

But the circumstance which made a stronger
impression than all the rest, was the conduct of
Maximilian with regard to his last treaties. At
the diet of Constance, the States had proposed
sending an embassy to France in order to renew
negotiations with that power; for they did not
choose to commit the whole business of the em-
pire implicitly to its chief. Maximilian had at
that time rejected all these proposals, and pro-
fessed an irreconcilable enmity to the French.
Now, on the contrary, he had himself concluded
a treaty. with France, and without consulting

* Very curious indications of the light in which Venice was
regarded by the trading towns of Germany are still to be found at
Niirnberg. That magnificent city endeavoured in all its insti-
tutions to imitate the queen of the Adriatic. Ihave seen, in MS.,
an application from the council of Niirnberg to the senate of
Venice for the rules of an orphan asylum, in which this senti-
ment is strongly expressed. — TRANSL.

202 VENETIAN WAR. Boox I.

the States; nay, he did not even think himself
called upon to communicate to them the treaty when
ratified.* No wonder if these puissant princes, who
had so lately entertained the project of uniting all
the powers of the empire in a government consti-
tuted by themselves, were profoundly disgusted.
They reminded the emperor, that they had told
him at Constance that the grant he then received
was the last ; and that he, on his side, had abandoned
all claim to further aids. He was persuaded, they
said, by his councillors, that the empire must help
him as often as he chose to require help; but this
notion must not be allowed to take root in his
mind, or they would have perpetually to suffer
from it.

A very strong opposition thus arose on various
grounds to the king’s proposals. It made no
change in public opinion, that the French obtained
a brilliant victory over the Venetians, and that the
latter for a moment doubted whether they should
be able to retain their possessions on the main land.
On the contrary, the first obstacle to the victorious
career of the league of Cambrai was raised in

* The Weimar Archives contain an opinion upon the necessity
of refusing succours, in which persons are especially complained
of, “ so bei S. Kais. Mt. sein und sich allwege geflissen Ks. Mt.
dahin zu bewegen Hilf bei den Stenden des Reiches zu suchen
zu solchem Fiirnemen, das doch ohne Rad und Bewusst der
Stennde des h. Reichs beschehen ist :” — “ who are about his
imperial majesty, and in all ways strive to move his imperial
majesty to seek help from the states of the empire, towards such
undertaking, which, however, has been entered upon without
the advice and knowledge of the states of the holy empire.”

Boox I. DIET OF WORMS, 1509. 2038

Germany. At the same moment in which the
Venetian cities in Apulia, Romagna and Lombardy
fell into the hands of the allies after the battle of
Aguadello, a committee of the States advised, and
the whole body thereupon resolved, that an answer
should be sent to the emperor, refusing all suc-
cours. ‘They declared that they were neither able
to support him in the present war, nor were they
bound to do so. Unable, because the last sub-
sidies had been announced to their subjects as
final, and no fresh ones could be levied without
great difficulties and discontents: not bound, since
the treaty had not even been communicated to
them, as was the custom from time immemorial in
all cases of the kind.*

The emperor’s commissioners (for he had quitted
the diet again himself a few days after his arrival,
in order to hasten the armaments on the Italian
frontier},) were in the utmost perplexity. What

* Transactions, &c. ‘ Dweile die Stende des Reichs davon
kein griindliches Wissen tragen, so hab I. Ks. Mt. wohl zu
ermessen, dass wo ichts darin begriffen oder verleipt das dem h.
Reich jetzo oder in Zukunft zu Nachtheil thate reichen, es were
mit Herzogthum Mailand oder anderm, dem Reich zustandig,
dass sie darin nit willigen kénnen.”——“ Seeing that the states
of the empire have no thorough knowledge thereof, his imperial
majesty has to consider well that if any thing be therein con-
tained or embodied which might tend now or hereafter to the
injury of the holy empire, be it with regard to the duchy of
Milan, or any other belonging to the empire, they cannot give
their consent thereunto.”

+ Not out of anger, as has been commonly believed. He
declared as early as the 22d of April, that he could not await
the conclusion, and went away two days afterwards, before the

204 VENETIAN WAR. Boox TI.

would the church, what would France, say if the
holy empire alone did not fulfil its conditions ?
The States declined any further explanation on
the matter; if the commissioners had any propo-
sition to make concerning law and order, concern-
ing the administration of justice, or the coinage,
the States were ready to entertain it. The com-
missioners asked whether this was the unanimous
opinion of all the States; the States replied, that
was their unanimous resolution. ‘The commissioners
said, that nothing then remained for them but to
report the matter to the emperor, and await his
answer.

It may easily be imagined what a tempest of
rage he fell into. From the frontiers of Italy —
from Trent — he dispatched a violent answer,
printed, though sealed. He began by justifying
his own conduct; especially the conclusion of the
last treaty, for which he had power and authority,
“as reigning Roman Emperor, according to the
ordinance of the Almighty, and after high counsel
and deliberation ;” he then threw the blame of his
reverses back on the States, alleging, as the cause
of them, the incompleteness of the subsidies.

diet had fully met : the real proposition of the diet took place only
on May 16., Wednesday before the Feast of the Assumption,
Casimir of Brandenburg acting as his Lieutenant (Statthalter),
Adolf von Nassau and Frauenberg as his councillors. Frankf.
Ar., vol. xxiv. The letters of the Frankfurt friend of the
council (Rathsfreund), Johannes Frosch, repeat nearly what is
contained in the Archives, with some additions. It appears from
both that no final resolution was come to, although Miiller and
Fels seem to imply the contrary.

Boox I. DIET OF AUGSBURG, 1510. 205

Their inability he could not admit. They should
not try to amass treasure, but think of the oath
they had sworn, and the allegiance they owed to
him. Nor was that the cause of their refusal ; it
was the resentment which some had conceived be-
cause their advice was not taken.

Before this answer arrived, the States had dis-
persed. No final Recess was drawn up.

DIET OF AUGSBURG, 1510; OF TREVES AND
COLOGNE, 1512.

Berore I proceed further, I feel bound to make
the confession that the interest with which I had
followed the development of the constitution of the
empire, began to decline from this point of my re-
searches.

That at so important a moment, when the most
desirable conquest was within their grasp — a con-
quest which would have more than freed them
from the burdens they bore so reluctantly, and
would have constituted an interest common to all
the States—they came to no agreement, shows that
all these efforts were doomed to end in nothing,
and that the impossibility of reaching the proposed
end lay in the nature of things.

Although the emperor by no means took the ac-
tive, creative part which has been ascribed to him
in the establishment of national institutions, he
evinced a strong inclination towards them ; he had a
lofty conception of the unity and dignity of the

4.

206 THE EMPEROR AND THE STATES. Boox I.

empire; and occasionally he submitted to con- -
stitutional forms, the effect of which was to limit
his power. Nor were there ever States so pro-
foundly convinced of the necessity of founding
settled coherent institutions, and so ready to en-
gage in the work, as those over which he presided.
Yet these two powers could not find the point of
coincidence of their respective tendencies.

The States saw in themselves, and in their own
union, the unity of the empire. They had in their
minds a government composed of representatives
of the several orders in the empire (stdéindisches
Regiment) * such as really existed in some of the
separate territories of the empire; by which they
thought to maintain the dignity of the emperor,
or, if occasion demanded, to set fixed bounds to his
arbitrary rule; and to introduce regularity and
order into the establishments for war, finance, and
law, even at the expense of the power of the terri-
torial sovereigns. But the calamities of an ill-timed
campaign, and the dissatisfaction of the emperor
with the part they took in foreign affairs, had de-
stroyed their work.

Maximilian then undertook to renovate the em-
pire by means of similar institutions, only with a
firmer maintenance of the monarchical principle;
resolutions to that effect were actually passed, not
indeed of such a radical and.vital character as those
we have just mentioned, but more practicable in
their details: but when these details came to be
carried into execution, misunderstandings, reluc-

* See note, p. 151.

Boox I. DIET OF AUGSBURG, 1510. 207

tances without end appeared, and suddenly every
thing was at a stand.

The States had been more intent on internal,
Maximilian on external, affairs; but neither would
the king so far strip himself of his absolute
power, nor the States part with so much of their
influence, as the other party desired. The States
had not power to keep the emperor within the
circle they had drawn round him, while the emperor
was unable to hurry them along in the path he
had entered upon.

For such is the nature of human affairs, that lit-
tle is to be accomplished by deliberation and a nice
balance of things: solid and durable foundations
can only be laid by superior strength and a firm
will. -

Maximilian always maintained, and not without
a colour of probability, that the refusal of the em-
pire to stand by him gave the Venetians fresh cou-
rage.* Padua, which was already invested, was
lost again, and Maximilian besieged this powerful
city in vain. In order to carry on the war, he was
obliged to convoke the States anew. On the 6th
of March, 1510, a fresh imperial diet was opened

* Rovereyt, Noy. 8. 1509. “ Als uns der Stend Hilf und
Beistand vorzigen und abgeschlagen, und den Venedigern das
kund, wurden sy mehr gestiirkt, suchten erst all ir Vermégen
und bewegten daneben den gemein Popl in Stetten.” — “ When
the help and assistance of the states was withdrawn and refused
us, and this became known to the Venetians, they felt further
strengthened, examined into all their resources, and moreover
stirred up the common people in the cities."—Frankf. Ar.

208 VENETIAN WAR. Boox I.

at Augsburg.* Maximilian represented the ne-
cessity of once more bringing an army against
Venice. Already he had extended the empire over
Burgundy and the Netherlands, and established an
hereditary right to Hungary ; he would now annex
to it these rich domains, on which the burdens of
the state might fall, instead of resting wholly on
Germany.

The prospect thus held out produced a certain
impression on the States, yet they still remained
very pacific. They wished to bring the affair to a
conclusion by a negotiation with Venice. The Re-
public had already promised a payment of 100,000
gulden down, and 10,000 gulden yearly tax, and
the diet was extremely inclined to treat on this
basis. This will appear intelligible enough, when
it is remembered with how much difficulty a grant
of a few hundred thousand gulden was obtained.
It would at least have relieved them from the small
tax raised for the support of the Imperial Chamber,
which was collected with great difficulty.

* Hiaberlin is uncertain whether the imperial diet had been
summoned for the feast of the three kings, or for the 12th of
Jan. The summons is addressed to the observers of the feast
of the three kings, z.e. Jan. 13.

{ Proceedings at the Imperial Diet held at Augsburg in 1510,
(Fr. Ar.) Answer of the States, second Wednesday after Judica.
They advised the measure, in order neither to let the matter
drop entirely for the future, “ oder viel nachtheiliger und be-
schwerlicher Rachtigung annehmen zu miissen, als jetzt dem heil.
Reich zu Ehr und Lob erlangt werden mége:”—“ nor to be
obliged to accede to a more disadvantageous and oppressive
arrangement, than might now be got to the honour and praise
of the holy empire.”

Boox I. DIET OF AUGSBURG, 1510. 2g

To the emperor, however, these offers appeared
almost insulting. He calculated that the war had
cost him a million; that Venice derived an annual
profit of 500,000 gulden from Germany; he de-
clared that he would not suffer himself to be put
~ off so. ;

The misfortune was now, as before, that he could
not inspire the States with his own warlike ardour.
All projects that recalled the Common Penny or
the four-hundredth man, were rejected at the first
mention. A grant was indeed at length agreed on;
- they consented to raise succours according to the
census and rate (matricula) fixed at Cologne (for
they rejected that of Constance), and to keep them
in the field for half a year*: but how could they
hope to drive the Venetians from the terra firma
by so slight an effort? The papal nuncio spoke
on the subject in private to some of the most influen-
tial princes. They answered him without reserve,
that the emperor was so ill-supported because he
had undertaken the war without their advice.

It followed by a natural reaction, that Maximilian
felt himself bound by no considerations towards the
empire. When he was requested at Augsburg not

* The emperor desired a free promise of “ the grant made at
Constance for as long as his majesty should have need of it.” He
was willing to give a secret promise in return, that he wanted
them for one year only. The States proposed the levy of
Cologne. The emperor replied that this shocked him; that
many of the States were able to contribute more than that singly.
They persisted, however, and all they resolved on was, to grant
the levy of Cologne for half, as they had before done for a
whole, year.

VOL. I. EB

210 VENETIAN WAR. Boox I.

to give up his conquests at his own pleasure, he
replied, that the empire did not support him in a
manner that would make it possible to do other-
wise; he must be at liberty to conclude treaties,
and to make cessions as he found occasion. So
little advance was made at this diet towards a
good understanding and co- operation between the
emperor and the States.

The emperor rejected even the most reasonable
and necessary proposals. The States required that
he should refrain from all interference with the
proceedings of the Imperial Chamber. This had
been the subject of continual discussion, and was at
total variance with the idea upon which the whole
institution was founded. Maximilian, however, did
not scruple to reply, that the Chamber sometimes
interfered in matters beyond its competence: that
he could not allow his hands to be tied.

No wonder if the States refused to assent to a
plan which he submitted to them for the execution
of the sentences of the Imperial Chamber, not-
withstanding its remarkable merits. Maximilian
proposed to draw out a scheme of a permanent levy
for the whole empire, calculated on the scale of
Cologne, of from one to fifty thousand men, so that,
in any exigency, nothing would be needed but to
determine the amount of the subsidy required.
For, he said, a force was necessary to chastise the
rebellious who break the Public Peace or disregard
the ban of the Chamber, or otherwise refuse to
perform the duties of subjects of the empire. The.
fame of such an organisation would also intimidate

Boox I. DIET OF AUGSBURG, 1510. 211

foreign enemies. A committee might then sit in
the Imperial Chamber, charged with the duty of
determining the employment of this force in the
interior.* This was evidently a consistent mode
of carrying out the matricular system. Maximi-
lian, with the acuteness and sagacity peculiar to
him, had once more touched and placed in-a pro-
minent light the exact thing needed. The States
declared that this scheme was the offspring of great
wisdom and reflection; but they were not to be
moved to assent to it — they would only engage to
take it into consideration at the next diet. This
was natural enough. The very first employment
of the levy would have certainly been in Maximi-
lian’s foreign wars. The emperor’s councillors, too,
with whom the States were extremely dissatisfied,
would have gained a new support in their de-
mands.

It was not to be expected that affairs would turn
out otherwise than they did.

No new disputes arose at Augsburg: to appear-

* Commissioners for the maintenance of the law. “ Also
dass Kais. Mt. Jemand dazu verordnet, desgleichen auch das
Reich von jedem Stand etliche, mit voller Gewalt, zu erkennen,
ob man Jemand der sich beklagt dass ihm Unrecht geschehen,
Hiilfe schuldig sey und wie gross.”—“ So that his imperial ma-
jesty do appoint some one; in the same manner, also, the empire,
certain persons from each state, with full power to discover
whether help, and to what extent, be due to any man com-
plaining that wrong has been done him.” In each quarter of
the empire was to be a president, who would summon help upon
such discovery. There was also to be a general captain for the
empire.

P 2

212 VENETIAN WAR. Boox I

ance a tolerable harmony prevailed, but in essen-
tials no approach was made to union.

Maximilian carried on the Venetian war for a
few years longer, with various success, and involved
in ever new complications of European policy. He
interwove some threads in the great web of the his-
tory of that age, but all his attempts to draw the
empire into a fuller participation in his views and
actions were vain: neither the cities, nor even the
Jews who inhabited them, gave ear to his demands
for money; the results of his levies were so inade-
quate that he was obliged to dismiss them as useless;
the utmost he could hope was, that the succours
granted him in Augsburg would arrive’ at last.
The surrender of one city after another, the loss of
the hope of some alleviation of the public burthens,
were partly the consequence, partly the cause, of
all these misunderstandings.

In April, 1512, a diet again assembled at Treves,
whence its sittings were afterwards transferred to
Cologne.*

The emperor began by renewing his proposal for
a permanent rate and census, and by praying for
a favourable answer. The princes answered, that
it was impossible to carry this measure through in
their dominions, and with their subjects ; they beg-
ged him to propose to them other ways and means.

* The acts of this diet are to be found tolerably complete
in vol. xxxi. of the Frankfurt Collection. The letters of the
Frankfurt deputy, Jacob Heller, from the 4th of May to the
29th of June, are dated from Treves; one on the 12th of J uly
from Cologne, in yol. xxix.

Boox I. DIET OF TREVES AND COLOGNE, 1512. 213

Maximilian replied, that, he trusted they would
then at least revert to the resolutions of the year
1500, and grant him the four-hundredth man
that he might gain the victory over the enemy,
and a Common Penny wherewith to maintain the
victory when gained. The States did not venture
entirely to reject this proposal, feeling themselves,
as they did, bound by the promises made at Augs-
burg. The scheme of a Common Penny was now
resumed, but with modifications which robbed it of
all its importance: they lowered the rate ex-
tremely ; before, they had determined to levy a tax
of one gulden on every thousand, capital; now, it
was to be only one on every four thousand.* They
likewise exempted themselves: before, princes and
lords were to contribute according to their property;
now they alleged they had other charges for the
empire, to defray out of their own exchequer. Even
the representations of the knights were immediately
yielded to ; they were only to be bound to include
their vassals and subjects within the assessment.
Maximilian made less objection to this, than to the
insufficiency of the tax generally ; but the States
answered that the common people were already
overladen with burthens, and that it would be im-
possible to extort more from them. He then re-
quested that at least the tax might be granted until
so long as it should have produced a million of

* This is the principle: — Whoever possessed 50 gulden was
to pay @y of a Rhenish gulden ; between 50 and 100, 3; 100
and 400, 35; 400 and 1000, #5; 1000 and 1500, 4; 2000 and
4000, 4 ; 4000 and 10,000, 1 gulden.

P 3

214 VENETIAN WAR. Boox I.

gulden. ‘The States replied that the bare mention
of such a sum would fill the people with terror.

The emperor’s other proposition, concerning the
execution of the sentences of the Imperial Chamber,
was received and discussed with greater cordiality.
Rejecting the division of the empire into four quar-
ters, which Maximilian, like Albert II., had once
thought of adopting, the States conceived the idea
of employing the division into circles (hitherto
used only for the elections for the Council of
Regency and the Imperial Chamber) for that pur-
pose, and of rendering it more generally applicable
to public ends. The electoral and imperial here-
ditary domains were also to be included among the
circles. Saxony and Brandenburg, with their se-
veral houses, were to form the seventh; the four
Rhenish electorates the eighth, Austria the ninth,
Burgundy the tenth circle. In each a captain or
governor was to be appointed for the execution of
the law.

But this subject also gave rise to the most
important differences. The emperor laid claim to
the nomination of these captains, and demanded
moreover a captain-general, whom he might em-
ploy in war, and a council of eight members who
should reside at his court; a sort of ministry
(Regiment), from whose participation in affairs he
promised himself peculiar influence in the empire.
The States, on the contrary, would hear nothing
either of these councillors, or of the captain-general,
and they insisted on reserving to themselves the
nomination of the captains of their circles.

Boox I. DIET OF TREVES AND COLOGNE, 1512. 215

These points gave rise to fresh and violent dis-
putes at Cologne, in August, 1512. On one oc-
casion the emperor refused to receive the answer
sent by the States, which, he said, was no
answer, and should not remain a moment in his
hands.

It was only through the zealous endeavours of
the Elector of Mainz, that the proposal for the
eight councillors was at length accepted. Their
chief office was to be that of putting an end to
quarrels by conciliation. Of the captain-general,
no further mention occurs. I do not find that
there was any intention of limiting the circles in
the nomination of the subordinate captains. The
subsidy was granted in the way determined by
the States, and the emperor abandoned his demand
for a million.

At length, therefore, resolutions were passed,
and finally embodied in a Recess of the empire.

When, however, we come to examine whether it
was executed, we find not a trace of it. There
was a numerous party which had never, from the
first, assented to the resolutions, though they had
not been able to prevent their adoption; at the
head of which was one of the most experienced and
the most respected princes of the empire— Frederic,
Elector of Saxony. The projected subsidy was
never even called for, much less raised. The eight
councillors were never appointed, nor the captains,
whether supreme or subordinate. The division of
the empire into ten circles did not assume any
positive character till ten years later.

rp 4

216 INTESTINE DISORDERS. Boox I.

INTESTINE DISORDERS.

Hap the attempts to give a constitution to the
empire succeeded, a considerable internal agitation
must necessarily have ensued, until an adapt-
ation and subordination of the several parts to the
newly-created central power had taken place. But
that attempts had been made, and had not suc-
ceeded,—that existing institutions had been rudely
shaken and no real or vital unity been produced,
— could result in nothing but a universal fer-
mentation.

The reciprocal rights and duties of the head of
the empire and the States, were now for the first
time thrown into utter uncertainty and confusion.
The States had demanded a share in the juris-
diction and the government; the emperor had con-
ceded some points and had held tenaciously to
others; no settled boundary of their respective
powers had been traced. It was an incessant series
of demands and refusals —extorted grants, inade-
quate supplies — without sincere practical efforts,
without material results, and hence, without satis-
faction on any side. Formerly the union of the
electors had, at least, possessed a certain inde-
pendence, and had represented the unity of the
empire. Since 1504 this also was dissolved.
Lastly, Mainz and Saxony had fallen into a bitter
strife, which entirely broke up the college. The
only institutions which had come to any real
maturity, were the Imperial Chamber and the ma-

\

Boox I. INTESTINE DISORDERS. 217

tricula. But how carelessly was this constructed !
Princes who no longer existed, except in old re-
gisters, were entered in the list; while no notice
was taken of the class of mediate proprietors which
had gradually arisen. Countless appeals were the
consequence. ‘The emperor himself named fifteen
secular, and five spiritual lords, whose succours
belonged to the contingent of his own dominions,
and not to the matricula of the empire; Saxony
named fifteen secular lords and three bishops * ;
Brandenburg, two bishops and two counts; Co-
logne, four counts and lords; every one of the
greater States put forward mediate claims which
had not been thought of. A number of cities, too,
were challenged. Gelnhausen, by the Palatinate ;
Gottingen, by the house of Brunswick; Duisburg,
Niederwesel, and Soest, by Juliers; Hamburg, by

* In the Archives at Dresden there is an instruction from
Duke George for Dr.G. von Breyttenbach, according to which
the latter was to declare at Worms (in 1509), “das wir uns
nicht anders zu erinnern wissen, denn das alles, so wir uf dem
Reychstage zu Costnitz zu Underhaltung des Kammergerichtes
zu geben bewilligt, mit Protestation beschehen, also das dye
Bischoffe und Stifte desgleichen Graven und Herrn die uns mit
Lehen verwandt und auch in unsern Fiirstenthumen sesshaftig
seyn, welche auch an dem Kammergericht nie gestanden, ichtes
dabei zu thun nicht schuldig, bei solcher Freiheit bleiben.” —
“ That we have no other remembrance than that all which we
consented to give at the diet at Constance for the maintenance
of the Imperial Chamber, was accompanied with a protest; that
thus the bishops and chapters of such counts and lords as hold
of us by feudal tenure and are vassals of our principalities, and
who have never appeared before the Imperial Chamber and are
under no obligation to do so, continue to be exempt.”

218 INTESTINE DISORDERS. Boox I.

Holstein.* In the acts of the diets we find the
memorial of an ambassador of Denmark-Holstein
to the States of the empire, wherein he pleads that
he has travelled two hundred miles (German) to
the emperor, but could obtain no answer either
from him or his councillors; and now addressed
himself to the States, to inform them that there
was a city called Hamburg, lying in the land of
Holstein, which had been assessed as an imperial
city, but of which his gracious masters were the
natural hereditary lords and sovereigns. There
was no dispute about the principle. It was always
declared in the Recesses, that the States should
retain their right over all the succours which be-
longed to them from remote times ; yet in every in-
dividual case the question and the conflicting claim
were always revived. Even the most powerful
princes had to complain that the fiscal of the Im-
perial Chamber issued penal mandates against their
vassals.

In short, the Imperial Chamber excited opposition
from every side. The princes felt themselves con-
trolled by it, the inferior States, not protected.
Saxony and Brandenburg reminded the diet that
they had only subjected their sovereign franchises to
the chamber under certain conditions. Joachim I. of

* Proceedings concerning the Imperial Chamber, and such
as claim exemption from its jurisdiction : Harpprecht, Staats
Archiv. iii. p. 405.

{ We know that he did not succeed. The decision of the
imperial diet of 1510 is the main foundation of the freedom of

the empire possessed by Hamburg. Liinig, Reichsarch. Pars
Spec. Cont. iv. p. 965. »

Boox I. INTESTINE DISORDERS. 219

Brandenburg complained that this tribunal received
appeals from the courts of his dominions; which
had never been done in his father’s time.* The
knights of the empire, on the other hand, were dis-
contented at the influence exercised by the power-
ful princes over the chamber ; when a prince, they
said, saw that he would be defeated, he found means
to stop the course of justice. Maximilian, at least,
did not think their complaints unfounded : ‘“ Either,”
says he, “the poor man can get no justice against
the noble, or if he does, it is ‘so sharp and fine
pointed’ that it avails him nothing.” Nor were
the cities backward with their complaints. They
thought it insufferable that the judge should receive
the fiscal dues ; they prayed for the punishment of
the abandoned men by whose practices many cities
were, without any crime or offence, dragged before
the court: in the year 1512 they again demanded
that two assessors appointed by the cities should
have seats in the chamber};—of course, all in
vain.

The natural consequence of this inability of the
supreme power either to enforce obedience or to
conciliate approbation and respect, was an uni-

* Letter from Frederic of Saxony to Renner, on the Wed-
nesday after the feast of the Three Kings, 1509 (Weim. Ar.) ;
Joachim I. die erps. Christi, 1510.

{ Jacob Heller to the city of Frankfurt, June 11. “ Wir
Stett sein der Meinung auch auzubringen zween Assessores
daran zu setzen auch Gebrechen und Mangel der Versammlung
fiirzutragen.”—“ We cities are of the opinion that we should
introduce two assessors to sit there (in the court), and to bring
forward the abuses and defects of the assembly.”

220 INTESTINE DISORDERS. Boox I.

versal striving after separate and independent
power—a universal reign of force, which singularly
characterizes this period. It is worth while to try
to bring before us the several States under this
aspect.

I. In the principalities, the power of the territo-
rial lord was much extended and increased. In
particular ordinances we clearly trace the idea of a
legislation for the whole territory, intended to su-
persede local unions or associations, traditional
rules and customs; and of an equally general su-
pervision, embracing all the branches of administra-
tion. A remarkable example of this may be found
in the ordinances issued by Elector Berthold for
the government of his archbishopric.* In some
places, a perfect union and agreement: subsisted
between the princes and their estates ; e.g. in the
dominions of Brandenburg, both in the Mark and
Franconia: the estates contract debts or vote taxes
to pay the debts of the sovereign. In other coun-
tries, individual administrators become conspicuous.
We distinguish the names of such men as George
Gossenbrod in Tyrol, created by Maximilian, Regi-
mentsherr (master or chief of the government), and
keeping strict watch over all the hereditary rights of
the sovereign. In Styria, we find Wallner, the son of
that sacristan of Altéttingen in Bavaria who accu-
mulated the treasure of Landshut; in Onolzbach,
the general accountant Prucker, who for more than
thirty years conducted the whole business of the privy
chancery and the chamber of finance. It is remark-

* Bodmann, Rheingauische Alterthiimer, ii. 535.
} Buchholz, Geschichte der Mark, iii. 363. Lang, i. p. 111.

Boox I. INTESTINE DISORDERS. pa le

able too that these powerful officials seldom came to
a good end. We often see them dragged before the
tribunals and condemned to punishment: Wallner
was hanged at the door of the very house in which
he had entertained princes, counts, and doctors as
his guests; Gossenbrod was said to have ended his
life by poison; Wolfgang of Kolberg *, raised to
the dignity of count, died in prison; Prucker was
forced to retreat to a prebend in Plassenburg.f
In order to put an end to the arbitrary acts of the
detested council of their duke, the Wiirtenbergers
extorted the treaty of Tiibingen in 1514. Here
and there we see the princes proceeding to open
war in order to extend their territory. In the
year 1511 Brunswick, Liineburg, Bremen, Minden,
and Cleves fell with united forces on the country of
Hoya, which could offer them no resistance. In
1514, Brunswick, Liineburg, Calenberg, Oldenburg,
and Duke George of Saxony, turned their arms
against the remnant of the free Frieslanders in the
marshes. The Butjadinger swore they would
rather die than live exposed to the incessant vexa-
tions of the Brunswick officials, and flew to arms
behind the impassable ramparts of their country ;
but a traitor showed the invading army a road by
which it fell upon their rear: they were beaten, and
their country partitioned among the conquerors,
and the Worsaten and Hadeler compelled to learn
the new duty of obedience to a master. f

* Report in the manuscript Fugger.

t Lang, i. p. 147.

t Rehtmeier, Braunschweigsche Chronik., ii. p. 861

999 ; INTESTINE DISORDERS. Boox I.

In some cases the princes tried to convert the
independence of a bishop into complete subjection ;
as, for example, Duke Magnus of Lauenburg de-
manded of the bishop of Ratzeburg the same aids* as
were granted him by his States, perhaps with twofold
violence, because that prelate had formerly served
in his chancery; he encountered a stout resistance,
and had to resort to Open force.f Or a spiritual
prince sought to extort unwonted obedience from
the knights of his dominions, who thereupon, with
the aid of a secular neighbour, broke out in open
revolt ; as the dukes of Brunswick took the knights
of Hildesheim, and the counts of Henneberg the
chapter of Fulda and the nobility connected with
it, under their protection.

II. For the increasing power of the princes was
peculiarly oppressive to the knights. In Swabia
the associations of the knights of the empire
(Reichsritterschaft) consolidated themselves under
the shelter of the league. In Franconia there were
similar struggles for independence ; occasionally (as,
for instance, in 1511 and 1515), the six districts
(Orte) of the Franconian knights assembled, mainly

* Bede—precaria ; (beten, to pray)—grants of money to the
prince on extraordinary occasions, such as attendance on the
emperor, the marriage of a daughter, &e. — TRANSL.

+ Chytraus, Saxonia, p. 222. By Masch, Gesch. von Rat-
zeburg, p.421., we perceive that there were many other points
of dispute. On the 28th of March, 1507, bishop and chapter
were obliged to promise, “ that when the sovereign received a
land-tax from his knights, it should be paid by the peasants on
the church lands just as by the peasants of any other lords.”

Boox I. INTESTINE DISORDERS. 223

to take measures for subtracting their business under
litigation from the tribunals of the sovereign: the
results of these efforts, however, were not lasting;

here and on the Rhing every thing remained in a
very tumultuous state. We still see the warlike
knights and their mounted retainers, in helm and
breastplate and with bent cross-bow before them
—for as yet the horsemen had no fire-arms —
riding up and down the well-known boundary
line, marking the halting places, and lying in
ambush day and night in the woods, till the
enemy whom they are watching for appears; or
till the train of merchants and their wares, coming
from the city they are at war with, is seen winding
along the road :' their victory is generally an easy
one, for their attack is sudden and unexpected ;
and they return surrounded by prisoners and laden
with booty to their narrow stronghold on hill and
rock, around which they cannot ride a league with-
out descrying another enemy, or go out to the chase
without harness on their back: squires, secret friends,
and comrades in arms, incessantly come and go,
craving succour or bringing warnings, and keep up
an incessant alarm and turmoil. The whole night
long are heard the howlings of the wolves in the
neighbouring forest. While the States of the
empire were consulting at Treves as to the means
of ensuring the execution of the laws, Berlichingen
and Selbitz seized the train of Wiirabere mer-
chants coming from the Leipzig fair, under the
convoy of Bamberg, and thus began the open war
against the bishop and the city. The decrees of

2294 INTESTINE DISORDERS. Boox I,

the diet were of little avail.* Gotz von Berlichingen
thought himself entitled to complain of the nego-
tiations that were opened; for otherwise he would
have overthrown the Niirnbergers and their Bur-
germeister “with his gold chain round his neck
and his battle-mace in his hand.”f At the same

* Emperor and States disputed as to the amount of the levy
necessary. The emperor thought they wanted to put the affair off,
and reminded them that what had happened to-day to Bamberg,
might happen to-morrow to another city. If the succours de-
manded appeared too considerable, he would ask Bamberg to be
content with a hundred horses fit for service. This the States
agreed to; but only under the condition that the ban must be
first proclaimed against outlaws or suspected persons before the
troops were employed. (Frankf. A.) The universal state of di-
vision extended even to this matter.

+ Gé6tzens von Berlichingen ritterliche Thaten. Ausgabe
von Pistorius, p. 127. Miillner’s Chronicle (MS.) relates the
whole affair, after the documents in the Niirnberg Archives, in
the following manner :—The attack was made between Forch-
heim and Neusess, May 18. 1512, by a band of 130 horse ;
31 persons were carried off; the damage done amounted to
8800 gulden; the horses were foddered and the booty divided
in a wood near Schweinfurt. The prisoners were concealed
by the knights of Thiingen, Eberstein, Buchenau. The
council of Niirnberg hereupon took 500 foot soldiers into their
pay, and announced to the Great. Council their determina-
tion to do every thing to bring the perpetrators to punishment.
Meanwhile, “ solten sie ihre Kaufmannschaft so enge es seyn
konnte, einziehen, bis die Leufte etwas besser wiirden:” — “they
must draw in their dealings as much as possible till the ways
became somewhat better.” And he actually produces a pro-
clamation of ban of the 15th of July, accompanied, however, by
a proposal for a commission before which the accused might clear
themselves. Some did thus clear themselves ; others not. Among
the last are mentioned, Caspar von Rabenstein, Balthasar and
Reichart Steinriick, Wilhelm von Schaumburg, Dietrich and
Georg Fuchs, Conrad Schott. Among them are many Wiirz-

Boox I. INTESTINE DISORDERS. 225

time another notorious band had collected under
the command of the Friedingers in Hohenkrahn
(in the Hegau), originally against Kaufbeuern, to
avenge the affront offered to a nobleman who had
sued in vain to the fair daughter of a citizen: after-
- wards they became a mere gang of robbers, who
made the country unsafe; so that the Swabian
league at length stirred itself against them, and the
emperor himself sent out his best men, the Weckauf
(Wake up) of Austria, and the Burlebaus,—at
whose shots, as the historical ballad says, “the
mountain tottered, the rocks were rent, and the walls
riven, till the knights fled, their people surrendered,
and the castle was razed to the ground.”* But

burg officials, who were jointly declared under ban by the Im-
perial Chamber. As in the mean time a number of fresh at-
tacks had taken place, at Vilseck, Ochsenfurt, Mergentheim
(in which the Commander of the Order at Mergentheim had drawn
suspicion upon himself), the Swabian league at last came for-
ward with an armed force, to which the Niirnbergers added 600
men on foot, a squadron of cavalry, and a small body of artillery.
Gangolf yon Geroldseck led the troops of the league; their first
move was against Frauenstein, belonging to Hans von Selbitz :
several castles were carried, and lands taken, and at last the
way was opened to a treaty, The emperor decreed that the
knights should pay 14,000 gulden as compensation. Miiller as-
serts that of this sum the Bishop of Wiirzburg paid 7000 gulden,
the Count Palatine Ludwig 2000, the Duke of Wiirtenberg as
much, the Master of Mergentheim 1000, and Gotz himself 2000,
He infers that those princes, “ dieser Fehd heimlich verwandt
gewesen,”— “had been privily concerned in this Feid.” On the
other hand, he speaks with praise of the bishop of Bamberg and
Markerave Frederic of Brandenburg.

* Anonymi Carmen de Obsidione et Expugnatione Arcis Ho-
henkrayen, 1512. Fugger, both MS, and printed, Gassari An-
nales ad ann, 1512.

VOL. I. Q

226 INTESTINE DISORDERS. Boox I.

there was also many a castle in Bavaria, Swabia,
and Franconia for which a similar fate was re-
served. The insecurity of the roads and high-
ways was greater than ever; even poor travelling
scholars who begged their way along, were set
upon and tortured to make them give up their
miserable pittance.* ‘Good luck to us, my dear
comrades,” cried Giétz to a pack of wolves which he
saw fall upon a flock of sheep, “ good luck to us
all and every where.” He took it for a good omen.

Sometimes this fierce and lawless chivalry as-
sumed a more imposing aspect, and constituted a
sort of tumultuary power in the state. Franz von
Sickingen had the audacity to take under his pro-
tection the enemies of the council which had just
been re-established in Worms by the emperor; he
began the war with that city by seizing one of its
vessels on the Rhine. He was immediately put under
ban. His answer to this was, instantly to appear
before the walls of that city, to fire upon it with
carronades and culverins, lay waste the fields, tear
up the vineyards, and prevent all access to the
town. The Whitsuntide fair could not be held
either in 1515 or 1516. The States of the circle
of the Rhine assembled, but dared not come to any
resolution ; they thought that could only be done
at an imperial diet. , It is indisputable that some
princes, out of opposition either to the emperor or

* Plater’s Lebensbeschreibung. The period he speaks of is
about the year 1515, as he immediately afterwards mentions the
battle of Marignano.

{ Zorn’s Wormser Chronik. in Miinch’s Sickingen, iii.

Boox IL. INTESTINE DISORDERS. - 225

to the Swabian league, favoured, or at least con-
nived at, these acts of violence. The knights were
connected with the party among the princes which
was inclined neither to the emperor nor to the league.

II. The cities were exposed to annoyance and
injury from all sides; from the imperial government,
_ which continually imposed fresh burthens upon
them ; from these lawless knights, and from the
princes, who in 1512 agitated the old question of
the Pfahlbiirger.* But they made a most gallant
defence. How many a robber noble did Liibeck
drag from his stronghold! Towards the end of the
fifteenth century that city concluded a treaty with
neighbouring mediate cities, the express object of
which was to prevent the landed aristocracy from
exceeding the powers they had hitherto exercised.
It availed nothing to King John of Denmark
that the Emperor Maximilian for a time favoured
his attempts. In the year 1509, the Hanse towns
or rather a part of them, attacked his islands, beat
his ships at Helsingér, carried afway his bells for
their chapels, and remained ‘absolute masters on
the open sea. A Liibeck vessel boarded by three
Danish ones near Bornholm beat off two of them
and captured the third: in the year 1511 the

* Pfahlbiirger (from PfaAl, pale or stake) were originally per-
sons inhabiting a town, but not enjoying all the rights of citizen-
ship. (See Golden Bull, cap. 16.) They were often free peasants,
subject to the sovereign lord’s jurisdiction, but not his serfs.
It seems that they availed themselves of the protection and se-
curity afforded by the cities to the prejudice of the lord’s feudal
rights, and formed associations to resist him. (See Eichhorn,
ii. 162.)

Q 2

228 INTESTINE DISORDERS. Boox I.

Liibeck fleet returned to the Trave with eighteen |
Dutch ships as prizes.*

Nor did the inland cities make a less spirited
resistance to those aggressions from which they
were not protected by the Swabian league. How
admirably did Niirnberg defend herself! For every
injury she sustained, she carried her vengeance
home to the territory of the aggressor, and her
mounted bands frequently made rich captures.
Woe to the nobles who fell into their hands! No
intercession either of kinsmen or of neighbouring
princes availed to save them; the council was
armed with the ever-ready excuse that the citizens
absolutely demanded the punishment of the offender.
In vain did he look out from the bars of his prison
towards the forest, watching whether his friends
and allies were not coming to his rescue: Berlichin-
gen’s story sufficiently shows us with how intense a
dread even those of her neighbours who delighted
the most in wild and daring exploits regarded the
towers of Niirnbérg. Noble blood was no security
either from the horrors of the question or the axe
of the executioner.f

Sometimes, indeed, commercial difficulties arose
— for example, in the Venetian war—which could
not be met with the same vigour by the inland
towns as the Hanseats displayed at sea, but the
effects of which they found other means to elude.
All intercourse with Venice was in fact forbidden,
and the Scala which had obtained the proclam-

* Becker, Geschichte von Liibek, vol. i. p. 488.
{ Miillner’s Chronicle is full of anecdotes of this kind.

Boox I. INTESTINE DISORDERS. 229

ation of the ban, often arrested the merchandise
travelling along that road; though this was done
only in order to extort money from the owners
for its redemption. I find that one merchant had
to pay the emperor three thousand ducats transit
duty, on three hundred horse-load of goods: the
Tyrol government had formerly appointed a com-
missary in Augsburg, whose business it was to
collect regular duties on those consignments of*
goods the safety of which it then guaranteed. The
towns accommodated themselves to the times as they
could; thankful that their trade was not utterly
destroyed. The connexion with the Netherlands,
established by the house of Austria, had meanwhile
opened a wide and magnificent field for commercial
enterprise. Merchants of Niirnberg and Augsburg
shared in the profits of the trade to the East
and West Indies.* Their growing prosperity and
indispensable assistance in all pecuniary business
gave them influence in all courts, and especially
that of the emperor. In defiance of all decrees of
diets, they maintained “ their friendly companies ;”
associations to whose hands the smallest affairs
as well as the largest were committed. There is
sufficient ground for the belief that they gave oc-
casion to many just complaints of the monopoly
which was thus vested in few hands; since the
importers of wares had it in their power to regulate

* Gassarus (Annales in Mencken, i. 1743) names those of
the Welser, Gossenbrot, Fugger, Hochstetter, Foélin ; the last
are without doubt the Vehlin. He reckons the dividends from
the first voyage to Calcutta at 175 per cent.

q 3

230 INTESTINE DISORDERS. Boox I.

the price at will.* But they nevertheless main-
tained a strong position in the assemblies of the
empire. The abortive results of the diets held from
1509 to 1513 were chiefly caused by their opposition.
They found means to get the proposed measures
concerning the Pfahlbiirger, in virtue of which goods
were to pay duty, not to the town in which the owner
of them lived, but to the sovereign or lord in whose
dominions that town was situated, indefinitely ad-
journed. (a. p. 1512.)F

It is evident that the peaceful security, the undis-
turbed prosperity, which are often ascribed to those
times, had no existence but in imagination. The
cities kept their ground only by dint of combination,
and of unwearied activity, both in arms and in
negotiation.

There was also a vehement and continual ferment
in the interior of the towns. The old struggle be-
tween the town councils and the commons or people
was continually revived by the increasing demands
for money made by the former and resisted by
the latter; in some places it led to violence and
bloodshed. In the year 1510 the Vierherr ¢ Heinrich

* Jager, Schwibisches Stiidtewesen, i. 669. As early as
1495, the plan was entertained of taxing the great companies.
Datt. p. 844. nr. 16. Things remained in this state from one
diet to another. .

+ A counter representation from Wetzlar and Frankfurt “Es
wurde dem Reich und ihnen ein merklicher Abbruch seyn und
wider ihre Privilegien laufen.” — “It would be a signal injury to
the empire and to them, and go against their privileges.” (Fr. A.)

{ Vierherr and Hansgraf are among the numerous titles of
magistrates used in different parts of Germany. The former
was probably the title of the four chief magistrates, like the

Boox I. INTESTINE DISORDERS. 231

Kellner was executed in Erfurt for having, in the
financial straits of the city, allowed the house of
Saxony to redeem Capellendorf for a sum of money:
all the following years were marked with violence
and disorder. In Regensburg the aged and honest
Lykircher, who had frequently held the offices of
chamberlain, hansgrave, and judge of the peace,
was brought to trial; and, though the treasonable
acts of which he was accused were never proved
against him, was barbarously tortured in the Holy
Week of 1513, and shortly afterwards put to death.*
In Worms, first the old council, and afterwards its
successor, was driven out. In Cologne the com-
mons were furiously incensed against the new
contributions with which they were vexed; and
still more against an association or company called
the Garland, to which the most criminal designs
were imputed.t Similar disturbances took place
in Aix-la-Chapelle, Andernach, Speier, Hall in Swa-
bia, Liibeck, Schweinfurt, and Niirnberg {: in every
direction we meet with imprisonments, banishments,
executions. Domestic grievances were often aggra-
four Syndics of Hamburg. The Hansgraf was a sort of president
of the board of trade (if I may so apply the words) in the Hanse
towns. There are still, lam told, two Hansgrafen in Litbeck, —
TRANSL.

* Chronicle of Regensburg, vol. iv. part 111.

+ Rhythmi de Seditione Coloniensi in Senkenberg, Selecta
Juris et Hist. iv. nr. 6.

+ Baselii Auctarium Naucleri, p. 1016. “ Ea pestis pessime
rebellionis adversus senatum in plerisque — civitatibus irrepsit.
Trithemius (Chronic. Hirsaug. ii. p. 689.) reckons them up,
adding the remarks, “et in aliis quarum vocabula memoriz non
occurrunt.”

Q 4

wae INTESTINE DISORDERS. Boox I.

vated by the suspicion of a criminal understanding
with neighbouring states. In Cologne it was Guel-
ders; in Worms and Regensburg, Austria ; in Erfurt
Saxony, which was the object of their suspicions.
The feeling of public insecurity burst forth in acts
of the wildest violence.

IV. Nor was this excitement and agitation con-
fined to the populations of towns; throughout the
whole breadth of the empire, the peasantry was in
an equal state of ferment. The peasants of the
Swiss mountains had completely changed their re-
lation to the empire: from the condition of subjects,
they had passed to that of free and independent
allies: those of the marches of Friesland on the
contrary had succumbed to the neighbouring sove-
reigns; the Ditmarschers alone stood for a while
after a glorious and successful battle, like a noble
ruin amidst modern edifices. The antagonist prin-
ciples which, in distant lands and from the furthest
marches of the empire, gave rise to these conflicts,
came into contact under a thousand different forms
in the heart of the country. The subsidies for the
empire and its growing necessities fell ultimately
on the peasant ; the demands of the sovereign, of
the holders of church lands, and of the nobility,
were all addressed to him.* On the other hand, in
some countries the common people were made to
bear arms; they formed the bands of landsknechts

* Rosenbliit complains that the noble draws his maintenance
from the peasant, and yet does not insure him any peace ; that
he is constantly pushing his demands further, whereupon the pea-
sant answers with abuse, and the noble rides down his cattle.

Book I. INTESTINE DISORDERS. 233

which acquired and maintained a name amongst
European troops ; they once more felt the strength
that was in them. ‘The example of the Swiss was
very seducing to the south of Germany. In the
country round Schletstadt, in Alsatia, a society of
discontented citizens and peasants, the existence and
proceedings of which were shrouded in the pro-
foundest secrecy, was formed as ‘early as the year
1493. ‘Traversing almost impassable ways, they
met at night on solitary mountains, and swore
never in future to pay any tax which was not
levied with their own free consent; to abolish tolls
and duties, to curtail the privileges of the clergy,
to put the Jews to death’ without ceremony,
and to divide their possessions. They admitted
new members with strange ceremonies, specially
intended to appal traitors. Their intention was in
the first place to seize on Schletstadt, immediately
after to display the banner with the device of the
peasant’s shoe *, to take possession of Alsatia, and
to call the Swiss to their aid.¢ But in spite of the
fearful menaces which accompanied the admission
to the society, they were betrayed, dispersed, and
punished with the utmost severity. Had the Swiss
in 1499 understood their own advantage and not

* The Bundschuh; the large rude shoe bound on the foot
with thongs of leather, commonly worn by the Swabian pea-
santry, and borne on their banner in the servile war to
which they were driven by intolerable oppression. The Bund
or league of the peasants, was afterwards called the Bundschuh.

(See Vol. II.) — Transt. ;
+ Herzog, Edelsasser Chronik., c. 71. p. 162.

~

234 INTESTINE DISORDERS. : Boox I.

excited the hatred of their neighbours by their

cruel ravages, the people along their whole frontier
would, as contemporaries affirm, have flocked to
join their ranks. An incident shows the thoughts
that were afloat among the people. During the
negotiations preceding the peace of Basle, a peasant
appeared in the clothes of the murdered Count of
Fiirstenberg. ‘We are the peasants,” said he,
‘‘ who punish the nobles.” The discovery and dis-
persion of the conspiracy above-mentioned by no
means put an end to the Bundschuh. In the
year 1502 traces of this symbol were found at
Bruchsal, from whence the confederates had already
gained over the nearer places, and were extending
their ramifications into the more remote. They
declared that in answer to an inquiry addressed to
the Swiss they received an assurance that the Con-
federation would help the right, and risk life and
limb in their cause. There was a tinge of religious
enthusiasm in their notions. ‘They were to say five
Pater nosters and Ave Marias daily. Their war-
cry was to be, “ Our Lady!” They were to take
Bruchsal, and then march forth and onward, ever
onward, never remaining more than twenty-four
hours in a place. The whole peasantry of the
empire would join them, of that there was no
doubt; all men must be brought into their covenant,
that so the righteousness of God might be brought
upon earth.* But they were quickly overpowered,
scattered, and their leaders punished with death.

* Frankf. Acten, vol. xx. Baselii Auctarium, p. 997.

Boox I. INTESTINE DISORDERS. 235

The imperial authorities had often contemplated
the danger of such commotions. Among the ar-
ticles which the electors projected discussing at
their diet of Gelnhausen, one related to the ne-
cessity of alleviating the condition of the common
people.* It was always the conclusive argument
against taxes like the Common Penny, that there
was reason to fear they would cause a rebellion
among the people. In the year 1513, the authori-
ties hesitated to punish some deserters from the
Landsknechts, because they were afraid that they
might enter into a combination with the peasants,
whose permanent conspiracy against the nobles
and clergy had been discovered from the con-
fessions of some who had been arrested in the
Breisgau. In the year 1514, they rose in open
and complete rebellion in Wiirtenberg under the
name of Poor Kunz (der armer Kunz): the treaty
of Tiibingen did not satisfy the peasants; it was
necessary to put them down by force of arms.t
We hear the sullen mutterings of a fierce untamed
element, incessantly going on under the very earth
on which we stand.

While such was the state of Germany, the em-
peror was wholly occupied with his Venetian war ;
—at one time fighting with the French against the

* «Ter mit Fron Diensten Atzung Steure geistlichen Gerich-
ten und andern also merklich beschwert ist, dass es in die Harre
nicht zu leiden feyn wird.” — “ Who is so signally burthened with
feudal services, taxes, ecclesiastical gourts, and other things,
that in the long run it will not be to be borne.”

+ Wahraftig Unterrichtung der Ufrur bei Sattler Herzoge,
i. App. no. 70.

236 INTESTINE DISORDERS. Boox I.

Pope and the Venetians, at another with the Pope
and the English against the French: the Swiss,
now in alliance with him, conquer Milan and
lose it again; he himself, at the head of Swiss
and Landsknechts, makes an attempt to recover
it, but in vain. We see him repeatedly tra-
velling from Tyrol to the Netherlands, from the
sea-coast back to the Italian Alps; like the com-
mander of a beleaguered fortress, hurrying inces-
santly from bastion to bastion, and watching the
propitious moment for a sortie. But this ex-
hausted his whole activity; the interior of Ger-
many was abandoned to its own impulses.

A diet was appointed to be held at Worms
again, in the year 1513; and on the Ist June we
find a certain number of the States actually as-
sembled. The emperor alone was wanting. At
length he appeared, but his business did not allow
him to remain: under the pretext that he must
treat in person with the dilatory electors of Treves
and Cologne, he hurried down the Rhine, pro-
posing to the States to follow him to Coblentz.
They chose rather to disperse altogether.* “ Of

* In the Frankfurt Acts, vol. xxx., there is a letter from
Worms to Frankfurt, according to which the States present,
“prima Junii nechst verruckt einhelliglich entschlossen und
den kais. Commissarien fiir endlich Antwort geben, dass sie
noch zehn Tag allhie bei einander verziehen und bleiben, und
wo inen in mitler Zeit nit weiter Geschefte oder Befel von
Kais. Mt zukommen, wollen sie alsdann sich alle wieder yon
dannen anheim thun.”—“On the first of June just past,
unanimously resolved, and give this their final answer to the
imperial commissioners, that they shall tarry and remain here

Boox I. INTESTINE DISORDERS. 287

a truth,” writes the Altbiirgermeister of Cologne
to the Frankfurters, “you have done wisely that
you stayed at home; you have spared much cost,
and earned equal thanks.”

It was not till after an interval of five years
(a.D. 1517), when not only Sickingen’s private
_ wars threw the whole of Upper Germany into con-
fusion, but the universal disorder of the country
had sichdonait intolerable, that a diet was held again ;—
this time at Mainz, in the chapter house of which
city it was opened on the Ist July.

The imperial commissioners demanded vast suc-
cours for the suppression of the disturbances — not,
as before, every four hundredth, but every fiftieth
man; the States, however, did not deem it ad-
visable to resort to arms. The poor husband-
man, already suffering under the torments of want
and famine, might, “in his furious temper,” be
still further exasperated; the rage which had long
gnawed at his heart might burst forth; a universal
rebellion was to be feared. They desired rather to
put down the prevailing disturbances by lenity and
conciliation ; they entered into negotiations on all
sides — even with Sickingen; above all, they ap-

together ten days longer, and if, meantime, no further business
or command reach them from his imperial majesty, they shall
allin that case betake themselves thence home.” In an address
of the 20th of August, Maximilian announces a new diet of
the empire, “ Die geringe Anzahl der erschienenen Stinde habe
ihren Abschied genommen, da sie sich keiner Handlung ver-
fangen mégen.”—“ The small number of states which had
appeared, had taken their leave, as ee were unwilling to
meddle with any business.”

238 INTESTINE DISORDERS. Boox I.

pointed a committee to inquire into the general
state of the country, and into the causes of the
universal outbreak of disturbances. The imperial
commissioners wanted to dissolve the assembly on
the ground that they could do nothing without
ascertaining the opinion of his imperial majesty ;
but the States would not consent to be put off so:
the sittings of the committee, two members of
which were nominated by the cities, were solemnly
opened by a mass for the invocation of the Holy
Ghost (Missa Sancti Spiritus). On the 7th Au-
gust, 1517, they laid their report before the diet.
It is very remarkable that the States discover
the main source of the whole evil in the high-
est and most important institution that had been
founded in the empire —in the Imperial Chamber ;
and in the defects in its constitution and modes of
procedure. The eminent members of that tri-
bunal, they said, were gone, and incapable ones
put in their places. The procedure was protracted
through years ; one great cause of which was, that
the court received so many appeals on trifling mat-
ters that the important business could not be des-
patched. Nor was this all. The court had not
free course; it was often ordered to stay all pro-
ceedings. If, after long delays and infinite trouble,
a suitor succeeded in getting judgment pronounced,
he could not get it executed; his antagonist
obtained mandates to prevent its execution. The
consequence was, that the highest penalties of
the law, the ban and reban (Acht wnd Aberacht),
had no longer terrors for any one. The cri-

Boox I. INTESTINE DISORDERS. 259

minal under ban found shelter and protection;
and as the other courts of justice were in no
better condition — in all, incapable judges, im-
punity for misdoers, and abuses without end —
disquiet and tumult had broken out in all parts.
Neither by land nor by water were the ways safe;
no safe-conduct, whether of the head or the mem-
bers of the empire, was the least heeded; there was
no protection, whether for subjects or for such
foreigners as were entitled to it: the husbandman,
by whose labours all classes were fed, was ruined ;
widows and orphans were deserted; not a pilgrim
or a messenger or a tradesman could travel along
the roads, whether to fulfil his pious duty, or to de-
liver his message, or to execute his business. To
these evils were added the boundless luxury in
clothing and food; the wealth of the country all
found its way into foreign lands, especially to
Rome, where new exactions were daily invented:
lastly, it was most mischievous to allow the men
at arms, who had sometimes been fighting against
the emperor and the empire, to return to their
homes, where they stirred up the peasantry to re-
bellion.

And while such was the statement of public grie-
vances, the particular petitions and remonstrances
were countless. The inhabitants of Worms com-
plained of “the inhuman private warfare (Fehde)
which Franciscus von Sickingen, in despite and dis-
regard of his honour, carried on against them ;” to
which the deputies from Spires added, that Sickin-
gen’s troops had the design to burn down the Spital

240 INTESTINE DISORDERS. Boox I.

of their city. Miihlhausen complained in its own
name, and those of Nordhausen and Gosslar, that they
paid tribute for protection and were not protected: —
Liibeck enumerated all the injuries it sustained
from the King of Denmark, from nobles and com-
mons ; it could obtain no help from the empire, by
which it was so heavily burthened ; it must pay its
money to the Imperial Chamber, which always gave
judgment against it, and never in its favour. Other
towns said nothing of their grievances, because
they saw it was of no avail. Meantime the knights
held meetings at Friedberg, Gelnhausen, Bingen,
and Wimpfen, whither thé emperor sent delegates
to appease them. Anna of Brunswick, the widowed
Landgravine of Hessen, appeared in person at the
diet, and uttered the bitterest complaints: she said
she could obtain no justice in Hessen; that she
vainly followed the emperor and the Imperial
Chamber from place to place; her dowry of Mel-
sungen was consumed; she was reduced to travel
about like a gipsy, with a solitary maid-servant,
and to pawn her jewels.and even her clothes; she
could not pay her debts, and must soon beg her
bread.

“ Summa Summarum,” writes the delegate from
Frankfurt, “here is nothing but complaint and
wrong; it is greatly to be feared that no remedy

He.
will be found.”* The States made the most ur-

* Philip Fiirstenberg, July 26. In the 82d vol. of the
Frankf. A., where generally the transactions of this diet are to
be found. “Wo Kais. Mt.” he says, on the 16th of Aug., of
the representations which were made, “dieselbig als billig und

Boox I. INTESTINE DISORDERS. 241

gent appeals to the emperor: they conjured him
for God’s sake, for the sake of justice, for his own,
for that of the holy empire, of the German na-
tion, nay of all Christendom, to lay these things
to heart ;—-to remember how many mighty states
had fallen, through want of inward tranquillity and
order ; to look carefully into what was passing in
the tag of the common people, and to find a re-
medy for these great evils.

Such were the words addressed to him; but
they were but words. A remedy—a measure of
the smallest practical utility — was not so much as
suggested; the diet was dissolved without having
even proceeded to one resolution.

And already the excited mind of the nation was
turned towards other evils and other abuses than
those-which affected its civil and political con-
dition.

In consequence of the intimate union between
Rome and Germany, in virtue of which the Pope
was always a mighty power in the empire, a grave
discussion on spiritual affairs had become inevitable.
For a time, they had fallen into the back-ground,
or been the subject only of chance and incidental
mention: now, however, they attracted universal
attention ; the vigorous and agitated spirit of the
nation, weary and disgusted with the present and

wol wiire verwilligen wiirde, hofft ich alle Dinge sollten noch
gut werden, wo nicht, so helf uns Gott.” “If his imperial
majesty would comply with the same, as were reasonable and
right, I should hope that all things might yet go well; if not,
then God help us.”

VOL. I. R

242 INTESTINE DISORDERS. Boox I.

the past, and eagerly striving after the future,
seized upon them with avidity. As a disposition
was immediately manifested to go to the bottom of
the subject, and to proceed from a consideration of
the external interference of the church, toa general
and thorough examination of its rights, this agita-
tion speedily acquired an importance which extended
far beyond the limits of the internal policy of
Germany.

BOOK II.

EARLY HISTORY OF LUTHER AND OF CHARLES YV.

1517—1521.

R2

ba -
; 4

ns prise

He
}

sentry rh oe *) “Onie

245

BOOK II,

CHAPTER I.

ORIGIN OF THE RELIGIOUS OPPOSITION,

WHATEVER hopes we may entertain of the final
accomplishment of the prophecies of an universal
faith in one God and Father of all which have come
down to us in the Hebrew and Christian Scriptures,
it is certain that after the lapse of more than ten
centuries that faith had by no means overspread
the earth. The world was filled with manifold and
widely differing modes and objects of worship.
Even in Europe, the attempts to root out pagan-
ism had been but partially successful; in Lithuania,
for example, the ancient worship of the serpent
endured through the whole of the 15th and 16th
centuries, and was even invested with a political
significancy*; and if this was the case in Europe,
how much more so in other portions of the globe.
In every clime men continued to symbolise the
powers of nature, and to endeavour to subdue them
by enchantments or to propitiate them by sacrifices:
throughout vast regions the memory of the dead

* ZEneas Silvius de Statu Europe, c.20. Alexander Gua-
gninus in Resp. Polonie. Elz. p. 276.
R 3

246 ORIGIN OF RELIGIOUS OPPOSITION.  Boox II.

was the terror of the living, and the rites of re-
ligion were especially designed to avert their de-
structive interference in human things; to worship
only the sun and moon supposed a certain elevation
of soul, and a considerable degree of civilisation.

Refined by philosophy, letters, and arts, repre-
sented by vast and powerful hierarchies, stood the
mightiest antagonists of Christianity—the Indian
religion and Islam ; and it is remarkable how great
an internal agitation prevailed within them at the
epoch of which we are treating.

Although the Brahminical faith was, perhaps, -
originally founded on monotheistic ideas, it had
clothed these in a multiform idolatry. But at
the end of the 15th and beginning of the 16th cen-
tury, we trace the progress of a reformer in Hin-
dostan. Nanek, a native of Lahore, endeavoured
to restore the primitive ideas of religion, and to show
the advantages of a pure morality over a merely cere-
monial worship: he projected the abolition of castes,
nay, even a union of Hindoos and Moslem ; he
presents one of the most extraordinary examples of
peaceful unfanatical piety the world ever beheld.*
Unfortunately, his efforts were unsuccessful. The
notions he combated were much too deeply rooted ;
even those who called themselves his disciples—the
Sikhs—paid idolatrous honours to the man who
laboured to destroy idolatry.

* Bhai Guru the B’hale in Malcolm’s Translation, Sketch of
the Sikhs. Asiatic Researches, xvi. 271. That holy man
made God the Supreme known to all—he restored to virtue

her strength, blended the four castes into one -— established one
mode of salutation.

Cuar. I. ORIGIN OF RELIGIOUS OPPOSITION. 247

A new and very important development of the
other branch of the religions of India — Buddhism
—also took place in the fifteenth century. The first
regenerated Lama appeared in the monastery of Bre-
pung, and was universally acknowledged throughout
Thibet ; the second incarnation of the same (from
1462 to 1542) had similar success in the most
remote Buddhist countries*; from that time hun-
dreds of millions revere in the Dalailama at
L’Hassa the living Buddha of the present, —the
unity of the divine trinity,—and throng thither
to receive his blessing. It cannot be denied that
this religion had a beneficial influence on the man-
ners of rude nations; but, on the other hand, what
fetters does such a fantastic deification of human
nature impose on the mind! Those nations possess
the materials for forming a popular literature,
a wide diffusion of the knowledge of the elements
of science, and the art of printing ; but the literature
itself—the independent exercise and free utterance
of the mind, can never exist?; nor are such con-

* Fr. Georgi Alphabetum Tibetanum, p. 326., says of it:
“ Pergit inter Tartaros ad amplificandam religionem Xacaicam in
regno Kokonor cis murum magnum Sinorum : inde in Kang :
multa erigit asceteria: reditin Brepung.” He bears the name of
So-nam-kiel vachiam-tzho, and is notwithstanding the old Reval-
Kedun, who died in 1399.

+ Hodgson, Notice sur la Langue, la Litérature, et la Religion
des Boudhistes. “L’écriture des Tubétains n’est jamais employée
A rien de plus utile que des notes des affaires ou de plus instructif
que les réves d’une mythologie absurde,” &c. . The objections of
Klaproth, Nouv. Journ. Asiatique, p. 99., are not in my opinion
of much weight, as the question is not concerning a literature,

R 4

248 ORIGIN OF RELIGIOUS OPPOSITION. Boox II.

troversies as those between the married and un-
married priests, or the yellow and the red pro-
fessions which attach themselves to different chiefs,
at all calculated to give birth to it. The rival
Lamas make pilgrimages to each other, and
reciprocally recognise each other’s divine cha-
racter.

The same antagonism which prevailed between
Brama and Buddha, subsisted in the bosom of Is-
lam, from its very foundation, between the three
elder Chalifs and Ali; in the beginning of the six-
teenth century the contest between the two sects,
which had been dormant for awhile, broke out with
redoubled violence. The sultan of the Osmans re-
garded himself (in his character of successor to
Abubekr and the first Chalifs) as the religious
head of all Sunnites, whether in his own or foreign
countries, from Morocco to Bokhara. On the
other hand, a race of mystic Sheiks of Erdebil,
who traced their origin from Ali, gave birth to
a successful warrior, Ismail Sophi, who founded
the modern Persian monarchy, and secured once
more to the Shiites a powerful representation
and an illustrious place in history. Unfortu-
nately, neither of these parties felt the duty or
expediency of fostering the germ of civilisation
which had lain in the soil since the better times
of the early Chalifat. They only developed
the tendency to despotic autocracy which Islam

which may be old, or the existence of which may be unknown,
but a living one of the present day.

Cuar. I. ORIGIN OF RELIGIOUS OPPOSITION. 249

so peculiarly favours, and worked up _ political
hostility to an incredible pitch of fury by the
stimulants of fanaticism. The Turkish histo-
rians relate that the enemy who had fallen into
Ismail’s hands were roasted and eaten.* The Os-
man, Sultan Selim, on the other hand, opened the
war against his rival by causing all the Shiites in
his land, from the age of seven to seventy, to be
hunted out and put to death in one day; “ forty
thousand heads,” says Seadeddin, ‘“ with base souls.”
The antagonists were, as we perceive, worthy of
each other.

In Christendom, too, a division existed between
the Greeco-Oriental and the Latin church, which,
though it did not lead to acts of such savage vio-
lence, could not be healed. Even the near approach
of the resistless torrent of Turkish power which
threatened instant destruction, could not move the
Greeks to accede to the condition under which the
assistance of the West was offered them — the adop-
tion of the distinguishing formule of confession —
except for the moment, and ostensibly. The union
which was brought about at Florence, in the year
1439, with so much labour, met with little sympathy
from some, and the most violent opposition from -
others: the patriarchs of Alexandria, Antioch, and
Jerusalem, loudly protested against the departure
from canonical and synodal tradition, which such
an union implied; they threatened the Greek em-
peror with a schism on their own part, on account

* Hammer, Osmanische Gesch., ii. 345.

250 ORIGIN OF RELIGIOUS OPPOSITION.  Boox II.

of the indulgence he showed to the Latin hetero-
doxy.*

If we inquire which of these several religions had
the greater external and political strength, we areled
to the conclusion that Islam had unquestionably the
advantage. By the conquests of the Osmans in the
15th century, it had extended to regions where it
had been hitherto unknown, almost on the borders
of Europe; combined too with political institutions
which must inevitably lead to the unceasing pro-
gress of conversion. It reconquered that sove-
reignty over the Mediterranean which it had lost
since the eleventh century. Its triumphs in India
soon equalled those in the West. Sultan Baber was
not content with overthrowing the Islamite princes
who had hitherto held that land. Finding, as he
expressed it, ‘that the banners of the heathen
waved in two hundred cities of the faithful — that
mosques were destroyed and the women and
children of the Moslem carried into slavery,” he
proclaimed a holy war against the Hindoos, as
the Osmans had done against the Christians.
On the eve of a battle he resolved to abjure
the use of wine; he repealed taxes which were in-
consistent with the Koran, and enkindled the ardour
of his troops by a vow sworn upon this their
sacred book; his reports of his victories are con-
ceived in the same spirit of religious enthusiasm,
and he thus earned the title of Gazi.; The rise of

* Passages from their letter of admonition, in Gieseler,
Kirchengeschichte, ii. 4. p. 545.
{ Baber’s own Memoirs, translated into English by Leyden

Cuar. I. ORIGIN OF RELIGIOUS OPPOSITION. 251

so mighty a power, actuated by such ideas, neces-
sarily gave a vast impulse to the propagation of
Islam throughout the East.

But if, on the other hand, we endeavour to ascertain
which of these different systems possessed the great-
est internal force, — which was pregnant with the
most important consequences to the destiny of the
human race, — we can as little fail to arrive at the
conviction (whatever be our religious faith), that the
superiority was on the side of Latin Christendom.

Its most important peculiarity lay in this —that
_a slow but sure and unbroken progress of intel-
lectual culture had been going on within its bosom
for a series of ages. While the East had been con-
vulsed to its very centre by torrents of invasion
like that of the Mongols, the West had indeed
always been agitated by wars, in which the various
powers of society were brought into motion and ex-
ercise ; but neither had foreign tribes overrun the
land, nor had there been any of those intestine
convulsions which shake the foundations of a
society in an early and progressive stage of civili-
sation. Hence all the vital and productive ele-
ments of human culture were here united and
mingled: the development of society had gone
on naturally and gradually; the innate passion
and genius for science and for art constantly re-
ceived fresh food and fresh inspiration, and were
in their fullest bloom and vigour; civil liberty

and Erskine, into German by Kaiser, 1828, p. 537. and the two
firmans thereto annexed.

252 ORIGIN OF RELIGIOUS OPPOSITION. Boox II.

was established upon firm foundations; solid and
symmetrical political structures arose in beneficent
rivalry, and the necessities of civil life led to
the combination and improvement of physical re-
sources; the laws which eternal Providence has
impressed on human affairs were left to their free
and tranquil operation; what had decayed crumbled
away and disappeared, while the germs of fresh life
continually shot up and flourished: in Europe were
found united the most intelligent, the bravest, and
the most civilised nations, still in the freshness of
youth. :

Such was the world which now sought, like its
eastern rival, to extend its limits and its influence.
Four centuries had elapsed since, prompted by
religious motives, it had made attempts at con-
quest in the East; but after a momentary success
these had failed —only a few fragments of these ac-
quisitions remained in its possession. But at the
end of the fifteenth century, a new theatre for
boundless activity was opened to the West. It was
the time of the discovery of both Indies. All ele-
ments of European culture — the study of the half-
effaced recollections of antiquity, technical improve-
ments, the spirit of commercial and political en-
terprise, religious zeal —all conspired to render the
newly-discovered countries tempting and profitable.
All the existing relations of nations, however, ne-
cessarily underwent a change; the people of the
West acquired a new superiority, or at least became
capable of acquiring it.

Above all, the relative situation of religions was

Cuap. I. POSITION OF PAPACY TO RELIGION. 253

altered. Christianity, especially in the forms it
had assumed in the Latin Church, gained a fresh and
unexpected ascendancy in the remotest regions. It
was therefore doubly important to mankind, what
might be the present or the future form and cha-
racter of the Latin Church. The pope instantly
put forth a claim, which no one contested, to divide
the countries that had been, or that yet might be
found, between the two States by which they were
discovered.

POSITION OF THE PAPACY WITH REGARD TO
RELIGION.

THE question, at what periods and under what cir-
cumstances the distinguishing doctrines and prac-
tices of the Romish Church were settled, and
acquired an ascendancy, merits a minute and
elaborate dissertation.

It is sufficient here to recal to the mind of the
reader, that this took place at a comparatively late
period, and precisely in the century of the great
hierarchical struggles.

It is well known that the institution of the Seven
Sacraments, whose circle embraces all the important
events of the life of man, and brings them into
contact with the church, is ascribed to Peter Lom-
bard, who lived in the twelfth century.* It appears

* Jt would amount to little, if what Schréckh (Kirchen-
geschichte, xxviii. p. 45.) assumes were true; viz. that Otto of
Bamberg had already preached this doctrine to the Pomeranians ;

254 POSITION OF THE PAPACY Boox II.

upon inquiry that the notions regarding the most
important of them, the Sacrament of the Altar, were
by no means very distinct in the church itself, in the
time of that great theologian. It is true that one
of those synods which, under Gregory VIL, had
contributed so much to the establishment of
the hierarchy, had added great weight to the
doctrine of the real presence by the condemna-
tion of Berengar: but Peter Lombard as yet did
not venture to decide in its favour: the word tran-
substantiation first became current in his time; nor
was it until the beginning of the thirteenth cen-
tury, that the idea and the word received the sanc-
tion of the church: this, as is well known, was
first given by the Lateran confession of faith in the
year 1215; and it was not till later that the ob-
jections which till then had been constantly sug-
gested by a deeper view of religion, gradually
disappeared.

It is obvious, however, of what infinite importance
this doctrine became to the service of the church,
which has crystallized (if I may use the expression)
around the mystery it involves. The ideas of
the mystical and sensible presence of Christ in
the church were thus embodied in a living image;
the adoration of the Host was introduced; fes-
tivals in honour of this greatest. of all miracles,
incessantly repeated, were solemnized. Intimately
connected with this is the great importance at-

but it has been justly remarked, that the biography of Otto, in
which this statement appears, was written at a later time.

Cuap. I. WITH REGARD TO RELIGION. 255

tached to the worship of the Virgin Mary, the
mother of Christ, in the latter part of the middle
ages.

The prerogatives of the priesthood are also
essentially connected with this article of faith.
The theory and doctrine of the priestly character
were developed ; that is, of the power communicated
. to the priest by ordination, “to make the body
of Christ” (as they did not scruple to say); “ to
act in the person of Christ.” It is a product of
the thirteenth century, and is to be traced princi-
pally to Alexander of Hales and Thomas Aqui-
nas.* This doctrine first gave to the separation
of the priesthood from the laity, which had indeed
other and deeper causes, its full significancy.
People began to see in the priest the mediator
between God and man.f

This separation, regarded as a positive institu-
tion, is also, as is well known, an offspring of the
same epoch. In the thirteenth century, spite of all
opposition, the celibacy of the priesthood became an
inviolable law. At the same time the cup began
to be withheld from the laity. It was not denied
that the efficacy of the Eucharist in both kinds was
more complete; but it was said that the more

* See the researches of Thomas Aquinas concerning the
Birth of Christ, “ Utrum de purissimis sanguinibus virginis
formatus fuerit, &c.” Summe, pars iii. questio 31. It is evi-
dent what value was set upon the point.

+ “ Sacerdos,” says Thomas, “ constituitur medius inter Deum
et populum. Sacerdos nova legis in persona Christi operatur.”
Summz, pars iii. quastio 22. art. 4. concl.

256 POSITION OF THE PAPACY Boox II.

worthy should be reserved for the more worthy —
for those by whose instrumentality alone it was
produced. “It is not in the participation of the
faithful,” says St. Thomas, “ that the perfection of
the sacrament lies, but solely in the consecration
of the elements.”* And in fact the church ap-
peared far less designed for instruction or for the
preaching of the Gospel, than for the showing forth
of the great mystery; and the priesthood is, through
the sacrament, the sole depository of the power
to do this; it is through the priest that sanctifi-
cation is imparted to the multitude.

This very separation of the priesthood from the
laity gave its members boundless influence over
all other classes of the community.

It is a necessary part of the theory of the
sacerdotal character above alluded to, that the
priest has the exclusive power of removing the
obstacles which stand in the way of a participation
in the mysterious grace of God: in this not even a
saint had power to supersede him.f But the absolu-
tion which he is authorized to grant is charged with
certain conditions, the most imperative of which’
is confession. In the beginning of the thirteenth ~
century it was peremptorily enjoined on every
believer as a duty, to confess all his sins, at least
once in a year, to some particular priest.

* “Perfectio hujus sacramenti non est in usu fidelium sed in
consecratione materie.”— Pars iii. qu. 80. a. 12. ¢. 2™.

{+ Summez Suppl. Qu. 17. a. 2.c.1™. “Character et potestas
conficiendi et potestas clavium est unum et idem.” But I refer
to the entire question. ;

eo

Cuap. I. WITH REGARD TO RELIGION. 257

It requires no elaborate argument to prove what
an all-pervading influence auricular confession, and
the official supervision and guidance of consciences,
must give to the clergy. With this was connected
a complete, organized system of penances. .

Above all, a character and position almost divine
was thus conferred on the high-priest, the pope
of Rome; of whom it was assumed that he occupied
the place of Christ in the mystical body of the
church, which embraced heaven and earth, the
dead and the-living. This conception of the
functions and attributes of the pope was first filled
out and perfected in the beginning of the thirteenth
century; then, too, was the doctrine of the trea-
sures of the church, on which the system of in-
dulgences rests, first promulgated. Innocent III.
did not scruple to declare, that what he did, God
did, through him. Glossators added, that the pope
possessed the uncontrolled will of God; that his sen-
tence superseded all reasons : with perverse and ex-
travagant dialectic, they propounded the question,
whether it were possible to appeal from the pope
to God*, and answered it in the negative; seeing
that God had the same tribunal as the pope, and
that it was impossible to appeal from any being to
himself. |

It is. clear that the papacy must have already
gained the victory over the empire, —that it could
no longer have any thing to fear, either from

* Augustini Triumphi Summa in Gieseler, Kirchengeschichte,

VOL. I. S$

258 POSITION OF THE PAPACY Boox II.

master or rival,—before opinions and doctrines
of this kind could be entertained or avowed. In
the age of struggles and conquests, the theory of
the hierarchy gained ground step by step with the
fact of material power. Never were theory and
practice more intimately connected.

Nor was it to be believed that any interruption
or pause in this course of things took place in the
fifteenth century. The denial of the right of the
clergy to withhold the cup was first declared to
be heresy at the council of Constance: Eugenius LV.
first formally accepted the doctrine of the Seven
Sacraments; the extraordinary school interpretation
of the miraculous conception was first approved
by the councils, favoured by the popes, and ac-
cepted by the universities, in this age.*

It might appear that the worldly dispositions of
the popes of those times, whose main object it was
to enjoy life, to promote their dependents and to
enlarge their secular dominions, would have pre-
judiced their spiritual pretensions. But, on the
contrary, these were as vast and as arrogant as
ever. The only effect of the respect inspired by the
councils was, that the popes forbade any one to
appeal to a council under pain of damnation. +
With what ardour do the curialist writers labour
to demonstrate the infallibility of the pope! John
of Torquemada is unwearied in heaping together

* Baselii Auctarium Naucleri, p. 993.
} Bull of Pius II. of the 18th of Jan. 1460. (XV. Kal. Febr.,
not X., as Rain. has it.) Bullar. Cocq, tom. iii. pars iii. p. 97.

Cuap. I. WITH REGARD TO RELIGION. 259

analogies from Scripture, maxims of the fathers
and passages out of the false decretals, for this
end; he goes so far as to maintain that, were
there not a head of the church who could decide
all controversies and remove all doubts, it might
be possible to doubt of the Holy Scriptures them-
selves, which derived their authority only from the
church; which, again, could not be conceived as
existing without the pope.* In the beginning of
the sixteenth century, the well-known Dominican,
Thomas of Gaeta, did not hesitate to declare the
church a born slave, who could have no other
remedy against a bad pope, than to pray for him
without ceasing. f

Nor were any of the resources of physical force
neglected or abandoned. The Dominicans, who
taught the strictest doctrines in the universities
and proclaimed them to the people from the pulpit,
had the right to enforce them by means of fire and
sword. Many victims to orthodoxy were offered
up after John Huss and Jerome of Prague. The
contrast between the worldly-mindedness and sen-
suality of Alexander VI. and Leo X., with the

* Johannes de Turrecremata de Potestate Papali (Roccaberti,
tom. xili.), c. 112. “ Credendum est, quod Romanus pontifex in
judicio eorum que fidei sunt, spiritu sancto regatur et per con-
sequens in illis non erret: alias possit quis eadem facilitate
dicere, quod erratum sit in electione quatuor evangeliorum et
epistolarum canonis.” He laments, however, over the “ multa
turba adversariorum et inimicorum Romane sedis,” who will not
believe this.

+ De Autoritate Pape et Concilii, Extracts in Rainaldus,
1512, nr. 18.

s 2

260 POSITION OF THE PAPACY Boox II.

additional stringency and rigour they gave to the
powers of the Inquisition, is most glaring.* Under
the authority of similarly disposed predecessors,
this institution had recently acquired in Spain a
more fearful character and aspect than it had ever
yet presented to the world; and the example of Ger-
many shows that similar tendencies were at work
in other countries. The strange distortion of the
fancy which gave birth to the notion of a personal
intercourse with Satan, served as the pretext for
bloody executions; the ‘‘ Hexenhammer” (Hammer
for Witches) was the work of two German Domini-
cans. The Spanish Inquisition had originated in a
persecution of the Jews: in Germany, also, the Jews
were universally persecuted in the beginning of the
sixteenth century, and the Dominicans of Cologne
proposed to the emperor to establish an Inquisition
against them. They had even the ingenuity to
invent a legal authority for such ameasure. They
declared that it was necessary to examine how far
the Jews had deviated from the Old Testament,
which the emperor was fully entitled to do, since
their nation had formally acknowledged before the
judgment-seat of Pilate the authority of the im-
perial majesty of Rome. If they had succeeded,
they would certainly not have stopped at the Jews.

Meanwhile the whole intellectual energy of the
age flowed in the channels- marked out by the
church. Germany is a striking example to what

* Decretals in Rainaldus, 1498, nr. 25. 1516, nr. 34.
t Report in Reuchlin’s Augenspiegel (Mirror), printed by v. d.
Hardt, Historia Liter. Reformationis, iii. 61.

Cuap. I. WITH REGARD TO RELIGION. 261

an extent the popular mind of a nation of the West
received its direction from ecclesiastical principles.
The great workshops of literature, the German
universities, were all more or less colonies or
branches of that of Paris—either directly sprung
from it, like the earlier; or indirectly, like the
later. Their statutes sometimes begin with a
eulogy on the Alma Mater of Paris.* From that
most ancient seat of learning, too, had the whole
system of the schoolmen, the controversy between
Nominalism and Realism, the preponderancy of
the theological faculty, —“ that brilliant star from
which every thing received light and life,” — passed
over to them. In the theological faculty the Pro-
fessor of Sentences} had the precedency, and the
Baccalaureus who read the Bible was obliged to
allow him to determine the hour of his lecture. In
some universities, none but a clerk who had received

* Principium Statutorum Facultatis Theologice Studii Vien-
nensis ap. Kollar Analecta, i. 137. p. 240. n. 2. Statute of
Cologne in Bianco, Endowments for Students at Cologne, p. 451. :
* Divine sapientiz fluvius descendens a patre luminum — ab al-
veo Parisiens. studii tanquam cisterna conductu capto per canalia
pmrorupit Rheni partes ubertando.” The genealogy is as fol-
lows: — From the university of Paris issued those of Prague,
Vienna, Heidelberg, and Cologne ; from Prague, — Leipzig,
Rostock, Greifswald ; and for the greater part, Erfurt ; from
Cologne, — Louvain and Treves; from Vienna, — Freiburg,
and, according to the Statutes, Ingolstadt. At Basle and Tii-
bingen at first, deference was paid to Bologna also; but even in
Basle, the first Bursa was called the Parisian and in Tiibingen
the first teacher of Theology was a magister from Paris.

+ Professor Sententiarum, the expositor of the “ Sententia ”
of Peter Lombard. — TRANSL.

s 3

262 POSITION OF THE PAPACY Boox II.

at least inferior ordination, could be chosen Rector.
The whole of education, from the first elements to
the highest dignities of learning, was conducted in
one and the same spirit. Dialectical distinctions in-
truded themselves into the very rudiments of gram-
mar*; and the elementary books of the eleventh and
twelfth centuries were constantly retained as the
groundwork of learning}: here, too, the same road
was steadily pursued which had been marked out at
the time of the foundation of the hierarchical power.

Art was subject to the same influences. The
minsters and cathedrals, in which the doctrines and
ideas of the’church are so curiously symbolised, rose
on every side. In the year 1482, the towers of the
church of St. Sebaldus at Niirnberg were raised to
their present height; in 1494, a new and ex-
quisitely wrought gate was added to Strasburg
minster; in 1500, the king of the Romans laid the
first stone of the choir of the Reichsgotteshaus
(Church of the Empire) St. Ulrich, in Augsburg,
with silver trowel, rule, and hod; he caused a
magnificent block of stone to be brought from the
mountains, out of which a monument was to be
erected “to the well-beloved lord St. Ulrich, our
kinsman of the house of Kyburg:” upon it was to
stand a king of the Romans, sword in hand.t In

* Geiler, Navicula : “In prima parte de subjecto attributionis
et de Bebe pup intellectualibus, quod scire jam est magistrorum
provectorum.’

t Johannes de Garlandia, Alexander’s Doctrinale. Duspecne,
Preefatio ad Glossarium, 42, 43.

{ Account in the Fugger MS. We remember that St. Ulrich
was the first saint canonised by a pope (Johannes, xy. 973. ) for
the whole church.

Cuar. I. WITH REGARD TO RELIGION. 263

1513, the choir of the cathedral of Freiburg, in
1517, that of Bern, was finished; the porch on the
northern transept of the church of St. Lawrence in
Niirnberg dates from 1520. The brotherhoods ‘of
the masons, and the secrets which arose in the work-
shops of German builders, spread wider and wider.
It was not till a later period that the redundancy
of foliage, the vegetable character, which so remark-
ably distinguishes the so-called gothic architecture
became general. At the time we are speaking of,
the interior of churches was principally adorned
with countless figures, either exquisitely carved in
wood, or cast in precious metals, or painted and
enclosed in gold frames, which covered the altars
or adorned the aisles and porches. It is not the
province of the arts to produce ideas, but to give
them a sensible form ; all the creative powers of the
nation were now devoted to the task of representing
the traditional conceptions of the church. Those
wondrous representations of the Mother of God, so
full of sweet and innocent grace, which have immor-
talized Baldung, Schaffner, and especially Martin
Schon, are not mere visions of an artist’s fancy ; they
are profoundly connected with that worship of the
Virgin which was then peculiarly general and fervent.
I venture to add that they cannot be understood
without the rosary, which is designed to recal the
several joys of the Holy Mary ;— the angelic salu-
tation, the journey across the mountains, the child-
bearing without pain, the finding of Jesus in the
temple, and the ascension; as the prayer-books of
that time more fully set forth.
s4

264 POSITION OF THE PAPACY Boox II.

These prayer-books are altogether singular
monuments of a simple and credulous devotion.
There are prayers to which an indulgence for 146
days, others to which one for 7000 or 8000 years,
are attached: one morning benediction of peculiar
efficacy was sent by a pope to a king of Cyprus;
whosoever repeats the prayer of the venerable Bede
the requisite number of times, the Virgin Mary will
be at hand to help him for thirty days before his
death, and will not suffer him to depart unabsolved.
The most extravagant expressions were uttered in
praise of the Virgin: “ The eternal Daughter of the
eternal Father, the heart of the indivisible Trinity:”
it was said, ‘Glory be to the Virgin, to the Father,
and to the Son.” * Thus, too, were the saints invoked
as meritorious servants of God, who, by their
merits, could win our salvation, and could extend
peculiar protection to those who believed in them;
as, for example, St. Sebaldus, “‘ the most venerable
and holy captain, ee and defender of the im-
perial city of Niirnberg.”

Relics were collected with great ace Elector
Frederick of Saxony gathered together in the
church he endowed at Wittenberg, 5005 particles,
all preserved in entire standing figures, or in ex-
quisitely wrought reliquaries, which were shown to
the devout people every year on the Monday after
Misericordia.t In the presence of the princes as-

* Extracts from the prayer-books: Hortulus Anime, Salus
Anime, Gilgengart, and others in Riederer, Nachrichten zur
Biichergeschichte, ii. 157—411.

} Zaygung des Hochlobwiirdigsten Heiligthums, 1509. (The

Cuar. I. WITH REGARD TO RELIGION. 265

sembled at the diet, the high altar of the cathedral
of Treves was opened, and “the seamless coat of
our dear Lord Jesus Christ,” found in it; the little
pamphlets in which this miracle was represented in
wood-cuts, and announced to all the world, are to
be found in the midst of the acts of the diet.*
Miraculous images of Our Lady were discovered ;—
one, for example, in Eischel in the diocese of Con-
stance; at the Iphof boundary, by the road-side, a
sitting figure of the Virgin, whose miracles gave
great offence to the monks of Birklingen, who pos-
sessed a similar one; and in Regensburg, the beau-
tiful image, for which a magnificent church was
built by the contributions of the faithful, out of the
ruins of a synagogue belonging to the expelled
Jews. Miracles were worked without ceasing at
the tomb of Bishop Benno in Meissen; madmen
were restored to reason, the deformed became
straight, those infected with the plague were
healed; nay, a fire at Merseburg was extinguished
by Bishop Bose merely uttering the name of Ben-
no; while those who doubted his power and sanc-
tity were assailed by misfortunes.f When Trithe-
mius recommended this miracle-worker to the pope
for canonization, he did not forget to remark that
he had been a rigid and energetic supporter of the

Showing of the most venerable Relics, 1509.) Extract in Heller’s

Lucas Kranach, i. p. 350.
* Chronicle of Limpurg in Hontheim, p. 1122. Browerus is

again very solemn on this occasion. _
+ Miracula S. Bennonis ex impresso, Rome 1521, in Mencken,
Scriptores Rer. Germ. ii. p. 1887.

266 POSITION OF THE PAPACY Boox IL.

church party, and had resisted the tyrant Henry
IV.* So intimately were all these ideas connected.
A confraternity formed for the purpose of. the
frequent repetition of the rosary (which is, in fact,
nothing more than the devout and affectionate
recollection of the joys of the Holy Virgin), was
founded by Jacob Sprenger, the violent and fana-
tical restorer of the Inquisition in Germany, —the
author of the ‘‘ Hexenhammer.”

For it was one single and wondrous structure
which had grown up out of the germs planted by
former ages, wherein spiritual and temporal power,
wild fancy and dry school-learning, the tenderest
devotion and the rudest: force, religion and su-
perstition, were mingled and confounded, and were
bound together by some mysterious quality com-
mon to them all;—and, amidst all the attacks
it sustained, and all the conquests it achieved
—amidst those incessant conflicts, the decisions of
which constantly assumed the character of laws,
—not only asserted its claim to universal fitness
for all ages and nations— for this world and the
next — but to the regulation of the minutest
particulars of human life.

I know not whether any man of sound un-
derstanding—any man, not led astray by some
phantasm, can seriously wish that this state of
things had remained unshaken and unchanged in
Europe; whether any man persuades himself that
the will and the power to look the genuine, entire

* His letter in Rainaldus, 1506, nr. 42.

Cuap. I. WITH REGARD TO RELIGION. 267

and unveiled truth steadily in the face — the
manly piety acquainted with the grounds of its
faith — could ever have been matured under such
influences. Nor do I understand how any one
could really regard the diffusion of this most sin-
gular condition of the human mind (which had
been produced by circumstances wholly peculiar
to the West) over the entire globe, as conducive
to the welfare and happiness of the human
race. It is well known that one main ground
of the disinclination of the Greeks to a union
with the Roman church, lay in the multitude
of rules which were introduced among the Latins,
and in the oppressive autocracy which the See
of Rome had arrogated to itself.* Nay, was not
the Gospel itself kept concealed by the Roman
church? In the ages in which the scholastic
dogmas were fixed, the Bible was forbidden to
the laity altogether, and even to the priesthood,
in the mother tongue. It is impossible to deny
that, without any serious reference to the source
from which the whole system of faith had pro-
ceeded, men went on to construct doctrines and to
enjoin practices, shaped upon the principle which
had become the dominant one. We must not con-
found the tendencies of the period now before us
with those evinced in the doctrines and practices
established at the Council of Trent; at that time

* Humbertus de Romania (in Petrus de Alliaco de Reform.
Eccles. ¢. 2.) “ dicit quod causa dispositiva schismatis Grecorum
inter alias una fuit propter gravamina Romane ecclesiz in ex-
actionibus, excommunicationibus, et statutis.”

268 OPPOSITION RAISED BY Boox II.

even the party which adhered to Catholicism had
felt the influences of the epoch of the Reformation,
and had begun to reform itself: the current was
already arrested.* And this was absolutely neces-
sary. It was necessary to clear the germ of religion
from the thousand folds of accidental forms under
which it lay concealed, and to place it unincum-
bered in the light of day. Before the Gospel could
be preached to all nations, it must appear again in
its own lucid, unadulterated purity.

It is one of the greatest coincidences presented
by the history of the world, that at the moment in
which the prospect of éxercising dominion over the
other hemisphere opened on the Romano-Germanic
nations of the Latin church, a religious movement
began, the object of which was to restore the purity
of revelation.

Whilst other nations were busied in the conquest
of distant lands, Germany, which had little share
in those enterprises, undertook this mighty task.
Various events concurred to give that direction to
the mind of the country, and to incite it to a stren-
uous opposition to the See of Rome.

OPPOSITION RAISED BY THE SECULAR POWERS.

Tue efforts to obtain a regular and well compacted
constitution, which for some years had occupied

* J hold it to be the fundamental error of Méhler’s Symbolik,
that he considers the dogma of the Council of Trent as the
doctrine from which the Protestants seceded ; whilst it is much
nearer the truth to say, that itself produced Protestantism by a
reaction.

Cuap. I. THE SECULAR POWERS. 269

the German nation, were very much at variance
with the interests of the papacy, hitherto exer-
cising so great an influence over the government
of the empire. The pope would very soon have
been made sensible of the change, if that national
government which was the object of such zealous
and ardent endeavours had been organised.

The very earliest projects of such a constitution,
in the year 1487, were accompanied with a warning
to the pope to abolish a tithe which he had arbi-
trarily imposed on Germany, and which in some
places he had actually levied.* In 1495, when it
became necessary to form a council of the empire,
the intention was expressed to authorize the presi-
dent to take into consideration the complaints of
the nation against the church of Rome.f Scarcely
had the States met the king in 1498, when they re-
solved to require the pope to relinquish the Annates
which he drew to so large an amount from Ger-
many, in order to provide for a Turkish war. In
like manner, as soon as the Council of Regency was
formed, an embassy was sent to the pope to press
this request earnestly upon him, and to make re-
presentations concerning various unlawful encroach-
ments on the gift and employment of German
benefices.{ A papal legate, who shortly after ar-
rived for the purpose of causing the jubilee to be

* Letter, with the seals of Mainz, Saxony, and Brandenburg ;
June 26. 1487, in Miller, Rtth. Fr. vi. 180.

{ Datt, de Pace Publ. p. 840.

t Instructions of the Imperial Embassy. Miller, Reich-
stagsstaat, 117.

270 OPPOSITION RAISED BY Boox II.

preached, was admonished by no means to do any-
thing without the advice and knowledge of the
imperial government *; care was taken to prevent
him from granting indulgences to breakers of the
Public Peace: on the contrary, he was charged ex-
pressly to uphold it; imperial commissioners were
appointed to accompany him, without whose presence
and permission he could not receive the money when
collected.

We find the Emperor Maximilian occasionally
following the same course. In the year 1510 he
caused a more detailed and distinct statement of
the grievances of the German nation to be drawn
up, than had hitherto existed ; he even entertained
the idea of introducing into Germany f the Prag-
matic Sanction, which had proved so beneficial to
France. In the year 1511 he took a lively interest
in the convocation of a council at Pisa: we have
an edict of his, dated in the January of that year,
wherein he declares that, as the court of Rome
delays, he will not delay; as emperor, steward and
protector of the Church, he convokes the council
of which she is so greatly in need. In a-brief dated
June, he promises to those assembled his protection
and favour till the close of their sittings, “‘ by which
they will, as he hopes, secure to themselves the ap-

* Articuli tractati et conclusi inter Rev™™ Dominationem.
D™™ Legatum ac senatum et conventum Imperii in Miller,
Reichstagsstaat, p. 213.

t Avisamenta Germanice Nationis in Freher, ii. 678. Yet
more remarkable is the Epitome pragmatice sanctionis in
Goldast’s Constitutt. Imp. ii. 123.

Cuar. I. THE SECULAR POWERS. pi il

probation of God and the praise of men.”* And, in
fact, the long-cherished hope that a reform in the
church would be the result of this council, was
again ardently indulged. The articles were pointed
out in which reforms were first anticipated. For
example, the cumulation of benefices in the hands
of the cardinals was to be prevented; a law was
demanded, in virtue of which a pope whose life was
stained with notorious vice, might be summarily
deposed. But neither had the council authority
enough to act upon ideas of this sort, nor was
Maximilian the man to follow them out. He was of
too weak a nature ; and the same Wimpheling who
drew up the oayier: of grievances, remarked to
him how many former emperors had been deposed
by an incensed pope leagued with the princes of
the empire —certainly no motive to resolute per-
severance in the course he had begun. Independent
of this, every new turn in politics gave a fresh di-
rection to his views on ecclesiastical affairs. { After
his reconciliation with Pope Julius II. in 1513, he
demanded succours from the empire in order to
take measures against the schism which was to
be feared. Had there really been reason to fear it,
he himself would have been mainly to blame for

* Triburgi XVI. mensis Januarii and Muldorf V. Junii in
Goldast, i. 421. 429.

+ In the Fugger MS. the decrees which were expected are
noted down.

t Baselius, 1110. ‘ Admonitus prudentium virorum consilio
— quem incaute pedem cum Gallis contra pontificem firmaverat,
citius retraxit.”

972, OPPOSITION RAISED BY *  Boox IL.

the encouragement he had given to the Council of
Pisa.

It is sufficiently clear that this opposition to
Rome had no real practical force. The want of a
body in the state, armed with independent powers,
crippled every attempt, every movement, at its very
commencement. But, in the public mind, that op-
position still remained in full force ; loud complaints
were incessantly heard.

Hemmerlin, whose books were in those times ex-
tensively circulated and eagerly read, exhausted the
vocabulary for expressions to paint the cheating
and plunder of which the court of Rome was
guilty.*

In the beginning of the sixteenth century there
were the bitterest complaints of the rumous nature
of the Annates. It was probably in itself the most
oppressive tax in the empire : occasionally a prelate,
in order to save his subjects from it, tried to mort-
gage some lordship of his see. Diether of Isenburg
was deposed chiefly because he was unable to fulfil
the engagements he had entered into concerning
his Pallium. The more frequent the vacancies, the

* Felix Malleolus, Recapitulatio de Anno Jubileo. “ Pro nune
de presentis pontificis summi et aliorum statibus comparationis
preparationem fecimus, et nunc facie ad faciem experientia vi-
demus quod nunquam visus est execrabilioris exorbitationis di-
reptionis deceptionis circumventionis derogationis decerptationis
depradationis expoliationis exactionis corrosionis et omnis si
audemus dicere simoniace pravitatis adinventionis nove et reno-
vationis usus et exercitatio continua quam nunc est tempore
pontificis moderni (Nicolas V.) et in dies dilatatur.”

Cuap. I. THE SECULAR POWERS. We

more intolerable was the exaction. In Passau, for
example, these followed in 1482, 1486, 1490, 1500:
the last-appointed bishop repaired to Rome in the
hope of obtaining some alleviation of the burthens
on his see; but he accomplished nothing, and his
long residence at the papal court only increased his
pecuniary difficulties.* The cost of a pallium for
Mainz amounted to 20,000 gulden ; the sum was as-
sessed on the several parts of the see: the Rheingau,
for example, had to contribute 1000 gulden each
time.t In the beginning of the sixteenth century
vacancies occurred three times in quick succession —
1505, 1508, 1513; Jacob von Liebenstein said that
his chief sorrow in dying was that his country
would so soon again be forced to pay the dues; but
all appeal to the papal court was fruitless ; before
the old tax was gathered in, the order for a new
one was issued.

We may imagine what was the impression made
by the comparison of the laborious negotiations
usually necessary to extract even trifling grants
from the diet, and the great difficulty with which
they were collected, with the sums which flowed

* Schreitwein, Episcopi Patavienses, in Rauch, Scriptt.ii. 527.

{ This is shown by the Articles of the inhabitants of the
Rheingau in Schunck’s Beitragen, i. p. 183. Jacob of Treves
also reckons in 1500, “ Das Geld, so sich an dem piipstlichen
Hofe fiir die pipstlichen Bullen und Briefe, dariiber Annaten,
Minuten, Servitien, und anders demselben anhangend, zu geben
gebiiret,” “the money, which it behoves to give to the papal
court for the papal bulls and briefs, moreover annats, minutes,
services, and the rest belonging to the same,” at 20,000 guldens,
Document in Hontheim, ii. ser. xv.

VOL. I. dl

274 OPPOSITION RAISED BY Boox II.

without toil or trouble to Rome. They were cal-
culated at 300,000 gulden yearly, exclusive of the
costs of law proceedings, or the revenues of bene-
fices which lapsed to the court of Rome.* And
for what purpose, men asked themselves, was all
this ? Christendom had, nevertheless, lost two em-
pires, fourteen kingdoms, and three hundred towns
within a short space of time: it was continually
losing to the Turks; if the German nation were
to keep these sums in its own hands and expend
them itself, it would meet its hereditary foe on
other terms, under the banners of its valiant com-
manders.

The financial relations to Rome, generally, excited
the greatest attention. It was calculated that the
barefooted monks, who were not permitted by their
rule to touch money, collected a yearly income of
200,000 gulden ; the whole body of mendicant friars,
a voillion.

Another evil was the recurrence of collisions
between the temporal and spiritual jurisdictions,
which gradually became the more frequent and
obvious, the more the territorial sovereignties
tended towards separation and political inde-
pendence. In this respect Saxony was pre-eminent.
In the different possessions of the two lines, not

* Thisis, for instance, the calculation of the little book, Ein
klagliche Klag (A mournful Complaint) 1521, which, however,
Iam not for adopting. It might very likely be impossible to
reckon the gains of the Romish court. The tax of the annates
at Treves, for instance, legally amounted to 10,000 gulden, and
yet the actual charge was 20,000.

Cuap. I. THE SECULAR POWERS. 275

only the three Saxon bishops, but the archbishops
of Mainz and Prag, the bishops of Wiirzburg and
Bamberg, Halberstadt, Havelberg, Brandenburg
and Lebus, had spiritual jurisdiction. The confusion
which must, at all events, have arisen from this, was
now enormously increased by the fact that all
disputes between laity and clergy could only be de-
cided before spiritual tribunals, so that high and
low were continually vexed with excommunication.
In the year 1454, we find Duke William complaining
that the evil did not arise from his good lords and
friends the bishops, but from the judges, officials,
and procurators, who sought therein only their own -
profit. In concurrence with the counts, lords, and
knights of his land, he issued certain ordinances to
prevent this abuse *, in support of which, privileges
granted by the popes were alleged; but in 1490
the old complaints were revived, the administration
of justice in the temporal courts was greatly ob-
structed and thwarted by the spiritual, and the
people were impoverished by the consequent delays
and expenses.} In the year 1518, the princes of both
lines, George and Frederic, combined to urge that
the spiritual jurisdiction should be restricted to
spiritual causes, and the temporal to temporal ; the
diet to decide what was temporal and what spiritual.
Duke George was still more zealous in the matter

* Ordinance of Duke William; Gotha, Monday after Exaudi,
1454, in Miller, Rtth. Fr. i. 130.
+ Words of an ordinance of Duke George in Langenn’s Duke
Albrecht, p. 319.
T 2

276 OPPOSITION’ RAISED BY Boox II!

than his cousin.* But the grievances and complaints
which fill the proceedings of the later diets were
universal, and confined to no class or portion of the
empire.

The cities felt the exemptions enjoyed by the
clergy peculiarly burthensome. It was impossible
to devise any thing more annoying to a well-
ordered civic community, than to have within their
walls a corporate body which neither acknowledged
the jurisdiction of the city, nor contributed to bear
its burthens, nor deemed itself generally subject
to its regulations. The churches were asylums for
criminals, the monasteries the resort of dissolute
youth; we find examples of monks who made use
of their exemption from tolls, to import goods for
sale, or to open a tavern for the sale of beer. If
any attempt was made to assail their privileges,
they defended themselves with excommunication
and interdict. We find the municipal councils in-
cessantly occupied in putting some check to this
evil. In urgent cases they arrest offenders even in
sanctuary, and then take measures to be delivered
from the inevitable interdict by the interposition of
some powerful protector ; they are well inclined to
pass over the bishops and to address themselves
directly to the pope; they try to effect reforms
in their monasteries. They thought it a very
questionable arrangement that the parish priest
should take part in the collection of the Common

* Articles of the negotiations of the diet, as my gracious
lord has caused them to be given in. 1518. In the Dresden
Archives,

Cuap. I. THE SECULAR POWERS. 2046.

Penny; the utmost that they would concede was
that he should be present, but without taking any
active share.* The cities always vehemently op-
posed the emperor’s intention of appointing a bishop
to be judge in the Imperial Chamber.

The general disapprobation excited by the church
on such weighty points, naturally led to a discus-
sion of its other abuses. Hemmerlin zealously con-
tends against the incessant augmentation of ecclesi-
astical property, through which villages disappeared
and districts became waste; against the exorbitant
number of holidays, which even the council of
Basle had endeavoured to reduce ; against the celi-
bacy of the clergy, to which the rules of the East-
ern Church were much to be preferred; against
the reckless manner in which ordination was granted,
as, for example, that two hundred priests were
yearly ordained in Constance: he asks to what all
this is to lead.

Things had gone so far that the constitution of
the clergy was offensive to public morals: a mul.
titude of ceremonies and rules were attributed to
the mere desire of making money ; the situation of
priests living in a state of concubinage and bur-
thened with illegitimate children, and often, spite
of all purchased absolutions, tormented in cons
science and oppressed with the fear that in per-

* Jiger, Schwabisches Stiidtewesen : Millner’s Nurnberger
Annalen, in several passages.
t+ The “books De Institutione novorum Officiorum, and De
Libertate EcclesiasticA, are especially remarkable with reference
to this matter.
Tt 3

278 CHARACTER AND TENDENCIES OF  Boox II.

forming the sacrifice of the mass they committed a
deadly sin, excited mingled pity and contempt:
most of those who embraced the monastic profession
had no other idea than that of leading a life of self-
indulgence without labour. People saw that the
clergy took from every class and station only what
was agreeable, and avoided what was laborious or
painful. From the knightly order, the prelate bor-
rowed his brilliant company, his numerous retinue,
the splendidly caparisoned horse, and the hawk
upon his fist: with women, he shared the love of
gorgeous chambers and trim gardens; but the
weight of the mailed coat, the troubles of the house-
hold, he had the dexterity to avoid. If a man
wishes to enjoy himself for once, says an old pro-
verb, let him kill a fat fowl ; if for a year, let him
take a wife; but if he would live joyously all the
days of his life, then let him turn priest.

Innumerable expressions of the same sentiment
were current; the pamphlets of that time are full
of them.*

CHARACTER AND TENDENCIES OF THE POPULAR
LITERATURE.

Tuts state of the public mind acquired vast im-
portance from its coincidence with the first dawn-
ings of a popular literature, which thus, at its
very commencement, became deeply and thoroughly

_ * Wimpheling also mentions, “ scandalum odium murmur
populi in omnem clerum.”

Cuap. I. POPULAR LITERATURE. 279

imbued with the prevalent sentiment of disappro-
bation and disgust towards the clergy.

It will be conceded on all sides that in naming
Rosenbliit and Sebastian Brant, the Eulenspiegel
(Owleglass) and the edition of Reineke Fuchs (Rey-
nard the Fox) of the year 1498, we cite the most
remarkable productions of the literature of that
time. And if we inquire what characteristic they
have in common, we find it to be that of hos-
tility to the Church of Rome. The Fastnacht-
spiele (Carnival Sports) of Hans Rosenbliit have
fully and distinctly this character and intention ;
he introduces the Emperor of Turkey, in order
through his mouth to say the truth to all classes of
the nation.* The vast success of the Eulenspiegel
was not to be attributed so much to its clown-
ish coarseness and practical jokes, as to the irony
which was poured over all classes; the wit of the
boor, “who scratches himself with a rogue’s nails,”
put that of all others to shame. It was under this
point of view alone that the German writer recast
the fable of the fox; he saw in it the symbolic
representation of the defects and vices of human
society, and he quickly detected its application to
the several classes of men, and laboured to develop
the lesson which the poet reads to each. ‘The same
purpose is obvious to the first glance in Brant’s
Ship of Fools. The ridicule is not directed against

* In the description also of the battle of Hembach in Reinhart’s
Beitrige zur Historie Frankenlandes, the nobles are mentioned
“asa sharp scourge, which chastises us on account of our sins ;”
“ their hearts are harder than adamant.”

T4

280 CHARACTER AND TENDENCIES OF  Boox II.

individual follies: on the one side is vice, nay crime,
on the other, lofty aspirations and _ pursuits
which rise far above vulgar ends, (as, for example,
where the devotion of the whole mind to the task
of describing cities and countries, the attempt to
discover how broad is the earth, and how wide the
sea,) are treated as folly.* Glory and beauty are
despised as transient ; ‘ nothing is abiding but
learning.”

In this general opposition to the prevailing state
of things, the defects in the ecclesiastical body are
continually adverted to. The Schnepperer declaims
violently against the priests, “‘ who ride high horses,
but will not do battle with the heathen.” The most
frequent subject of derision in the Eulenspiegel is the
common priests, with their pretty ale-wives, well-
groomed nags, and full larders; they are represented
as stupid and greedy. In Reineke too the Pape-
meierschen — priests’ households, peopled with
little children — play a part. The commentator
is evidently quite in earnest; he declares, that
the sins of the priests will be rated more highly
than those of the laity on account of the evil ex-
ample they set. Doctor Brant expresses his indig-
nation at the premature admission into the convent,
before the age of reason; so that religious duties
are performed without the least sentiment of devo-
tion: he leads us into the domestic life of the un-
called priests, who are at last in want of the means
of subsistence, while their soul is heavy laden

* Dr, Brant’s Narrenschiff. 1506. f. 83.

Cuap. I. POPULAR LITERATURE. 281

with sins; “for God regardeth not the sacrifice
which is offered in sin by sinful hands.” *

This, however, is not the exclusive, nor, indeed,
the principal matter of these books; their sig-
nificance is far more extensive and general.

While the poets of Italy were employed in mould-
ing the romantic materials furnished by the middle
ages into grand and brilliant works, these excited
little interest in Germany: Titurel and Parcival,
for example, were printed, but merely as anti-
quarian curiosities, and in a language even then
unintelligible,

While, in Italy, the opposition which the institu-
tions of the middle ages encountered in the advancing
development of the public mind, took the form of
satire, became an element of composition, and as it
were the inseparable but mocking companion of the
poetical Ideal; in Germany that opposition took up
independent ground, and directed its attacks im-
mediately against the realities of life, not against
their reproduction in fiction.

In the German literature of that period the
whole existence and conduct of the several classes,
ages and sexes were brought to the standard
of the sober good sense, the homely morality,
the simple rule of ordinary life; which, however,
asserted its claim to be that ‘“ whereby kings hold
their crowns, princes their lands, and all powers and
authorities their due value.”

The universal confusion and ferment which is

* The 72nd Fool. fol. 94.

282 CHARACTER OF POPULAR LITERATURE. Boox II.

visible in the public affairs of that period, proves by
inevitable contrast, that the sound common sense of
mankind is awakened and busy in the mass of the
nation; and prosaic, homely, vulgar, but thoroughly
true, as it is, constitutes itself judge of all the phe-
nomena of the world around it.

We are filled with admiration at the spectacle
afforded by Italy, where men of genius, reminded
by the remains of antiquity around them of the sig-
nificancy of beautiful forms, strove to emulate their
predecessors, and produced works which are the
eternal delight of cultivated minds ; but their beauty
does not blind us to the fact that the movement of the
national mind of Germany was not less great, and
that it was still more important to the progress of
mankind. After centuries of secret growth it now
became aware of its own existence, broke loose from
tradition, and examined the affairs and the institu-
tions of the world by the light of its own truth.

Nor did Germany entirely disregard the demands
of form. In Reinecke Fuchs, it is curious to observe
how the author rejects every thing appropriate
to the style of romantic poetry; how he seeks
lighter transitions, works out scenes of common life
to more complete and picturesque reality, and con-
stantly strives to be more plain and vernacular (for
example, uses all the familiar German names): his
main object evidently is to popularise his matter, —
to bring it as much as possible home to the nation ;
and his work has thus acquired the form in which
it has attracted readers for more than three centuries.
Sebastian Brant possesses an incomparable talent

Cuar.I. CONDITION OF LEARNED LITERATURE. 283

for turning apophthegms and proverbs ; he finds the
most appropriate expression for simple thoughts ;
his rhymes come unsought, and are singularly happy
and harmonious. ‘“ Here,” says Geiler von Keiser-
sperg, “ the agreeable and the useful are united ;
his verses are goblets of the purest wine ; here we
are presented with royal meats in finely wrought
vessels.” * But in these, as well as in many other
works of that time, the matter is the chief thing ;—
the expression of the opposition of the ordinary
morality and working-day sense of mankind to the
abuses in public life and the corruptions of the
times.

At the same period another branch of literature,
—the learned, took an analogous direction ; perhaps
with even greater force and decision.

CONDITION AND CHARACTER OF LEARNED
LITERATURE.

Upon this department of letters Italy exercised the
strongest influence.

In that country neither the metaphysics of the
schools, nor romantic poetry, nor Gothic archi-
tecture, had obtained complete dominion : recollec-
tions of antiquity survived, and at length in the

* Geiler, Navicula Fatuorum, even more instructive as to the
history of morals, than the original; J, u. “ Est hic,” he con-
tinues, “in hoe speculo veritas moralis sub figuris sub vulgari
et vernacula lingua nostra teutonica sub verbis similitudini-
busque aptis et pulchris sub rhitmis quoque concinnis et instar
cimbalorum concinentibus.”

284. CONDITION AND CHARACTER OF Boox II.

fifteenth century, expanded into that splendid re-
vival which took captive all minds and imparted a
new life to literature.

This reflorescence of Italy in time reacted on
Germany, though at first only in regard to the mere
external form of the Latin tongue.

In consequence of the uninterrupted intercourse
with Italy occasioned by ecclesiastical relations,
the Germans soon discovered the superiority of the
Italians; they saw themselves despised by the
disciples of the grammarians and rhetoricians of
that country, and began to be ashamed of the
rudeness of their spoken, and the poverty of their
written language. It was not surprising, therefore,
that young aspiring spirits at length determined
to learn their Latin in Italy. At first they were
only a few opulent nobles —a Dalberg, a Langen*,
a Spiegelberg, who not only acquired knowledge
themselves, but had the merit of bringing back
books, such as grammatical treatises and better
editions of the classics, which they communicated to
their friends. A man endowed with the peculiar
talent necessary for appropriating to himself the
classical learning of the age then arose — Rudolf
Huesmann of Gréningen, called Agricola. His
scholarship excited universal admiration; he was
applauded in the schools as a Roman, a second
Virgil.t He had, indeed, no other object but his

* Hamelmann published in 1580 an Oratio de Rodolpho
Langio, which has some merit, but which has also given rise to
many errors.

} Erasmi Adagia. Ad. de Cane et Balneo.

Giare.i * LEARNED LITERATURE. 285

own advancement in learning ; the weary pedantries
of the schools were disgusting to him, nor could he
accommodate himself to the contracted sphere as-
signed toa learned manin Germany. Other careers
which he entered upon did not satisfy his aspirations,
so that he fell into a rapid decline, and died prema-
turely. He had, however, friends who found it less
difficult to adapt themselves to the necessities of
German life, and to whom he was ever ready to
afford counsel and help. A noble and intimate
friendship was formed in Deventer, between Agricola
and Hegius, who attached himself to him with all
the humility and thirst for knowledge of a disciple ;
he applied to him for instruction, and received not
only assistance but cordial sympathy.* Another
of his friends, Dringenberg, followed him to Schlet-
stadt. The reform which took place in the Low
German schools of Miinster, Hervord, Dortmund,
and Hamm, emanated from Deventer, which also
furnished them with competent teachers. In Niirn-
berg, Ulm, Augsburg, Frankfurt, Memmingen,
Hagenau, Pforzheim, &c., we find schools of poetry
of more or less note.t Schletstadt at one time

* Adami, Vite Philosophorum, p. 12. mentions this corre-
spondence “ unde tum ardor proficiendi, tum candor in commu-
nicando elucet.”

+ They are so called, e.g. in the Chronicle of Regensburg. A
list of the schools, very incomplete, however, is given by Erhard,
Hist. of the Restoration of the Sciences, i. 427. Eberlin von
Giinzburg names in 1521, as pious schoolmasters, “ deren trewe
Unterweisung fast geniitzt,” whose faithful instruction had been
profitable,” Crato and Sapidus at Schletstadt, Mich. Hilspach at
Hagenau, Spinler and Gerbellius at Pforzheim, Brassicanus and

286 LEARNED LITERATURE. Boox II.

numbered as many as nine hundred students. It
will not be imagined that these literati, who had to
rule, and to instruct in the rudiments of learning,
arude undisciplined youth compelled to live mainly
on alms, possessing no books, and wandering from
town to town in strangely organized bands, called
Bachantes and Schiitzen*, were very eminent
scholars themselves, or made such ; nor was that the
object: their merit, and a sufficient one, was that
they not only kept the public mind steady to the
important direction it had taken, but carried it
onwards to the best of their ability, and founded
the existence of an active literary public. The
schoolbooks hitherto in use gradually fell into
neglect, and classical authors issued from the German
press. As early as the end of the fifteenth century,
Geiler of Keisersberg, who was not himself devoted
to these pursuits, reproached the learned theologians
with their Latin, which, he said, was rude, feeble,
and barbarous— neither German nor Latin, but both
and neither.

For since the school learning of the universities,

Henrichmann at Tibingin, Egid. Krautwasser at Stuttgart and
Horb, Joh. Schmidlin at Memmingen, also Cocleus at Niirnberg,
and Nisenus at Frankfurt. See Dr. Karl Hagen, Deutchlands
literarische und religidse Verhaltnisse im Reformations Zeitalter,
1841. vol. i. p. 164—237.

* Platter’s Autobiography places this practice in a very lively
manner before us. (Thomas Platter, after the autograph
manuscript lately edited by Fechner, Basle, 1840.)

t Geiler, Introductorium, ii. c. “ Quale est illud eorum
Latinum, quo utuntur, etiam dum sederint in sede majestatis
sue, in doctoralis cathedra lecture !”

Cuap. I. ERASMUS. 287

which had hitherto entirely given the tone to ele-
mentary instruction, adhered to its wonted forms
of expression, a collision between the new and hu-
manistic method, now rapidly gaining ground, and
the old modes, was inevitable. Nor could their col-
lision fail to extend from the universal element of
language into other regions.

It was this crisis in the history of letters that
produced an author whose whole life was devoted
to the task of attacking the scholastic forms pre-
vailing in universities and monasteries; the first
great author of the modern opposition, the cham-
pion of the modern views, —a low German, Erasmus
of Rotterdam.

On a review of the first. thirty years of the life of
Erasmus, we find that he had grown up in ceaseless
contradiction with the spirit and the systems which
presided over the conventual life and directed the
studies of that time;— indeed that this had made him
what he was. We might say that he was begotten
and born in this contradiction, for his parents had
not been able to marry, because his father was
destined to the cloister. He had not been admitted
to a university, as he wished, but had been kept at
a very imperfect conventual school, from which he
soon ceased to derive any profit or satisfaction ;
and, at a later period, every art was practised to
induce him to take the vows, and with success. It
was not till he had actually taken them, that he
felt all the burthen they imposed: he regarded it
as a deliverance when he obtained a situation in a
college at Paris: but here, too, he was not happy ;

288 LEARNED LITERATURE. " Boox I

he was compelled to attend Scotist lectures and
disputations; and he complains that the un-
wholesome food and bad wine on which he was
forced to live, had entirely destroyed his health.
But in the meanwhile he had come to a consciousness
of his own powers. While yet a boy, he had lighted
upon the first trace of a new method of study*, and
he now followed it up with slender aid from without,
but with the infallible instinct of genuine talent ;
he had constructed for himself a light, flowing style,
formed on the model of the ancients, not by a
servile imitation of particular expressions, but in
native correctness and elegance far surpassing any
thing which Paris had to offer. He now emancipated
himself from the fetters which bound him to the
convent and the schools, and boldly trusted to the
art of which he was master, for the means of sub-
sistence. He taught, and in that way formed con-
nections which not only led to present success, but
to security for the future; he published some
essays which, as they were not less remarkable for
discreet choice of matter than for scholarlike ex-
ecution, gained him admirers and patrons; he
gradually discovered the wants and the tastes of
the public, and devoted himself entirely to literature.
He composed school-books treating of method and
form of instruction; translated from the Greek,
which he learned in the process; edited the classics of
antiquity, and imitated them, especially Lucian and

* He cannot, however, be properly considered as a scholar of

Hegius. ‘“ Hegium,” he says in the Compendium Vite, “ testis
diebus audivi.” It was the exception.

Cuap. I. ERASMUS. 289

Terence. His works abound with marks of thatacute
and nice observation which at once instructs and
delights; but great as these merits were, the grand
secret of his popularity lay in the spirit which
pervades all he wrote. The bitter hostility to the
forms of the devotion and the theology of that time,
which had been rendered his habitual frame of
mind by the course and events of his life, found
vent in his writings; not that this was the pre-
meditated aim or purpose of them, but it broke
forth sometimes in the very middle of a learned
disquisition — in indirect and unexpected sallies of
the most felicitous and exhaustless humour. In
one of his works, he adopts the idea, rendered so
popular by the fables of Brant and Geiler, of the
element of folly which mingles in all human affairs.
He introduces Folly herself as interlocutor. Moria,
the daughter of Plutus, born in the Happy Islands,
nursed by Drunkenness and Rudeness, is mistress of
a powerful kingdom which she describes, and to
which all classes of men belong. She passes them all
in review, but dwells longer and more earnestly on
none than on the clergy, who, though they refuse
to acknowledge her benefits, are under the greatest
obligations to her. She turns into ridicule the
labyrinth of dialectic in which theologians have
lost themselves,—the syllogisms with which they
labour to sustain the church as Atlas does the
heavens, —the intolerant zeal with which they per-
secute every difference of opinion. She then comes
to the ignorance, the dirt, the strange and ludicrous
pursuits of the monks, their barbarous and objur-

VODS: f U

290 LEARNED LITERATURE. Boox I.

gatory style of preaching; she attacks the bishops,
who are more solicitous for gold than for the
safety of souls; who. think they do enough if they
dress themselves in theatrical costume, and under
the name of the most reverend, most holy, and most
blessed fathers in God, pronounce a blessing or a
curse; and lastly, she boldly assails the court of
Rome and the pope himself *, who, she says, takes
only the pleasures of his station, and leaves its
duties to St. Peter and St. Paul. Amongst the
curious woodcuts, after the marginal drawings of
Hans Holbein, with which the book was adorned,
the pope appears with his triple crown.

This little work brought together, with singular
talent and brevity, matter which had for some
time been current and popular in the world, gave
it a form which satisfied all the demands of taste
and criticism, and fell in with the most decided
tendency of the age. It produced an indescribable
effec t :twenty-seven editions appeared even during
the lifetime of Erasmus; it was translated into all
languages, and greatly contributed to confirm the
age in its anticlerical dispositions.

But Erasmus coupled with this popular warfare
a more serious attack on the state of learning. The
study of Greek had arisen in Italy in the fifteenth
century ; it had found its way by the side of that of
Latin into Germany and France, and now opened a

* Mupiac éyxopuov. Opp. Erasmi, t.iii. “Quasi sint ulli hostes
ecclesia perniciosiores quam impii pontifices, qui et silentio
Christum sinunt abolescere et questuariis legibus alligant et
coactis interpretationibus adulterant et pestilente vita jugulant.”

Cuap. I. ERASMUS. Z91

new and splendid vista, beyond the narrow horizon
of the ecclesiastical learning of the West. Erasmus
adopted the idea of the Italians, — that the sciences
were to be learned from the ancients; geography
from Strabo, natural history from Pliny, mythology
from Ovid, medicine from Hippocrates, philosophy
from Plato; and not out of the barbarous and im-
perfect schoolbooks then in use: but he went a step
further—he required that divinity should be learned
not out of Scotus and Thomas Aquinas, but out of
the Greek fathers, and, above all, the New Tes-
- tament. Following in the track of Laurentius Valla,
whose example had great influence generally on
his mind, he showed that it was not safe to adhere
to the Vulgate, wherein he pointed out a multitude
of errors*; and he then himself set about the great
work,—the publication of the Greek text ; which
was as yet imperfectly and superficially known to
the West. Thus he thought, as he expresses it, to
bring back that cold word-contender, Theology, to
her primal sources ; he showed the simplicity of the
origin whence that wondrous and complicated pile
had sprung, and to which it must return. In all
this he had the sympathy and assent of the public
for which he wrote. The prudence wherewith he con-

* In the edition of Alcala de Henares, on the other hand,
the Greek text has been changed according to the Vulgate ;
e.g. 1 Joh. v.7. Schréckh, KGsch. xxxiv. 83. As to the rest,
this adherence to the Vulgate was regarded at a later period,
and especially when his canonisation was talked of, as the chief
merit of Ximenes, “ ut hoc modo melius intelligeretur nostra
vulgata in suo rigore et puritate.”—Acta Toletana in Rainal-
dus, 1517, nr. 107.

u 2

2992 CONDITION AND CHARACTER OF Boox IL.

cealed from view an abyss in the distance, from which
that public would have shrunk with alarm, doubt-
less contributed to his success. While pointing out
abuses, he spoke only of reforms and improvements,
which he represented as easy ; and was cautious not
to offend against certain opinions or principles to
which the faith of the pious clung.* But the main
thing was. his imcomparable literary talent. He
worked incessantly in various branches, and com-
pleted his works with great rapidity; he had hot the
_ patience to revise and polish them, and accordingly
most of them were printed exactly as he threw them
out; but this very circumstance rendered them uni-
versally acceptable; their great charm was that they
communicated the trains of thought which passed
through a rich, acute, witty, intrepid, and cultivated
mind, just as they arose, and without any reserv-
ations. Who remarked the many errors which es-
caped him ? His manner of narrating, which still
rivets the attention, then carried every one away.
He gradually became the most celebrated man in
Europe; public opinion, whose pioneer he had
been, adorned him with her fairest wreaths ;
presents rained upon his house at Basle; visitors
flocked thither, and invitations poured in from all
parts. ¢ His person was small, with light hair,
* A few years later he thus describes his situation: “ Adnixus
sum ut- bone liters, quas scis hactenus apud Italos fere paganas
fuisse, consuescerent de Christo loqui.” Epistola ad Cretium,

9 Sept. 1526. Opp. III. i. p. 953.
+ He afterwards complains of the want of contradiction.

“ Longe plus attulissent utilitatis duo tresve fidi monitores quam
multa laudantium millia. Epp. III. i. 924.

Cuap. I. LEARNED LITERATURE. 293

blue, half-closed eyes, full of acute observation,
and humour playing about the delicate mouth : his
air was so timorous that he looked as if a breath
would overthrow him, and he trembled at the very
name of death.

If this single example sufficed to show how much
the exclusive theology of the universities had to fear
from the new tendency letters had acquired, it was
evident that the danger would become measureless
if the spirit of innovation should attempt to force its
way into these fortresses of the established corpor-
ations of learning. ‘The universities, therefore, de-
fended themselves as well as they could. George
Zingel, pro-chancellor of Ingolstadt, who -had been
dean of the theological faculty thirty times in three-
and-thirty years, would hear nothing of the intro-
duction of the study of heathen poets. Of the
ancients, he would admit only Prudentius; of the
moderns, the Carmelite Baptista of Mantua: these he
thought were enough. Cologne, which had from the
very beginning opposed the introduction of new
elementary books *, would not allow the adherents of
the new opinions to settle in their town: Rhagius
was banished for ten years by public proclamation ;
Murmellius, a pupil of Hegius, was compelled to give
way and to become teacher in a school; Conrad Celtes

* According to Chytrius (Saxonia, p. 90.) Conrad Ritberg,
the bishop of Miinster, was warned by the university of Cologne
against the establishment of a school upon the new method, but
he, who had himself been in Italy, was far more strongly worked
on by the recommendations which Langen had brought with
him thence; e.g. even from Pope Sixtus.

u 3

294 CONDITION AND CHARACTER OF Boox IL.

of Leipzig, was driven away almost by force; Her-
mann von dem Busch could not maintain his
ground either in Leipzig or Rostock; his new
edition of Donatus was regarded almost as a
heresy.* This was not, however, universal. Ac-
cording to the constitution of the universities,
every man had, at least after taking his degree as
Master of Arts, a right to teach, and it was not
every one who afforded a reason or a pretext for
getting rid of him.¢ In some places, too, the
princes had reserved to themselves the right of
appointing teachers. In one way or another,
teachers of grammar and of classical literature
did, as we find, establish themselves; in Tiibingen,
Heinrich Bebel, who formed a numerous school;
in Ingolstadt, Locher, who, after much molesta-
tion, succeeded in keeping his ground, and left
a brilliant catalogue of princes, prelates, counts,
and barons, who had been his pupilst; Conrad
Celtes in Vienna, where he actually succeeded in es-
tablishing a faculty of poetry in the year 1501; and
in Prague, Hieronymo Balbi, an Italian, who gave
instructions to the young princes, and took some

* Hamelmann, Oratio de Buschio, nr. 49.

{ Erasmi Epistole, i. p. 689. In the Epp. Obse. Vir. ed.
Minch, p. 102. a Socius from Moravia is complained of who
wanted to lecture at Vienna without having taken a degree.

t “ Qui nostri portarunt signa theatri.”— Catalogus Illustrium
Auditorum Philomusi. “ Doctorum insignium magistrorum no-
bilium ac canonicorum infinitum pene numerum memorare
nequeo, qui ore magnifico laudisonaque voce me praceptorem
salutare gestiunt. Hee citra omnem jactantiam apposuimus.”
— Extract in Zapf. Jacob Locher, called Philomusus, p.27.

Cuap. I. LEARNED LITERATURE. 295

share in public affairs. In Freiburg the new studies
were connected with the Roman law; Ulrich
Zasius united the two professorships in his own
person with the most brilliant success; Pietro
Tommai of Ravenna, and his son Vincenzo, were
invited to Greifswald, and afterwards to Witten-
berg in the same double capacity *: it was hoped
that the combined study of antiquity and law
would raise that university. Erfurt felt the in-
fluence of Conrad Muth, who enjoyed his canonry
at Gotha “ in’ blessed tranquillity” (“in glickseliger
Ruhe”) as the inscription on his house says: he
was the Gleim of that age — the hospitable patron
of young men of poetical temperament and pur-
suits. Thus, from the time the new spirit and
method found their way into the lower schools,
societies of grammarians and poets were gra-
dually formed in most of the universities, com-
pletely opposed to the spirit of those establish-
ments as handed down from their fountain-head,
Paris. They read the ancients, and perhaps
allowed something of the petulance of Martial, or
the voluptuousness of Ovid, to find its way into
their lives; they made Latin verses, which, stiff
and barbarous as they generally were, called forth
an interchange of admiration; they corresponded
in Latin, and took care to interlard it with a few
sentences of Greek; they Latinised and Grecised

* Tiraboschi also mentions them, vi. p.410. Their ca-
tastrophe at Cologne is not yet, however, thoroughly clear-
ed up.

u 4

296 LEARNED LITERATURE. Boox II

their names.* Genuine talent or accomplished
scholarship were very rare; but the life and
power of a generation does not manifest itself
in mere tastes and acquirements: for a few indi-
viduals these may be enough, but, for the many,
the tendency is the important thing. The cha-
racter of the universities soon altered. The scholars
were no longer to be seen with their books under
their arms, walking decorously after their Magister;
the scholarships were broken up, degrees were no
longer sought after —that of bachelor especially
(which was unfrequent in Italy) was despised.
On some occasions the champions of classical
studies appeared as the promoters of the disorders
of the students ff and ridicule of the dialectic theo-
logians, nominalists as well as realists, was hailed
with delight by the young men.

The world, and especially the learned world,
must be other than it is for such a change to be
effected without a violent struggle.

The manner, however, in which this broke out
is remarkable. It was not the necessity of warding
off a dangerous attack or a declared enemy that
furnished the occasion: this was reserved for the
most peaceful of the converts to the new system,
who had already fulfilled the active task of life, and

* Chrachenberger entreats Reuchlin to find some Greek
name, “ quo honestius in Latinis literis quam hoe barbaro uti
possim.” Lynz, Febr. 19. 1493.

t Acta Facultatis Artium Friburgensis in Riegger, Vita
Zasii, i.42. “ Conclusum, ut dicatur doctori Zasio, quod scholari-
bus adhereat faciendo eos rebelles in universitatis prajudicium.”

Cuapr. L. REUCHLIN. 297

at that moment devoted himself to more abstruse
studies, —John Reuchlin.

Reuchlin, probably the son of a messenger at
Pforzheim, was indebted to his personal gifts for
the success which attended him in his career. A
fine voice procured him admittance to the court of
Baden ; his beautiful handwriting maintained him
.during his residence in France; the pure pronun-
ciation of Latin which he had acquired by inter-
course with foreigners, caused him to be appointed
member of an embassy to Rome, and this led to an
important post and considerable influence at the
court of Wiirtemberg, and the Swabian league
generally.* His qualities, both external and in-
ternal, were very unlike those of Erasmus. He was
tall and well made, and dignified in all his deport-
ment and actions, while the mildness and serenity
‘of his appearance and manner won instant con-
fidence towards his intellectual superiority.¢ Asan
author, he could never have gained the applause of
the large public of Latin scholars ; his style is not
above mediocrity, nor does he evince any nice
sense of elegance and form. On the other hand,
he was inspired by a thirst for learning, and a zeal
for communicating, which were without a parallel.

* Schnurrer, Nachrichten von den Lehrern der Hebraischen
Literatur, p. 11. A small essay of Michael Coccinius, De Imperii
a Grecis ad Germanos Translatione, 1506, is dedicated to Reuch-
lin, together with his two colleagues in the court of the Swabian
league, Streber and Winkelhofer (confeederatorum Suevorum
judicibus consistorialibus et triumviris).

+ Joannis Hiltebrandi Prefatio in Ilustrium Virorum Epis-
tolas ad Reuchlinum,

298 LEARNED LITERATURE. Boox II.

He describes how he picked up his knowledge bit
by bit, crumbs that fell from the lord’s table—
at Paris and in the Vatican, at Florence, Milan,
Basle, and at the Imperial Court; how, like the
bird of Apollonius, he left the corn for the other
birds to eat.* He facilitated the study of Latin
by a dictionary, which in great measure supplanted
the old scholastic ones, and of Greek, by a small,
grammar; he spared neither labour nor money to
get copies of the classics brought across the Alps,
either in manuscript, or as they issued from the
Italian press. What no prince, no wealthy city or
community thought of doing, was done by the son
of a poor errand man; it was under his roof that
the most wondrous production of distant ages —
the Homeric poems — first came in contact with the
mind of Germany, which was destined in later times
to render them more intelligible to the world. His
Hebrew learning was still more highly esteemed by
his cotemporaries than all his other acquirements,
and he himself regarded his labours in that field
as his most peculiar claim to distinction. ‘“ There
has been none before me,” exclaims he with well-
grounded self-gratulation, to one of his adversaries,
‘““who has been able to collect the rules of the
Hebrew language into a book; though his heart
should burst with envy, still lam the first. Exegi
monumentum ere perennius.”+ In this work he

* Preefatio ad Rudimenta Lingue Hebraice, lib. iii. Cf. Burk-
hard, de Fatis Lingue Latiney, p, 152.

t Reuchlini Consilium pro Libris Judzorum non abolendis in
v. d. Hardt, Historia Ref. p. 49. This is moreover a fine speci-
men of German prose.

Car. L REUCHLIN. 299

was chiefly indebted to the Jewish Rabbis whom
he sought out in all directions, not suffering one
to pass by without learning something from him:
by them he was led to study not only the Old
Testament, but other Hebrew books, and especially
the Cabbala. Reuchlin’s mind was not one of
those to which the labours of a mere grammarian
or lexicographer are sufficient for their own sake.
After the fashion of his Jewish teachers, he applied
himself to the study of the mystical value of words.
In the name of the Deity as written in the Holy
Scriptures, in its elementary composition, he dis-
covers the deepest mystery of his being. For, he
says, “‘ God, who delights in intercourse with a holy
soul, will transform it into himself, and will dwell
in it: God is Spirit; the Word is a breath ; Man
breathes; God is the Word. The names which He
has given to Himself are an echo of Eternity; in
them is the deep abyss of his mysterious working
expressed ; the God-Man called himself the Word.” *
Thus, at its very outset, the study of language
in Germany was directed towards its final end
and aim—the knowledge of the mysterious connec-
tion of language with the Divine— of its identity
with the spirit. Reuchlin is like his cotemporaries,
the discoverers of the New World, who sailed some
north, some south, some right .on tothe west, found
portions of coast which they described, and while at
the beginning, often thought they had reached the
end. Reuchlin was persuaded that he should find

* Reuchlin de Verbo Mirifico, ii. 6. 15.; iii. 8. 19.

3800 LEARNED LITERATURE. Boox II.

in the road he had taken, not only the Aristotelic
and Platonic philosophies, which had already been
brought to light, but that he should add to them the
Essai —an offspring of Hebraism. He
believed that by treading in the footsteps of the
Cabbala, he should ascend from symbol to symbol,
from Etre to form, till he should reach that last
and purest form which rules the empire of mind,
and in which human mutability approaches to the
Immutable and Divine.*

But while living in this world of ideas and ab-
stractions, it was his lot to be singled out by
the enmity of the scholastic party : he unex-
pectedly found himself involved in the heat of a
violent controversy.

We have already alluded to the inquisitorial
attempts of the Dominicans of Cologne, and their
hostility to the Jews. In the year 1508, a book
was published by an old Rabbi, who at the age of
fifty had abandoned his wife and child, and become
a Christian priest. In this he accused his former
co-religionists of the grossest errors; for example,
Elomtion of the sun asta moon; but, shore all, of the
most horrible blasphemies wealth che Ghristiati faith,
which he endeavoured to prove from the Talmud. ‘
It was mainly on this ground that the theologians
of Cologne urged the emperor to order the ‘ous
lication of the Talmud; and gave him, at his request,

* Reuchlin de Arte Cabbalistica, p. 614. 620. 696.

} Notices of this little Jewish book in Riederer’s N. achrichten,
Li, pos. lt appeared in Latin in 1509, as an “ opus aureum
ac novyum.’

Cuap. I. REUCHLIN. 301

the opinion in which they affirmed his right to
proceed against the Jews as heretics. The Im-
perial Council, however, deemed it expedient to
consult another master of Hebrew literature. They
referred the matter to the reviver of the cabbalistic
philosophy — Reuchlin.

Reuchlin gave his opinion, as might be expected,
in favour of the-Judaical books. His report is a
beautiful monument of pure dispassionate judg-
ment and consummate sagacity. But these qua-
lities were just those fitted to draw down the
whole storm of fanatical rage upon himself.

The Cologne theologians, irritated to fury by
the rejection of their proposition, which they as-
eribed, not without reason, to the adverse opinion
of Reuchlin, incited one of their satellites to attack
him ; he answered; they condemned his answer ;
he rejoined, upon which they appointed a court of
inquisition to try him.

This was the first serious encounter of the two
parties. The Dominicans hoped to establish their
tottering credit by a great stroke of authority, and
to intimidate the adversaries who threatened to
become dangerous to them, by the terrors which
were at their disposal. The innovators — the
teachers and disciples of the schools of poetry
whom we have mentioned —were fully sensible that
Reuchlin’s peril was their own; but their efforts
and aspirations were checked by the consciousness
of opposition to existing authority, and of the
dubious position which they occupied.

In October, 1518, a court of inquisition was
formed at Mainz, composed of the doctors of the

302 CONDITION AND CHARACTER OF Boox IT.

university and the officers of the archbishopric,
under the presidency of the inquisitor of heretical
wickedness — Jacob Hogstraten ; and it remained
to be seen whether such a sentence as that pro-
nounced some years before against John of Wesalia,
would now be given.

But times were totally altered. That intensely
Catholic spirit which had rendered it so easy for
the Inquisition to take root in Spain, was very
far from reigning in Germany. The Imperial
Council must have been, from the outset, indis-
posed towards the demands of the Cologne divines,
or they would not have appealed to such a man as
Reuchlin for advice. The infection of the prevalent
spirit of literature had already spread too widely,
and had created a sort of public opinion. We have
a whole list of members of the higher clergy who are
cited as friends of the literary innovation— Gross
and Wrisherg, canons of Augsburg, Nuenar of Co-
logne, Adelmann of Eichstadt, Andreas Fuchs, dean
of Bamberg, Lorenzo Truchsess, of Mainz, Wolfgang
Tanberg, of Passau, Jacob de Bannissis, of Trent.
Cardinal Lang, the most influential of the em-
peror’s councillors, shared these opinions. The
superior clergy were not more disposed than the
people to allow the Inquisition to regain its power.

Elector Diether had consented to the trial of
Wesalia, against his will, and only because he
feared the puissant Dominicans might a second time
effect his deposition*; now, however, the heads

* “ Cogentibus Thomistis quibusdam, veritus ne denuo ab
episcopatu ejiceretur jussu Romano pontificis.” — Kxamen We-
salia, fase. i. 327.

Crap. I, LEARNED LITERATURE. 303

of the church were no longer so timorous, and
after the tribunal had already taken its seat to
pronounce judgment, Dean Lorenz Truchsess per-
suaded the Elector to command it to suspend its
proceedings, and to forbid his own officers to take
part in them.*

Nay, another tribunal, favourable to Reuchlin,
was appointed to hold its sittings under the Bishop
of Spires, in virtue of a commission obtained from
Rome; the sentence pronounced by this court on
the 24th April, 1514, was, that the accusers of
Reuchlin, having falsely calumniated him, were
condemned to eternal silence and to the payment
of the costs. F

So widely diffused and so powerful was the an-
tipathy which the Dominicans had excited. So
lively was the sympathy which the higher and
educated classes testified in the efforts of the new
school of literature. So powerful already was the
opinion of men of learning. It was their first
victory. ;

Persecuting orthodoxy found no favour either
‘ with the emperor or with the higher clergy of
Germany. But its advocates did not give up the
contest. At Cologne, Reuchlin’s books were con-
demned to be burnt: unanimous sentences to the
same effect were obtained from the faculties of

Erfurt, Mainz, Louvaine, and Paris; thus fortified,

* Hutten’s Preface to Livy, opp. iii. p. 8384 ed. Minch proves
the share of Lorenz Truchsess “ quodam suo divino consilio.”

+ Acta judiciorum in v. d. Hardt, Hist. Lit. Reformationis,
114. The chief source of information respecting these events.

304 CONDITION AND CHARACTER OF Boox II.

they applied to the supreme tribunal at Rome; the
representatives of orthodox theology presented
themselves before the pope, and urged him to give
his infallible decision in aid of the ancient cham-
pions of the Holy See against innovators.

But even Rome was perplexed. Should she
offend public opinion represented by men so influ-
ential from their talents and learning ? Should she
act in opposition to her own opinions? On the
other hand, would it be safe to set at nought the
judgment of powerful universities ? to break with
the order which had so zealously contended for the
prerogatives of the Roman see, and had preached
the doctrine and furthered the sale of indulgences
all over the world ?*

In the commission appointed by the pope at
Rome, the majority was for Reuchlin, but a con-
siderable. minority was against him, and the pope
held it expedient to defer his decision. He issued
a mandatum de supersedendo.t

Reuchlin, conscious of a just cause, was not per-
fectly satisfied with this result, especially after all
that had gone before: he expected a formal and
complete acquittal; nevertheless, even this was
to be regarded as little less than a victory. The
fact that the party which assumed to represent
religion and to have exclusive possession of the
true doctrines, had failed to carry through their in-

* Erasmus ad Vergaram, Opp. III. ; 1015. “ Quis enim magis
timet monachos quam Romani pontifices ? ”

+t Reuchlin de Arte Cabbalistica, p. 730. Acta Judiciorum,
p. 130.

Cuar. I. LEARNED LITERATURE. 3805

quisitorial designs, and even, as secret reports said,
had only escaped a sentence of condemnation by
means of gold and favour*, was enough to encourage
all their adversaries. Hitherto the latter had only
stood on the defensive ; they now assumed an atti-
tude of open, direct offence. Reuchlin’s corre-
spondence, which was published expressly to show
the respect and admiration he enjoyed, shows how
numerously and zealously they rallied round him.
We find the spiritual lords we have mentioned ;
patricians of the most important cities, such as Pirk-
heimer of Niirnberg, who delighted in being con-
sidered as the leader of a numerous band of Reuch-
linists ; Peutinger of Augsburg, Stuss of Cologne;
preachers like Capito and Cicolampadius; the Aus-
trian historians, Lazius and Cuspinian; doctors of
medicine —all, in short, who had any tincture of
letters; but chiefly those poets and orators in the
schools and universities who beheld their own cause
in that of Reuchlin, and now rushed in throngs to the |
newly-opened arena; at their head Busch, Jiiger,
Hess, Hutten, and a long list of eminent names.f
The remarkable production in which the whole
character and drift of their labours is summed
up, is, the Epistole Obscurorum Virorum. That
popular satire, already so rife in Germany, but

* In Hogstratus Ovans, 336. it is said, through the interces-
sion of Nicolaus von Schomberg.

+ Even before the letters to Reuchlin, we find set down the
Exercitus Reuchlinistarum. Pirkheimer, Epistola Apologetica,
in Hardt, p. 136. has another list. Later lists, e. g. in Mayerhoff,
must, in several cases, be taken with restrictions.

VOL. I. D6

306 CONDITION AND CHARACTER OF _ Book II.

hitherto confined to generals, here found a par-
ticular subject exactly suited to it. We must
not look for the delicate apprehension and_ tact
which can only be formed in a highly polished
state of society, nor for the indignation of insulted
morality expressed by the ancients: itis altogether
caricature,—not of finished individual portraits, but
of a single type;—a clownish, sensual German
priest, his intellect narrowed by stupid wonder and
fanatical hatred, who relates with silly naiveté and
gossiping confidence the various absurd and scan-
dalous situations into which he falls. These letters
are not the work of a high poetical genius, but
they have truth, coarse strong features of resem-
blance, and vivid colouring. As they originated
in a widely-diffused and powerful tendency of the
public mind, they produced an immense effect :
the See of Rome deemed it necessary to prohibit
them.

It may be affirmed generally that the genius of
the literary opposition was triumphant. In the
year 1518, Erasmus looked joyfully around him;
his disciples and adherents had risen to eminence
in every university—even in Leipsig, which had
so long resisted: they were all teachers of ancient
literature.* :

* In the Essay De Ratione conscribendi Epistolas, the dedi-
cation of which belongs to the year 1522, he exclaims (ed. of
1534, p.71.), “ Videmus quantum profectum sit paucis annis. Ubi
nune est Michael Modista, ubi glossema Jacobi, ubi citatur
Catholicon brachylogus aut Mammetrectus, quos olim ceu rarum
thesaurum aureis literis descriptos habebant monachorum bib-
liotheca.” It is evident how much the method had changed.

Cuapr. I. LEARNED LITERATURE. : 307

Was it indeed possible that the great men of an-
tiquity should have lived in vain? That their works,
produced in the youth-time of the human race, —
works with whose beauty and profound wisdom no-
thing that has since arisen is to be compared, should
not be restored to later ages in their primitive form
and perfection ? It is an event of the greatest his-
torical importance, that after so many convulsions
by which nations were overthrown and others con-
stituted out of their ruins, —by which the old world
had been obliterated and all its elements replaced
by other matter, —the relics of its spirit, which could
now exercise no other influence than that of form,
were sought with an avidity hitherto unknown, and
widely diffused, studied, and imitated.

The study of antiquity was implanted in Germany
as early as the first introduction of Christianity ;
in the 10th and 11th centuries it had risen to a con-
siderable height, but at a later period it was stifled
by the despotism of the hierarchy and the schools.
The latter now returned to their original vocation.
It was not to be expected, that great works of lite-
rary art could as yet be produced; for that, circum-
stances were not ripe. The first effect of the new
studies showed itself in the nature and modes of
instruction—the more natural and rational training
of the youthful mind which has continued to be the

basis of German erudition. The hierarchical system
of opinions which, though it had been wrought up
to a high point of brilliancy and refinement, could
not possibly endure, was thus completely broken
up. A new life stirred in every department of

oe

308 EARLY CAREER OF LUTHER. Boox II.

human intelligence. ‘“ What an age!” exclaims
Hutten, “learning flourishes, the minds of men
awake; it is a joy to be alive.” This was pecu-
liarly conspicuous in the domain of theology. The
highest ecclesiastic of the nation, Archbishop Albert
of Mainz, saluted Erasmus as the restorer of theo-
logy.

_ But an intellectual movement of a totally different
kind was now about to take place.

EARLY CAREER OF LUTHER.

Tue authorities, or the opinions which rule the
world, rarely encounter their most dangerous
enemies from without; the hostilities by which
they are overthrown are usually generated and
nurtured within their own sphere.

In the bosom of theological philosophy itself,
discords arose from which a new era in the history
of life and thought may be dated.

We must not omit to notice the fact, that the
doctrines of Wickliffe, which had spread from Ox-
ford over the whole of Latin Christendom, and broke
out with such menacing demonstrations in Bohemia,
had not, in spite of all the barbarities of the Hussite
wars, been extirpated in Germany. At a much
later period we find traces of them in Bavaria,
where the Boklerbund drew upon itself the sus-
picions of Hussite opinions; in Swabia and Fran-
conia, where the council of Bamberg at one time
thought it necessary to compel all the men in that

Cuap. I. THEOLOGICAL MOVEMENT. 309

city to abjure the Hussites ; and even in Prussid,
where the adherents of Wickliffite and Hussite doc-
trines at length submitted, though only in appear-
ance.* It was the more remarkable that after such
measures, the society of the Bohemian brethren
arose out of the fierce tempest of Hussite opinions
and parties, and once more exhibited to the world
a Christian community in all the purity and sim-
plicity of the primitive church. Their religion de-
rived a new and singular character from the fun-
damental principle of their secession — that Christ
himself was the rock on which the church was
founded, and not Peter and his successors. Their
settlements were in those districts where the Ger-
manic and Slavonic elements are intermingled, and
their emissaries went forth and traversed unnoticed
the wide domain of either language, seeking those
already allied to them in opinion, or endeavouring
to gain over new proselytes. Nicholas Kuss of
Rostock, whom they visited several times, began at
this time to preach openly against the pope (A. D.
HOLL)

The opposition to the despotism of the Dominican
system still subsisted in the universities themselves.
Nominalism, connected at the very moment of its

* Zschokke, Baier. Gesch. ii. 429. Pfister, Gesch. von Schwa-
ben, v. 378. Baczko, Gesch. von Preussen, i. 256.

+ What it was which appeared dangerous in their doctrines

‘is shown particularly in the Refutations of the Dominican

Heinrich Institoris, from which Rainaldus (1498, nr. 25.) gives
copious extracts.

t Wolfii Lectiones memorabiles, ii. 27.

x5

310 EARLY CAREER OF LUTHER. Boox II,

revival with the adversaries of the papacy, had
found great acceptance in Germany, and was still
by no means suppressed. The most celebrated
nominalist of that time, Gabriel Biel, the collector,
is mainly an epitomizer of Occam. ‘This party
was in the minority, and often exposed to the per-
secutions of its enemies who wielded the powers of
the Inquisition*; but it only struck deeper and
firmer root. Luther and Melanchthon are the off-
spring of nominalism.

And perhaps a still more important circumstance
was, that in the 15th century the stricter Augus-
tinian doctrines were revived in the persons of some
theologians.

Johann de Wesalia taught election by grace; he
speaks of the Book in which the names of the elect
are written from the beginning. ‘The tendency of
his opinions is shown by the definition of the Sa-
crament which he opposes to that given by Peter
Lombard: the former is that of St. Augustine in
its original purity, while the latter is an exten-
sion of it; the general aim of his works is, the re-
moval of the additions made in later times to the
primitive doctrines of the church.t He denies the
binding force of priestly rules, and the efficacy of

* In the Examen Magistrale D™* Joh. de Wesalia, the Con-
cipient describes these disputes at the conclusion: “ adeo ut si
universalia quisquam realia negaverit, existimetur in spiritum
sanctum peccavisse, immo — contra deum, contra Christianam
religionem, — deliquisse.”

+ Joh. de Wesalia, Disputatio adversus indulgentias in Walch,
Monimenta Medii A®vi, tom. i. fase. i. p. 131.

Cuar. I. THEOLOGICAL MOVEMENT. alt

indulgences ; he is filled with the idea of the in-
visible church. He was a man of great intellectual
powers, capable of playing a distinguished part at
a university like that of Erfurt: he arrived at these
convictions by degrees, and when convinced did
not conceal them even in the pulpit; nor did he
shrink from a connexion with Bohemian emissaries.
At length, however, when advanced in age, he
~was dragged; leaning on his staff, before the In-
quisition, and thrown into prison, where he died.

Johann Pupper of Goch, who founded a convent of
nuns of the rule of St. Augustine at Mechlin about
the year 1460-70, made himself remarkable by
accusing the dominant party in the church of a
leaning to Pelagianism.* He calls Thomas Aquinas
the prince of error. He attacked the devotion to
ceremonies, and the Pharisaism of vows, upon Au-
gustinian principles.

How often have the antagonists of the church of
Rome made this the ground of their opposition!
—from Claudius of Turin in the beginning of the
ninth, to Bishop Janse in the 17th century, and
his followers in the 18th and 19th. The deeper
minds within her pale have always felt compelled
to point back to those fundamental doctrines on
which she was originally based.

The principles of the opposition now assumed

* Dialogus de Quatuor Erroribus circa Legem Evangelicam
in Walch, Monim. I. iv. p.181. “Hee fuit insania Pelagii ha-
retici, a qua error Thomistarum non solum in hoe loco sed
etiam in multis aliis non multum degenerare videtur.” What
impression this made, we perceive from Pantaleon’s description.

x4

312 EARLY CAREER OF LUTHER. Boox II.

the form of a scientific structure. In the works of
Johann Wessel, of Groningen, we see a manly mind
devoted to truth, working itself free from the bonds
of the mighty tradition which could no longer
satisfy a religious conscience. Wessel lays down
the maxim that prelates and doctors are to be be-
lieved only so far as their doctrines are in confor-
mity with the Scriptures, the sole rule of faith,
which is far above pope or church*; he writes.
almost in the spirit of a theologian of later times.
Itwas perfectly intelligible that he was not permitted
to set foot in the university of Heidelberg.

Nor were these efforts completely isolated.

At the time of the council of Basle, the German
provincial society of the Augustin Eremites had
formed themselves into a separate congregation,
and had from that moment made it their chief en-
deavour to uphold the more rigorous doctrines of
the patron of their order. This was peculiarly the
aim of the resolute and undaunted Andreas Proles,
who for nearly half a century administered the
Vicariate of that province.t Another and a con-
genial tendency came in aid of this in the beginning
of the 16th century. The despotism of the schools
had been constantly opposed by all those who were
inclined to mystical contemplation: the sermons of
Tauler, which had several times issued from the
press, became extremely popular from their mild

* Ullmann, Johann Wessel, p. 303.
t Joh. Pelz, Supplementum Aurifodine, 1504, in Kapp, Nach-
lese, iv. p. 460,

Cuap. I, THEOLOGICAL MOVEMENT. 8138

earnestness, their depth of thought and reason, and
the tone of sincerity so satisfactory to the German
mind and heart. The Book of German Theology,
which appeared at that time, may be regarded as an
offspring of Tauler’s teaching. It chiefly insisted
on the inability of the creature, of himself, to com-
prehend the Infinite and the Perfect, to attain to
inward peace, or to give himself up to that Eternal
Good, which descends upon him of its own free
motion. Johann Staupitz, the successor of Proles,
adopted these ideas, and laboured to develope
and to diffuse them.* If we examine his views
of the subject,—as for example, the manner in
which he treats of the love “which a man can
neither learn of himself nor from others, nor
even from the Holy Scriptures,—which he can only
possess through the indwelling of the Holy
Spirit,” — we are struck with their perfect con-
nexion and accordance with the stricter ideas
of grace, faith, and free-will; a connexion, in-
deed, without which these doctrines would not have
been intelligible to the age. We must not assume
that all Augustine convents, or even all the mem-
bers of the one in question, were converted to these
opinions ; but it is certain that they first struck
root among this order, whence they spread abroad
and tended to foster the resistance to the pre-
vailing doctrines of the schools.

It is manifest that all these agitations of opinion,

* Grimm de Joanne Staupitzio ejusque in sacrorum Christian-

orum restaurationem meritis, in gen Zeitschrift fiir die Hist.
Theologie, N. F. i. ii, 78.

314 EARLY CAREER OF LUTHER. Boox II.

from whatever source they proceeded, were allies
of the literary opposition to the tyranny of the
Dominican system. The fact that these various
but converging tendencies at length found repre-
sentatives within the circle of one university, must
be regarded as in itself an important event for the
whole nation.

In the year 1502, Elector Frederic of Saxony
founded a new university at Wittenberg. He ac-
complished this object chiefly by obtaining the
pope’s consent to incorporate a number of parishes
with the richly endowed church attached to the
palace, and transforming the whole into a founda-
tion, the revenues of which he then allotted to the
new professors. The same course had been pursued
in Treves and in Tiibingen ; the clerical dignities of
the institution were connected with the offices in
the university. The provost, dean, scholaster, and
syndic formed the faculty of law; the archdeacon,
cantor, and warden, that of theology ; the lectures on
philosophy and the exercises of the candidates for
the degree of master of arts were attached to five
canonries. The eminent Augustine convent in the
town was to take part in the work.*

We must recollect that the universities were
then regarded not only as establishments for edu-
cation, but as supreme tribunals for the decision of
scientific questions. In the charter of Wittenberg,
Frederic declares f that he, as well as all the neigh-

* The papal privilege in Grohmann, Geschichte der Univer-
sitat Wittenberg, comp. p. 110. .
+ Confirmatio ducis Frederici, ib. p. 19.

Crap. I. UNIVERSITY OF WITTENBERG. 315

bouring states, would repair thither as to an oracle;
‘so that,” says he, “when we have come full of
doubt, we may, after receiving the sentence, de-
part in certainty.”

Two men, both unquestionably belonging to the
party hostile to the reigning theologico-philosophical
system, had the greatest influence on the foundation
and first organisation of this university. The one
was Dr. Martin Pollich of Melrichstadt, physician
to the elector, whose name stands at the head of the
list of the rectors of the Leipzig university, where he
was previously established. We know that he had
contended against the fantastic exaggerations of
scholastic learning, and the strange assertions to
which they gave birth ; such as that the light created
‘on the first day was theology; that discursive
theology was inherent in the angels. We know that
he had already perceived the necessity of grounding
that science on a study of letters generally.*

The other was Johann Staupitz, the mystical
cast of whose opinions, borrowed from St. Augustine,
we have just mentioned ; he was the first dean of
the theological faculty, the first act of which was,
the promotion of Martin Pollich to be doctor of
theology}: as director of the Augustine convent, he
likewise enjoyed peculiar influence, It was not an

* Léscher, in the unoffending accounts of 1716, and in the
Acts of the Reformation, i. 88., has given extracts from his
writings. In his epitaph in the parish church at Wittenberg,
he is rightly called hujus gymnasii primus rector e¢ parens.

+ Liber decanorum facultatis theologorum Vitebergensis, ed.
Foerstemann, p. 2.

316 EARLY CAREER OF LUTHER. Boox II.

insignificant circumstance that the university had
just then declared St. Augustine its patron. Not-
withstanding his strong tendency to speculation,
Staupitz was obviously an excellent man of bu-
siness; he conducted himself with address at court,
and a homely vein of wit which he possessed, en-
abled him to make his part good with the prince ;
he undertook an embassy, and conducted the nego-
tiation with success; but the deeper spring of all
his conduct and actions is clearly a genuine feeling
of true and heartfelt religion, and an expansive
benevolence.

It is easy to imagine in what spirit these men
laboured at the university. But anew star soon
arose upon it. In the year 1508, Staupitz con-
ducted thither the young Luther.

We must pause a moment to consider the early
years of this remarkable man.

“‘T am a peasant’s son,” says he; “my father,
grandfather, and ancestors were genuine peasants ;
afterwards, my father removed to Mansfield, and
became a miner; that is my native place.” * Tretaieie
family was fbi Mohra, a village on the very
summit of the Thuringian forest, not far from the
spot celebrated for the first preaching of Chris-
tianity by Boniface; it is probable that Luther’s
forefathers had for centuries been settled on their
hide of land (Hufe) as was the custom with those
Thuringian peasants, one brother among whomalways
inherited the estate, while the others sought a sub-

* Tischreden, p. 581.

Cuar. I. EARLY CAREER OF LUTHER: 317

sistence in other ways. Condemned by such a
destiny to seek a home and hearth for himself,
Hans Luther was led to the mines at Mansfield,
where he earned his bread by the sweat of his
brow, while his wife, Margaret, often fetched wood
from the forest on her back. Such were the
parents of Martin Luther. He was born at Eisleben,
whither his sturdy mother had walked to the yearly
fair; he grew up in the mountain air of Mansfeld.

The habits and manners of that time were ge-
nerally harsh and rude, and so was his education.
Luther relates that his mother once scourged him
till the blood came, on account of one miserable
nut; that his father had punished him so severely —
“that it was with great difficulty that he could get
over the child’s terror and alienation; at school he
was flogged fifteen times in one forenoon. He had
to earn his bread by singing hymns before the
doors of houses, and new year’s carols in the vil-
lages. Strange—that people should continually
exalt and envy the happiness of childhood, in
which the only certain foretaste of coming years is
the feeling of the stern necessities of life ; in which
existence is dependent on foreign help, and the will of
another disposes of every day and hour with iron
sway. In Luther’s case, this period of life was full
of terrors.

From his fifteenth year his condition was some-
what better. In Eisenach, where he was sent to
the high school, he found a home in the house of
some relations of his mother; thence he went to
the university of Erfurt, where his father, whose

318 EARLY CAREER OF LUTHER. Boox II.

industry, frugality and success had placed him in
easier circumstances, made him a liberal allow-
ance*: his hope was, that his son would be a
lawyer, marry well and do him honour.

But in this weary life the restraints of child-
hood are soon succeeded by troubles and _per-
plexities. The spirit feels itself freed from the
bonds of the school, and is not yet distracted by
the wants and cares of daily life; it boldly turns
to the highest problems, such as the relation of man
to God, and of God to the world, and while eagerly
rushing on to the solution of them, it falls into the
most distressing state of doubt. We might be almost
tempted to think that the Eternal Source of all life
appeared to the youthful Luther only in the light
of the inexorable judge and avenger, who punishes
sin (of which Luther had from nature an awful
and vivid feeling) with the torments of hell, and
can only be propitiated by penance, mortification
and painful service. As he was returning from
his father’s house in Mansfeld to Erfurt, in the
month of July, 1505, he was overtaken in a field
near Stotternheim by one of those fearful tempests
which slowly gather on the mountains and at
length suddenly burst over the whole horizon.
Luther was already depressed by the unexpected
death of an intimate friend. There are moments
in which the agitated desponding heart is com-
pletely crushed by one overwhelming incident,

* Luther’s Erklirung der Genesis, c. 49. v. 15. Attenb.
tom. ix. p. 1525.

Cuap. I. EARLY CAREER OF LUTHER. 319

even of the natural world. Luther, traversing his
solitary path, saw in the tempest the God of wrath
and vengeance; the lightning struck some object
near him ; in his terror he made a vow to St. Anne,
that if he escaped, he would enter a convent. He
passed one more evening with his friends, enjoying
the pleasures of wine, music, and song; it was the
last in which he indulged himself; he hastened to
fulfil his vow, and entered the Augustine Convent
at Erfurt.

But he was little likely to find serenity there;
imprisoned, in all the buoyant energy of youth, with-
in the narrow gates and in the low and gloomy
cell, with no prospect but a few feet of garden
within the cloisters, and condemned to perform
the lowest offices. At first he devoted himself to
the duties of a novice with all the ardour of a
determined will. ‘ If ever a monk got to heaven
by monkish life and practices (durch Moncheret),
I resolved that I would enter there,’ were: his
words.* But though he conformed to the hard
duty of obedience, he was soon a prey to the most
painful disquiet. Sometimes he studied day and
night, to the neglect of his canonical hours, which
he then passed his nights in retrieving with penitent
zeal. Sometimes he went out into some neigh-
bouring village, carrying with him his midday
repast, preached to the shepherds and ploughmen,
and then refreshed himself with their rustic music;

* Short answer to Duke George. Altenburg. t. vi. p. 22,
Exposition of the eighth chapter of John, v. 770.

320 EARLY CAREER OF LUTHER. BooxIl,

after which he went home, and shutting himself
up for days in his cell, would see no one. All his
former doubts and secret perplexities returned from
time to time with redoubled force.

In the course of his study of the Scriptures, he
fell upon texts which struck terror into his soul;
one of these was, ‘‘ Save me in thy righteousness and
thy truth.” “I thought,” said he, “that righteous-
ness was the fierce wrath of God, wherewith he
punishes sinners.” Certain passages in the Epistles
of St. Paul haunted him for days. The doctrine of
grace was not indeed unknown to him, but the
dogma that sin was at once taken away by it, pro-
duced upon him, who was but too conscious of his
sins, rather a sense of rejection —a feeling of deep de-
pression, than of hope. He says it made his heart
bleed —it made him despair of God.* ‘“ Oh, my sing, -
my sins, my sins!” he writes to Staupitz, who was
not a little astonished when he received the confession
of so sorrowful a penitent, and found that he had
no sinful acts to acknowledge. His anguish was the
longing of the creature after the purity of the Crea-
tor, to whom it feels itself profoundly and intimately
allied, yet from whom it is severed by an immeasur-
able gulph: a feeling which Luther nourished by in-
cessant solitary brooding, and which had taken the
more painful and complete possession of him because
no penance had power to appease it; no doctrine
truly touched it, no confessor would hear of it.

* He relates this in the Sermo die §. Joh. 1516, in Léscher,
Reformations Acta, i. p. 258.

Cuar. I. EARLY CAREER OF LUTHER. 321

There were moments when this anxious melancholy
arose with fearful might from the mysterious
abysses of his soul, waved its dusky pinions over
his head, and felled him to the earth. On one
occasion when he had been invisible for several
days, some friends broke into his cell and found
him lying senseless on the ground. They knew
their friend; with tender precaution they struck
some chords on a stringed instrument they had
brought with them; the inward strife of the per-
plexed spirit was allayed by the well-known re-
medy ; it was restored to harmony and awakened
to healthful consciousness.

But the eternal laws of the universe seem to
require that so deep and earnest a longing of the
soul after God should at length be appeased with
the fulness of conviction.

The first who, if he could not administer comfort
to Luther in his desperate condition, at least let
fall a ray of light upon his thick darkness, was an
old Augustine friar who with fatherly admonitions
pointed his attention to the first and simplest truth
of Christianity,—the forgiveness of sins through
faith in the Redeemer; and to the assertion of St.
Paul (Rom. iii.), that man is justified without
works, by faith alone*: doctrines which he might
indeed have heard before, but obscured as they

* Short notice by Melancthon on the Life of Luther. Works.
Attenb. viii. 876. See Matthesius, Historien Dr. Luthers.
First Sermon, p. 12. Bavarus in Seckendorf, Hist. Luther-
anismi, p. 21,

VOL. I. Y:

822 EARLY CAREER OF LUTHER. Boox II.

were by school subtleties, and a ceremonial worship,
he had never rightly understood. They now first
made a full and profound impression on him. He
meditated especially on the saying “ The just shall
live by faith.” He read St. Augustine’s commentary
on this passage. ‘“ Then was I glad,” says he, “ for
I learned and saw that God’s righteousness is his
mercy, by which he accounts and holds us justified ;
thus I reconciled justice with justification, and felt
assured that I was in the true faith.” This was ex-
actly the conviction of which his mind stood in need :
it was manifest to him that the same eternal grace
whence the whole race of man is sprung, mercifully
brings back erring souls to itself and enlightens them
with the fulness of its own light; that an example
and irrefragable assurance of this is given us in
the person of Christ: he gradually emerged from
the gloomy idea of a divine justice only to be pro-
pitiated by the rigours of penance. He was like
a man who after long wanderings has at length
found the right path, and feeling more certain of
it at every step, walks boldly and hopefully on-
ward.

Such was Luther’s state when he was removed
to Wittenberg by his provincial (A. p. 1508). The
philosophical lectures which he was obliged to
deliver, sharpened his desire to penetrate the mys- -
teries of theology, “‘the kernel of the nut,” as he
calls it, “the heart of the wheat.” The books,
which he studied were St. Paul’s Epistles, St.
Augustine against the Pelagians, and, lastly, Tauler’s
sermons: he troubled himself little with literature

Cuar. I. * EARLY CAREER OF LUTHER. 323

foreign to this subject; he cared only to strengthen
and work out the convictions he had gained.*
A few years later we find him in the most ex-

* Jn the “ Histori, so zwen Augustinerordens gemartert seyn
zu Bruxel in Probandt,” —“ History, how two monks of the order
of St. Augustine underwent martyrdom at Brussels in Bra-
bandt,”—there is in sheet B the following excellent and authentic
passage upon Luther’s studies. ‘“ In welchen Verstand (dass er
die Schrift so klar und guadenreich erklire) er kummen ist
erst durch maniche Staupen dye er erlitten hat von Got, und
mit vleissigen Bitten zu Got, steten Lesen, und nemlich
Augustinus wider die Pelagianer hat ym grosse hilff gethan
tzur erkenndnuss Pauli yn seyn Episteln. Sunderlich ein Pre-
digbiichlin der Tawler genanndt yhm deutschen das hat er uns
oft zu erkauffen ermant unter seym lesen yn der Schul, welches
yn gefurt hat yn geist, als er offt uns bekannt: auch ist eyn
Biichlyn genandt die deutsch Theologen, hat Er allzeyt hoch-
gebrifft, als er den schreibtt yn der Vorrede gedachten Buch-
lyns. — Hat auch oft gesagt, das seyn Kunst mer yhm geben
sey auserfaren denn lesen, und das vyll Biicher nit gelert machen.
Darumb findt man (Spater, 1523) yhn seiner Wonung nit vyll
Biicher, den eyn Bibel und Concordanz der Bybel.” —“ To what
understanding (enabling him to explain the Scriptures with such
clearness and grace) he has arrived, first by manifold chastise-
ments which he has suffered from God, and through diligent
prayer to God, and constant reading ; and for instance, Augustine
against the Pelagians has been of great help to him towards the
comprehension of Paul in his Epistles. Especially a little book
of sermons by Tawler, he has often admonished us to buy, in the
middle of his teaching in the school, as what has guided him in
spirit, as he as often acknowledged to us; there is also a little
book called the German Theology, which he has at all times highly
praised, as he writes in the preface to the said little book. He
has also often said, that his skill was given him more by expe-
rience than reading, and that many books do not make a man
learned. Therefore many books are not to be found (this is
later, in 1523) in his dwelling ; but one Bible and a Concordance
of the Bible.”

vee’

324 EARLY CAREER OF LUTHER. Boox II

traordinary frame of mind, during a journey which
he took for the affairs of his order to Rome. As
soon as he descried the towers of the city from a
distance, he threw himself on the ground, raised
his hands and exclaimed, ‘“ Hail to thee, O holy
Rome!” On his arrival, there was no exercise in
use among the most pious pilgrims which he did
not perform with earnest and deliberate devotion,
undeterred by the levity of other priests; he said
he was almost tempted to wish that his parents
were dead, that so he might have been able cer-
tainly to deliver them from the fire of purgatory
by these privileged observances.* Yet, at the same
time, he felt how little such practices were in
accordance with the consolatory doctrine which '
he had found in the Epistle to the Romans and
in St. Augustine. _ While climbing the Scala
Santa on his knees in order to obtain the plenary
indulgence attached to that painful and _ labo-
rious work of piety, he heard a reproving voice
continually crying within him, “ The just shall live
by faith.” TF

After his return in 1512, he became Doctor of
the Holy Scripture, and from year to year enlarged
his sphere of activity. He lectured at the uni-
versity on both the Old and New Testament; he
preached at the Augustine church, and performed
the duties of the priest of the parochial church of
the town during his illness; in 1516, Staupitz ap-

* Exposition of the 117th Psalm to Hans von Sternberg.
Luthers Werke, Altenb. v. 251.
t Story told by Luther in the Table Talk, p. 609.

Cnap. I. EARLY CAREER OF LUTHER. 325

pointed him administrator of the order during his
absence on a journey, and we trace him visiting all
the monasteries in the province, appointing or
displacing priors, receiving or removing monks.
While labouring to introduce a profounder spirit
of piety, he did not overlook the smallest econo-
mical details ; and besides all this, he had to manage
his own crowded and extremely poor convent.
Some things, written in the years 1515 and 1516,
enable us to understand the state and workings
of his mind during that period. Mystical and
scholastic ideas had still great influence over him.
In the first words of his on religious subjects in the
German language which we possess, —a sketch of a
sermon dated November, 1515,— he applies, in
somewhat coarse terms, the symbolical language of
the Song of Songs to the operations of the Holy
Ghost, which acts on the spirit through the flesh; and
also to the inward harmony of the Holy Scriptures.
In another, dated December of the same year, he
endeavours to explain the mystery of the Trinity
by the Aristotelic theory of being, motion, and
rest.* Meanwhile his thoughts were already turned
to a grand and general reform of the church. In a
speech which appears to have been intended to be
uttered by the provost of Lietzkau at the Lateran
council, he sets forth that the corruption of the
world was to be ascribed to the priests, who de-
livered to the people too many maxims and fables
of human invention, and not the pure word of

* Sermo Lutheri in Nativitate Christi, 1515.
xy 3

326 EARLY CAREER OF LUTHER. Boox II.

God. For, he said, the word of life alone is able
to work out the regeneration of man. It is well
worthy of remark, that, even then, Luther looked
for the salvation of the world far less to an amend-
ment. of life, which was only secondary in his eyes,
than to a revival of the true doctrines: and there
was none with the importance of which he was so
penetrated and filled as with that of justification
by faith. He continually insists on the absolute
necessity of a man denying himself, and fleeing for
refuge under the wings of Christ; he seizes every
opportunity of repeating the saying of St. Augus-
tine, that faith obtains what the law enjoins.* We
see that Luther was not yet completely at one with
himself; that he still cherished opinions funda-
mentally at variance with each other; but all his
writings breathe a powerful mind, a youthful cou-
rage, still restrained within the bounds of modesty
and reverence for authority, though ready to over-
leap them; a genius intent on essentials, tearing
asunder the bonds of system, and pressing for-
ward in the new path it has discovered. In the year
1516, we find Luther busily occupied in defending
and establishing his doctrine of justification.+ He
was greatly encouraged by the discovery of the
spuriousness of a book attributed to Augustine, on
which the schoolmen had founded many doctrines
extremely offensive to him, and which was quoted

* Fides impetrat que lex imperat.

+ From the Sermo de propria Sapientia, it appears that he
had already been attacked on this point. “ Efficitur mihi et
errans et falsum dictum.”

Cuap. I. EARLY CAREER OF LUTHER. oat

almost entire in Lombard’s book, ‘De vera et
falsé Penitentia ;” and he now took heart to attack
the doctrine of the Scotists on love, and that of the
Magister Sententiarum on hope; he was already
convinced that there was no such thing as a work
in and for itself pleasing to God— such as prayer,
fasts and vigils; for, as their whole efficacy de-
pended on their being done in the fear of God, it
followed that every other act or occupation was
just as good in itself.

In opposition to some expressions of German
theologians which appeared to him of a Pelagian
tendency, he embraced with uncompromising firm-
ness even the severer views of Augustine: one of
his disciples held a solemn disputation in defence
of the doctrine of the subjection of the will, and
of the inability of man to fit himself for grace,
much more to obtain it, by his own powers.*

If it be asked wherein he discovered the mediating
power between divine perfection and human sinful-
ness, we find that it was solely in the mystery of the
redemption, and the revealed word; mercy on the
one side, and faith on the other. These opinions
led him to doubt of many of the main dogmas of
the church. He did not yet deny the efficacy of
absolution ; but no later than the year 1516, he
was perplexed by the doubt how man could ob-
tain grace by such means: the desire of the soul
was not appeased by it, nor was love infused ;

* Questio de viribus et voluntate hominis sine gratia, in
Loscher, i. 328.
y 4

328 EARLY CAREER OF LUTHER. Boox II.

those effects could only be produced by the enlight-
enment of the mind, and the kindling of the will
by the immediate operation of the Eternal Spirit ;
for, he added, he could conceive of religion only
as residing in the inmost depth of the heart.* He
doubted whether all those outward succours for
which it was usual to invoke the saints, ought to be
ascribed to them.

Such were the doctrines, such the great general
direction of mind immediately connected with the
opinions implanted by Pollich and Staupitz, which
Luther disseminated among the Augustine friars
of his convent and his province, and, above all,
among the members of the university. For a
time Jodocus Trutvetter of Eisenach sustained
the established opinions; but after his death in
the year 1513, Luther was the master spirit that
ruled the schools. His colleagues, Peter Lupinus
and Andreas Carlstadt, who for a time withstood
his influence, at length declared themselves over-
come and convinced by the arguments of Augustine
and the doctrines of the Holy Scripture which had
made so deep on impression on him; they were
almost more zealous than Luther himself. A to-
tally different direction was thus given to the
university of Wittenberg from that in which the
other seats of learning continued to move. Theo-
logy itself, mainly indeed in consequence of its
own internal development, made similar claims

* Sermo x™ post Trinitatis. He still says himself occasion-
ally, “ Ego non satis intelligo hanc rem; manet dubium,” &c¢. —
Léscher, p. 761.

Cuar. I. THE PAPAL COURT. 329

to those asserted by general literature. In Witten-
berg arose the opposition to the theologians of the
old and the new way, the nominalists and the
realists, and more especially to the reigning tho-
mistical doctrines of the Dominicans ; men turned
to the scriptures and the fathers of the church, as
Erasmus (though rather as a conscientious critic
than an enthusiastic religionist) had recommended.
In a short time there were no hearers for the
lectures given in the old spirit.

Such was the state of things in Wittenberg when
the preachers of papal indulgences appeared in the
country about the Elbe, armed with powers such
as had never been heard of before, but which Pope
Leo X. did not scruple, under the circumstances in
which he found himself, to grant.

For no fear whatever was now entertained at
Rome of any important division in the church.

In the place of the council of Pisa, one had been
convoked at the Lateran, in which devotion to the
see of Rome, and the doctrine of its omnipotence,
reioned unalloyed and undisputed.

At an earlier period, the college of Cardinals had
often made an attempt to limit the powers of the
papacy, and to adopt measures with regard to it like
those employed by the German chapters towards
their bishoprics; they had elected Leo because
they thought he would submit to these restraints.
But the event proved how utterly they had mis-
calculated. The men who had chiefly promoted
Leo’s election were precisely those who now most
severely felt his power. Their rage knew no

330 EARLY CAREER OF LUTHER. Boox II.

bounds. Cardinal Alfonso Petrucci several times
went to the college with a dagger concealed be-
neath the purple; he would have assassinated the
pope had he not been withheld by the consideration
of the effect which the murder of a pope by a
cardinal would produce on the world. He there-
fore held it to be more expedient to take another
and less violent way to the same end—to get rid
of the pope by poison.. But this course required
friends and allies among the cardinals and as-
sistants in the palace, and thus it happened that he
was betrayed.*

What stormy consistories followed this discovery!
The persons standing without, says the Master
of the Ceremonies, heard loud clamours,—the pope
against some of the cardinals, the cardinals against
each other, and against the pope. Whatever
passed there, Leo did not allow such an opportunity
of establishing his power for ever, to escape him.
Not only did he get rid of his formidable adversary,
but he proceeded to create at one stroke thirty-one
cardinals, thus insuring to himself a majority in all
contingencies, and a complete supremacy. +

The state, too, was convulsed by a violent storm.
Francesco Maria, Duke of Urbino, who had been

~ * All doubts whatsoever in the reality of this conspiracy
cease, upon reading the discourse held by Bandinelli upon re-
ceiving his pardon, in which he acknowledges, “ qualiter ipse
conspirarat cum Francisco Maria,...et cum Alfonso Petrutio
machinatus erat in mortem sanctitatis vestre preparando ve-
nena,” &. &c.

{ Paris de Grassis, in Rainaldus, 1517, 95. Comp. Jovius,
Vita Leonis, iv. 67.

Crap. I. PAPAL EXTORTIONS. 3ok

driven out of his territory, had returned, and had
set on foot a war, the result of which long kept the
pope in a state of mingled exasperation and shame:
gradually, however, he mastered this opposition
also; the war swallowed up streams of gold, but
means were found to raise it.

The position which the pope, now absolute lord
of Florence and master of Siena, occupied, the
powerful alliances he had contracted with the other
powers of Europe, and the views which his family
entertained on the rest of Italy, rendered it abso-
lutely indispensable for him, spite of the prodi-
gality of a government that knew no restraint, to
be well supplied with money. He seized every
occasion of extracting extraordinary revenues from
the church.

The Lateran council was induced, immediately
before its dissolution (15th of March, 1517), to
grant the pope a tenth of all church property
throughout Christendom. Three different com-
missions for the sale of indulgences traversed
Germany and the northern states at the same
moment.

These expedients were, it is true, resorted to
under various pretexts. The tenths were, it was
_said, to be expended in a Turkish war, which was
soon to be declared; the produce of indulgences
was for the building of St. Peter’s Church, where
the bones of the martyrs lay exposed to the incle-
mency of the elements. But people had ceased to
believe in these pretences.

* Leoni, Vita di Francesco Maria d’ Urbino, p. 205.

332 EARLY CAREER OF LUTHER. Boox II.

Devoted as the Lateran council was to the pope,
the proposition was only carried by two or three
votes : an extremely large minority objected to the
tenths, that it was impossible to think of a Turkish
war at present.* Who could be a more zealous
catholic than Cardinal Ximenes, who then governed
Spain? Yet even in the year 1513, he had opposed
the attempt to introduce the sale of indulgences
into that country ¢; he made vehement professions
of devotion to the pope, but he added, as to the
tenths, it must first be seen how they were to be
applied. f

For there was not a doubt on the mind of any
reasonable man, that all these demands were mere
financial speculations. There is no positive proof
that the assertion then so generally made —that the
proceeds of the sale of indulgences in Germany was
destined in part for the pope’s sister Maddelena —
was true. But the main fact is indisputable, that
the ecclesiastical aids were applied to the uses of the
pope’s family. We have a receipt now lying before
us, given by the pope’s nephew Lorenzo to the king
of France, for 100,000 livres which that monarch
paid him for his services. Herein it is expressly
said that the king was to receive this sum from the
tenths which the council had granted to the pope for _
the Turkish war.§ This was, therefore, precisely

* Paris de Grassis, in Rainaldus, 1517, un. 16.

+ Gomez, Vita Ximenis, in Schott, Hispania illustrata, i.
p. 1065.

~ Argensola, Anales de Aragon, p. 354.

§ Molini, Documenti storici, t. i. p. 71.

Cuap. I. SALE OF INDULGENCES. Riot,

the same thing as if the pope had given the money
to his nephew; or, perhaps even worse, for he gave
it him before it was raised.

The only means of resistance to these impositions
were therefore to be sought in the poyers of the
state, which were just now gradually acquiring
stability, as we see by the example of Ximenes in
Spain; or in England, where the decision of the
Lateran council could not have reached the govern-
ment, at the time when it forced the papal collectors
to take an oath that they would send neither money
nor bills of exchange to Rome.* But who was there
capable of protecting the interests of Germany ?
The Council of Regency no longer existed ; the em-
peror was compelled by his uncertain political re-

lations (especially to France) to keep up a good
understanding with the pope. One of the most con-
siderable princes of the empire, the Archchancellor
of Germany, Elector Albert of Mainz, born Mark-
grave of Brandenburg, had the same interests as
the pope,—a part of the proceeds were to go into
his own exchequer.

Of the three commissions into which Germany
was divided, the one which was administered by
Arimbold, a member of the Roman prelature,
embraced the greater part of the dioceses of
Upper and Lower Germany; another, which in-
cluded only Switzerland and Austria, fell to the

* Oath of Silvester Darius, the papal collector (in curia can-
cellaria in aula palatii Westmonasteriensis) April 22, 1517, in
Rymer’s Foedera, vi. i. p. 133.

834. EARLY CAREER OF LUTHER. Boox II.

charge of Cristofero Numai of Forli*, general of
the Franciscans; and the Elector of Mainz himself
had undertaken the third in his own vast archi-
episcopal provinces, Mainz and Magdeburg: and
for the following reasons.

- We remember what heavy charges had been
brought upon the archbishopric of Mainz by the
frequent recurrence of vacancies. In the year 1514
the chapter elected Markgrave Albert for no other
reason than that he promised not to press heavily
on the diocese for the expenses of the pallium.
But neither was he able to defray them from his
own resources. The expedient devised was, that
he should borrow’ 30,000 gulden of the house of
Fugger of Augsburg, and detain one half of the
money raised by indulgences to repay it. This
financial operation was perfectly open and undis-
guised. Agents of the house of Fugger travelled

* His deputy plenipotentiary was Samson, of whom it was
said in a pamphlet of 1521: er habe den Bauern “ Bassporten
geben in den Hymel durch ein Tollmetschen, von welchem
Kaufmannschatz hatt er gut silberin Platten gefiret gen Mai-
land.” — He had given the peasants “ passports into Heaven
through an interpreter, by means of which stock in trade he had
taken good silver coin back to Milan.”

+ Notices from a manuscript essay, from which Rathmann
Gesch. von Magdeburg, iii. p. 302., has made extracts. In
Erhard’s Uberlieferungen zur vaterlind. Gesch. part iii. p. 12.
isto be found a calculation addressed to Leo X., and a motu-
proprio by him referring to this point. The money advanced
by the Fuggers to the archiepiscopal oratores in Rome towards
the payment for the pallium amounted to 21,000 ducats (100
ducats are equal to 140 gold gulden); the Fuggers received 500
Rhenish gulden over, as commission.

Cuap. I. THEORY OF INDULGENCES. 335

about with the preachers of indulgences. Albert
had authorized them to take half of all the money
received on the spot, ‘in payment of the sum due
to them.”* The tax for the plenary indulgence
reminds us of the measures taken for the collection _
of the Common Penny. We possess diaries in
which the disbursements for spiritual benefits are
entered and calculated together with secular
purchases.f

And it is important to examine what were the
advantages which were thus obtained.

The plenary indulgence for all, the alleged object
of which was to contribute to the completion of the
Vatican Basilica, restored the possessor to the
grace of God, and completely exempted him from
the punishment of purgatory. But there were three
other favours to be obtained by further contributions :
the right of choosing a father confessor who could
grant absolution in reserved cases, and commute
vows which had been taken into other good works;
participation in all prayers, fasts, pilgrimages, and
whatever good works were performed in the church.
militant; lastly, the release of the souls of the
departed out of purgatory. In order to obtain
plenary indulgence, it was necessary not only to
confess, but to feel contrition; the three others
could be obtained without contrition or confession,

* Gudenus, Diplom. Moguntiae, iv. 587. :

+ e.g. Johannis Tichtelii Diarium, in Rauch, ii, 558.
“ Uxor imposuit pro se duas libras denariorum, pro parentibus
dimidiam 1. d., pro domino Bartholomzo dimidiam 1, d.”

336 EARLY CAREER OF LUTHER. Boox II.

by money alone.* It is in this point of view that
Columbus extols the worth of money: “ he who
possesses it,” says he seriously, ‘‘ has the power of
transporting souls into Paradise.”

Never indeed were the union of secular objects
with spiritual omnipotence more strikingly dis-
played than in the-epoch we are now considering.
There is a fantastic sublimity and grandeur in this
conception of the church, as a community compre-
hending heaven and earth, the living and the dead;
in which all the penalties incurred by individuals
were removed by the merit and the grace of the
collective body. What a conception of the power
and dignity of a human being is implied in the
belief that the pope could employ this accumulated
treasure of merits in behalf of one or another at his
pleasure ! + The doctrine that the power of the pope
extended to that intermediate state between heaven
and earth, called purgatory, was the growth of
modern times. ‘The pope appears in the character
of the great dispenser of all punishment and all
mercy. And this most poetical, sublime idea he
now dragged in the dust for a miserable sum of

* Tnstructio summaria ad subcommissarios, in Gerdes, His-
toria Evangelii, i. App. n.ix. p. 83. For the most part agreeing
word for word with the Avvisamenti of Arcimbold in Kapp’s
Nachlese.

{+ Summa divi Thome Suppl. Qu. 25. art. 1. concl. “ Pre-
dicta merita sunt communia totius ecclesiz ; ea autem que sunt
alicujus multitudinis communia, distribuuntur singulis de multi-
tudine secundum arbitrium ejus qui multitudini preest.”. Fur-
ther: art. 2. “ Nec divine justitie derogatur, quia nihil de poena
dimittitur, sed unius peena alteri computatur.”

Cuap, I. THEORY OF INDULGENCES. Oot

money, which he applied to the political or domestic
wants of the moment. Mountebank itinerant com-
missioners, who were very fond of reckoning how
much they had already raised for the papal court,
while they retained a considerable portion of it for
themselves, and lived a life of ease and luxury, out-
stripped their powers with blasphemous eloquence.
They thought themselves armed against every at-
_ tack, so long as they could menace their opponents
with the tremendous punishments of the church.

But a man was now found who dared to con-
front them.

While Luther’s whole soul was more and’ more
profoundly embued with the doctrine of salvation
by faith, which he zealously diffused not only in
the cloister and the university, but in his cha-
racter of parish priest of Wittenberg, there ap-
peared in his neighbourhood an announcement of
a totally opposite character, grounded on the
merest external compromise with conscience, and
resting on those ecclesiastical theories which he,
with his colleagues, disciples and friends, so strenu-
ously combated. In the neighbouring town of
Jiiterbock, the multitude flocked together around
the Dominican friar, John Tetzel, a man distin-
guished above all the other pope’s commissioners
for shamelessness of tongue. Memorials of the
traffic in which he was engaged are preserved (as
was fitting) in the ancient church of the town.
Among the buyers of indulgences were also some
people from Wittenberg; Luther saw himself di-
rectly attacked in his cure of souls. °

VOL. I. Z

338 EARLY CAREER OF LUTHER. Boox IL.

It was impossible that contradictions so absolute
should approach so near without coming into open
conflict.

On the vigil of All Saints, on which the parochial
church was accustomed to distribute the treasure
of indulgences attached to its relics, —on the 31st
October, 1517,—Luther nailed on its gates ninety-
five propositions ; — “a disputation for the purpose
of explaining the power of indulgences.”

We must recollect that the doctrine of the
treasure of the church, on which that of indul-
gences rested, was from the very first regarded as at
~ complete variance with the sacrament of the power
of the keys. The dispensation of indulgences rested
on the overflowing merits of the church: all that was
required on the one side was sufficient authority:
on the other, a mark or token of connection with
the church,—any act done for her honour or
advantage. ‘The sacrament of the keys, on the
contrary, was exclusively derived from the merits
of Christ; for that, sacerdotal ordination was ne-
cessary on the one side, and, on the other, contri-
tion and penance. In the former case the measure
of grace was at the pleasure of the dispenser; in
the latter, it must be determined by the relation
between the sin and the penitence. In this con-
troversy, Thomas Aquinas had declared himself
for the doctrine of the treasure of the church and
the validity of the indulgences which she dispensed :
he expressly teaches that no priest is necessary, a
mere legate can dispense them; even in return
for temporal services, so far as these were sub-

Cuap. I. THE NINETY-FIVE PROPOSITIONS. 339

servient to a spiritual purpose. In this opinion he
was followed by his school.*

The same controversy was revived, after the
lapse of ages, by Luther; but he espoused the
contrary side. Not that he altogether denied the
treasures of the church; but he declared that this
doctrine was not sufficiently clear, and, above all,
he contested the right of the pope to dispense
them. For he ascribed only an inward efficacy to
this mysterious community of the church. He
maintained that all her members had a share in her
good works, even without a pope’s brief; that his
power extended over purgatory only in so far as
the intercessions of the church were in his hand ;
but the question must first be determined whether
God would hear these intercessions: he held that the
granting indulgences of any kind whatsoever with-
out repentance, was directly contrary to the Chris-
tian doctrine. He denied, article by article, the au-
thority given to the dealers in indulgences in their
instructions. On the other hand, he traced the
doctrine of absolution to that of the authority of
thekeys.¢ In this authority, which Christ delegated

* Scti Thome Summa, Supplementum tertiz partis, Quastio
xxy. art. ii, expounds this doctrine very clearly. Its main
ground, however, always remains the same, that the church says
thus : for, “si in predicatione ecclesie aliqua falsitas depre-
henderetur, non essent documenta ecclesiz alicujus autoritatis
ad roborandam fidem.”

+ Just as the adversaries, whom Thomas Aquinas refutes,
maintained : “ indulgentia non habent effectum nisi ex vi cla-
vium.”

Z 2

340 EARLY CAREER OF LUTHER. Boox II.

to St. Peter, lay the power of the pope to remit
sin. It also extended to all penances and cases
of conscience; but of course to no punishments but
those imposed for the purpose of satisfaction ; and
even then, their whole efficacy depended on whether
the sinner felt contrition, which he himself was not
able to determine, much less another for him. If
he had true contrition, complete forgiveness was
granted him; if he had it not, no brief of indul-
gence could avail him: for the pope’s absolution
had no value in and for itself, but only in so far
as it was a mark of Divine favour.

It is evident that this attack did not originate in
a scheme of faith new to the church, but in the
very centre of the scholastic notions; according to
which the fundamental idea of the papacy —viz.
that the priesthood, and more especially the suc-
cessors of St. Peter, were representatives and vice-
gerents of Christ,—was still firmly adhered to,
though the doctrine of the union of all the powers
of the church in the person of the pope was just as
decidedly controverted. It is impossible to read
these propositions without seeing by what a daring,
magnanimous, and constant spirit Luther was
actuated. The thoughts fly out from his mind
like sparks from the iron under the stroke of the
hammer.

Let us not forget to remark, however, that as
the. abuse complained of had a double character,
religious and political, or financial, so also political
events came in aid of the opposition emanating
from religious ideas.

Cuar.I. DISPUTE CONCERNING INDULGENCES. 341

Frederick of Saxony had been present when the
Council of Regency prescribed to Cardinal Raimund
very strict conditions for the indulgence then pro-
claimed (A. D. 1501): he had kept thé money ac-
cruing from it in his own dominions in his possession,
with the determination not to part with it, till an
expedition against the infidels, which was then
contemplated, should be actually undertaken; the
pope and, on the pope’s concession, the emperor
had demanded it of him in vain*: he held it for
what it really was—a tax levied on his subjects;
and after all the projects of a war against the
Turks had come to nothing, he had at length
applied the money to his university. Nor was he
now inclined to consent to a similar scheme of
taxation. His neighbour, Elector Joachim of
Brandenburg, readily submitted to it: he com-

* At the Diet of Augsburg, 1510, the Saxon deputies declared
to the papal nuncio, as appeared in one of their letters to Fred-
eric the Wise: “es habe Pp. Heiligkeit leiden mégen, das E.
Gn. das Geld so in iren Landen gefallen zu sich genommen,
mit einer Verpflichtung wann es zum Streit wider die Ungliu-
bigen komme es wyderum darzulegen: aus der Ursach hab
E. Gn. wyewol mefirmal darum angesucht von Keys Mt.
wegen, die auch gerne E. Gn. gemelte Summe um ihre Schuld
geben hiitt, dy Summa noch wy sy gefallen ist.” “ His Papal
Holiness has been obliged to allow that your Grace should
take into your keeping the money collected in your States,
under an obligation to produce it again whenever a war with
the infidels should come about : from this cause, your Grace,
although many times applied to for it, on behalf of his Im-
perial Majesty, who would gladly have given the before-
mentioned sum to your Grace in payment of debts, still has the
entire sum, as it was collected.”

Z3

342 EARLY CAREER OF LUTHER. Boox IL.

manded his States to throw no obstacles in the way
of Tetzel or his sub-commissioners*; but his com-
pliance was clearly only the result of the considera-
tion that oné half of the amount would go to his
brother. For this very reason, however, Elector
Frederick made the stronger resistance: he was
already irritated against the Elector of Mainz in
consequence of the affairs of Erfurt, and he de-
clared that Albert should not pay for his pallium
out of the pockets of the Saxons. The sale of
indulgences at Jiiterbock and the resort of his sub-
jects thither, was not less offensive to him on finan-
cial grounds than to Luther on spiritual.

Not that the latter were in any degree excited
by the former; this it would be impossible to
maintain after a careful examination of the facts;
on the contrary, the spiritual motives were more
original, powerful, and independent than the tem-
poral, though these were important, as having their
proper source in the general condition of Germany.
The point whence the great events arose which
were soon to agitate the world, was the coincidence
of the two.

There was, as we have already “observed, no one
who represented the interests of Germany in the
matter. There were innumerable persons who saw
through the abuse of religion, but no one who
dared to call it by its right name and openly to
denounce and resist it. But the alliance between
the monk of Wittenberg and the sovereign of

'* Mandate of Joachim in Walch, Werke Luthers, xv. 415.

Cuar.I. DISPUTE CONCERNING INDULGENCES. 343
&

Saxony was formed; no treaty was negotiated;
they had never seen each other; yet they were
bound together by an instinctive mutual under-
standing. The intrepid monk attacked the enemy;
the prince did not promise him his aid —he did not
even encourage him; he let things take their
course. .

Yet he must have felt very distinctly what was
the tendency and the importance of these events, if
we are to believe the story of the dream which he
dreamt at his castle of Schweinitz, where he was
then staying, on the night of All Saints, just after
the theses were stuck up on the church door at
Wittenberg. He thought he saw the monk writing
certain propositions on the chapel of the castle at
Wittenberg, in so large a hand that it could be
read in Schweinitz; the pen grew longer and
longer, till at last it reached to Rome, touched the
pope’s triple crown and made it totter; he was
stretching out his arm to catch it, when he woke.*

Luther’s daring assault was the shock which
awakened Germany from her slumber. That a
man should arise who had the courage to undertake
the perilous struggle, was a source of universal
satisfaction, and as it were tranquillised the public
conscience.t The most powerful interests were

* A divine and scriptural dream from Caspar Rothen, Gloria
Lutheri, in Tentzel’s Histor. Bericht, p. 239.

+ Erasmus to Duke George of Saxony, Dec. 12. 1524. “Cum
Lutherus aggrederetur hanc fabulam, totus mundus illi magno
consensu applausit, — susceperat enim optimam causam adversus
corruptissimos scholarum et ecclesia mores, qui eo progressi
fuerant ut res jam nulli bono viro tolerabilis videretur.”

z4

344 EARLY CAREER OF LUTHER. Boox IL.

involved in it;—that of sincere and profound
piety, against the most purely external means of
obtaining pardon of sins; that of literature, against
fanatical persecutors, of whom Tetzel was one;
the renovated theology against the dogmatic learn-
ing of the schools, which lent itself to all these
abuses; the temporal power against the spiritual,
whose usurpations it sought to curb; lastly, the
nation against the rapacity of Rome.

But since each of these interests had its an-
tagonist, the resistance could not be much less
vehement than the support. A numerous body
of natural adversaries arose.

The university of Frankfurt on the Oder, like
that of Wittenberg, was an off-shoot of Leipzig, only
founded at a later date, and belonging to the oppo-
site party. Determined opponents to all innovation
had found appointments there. Conrad Koch, sur-
named Wimpina, an old enemy of Pollich, who had
often had a literary skirmish with him, had acquired
a similar influence there to that possessed by Pollich
at Wittenberg. Johann Tetzel now addressed him-
self to Wimpina, and with his assistance (for he
was ambitious of being a doctor as well as his
Augustine adversary) published two theses, on one
of which he intended to hold a disputation for
the degree of licentiate, on the other, for that of
doctor: both were directed against Luther. In
the first he attempted to defend the doctrine of
indulgences by means of a new distinction between
expiatory and saving punishment. The pope, he

Cuap.I. DISPUTE CONCERNING INDULGENCES. 345

said, could remit the former, though not the latter.*
In the second thesis he extols most highly the
power of the pope, who had the exclusive right of
settling the interpretation of Scripture, and deciding
on articles of faith; he denounces Luther, not
indeed by name, but with sufficient distinctness,
as a heretic, nay a stiff-necked heretic. This now
resounded from pulpit and chair. Hogstraten
thundered out invectives, and clearly intimated
that such a heretic was worthy of death; while a
manuscript confutation by an apparent friend,
Johann Eck of Ingolstadt, was circulated, contain-
ing insinuations concerning the Bohemian poison.T
Luther left none of these attacks unanswered: and
in every one of his polemical writings he gained
ground. Other questions soon found their way
into the controversy; e.g. that concerning the
legend of St. Anne, the authenticity of which was
disputed by a friend of Luther’s at Zwickau, but
obstinately maintained by the Leipzig theologians. f
The Wittenberg views concerning the Aristotelian
philosophy and the merit of works spread abroad :
Luther himself defended them at a meeting of his
order at Heidelberg; and if he experienced oppo-

* Disputatio prima, J. Tetzelii Thesis, 14. To this refers
the passage in Luther’s second sermon on Indulgences, in which
he calls such a distinction mere talk.

+ Obelisci Eckii, nr. 18 et 22.

t Joh. Sylvii Apologia contra Calumniatores suos, in qua
Annam nupsisse Cleophe et Salome evangelicis testimoniis
refellitur. Reprinted in Rittershusii Commentarius de Gradibus
Cognationum, 1674.

346 EARLY CAREER OF LUTHER. Boox II.

sition from the elder doctors, a number of the
younger members of the university became his ad-
herents. The whole theological world of Germany
was thrown into the most violent agitation.

But already a voice from Rome was heard through
the loud disputes of excited Germany. Silvester
Mazolini of Prierio, master of the sacred palace, a
Dominican, who had given out a very equivocal and
cautious opinion concerning the necessity of repent-
ance and the sinfulness of lying, but had defended
the system of teaching practised by his order with
inflexible zeal ;—who, in Reuchlin’s controversy,
had been the only member of the commission that
had prevented it from coming to a decision fa-
vourable to that eminent scholar, now deemed him-
self called upon to take up arms against this new
and far more formidable assailant. He rose, as he
said, from the commentary in “ Primam Secundz.”
of St. Thomas, in the composition of which he was
absorbed, and devoted a few days to throw himself
like a buckler between the Augustine monk and
the Roman See, against which he had dared to
rear his head*; he thought Luther sufficiently
confuted by the mere citation of the opinions of his
master, St. Thomas. An attack emanating from
Rome made some impression even upon Luther:
feeble and easy to confute as Silvester’s writing
appeared to him, he now paused; he did not wish
to have the Curia his open and direct foe. On the

* Dialogus rev® patris fratris Sylvestri Prieriatis —in pra-
sumptuosas Martini Lutheri conclusiones, in Lischer, ii. 12.

Cuar.I. DISPUTE CONCERNING INDULGENCES. 347

the 30th May he sent an explanation of his pro-
positions to the pope himself, and seized this occa-
sion of endeavouring to render his opinions and
conduct generally intelligible to the Holy Father.
He did not as yet go so far as to appeal purely
and exclusively to the Scriptures; on the contrary,
he declared that he submitted to the authority of
the fathers who were recognized by the church,
and even to that of the papal decrees. But he
could not consider himself bound to accept the
opinions of Thomas Aquinas as articles of faith,
since his works were not yet sanctioned by the’
church. “ I may err,” he exclaims, “ but a heretic
I will not be, let my enemies rage and rail as
they will.”

Affairs, however, already began to wear the most
threatening aspect at Rome.

The papal fiscal, Mario Perusco*, the same who
had rendered himself celebrated by the investigation
of the conspiracy of cardinals, commenced criminal
proceedings against Luther; in the tribunal which
was appointed, the same Silvester who had thrown
down the gauntlet to the accused on the literary
ground was the only theologian. There was not
much mercy to be expected.

There isno question that German influences were
also at work here. Elector Albert, who instantly
felt that the attack from Wittenberg was directed
in part against himself, had referred Tetzel to
Wimpina; the consequence of this was, that

* Guicciardini (xiii. p. 384.) and Jovius mention him.

348 EARLY CAREER OF LUTHER. Boox II.

Frederic was attacked in Tetzel’s theses (indirectly
indeed, but with the utmost bitterness), as a prince
who had the power to check the heretical wicked-
ness, and did not— who shielded heretics from
their rightful judge.* Tetzel at least affirms, that
the Elector had had an influence in the trial.
Personal differences, and the jealousies of neigh-
bouring states, had influenced, from the very be-
ginning, the course of these events.T

Such was the state of the spiritual power in
Germany. As yet, a secession or revolt from the
pope was not thought of; as yet, his power was
universally aknowledged, but indignation and re-
sistance rose up against him from all the depths of
the national feeling and the national will. Already
had his sworn defenders sustained a defeat ; — al-
ready some of the foundations of the edifice of
dogma, on which his power rested, tottered ; the in-
tense desire of the nation to consolidate itself into
a certain unity, took a direction hostile to the au-
thority of the Court of Rome. An opposition had
arisen which still appeared insignificant, but which
found vigorous support in the temper of the nation
and in the favour of a powerful prince of the empire.

* Disputatio secunda; J. Tetzelii Thesis, 47, 48.

+ Tetzel to Miltitz in Léscher, ii. 568. : “so doch hochben-
annter Erzbischof inen bestellt hat zu citiren und nicht ich.” —
“ Thus then the above-named archbishop has summoned him
(Luther) and not I.”

349

CHAPTER II.

DESCENT OF THE IMPERIAL CROWN FROM MAXIMILIAN
TO CHARLES V.

DIET OF AUGSBURG, 1518.

Hap there been at this moment a powerful emperor,
he might have turned these agitations to vast
account. Supported by the nation, he would have
been able to revive the ancient opposition to the
papacy, and to inspire his people with a new life
founded upon religious ideas.

Maximilian was by nature far from being inac-
cessible to such a project. Indeed, the expression
he once let fall to Elector Frederic, that he wished
“to take good care of the monk,” for that it
might be possible some time or itn to make
use of him, betrays what was passing in his mind ;
but for the moment he was not in a condition to
follow it out.

In the first place, he was old, and wished to
secure to his grandson Charles the succession to the
empire. He regarded this as the closing business
of his life. He had laboured all his days, as he
said, to aggrandize his house: all his trouble would,
however, be lost, if he did not attain this his final
aim.* But, for this, he especially required the

— * Letter of the 24th of May, 1518.

350 DIET OF AUGSBURG, 1518. Boox II.

support of the spiritual power; for the minds of
men were not yet so far emancipated from the ideas
of the middle ages, as that they could be brought
to recognize in him the full dignity of emperor,
without the ceremony of coronation. While medi-
tating the project of raising his grandson to the
rank of king of the Romans, the first difficulty that
occurred to Maximilian was, that he himself had
not been crowned. He conceived the idea of
causing himself to be crowned, if not in Rome, at
least with the genuine crown of a Roman emperor,
which he hoped to induce the papal court to send
across the Alps, and opened negotiations with that
view. It is evident how necessary it became for
him, not only not to irritate, but to conciliate the
pope.

On another point also, advances were made
towards a good understanding between the emperor
and the pope. We have mentioned the grant of a
tenth for a Turkish war, which the Lateran council
was induced to consent to, just before its close. It
is a very significant fact, that while this excited
amazement and resistance throughout Europe,
Maximilian acquiesced in it. He, too, wished no-
thing more earnestly than once more to levy a large
tax on the whole empire; we know, however, what.
a mighty opposition he encountered, and that even
the grants which he wrung from the States had been
fruitless: he now hoped to obtain his end in con-
junction with the pope. He therefore assented
without a question to the plan of the Court of
Rome. It seems as if not only his self-interest was

Cuapr. II. DIET OF AUGSBURG, 1518. 351

moved, but his imagination captivated. He exhorts
the pope, in letters of the greatest ardour and
vivacity, to undertake the campaign in person,
surrounded by his cardinals, under the banner of
the cross; then, he says, every one would hasten to
his aid: he, at least, had from his youth had no
higher ambition than to do battle against the Turks.*
The victories of Selim I. over the Mamelukes
revived his sense of the general danger. He con-
voked the States of the empire, in order at length to
conclude on means of raising efficacious succour
against the Turks, to whom already all Asia, as
far as the domains of Prester John, belonged; by
whom Africa was occupied, and whom it would
soon become utterly impossible to resist.— He
hoped that the moment was come for realising his
long-cherished project of establishing a permanent
military constitution. Thus, after long interruption,
the ancient union of the spiritual and temporal
powers was once more beheld at the diet. Instead
of opposing the pope, the emperor united with him ;
while the pope sent a legate to assist the emperor
in his negotiations with the States.

His choice fell on the Dominican, Thomas de Vio,
the same who had so zealously defended the papal
prerogatives; this had opened to him the way to
higher dignities, which had terminated in that of
cardinal. The brilliant appointment of legate, now

* Letter of Maximilian, Feb. 28. in Rainaldus, 1517, 2—5.

+ Address of the 9th February in the Frankf. A., vol. xxxiii.
By a letter from Fiirstenberg (July 3. 1518) it appears that the
States had met by the beginning of July.

352 DIET OF AUGSBURG, 1518. Boox II.

superadded, placed him at the summit of his am-
bition. He determined to appear with the greatest
magnificence, and almost acted in earnest upon the
pretension of the Curia, that a legate was greater
than aking.* At his nomination he made special
conditions as to the state and splendour of his
equipments; for.example, that a white palfrey with
bridle of crimson velvet, and hangings for his room
of crimson satin, were to be provided for him: even
his old master of the ceremonies could not refrain
from laughing at the multiplicity of demands which
he had to make. When at Augsburg he delighted
beyond all things in magnificent ceremonies ; such
as the high mass which he celebrated before all the
princes, spiritual and temporal, in the cathedral,
on the Ist of August; when he placed the car-
dinal’s hat on the head of the Archbishop of Mainz,
kneeling at the altar, and delivered to the em- —
peror himself the consecrated hat and sword — the
marks of papal grace and favour. He indulged also
in the most extravagant ideas. While exhorting
the emperor to march forth against the hereditary ~
enemy who thirsted for the blood of Christendom,
he reminded him that this was not only the day
on which Augustus had become master of the
world at the battle.of Actium, but also that it was
sacred to St. Peter: the emperor might accept it
as an augury of the conquest of Constantinople and
Jerusalem, and the extension of the empire and the

* “Legati debent esse supra reges quoscunque.” — Paris de
Grassis in Hofmanni Scriptores novi, p. 408.

Cuap. II. DIET OF AUGSBURG, 1518. 3538

church to the farthest ends of the earth.* Such
was the style of a discourse, framed according to all
the rules of rhetoric, which he delivered to the
assembly of the States.

_ It may easily be imagined, that it cost him no
labour to persuade the emperor; after a short de-
liberation they now made the joint proposal, that
in order to bring an army against the Turks into
the field, every fifty householders should furnish
one man, and the clergy should pay a tenth, the
laity a twentieth, of their income for its mainte-
nance.

It was extremely difficult, however, to carry this
measure through the States. Whatever were the
real designs of the emperor, people refused, whether
in Germany or abroad, to believe that he was in
earnest. Publications appeared, in which the in-
tention of the See of Rome to make war on the in-
fidels was flatly denied ; these were all Florentine
arts, it was affirmed, to cajole the Germans out of
their money ; the proceeds of indulgences were not
even applied to the building which was represented
as so urgently wanted; the materials destined for
the building of St. Peter’s wandered by night to the
palace of Lorenzo de Medici; —the Turks whom they
ought to make war upon were to be found in Italy.

* Jacobi Manlii Historiola duorum Actuum; Freher, ii.
p. 709.

+ Oratio Dissuasoria ; Freher, ii. 701. The “conclusion of
this discourse makes against the opinion that it is by Hutten.
But how is the fact to be explained, that the dialogue, un-
questionably Hutten’s, “ Pasquillus Exul,” has so extraordinary a

VOL. be BA

354 DIET OF AUGSBURG, 1518. Boox II.

As to the emperor, it was suggested that his object
was to impose a tax on the empire under these
pretexts.

The answer which the States returned on the 27th
of August, therefore, was a decided negative. They
observed, that it would be impossible to raise so
considerable a tax, in the state to which the
country had been reduced during the last years
by war, scarcity, and intestine disorder. But that,
independently of this, the common people com-
plained of all the money that was sent out of
Germany to no purpose; the nation had already
frequently contributed funds for a Turkish war by
means of indulgences and cruciata, but it had never
yet heard that any expedition against the Turks
had been attempted. The refusal thus assumed the
character of an accusation. The States seized the
opportunity afforded by the demand on the part of
the See of Rome to retort upon it a multitude of
grievances : é. g. the annates which were now ex-
acted from abbeys, prebends, and parishes; the
constantly increasing costs of the confirmation in
spiritual offices caused by the creation of new
officia; the apparently eternal burthens imposed by
the rules of the Roman chancery ; all the various
encroachments on the right of patronage ; the ap-
pointment of foreigners to spiritual posts in Upper
and Lower Germany ; and, generally, an incessant

resemblance in many passages to this discourse, that it cannot
possibly be accidental? It might, however, very well have had
an influence upon the consultations, as it reached Wittenberg
on the 2nd of September.” — Luther’s Letters, i. nv. 79.

Cuar. II. DIET OF AUGSBURG, 1518. 355

violation of the concordat with the German nation.*
A memorial presented by the Bishop of Liege to
the head and princes of the empire, served to give
additional force to these complaints. It contained
a complete catalogue of acts of injustice which the
German church had to suffer from the courtiers of
Rome; those mighty huntsmen, sons of Nimrod, as
— it said, sallied forth daily in chace of benefices ; day
and night they meditated on nothing but how to
thwart the canonical elections; the German gold,
formerly too heavy for an Atlas, had fled across
the Alps.f Such a writing, “so full of boldness,”
said the Frankfurt envoy, had never been seen.

How greatly had the emperor deceived himself
in imagining that he should more readily attain his
end by the aid of the spiritual power !

Charges against the pope were now also advanced
at the discussions on the grievances which had
been brought forward a year before at Mainz; e. g.
his encroachment on the right of collation; the
conduct of the clergy generally; above all, the use
of excommunication, to which the people had no
mind to concede a validity equal to that of the sen-
tence of the civil tribunals. But in urging these
complaints, they did not lose sight of those against
the emperor. They again demanded a better com-
position of the courts of justice, and a more perfect
execution of the judgments of the Imperial Chamber;

* Answer of the States, Friday after the Feast of St. Bar-
tholomew. Frankft. A.

+ Erardus de Marca Sacra™® Cxs® Majestati. Kapps Nach-
lese, ii. nr. 1,

Pe RP.

356 DIET OF AUGSBURG, 1518. Boox II.

a commission was appointed in order to deliberate
on the code of criminal procedure.

Nor was this all; the opposition to the imperial
authority took a perfectly new direction in the im-
portant discussions on the Turkish war.

The States did, indeed, after much debate, at
length seem to come to some agreement as to the
nature and mode of a new tax; it was actually
decreed in the Recess, that for three years every
one who communicated at the Lord’s Supper should
pay at least a tenth of a gulden, and that the sum
resulting from this collection should be kept by
_ the government till the commencement of a Turkish
war; but even a grant of so strange and equivocal
a kind was rendered nearly illusory by a condition
attached to it. The princes declared that they
must first consult with their subjects upon it. The
emperor’s answer shows how astonished he was at
this innovation. He said, that was not the usage
in the Holy Empire; the princes were not bound
by the consent of their subjects ; it was the duty
of the latter to execute the decisions of their
lords and rulers.* The princes replied, that they

* Declaration of the emperor on the 9th of Sept. “ Item,
dass in dem allen Churfiirsten Fiirsten und Stinde kein Ausred
noch Entschuldigung fiirnemen, noch soleh Zusage thun mit
eynicher Weigerung oder Condicion auf ihre Unterthanen,
denn sollichs in bisher bewilligten Hiilfen nie bedacht worden
und daruf gestellt ist, sondern Churff. FF. und Stend haben
allezeit frei gehandelt und bewilligt, nachdem sy Kais". Mt. und
des Reichs Churf. belehnt seyen, auch die Unterthanen schuldig
‘seyn den Willen der Fiirsten und Obern und nit die Fiirsten und

Obern der Unterthanen Willen zu verfolgen und Gehorsam zu
beweisen.” “ Also, that in all these things the electors, princes,

Cuap. IT. DIET OF AUGSBURG, 1518. 300

had often made promises without consulting their
subjects, and the consequence had been, that it
had generally been found impossible to execute
them: continuance in such a course could end in
nothing but disgrace and contempt. The Recess,
accordingly, contained nothing more than that
the princes promised to treat with their subjects,
and to report the result at the next diet.

It is evident that the disposition which this
betrays must have rendered it impossible to
come to any agreement on the other affairs of the
empire.

A great deal was done about the Imperial
Chamber, but without any results.* The Electors
protested in a body that in virtue of their fran-
chises they were not subject to the Imperial Cham-

and States take upon themselves no evasion or excuse, nor make
such promise with any hesitation or condition having reference
to their subjects, for none such had ever been made, nor grounded
thereon, on occasion of succours granted heretofore; but
electors, princes, and estates have in all times freely acted and
made grants, as lieges of his Imperial Majesty and electors
of the empire; also the vassals are bound to follow the
wills of, and to show obedience to, princes and superiors, and
not princes and superiors to follow the will of, and to show
obedience to, subjects.” — Frankft. Acten.

* The reason of the bad appointments lies in the bad pay.
Fiirstenberg (Letter of the 8th of Sept.) remarks that no better
pay could be obtained. “ Daraus folgt, dass es auch nit mit
dem Inkommen, so jetzunder geben wird, mit gelehrt fromm
und yerstiindig Leuten besetzt mag werden.” “ ‘Thence follows,
that it (the Imperial Chamber) cannot, with the income which
is now given, be provided with learned, pious and sensible
men.”

AaB

358 DIET OF AUGSBURG, 1518. Boox II.

ber: they could not agree on the suggestions for a
reform ; the old objections to the matricula for the
contributions were urged again; its operation was
no longer felt, and in a short time it was entirely
at a stand.*

Disorder once more prevailed on all sides. ‘The
same torrent of complaints poured in upon the diet
at Augsburg, as the year before at Mainz.

The Count von Helfenstein invoked assistance
against Wiirtemberg, Ludwig von Boyneburg against
Hessen, the Archbishop of Bremen. against the
Worsats: all in vain. The disputes between the
city of Worms and their bishop, between the Elec-
tor Palatine and a company of merchants who
were robbed when under his escort, were brought
to no conclusion. The behaviour of the Elector
Palatine in this affair, and the support which he
appeared to find, raised the indignation of the city
to the highest pitch.t There was hardly a part of

* Furstenberg, Sep. 14. “ Somma Sommarum aller Hande-
lung die uf diesem Reichstag gehandelt ist, dass von Friede
und Recht nichts beschlossen wird, dass die Schatzung des
Tiirkenzugs, wie K. Mt. dawider, bei den Unterthanen an-
bracht (wird). “ The sum total of all the affairs which have
been transacted at this Imperial Diet is, that nothing is deter-
mined as to the peace and the laws, and that the taxation for
the Turkish war, although his Imperial Majesty is opposed to
it, is laid on the vassals.”

+ Fiirstenberg, in transmitting the correspondence, expresses
his dissatisfaction. “ Hie ist nit anders: ein jeder sehe sich
fir. Die Churf. Fursten und Andre haben nit alle ob der
Handlung Gefallens: es will aber diess Mal aus Ursachen nit
anders seyn. Gott erbarms.” “ Here things are not otherwise :
let each man look to himself. The electors, princes, and others

Cuap. IT. DIET OF AUGSBURG, 1518. - 359

the country which was not either distracted by
private warfare, or troubled by internal divisions,
or terrified by the danger of an attack from some
neighbouring power. Those who wished for peace —
must take their own measures to secure it: it was
in yain to reckon upon the government.

Such a state of anarchy necessarily led to a
general conviction that things could not go on
thus. For a long time the emperor could come to
no agreement with the Estates on any measure
whatever, whether for tranquillity at home, or
against the enemy abroad: what he had been un-
able to accomplish single-handed, he had tried to
effect in conjunction with the pope—an attempt
which had ended in more signal failure than
before. The highest authorities could no longer
fulfil the prime duties of a government.

In so far it was of great importance that the
States of the Empire made the innovation we have
just mentioned; viz. to render the grants depend-
ent on the will of their subjects. The life of the
nation showed a tendency to fall off from what
had hitherto been its centre, and to form itself
into independent self-sufficing powers in the seve-
ral territories. This tendency was now greatly
increased by the interests connected with the
election of an emperor, which were already very
active in Augsburg, and shortly afterwards began
to occupy all minds,

are not all content with the transaction: but this time there are
causes why it cannot be otherwise. God have mercy on us.”

AA 4

360 MUTUAL RELATIONS OF Boox II.

In fact, we cannot advance a step further with-
out some preliminary inquiry into the relations of
the German principalities.

MUTUAL RELATIONS OF THE GERMAN PRINCES.

Ir was impossible as yet to speak of German
states, properly so called. The unity of even the
larger principalities was not yet sufficiently ce-
mented : — attempts were here and there made at
a common government, which, however, seldom
succeeded, so that people constantly returned to
the principle of division;— nor was there any
settled system of representation. A vast number
of independent powers and privileges still existed,
incompatible with any form of government whatever.
But, in the larger territories, there were efforts
towards the establishment of unity and order; in
the smaller, local associations took the place of
the princely power: in all directions the force of
the local spirit struggled for ascendency with the
imperial authorities, and with the greater success,
the more vain were the attempts of the latter at
concentration and general efficient control.

It was unquestionably an important circumstance,
that the head of the empire was less intent on the
tranquil exercise of his legal sovereignty, than
on acquiring influence by personal and irregular
interference. It was only in moments of en-
thusiasm and excitement that Emperor Maxi-
milian beheld his high station in its national point

Cuap. II. THE GERMAN PRINCES. 361

of view; in ordinary moments he regarded it
rather as a fraction of his personal power. The
nature of his administration was exactly calculated
to excite agitations of every kind in the somewhat
formless world around him.

In Upper Germany the emperor had naturally,
after all that had passed, to encounter much oppo-
sition. The Elector Palatine could not yet for-
get the injuries he had sustained in the last war;
he was still unappeased, nor had he received his in-
vestiture. Although the emperor had then espoused
the party of Bavaria, the people of that country
were not the less sensible to what the two branches
of the sovereign house, viewed collectively, had
lost. The young princes, William and Louis, had
such a profound sense of this, that they arranged
the disputes which had broken out between them
as to their respective shares in the government,
as quickly as possible, when they thought they
detected, on the part of the emperor, a design of
turning their disagreements to advantage in order
to promote another interest, as in the year 1504.*
They remembered what Bavaria had been stripped
of; and the first act of their combined government
was to pledge themselves mutually to reconquer
all that had been lost, as soon as the emperor, their
uncle, was dead.f

It appeared that Maximilian might reckon more

* From a letter of Duke Ludwig ; Freiberg, Landstande, ii.

149.
+ The first document in the Urkundenbuch to Stumpf,

Baierns Politische Gesch. i.

362 ; MUTUAL RELATIONS OF Boox II.

securely on Duke Ulrich of Wiirtenberg, whom
he had declared of age before the legal term, who
had accompanied him in his wars, had made con-
quests under his banner, and to whom he had
given a consort: Ulrich seemed bound to him by
every tie of gratitude. But this prince soon
began to display a determined spirit of resistance
to the emperor’s designs, inspired by the most
arrogant self-conceit. He was displeased that he
was of so little importance in the Swabian league.
He considered it an insufferable abridgement of
his power, that of the one and twenty votes in the
council of that body, fourteen belonged to the
lower states, — prelates, counts, knights, and above
all, cities ; to had the right of deciding on peace
andl war; so that ‘“ his sail and possession were
in the heatide of strangers.”* In the year 1512,
when the league was renewed, he obstinately refused
to join it. He thus offended the league, began
consequently to fear its hostility, and allied himself
with its enemies, especially the Elector Palatine
and the Bishop of Wiirzburg. He thus got into
innumerable difficulties and quarrels with the
emperor, with all his neighbours, and even with
his own states and councils, which would rather
have adhered to the emperor and the league. In
all these affairs his behaviour became more and

* « Beswerung so wir Herzog Ulrich zu Wirtemperg haben,
des Pundts Schwaben Erstreckung anzunemen.” “ Difficulty
which we, Duke Ulrich of Wiirtenberg, have to consent to the
extension of the Swabian League.” Sattler, Herzoge, i. Ap-
pendix, nr. 56, p. 129.

Cuap. II. THE GERMAN PRINCES. 363

more violent, harsh, and overbearing. The peasants
revolted against his taxes; the estates of his do-
minions compelled him to sign a contract limiting
his authority, which he showed an inclination to
break: his councillors meditated setting a regency
over him, which filled him with rage. At length
the consummation of all these evils pare upon him
in his own house.

Unhappily he had suffered himself to be carried
away by an inclination for the wife of one of
his courtiers, Hans von Hutten, his comrade in
the field and the chace. Hutten at length seized
an occasion to speak to his lord on this subject;
the duke threw himself at his feet, extended his
arms imploringly to him, and conjured him to
permit him to see and to love her; he had tried in
vain, he said, to conquer his passion—he could not.*
It is reported, that in a short time they exchanged
characters; Hutten became the lover of the duchess
Sabina. One day Ulrich thought he saw the
betrothing ring which he had given his wife, on
Hutten’s finger, and fell into the most violent
transports of jealousy. It is impossible, in the
dearth of authentic accounts, to say how much of
the story is true. According to the legal docu-

* The printed address of the family of von Hutten in Sattler,
a. a. O. p. 218.

+ See Heyd, Duke Ulrich, i. p. 394. It is not to be forgotten
that a certain respect was observed in the staement in spite of all
its violence. The Huttens would not have brought forward
the connection with the wife of the murdered man, had not the
Duke first mentioned it.

364 MUTUAL RELATIONS OF Boox II.

ments, what peculiarly incensed the duke was, that
Hutten had not kept the secret of his master’s
passion, and had given currency to reports by
which he appeared at once vicious and ridiculous.
It seemed that the servant was little alarmed at
the anger which his lord gave vent to on this oc-
casion; he thought he should have to encounter some
sharp words, to which he could return others as sharp
and as proud. But Ulrich was now worked up to
deeds of vengeance. They were riding together,
and as they came into the Béblinger wood, the
duke took the knight aside, upbraided him with his
falsehood, called out to him to defend his life; and,
as Hutten was not armed, overpowered and killed
him.* He then stuck his sword into the ground,
and tied the lifeless body fast to it with a girdle
twisted round the neck. He said that as Frei-
schoffe, as initiated member of the Fehme, he had
the right and authority to do so. He carried home
the bloody sword, and laid it by his wife’s bed-
side. Alarmed for her freedom, and even for her
life, she fled, first to her uncle the emperor, who was
taking the diversion of hunting in the neighbour-
hood, and then to her brothers in Bavaria, between
whom and Ulrich there was already much bad blood.
Sabina accused her husband to the emperor, and
demanded that her enemies should be delivered up.

* Address of Duke Ulrich, a. a. O. p. 805. The relations
maintained, that Hutten had been positively invited to join in
the ride; the Duke, that he had been warned and yet had ob-
stinately accompanied them. The account of the Duke seems to
me to have greater moral probability.

Cuap. IT. THE’ GERMAN PRINCES. ~ 86a

Ulrich, on the other hand, persecuted with vin-
dictive fury her friends and all those whom he
regarded as adherents of the emperor and the
league. Attempts at reconciliation only served
to bring the secret hostilities fully to light: a
treaty was. concluded, but immeditaely broken;
letters injurious to the honour of both parties
were interchanged: never, in short, did a prince
rend asunder all the ties that bound him to a party,
as whose ally and associate he had risen to power,
with greater violence than Duke Ulrich. At the
diet of 1518 it was reported that he had arrested
followers of the emperor, put them to horrible
tortures, and threatened them with death. On the
other hand, Maximilian intimated that he would
appoint a criminal tribunal to try the duke, and
would execute whatever sentence it might pro-
nounce *: he immediately issued a special writ
to the States, not only authorising, but summoning
them to set at liberty their lord’s prisoners.t This
furnished an additional motive to the emperor for

* Fiirstenberg, Sept. 9. calls it, “eine scharfe und tbermess-
liche Antwort :” “a sharp and immoderate answer.” “ Wo er
sich nicht fiige, wolle ihm S. M. ein Halsgericht setzen, dass
er daselbst in Schranken komme, und wess von anderen, und
Sr. Maj. Interessen wegen an ihn erlangt wird, dass dem auch
Vollzug geschehe.” —“ In case he do not yield, his Majesty
will sit in judgment on him, that he may be thereby brought
within bounds, and whatever, by reason of his Majesty’s and
other interests may be decreed against him, that the same may
also be executed.

+ July 17. 1518. Sattler, i. App. 263.

366 MUTUAL RELATIONS OF Boox II.

desiring a reconciliation with the Elector Palatine.
This he accomplished so far that that prince appeared
at the diet and received his investiture. It is clear
that the emperor’s policy acquired by this event,
and by his influence over the league and Bavaria,
the ascendency in Upper Germany; nevertheless,
affairs wore a very perilous aspect, and it was easy
to foresee that, be the event what it might, dif-
ferences could not be adjusted in an amicable
manner. Their ramifications extended over the
whole empire.

Another and far more formidable opposition to
the emperor arose out of the affairs of Lower
Germany connected with the house of Burgundy.

One of the earliest acts of Maximilian’s govern-
ment, in 1486, the year of his election, had been
to grant the reversion of Juliers and Berg to
the house of Saxony, in case that those provinces
should, “by reason of failure of lineal heirs male,”
become vacant.* In the year 1495 he confirmed
this for himself and all his successors in the empire,
“ now as then, and then as now.” The event in
question seemed not far distant, since Duke Wil-
liam VII. had only a daughter; this opened to the
house of Saxony a prospect of a more command-
ing, indeed of what might be called an European
position, since Friesland had then been transferred
to the younger line.

But difficulties soon arose. This assignment to
so distant a master was by no means popular in the

* Document in Miller, Imp. Rtth. Fr. vi. 48.

Cuar, II. THE GERMAN PRINCES. : 367

country itself, which would have thought itself
better provided for by an union with the neigh-
bouring province of Cleves. Princes and states
were unanimous in this opinion. In the year 1496
they already determined to marry the daughter of
the Duke of Juliers with the heir of Cleves, and to
unite the two countries. A solemn treaty, which
may be regarded as effecting a union of all these
provinces, was entered into and signed by nobles
‘and cities.* They prayed the emperor to confirm
it, and to acknowledge the Princess of Juliers as
heiress of her father’s possessions.

The emperor, however, would have paid little
attention to this petition, and would have adhered
to the grant of reversion, had not certain political
events occurred to change his designs.

From the time that Duke Charles, son of the
Duke of Gueldres, formerly deposed by Charles the.
Bold, had returned to his hereditary dominions,
and, in defiance of the unfavourable decrees of the
empire, had found means, with the aid of his es-
tates, to maintain himself, there had not been one
moment’s peace in those parts. He was closely allied
with France; all the enemies of Austria found in

* Treaty of Marriage and Agreement in Teschenmacher,
Annales Clivie, Cod. dipl. nr. 98, 99.; wherein the two princes
promised one another —the Duke of Juliers, that his daughter
should bring the son of his brother of Cleves his principalities
of Juliers, Berg, his countship of Ravensburg, with all his other
lordships, — the Duke of Cleves, that his son should bring the
daughter of his brother of Juliers his principality of Cleves, his
countship of the Mark, and all his other lordships, now actually
possessed, or still to be acquired.

368 MUTUAL RELATIONS OF Boox II.

him an ever-ready protector. It was, therefore, a
serious thing to make another powerful enemy in
that neighbourhood. The Duke of Cleves threat-
ened, in case his petition was refused, to enter into
a matrimonial connexion and an indissoluble alli-
ance with the Duke of Gueldres—a threat which
filled the Netherlands with alarm.* The Governess
Margaret, Maximilian’s daughter, thought it would
be impossible to wrest Juliers and Berg from the
Duke of Cleves; the only effect would be to cause
him to unite with Gueldres, Arenberg, and Liege,
all foes of the house of Burgundy: this would
furnish a power strong enough even to drive the
emperor’s posterity out of the Netherlands.

In Saxony it was believed that the emperor con-

* The emperor says to Cesar Pflug : “ Die klevisch Tochter
hindre I. M. Frau Tochter Margr.” ‘“ The daughter of the Duke
of Cleves stands in the way of the Lady Margaret, his Imperial
Majesty’s daughter.” Renner states: “Clef lisst sich vernehmen,
wolt man die Lehen nit thun, so musste sich Clef mit den Herrn
verbinden, von denen es Trost und Hiilf haben mecht das Sine
zu erhalten.” “ Cleves says thus — if they will not bestow the
fief, then Cleves must join the lords from whom she may have
comfort, and help to hold her own.” — Weimar Acts. Comp.
Correspondance de ’Empereur Maximilien I. et de Marguerite
d’Autriche I. p. 390. Margaret further wrote in 1511 to the
emperor, as is said in his answer : “ Que se povons tant faire
que nostre cousin le duc de Zaxssen voulsist quicter ou du moins
mectre en délay la querelle qu’il prétend & la duché de Juillers,
le jeusne due de Cléves et son pére se condescendroient facile-
ment & eulx déclairer & la guerre et aydier A la réduction de
nostre pays de Gheldres.” The emperor hoped to conciliate the
elector at the approaching imperial diet, but in this he did not
succeed.

Cuar. II. THE GERMAN PRINCES. 369

nected schemes of another kind with this de-
sign. lector Frederic enjoyed singular consider-
ation in the empire. He steadily adhered to the
principles and sentiments of the old electors, and
his power was constantly on the increase. His
intellectual superiority checked the inclination
which his cousin George now and then betrayed to
oppose him ; so that the house of Saxony might still
be regarded as one power. His brother Ernest had
been Archbishop of Magdeburg up to the year 1513,
and certainly one of the best that see had ever
possessed ; his cousin Frederic was Grand Master in
Prussia; his sister Margaret, Duchess of Liineburg,
ancestress of that house. It is evident how exten-
sive was the influence of this family; an influence
further augmented by the act of the States of
Hessen, which, on the death of Landgrave William,
in 1510, excluded his widow Anne from the guar-
dianship of the minor, claimed by her, and com-
mitted it to the elector and house of Saxony,
to which the regency thereupon appointed was
subject. Boyneburg, the governor of the pro-
vince, who was at the head of affairs, was entirely
devoted to Frederic.* It appeared to the emperor
highly inexpedient to throw Juliers, and Berg also,
which must soon be without a sovereign, into the
hands of this powerful prince, who might thus be-
come too mighty a vassal.

Under the influence of these considerations,
Maximilian retracted the promise he had made at

* See Rommel, Philipp der Grossmiithige, vol. i. p. 26.
VOL. I. BB

370 MUTUAL RELATIONS OF Boox II

the time of his election (and doubtless with a view
to that), and in various documents of the years
1508-9 revoked the contingent rights on Juliers
and Berg which had been conferred: he declared
that the duke’s daughter, Maria, was the worthy and
competent successor of her father.* In the year
1511 William VII. died; his son-in-law, John of
Cleves, took possession of the country without
opposition. All attempts to recall the past, all per-
~ suasions and negotiations on the part of the house
of Saxony, were vain.

The effect of this certainly was to induce Cleves
to refuse the alliance with Gueldres, and to adhere
faithfully to Austria. Saxony, on the contrary,
declined in importance. The spiritual principalities
which were occupied by members of that house
passed into other hands on the death of their
possessors. Boyneburg, by his somewhat tyrannical
mode of governing, provoked the discontent of the
States of Hessen, and especially of the cities (a. p.
1514). By a sort of revolution, the Princess Anne
was restored to the guardianship of which she had
been deprived; Elector Frederic retaining nothing
more than the name. Another proof of this anti-
Saxon spirit was, that the emperor, at the sug-
gestion of the order of knights, declared the young
Landgrave Philip of age when only fourteen years
old (March, 1518); alleging that he would be
better off so, than under any guardianship or
tutelage whatsoever. In these Hessian transactions,

* The document in Teschenmacher, nr. 100. is inconclusive ;
nr. 101. leaves no room for doubt.

Cuap. I. THE GERMAN PRINCES. 371

Duke George took part against the elector: so far
from raising any cordial opposition to the designs
of Anne, he betrothed his son with her daughter.
Meanwhile he had already restored Friesland to |.
Austria.

In this case, too, the policy of Austria was trium-
phant; the dreaded coalition of the Netherland adver-
saries was prevented, and Saxony kept at a distance
and depressed.* On the other hand, however, the hos-
tility of the most able and prudent of all the princes
of the empire was provoked. What the weight of that
hostility was, soon appeared at the diet of Cologne
(A.D. 1512). Frederic’s resistance sufficed to de-
feat all the emperor’s plans; at least his biographer
imputes to his opposition the rejection of the pro-
ject of anew tax. ‘This enmity affected even the
Netherlands through another channel. The niece
of the elector, a Liineburg princess, married Charles
of Gueldres (of whom we have already spoken), who
thus secured in two of the most powerful princely
houses, such 4 support as he had never before been
able to obtain.

* The Saxon councillors, as early as 1512, dreaded further
disfavour: “ Darum er (der Kaiser, nach jener Erklirung
fiir Cleve) fort und fort auf Wege trachten mocht, Ewer
Aller Fiirstl. Gnaden zuzuschieben so viel ihm moglich, damit
Ew. Aller Firstl. Gn. in Dempfung und Abfall kimen.” —
“Lest he (the emperor, after that declaration in behalf of
Cleves) should more and more strive after means of embarrassing
your most Princely Grace as much as possible, so that your
most Princely Grace may fall into weakness and decline.”—
Letter from Cologne written Thursday after Jacobi, 1512.
Weimar Records.

BB 2

yee MUTUAL RELATIONS OF Boox IL

While the house of Saxony was thus weakened by
a contest with Austria, Brandenburg rose upon her
favour. It was with the emperor’s assistance that
Brandenburg princes succeeded to those of Saxony
both in the grand mastership of the Teutonic Order
and the see of Magdeburg : he then further favoured
the elevation of the young archbishop, who was also
bishop of Halberstadt, to the Electorate of Mainz,
which had formerly been enjoyed by a brother of
Elector Frederic: we have already seen what was the
nature of the relations which subsisted between these
two princes. Maximilian also renewed his alliance
with the Franconian lineof this house. He confirmed
the removal of the old Markgrave, who had been de-
clared idiotic, from the government ; and marrying
the Markgrave’s eldest son Casimir to his own
niece, Susanna of Bavaria, he gave that prince the
whole support of his authority and an important
advantage over his brothers. For this very reason,
however, he did not win them over completely ;
with one of them, indeed, the Grand Master, he
had a serious difference. The emperor had at first
induced him to assume a hostile attitude towards
King Sigismund of Poland*, who was rendered ex-
tremely formidable to the Austrian claims on the

* The Fugger MS. : “ Deswegen die Kais. Maj. nach solchem
Wege getrachtet, dieweil S. M. erachtet, dass Konig Sigmund
seinem Schwager Graf Hansen von Trentschin Grossgrafen in
Ungarn Rath und Hiilfe erzeiget und denselben nach Absterben
des Konigs Lasslew zu dem Reich Ungarn. .. beférdern mécht,
dass er demselben etliche Kénige und Fiirsten zu Feinden
machen wollt, und ward durch 5. Mt. so vil gehandelt, dass
Marke. Albrecht von Br: andenburg Hochmeister in Preussen

Crap. IT. THE GERMAN PRINCES. 373

kingdom of Hungary, by his connection with the
House of Zapolya. Maximilian wished to hold him
in check, on the one side by the Grand Duke of
Moscow, on the other by the Teutonic Order. But
the situation of things was now much altered. In
the year 1515, Sigismund of Poland had formed
very amicable relations with the emperor; he
now recognised the hereditary right of Austria to
Hungary, and took a wife out of the Italian branch
of that house. Maximilian, on his side, waived the
claims of the empire: he granted Danzig and Thorn
an exemption from the jurisdiction of the Imperial
Chamber in 1515, as he had to Switzerland in 1507 ;
a measure the more important in this case, since it
substituted a Polish for a German jurisdiction ; it
was, in fact, a sort of cession. It may readily be
imagined how much less inclined he must now be
to interpose earnestly on behalf of the Order ; and
accordingly we find it stated in the preamble to
the agreement, that the emperor recognised the

den hochernannten Konig Sigmundt von Polen anfeindet.”
“ His Imperial Majesty on this account, because his Majesty
considered that King Sigismund had yielded counsel and aid
to his brother-in-law, Count Hans von Trentschin Gross-
graf in Hungary, and after the decease of King Ladislas
might advance the same to the kingdom of Hungary, that
he wished to render sundry kings and princes enemies to the
same; and so much was done by his Majesty, that Margrave
Albert of Brandenburg, Great Master in Prussia, opposes the
above-named King Sigismund of Poland.” The alliance with
Russia was concluded expressly for the re-conquest of the lands
of the Order seized on by Poland. Thisis the famous document
in which Zar was translated into Kaiser (emperor).—Karamsin,
Hist. of Russia, vii. 45. 450.

BB 3

374 MUTUAL RELATIONS OF Boox II.

peace of Thorn, — the very thing against which the
Grand Master protested, and by which he had been
made a vassal of the crown of Poland. Prussia
“was thus again alienated from the emperor, and
this re-acted on the other members of the house of
Brandenburg. Elector Joachim, at least, was not
disinclined to give the same support to the Grand
Master as he did to his brothers in Franconia.

It may easily be imagined that the position of
the other sovereign houses was affected in various
ways by all these friendships and enmities.

Pomerania, forced to give way before the claims
of Brandenburg to the supreme feudal lordship,
was alienated from Austria by the support its
rival received from that power. The Pomeranian
historians ascribe it to the influence of Joachim I.
that the projected marriage of a Pomeranian prin-
cess with King Christian II. of Denmark did not.
take place ; and on the contrary, that that monarch
married a grand-daughter of Maximilian.* The
result of this again was, that the uncle and rival
of Christian Frederic of Holstein, who thought
himself unjustly dealt with in the partition of the
ducal inheritance, and, as king’s son, believed him-
self to have claims even on Norway, now sought to
ally himself with the house of Pomerania; whilst

* Kanzow, Pomerania, ii. 313.

+ Chief points of complaint, as set forth in the different pub-
lications on the dispute: Christiani, Neuere Gesch. von Schles-
wig- Holstein, i. p. 818. These complaints sufficiently refute
the supposition of a good understanding, to which Christiani
previously adheres.

Cuap. IT. THE GERMAN PRINCES. ole

the third member of this house, the Count of Ol-
denburg, adhered firmly to the Austro-burgundian
alliance, and once more received a stipend from the
Netherlands. Every event that occurred in the
northern states immediately affected the. dynastic
houses of Germany through these various com-
binations.

It must not be imagined that open hostility
broke out amongst them. There was a greater or
lesser influence of the house of Austria; a more
or less visible favour shown by or inclination to-
wards it; but they remained on the footing of
good neighbours, met at diets, interchanged visits
at family festivals, endured what they could not
alter, and kept their eye steadily on the point in
view.

The discord was most fierce and undisguised in
the house of the turbulent Welfs. Calenberg and
Wolfenbiittel held to the friendship of Austria;
indeed it was in her service that the duke of

the former state had revived the ancient war-like
- renown of his house. Liineburg sided with the
opposition. There were a multitude of old dis-
putes between them, mainly caused by an attempt
of the Bishop of Minden, a Wolfenbiittler by birth,
to appropriate to himself the countship of Diepholz,
to which Liineburg had ancient contingent claims.*
Lauenburg was now drawn into these quarrels.
During the absence of the Archbishop of Bre-
men — another Wolfenbiittler — the Worsats, who

* Delius, Hildesheimische Stiftsfehde, p. 96.

BB 4

376 MUTUAL RELATIONS OF Boox II.

had recently been conquered, killed his officers ;
Magnus of Lauenburg, to whom they appealed
as the true Duke of Lower Saxony, lent them ~
aid, and destroyed the fortress erected by the arch-
bishop.* On his return, open war among all these
princes appeared imminent, and was only prevented
from breaking out by Mecklenburg, which stood
in a tolerably impartial situation in the midst of
all these disputes; or rather, in that of an ally of both
parties.

This example suffices to prove that there was
but little distinction between temporal and spiritual
princes.

For the highest posts in the church had long been
distributed, not in consequence of spiritual merits,
but in compliance with the wishes of some power-
ful prince, especially the emperor; or of the inte-
rests of the neighbouring nobles, who had seats in the
chapters: indeed it was, as we have seen, a maxim
of the court of Rome, ever since the last century, to
use its influence in promoting the younger sons of
sovereign houses. In the beginning of the six-
teenth century this policy had been pursued with
success in many sees. In Lower Germany, Bruns-
wick, and Lauenburg in particular, rivalled each
other in this respect. The house of Brunswick-
Wolfenbiittel and Grubenhagen had got possession
of the archbishopric of Bremen, the bishoprics of
Minden, Verden, Osnabriick and Paderborn; the

* Chytreeus, Saxonize Chronicon, lib. vii. p. 227.
* t See p. 64. A&neas Sylvius, Epistola ad Martinum Maier,

_ p. 679.

Cuap. IT. THE GERMAN PRINCES. Oto

house of Lauenburg, of Miinster and Hildesheim.
We have seen how richly Brandenburg was pro-
vided for. We find princes of Lorraine as bishops
of Metz, Toul and Verdun. The palatinate pos-
sessed Freisingen, Regensburg, Speier, Naumburg,
and afterwards Utrecht. Bavaria obtained Passau.
In the year 1516, the chapter of Schwerin chose
Prince Magnus of Mecklenburg, although not yet
seven years old, its bishop.* It were impossible
to enumerate all the prebends which came into
the hands either of members of the less powerful
houses, or favourites of the emperor. Melchior
Pfinzing, his chaplain and secretary, was dean of
St. Sebald, in Niirnberg, of St. Alban and St. Vic-
tor in Mainz; and prebendary both in Trent and
Bamberg. Hence it followed that the interests of
the house to which a dignitary of the church be-
loriged, or to which he owed his elevation, influenced
the exercise of his functions: we find the spiritual
principalities implicated in all the intrigues or
dissensions of the temporal rulers.

These circumstances re-acted on the other states
of the empire, though perhaps less obviously.. The
cities of the Oberland, for example, whose strength
was the main support of the Swabian league, be-
longed to the one party; while the Franconian
knights, who were at open war with the league,
sided more with the other.

For imperfect and undefined as all relations were,
the powers of Germany may be ranged under

* Born July 4. 1509, elected June 21. 1516. Rudloff, Meck-
lenburgische Gesch. iii. 1. 37.

378 RELATIONS OF GERMAN PRINCES. Boox I.

two great political parties. On the side of Austria
were Bavaria, the League, Brandenburg (for the
most part), Hessen, Cleves, the Count of East
Friesland (which had lately joined this party), Ol-
denburg, Denmark, Calenberg, Wolfenbiittel, and
Albertine Saxony. On that of the opposition, were
Ernestine Saxony, Pomerania, Lauenburg, Liine-
burg, the Franconian knights, Wiirtemberg, and
Gueldres. The Duke of Gueldres was indeed in
a state of open warfare. In the year 1517, his
troops devastated the whole of Holland; he gave
up Alkmaar to pillage for eight days: in the year
1518, the Frisian corsair, Groote Pier, appeared in
the Zuyder Zee, and made himself complete master
of it for a considerable time. The duke employed all
his influence to keep the Frieslanders in a continual
state of revolt. The palatinate and Mecklenburg
occupied a sort of neutral or middle ground between
these two parties. The Elector palatine inclined
to the house of Austria for a singular reason. His
brother Frederic, who had served for many years at
the court of Burgundy, had formed an attachment to
the Princess Leonora. One of his letters was found
in her possession, and excited such displeasure, that
the unhappy prince was obliged to quit the court,
with the persuasion that he had thus thrown away
all his well-earned claims on the emperor’s favour,
unless he could re-establish them by still more impor-
tant services. But his brother was not disposed to
forget what he had suffered in the war of inheritance.
On the contrary, the brave knight who had risen to

fame and honour in his service, Franz von

Cuar. IL, MAXIMILIAN. 379

Sickingen, now took revenge on Hessen for those
very injuries.* While the diet was sitting at
Augsburg, he marched an army of 500 horse
and 8000 foot upon the fortified town of Darmstadt,
and extorted from the inhabitants contributions to
the amount of 45,000 gulden, on the hardest and
most oppressive terms. A deputation of the empire
made representations to the emperor against this
breach of the Public Peace ; but he did not venture
to do any thing; he had formerly taken Sickingen
into his own service, and he had no mind to alienate
the palatinate again.

Such is the situation in which we find Maxi-
milian towards the close of his career.

The received opinion which recognises in him
the creative founder of the later constitution of the
empire, must be abandoned. We saw above that
the ideas of organisation which first became current
in the early years of his reign experienced far more
opposition than encouragement from him; and that
he was incapable of carrying even his own projects
into execution. We now see that he had not the
power of keeping the princes of the empire together ;
that, on the contrary, every thing about him split
into parties. It followed of necessity that abroad
he rather lost than gained ground. In Italy nothing
was achieved: Switzerland acquired greater indepen-
dence than she possessed before ; Prussia was rather
endangered than secured. The policy of France
had obtained new influence in the heart of Germany;

* That this was the motive, is asserted in the Chronicle of
Flersheim, by Miinch, iii. 210.

380 MAXIMILIAN. Boox II.

first Gueldres and then Wiirtemberg openly declared
for that power.

The glory which surrounds the memory of Maxi-
milian, the high renown which he enjoyed even
among his contemporaries, were therefore not won
by the success of his enterprises, but by his per-
sonal qualities. .

Every good gift of nature had been lavished upon
him in profusion ; health up to an advanced age, so
robust that when it was deranged strong exercise
and copious draughts of water were his sole and
sufficient remedy * ; not beauty indeed, but so fine a
person, so framed for strength and agility, that he
outdid all his followers in knightly exercises, out-
wearied them in exertions and toils; a memory to
which every thing that he had learnt or witnessed was
ever present; so singular a natural acuteness and
justness of apprehension, that he was never deceived
in his servants; he employed them exactly in the
services for which they were best fitted; an
imagination of unequalled richness and brilliancy ,
every thing that he touched came new out of his
hands ; a mind, as we have already remarked, which
always seized with unerring instinct on the necessary,
though unfortunately the execution of it was so often
embarrassed by other conditions of his situation! He
was a man, in short, formed to excite admiration,

* Pasquaglio, Relatione di 1507 : “ Non molto bello di volto
ma bene proportionato, robustissimo, di complessione sanguinea
e collerica, e per l et& sua molto sano, né altro il molesto che un
poco di catarro; che continuamente li discende, per rispetto de]
quale ha usato e usa sempre far nelle caccie gran esercitio.”

‘

Cuap. II. MAXIMILIAN. 381

and to inspire enthusiastic attachment; formed to
be the romantic hero, the exhaustless theme of the
people. ;

What wondrous stories did they tell of his ad-
ventures in the chase! How, in the land beyond
the Ens, he had stood -his ground alone against an
enormous bear in the open coppice: how in a
sunken way in Brabant he had killed a stag at the
moment it rushed upon him: how, when surprised
by a wild boar in the forest of Brussels, he had laid
it dead at his feet with his boar-spear, without
alighting from his horse. But above all, what
perilous adventures did they recount of his chamois
hunts in the high Alps, where it was he who some-
times saved the practised hunter that accompanied
him, from danger or death. In all these scenes he
showed the same prompt and gallant spirit, the same
elastic presence of mind. Thus, too, he appeared
in face of the enemy. Within range of the enemy’s
fire, we see him alight from his horse, form his
order of battle, and win the victory : in the skirmish,
attacking four or five enemies single handed: on
the field, defending himself in a sort of single com-
bat against an enemy who selected him as his
peculiar object; for he was always to be found
in the front of the battle, always in the hottest of
the fight and the danger.* Proofs of valour which
served not merely to amuse an idle hour, or to
be celebrated in the romance of Theuerdank: the

* See the Geschichtbibel of Seb. Frank; and particularly
the Key to Theuerdank, reprinted in the edition of Theuerdank
by Haltaus, p. 111.

382 MAXIMILIAN. - Boox II.

Venetian ambassador cannot find words to express
the confidence which the German soldiers of every
class felt for the chief who never deserted them in
the moment of peril. He cannot be regarded as a
great general; but he had a singular gift for the
organisation of a particular body of troops, the
improvement of the several arms, and the constitu-
tion of an army generally: the militia of the Lands-
knechts, by which the fame of the German foot
soldiers was restored, was founded and organised
by him. He also put the use of fire-arms on an
entirely new footing, and his inventive genius dis-
played itself pre-eminently in this department; he
surpassed even the masters of the art, and his
biographers ascribe to him a number of very suc-
cessful improvements *: they add, that he brought
even the Spaniards who served under him to the use
of fire-arms. Wherever he was present he found
means to allay the mutinous disorders which often
arose in these bands of mercenaries, in consequence

* Griinbeck in Chmel, p. 96. “ Bellicas machinas in minutas
partes resolvere, parvis viribus bigis aptari et quocunque fert
voluntas faciliter deduci primus invenit.” The Fugger MS.:
“ Durch S. Mt. Erfindung sind die Poller und Morser zu dem
werfen, auch die langen Ror zu dem weitraichen, desgleichen
die weiten kurzen Ror zu dem Haglschiessen in die Streich-
wehre darin auch etwa eisern Ketten und Schrot geladen
werden, alsdann auch die grossen Karthaunen von neuen er-
funden und zu gebrauchen aufbracht worden.” “ By his
majesty’s invention, mortars for throwing, also long tubes for
distant range, likewise broad short tubes for firing canister shot
from fortifications, and which may also be loaded with iron chains
and balls; moreover large carronades have been afresh discovered
and brought into use.”

Cuap. IL. MAXIMILIAN, 383

of the irregular state of his finances. We are
told that once in extremity he appeased the dis-
content of his men by the jests and antics of a
court fool, whom he sent among them. He had
a matchless talent for managing men. The prin-
ces who were offended and injured by his policy
could not withstand the charm of his personal in-
tercourse. ‘“‘ Never,” says the sagacious Frederic
of Saxony, “‘ did I behold a more courteous man.”
The wild turbulent knights against whom he raised
the empire and the league, yet heard such ex-
pressions from his lips, that it was, as Gotz von
Berlichingen said, “a joy to their hearts ; and they
could never bear to do any thing against his Im-
perial Majesty or the house of Austria.” He took
part in the festivals and amusements of the citizens
in their towns—their dances and their shooting
matches, in which he was not unfrequently the best
shot; and offered prizes—damask for the arquebu-
siers, or a few ells of red velvet for the cross-bowmen:
he delighted to be among them, and found in their
company and. diversions a relief from the arduous
and weary business of the diet. At the camp before
Padua he rode up to a suttler and asked for
something to eat. John of Landau, who was with
him, offered to taste the food; the emperor inquired
where the woman came from. From Augsburg, was
the reply. “ Ah!” exclaimed he, ‘“ then there is no
need ofa taster, for they of Augsburg are God-fearing
people.” In his hereditary dominions he often ad-
ministered justice in person, and if he saw a bashful
man who kept in the back-ground, he called him

384 MAXIMILIAN. Boox IL.

forward to a more honourable place. He was little
dazzled by the splendour of the supreme dignity.
“My good fellow,” said he to an admiring poet,
‘thou knowest not me nor other princes aright.” *
All that we read of him shows freshness and
clearness of apprehension, an open and ingenuous
spirit. He was a brave soldier and a kind-hearted
man; people loved and feared him.

And in his public life, we should do him in-
justice if we dwelt exclusively on his abortive
attempts to re-constitute the empire. It is an
almost inevitable defect of that form of government
which excites a competition between the highest
person in the state and a representative body or
bodies, that the sovereign separates his personal
interests from those of the community. Maxi-
milian, at least, was far less intent on the pros-
perity of the empire than on the future fortunes of
his house. When a youth of eighteen, he went to
the Netherlands, and, by the union of Burgundy
and Austria, founded a new European power.
In states, as in the world of science, there are
certain minds whose vocation it is to act as the
pioneers of those gifted with the genius of con-
struction. Incapable of bringing any thing new
into existence, they are actively employed in pre-
paring the materials. and the instruments with
which their more creative successors are to work.
The force that was in embryo did not assume its
complete form under Maximilian. But by. main-

* The Fugger MS. Cuspinian. Querini paints him, Noy.
1507, as “ homo virtuoso, religioso, forte, liberal, quasi prodego.
Adeo tutti ? ama: ma mancha di prudentia.”— Sanuto, vol. vii.

Cuar. II. MAXIMILIAN. 385

taining the sovereign prerogatives in the Nether-
lands, as well as in Austria; by defending the
former against the French, the latter against the
Hungarians; by securing for his house the great
Spanish inheritance ; by definitively founding that
of Hungary and Bohemia, he exerted a vast and per-
manent influence on succeeding ages. How different
was the position of his grandson from that of his
father, an exile from his paternal land, or from his
own, a prisoner in Bruges! Never did a family enjoy
more magnificent or more extensive prospects than
those which now lay before that of Austria. This was
the point of view from which Maximilian regarded.
the affairsof Germany. Until the latter half of the
fifteenth century, Austria was almost shut out from
Germany: she now interfered with a high hand in
the affairs of every state and province, temporal or
spiritual —territories of cities or of knights; nothing
could stir, whether in an amicable or a hostile di-
rection, by which she was not immediately affected.
If it be undeniable that the empire, regarded as a
whole, had sustained losses, it is not less true that
it was the union of the house of Austria with
Burgundy which restored the province of the Low

Countries again to a conscious connection with —
Germany ; and that the remote prospects which were
involved in the Hungarian, and still more in the
Spanish family alliance, opened a new theatre of ac-
tivity to the nation. The shadows of coming events
continually flitted before the mind of Maximilian : it
was this presentiment which influenced his whole
conduct and actions, and produced all that was appa-

VOL. I. CC

386 _ MAXIMILIAN. Boox IL.

rently unsteady, mysterious, and one-sided in his
policy. It was not given to him to perfect or to
found; his mission was solely to prepare, to main-
tain, and to extend the views and the claims of his
house, amidst the conflicting powers of the world.

The last decisive moment still remained; and
although he would never hear any thing on the
subject at an earlier period of his reign, it is clear
how earnestly he must have desired to secure his
grandson’s succession.

From the situation of things in Germany which
we have just contemplated, it is easy to infer what
was the support he might reckon upon, and what
the obstacles he was likely to encounter. He had
already made great progress in his negotiations at
the diet of Augsburg. The renewal and con-
firmation of his good understanding with the
Hohenzollern, and the large promises he made
to that family, secured to him two electoral votes,
those of Brandenburg and of Mainz, both of
which had very recently been extremely dubious.*
Hermann of Cologne, of the family of Wied, who
was intimately connected with Cleves, and hence
well inclined to the emperor, was completely won

* Albert and Joachim had made preliminary promises
in 1517 to the king of France, which they now retracted.
The state of things appears from a memorandum which the
emperor had drawn up for his grandson in Oct. 1518, wherein
it is said: “ Le’mariage de dame Catherine avec le fils du
Marquis Joachim n’importe pas moins ; le marquis pour donner
sa voix 4 Charles adti renoncer & son mariage avec dame Renée
de France et 4 une grande somme d’argent que le roi de France
luy avoit promis.”

Cuap. ID. MAXIMILIAN. 387

by presents made to himself, and by pensions
promised to his brothers and kinsmen *: lastly, the
old misunders tandings with the palatinate were
arranged by the mediation of the Count Palatine
Frederic ; the elector received his investiture, en-
tered into an agreement with Austria as to the
inheritance, and gave his sanction to the order of
succession. After certain preliminary arrangements
had taken place, these four electors had a meeting
with the emperor, who was surrounded by his own
council and that of his nephew, on the 27th August,
1518, and ratified their consent by a formal treaty.
The ambassadors of Bohemia, who was now restored
to her place in the Germanic body (as since the
league of 1515, Austria was sure of her vote), gave
their assent.

On the other hand, Frederic of Saxony, as may
readily be believed, did not forget his numerous
wrongs and affronts, and was not to be propitiated.
With him was Elector Richard of Treves, a Greif-
enklau by birth, who had already been opposed to the

Prince of Baden, and had, at a more recent vacancy,

* Argent Comptant et Pensions pour lArchevesque de
Coulongne ; Mone, Anzeiger fiir Kunde der teutschen Vorzeit,
1836, p. 409.. The records therein inserted from the Archives
of Lille have all been of great use to me. M. Mone had,
however, left a great many untouched, from which M. Gachard
of Brussels has lately given an extract in a “ Rapport 4 Monsieur
le Ministre de VIntérieur sur les Archives de Lille,” Annexé
C. p. 146. In addition to printed sources, I made use of a cor-
respondence of the Venetian ambassador at Rome, who transmits
home the news which reaches him, and paints admirably the
varying dispositions of the court.

Garey

388 MAXIMILIAN. Boox II.

obtained the electorate. Their chief objections were,
that it was an unheard-of thing to place a king of
the Romans by the side of an uncrowned emperor,
and that a papal constitution forbade the union of
the kingdom of Naples, which Charles possessed,
with the crown of Germany.

Maximilian laboured incessantly to remove these
objections, as well as the deeper reasons for which
they were only acover. Active negotiations were car-
ried on with the court of Rome, both as to the sending
of the crown across the Alps *, and the repeal of the
above-mentioned constitution. The strangest plans
were suggested. Maximilian once thought of abdi-
cating and passing the rest of his life at Naples ; not,
indeed, without receiving the crown of that country
as compensation for the one which he renounced,
so as to remove both of those obstacles at once.
Besides this, the physicians had told him he might
recover his health in Naples. The German nego-
tiations he thought he should conclude at a meeting
which was to take place in the following March at
Frankfurt. He begged Elector Frederic in the
most urgent manner not to fail to be present, and

* Maximilian even demanded that the pope himself should
come to Trent and crown him. He alleged that the pontiff
had gone to meet Francis I. at Bologna. But the master of the
ceremonies held a coronation out of Rome to be thoroughly
inadmissible. Even were pope and emperor in one province, the
pope might not, he said, then and there crown the emperor ; he
must rather suffer him to proceed alone to Rome and be there
crowned by a cardinal.—Paris de Grassis, in Hoffmann, p. 425.
Another idea was, that the cardinals, Giulio de’ Medici and
Albert of Mainz, should perform the ceremony at Trent.

Cuar. II. ELECTION OF EMPEROR IN 1519. 389

added that he himself intended to set out soon
after the new year.

But this was not permitted him. He fell sick
on the journey, at Wels, within his own dominions.
His illness did not prevent him from carrying on
the negotiations concerning the succession: in
his sleepless nights he had the genealogical his-
tory of his early progenitors read to him; he was
occupied with the past and the future fortunes
of his race, when he expired, on the 12th January,
1519. :

His death suddenly plunged the issue of the
pending negotiations into fresh uncertainty. The
engagements already entered into related only to
the election of a king, as next in dignity and suc-
cession to the emperor; the affair altered its aspect
now that the subject of them was an immediate,
reigning king and emperor. But so much more
weighty was now the decision, both as it regarded
the distant future, and the present, pressing, tem-
pestuous moment.

Possibilities of every kind still presented them-

selves.

ELECTION OF EMPEROR IN 1519.

Hap the powers and functions of the head of the
empire been defined by a regular constitution,
such as was once contemplated, the most illustrious
princes of the empire might have chosen one out of
their own body to fill that station. But as the
project had failed, who among them all would have

cca

390 ELECTION OF EMPEROR IN 1519.  Boox Il.

been powerful enough to allay the storm of hosti-
lities that raged on all sides, and to uphold the
dignity of the empire among the powers of Europe ?
It was a great question whether any one of them
would venture upon such a task.

Maximilian had entertained and declared various
singular projects before he would suffer it to be
known that he had designs for his grandson. He
~ had offered the succession to the king of England:
in one of the most extraordinary documents ex-
isting, he at another time nominated the young
king Louis of Hungary and Bohemia, administrator
of the empire during his lifetime, and after his
death, his successor; and these two princes now
actually cherished some hopes of the imperial
crown: but the one was at too great a distance,
the other not sufficiently powerful at home; it was
impossible to entertain serious thoughts of either.

In declaring himself openly in favour of his
grandson, Archduke Charles, King of Spain and
Naples, Maximilian now proposed a scheme which
had much to recommend it. Charles was of
German blood, heir to Austria, and to many pro-
vinces of the German Netherlands, and sprung of the
house which had already acquired a sort of title to
the imperial dignity. There was, however, no want
of objections to this young prince. It was ob-
served that he did not even understand German,
and had given no proofs of personal valour or
ability; the multitude of his dominions would
leave him no time to devote to the empire ; lastly,
he was expressly excluded by the papal consti-
tution. His prospects, indeed, began to be over-

Cuar. I. ELECTION OF EMPEROR IN 1519. 391

clouded. The electors, as we have observed, did not
think themselves bound by their promises ; nor did
Maximilian’s daughter Margaret, who now con-
ducted the negotiations, deem it expedient to lay
before them the sealed copies of their several com-
pacts, as she had been advised to do; she contented
herself with reminding them in general terms of
their expressions of good-will. ° Added to this, dis-
turbances of a very serious nature had broken out
in Austria after Maximilian’s death, in which the
States established a government of their own*
without troubling themselves about the young and
absent princes ; ‘‘ poor boys, of whom nobody could
tell whether they would ever be seen in Germany.”
In Tyrol similar troubles broke out.¢ Louis, King
of Hungary, thought it expedient to recall his sister
Anna from Austria, where she had already arrived
in order to conclude her marriage with one of the
brothers.

Under these circumstances, a foreign monarch,
already the natural rival of the Austro-Burgundian
power, — Francis I. of France, — determined to
grasp at the supreme dignity of Christendom. {

* Narratio de Dissensionibus Provincialium Austriz. Pez.
Scriptt. ii. 990.

+ Zevenberghen to Margaret, March 28. Mone, p. 292.

+ I Cl. di Bibbiena al Cl. de’ Medici, 13 Ott. 1518. He
gives an account of an audience he had of the king relating to
the elettion del Catholico (the grants which had been made at
Augsburg for Charles): “sopra che in sustanza mi disse, in
grandissimo secreto, sua opinione et volonta essere, che per
Nostro Signore (the pope) e per sua Mta si faccia ogni opera
possibile, accioche ella non vada innanzi et che si corrompano

cc 4

392 ELECTION OF EMPEROR IN 1519. — Boox II.

The fortune and fame of Francis were still in
the ascendant. The battle of Marignano, by which
he had reconquered Milan, and the personal valour
which he had displayed there, had secured him a
high station in Europe, and a great name. He
was on an intimate footing with Leo X. We find
that this pope communicated the briefs which he
intended to address to the German princes, first to
the court of France. King Henry of England,
after a short hesitation, promised him his co- .
operation “by word and deed.” A still more
essential thing was, that he had gained an influence
over at least a portion of the German opposition.
We have spoken of the Dukes of Gueldres and
Wiirtemberg ; the existence of the one, and all the
hopes of the other, depended on France: old re-
lations, never entirely broken, united the palatinate
to that country, and Duke Henry der Mittlere of
Liineburg now also took part with the king.
‘‘T rejoice in his good fortune,” says he in a
letter, “I grieve at his bad fortune ; whether he
be up or down I am his.” The king affirmed that
he was solicited by Germany to try to acquire the
crown. His adherents insisted particularly on his
bravery ; they urged that no other prince was so
well fitted to conduct the war against the Turks,
which, sooner or later, must be undertaken.

Kings of France, both before and after Francis,

con danari et con promesse et con ogni possibil mezzo gli elettori.”
— Lettere di Principi, i. p. 47. The whole correspondence,
which is printed in this collection, ought to be read ; it perfectly
shews the relations between Leo X. and Francis I.

Cuap. IJ. ELECTION OF EMPEROR IN 1519. 393

have entertained similar projects—for example,
Philip of Valois and Louis XIV; but none ever had
so much encouragement from the posture of affairs,
none such favourable prospects, as Francis I.

Two things were necessary to the success of his
undertaking ; the electors must be won over, and the
anti-Austrian party must be supported and strength-
ened. Francis was resolved to do every thing in
his power to accomplish both these ends, especially
to spare no money; he gave out that he would
spend three millions of kronthalers to become
emperor. In the February of 1519, we find Ger-
many again filled with his emissaries. Somewhat
later, his most confidential minister, Admiral
Bonnivet, in whose talents the public had great
confidence from his late successful conclusion of
the peace with England and Spain, set out for the
Rhine, largely provided with money; whence he
ventured, but in the profoundest secrecy, further
into the interior of Germany.*

At one time it really appeared as if the king
would attain his object with the electors.

* In Rome it was asserted, “ che l era in Augusta el dito
Amirante,” according to letters of the 1st of April; but I find
no further proof of it.

+ The statements of Flassans, Histoire de la Diplom. Fr. i.
322. are not of importance. But he there mentions a “ liasse
contenant des mémoires, lettres et instructions données par
Francois I. & ses envoyés auprés des électeurs,” in the Trésor
des Chartes. (I looked them over myself in the year 1839,
and have extracted from them some remarkable notices.) The
accounts of the jeune aventureux (Mémoires de Fleuranges,

Coll. univ. xvi. 227.) though well worth reading, do not go
deep enough. :

394 ELECTION OF EMPEROR IN 1519.  Boox II.

He had long had the most perfect understand-
ing with Richard Greifenklau, Elector of Treves.
Whatever were the cause, — whether ancient dissen-
sions between Treves and the house of Bur-
gundy concerning their claims on Luxemburg, or
perhaps the hope which the Elector (who was
already ‘ Archchancellor through Gallia and the
kingdom of Arles”) might entertain of an acces-
sion to his power and importance in case France
were once more so closely united to the empire, —
it is certain that Elector Richard had been equally
deaf to the seductions of Maximilian and to the
prayers of delegates from the Spanish Netherlands.
On the other hand, the terms of the credentials given
him by Francis show the most implicit confidence
in him. ‘Convinced of his fidelity, his zeal, his
honour and his prudence,” the king nominated
him his lawful and unquestioned procurator, envoy
and commissary, with full powers to grant to the
remaining electors and their confidential servants,
or to any other princes of the empire, as much
money as he thought fit, either in one sum, or in
the form of yearly pension; and to that intent, to.
mortgage the crown lands in the name of the king,
and even in that of his successors: whatever he
agreed to was to have the same force and validity
as if concluded by the king in person. While he
declared himself ready to protect the rights and
privileges of the princes, the nobles and the cities ;
and, generally, to do every thing appertaining to an
emperor, — especially to undertake the war against
the Turks for the defence and extension of the

Cuar. II. ELECTION OF EMPEROR IN 1519. ou8

faith, —he empowered the Elector of Treves, should
the occasion present itself, to take the required
oath on the salvation of his soul.

Nor were the king’s negotiations fruitless in
other quarters. A complete outline of a treaty
with the Elector Palatine was drawn up by his
envoys™, and in the beginning of April that prince
raised his pecuniary demands on Austria threefold,
and revived his claim to the Stewardship (Land-
vogtei) of Hagenau. Cologne received a warning
from Austria not to allow herself to be seduced
into the wrong way, while the French sometimes
thought themselves nearly sure of her support.

All these Rhenish electors feared the violence
and vengeance of Francis I. in case they resisted
him; they were alarmed at perceiving no refuge
or defence on the other side. But the support
of the See of Rome was still more advantageous
to the king’s cause, than the fears or the sense
of weakness of these princes. Pope Leo X. indeed
sometimes expressed himself doubtfully, and it
appeared as if he would not take part against
Austria; but he was far too deeply versed in the
policy of Italy, not to see the dangers that would
impend over himself if Naples were united to the
empire. The Venetian ambassador, who enjoyed
his confidence, affirms that Leo would on no ac-
count consent to that.— Nor was the court of

* In the extract in Stumpf, Baierns polit. Gesch. i. p. 24.

+ “Tl papa dice vol far ogni cosa in favor del re christia-
nissimo, et non vol sia il re cattolico per niuno partido per es-
serli troppo vicino, e poi S. S é in liga col re christianissimo

396 ELECTION OF EMPEROR IN 1519. Boox II.

Spain deceived; King Charles once ordered the
pope’s messengers to be arrested in Tyrol, in
order to obtain proof of the illicit practices of the
court of Rome in that country.* He knew that
the legate spoke ill of him; one of his councillors
was astonished when the Elector of Mainz showed
him all the letters he had received from the papal
court in the interest of the French. Of all the
electors he was the one whom it was the most
important to gain; and who had such ample
means of gaining him as the pope? One of the
favourite objects of the elector of Mainz was to get
himself nominated legate of Germany, like Amboise
in France and Wolsey in England. It is well known
how difficult it was to induce the See of Rome to
grant that dignity to a native; but at the present
moment, and in favour of Francis I., it was disposed
to do so. Ina letter dated from St. Peter’s, March
14, 1519, and bearing the seal of the fisherman’s
ring, Leo X. authorized the king, in the event of
his obtaining the imperial crown by the vote and
influence of the Elector of Mainz, to promise
the same the dignity of legate in Germany: he,
Leo X., binding himselt, on the word of a true pope
of Rome, to fulfil the engagement. There seemed
little reason to doubt that the elector would yield
to such a temptation.f
dicendo aver mandato al re cattolico il juramento ha fatto per
il reame di Napoli accio si aricordi: poi pregd lorator tenesse
silentio.” Roma, 12 April.

* “« Pour dévoiler ses illicites poursuites.” From the letter
of the 31st of March in Gachard.

+ I give in the Appendix the letter from the Archives of
Paris.

Cuar. IJ. ELECTION OF EMPEROR IN 1519. 397

The bait which he held out to Joachim L,
Elector of Brandenburg, brother of the Cardinal,
was at least equally alluring. Joachim, to whom
Maximilian had promised his grand-daughter Cathe-
rine, the sister of Charles, in marriage to the
hereditary prince, with a very large dowry, had
conceived some suspicions that there was a design
to disappoint him. The contract was indeed rati-
fied, but only by Charles, not by the princess,
without whose consent it could not be considered
binding. The Fuggers declared themselves not
authorized to fulfil the pecuniary obligations con-
tracted with the Elector. Joachim, whether at home
or in his foreign relations, was fiery, resolute, and
suspicious ; in money matters, above all, he was not
to be trifled with. He was already mortified that
the affair had not been terminated a year sooner, as
he wished. He therefore fixed a term within which
the promises made him were to be fulfilled, and
meanwhile gave audience to the French ambassador,
de la Motte. The French now in their turn
promised him a princess of the blood for his son, —
Madame Rénée, daughter of Louis XII. and
Queen Anne,—with a still larger dowry, for the
payment of which they offered greater security
than their rival. But they did not fail to accom-
pany these promises with others of a far more
extensive character. In case Francis I. was really
chosen, they declared themselves empowered to
acknowledge the elector his lieutenant or viceroy ;
but if that was found to be impracticable, they
would use all their influence to raise Joachim him-

398 ELECTION OF EMPEROR IN 1519.  Boox IL.

self to the throne. Joachim was not so free from
ambition as not to be captivated by proposals of
such a kind. The moment of Brandenburg’s great-
ness seemed to him arrived. It was something
that he should be lieutenant of the future emperor;
his brother, legate of the pope; the highest secular
and spiritual honours would thus be united in his
house. Behind these, floated the far more splendid
vision of the imperial crown. E

While however the French became thus deeply
implicated with the house of Brandenburg, they
did not desist from attempts to gain over the elector
of Saxony.* We have no accurate knowledge of
the negotiations carried on with him, but we
have evidence that the French were perfectly well
informed of the disgusts the elector had latterly
had to endure respecting the Netherlands; and
presumed that he would not be very willing to
recognize the sovereign of that province as his
emperor.

During these negotiations, which awakened guch
lively hope, the opposition in the interests of
France, so long kept down by the late emperor,
broke out in acts of open violence. Ulrich of Wiir-
temberg, even on his way home from the obse-
quies of Maximilian, made an attack on Reutlingen,
where one of his stewards was killed, took the
town, and, with the aid of French money f, col-
lected a numerous army, with which he thought

* Letter from the Venetian ambassador, dated Poisy, March
28.: “ Del duca di Saxonia si confida : non vorra il re catolico.”
t Francis complained afterwards that Ulrich had declared the

Cuar. I ELECTION OF EMPEROR IN 1519. 399

to revenge himself on all his enemies, especially the
Duke of Bavaria. He negotiated with the Swiss,
and hoped to excite them to take up arms against the
Swabian league. Somewhat later, the Bishop of
Hildesheim also put himself at the head of his
troops, and, during Passion week, under the invo-
cation of the Blessed Virgin, inflicted the most
fearful devastations on the territory of his Brunswick
enemies. The Duke of Liineburg, who had also
received money from France, acted in concert with
him, gained friends on all sides, and made magni-
ficent preparations for war. The Duke of Gueldres
had promised to send him succours, and took troops
into his service.

The French endeavoured to gain over other
military chiefs, as for example, in Upper Germany,
Sickingen ; in Lower, Henry of Mecklenburg. The
latter was to bind himself to appear with his troops
at Coblentz in the territory of Treves, immediately
after the election, in order to earn the pension
promised him by the king.* French money was
offered to the Counts of the Harz, and to the nobles
of Westphalia, through the mediation of Gueldres.t

The idea of the French doubtless was, that they

sum which he had received. See Sattler, ii. 92. A letter
in Sanuto, dated April 27. 1519. “S.M. X™ era quello che
dava danari al duca de Virtenberg, accio tenesse la guerra in
Germania.”

* Rudloff, Neuere Gesch. von Mecklenburg, i. p. 50.

+ The Count of Schwarzburg declared, according to a letter of
Nassau, of the 20th of March, in Mone (p. 136.), that a pension
of 600 livres for his life had been offered him, and that he had
not accepted it.

400 ELECTION OF EMPEROR IN 1519. — Boox II.

should best attain their end by a union of nego-
tiation and warlike demonstrations, — of persuasion
and terror. The court already regarded the event
as nearly certain. It is said that the king’s mother
had ordered the jewels in which she meant to
appear at the coronation.* The ambition of her
son took a higher flight. When the English am-
bassador asked him whether it was his serious in-
tention, if he became emperor, to take any active
measures as to the long-talked of Turkish war, he
solemnly assured him, laying his hand on his heart,
that in three years he would either not be alive, or
be in Constantinople.f

But he was far from being so near the goal of his
wishes as he and his courtiers imagined. The
attachment to Austria was not so weak in Germany
as to have lost all its force on the death of the em-
peror. The electors might indeed vacillate, but
they were not yet won by France. Enemies of the
House of Austria might arise, but it found friends
who adhered to it with constancy. Above all, too,
that house possessed a head determined to defend
his claims, prepared to accept the challenge of his
French rival, and to sustain the combat to the last.

Some former councillors of Maximilian, Matthew
Lang, Villinger, Renner, and certain delegates from
the court of the Netherlands, among whom the
most conspicuous was Maximilian of Zevenberghen,
formed a commission in Augsburg, which, under the

* Le Ferron, v. 118.
t Sir Thomas Boleyn to King Henry. Ellis Letters, i. 147.

Cuar. I. ELECTION OF EMPEROR IN 1519. ‘ AOL

presidency of Margaret, watched over the interests
of Austria. Able and devoted as these men were,
they sometimes took a very gloomy view of affairs
and feared for the event. At one time the thought
passed through their minds, that it would be better
to put forward the Archduke Ferdinand, Charles’s
brother, who was just arrived in the Netherlands
from Spain: they were at all events very desirous
that he should come to Germany without loss of time.
But they little knew their master, King Charles, if
they thought this could be agreeable to him. He
was not only displeased but incensed at it. He
declared to the Archduchess Margaret, that he was
absolutely determined to have the crown himself,
by whatever means it was to be obtained, and at
whatever cost: he forbade his brother’s journey.*
He who united in his person so many monarchies,
felt that his ambition would be unsatisfied till he
had achieved the supreme dignity of Christendom.
He had long reflected not only on the advantages
likely to result from it, but on the disadvantages he
had to expect if he. failed, and that dignity was
bestowed on another. He resorted without delay
to every form of canvass. To the electors he re-
presented that his great-grandfather, and his grand-
father, the late Maximilian, when invested with the
imperial majesty, had governed the German nation
long and well; he was resolved to tread in their

<a Margaret to Zevenberghen, May 15. “ Absolument le roi
est délibéré de lui-mesme parvenir a l'empire, comment que ce
soit et quoi que il luy doibve couster.”

VOL. I. DD

402 ELECTION OF EMPEROR IN 1519.  Boox II.

footsteps, and to protect all franchises, spiritual
and temporal, particular and general ; and to abate
every thing which could be prejudicial to the
liberties of Germany. He declared that his sole
object was to maintain peace throughout Christen-
dom; and,¢after the pattern of his other grand-
father, the King of Aragon, to make war upon the
unbelievers, and to reserve his whole force for the
defence and diffusion of the Catholic faith.* From
this time Ferdinand was no more thought of: the
councillors reverted to their original project, — to
raise their elder lord, the King of Spain, to the station
of “‘ Prince of princes,” at whatever risk or sacrifice.

We must here examine a little in detail what
were the means to which they resorted, what the
circumstances which favoured them, and what the
obstacles they encountered.

Their greatest advantage was precisely that from
which their antagonist had hoped the most ;—the
connection between Francis and the Pope.

At a meeting of the Rhenish electors at Wesel,
in the beginning of April, the papal legate formally
admonished them, in virtue of a prohibitory bull of
Clement IV., not to elect the King of Naples, which .
country, he said, was the property of the Church of
Rome. Though the negotiations between the French
and the electors were at that moment peculiarly
active, such a demand as this roused their spirit
of independence. They replied that they were
astonished that the pope should endeavour to throw

* Papiers d’Etat du Cl. Granvelle, t.i. p. 112.

Car. i]. ELECTION OF EMPEROR IN 1519. 403

a prohibition in the way of the election;—a thing
which the See of Rome had never done and ex-
pressed their hope that his holiness Aget desist
from such an attempt. The legate answered with
some bitterness; he reminded them of their not
altogether lawful transactions with Maximilian.
A correspondence arose which betrayed great irri-
tation, and was not much fitted to advance the
cause die pope had espoused. *

The warlike movements of Francis and his allies
were, if possible, yet more advantageous to his rival;
above all, the rising of the restless Wiirtemberger.
Some few of the imperial council thought to settle
the affair in good German fashion, by peaceful
means; but the more sagacious prevented this: they
foresaw with certainty on whose side the superior
strength lay, who would be victorious, and what
an advantage would result to the interests of the
election: they wished for war.t The Swabian
league, irritated by former and by recent affronts,
and now strengthened by considerable subsidies,
was ready to take the field. Franz von Sickingen
at length accepted a yearly pension from the house
of Burgundy, broke off all negotiations with France,

* Correspondence in Bucholtz, iii. 670. Acta Legationis in
Goldast, Political Imper., p. 102. This coincides with the
fact of the electors demanding back so seriously and pres-
singly their circular letters from Augsburg.

+ Letter from Zevenberghen, March 28. Mone. Matth.
Schiner. Feb. 12.: “ Que ce Duc de Wirtemberg estoit le plus
grand ami du roi (Charles) — car & cause de sa folie la grande
lighe feront de si grosses armées qui feront crainte aux Frangois
et autres qui veuillent empescher son election.”

DD 2

404 ELECTION OF EMPEROR IN 1519.  Boox IL.

and protnised to come to the aid of the league with
his cavalry. It was, however, at the same time
necessary to restrict the struggle within these
limits, to prevent a general conflagration, and espe-
cially to keep the Swiss from siding with Wiir-
temberg.

Duke Ulrich had already taken 16,000 Swiss into
his pay; and it was to be feared that the old hos-
tility between the Confederation and the Swabian
league might break out anew, as it had done twenty
years before. This would have been as welcome
a sight to Francis as it was to his predecessor
Louis XII. It was all important not only that
it should be avoided, but that contrary dispositions
should be excited.

The election of emperor had already been dis-
cussed in the Swiss diet. French ambassadors had
presented themselves to seek the support of the
Confederation: the Swiss in Paris, among. them
Albert von Stein, advised their countrymen to
declare for the king, were it only in order to enjoy
the credit and the favour resulting from an event
which was no longer to be averted.* The Con-
federation was not, however, so decidedly French
as to follow this course. The Cardinal von Sitten,
the old enemy of the French, well skilled in all
the secret ways of diplomacy, was then in Ziirich,
and in the enjoyment of great consideration. In
the middle of March, Zevenberghen came from
Augsburg to his aid. They had, indeed, no easy
task. Zevenberghen makes loud complaints of the

* Anshelm, Chronicle of Berne, v. 375.

Cuar. II. ELECTION OF EMPEROR IN 1519. 405

bad words and threats he was obliged to endure
from the pensionaries and speakers; what it cost
him to acknowledge “ this low rabble as gentle-
men, and to pay them respect; he would rather
carry stones;” but he bore it all: he did among
them, he-said, as if at a fair—paid much, and
promised more; at length he succeeded. The
main cause of his success was, indeed, the in-
terests of Switzerland herself; not only the re-
collection of the Swiss blood shed in the late wars,
or of the numerous claims which still remained un-
satisfied ; but above all, the consideration that France
would, by the acquisition of the imperial dignity,
become too mighty, would no longer need the
assistance of the Swiss, and would consequently
trouble herself no more about them, — still less,
pay their pensions. On the 18th of March, the
Swiss diet came to a formal resolution to oppose the
election. of the French king to the imperial crown,
with body and soul (as they expressed it) ; and on
the contrary to promote the election of a German
prince, whether an elector or another. In pur-
suance of this they wrote to the electors, and to.
Francis himself; they took the liberty to admonish
the latter to content himself with his own kingdom,
The Austrian ambassadors wished the Confedera-
* tion to declare openly for King Charles, but this
they could not accomplish. ‘“ Wherever they fall,”
said Zevenberghen, “ there they abide.”* Never-

* Mars 22. “La ou ils tombent, ils demeurent comme tels
gens quils sont.” Gachard, 178. See Maroton to Margaret,
‘April 10., Mone, 397.

DD 3

406 ELECTION OF EMPEROR IN 1519.  Boox II:

theless much was effected. The ancient union
with Austria was renewed. ‘The diet determined
to recall from the field those of their people
who had joined the duke, and with such una-
nimous earnestness that they should not dare to
resist.

This decided Duke Ulrich’sruin. Zevenberghen
justly gloried in having persuaded the diet to pass
such a resolution.

At the moment when letters of challenge (eh-
debriefe) poured in upon the duke from all sides —
when even some of his own vassals renounced their
allegiance, and the powerful troops of the league
were preparing to fall upon his country—at that
moment he was abandoned by those who alone
could have defended him. His Wiirtemberg militia
did not understand regular warfare; his cavalry
was no match whatever for that of the league.
The league encountered no resistance. On the 21st
of April they took Tiibingen, where the duke’s
children were residing, and he himself was compelled
to abandon his country.

So complete a victory — deciding the conquest _
of a considerable principality — turned the:scale in
favour of the Austrian interest through the whole
of Upper Germany.

A similar change soon followed in Lower Ger-
many. ‘Towards the end of May the dukes of
Calenberg and Wolfenbiittel had completed their
preparations, and appeared in the field with
their auxiliaries from Hessen and Meissen in un-

disputed superiority. They destroyed Walden-

Cuar. II. ELECTION OF EMPEROR IN 1519. 407

stein, stormed Peine, and plundered the Liineburg
territory. Fifty villages were seen in flames at
once on their path, nor did they spare a single
church; they defaced the arms of their own house,
the house of Welf, on their cousin’s castle, and
carried off rich booty. “ They were of a proud
spirit,” says a song of that day; ‘they had silver
and the red gold; they went in velvet with golden
chains; they had two thousand chariots with them.”
They challenged the Duke of Liineburg in mockery
to do battle, while he was still waiting for the
succour promised him from Gueldres.

But if the French thought to attain their end by
the aid of the intestine wars of Germany, they
soon found how completely they had deceived them-
selves. Exactly at the decisive moment, these
private wars took a turn in favour of Austria.

Under the impressions produced by these events
the plenipotentiaries of King Charles renewed their
negotiations with the electors with the greatest
diligence.

Towards the end of April a Spanish chargé-
d’affaires arrived, bringing the archbishop of
Mainz the assent to all his demands. Very re-
markable concessions and promises were made to
him; full power over the chancery of the em-
pire; the protection of the emperor in the dis-
pute of the archbishopric with Saxony about
Erfurt, and in that with Hessen about a newly-
erected toll; the emperor’s intercession with the
pope that he would allow the archbishop to
hold a fourth bishopric in Germany; and, lastly,

pvp 4

408 ELECTION OF EMPEROR IN 1519.  Boox II.

(for the example of France was to be followed in
this) his appointment as legate of the Apostolical
Sée in the empire. Moreover, the pensions promised
him were secured to him by special legal instru-
ments from Mechlin and Antwerp.* From this
time we find the archbishop, who had vacillated
for a moment, unshaken in his attachment to
Austria and doubly zealous in her cause. He threw
the whole weight which the dignity of archchan-
cellor gave him in Germany, into the scale of King
Charles.

The elector palatine’s support was secured by
similar means. He had wavered, only because the
publication of his new agreement with Austria as to
the succession, and the promised compensation for
the stewardship of Hagenau were delayed ; while, on
the other hand, the Swabian league threatened to
espouse the pecuniary claims urged against him by
the Rhenish merchants. The Austrian plenipoten-
tiaries hastened to allay these troubles; they satisfied
the demands of the merchants at their own cost.
Count Palatine Frederic, moreover, exerted all his
influence with his brother in favour of Austria, and
considerable sums of money were granted to both.
Though the elector had said at first, that whatever
wind blew, he would always be for Austria, he had not
entirely kept his word; but he gradually returned
to his first intention, and remained constant to it.

* Carolus ad Albertum 12 Martii, in Gudenus, iv. 607.
Jean de le Sauch & Marguer. 29th April; Mone, p. 403.

+ Correspondence in Mone, p. 84. See Hubert Thomas
Leodius, Vita Friderici Palatini, iv. p. 100. sq.

Cuap. II. ELECTION OF EMPEROR IN 1519. 409

The difficulties with Cologne were not so great.
The Count of Nassau, who conducted the nego-
tiations in this part of the country, understood the
means of conciliating the Rhenish counts gene-
rally, and the archbishop— who was by birth one of
that body — in particular. The concessions made
to that prelate at Augsburg were now extended.
We have a letter of his, dated the 6th of June, in
which he treats the affair of the election as settled,
as soon as Bohemia shall be secured.*

The King of Bohemia had indeed at first con-
templated availing himself of the engagements
entered into with him by Maximilian, and. had
in consequence sent his ambassadors to Italy ; but
he soon saw how little he had to expect. The pope
treated his documents with the greatest contempt,
as some of the many privilegia which Maximilian
had created in order to put money into the
pockets of his clerks. Upon this the government:
of Bohemia resolved to support the house of Au...
tria, with which it was about to enter into so near
a family alliance. Perhaps the circumstance that
John, brother of the Markgrave George of Bran-
denburg, who had great influence at that court,
was just married to the widow of Ferdinand the
Catholic and nominated Viceroy of Valencia, con-
tributed greatly to this result.

There remained, therefore, only Treves, Bran-
denburg, and Saxony; and the Austrian pleni-

* Bucholtz, iii. 671.
+ Letter from Charles to Casimir on this subject, March 6.
1519: Spiess, Brandenburgische Miinzbelustigungen, i. p. 389.

410 ELECTION OF EMPEROR IN 1519. ~ Boox IL.

potentiaries showed no lack of zeal in their en-
deavours to secure these important votes.

With Treves there was nothing to be done.
Although the dependents of the elector gave some
hope, he himself declared he would keep his vote
free, and from this resolution no representations
could induce him to depart. If, notwithstanding
this, he had entered into the close connexion with
France which we have already noticed, it must
have been under some reservation which secured to
him his freedom of voting at the decisive moment.
Such, at least, was the case with Brandenburg.

On the 20th of April the plenipotentiaries of King
Charles, the Count of Nassau, M. de la Roche, and
Nicholas Ziegler, who enjoyed the especial confidence
of the archbishop of Mainz, arrived at Berlin. They
were commissioned to renew to Elector Joachim all
the promises which had formerly been made to
him, especially in relation to the marriage of his
son with the archduchess and infanta Catherine.
They brought with them the infanta’s ratification,
and placed it in the hands of a kinsman of the
elector, Markgrave Casimir. But they found Joa-
chim little disposed to listen to them. The utmost
that he would promise was, that he would vote for
Charles, if the four electors who preceded him had
done so; and even for this very unsatisfactory
engagement, he made greater demands than they
were empowered to grant. Nor had he given any
promise to the King of France, but with the con-
dition that two electors should have voted on that
side before it came to his turn; yet that sovereign

Cuar. 11. ELECTION OF EMPEROR IN 1519. 411

had, in addition to various other concessions,
agreed to these exorbitant demands. According to
the first proposal made by Margaret, her ambas-
sadors certainly gave the elector reason to hope
that he would have the lieutenancy of the
empire, but I do not find whether this was con-
firmed by Charles or not. The ambassadors did
not accede to a suggestion of Joachim’s as to the
vicariate of the empire for the Saxon provinces;
still less would they permit him to hope for
the crown, in any case or under any condition.
As this was the prospect that first allured the
elector, we need not wonder that they had no
success with him.

It was the more important to obtain the vote of
him whom Austria had lately so deeply offended,
and whom the councillors regarded as their most
formidable opponent — Frederic of Saxony.* As
the Bohemian vote did not carry great weight
(and indeed the last election was concluded with-
out Bohemia), the vote of Saxony was necessary to
the formation of a majority that would be uni-
versally recognised. The refusal of the elector to
take part in the measures agreed on at Augsburg,
which excited great discontent in the nation when
they were known, had increased the already high
consideration he enjoyed. Moral authority and
the consent of public opinion were attached to this
vote; every effort must be made to secure it.

* Marnix to Margaret, March 16., traces the unfavourable
disposition of Bohemia, amongst other sources, to Saxony :
Mone, p. 131. a

Al ELECTION OF EMPEROR IN 1519.  Boox II.

The elector himself remained inaccessible. He
would hear of no promises ; he forbade his servants
to receive presents, and referred all inquiries to the
day of election, when it would be seen to whom he
gave his vote; till then he would keep it free.

But there is no position on earth so lofty or so im-
pregnable, that it cannot. be reached by some means
or other. The deputies determined to take a step
which, if successful, would certainly put an end to all
the animosities that had been accumulating between
Saxony and Austria. They now offered the Arch-
duchess Catherine, sister of King Charles, who had
just been the subject of their fruitless negotiations
with Joachim I., to Duke John, brother of the

elector, for his son, John Frederic, the future heir
to the electorate.

To this proposal Duke John replied, that the
king would be able to place his sister in a more
exalted position. The ambassadors answered, that
the king only wished to renew the ancient alliance
of the two houses. They overruled the objections
raised by his modesty in the most dexterous and
flattering manner, by reminding him that the
sister of Emperor Frederic was the grandmother of
the dukes of Saxony.*

The elector took no part in these negotiations,
but he allowed them to go on. The ambassadors
thought they discovered that the whole business of
the election depended on the success of them. They
wrote first from Lochau, and again on the 16th of

* Miiller, Geschichte der Protestation, p. 689.

Cuar. Il. ELECTION OF EMPEROR IN 1519. 413

May from Rudolstadt, to the king, in Spain, urging
him to send them full powers to conclude this
treaty of marriage as quickly as possible, if he
would not have their endeavours prove fruitless: this
was the only means of arriving at the desired end.*
This was so obvious to the king that he did not
hesitate an instant. On the 30th of May he signed
the act empowering his envoys to negotiate this
marriage and every thing relating to it, in his
name, and to arrange the terms with an authority
equal to his own.t Hereupon Duke John granted
his council full powers to treat ; in the preamble to
which he said that, “ bearing in mind the dignity of
the crown of Spain, and the name and race of the
honourable house of Austria, he wished most
especially to see his son, who was also well inclined
thereto, advised to a friendly marriage with the
most illustrious princess, the Lady Catherine.”
The Austrian ambassadors had now only to as-
certain what effect this good understanding with
the duke was likely to have on the elector, and to
act accordingly.

At all events it is evident that they had suc-
cessfully employed the interest of the house they
served.

But the affair was not decided thus.

Austria had now unquestionably a majority of
declared friends in the electoral college; but the
French, too, could reckon on more than one par-

* Nassou et Peine, May 16. Mone, p. 406.
+ Document in Arnoldi’s Denkwirdigkeiten, p. 8.

A414 ELECTION OF EMPEROR IN 1519.  Boox IU.

tisan, and did not relinquish the hope of gaining
over one or two of the others. ‘They had just made
a vehement, and, as they believed, successful attempt
on the elector of Cologne: they thought that even
if they had only three votes, the pope would
declare the election valid; and his legate, at least,
adhered firmly to their side up to the middle of
June.

Austria was indeed victorious, and remained
with arms in her hands; but the partisans of
France in Lower Germany were by no means
crushed. We find traces of very extensive and
unexpected plans; ¢.g. an original document, in
which Francis promises to pay whatever troops the
electors of Treves and Brandenburg should levy in
Germany, under the extraordinary pretext that
they were to maintain the peace of the country
and the freedom of the roads for the meeting in
Frankfurt. The Duke of Gueldres was already up
in arms again. The French troops did not yet
advance upon the German frontier, but they were
prepared to do so.*

The two powers vied with each other in prodigal
expenditure of money. It was a peculiar ad-
vantage on the side of Austria that the great
mercantile -house of Fugger, which conducted
nearly the whole monetary business of Germany,
refused its services to the French.f Admiral

* Letter from France, May 26. “In Franza non é alcun
motivo di arme, ma ben la zente preparata.”
t Letter from Zevenberghen ; Mone, p.36. In the Nether-

Cuar. I. ELECTION OF EMPEROR In 1519. A15

Bonnivet had, however, brought large sums in
hard money to Germany, which many might think
better than any bills of exchange whatsoever.

Had the event depended exclusively on pecu-
niary interests, its decision would have remained
very doubtful.

But considerations of a totally different nature -
evidently had weight.

We must do the princes of Germany in old times
the justice to admit that, spite of the many scan-
dalous transactions they engaged in, the interests
of the nation always prevailed at last.

To uphold the ancient privileges of the empire
against all attacks or encroachments of the See of
Rome, was the motive which led the Rhenish
electors to reject the proposals and arguments of
the legate.

But was not Francis also a foreigner? Could
the electoral college venture so lightly to alienate
from the nation that imperial crown which, at
every diet, they solemnly promised to maintain ?
There were those who did not fail to remark that
Francis was an absolute monarch, accustomed to
implicit obedience and possessed of great power,
under whose sceptre the maintenance of German
liberties could hardly be expected. The violent
acts of his partisans were not calculated to make
quiet patriots his friends.

lands Margaret forbade business relating to French bills of
exchange to be transacted. Ibid. p. 293. But we find the
imperial agents not always on a good understanding with the
Fuggers. The Welsers seem to have done business on lower
terms.

;

416 ELECTION OF EMPEROR IN 1519. — Boox II.

On the other hand, the young King of Spain
was without question a German. He reminded
the German princes that the true stem and the
first blossom of his nobility were from Austria:
were he not a German, had he not land and lord-
ships in Germany, he would withdraw from the
contest.

How profound an effect was produced by this
difference in the pretensions of the rivals, is dis-
tinctly shown by a remark of the papal delegates.
They say, every one will, in the end, deem it in-
famous to receive money from France; but to take
it from King Charles, is thought Bet of.

Public opinion hed also already declared itself
on the matter. The electors had it in their power
to choose one of their own body,—a German
prince. Had they chosen the King of France,
taking money too for their votes, the result might
have been dangerous to themselves.

All these things were gradually so distinctly
felt, that, by the iesadle of June, Charles’s supe-
riority was decided, and no further doubt was en-
tertained of the event.

Henry VIII. of England for a moment che-
rished the hope of placing the crown on his own
head, during the contest of the other two sove-
reigns; but his ambassador acted with great discre-
tion and reserve. He looked at the affair like a
man of business, and, on calculation, he found this
crown too dear a purchase for its value and utility.*

* Richard Pace; Ellis, i. 156. See Herbert, Life of
Henry VIIL, p. 74. :

‘

Cuar. I ELECTION OF EMPEROR IN 1519. 417

A letter of his, of the 12th of June, shows that he
had then given up all hope.

At this conjuncture Carracciolo, one of the pope’s
chargés-d’affaires, caused himself to be carried,
ill as he was, to the archbishop of Mainz, in order
that he might once more recommend to that
prelate the interests of the church and of the King
of France. The archbishop answered, that he
took upon his own head the affairs of the church,
but that he would have nothing to do with the
King of France. The envoy asked upon whom the
choice of the electors would fall? The cardinal
said, on the King of Spain; and if not upon him,
then upon the Elector of Saxony. The envoy was
perfectly astonished that the cardinal, notwith-
standing such repeated misunderstandings, still
preferred the Elector of Saxony to the King of
France.* These words perhaps decided the conduct
of the Roman see. When Pope Leo found what
the dispositions of Germany were, he was heard.
to exclaim, that it would not do to run one’s
head against the wall; an expression characteristic
of his policy, which was always that of giving way
before an obstinate resistance. After having so
long held out, he at length yielded (June 24th),
and announced to the electors his assent to the
election of the King of Spain and Naples.

When the electors assembled in Frankfurt there
was not the smallest hope left for Francis: the

* «Lz esso Moguntino habbi gran inimicitia con Saxonia,
lo vol avanti che il re christianissimo.”
VOL. I. EE

418 ELECTION OF EMPEROR IN 1519. — Boox IL

only remaining obstacle to Charles’s success was
the wish which had existed among them, of having
a native of the’soil of Germany for their emperor.*
The elector Joachim, who now put forward urgent
claims f, was thought of; but his own relations,
above all his brother of Mainz, were against him:
they found that the maintenance of the imperial
dignity would necessitate exertions and expenses
which would consume the resources of the Mark,
and those of their whole family; they knew, too,
that the princes of the empire would not choose
a head of so harsh, severe and self-willed a character.
Joachim would never have conciliated a sufficient
number of voices. A far more formidable rival
existed in the person of Frederic of Saxony, on
whom the eyes of the assembly were now turned.
Richard of Treves went to him once by night, and
offered to take a part of the labour of the canvass
on himself. His own hopes being utterly at an end,
the King of France determined to use his influence

* The Italians, for instance, could not at all comprehend why
such an one was not chosen. “ Li electori,” says Lippomano, the
Venetian ambassador at Rome, “ saranno pazzi a non si far uno
di loro.” On this ground they willingly believed that the Elector
of Brandenburg would be chosen. “ Scrive il Cl. Sedunese, sara
il Brandenburg, 5 Giugno.” Hereon rests also Vettori’s
opinion, that Leo had never wished to give his support to the
king, in whose behalf, however, he had expressed himself far
too decisively.

+ According to a letter from the admiral, of the 17th or 18th
of June, “ Il Treverese havea rimosso il Marchese di Branden-
burg qual volea esser electo lui;” but he concluded thence, that
the king had fresh hope.

Cuar. If. ELECTION OF EMPEROR IN 1519. 419

in favour of Frederic. Considering the conduct
of that prince in the Lutheran affairs, and the
national tendencies with which these affairs were
connected, this certainly opened one of the grandest
prospects for the destiny of Germany. The elec-
tors were, on the whole, well disposed towards the
measure ; indeed it was afterwards said, in the way
of reproach, that if there had been one among them
‘¢ capable of sustaining the empire,” he would have
been chosen. Had Frederic only been inspired by
a more daring ambition! Had he ‘not been of so
cautious a nature, rendered still less enterprising by
age! But he had too long and too profound an
acquaintance with the history of the empire, not
to know that a vast preponderance of power was
necessary to hold together in union and subordina-
tion these haughty, energetic princes and states,
all striving for independence.

Although his resolution was taken, he once
asked his follower, Philip of Solms, his opinion.
Philip replied, that he feared his lord would not
be able to use his power of punishing with due
severity. Frederic answered, that he was of the
same opinion ; and declined the proffered support.”
The time was come, too, when no more reserves
could be maintained: he declared himself openly
for King Charles. This declaration decided those
who had till then been wavering.

On the 28th of June, the tocsin was sounded,

* Extract from Lucas Geierberg, Leben Philipsen, Grafen
von Solms, after the preface to Gobel’s Beitragen zur Staatsge-
schichte von Europa, p. 19.

EE 2

420 ELECTION OF EMPEROR IN 1519. Boox II.

according to ancient custom, and the electors assem-
bled, clad in their scarlet robes of state, in the
small dark chapel in the choir of the church of
St Bartholomew, which served them as conclave.
They were already unanimous. Mainz addressed.
himself first, according to ancient precedent, to
Treves, who replied that he voted for the Archduke
Charles of Austria, Prince of Burgundy, King of
Spain. So said they all; the King of France had
not a vote.*

The electors were however mindful, in choosing
so puissant a prince, immediately to take measures
for securing the rights of the empire. They laid
before the elected King of the Romans a rigorous
capitulation, constructed on the principles which had
been established during the last negotiations with
Maximilian.t In this it was decided that the public
offices should be filled exclusively by Germans,
the public proceedings carried on exclusively in the
German language, and the assemblies of the empire
invariably held within the frontiers of the German
nation. Nor did the electors forget their own
privileges. They stipulated that they were to
have seats in the Council of Regency; that no war
was to be declared, no alliance concluded, no diet
convoked — it is hardly necessary to add, no tax im-
posed—without their consent; whatever was acquired

* Protocollum Electionis in Goldast’s Polit. Reichshiin-
deln, p. 41. The speeches said to have been delivered on
this occasion are fictitious. See Ranke, Zur Kritik neuerer
Geschichtschreiber, p. 62.

+ Revers in Bucholtz, iii. 668.

Cuar. II. ELECTION OF EMPEROR IN 1519. 421

by the counsel and aid of the States in war, should
remain for ever the property of the empire.*

And here another reflection suggests itself. The
princes, it is true, elected a puissant monarch as
their chief. But it may be asked, was not his
position, which rendered inevitable his frequent
absence, favourable to the development of their
own power ?

Under a prince like this, who had to govern so
many countries, to ares against so many wars,
they could most easily obtain that representative
constitution, that share in the government of the
empire, which it had been the constant object of their
endeavours to acquire under Maximilian.

How strange a mixture of the most heterogeneous
motives combined to bring about the one of
Charles V.! Pecuniary bribes (it is not to be de-
nied) to a large amount, both to the princes,
among whom were even Treves and Duke John of
Saxony, and to their dependents and councillors;
the concession of new privileges; family alliances,
near or remote, which either already existed, or
were now concluded, or contracted for the future:
on the other hand, some degree of dread of the army
of the Swabian league which was still in the field
and in the pay of Austria f; and, lastly, antipathy

* Capitulation, amongst others, in Dumont, iv. 1. Unfor-
tunately I have not been able to examine the documents.

+ Richard Pace to Cardinal Wolsey, i. 157. “ Suerly they
wold nott have electidde him yff fere of these persons hadde not
dryven them thereunto.”

EE 3

429 ELECTION OF EMPEROR IN 1519.  Boox II.

to the stranger, in spite of his still more profuse
offers of money; attachment to the house which
had already given several emperors to Germany and
~ which enjoyed traditional respect; the dangers at-
tending every other course ; the expectation of good
results from that pursued ;—in short, a mixture
of purely personal considerations and of sincere
regard for the publi¢ weal! Among the various in-
fluences which determined the event, we must not
omit to add that of luck. On the very day, nay the
very hour, of election, an event took place in Lower
Saxony, which, had it occurred earlier, might
easily have rendered the issue once more doubtful,
and have revived the hopes of the French party.
The cavalry of Gueldres had at length joined
Duke Henry of Liineburg, who had set out without
delay to seek in the field the plunder-laden army
of his cousins. He came up with this near Soltau
on the Haide, and began the attack without waiting
for his infantry. His strength lay in his cavalry,
which rushed up to the enemy’s artillery and took
it, then broke the lines of the infantry, partly
mercenaries, who took to flight and threw their
arms into the sand: animated by this success, the
conquering troop then made a violent attack on
the squadron of: Calenberg horse. Here they met
with a gallant resistance ; Duke Eric of Calenberg,
- distinguishable by his white plume, -forced his
way into their ranks; but, in spite of his bravery,
the Liineburgers overpowered him by their numbers,
and gained a complete victory. Eric himself, his
brother William, and a hundred and twenty

Cuap. IL. NEW | GOVERNMENT. 423

knights, were made prisoners by the partisans of
the King of France.*

But since, as we have observed, the election of the
emperor was concluded on the same day, this victory
was utterly fruitless. The victors were now com-
pelled to avoid all connexion with France, while the
vanquished found favour and assistance from the
commissioners of Charles V. at Augsburg. In Oc-
tober, Henry the Younger of Wolfenbiittel took
up arms anew, aided, as it was believed, by money
from Augsburg, and committed devastations in
Hildesheim, estimated at a hundred and tifty thou-
sand gulden; and it was with difficulty that he
could be induced by the neighbouring princes to
grant a truce. He would agree to no definitive
terms proposed by the mediators. He quitted
Zerbst, where they were assembled, by night, |
without bidding them farewell, and only leaving
word that he must reserve the matter for the
decision of his imperial majesty (May 1520). If
France had defended the Liineburgers, Austria
and her fortunes now lent more powerful support
to their adversaries.

The affairs of Upper Germany at the same
moment took a still more decisive turn in the same
direction. Wiirtemberg passed entirely into Austrian
hands.

The cause of this was that Duke Ulrich, in this
unexpected attack in August, had driven out the
government of the league, taken the country again

* Chytreus, Saxonia, lib. viii. p. 207. Carmen prolixius, in
Leibnitz, Scriptores Rer. Brunsv. iii. 257.
ER 4

494 BEGINNING OF THE Boox II.

into his own possession, and was only expelled
from it by renewed efforts of that body.* This
conquest was now burdensome to the conquerors:
the expenses of the former war, for which they
earnestly desired some compensation, were now, on
the contrary, increased by new ones. The mem-
bers of the league, therefore, joyfully accepted
the emperor’s proposition to take into his charge
and custody the country, together with the duke’s
children ; and, in consideration of this concession,
he promised to accede to the demands of the States.
In February, 1520, the imperial commissioners took
the administration into their own hands ; and by
confirming the treaty of Tiibingen, which Ulrich
at his return had been imprudent enough to re-
voke, they secured a considerable party in the
country.

This first act of Charles’s government wore a
very arbitrary aspect. For it was utterly unheard
of that, as the Swiss expressed it, “‘a prince of the
Holy Empire should be driven from his illustrious
house, contrary to all law, and forcibly despoiled
of the principality which was his by paternal i in-
heritance and right.” But the commissioners re-
garded the election as a triumph of the Austrian
party, and were only anxious to turn it to their
own advantage.

This had not been the intention of the electors, —

* Stumphart, Chronica gwaltiger Verjagung Herzog Ulrichs
(Chronicle of the forcible Expulsion of Duke Ulrich): Sattler,
Herzoge, ii. Appendixes, p. 43.

+ Gwalt K. Karls V. auf seine Commissarien, ibid. p. 79.

Crap. I. NEW GOVERNMENT. " 495

least of all that of Frederic of Saxony; on the
contrary, they had immediately considered how to
introduce an uniform representative government,
to convoke an imperial diet, and to appoint a
Council of Regency. The court of Spain appeared
to approve cordially of these measures; a pro-
clamation arrived, in which Elector Frederic was
nominated lieutenant (Statthalter) of the Regency,
and was also intreated to give his good counsel
in public affairs. But the commissioners did not
think fit to convoke a diet, still less to nominate a
Council of Regency. They carefully avoided con-
sulting the elector, and kept the diploma of his
nomination to themselves. They were as fully
determined now, as under Maximilian, to resist all
interference on the part of the States; they chose
to retain the whole of the public business in their
own hands.

This ought to excite no wonder. ‘These imperial
functionaries remained firmly attached to those views
which had become current under Maximilian, and
regarded the new government as a mere continu-
ation of the old.

It therefore became a matter of double solicitude
to ascertain in what light the young prince, on his
arrival in Germany, and those around him, would
regard affairs, or in what spirit he would under-
take their management. His commanding station
and wide sovereignty naturally led people to expect
views proportionally grand and elevated; and such
indeed were displayed in all his letters. He wrote
to Elector Frederic that he should find that he

AFG. 9” NEW GOVERNMENT. Boox IL.

had given his vote to the most grateful of princes ;
that he would shortly appear in person, hold a diet,
and order the affairs of the empire with the counsel
and approbation of his well-beloved, the Elector ;
“for,” said he, ‘we esteem marvellously the de-
signs, the counsel, and the wisdom of thy rule.” *

Before, however, Charles could arrive, the re-
ligious affairs of Germany had assumed a character
which rendered the question, what course he would
embrace, no Jess important to the church than to
the empire.

* Instruction to Hieronymus Brunner, Barselona, Sept. 25.
1519, in a register in the Weimar archives, which lays open
the whole of the circumstances.

427

CHAPTER III.

FIRST DEFECTION FROM THE PAPACY, 1519-20.

CAJETAN AND MILTITZ.

Durine the interval we have been treating of, it
had more than once appeared probable that the
Lutheran controversy would be brought to a peace-
ful termination ; to this both sides were inclined.

During the diet at Augsburg, Elector Frederic
prevailed on himself to pay a visit to the papal
legate, and to invite his mediation. I do not find
that the latter had any special commission from Rome
to this effect, but his general powers gave him full
liberty to accept such an office. He promised the
elector to listen to the monk whenever he should
appear before him, and to dismiss him with paternal
kindness.*

The business of the meeting was already ended,
when Luther, well pleased at not being obliged to
go to Rome, set out to present himself before the
cardinal. He travelled indeed ina most lowly
guise; the cowl he wore was borrowed, and he

* Frederic’s letter to Cajetan (Loscher, ii. 543.): “ Per-
suaseramus nobis, vestram pietatem audito Martino secundum
yestram multiplicem promissionem eum paterne et benevole
dimissuram esse.” See Luther, wider Hans Worst Altenb. vii.
462. Letter to Lang in de Wette, i. 141.

428 CAJETAN. é; Boox II.

wandered on, craving hospitality from convent to
convent, ill, and sometimes exhausted even to
fainting.* He often said afterwards, that if the
cardinal had treated him kindly, he might easily
have induced him to keep silence. When he came
into his presence he fell down at his feet.
Unhappily, however, this legate, Thomas de Vio
of Gaeta (Cajetan), was not only a representative
of the Curia, but a most zealous Thomist. His
mother, it is said, dreamt when she was with child
of him, that she saw St. Thomas in person teaching
him, and afterwards bearing him to heaven.} In his
sixteenth year, in spite of the great reluctance of his
family, he was not to be withheld from entering a
Dominican convent, where laying aside his original
name of James, he took that of his saint, and exerted
all his powers thoroughly to imbue his mind with
the doctrines of St. Thomas, whom he esteemed
the most perfect theologian that ever existed. He
undertook to defend his great work, the Summa,
step by step, against the objections of the Scotists.t
Luther, therefore, was already extremely odious
to him as a nominalist, as an impugner of the theo-
logical despotism of St. Thomas, and as leader of
an. active opposition party in a newly-created uni-
versity. At first he replied to Luther’s humility

* Luther to Spalatin, Oct. 10. 1518. in de W. 142.

+t So says the Biography in Roccaberti, Bibl. Max. t. xix.
p- 443.

{ “ Divi Thome Summa cum commentariis Thome de Vio,
Lugduni, 1587. Prefatio: “ Inter theologos quem divo Thome
Aquinati preferre ausis, invenies neminem.”

Cuap. III. CAJETAN. 429

.with the official fatherly condescension of a spiritual
superior. But the natural antagonism between them
soon broke out. The. cardinal was not disposed to be
satisfied with mere silence, nor would he permit the
matter to come to a disputation, as Luther proposed ;
he thought he had demonstrated the monk’s error to
him in a few words, and demanded a recantation.
This awakened in Luther a feeling of that complete
contrariety of opinions and systems, which acknow-
ledges no subordination, whether spiritual or tem-
poral. It appeared to him that the cardinal. did
not even understand his idea of faith, far less
confute it: a conversation arose in which Luther
displayed more reading, more distinctness and
depth of views, than the legate had given him
credit for; speculations of so extraordinary a kind
had never come before him; the deep-set glittering
eyes, fixed upon his, inspired him with a sort of
horror; at length he exclaimed that Luther must
either recant or never venture into his sight again.*

It was the dominican system which here, clad
in purple, repulsed its antagonist. Luther, though
furnished with a safe-conduct from the emperor,
thought himself no longer secure from violence ; he
drew up an appeal to the pope, praying him to in-
quire into the matter, and took to flight. His going
corresponded with his coming. Escaping through

* Luther’s report in the Acta Augustana, his letters, the
addresses of the legate, finally a letter from Staupitz, in
Grimm (passim, p. 128.), give sufficient information about this
interview. It is to be regretted that the account sent by the
legate to Rome has never come to light.

430 CAJETAN. Boox II.

a secret gate which his Augsburg friends opened.
for him by night, mounted on a horse procured for
him by his provincial, Staupitz, habited in his cowl,
and without any proper riding garments, he rode,
accompanied by a mounted guide, eight long Ger-
man miles the first day; on alighting, he fell half
dead from fatigue by the side of his horse on the
straw. But he was happily out of the immediate
jurisdiction of the legate.

Cajetan’s accusations soon followed him to Sax-
ony. He conjured the elector not to stain the
glory of his house for the sake of an heretical friar;
if he did not choose to send him to Rome, at least
to get rid of him out of his country; he declared
that Rome would never suffer this affair to drop.
But he could no longer produce any impression ;
his indiscreet and violent conduct had robbed him
of all credit with Frederic. The university wrote
to their prince that they knew no otherwise than
that Luther showed all due reverence for the
church, and even for the pope; were there wick-
edness in the man, they would be the first to
notice it. This corporation was irritated that the
legate should treat one of its members as a heretic,
before any sentence had been pronounced.* Thus
seconded, Frederic replied to the legate, that it
had not yet been shown by any of the numerous
learned men in his own states, or those contiguous,

* With regard to the brief in which mention is made of a
sentence already passed (in Liéscher, ii. 438.), I think I have
shown in an Excursus, that it is not genuine.

Cuar. III. MILTITZ. 431

that Luther was a heretic; and refused to banish
him.*

Luther however did not conceal from himself
that the sentence pronounced by Rome might
very probably be unfavourable to him. He hastened
to secure himself against this as far as possible by
a fresh appeal to the general council which was
just about to be called.

But the conduct of the cardinal did not obtain
the approbation of Rome. That court was not
disposed to alienate so considerable and respected
a sovereign as Frederic, who had just acquired
twofold weight by his conduct at the election,
and with whom it had probably rested: to raise the
King of France to the imperial throne, as the pope .
had desired. Leo therefore now made an attempt to
bring the discussion concerning Luther to an
amicable conclusion. He determined to send the
elector the golden rose, a mark of the apostolical
favour, for which that prince had always been very
anxious. In order to draw the loosened ties closer
between them, he likewise despatched a native of
Saxony, and agent of the elector at Rome, to
him as nuncio.

Karl von Miltitz unquestionably showed great
address in the manner in which he set about the
affair. .

On his arrival in Germany he abstained from
visiting the legate, who indeed had lost all influence,
and now showed a sullen resentment against the

* Correspondence in Loscher, 537—542.

432 MILTITZ. Boox II.

elector; even on the journey, Miltitz contracted an
intimacy with one of Frederic’s privy councillors,
Degenhard Pfeffinger. He did not scruple among
friends, over the convivial table, or even in inns
and taverns, to join in the complaints which were
made in Germany of the Curia, and of the abuses
of the church ; nay, to confirm them by anecdotes
of what he had himself witnessed. But he assured
his hearers that he knew the pope, and had influence
with him, and that Leo did not approve these
things. He pronounced the most entire and dis-
tinct disapprobation of the scandalous proceedings
of the vendors of indulgences; and in short the
reputation which preceded him was such that
Tetzel did not dare to present himself before him.*

On the other hand, the prince, towards whom
he maintained the demeanour of a subject and
servant, and Luther himself, whom he treated
very indulgently, conceived great confidence in
him. Without much trouble, he succeeded in bring-
ing about that degree of approximation between
himself and the anti-dominican party, which was
absolutely necessary to the success of his ne-
gotiation.

On the 3d January, 1519, he had an interview
with Luther at Altenburg. The nuncio represented
to the monk the evils which arose from his vehe-
mence, and the great breach which he would thus

* His letter of apology, subscribed “ Brother Tetzel, on the
last day of Dec. 1519,” (2. e. 1518,) in Walch, xv. p. 860. The
rest of Miltitz’s Correspondence, first published by Cyprian, is
also to be found in Walch.

Cuav. III. . MILTITZ. 433

make in the church: he implored him with tears
to lay these things to heart. Luther promised to
remedy, by a public explanation of his doctrine,
whatever mischief he might have done. On the
other hand, the nuncio gave up the idea of bringing
Luther to a recantation. They came to an agree-
ment that the matter should be referred to a
German bishop, and that, meanwhile, both parties
should be bound to observe silence.* So, thought
Luther, the controversy would die away. They
embraced and parted.

The explanation which Luther soon after pub-
lished, in consequence of this conversation, is very
remarkable. He touches on all the ‘controverted
points of the moment. Without abandoning the
free attitude he had assumed, he shows that he
considers himself as still. within the pale of the
Roman church; for example, he maintains that
the saints ought to be invoked for spiritual, rather
than for temporal gifts, but he does not deny that
God works miracles at their graves; he still admits
the doctrine of purgatory, and of indulgences in
a certain sense; he wishes for some relaxation of
the commandments of the church, but is of opinion
that this could only be granted by an ecclesias-
tical council; although he ascribes salvation to
the fear of God and the state of the thoughts and
intentions, he does not entirely reject good works.
It is evident that on every point he insists on in-
ward, rather than outward influences and merits ;

* “Tn ir selbs vorgehn.” — Luther to the Electors, in De
Wette, i. 218. :
VOL. I. FF

434 MILTITZ: Boox IL.

but he does so with great moderation, and endea-
vours to maintain external observances. In the
same spirit he speaks of the church. He sees her
essence in “ inward unity and love;” but he does
not reject her constitution ; he acknowledges the su-
premacy of the church of Rome, “ where St. Peter
and St. Paul, forty-six popes, and hundreds of thou-
sands of martyrs, poured out their blood, and over-
came hell and the world:” no sin that can be com-
mitted in her can justify us in separating ourselves
from her, or in resisting the commands of the pope.*

With this explanation the ecclesiastical authority
might for the moment be content — and indeed was
forced to be content. For, if Elector Frederic
chose to accept it, there was no other power that
could be turned against Luther: so great was
the interest which the nation already took in his
cause; so strong the aversion which repelled all
interference of the court of Rome.

In the early months of the year 1519, when the
demands of the last diet in behoof of the Turkish war
were made to the several States in all parts of
Germany, the doubts expressed in that assembly as
to the reality of the intention which served as
pretext were now repeated in various circles, and
were more and more widely diffused; all the well-
founded complaints which had there been more dis-
tinctly stated than ever, were now the topic of
discourse through the whole nation.

Moreover, the interest which the papal legate had
evinced in the views of Francis I. on the imperial

* D.M. L. Unterricht auf etliche Artikel so ihm von seinen
Abgénnern aufgelegt worden: Walch, xv. 812.

Cuap. IIT. MILTITZ. ; 435

crown, excited great disgust. It is a fact well worth
notice, that the whole Austrian party thus naturally —
fell into a state of hostility to the Roman see. At
the court of its leader, the Elector of Mainz, there
appeared satires in which the pompous inanity of
the legate, his personal peculiarities and the op-
pressive nature of his office, were ridiculed in the
bitterest manner. In the spring of 1519%*, it was
with difficulty that he could find a boatman in
Mainz who would consent to take him down the
river to Niederwesel, where the Rhenish electors
held a meeting: he was once told that he must
renounce all his French schemes if he wished to get
home in a whole skin.f

This universal unpopularity compelled the court
of Rome to observe a discreet reserve, to which its
interest in the election contributed, and thus it
happened that Rome once more tried by every
means in its power to be upon a footing of amity
with Elector Frederic. Another plenipotentiary
of the Curia besides Miltitz appeared in Saxony.
The legate, although with obvious ill will, was at
length prevailed upon to deliver to the elector the
golden rose which had been entrusted to him, and
which he had till now withheld. The prospect
of putting an end to the controversy in Germany
was desirable and commodious even to him. The
Archbishop of Treves was selected as judge.

* Hutten’s Febris Prima (op. iii. 109.) belongs to this

period.
+ Letter to Ziirich in Anshelm, Berne Chronik, v. 373.
+ Miltitz to the Electors: Walch, xv. 879. : he had seen the

FF 2

436 MELANCHTHON. Boox II.

ARRIVAL OF MELANCHTHON.

Tue state of suspended controversy and_pre-
liminary calm that now arose was peculiarly
advantageous to the university of Wittenberg.
There was a general sentiment of an undertaking
successfully begun, increasing in force of opposition,
but yet not ababieces to the condemnation of the
church. The members of the university had time
to carry forward the proper studies of the place in
the spirit that had from the first presided over
them. The most eminent teachers still held the
same opinions on the main question. Besides this,
in the summer of 1518, they had acquired a youth-
ful assistant, whose labours from the first moment
gave new life to their whole proceedings.

Philip Schwarzerd, surnamed Melanchthon, was,
in the truest and most perfect’ sense, a disciple of
Reuchlin. Reuchlin was one of his nearest relations,
and had directed his education: the young man
followed the precepts and the example of his master
with intelligent docility; the native powers which
well-conducted studies never fail to develop, the
sympathy he received from his fellow-students, and
above all, a matchless capacity, certain, from the
first, of its vocation, led him rapidly forwards. In
his 17th or 18th year he had already begun to

legate at Coblentz. The instruction to Miltitz, 1. 1, must like-
wise be assigned to the month of May, asit refers to his journey
into Saxony, which he mentions in his letter, dated Wed-
nesday after Misericordia, May 11.

Crap. ITI. MELANCHTHON. 437

teach in Tiibingen, and had published two or three
little books on grammatical subjects.*

But the mind of the pupil, like that of the master,
was not satisfied with philological studies. He at-
tended lectures in all faculties; for the sciences
were not as yet cultivated in such detail or in
so special a manner, as to render that impossible;
they could still furnish nutriment to a large and
liberal curiosity. Melanchthon felt peculiarly at-
tracted towards the study of philosophy, in com-
parison with which all his other pursuits appeared
to him mere waste of time. But the rigid, sta-
tionary spirit of the old universities still reigned in
Tiibingen ; and while his whole intellectual powers
were stretching forward to unknown regions, his in-
structors sought to bind him down to a lifeless
routine.

A circumstance, however, occurred which decided
both his outward destiny and the direction of his
mind. In the spring of 1518, Elector Frederic
applied to Reuchlin to send him a teacher of the

Greek language *for his university. Without a
~ moment’s hesitation, Reuchlin recommended “ his
kinsman and friend,” whom he himself had in-
structed.f This might be regarded as involving
Melanchthon’s decision; for between master and
disciple there was that noble relation which exists

* Schnurrer de Phil. Melanchthonis rebus Tubingensibus :
Orationes Academ. ed. Paulus, p. 52. Prefatio in primam
editionem operum. Bretschneiders Corpus Reformatorum, iv.
715.

+ Correspondence in the Corp. Ref. i. 28.

FF 3

438 MELANCHTHON. Boox II.

between a youth who beholds the world in the
imperfect light shed over distant objects, and the
admitted superiority of a matured judgment.
‘“¢ Whither thou wilt send me,” writes Melanchthon
to Reuchlin, “ there will I go; what thou wilt
make of me, that will I become.” ‘“ Get thee out,”
answered Reuchlin, “from thy country and from
thy kindred.” With the words once addressed
to Abraham, he blessed him and bade him depart.
In August, 1518, Melanchthon cameto Wittenberg.
His first determination was, as he says, to devote
himself entirely to the university, and to raise its
fame in the classical studies which had as yet been
cultivated with little success. With the high spirits
of youth he reckoned up the labours he had before
him, and hastened to.enter upon them.* Before
September was over, he dedicated to the elector
the translation of one of Lucian’s works; in October
he printed the Epistle to Titus and a little dic-
tionary; in November he wrote the preface to a
Hebrew Grammar. He immediately undertook a
more elaborate work, — his Rhetoric, which appeared
in three books, in January, 1519. In February
followed another discourse; in March and April
editions of several of Plutarch’s writings, with a
preface—all during an equally varied and laborious
course of teaching; for the youthful stranger

undertook to give instructions in Hebrew as well
as Greek.t

* To Spalatin, Sept. 1518. Corp. Ref. i. 43.

+ Luther to Spalatin, Jan 25. in De Wette, i. 214. Upon
these two correspondences, as may be imagined, my whole nar-
rative is founded,

Crap. III. MELANCHTHON. 439

Yet these immediate occupations led neither to
the scope, nor to the results, of his laborious
studies.

It was an important circumstance that a perfect
master of Greek arose at this moment at a university,
where the development of the Latin theology already
led to a return to the first genuine documents of pri-
mitive Christianity. Luther now began to pursue
this study with earnestness. His mind was relieved, ©
and his confidence strengthened, when the sense
of a Greek phrase threw a sudden light on his
theological ideas; when, for example, he learned
that the idea of repentance (pcenitentia), which,
according to the language of the Latin church,
signified expiation or satisfaction, in the original
conception of the Founder and the apostles of Chris-
tianity signified nothing but a change in the state
of mind*: it seemed as if a mist was suddenly
withdrawn from before his eyes.

It was also of inestimable value to Melanchthon
that he could here devote himself to subjects
which filled his whole soul, and that he now found
the substance of those forms to which his attention
had hitherto been principally directed. _ He
embraced with enthusiasm the theological views
of Luther, and above all, his profound expo-
sition of the doctrine of justification. But he was
not formed to receive these opinions passively.
He was one of those extraordinary spirits, appear-
ing at rare intervals, who attain to the full posses-

* per dyvocc.

FF 4

440 MELANCHTHON. Boox II.

sion and use of their powers at an early period of
life. He was now but just twenty-one. With
the precision which solid philological studies seldom
fail to impart, —with the nice instinct natural to
the frame of his mind, he seized the theological
element which was offered to his grasp.

The somewhat unfavourable impression which
‘the youthful and unpretending appearance of
the new comer had at first made, was quickly
effaced. The scholars caught the infection of their
teacher’s zeal. ‘‘ They are as industrious as ants
at the university,” says Luther. Reforms in the
method of instruction were proposed. With the
approbation of the court, lectures were discontinued
which had no value but for the scholastic system,
and others were instituted, founded on classical
studies; the conditions upon which academical
degrees were granted were rendered less severe.
These measures unquestionably tended to place
Wittenberg in stronger contrast to the other uni-
versities; new views and ideas were introduced.
Luther’s letters show the ferment that was going
on within him, but they equally show that neither
he nor those associated with him were conscious
of being involved in a general struggle with the
church of Rome. We saw how carefully Luther
kept within the bounds prescribed by the church;
and Melanchthon, in one of his prefaces, extols
the services rendered by his sovereign to monas-
teries.* This, as well as the conduct pursued by

* Dedication of Lucian in Calumniam.~ C. R. i. 47.

Cnar. ITI. DISPUTATION AT LEIPZIG. 44]

Miltitz, and finally also by the legate, shows that
every thing wore a peaceful aspect.

But at this very moment, when external peace
at least was restored, and when, though vehement
struggles were to be anticipated from differences of
opinion and of education, it was possible they might
be confined within the region of school learning,
there arose a contest touching those important
doctrines whereon the Church and the State are
founded, and lighting up that war which has never
since. been extinguished. It must be admitted that
Luther was not the person who caused its out-
break.

DISPUTATION AT LEIPZIG.

Durine the diet of 1518, Eck had appeared in
Augsburg, dissatisfied that his polemical writings
had as yet procured him neither emolument nor
honour * : he had called on Luther, and had agreed
with him, in a perfectly amicable manner, publicly
to fight out an old controversy which he had
with Dr. Carlstadt in Wittenberg, concerning grace
and free will. Luther had readily offered his me-
diation, in order, as he says, to give the lie to
the opinion that theologians cannot differ without
hostility. Carlstadt consented to dispute with Eck
in Erfurt or Leipzig ; upon which Eck immediately
published a prospectus of the disputation, and made
it known as widely as possible.

* Bartholini Commentarius de comitiis Augustanis, p. 645.

4492 DISPUTATION AT LEIPZIG. Boox II.

Luther’s astonishment was extreme when he
saw in this prospectus certain opinions announced
as the subject of the debate, of which he was far more
the champion than Carlstadt. He held this for an
act of faithlessness and duplicity which he was
called upon openly to resist; the agreement he had
just concluded with Miltitz seemed to him broken ;
he was determined to take up the gauntlet.*

It was of vast importance that Eck had an-
nexed to the dogmatic controversy, a proposition as
to the origin of the prerogatives of the papacy. At
a moment when anti-papal opmions were so de-
cidedly triumphant throughout the nation, he had
the clumsy servility to stir a question, always of very
difficult and dubious solution, yet from which the
whole system of the Church and State depended,
and, when once agitated, certain to occupy universal
attention: he ventured to irritate an adversary who
knew no reservations, who was accustomed to defend
his opinions to the utmost, and who had already
the voice of the nation on his side. In reference
to a former assertion of Luther’s, which had at-
tracted little attention, Eck propounded the maxim,
that the primacy of the Pope of Rome was derived
from Christ himself, and from. the times of St.
Peter; not, as his opponent had hinted, from those
of Constantine and Sylvester. The consequences
of this gross imprudence were soon apparent.
Luther, who now began to study the original docu-

* Luther's letters to Sylvius, Feb. 3.; Spalatin, Feb. 7.;
Lang, April 13.

Cuap. IIT. DISPUTATION AT LEIPZIG. | 443

ments of the papal law — the decretals, and had
often in the course of this study felt his Christian
convictions wounded, answered with a much bolder
assertion, namely, that the primacy of Rome had
been first established by the decretals of the later
popes in the last four centuries (he meant, per-
haps, since Gregory VII.), and that the primitive
church knew nothing of it.*

It is not surprising that the ecclesiastical autho-
rities in Saxony, (for example, the bishop of Mer-
seburg) and even the theologians of the university,
were not much pleased that a disputation of the
kind at last agreed upon between the_ parties,
should be held in Leipzig. Even the elector
hesitated for a moment whether he should allow
Luther to go. But as he had the firmest con-
viction. that hidden truth would best be brought
tolight in this manner, he at length determined that
it should take place, and endeavoured to obviate
every objection that stood in its way. It was
settled that, together with various other important
points of doctrine on the mysteries of faith, the
question, whether the papacy was established by
God, or whether it was instituted by man, and
consequently might be abolished by man (for that
is in fact the point at issue in the two doctrines),
was to be argued in a public disputation, at a great
university, in the face of all Germany; that this

* Contra novos et veteres errores defendet D. Martinus
Lutherus has sequentes positiones in studio Lipsensi. It is the
thirteenth proposition. Opp. lat. Jen. i. 221.

444 DISPUTATION AT LEIPZIG. Boox II.

question, the very one in which all political and
ecclesiastical interests met as in a point, was to be
thus discussed in a period of ferment and of ardent
innovation.

’ At the very moment when the electors assembled
at Frankfurt to choose an emperor, (June, 1519,)
the theologians met to perform an act of no less
importance.

Eck arrived first from Ingolstadt. Johann Mayr
von Eck was unquestionably one of the most emi-
nent scholars of his time—a reputation which he
had spared no pains to acquire. He had visited the
most celebrated professors in various universities:
the Thomist Siistern at Cologne, the Seotists Su-
menhard and Scriptoris at Tiibingen ; he had at-
tended the law lectures of Zasius in Freiburg, those
on Greek of Reuchlin, on Latin of Bebel, on cos-
mography of Reusch. In his twentieth year he
began to write and to lecture at Ingolstadt upon
Occam and Biel’s canon law, on Aristotle’s dialectics
and physics, the most difficult doctrines of dogmatic
theology, and the subtilties of nominalistic morality ;
he then proceeded to the study of the mystics,
whose most curious works had just fallen into his
hands: he set himself, as he says, to establish the
connexion between their doctrines and the Orphico-
platonic philosophy, the sources of which are to be
sought in Egypt and Arabia, and to discuss the
whole in five parts.* He was one of those learned

' * Kekii Epistola de ratione, studiorum suorum, in Strobel’s
Miscellaneen, iii. p. 97.

Cuap. III. DISPUTATION AT LEIPZIG: 445

men who held that the great questions which had
occupied men’s minds were essentially settled; who
worked exclusively with the analytical faculty and
the memory; who were always on the watch to
appropriate to themselves a new subject with which
to excite attention, to get advancement, and to
secure a life of ease and enjoyment. His strongest
taste was for disputation, in which he had made
a brilliant figure in all the universities we have
mentioned, as well as in Heidelberg, Mainz, and
Basle: at Freiburg he had early presided over a
class (the Bursa zum Pfauen) where the chief busi-
ness was practice in disputation ; he then took long
journeys, —for example, to Vienna and Bologna, —
expressly to dispute there. It is most amusing to see
in his letters the satisfaction with which he speaks
of his Italian journey: how he was encouraged
to undertake it by a papal nuncio; how, before
his departure, he was visited by the young Mark-
grave of Brandenburg; the very honourable recep-
tion he experienced on his way, in Italy as well as
in Germany, from both spiritual and temporal lords,
who invited him to their tables ; how, when certain
young men had ventured to contradict him at one
of these dinners, he had confuted them with the.
utmost ease, and left them filled with astonishment
and admiration ; and lastly, how, in spite of mani-
fold opposition, he had at last brought the most
learned of the learned in Bologna to subscribe to
his maxims.* He regarded a disputation with the

* Riederer, Nachrichten, &c., iti. 47.

446 DISPUTATION AT LEIPZIG. Boox IL.

eye of a practised fencer, as the arena of unfailing
victory; his only wish was to find new adversaries
on whom to try his weapons. He therefore seized
with avidity on an opportunity of extending his fame
in North Germany. He was now seen in the midst
of the Leipzig professors (who welcomed him as an
ally against their neighbouring rival and enemy),
taking part in the procession of the Corpus Christi,
dressed in his priestly garments and with an air of
great devotion. In his letters we find that he did
not neglect to institute a nice comparison between
the Saxon beer and that of Bavaria; and also that
the fair sinners of Leipzig did not escape his notice.*

On the 24th of June the Wittenbergers arrived ;
the professors in low open waggons on rollers or
solid wooden wheels (Rollwagen), Carlstadt first,
then Luther and Melanchthon, and some young
licentiates and bachelors; with them was Duke
Barnim of Pomerania, who was then studying in
Wittenberg and held the dignity of rector; around
them, on foot, some hundreds of zealous students
armed with halberds, battle-axes, and spears. It
was observed that the Leipzigers did not come out
to meet them, as was the custom and the courtesy
of those times. f

With the mediation of Duke George, the terms of
the combat were next settled: Eck reluctantly
acquiesced in the condition that the speeches and

* Eck to Haven and Burkard, July 1., in Walch, xy. p. 1456.
In this respect he had the very worst reputation.
+ Pfeifer’s Beschreibung, ibid. p. 1435.

Cuap. III. DISPUTATION AT LEIPZIG. 447

rejoinders should be written down by notaries;
while Luther was forced to concede that the de-
cision was to be left to certain universities; he
himself proposed Paris and Erfurt. The duke in-
sisted, with peculiar earnestness, on these things ; he
treated the affair like a trial at law, and wanted to
send the documents, as it were to a court of appeal
for its decision. Meanwhile he ordered a spacious
hall in the castle to be got ready for the literary
duel; two pulpits were placed opposite to each
other, covered with tapestry, on which were the
figures of the warrior saints, St.George and St.
Martin ; there was ample provision of tables for the
notaries, and of benches for the audience. At
length, on the 27th of June, the action was
commenced with a mass and invocation of the Holy
Ghost.

Carlstadt had insisted on his right‘of opening the
debate, but he acquired little glory from it. He
brought books, out of which he read passages, then
hunted for others, then read again; the objections
which his opponent advanced one day, he answered
the next.* How different a disputator was Johann
Eck! His knowledge was all at his command, ready
for use at the moment; he required so little time
for preparation, that immediately after his return
from a ride he mounted the chair. He was tall,
with large muscular limbs, and loud penetrating
voice, and walked backwards.and forwards while
speaking ; he had an exception ready to take against

* Rubeus, in Walch, xv. 1491.

448 DISPUTATION AT LEIPZIG. Boox II.

every argument; his memory and address dazzled
his hearers. In the matter itself—the explanation
of the doctrine of grace and free-will—no progress
was, of course, made. Sometimes the combatants
approximated so nearly in opinion, that each boasted
he had brought over the other to his side, but
they soon diverged again. With the exception of
a distinction made by Eck, nothing new was pro-
duced*; the most important points were scarcely
touched upon ; and the whole affair was sometimes
so tedious that the hall was emptied.
he interest was, therefore, the more intense,
when at length, on Monday the 4th of July, at
seven in the morning, Luther arose ; the antagonist
whom Eck most ardently desired to meet, and
whose rising fame he hoped to crush by a brilliant
victory. Luther was of the middle size, at that
time so thin as to be mere skin and bone; he
possessed neither the thundering organ, nor the
ready memory stored with various knowledge, nor
the skill and dexterity acquired in the gladiatorial
exercises of the schools, that distinguished his op-
ponent. But he, too, stood in the prime of man-
hood, and in the fulness of his strength: he was in
his thirty-sixth year ; his voice was melodious and
clear ; he was perfectly versed in the Bible, and its
aptest sentences presented themselves unbidden to
his mind: above all, he inspired an_ irresistible
conviction that he sought the truth. He was

* Rogatus largireturne totum opus bonum esse a deo re-
spondit : totum quidem, non autem totaliter.— Melanchthon.

Cuap. III. DISPUTATION AT LEIPZIG. 449

always cheerful at home, and a joyous jocose com-
panion at table; he even, on this grave occasion,
ascended the platform with a nosegay in his hand ;
but when there, he displayed the intrepid and self-
forgetting earnestness arising from the depths of a
conviction till now unfathomed, even by himself. He
drew forth new thoughts and placed them in the
fire of the battle, with a determination that knew no
fear and no personal regards. His features bore the
traces of the storms that had passed over his soul,
and of the courage with which he was prepared to
encounter those that yet awaited him; his whole
aspect breathed profound thought, joyousness of
temper, and confidence in the future. The battle
immediately commenced on the question of the au-
thority of the papacy, which, at once intelligible
and important, riveted universal attention. ‘Two
sons of German peasants (for Eck, too, was the son
of a peasant, — Michel Mayr, who was for many years
Ammann* of Eck, as Luther’s father was Rathsherr*
of Mansfeld) represented the two great tendencies
of opinion which divided the world then, and divide
it now; the future condition of the Church and the
' State mainly hung on the issue of their conflict —
on the success of the one in attack, and of the other
in defence.

It was immediately obvious that Luther could
not maintain his assertion, that the pope’s primacy
dated only from the last four centuries: he soon
found himself forced from this position by ancient

* Titles of local magistrates. — 'TRANSL. .
VOL. I. GG

450 DISPUTATION AT LEIPZIG. Boox II.

documents, and the rather, that no criticism had
as yet shaken the authenticity of the false decretals.
But his attack on the doctrine, that the primacy of
the pope (whom he still persisted in regarding as the
ecumenical bishop) was founded on Scripture and
by divine right, was far more formidable. Christ’s
words, ‘‘ Thou art Peter, feed my sheep,” which
have always been cited in this controversy, were
brought forward *: Luther laboured to support the
already well-known explanation of them, at variance
with that of the curia, by other passages which
record similar commissions given to the apostles.
Eck quoted passages from the Fathers in support
of his opinions, to which Luther opposed others
from the same source. As soon as they got into
these more. recondite regions, Luther’s superiority
became incontestible. One of his main arguments
was, that the Greeks had never acknowledged the
pope, and yet had not been pronounced heretics ;
the Greek church had stood, was standing, and
would stand, without the pope; it belonged to
Christ as much as the Roman. Eck did not he-
sitate at once to declare that the Christian and the
Roman church were one; that the churches of
Greece and Asia had fallen away, not only from
the pope, but from the Christian faith — they were

* In the exposition by Nicolaus von Lire (Lyranus) also, of
which Luther made the most use, there occurs this explanation,
differing from that of the curia, of the passage in Matthew,
chap. xvi.: “ Quia tu es Petrus, «7. e¢. confessor vere petra,
qui est Christus factus ; — et super hanc petram, quam confessus
es, 7. e. super Christum, edificabo ecclesiam meam.”

Cuap. III. DISPUTATION AT LEIPZIG. A5lL

unquestionably heretics: in the whole circuit of the
Turkish empire, for example, there was not one soul
that could be saved, with the exception of the few
who adhered to the pope of Rome. “ How?” said
Luther, “ would you pronounce damnation on the
whole Greek church, which has produced the most
eminent fathers, and so many thousand saints, of
whom not one had even heard of a Roman pri-
mate ? Would Gregory of Nazianzen, would the
great Basil, not be saved’? or would the pope and
- his satellites drive them out of heaven?” These
expressions prove how greatly the omnipotence and
exclusive validity of the forms of the Latin church,
and the identity with Christianity which she claimed,
were shaken by the fact that, beyond her pale,
the ancient Greek church, which she had _ herself
acknowledged, stood in all the venerable authority of
her great teachers. It was now Eck’s turn to be
hard pressed: he repeated that there had been many
heretics in the Greek church, and that he alluded
to them, not to the Fathers ,—a miserable evasion,
which did not in the least touch the assertion of his
adversary. Eck felt this, and hastened back to the
_domain of the Latin church. He particularly
insisted that Luther’s opinion, —that the primacy of
Rome was of human institution, and not of divine
right, —was an error of the poor brethren of Lyons,
of Wickliffe and Huss, but had been condemned by
the popes and especially by the general councils
wherein dwelt the spirit of God, and recently at that
of Constance. This new fact was as indisputable as
the former. Eck was not satisfied with Luther’s

GG 2

452 DISPUTATION AT. LEIPZIG. Boox IL.

declaration that he had nothing to do with the
Bohemians, nay, that he condemned their schism;
and that he would not be answered out of the Col-
lectanea of inquisitors, but out of the Scriptures.
The question had now arrived at its most critical
and important moment. Did Luther acknowledge
the direct influence of the Divine Spirit over the
Latin church, and the binding force of the decrees
of her councils, or did he not? Did he inwardly
adhere to her, or did he not? We must recollect
that we are here not far from the frontier of
Bohemia; in a land which, in consequence of the
anathema pronounced in Constance, had expe-
rienced all the horrors of a long and desolating
war, and had placed its glory in the resistance it
had offered to the Hussites: at a university
founded in opposition to the spirit and doctrine of
John Huss: in the face of princes, lords, and
commoners whose fathers had fallen in this strug-
gle; it was said, that delegates from the Bo-
hemians, who had anticipated the turn which this
conflict must take, were also present: Luther saw
the danger of his position. Should he really reject
the prevailing notion of the exclusive power of the
Roman church to secure salvation; oppose a council
by which John Huss had been condemned to the
flames, and perhaps draw down a like fate upon
himself? Or should he deny that higher and more
comprehensive idea of a Christian church which he
had conceived, and in which his whole soul lived
and moved ? Luther did not waver for a moment.
He had the boldness to affirm, that among the

Cuap. III. DISPUTATION AT LEIPZIG. 453

articles on which the council of Constance grounded
its condemnation of John Huss, some were fun-
damentally Christian and evangelical. The assertion
was received with universal astonishment. Duke
George, who was present, put his hands to his sides,
and shaking his head uttered aloud his wonted curse,
‘A plague upon it!” * Eck now gathered fresh
courage. It was hardly possible, he said, that
Luther could censure a council, since his Grace the
Elector had expressly forbidden any attack upon
councils. Luther reminded him that the council
of Constance had not condemned all the articles of
Huss as heretical, and specified some which were
likewise to be found in St. Augustine. Eck replied
that all were rejected ; the sense in which these par-
ticular articles were understood was to be deemed
heretical ; for a council could not err... Luther an-
swered that no council could create a new article
of faith; how then could it be maintained that no
council whatever was subject to error? “ Reverend
father,” replied Eck, “if you believe that a council
regularly convoked can err, you are to me as a
heathen and a publican.”

Such were the results of this disputation.f It
was continued for a time, and opinions more or less
conflicting on purgatory, indulgences, and penance
were uttered. Eck renewed the interrupted con-

* “This I myself heard and saw.” — Fréschel’s Report in
Walch, xv. 1400. ’

+ “Disputatio Excellentissimorum Theologorum Johannis
Eecii et D. Martini Lutheri Augustiniani que Lipsiz ccepta
fuit iv die Julii ad 1519. Opera Lutheri Jen. i. 231.

aga 3

454 PROGRESS OF THEOLOGICAL OPPOSITION. Boox IL.

test with Carlstadt; the reports were sent, after the
solemn conclusion, to both universities ; but all these
measures could lead to nothing further. The main
result of the meeting was, that Luther no longer
acknowledged the authority of the Roman church
in matters of faith. At first, he had only attacked
the instructions given to the preachers of indul-
gences, and the rules of the later schoolmen, but
had expressly retained the decretals of the popes:
then he had rejected these, but with appeal to the
decision of a council; he now emancipated himself
from this last remaining human authority also; he
recognised none but that of the Scriptures.

PROGRESS OF THE THEOLOGICAL OPPOSITION. —

At this period Luther conceived an idea of the
Church different from any he had before entertained
— deeper and more comprehensive. He recognised
in the Oriental and Greek Christians true members
of the universal church: he no longer admitted the
necessity of a visible head; he acknowledged none
but the Invisible, the ever-living Founder, whom he
regarded as standing in a mystical relation to his
faithful disciples of every nation and clime. This
was not only a dogmatical innovation, but at the
same time the recognition of an incontestible fact
—the validity of Christianity without the pale of
the Latin church. In asserting this opinion, Luther
now took up a position which enabled him to ap-
propriate all the various elements of opposition to

Cuar. III. PROGRESS OF THEOLOGICAL OPPOSITION. 455

the papacy that were afloat in the world. He
made himself better acquainted with the doctrines
of the Greek church, and finding, for example, that
it did not admit the doctrine of purgatory, of which
he also found no mention in Scripture, he ceased to
maintain it, as he had done even in Leipzig.* <A
far stronger impression was made on him by the
_works of John Huss, which now reached him from
Bohemia; he was perfectly astonished at finding
therein the doctrines expounded by St. Augustine,
and derived from St. Paul, which he had adopted
after such violent mental struggles. “I taught
Huss’s opinions,” says he, in February, 1520, ‘“with-
out knowing them, and so did Staupitz: we are all
Hussites, without knowing it. Paul and Augustine
are Hussites: I do not know what to think for
amazement.” He denounces woe to the earth, and
predicts the fearful judgments of God, because
evangelical truth had been known for a century,
and had been condemned and burnt.f It is evi-
dent that he not only receded in opinion from the
church of Rome, but at the same time conceived a
religious disgust, nay hatred, of her. In the same
month, the treatise of Laurentius Valla, on the do-
nation of Constantine, first fell into his hands. It
was a discovery to him that this donation was a
fiction: his German honesty was shocked and ex-
asperated at finding that, as he says, ‘‘ such shame-
less lies had been incorporated into the decretals,

* Letter to Spalatin, Nov. 7.
+ To Spalatin, in De Wette, nr. 208.

GG 4

456 PROGRESS. OF THEOLOGICAL OPPOSITION. BooxII. ©

and almost made articles of faith.” ‘“ What dark-
ness!” exclaims he; ‘what wickedness!” All
spirits and powers that had ever waged war against
the papacy now gathered around him; those which
had never submitted from the beginning; those
which had emancipated themselves and never been
reclaimed ; and all the tendencies of the opposition
that existed in the bosom of Latin Christendom,
whether theological or literary. He had no sooner
begun to study the papal laws, than he thought he
perceived that they were in contradiction to the
Scriptures: he was now persuaded that the Scrip-
tures and the papacy stood irreconcilably opposed.
It is quite in accordance with Luther’s character
that, while seeking a solution of the problem, how
this could be permitted by Divine providence ;
while struggling to recover the broken unity of his
religious convictions, he fell, after violent conten-
tion and torture of mind, on the hypothesis that
the pope was the antichrist whom the world was
taught to expect.* This mythical notion tended,

* To Spalatin,. Feb. 23. (mot 24.) 1520. nr. 204.“ Ego sic
angor ut prope non dubitem papam esse proprie antichristum.”
This notion sprang from the old chiliastic notions still main-
tained in the West (see the passage of Commodian: “ venturi
sunt sub antichristo qui vincunt,” in Gieseler, Kirchenges-
chichte, i. 281.), and was especially cherished in Germany.
One of the oldest German works in print, the first mentioned
by Panzer in the Annal ender ilteren deutschen Literatur, is,
Das Buch vom Entkrist (The Book of Antichrist), or also:
“ Biichlin von des Endte Christs Leben und Regierung durch
verhengniss Gottes, wie er die Welt tuth verkeren mit seyner
falschen Lere und Rat des Teufels, auch wie darnach die zween

Cuar. III. PROGRESS OF THEOLOGICAL OPPOSITION. 457

no doubt, to obscure the historical view which
might perhaps have been obtained of the subject ;
but it had, in fact, no other meaning than that
the doctrine of the church was corrupted, and must
be restored to its original purity. .

Melanchthon, meanwhile, who had taken the part
of an ally and adviser in the Leipzig disputation,
was occupied with a parallel, but peculiar train of
speculation, and now devoted himself to theological
studies with the quiet ardour natural to him; with
the enthusiasm which a successful and steady
progress in a new path always excites.

The principles on which protestant theology rest
are to be traced, at least as much to him as to
Luther. One of the first that he enounced, re-
ferred immediately to the controversy in Leipzig.

Maxims of the Fathers of the church were ap-
pealed to by each side, and with equal justice. To
extricate the matter from this contradiction, Me-
lanchthon laid it down in a little treatise, published
August, 1519, that the Scripture was not to be
expounded according to the Fathers, but that these
were to be understood according to the sense of

Propheten Enoch und Helyas die Christenheit wieder bekeren
mit predigen den Christen Glauben.” “ Little Book concerning
Antichrist’s Life and Rule through God’s Providence, how he
doth pervert the World with his false Doctrine and Counsel of
the Devil; also how, thereafter, the two Prophets, Enoch and
Elias, again convert Christendom with preaching of Christ’s
faith.” In 1516 this book was reprinted at Erfurt. We see
how it came about that Luther was occasionally called Elias by
his followers.

458 PROGRESS OF THEOLOGICAL OPPOSITION. Boox II.

Scripture.* He maintained that the expositions of
the great pillars of the Latin church, Ambrose,
Jerome and even Augustine, were often erroneous.
This principle—that a Christian (or, as he expresses
it, a Catholic) is not bound to receive any thing
but what is contained in Scripture—he treated
more at large in September, 1519. What he had
said of the Fathers, he now repeated of councils —
that their authority was of no account when com-
pared to that of Scripture. Having reached this
point, doubt on doubt inevitably presented itself to
his mind, as to the entire system of authoritative
dogmas. If Luther was resolute in action, Me-
lanchthon was no less so in speculation. Even in
September, 1519, he stated the polemical maxims
in which he attacked the two most important funda-
mental doctrines of the whole system; that of tran-
substantiation, and that of the sacerdotal character ;
whereon the mystery of the visible church, as well
as the sacramental ritual which governs the whole
course of human life, rest. The boldness of the
attack, and the ingenuity with which it was carried

* Defensio contra J. Eckium: C. R. i. p. 113. “ Patres
judice Scriptura recipiantur.”

} Unluckily these propositions, which play a chief part in the
construction of the protestant system of belief, are no longer to
be met with. From a letter of Melanchthon to John Hess, Feb.
1520. (C. R. i. 138.) we get a knowledge of three of them,
which are moreover the most important. According to Luther’s
letter to Staupitz in de Wette, i. nr. 162. they must date from
the month of September. The propositions which appear in the
C. R. p. 126. are, as Férstemann there remarks, of later origin ;
seemingly of the date of July, 1520.

Cuar. III. PROGRESS OF THEOLOGICAL OPPOSITION. 459

on, filled every one with surprise. ‘He has now
appeared to all,” says Luther, “ as wonderful as he
really is. He is the most powerful enemy of Satan
and of the schoolmen; he knows their folly and
the rock of Christ; he has the power and the will
to do the deed. Amen.” Melanchthon now applied
himself with fresh fervour to the study of the New
Testament. He was enchanted by its simplicity,
and found in it true and pure philosophy; he
refers the studious to it as the only refreshment to
the soul, and the afflicted, as pouring peace and joy
into the heart. In his course of study, too, he
thought he perceived that much was contained in
the doctrines of former theologians, which not only
could not be deduced from Scripture, but was at
variance with it, and could never be brought into
accordance with its spirit. In a discourse on the |
doctrines of Paul, pronounced on the 18th of Ja-
nuary, 1520, he first declared this without reserve.
In the following month he remarked that his ob-
jections to transubstantiation and the sacerdotal
character, were applicable to many other doctrines ;
he finds traces of Jewish ceremonies in the seven
sacraments, and esteems the doctrine of the pope’s
infallibility an arrogant pretension, repugnant to
Holy Scripture and to common sense :— most
pernicious opinions, he says, which we ought to
combat with all our might; more than one Her-
cules is needed for the work.* .

- Thus we perceive that Melanchthon arrives at

* Dedication to Bronner, C. R. p. 138. Letter to Hess,

460 . PROGRESS OF THEOLOGICAL OPPOSITION. Boox II.

the same point which Luther had already reached,
though by a calmer and more philosophical path.
It is remarkable how each expresses himself con-
cerning the Scripture, in which both live. “ It fills
the soul,” says Melanchthon: “ it is heavenly am-
brosia.” * ‘“ The word of God,” exclaims Luther,
“¢ig asword, and war, and destruction: it. meets the
children of Ephraim like a lioness in the forest.”
The one views it in reference to the inward thoughts
of man, with which it has so strong an affinity ; the
other, in its relation to the corruptions of the world,
against which it wars; but they come to the same
conclusion. They quitted each other no more.
“That little Greek (Griechlein),” says Luther,
‘“‘outdoes me even in theology.” ‘“ He will make
up to you,” exclaims he, “ for many Martins.” All
his solicitude is that any of those misfortunes should
befall him which are incident to great minds. On
the other hand, Melanchthon was deeply impressed
and penetrated with the thorough comprehension
of St. Paul, peculiar to Luther; he prefers the
latter to the fathers of the church; he finds him
more admirable every time he sees him; even in
ordinary intercourse, he will not admit the justice of
the censures which his joyous and jocose humour
brought upon him. It was truly a divine dispens-
ation that these two men lived together and united
at this crisis. They regarded each other as two
of God’s creatures endowed with different gifts, each
worthy of the other, joined in one common object,

* To Schwebel, Dec. 1519. 128.

Cuap. III. HUTTEN. 461

and holding the same convictions ; a perfect picture
of true friendship. Melanchthon is careful not to
trouble Luther’s mind.* Luther confesses that he
abandons an opinion when Melanchthon does not
approve it.

So immeasurable was the influence which the
literary spirit had obtained over the new and grow-
ing theology ; an influence which we shall now see
it exercising in another manner.

HUTTEN.

The minds which took part in the poetical and
philological movement of Germany of which we
have treated, may be arranged under two distinct
classes. Those of the one class, eager to acquire
and apt to give instruction, sought by tranquil and
laborious study to master the erudition they were
afterwards to diffuse. ‘The whole character of
their labours, which from the first were directed
to the Holy Scriptures, was represented by Me-
lanchthon, and had formed in his person the most
intimate union with the deeper theological ten-
dencies which were exhibited in that of Luther,
and had gained an ascendency at the university
of Wittenberg. We have seen what were the
results of this union. The peaceful study of
letters acquired solidity, depth, and intensity of

* To John Lange, Aug. 1520. “ Spiritum Martini nolim

temere in hac causa, ad quam destinatus i7d mpovoiac videtur,
interpellare.” (C. R. i, 221.)

462 HUTTEN. Boox IL

purpose; theology, scientific form and an erudite
basis. But literature exhibited another phase:
by the side of the tranquil students were to be
seen the combative poets;—vwell content with
the ground they had gained, self-satisfied and
arrogant; incensed at the opposition they had
experienced, they filled the world with the noise
of their war. At the beginning of the Lutheran
controversy, which they regarded as a mere dis-
pute between two monastic orders, they had re-
mained neutral. But now that this revealed a
character of such vastness, and opened a vista so
remote, now that it appealed to all their sym-
pathies, they too took part init. Luther appeared
to them in the light of a successor of Reuchlin;
John Eck as another Ortwin Gratius, a hired ad-
herent of the Dominicans, and in that character
they attacked him. In March, 1520, a satire ap-
peared with the title of ‘ The Planed-off Angle,”
(Der abgehobelte Eck) which for fantastic in-
vention, striking and crushing truth, and Aris-
tophanic wit, far exceeded the “ Literee Obscurorum
Virorum,” which it somewhat resembled. And at
this moment a leader of the band entered the lists,
not nameless like the others, but with his visor up.
It was Ulrich von Hutten, the temper of whose
weapons and his skill in wielding them had long
been well known.

The whole course of Hutten’s life had, like that of
Erasmus, been determined by his being very early
condemned to the cloister; but to him this con-
straint was far more intolerable: he was the first-

Cuar. III. _ HUTTEN. 463

born of one of the most distinguished equestrian
families of the Buchen, which still laid claim to the
freedom of the empire. On his friends earnestly
pressing him to take the vows, he ran away, and
sought his fortune, as Erasmus had done, in
the newly opened career of literature.* He en-
countered every variety of suffering: plague and
_ shipwreck; the banishment of a teacher whom he
followed ; robbery, and disease; the scorn with
which indigence and a mean garb are commonly
regarded, especially in a strange land; the utter
neglect of his family, who acted as if he did not
belong to them; nay, his father even treated him
with a sort of irony. But his courage remained
buoyant, his mind free and unshackled; he bid
defiance to all his enemies, and a state of literary
warfare became a second nature to him. Some-
times it was his own personal quarrels which he
fought out on the field of literature; for example,
the ill-treatment he sustained from his hosts at
Greifswald, who robbed him; he called upon all his
companions of the school of poets to take part
against this act of injustice, which was, as it were,
committed against them all.f— Another time he
replied to the reproach which even in that age
he had to encounter, that a man must be some-
thing, z. ¢. must fill some office, or hold some title;

* Mohnike, Ulrich Huttens Jugendleben, p. 43. Hutten
was born in 1488; in 1499 he entered the convent, and in 1504
deserted it.

+ Querelarum, lib. ii. eleg. x. “ nostros, communia vulnera
easus.”

464 HUTTEN. Boox Il.

or some deed of violence, like the unjustifiable
conduct of the Duke of Wiirtenberg to one of his
cousins, moved him to vehement accusation. But his
warlike muse was still more excited by the affairs
of his country.

The study of Roman literature, in which the
Germans have taken so eminent a part, has not un-
frequently had the effect of awakening the patriotism
of their descendants. The ill success of the emperor
in the Venetian war did not deter Hutten from
eulogizing him, or from treating the Venetians, in
their contest with him, as upstart fishermen ; he
contrasts the treachery of the pope and the insolence
of the French, with the achievements of the Lands-
knechts and the fame of Jacob von Ems. He
writes long poems to prove that the Germans have
not degenerated, that they are still the ancient
race. Just as he returned from Italy, the contest
between the Reuchlinists and the Dominicans had
broken out, and he rushed to the side of his natural
ally, armed with all the weapons of indignation
and of ridicule; he celebrated the triumph of his
master in his best hexameters, which were embel-
lished with an ingenious'wood-cut. Hutten is not
a great scholar, nor is he a very profound thinker ;
his excellence lies more in the exhaustlessness of
his vein, which gushes forth with equal impetuosity,
equal freshness, in the most various forms, —in Latin
and in German, in prose and in verse, in eloquent
invective and in brilliant satirical dialogue. Nor
is he without the spirit of acute observation ; here
and there (for example in the Nemo) he soars to

Cuap. III. HUTTEN. 465

_ the bright and clear regions of genuine poetry: his
hostilities have not that cold malignant character
- which disgusts the reader; they are always con-
nected with a cordial devotion to the side he advo-
cates: he leaves on the mind an impression of
perfect veracity, of uncompromising frankness and
honesty ; above all, he has always great and single
purposes which command universal sympathy; he
has earnestness of mind, and a passion (to use his
own words) “for godlike truth, for common liberty.”
The victory of the Reuchlinists had turned to his
advantage also: he had found an asylum at the court
of the Elector Albert of Mainz, and formed an in-
timacy with the formidable Sickingen ; he was cured
of his illness, and now thought of marrying and
entering upon his paternal inheritance; he thus
hoped to enjoy the tranquillity of domestic life, while
the brilliancy of the reputation he had already ac-
quired secured to him an eminent station. Under
these circumstances the spirit which Luther had
awakened in the nation breathed upon him; a
prospect opened, compared to which all previous
results had been mere child’s play; it took posses-
sion of his whole convictions, of every impulse and
energy of his mind. For a moment Hutten deliber-
ated. The enemy to be attacked was the mightiest
in existence, who had never been subdued, and
who. wielded power with a thousand hands; who-
ever engaged in a conflict with him must be aware
that he would never more find peace so long as he
lived. Hutten did not disguise this from himself;
VOL. I. HH

466 HUTTEN. Boox II.

it was discussed in the family, who dreaded the
losses and evils to which it would expose them.
“My pious mother wept,” said he. But he tore
himself away, renounced his paternal inheritance,
and once more took up arms.*

In the beginning of the year 1520, he wrote
some dialogues, for which he could never hope
to obtain pardon. In the one, called the Spec-
tators (Anschauenden), the jests on the papal
legate are no longer, as before, confined to certain
externals ; all his spiritual faculties, his anathema
and excommunication which he hurls against the
sun, are treated with the bitterest scorn and de-
rision. In another—Vadiscus, or the Roman
Trinity—the abuses and pretensions of the Curia
are described in striking triplets: in confirma-
tion of the Wittenberg opinion, that the papacy
‘was inconsistent with the Scriptures, Hutten drew
a picture of the actual state of the court of Rome,
in which he represented it as an abyss of moral
and religious corruption, which the duty of Ger-
mans to God and their country equally called
upon them to shun.t His ideas were profoundly
national. An old apology for Henry IV. having
accidentally fallen into his hands, he published it
in March, 1520, with a view of reviving the recol-
lection of the great struggle with Gregory VIL,
and the extinct sympathy of the nation with the

* Apology for Ulrich von Hutten in Meiner’s Lebensbes-
chreibungen beriihmter Minner, &c., iii. 479.

t+ Vadiscus, Dialogus qui-et Trias Romana inscribitur. In-
spicientes Dialogus Hutteni. Opera ed. Miinch. iii. 427. 511.

Cuap. III. HUTTEN. 467

empire, and of the empire with the nation.* He
sent it to the young Archduke Ferdinand, who had
just arrived in the Netherlands from Spain, with a
dedication, in which he calls upon him to lend his
aid to the restoration of the ancient independence
of Germany, which had withstood the warlike and
victorious Romans of old, and was now become tri-
butary to the effeminate Romans of modern times. +
It appeared as if the nation might reasonably look
with hope to the two brothers of the house of
Austria, whose elevation to the throne had been so
earnestly opposed by the papal court.. Most of their
friends were indeed at this moment enemies of the
papacy. We have already alluded to the disposition
of the court of Mainz. In Switzerland all who had
approved Luther’s first book were adherents of
Cardinal von Sitten, who had so successfully con-
ducted the affairs of the house of Austria at the
diet, partly by their assistance. Sickingen, who
had contributed so much to the decision taken by |
Wiirtemberg, was likewise a partisan of Reuchlin,
and found means to compel the Cologne Domini-
cans, although the process was still pending in
Rome, to obey the sentence of the Bishop of Spires,
and to pay the costs to which they had there been
condemned. No one had contributed more to the
election of Charles V. than Frederic of Saxony: by
the protection which he had afforded to Luther
and his university, he had rendered possible the

* Waltramus de Unitate Ecclesiz conservanda, etc., in Schar-
dius, Sylloge, Part I.
+ Prefatio ad Ferdinandum. Opp. iii. 551.
HH 2

468 HUTTEN. Boox II

national movement in that prince’s favour. He
now absolutely refused to allow Luther to be tried
at Rome. On the day of the emperor’s election
the Archbishop of Treves had actually under-
taken the office of umpire, and Elector Frederic
declared that no steps should be taken against
Luther till that prelate had pronounced his deci-
sion, by which he-would abide.* There was a
secret connection between all these incidents, these
various manifestations of opinion:—people were
resolved to get rid of the interference of Rome.
Hutten preached in all parts, that Germany must
abandon Rome and return to her own bishops and
primates. “To your tents, O Israel!” exclaimed he ;
and we perceive that sovereigns and cities responded
to his appeal.tf He deemed himself destined to
accomplish this change, and hastened to the court
of the archduke, in order if possible to gain him
over by personal intercourse, and to inspire him
with his own ardour. He felt the most confident
assurance of success. In an essay written on the
road, he predicted that the tyranny of Rome would
not long endure; already the axe was laid to the
root of the tree. He exhorted the Germans only

* Transactions, Walch, xv. 916.919. The chief reason why
this did not come to pass was, that Frederic wanted to bring
Luther with him to the Imperial Diet, which was to be held
in Nov. 1519, but which the Imperial Commissioners pre-
vented.

{ Agrippa a Nettesheim Johanni Rogerio Brennonio ex
Colonia 16 Junii, 1520. (Epp. Agrippa, lib. ii. p. 99.)  “ Re-
linquat Romanos Germania et revertatur ad primates et episcopos
suos.”

Cuap. III. BULL OF" LEO :X. 469

to have confidence in their brave leaders, and not
to faint in the midst of the fight; for they must
go on—on, in this propitious state of things, with
this good cause, with these noble energies. “ Li-
berty for ever — Jacta est alea,” was his motto.
The die is cast ; I have ventured all upon the throw.*

Such was the turn which Luther’s cause now
took—not without great faults on the side of the
defenders of the See of Rome. The attack, which,
though only levelled at one side of the great

system, would unquestionably have been very

troublesome to the head of the Church, was now
directed against his entire position and functions, —
against that idea of his authority and prerogative
which he had so successfully laboured to establish.
It was no longer confined to the domain of theo-
logy; for the first time, the literary and political

elements of opposition existing in the nation came-

into contact and mutual intelligence, if not imto
close union, with the theological; thus allied, they
turned their united strength against the RESre:
gatives of the Pope of Rome.

This led to a similar combination on the other
side; and the See of Rome, which had hitherto
always maintained reserve, was now induced to
pronounce a definitive sentence.

BULL OF LEO X.

We must bear in mind that the advocates of the old
opinions were not satisfied with opposing Luther

* Ad liberos in Germania omnes. Opp. iii. 563.

HH 3

“

470 BULL OF LEO X. Boox II.

with all the authority they possessed (for example,
the Dominican universities of Louvain and Co-
logne pronounced a solemn condemnation of his
works), but sought to prove themselves the strictest
and most faithful allies of the Roman See. The
attacks of the Germans furnished them with an
opportunity to exalt the omnipotence of the papacy
more extravagantly than ever. Silvestro Maz-
zolini, the Master of the Sacred Palace, of whom we
have spoken, published a pamphlet *, in which,
indignant that Luther had dared to appeal from
his judgment to the pope, and in the last resort to a
council, he tries to demonstrate that there can be no
judge superior to the pope; that the Roman pontiff
is the infallible arbiter of all controversies and of
all doubts; and further sets forth that the papal
sovereignty is the only true monarchy, the fifth
monarchy mentioned by Daniel; that the pope is
the prince of all spiritual, and the father of all
temporal princes; the head of the whole world,
nay, that he is, virtually, the whole world.; In
his former work, he had only said that the whole
collective church was in the pope; now he affected

* De Juridica et Irrefragabili Veritate Romanz Ecclesiz
Romanique Pontificis: Roceaberti, Bibl. Max. tom. xix. p. 264.

{+ C.iv. “Etsi ex jam dictis constat Romanum presulem
esse caput orbis universi, quippe qui primus hierarcha et prin-
ceps sit omnium spiritualium ac pater omnium temporalium
principum, tamen quia adversarius negat eum esse ecclesiam
catholicam virtualiter aut etiam esse ecclesia caput, eapropter
ostendendum est quod sit caput orbis et consequenter orbis
totus in virtute.”

Cuap. III. BULL OF LEO xX. 471

to prove that the pope was the world. In another
place, too, he did not hesitate to declare that all
the power of temporal sovereigns was a sub-dele-
gation of the papal.* The pope, he says, is more
superior to the emperor than gold to lead: a pope
can appoint or depose an emperor; appoint or
depose electors; make or abolish positive laws:
the emperor, he exclaims, together with all laws
and all Christian peoples, could effect nothing con-
trary to his will.t . The proofs that he adduces in
- support of his opinion are, indeed, strange enough,
but it was not necessary to substantiate them ; it
was enough that they were adduced by a man of
so eminent a station, and that they emanated from
the papal palace. German obsequiousness hastened
to furnish Roman arrogance with a somewhat
better groundwork for its pretensions. In Fe-
bruary, 1520, Eck also completed a treatise on the
primacy, in which he promises triumphantly and
clearly to confute Luther’s assertion, “that it is
not of divine right,” and also to set forth various

* De Papa et ejus Potestate, ibid. p. 869. “ Tertia potestas
(the first is that of the Pope, the second that of the prelates) est
in ministerium data, ut ea que est imperatoris et etiam prin-
cipum terrenorum, que respectu Pape est subdelegata sub-
ordinata.”

+ “Papa est imperatore major dignitate, plus quam aurum
plumbo (371.). —-Potest eligere imperatorem per se ipsum im-
mediate — ex quo sequitur quod etiam possit eligere electores
imperatoris et mutare ex causa: ejus etiam est electum con-
firmare, —et dignum depositione deponere (372.).— Nec im-
perator cum omnibus legibus et omnibus Christianis possent
contra ejus voluntatem quicquam statuere.”

HH 4

472 BULL OF LEO X. Boox IL.

other rare and notable things, collected with great
labour, partly from manuscripts which he had
most diligently collated. ‘ Observe, reader,” says
he, “and thou shalt see that I keep my word.” *
Nor is his work by any means devoid of learning
and talent; it is an armoury of very various
weapons; but it affords the most distinct evi-
dence of the importance of this controversy to
science, independent of all theological consider-
ations, and of the profound darkness in which all
true and critical history still lay buried. Eck .
assumes, without the slightest hesitation, that Peter
resided twenty-five years at Rome, and was a
perfect prototype of all succeeding popes ; whereas,
historical criticism has shown that it is a matter of
doubt whether the apostle ever was at Rome at all:
he finds cardinals, and even under that title, as early
as the year 770, and assigns the rank and functions
of cardinal to St. Jerome. In the second book, he
adduces the testimony of the Fathers of the Church
in support of the divine right of the pope, and
places at their head Dionysius Areopagita, whose
works are, unfortunately, spurious. Among his
favourite documents are the decretals of the elder
popes, from which much certainly is derived that
we should not otherwise be inclined to believe ;
the only misfortune is, that they are altogether
forgeries. He reproaches Luther with under-
standing nothing whatever of the old councils; the

* De Primatu Petri. In Eckii Opp. contra Lutherum, tom. i.
fit.

Cuap. II. BULL OF LEO. x: 473

sixth canon of the council of Nice, from which
Luther deduced the equality of the ancient patri-
archate, he interprets in a totally different manner ;
’ but here again he had the ill luck to rest his argu-
ments on the spurious canon, which belongs not to
the Ni icene, but the CeiSii orto synod. And so on.
It is important to have a aca idea of the ac-
tual state of things. With these claims of an abso-
lute power, including all other earthly powers,
were connected, not only dogmatic theology as
elaborated in the schools, but this gigantic fiction,
this falsification of history, resting on innumerable
forged documents; which, if not overthrown, as
it subsequently was (and we must add chiefly
by truly learned men of the Catholic church
itself), would have made all authentic and well-
founded history impossible: the human mind would
~ never have arrived at the true knowledge of ancient
times, or at the consciousness of the stages itself
had passed through. The newly-awakened spirit of
the German nation seized at once upon this entire
system, and laboured energetically to open new
paths in every direction of human thought and
action — politics, religion, science, and letters. Equal
zeal was displayed on the other side in maintaining
the old system entire. As soon as Eck had finished
his book, he hastened to Rome to present it himself
to the pope, and to invoke the severest exercise of
the ecclesiastical authority against his opponents.
It was asserted at that time that Eck was in fact
sent to Rome by the house of Fugger, which was
alarmed at the prospect of losing the profit arising

ATA BULL OF LEO X. Boox II.

from the money exchanges between Rome and
Germany. It is at least certain that the doctor had
some intimate connection with those eminent mer-
chants. It was in their behalf that he defended
usury in his disputation at Bologna.*

But his chief aid was derived from the judg-
ment pronounced against the new opinions by
Cologne and Louvain. Cardinals Campeggi and
Vio, who were well acquainted with Germany,
gave him all the support in their power. His
book was fully calculated to place the immi-
nence of the danger before their eyes. A commis-
sion of seven or eight zealous theologians was
appointed, of which Giovan Pietro Caraffa, Ale-
ander, and probably also Silvestro Mazzolini and
Kick himself, were members; their judgment could
not be, for one moment, doubtful; already, in the
beginning of May, the draft of the bull by which
Luther was condemned was prepared.

In the trial of Reuchlin, it was matter of doubt
how far the See of Rome made common cause with
the Dominicans; now, however, that order had
completely succeeded in restoring the ancient al-
liance. In the present case the trial was hardly
begun, when we hear that the monks at Cologne

* Liters cujusdam e Roma. From the Pirkheimer papers in
Riederer, Nachrichten zur Kirchen Gelehrten und Biicher-
geschichte, i. p. 178. As a letter, this document certainly in-
spires me with some suspicion ; at all events, however, it is of
the same date, and expresses the opinion of a well-informed con-
temporary. Welser also says (Augspurgische Chroniken, ander
theil, p. 275.) that that disputation had been held “at the cost
of Jacob Fugger and his partners.”

Cuar. IIL. BULL OF LEO. xX: 475

triumphed in a sentence which had been pronounced
in their favour, and caused it to be affixed on their
church doors.*

The Elector of Mainz was called to account for
the protection he had afforded to Ulrich von
Hutten, and exhorted to show severity against the
author of so many libels. The main object, how-
ever, was the condemnation of Luther. The jurists
of the Curia were of opinion that a citation and fresh
hearing of the accused were necessary, adding, that
“God had summoned even Cain once and again be-
fore him;” but the theologians would accede to no
further postponement. They at length came to a_
compromise, and determined that the propositions
extracted from Luther’s writings were to be judged
without delay, but that an interval of sixty days
was to be granted to him for recantation. The
draft of the bull, framed by Cardinal Accolti, under-
went many alterations. A consistory was held
four times, to consider of each separate proposition ;
Cardinal Vio, though suffering under a severe attack

* Letter from Hedios to Zwinglius in Meiners, passim, p. 236.
This matter deserved closer examination. That it had been
really agitated again in Rome at that very time, is clear from
the letters of the Elector Palatine and the Dominicans assembled
at Frankfurt (Friedlander, Beitrige zur Reformations-ge-
schichte, pp. 113. 116.), May 10. and 20. 1520. But might not
the letter of the Dominicans have been merely a consequence of
the extorted agreement with Sickingen? If so, no weight
could be attached to it by the court of Rome. Even at Leip-
zig, Eck had drawn attention to the necessity of that re-union ;
he blamed the pope for his leaning to the grammarians (gram-
maticelli), adding that he was not proceeding in the via regia :
July 24. 1519 (not 1520): in Luther’s Opp. Lat. ii. p. 469.

va

476 BULL OF LEO X. Boox II.

of illness, would on no account stay away; he
was carried to the meeting every time. A smaller
conference met in the presence of the pope himself,
at his country-house at Malliano, and in this Eck took
part. At length on the 16th of June, the bull was
completed. Forty-one propositions from Luther’s
writings were declared false, dangerous, scandalous,
or absolutely heretical, and the damnatory decrees
of the universities of Louvain and Cologne as
learned, true, and even holy. Christ was invoked
to protect his vineyard, the management of which
he had, at his ascension, entrusted to St. Peter.
St. Peter was besought to take the cause of the
Church of Rome, the mistress of the faith, under his
care. Luther, if he did not recant within the sixty
days allowed him, was to be considered a stubborn
heretic, and to be hewn off, as a sere and withered
branch, from Christendom. All Christian authorities
were exhorted to seize his person and to deliver
him into the hands of the pope.*

It appears that no doubt of the complete success
of this measure was entertained in Rome. Two
vigorous champions who had a personal interest in
the matter, Aleander and John Eck himself, were
entrusted with its execution. In Germany there was.
no need of a royal placet; the commissioners had
their hands completely free.

* Frequently printed in Luther’s and Hutten’s works. The
authentic copy is in Bull. Cocq. IIL. iii. p. 487. It surprises me
that Rainaldus, who gives it, should have taken it from Cochlius,
On all these subjects he is very scanty. Pallavicini is somewhat

better. A few notices are to be found in the Parnassus Boicus,
iii. p. 205.

Cuap. III. BULL OF LEO x. ATT

How proud and elated was Eck on reappearing
in Germany with the new title of papal prothonotary
and nuncio. He instantly hastened to the scene of
the conflict, and in the month of September caused
the bull to be fixed up in public places in Meissen,
Merseburg and Brandenburg. Meanwhile Alean-
der descended the Rhine for the same purpose.

It is said, and with perfect truth, that they did
not every where meet with the best reception ; but
the arms they wielded were still extremely terrible.
Eck had received the unheard of permission to
denounce any of the adherents of Luther at his
pleasure, when he published the bull; a permission
which, it will readily be believed, he did not allow
to pass unused. Amongst others he had named
Adelmann of Adelmannsfeld, his brother canon at
Eichstiidt, with whom he had once nearly gone to
blows at dinner concerning the questions of the day.
In pursuance of the bull the bishop of Augsburg
now set on foot proceedings against Adelmann, who
was compelled to purge himself of the Lutheran
heresy by oath and vow. Eck had not scrupled also
to denounce two eminent and respected members
of the council or senate of Niirnberg — Spengler and
Pirkheimer: the intercessions of the city, of the
Bishop of Bamberg, even of the Dukes of Bavaria,
were of no avail; they were forced to bow before
Eck, who made them feel the whole weight of the
authority of one commissioned by the See of Rome.*

* Riederer’s little work, Beitriige, &c. is specially devoted to
these events. The privilege possessed by Eck appears from a
paragraph of his Instructions, quoted by him word for word, p.79.

478 BULL OF LEO X. Boox II.

In October, 1520, Luther’s books were seized in all
the bookseller’s shops of Ingolstadt, and sealed.*
Moderate as was the Elector of Mainz, he was
obliged to exclude from his court Ulrich von
Hutten, who had been ill received in the Nether-
lands, and to throw the printer of his writings into
prison. Luther’s works were first burnt in Mainz.
Aleander’s exultation at this was raised to a pitch
of insane insolence. He let fall expressions like
those of Mazzolini,—that the pope could depose
king and emperor; that he could say to the em-
peror, ‘ Thou art a tanner;” (Du bist ein Gerber)
he would soon, he said, settle the business of a few
miserable grammarians; and even that Duke Fre-
deric would be come at by some means or other. +
But though this storm raged far and wide, it
passed harmless over the spot which it was destined
to destroy. Wittenberg was unscathed; Eck had
indeed instructions, if Luther did not submit, to
execute on him the menaces of the bull, with the aid
of the surrounding princes and bishops.{ He had
been authorized to punish as a heretic the literary
adversary whom he was unable to overcome; a -
commission against which the natural instinct of
morality so strongly revolted, that it more than once
endangered Eck’s personal safety, and which, more-

* Letter of Baumgartner to the Council of Niirnberg,
Oct. 17:

+ Erasmi Responsio ad Albertum Pium, in Hardt, Hist. Lit.
Ref. i. 169. For the durAwparogdpog is no other than Aleander.

¢ Extract from the Breve Apostol. 15 Kal. Aug. Winter,
Geschichte der Evangel. Lehre, in Baiern, i. p. 53.

Cuapr. IIT. BULL OF LEO x. 479

over, it was found impossible to execute. The Bishop
of Brandenburg had not the power, even had he had
the will, to exercise the rights of an ordinary in
Wittenberg; the university was protected by its
exemptions, and, on receiving the bull from Eck, he
resolved not to publish it. The authorities assigned
as a reason that his Holiness either knew nothing
about it, orshad been misled by the violent instiga-
tions of Eck. That Eck had, on his own authority,
specified by name two other members of the uni-
versity, Carlstadt and Johann Feldkirchen, as par-
tisans of Luther, created universal indignation.
Luther and Carlstadt were allowed to be present at
the sittings in which the resolutions as to the bull
were passed.* Already the university had greater
authority in this part of Germany than the pope.
Its decision served as a rule to the electoral go-
vernment, and even to the official of the bishopric
of Naumburg-Zeiz.

The only question now was, what the Elector of
Saxony, who was just gone to meet the emperor
on his arrival at the Rhine, would say. Aleander
met him in Cologne and instantly delivered the bull
to him. But he received a very ungracious answer.
The elector was indignant that the pope, notwith-
standing his request that the affair might be tried in
Germany, notwithstanding the commission sent to
the Archbishop of Treves, had pronounced sentence
in Rome, at the instigation of a declared and per-
sonally irritated enemy, who had then come himself

* Peter Burcard (Rector) to Spengler. Riederer, p. 69.

480 BULL OF LEO X. Boox II.

to publish, in the sovereign’s absence, a bull, which,
if executed, would ruin the university, and must
inevitably cause the greatest disorder in the excited
country. But, besides this, he was convinced that
injustice was done to Luther. Erasmus had already
said to him at Cologne, that Luther’s sole crime
was that he attacked the pope’s crown and the
monks’ bellies.* This was likewise the prince’s
opinion ; it was easy to read in his face how much
these words pleased him. His personal dignity was
insulted, his sense of justice outraged; he deter-
mined not to yield to the pope. He reiterated his
old demand, that Luther should be heard by his
equals, learned and pious judges, in a place of safety;
he would hear nothing of the bull.f This, too, was
the opinion of his court, his brother, and his nephew,
—the future successor to the throne—nay, of the
whole country.

For it was in the nature of things that the
partial and ill-considered proceedings of the See of
Rome should awaken all antipathies. We may
safely affirm, that it was the bull which first occa-
sioned the whole mass of public indignation to
burst forth.

* Spalatin, Life of Frederic, p. 182. The “ Axiomata Erasmi
Roterodami pro causa Lutheri Spalatino tradita, 5 Nov. 1520,
in Lutheri Opp. Lat. ii. p. 314.”: are very remarkable, as
throwing light upon the notions of Erasmus.

} Narrative of the proceedings at Cologne (W. xv. 1919.) ;
the idea that this is by Heinrich von Ziitphen, is an error caused
by the signature in the earlier edition, which, however, only
refers to an annexed correspondence.

{ Veit Warbeck ; Walch, xv. 1876.

Cuar. III. CRISIS OF SECESSION. A81

CRISIS OF SECESSION.

During the early months of the year 1520, Lu-
ther had remained comparatively passive, and had
only declared himself against auricular confession
and against the administration of the Lord’s Supper
in one kind, or defended the propositions he had ad-
vanced at Leipzig ; but when the tidings of Eck’s
success at Rome, and of the impending excommuni-
cation, reached him, at first as a vague rumour, but
daily acquiring consistency and strength, his ardour
for spiritual combat awoke: the convictions which
had meanwhile been ripening in him burst forth; “at
length,” exclaimed he, ‘“‘ the mysteries of Antichrist
must be unveiled :” in the course of June, just as the
bull of excommunication had been issued at Rome,
he wrote his Book to the Christian Nobility of the
German Nation, which was, as his friends justly
observed, the signal for a decisive attack. The
two nuncios, with their bulls and instructions, were
met by this book, which was published in August
at Wittenberg.* It consists of a few sheets, the
matter of which however was destined to affect the
history of the world, and the development of the .
human mind ;—at once preparative and prophetic.
- Howloud had been the complaints uttered in all coun-
tries at this time of the abuses of the Curia, and

* Probably, however, in the beginning of August. On the
third of August Luther writes to his brother Augustine, Voigt,
«jam edo librum vulgarem contra Papam de statu ecclesia
emendando.” (De V.i. 475.)

VOL. I. Il

482 CRISIS OF SECESSION. Book II.

the misconduct of the clergy! Had Luther done
nothing more, it would have signified little; but he
brought into application a great principle which
had taken firm hold on his mind since Melanchthon’s
disputation ; he denied the character indelebilis con-
ferred by ordination, and thus shook the whole
groundwork of the separation and privileges of the
clergy. He came to the decision that in regard to
spiritual capacity, all Christians are equal; this is the
meaning of his somewhat abrupt expression that “all
Christians are priests.” Hence followed two conse-
quences ; first, that the priesthood can be nothing
. but a function ; “no otherwise separate or superior
in dignity,” says he, “than that the clergy must
handle the Word of God and the Sacraments; that
is their work and office;” but also that they must
be subject to the sovereign power, which has
another office to perform; ‘which holds the sword
and the rod in its hand wherewith to punish the
wicked and to protect the good.”* These few
words run counter to the whole idea of the papacy
as conceived in the middle ages: on the other
hand, they furnish a new basis to the secular
power, for which they vindicate the scriptural idea
of sovereignty; and they include in themselves the
sum of a new and grand social movement which
was destined by its character to be prolonged
through centuries. Yet Luther was not of opinion

* An den christlichen Adel deutschen Nation; von des

christlichen Standes Besserung. Altenb. Ausg. Werke, i.
483.

Cuap. III. CRISIS OF SECESSION. 483

that the pope should be overthrown. He would
have him remain, neither, of course, as lord para-
mount of the emperor, nor as possessor of all
spiritual power; but with well-defined limited
functions, the most important of which would be to
settle the differences between primates and arch-
bishops and to urge them to the fulfilment of their
duties. He would retain cardinals also, but only
as many as should be necessary —about twelve —
and they should not monopolise the best livings
throughout the world. The national churches
should be as independent as possible; in Germany,
especially, there should be a primate with his own
jurisdiction and his chanceries of grace and justice,
before which the appeals of the German bishops
should be brought; for the bishops, too, should
enjoy greater independence. Luther strongly cen-
sured the interference which the See of Rome had
recently been guilty of in the diocese of Strasburg.
The bishops should be freed from the oppressive oaths
with which they were bound to the pope: con-
vents might still be suffered to exist, but in smaller
number, and under certain strict limitations: the
inferior clergy should be free to marry. Itis not ne-
cessary to enumerate all the changes which were con-
nected with these in his mind; his meaning and
purpose are clear. It could not be said that he
wished to break up the unity of Latin Christendom,
or completely destroy the constitution of the church.
Within the bounds of their vocation, he acknow-~
ledges the independence, nay, even the authority of

iz 2

484 CRISIS OF SECESSION. Boox II.

the clergy* ; but to this vocation he wishes to recall
them, and at the same time to nationalise them and
render them less dependent on the daily inter-
ference of Rome. ‘This wish, indeed, he shared
with every class of the community.

This was, however, only one point of his attack—
the mere signal for the battle which soon after
followed in all its violence. In October, 1520, ap-
peared the treatise on the Babylonish captivity of
the church}; for Luther regarded the gradual
establishment of the Latin dogmas and usages,
which had been effected by the co-operation of the
schools and the hierarchy, in the hght of a power
conferred on the church. He attacked them in the
very centre of their existence—in the doctrine of
the sacraments—and, in the first place, in the most
important of these, the Eucharist. We should do
him injustice were we to look for a thoroughly
elaborated theory on this subject; he only points
out the contradictions which subsisted between
the original institution, and*the prevailing doctrine.
He opposes. the refusal of the cup, not because
he did not believe that the bread contained the
whole sacrament, but because nobody ought to
attempt to make the smallest change in the original
institutions of Christ. He does not, however, coun-

* “Tt does not beseem the pope to exalt himself above the
temporal power, save only in spiritual offices, such as preaching
and absolving.” (p. 494.)

+ De Captivitate Babylonica Ecclesize Preludium M. L., ubi
precipue de natura, numero et usu sacramentorum agitur. Opp.
ed. Jen. ii, 259,

Cuap. III. CRISIS OF SECESSION. 485

sel the resumption of the cup by force*; he only
combats the arguments with which it had been
attempted to justify the refusal of it from Scripture,
and zealously traces out the vestiges of the pure and
primitive practice. He then treats of the doctrine
of transubstantiation. The reader will recollect
that Peter Lombard had not ventured to maintain
the transformation of the substance of the bread.
Later theologians did not hesitate to do this ; they
taught that the accidens alone remained ; a theory
which they supported by a pretended Aristotelic
definition of subject and accident.t This was the
point taken up by Luther. The objections raised
by Peter of Ailly to this hypothesis had, at a former
period, made a great impression upon him; but he
now also thought it dishonest to introduce into
Scripture any thing which was not found in it, and
that its words were to be taken in their plainest
and most precise meaning ; he no longer acknow-
ledged the force of the argument, that the Church
of Rome had sanctioned this hypothesis; since she
was that same thomist aristotelic church, with
which he was engaged in.a mortal struggle. More-
over, he believed himself able to prove that Aristotle
had not even been understood on this point by St.
Thomas.t But a yet more important doctrine, as

* «< Contra tam patentes potentes scripturas ; contra evidentes
Dei scripturas,” p. 262.

+ One principal passage is in the Summa Divi Thome, pars
aii, qu. 75. arts iv.\¢..1P..¥. 4.

{ Opiniones in rebus fidei non modo ex Aristotele tradere,
sed et super eum, quem non intellexit, conatus est stabilire : in-
felicissimi fundamenti infelicissima structura. (p. 263.)

ba)

486 CRISIS OF SECESSION. Boox II.

affecting the practical views of Luther, was, that
he celebration of the sacrament was a meritorious
work —a sacrifice. This dogma was connected
with the mysterious notion of the identity of Christ
with the Church of Rome, which Luther now
entirely rejected. He found nothing of it in the
Scripture ; here he read only of the promise of
redemption connected with the visible sign or
token, and with the faith ; nor could he forgive the
schoolmen for treating only of the sign, and passing
over in silence the promise and the faith.* How
could any.man maintain that it was a good work—
a sacrifice —to remember a promise? That the
performance of this act of remembrance could be
profitable to another, and that other absent, was one
of the most false and dangerous doctrines. In com-
bating these dogmas, he does not conceal from him-
self the consequences : —that the authority of count-
less writings must be overthrown; the whole system
of ceremonies and external practices altered: but
he looks this necessity boldly in the face; he
regards himself as the advocate of the Scripture,
which was of higher significance and deserved
more careful reverence than all the thoughts of
men or angels. He said he only proclaimed the

* Tf at a later period, Bellarmin, as Mohler, p. 255., relates,
requires before all things “exparte suscipientis voluntatem fidem
et poenitentiam,” still it was exactly conclusions of this kind
which Luther missed in the then prevailing thomistic writings ;
and before we blame him, it must be shown that these doctrines
had been really taught and inculcated in his time. Their re-
admission into the Roman church is, as has been said, only the
re-action of the spirit of reform.

Cuap. III. CRISIS OF SECESSION. A487

Word in order to save his own soul; the world
might then look to it whether it would follow that
Word or not. He would no longer adhere to the
doctrine of the seven sacraments. Thomas Aquinas
delights to show how their order corresponds with
the incidents of the natural and social life’of man:
—pbaptism with his birth; confirmation with his
growth ; the eucharist with the nutriment of his
body; penance with the medicine of his diseases;
extreme unction with his entire cure :—how ordi-
nation sanctified public business; marriage, natural
procreation.* But these images were not cal-
culated to make any impression on Luther; he
only inquired what was to be clearly read in the
Scriptures ; what was the immediate relation be-
tween arite, and faith and redemption: he rejected,
almost with the same arguments as those to be
found in the confession of the Moravian brethren,
four of the sacraments, and adhered only to
baptism, the Lord’s Supper, and penance. The
others could not even be derived from the See of
Rome; they were the product of the schools, to
which, indeed, Rome was indebted for all she pos-
sessed}; and hence, there was a great difference
between the papacy of a thousand years ago and
that of the present day.

The hostile systems of opinion on the destiny

\
* Tertia pars, qu. Ixv. conclusio. ‘ ,
+ “Neque enim staret tyrannis papistica tanta, nisi tantum
accepisset ab universitatibus, cum vix fuerit inter celebres epis-
copatus alius quispiam qui minus habuerit eruditionem  ponti-
ficum.
ri 4

488 CRISIS OF SECESSION. Boox II.

and duties of man, and on the plan of the universe,
now stood confronted in all their might. Whilst
_ the papal see proclaimed anew in every bull all
the privileges which it had acquired during the
gradual construction of its spirituo-temporal state
in the middle ages, and the principles of faith con-
nected with them, the idea of a new ecclesiastical
constitution according to which the priesthood
should be brought back to a merely spiritual office,
and of a system of faith emancipated from all the
doctrines of the schools and deduced from the
original principles of its first apostles —an idea con-
ceived by one or two teachers in a university, and
emanating from a little town in Germany — arose
and took up its station as antagonist of the time-
hallowed authority. This the pope hoped to stifle
in its birth. What if he could have looked down
that long vista of ages through which the conflict
between them was destined to endure !

We have already observed that the pope’s bull
did not touch Wittenberg. Luther had even the
audacity to denounce the pope as a suppresser of
the divine word, for which he substituted his own
opinions ;—nay, even as a stubborn heretic. Carl-
stadt also raised his voice against the fierce Floren-
tine lion, who had never wished any good to Ger-
many, and who now condemned the truest doctrines,
contrary to laws divine and human, without even
having granted the defenders of them a hearing.
The whole university rallied more and more firmly
round its hero, who had in fact given it existence
and importance. When the intelligence arrived
that im some places the authorities had begun to

Cap. III. CRISIS OF SECESSION. 489

execute the bull, and to burn Luther’s books, the
monk felt himself sufficiently strong to revenge
this arbitrary act on the pope’s writings. On the
10th of December, 1520, the academic youth%,
summoned by a formal proclamation posted on a
black board, assembled in unwonted numbers before
the Elster Gate of Wittenberg ; a pile of wood was
collected, to which a Master of Arts of the university
set fire: in the full feeling of the orthodoxy of his
secession, the mighty Augustine, clad in his cowl,
advanced to the fire, holding in his hand the pope’s
bull and decretals: ‘‘ Because thou hast vexed the
Lord’s saints,” exclaimed he, “‘ mayst thou be con-
sumed in eternal fire!” and threw it into the
flames. Never was rebellion more resolutely pro-
claimed. “ Highly needful were it,” said Luther
another day, ‘‘ that the pope (that is, the papacy)
with all his doctrines and abominations should
be burnt.”

The attention of the whole nation was now
necessarily drawn to this open resistance. What
had first procured for Luther the general sympathy
of the thinking and serious-minded among his
contemporaries was his theological writings. By
the union of profound thought and sound common
sense which distinguishes them, the lofty earnest-

* According to Sennert, Athene et Inscriptiones Viteber-
genses, pp. 58.and 59., the names in the university books amounted
in the year 1512 to 208; in 1513 to 151; in 1514 to 218; in
1515 to 218; in 1516 to 162; in 1517 to 232; in the year 1518
the number of the students entered already rose to 273 ; in 1519
to 458; in 1520 to 578.

490 CRISIS OF SECESSION. Boox II.

ness which they breathe, their consolatory and
elevating spirit, they had produced an universal
effect. ‘ That know I,” says Lazarus Spengler in
the letter which was imputed to him as a crime,
‘“ that all my life long no doctrine or sermon has
taken so strong hold on my reason. Divers ex-
cellent and right learned persons of spiritual and
temporal estate are thankful to God that they have
lived to this hour, that they might hear Dr. Luther
and his doctrine.”* The celebrated jurist Ulrich
Zasius in the most explicit and animated terms
proclaims his adoption of Luther’s opinions as to
absolution, confession, and penance; his writings on
the ten commandments and on the Epistle to the
Galatians.t The collections of letters of that time
afford abundant proof of the interest which the
religious publications —for example, the exposition
of the Lord’s Prayer, or the new edition of the
German Theology — excited; societies of friends
were formed for the purpose of communicating
them to each other, of getting them reprinted and
then distributed by messengers sent about with
these books, and no others, in order that the atten-
tion of the buyers might not be diverted ; preachers
recommended them from the pulpit. {

The boldness of this attack, so formidable and so
immediately connected with the deepest feelings of re-

* Speech in defence, Riederer, p. 202.

} Zasii Epp. p. 894. I cannot possibly believe this letter to
be spurious, as the same opinion re-appears in so many others.

{ Beatus Rhenanus to Zwinglius. Huldrici Zwinglii Opera,
tom. vii. pp. 77. 81.

Cuap. II. CRISIS OF SECESSION. 491

ligion, was another cause of popular interest. Some,
and among them Zasius whom we have just quoted,
disapproved the turn it had taken, but its temerity
only served to heighten the admiration and the
sympathy of the majority ; all the elements of op-
position naturally congregated around a doctrine
which afforded them that of which they stood most
in need —justification in their resistance on reli-
gious grounds. Even Aleander remarked that a
great proportion of jurists declared themselves
against the ecclesiastical law; but how great was
his error if he really thought what he asserted —
that they only wished to be rid of their canonical
studies: he little knew the scholars of Germany,
who were actuated by a far different motive, —
the vexatious collisions between the spiritual and
temporal courts, complaints of which had been laid
before so many diets and assemblies of the empire.
The very latest proceedings of the court of Rome
had drawn down severe criticism from the lawyers
of Germany. Jerome of Endorf, an imperial coun-
cillor, declared that the mode taken by the pope of .
enforcing his bull by the threat of “ attainder
for high treason, loss of inheritance and fief,” was an
encroachment of the spiritual power on the tem-
poral, which he exhorted the emperor not to endure.*
It was not, however, the jurists alone, but even the
clergy whom Aleander found wavering, especially
the inferior clergy who severely felt the pressure
of the hierarchical power; he was of opinion. that

* To the Landeshauptmann of Styria,Siegm. v. Dietrichstein.
Walch, xv. 1902.

492 é CRISIS OF SECESSION. Book II.

throughout Germany they approved Luther’s doc-
trines.* Nor did it escape him that the religious
orders too were infected : among the Augustines this
arose from the influence of the later vicars, and par-
tiality for a brother of their own order; with others,
from hatred of the tyranny of the Dominicans. It
was also inevitable, that in the heart of many a
reluctant inmate of a cloister, the events now passing
would awaken the wish and the hope of shaking off
his fetters. The schools of the humanists belonged
of course to this party; no dissension had as yet
broken out among them, and the literary public re-
garded Luther’s cause as their own. Already too
attempts had been made to interest the unlearned
in the movement. Hutten perfectly understood
the advantage he possessed in writing German:
‘“‘T wrote Latin,” he says, “formerly, which not
every one understands; now I call upon my father-
land.” The whole catalogue of the sins of the
Roman Curia, which he had often insisted upon, he
now exhibited to the nation in the new light thrown
upon it by Luther, in German verses.f He indulged
the hope that deliverance was at hand, nor did he
conceal that if things came to the worst, it was to the
swords and spears of brave men that he trusted ; by
them would the vengeance of God be executed. The
most remarkable projects began to be broached; some
particularly regarding the relation of the German
church to Rome; as that no man should for the

* Extracts from the Report of Aleander in Pallavicini.
+ Klage und Vermanung gegen die ungeistlichen Geistlichen.

Cuap. ITI. CRISIS OF SECESSION. 493

future possess an ecclesiastical dignity, who could not
preach to the people in the German tongue; that.
the prerogatives of the papal months, accesses, re-
eresses, reservations, and of course, annates, should
be abolished ; that no sentence: of excommunication
issued by Rome should have any validity in Ger-
many; that no brief should have any force till a
German council had pronounced whether it were
to be obeyed or not; the bishops of the country
were always to hold in check the papal power.*
Others added proposals for a radical reform in
details; that the number of holydays should be
diminished, the curates regularly paid, fit and de-
corous preachers appointed, fasts observed only on
a few days in the year, and the peculiar habits of
the several orders laid aside; a yearly assembly
of bishops should watch over the general affairs of
the German church. The idea even arose that a
christian spirit and life would, by .God’s especial
ordinance, spread from the German nation over the
whole world, as once from out Judea. Thereunto,
it was said, the seeds of all good had sprung up
unobserved ;— ‘‘ a subtle sense, acute thought, mas-
terly skill in all handicrafts, knowledge of all
writings and tongues, the useful art of printing,
desire for evangelical doctrine, delight in truth and

* Etliche Artickel Gottes Lob und des heyligen Rémischen
Reichs und der ganzen Deutschen Nation ere und gemeinen nutz
belangend.” “ Divers articles touching God’s praise, and the
honour and the common profit of the holy Roman empire and of
the whole German nation.” At the end, Printed at Hagenau
by Thomas Anshelm, in Feb. 1521.

494. CRISIS OF SECESSION. Boox II.

honesty.” To this end, too, had Germany remained
obedient to the Roman emperor.* |

All hopes now rested on Charles V., who was at
this moment ascending the Rhine. Those who op-
posed the new opinions wished him the wisdom of
Solomon and of Daniel, ‘‘ who at as early an age were
enlightened by God;” they even thought the state of
things so desperate, that if not changed by a serious
and thorough reformation, the last day must quickly
come.” f The partisans of innovation approached
him with the boldest suggestions. He was asked to
dismiss the grey friar his confessor, who boasted that
he ruled him and the empire; to govern with the
counsels of temporal electors and princes ; to entrust
public business, not to clerks and financiers, but to

* «Kin Kligliche Klag an den Christlichen Rom. Kayser
Carolum von wegen Doctor Luthers und Ulrich von Hutten,” &c.
—“A Doleful Complaint to the Christian Roman Emperor
Charles, relating to Dr. Luther and Ulrich von Hutten,” &c. ;
the work known by the title of “ The Fifteen Confederates.”
Panzer, Annals of the earlier German Literature, ii. p. 39., has
shown that it is by Eberlin von Giinzburg. In the Epistola
Vdelonis Cymbri Cusani de Exustione Librorum Lutheri, 1520,
the contrast between the Romans and the Germans is de-
scribed in the following manner: “ Nos Christum, vos chrysum,
nos publicum commodum, vos privatum luxum colitis, vos ves-
tram avaritiam — et extremam libidinem, nostram nos innocen-
tiam et libertatem tuentes pro suis quisque bonis animose
pugnabimus.”

+ Verbatim, from Hieronymus Emser against the unchristian
book of Martin Luther the Augustine, sheet iv. He adds, all
ranks are sinful, and “ foremost, the clergy from the highest to
the lowest.” He also applies to them the saying, “ from the heel
to the crown of the head there is no soundness.”

Crap. III. CRISIS OF SECESSION. 495

the nobles, who now sent their sons to study; to |
appoint Hutten and Erasmus members of his coun-
cil, and to put an end to the abuses of Rome and
to the mendicant orders in Germany. Then would
he have the voice of the nation for him; he would
no longer stand in need of pope or cardinal, but,
on the contrary, they would receive confirmation
from him; “ then,” said one, “ will the strong Ger-
mans arise with body and goods, and go with thee to
Rome, and make all Italy subject to thee ; then wilt
thou be a mighty king. If thou wilt settle God’s
quarrel, he will settle thine.” *

“‘ Day and night,” exclaims Hutten to him, “ will
I serve thee without fee or reward ; many a proud,
hero will I stir to help thee; thou shalt be the
captain, the beginner, and the finisher ; — thy. com-
mand alone is wanting.”

* Kin Klagliche Klag, sheet t{ II.

496 Boox II.

CHAPTER IV.

DIET OF WORMS. A.D. 1521.

Tue most important question for the intellectual
and moral progress of the nation now unquestion-
ably was, in what light Charles V. would regard
exhortations of this kind; what disposition he
would evince towards the great movements of the
national mind.

We have seen that as yet every thing was
wavering and unsettled: no form had been found
for the government; no system of finance, no mili-
tary organisation perfected; there was no supreme
court of justice; the Public Peace was not main-
tained. All classes in the empire were at strife— -
princes and nobles, knights and citizens, priests
and laymen; above all, the higher classes and the
peasants. In addition to all these sources of
confusion, arose the religious movement, embracing
every region of mind, originating in the depths of
the national consciousness, and now bursting forth
in open revolt against the head of the hierarchy.
The existing generation was powerful, ifitelligent,
inventive, earnest, thoughtful. It had a presenti-
ment that it contained the germ of a great moral
and social revolution. |

The want of a sovereign and chief, felt by all
mankind, is in fact but the conscious necessity
that their manifold purposes and endeavours should

Cuar.IV. DIET OF WORMS, A.D. 1521. 497

be collected and balanced in an individual mind;
that one will should be the universal will; that
the many-voiced debate should ripen into one
resolve, admitting of no contradiction. This,
too, is the secret of power; when all the energies
of a nation give voluntary obedience to its com-
mands, then, and then only, can it wield all its re-
sources.

This was the important result which now hung
upon the question, whether Charles would under-
stand the sentiments and the wants of his nation,
and thence be able to secure its full obedience.

In October, 1520, he proceeded from the Nether-
lands to Aix-la-Chapelle, where he was to be
crowned. The newly elected emperor was a young
man of twenty, still imperfectly developed, who had
just learned to sit his horse well and to break a
lance; but of feeble health, a pale and melancholy
countenance, with a grave, though benevolent ex-
pression. He had as yet given few proofs of
talent, and left the conduct of business to others ;
it was principally in the hands of the high cham-
berlain, William of Croi, Lord of Chievres, who
possessed, as it was said, absolute authority over
finances, court and government. The minister
was as moderate as his master, who had formed
himself upon his model ; his manner of listening
and answering satisfied every body; nothing was
heard to fall from his lips but sentiments of peace
and justice.*

* “« Relatione di Francesco Corner venuto orator di la Ces* e
catolica M“® 6 Zugno 1521. Chievres: zentilhuomo per esser

VOL. I. K K

498 DIET OF WORMS, A.D. 1521. Boox II.

On the 23d October Charles was crowned; he
took the title of Roman Emperor Elect*, which
his predecessor had borne in the latter years of his
life. No later than December we find him in
Worms, where he had convoked his first diet, and
whither the sovereigns and states of Germany now
flocked together. His whole soul was filled with the
high significance of the imperial dignity. He opened
the diet on the 28th January, 1521, the day sacred
to Charlemagne. The reigning idea of his open-
ing speech was, that no monarchy on earth was to
‘be compared with the Roman empire, which the
-whole world had once obeyed, to which “God him-
self had paid honour and allegiance, and had left
behind him.” Unhappily it was now but the
shade of what it had been, but he hoped, with the
help of the monarchies, the powerful countries and
the alliances which God had granted him, to raise it
again to its ancient glory.f

il secondo genito non di molta facolta, ma adesso pit non potria
essere, per haver al governo suo non solum la persona del re,
ma la caxa li stati li danari e tutto quello é sotto la S. M®. E
homo di bon ingegno, parla pocho, perho molto humanamente
ascolta e benignamente risponde : non dimostra esser colerico,
ma pili presto pacifico e quieto che desideroso di guerra, et &
molto sobrio nel suo viver, il che si ritrova in pochi Fiaminghi.”

* A description of the place (in which the journey of Char-
lemagne to Jerusalem is still treated as an historical fact) and
of the ceremonies, by an eye-witness, in Passero, Giornale
Napol. p. 284. ;

+ The Proposition, which is the first document in the Frank-
furt and Berlin Archives relating to this Imperial Diet, was fol-
lowed on the 14th of March, Monday after Oculi, by a special

Cuap. IV. INTERNAL AFFAIRS. 499

This seemed the echo of the common wish of
Germany; it remained to be seen how he would
understand his work—how he would endeavour to
perform it.

SECULAR AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS OF THE EMPIRE.

Charles’s first care at the diet was to strengthen
the advantageous relation in which, from the cir-
cumstances attending his election, he stood to the
several German sovereigns. The Elector of Mainz
received an extension of his powers as arch-chan-
cellor. Whenever he was present in person at court,
the despatch of all the internal business of the em-
pire was to rest with him; but in his absence, to be
in the charge of a secretary appointed by himself,
to act with the grand chancellor.* The Elector
of Saxony obtained the sanction of his nephew’s
marriage with the infanta Catharine. As the Saxon
government wished, on account of the expense, to
avoid a marriage by proxy, the emperor pledged
himself to see that the infanta should arrive in
Germany six months after his own return to Spain.
Markgrave Casimir of Brandenburg had the rever-
sion of the next considerable fief of the empire which

statement, which explains it ; this is given also by Olenschlager,
Explanation of the Golden Bull. Records, nr. vii. p. 15. One of
the best printed works of that time, but not however quite exact.
As to the rest, Charles’s statement recalls strongly some passages
in Peter von Andlo.
* Hiiberlin, Reichsgeschichte, x. p. 375.
KK 2

500 DIET OF WoRMS, A.D. 1521. Boox IL.

might fall vacant in Italy. The Count Palatine Fre-
deric, who had been promised the dignity of Viceroy
of Naples, received as compensation the post of
imperial lieutenant in the Council of Regency ;
Calenberg, and Wolfenbiittel, the old and devoted
friends of Austria, were readily favoured in the
matter of Hildesheim, upon which the Liineburgers
quitted the diet in disgust; they saw that they
should have to pay severely for their inclination
towards the French. Shortly after, a very un-
gracious decree was issued against them.* The
proceedings of the Swabian league, on the other
hand, met with a no less cordial approbation. The
exiled Duke of Wiirtemberg, who had neglected
to repair to the Netherlands, as he had promised,
now declared himself ready to appear at the diet.
He received for answer, that it was no longer con-
venient to his imperial majesty to give audience to
the duke ; nor would any intercession induce Charles
to change this determination. Proceedings were
instituted against him, which terminated as un-
favourably as those of Liineburg: both were shortly
after placed under ban.f ‘The affair of Wiir-
temberg was the more important, since that coun-
try belonged to the territory which it was pro-
posed to incorporate into the newly constituted
state of Austria. Archduke Ferdinand, the em-
peror’s brother, who was educated in Spain, but
had been fortunately removed from that country f,

* In Delius Stiftsfehde, p.175. + Sattler, Herzdge, ii. p. 75.
{ Corner: “ Credo non si hanno fidato di lassarlo in Spagna
né al governo di Spagnoli dubitando di qualche novita.”

Cuar. IV. INTERNAL AFFAIRS. 501

where he might have become dangerous, received
the five Austrian duchies, which Maximilian had
once entertained the project of raising into a king-
dom in his favour, as his portion of the inheritance
of the German domains. The day on which this
contract was ratified (28th April, 1521*,) is one of
the most memorable in German history. It wit-
nessed the foundation of the German line of the
house of Burgundian Austria, which was destined to
occupy so great and conspicuous a station not only
in Germany but in the whole of western Europe.
Emperor Maximilian’s former plans were adopted ;
and those reciprocal engagements with the royal
houses of Bohemia and Hungary which were preg-
nant with such vast and immediate results, were
contracted. The emperor at first intended to keep
Wiirtemberg and the upper hereditary domains for
himself, and to appoint a government for the joint
administration of them; but he did not carry this
into execution; with great magnanimity he left
first the government and then the possession of
them to his brother, as his alter ego.t Many
thought Ferdinand a man of greater talents than
Charles; at all events he was evidently more
animated, daring and warlike, and kept a vigilant
eye on what occurred in every direction.

It cannot be said that in these transactions
Charles showed a constant regard to the national
feelings or interests. He suffered himself to be

* Bucholtz, Ferdinand, i. p. 155.
+ Extracts from the Records, ib, 158,

KK 3

502 DIET OF WORMS, A.D. 1521. Boox II.
persuaded to strip the Bishop of Liibeck of the in-
ferior feudal dominion of Holstein, to which he had
a right, and to transfer it to the King of Denmark
and his heirs: he forbade the duke, “‘ under pain of
his grievous displeasure and that of the empire,” to
oppose any obstacle. He had certainly no other
motive for this measure than that the king was his
brother-in-law, and forgot that that monarch would
never be regarded in any other light than as a
foreign prince.* Nor was his conduct towards
Prussia untainted by similar considerations: the em-
peror negotiated a truce between the Grand Master
and the King of Poland for four years, within which
time he promised, with the aid of his brother and
the King of Hungary, to endeavour to adjust the
difference. The Grand Master would acknowledge
no other allegiance than that he owed to the emperor
and empire, and rejected every other demand. The
emperor took this occasion to institute an inquiry
whether his vassal could, or could not, render feudal
service to a foreign king. He appointed the King
of Hungary one of the umpires; that prince being
now related to the house of Austria through the
Jagellon alliance, which, as we have observed, was
the main cause of the change in the late emperor's
policy with regard to Prussia.

It is evident that it was Charles’s earnest pur-
pose to maintain the position prepared by Maxi-
milian, and occupied, even before his arrival, by his
own commissioners. Kinsmen and old partisans

* Copies of the Records, printed in Christiani, i. p. 541.

Cnar. IV. INTERNAL AFFAIRS. 503

were favoured, and, as far as possible, promoted;
recently acquired friends, more closely attached;
the decision of difficult disputes, for example,
those between Cleves and Saxony, Brandenburg
and Pomerania, Hessen and Nassau, were, if pos-
sible, postponed, and rendered dependent on future
favour: the old opposition was, for the moment,
broken up and reduced to inactivity.

Such were the auspices under which the de-
liberations on the institutions of the empire now
commenced.

Weshall not examine what would have happened, or
what course Charles’s councillors would have entered
on, if their hands had been perfectly free. It is
enough to say that this was not the case.

In the third article of the election capitulations,
the emperor had promised to establish a government,
or Council of Regency, “‘ such as had formerly been
devised and had been in course of formation, of
pious, acceptable, brave, wise and honest persons
of the German nation, together with certain
electors and princes.” The purpose of this sti-
pulation was not doubtful. The nation wished
now to establish, on a permanent basis, the repre-
sentative form of government which had been
under discussion in 1487, planned and proposed
in 1495, and brought into operation in 1500,
but abolished again by Maximilian. The opinions
and designs of Archbishop Berthold were now re-
vived.

At Worms the electors renewed their ancient
union, and interchanged their word to press for the

KK 4

504 DIET OF WORMS, A.D. 1521. Boox IL.

performance of the promises contained in the
capitulations. In March a scheme of the Council
of Regency was submitted to the emperor. This
scheme was no other than a repetition of the or-
dinance for the establishment of the Regency of the
year 1500. It was to be composed exactly in the
same manner :—a lieutenant of the emperor as pre-
sident, delegates from the electors and the six circles
(for the division of the empire into ten circles was
not yet carried into effect), and representatives of
the different states in rotation: to remain in ex-
istence and in force when the emperor was present
with in the empire, as well as in his absence; to
have power to carry on negotiations, in urgent cases
to contract alliances and to decide feudal ques-
tions. In short, now, as at the former period, the
ereater part of the powers and functions of em-
peror were to be transferred to this represen-
tative body.

It was not in the nature of things that the em-

peror should assent to such a project. He was sur-—

rounded by the same school of German councillors
who had been about his predecessor: the ideas of
Elector Berthold were once more encountered by
the views of Maximilian. The emperor declared,
that his predecessor on the throne had found that the
Council of Regency tended to the diminution of his
own power and to the prejudice of the empire, and
therefore had not established it; that it could not
be expected of him to attempt to repeat the ex-
periment of an institution which could only lower
his dignity in the eyes of foreign nations. He sent
the States a scheme of a totally different nature for

Cuar. IV. COUNCIL OF REGENCY. 505

their consideration; according to which the most
important element of the Regency was six per-
manent imperial councillors; the fourteen coun-
cillors named by the Estates, who were to be asses-
sors to the former, were to be constantly changed.
Although the interests of the emperor would thus
be far more powerfully represented than before, yet
the Council of Regency thus constituted was neither
to make alliances, nor to decide important feudal
questions; nor to remain in existence, except during
the emperor’s residence out of the limits of the
empire. The oath was to be pronounced, not to
the emperor and the empire, but to the emperor
alone. The imperial hereditary dominions, which
it was one of the main objects of the States to
render subject to the common duties and burdens
of the empire, Charles insisted on keeping under a
perfectly independent administration; even Wiir-
temberg was not included within the boundary he
had assigned to the circles.

This led to a very animated encounter. The
States considered the expressions about Maximilian
as “more than highly vexatious.” Had not that
prince, they said, suffered himself to be persuaded
-by false friends to recede from the original plan, it
would have been honourable, useful, and glorious
for himself and the holy empire, and terrible to all
adversaries. And this time they were immovably
steadfast to their project. The emperor could
obtain nothing but some mitigation of subordinate
points.

The most vexatious thing to him was the mention

506 DIET OF WORMS, A.D. 1521. Boox II.

of an administration of the empire which should con-
tinue its functions during his presence. He regarded
this as a sort of tutelage—a stain upon his honour.
On this point they yielded to him, and acceded to the
title he proposed, “‘ His Imperial Majesty’s Regency
in the Empire;” also that it should at first be estab-
lished only for the period of his absence. This was
subject to the less difficulty, because its duration
could not be fixed, and the emperor on his part
promised to decide whether the existence of the
institution should be prolonged or not, according to
the situation of affairs at the time of his return.

Concessions were made to the emperor on some
other matters of detail. The composition of the
Council of Regency, which was the most important
matter, was indeed to be precisely on the model of
the former, but thenumber of assessors was increased
from twenty to twenty-two, the two additional mem-
bers to be nominated by the emperor. On the more
important feudal questions, and in alliances with
foreign powers, the approbation of the emperor was
justly made a necessary condition ; but the initiative
in affairs, and the negotiation of them, were to be left
to the Regency. Wiirtemberg was restored to the
Swabian circle. Austria and the Netherlands
were to send deputies as before. The oath was
unquestionably to be taken in the first place to the
emperor, but a distinct pledge was given that the
honour and welfare of the Holy Empire were to be
mentioned immediately after in the formula of the
~ oath.*

* The documents exchanged in this contest are tolerably com-
plete in Harpprecht. In the Frankfurt Archives there is, besides,

Cuap. IV. IMPERIAL CHAMBER. 507

In a word, the emperor succeeded in maintaining
his honour and authority —a point on which he
showed great susceptibility ; but, at the same time,
the States carried through their long-cherished idea,
and obtained a share in the government of the
empire, which Maximilian, after the first expe-
riment, would never again grant them. The
Electors of Saxony and of Treves were peculiarly
satisfied with the result.

The Imperial Chamber, which had fallen into utter
decay, was reconstituted upon the same principles.
The original scheme was a very extensiveone. As
there were about.three thousand causes undecided,
it was proposed to name so many assessors that they
might be divided into two senates ; the one of which
should be entirely occupied in disposing of old causes.
There was a project for reforming the procedure
on the model of the Rota Romana and the parlia-
ment of France. But it was soon evident how little
could be done. ‘I have as yet seen no doctor,”
writes the Frankfurt delegate home, “ who has pro-
posed any good scheme of reform. People say the
judges’ hearings should be increased, the holydays
curtailed, and proceedings the only purpose of
which is delay, abolished: any peasant might have
advised that.” ‘ They are deliberating,” says he,
another time, ‘on the reform of the Imperial
Chamber ; but that is like a wild beast, every body

anessay: “ungeverlich Anzeyg, was in Keys. Mt. iibergebenem
Regiment zugesetzt und umbgangen ist.” —“a tolerably exact
Account of what has been determined and done in the Regency
appointed for his Imperial Majesty.”

508 DIET OF WORMS, A.D. 1521. Boox II.

knows his strength, but nobody where to attack
him; one advises here, the other there.” At last the
States, with whom this proposal likewise originated,
came to the conviction that nothing could be
invented more expedient than the old ordinance of
the year 1495, with the improvements it had after-
wards undergone, and some new additions.* The

* The ordinance of the Imperial Chamber of 1521 is almost
word for word the same as this project of the states. The begin-
ning only is different. ‘“ Dienstag nach Litare,” lautet er, “ ist
auf Rémisch. Ks. Mt. unsres Allergniidigsten Herrn Beger von
Churfiirsten Fiirsten Stennden des heil. Rom. Reychs berat-
schlagt, da hievor auf erstgehalltenem Reychstag allhie zu
Wormbs im xcv. I. ain Ordnung desselben Kaiserl. Cammer-
gerichts aufgericht, welche nachmals zu vorgehalten Reychstagen
zum hail weiter declarirt und gebessert worden, das dieselbe
als notturfdeglich und hochlich ermessen und bedacht, im h. R.
zu hallten und zu vollziehen auch nachmals nit wol stattlicher
zu machen oder zu ordnen seyn mocht dann wie hernach folgt ;
darum Ir der Stennde getreuer Rate, das die kais. Mt. jetzo
solich (Ordnung ?) wider allhie gegen und mit den Stennden des
heyl. Reychs und herwiderumb sambt hernachgemeldten Ender-
ungen Ratschlag und Zusatz genadigklich annem, approbir und
wie bei S. K. Mt. Anherrn geschehen verpflicht und dieselben
also zu halten und zu vollziehen als Rémischer Keiser handhabe.”
—*“ On Thursday after Leetare,” it proceeds, “ at the desire of the
Roman emperor, our most gracious lord, the electors, princes,
and states of the Roman empire have debated on a new consti-
tution of the Kammergericht having been, on a former diet here
at Worms, in 1495, decreed, which constitution afterwards, at
other diets, has been farther interpreted and amended; that the
same, as requisite and highly fitting and well-considered, should
be kept and executed in the empire, since the same could not
well be made or constituted more excellent than here follows.
Therefore it is the loyal advice of the said states, that his im-
perial majesty do now, in a common accord with the states

Cuap. IV. COUNCIL OF REGENCY. 509

chief alteration was, that the emperor should be
allowed to appoint two new assessors to the court
of justice as well as to the Regency. The constitu-
tion of the court was in other respects the same as
that agreed to at Constance; here, too, the division
of the six circles was retained. The three spiritual
electors and the three first circles, Franconia,
Swabia and Bavaria, were to send assessors learned
in the law; the three temporal electors and the
three last circles, Upper Rhine, Westphalia and
Saxony, assessors of the knightly class. Charles V.
promised to send from his hereditary dominions
two of the former and two of the latter descrip-
tion. He had also the joint nomination, with
the States, of the judge or president of the court,
and of the two assessors out of the class of
counts andlords. The character of the tribunal, as
we perceive, remained essentially that of class re-
presentation (stdéndisch) ; and this was the more
unequivocal, since it was to hold its sittings in the
same place as the Council of Regency, which was
so decidedly representative, and was to be subject to
the supervision of that body.

What likewise contributed to impress this cha-
racter on it was, that the States took upon them-
selves (as, indeed, they had from the first offered
to do) the maintenance of all these authorities.
Many extensive plans were devised for that end:

of the empire, with the alterations, suggestions, and additions
hereafter mentioned, graciously accept and approve of the said °
constitution, and, like his majesty’s imperial predecessors, en-
gage to keep and execute the same and uphold it as Roman
emperor.”

510 DIET OF WORMS, A.D. 1521. Boox II.

e.g. the keeping back the annates and the revenues
of spiritual fiefs, which now went to Rome ; or a tax
on the Jews; or the imposition of an import duty
throughout the empire, which had the most nume-
rous and the warmest advocates; at last, however,
they came back to a matricula on the pattern of
that proposed at Constance, only that the rate was
much higher. The cost of the courts of justice was
estimated at 18,410 gulden; that of the Council of
Regency, the assessors of which must receive much
~ higher salaries, at 28,508.* But as it was foreseen
that there would be many deficits, it was deter-
mined to make the estimates at 50,000 gulden. The
assessment of Constance was altered as follows:
the principle was, to multiply the contributions
then required by five, and this rule was generally
adhered to, though not without many exceptions.
Many of the counts and lords, who were always
very intractable, were left at the old assessment;
others were raised, but only threefold at the
highest. On the other hand, some cities which had
the reputation of being very flourishing and wealthy,
were compelled to submit to a contribution above
fivefold higher than the last. Niirnberg and Ulm
were raised from 100 to 600 gulden; Danzig, from
70 to 400. In this manner was the only permanent
impost on the States of the empire, which, together
with the supreme tribunal, had begun to fall into
oblivion, revived.

* Harpprecht IV., iii. 35., has, it is true, only 27,508 gulden,
but this is an error. In the Frankfurt copy the sums are
given more correctly than in Harpprecht.

Cuar. IV. MATRICULA. BAL

Larger demands, with a view to a military orga-
nisation, and also more immediately to the emperor's,
coronation journey to Rome, necessarily came under
discussion. .

It might have been thought that the projects of a
general tax, and of a military training of the people

‘in parishes, would have been revived in conjunction
with that of the Council of Regency; representative
government and popular armament had always hi-
therto been kindred ‘notions. On this occasion, how-
ever, the latter was not suggested ; either because it
had always been found to be impracticable, or be-
cause, since it was last entertained, the power of the
princes had so greatly increased. On the 21st of
March Charles V. appeared in person in the as-
sembly of the States, and, with much circumlocution,
demanded through the mouth of Dr. Lamparter suc-
cours for his expedition to Rome, which he himself
estimated at 4000 horse and 20,000 foot, fora year.
He then promised to contribute 16,000 foot soldiers,
2000 heavy horse, and a considerable body of light
horse at his own cost. Elector Joachim of Bran-
denburg answered in the name of the states, ‘his
brothers, lords, and good friends*,” and prayed
time for consideration. Tothe demand itself, which
was founded on the ancient customs of the em-
pire, or to the number of troops specified, which

* Letter from Fiirstenberg to Frankfurt, March 24. “ 8. Maj.
sey auch willens gen Rom zu ziechen und dasjenige so dem Reich
“ entwandt, wieder zu erlangen.”—“ His majesty purposes to go
to Rome, and to regain possession of that which has been
wrested from the empire.”

512 DIET OF WORMS, A.D. 1521. Boox II.

was not unreasonable, there was no objection to be
urged. But again the States would promise no-
thing, till they were certain of the establishment of
the supreme court and of the Council of Regency,
which latter institution they more than ever felt
bound in duty to insist on. At length they granted
the required number of troops, but only for’
half a year; it was also agreed that they should
furnish the men, and not money for raising
them; they would not give occasion a second time
to all the disorders that had prevailed in this matter
under Maximilian.* Lastly, care was taken that
the German troops should not be left to the com-
mand of foreigners: they were all to march under
their own officers; the emperor was only to have
the appointment of the commander-in-chief, who
also must be a German. For every leader wished to
see his own men in the field under his own banner.
A matricula was drawn out on the principles of that
of Constance of 1507. As to the cavalry, it was
almost exactly the same ; in addition to the 3791
men then registered, there were now 240 from Aus-
tria and Burgundy, so that all the electors, and many
other of the states, had only to furnish their old
contingent. For the infantry (to which Austria
and Burgundy now contributed 600 men each) ~
the former demand of 4722 was generally quad-
rupled, though with many exceptions.— Thus

* Fiirstenberg, May 18. : “ Damit kein Finantz in den gesucht
werde.”—“ In order that it might not be turned into a matter
of financial speculation.”

J Neueste Sammlung der Reichsabschiede, ii. p. 211.

Cuap. IV. DIET OF WORMS. 513

arose the matricula of 1521, which was the last, and
formed the model for the military organisation of
the German empire for ages.

Such were the most important measures pro-
posed by the new emperor at this first diet. It
could not be said that they were fully adequate to
the wants of the nation. The resolutions adopted
were chiefly to the advantage of the sovereign
princes; the preliminary ordinances concerning
the execution of the judgments of the Imperial
Chamber — which was chiefly intrusted to them —
were, for example, manifestly in their favour: even
in his capitulation, the emperor had proposed to
forbid alliances or leagues between the nobles and
vassals; and this might have the effect of forming
more compact local powers. On the other hand,
nothing was done for the mass of the people,
among whom such a ferment prevailed, though it
had been so much and so often talked of. The
nobility remained excluded from all share in the
business of the empire; counts, lords, and nobles
were in a constant state of excitement concerning
the legal decision of their disputes with princes and
electors, which they wanted to have more expedi-
tious and equitable, and some rather acrimonious
correspondences on this subject passed at the diet.
The cities had vainly demanded a seat in the Im-
perial Chamber for their deputies; the great
subsidies of the empire were discussed and voted
without consulting them; many of them were re-
cently aggrieved by the new rate of contributions
imposed on them; and, besides this, they were

VOL. I. LL

514 DIET OF WORMS, A. D. 1521. Boox II.

threatened with an import duty for the whole
empire, from which they feared a universal dis-
turbance to commerce. They made incessant com-
plaints, and at last only agreed to the project
because they would not, as they said, be the only
members of the empire who resisted; they would
not have to bear the blame if peace and justice
were not established.*

Notwithstanding these defects, it was a great
point gained that the disorders of the last years
of Maximilian’s reign were checked ; and that the
ideas of a representative government, which had
never been realised under him, were revived with
such considerable success. The constitution of
1521, like that of 1507, was founded on a combi-
nation of matricular with representative forms ;
but the latter were now far more comprehensive,

* Hans Bock and Dr. Peutinger, who had sat in the com-
mittee, got little credit. ‘ Etlich geben,” schreibt Fiirsten-
berg, am 20 sten Mai, “ Hr. Hansen Bock etwa spitz Wort,
als ob er sich und die rheinischen Stadte erhalten und sie
im Pfeffer habe stecken lassen. Dazu verdriesst sie und uns
alle, dass sie die Grafen fast gelachert (erleichtert) und die
Beschwerung auf uns getrieben haben. Dr. Peutinger der
ist der aller onlustigst, er wolt gern dass man es beim alten
Anschlag liess, will nit ansehn dass Eine Stadt aufeeht die
andre in Abfall kommt.” —“ Some give,” writes Fiirstenberg on
the 20th of May, “ Herr Hans Bock hard words, as if he had
taken care of himself and the Rhenish cities, and left them (the
others) in the lurch. Moreover, it vexes them and all of us that
they have greatly relieved the counts, and forced the burden
upon us. Dr. Peutinger is the most discontented of all; he
would gladly have abided by the old assessment: he does not
like to see that whilst one city rises, another falls into decline.”

Cuapr. IV. FOREIGN RELATIONS. 515

since they did not, as on the former occasion, re-
gard the administration of justice only, but, accord-
ing to the propositions of 1495 and 1500, formed the
basis of a Council of Regency, enjoying considerable
independence of the emperor. The attempt to re-
vive an administration adapted to the momentary
interests of the policy of the house of Austria, such
as that constantly carried on by Maximilian, was
met by a national institution, which, if it could but
acquire consistency and development, promised the
most important future results.

FOREIGN RELATIONS. —LUTHER.

While these political arrangements were con-:
cluded, the spiritual interests of the empire were
also frequently discussed : they opened another field
to the emperor’s policy.

On all the other questions which came before
him, he had been able to keep in view Germany,
his relation to the interior of the empire, and the
interests of his family; but the Lutheran agitation
extended so widely that it affected even the most
important foreign relations.

Charles V. was the child and nursling of that
Burgundian court which had been mainly composed
of French elements under Philip the Good and
Charles the Bold, and had followed the peculiar line
of policy dictated by the position of those princes.
Even as opposed to Ferdinand the Catholic and
the Emperor Maximilian, this court had maintained

Mata 2

516 DIET OF WORMS, A.D.1521. — Boox IL.

and acted on its own independent views, ‘often m
direct hostility to the former. The prospects which
had been contemplated under Charles the Bold,
and opened under Philip I., appeared to find a
necessary fulfilment in the position and the rights
of Charles V. The court of Brussels, which was
not properly a sovereign court and wielded no
extraordinary powers, was suddenly called, by the
hereditary rights of its prince, to play the greatest
part in Europe. To take possession of this pre-
eminent station was of course its first care.

For the attainment of this end, the policy of
the Netherlands was conducted with singular pru-
dence and suecess by the Archduchess Margaret
and the Lord of Chiévres. Friesland had been
annexed to the Netherlands, which had also been
strengthened by the appointment of a kinsman to
the bishopric of Utrecht, and by the closest alliance
’ with Liege and Cleves. The crowns of Castile and
Aragon, with all their dependencies, had been
taken possession sof. Rebellious commotions had
indeed been universal, even in Naples and Sicily,
but they had all beer put down: the national
pride of the Castilians, offended by the dominion
of a court composed of foreigners, burst forth in
an insurrection of the communes; but the. monarch
possessed natural allies there in the clergy and the
grandees, and needed not to fear the people.

The inheritance of Maximilian was now added
to these vast territories. The Austrian hereditary
dominions, with all their rights or expectancies in
the east of Europe, which had been acquired by
the late emperor, were now left to the younger

Cua. IV. FOREIGN RELATIONS. 517

scion of the house, who, however, was kept in con-
stant dependence by his need of assistance: the
empire Charles took into his own hands, and
founded the ascendency of his house in Germany —.
with what care, we have just seen.

All this was carried into effect in the midst of
continual irritations and collisions with France,
_ originating in the disputes between former dukes
and kings ; but matters were so skilfully conducted
in Brussels, that peace was maintained under the
most difficult circumstances. The successors ’ of
Louis XI. were compelled, however reluctantly, to
allow the posterity of Charles the Bold to consoli-
date a power which infinitely exceeded all that
could have been anticipated in his time.

Nothing now remained but for the Burgundian
monarch to take possession of the imperial rights
in Italy, which appeared the more practicable,
since he already ruled Naples and Sicily, and since
his expedition to Rome. would be supported by
the whole might of the Spanish monarchy ;—a com-
bination which had never existed before. The Pro-
position* with which he opened the diet sufficiently
showed that the young emperor was determined to
avail himself of it. During the proceedings, fre-
quent allusion was made to the recovery of the im-
perial dominions that had been lost, and grants for
that purpose were made by the diet; negotiations
were entered into with the Swiss, even at Worms.

* The Proposition was the speech with which the emperor
opened the diet. It contained the topics proposed for discus-

sion. —TRANSL.
bL 38

518 DIET OF WORMS, A. D. 1521. Boox II.

The maintenance of peace with France, the
country the most nearly interested, was no longer
possible. Francis I. held the duchy of Milan with-
out having received or even sought the investiture;
the emperor’s first. efforts must be directed to this
point. Other plans, which gradually attained to
maturity, lay in the. back ground; for example,
that of recovering the duchy of Burgundy, taken
by Louis XI., the loss of which the Netherlands
had never learned to brook. The consolidation of
two great European powers completely opposed to
each other, which had long been silently preparing,
became at this moment fully manifest. France,—by
her internal unity and her wide-spread connexions,
both early in the 14th and (after the expulsion
of the English) at the close of the 15th and be-
ginning of the 16th centuries, unquestionably the
most powerful country in Europe, — saw herself
surrounded and overshadowed on all her frontiers
by a vassal who had gradually arisen to power,
whom she thought she had crushed, but who, by a
few easy and fortunate matrimonial alliances, had
come into possession of a combination of crowns
and dominions such as the world had never beheld.
Here we first perceive the hidden motives which
rendered Francis so eager to obtain the imperial
crown; he could not endure that his ancient vassal
should rise to a dignity superior to hisown. That
this nevertheless had come to pass, —that his rival
could now set up legitimate claims to the very
country the possession of which was peculiarly
dear to the king as the conquest of his own sword,
—inflamed him with bitter and restless irritation.

Cuar. IV. FOREIGN RELATIONS. 519

Growing ill will was observable in all the nego-
tiations, and it became evident that a breach was
inevitable between these two powers.*

This was the grand conjuncture destined to de-
velope the political life of Europe; the several states
of which necessarily inclined to the one side or the
other, according to their peculiar interests. Its more
immediate consequence was, to determine the posi-
tion of the empire and the application of its forces.

For however highly Charles V. estimated the im-
perial dignity, it was natural that he should not look
upon Germany as the central point of his policy.
The sum of all his opinions and feelings was, of
necessity, the result of the aggregate of his various |
dominions and relations. He ever felt himself the
Burgundian prince who united the highest dignity
of Christendom with the numerous crowns he had
inherited from his ancestors; and he thus, like his
grandfather, necessarily regarded the rights he
enjoyed as emperor as only a part of his power ; in-
deed the extent and variety of the countries subject
to his sway rendered it even more impossible for
him to devote himself completely to the internal af-
fairs of Germany, than it had been for Maximilian.

Of the workings of the German mind, he had
not the faintest idea; he understood neither the
language nor the thoughts of Germany.

It was a singular destiny that the nation, in the
moment of an internal agitation so mighty, so

* What were the mutual reproaches appears in the French
Apologia Madritz Conventionis Dissuasoria, and the Imperial
Refutatio Apologize in Goldast, Politica Imperialia, pp. 864. 863.

Lu 4

520 “DIET OF WORMS, A. D. 1521. Boox IL.

peculiar to itself, had called to its head a stranger
to its character and spirit; in whose policy, which
embraced a much wider sphere, the wants and
wishes of the German people could appear but as
a subordinate incident.

Not that’ religious questions were indifferent to
the emperor—they were very interesting to him ;
but only in as far as they affected or threatened
the pope, and afforded a new view of his own con-
nexion with the court of Rome, or new weapons
with which to encounter it.

Amidst all the various political relations of the
emperor, this, however, was unquestionably now
the most important.

For as a conflict with France was obviously in-
evitable — a conflict of which Italy must be the
principal scene — the main question for the emperor
was, whether he should have the pope with him or
not. The two monarchs already rivalled each other
in their efforts to gain Leo’s favour. Both were
lavish in their promises; the king, in case he
should conquer Naples, which he was resolved to
attack; the emperor, in the event of an attempt
upon Milan, which he was about to make in favour
of the pretender and the house of Sforza, and for
the purpose of restoring the rights of the empire
over that province.

This, however, was not the only close relation
of the emperor to the see of Rome; others of an
ecclesiastical nature, but involving not less im-.
portant results, existed in his other dominions,
and especially in Spain.

Cuar. IV. FOREIGN RELATIONS. . 521

It is matter of notoriety that the main prop of the
government of that country, as constituted under
Ferdinand the Catholic, was the inquisition. But
this institution was now the object of a simultaneous '
attack in Castile, Aragon, and Catalonia. That
powerful body, the Cortes of Aragon, had applied
to the pope, and had actually obtained from him
some briefs, according to which the whole consti-
tution of the inquisition was to be altered and
approximated to the forms of the common law.*
In the spring of 1520, Charles sent an ambassador
to Rome to effect a revocation of these briefs,
which he foresaw must have important conse-
quences in his other dominions, and endanger his
whole government.

The negotiations were pending when Charles
arrived in the Netherlands, and a loud and almost
universal voice, expressing both a political and a
religious opposition, called upon him to assume a
bold attitude of resistance to the pope.

Charles’s acute and able envoy, who arrived in
Rome while Eck was there, and Luther’s contro-
versy gave rise to so many deliberations of the
theologians and sittings of the consistory, imme-
diately perceived all the advantage which might
accrue from it to his master. ‘‘ Your Majesty,” he
writes to the emperor on the 12th of May, 1520,
“must go to Germany, and there confer some
favour upon a certain Martin Luther, who is at the
court of Saxony, and excites great anxiety in the

* Llorente, Hist. de Inquisition, i. p. 395. nr. x.

522 . DIET OF WORMS, A.D. 1521. Boox II.

court of Rome by the things he preaches.” * This
view of the case was actually adopted at the imperial
court. When the papal nuncio arrived there with
the bull against Luther, the prime minister let fall
the expression, that the emperor would do what was
agreeable to the pope, if his holiness would oblige
him, and not support his enemies. t= On another oc-
casion, Chievres said that if. the pope embarrassed
the affairs of the emperor (with France), other
people would stir up embarrassments for him, out
of which he would not easily extricate himself.

This, therefore, was the real point on which the
affair, from the first moment, turned: not the ob-
jective truth of the opinions, nor the great interests
of the nation connected with them,—of which the
newly arrived sovereign was not conscious, and with
which he could have no sympathy; but the general
situation of politics, the support which the pope was
willing to grant the emperor, and the footing upon
which the former intended to place himself with
regard to him.

This was well known at Rome. Great pains
were taken to gain over the emperor’s confessor,
Glapio, a Franciscan, who was not well disposed
towards Rome, “ by civilities.” It was determined,
after long hesitation, to nominate the Bishop of
Liege, Eberhard of the Mark, who had gone over

* Extract from Manuel’s Despatches: Llorente, i. p, 398.

+ From Aleander’s letters: Pallavicini, i. c. 24. p. 136. —
To what does the emperor refer, when he afterwards reproaches
the court of Rome with having tried to delay the coronation at
Aix? Caroli Reser. Goldast, Const. p. 992.

Cuapr. IV. ALEANDER. - 525

from the side of France to that of Austria, car-
dinal, offensive as this must be to the former
power.* The same motives had dictated the mission
of Aleander, who had been in the bishop’s service
before he came to Rome, and, from the influence
which that prelate enjoyed over the government of
the Netherlands, appeared there as the natural
mediator between Rome and the empire. This
bishop, Aleander thought, too, would be an active
instrument in securing a favourable result to the
negotiations with the empire, though his lan-
guage was generally frank and audacious. All
the measures which the nuncio suggested or em-
ployed were conceived in this spirit. The Bishop
of Tuy, who had followed the emperor from Spain,
and enjoyed great consideration with the prime
minister, was to be conciliated by the gift of a
benefice which had been already promised to one
‘who had every possible claim to it. Aleander
paid one of the imperial secretaries fifty gulden,
for which sum the latter engaged to render him
“ secret and good service ;” and promised the same
man a pension for some years, in consideration of
his pledging himself to report to him all the de-
liberations of the Council of Regency hostile to the
court of Rome. He expresses himself persuaded
that most of these councillors and secretaries, al-
though they hate the’ papacy, will “dance to
Rome’s piping,” if they do but see her gold.ft
* Molini, Documenti di Storia Italiana, i. p. 84.

+ Heasks on one occasion for “denari si per mio vivere
come per donar a segretarii et a sbirri, li quali ancorche siino in-

524 - DIET OF WORMS, A. D. 1521. Boox II.

His bribes extended even to the door-keepers and
beadles who were to seize Luther’s works; his
sole and continual complaint is, that his em-
ployers send him too little money. By a similar
course of “‘ cunning and promptitude,” as he boasts,
he had carried into effect the mandate for the
burning of Luther’s books in Flanders: “ the em-
peror and his councillors saw the books burning,
before they were fully aware that they had assented
to the mandate.” Aleander’s letters present an
odious and disgusting spectacle; a most immoral
mixture of cunning, cowardice, arrogance, affected
devotion and mean ambition; the vilest means
employed in so great a cause. It is not probable
that these were without influence, though of
course others were needed to produce a decisive
effect. But what had not been put in practice ?
In the matter of the inquisition, especially, the pope
agreed to make the most important concessions. ’
On the 21st of October, 1520, he declared to the
grand inquisitor of Spain, that he would give no
further encouragement to the demands of the cortes
of Aragon; that he would not confirm the briefs
he had issued, and that he would introduce no
innovation in the affairs of the inquisition, without
the approbation of the emperor. Even this did not
satisfy Charles; he demanded the entire revocation

fensissimi alla corte di Roma, tutta volta qualche danaro li
farebbe saltar a nostro modo: quia aliter nihil fit et vix facie-
mus aliquid.” — Extracts from Aleander’s Letters in Miinter,
Beitrége zur Kirchengeschichte, p. 78.

Cuar. IV. DISCUSSIONS CONCERNING LUTHER. 525

of the briefs. On the 12th of December, the pope
offered to declare all steps that had been taken
against the inquisition null and void. On the 16th
of January, 1521, he at length actually permitted
the emperor to suppress the briefs, and expressed
the wish that they might be sent back to Rome in
order that he might annul them.*

It is obvious that this state of things was little
calculated to meet the wishes of the people of
Germany. Charles’s position and connexions re-
quired of him an alliance with the pope, instead of
that opposition which the spirit of the nation would
have dictated. How grievously were the hopes which
such men as Hutten and Sickingen had placed on
the young emperor disappointed! The papal bull
was executed without hesitation in the Low German
hereditary dominions, where the higher clergy and
confessors seemed to engross-all the consideration
. of the court: in January, 1521, there was a ge-
neral belief that the emperor was determined to
destroy Luther, and, if possible, to exterminate
his followers.¢ A brief arrived, probably together
with the last concessions, wherein the pope exhorted
the emperor to give the force of law to his bull
by an imperial edict. ‘He had now an oppor-
tunity of showing that the unity of the church was
as dear to him as to the emperors of old. Vainly
would he be girded with the sword, if he did not

* Extracts in Llorente, i. pp. 396. and 405,
+ Spengler to Pirkheimer, Dec. 29. Jan. 10. in Riederer,
pp. 1138. 131.

526 DIET OF WORMS, A. D..1521. Boox I.

use it, not only against the infidels, but against
heretics, who were far worse than infidels.” *

One day in the month of February on which a
tournament was to be held, the emperor’s banner
was already displayed, when the princes were
summoned, not to the lists, but to the imperial
quarters, where this brief was read to them, and at
the same time an edict commanding the rigorous
execution of the bull was laid before them.

Strange and unlooked for entanglement of events !
The Lutheran controversy led the pope to revoke
that mitigation of the severities of the inquisition in
Spain which he had already determined on at. the
request. of the cortes; while in Germany, on the |
other hand, the emperor prepared to crush the
monk who so audaciously incited the people to
rebel against the authority of Rome. The resis-
tance to the power of Dominican inquisitors was
in both countries a national one. This fully ex-
plains the fact that, among the Spaniards who
accompanied the court, those at least of the mid-
dle classes took the liveliest interest in Luther and
his writings.

In Germany however the emperor could ac-
complish nothing without the approbation of the
empire ; and in submitting the draft of the man-
date before alluded to to the States, he had added,
“that if they knew of any thing better, he was
ready to hear it.” This gave rise to very warm

* “Deus accinxit te terrene potestatis supremo gladio,
quem frustra profecto gereres juxta Pauli apostoli sententiam,

nisi eo uterere cum contra infideles tum contra infidelibus multo
deteriores hereticos.”—/Fr. Arch.

Cuar.IV. DISCUSSIONS CONCERNING LUTHER. 527

discussions in the imperial council. ‘ The monk,”
says the Frankfurt deputy, “ makes plenty of ene
Some would gladly crucify him, and I fear he will
hardly escape them; only they must take care that
he does not rise again on the third day.” The same
doubt and fear, that condemnation by a party would
produce no permanent effect, prevailed in the
States. The emperor had intended to publish the
edict without further trial*, according to the
advice of Aleander, who declared that the sen-
tence of condemnation already pronounced was
sufficient ; Doctor Eck, too, sent in a little me-
morial, full of flatteries and admonitions, to the same
effect. It was the same question which had been

* In the draft it is said: “ Und (weil) dann der gedacht
Martin Luther alles das, so muglichen gewesen ist, offentlichen
gebredigt, geschrieben und ausgebraitet, und yetzt am jungsten
etlich Articul, so inn viel Orten in Behem gehalten werden und
die von den hailigen Concilien fiir kitzerisch erkannt und erklart
seyn, angenommen, und ine darum die papstlich Heyligkeit fiir
einen offenbaren Ketzer wie obstet erklirt und verdammt hat und
deshalben inen weiter zu héren nit rat noch geburlich ist.”—
«© And (since) then the said Martin Luther has openly preached,
written, and spread all this as much as possible, and has
now lately accepted certain articles which are maintained in
many places in Bohemia, and which are recognised and de-
clared by the holy councils to be heretical, and his papal holiness
has, therefore, as beforesaid, declared and condemned him as an
avowed heretic, and therefore it is neither advisable nor fitting
to hear him further.”

t “Ad Carolum V. de Ludderi causa: Ingoldstadt, 18 Feb.
Saxones sub Carolo magno colla fidei et imperio dedere: absit
ut sub Carolo maximo Ludder Saxo alios fidem veram et unicam
deponere faciat.”

528 ~ DIET OF WORMS, A.D.1521. ~ — Boox IZ.

discussed in the curia, but the Estates of Germany
were not so obsequious as the jurists of Rome.
They begged the emperor to reflect what an im-
pression would be made on the common people, in
whose minds Luther’s preaching had awakened various
thoughts, fantasies, and wishes, if he were sentenced
by so severe a mandate, without being even called
to take his trial. They urged the necessity of
granting him a safe-conduct, and summoning him
to appear and defend himself. But a new question
arose. On what basis was this trial to be conducted ?
The States distinguished between two branches of
Luther’s opinions; the one relating to church
government and discipline, which they were for
handling indulgently, even if he refused to recant
(and they seized this occasion of once more strongly
impressing on the emperor the complaints of the
nation against the See of Rome) ; the other, against
the doctrine and the faith “‘ which they, their fathers
and fathers’ fathers, had always held.” Should he
also persist in these, and refuse to recant, they de-
clared themselves ready to assent to the imperial
mandate, and to maintain the established faith
without further disputation.*

* “Der Stennd Antwurt auf keyserlicher Mt. Beger des Man-
dats.” —“ The answer of the States to the desire of his imperial
majesty to the mandate.” Without a date. Unfortunately, also,
Fiirstenberg has not dated his letters precisely. The one, for
instance, which refers to this resolution, he has inscribed Satur-
day after Marthe. Saturday after Matthie, March 2., is cer-
tainly meant. In which case this resolution of the States is of
that date. For that their answer should have referred to a

Cuap. IV. GRAVAMINA. 529

Such were the views with which Luther was
summoned to Worms. ‘“ We have determined,”
says the imperial citation, ‘‘ we and the States of
the Holy Roman empire, to receive information
from thee concerning the doctrine and the books
that have been uttered by thee.” An imperial
herald was sent to conduct him.

With regard to the opposition to the temporal
interference of Rome, the States were essentially of
the same opinion with Luther. As the emperor
was bound even by his capitulation to restore and
maintain the Concordat and the ecclesiastical liber-
ties of the nation, which had been continually
violated to an insufferable extent, the lesser com-
mittee was now employed in drawing up a complete
statement of the grievances of the nation against
the See of Rome. Their manner of proceeding
was this; each prince delivered in a list of the
grievances of which he had more particularly to
complain, and every charge alleged by more than
one was received and recorded. Already it was
feared that the spiritual princes would draw back ;
but the councillors of the temporal were determined
in that case to carry the matter on to the end alone.
A statement of grievances was produced which re-
minds us of the writings of Hutten and the Book to
the German Nobles; so strong was the censure of
the papal See generally, and above all, of the

command of the emperor of the 7th of March, is impossible,
since the letter of summons to Luther is dated the 6th of
March.

VOL. I. MM

530 DIET OF WORMS, A. D. 1521. Boox IL.

government of Pope Leo X.* It is filled with the
cunning and malignant devices, the roguery and
cheating, which prevailed at the court of Rome.
The curia was also directly accused, in practice,
of simony. If Luther had done nothing more
than attack the abuses of the curia, he could
never have been deserted by the States; the opinion
he had expressed on this subject was the general
one, and was indeed their own. Probably the em-
peror himself would not have been able to with-
stand it; his father confessor had threatened him
with the chastisements of Heaven if he did not re-
form the church.

We feel almost tempted to wish that Luther had
remained for the present satisfied with this. The
nation, engaged under his conduct in a common
‘ struggle against the temporal sway of the church
of Rome, would have become for the first time
strongly united and completely conscious of its own
unity. But the answer to this is, that the strength
of a mind like his would have been broken, had
it been fettered by any consideration not purely
religious. Luther had been incited not by the wants

* This document is republished from the old printed edition,
in Walch, xv. 2058. The copy in the Frankfurt Archives, which
agrees with the printed one, shows more plainly that the work
consists of three parts; the first reaching to E iiii., upon which
follows an episode; the second, with a fresh superscription,
touching especially the usurpations of the spiritual courts of
justice, reaching to Giii.; finally, a third, containing chiefly the
complaints of the clergy themselves, and of the ordinaries, against
the court of Rome, which was presented on the Monday after
Jubilate, April 22., Luther himself being by.

Crap. IV. GLAPIO. 531

of the nation, but by his own religious convictions,
without which he would never have done any
thing, and which had indeed led him further than
would have been either necessary or expedient in
a political struggle.

Some still hoped, however, that he would recall
one step; that he would at least not persist in his
last most offensive expressions which occurred in
the Book of the Babylonish Captivity. This was in
particular the opinion of the emperor’s confessor.
He did not regard the papal anathema as an insu-
perable obstacle to an amicable adjustment. Luther
had not yet had a hearing ; a door remained open
to the pope for restoring him to the bosom of the
church, if he would but consent to retract this last
book, which was full of the most untenable asser-
tions and not comparable to his other writings.
But by maintaining these passages he laid a stum-
bling block in his own path; he would cause that
the precious wares which he might otherwise bring
safely to port would be shipwrecked.* At first he
proposed to the Elector of Saxony to nominate
two or three councillors with whom he could con-
sult as to the means of arranging the affair. The
elector replied that he had not learned councillors
sufficient. Glapio hereupon asked whether the
parties would submit the matter to chosen arbi-
trators, by whose decision the pope himself would
abide. The elector did not believe it possible to

* Seckendorf, Comm. de Lutheranismo, i. 142.
MM 2

532 DIET OF WORMS, A.D. 1521. Boox II.

induce the pope to consent to this, especially since
the emperor intended so soon to leave Germany.
On hearing this, Glapio sighed. The silent, re-
served prince, who repelled all attempts at in-
timacy or sympathy from others, and who was in
fact the only human being that had any influence
over Luther, was absolutely unapproachable: it
was impossible to obtain from him even a private
audience. The confessor, therefore, addressed him-
self to other friends of Luther. He went to the
' Ebernburg to visit Sickingen, who had just then
re-entered the emperor’s service and was esteemed
one of Luther’s most distinguished patrons, in
the hope of obtaining his mediation. Here, too,
Glapio expressed himself in such a manner on
some points, that he might have been supposed
to be an adherent of Luther. I am not of opinion
that this was a stratagem, as so many have as-
sumed ; Aleander, at least, was very uneasy about it,
and neglected no means of interrupting the course
of the negotiations. It is obvious that Luther’s
opposition to the pope promised to be a doubly
powerful instrument of the ‘imperial policy, if the
government did not find itself compelled absolutely
to condemn him on account of his open schism, and
could keep the matter pending before a cdurt of
arbitration. Sickingen sent an invitation to Luther
to visit him in passing by.*

For Luther was already on his way from Wit-
tenberg to Worms. He preached once on the road,

* See Luther’s Narrative. Works, Altenb. Ed. t. i. p. 733,

Cuar. IV. LUTHER AT WORMS, A.D. 1521. 533

and in the evening when he arrived at his inn,
amused himself with playing the lute; he took no
interest whatever in politics, and his mind was ele-
vated far above all subjects of mere personal in-
terest, whether regarding himself. or others. At
various places on the road he had to pass through,
might be seen posted up the decretal condemning
~ his books, so that when they arrived at Weimar
the herald asked him whether he would go on. He
replied that he would rely on the emperor’s safe-
conduct. Then came Sickingen’s invitation. He
replied, if the emperor’s confessor had any thing to
say to him, he could say it in Worms. Even at
the last station, a councillor of his sovereign sent him
word that he had better not come, for that he might
share the fate of Huss. ‘ Huss,” replied Luther,
‘“‘ was burnt, but not the truth with him: I will go,
though as many devils took aim at me as there are
tiles on the roofs of the houses.” * Thus he reached
Worms, on the 18th of April, 1521, one Tuesday,
about noon, just as people sat at dinner. When the
watchman on the church tower blew his trumpet,
every body crowded into the streets to see the monk.
He sat in the open waggon (Lollwagen) which the
council of Wittenberg had lent him for the journey,

* Miiller, Staatscabinet, viii. 296. I retain the expres-
sion, which he himself makes use of in a subsequent letter :
“ Wenn ich hitte gewusst, dass so viel Teufel auf mich
gehalten hitten, als Ziegel auf den Dachern sind, wire ich
dennoch mitten unter sie gesprungen mit Freuden.”—“ If I
had known that as many devils would have set upon me as there
are tiles on the roofs, I should still have sprung into the midst
of them with joy.” — Letters, ii. 139.

MM 3

534 LUTHER AT WORMS, A.D. 1521. Boox II.

in the cowl of his order; before him rode the herald,
with his tabard, embroidered with the imperial eagle,
hung over his arm. Thus they passed through the
wondering, gaping crowd, regarded by some with
sympathy, by all with various and unquiet emotions.
Luther looked down upon the assembled multitude,
and his daring courage rose to the height of firm
confidence: he said, “* God will be with me.” In
this state of mind he alighted.

The very next day towards evening he was con-
ducted into the assembly of the empire. The young
emperor, the six electors (among whom was his
own master), a body of spiritual and temporal
princes before whom their subjects bowed the knee,
numerous chiefs celebrated for deeds in war and
peace, worshipful delegates of cities, friends and foes,
were there, awaiting the entrance of the monk.
The sight of this majestic and splendid assemblage
seemed for a moment to dazzle him. He spoke in
a feeble and almost inaudible voice. Many thought
_ he was frightened. Being asked whether he would

defend his books (the titles of which were read
aloud) collectively, or consent to recant, he replied
that he begged for time to consider: he claimed, as
we have seen, the benefit of the forms and customs
of the empire. ;

The following day he appeared again before the
diet. It was late before he was admitted; torches
were already lighted; the assembly was perhaps
more numerous than the day before; the press of
people so great, that the princes hardly found seats ;
the interest in the decisive moment, more intense.

Cuar. IV. LUTHER AT WORMS, A.D. 1521. 535

Luther now exhibited not a trace of embarrass-
ment. The same question as before being repeated
to him, he answered with a firm, distinct voice and
with an air of joyful serenity. He divided his works
into books of Christian doctrine, writings against
the abuses of the See of Rome, and controversial
writings. To be compelled to retract the first, he
said, would be unheard of, since even the papal bull
had acknowledged that they contained much that
was good ; the second, would afford the Romanists a
pretext for the entire subjugation of Germany ; the
third, would only give his adversaries new courage
to resist the truth: — an answer which was more
directed against the erroneous form in which the
questions had been arranged, than against the views
with which the States had entered on the trial.
The official of Treves put the matter in a more
tangible shape, by advising Luther not to give a
total and unqualified refusal to the proposal to
retract. Had Arius, he said, retracted some points,
his good books would not have been destroyed to-
gether with the bad. In his (Luther’s) case, too,
means would be found to rescue some of his books
from the flames, if he would recant what had been
condemned by the Council of Constance, and what
he had repeated in defiance of that condemnation.
The official insisted more on the infallibility of
councils than on that of the pope.

But Luther now believed as little in the one as
in the other ; ‘he replied, that even a council might
err. This the official denied. Luther repeated that
he would prove that this might happen, and that it

MM 4

536 LUTHER AT WORMS, A.D. 1521.  Boox IZ.

had happened. The official could not of course go
into the inquiry in that assembly. He asked again
definitively whether Luther meant to defend all his
works as orthodox, or to retract any part. He
announced to him that, if he utterly refused to
recant, the empire would know how to deal with a
heretic. Luther had expected that a disputation
or confutation, or some attempt at demonstrating
his errors, awaited him in Worms; when therefore
he found himself at once treated as a false teacher,
there arose in his mind during the conversation
the full consciousness of a conviction dependent
on no act of the will, founded on God’s word, re-
gardless of and untroubled by pope or council:
threats alarmed him not; the universal sympathy,
the warm breathings of which he felt around him,
had first given him strength and courage: his
feeling was, as he said at going out, that had he
a thousand heads he would let them all be struck
off sooner than recant. He repeated now, as he had
done before, that, unless it were demonstrated to
him by texts from the Holy Scripture that he was
in error, he could not and would not recant, since
his conscience was captive to God’s word. “ Here
I stand,” exclaimed he: “I can do no otherwise;
God help me. Amen.”* |

* Acta, Rev" Patris Martini Lutheri coram Czs* Majestate,
etc. Opp. Lutheri, lat. ii. p. 411. The account which Pallavi-
cini drew from the letters of Aleander contains somewhat
more: a good deal of the detail which he gives, as well as dif-
ferent pieces of news, I found in the letters of the Frankfurt
delegates, Fiirstenberg and Holzhausen.

Cuar. IV. LUTHER AT WORMS, A.D. 1521. O80

It is remarkable how different was the impres-
sion which Luther made upon those present. The
Spaniards of high rank, who had always spoken
of him with aversion and contempt, who had been
seen to take a book of Luther’s or Hutten’s from a
book-stall, tear it in pieces and trample it in the
mire*, thought the monk imbecile. A Venetian,
who was otherwise perfectly impartial, remarks,
that Luther showed himself neither very learned
nor remarkably wise, nor even irreproachable in
his life, and that he had not answered to the ex-
pectations conceived of him.t It is easy to im-
agine what was Aleander’s judgment of him. But
even the emperor had received a similar impression :
‘¢ That man,” said he, “‘ will never make a heretic of
me.” The next day (19th of April) he announced
to the states of the empire in a declaration written
in French and with his own hand, his determination
to maintain the faith which had been held by his
predecessors, orthodox emperors and catholic kings.
In that word he included all that had been es-
tablished by councils, and especially that of Con-
stance. To this he would devote his whole power,
body and soul. After the expressions of obstinacy
which they had yesterday heard from Luther, he
felt remorse that he had spared him so long, and
would now proceed against him as against an
avowed heretic. He called upon the princes to act

* Buschius ad Huttenum. Opp. Hutt. iv. p. 237.
+ Contarenus ad Mattheum Dandulum- Vormatie, 26™° d.
April, 1521, in the Chronicle of Sanuto, tom. xxx.

538 LUTHER AT WORMS, A.D. 1521. — Boox II.

in the same spirit, according to their duty and their
promises.

Luther had, on the contrary, completely satisfied
his own countrymen.* The hardy warriors were
delighted with his undaunted courage; the veteran
George of Frundsperg clapped him on the shoulder,
encouragingly, as he went in; the brave Erich of
Brunswick sent him a silver tankard of Eimbeck
beer through all the press of the assembly. At
going out a voice was heard to exclaim, “ Blessed
is the mother of such a man!” Even the cautious
and thoughtful Frederic was satisfied with his pro.
fessor: ‘‘ Oh,” said he to Spalatin in the evening,
in his own chamber, ‘“ how well did Doctor Mar-
tinus speak before the emperor and states!” He
was particularly delighted at the ease and abi-
lity with which Luther had repeated his German
declaration in Latin. From this time, the princes
rivalled each other in the frequency of their visits
to him. ‘“ Ifyou be right, Sir Doctor,” said Land-
erave Philip of Hessen, after a few jocose words,
which Luther gently rebuked with a smile, “‘ may
God help you.” Luther had already been told, that
if his enemies burned him, they must burn all the
German princes with him. Their latent sympathy

* “ Contarenus ad Tiepolum, 25™° d. Apr. Habet intentis-
simos inimicos et maximos fautores : res agitur tanta contentione
quantam nemo crederet.”-—Letter of Tonstall from the Diet of
Worms, in Fidde’s Life of Wolsey, p. 242. The Germans
every where are so addicted to Luther, that rather than he shall —
be oppressed by the pope’s authority, a hundred thousand of
the people will sacrifice their lives.

Cuar. IV. LUTHER AT WORMS, A.D. 1521. 539

was aroused and set in. motion by the emperor’s
peremptory manifesto, so foreign to all the forms
of the empire. A paper was found in his apart-
ments on which were written the words, ‘‘ Woe to
the land whose king is a child!” <A declaration
of open hostility was fixed on the town-hall, on the
part of four hundred allied knights against the ©
Romanists, and especially against the Archbishop
of Mainz, for trampling under foot honour and di-
vine justice. They had sworn not to abandon the
. upright Luther. “Iam ill at writing,” said the
author of this proclamation; ‘“ but I mean a
great mischief, with 8000 foot soldiers’ at my
back. Bundschuh, Bundschuh, Bundschuh!” *
This seemed to announce a combination between
the knights and the peasants to protect Luther
against his enemies. In fact, the courtiers did not
feel perfectly at ease, when they saw themselves
thus unarmed and defenceless, in the midst of a
warlike nation in a state of violent excitement and
agitated by conflicting passions.

For the moment, however, there was nothing to
fear, since Sickingen and many other knights and
captains had entered Charles’s service, in the hope
of soon reaping an ample harvest of glory and gain
under his banners.

Before the States entered on the discussion of
the emperor’s proclamation, they proposed that an
attempt should be made to induce Luther to re-

* The war-cry of the league of the peasants of the Upper
Rhine in 1501-2. (See note,-p. 233.) — TRANSL.

540 LUTHER AT WORMS, A.D. 1521. Boox IL.

nounce his most offensive opinions; they intimated
that there was danger of a rebellion, if the pro-
ceedings against him were of so hasty and violent
a kind: for this purpose the emperor granted a
delay of some days.

But it was easy to foresee that little could be
accomplished by such means. Representations were
made to Luther concerning his opinions on the
councils ;— he persisted in affirming that Huss was
unjustly condemned at Constance. He was again
asked to acknowledge the emperor and states as
judges of his doctrines; —he declared that he would
not allow men to be the judges of God’s word.

Aleander maintains that Luther had really, at
one moment, been advised to abandon some of the
opinions he had last proclaimed, and to defend only
those immediately directed against Rome. No trace
of this is to be found in German authorities. It does
not even appear that the question contained in the
memorial of the States was very precisely put; but
all his declarations were so clear and explicit, so
profoundly religious, that no personal considera-
tions were to be expected from him: he had
emancipated himself for ever from the forms of the
church of Rome; in rejecting the decision of one
council, he rejected the whole idea on which it
rested: a compromise was now impossible.

But as he quitted Worms without having con-
sented to the smallest limitation of his opinions,
the former resolution of the States, which had given
occasion to his being summoned before them, was
now put in force as an instrument of his con-

Cuar. IV. EDICT OF WORMS, A.D. 1521. 5AL

demnation. The emperor, at least, could not have
contemplated a revision of this decree or a fresh
debate upon it, since he had just formed the most
intimate relations with the See of Rome.

The ill concealed hostile disposition in which
Don Juan Manuel had found the court of Rome
in the spring of 1520, had been converted into the
strictest union by his efforts, within the space of a
year. On the 8th of May, 1521, an alliance was
concluded between Charles and Leo, in which they
mutually promised ‘to have the same friends and
the same enemies, without exception; the same
will in consent and denial, in attack and defence.”
They began by making common cause against
France; the pope having at length determined com-
pletely to take the side of the emperor, and to-
exert all his powers to drive the French out of
Milan andGenoa. ‘The immediate object, however,
was the spiritual affairs of Germany.

In the 16th article of the treaty, the emperor
promised that, “inasmuch as certain men had
arisen, who fall off from the Catholic faith and
wickedly slander the apostolic see, he would
employ all his powers in punishing them and
avenging the wrong they had committed against
the apostolic see, in like manner as if it had been
done against himself.” *

It cannot be affirmed that the conduct of

* Tabule Foederis, &c. in Dumont, t. iv. part iii. p. 98.
“‘ Quoniam sanctissimo domino nostro cura est aliquanto etiam
major rerum spiritualium et pastoralis officii quam tempora-
lium i

542 EDICT OF WORMS, A.D. 1521, —_ Boox II.

Charles V. in the affair of Luther was dictated
exclusively by political motives; it is very probable
that a denial of the infallibility of councils and an
attack on the sacraments, was as offensive as it was
unintelligible to him; but it is perfectly clear that
he was mainly determined by politics. To what
purposes might not Luther have been turned, if he
had moderated his tone so as to render it un-
necessary to condemn him? But as this was not
to be avoided, it was made a condition of the great
war which was about to be declared.

There was, however, still a certain difficulty in

adopting decisive measures, arising from the uni-
versal sympathy which Luther had excited during
his presence. ‘The resolution passed by the States
-was now repugnant toaconsiderable number of them.
The question was, whether they would acquiesce
without contest in an edict founded upon this
resolution.

In order to obtain this result, the following

course was adopted.

Nothing was said for some time ; meanwhile
many quitted Worms, as all the aalen business
was ended.

On the 25th of May, when the emperor appeared
at the town-hall to go through the formalities of re-
ceiving the resolutions concerning the Council of
Regency, the courts of justice, and the matricula, in
person, he requested the States to adjourn their de-
parture for three days, in order to terminate some
matters which were still undecided.* According to

* Letter of Fiirstenberg, May 28. Frankf. Arch.

Cnuar. IV. EDICT OF WORMS, A.D. 1521. 543

ancient usage, the members of the diet escorted him
- back to the bishop’s palace, where he resided; the
electors of Saxony and the Palatinate had left
Worms, but the four others were present. On their
arrival at the palace, they found the papal nuncios
awaiting them. In consequence of Aleander’s urgent
representations of the necessity of sending this mark
of honour, briefs had arrived from the pope to the
electors, and were presented to them by the nun-
cios. A brief had also arrived addressed to the em-
peror, the publication of which had been designedly
delayed till this moment. Under the impressions
made by these flattering communications, the em-
peror now declared that he had caused an edict on
the Lutheran affair to be drawn up, on the basis of
the former resolution of the States. This document
had even been composed — such was the confidence
now prevailing between emperor and pope—by one
of the nuncios; the present was esteemed the favour-
able moment for communicating it to these mem-
bers of the diet. There was now no legitimate or
efficient line of opposition open to them, even had
they been disposed to pursue it; and the Elector of
Brandenburg, Joachim I., replied that the opinion
of the States was certainly conformable to the
measure in question. Aleander hastened to place
this instantly on official record.*

* Pallavicini, lib. i. c. 28. from Aleander’s Letters. It is
evident what pleasure the narrator takes in the success of so
dexterous a proceeding: “ Era ignoto il misterio all’ istesso
~ Grancancelliere —crucciava forte i ministri di papa, veggendo
nel discioglimento della dieta rimanerse con le mani vacue : mai
principi se vogliono adoperare prudentemente, conviene,” &c. &c.

544 EDICT OF WORMS, A.D. 1521. Boox II.

We perceive that the edict was not laid before
the States in assembly; it was not submitted to
any new deliberation; it was announced to them
unexpectedly, in the emperor’s apartments, and after
every artifice had been employed to incline them to
listen favourably to any proposal: their assent,
which cannot even be called a formal one, was
extorted by a sort of surprise.*

It was, however, as severe and peremptory as
possible. Sentence of ban and re-ban was de-
clared against Luther as a member lopped off from
the church of God; together with all his adherents,
patrons and friends. His writings, and those of
his followers, were prohibited and sentenced to be
burnt. And that no similar works might appear
in future, a censorship was appointed to control the
press.T

Aleander had thus attained the long-desired
object of all his negotiations. In the course of
the day he had two fair copies made, the one in
German, the other in Latin: the next morning —

* Dr. Caspar Riffel, in his Christl. Kirchengesch. der
Neuesten Zeit, vol. i. p. 214., cannot, in fact, avoid admitting
this. But he rejoices, that “the emperor, by means of this
‘ surprise,’ removed all opportunity for even one of them (the
princes) to break his word at the decisive moment.” It could
not well be said more plainly that a serious difference prevailed
between the emperor and the princes.

+ Edict of Worms in Walch, xv. 2264. It is remarkable
that in all other departments the censorship is conferred on the
bishop alone; but in that of theology, only in conjunction
with “ the faculty of the Holy Scriptures of the nearest situated
university.” — § 36.

Cuar. IV. EDICT OF WORMS, A.D. 1521. 545

Sunday,— he hastened with them to the emperor; he
found him with the States and the court in the
. church, but even this did not prevent him from
laying the paper before Charles on the spot; in the
church it received the imperial signature. This
was on the 26th of May; but Aleander had thought
it expedient to date it the 8th, at which time the
assembly was still tolerably full.

By this act the temporal power, as well as the
spiritual, declared open resistance to the spirit of
religious innovation which was awakened in the
nation. The opposition had not succeeded, as they
had hoped, in inspiring the emperor with their own
hostility to the papacy; on the contrary, he had
drawn closer all the ties which bound him to the
pope. The two representatives of the secular and
ecclesiastical powers had united, in order to uphold
the established constitution of the church.

Whether they would succeed was, indeed, another
question.

END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.

VOL. I. NWN

THEOLOGY LIBRARY
CLAREMONT, CALIF.

G7 7k

Lonpon:

Printed by A. SrorriswoopE,
New-Street-Square.

NEW WORKS

PRINTED FOR

LONGMAN, BROWN, GREEN, AND LONGMANS.

PIPPI

z :

BLAIR’S CHRONOLOGICAL AND HISTORICAL TABLES,
From the Creation to the present Time: with Additions and
Corrections from the most authentic Writers; including the
Computation of St. Paul, as connecting the Period from the Exode
to the Temple. Under ‘the revision of Siz Henry Exris, K. H.,
Principal Librarian of the British Museum. Imperial 8vo.
31s. 6d. half-bound morocco.

I.
CRITICAL AND HISTORICAL ESSAYS CONTRIBUTED
TO THE EDINBURGH REVIEW. By the Right Hon.
“ Tuomas Basineton Macaunay, M. P. 3d Edition. 3 vols.
8yo. 36s.

ut.

CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE EDINBURGH REVIEW. By
Francis JErrrey, now one of the Judges in the Court of Session
in Scotland. 4 vols. 8vo. 48s.

IV.

THE WORKS OF THE REV. SYDNEY SMITH. 2d Edition.
3 vols. 8vo. with Portrait, 36s.

*,* This collection consists of the Author’s contributions to the “‘ Edin-
burgh Review,” Perer Prymuzy’s “ Letters on the Catholics,”
and “other miscellaneous works.

Vv.

SIR JAMES MACKINTOSH’S MISCELLANEOUS WORKS;
Including his ConrrisuTions To Tue Epinsures Review. Col-
lected and Edited by his Son. 3 vols. 8vo. — In the press.

vi.

RUSSIA. By the Mareuis Dr Custinr. Translated from the
French. 2d ee 3 vols. post 8vo. 31s. 6d.

Vil.

HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH REVOLUTION. By F.C.
Dautmann, late Professor of History at the University of
Gottingen. Translated from the German, by H. Evans Luoyp.
8yo. 10s.. 6d.

New Works printed for Longman and Co.

vill.
THE CHRONICLE OF THE KINGS OF NORWAY, From the
Earliest Period of the History of the Northern Sea-Kings to the
Middle of the Twelfth Century, commonly called the Heim-
skringla. Translated from the Icelandic of Snorro Sturleson,
with Notes, and a preliminary Discourse, by Samurn Larne,

- author of “ Notes of a Traveller,” &c, 3 vols. 8vo.-36s.

Ix.

THE HISTORY OF GREECE. By the Right Rev. the Lorp Bisnop
or St. Davin’s. 8 vols. feap. 8vo. with Vignette Titles, 27. 8s.

x

LIFE AND TIMES OF RICHARD THE THIRD, as Duke of
Gloucester and King of England: in which all the Charges
against him are carefully investigated and compared with the
Statements of the contemporary Authorities. By Carorine A.
Haxstep, author of “The Life of Margaret Beaufort.” 2 vols.
8vo., with Portrait, from an original Picture in the possession of
the Right Honourable Lord Stafford, never before engraved, and
other Illustrations, 1/. 10s.

xi.

A SELECTION FROM THE SPEECHES AND WRITINGS OF
THE LATE LORD KING. With a short Introductory
Memoir, by Eart Fortescun. Demy 8vo. Portrait. 12s.

XII.

A DICTIONARY, GEOGRAPHICAL, STATISTICAL, AND
“HISTORICAL, of the various Countries, Places, and Principal
Natural Objects in the World. By J. R. M‘Cutrocn, Esq.
2 thick vols. 8vo., illustrated with Six large Maps, 4.

xm

AN HISTORICAL MEMOIR OF A MISSION TO THE COURT
OF VIENNA IN 1806. By the Right Honourable Sir Ropertr
Aparr, G.C.B. With a Selection from his Despatches, by per-
mission of the proper Authorities. 8vo. 18s.

xIvs 4

THE TREASURY OF HISTORY; Comprising a general Intro-

ductory Outline of Universal History, Ancient and Modern, and

a Series of separate Histories of every principal Nation that

exists; developing their Rise, Progress, and Present Condition,

the Moral and Social Character of their respective Inhabitants,

their Religion, Manners, and Customs, &c. &e. By Samurn
Maunprr. 1 thick vol. fcap. 8vo. 10s. ; bound in roan, 12s.

XV. '

A COURSE OF ENGLISH READING; Adapted to every Taste
and Capacity. With Anecdotes of Men of Genius. By the Rev.
James Pycrorr, B.A., Trinity College, Oxford, author of
“ Greek Grammar Practice,” “Latin Grammar Practice,” &e.
Feap. 8vo., 6s. 6d.

September 1844.

A Catalogue of New Works and New Hditions,
printed for Longman, Brown, Green, and
Longmans, London.

AGRICULTURE AND RURAL
AFFAIRS.
Fages

Bayldon On valuing Rents, &c. -
the Valuation of Pro-

perty for Poor’s Rate - = s ¢
Crocker’s Land-Surveying - - 7
Davy’s Agricultural Chemistry - 7
Greenwood’s (Col.) Tree-Lifter - 10
Hannam on Waste Manures - - 10
Johnson’s Farmer’s Encyclopedia 14
Loudon’s Encyelopedia of LS
culture - 17
a (Mrs.) Lady’s Country
Companion - 17
Low’s Elements of Agriculture - 18
a Breeds of the Domesticated
Animals of Great Britain- 18
*¢ On Landed Property - - 18
Whitley’s Agricultural Geology - 32

ARTS, MANUFACTURES,
AND ARCHITECTURE.

Brande’s Dictionary of Science,

Literature,and Art - 6
Gwilt’s ETT of Architec-
ture - 10
Loudon’s Ene: yelopaedia of Cottage,
Farm, and Villa Architecture et
Furniture - 17
Porter’ 8 Manufacture of “Silk - ecm 128
os Porcelain& Glass 23
Reid (Dr.) On Warning) and iene
tilating - 24
Savage’s Dictionary of Printing - 26
Steam Engine (he) , by theArtisan
Club - 28
Ure’s Dictionary of. Arts, Manufac-
tures,and Mines- =  - 31

Wathen’ 8s Egypt. ‘Arts & Antiquities 31

BIOGRAPHY.
Aikin’s Life of Addison - -
Bell’s Lives of the most eminent
British Poets -
Biographical Dictionary of the So-
ciety for the Diffasion’ of Useful
Knowledge
Dover’s Life > of the ‘Kin 7 of Prussia
Dunham’s Lives of the Early Wri-
ters of Great Britain -
“ Lives of the British
Dramatists -
Forster’s Statesmen of the Com-
monwealth of England -
Gleig’s Lives of the most Eminent
British Military Commanders -
Grant’s (Mrs.) Memoir and Corre-
spondence - 9

-~ ©

os @ 2 OF

Hunter’s Life of Oliver Heywood =- if
James’s Life of the Black Prince - 14
G Lives of the most Eminent
Foreign Statesmen -  - - i4
Maunder’s Biographical Treasury- 21
Roscoe’s Lives of British Lawyers- 25

Russell’s Correspondence of the

Fourth Duke of Bedford = - 4

Shelley’s Lives of the most eminent

Literary Men of Italy,

Spain, and Portugal = -

Ke: Lives of the most eminent
French Writers -

Smith’s Memoirs of the Manquis De

Pombal -

Southey’s Lives of the Admirals - 27
‘Tate’s Horatius Restitutus - - 29
BOOKS OF CENERAL
UTILITY.

Black’s Treatise on Brewing - - 4
Donoyan’s Domestic misonorty, = '8
Hints on Etiquette - - ll
Hudson’s Parent's Hand- book - 13

& Executor’s Guide - - 13

“ on Making Wills - - 18
Lorimer’s Letters to a Young

Master Mariner = - - 16

CLASSIFIED INDEX.

ae

Pages

Maunder’s Treasury of Knowledge 20
3 Scientific and DuSrHny

Treasury - 21

s Treasury of History - #0

33 Biographical Treasury - 21

« Universal Class-Book - 21

Riddle’s Latin ane eee H Py
tionaries = -
Short Whist - - -
Thomson's Domestie Management
f the Sick Room - 29
Tomlins’s nae Dictionary - - 30

BOTANY AND GARDENING

24
26

IN GENERAL.

Calicott’s Scripture Herbal - - 6
Conversations on Botany - yi
Drummond’s First Steps to Botany 8

sees: On the Culture of the
Pine Ap pple - 9
Greenwood’s (Col. ) ase: Lifter - 10
Henslow’s Botany - ll

Hoare On Cultivation of ‘the Grape
Vine on Open Walls - ll

« On the Management of the
Roots of Vines - - 11
Hooker’s British Flora - = - - 12
“« —Teones Plantarum - - 12

«and Taylor’s Muscologia
Britannica - - - 12
Jackson’s Pictorial Flora - - 14
Has p’s Gramina Britannica - 16
indley’s Theory of Horticulture - 16

(2 Outline ofthe First Prin-
iples of Horticulture - 16

Ga Gui e to the Orchard and
Kitchen Garden - - 16
ee Introduction to Botany + 16
£6 Flora Medica - - 16
BS Synopsis of British Flora 16
Loudon’s Hortus Britannicus - 17
ae Lignosis Londinensis 17

is Encyclopedia of Trees
and Shrubs- - 17
At $f Gardening 17
ie me Plants - 17

¥ Suburban Garden and
Villa Companion - 18

ef Cemeteries and Church-
yards - 18

Repton’s Landscape Gar dening and
Landscape Architecture - - 24
Rivyers’s Rose Amateur’s Guide - 24
Roberts On the Vine —- - - 25
Rogers’s Vegetable Cultivator - 25
Smith’s Introduction to Botany - 27
«« English Flora - - = 26

« Compendium of English
Flora_- - - 26
«  DittoinLatin- - - 26

CHRONOLOCY.

Blair’s Chronological Tables -~ 4
Nicolas’s Chronology of History ~ 22
Riddle’s Ecclesiastical Chronology 24
Tate’s Horatius Restitutus - 29
Wathen’sChronology of Anc, Egypt 31

COMMERCE AND MERCAN-
TILE AFFAIRS.

Kane’s (Dr.) Industrial Resources

of Ireland - - - - i
Lorimer’s Letters to a Young

Master Mariner - — - - 16
M‘Culloch’s Dictionary of ‘Com-

merce and Commer. Navigation- 19
Spackman’s Statistical Tables - 27
Steel’s Shipmaster’s Assistant - 28

GEOGRAPHY & ATLASES,

Butler's Sketch of Ancient and
Modern Geography - 6
*€ — Atlas of Modern Geography .

ao ae Ancientdo.- = =
Hall’s New General Atlas ~ - 10

Pages
M‘Culloch’s Geographical iedoner 16
Malte-Brun’s Geography - - 19
Murray’s Encyclop. of Geography- 22

HISTORY & CRITICISM.
Adair’s (Sir R.) Memoir of a Mis-
sion to Vienna - -
Addison’s History of the Knights
Templars -
Bell's History of Russia -
Blair's Chron. and Histor. Tables - -
Bloomfield’s Edition of Thucydides
Translation of do. -
Cooley” s History of Maritime and ©
Inland Discover: - = -
Crowe’s History of France - -
Dahlmann’s English Revolution -
Dunham’s History of SS and
Portugal
History of Europe dur-
ing the Middle Ages -

«

Ke History of the German
Empire -
< History of Denmark,

Sweden, and Norway -

$4 History of Poland -
Fergus’s pee of United States
Grant’s (Mrs.) Memoir and Corre-

spondence -

Grattan’s History of Netherlands -
Halsted’s Life of Richard III. -
Horsley’s (Bp.) Biblical Criticism -
Jeffrey’s (Francis) Contributions to

ee
BoLeo DND © © DB ANNA ATTRA Ww

The Edinburgh Review - - 14
Keightley’s Outlines of History - 14
King’s (Lord) Speeches and Writ-

ings, with Memoir - - - 16
Laing’s Kings of Norway - 15
Macaulay’s Essays contributed to

The Edinburgh Review = - 18
Mackintosh’s Miscellaneous Wor! ks 18

M‘Culloch’s Dictionary, Historical,

Geographical, and Statistical - 18
Mackintosh’s History of England - 18
Maunder’s Treasury of History - 20
Moore’s History of Ireland - - 21
Miiller’s Mythology = - * 22
Rome, History of - - - 25

Russell’s Correspondence of the
Fourth Duke of Bedford = - 4

Scott’s History of Scotland - 26
Sismondi’s History of the Fall of

Roman Empire - 26

a Italian Republics - 26

Stebbing” 's History ofthe Church- 27

History of Reformation 27
Switzerland, Historyof- - - 29
Sydney Smith’s Works - - 27

irlwall’s History of Greece - 29
Turner’s History of England - 30

JUVENILE BOOKS,
INCLUDING MRS. MARCET’S WORKS.
Boy’s own Book (The) - Eras
Howitt’s (Wm.) Jack of the Mill - 3
e Boy ’s Country Book 138
Howitt's (Mary) Child’s Picture

and Verse Book - 12

Ladies’ (the Young) Book = - 32
Marcet’s Conuenai ones

On the History of England - 20

On Chemistry - - - ‘19

On Natural Philosophy - - 19

On Political Econom: - an 8

On Vegetable Physiology - 19

On Land and Water ey cae

«« The Gameof Grammar - 20

«  Mary’sGrammar- - - 20

«¢ Lessons on Animals,&c. - 20

« Conversations on Language 20

Masryat’s Masterman Ready - 20

Settlers in Canada - 20

Maunder’s Universal Class-Book - 21

Pycroft’s (Rev. J.) English Reading 24

Summerly’s (Mrs. eee Mother's 8
Primer - S

fe ee de er

2

MEDICINE.

Pages

Bull’s Hints to Mothers- = - = 5
« Management of Children ~- 5
Copland’s Dictionary of Medicine - 7
Elliotson’s Human Physiology - 8
Frankum On Enlarged Abdomen - 9
Holland’s Medical Notes = = An
Macleod On Rheumatism —_- - 18
Marx and Willis ea on Disease 20
Pereira On Food and Diet - - 23
Reece’s Medical Guide - - - 24
Sandby On Mesmerism - - 2%

MISCELLANEOUS.
Beale’s (Miss) Vale of the Towey -
Black’s Treatise on Brewing -
Bray’s Philosophy of Necessit;
Clavers’s Forest Life  - -
Colton’s Lacon  - - -
De Morgan On Probabilities
Good’s Book of Nature - -
Graham’s English - — - -

Cs HelpstoEnglishGrammar 9
Guest’s Mabinogion - = 2.10
Hand-book of Taste - - - ll
Hobbes (Thos.), English Works of 11
Holland’s Progressive Education - 11
Howitt’s Rural Life of England - 12

G Visits to Remarkable Places 13
« Student-Life of Germany ~ 13
« Rural and Domestic Life

OOBWIO BA

of Germany - - - 18
= Colonisation and Chris-
timity - - - - 1
@ German Experiences - 12
Humphreys’ IlluminatedBooks - 14
Jettrey’s (Francis) Contributions to
The Edinburgh Review - - i4
Laing’s (S., jun.) on National
Distress (Prize Essay) - - 1
Letters on American Debts - - 27
Life ofa Travelling Physician - 16

Loudon’s (Mrs.) Lady’s Country

Companion - 17
Macaulay’s Critical and Historical
Essays - - - - 18

Mackintosh’s Miscellaneous Works
Marx and Willis (Drs.} on Decrease

18

of Disease - - = - - 20
Miiller’s Mythology - - - 22
Peter Plymley’s Letters- = - - 27
Sandby On Mesmerism - - - 2

Seaward’s Narrative of Shipwreck -
Smith’s (Rey. Sydney) Works -
Summerly’s (Mrs. Felix) Mother’s

Primer - 28
Taylor’s Statesman - - - 29
Walker’s Chess Studies - - - 31
Willoughby’s (Lady) Diary - = 32

NATURAL HISTORY.

Catlow’s Popular Conchology = 6
Gray’s¥igures of MolluscousAnimals 10

«and Mitchell’s Ornithology - 10
Kirby and Spence’s Entomology - 15
Lee’s Taxidermy - - 16

*« Elements of Natural History 16

Proceedings of Zoological Society - 24
Stephens’s British Coleoptera = 28
Swainson On Study of Natural Hist. 28
iG Animals- - - - 2
“ Quadrupeds - - - 2
a Birds + = ‘- = 28
ee Animals in Menageries - 28

ee Fish, Amphibians, and
Reptiles  - - = 28
ee Insects - - - - 28

to Malacology - - -

as Habits and Instincts of
Animals - - - 2
Turton’s Shells oftheBritishIslands 31
‘Waterton’s Essays on Natural Hist. 31
Westwood’s Classification of Insects 31

NOVELS AND WORKS OF
FICTION,
Carlén’s Rose of Tistelbn - - 6
Doctor (the) - > - 8
Howitt’s (Mary) Neighbours - - 12
$6. Tidme inh > Se We Mee rel 19
“ President’s Daughters - 122
“ Diary, &e. - = = me 12
« The H—— Family, &. - 12
Marryat’s Masterman Ready- - 20

«e Settlers in Canada -

Rambles of the Emperor Ching Tih 6 |

‘Trollope’s (Mrs.) The Laurringtons

ONE-VOL. CYCLOPAEDIAS
AND DICTIONARIES,
Blaine’s Encyclopedia of Rural

Sports -_—- - - |
Brande’s Dictionary of Science,
Literature,andArt - - - §

Emma ee

Pages
Copland’s Dictionary of Medicine - 7
Gwilt’s Enecyclop. of Architecture -
Johnson’s Farmer’s Encyclopedia -
Loudon’s Eneyclopedias—

Treesand Shrubs - <- = 17
Gardening o Cages | ae
Agriculture - - - - i
Plants. - - - - ca
M‘Culloch’s Geographical Dictionary 18
* Dictionary of Commerce 19
Murray’s Encyclop. of Geography- 22

| Savage’s Dictionary of Printing - 26

Ure’s Dictionary of Arts, Manufac-
tures, and Mines - - at Ble

Webster and Parkes’s Domestic

Economy - = - —

POETRY AND THE DRAMA.

Aikin’s (Dr.) British Poets  - 26
Baillie’s New Dramas - - = Ps
Hv Plays of the Passions - 3
Bowdler’s Family Shakespeare + 26
Chalenor’s Walter Gray - «6
<6. Poetical Remains - 6
Goldsmith’s Poems si et ee
L. E. L.’s Poetical Works = - - 16
Macaulay’s Lays of Ancient Rome 18
Montgomery’s Poetical Works - 21
Moore’s Poetical Works - - 21
«¢ Lalla Rookh, medium 8yo. 21
= Ee ‘f fcep.8vo. - 21
ae Trish Melodies - - - 21
« Do. illustrated by Maclise 21
Moral of Flowers - - - - 21
Southey’s Poetical Works - 27
as British Poets-  - - 26
Spirit of the Woods - - - 27
Thomson’s Seasons - - - 29
POLITICAL ECONOMY
AND STATISTICS.
M‘Culloch’s Geographical, Statisti-
cal, and Historical Dictionary - 18
< PoliticalEconomy - 19
Kane’s (Dr.) Industrial Resources
ofIreland -  - - - =
Smith’s Wealth of Nations - - 27
Spackman’s Statistical Tables = 27
Tooke’s History of Prices - - 30

RELIGIOUS X MORALWORKS.

Amy Herbert - - - = -
Bailey’s Essays on Pursuit of Truth
Bloomfield’s Greek Testament -
me College and School do.

<< Greek & English Lexi-

con to NewTestament

Burder’s Oriental Customs - =
Buras’s Christian Philosophy -
ee Fragments -
Callcott’s Scripture Herbal -  -
Dibdin’s Sunday Library - = -
Doddridge’s Family Expositor —-
Englishman’sHeb.&Chald.Concord,

Ford’s New Deyout Communicant
“Century of Prayers - -
Horsley’s (Bp.) Biblical Criticism -
Kippis’s Collection of Hymns, &c, -
Marriage Gift- - - - ~~
Parkes’s Domestic Duties - ~
Pearson’s Prayers for Families —-
Riddle’s Letters from a Godfather -
Robinson’s Greek&EnglishLexicon

C) nD
REESE on connkoauan mowe

to the New Testament 25
Sandford’s Female Improvement - 25
** On Woman bs - 25
Spalding’s Philosophy of Christian
Morals - - - - - - 27
Tate’s History of St. Paul = - 29
Tayler’sDoraMelder  - = - 29
«Margaret; or, the Pearl - 29
«Sermons - - - - 29
Turner’s Sacred History- - - 381
Wardlaw’s Socinian Controversy - 31

RURAL SPORTS.

Blaine’s Dictionary of Sports - 4

Hansard’s Fishing in Wales ~ 1h
Hawker’s Instructions to Sportsmen 11
Loudon’s (Mrs.) Lady’s Country
Companion - - - - ee We
Ronalds’s Fly-fisher’s Entomology 26
Thacker’s Courser’sRemembrancer 29

22

THE SCIENCES IN GENERAL
AND MATHEMATICS.

Bakewell’s Introduction toGeology 3
Balmain’s Lessons on Chemistry -~ 3
5
5

co Coursing Rules - -

Brande’s Dictionary of Science,
Literature,and Art - - =
Brewster’s Optics - - - =

CLASSIFIED INDEX TO CATALOGUE OF NEW WORKS.

Conversations on Mineralogy - 7
De la Beche On the Geology of

Cornwall, &c. =i

Donovan’s erry, Se eS

Farey On the Steam Engine - - 8
Fosbroke On the Arts, Manners,
Manufactures, and Institutions

ofthe Greeks and Romans- - 9

Greener’s Science of Gunnery - 10

C3 OntheGun - - - 10

Herschel’s Natural Philosophy - 11

Ke Astronomy - = = EL

Holland’s Manufactures in Metal - 12

Hunt’s Researches on Light - - 1

Kane’s Elements of Chemistry - 14

Kater and Lardner’s Mechanies - 14

Lardner’s Cabinet Cyclopedia - 15
33 Hydrostatics and Pneu-

matics - - - - 16

oY and Walker’s Electricity 15

2 Arithmetic - - - 15

ad Geometry = ee ne J

ee Treatise on Heat - - 16

Lectures on Polarised Light - - 16

Lerebours’ Photography,byEgerton 8

Lioyd On Light and Vision - - 16
Low’s Simple Bodies of Chemistry 18
Mackenzie's Physiology of Vision - 18
Marcet’s (Mrs.) Conyersations on

the Sciences, &c. = - - 19
Moseley’s Practical Mechanics - 22

Engineering&Architecture 22

Narrien’s ‘ eometry - - - 2%

Se Astronomy and Geodesy 25

Owen’s LecturesonComp.Anatomy 22

Parnell On Roads - - - 22

Pearson’s Practical Astronomy - 23
Phillips’s Paleozoic Fossils o

Cornwall, &e. - - 23

os Guide to Geolo - = 2

a Treatise on Gatlesy - 2B

“

Introduct. to Mineralogy 23
Portlock’s Report on the Geology

of Londonderry - - - =
Powell’s Natural Philosophy - - 4
Roberts's Dictionary of Geology - 25
Sandhurst’s Mathematical Course 25
Scoresby’s Magnetical Investigations 26

Sicott’s Arithmetic and Algebra - 25
Thomson’s Algebra —_- - - 30
Wilkinson's Engines of War - ~ 32
Wood On Railroads - - - 32
TOPOGRAPHY AND
GUIDE BOOKS.
Addison’s History of the Temple
Church - - - 3
oe Guide to ditto ou
Britton’s Picture of London - = eb,
Howitt’s German Experiences - 12
TRANSACTIONS OF
SOCIETIES.
Transactions of Societies
British Architects - - - 30
Cc Engineers - - - 30
Entomological ~ - - 30
Linnean - - - - 30
Zoological Sagem = 2,130!
Proceedings ofthe Zoological Society 24
TRAVELS,
Allan's Mediterranean - -

as)

Beale’s (Miss) Vale of the Towey - 4
- 6

ud

China, Last Yearin  - -
Chorley’s Music and Manners in
France and Germany - - -
De Custine’s Russia ~ - - =F ih
Harris’s Highlands of Hthiopia - 11
Howitt’s Wanderings of a Journey-
man Taylor- - - - “= 13
Laing’s Notes ofa Trayeller- - 15
Ks Residence in Norway - 22
ee Tour in Sweden - - 22
Life of a Travelling Physician - 16
Postans’s Observationson Sindh - 23
Seaward’s Narrative - = - - 26
Strong’s GreeceasaKingdom - 28
Wilde’s Voyage to Madeira, &e. - 32

VETERINARY MEDICINE
AND AFFAIRS.

Field’s Veterinary Records - - 9g
Morton’s Veterinary Medicine - 22
a “« — Toxicological Chart 21
Perciyall’s Hippopathology - - 23
¢ Anatomy of the Horse- 23
Spooner On Foot and Leg of Horse 27
Turner On the Foot of the Horse - 31
White's Veterinary Art - - = 82
we Cattle Medicine = 2982

CATALOGUE.

ADAIR (SIR ROBERT).—AN HISTORICAL MEMOIR OF A

MISSION to the COURT of VIENNA in 1806. By the Right Honourable Sir RopErT ADA IR,
G.C.B. With a Selection from his Despatches, published by permission of the proper
Authorities. 8vo. 18s. cloth.

“ Sir Robert Adair’s valuable Memoir needs no commendation. Its obvious utility, the nat f i
the name of the author, will command the notice and appreciation of statesmen aan intaraae e Ar ee pee i a

“‘ The vindication of Mr. Fox from the observations of Mr. Gentz and others is complete; and the Memoir is alto-
gether a work which must be deferred to by future historians as the authority on the enportant affairs of "eich 3
treats.”—Tarr’s MAGAZINE.

ADDISON.—THE KNIGHTS TEMPLARS.

By C. G. App1son, Esq., of the Inner Temple. 2d Edition, enlarged, square crown 8yvo. with
Illustrations, 18s. cloth.

ADDISON.—THE TEMPLE CHURCH IN LONDON:

Its History and Antiquities. By C. G. Apprson, Esq., of the Inner Temple; Author of
“The History of the Knights Templars.’? Square crown 8vo. with Six Plates, 5s. cloth.

Also,
A FULL AND CCMPLETE GUIDE, HISTORICAL AND DESCRIPTIVE, TO THE TEMPLE
CHURCH. (From Mr. Addisoen’s “ History of theTempleChurch.””) Square cr. 8yo. 1s, sewed.

AIKIN.—THE LIFE OF JOSEPH ADDISON.

Illustrated by many of his Letters and Private Papers never before published. By Lucy
AIKIN. 2 vols. post 8vo. with Portrait from Sir Godfrey Kneller’s Picture, 18s. cloth.

“Tn the execution of her labour, Miss Aikin has exercised praiseworthy diligence; she has ransacked among
those fine and inexhaustible sources of personal and national interest—family papers, and has succeeded in rescuing
from the obscurity of worm-eaten chests, and from the bondage of red tape, many documents which throw light on
the most doubtful parts of Addison’s history, and relieve his character from the reproaches attempted to be cast on it.
She has produced, beth in style and matter, a very interesting work,creditable to her feelings and talents, and honoura-
ble to her industry.”—BRITANNIA.

ALLAN.—A PICTORIAL TOUR IN THE MEDITERRANEAN ;

Comprising Malta, Dalmatia, Turkey, Asia Minor, Grecian Archipelago, Egypt, Nubia, Greece,
Jonian Islands, Sicily, Italy, and Spain. By J. H. ALLAN, Member of the Athenian Archee-
logical Society, and of the Egyptian Society of Cairo. Imperial 4to. with upwards of Forty
Lithographed Drawings, and 70 Wood Engravings, #3. 3s. cloth.

“« 4 most artist-like and interesting work, full of beautiful views, and interspersed with many charming woodcuts
of scenery and antiquities.”—Lirerany GazETre.

AMY HERBERT.

By aLapy. Edited by the Rev. WILLIAM SEWELL, B.D. of Exeter College, Oxford. 2 vols.
fep. 8vo. 9s. cloth.
«« Amy Herbert’ paints nature to the life. Itis by ‘a Lady,’ for whose soundness Mr, Sewell is sponsor. It is

admirably adapted for the young of the higher classes, and we sincerely hope it may not be the fair author’s last pro-
duction.”—CHrisTIAN REMEMBRANCER.

BAILEY.—ESSAYS ON THE PURSUIT OF TRUTH,

And on the gi cae of Knowledge, By Samu. BaiLey, Author of “ Essays on the For-
mation and Publication of Opinions,” “ Berkeley’s Theory of Vision,”? &c. 2d Edition,
revised and enlarged, 8vo. 9s. 6d. cloth.

“ Mr. Bailey is an admirable writer, both as to the general tone of thought and sentiment, and as to his style,
which is clear, forcible, and elegant. On the class of subjects to which he has chiefly directed his attention, no man
writes what is more worthy of being read, or what is acceptable to a larger class of readers, The peculiar quality
of his powerful essays is the practical and useful conviction they pense of truths as obvious as they are important,
but which are strangely neglected by the majority of mankind. edo not often meet with a book which we can
‘more strongly recommend.”—INQUIRER.

BAILLIE’S (JOANNA) NEW DRAMAS.

3 vols. 8v0. #1. 16s. boards.

BAILLIE’S (JOANNA) PLAYS ON THE PASSIONS.

3 vols. 8vo. £1. 11s. 6d. boards.

BAKEWELL.—AN INTRODUCTION TO GEOLOGY.

Intended to convey Practical Knowledge of the Science, and comprising the most important
recent discoveries; with explanations of the facts and phenomena which serve to confirm or
invalidate various Geological Theories. By RopertT BAKEWELL. Filth Edition, considerably
enlarged, 8vo. with numerous Plates and Woodcuts, 21s. cloth.

BALMAIN.—LESSONS ON CHEMISTRY,

For the use of Pupils in Schools, Junior Students in Universities, and Readers who wish to
learn the fundamental Principles and leading Facts: with Questions for Examination,
Glossaries of Chemical Terms and Chemical Symbols, and an Index. By Wiuuian H.
BALMAIN. With numerous Woodcuts, illustrative of the Decompositions, fep. 8vo. 6s. cloth.

4 CATALOGUE OF WORKS

BAYLDON.—ART OF VALUING RENTS AND TILLAGES,

And the Tenant’s Right of Entering and Quitting Farms, explained by several Specimens of
Valuations; and Remarks on the Cultivation pursued on Soils in different Situations.
Adapted to the Use of Landlords. Land-Agents, Appraisers, Farmers, and Tenants. By
J.S. BAYLpon. 6th Edition, correctedand revised. By Joun Donapson, Land-Steward,
Author of “A Treatise on Manures and Grasses.” 8yo. 10s. 6d. cloth.

BAYLDON.—TREATISE ON THE VALUATION OF PROPERTY

FOR THE POOR’S RATE; shewing the Method of Rating Lands, Buildings, Tithes, Mines,
Woods, Navigable Rivers and Canals, and Personal Property: with an Abstract of the Poor
Laws relating to Rates and Appeals. By J. S. Bayupon, Author of “Rents and Tillages.”’
1 vol. 8vo. 7s. 6d. boards.

BEALE (ANNE).—THE VALE OF THE TOWRY;

Or, Sketches in South Wales. By ANNE BEALE. Post Svo. 10s. 6d. cloth.

&Miss Beale has been sojourning in the Vale of the Towey; and has thrown her enjoyment of its scenery, and
her observations on the manners of its rustic population, into the form of a series of sketches. These, either by
original design, or by the mode in which she happened to cast them, become connected together, as the book
proceeds, by means of the characters, incidents, and fortunes involved in a rural love-match,—which, like all other
love, does not run quite smooth to its ending. The great merit of her book is its truth; which leaves a strong im-
pression on the reader’s mind,”—SprcTaTor.

BEDFORD CORRESPONDENCE. — CORRESPONDENCE OF

JOHN, FOURTH DUKE OF BEDFORD, selected from the Originals at Woburn Abbey:
with Introductions by Lord Joun RussEu.

8vo. Vol. 1 (1742-48), 18s. cloth; Vol. 2 (1749-60), 15s. cloth.

« The second volume of this publication includes a correspondence having relation to the period from the Peace of
Aix-la-Chapelle to the death of George II. Its most remarkable portion bears upon an important question on which
there exist some differences of opinion at the present time, viz. the intrigues which led to the junction of the Duke of
Newcastle and Pitt, in 1757. The letters respecting the state of Ireland under the Viceroyalty of the Duke of Bedford,
also here, are not a little interesting.” —Mornine Herarp.

*,* Vol. 8, to complete the work, is nearly ready.

BELL.—LIVES OF THE MOST EMINENT ENGLISH PORTS.

By Ropert BELL, Esq. 2 vols. fep. 8vo. with Vignette Titles, 12s. cloth.

BELL.—THE HISTORY OF RUSSIA,

From the Earliest Period to the Treaty of Tilsit. By Ropert BELL, Esq. 3 vols. fep. 8vo.
with Vignette Titles, 18s. cloth.

BIOGRAPHICAL DICTIONARY

Of the Society for the Diffusion of Useful Knowledge. Half-volumes 1 to 7 (Aa to
AZ-ZUBEYDI, comprising the letter A), 8vo. 12s. each, cloth.

*,* Published Quarterly.—The work will probably not exceed Thirty Volumes.

“ We have carefully examined the articles under letter A, now completed, and haye no reason to complain of any
want of uniformity. There seems to have been, on the whole, a judicious apportioning of space, according to the
importance of the individual, In order to, secure this necessary uniformity, a society, which had no pecuniary
profit as its end, was more likely to succeed than a private publisher, or body of publishers. In style, execution, and
completeness, the lives are far superior to those of any biographical dictionary with which we are acquainted. The
only one, indeed, with which, for completeness, it can be compared, is the French ‘ Biographie Universelle,’ but in
this respect it has very greatly the advantage.” [The reviewer institutes a comparison in favour of the English
work, too long to be quoted, and ends his paragraph as follows :]}—So that the Society’s Dictionary must be regarded
as a labour not only for Great Britain, but for Europe.—In all the articles there are two points in which they are
fuller and more accurate than any previous work of the kind; and these are, the titles, HESS, and places of publi-
cation of books, and their editions, and the sources from whence the materials haye been derived for the biography.”

ATHEN ZUM.

BLACK.—A PRACTICAL TREATISE ON BREWING,

Based on Chemical and Economical Principles: with Formule for Public Brewers, and
Instructions for Private Families. By WiiLt1Am Biack. ‘Third Edition, revised and cor-
rected, with considerable Additions. The Additions revised by Professor Graham, of the
London University. 8vo. 10s. 6d. cloth.

« This comprehensive and informing essay will be found invaluable to the practical brewer and private families ;
to the former we recommend it as a work ably treating of their art; to the latter, as one which Aneel will find an
efficient and correct guide. This edition fully bears out the statement on the title-page—that it has been ‘ much
enlarged and improved.’ ”—Cupmist.

BLAINE.—AN ENCYCLOPADIA OF RURAL SPORTS ;

Or, acomplete Account, Historical, Practical, aud Descriptive, of Hunting, Shooting, Fishing,
Racing, and other Field Sports and Athletic Amusements of the present day. By DELABERE
P. Buatne, Esq. Author of ‘Outlines of the Veterinary Art,” “ Canine Pathology,’ &c. &c.
Tilustrated by nearly 600 Engravings on Wood, by R. Branston, from Drawings by Alken,
T. Landseer, Dickes, &c. 1 thick vol. 8vo. £2. 10s. cloth.

BLAIR’S CHRONOLOGICAL AND HISTORICAL TABLES,

From the Creation to the present time: with Additions and Corrections from the most authen-
tic Writers ; including the Computation of St. Paul, as connecting the Period from the Exode
to the Temple. Under the revision of Sir Henry Exuis, K.H., Principal Librarian of the
British Museum. Imperial 8vo. 31s. 6d. half-bound morocco.

“ The arrangement adopted in this extended edition of Dr. Blair’s valuable work is most admirable ;
comprising the space of half a century, and exhibiting, in parallel columns, contemporary kings more Seth nine ane
events that marked the history of their time, and the most celebrated characters who flourished in their age. As an
aid to the study of history, and as a general work of reference, the tables are of great utility, and we are satisfied that.
as their merit becomes known, no one to whom they are accessible will ever ere up a history without haying this
yolume open before him. It is to our view an indispensable companion to every collection of history, however small.”

BRITANNIA.

PRINTED FOR LONGMAN, BROWN, AND CO. 5

BLOOMFTELD.—HISTORY OF THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.

By THucypipeEs. Newly translated into English, and accompanied with very copious Notes,
Philological and Explanatory, Historical and Geographical. By the Rey. S. 'T. BLOOMFIELD,
D.D. F.S.A. 3 vols. 8vo. with Maps and Plates, #2. 5s. boards.

BLOOMFIELD.—HISTORY OF THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.

By Tnhucypipes. A New Recension of the Text, with a carefully amended Punctuation; and
copious Nores, Critical, Philological, and Explanatory, almost entirely original, but partly
selected and arranged from the best Expositors: accompanied with full Indexes, both of
Greek Words and Phrases explained, and matters discussed in the Notes. The whole illus-
trated by Maps and Plans, mostly taken from actual surveys. By the Rev.S.T. BLoomFIELD,
D.D. F.S.A. 2 vols. 8vo. 38s. cloth.

BLOOMFIELD.—THE GREEK TESTAMENT:
With copious he Notes, Critical, Philological, and Explanatory. By the Rev. S. T.

BLOOMFIELD, D.D. F.S.A. Sth Edition, improved. 2 vols. 8vo. with a Map of Palestine,
£2, 2s. cloth.

BLOOMFIELD.—COLLEGE & SCHOOL GREEK TESTAMENT ;

With English Notes. By the Rev. S.T. BhoomrixLp, D.D. 3d Edition, greatly enlarged,
and very considerably improved, 12mo. 10s. 6d. cloth.

BLOOMFIELD.—GREEK AND ENGLISH LEXICON TO THE

NEW TESTAMENT: especially adapted to the use of Colleges, and the Higher Classes in
Public Schools; but also intended as a convenient Manual for Biblical Students in general.
By Dr. BLOOMFIELD. Fep. 8vo. 9s. cloth.

BOY’S OWN BOOK (THE):

A Complete Encyclopedia of all the Diversions, Athletic, Scientific, and Recreative, of Boy-
hood and Youth. 20th Edition, square 12m0. with many Engraving on Wood, 6s. boards.

BRANDE.— A DICTIONARY OF SCIENCE LITERATURE,

AND ART; comprising the History, Description, and Scientific Principles of every Branch
of Human Knowledge; with the Derivation and Definition of all the Terms in General Use
Edited by W. T. BRANDE, F.R.S.L. & E.; assisted by JosepH CaAuvin, Esq. The vari
departments are by Gentlemen of eminence in each. 1 very thick vol. 8vo. illustrat«
Wood Engravings, £3, cloth.

BRAY.—THE PHILOSOPHY OF NECESSITY ;

Or, the Law of Consequences as applicable to Mental, Moral, and Social Science. By CHARLE.
Bray. 2 vols. 8vo. 15s. cloth.

BREWSTER.—TREATISE ON OPTICS.

By Sir Davip Brewster, LL.D. F.R.S., &c. New Edition. J vol. fep. 8vo. Vignette Title,
and 176 Woodcuts, 6s. cloth.

BRITTON.—THE ORIGINAL PICTURE OF LONDON:

With a Description of its Environs. Re-edited, and mostly re-written, by J. Brirron,
F.S.A. &c. 28th Edition, with upwards of 100 Views of Public Buildings, Plan of the Streets,
and Two Maps, 18mo. 9s. neatly bound; with the Maps only, 6s. bound.

BULL.—HINTS TO MOTHERS,

For the Management of Health during the Period of Pregnancy and in the Lying-in Room;
with an Exposure of Popular Errors in connection with those subjects. By THomaAs BuLL,
M.D. Physician Accoucheur to the Finsbury Midwifery Institution, &c. &c. 4th Edition,
revised and considerably enlarged. Fcp. 8vo. 7s. cloth.

BULL.—THE MATERNAL MANAGEMENT OF CHILDREN,

in HEALTH and DISEASE. By T. Buty, M.D. Fep. 8vo. 7s. cloth.

“Excellent guides, and deserve to be generally known.”—JOHNSON'S Mepico-CHInurGIcaL REeviEw.

BURDER.—ORIENTAL CUSTOMS,

Applied to the Illustration of the Sacred Scriptures. By SamuxL Burpgr, A.M. 3d Edit.
with additions, fep. 8vo. 8s 6d. cloth, : 4

Houses and Tents—Marriage—Children—Servants—Food and Drink—Dress and Clothing—
Presents and Visiting —Amusements—Books and Letters —Hospitality—Travelling—Respect
and Honour—Agriculture—Cattle and Beasts— Birds, Insects, and Reptiles—Fruit and Wine
—Kings and Government—War—Punishments—Keligion—Time and Seasons—Medicine—
Funerals, &c.

BURNS.—THE PRINCIPLES OF CHRISTIAN PHILOSOPHY ;

containing the Doctrines, Duties, Admonitions, and Consolations of the Christian Religion.
By aaa hens M.D. F.R.S. 5th Edition, 12mo. 78. boards.

Man is created for a Future State of Happiness; on the Means by which a Future State of
Happiness is procured; of what is required of Man that he may obtain a Future State of
Happiness; of the Nature of the Future State of Happiness; of the Preparation for the Future
State of Happiness ; of Personal Duties; of Relative Duties ; of the Duties Men owe to God ;
of the Admonitions and Consolations afforded by the Christian Religion.

6 CATALOGUE OF NEW WORKS

I LS ew

BURNS.—CHRISTIAN FRAGMENTS;

Or, Remarks on the Nature, Precepts, and Comforts of Religion. By Joun Burns, M.D.
F.R.S. Professor of Surgery in the University of Glasgow. Author of “The Principles of
Christian Philosophy.’’ Fep. 8vo. 5s. cloth.

“ We recommend this volume with sincere pleasure to our readers, as an admirable manual of devotion, and a
safe companion in seasons of distress.” —ATHENZUM.

BUTLER.—SKETCH OF ANCIENT & MODERN GEOGRAPHY.

By SAMUEL Bur_eEr, D.D. late Lord Bishop of Lichfield and Coventry; and formerly Head
Master of Shrewsbury School. New Edition, revised by his Son, 8vo. 9s. boards.

The present edition has been Beneay revised by the author’s son, and such alterations introduced as continually
progressive discoveries and the latest information rendered necessary. Recent Travels have been constantly con-
sulted where any doubt or difficulty seemed to require it; and some additional matter has been added, both in the
ancient and modern part.

BUTLER.—ATLAS OF MODERN GEOGRAPHY.

By the late Dr. BuTLER. New Edition; consisting of Twenty-three coloured Maps, from a
New Set of Plates. 8vo. with Index, 12s. half-bound.

BUTLER.—ATLAS OF ANCIENT GEOGRAPHY ;

Consisting of Twenty-three coloured Maps. With Index. By the late Dr. BurLER. New
Edition. 8vo. 12s. half-bound.
*,* The above two Atlases may be had, half-bound, in One Volume, 4to. price 24s.

CALLCOTT.—A SCRIPTURE HERBAL.

With upwards of 120 Wood Engravings. By Lapy CaxLLcorr. Square crown 8yo. pp. 568,
#1. 5s. cloth.

“‘ The Herbal is executed in a very meritorious and interesting manner. All the vegetable productions mentioned
in the Scriptures are alphabetically enumerated and described, and the texts in which they occur cited ; the properties
of the various plants are stated under each, and, where critical opinions differ as to their identification, compared,
with the authoress’s judgment on the conflicting testimony. Beautiful woodcuts illustrate all the specimens, whilst
the authoress’s travels have enabled her to offer many original remarks of an interesting kind. Finally, the whole is
seasoned with appropriate quotations and reflections to relieve the drier points of inquiry, and blend the pleasing
with the instructive, in an elegant style, than which nothing could be better adapted to the nature of the volume:
and when we have added that the book is altogether AN EXCELLENT BrsLE COMPANION, we ean bestow no higher
praise.” —LI?rERAry GAZETTE.

CARLEN (EMILIE).—THE.ROSE OF TISTELON :

A Tale of the Swedish Coast. By EmMIL1E Caruén. Translated from the original Swedish.
2 vols. post 8vo. 21s. boards.

“ Many passages descriptive of manners, character, or nature, might be quoted from this novel, possessing all the
power, truth, and finish of a Flemish painting. Notwithstanding its late appearance before the English public, its
Swedish scenery and manners have nearly as much novelty as Tue NEIGHBOURS. The domestic economy and hard
life of the poor fishermen in the remote and sea-beaten villages along the Swedish coast, the little shopkeepers or
merchants, the wreckers, smugglers, and custom-house officers, with the miscellaneous persons that fill up the
pprereaeee of these classes, are all painted to the life, as well as the ‘interiors,’ and the few forms of landscape around

em.”—SPECTATOR. ,

CATLOW.—POPULAR CONCHOLOGY ;

Or, the Shell Cabinet arranged: being an Introduction to the Modern System of Conchology:
with a sketch of the Natural History of the Animals, an account of the Formation of the She Sy
and a complete Descriptive List of the Families and Genera, By AGNnes CarLtow. Fep. 8vo.
with 312 Woodcuts, 10s. 6d. cloth.

“ This admirable little work is designed to facilitate the study of natural history, daily becoming more attractive
not only from its intrinsic interest, but also from its multiplied relations with geology. It will furnish the youn’ :
entomologist with an elementary manual, which, though scientific in its form, is, by the simplicity of its metho:
and the familiarity of its style, calculated effectually to assist him in the early steps of his progress in this fascinating
pursuit.”’—Sv. JamzEs’s CHRONICLE.

** A pleasant, useful, and well-illustrated volume.’’—JamxEson’s Ep1n. Puitos. JouRNAL.

CHALENOR.—POETICAL REMAINS OF MARY CHALENOR.

Fcp. 8vo. 4s. cloth.

“The poems are sweetly natural; and, though on topics often sung, breathe a tenderness and melancholy which
are at once soothing and consolatory.”—LireRaRy GAZETTE.

CHALENOR.—WALTER GRAY,

A Ballad, and other Poems. 2d Edition, including the Poetical Remains of Mary Chalenor.
Fcp. 8vo. 6s. cloth.

‘¢ As the simple and spontaneous effusions of a mind apparently filled with feelings which render the fireside h
and Reuinatneenl with affectation or verbiage, they may with benefit be received thio the ‘ happy hemes of mages
and offered as a gift to the youthful of both sexes.”—CHamsers’s EDINBURGH JOURNAL. ss

CHINA.—THE LAST YEAR IN CHINA,

To the Peace of Nanking: as sketched in Letters to his Friends, by a Field Officer actively
employed in that Country. With a few concluding Remarks on our Past and Future Policy
in China. 2d edition, revised.. Fcp. 8vo. with Map, 7s. cloth.

CHINESE NOVEL.—RAMBLES OF THE EMPEROR CHING

Tih in Kéang Nan: a Chinese Tale. Translated by Tkin Shen; with a P:
LeaGE, D.D. 2 vols. post 8yo. 21s. cloth. a 4 shabishy 6 st

‘« These rambles of the Haroun Alraschid of the Celestial Empire give a very curious, and, at
a peculiarly interesting view of Chinese opinions, usages, and iaedintionaree 'AIT’S wee ro poan tone,

PRINTED FOR LONGMAN, BROWN, AND CO. a

PPL LD PPL LOR PP

CHORLEY.—MUSIC AND MANNERS IN FRANCE AND

GERMANY: a Series of Travelling Sketches of Art and Society. By H. F. Cuorury, Esq.
Author of ‘Conti,’? 3 vols. post 8vo. 31s. 6d. boards.

CLAVERS.—FOREST LIFE,

By Mary Cuavers, an Actual Settler; Author of “A New Home, Who’ll Follow??? 2 vols.
fep. 8vo. 12s. cloth.

COLTON.—LACON ; OR, MANY THINGS IN FEW WORDS.

By the Rev. C. C. Cotron. New Edition, 8vo. 12s. cloth.

CONVERSATIONS ON BOTANY.
9th Edition, improved. Fcp. 8vo. 22 Plates, 7s. 6d. cloth; with the plates coloured, 12s. cloth.

The object of this work is to enable children and young persons to acquire a knowledge of the vegetable produc-
tions of their native country, by introducing to them, in a familiar manner, the principles of the Linnean System of
Botany. For this purpose, the arrangement of Linnéeus is briefly explained ; a native plant of each class, with a
few exceptions, is examined, and illustrated by an engraving; a short account is added of some of the principal
foreign species.

CONVERSATIONS ON MINERALOGY.

With Plates, engraved by Mr. and Mrs. Lowry, from Original Drawings. 3d Edition, en-
larged. 2vols. 12mo. 14s. cloth.

COOLEY.—THE HISTORY OF MARITIME AND INLAND

DISCOVERY. By W. D. Cootey, Esq. 3 vols. fcp. 8vo. with Vignette Titles, 18s. cloth.

COPLAND.—A DICTIONARY OF PRACTICAL MEDICINE ;

comprising General Pathology, the Nature and Treatment of Diseases, Morbid Structures,
and the Disorders especially incidental to Climates, to Sex, and to the different Epochs of
Life, with numerous approved Formule of the Medicines recommended. By Jamrs CopLann,
M.D., Consulting Physician to Queen Charlotte’s Lying-in Hospital; Senior Physician to the
Royal Infirmary for Children; Member of the Royal College of Physicians, London; of the
Medical and Chirurgical Societies of London and Berlin, &c. Vols. 1 and 2, 8vo, #3, cloth;
and Part 9, 4s. 6d. *,* To be completed in one more volume.

CROCKER’S ELEMENTS OF LAND SURVEYING.

Fifth Edition, corrected throughout, and considerably improved and modernized, by T. G.
Bunt, Land Surveyor, Bristol. To which are added, TABLES OF SIX-FIGURE LOGA-
RITHMS, &c.,superintended by RicHARrD FARLEY, of the Nautical Almanac Establishment,
1 vol. post 8vo. 12s. cloth.

*,* The work throughout is entirely revised, and much new matter has been added ; there are new chapters, con-
taining very full and minute Directions relating to the modern Practice of Surveying, both with and without the aid
of angular instruments. The method of Plotting Estates, and Casting or Computing their Areas, are described, &c.
&c. The chapter on Levelling also is new.

CROWE.—THE HISTORY OF FRANCE, :

From the Earliest Period to the Abdication of Napoleon. By E. E. Crow, Esq. 3 vols. fcp.
8vo. with Vignette Titles, 18s. cloth.

DAHLMANN.—HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH REVOLUTION.

By F. C. DAHLMANN, late Professor of History at the University of Géttingen. ‘Translated
from the German, by H. Evans Luoyp. 8vo. 10s. 6d. cloth.

“Professor Dahlmann’s book is, in short, a rapid sketch of the whole of what we call the Modern History of Eng-
land, from its start at the Coronation of Henry the Seventh, to its intermediate settlement at the Coronation of
William the Third. We have no English summary of the history it relates, so brief, compendious, and impartial.
M. Dahlmann is a very earnest as well as intelligent writer ; and the steady advance of the pepulas principle in Eng-
land, through an almost uninterrupted march of two cepturies, is startlingly reflected in his clear and transparent
relation. Mr. Lloyd’s translation 1s very well executed.”—EXAMINER.

DAVY (SIR HUMPHRY).—AGRICULTURAL CHEMISTRY :

With Notes by Dr. Jonn Davy. 6th Edition, 8vo. with 10 Plates, 15s. cloth.

ConrEnTs :—Introduction— The General Powers of Matter which influence Vegetation—The Organization of
Plants—Soils—Nature and Constitution of the Atmosphere, and its influence on Vegetables—Manures of Vegetable
and Animal Origin—Manures of Mineral Origin, or Fossil Manures—Improyement of Lands by Burning—Experi-
ments on the Nutritive Qualities of different Grasses, &c.

DE CUSTINE.—RUSSIA.

By the Marauis De CusTINE. Translated from the French. 2d Edition, 3 vols. post 8yo.
31s. 6d. cloth.

«We are inclined to think—and it is a painful reflection—that Mons. De Custine’s remarkable volumes contain a
more accurate account of the state and condition of Russia than any other work of recent date, without exception.
The author has manifestly penetrated through that superficial glitter and gorgeous array which haye blinded the eyes
of too many travellers to the imperfections and defects of this great empire, and has shewn it as it really is, Todo
this in the case of Russia requires many and fayourable opportunities of observation, considerable shrewdness, and a
courage and determination not easily to be daunted ; all which Mons. De Custine has proved himself to have
possessed in an eminent degree ; and the result is, a work which those who are desirous to know Russia as it really is
and not as it would fain impose itself on the world to be, would do well to consult. We» promise our readers equ
surprise and pleasure from the perusal of his very clever book.”’—GENTLEMAN’S MAGAZINE.

DE LA BECHE.—REPORT ON THE GEOLOGY OF CORN-

WALL, DEVON, and WEST SOMERSET. By Henry T. De La Becue, F.R.S. &c.,
Director of the Ordnance Geological Survey. Published by Order of the Lords Commissioners
of H.M. Treasury. 8yo. with Maps, Woodcuts, and 12 large Pates, 14s. cloth.

8 CATALOGUE OF NEW WORKS

DE MORGAN.—AN ESSAY ON PROBABILITIES,

And on their Application to Life Contingencies and Insurance Offices. By AUG. DE MoRGAN,
of Trivity College, Cambridge. 1 vol. fep. 8vo. with Vignette Title, 6s. cloth.

DOCTOR (THE), &.
5 vols. post 8vo. £2. 12s. 6d. cloth.

“ Admirably as the mystery of the ‘ Doctor’ has been preserved up to the present moment, there is no longer any
reason for affecting secresy on the subject. The author is Robert Southey: he acknowledged the fact shortly before
his last illness to his most confidential friend, an M.P. of high character. In a private letter from Mrs. Southey,
dated February 27, 1843, she not only states the fact, but adds that the greater part of a sixth volume had gone
through the press, and that Southey looked forward to the pleasure of drawing her into it as a contributor ; giving her
full authority to affirm that her husband is the author.”—Roger? BELL, Esa. in THE STORY TELLER.

DODDRIDGE.—THE FAMILY EXPOSITOR;

Or, a Paraphrase and Version of the New Testament: with Critical Notes, and a Practical
Improvement of each Section. By P. DoppripeE, D.D. To which is prefixed, a Life of the
Author, by A. Krpris, D.D. F.R.S. and 8.A. New Edition, 4 vols. 8vo. £1. 16s. cloth.

DONOVAN.—TREATISE ON CHEMISTRY.

By M. Donovan, M.R.I.A. Fourth Edition, 1 vol. fep. 8vo. with Vignette Title, 6s. cloth.

DONOVAN.—A TREATISE ON DOMESTIC ECONOMY.

By M. Donovan, Esq: M.R.I.A. Professor of Chemistry to the Company of Apothecaries in
Ireland. 2 vols. fep. 8vo. with Vignette Titles, 12s. cloth.

DOVER.—LIFE OF FREDERICK II. KING OF PRUSSIA.

By Lorp Dover. 2d Edition, 2 vols. 8vo. with Portrait, 28s. boards.

DRUMMOND.—FIRST STEPS TO BOTANY,

Intended as popular Illustrations of the Science, leading to its study as a branch of general
education. By J. L. DrumMonpb, M.D. 4th Kdit. 12mo. with numerous Woodcuts, 9s. bds.

DUNHAM.—THE HISTORY OF THE GERMANIC EMPIRE.

By Dr. DunHAM. 83 vols. fep. 8vo. with Vignette Titles, 18s. cloth.
Tur History or Europe purinc THE | Tar History oF Potanp. By Dr.

MippLeE Aces. By Dr. Dunham. 4 vols. Dunham. 1 vol. fep. 8vo. with Vignette
fcp. 8vo. with Vignette Titles, #1. 4s. cloth. Title, 6s. cloth.

Tux History or SParn AnD Portucat, | THE Lives or tue Earry Writers
By Dr. Dunham. 5 vols. fep. Svo. with or Great Britain. By Dr. Dunham,

R, Bell, Esq. &c. 1 vol. fep. 8vo. with
Vignette Title, 6s. cloth.

‘Tur History oF SWEDEN, DENMARK, Tre Lives or British Dramatists.
AND Norway. By-Dr. Dunham. 3 vols. By Dr. Dunham, R. Bell, Esq. &c. 2 vols.
fcp. 8vo. with Vignette Titles, 18s. cloth. fep. 8vo. with Vignette Titles, 12s. cloth.

EGERTON.—A TREATISE ON PHOTOGRAPHY ;

Containing the latest Discoveries appertaining to the Daguerreotype. Compiled from Com-
munications by MM. Daguerre and Arago, and other Eminent Men of Science. By N. P.
LEREBOURS, Optician to the Observatory, Paris, &c. Translated by J. Eaerron. Post 8vo.
with Plate of Apparatus, 7s. 6d. cloth.

«A translation of M. Lerebours’ celebrated ‘ Treatise on Photography.’ This work will be peculiarly acceptable
to the scientific world, containing, as it does, the latest discoveries and improvements in the art of which it treats ;

together with a vast variety of practical instructions, valuable hints respecting the choice of plates, apparatus, &e ;
indeed, all the details and minutie necessary to lead to successful results.” —EXAMINER,

ELLIOTSON.—HUMAN PHYSIOLOGY:

With which is incorporated much of the elementary part of the “‘ Institutiones Physiologice’”
of J, F. Blumenbach, Professor in the University of Gdttingen. By JouNn ELuiotson, M.D.
Cantab. F.R.S. Fifth Edition, 8vo. with numerous Woodcuts, 2. 2s. cloth.

ENGLISHMAN’S HEBREW AND CHALDEE CONCORDANCE

of the OLD TESTAMENT; being an attempt at a Verbal Connection between the Original
and the English Translations: with Indexes, a List of the Proper Names and their occur-
rences, &c, &c. 2 vols. royal 8vo. cloth, #3. 13s. 6d.; large paper, 4. 14s. 6d.

“ The labour bestowed upon this important work has seldom, we should suppose, been equalled ; and we have the
fullest conviction, from the merely cursory examination we are able to give to such a stupendous task, that the result
justifies all the labour, time, and money expended upon it. Indeed, the whole book bears the most palpable evi-
dence of honest carefulness and unwearied diligence (the points of prime worth in a Concordance) ; and wherever
we have dipped into its pages (about 1800), we have, in every case, had our opinion of its neatness, accuracy, and
lucid order, confirmed and increased.” —Lirerary Gazerre,

FAREY.—A TREATISE ON TILE STEAM ENGINE,

Historical, Practical, and Descriptive. By Joann Farey, Engineer. 4to. “Illustrated by
numerous Woodcuts, and 25 Copper-plates. #5. 5s. boards.

FERGUS.— HISTORY OF UNITED STATES OF AMERICA

From the Discovery of America to the Election of General Jackson to the Presidency. By the
Rev. H. Fergus. 2 vols. fep. §vo. with Vignette Titles, 12s. cloth.

Vignette Titles, £1. 10s. cloth.

PRINTED FOR LONGMAN, BROWN, AND CO. 9

aaa eee

FIELD.— POSTHUMOUS EXTRACTS FROM THE

VETERINARY RECORDS OF THE LATE JOHN FIELD. Edited by his Brother,
WILLIAM FIELD, Veterinary Surgeon, London. 8vo. 8s. boards.

_“ A collection of remarkable cases of disease in the horse, observed by the late Mr. Field, during his extensivs prac-
tice ; with a few papers on particular diseases, either read before the Veterinary Medical Society, or, seemingly,
sketched with that end in view. To pass a decided judgment on the veterinary value of the volume is beyond our
power; but the cases appear to be noted with great clearness in their symptoms, treatment, and post-mortem exami-
nation. We should conceive the work likely to be of considerable use to veterinary surgeons,—who, lucky people, do
not as yet appear overburdened with books on their business ; and not without interest to the medical practitioner,
who would study comparative surgery, as well as comparative anatomy.”—SPrECTATOR.

FORD.—THE NEW DEVOUT COMMUNICANT,

According to the Church of England; containing an Account of the Institution, Prayers, and
Meditations, before and after the Administration, and a Companion at the Lord’s Table. By
the Rev. James Forp, B.D. 7th Edition, 18mo. 2s. 6d. bound in cloth, with gilt edges;
fep. 8vo. 3s. 6d. bound.

FORD.—A CENTURY OF CHRISTIAN PRAYERS,

On FAITH, HOPE, and CHARITY; with a Morning and Evening Devotion. By the Rev.
JaMEs Forp, B.D. 3d Edition, 18mo. 4s. cloth.

FORSTER.—THE STATESMEN OF THE COMMONWEALTH

OF ENGLAND. With an Introductory Treatise on the Popular Progress in English History.
By Joun Forster, Esq. 5 vols. fcp. 8vo. with Original Portraits of Pym, Eliot, Hampden,
Cromwell, and an Historical Scene after a Picture by Cattermole, £1. 10s. cloth.

The Introductory Treatise, intended as an Introduction to the Study of the Great Civil War in
the Seventeenth Century, separately, 2s. 6d. sewed.

The above 5 vols. form Mr. Forster’s portion of the Lives of Eminent British Statesmen, by Sir -
James Mackintosh, the Right Hon. T. P. Courtenay, and John Forster, Esq. 7 vols. fcp. 8vo.
with Vignette Titles, £2. 2s. cloth.

FOSBROKE.—A. TREATISE ON THE ARTS, MANNERS,

MANUFACTURES, and INSTITUTIONS of the GREEKS and ROMANS. By the Rev.
T. D. FosBrokeE, &c. 2 vols. fep. 8yo. with Vignette Titles, 12s. cloth.

FRANKUM.—DISCOURSE ON THE ENLARGED. AND

PENDULOUS ABDOMEN, showing it to be a visceral affection attended with important
consequences in the Human Economy; with cursory Observations on Diet, Exercise, and the
general Management of Health: for the use of Dyspeptics.. By R. Frankum, Esq. Surgeon.
The Second Edition, augmented, with a Dissertation on Gout, suggesting new physiological views
as to its Cause, Prevention, and the best Course of Treatment. Fcp. 8vo. pp. 126, 5s. cloth.

GLEIG.—LIVES OF MOST EMINENT BRITISH MILITARY

COMMANDERS. Bythe Rev.G.R.Guer1a. 3vols. fcp. 8vo,. with Vignette Titles, 18s. cloth.

GLENDINNING.—PRACTICAL HINTS ON THE CULTURE

OF THE PINE APPLE. By R. GLenpINKiING, Gardener to the Right Hon. Lord Rolle,
Bicton. 12mo. with Plan of a Pinery, 5s. cloth.

GOOD.—THE BOOK OF NATURE.

A Popular Illustration of the General Laws and Phenomena of Creation. By JoHN Mason
Goon, M.D. F.R.S., &c. Third Edition, corrected, 3 vols. fep. 8vo. 248. cloth.

GRAHAM.—ENGLISH; OR, THE ART OF COMPOSITION

explained in a Series of Instructions and Examples. By G.F.Granam. Second Edition,
revised and improved. Fcp. 8vo. 7s. cloth.

GRAHAM.—HELPS TO ENGLISH GRAMMAR;

Or, Easy Exercises for Young Children. By G. F. Grauam. Illustrated by Engravings on
Wood. Fcp. 8vo. 3s. cloth.

« Well adapted for the instruction of young children, for whose use it is especially designed.”"—ATHEN ZUM.

GRANT (MRS. OF LAGGAN).—MEMOIR AND CORRE-

SPONDENCE of the late Mrs. Grant, of Laggan, Author of “ Letters from the Mountains,”
“ Memoirs of an American Lady,” &c. &c. Comprising Sketches of the Society and Literary
Characters of Edinburgh for nearly the last thirty years. Kdited by her Son, J. P, Grawnv,
Esq. 3 vols. post 8vo. with Portrait, 31s. 6d. cloth.

“ The three volumes consist of a brief sketch of Mrs. Grant’s life (drawn up by herself to the year 1806, and con-
tinued by her sons,) and of her letters written to various friends, between 1803, when she left Laggan for Woodend,
and within afew months of her death, in 1888, The nature of this correspondence is domestic, though often inter-
spersed with remarks on the books she was reading, or sketches of the persons she had met. There are also very many
passages of a biographical character; but the great bulk of the book is private and personal—letters of compliment
and condolence, the effusions of friendship or piety, accounts of her domestic affairs, or sketches of the persons,
often great names in literature and life, both of ‘London and Edinburgh, whom she had met in society, both readable
and attractive,”—SPrcTaTor.

GRATTAN.—THE HISTORY OF THE NETHERLANDS,

From the Invasion by the Romans to the Belgian Revolution in 1830. By T, C. Grarran,
Esq. 1 vol. fcp. 8vo. with Vignette Title, 6s. cloth.

10 CATALOGUE OF NEW WORKS

GRAY.—FIGURES OF MOLLUSCOUS ANIMALS,

Selected from various Authors. Etched for the Use of Students. By MAr1IA EMMA Gray.
Vol. 1. pp. 40, with 78 plates of Figures, 12s. cloth.

GRAY AND MITCHELL’S ORNITHOLOGY.—THE GENERA

Of BIRDS ; comprising their Generic Characters, a Notice of the Habits of each Genus, and
an extensive List of Species, referred to their several Genera. By Georce RoBertT Gray,
Acad. Imp. Georg. Florent. Soc. Corresp. Senior Assistant of the Zoological Department,
British Museum ; and Author of the “ List of the Genea of Birds,” &c. &c. [lustrated with
Three Hundred and Fifty imperial quarto Plates, by DaviD WILLIAM MITCHELL.

In course of publication, in Monthly Parts, 10s. 6d. each ; each Part consisting generally of
Four imperial quarto coloured Plates and Three plain, and accompanying Letterpress ; giving
the Generic Characters, short Remarks on the Habits, and a List of Species of each Genus as
complete as possible. The uncoloured Plates contain the Characters of all the Genera of
the various Sub-families, consisting of numerous details of Heads, Wings, and Feet, as the
case may require, for pointing out their distinguishing Characters.

*,* The work will not exceed Fifty Monthly Parts. No. 5 was published Sept. 2d.

GREENER.—THE GUN;

Or, a Treatise on the various Descriptions of Small Fire-Arms. By W. GREENER, Inventor of
an improved method of Firing Cannon by Percussion, &c. 8vo. with Illustrations, 15s. boards.

GREENER.—THE SCIENCE OF GUNNERY,

As applied to the Use and Construction of Fire Arms. By WILLIAM GREENER, Author of
“The Gun,” &c. With numerous Plates, 15s. cloth.

GREENWOOD (COL.)—THE TREE-LIFTER 5

Or, a New Method of Transplanting Trees. By Col. Geo.GREENWoOD. 8yo. with an Illus-
trative Plate, 7s. cloth.

GUEST.—-THE MABINOGION,

From the Llyfr Coch 0 Hergest, or Red Book of Hergest, and other ancient Welsh MSS. :
with an English Translation and Notes. By Lady CHARLOTTE Guest. Parts 1 to 5.
Royal 8vo. &s. each.

Part 1. The Lady of the Fountain.

Part 2. Peredur Ab Evrawc; a Tale of Chivalry. .

Part 3. The Arthurian Romance of Geraint, the Son of Erbin.

Part 4. The Romance of Kilhwch and Olwen.

Part 5. The Dream of Rhonabwy, and the Tale of Pwyll Prince of Dyved.

GWILT.—AN ENCYCLOPADIA OF ARCHITECTURE 5

Historical, Theoretical, and Practical. By JoserpH Gwitt, Esq. F.S.A. Illustrated with
upwards of 1000 Engravings on Wood, from Designs by J. 8. Gwixir. In 1 thick vol. 8vo.
containing nearly 1300 closely-printed pages, #2. 12s. 6d. cloth.

“ Gwilt’s Encyclopedia ranks high as a work for professional students, containing the mathematics of architecture,

with copious details upon all the technicalities of the science, It is a work which no professed architect or builder
should be without,”—WnsTMINSTER REVIEW.

HALL.—NEW GENERAL LARGE LIBRARY ATLAS OF

FIFTY-THREE MAPS, on Colombier Paper; with the Divisions and Boundaries carefully
coloured. Constructed entirely from New Drawings, and engraved by SipNey Hau. New
Edition, thoroughly revised and corrected ; including all the Alterations rendered necessary
by the recent Official Surveys, the New Roads on the Continent, and a careful Comparison
with the authenticated Discoveries published in the latest Voyages and Travels. Folded in
half, Nine Guineas, half-bound in russia; full size of the Maps, Ten Pounds, half-bd. russia.

The following Maps have been re-engraved, from entirely new designs---Ireland, South Africa, Turkey in Asia;
the following have been materially improved---Switzerland, North ftaly, South Italy, Egypt, Central Germany,
Southern Germany, Greece, Austria, Spain and Portugal; a new map of China, corrected from the recent government

survey of the coast from Canton to Nankin (to which is appended ,the Province of Canton, on an enlarged scale, in
a separate compartment), has since been added.

HALSTED.—LIFE AND TIMES OF RICHARD THE THIRD,

as Duke of Gloucester and King of England: in which all the Charges against him are care-
fully investigated and compared with the Statements of the Cotemporary Authorities. By
CaROLINE A, Hausrep, Author of “The Life of Margaret Beaufort, Mother of King Henry
VIL” and “ Obligations of Literature to the Mothers of England.’”’ 2 vols. 8vo. with a
Portrait from an Original Picture in the possession of the Right Hon. Lord Stafford, never
before engraved, and other illustrations, #1. 10s. cloth.
“ We consider Miss Halsted’s work as one of the most interesting and able pieces of history which has ever been
presented to the world. The research which it manifests is most extensive; the arrangement clear and lucid; the
style always animated and picturesque. Many new lights are thrown on the career of Richard, many new facts

elicited, and the injustice of four centuries vindicated by this intrepid and indefatigable champion of historical
truth.”—MnrrroPoLitan MAGAZINE.

HANNAM.—THE ECONOMY OF WASTE MANURES:

a Treatise on the Nature and Use of Neglected Fertilizers. By JoaN HANNAM. Written for

pee Vorksbive Agricultural Society, and published by permission of the Council. Fep. 8vo.
3s. 6d. cloth.

“ We consider this an invaluable treatise. It must prove of incalculable benefit to that class to whom it is chiefly
addressed. By the general reader it will likewise be perused with no common interest. It is a lucid, practical de-
monstration from beginning to end. The writer is not only entirely master of his subject, but he has unfolded it in
the most scientific, and, we would add, logical manner. He has displayed so marked a precision in his exposition,
that the dullest capacity may at once comprehend his meaning and the drift of his argument.’—A ras,

PRINTED FOR LONGMAN, BROWN, AND CO. 1]

or

PIO

HAND-BOOK OF TASTE;

Or, How to Observe Works of Art, especially Cartoons, Pictures, and Statues. By Fasius
Picror., Second Edition. Fep. 8vo. 3s. boards.

_, * We have never met with a compendious treatise on art, and the principles which should guide taste in judging of
its productions, that contained more excellent matter than this small unpretending volume. It is expressly compiled
for the instruction of the public, and with a view to that era in art which the decoration of the new Houses of Parlia-
ment, and the present display of the cartoons in Westminster Hall, may be expected to create. It exhibits the opinions
of the best artists and critics of allages. It is not intended to instruct the student in art, though he may profit much
by its lessons, but to tell the observer how he may judge of the productions of the fine arts. It is not flattering to set
out with saying that England, in the art of design, is not only immeasurably behind Italy, but falls short of what
France aspires to, and Germany has accomplished ; but this is qualified by the admission that England is, nevertheless,
quite capable of efficient progress.

The following rules, and those which precede them, should be well conned over before yisiting exhibitions, and
afterwards stitched up with our catalogue.”—Tarv’s MaGAzInE.

HANSARD.—TROUT AND SALMON FISHING IN WALES.

By G. A. HANSARD. 12mo. 6s. 6d. cloth.

HARRIS.—THE HIGHLANDS OF ATHIOPIA;

Being the Accout of Kighteen Months’ Residence of a British Embassy to the Christian Court
of Shoa. By Major W. C. Harris, Author of ‘Wild Sports in Southern Africa,” &c. 2d
Edition, 3 vols. with Map and Illustrations, £2. 2s. cloth.

“ Sir William Harris has produced a work of extraordinary interest and value; a narrative which will take a per-
manent place in the library, as the best authority ever yet given to the world on all the subjects to which it relates.
It has, moreover, for present readers, the charm of perfect freshness and novelty. The writer’s inquiries extend to
the minutest particulars of the habits, manners, customs, political and social economy of the people, among whom
he was a welcomed visitor. He makes research into their history, sketches the geography, natural history, and
botany of the country, and, in brief, leaves no subject unexplored that could add to the completeness of the picture
he has undertaken to paint; and most vividly does his graphic touch summon before the mind’s eye of his readers
the scenes he has witnessed.”"—Fore1GN AND CoLoNIAL REVIEW. ‘

HAWKER.—INSTRUCTIONS TO YOUNG SPORTSMEN

In all that relates to Guns and Shooting. By Lieut.-Col. P. HAwKER. 9th Edit. corrected,
enlarged, and improved, with Eighty-five Plates and Woodcuts by Adlard and Branston, from
Drawings by C. Varley, Dickes, &c. 8vo. #1. 1s. cloth.

“We have so often spoken favourably of preceding editions of this popular work, that we need only notice the
opportune publication of the NrytH, which has just made its appearance, and which brings Sree bear of sporting,
in relation to the field and gun, down to the present time; giving interesting notes of whatever has been done in the
way of change and improvement.”—LirERARY GAZETTE.

HENSLOW.—THE PRINCIPLES OF DESCRIPTIVE AND

PHYSIOLOGICAL BOTANY. By J. S. Henstow, M.A. F.L.S. &c. 1 vol. fep. 8vo. with
Vignette Title, and nearly 70 Woodcuts, 6s. cloth.

HERSCHEL.—A TREATISE ON ASTRONOMY.

By Sir Joon HerscuHet. New Edition. 1 vol. fep. 8vo. Vignette Title, 6s. cloth.

HERSCHEL.—A PRELIMINARY DISCOURSE ON THE

STUDY OF NATURAL PHILOSOPHY. By Sir Jonn HerscHeu. New Edition, 1 vol.
fep. 8vo. with vignette title, 6s. cloth.

HINTS ON ETIQUETTE AND THE USAGES OF SOCIETY:

With a Glance at Bad Habits. By Aywyos. ‘“ Manners make the man.” 23d Edition,
revised (with additions) by a Lady of Rank. Fcp. 8vo. 2s. 6d. cloth, gilt edges.

General Observations; Introductions—Letters of Introduction—Marriage—Dinners—Smoking ;
Snuff—Fashion—Dress—Music—Dancing—Conversation—Advice to Tradespeople—Visiting ;
Visiting Cards—Cards—Tattling—Of General Society.

HOARE.—A DESCRIPTIVE ACCOUNT OF A NEW METHOD

of PLANTING and MANAGING the ROOTS of GRAPE VINES. By CLemenr Hoare,
Author of “ A Treatise on the Cultivation of the Grape Vineon Open Walls.’’ 12mo. 5s. cloth.

The facts, proved by experiments carried on by Mr. Hoare for a series of years, are so extra-
ordinary, that there is every reason to believe they will effect a complete revolution in the
planting of the Grape Vine.

HOARE.—A PRACTICAL TREATISE ON THE CULTIVATION

OF THE GRAPE VINE ON OPEN WALLS. By CLEMENT Hoare, 3d Edition, 8yo.
7s. 6d. cloth.

HOBBES.—ENGLISH WORKS OF THOMAS HOBBES,

Of Malmesb ; now first collected by Sir W1LL1AM MoLEsworrtH, Bart. Vol. 10, contain-
ing ae Teepenton of Homer’s Iliad and Odyssey. 8vo. 10s, cloth; to non-subscribers, 12s,

Nine preceding Volumes have been published of the English and Latin Works. Vols. 8 andg,
recently published, comprise the Translation of Thucydides.

HOLLAND.—PROGRESSIVE EDUCATION ;

Or, Considerations on the Course of Life. Translated from the French of Madame Necker de
Saussure. By Miss HoLtanp. 3 vols. fep. 8vo. 19s. 6d. cloth.
*,* The Third Volume, forming an appropriate conclusion to the first two, separately, 7s. 6d.

PAF

woo

12 CATALOGUE OF NEW WORKS

= RI RRR I

EET:

HOLLAND.—A TREATISE ON THE MANUFACTURES IN

METAL, By J.Houianp, Esq. 3 vols. fep. Vignette Titles, about 300 Woodcuts, 18s. cloth.

HOLLAND.—MEDICAL NOTES AND REFLECTIONS.

By Henry Houuanp, M.D. F.R.S. &c. Fellow of the Royal Colleze of Physicians, Physician
Extraordinary to the Queen, and Physician in Ordinary to His Royal Highness Prince Albert.
2d Edition, 1 vol. 8vo. pp. 654, 18s. cloth.

HOOKER.—THE BRITISH FLORA,

In Two Vols. Vol. 1; comprising Phenogamous or Flowering Plants, and the Ferns. By Sir
WiLuiaM Jackson Hooker, K.H. LL.D. F.R.A. and L.S. &c. &c &c. Fifth Edition, with
Additions and Corrections ; and 173 Figures illustrative of the Umbelliferous Plants, the
Composite Plants, the Grasses, and the Ferns. 8vo. pp. 502, with 12 Plates, 14s. plain; with
the plates coloured, 24s. cloth. . J cab

Vol. 2, in Two Parts, comprising the Cryptogamia and Fungi, completing the British Flora, and
forming Vol. 5, Parts 1 and 2, of Smith’s English Flora, 24s. boards.

HOOKER.—ICONES PLANTARUM ;

Or, Figures, with brief Descriptive Characters and Remarks, of New and Rare Plants, selected
from the Author’s Herbarium. By Sir W. J. Hooker, K.H. LL.D. &c. 4 vols. 8vo. with

400 Plates, €5. 12s. cloth.

HOOKER AND TAYLOR.—MUSCOLOGIA BRITANNICA.

Containing the Mosses of Great Britain and Ireland, systematically arranged and described ;
with Plates, illustrative of the character of the Generaand Species. By Sir W. J. Hooker
and T. TayLor, M.D. F.L.S., &c. 2d Edition, 8vo. enlarged, 31s. 6d. plain; £3. 3s. coloured.

HORSLEY (BISHOP).—BIBLICAL CRITICISM

On the first Fourteen Historical Books of the Old Testament; and on the first Nine Prophetical
Books.. By SAmuEL Horstey, LL.D. F.R.S. F.S.A. Lord Bishop of St. Asaph. 2d Edition,
containing Translations by the Author never before published, together with copious Indices.
2 vols. 8vo. £1. 10s. cloth.

HOWITT (MARY).—THE CHILD’S PICTURE AND VERSE

BOOK, commonly called ‘‘ Otto Speckter’s Fable Book.” Translated by Mary Howirr:
With French and German on corresponding pages, and illustrated with 100 Engravings on
Wood by G. F. Sargent. Square 12mo. 10s. 6d. boards.

“ Otto Speckter’s illustrations are well calculated to please children: some by their truth, others by their humour.
The verses, too, are in a kindly spirit—some sly, some cheatin ae those coral-and-bells measures which ought never
to be out of the ear of such as write for the very young. Mrs. Howitt has, in naturalizing this book, done a good deed
with a good grace.” —ATHEN ZUM.

HOWITT (MARY).— THE H—— FAMILY: TRALINNAN ;

AXEL and ANNA; and other Tales. By FreprikA BrReMeER. — Translated by MARY
Howirr. 2 vols. post 8vo. with Portrait of the Author, 21s. boards.

“ One great charm of Fredrika Bremer is her quiet vey of doing every thing. Whether she soars into the mysticism
of German metaphysics, OU BLES the gossip of the tea-table—whether she utters the most biting sarcasm, or gives
expression to the kindliest feeling, it is all done without the least appearance of effort. This elegant repose pervades
her story of the H. Family, and makes us like it in some respects better than any other of her writings.”—Joun Buu.

Tue Nereupours. Ture Presipent’s DauGutTers.
A Story of Every-day Life in Sweden. By
FREDRIKA BREMER. Translated by MARry qragteted tr Pehl B ne
Howirr. 3d Edition, revised and corrected. post 8vo. 31s. 6d. boards, i 4
2 vols. post 8vo. 18s. boards. ey | :

Tue Home. A New Sxertcu or Every-pay Lire:—
Or, Family Cares and Family Joys. By A Diary. Together with Srrirg and
FREDRIKA BReMER. Translated by MARY Peace. By FRepRIKA Bremer. Tran-
Howirr. 2d Edition, revised and corrected, Slated by Mary Howirr. 2 vols. post 8vo.
2 vols. post 8vo. 21s. boards. 21s. boards.

HOWITT.—THE RURAL LIFE OF ENGLAND.

By WiLu1AM Hlowrrr. 3d Edition, corrected and reyised, medium 8vo. with Engraving's on
wood, by Bewick and Williams, uniform with “ Visits to Remarkable Places,” 21s. cloth.
Life of the Aristocracy. | The Forests of England.
Life of the Agricultural Population. Habits, Amusements, and Condition of the
Picturesque and Moral Features of the Country. People; in which are introduced ''wo New
Strong Attachment of the English to Country} Chapters, descriptive of the Rural Watering
Lites Places, and Education of the Rural Population.

HOWITT.—GERMAN EXPERIENCES :

Addressed to the English, both Goers Abroad and Stayers at Home. By Wi1Lu1AM Howirv,
Fep. 8vo. 7s. 6d. cloth.

The minute practical information given in this book respecting Germany, and the modes of living there, will be
found of great use to the English resident, who, for the purpose of education or economy, sets u p his tent in that
country. It is a book full of facts—facts of direct utility to the travelling English.’—Courr Jounnat.

eee

PRINTED FOR LONGMAN, BROWN, AND Co. 13

HOWITT.—VISITS TO REMARKABLE PLACES;

Old Halls, Battle-Fields, and Scenes illustrative of Striking Passages in English History and
Poetry. By Wiii1Am Howitt. New Edition, medium 8yo. with 40 Illustrations by
S. Williams, 21s. cloth.

SECOND SERIES, chiefly in the Counties of DURHAM and NORTHUMBERLAND, with a
Stroll along the BORDER. 1 vol. medium 8vo. with upwards of 40 highly-finished Woodcuts,
from Drawings made on the spot for this work, by Messrs. Carmichael, Richardsons, and
Weld Taylor, 21s. cloth.

HOWITT.—THE LIFE AND ADVENTURES OF JACK OF

THE MILL, commouly called ‘“‘ Lord Othmill;’’ created, for his eminent services, Baron
Waldeck, and Knight of Kitticottie; a Fireside Story. By Witit1am Howirr. 2 vols.
fcep. 8vo. with 46 Illustrations on Wood by G. F. Sargent, 15s. cloth.

“ This agreeable story will be a great favourite with a large class of juvenile readers; and will sustain the un-

wearied interest even 6f those who have passed the season of youth. The style is racy, animated, and sparkling ;
the story never flags, and its moral bearing is most excellent.”—Ec.ecric Rrvirw.

NOWITT.—_THE RURAL AND SOCIAL LIFE OF GERMANY:

With Characteristic Sketches of its Chief Cities and Scenery. Collected in a General Tour,
and during a Residence in that Country in the Years 1840-42. By WiLi1am Howirrt,
Author of “ The Rural Life of England,” ‘‘ Visits to Remarkable Places,” “‘ The Boy’s
Country Book,” &c. Medium 8vo. with above 50 Illustrations, 21s. cloth.

HOWITT.—WANDERINGS OF A JOURNEYMAN TAILOR,

through EUROPE and the EAST, during the years 1824 to 1840. By P. D. HotrHaus,
from Werdohl, in Westphalia. Translated from the Third German Edition, by W1LLIAM
Howtrt, Author of “ The Rural and Social Life of Germany,’’ &c, &c. Fcp. 8vo. with Por-
trait of the Tailor, 6s. cloth.

“ He has traversed Germany, Poland, fae ti and Wallachia several times ; gazed with professional delight on
the varied costumes in Constantinople and Alexandria ; ascended the Nile; climbed the Pyramids; dodged the
Bedouins ; kneeled as a plea in the Holy City; stood in adoration on Mount Zion ; cut a walking-stick on Mount
Tabor; washed in the lake of Gennesareth; slept by the side of the Dead Sea ; braved the robbers of ‘ blest Arcady ;’
narrowly escaped being married at Malta by damsels who are worse than Sam Weller’s widows ; and been stoned tor
his impertinent curiosity in attempting to enter Solomon’s Mosque at Jerusalem. His descriptions of all these
various places are clear and vivid ; the expression of his feelings simple and natural.”—Cariric.

HOWITT.—THE STUDENT-LIFE OF GERMANY.

From the Unpublished MSS. of Dr. Cornelius. By Wituiam Howirt. 8yvo. with 24 Wood-
Engravings, and Seven Steel Plates, 21s. cloth.

“ German student-life has, of course, its brighter side and pleasanter traits. Its generous friendships, its buoyant
spirits, its noble songs, its intense study, at the last may well compensate for many of its darker features. In this
volume there is no want of material to form a very sufficient notion of German student-life.”’—QuARTERLY REVIEW.

HOWITT.—COLONISATION AND CHRISTIANITY:

A Popular History of the Treatment of the Natives, in all their Colonies, by the Europeans.
By WiLu1AM Howirr. Post 8vo. 10s. 6d. cloth.

HOWITT.—THE BOY’S COUNTRY BOOK:

Being the real Life of a Country Boy, written by himself; exhibiting all the Amusements,
Pleasures, and Pursuits of Children in the Country. Edited by W1LL1am Howrrv, Author
of *¢‘ The Rural Life of England,’’ &c. 2d Edition, fep. 8vo. with 40 Woodcuts, 8s. cloth.

“ A capital work; and, we are inclined to think, Howitt’s best in any line.”’—Quanrerty Revirw,

HUDSON.—PLAIN DIRECTIONS FOR MAKING WILLS

In Conformity with the Law, and particularly with reference to the Act 7 Will. 4 and 1 Vict.
c. 26. To which is added, a clear Exposition of the Law relating to the distribution of Per-
sonal Estate in the case of Intestacy ; with two Forms of Wills, and much useful information,
&c. By J.C. Hupson, of the Legacy Duty Office, London. 12th Kdition, corrected, with
notes of cases judicially decided since the above Act came into operation. Fep. 8vo. 2s. 6d.

HUDSON.—THE EXECUTOR’S GUIDE.

By J. C. Hupson. Third Edition, fcp. 8vo. 5s. cloth.
*,* These two works may be had in 1 volume, 7s. cloth.

HUDSON.—THE PARENT’S HAND-BOOK ;

Or, Guide to the Choice of Professions, Employments, and Situations ; containing useful and
practical Information on the subject of placing out bog Men, and of obtaining their Edu-
cation with a view to particular occupations. By J. C. Hupson, Esq. Author of * Plain
Directions for Making Wills.”’ Fcp. 8yo. 5s. cloth.

HUNT.—RESEARCHES ON LIGHT:

An Examination of all the Phenomena connected with the Chemical and Molecular Changes
produced by the Influence of the Solar Rays, embracing all the known Photographic Pro-
cesses, and new Discoveries in the Art, By RoBerT Hunt, Secretary of the Royal Cornwall
Polytechnic Society. 8vo. with Plate and Woodcuts, 10s. 6d, cloth.

“Mr. Hunt’s reputation is so well established, that we need only mention his pleasing volume to secure it a
favourable reception from the philosophical public.”—Jamuson’s New EDINBURGH PHILOSOPHICAL JOURNAL.

14 CATALOGUE OF NEW WORKS

—

RLF

HUMPHREYS.—THE ILLUMINATED BOOKS OF THE

MIDDLE AGES.—A History of Lluminated Books, from the [Vth to the XVIIth Century.

By Henry Nore Humpareys. Illustrated bya Series of Specimens, consisting of an entire

Page, of the exact Size of the Original, from the most celebrated and splendid MSS. in the

Imperial and Royal Libraries of Vienna, Moscow, Paris, Naples, Copenhagen, and Madrid ;—

from the Vatican, Escurial, Ambrosian, and other great Libraries of the Continent ;—and

from the rich Public, Collegiate, and Private Libraries of Great Britain; superbly printed in

Gold, Silver, and Colours.

In course of publication, in Parts, issued at intervals of about two months; each Part to con-
tain Three Plates, of the exact size of the original subjects, and each Plate accompanied by a
description, with some account of the MS. from which it is taken. The last Part to contain
an Historical Sketch of the Progress of the Art of Illumination, with a Table for placing the Plates
in Chronological Order,—as, in the Parts, they will, for the sake of variety and convenience, be
issued without regard to their Chronological arrangement.

Each Part, containing Three Plates, with Descriptions, Imperial Quarto (15 in. by 11), splen-
didly printed, in gold, silver, and colours, in imitation of the originals, as accurate as can
be produced by mechanical means, 12s.

LARGE PaPreER, on Half Imperial (214 in. by 15), to prevent folding the large Plates, 21s.

Six Parts to form a Volume, Four Volumes completing the work.
PLATES CONTAINED IN THE FIRST PART.
1. Page from a large and beautiful MS. executed for Edward IV. containing Portraits of himself,
and his brothers Gloucester and Clarence.
2. Page from a rich MS. of the Orations of Demosthenes, made for one of the Farnesi.

3. A remarkable Frontispiece, of great beauty, from a Venetian Diploma.
“We have seen some specimens of a proposed work by Mr. Humphreys, on Illuminated MSS. which have surprised
us by the accuracy of their execution, and the effect produced by merely mechanical means.”—QuaRTERLY REVIEW.

HUNTER.—THE RISE OF THE OLD DISSENT

Exemplified in the Lire of OLtveR Heywoop: with a Sketch of the subsequent History of
the English Presbyterian Dissenters. By the Rev. Jos—epH HUNTER, F.S.A. 8vo. 7s. cloth.

JACKSON.—PICTORIAL FLORA 5;

Or, British Botany delineated, in 1500 Lithographic Drawings of all the Species of Flowering
Plants indigenous to Great Britain ; illustrating the descriptive works on English Botany of
Hooker, Lindley, Smith, &c. By Miss Jackson. 8vo. 15s. cloth.

JAMES.--LIVES OF MOST EMINENT FOREIGN STATESMEN,

y G. P.R. James, Esq., and E. E. Crowe, Esq. 5 vols. fcp. 8vo. Vignette Titles, 30s. cloth.

JAMES.—A HISTORY OF THE LIFE OF EDWARD THE

BLACK PRINCE, and of various Events connected therewith, which occurred during the
Reign of Edward Ill. King of England. By G. P. R. JAMEs, Esq. 2d Edition, 2 vols. fcp.
8vo. Map, 15s. cloth.

JEFFREY.— CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE EDINBURGH

REVIEW. By Francis JEFFREY, now one of the Judges of the Court of Session in Scotland.
4 vols, 8vo. 48s. cloth.

JOHNSON.—THE FARMER’S ENCYCLOPADIA,

And Dictionary of Rural Affairs: embracing all the recent Discoveries in Agricultural Che-
mistry ; adapted to the comprehension of unscientific readers. By CurHBERT W. JOHNSON,
Esq. F.R.S. Barrister-at-Law, Corresponding Member of the Agricultural Society of Kénigs-
berg, and of the Maryland Horticultural Society; Author of several of the Prize Essays of
the Royal Agricultural Society of England, and other Agricultural Works; Editor of the
“ Farmer’s Almanack,”’ &c. 1 thick vol. 8vo. illustrated by Wood Engravings of the best
and most improved Agricultural Implements, €2. 10s. cloth.

“Cuthbert Johnson’s ‘ Farmer’s Encyclopedia’ is one of the best books of its class.”
Dr. Lindley, in THE GarpENER’s CHRONICLE,

KANE.—ELEMENTS OF CHEMISTRY ;

Including the most Recent Discoveries and Applications of the Science to Medicine and
Pharmacy, and to the Arts. By Roperr Kanu, M.D. M.R.I.A., Professor of Natural
Philosophy to the Royal Dublin Society. 1 thick volume, 8vo. with 236 Woodeuts, 24s. cloth.

KANE.—THE INDUSTRIAL RESOURCES OF IRELAND.

By Roserr Kane, M.D. Secretary to the Council of the Royal Irish Academy, Professor of
Natural Philosophy to the Royal Dublin Society, and of Chemistry to the Apothecaries’ Hall
of Ireland. Post 8vo. 7s. cloth.

“« We have been much struck by a work recently published, by Professor Kane, on the ‘Industrial Resources of
Ireland.’ The volume contains a masterly view of the physical materials upon which Irish industry might work.
The fuel, the water-power, the minerals, the composition and capabilities of the soil, the nature and locality of
manures, and the means of internal communication existing in the country, are successively taken up, analysed, and
laid before the reader, in their scientific as well as in their practical bearings, Nothing can leave a stronger impres-
sion of the mismanagement from which Ireland has suffered than Dr. Kane's clear and business-like statement of the
elements of wealth and power which have so long lain alrnost idle in her possession.”—MorNING CHRONICLE.

KATER AND LARDNER.—A TREATISE ON MECHANICS.

By Captain Karerand Dr. LarpNer. New Edition. 1 vol. fep. 8vo. Vignette Title, and 19
Plates, comprising 224 distinct figures, 6s. cloth.

KEIGHTLEY.—OUTLINES OF HISTORY,

From the Earliest Period. By THomMAs KricurLey, Esq. New Edition, correct -
siderably improved, fcp. 8vo. 6s. cloth; or 6s. 6d. bowed. eee

PRINTED FOR LONGMAN, BROWN, AND CO. 15

SS

KING. — A SELECTION FROM THE SPEECHES AND

WRITINGS of the late LORD KING. With a short Introductory Memoir, by EARL
ForrescuE. Demy 8vo. Portrait, 12s. cloth.

“ 4 judicious and interesting selection from the speeches and writings of a nobleman who, by ability, consistency,
and honesty of purpose, displayed throughout the course of a long public life, deserved to live in the remembrance of
his countrymen ; interesting, also, as a memorial of one of the earliest champions of those principles which now
receive general homage ; and an useful contribution to CE ee history of the first thirty years of the present
century. The introductory memoir is distinguished by good feeling and good taste, and is chargeable only with the
uncommon fault of being too short.”—Morn1ne CHRONICLE.

KIPPIS.—A COLLECTION OF HYMNS AND PSALMS,

For Public and Private Worship. Selected and prepared by A. Kippts, D.D., ABRAHAM
Rexs, D.D., the Rev. THomMaAs JERVIS, and the Rev. T Morgan. To whichis added, a
SUPPLEMENT. New Edition, corrected and improved, 18mo. 5s. bound.

KIRBY & SPENCE.—AN INTRODUCTION TO ENTOMOLOGY ;

Or, Elements of the Natural History of Insects: comprising an account of noxious and useful
Insects, of their Metamorphoses, Food, Stratagems, Habitations, Societies, Motions, Noises,
Hybernation, Instinct, &c. By W. Krrsy, M.A. F.R.S. & L.S. Rector of Barham; and W.
Spence, Esq. F.R.S.&L.S. 6th Edit. corrected and muchenlarged, 2 vols. 8vo. 31s. 6d. cloth.

The first two volumes of the ‘‘ Introduction to Entomology” are published as a separate work, distinct from
the third and fourth volumes, and, though much enlarged, at a considerable reduction of price, in order that
the numerous class of readers who confine their study of insects to that of their manners and economy, need not be
burthened with the cost of the technical portion of the work, relating to their anatomy, physiology, &c.

KNAPP.—GRAMINA BRITANNICA;

Or, Representations of the British Grasses : with Remarks and occasional Descriptions. By
J. L. Knapp, Esq. F.L-S. & A.S. 2d Edition, 4to. with 118 Plates, beautifully coloured,
pp- 250, £3. 16s. boards.

*€Most of the persons interested in the art of distinguishing grasses are country-gentlemen and farmers, who know
nothing of botany, and cannot use the technical descriptions or analytical figures of botanists. To that great class
such a book is invaluable. It ought, in fact, to form part of the library of every one interested in rural affairs ; for
there are few plants so difficult to distinguish as grasses, not any more so, and none which it is more important to
know correctly, because of their various uses and qualities. With Mr. Knapp’s book before him, no one can have the
least difficulty in making himself master of the subject.”—GARrpENERs’ CHRONICLE,

LAING, (S., JUN.)\—NATIONAL DISTRESS:
Its Causes and Remedies. By Samuren Laine, Jun. Esq. late Fellow of St. John’s College,
Cambridge. 8yvo. 7s. 6d. cloth.

*,* The Essay to which the First Prize of £100, offered by The Atlas newspaper, was awarded.

LAING.—THE CHRONICLE OF THE KINGS OF NORWAY,

From the Earliest Period of the History of the Northern Sea Kings to the Middle of the Twelfth
Century, commonly called The Heimskringla. Translated from the Icelandic of Snorro
Sturleson, with Notes, and a Preliminary Discourse, by SamMuUEL Laine, Author of “ Notes
of a Traveller,” &c. 3vols. 8vo. 36s. cloth.

“We have been rather profuse in our extracts from this curious and most characteristic old history, But it is

long since we have met with a work so spirited, and so amusing, and at the same time affording such valalile infor-

mation respecting a race to whom we are so largely indebted, as this yenerable Chronicle of Snorro Sturleson.”
Eciecric REVIEW.

LAING.—JOURNAL OF A RESIDENCE IN NORWAY,

During the years 1834, 1835, and 1836; made with a view to inquire into the Rural and Political
Economy of that Country, and the Condition of its Inhabitants. By SAmuEL Laine, Esq.
2d Edition, 8vo. 14s. cloth.

LAING. -NOTES OF A TRAVELLER,

On the Socia! and Political State of France, Prussia, Switzerland, Italy, and other parts of
Europe, during the present century. By SamurL Larne, Esq. 2d Edition, 8vo. 16s. cloth.

LAING.—A TOUR IN SWEDEN,

In 1838; comprising observations on the Moral, Political, and Economical State of the Swedish
Nation. By Samuet Laine, Esq. 8vo. 12s. cloth.

LARDNER’S CABINET CYCLOPADIA;

Comprising a Series of Original Works On History, Biography, Literature, the Sciences, Arts,
and Manufactures. Conducted and edited by Dr. LARDNER.

The Series, complete, in One Hundred and Thirty-three Volumes, #39. 18s. (One volume
only remains to be published.) The works, separate, 6s. per volume.

“Tn the completeness of its treatises, the Cabinet Cyclopedia is unrivalled ; and now that the whole plan is carried
out, it exhibits an extensive body of available knowledge such as this or no other country has ever yet presented in a
popular and convenient form.”—BRiTaNnNIA.

LARDNER AND WALKER.—A TREATISE ON ELECTRICITY,

MAGNETISM, and METEOROLOGY. By D. LArpner, LUD. F.R.S., and C. V. WALKER,
Secretary of the Electrical Society. 2 vols. fep. 8vo. 12s.

LARDNER.—A TREATISE ON ARITHMETIC,

By D. Larpner, LL.D. F.R.S. 1 vol. fep. 8vo. with Vignette Title, 6s. cloth lettered.

16 CATALOGUE OF NEW WORKS

LARDNER.—A TREATISE ON GEOMETRY,

And its Application to the Arts. By Dr. LARDNER. 1 vol. fep. 8vo. Vignette Title, and
upwards of 200 figures, 6s. cloth.

LARDNER.—A TREATISE ON HEAT.

By D. Larpner, LL.D., &c. 1 vol. fep. 8vo. with Woodcuts and Vignette Title, 6s. cloth.

LARDNER.—A TREATISE ON HYDROSTATICS AND PNEU-

MATICS. By Dr. LarpNER. New Edition. 1 vol. fep. 8vo. 6s. cloth.

LECTURES ON POLARISED LIGHT,

Delivered before the Pharmaceutical Society, and in the Medical School of the London
Hospital. 8vo. illustrated by above 50 Woodcuts, 5s. 6d. cloth.

L. E. L.—THE POETICAL WORKS OF LETITIA ELIZABETH

LANDON. New Edition (1839), 4 vols. fcp. 8vo. with Illustrations by Howard, &c. 28s. cloth
lettered; or handsomely bound in morocco, with gilt edges, €2. 4s.

The following may be had separately :—
THE IMPROVISATRICE........ 10s. 6d. |} THE GOLDEN VIOLET ........ 10s. 6d.
THE VENETIAN BRACELET.. 10s. 6d. | THE TROUBADOUR ............ 10s. 6d.

LEE.—TAXIDERMY ;

Or, the Art of Collecting, Preparing, and Mounting Objects of Natural History. For the
use of Museums and Travellers. By Mrs. R. Lex (formerly Mrs. T. E. Bowdich), Author of
Memoirs of Cuvier,” &c. 6th Edition, improved, with an account of a Visit to Walton
Hall, and Mr. Waterton’s method of Preserving Animals. Fep. 8vo. with Wood Engrayings,
7s. cloth.

LEE.—ELEMENTS OF NATURAL HISTORY,

For the use of Schools and Young Persons: comprising the Principles of Classification,
interspersed with amusing and instructive original Accounts of the most remarkable Animals.
By Mrs. R. Leg (formerly Mrs. T. E. Bowpic#), Author of “Taxidermy,” ‘ Memoirs of
Cuvier,’’ &c. 12mo. with Fifty-five Woodcuts, 7s. 6d. bound.

LIFE OF A TRAVELLING PHYSICIAN,

From his first Introduction to Practice ; including 20 Years’ Wanderings throughout the
greater part of Europe. 3 vols. post 8vo. 3 coloured Plates, 31s. 6d. cloth.

“¢ Really a very clever book, full of amusing and interesting matter, and giving unequivocal evidence of the
author's talent for observation, both of men and manners, as well asa happy facility of graphically delineating what
he sees.”"—BRIvISH AND ForzIGN Mppicat Review.

LINDLEY.—INTRODUCTION TO BOTANY.

By Prof. J. Linpuey, Ph.D. F.R.S. L.S. &c. 3d Edition (1839), with Corrections and consi-
derable Additions, 1 large vol. 8vo. pp. 606, with Six Plates and numerous Woodcuts, 18s. cloth.

LINDLEY.—FLORA MEDICA;

A Botanical Account of all the most important Plants used in Medicine, in different Parts of
the World. By Joun Linp ey, Ph.D., F.R.S., &c. 1 vol. 8Svo. 18s. cloth lettered.

LINDLEY.—A SYNOPSIS OF THE BRITISH FLORA,

Arranged according to the Natural Orders. By Professor JounN LINDLEY, Ph.D., F.R.S., &c.
3d Edit. with numerous additions, corrections, and improvements, 12mo. pp. 390, 10s. 6d. cl.

LINDLEY.—THE THEORY OF HORTICULTURE;

Or, an Attempt to explain the Principal Operations of Gardening upon Physiological Prin-
ciples. By JoHN LINDLEY, Ph.D., F.R.S. Svo. Illustrations on Wood. 12s. cloth.

This book is written in the hope of providing the intelligent gardener, and the scientific amateur, correctly, with
the rationalia of the more important operations of Horticulture; and the author has endeavoured to. present to his
readers an ery ee explanation, founded upon well-ascertained facts, which they can judge of by theirown means
of observation, of the general nature of vegetable actions, and of the causes which, while they control the powers
of life in plants, are capable of being regulated by themselves. The possession of such knowledge will necessarily
teach them how to improve their methods of cultivation, and lead them to the discovery of new and better modes. ~

LINDLEY.—AN OUTLINE OF THE FIRST PRINCIPLES OF

HORTICULTURE. By Proressor LINDLEY, 18mo. 2s. sewed.

LINDLEY.—GUIDE TO ORCHARD AND KITCHEN GARDEN;

Or, an Account of the most valuable Fruits and Vegetables cultivated in Great Britain : with
Kalendars of the Work required in the Orchard and Kitchen Garden during every month in the
year. By G. Linpirey C.M.U.S. Edited by Prof. Linpuey. 1 large vol. 8vo. 16s. bds.

LLOYD.—A TREATISE ON LIGHT AND VISION.

By the Rev. H. Luoyp, M.A., Fellow of Trin. Coll. Dublin. 8vo. 15s. boards.

LORIMER.—LETTERS TO A YOUNG MASTER MARINER,

On some Subjects connected with his Calling. By Cuarues Lorimer. 3d edition, 12mo.
with an Appendix, 5s. 6d. cloth.

PRINTED FOR LONGMAN, BROWN, AND Co. 17

FIFRA RADA RR

SR

PAAR ARR APRA AA

LOUDON (MRS.)—THE LADY’S COUNTRY COMPANION;

Or, How to Enjoy a Country Life Rationally. By Mrs. Loupon, Author of ‘‘ Gardening for

Ladies,” &c. z
Conrents.—Introduction—The House—The Garden—Domestic Animals—Rural Walks—

Miscellaneous Country Amusements—Country Duties. Un the press.

LOUDON.—AN ENCYCLOPADIA OF TREES AND SHRUBS;

being the ‘‘ Arboretum et Fruticetum Britannicum” abridged: containing the Hardy Tr
and Shrubs of Great Britain, Native and Foreign, Scientifically and Popdlarly Described ;
with their Propagation, Culture, and Uses in the Arts; and with Engravings of nearly all
the Species. Adapted for the use of Nurserymen, Gardeners, and Foresters. By J. C.
Lovupon, F.L.S. &c. 8vo. pp. 1234, 2000 Engravings on Wood, €2. 10s. bound in cloth.

The Origina] Work may be had in 8 vols. 8vo. with above 400 Octavo Plates of Trees, and
upwards of 2500 Woodcuts, 10, cloth.

LOUDON.—AN ENCYCLOPADIA OF GARDENING;

Presenting, in one systematic view, the History and Present State of Gardening in all Coun-
tries, and its Theory and Practice in Great Britain: with the Management of the Kitchen
Garden, the Flower Garden, Laying-out Grounds, &c. By J.C. Loupon, F.L.S. &c. A New
Edition, enlarged and much improved, 1 large vol. 8vo. with nearly 1,000 Engravings.on Wood,
pp. 1312, 50s. cleth.

LOUDON.—AN ENCYCLOPADIA OF AGRICULTURE;

Comprising the Theory and Practice of the Valuatien, Transfer, Laying-out, Improvement,
and Management of Landed Property, and of the Cultivation and Economy of the Animal and
oe productions of Agriculture: including all the latest Improvements, a general History
of Agriculture in all Countries, a Statistical View of its present State, with Suggestions for
its future progress in the British Isles ; and Supplement, bringing down the work to the year
1844. By J.C. Loupon, F.L.G.Z. and H.S. &c. 5th Edition, illustrated with upwards of |
1100 Engraving on Wood, by Branston, £2. 10s. cloth.

The SuPPLEMENT, bringing down Improvements in the art of Field-Culture from 1831 to
1844 inclusive, comprising all the previous Supplements, and illustrated with 65 Engravings
on Wood, may be had separately, 5s. sewed.

“To know that this Supplement is by the author of the justly-popular Encyclopedias of Agriculture and
Gardening, is a sufficient recommendation for its general excellence. Independently of Mr. Loudon’s long practical
‘experience, every available authority on agriculture, and works on other sciences in connection with it, ere been
vonsulted, and the result is, one of the most valuable works on rural affairs either in our own or in any other lan-

age.’’—BritisH Farmen’s Macazine.

LOUDON.—AN ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PLANTS;

Including all the Plants which are now found in, or have been introduced into, Great Britain ;
giving their Natural History, accompanied by such descriptions, engraved figures, and
elementary details, as may enable a beginner, who is a mere English reader, to discover the
name of every Plant which he may find in flower, and acquire all the information respecting
it which is useful and interesting. The Specific Characters by an Eminent Botanist; the
Drawings by J. D. C. Sowerby, #.L.S. A New Edition, with New Supplement, com-
prising every desirable particular respecting all the Plants originated in, or introduced into,
Britain between the first publication of the work, in 1829, and January 1840: with a new
General Index to the whole work. Edited by J. C. Loupon, prepared by W. H. Baxter, Jun.
and revised by George Don, F.L.S.; and 800 new Figures of Plants on Wood, from Drawings
by J. D. C. Sowerby, F.L.S. One very large vol. 8vo. with nearly 10,000 Wood Engravings,
£3. 13s. 6d. The last Supplement, separately, 8vo. pp. 190, 15s. cloth.

LOUDON.—AN ENCYCLOPADIA OF COTTAGE, FARM, AND

VILLA ARCHITECTURE and FURNITURE. Containing Designs for Cottages, Villas, Farm
Houses, Farmeries, Country Inns, Public Houses, Parochial Schools, &c.; with the requisite
Fittings-up, Fixtures, and Furniture, and appropriate Offices, Gardens, and Garden Scenery:
each Design accompanied by Analytical and Critical Remarks illustrative of the Principles of
Architectural Science and Taste on which it is composed, and General Estimates of the Expense.
By J. C. Loupon, F.L.S. &c. New Edition (1842), corrected, with a Supplement, containing
160 additional pages of letter-press and nearly 300 new engravings, bringing down the work to
1842. 1 very thick vol. 8yo. with more than 2000 Engravings on Wood, £3. 3s, cloth.
The Supplement, separately, 8vo. 7s. 6d. sewed.

“¢ The late Mr. London has the merit of having conveyed more information upon architecture in apopeise style, as
adapted for general readers, than was ever attempted before, or than has been accomplished since. His Encyclopedia
of Cottage and Village Architecture is indispensable to the librar of all non. professional readers, who may at some
time of their life propose to build a cottage or country house.”—WsTMINSTER Revipw.

LOUDON.—HORTUS BRITANNICUS:

A Catalogue of all the Plants indigenous to or introduced into Britain. The 8d Edition (1832),
with a New SUPPLEMENT, prepared, under the direction of J. C. Loupon, by W. H. BAxtTEr,
and revised by GEORGE Don, F.L.S. 1 vol. 8vo. 31s. 6d. cloth.

The SUPPLEMENT (1835) separately, 8vo. 2s. 6d. sewed.

The LATER SUPPLEMENT (1839) separately, 8v0. 88. sewed.

LOUDON.—HORTUS LIGNOSIS LONDINENSIS;

Or, a Catalogue of all the Ligneous Plants cultivated in the neighbourhood of London. To
which are added their usual prices in Nurseries. By J.C. Loupon, F.L.S. &c. 8vo. 78. 6d.
6

18 CATALOGUE OF NEW WORKS

— OOOO YF

LOUDON. —THE SUBURBAN GARDENER AND VILLA

COMPANION: comprising the Choice of a Villa or Suburban Residence, or of a situation on
which to form one; the Arrangement and Furnishing of the House; and the Laying-out,
Planting, and general Management of the Garden and Grounds; the whole adapted for grounds
from one perch to fifty acres and upwards in extent; intended for the instruction of those
who know little of Gardening or Rural Affairs, and more particularly for the use of Ladies,
By J. C. Loupon, F.L.S. &c. 1 vol. 8vo. with above 300 Wood Engravings, 20s. cloth.

LOUDON.—ON THE LAYING-OUT, PLANTING, AND

MANAGEMENT of CEMETERIES; and on the Improvement of Churchyards. By J. C.
Loupon, F.L.S. &c. 8vo. with 60 Engravings, 12s. cloth.

“ In 1813, Mr. Loudon was at Warsaw after the batlte of Bantzen; and was so strongly impressed by the contrast
between the burials of the rich in the cemetry, the poor in trenches in the open ground without coffins, and cart-loads
of dead soldiers from the hospitals thrown into great pits, as to have ever since directed his attention to burials
and burial grounds. Having been lately employed to plan the armbudre Cemetery, he was compelled to give his
views a definite and practical shape. The result is the volume before us; which, like most other works of Mr. Loudon,
exhausts the subject on which it treats, presenting the principles as well as the practice, in a full and popular form.
To shareholders of cemeteries and others having a practical connexion with the improvement of interments, the
book is almost necessary ; nor will it be without interest to any one whose hobby ambles towards the mournful
subject.”—SPecTATOR.

LOW.—ON LANDED PROPERTY, AND THE MANAGEMENT

of ESTATES; comprehending the Relations between Landlord and Tenant, and the Principles
and Forms of Leases ; the Construction of Farm-buildings, Enclosures, Drains, Embankments,
and other Works; and the Economy of Woods, Mines, &e. By Davip Low, F.R.S.E. &c.
8yvo. LIn the press.

LOW.—THE BREEDS OF THE DOMESTICATED ANIMALS

Of Great Britain Described. By Davip Low, Esq. F.R.S.E. Professor of Agriculture in the
University of Edinburgh; Member of the Royal Academy of Agriculture of Sweden; Corre-
sponding Member of the Conseil Royal d’Agriculture de France, of the Société Royale et
Centrale, &c. &c. The Plates from Drawings by W. Nicholson, R.S.A. reduced from a Series
of Oil Paintings, executed for the Agricultural Museum of the University of Edinburgh, by
W. Shiels, R.S.A. 2 vols. atlas quarto, with 56 plates of animals, beautifully coloured after
Nature, £16. 16s. half-bound in morocco.—Or in four separate portions, as follow :

The OX, in 1 vol. atlas quarto, with 22 plates, £6. 16s. 6d. half-bound in morocco.

The SHEEP, in 1 vol. atlas quarto, with 21 plates, #6. 16s. 6d. half-bound in morocco.

The HORSE, in 1 vol. atlas quarto, with 8 plates, €3, half-bound in morocco.

The HOG, in 1 vol. atlas quarto, with 5 plates, €2. 2s. half-bound in morocco.

LOW.—AN INQUIRY INTO THE NATURE OF THE SIMPLE

BODIES, of CHEMISTRY. By Davin Low, Esq. F.R.S.E, Prof. of Agriculture in the
University of Edinburgh, 8vo. 6s. cloth.

LOW.—ELEMENTS OF PRACTICAL AGRICULTURE;

Comprehending the Cultivation of Plants, the Husbandry of the Domestic Animals, and the
Economy of the Farm. By D. Low, Esq. F.R.S.E., Prof. of Agriculturein University of Edin-
burgh. 8vo. 4th Edit. with Alterations and Additions, and above 200 Woodcuts, 21s. cloth.

MACAULAY.—CRITICAL AND HISTORICAL ESSAYS CON-

TRIBUTED to the EDINBURGH REVIEW. By the Right Hon. Tuomas B. ;
MacauLay. 3d Edition, 3 vols. 8vo. 36s. cloth. 4 ig Ape PH

MACAULAY.—LAYS OF ANCIENT ROME.

By T. B. MacauLay, Esq. 5th Edition, crown 8vo. 10s. 6d. cloth.

MACKENZIE.—THE PHYSIOLOGY OF VISION.

By W. MackEnzI£, M.D., Lecturer on the Eye in the University of Glasgow. yO. Wi
Woodcuts, 10s. 6d. boards. ‘ el Saetyeee

MACKINTOSH (SIR JAMES).—SIR JAMES MACKINTOSH’S

MISCELLANEOUS WORKS; including his Contributions to ‘‘ The Edinburg iew.”?
Collected and edited by his Son. 3 vols, v0. a: eae

MACKINTOSH, &.—THE HISTORY OF ENGLAND.

By Sir JAMres MackintosH; W. WALLACE, Esq.; and RoBERT B z y
8vo. with Vignette Titles, #3. cloth. ye hE Bay bi zr

MACLEOD.—ON RHEUMATISM,

And on the Affections of Internal Organs, more especially the Heart and Brain, to which i
givesrise. By R. MacLrEop, M.D. Physician to St. George’s Hospital. 8vo. pp. 172, perdi, F

M'CULLOCH.—A DICTIONARY, GEOGRAPHICAL, STATIS-

TICAL, AND HISTORICAL, of the various Countries, Places, and Principal Natural Obj

: 7 ts
in the WORLD. By J. R. M‘Cuttocn, Esq. 2 thick vols. svo, ] i vig
Penne tre 3 in » Esq Cc Ss. 8V Illustrated with Six Large

“ The extent of information this Dictionary affords on the subjects referred to in its title i isi
cannot fail to prove a vade-meeum to the student, whose inquiries will be guided by its light pape a te *
and frequently elaborated communications. Every public room in which commerce, politics vor literature fo 7 th :
subject of discussion, ought to be furnished with these yolumes.”—GLone, : p SOMpe rane,

a

PRINTED FOR LONGMAN, BROWN, AND CoO. 19

IN

OR

M‘CULLOCH.—A DICTIONARY, PRACTICAL, THEORETI-

CAL, AND HISTORICAL, OF COMMERCE AND COMMERCIAL NAVIGATION. _Illus-
trated with Maps and Plans. By J. R. M‘Cuntocn, Esq. Member of the Institute of France.
An entirely New Edition, corrected throughout, enlarged, and improved. One thick vol.
8vo. 50s. cloth; or 55s. strongly half. bound in russia, with flexible backs.

* Without exaggeration one of the most wonderful compilations of the age. The power of continuous labour, the
wide range of inquiry, and the power of artistical finish, which have been brought into play by this work, are
probably unrivalled in the history of literature..... Compared with all previous attempts to compile a commercial
dictionary, Mr. M‘Culloch’s appears as the realisation of an idea which former projectors had conceived too vaguely
to be able to carry into execution. It is superior to them all, quite as much for the spirit of judicious selection
brought by the author to his task, as for any other quality. The great merit of the work is, that, while omitting
nothing of essential importance, it contains nothing that is useless or merely cumbrous..... The success of the earlier
editions of Mr. M‘Culloch’s Dictionary is, after all, the best proof of its merit: the facts attending it, prove that the
mercantile, political, and literary public were in want of such a work, and that they were satisfied with the manner
in which Mr. M‘Culloch had performed his task. No reader can rise from the perusal of any one of the larger
articles without feeling that no previous writer has concentrated so much valuable information within so small a
compass, or conveyed his information in so agreeable a style. And the remark is equally applicable to all the nume-
rous articles of which this crammed volume is composed..... It is, indeed, invaluable as a book of reference to the
merchant, the insurance-agent, the statesman, and the journalist; and its articles, from the care and talent with
which they are executed, are as well calculated to supply the wants of the patient inquirer as of the hurried man of
business. Mr. M‘Culloch occupies a high place amongst the authors of the day as a hard-headed original thinker in
political economy ; a still higher, as one of the most zealous and successful labourers in rendering that science
popular ; but, of all his publications, his Commercial Dictionary is the one least likely to encounter the rivalry of a
work of superior or even equal value.”—Abridged from Tux Spectator of March 16, 1844

M‘CULLOCH.—THE PRINCIPLES OF POLITICAL ECONOMY:

with some Enquiries respecting their Application, and a Sketch of the Rise and Progress of
the Science. By J. R. M‘Cuttocn, Esq. New Edition, enlarged and corrected, 8vo. 15s.

MALTE-BRUN.—A SYSTEM OF UNIVERSAL GEOGRAPHY;

Founded on the Works of MaLtTe-Bruwn and Bast, embracing an Historical Sketch of the
Progress of Geographical Discovery, the Principles of Mathematical and Physical Geography,
and a complete Description, from the most recent sources, of the Political and Social Condition
of all the Countriesin the World: with numerous Statistical Tables, and an Alphabetical Index
of 12,000 Names. One thick vol. 8vo. closely and beautifully printed, 30s. cloth.

MARCET.—-CONVERSATIONS ON CHEMISTRY ;

In which the Elements of that Science are familiarly Explained and Illustrated by Experiments.
14th Edition, enlarged and corrected, 2 vols. fcp. 8vc. 14s. cloth.

MARCET.—CONVERSATIONS ON NATURAL PHILOSOPHY;

In which the Elements of that Science are familiarly explained, and adapted to the compre-
hension of Young Persons. 10th Edition, enlarged and corrected by the Author, fcp. 8vo.
with 23 Plates, 10s. 6d. cloth.

Of the General Properties of Bodies; the Attraction of Gravity; the Laws of Motion; Compound
Motion; the Mechanical Powers; Astronomy; Causes of the Earth’s Motion; the Planets;
the Earth; the Moon; Hydrostatics; the Mechanical Properties of Fluids; of Springs,
Fountains, &c.; Pneumatics; the Mechanical Properties of Air; on Wind and Sound; Optics;
the Visual Angle and the Reflection of Mirrors; on Refraction and Colours; on the Structure
of the Eye, and Optical Instruments.

MARCET.—CONVERSATIONS ON POLITICAL ECONOMY;

In which the Elements of that Science are familiarly explained. 7th Edition (1839), revised
and enlarged, fep. 8vo. 7s. 6d. cloth.

Introduction; on Property; the Division of Labour; on Capital; on Wages and Population; on
the Condition of the Poor; on Value and Price; on Income; Income from Landed Property ;
Income from the Cultivation of Land; Income from Capital lent; on Money; on Commerce ;
on Foreign Trade; on Expenditure and Consumption.

MARCET. — CONVERSATIONS ON VEGETABLE PHYSIO-

LOGY; comprehending the Elements of Botany, with their application to Agriculture.
3d Edition, fcp. 8vo. with 4 Plates, 9s. cloth.

tion: on Roots; on Stems; on Leaves; on Sap; on Cambium and the peculiar Juices
aps eer on the ‘Action of Light and Heat on Plants; on the Naturalization of Plants; on
the Action of the Atmosphere on Plants; on the Action of Water on Plants; on the Artificial
Mode of Watering Plants; on the Action of the Soil on Plants; on the Propagation of Plants
by Subdivision; on Grafting; on the Multiplication of Plants by Seed; the Flower; on Com-
pound Flowers; on Fruit ; on the Seed; on the Classification of Plants ; on Artificial Systems ;
on the Natura] System; Botanical Geography; the Influence of Culture on Vegetation ; on
the Degeneration and Diseases of Plants; on the Cultivation of Trees; on the Cultivation of
Plants which produce Fermented Liquors ; on the Cultivation of Grasses, Tuberous Roots, and
Grain; on Oleaginous Plants and Culinary Vegetables.

MARCET.—CONVERSATIONS FOR CHILDREN ;

On Land and Water. 2d Edition, revised and corrected, fcp. 8vo. with coloured Maps,
showing the comparative altitude of Mountains, 5s. 6d. cloth.

«This is so far superior to the usual class of modern books, in which it is thought necessary to give instruction a
garnish of amusement, that we cannot omit to recommend it here.”—QUARTERLY Revinw.

20 CATALOGUE OF NEW WORKS

= CSS

MARCET.—CONVERSATIONS ON LANGUAGE,

For Children. By Mrs. MArcet, Author of “‘ Mary’s Grammar,” “ Conversations on Che-
mistry,” &c, 18mo. 4s. 6d. cloth.

“Tn these Conversations Mrs. Marcet travels over a great deal of ground, with her wonted skill in adapting know-
ledge to the capacity of the young. The nature of articulate sounds, and the organs of speech, the history of mankind
to indicate the formation of different languages, the manner in which English has been indebted to Latin, the pro-
bable or possible origin of language, and the use of cognomens and names, are all familiarly displayed in this instruc-

tive little volume,’”’—SPrcravon.

MARCET.—MARY’S GRAMMAR ;

Interspersed with Stories, and intended for the Use of Children. 7th Edition, revised and

enlarged. 18mo. 3s. 6d. half-bound.
« 4 sound and simple work for the earliest ages.” QuaRnTERLY REVIEW.

MARCET.—THE GAME OF GRAMMAR,

With a Book of Conversations shewing the Rules of the Game, and affording Examples of the
manner of playing at it. In a varnished box, or done up as a post 8vo. volume in cloth, 8s.

MARCET.—LESSONS ON ANIMALS, VEGETABLES, AND
MINERALS. By Mrs. Marcert, Author of “‘ Conversations on Chemistry,” &c. 12mo. 2s.

“ One of Mrs. Marcet’s carefully-written books of instruction, in which natural history is made pleasant and intel-
ligible for the young.” —ATHEN ZUM.

MARCET.—CONVERSATIONS ON THE HISTORY OF ENG-

LAND, for the Use of Children. By Mrs. Marcer, Author of “Conversations on Che-
mistry,” &c, 2d Edition, with Additions, continuing the History to the Reign of George the
Third, 18mo. 5s. cloth.
The Second Part, continuing the History to the Reign of George III. separately, 1s. 6d. cloth.
« Juvenile literature will freely own how much it is indebted to Mrs. Marcet, not only for the present, but all her
preceding works. She imparts interest to dry and dull details ; and, while she teaches, begets a desire in her pupils
for further knowledge, so pleasantly imparted. These ‘ Conversations,’ admirably suited to the capacities of children,
may be skimmed advantageously by ‘ children of a larger growth.’”—Lirerary Gazerre.

MARRIAGE GIFT.

By a Moruer. A Legacy to her Children. Post Svo. 5s. cloth, gilt edges.

MARRYAT.—THE SETTLERS IN CANADA.

Written for Young People. By Capt. Marryat, C.B. Author of “Peter Simple,”
“ Masterman Ready,” &c. 2 vols. fcp. 8vo. 12s. boards.

MARRYAT.—MASTERMAN READY ;

Or, the Wreck of the Pacific. Written for Young People. By CAprarin MARRYAT. 3 vols.
fep. 8vo. with numerous Engravings on Wood, 22s. 6d. cloth.
*,* The volumes separately, 7s. 6d. each, cloth.

«The best of Robinson Crusoe’s numerous descendants, and one of the most captivating of modern chi ‘1
books. The only danger is, lest parents should dispute with their children the oeeon of ie eur
QUARTERLY REVIEW.

MARX AND WILLIS.-ON THE DECREASE OF DISEASE

effected by the Progress of Civilization. By C. F. H. Marx, M.D. Professor of Medicine in
the University of Gottingen, &c.; and R. Wintiis, M.D. Member of the Royal College of
Physicians, &c. Fecp. 8vo. 4s. cloth. =

“« This little treatise, although evidently designed for professional perusal, is perfectly intelligible to the educated
reader ; and right glad shall we be to see it extensively circulated out of the profession ; itisa ®whi 2
credit to the hearts and the heads of its authors.”—LANcEr. i eaderteh i aanic Soa t=

MAUNDER.—THE TREASURY OF HISTORY;

Comprising a General Introductory Outline of Universal History, Ancient and Modern, and a
Series of separate Histories of every principal Nation that exists; their Rise, Progress and
Present Condition, the Moral and Social Character of their respective inhabitants, their
Religion, Manners, and Customs, &c. By SAMUEL MauNDER. 1 thick vol. fep. 8vo. 10s
cloth; bound in roan, 12s. ;

An encycloprdia of history in miniature—some hundreds of volumes compressed into one, The author first
gives a general sketch of ancient and modern history—a sort of explanatory chart by which we perceive the relations
of one state and empire to another, and mark how their boundaries advance or recede, fluctuate or become defined :
and then furnishes a neat and concise digest of the history of each kingdom or division of the world. The book is
an universal storehouse of historical facts, classified, chronologically arranged, linked by succinct narrative andl
broneht Gone to Bee ore en nee To the a OD and to all general readers, the work is invaluable for
constant reference, if only for its copious and minutely-accurate dates; i x indi
ment to all eee eee ceo ene u tes; and it must form an indispensable comple-

MAUNDER.—THE TREASURY OF KNOWLEDGE,

And LIBRARY of REFERENCE: containing a new and enlarged Dictionary of th i

Language, preceded by a Compendious Grammar, Verbal Bitactinns, &ce.; #4 new ee te
Gazetteer ; a Compendious Classicat Dictionary ; a Chronological Analysis of General History +
a Dictionary of Law Terms, &c. &. By SAMUEL MaUNDER. 14th Edition, 1 vol fep. Seo!
pp- 810, with two engraved Frontispieces, 8s. 6d. cloth; boundin roan, 10s. 6d. ee ;

ee a

PRINTED FOR LONGMAN, BROWN, AND Co. 21

ETO

MAUNDER.—THE SCIENTIFIC & LITERARY TREASURY;

A new and popular Encyclopedia of Science and the Belles-Lettres ; including all Branches of
Science, and every Subject connected with Literature and Art. The whole written in a familiar
style, adapted to the comprehension of all persons desirous of acquiring information on the
subjects comprised in the work, and also adapted for a Manual of convenient Reference to the
more instructed. By SamubL MAuNDER. 3d Hdition, 1 thick vol. fcp. 8vo. with engraved
Frontispiece, 10s. cloth; bound in roan, 12s.

MAUNDER.—THE BIOGRAPHICAL TREASURY;

Consisting of Memoirs, Sketches, and brief Notices of above 12,000 Eminent Persons of all Age.
and Nations, from the Earliest Period of History; forming a new and complete Dictionary
of Universal Biography. 4th Edition, with a “‘ Supplement,” from the Accession of Queen
Victoria to the Present Time. By SAMUEL MAUNDER. 1 vol. fcp. 8vo. with engraved Fron- .
tispiece, 8s. 6d. cloth; bound in roan, 10s. 6d.

MAUNDER.—THE UNIVERSAL CLASS-BOOK :

A new Series of Reading Lessons (original and selected) for Every Day in the Year; each
Lesson recording some important Event in General History, Biography, &c. which happened
on the day of the month under which it is placed, or detailing, in familiar language, inte-
resting facts in Science; also a variety of Descriptive and Narrative Pieces, interspersed with
Poetical Gleanings : Questions for Examination being appended to each day’s Lesson, and the
whole carefully adapted to Practical Tuition. By SAmMuEL MAuNDER, Author of “ The
Treasury of Knowledge.”’ 2d Edition, revised, 12mo. 5s. bound.

MODERN SYRIANS;

Or, Native Society in Damascus, Aleppo, and the Mountains of the Druses. From Notes
made during a Residence in those parts in 1841, 42, and 43, By an Oriental Student. Post
8vo. 10s. 6d.

“ A lively picture of the domestic manners, the moral and political condition, and the general characteristics of the
present inhabitants of Syria, together with a description of her Scenery, resources, and topography. It is the work
of an intelligent and enterprising tourist ; and his account of his rambles is very entertaining and animated.”

UnitEeD SERVICE GAZETTE.

MONTGOMERY’S (JAMES) POETICAL WORKS.

New and only Complete Edition. With some additional Poems, and Autobiographical
Prefaces. Collected and Edited by Mr. MonraomMERy. 4 vols. fep. 8vo. with Portrait, and
Seven other beautifully-engraved Plates, 20s. cloth; or bound in morocco, gilt edges, 36s.

MOORE’S POETICAL WORKS;

Containing the Author’s recent Introduction and Notes. Complete in one volume, uniform
with Lord Byron’s Poems. With a New Portrait, by George Richmond, engraved in the line
manner, and a View of Sloperton Cottage, the Residence of the Poet, by Thomas Creswick,
A.R.A. Medium 8vo. 21s. cloth; or 42s. bound in morocco, in the best manner, by Hayday.

*,* Also, an Edition in 10 vols. fep. 8vo. with Portrait, and 19 Plates €2. 10s. cloth
morocco, #4. 10s.

MOORE’S LALLA ROOKH.

Twentieth Edition, 1 vol. medium 8vo. beautifully illustrated with 13 Engravings finished
in the highest style of Art, 21s. handsomely bound in cloth and ornamented; morocco, 35s; or,
with India Proof Plates, 42s. cloth.

MOORE’S LALLA ROOKH.

Twenty-first Edition, 1 vol. fep. 8vo. with Four Engravings, from Paintings by Westall,
10s. 6d. cloth ; or, handsomely bound in morocco, with gilt edges, 14s.

MOORE’S IRISH MELODIES.

New Edition, imp. 8vo. illustrated with above 50 Designs by Maclise, etched on steel, £2. 2s. ;
Proofs on India Paper, #4. 4s.; before Letters (of Illustrations only), #6. 6s. [In the Press.
The Poetry and Designs will both be engraved, and each page surrounded with an Ornamental Border.

MOORE’S IRISH MELODIES.

Fifteenth Edition, with Engraved Title and Vignette, 10s. cloth lettered; or 13s. 6d.
handsomely bound in morocco, with gilt edges.

MOORE.—THE HISTORY OF IRELAND.

By Tuomas Moors, Esq. Vols. 1 to 3, with Vignette Titles, 18s. cloth. i
[To be completed in one more volume.
«« Mr. Moore fortunately brings to his labours not only extensive learning in the rarely-trodden paths of Irish
history, but strict AS rendered still more clear and uncompromising by an ennobling love of pete Every
page of his work contains evidence of research; and innumerable passages might be cited in proof of the independent
and truth-seeking spirit of the author.”—ATHEN ZUM,

MORAL OF FLOWERS.

3d Edition, 1 vol. royal 8vo. with 24 beautifully-coloured Engravings, -€1, 10s, half-bound.

MORTON.—A VETERINARY TOXICOLOGICAL CHART,

Containing those Agents known to cause Death in the Horse; with the Symptoms, Antidotes,
Action on the Tissues, and Tests. By W.J.T. Morton. 12mo. 6s. in case; onrollers, 8s. 6d.

i

22 CATALOGUE OF NEW WORKS

MORTON.—A MANUAL OF PHARMACY,

For the Student in Veterinary Medicine; containing the Substances employed at the Royal
Veterinary College, with an attempt at their classification, and the Pharmacopezia of that In-
stitution. By W. J.T. Morton. 3d Edition, 12mo. 10s, cloth,

MOSELEY.—THE MECHANICAL PRINCIPLES OF ENGI-

NEERING AND ARCHITECTURE. By the Rev. H. Mose ey, M.A. F.R.S., Professor of
Natural Philosophy and Astronomy in King’s College, London; and Author of “ Illustrations
of Mechanics,”’ &c. 1 vol. 8vo. with Woodcuts and Diagrams, 24s. cloth.

“The work of Mr. Moseley is an elaborate, profound, accurate, and elegant abstract, and purely mathematical

disquisition on the theoretical principles of mechanics; and will serve to increase the author’s high reputation as a
mathematician,”—ATHEN ZUM.

MOSELEY.—ILLUSTRATIONS OF PRACTICAL MECHANICS.

By the Rev. H. Mosevry, M.A., Professor of Natural Philosophy and Astronomy in King’s
College, London; being the First Volume of the Illustrations of Science by the Professors of
King’s College. 1 vol. fcp. 8vo. with numerous Woodcuts, 8s. cloth.

MULLER.—INTRODUCTION TO A SCIENTIFIC SYSTEM

of MYTHOLOGY. By C. O. MiiLLer, Author of “The History and Antiquities of the
Doric Race,” &c. Translated from the German by John Leitch, 8yo, uniform with “ Muller’s
Dorians,”’ 12s. cloth.

“Clearing away the obscurity and confusion in which mythology were enveloped by the glosses of the later and
more artificial ages, Miiller has reduced it to its primary elements ; and disentangling the beautiful legends of anti-
quity from the crowd of puerilities by which they were deformed, presented them to the world in the graceful form in
which they originally sprang from the mint of popular superstition. In this he has rendered an important service, not
only to those who wish to obtain a thorough understanding of the character and literature of the ancient Greeks, but
to enquirers into mental philosophy and the history of natural religion. At the same time, the acuteness and sobriety
of his judgment make him a safe guide to the practical student. His work has now been admirably translated by Mr.
Leitch, whose version, combining freedom, fidelity, and elegance, is all that can be wished.” —MoRNING CHRONICLE,

MURRAY.—ENCYCLOPADIA OF GEOGRAPHY ;

Comprising a complete Description of the Earth: exhibiting its Relation to the Heavenly
Bodies, its Physical Structure, the Natural History of each Country, and the Industry, Com-
merce, Political Institutions, and Civil and Social State of all Nations. By HueH Murray,
F.R.S.E.; assisted in Astronomy, &c. by Professor Wallace; Geology, &c. by Professor
Jameson; Botany, &c. by Sir W. J. Hooker; Zoology, &c. by W. Swainson, Esq. New
Edition, with Supplement, bringing down the Statistical Information contained in the work
to Dec. 1843; with 82 Maps, drawn by Sidney Hall, and upwards of 1000 other Engrayings on
Wood, from Drawings by Swainson, T. Landseer, Sowerby, Strutt, &c. representing the most
rernarkable Objects of Nature and Art inevery Region of the Globe. 1 yol. 8yo. containing
upwards of 1500 pages, #3. cloth.

*,* The SUPPLEMENT, Containing the most important Recent Information, may be had
separately, price 1s.

NICOLAS.—THE CHRONOLOGY OF HISTORY.

Containing Tables, Calculations, and Statements indispensable for ascertaining the Dates of
Historical Events, and of Public and Private Documents, from the Earliest Period to the
Present Time. By Sir Harris Nicouas, K.C.M.G. Second edition, corrected throughout.
1 vol. fep. 8vo. with Vignette Title, 6s. cloth.

«We strongly recommend to historical students the cleay and accurate ‘ Chronology of History,’ by Sir Harris
Nicolas, which contains all the information that can be practically peasined.—Geanseee? rpeheatly »

OWEN. — LECTURES ON THE COMPARATIVE ANATOMY

AND PHYSIOLOGY OF THE INVERTEBRATE ANIMALS, delivered at the Royal College
of Surgeons in 1843, By R1icHarp Owen, F.R.S. Hunterian Professor to the College. From
Notes taken by William White Cooper, M.R.C.S. and revised by Professor Owen. With
Glossary and Index. 8svo. with nearly 140 Illustrations on Wood, 14s. cloth.

«« By all who know the importance of Professor Owen’s labours in the vast field of comparative anatomy, this work
will be hailed with delight. It treats only of the SEY of Invertebrata. Although delivered to medical men, the
lectures contain a vast amount of matter interesting to all who wish to know something of the wonderful laws which
govern the structure and functions of animated beings. We can also recommend them as be
of the application of the principles of inductive science to the study of organised matter.”

‘ 3 Dr. Lindley, in Taz GarpENERS’ CHRONICLE.
*,* A Second and concluding Volume, being the Lectures (On Vertebrata) delivered by
Prof. Owen during the present session, is in the Press.

PARKES.—DOMESTIC DUTIES ;

Or, Instructions to Young Married Ladies on the Managementof their Households, and the
Regulation of their Conduct in the various Relations and Duties of Married Life. By Mrs,
W. PARKES. 5th Edition, fep. 8vo. 9s. cloth.

Social Relations—Household Concerns—the Regulation of Time—Moral and Religious Duties.

PARNELL.—A TREATISE ON ROADS;

Wherein the Principles on which Roads should be made are explained and illustrat
Plans, Specifications, and Contracts made use of by Thomas Telford, Esq. on the
Road. By the Right Hon. Sir Henry PARNELL, Bart., Hon. Memb. Inst. Civ.
Second Edition, greatly enlarged, with 9 large plates, €1. 1s. cloth.

ing admirable examples

ed by the
Holyhead
Eng. London.

PRINTED FOR LONGMAN, BROWN, AND Co. 23

PAF

PEARSON.—PRAYERS FOR FAMILIES:

Consisting of a Form, short but comprehensive, for the Morning and Evening of every day in
the week. Selected by the late E. Pearson, D,D. Master of Sidney Sussex College, Cambridge.
To which is prefixed, a Biographical Memoir of the Editor. New Edit. 18mo. 2s. 6d. cloth.

PEARSON.—AN INTRODUCTION TO PRACTICAL ASTRO-

NOMY. By the Rev. W. Pearson, LL.D. F.R.S., &c., Rector of South Killworth,
Leicestershire, and Treasurer to the Astronomical Society of London. 2 vols. 4to. with
Plates, £7. 7s. boards.

Vol. 1 contains Tables, recently computed, for facilitating the Reduction of Celestial observa-
tions; and a popular explanation of their Construction and Use.

Vol. 2 contains Descriptions of the various Instruments that have been usefully employed in
determining the Places of the Heavenly Bodies, with an Account of the Methods of Adjusting
and Using them.

PERCIVALL.—HIPPOPATHOLOGY ;

A Systematic Treatise on the Disorders and Lameness of the Horse; with their modern and
most approved Methods of Cure; embracing the doctrines of the English and French
Veterinary Schools. By W. PERcIVALL, M.R.C.S. Veterinary Surgeon in the Ist Life Guards.
Voll, 8vo. pp. 340, 10s. 6d. boards; Vol. 2, 8vo. pp. 436, 14s. boards.

PERCIVALL.—THE ANATOMY OF THE HORSE;

Embracing the Structure of the Foot. By W. PERcIVALL, M.R.C.S. 8vo. pp. 478, £1, cloth.

PEREIRA.—A TREATISE ON FOOD AND DIET:

With Observations on the Dietetical Regimen suited for Disordered States of the Digestive
Organs; and an Account of the Dietaries of some of the principal Metropolitan and other
Establishments for Paupers, Lunatics, Criminals, Children, the Sick, &c. By Jon. PEREIRA,
M.D. F.R.S. & L.S. Author of “ Elements of Materia Medica.’? 8vo. 16s. cloth.

* Invaluable to the professional, and interesting even to the general reader. It is written in that clear and racy style
which characterises Dr. Pereira’s writings, and which possesses such charms for those who like scientific books when
ues are not ‘too dry.’ We may, in fine, pronounce it well worthy of the author of the best work on Materia Medica
and Therapeutics of the age in which he lives.”—CueEmist.

PHILLIPS.—AN ELEMENTARY INTRODUCTION TO MINE-

RALOGY; comprising a Notice of the Characters and Elements of Minerals; with Accounts
of the Places and Circumstances in which they are found. By WiLLtam PuHILttps, F.L.S.
M.G.S., &c. 4th Edition, considerably augmented by R. ALLAN, F.R.S.E. Svo. numerous
Cuts, 12s. cloth.

PHILLIPS.—FIGURES AND DESCRIPTIONS OF THE

PALHOZOIC FOSSILS of CORNWALL, DEVON, and WEST SOMERSET; observed in
the course of the Ordnance Geological Survey of that District. By JouNn Puiutrrs, F.R.S.
F.G.S. &c. Published by Order of the Lords Commissioners of H.M. Treasury. 8vo. with
60 Plates, comprising very numerous figures, 9s. cloth,

PHILLIPS.—A GUIDE TO GEOLOGY.

By Joun PuI.uips, F.R.S.G.S., &c. 1 vol. fcp. 8vo. with Plates, 6s. cloth.

PHILLIPS.—A TREATISE ON GEOLOGY.

By Joun Puiuirs, F.R.S.G.S., &c. 2 vols. fep. 8vo. with Vignette Titles and Woodcuts,
12s. cloth.

PORTER.—A TREATISE ON THE MANUFACTURE OF SILK.

By G. R. Porter, Esq. F.R.S. Author of “The Progress of the Nation,” &c. 1 vol. 8vo. with
Vignette Title, and 39 Engravings on Wood, 6s. cloth.

PORTER.—A TREATISE ON THE MANUFACTURES OF

PORCELAIN AND GLASS. By G. R. Porter, Esq. F.R.S. 1 vol. fcp. 8vo. with Vignette
Title and 50 Woodcuts, 6s. cloth.

| PORTLOCK.—REPORT ON THE GEOLOGY OF THE COUNTY

of LONDONDERRY, and of Parts of Tyrone and Fermanagh, examined and described under
the Authority of the Master-General and Board of Ordnance. By J. E. Porrnock, F.R.S.
&c. 8vo. with 48 Plates, 24s. cloth.

POSTANS.—PERSONAL OBSERVATIONS ON SINDH,

The Manners and Customs of its Inhabitants, and its Productive Capabilities : with a Narrative
of the Recent Events. By Capt. Posrans, Bombay Army, late Assistant to the Political
Agent, Sindh. 8syvo. with new Map, coloured Frontispiece, and other Illustrations, 18s. cloth.

«For the interesting details of the manners and customs of the Sindhians of all classes, and the various particulars

which make up the description of the country, we refer the reader to Capt. Postans’ valuable work, which cannot fail
to afford him: equal information and amusement.”—ASIATIC JOURNAL.

FF SS

ARF R RAR AISA RRA

*

Q4 CATALOGUE OF NEW WORKS

= SF FFF FFP PL LPL PP PPP PPP

POWELL.—THE HISTORY OF NATURAL PHILOSOPHY,

From the Earliest Periods to the Present Time. By BADEN Powe LL, M.A.,Savilian Professor
of Mathematics in the University of Oxford. 1 vol. fep. 8vyo. Vignette Title, 6s. cloth,

PROCEEDINGS OF THE ZOOLOGICAL SOCIETY OF LONDON.

8vo. The last part published is Part 10 for 1842, 6s. cloth.

PYCROFT (REY. J..—A COURSE OF ENGLISH READING,

adapted to every Taste and Capacity: with Anecdotes of Men of Letters. By the Rev.
JAMES Pycror?, B.A. Trinity College, Oxford; Author of “ Latin Grammar Practice,” and
6 Greek Grammar Practice.”? ¥Wcp. 8vo. 6s. 6d. cloth.

« & book of unquestionable utility and sound advice, designed chiefly to recommend and indicate the study of con-

yenient epitomes before attempting the deliberate perusal of the larger works in history, philosophy, religion , biogra-
phy, and other branches of knowledge, and then only so much as inclination may suggest.” -ATHEN ZUM.

REECE.—THE MEDICAL GUIDE,

For the use of the Clergy, Heads of Families, Seminaries, and Junior Practitioners in Medi-
cine; comprising a complete Modern Dispensatory, and a Practical Treatise on the Distin-
guishing Symptoms, Causes, Prevention, Cure and Palliation, of the Diseases incident to the
Human Frame. By R. REECE, M.D. late Fellow of the Royal College of Surgeons of London,
&c. 16th Edition, 8vo. pp. 600, 12s. boards.

REID (DR.)—ILLUSTRATIONS OF THE PRINCIPLES AND

PRACTICE of WARMING and VENTILATING, with Preliminary Remarks on Health and
Length of Life. By D. B. Rurp, M.D. F.R.S.E. 8yo. With Diagrams, and 320 Engravings
on wood. 16s.

The object of this work is to facilitate the more general introduction of Systematic Venti-
lation in Public Buildings and Private Dwelling-houses, and in Mines, Ships, and Manu-
factories.

“ A very clever, ingenious, aud learned treatise, of practical utility and concern to all classes of people. Almost
every point of view in which the subjects of warming and ventilation can be taken is presented to de reader in this
masterly work: they are pursued in public and private buildings, in churches and chapels, in ships, manufactories.
and mines. The details are very curious, and greatly assisted in effect by the profuse employment of diagrams and
woodcuts. Every thing is dong, in short, to make the information acceptable to non-professional readers, as well as
available for the uses of the architect and physician.”—ExaMINER.

REPTON.—THE LANDSCAPE GARDENING & LANDSCAPE

ARCHITECTURE of the late Humpury ReEpron, Esq.; being his entire works on these

subjects. New Edition, with an historical and scientific Introduction, a systematic Analysis,

a Biographical Notice, Notes, and a copious alphabetical Index. By J. C. Loupon, F.L.S.

&e. Originally published in 1 folio and 3 quarto volumes, and now cemprised in 1 vel. 8vo.

ees ee upwards of 250 Engravings, and Portrait, 30s. cloth; with coloured plates,
. 6s. cloth.

RIDDLE.—A COMPLETE ENGLISH-LATIN AND LATIN-

ENGLISH DICTIONARY, compiled from the best sources, chiefly German. By the Rey.
J. E. Rippiy, M.a. 3d Edition, corrected and enlarged. 8vo. 31s. 6d. cloth.

*,* Separately—The English-Latin part, 10s. 6d. cloth; the English-Latin part, 21s. cloth.

RIDDLE.— A DIAMOND LATIN ENGLISH DICTIONARY.

For the waistcoat-pocket. A Guide to the Meaning, Quality, and right Accentuation of Latin
Classical Words. By the Rev. J. E. Rippxs, M.A. Royal 32mo. 48. bound.
« A most useful little lexicon to the general reader who may wish for an accommodatin interpreter of such Latin

words or sentences as may be encountered in eyery day’s casual literary exercises. It is at once copious and
succinct.”—Mornina HEsaLp.

RIDDLE.—LETTERS FROM AN ABSENT GODFATHER ;

Or, a Compendium of Religious Instruction for Young Persons. By the Rey, J. E.
M.A. Fcp. 8vo. 6s. cloth. 2 7 “at ae

RIDDLE.—ECCLESIASTICAL CHRONOLOGY ;

Or, Annals of the Christian Church, from its Foundation to the present Time. Containing a
View of General Church History, and the Course of Secular Events; the Limits of the
Church and its Relations to the State; Controversies; Sects and Parties; Rites,
Institutions, and Discipline ; Keclesiastical Writers. The whole arranged according to the
order of Dates, and divided into Seven Periods. To which are added, Lists of Councils and
Popes, Patriarchs, and Archbishops of Canterbury. By the Rey. J. E. RippLE, M.A.,
Author of The Complete Latin Dictionary.” 8vo. 15s. cloth.

RIVERS.—THE ROSE AMATEUR’S GUIDE;

Containing ample Descriptions of all the fine leading varieties of Roses, r i
2 ) 2S 8 of 3 , regularly classed in
their respective Families ; their History and mode of Culture, By T, Rivers, Jun. 3d Edi-
tion, corrected and improved, fep. 8vo. 6s. cloth.
“Mr, Rivers is the best authority on the subject of the cultivation of the rose; his book i ti
comprehensive, and supplies, indeed, all the information regarding the various varieties, that Fede be via sis
GENTLEMAN’S MAGAZINE.

Ae

ee

PRINTED FOR LONGMAN, BROWN, AND CO. 25

On On eee eee

ee

ROBERTS.—A COMPREHENSIVE VIEW OF THE CULTURE

of the VINE under GLASS. By James Roperrs, Gardener to M. Wilson, Esq.-Eshton Hall,
Yorkshire, 12mo. 5s. 6d. cloth.

ROBERTS.—AN ETYMOLOGICAL AND EXPLANATORY

DICTIONARY of the Terms and Language of GEOLOGY; designed for the early Student,
and those who have not made great progress inthe Science. ByG.Roperts. Fep. 6s. cloth.

ROBINSON.—GREEK AND ENGLISH LEXICON TO THE

NEW TESTAMENT. By E. Roprnson, D.D. Author of “Biblical Researches.” Edited,
with careful revision, corrections, &c. by the Rev. Dr. BLooMFIELD. } vol. 8yo. 18s. cloth.

ROGERS.—THE VEGETABLE CULTIVATOR;

Containing a plain and accurate Description of all the different Species of Culinary Vegetables,
with the most approved Method of Cultivating them by Natural and Artificial Means, and
the best Modes of Cooking them ; alphabetically arranged. Together with a Description of
the Physical Herbs in General Use. Also, some Recollections of the Life of ParLre MILLER,
F.A.S8., Gardener to the Worshipful Company of Apothecaries at Chelsea. By Joun Rocers,
Author of “‘ The Fruit Cultivator.’’? 2d Edition, fep. Syo. 7s. cloth.

“ Rogers’s ‘ Vegetable Cultivator’ is an useful book.”—Prof. Lindley, in Tux GaRDENEBS’ CHRONICLE.

ROME.—THE HISTORY OF ROME.

2 vols. fep. Sve. with Vignette Titles, 12s. cloth.

RONALDS.—THE FLY-FISHER’S ENTOMOLOGY,

Illustrated by Coloured Representations of the Natural and Artificial Insect ; and accompanied
by a few Observations and Instructions relative to Trout and Grayling Fishing. By ALFRED
Ronaups. 2d Edition, with 20 Copperplates, coloured, 8vo. 14s. cloth.

ROSCOE.—LIVES OF EMINENT BRITISH LAWYERS.

By Henry Roscog, Esq. 1 vol. fep. 8vo. with Vignette Title, 6s. cloth.

SANDBY (REV. G.)—MESMERISM AND ITS OPPONENTS:

With a Narrative of Cases. By the Rey GEorGE SANDBY, Jun. Vicar of Flixton, and Rector
of All Saints with St. Nicholas, South Elmham, Suffolk; Domestic Chaplain to the Right Hon.
the Earl of Abergavenny. Fep. 8vo. 6s. cloth.

*¢ A book written by a clergyman well known to be a man of Beh character, great talent, and clear intellect, coolly
turning supposed illusions into facts, proving their reality by a cloud of witnesses in addition to his own experience,.
and accounting on philosophical principles for seeming miracles, belief in which had been set down as evidence
either of the grossest ignorance or the wildest insanity! We look upon the appearance of Mr. Sandby’s volume as
an important event in the progress of philosophy, for it is impossible to suspect the author of either folly or
charlatanism. His cases are soberly stated, his reasonings logical, and his deductions ineyitable.”—Inp1an NEws-

SANDFORD.—WOMAN IN HER SOCIAL AND DOMESTIC

CHARACTER. By Mrs. JoHN SANDFORD. 6th Edition, fcp. 8vo. 6s. cloth.

Causes of Female Infiueuce; Value of Letters to Woman; Importance of Religion te Woman ;
Christianity the Source of Female Excellence; Scripture illustrative of Female Character ;
Female Influence on Religion; Female Defects; Female Romance; Female Education; Female
Duties.

SANDFORD.—FEMALE IMPROVEMENT.

By Mrs. Joun SanpForp. 2d Edition, fcp. 8vo. 7s. 6d. cloth.

The Formation of Female Character; Religion a paramount Object; the Importance of Religious
Knowledge; Christianity, Doctrinal and Practical; the Employment of Time; Study, its Mode
and its Recommendation; Accomplishment; Temper; Taste; Benevolence; Marriage; the
Young Wife; the Young Mother.

SANDHURST COLLEGE MATHEMATICAL COURS E

ELEMENTS of ARITHMETIC and ALGEBRA. By W. Scort, Esq. A.M. and F.R.A.S.
Second Mathematical Professor at the Royal Military College, Sandhurst. Being the Second
Volume of the Sandhurst Course of Mathematics. 8vo. 16s. bound.

“ This exeellent treatise is admirably adapted for the purpose which it is intended to answer, and certain to prove
as permanently beneficial to the interests and credit of the Tnstitution as it is honourable to Prof. Scott’s talents. It
is, we perceive, the first of a series which is to constitute a general course of mathematics, and which, when completd,
will be an invaluable addition to the cash-books already in use at Sandhurst ’—UnrvEp Service Gacerre.

PRACTICAL ASTRONOMY and GEODESY. By Joun Narrien, F.R.S and R.A.S. Pro-
fessor of Mathematics in the Royal Military College, Sandhurst, Being the 3rd Volume
of the Sandhurst Mathematical Course. 8yvo. [Just ready.

ELEMENTS of GEOMETRY; consisting of the first Four and Sixth Books of Euclid, chiefly
from the Text of Dr. Robert Simson: with the principal Theorems in Proportion, and a
Course of Practical Geometry on the Ground; aiso, Four Tracts relating to Circles, Planes,
and Solids, with one on Spherical Geometry. By Mr. Narrixen, Professor of Mathematics
in the Royal Military College, Sandhurst. Being the First Volume of the Sandhurst Course
of Mathematics, 8vo. with many diagrams, 10s. 6d, bound.

26 CATALOGUE OF NEW WORKS

aa RP PPR PP

SAVAGE.—A DICTIONARY OF PRINTING.

By Wii11AM Savaeke, Author of “ Practical Hints on Decorative Printing,” and a Treatise
«On the Preparation of Printing Ink, both Black and Coloured.” In 1 vol. 8vo. with numerous
Diagrams, #1. 6s. cloth.

SCORESBY.—MAGNETICAL INVESTIGATIONS,

By the Rev. W1LL1AM ScoresBy, D.D. F.R.S.L. and E. &c. &c. Comprising Investigations

concerning the Laws or Principles affecting the Power of Magnetic Steel Plates or Bars, in

combination as well as singly, under various conditions as to Mass, Hardness, Quality, Form,

&c. as also concerning the comparative Powers of Cast Iron. Part 2, 8vo. 10s. 6d. cloth.
Part 1, with Plates, 5s.

SCOTT.—THE HISTORY OF SCOTLAND.

By Sir WALTER Scorr, Bart. New edition. 2 vols. fcp. 8vo. with Vignette Titles, 12s. cloth.

SEAWARD.—SIR EDWARD SEAWARD’S NARRATIVE OF

HIS SHIPWRECK, and consequent Discovery of certain Islands in the Caribbean Sea: with
a detail of many extraordinary and highly interesting Events in his Life, from 1733 to 1749, as
written in his own Diary. Edited by Miss JANE Porter. 3d Edition, with a New Nautical
and Geographical Introduction, containing Extracts from a Paper by Mr. C. F. Collett, of the
Royal Navy, identifying the islands described by Sir E. Seaward. 2 vols. post 8vo. 21s. cloth.

SELECT WORKS OF THE BRITISH POETS,

From Chaucer to Withers. With Biographical Sketches, by R. SourHry,LL.D. 1 vol, 8vo.
30s. cloth; with gilt edges, 31s. 6d. 4

SELECT WORKS OF THE BRITISH POETS,

From Ben Jonson to Beattie. With Biographical and Critical Prefaces, by Dr. AIKIN.
1 vol. 8vo. 18s. cloth; with gilt edges, 20s.

*,* The peculiar feature of these two works is, that the Poems are printed entire, without mutilation or abridg-
ment; care being taken that such poems only are included as are fit for the perusal of youth, or for reading aloud.

SHAKSPEARE, BY BOWDLER.

THE FAMILY SHAKSPEARE; in which nothing is added to the Original Text ; but those
words and expressions are omitted which cannot with propriety be readaloud. By T. BowpLer,
Esq. F.R.S. Seventh Edition (1839), large vol. 8vo. with 36 Illustrations after Smirke, &c.
30s. cloth; or 31s, 6d. gilt edges.

*,* A LIBRARY EDITION, without Illustrations, 8 vols. 8vo. €4. 14s. 6d. boards.

SHELLEY, &.—LIVES OF THE MOST EMINENT LITERARY

MEN OF ITALY, SPAIN, and PORTUGAL. By Mrs. SHELLEY, Sir D. BREWSTER,
J. MonreomeERy, &c. 3 vols. fep. 8vo. with Vignette Titles, 18s. cloth.

SHELLEY.—LIVES OF MOST EMINENT FRENCH WRITERS.

By Mrs. SHELLEY, and others. 2 vols. fep. 8vo. with Vignette Titles, 12s. cloth.

SHORT WHIST:

Its Rise, Progress, and Laws; with Observations to make any one a Whist Player; containing
also the Laws of Piquet, Cassino, Ecarté, Cribbage, Backgammon. By Major A * ****,
7th Edition, To which are added, Precepts for Tyros. By Mrs. B*****, Fep. 8yo. 3s.
cloth, gilt edges.

SISMONDI.—HISTORY OF THE ITALIAN REPUBLICS;

Or, of the Origin, Progress, and Fall of Freedom in Italy, from a.p. 476 to 1805. By J.C. L.
DE SIsMONDI, 2 vols. fep. 8vo. with Vignette Titles, 12s. cloth.

SISMONDI.—THE HISTORY OF THE FALL OF THE ROMAN

EMPIRE. Comprising a View of the Invasion and Settlement of the Barbarians. By J.C.L.
DE SisMONDI. 2 vols. fcp. 8vo. with Vignette Titles, 12s. cloth.

SMITH.—THE ENGLISH FLORA.

By Sir JAMEs Epwarp Smiru, M.D. F.R.S., late President of the Linnean Society, &c.
6 vols. 8vo. €3, 128. boards.

Contents :—Vols. I. toTV. The FLowrerine PLantTs and the Ferns, £2. 8s.

Vol. V. Part 1, 12s,—CRryproGaAMIA ; comprising the Mosses, Hepatice, Lichens, Characee
and Algz. By Sir W. J. Hooker. : : ci : ;

Vol. V. Part 2, 12s.—The Fune1—completing the work, by Sir J. W. Hooker, and the Rey.
M.J. BERKELEY, F.L.S, &c. p . #4 : ay

SMITH.—COMPENDIUM OF THE ENGLISH FLORA.

By Sir J. E.Smirx. 2d Edition, with Additions and C ions. i
ped Secured 5 orrections. By Sir W. J, Hooker.

THE SAME IN LATIN. 5th Edition, 12mo. 7s. 6d.

PRINTED FOR LONGMAN, BROWN, AND CO. 2.

LODE IIIS

SMITH.—AN INTRODUCTION TO THE STUDY OF BOTANY.

By Sir J. E. Smiru, late President of the Linnean Society. 7th Edition (1833), corrected ; in
which the object of Smith’s ‘‘ Grammar of Botany” is combined with that of the ‘ Introduc-
tion.”?” By Sir WitLt1AM Jackson Hooker, K.H., LL.D., &c. 1 vol. 8vo. pp. 522, 36 Steel
Plates, 16s. cloth; with the Plates coloured, £2. 12s. 6d. cloth.

SMITH.—THE WORKS OF THE REV. SYDNEY SMITH.
2d Edition, 3 vols. 8vo. with Portrait, pp. 1412, 36s. cloth.

This collection consists of the author’s contributions to the Edinburgh Review, Peter Plymley’s Letters on the
Catholics, and other miscellaneous works, >

By the same Author, 2d Edition,
LETTERS on AMERICAN DEBTS, First printed in ‘The Morning Chronicle.” 8vo. 6d.

SMITH.—LETTERS ON THE SUBJECT OF THE CATHOLICS,

to my Brother Abraham who lives in the Country. By PETER PLYMLEY. 21st Edition,
post 8vo. pp. 200, 7s. cloth.

SMITH.—THE MEMOIRS OF THE MARQUIS DE POMBAL.

By Joun Smirtu, Private Secretary to the Marquis De Saldana. 2 vols. post 8vo. with Portrait
and Autographa, 21s. cloth.

These Memoirs of this illustrious Portuguese Statesman, designated by his countrymen the ‘Great Marauts,”
contain details of the terrible earthquake in 1755—the energy of Pombal on that awful occasion—the establishment
of the Oporto Wine Company—the Duke of Aveiro’s conspiracy—rupture with the Court of Rome—strange hallucina-
tionsof theJesuit Malagrida—suppression of the Jesuit order throughout Europe effected by Pombal’s energy and
address—family compact and war with France and Spain—extensive reforms and flourishing condition of Portugal—
death of the kmg—Pombal’s resignation, examination, sentence, illness, and death. The whole interspersed with
extracts from the despatches of Mr. Hay, Lord Kinnoull, Mr. Walpole, &c. never before published.

SMITH.—AN INQUIRY INTO THE NATURE AND CAUSES

OF THE WEALTH OF NATIONS. By Apam SmitH, LL.D. With a Life of the Author,
an Introductory Discourse, Notes, and Supplemental Dissertations. By J. R. M‘CuLtocu.
New Edition, corrected throughout, and greatly enlarged, 8vo. with Portrait, #1.1s. cloth.

SOUTHEY’S (ROBERT) COMPLETE POETICAL WORKS;

Containing all the Author’s last Introductions and Notes. Complete in one volume, medium
8vo. with Portrait and Vignette, uniform with Byron’s Poems and Thomas Moore’s Poetical
Works, 21s.; or 42s. bound in morocco, in the best manner, by Hayday.

Also, an Edition in 10 vols. fep. 8vo. with Portrait and 19 Plates, £2. 10s.
The following may be had, separately, in cloth :—

rows

DOOD OOO

JOVAINGO le ARC sacsieieieie’s\e's sigisiatotsrsin.a Bev, GAs Vk PDA MAUL DA eta/siasiasalctelnlatpiciietelelsis eisi’s lvol. 5s.
UD oe oo ctite radars v sine leininastiareininareatete aeVOl, S85 PAL VAD SE iC: csigihleiie stelareielsceisiaine 2vols. 10s.
CURSE of KEHAMA ...,........ iB Volsd8.1|| RODERICK, gariscc seus seta slete weet lvol. 5s.

SOUTHEY, &.—LIVES OF THE BRITISH ADMIRALS ;

With an Introductory View of the Naval History of England. By R. SourHey, Esq. and
R. BELL, Esq. 5 vols. fcp. 8vo. with Vignette Titles, £1. 10s, cloth.

SPACKMAN.—STATISTICAL TABLES

Of the Agriculture, Shipping, Colonies, Manufactures, Commerce, and Population of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and its Dependencies, brought down to the year 1843.
Compiled from Official Returns. By W. F. SpackMAN, Esq. Fcp. 8vo. pp. 162, 5s. cloth.

SPALDING.—THE PHILOSOPHY OF CHRISTIAN MORALS.

By SAMUEL SPALDING, M.A. of the London University. 8vo. 10s. 6d. cloth.

“ hor of this work was a young man of great promise, who graduated at the London University in 1840, and
died fis carn present year, at the ree of Good Hope, to which place he had repaired to recruit his strength,
shattered by intense application to study. The work which he has left behind bears traces of a thinking mind, which
might have done much in the field of science. Mr. Spalding’s treatise is modelled to a great extent on the writings
of that great ethical writer, Bishop Butler; and the whole work is throughout thoughtfully and epee written.”

SPIRIT OF THE WOODS. page

By the Author of ‘‘ The Moral of Flowers.” 2d Edition, 1 vol. royal 8vo. with 23 beautifully-
coloured Engravings of the Forest Trees of Great Britain, #1. 11s. 6d. cloth,

SPOONER.—A TREATISE ON THE STRUCTURE, FUNC-

TIONS, and DISEASES of the FOOT and LEG of the HORSE; comprehending the Com-
parative Anatomy of these parts in other Animals, embracing the subject of Shoeing and
the proper Treatment of the Foot; with the Rationale and Effects of various Important
Operations, and the best methods of performing them. By W. C. Spooner, M.R.V.C.
12mo. pp. 398, 78. 6d. cloth.

STEBBING.—THE HISTORY OF THE CHRISTIAN CHURCH,

from its Foundation to A.D. 1492. By the Rev. H. Sreppine, M.A. &c. 2 vols. fep. 8vo.
with Vignette Titles, 12s. cloth.

STEBBING.—THE HISTORY OF THE REFORMATION.

By the Rey. H. Sressine. 2 vols. fep. 8vo. with Vignette Titles, 12s. cloth.

——_—— nn a

28 CATALOGUE OF NEW WORKS

LS ST GS FS GF I IS Oo

STEAM ENGINE, BY THE ARTIZAN CLUB.

A Treatise on the Steam Engine. By the ArT1zAn CLuB. Nos. 1 to 4, 4to. 1s. each, sewed.
To be completed in 24 Monthly Parts, each illustrated by a Steel Plate and several Woodcuts.
This work will give a complete account of the Steam Engine as applied to Mines, Mills,
Railways, and Steam Navigation; will contain Practical Rules and Examples of the best
Machinery ; and will be representative of the present state of Steam Science in England.
“The treatise is marked by the same cleverness and yivacity which belongs to ‘the Club ;’ it is well illustrated with

woodcuts, and seems likely, as far as we can judge, to answer the important purpose of diffusing sound information
among the artisans of this country, in an agreeable and interesting manner.”—RaiLway CHRONICLE.

STEEL’S SHIPMASTER’S ASSISTANT,

And OWNER’S MANUAL; containing Information necessary for persons connected with
Mercantile Affairs; consisting of the Regulation Acts of the Customs for the United King-
dom, and British Possessions abroad; Navigation Laws; Registry Acts; Duties of Customs
of the United Kingdom, the British Plantations in America, Canada, and Isle of Man, in the
East Indies, Cape of Good Hope, New South Wales, and Van Dieman’s Land; Smuggling
Acts ; Pilotage throughout England and Scotland; Insurances; Commercial Treaties; Dock
Charges on Shipping, &r. New Edition, corrected by J. StikEMAN, Secretary to the East
India and China Association. With Tables of Monies, Weights, Measures, and Exchanges.
By Dr. KeLty. With aSupplement. 1 vol. 8vo. #1. 1s. cloth.

STEPHENS.—A MANUAL OF BRITISH COLEOPTERA ;

or, BEETLES: containing a Description of all the Species of Beetles hitherto ascertained to
inhabit Great Britain and Ireland, &c. With a Complete Index of the Genera. By J. F.
STEPHENS, F.L.S. Author of “ Illustrations of Entomology.”’ 1 vol. post Syo. 14s. cloth.

STRONG.—GREECE AS A KINGDOM: ;

A Statistical Description of that Country: its Laws, Commerce, Resources, Public Institutions,
Army, Navy, &c.—from the arrival of King Otho, in 1833, down to the present time. From
Official Documents and Authentic Sources. By FREDERICK Strona, Esq. Consul at Athens
for the Kingdoms of Bavaria and Hanover. §8vo 15s. cloth.

SUMMERLY (MRS. FELIX).—THE MOTHER’S PRIMER:

a Little Child’s First Steps in many ways. By Mrs. Fexr1x SuMMERLY. Fep. 8vo. printed
in colours, with a Frontispiece drawn on zinc by William Mulready, R.A. 1s. sewed.

SUNDAY LIBRARY:

Containing nearly One Hundred Sermons by the following eminent Divines. With Notes, &e.
by the Rev. T. F. Dippin, D.D. 6 vols. fep. 8vo. with Six Portraits, 30s. cloth.

Archbp. Lawrence , Bp. Huntingford Archdeacon Nares | Professor White Rey W. Jones (of Nayland)
Secker Maltby Pott Rey. Arch. Alison C. W. Le Bas
Bp. Bloomfield Mant Dr. Blair C. Benson H. H. Milman
Gray Newton Chalmers Joshua Gilpin R. Morehead
Heber Porteus D’Oyly G. Haggitt Thomas Rennell
Hobart J. B. Sumner Paley Robert Hall J.H. Spry
Horne Van Mildert Parr J. Hewlett Sydney Smith
Horsley Dean Chandler Shuttleworth A. Irvine Thomas Townson.

SWAINSON.—A PRELIMINARY DISCOURSE ON THE

STUDY OF NATURAL HISTORY. By W. Swarnson, Esq. 1 vol. fep. 8yo. 6s. cloth.

SWAINSON.—A TREATISE ON THE NATURAL HISTORY

AND CLASSIFICATION of ANIMALS. By W. Swainson, Esq. 1 vol. fcep. 8vo. 6s.

SWAINSON.—NATURAL HISTORY AND CLASSIFICATION

OF QUADRUPEDS. By W. Swainson, Esq. 1 vol. fep. 8vo. with vignette title and 176
Woodcuts, 6s. cloth.

SWAINSON.—NATURAL HISTORY AND CLASSIFICATION

a a By W. Swarnson, Esq. Fep. 8vo. Vignette Titles and above 300 Woodcuts, .
2s. cloth.

SWAINSON.—ANIMALS IN MENAGERIES.

By W. Swainson, Esq. Fep.8vo. Vignette Title and numerous Woodcuts, 6s. cloth lettered

SWAINSON NATURAL JISTORY AND. CLASSTEICATION
with numerous Woodcuts and Vignette Titles, 12s. cloth.

SWAINSON.—HABITS AND INSTINCTS OF ANIMALS.

By W. Swainson, Esq. 1 vol. fep. 8vo. with Vignette and numerous Woodcuts, 6s. cloth.

SWAINSON.—A TREATISE ON MALACOLOGY;

or, the Natural Classification of Shells and Shell-fish. By W. Swarnson, Esq. 1 vol. fcp.
8vo. with Vignette Title and very numerous Illustrations on Wood, 6s. cloth.

SWAINSON AND SHUCKARD.—HISTORY AND NATURAL

ARRANGEMENT OF INSECTS. By W. Swainson, Esq., and W. E. SHuck E
1 vol. fep. 8vo. with Vignette Title and Woodcuts, 6s. cei ; wa ,

PRINTED FOR LONGMAN, BROWN, AND CO. 29

—

SWITZERLAND.—THE HISTORY OF SWITZERLAND.

1 vol. fcp. 8vo. with Vignette Title, 6s. cloth.

TATE.—THE CONTINUOUS HISTORY OF THE LIFE AND

WRITINGS OF ST. PAUL, on the basis of the Acts; with Intercalary Matter of Sacred
Narrative, supplied from the Epistles, and elucidated in occasional Dissertations: with the
Hore Pauline of Dr. Paley, in a more correct edition, subjoined. By James TATE, M.A.
Canon Residentiary of St. Paul’s. 8vo. with Map, 13s. cloth.

TATE.—HORATIUS RESTITUTUS;

Or, the Books of Horace arranged in Chronological Order, according to the Scheme of Dr.
Bentley, from the Text of Gesner, corrected and improved. Witha Preliminary Dissertation,
very much enlarged, on the Chronology of the Works, on the Localities, and on the Life and
Character of that Poet. By James TATE, M.A. Second Edition. To which is now added,
an original Treatise on the Metres of Horace. Svo. 12s. cloth.

TAYLER (REV. CHARLES B.)—MARGARET ;

Or, the Pearl. By the Rev. CHArtes B. TayueEr, M.A. Rector of St. Peter’s, Chester, Author
of ‘‘ May You Like It,”’ “ Records of a Good Man’s Life,” &c. Fcp. 8vo. 6s. cloth.

* The design of this very pleasing and attractive story is to shew the errors of Tractarianism, and the happy effects
that flow from a strict discharge of our duties, religious and moral. The book is written in a style extremely graceful,
and is altogether free from that narrow-minded spirit which has but too frequently appeared of late in works of the
same description.”—ArLas.

TAYLER (REV. C. B.)—TRACTARIANISM NOT OF GOD:

Plain Sermons for the Times. By the Rev. C. B, TayLuR, M.A. Rector of St. Peter’s, and
Evening Lecturer of St. Mary’s, Chester. Ln the press.

* And he reasoned with them out of the Scriptures.”—ActTs xvii. 2.

TAYLER (REV. C. B.)—DORA MELDER ;

A Story of Alsace. By Mera SaAnpeER. A Translation. Edited by the Rev. C. B. Tayler,
Author of ‘* Records of a Good Man’s Life,” &c. Fcp.8vo. pp. 286, 2 Illustrations, 7s. cloth.
“Tn a literary point of view, this tale is admirably told ; whilst its air of reality gives it a true charm.”

TAYLOR.—THE STATESMAN. eee

By Henry Taytor, Esq., Author of *‘ Philip Van Artevelde.’’ 12mo, 6s. 6d. boards.

THACKER.—THE COURSER’S ANNUAL REMEMBRANCER,

and STUD-BOOK ; being an Alphabetical Return of the Running at all the Public Coursing
Clubs in England, Ireland, and Scotland, for the Season 1841-42; with the Pedigrees (as far
as received) of the Dogs that won, and the Dogs that ran up second for each Prize; also, a
Return of all single Matches run at those Meetings; with a Preliminary Essay on the Decision
of Short Courses. By T. THACKER. 8vo. 10s. cloth.

THACKER.—A POCKET COMPENDIUM OF COURSING

RULES AND BYE-LAWS, for Use in the Field. By THomAs THACKER, Is. 6d. sewed.

THIRLWALL.—THE HISTORY OF GREECE.

By the Right Rev. the Lorp BisHop of St. Davip’s. 8 vols. fcp, 8vo. with Vignette Titles,
#2. 8s. cloth.

THOMSON’S SEASONS.

Edited by Botton Corney, Esq. Illustrated with Seventy-seven Designs drawn ou Wood,
by the following Members of the Etching Club :—

J. Bell, Sculptor, J. C. Horsley, Frank Stone, H. J. Townsend,
C. W. Cope, J, P. Knight, C. Stonhouse, T. Webster, A.R.A.
Thomas Creswick, R. Redgrave, A.R.A. F. Tayler,

Engraved by Thompson and other eminent Engravers.
Square crown 8vo. One Guinea; bound in morocco, in the best manner, by Hayday, 36s.

«« Few works of the class have a fairer prospect of popularity than this new edition of Tomson, illustrated by the
members of the Etching Club. Most of the designs are in accordance with the spirit of the author,—some of them
beautiful. The landscape vignettes contributed by Mr. Creswick entitle him to a first place as a book-illustrator ;
exhibiting a versatility of talent for which his warmest admirers could hitherto have hardly ventured to give him
credit. Mr. F. Tayzer is not far behind, as his designs at pp. 11, 12, and 26, will most satisfactorily prove ; and he
comes one step nearer historical art than Mr. Creswick, in right of his clever management of rustic figures. Messrs,
Corz, Horstry, Reperave, and Bett, with all their true English feeling, and the grace of their conceptions, are a
degree more ambitious. Mr. BEL1’s preparatory outline of ¢ Sprig? gives indications of grace, poetry, and fancy,
worthy of being carried to the highest perfection. This book is beautifully prone out; the vignettes are from
copper blocks, produced by the electrotype process. This gives a peculiarity of effect to the impressions more easy to

erceive than to describe. Other of our classical poems are to follow, illustrated in a similar fashion, Mr. Bonron

ORNEY’s labours are not the less to be commended because they are unobtrusive: the work is extremely well edited,
and therefore entitled to a place on the library shelf as well as on the drawing-room table.” —ATHEN ZUM.

Uniform with “‘Thomson’s Seasons,’’

GOLDSMITH’S POETICAL WORKS, illustrated with Engravings on Wood, from Designs by
MempbeERrs of the Ercui1ne CLuB.—Jn the press.

THOMSON.—THE DOMESTIC MANAGEMENT OF THE SICK

ROOM, necessary, in Aid of Medical Treatment, for the Cure of Diseases. By ANTHONY
Topp Tuomson, M.D. F.L.S. &c. Post 8yo. 10s. 6d. cloth.

30 CATALOGUE OF NEW WORKS

THOMSON.—AN ELEMENTARY TREATISE ON ALGEBRA,

Theoretical and Practical. By JAMEs THomson, LL.D. Professor of Mathematics in the
University of Glasgow. 12mo. 5s. cloth.

“For clearness, simplicity, and completeness, it would be difficult to imagine a superior performance to Dr.
Thomson’s. Any intelligent individual might teach himself from it, and in the hands of an able master it must prove
invaluable. We recommend it to mathematical readers, teachers, and students, as incomparably the best elementary
treatise and the most comprehensive text-book of the science.”—ATLAS.

TOMLINS.—A POPULAR LAW DICTIONARY ;

Familiarly explaining the Terms and Nature of English Law; adapted to the comprehension
of persons not educated for the legal profession, and affording information peculiarly useful
to Magistrates, Merchants, Parochial Officers, and others. By THomMas EDLYNE TOMLINS,
Attorney and Solicitor. In 1 thick vol. post 8vo. 18s. cloth.

*.* The whole work has been revised by a Barrister.

TOOKE.—A HISTORY OF PRICES ;

With reference to the Causes of their principal Variations, from 1792 to the Present Time.
Preceded by a Sketch of the History of the Corn Trade in the last Two Centuries. By THoMAS
Tooks, Esq. F.R.S. 2 vols. Svo. #1. 16s. cloth.

(A Continuation of the Above.)

AN ACCOUNT of PRICES and of the State of the CIRCULATION in 1838 and 1839; with
Remarks on the Corn Laws, and on proposed Alterationsin our Banking System. 8vo. 12s. cloth.

TRANSACTIONS OF THE ENTOMOLOGICAL SOCIETY.

8vo. The last part published is Part 4 of Vol. 3, 8vo. with Plates, 6s. 6d.

TRANSACTIONS OF THE ZOOLOGICAL SOCIETY OF

LONDON. 4to. The last part published is Part 3, Vol. 3, with Plates, 19s. 6d. coloured,
and 12s. plain. _

TRANSACTIONS OF THE INSTITUTION OF CIVIL

Engineers, 4to. Vol. II. with Twenty-three finely engraved Plates, 28s. cloth.
Vol. III. with Nineteen finely engraved Plates, €2. 12s. 6d. cloth.

TRANSACTIONS OF THE ROYAL INSTITUTE OF BRITISH

ARCHITECTS of LONDON: consisting of a series of Papers on “ Antiquities,’’ and “ Con-
struction.” By R. Willis, M.A. F.R.S. &c.; Ambrose Poynter; Herr Hallmann, of Han-
over; Dr. Faraday; Mr. Bracebridge; Herr Beuth, of Berlin; Joseph Gwilt, F.S.A. F.A.S. ;
Mr. C. H. Smith; Mr. C. Fowler, Hon. Sec.; Mr. W. A. Nicholson, of Lincoln; and Mr, J. P.
Papworth. Vol. I. Part 2, 4to. with numerous lithographic and woodcut illustrations, 24s. cloth.

*,* Part 1, Vol. I. uniform with the above, 16s. cloth.

TRANSACTIONS OF THE LINNEAN SOCIETY OF LONDON,

The last part published is Part 2, Vol. XIX. 4to. with Plates, 21s.

TROLLOPE.—THE LAURRINGTONS ;

Or, Superior People. By Mrs. TroLLopr, Author of ‘Widow Barnaby,” &c. 3 vols.
post 8vo. 31s. 6d. boards.

“Mrs, Trollope gains upon public opinion, as a novel writer, by every successive production of her prolific pen.
* The Laurringtons,’ her last new novel, is vastly superior to ‘ Widow Barnaby,’ on which we conclude, from its being
associated with her name in the title-page,she founds her pretensions to public regard. The plot is simple ; the
characters comparatively few and their positions, sayings, and doings, perfectly in keeping. We predict that the
work will be a favourite with the novel-reading portion of the public.”—GtLoneE.

TURNER.—THE HISTORY OF ENGLAND,

From the Earliest Period to the Death of Elizabeth. By SHARon Turner, Esq. F.A.S.
R.A.S.L. 12 vols. 8vo. £8. 3s. cloth.

Or four separate portions, as follow :—

THE HISTORY of the ANGLO-SAXONS; comprising the History of England from the
Earliest Period to the Norman Conquest. 6th Edition, 3 vols. 8vo. €2. 5s. boards.

THE HISTORY of ENGLAND during the MIDDLE AGES; comprising the Reigns from
William the Conqueror to the Accession of Henry VIII., and also the History of the Litera-
ture, Religion, Poetry, and Progress of the Reformation and of the Language during that
period. 38d Edition, 5 vols. 8vo. €3, boards.

THE HISTORY of the REIGN of HENRY VIII.; comprising the Political History of the

commencement of the English Reformation: being the First Part of the Mod i
England. 3d Edition, 2 vols, 8vo. 26s. bds. 4 ae y ead

THE HISTORY of the REIGNS of EDWARD VI., MARY, and ELIZABETH; being the
Second Part of the Modern History of England. 3d Edition, 2 vols. 8vo. 32s. boards,

a a |

PRINTED FOR LONGMAN, BROWN, AND Co. 31

Sn ee

SSS SSS

TURNER.—THE SACRED HISTORY OF THE WORLD,

Philosophically considered. By SHARON TURNER, F.S.A. R.A.S.L. New Edit. 3 vols. 8vo. 428.

Vol. 1 considers the Creation and System of the E: i 2 i
-and Material Laws, and Formation of Mankind. arth, and of its Vegetable and Animal Races

Vol. 2, the Divine Economy in its special Relation to Mankind, and in the Deluge, andthe
History of Human Affairs ;

Vol. 3, the Provisions for the Perpetuation and Support of the Human Race, the Divine System
of our Social Combinations, and the Supernatural History of the World.

TURNER.—A TREATISE ON THE FOOT OF THE HORSE,

And a New System of Shoeing, by one-sided nailing ; and on the Nature, Origin, and Symptoms
of the Navicular Joint Lameness, with Preventive and Curative Treatment. By James
TuRNER, M.R.V.C. Royal 8vo. pp. 118, 7s. 6d. boards.

TURTON’S (DR.) MANUAL OF THE LAND AND FRESH-

WATER SHELLS of the BRITISH ISLANDS. A New Edition, thoroughly revised and with
considerable Additions. By JoHn Epwarp Gray, Keeper of the Zoological Collection in
the British Museum. 1 vol. post 8vo. with Woodcuts, and 12 Coloured Plates 15s. cloth.

URE.—DICTIONARY OF ARTS, MANUFACTURES, & MINES;

Containing a clear Exposition of their Principles and Practice. By ANDREW URE, M.D.
F.R.S. M.G.S. M.A.S. Lond.; M. Acad. N.L, Philad.;.S. Ph. Soc. N. Germ. Hanov.; Mulii.
&c. &c. Third Edition, corrected, 8vo. illustrated with 1240 Engravings on Wood, 50s. cloth.

“To the manufacturing districts of England, to practical engineers, chemists, and inventors in all the branches
of science, and, indeed, to all classes concerned in industrial pursuits, this work is one of the most valuable epitomes
of information that has probably ever been published. Dr. Ure is perhaps better qualified than almost any other
writer to render a work of this varied and useful description every thing that it ought to be. It forms an indispensable
work of reference to men of science and manufacturers, for practical purposes, and to every reader who is incidentally
interested in any of the numerous subjects of which it treats.”.—ArTLAas,

In the press, by the same Author,

RECENT IMPROVEMENTS IN ARTS, MANUFACTURES, AND MINES; being a Supple-
ment to his Dictionary.

WALKER (GEO.)—CHESS STUDIES ;

Comprising One Thousand Games of Chess, as really played by the first Chess Players ;
forming a complete Encyclopedia of Reference, and presenting the greatest Collection extant
of fine specimens of strategy in every stage of the Game. Selected and arranged by GrorGE
WALKER, Author of ‘‘ Chess made Easy,” *‘ A New Treatise on Chess,” and other Works on
the subject. 8vo. 10s. 6d. sewed.

“A very complete account of the game in modern times, which, as it has become more a rage than ever, and
nations look on its contests with almost national passions, every chess-player will find deserving of his best atten-
tion. No trial of skill, certainly, excités such earnest desire to conquer; and those who are ambitious of victory
must study Walker.” —LirERary GAZETTE,

WARDLAW.—DISCOURSES ON THE PRINCIPAL POINTS

OF THE SOCINIAN CONTROVERSY—the Unity of God, and the Trinity of Persons in the
Godhead ; the Supreme Divinity of Jesus Christ ; the Doctrine of the Atonement ; the Christian
Character, &c. By RALPH WARDLAW, D.D. 5th Edition, 8yo. 15s. cloth.

By the same Author,
SERMONS. 8vo. 12s. boards.

WATERTON.—ESSAYS ON NATURAL HISTORY,

Chiefly Ornithology. By CHAarLes WaTErTON, Esq., Author of ‘‘ Wanderings in South
America.”? With an Autobiography of the Author, and a View of Walton Hall. Fifth
Edition, fcp. 8vo. 8s. cloth.

SECOND SERIES. With Continuation of Mr. WaTERTON’s Autobiography. Fep. 8vo. with
Vignette by T. Creswick, A.R.A. 6s. 6d. cloth.

“Tt gives us hearty pleasure to meet with Mr. Waterton again. To miserable mortals ‘close in populous cities
pent sits books are as a Vigorous autumn air. He is a charming writer. Candid, cordial, good-hearted, and full of
the most masculine sympathies. His AvrostoGrarny will rank with the most piquant and comprehensive pieces of
that kind of writing inthe language. His Essays, with little of the learned pretences, have a store of cheerful wisdom
in them which yields unfailing instructiveness and pleasure.”—EXAMINER,

WATHEN.—ARTS, ANTIQUITIES, AND CHRONOLOGY OF

ANCIENT EGYPT, from Personal Observations. By G. H. WATHEN, Architect. With
Illustrations from Original Sketches by the Author. Royal 8vo. with Plates and Woodcuts,
16s. cloth.

« To commend or recommend Mr. Wathen’s volume, after what we have extracted from it, would be superfluous.
The antiquary, the scholar, the philosopher, the artist, in short, every educated man who reads, either for instruction
or entertainment, must be interested in its rich and varied contents,”"—Eciectic Review,

WESTWOOD.—INTRODUCTION TO THE MODERN CLASSI-

FICATION OF INSECTS; comprising an Account of the Habits and Transformations of the
different Families; a Synopsis of all the British, and a Notice of the more remarkable Foreign
Genera. By J. O. WEstwoop, Sec. Ent. Soc. London, F.L.S., &c. 2 vols. illustrated with
above 150 Woodcuts, comprising about 2500 distinct Figures, £2. 7s. cloth.

-*
32 CATALOGUE OF NEW WORKS PRINTED FOR LONGMAN AND CO.

POF

Soe

SF

=

WEBSTER.—AN ENCYCLOPADIA OF DOMESTIC ECONOMY;

Comprising such subjects as are most immediately connected with Housekeeping: as, The
Construction of Domestic Edifices, with the modes of Warming, Ventilating, and Lighting
them—A description of the various articles of Furniture, with the nature of their Materials—
Duties of Servants—A general account of the Animal and Vegetable Substances used as Food,
and the methods of preserving and preparing them by Cocking—Making Bread—The Chemical
Nature and the Preparation of all inds of Fermented Liquors used as Beverage—Materials
employed in Dress and the Toilette—Business of the Laundry--Description of the various
Wheel Carriages—Preservation of Health—Domestic Medicine, &c. &c. &c. By THOMAS
Wesster, F.G.S. &c.; assisted by the late Mrs. Parkes, Author of ‘‘ Domestic Duties.”
1 thick vol. 8vo. illustrated with nearly 1000 Woodcuts, 50s. cloth.

“The title-page sufficiently indicates the wide range of topics included in this most usefal encyclopedia, and all
are treated with a fulness which leaves nothing to be desired. It has been the object of the editor to combine science
with practice, a knowledge of paistipies with the ordinary details and daily recurring duties of domestic life. In some
departments of the work, Mr. Webster has been assisted by a lady whose qualifications are beyond dispute, and the
result of their united labours is the production of a volume which exhausts the subject, and defies all competition.
The work is richly iliustrated with woodcuts, edame greatly to its value. We strongly recommend every lady, and
ail others who are concerned in the management of domestic affairs, to make themselves familiar with Mr. Webster’s
volume, which must speedily be regarded as an indispensable book of reference to every housekeeper.” Z

Ecrecric REVIEW.

WHITE’S COMPENDIUM OF THE VETERINARY ART;

Containing Plain and Concise Observations on the Construction and Management of the
Stable; a brief and popular Outline of the Structure and Economy of the Horse; the Nature,
Symptoms, and Treatment of the Diseases and Accidents to which the Horse is liable; the
best method of performing various Important Operations ; with Advice to the Purchasers of
Horses; anda copious Materia Medica and Pharmacopeia. 17th Edition, entirely recon-
structed, with considerable Additions and Alterations, bringing the work up to the present state
of Veterinary Science. By W.C. Spooner, Veterinary Surgeon, &c.&c. 8vo. pp. 588, with
coloured Plate, 16s. cloth. London, 1842. J

WHITE’S COMPENDIUM OF CATTLE MEDICINE;

Or, Practical Observations on the Disorders of Cattle and other Domestic Animals, except
the Horse. 6th Edition, re-arranged, with copious Additions and Notes, by W. C. SPOONER,
Vet. Surgeon, Author of a “‘Treatise on the Infiuenza,’’ and a ‘Treatise on the Foot and
Leg of the Horse,” &c. 8vo. 9s. cloth.

WHITLEY.—THE APPLICATION OF GEOLOGY TO AGRI-

CULTURE, and to the Improvement and Valuation of Land: with the Nature and Properties
of Soils, and the Principles of Cultivation. By NicHoLAs WHITLEY, Land-Surveyor. 8vo.
Vs. éd. cloth.

WILDE.—NARRATIVE OF A VOYAGE TO MADEIRA,

TENERIFFE, and along the SHORES of the MEDITERRANEAN. By W. R. WiLDg,
Surgeon, &c. &c. 2d Edition, corrected and enlarged, Svo. with Illustrations, 18s. cloth.

WILKINSON.—THE ENGINES OF WAR, &c.

Being a History of Ancient and Modern Projectile Instruments and Engines of Warfare and
Sporting; including the Manufacture of Fire-Arms, the History and Manufacture of Gun-
powder, of Swords, and of the cause of the Damascus Figure in Sword Blades, with some
Observations of Bronze: to which are added, Remarks on some Peculiarities of Iron. and on
the Extraordinary Effect produced by the Action of Sea-water on Cast-Iron; with Details of
various Miscellaneous Experiments. By H. WILKINSON, M.R.A.S. 1 vol. 8vo. 9s. cloth.

WILLOUGHBY (LADY).—A DIARY,

Purporting to be by the LADY WILLOUGHBY, of the Reign of Charles I. ; embracing some
Passages of her Domestic History from 1635 to 1648.

To give additional interest to the work, it has been printed and bound in the style of the

period to which it refers. Small 4to. 18s. boards; or in morocco, by Hayday, #2. 2s.

‘¢So rarely have we met in our literary walks with so sweet a character as the Lady Willoughby, that we know not
whether the feeling of regret or pleasure has prevailed as we have closed the volume of her beautiful fragment. She
looks out upon us from her opened casement with such freshness and beauty, that we are compelled to regard her
with admiration and delight. There is no aim at effect in what she has written, no indication of a woman's vanity:
her whole mien is that of subdued grace and feminine loveliness. That the exquisite passages purporting to (ie
extracts from her diary have flowed from a woman’s pen, alone we cannot fora moment doubt. A woman only could
have so justly and tenderly portrayed the character of an affectionate daughter, a gentle and loving wife, and a faithful
and devoted mother, All this her ladyship, whether a real or an imaginary personage, has done, with a gracefulness
and truth worthy of female nature in its best and loftiest mood. If her work is indeed only an imitation of days gone
by, then the genius of Chatterton is far surpassed by that of the successful author. In taking leave of her unique and
interesting book, we express our cordial hope that it will find its way to the toilette of every titled and untitled lady in
Great Britain.”—EVANGELICAL MAGAZINE.

WOOD.—A PRACTICAL TREATISE ON RAILROADS, AND

INTERIOR COMMUNICATIGN in GENERAL; containing numerous Experiments on
the Powers of the Improved Locomotive Engines, and Tables of the comparative Cost of Con-
veyance on Canals, Railways, and Turnpike Roads. By NicHoLas Woop, Colliery Viewer,
Memb. Inst. Civ. Eng. &c. Third edition, very greatly enlarged, with 13 large Plates, and
several new Woodcuts. 1. 11s. 6d. cloth.

YOUNG LADIEY BOOK (THE) :

A Manual of Elegant Recreations, Exercises, and Pursuits. 4th Edition, with numerous

beautifully executed Engravings on Wood. #1. 1s. elegantly bound in crimson silk, lined with
imitation of Mechlin lace.

QoS

WILSON AND OGILVY, SKINNER STEED’, SNOWHILL, LONDON,

ay

r”

= jk
os

ay

tag
4

it)

‘

a

re
+.
hs

{
‘
4

ey
oT) 5
ste

, ~ + ce
: ' , Paw” x
r >. ee
ES i ee ee of
7 ts, 2 ;
‘ ne ’
Pact re: S
nl
a
J
a
i*
r
gat
j
i
ae
y i
. '
i
\
_,
z
f

BR Ranke, Leopold von, 1795-1886.
305 History of the Reformation in Germay. Trans-

R313 lated by Sarah Austin.
1845 and Longmans, 1845-47.
vil 3v. 2hem.

Vol.1-2: ed ed.

London, Brown, Green

Translation of Deutsche Geschichte im Zeit-

alter der Reformation.

6772 es)

: : uy

i :

ay
2)
ah
oy
i
4

Han aie
HHA iH
iit
