'.-.r:-

%i[>'
,'  f

y.is

:4^;:

.^'

'^^^

'J, '  0  ,  I  "* ^0 ^

«sr

...  ^  ' « ^  ^

Cp

!i^''

>x °  ^>

A^  n  V I ft /,  -  '  "^  ^:^

L.

/, '-2>M^  1,^

^^.  ,<^^

f

^-^.#-
^.>'  %

^'  '/>,

,^-^  '^/>

v'^- ^^.

.0  0.

w^.^,.

0  s  ''  '  /

<J^  ,\N

^ s\

° ^^-  ^>

.0  0^

V.  ,<^'

,.=,  -'l

'^ "^  ■^.'''^''#%'^^

'^ -»'  f, ,  >

\ 1 B „ -Z-- " ■ ^

^ " li ^  Q

Ki^/."..

■  oij^ o  0'

>i  ,^  -"'P.

* « 1  \ " ^'

^ . 0 N C

o  0^

^.

' ^0-

■^^

^.>  <r^.

<^'  -^

n..

.°^c

o  0'

'^  V

V *

.■^'^  :

- 0 N O  \V

lis ^

Ä: ^^^\^

<. ^^

Ä° ''*■■

,. ,/ '^'^/„^^^/„o

>.0°x.

.<,^  :

>y

^.  ^^■

^^

-if  O

.^^ ^^.

''  .  ^

\' ^

fc--> "-■■'.  '-^^

''A V

. \^

■:?• ^

^  ^/r?^:_

-0'

i5>:

%

CO

*  s

r*

rj

,.-  ,0

.0^  .^^:U'^ c

iSsf^«.^ ^

i

'^  '-'^^4^

''  "^-  v^^  ;.

>  -^"'^.^M  * \^o^

f^ * 0 M 0 ^

t  .t?^  %■-  '-^.

*^

'"\*v^^:s^

/  * 0 s 0  ^ <^  ^

^^'  <^.

0  N C

'-^\a^

t^  ^^

."--^

x^^-.

•  •  ^  'o^^'  s  - «  .,.  V*  '  ~  °  \  N*" ,  .  0  > ■" ' ^ -^

^.x"^"'  ^y M^n^,^^ ^.^  -^

V ^

•i>- «L '  «  *

•=**^  *

^^^  '

> ^ 0 '^ 0

HISTORY

William  It,  Smith,
OF  THE ^'  S.  Botanic  Garden,

WA&iiHOSO»,  D.  0.

REFORMATION  IN  GERMANY.

XU

LEOPOLD  RANKE,

AUTHOR OP

THE HISTORY OF THE POPES, &c.,  &c.

TRANSLATED  FROM  THE  LAST  EDITION  OF  THE  GERMAN,

SARAH  AUSTIN

COMPLETE IN ONE VOLUME.

PHILADELPHIA :

LEA AND BLANC  HARD.
1844.

Printed  by  T.  K.  &  P.  G.  Collins

PREFACE

From  the  first  ten  years  of  the  fifteenth  century,  to  the  beginning  of  the  thirty
years'  war,  the  constitution  and  political  condition  of  Germany  were  determined  by
♦he  periodical  diets  anu  tue  measures  there  resolved  on.

The  time  was  long  past  in  which  the  public  affairs  of  the  country  were  determined
by  one  supreme  will ;  but  its  political  life  had  not  yet  (as  at  a  later  period)  retreated
within  the  circle  of  the  several  constituent  members  of  the  empire.  The  imperial
assemblies  exercised  rights  and  powers  which,  though  not  accurately  defined,  were  yet
the  comprehensive  and  absolute  powers  of  sovereignty.  They  made  war  and  peace  ;
levied  taxes ;  exercised  a  supreme  ^per vision,  and  were  even  invested  with  executive
power.  Together  with  the  deputie?  from  the  cities,  and  the  representatives  of  the
counts  and  lords,  appeared  the  emperor  and  the  sovereign  princes  in  person.  It  is
true  they  discussed  the  most  important  affairs  of  their  respective  countries  in  their
several  colleges,  or  in  committees  chosen  from  the  whole  body,  and  the  questions  were
decided  by  the  majority  of  voices.  The  unity  of  the  nation  was  represented  by  these
assemblies.  Within  the  wide  borders  of  the  empire  nothing  of  importance  could  occur
which  did  not  here  come  under  deliberation,  nothing  new  arise,  which  mu  not  await
its  final  decision  and  execution  here.

Spite  of  all  these  considerations,  the  history  of  the  diets  of  the  empire  has  not  yet
received  the  attention  it  deserves.  The  Recesses*  of  the  diets  are  sufficiently  well
known  ;  but  who  would  judge  a  deliberative  assembly  by  the  final  results  of  its  deliber-
ations ?  Projects  of  a  systematic  collection  of  its  transactions  have  occasionally  beeii
entertained,  and  the  work  has  even  been  taken  in  hand  ;  but  all  that  has  hitherto  been
done  has  remained  in  a  fragmentary  and  incomplete  state.

*  The  Recess  {Abschied — Recessus),  the  document  wherewith  the  labours  of  a  deliberative  assem-
bly are  closed,  and  in  which  they  are  summed  up.  All  the  resolutions  of  the  assembly,  or  the  deci-
sions of  their  sovereign  on  their  proposals  or  petitions,  were  collected  into  one  whole,  and  the  session,
or,  according  to  the  German  expression,  day  ( Tag)  was  thus  closed,  with  the  publication  of  the
Recess.  Each  separate  law,  after  having  passed  the  two  colleges,  that  of  the  electors  and  that  of  the
princes,  received  the  emperor's  assent  or  ratification,  and  had  then  the  force  of  law.  It  was  called
Resolution  of  the  Empire  (Reichscluss  of  Reicksconclusum).  The  older  recesses  of  the  empire  (Reicks-
abschiede)  are  lost.  Since  the  year  1663,  as  the  diet  remained  constantly  sitting  down  to  1806,  no
recess,  properly  so  called,  could  be  published.  The  sum  of  all  the  decisions  or  acts  of  a  diet  was  called
Reichsabsckied.  The  correspondence  of  this  with  the  English  term  Statute  will  be  seen  in  the  follow-
ing extract :  "  For  all  the  acts  of  one  session  of  parliament  taken  together  make  properly  but  one
statute  ;  and  therefore  when  two  sessions  have  been  held  in  one  year  we  usually  mention  stat.  1  or  2.
Thus  the  Bill  of  Rights  is  cited  as  1  W.  &  M.  st.  2,  c.  2  ;  signifying  that  it  is  the  second  chapter  or
act  of  the  second  statute,  or  the  laws  made  in  the  second  session  of  parliament  in  the  first  year  of  King
William  and  Queen  M-^ry.""— Blackstone' s  Comment,  vol.  i.  p.  85,  15th  ed.

The  speech  with  which  the  emperor  opened  the  diet  was  called  the  Proposition.

(3)

iv  PREFACE.

As  it  is  the  natural  ambition  of  every  man  to  leave  behind  him  some  useful  record
of  his  existence,  I  have  long  cherished  the  project  of  devoting  my  industry  and  my
powers  to  this  most  important  work.  Not  that  I  flattered  myself  that  I  was  competent
to  supply  so  large  a  deficiency ;  to  exhaust  the  mass  of  materials  in  its  manifold
juridical  bearings ;  my  idea  was  only  to  trace  with  accuracy  the  rise  and  developmt;nt
of  the  constitution  of  the  empire,  through  a  series  (if  possible  unbroken)  of  the  A: is
of  the  Diets.

Fortune  was  so  propitious  to  my  wishes,  that,  in  the  autumn  of  1836, 1  found  in  the
Archives  of  the  city  of  Frankfurt  a  collection  of  the  very  kind  I  wanted,  and  was
permitted  to  use  these  precious  documents  with  all  the  facility  I  could  desire.

The  collection  consists  of  ninety-six  folio  volumes,  which  contain  the  Acts  of  the
Imperial  Diets  from  1414  to  1613.  In  the  earlier  part  it  is  very  imperfect,  but  step
by  step,  in  proportion  as  the  constitution  of  the  empire  acquires  form  and  development,
the  documents  rise  in  interest.  At  the  beginning  of  the  sixteenth  century,  from  which
time  the  practice  of  reducing  public  proceedings  to  writing  was  introduced,  it  becomes
so  rich  in  new  and  important  documents,  that  it  lays  the  strongest  hold  on  the  atten-
tion. There  are  not  only  the  acts,  but  the  reports  of  the  deputies  from  the  cities — the
Rathsfreünde,  which  generally  charm  by  their  frankness  and  simplicity,  and  often  s  ir-
prise  by  their  sagacity.  I  profited  by  the  opportunity  to  make  myself  master  of  The
contents  of  the  first  sixty-four  of  these  volumes,  extending  down  to  the  year  1551.  A
collection  of  Imperial  Rescripts  occasionally  afibrded  me  valuable  contributions.

But  I  could  not  stop  here.  A  single  town  was  not  in  a  condition  to  know  all  that
passed.  It  is  evident  that  the  labours  of  the  electoral  and  princely  colleges  were  not
to  be  sought  for  in  the  records  of  a  city.

In  the  beginning  of  the  year  1837,  I  received  permission  to  explore  the  Royal
Archives  of  the  kingdom  of  Prussia  at  Berlin,  and  in  the  April  of  the  same  year,  the
State  Archives  of  the  kingdom  of  Saxony  at  Dresden,  for  the  affairs  of  the  empire
during  the  times  of  Maximilian  I.  and  Charles  V.  The  former  were  of  great  value
to  me,  as  containing  the  records  of  an  electorate ;  the  latter,  down  to  the  end  of  that
epoch,  those  of  a  sovereign  principality.  It  is  true  that  I  came  upon  many  documents
which  I  had  already  seen  at  Frankfurt ;  but,  at  the  same  time,  I  found  a  great  number
of  new  ones,  which  gave  me  an  insight  into  parts  of  the  subject  hitherto  obscure.
None  of  these  collections  is,  indeed,  complete,  and  many  a  question  which  suggests
itself  remains  unanswered  ;  yet  they  are  in  a  high  degree  instructive.  They  throw  u
completely  new  light  on  the  character  and  conduct  of  such  influential  princes  as
Joachim  II.  of  Brandenburg,  and  still  more,  Maurice  of  Saxony.

Let  no  one  pity  a  man  who  devotes  himself  to  studies  apparently  so  dry,  and
neglects  for  them  the  delights  of  many  a  joyous  day.  It  is  true  the  companions  of  his
solitary  hours  are  but  lifeless  paper,  but  they  are  the  remnants  of  the  life  of  past  ages,
which  gradually  assume  form  and  substance  to  the  eye  occupied  in  the  study  of  them.'
For  me  (in  a  preface  an  author  is  bound  to  speak  of  himself —  a  subject  he  elsewhere
gladly  avoids)  they  had  a  peculiar  interest.

When  I  wrote  the  first  part  of  my  History  of  the  Popes,  I  designedly  treated  the
origin  and  progress  of  the  Reformation  with  as  much  brevity  as  the  subject  permitted.
I  cherished  the  hope  of  dedicating  more  extensive  and  profound  research  to  this  most
important  event  of  the  history  of  our  country.

This  hope  was  now  abundantly  satisfied.  Of  the  new  matter  which  I  found,  the
greater  part  related  directly  or  indirectly  to  the  epoch  of  the  Reformation.  At  evei  v
step  I  acquired  nev/  information  as  to  the  circumstances  which  prepared  the  politic  *»
rehgious  movement  of  that  time;  the  phases  of  our  national  life,  by  which  it  wjs
accelerated ;  the  origin  and  working  of  the  resistance  it  encountered.

PREFACE.  V

It  Is  impossible  to  approach  a  matter  originating  in  such  intense  mental  energy,  and
exercising  so  vast  an  influence  on  the  destinies  of  the  world,  without  being  profoundly
interested  and  absorbed  by  it.  I  was  fully  sensible  that  if  I  executed  the  work  I  pro-
posed to  myself,  the  Refornmation  would  be  the  centre  on  which  all  other  incidents
and  circumstances  would  turn.

But  to  accomplish  this,  more  accurate  information  as  to  the  progress  of  opinion  in
the  evangelical*  or  reforming  party,  especially  in  a  polhical  point  of  view,  antecedent
to  the  crisis  of  th^  Reformation,  was  necessary  than  any  that  could  be  gathered  from
printed  sources.  The  Archives  common  to  the  whole  Ernestine  line  of  Saxony,
deposited  at  Weimar,  which  I  visited  in  August,  1837,  afforded  me  what  I  desired.
Nor  can  any  spot  be  more  full  of  information  on  the  marked  epochs  at  which  this
house  played  so  important  a  part,  than  the  vault  in  which  its  archives  are  preserved.
The  walls  and  the  whole  interior  space  are  covered  with  the  rolls  of  documents  relating
to  the  actions  and  events  of  that  period.  Every  note,  every  draft  of  an  answer,  is
here  preserved.  The  correspondence  between  the  Elector  John  Frederic  and  the
Landgrave  Philip  of  Hessen  would  alone  fill  a  long  series  of  printed  volumes.  I
endeavoured,  above  all,  to  make  myself  master  of  the  two  registers,  which  include  the
affairs  of  the  empire  and  the  Schmalkaldic  League.  As  to  the  former,  I  found,  as
was  to  be  expected  from  the  nature  of  the  subject,  many  valuable  details ;  as  to  the
latter,  I  hence  first  drew  information  which  is,  I  hope,  in  some  degree  calculated  to
satisfy  the  curiosity  of  the  public.

I  feel  bound  here  publicly  to  express  my  thanks  to  the  authorities  to  whom  the
guardianship  of  all  these  Archives  is  entrusted  for  the  liberal  aid — often  not  unattended
with  personal  trouble  —  which  I  received  from  them  all.  How  much  more  easy  are
existence  and  study  become  than  they  formerly  were  !

At  length,  I  conceived  the  idea  of  undertaking  a  more  extensive  research  into  the
Archives  of  Germany.  I  repaired  to  the  Communal  Archives  of  the  house  of  Anhalt
at  Dessau,  which  at  the  epoch  in  question  shared  the  opinions  and  followed  the
example  of  that  of  Saxony ;  but  I  soon  saw  that  I  should  here  be  in  danger  of
encumbering  myself  with  too  much  matter  of  a  merely  local  character.  I  remem-
bered how  many  other  documents  relating  to  this  period,  had  been  explored  and
employed  by  the  industry  of  German  inquirers.  The  work  of  Bucholz  on  Ferdinand
L  contains  a  most  copious  treasure  of  important  matter  from  those  of  Austria,  of
which  too  little  use  is  made  in  that  state.  The  instructive  writings  of  Stumpf  and
Winter  are  founded  on  those  of  Bavaria.  The  Archives  of  Würtenberg  were  formerly
explored  by  Sattler  ;  the  Hessian,  recently,  by  Rommel  and  Neudecker.  For  the
more  exclusively  ecclesiastical  view  of  the  period,  the  public  is  in  possession  of  a  rich
mass  of  authentic  documents  in  the  collections  of  Walch,  and  the  recent  editions  of
Luther's  Letters  by  De  Wette,  and  still  more  in  those  of  Älelanchthon  by  Bret-
schneider.  The  letters  of  the  deputies  from  Strasburg  and  Nürnberg,  which  have
been  published,  throw  light  on  the  history  of  particular  diets.  It  is  hardly  necessary
for  me  to  mention  how  much  has  lately  been  brought  together  by  Förstemann  respect-
ing the  Diet  of  Augsburg  of  1530,  so  long  the  subject  of  earnest  research  and  labour.

Recent  publications',  especially  in  Italy  and  England,  lead  us  to  hope  for  the  possi-

*  It  is,  perhaps,  hardly  necessary  to  remark,  that  I  have  retained  this  word  throughout  the  following
work  in  its  original  acceptation  ;  viz.  as  denoting  the  party  which,  at  the  time  of  the  Reformation,
adhered  to  the  Confession  of  Augsburg.  In  our  own  age  and  country  it  has  been  adopted  by  a  party
which  stands  in  nearly  the  same  relation  to  the  Church  of  England  as  the  party  called  pietistigal
{pieiistisch)  to  the  Lutheran  Church  of  Germany.  But  this  did  not  seem  to  me  a  sufHcient  reason
for  removing  it  from  its  proper  and  authorised  place  in  German  history. — Transl.

vi  PREFACE.

bility  of  a  thorough  and  satisfactory  -explanation  of  the  foreign  relations  of  the
empire.*

I  see  the  time  approach  in  which  we  shall  no  longer  have  to  found  modern  history
on  the  reports  even  of  contemporaneous  historians,  except  in  so  far  as  they  were  in
possession  of  personal  and  immediate  knowledge  of  facts ;  still  less,  on  works  yet
more  remote  from  the  source ;  but  on  the  narratives  of  eye-witnesses,  and  the
genuine  and  original  documents.  For  the  epoch  treated  in  the  following  work,  this
prospect  is  no  distant  one.  I  myself  have  made  use  of  a  number  of  records  which  I
had  found  when  in  the  pursuit  of  another  subject,  in  the  Archives  of  Vienna,  Venice,
Rome,  and  especially  Florence.  Had  I  gone  into  further  detail,  I  should  have  run  the
risk  of  losing  sight  of  the  subject  as  a  whole ;  or,  in  the  necessary  lapse  of  time,  of
breaking  the  unity  of  the  conception  which  arose  before  my  mind  in  the  course  of  my
past  researches.

And  thus  I  proceeded  boldly  to  the  completion  of  this  work ;  persuaded  that  when
an  inquirer  has  made  researches  of  some  extent  in  the  authentic  records,  with  an
earnest  spirit  and  a  genuine  ardour  for  truth,  later  discoveries  may  throw  clearer  and
more  certain  light  on  details,  but  can  only  strengthen  his  fundamental  conceptions  of
the  subject :  —  for  truth  can  be  but  one.

*  Researches  and  publications  of  this  kind  have  been  going  on  ever  since  the  first  edition  of  the
two  first  volumes  of  this  work  were  published ;  I  have  availed  myself  of  them  as  far  as  was  possible  in
the  second.  Nor  have  I  neglected  to  introduce  the  additional  matter  which  presented  itself  to  me  in
Brussels  and  in  Paris. (Note  to  the  second  edition.')  ,

TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE

In  the  Preface  to  the  first  volume  of  this  work,  I  said  that,  accord-
ing to  the  view  of  the  Author,  it  might  be  divided  into  three  epochs  :
the  first  comprehended  in  the  first  two  volumes ;  the  next,  in  the
third ;  and  the  last,  in  the  two  concluding  volumes.

The  second  of  these  historical  divisions  I  now,  after  a  considerable
and  unwilling  delay,  offer  to  the  English  reader.

If,  in  the  volumes  already  translated,  he  watched  the  early  struggles,
the  partial  and  doubtful  triumphs  of  the  church  founded  by  Luther,
he  will  here  accompany  it,  through  the  various  stages  of  growing
strength,  to  maturity.  At  the  close  of  this  volume,  we  leave  it  in
possession  of  all  the  attributes  of  a  regularly  constituted  Church ;  we
leave  it  protected  by  the  civil  power,  and  yielding  in  return  cordial
obedience  and  firm  support.

We  leave  it  also  (such  is  the  infirmity,  and  such  the  presumption
of  man)  already  laying  claim  to  the  possession  of  absolute  truth;
already  forging  instruments  for  restraining  the  inquiry  it  had  so
ardently  promoted,  and  so  largely  used;  and  for  establishing  an
authority  akin  to  that  which  it  had  risen  to  overthrow.

In  their  ardour  to  overthrow  the  authority  of  the  ancient  church,
the  Reformers  had  not  measured  the  aberrations  of  which  undis-
ciplined  minds,  suddenly  freed  from  habitual  restraint,  are  capable :
and  now,  alarmed  at  the  frightful  and  apparently  boundless  extent  of
the  moral  disorder,  they  felt  the  necessity  of  fixing  certain  limits,
beyond  which  the  extravagance  of  man  should  not  pass.

But  if  they  had  not  calculated  the  amount  of  evil  they  had  let
loose  on  the  world,  neither  had  they  understood  all  the  value  and
potency  of  the  great  conservative  and  corrective  principle  to  which
they  were  the  first  to  give  a  general  and  systematic  application.  It
is  in  the  promptitude,  the  energy,  the  inflexible  perseverance,  with
which  Luther  seized  and  pursued  the  idea  of  the  connexion  between
the  Church  and  the  School  (i.  e.  the  joint  and  inseparable  culture  of

translator's  preface.

the  religioTis  affections  and  the  intellectual  faculties),  and  of  the  duty
incumbent  on  a  Christian  State  to  provide  with  equal  care  for  both,
that  we  recognize  the  pre-eminent  genius  of  the  first  German
Reformer.  This  idea  was  adopted  by  most  of  his  successors ;  but
none  of  them — nor,  indeed,  even  the  great  author  of  it  himself — was
as  yet  sufficiently  secure  of  its  results,  to  dare  to  intrust  religion  to
the  guardianship  of  enlightened  reason,  or  the  order  of  the  world  to
the  slow  but  sure  operation  of  moral  discipline.

The  experience  of  three  centuries  has  shown  that  religion  and
morality  have,  at  best,  a  precarious  hold  on  minds  too  gross  to  under-
stand their  foundations  or  their  value ;  that  all  modes  of  governing
men  which  take  no  account  of  their  reason  are  inefficacious  or  de-
praving, and,  in  either  case,  fraught  with  danger;  and  thus  the
political  expediency  (as  well  as  the  Christian  duty)  of  educating  the
people,  which  the  dauntless  innovator  was  the  first  to  proclaim,  has
come  to  be  admitted,  even  by  the  selfish  and  the  timorous.  Nor  is
the  recognition  of  this  great  necessity  confined  to  the  countries  which
adopted  his  ecclesiastical  reforms.  In  many  of  those  where  the
Catholic  Church  retains  her  authority,  the  State  has  provided  (more
or  less  amply)  for  the  instruction  of  all  its  subjects.

The  origin  and  course  of  the  Keformation  in  England  sufficiently
explain  the  absence  of  any  such  presiding  thought  among  its  authors
and  leaders.  Exactly  three  hundred  years  have  passed  since  Luther's
death  (1546) :  are  we  too  sanguine  in  believing  the  time  to  be  at  hand,
when,  in  a  country  calling  herself  the  champion  of  Protestantism,
some  attempt  may  be  made  to  act  up  to  that  sublime  conception  of
the  duties  of  a  Reformed  Church  and  a  Protestant  State,  which  he
bequeathed  to  the  world  ?

S.  A.

December,  1846.

HISTORY

REFORMATION  IN  GERMANY

INTRODUCTION.

VIEW OF THE EARLY  HISTORY OF GERMANY.

For  purposes  of  discussion  or  of  instruction,
it  may  be  possible  to  sever  ecclesiastical  from
political  history  ;  in  actual  life,  they  are  indis-
solubly  connected,  or  rather  fused  into  one  in-
divisible whole.

As  indeed  there  is  nothing  of  real  import-
ance in  the  moral  and  intellectual  business  of
human  life,  the  source  of  which  does  not  lie
in  a  profound  and  more  or  less  conscious  rela-
tion of  man  and  his  concerns  to  God  and  divine
things,  it  is  injipossible  to  conceive  a  nation
worthy  of  the  name,  or  entitled  to  be  called,  in
any  sense,  great,  whose  political  existence  is
not  constantly  elevated  and  guided  by  religious
ideas.  To  cultivate,  purify  and  exalt  these, —
to  give  them  an  expression  intelligible  to  all
and  profitaWe  to  all,— to  embody  them  in  out-
ward forms  and  public  acts,  is  its  necessary  as
well  as  its  noblest  task.

It  is  not  to  be  denied  that  this  process  in-
evitably brings  into  action  two  great  principles
wiiich  seem  to  place  a  nation  at  variance  with
itself.  Nationality  (i.  e.  the  sum  of  the  pecu-
liar qualities,  habits,  and  sentiments  of  a  nation)
is  necessarily  restricted  within  the  bounds
marked  out  by  neighbouring  nationalities ;
whereas  religion,  ever  since  it  was  revealed  to
the  world  in  a  form  which  claims  and  deserves
universality,  constantly  strives  after  sole  and
absolute  supremacy.

In  the  foundation  or  constitution  of  a  State,
some  particular  moral  or  intellectual  principle
predominates ;  a  principle  prescribed  by  an
inherent  necessity,  expressed  in  determinate
forms  and  giving  birth  to  a  peculiar  condition
of  society,  or  character  of  civilisation.  But
no  sooner  has  a  Church,  with  its  forms  of
wider  application,  embracing  different  nations,
arisen,  than  it  grasps  at  the  project  of  absorb-
ing the  State,  and  of  reducing  the  principle  on
which  civil  society  is  founded  to  complete
subjection :  the  original  underived  authority
of  that  principle  is,  indeed,  rarely  acknow-
ledged by  the  Church.

At  length the  universal  religion  appears,
and,  after  it  has  incorporated  itself  w-ith  the
consciousness  of  mankind,  assumes  the  cha-
4  c

I  racter  of  a  great  and  growing  tradition,  handed
I  down  from  people  to  people,  and  communi-
I  cated  in  rigid  dogmas.  But  nations  cannot
suffer  themselves  to  be  debarred  from  exer-
cising the  understanding  bestowed  on  them  by
nature,  or  the  knowledge  acquired  hj  study,
on  an  investigation  of  its  truth.  In  every  age,
therefore,  we  see  diversities  in  the  views  of
religion  arise,  in  different  nations,  and  these
again  react  in  various  ways  on  the  character
and  condition  of  the  State.  It  is  evident,  from
the  nature  of  this  struggle,  how  mighty  is  the
crisis  w^hich  it  involves  for  the  destinies  of  the
human  race.  Religious  truth  must  have  an
outward  and  visible  representation,  in  order
that  the  State  may  be  perpetually  reminded  of
the  origin  and  the  end  of  our  earthly  existence ;
of  the  rights  of  our  neighbours,  and  the  kindred
of  all  the  nations  of  the  earth  ;  it  would  other-
wise be  in  danger  of  degenerating  into  tyranny,
or  of  hardening  into  inveterate  prejudice, —
into  intolerant  conceit  of  self,  and  hatred  of  all
that  is  foreign.  On  the  other  hand,  a  free  de-
velopment of  the  national  character  and  culture
is  necessary  to  the  interests  of  religion.  With-
out this,  its  doctrines  can  never  be  truly  under-
stood nor  profoundly  accepted  :  without  inces-
sant alternations  of  doubt  and  conviction,  of
assent  and  dissent,  of  seeking  and  finding,  no
error  could  be  removed,  no  deeper  understand-
ing of  truth  attained.  Thus,  then,  independ-
ence of  thought  and  political  freedom  are  in-
dispensable to  the  Church  herself;  she'  needs
them  to  remind  her  of  the, varying  intellectual
wants  of  men,  of  the  changing  nature  of  her
own  forms ;  she  needs  them  to  preserve  her
from  the  lifeless  iteration  of  misunderstood
doctrines  and  rites,  which  kill  the  soul.

It  has  been  said,  the  State  is  itself  the
Church,  but  the  Church  has  thought  herself
authorised  to  usurp  the  place  of  the  State.
The  truth  is,  that  the  spiritual  or  intellectual
life  of  man — in  its  intensest  depth  and  energy
unquestionably  one — yet  manifests  itself  in
these  two  institutions,  which  come  into  con-
tact under  the  most  varied  fo?ms  ;  which  are
continually  striving  to  pervade  each  other,  yet

(25)

26

INTRODUCTION,

never  entirely  coincide  ;  to  exclude  each  other,
yet  neither  has  ever  been  permanently  victor
or  vanquished.  In  the  nations  of  the  West,
at  least,  such  a  result  has  never  been  obtained.
The  Califate  may  unite  ecclesiastical  and
political  power  in  one  hand;  but  the  whole
life  and  character  of  western  Christendom  con-
sists of  the  incessant  action  and  counter-action
of  Church  and  State ;  hence  arises  the  freer,
more  comprehensive,  more  profound  activity  of
mind,  which  must,  on  the  whole,  be  admitted
10  characterise  that  portion  of  the  globe.  The
aspect  of  the  public  life  of  Europe  is  always
determined  by  the  mutual  relations  of  these
two  great  principles.

Kence  it  happens  that  ecclesiastical  history
is  not  to  be  understood  without  political,  nor
the  latter  without  the  former.  The  combina-
tion of  both  is  necessary  to  present  either  in
its  true  light ;  and  if  ever  we  are  able  to
fathom  the  depths  of  that  profounder  life  where
both  have  their  common  source  and  origin,  it
must  be  by  a  complete  knowledge  of  this  com-
bination.

But  if  this  is  the  case  with  all  nations,  it  is
most  pre-eminently  so  with  the  German,  w^hich
has  bestowed  more  persevering  and  original
thought  on  ecclesiastical  and  religious  subjects
than  any  other.  The  events  of  ten  centuries
turn  upon  the  struggles  between  the  Empire
and  the  Papacy,  between  Catholicism  and
Protestantism.  We,  in  our  days,  stand  mid-
way between  them.

My  design  is"  to  relate  the  history  of  an
epoch  in  which  the  politico-religious  energy
of  the  German  nation  was  most  conspicuous
for  its. growth  and  most  prolific  in  its  results.
I  do  not  conceal  from  myself  the  great  diffi-
culty of  this  undertaking ;  but,  with  God's
help,  I  will  endeavour  to  accomplish  it.  I
sjiall  first  attempt  to  trace  my  way  through  a
retrospect  of  earlier  times.

CAROLINGIAN TIMES.

One  of  the  most  important  epochs  in  the
history  of  the  world  was  the  commenceijient
of  the  eighth  century ;  when,  on  the  one  side
Mahommedanism  threatened  to  overspread
Italy  and  Gaul,  and  on  the  other,  the  ancient
idolatry  of  Saxony  and  Friesland  once  more
forced  its  way  across  the  Rhine.  In  this  peril
of  Christian  institutions  a  youthful  prince  of
Germanic 'race,  Karl  Martell,  arose  as  their
champion  ;  maintained  them  with  all  the  en-
ergy which  the  necessity  for  self-defence  calls
forth,  and  finally  extended  them  into  new
regions.  For,  as  the  possessor  of  the  sole
power  which  still  remained  erect  in  the  nations
of  Roman  origin — the  Pope  of  Rome — allied
himself  with  this  prince  and  his  successors;
as  he  received  assistance  from  them,  and  be-
stowed in  return  the  favour  and  protection  of
the  spiritual  authority,  the  compound  of  military
and  sacerdotal  government  v/hich  forms  the
basis  of  all  European  civilisation  from  that
moment  arose  into  being.  From  that  time
conquest  and  conversion  went  hand  in  hand.
"  As  soon,"  says  the  author  of  the  life  of  St.

Boniface,  "as  the  authority  of  the  glorious
Prince  Charles  over  the  Frisians  was  con-
firmed, the  trumpet  of  the  sacred  word  was
heard."  It  would  be  difficult  to  say  whether
the  Frankic  domination  contributed  more  to  the
conversion  of  the  Hessians  and  Thuringians,
or  Christianity  to  the  incorporation  of  tl^^ose
races  with  the  Frankic  empire.  The  war  of
Charlemagne  against  the  Saxons  was  a  war
not  only  of  conquest  but  of  religion.  Charle-
magne opened  it  with  an  attack  on  the  old
Saxon  sanctuary,  the  Irminsul ;  the  Saxons
retorted  by  the  destruction  of  the  church  at
Fritzlar.  Charlemagne  marched  to  battle  bear-
ing the  relics  of  saints ;  missionaries  accom-
panied the  divisions  of  his  army  ;  his  victories
were  celebrated  by  the  establishment  of  bishop-
rics ;  baptism  was  the  seal  of  subjection  and
allegiance ;  relapse  into  heathenism  was  also
a  crime  against  the  state.  The  consummation
of  all  these  incidents  is  to  be  found  in  the  in-
vestiture of  the  aged  conqueror  with  the  im-
perial crown.  A  German,  in  the  natural  course
of  events  and  in  the  exercise  of  regular  legi-
timate power,  occupied  the  place  of  the  Caesars
as  chief  of  a  great  part  of  the  Romanz  world;
he  also  assumed  a  lofty  station  at  the  side
of  the  Roman  pontiff  in  spiritual  affairs;  a
Frankic  synod  saluted  him,  as  "Regent  of  the
true  religion."  The  entire  state  of  which  he
was  the  chief  now  assumed  a  colour  and  form
wherein  the  spiritual  and  temporal  elements
were  completely  blended.  The  union  between
emperor  and  pope  served  as  a  model  for  that
between  count  and  bishop.  The  archdeacon-
ries into  which  the  bishoprics  were  divided,
generally,  if  not  universally,  coincided  with
the  Gauen,  or  political  divisions  of  the  country.
As  the  counties  were  divided  into  hundreds,
so  were  the  archdeaconries  into  deaneries.
The  seat  of  them  was  different;  but,  in  respect
of  the  territory  over  which  their  jurisdiction
extended,  there  was  a  striking  correspondence.*
According  to  the  view  of  the  lor,d  and  ruler,
not  only  was  the  secular  power  to  lend  its  arm
to  the  spiritual,  but  the  spiritual  to  aid  the
temporal  by  its  excommunications.  The  great
empire  reminds  us  of  a  vast  neutral  ground  in
the  midst  of  a  world  filled  with  carnage  and
devastation ;  where  an  iron  will  imposes  peace
on  forces  generally  in  a  state  of  mutual  hos-
tility and  destruction,  and  fosters  and  shelters
the  germ  of  civilisation ;  so  guarded  was  it  on
all  sides  by  impregnable  marches.

But  every  age  could  not  produce  a  man  so
formed  to  subdue  and  to  command  ;  and  for
the  development  of  the  world  which  Charle-
magne founded,  it  remained  to  be  seen  what
would  be  the  mutual  bearing  of  the  different
elements  of  which  it  was  composed  ;  whether
they  would  blend  with  or  repel  each  other,
agree  or  conflict :  for  there  can  be  no  true  and
enduring  vitality  without  the  free  motion  of
natural  and  innate  pov/ers  and  propensities.

It  was  inevitable  that  the  clergy  would  first
feel  its  own  strength.  This  body  formed  a
corporation  independent  even  of  the  emperor :

*See  Wenck,  Hessische  Landesgeschichte,  ii.  469.

CAROLINGIAN  TIMES.

27

originating  and  developed  in  the  Romanz  na-
tions, whose  most  remarkable  product  it  had
been  in  the  preceding  century,  it  now  extended
over  those  of  Germanic  race;  in  which,  through
the  medium  of  a  common  language,  it  continu-
ally made  new  proselytes  and  gained  strength
and  consistency.

Even  under  Charlemagne  the  spiritual  ele-
ment was  already  bestirring  itself  wdth  activity
and  vigour.  .  One  of  the  most  remarkable  of
his  capitularies  is  that  wherein  he  expresses
his  astonishment  that  his  spiritual  and  tem-
poral officers  so  often  thwart,  instead  of  sup-
porting each  other,  as  it  is  their  duty  to  do.
He  does  not  disguise  that  it  was  the  clergy
more  especially  who  exceeded  their  powers :
to  them  he  addresses  the  question,  fraught  with
reproach  and  displeasure,  which  has  been  so
often  repeated  by  succeeding  ages  —  how  far
tliey  are  justified  in  interfering  in  purely  secu-
lar affairs]  He  tells  them  they  must  explain
what  is  meant  by  renouncing  the  world;
whether  that  is  consistent  with  large  and
costly  retinues,  with  attempts  to  persuade  the
ignorant  to  make  donations  of  their  goods  and
to  disinherit  their  children ;  whether  it  were
not  better  to  foster  good  morals  than  to  build
churches,  and  the  like.*

But  the  clergy  soon  evinced  a  much  stronger
propensity  to  ambitious  encroachment.

We  need  not  here  inquire  w^hether  the  pseu-
do-Isidorian  decretals  were  invented  as  early
as  the  reign  of  Charlemagne,  or  somewhat
later ;  in  the  F^ankic  church,  or  in  Italy :  at
all  events,  they  belong  to  that  period,  are  con-
nected with  a  most  extensive  project,  and  form
a  great  epoch  in  our  history.  The  project  was
to  overthrow  the  existing  constitution  of  the
church,  which,  in  every  country,  still  essenti-
ally rested  on  the  authority  of  the  metropolitan ;
to  place  the  whole  church  in  immediate  sub-
jection to  the  pope  of  Rome,  and  to  establish
a  unity  of  the  spiritual  power,  by  means  of
which  it  must  necessarily  emancipate  itself
from  the  temporal.  Such  was  the  plan  which
the  clergy  had  even  then  the  boldness  to  avow.
A  series  of  names  of  the  earlier  popes  v/ere
pressed  into  the  service,  in  order  to  append  to
them  forged  documents,  to  which  a  colour  of
legality  was  thus  given.f

And  what  was  it  not  possible  to  effect  in
those  times  of  profound  historical  ignorance,
in  which  past  ages  were  only  beheld  through
the  twilight  of  falsehood  and  fantastic  error?
and  under  princes  like  the  successors  of  Char-
lemagne, whose  minds,  instead  of  being  eleva-
ted or  purified  were  crushed  by  religious  influ-
ences, so  that  they  lost  the  power  of  distin-
guishing the  spiritual  from  the  temporal  pro-
vince of  the  clerical  office  1

It  is  indisputable  that  the  order  of  succes-

*"CapJtulare  iuterrogationis  de  iis  quse  Karolus  M.
pro  communi  omnium  utilitate  interroganda  constituit
Aquisgrani  811." — Monum.  Oermanice  Histor.  ed.  Pertz,
iii.  p.  106.

t  A  passage  from  the  spurious  Acts  of  the  Synods  of
Pope  Silvester  is  found  in  a  Capitulary  of  806.  See  Eicli-
horn,  Ueber  die  spanische  Sammlung  der  Quellen  des
Kirchenrechts  in  den  Abhandll.  der  Preuss.  Akad.  d.  W.
1834. Püilos.  Hist.  Klasse,  p.  132. *

sion  to  the  throne  which  Louis  the  Pious,  in
utter  disregard  of  the  warnings  of  his  faithful
adherents,  and  in  opposition  to  all  German
modes  of  thinking,  established  in  the  year  817,4:
was  principally  brought  about  by  the  influence
of  the  clergy.  "The  empire,"  says  Agobar-
dus,  "  must  not  be  divided  into  three  ;  it  must
remain  one  and  undivided."  The  division  of
the  empire  seemed  to  endanger  the  unity  of  the
church  :  and,  as  the  emperor  was  chiefly  de-
termined by  spiritual  motives,  the  regulations
adopted  were  enforced  with  all  the  pomp  of
j  religious  ceremonies,  —  by  masses,  fasts,  and
I  distributions  of  alms ;  every  one  swore  to
I  them ;  they  were  held  to  be  inspired  by  God
himself,

, After  this,  no  one,  not  even  the  emperor,
could  venture  to  depart  from  them. Great,  at
least,  were  the  evils  which  he  brought  upon
himself  by  his  attempt  to  do  so,  out  of  love  to
a  son  born  at  a  later  period  of  his  life. The
irritated  clergy  made  common  cause  with  his
elder  sons,  who  w^ere  already  dissatisfied  with
the  administration  of  the  empire. The  supreme
pontiff  came  in  person  from  Rome  and  declared
in  their  favour ;  and  a  universal  revolt  was  the
I  consequence. Nor  did  this  first  manifestation
I  of  their  power  satisfy  the  clergy. In  order  to
I  make  sure  of  their  advantage,  they  formed  the
j  daring scheme of depriving the born  and
I  anointed  emperor,  on  whom  they  could  now  no
I  longer  place  reliance,  of  his  consecrated  dig-
I  nity, — a  dignity  which,  at  any  rate,  he  owed
not  to  them, — and  of  bestowing  it  immediately
on  the  successor  to  the  throne  who  had  been
nominated  in  817,  and  who  was  the  natural
representative  of  the  unity  of  the  empire. If,
on  the  one  hand,  it  is  indisputable  that,  in  the
eighth  century,  the  spiritual  authority  contri-
buted greatly  to  the  establishment  of  the  prin-
ciple of  obedience  to  the  temporal  government,
it  is  equally  certain  that,  in  the  ninth,  it  made
I  rapid  strides  towards  the  acquisition  of  pov/er
I  into  its  own  hands. In  the  collection  of  capi-
I  tularies  of  BenediCtus  Levita,  it  is  treated  as
one  of  the  leading  principles,  that  no  constitu-
tion in  the  world  has  any  force  or  validity  against
the  decisions  of  the  popes  of  Rome;  in  more
than  one  canon,  kings  who  act  in  opposition  to
I  this  principle  are  threatened  with  divine  pun-
ishment.§ The monarchy of Charlemagne
seemed  to  be  about  to  be  transformed  into  an
ecclesiastical  state.

I  do  not  hesitate  to  affirm  that  it  was  mainly
the  people  of  Germany  who  resisted  this  ten-
dency ;  indeed,  that  it  was  precisely  this  re-
sistance which  first  a,wakened  Germany  to  a
consciousness  of  its  own  importance  as  a  na-
tion. For  it  would  be  impossible  to  speak  of
a  German  nation,  in  the  proper  sense  of  the
word,  during  the  preceding  ages.  In  the  more
remote,  the  several  tribes  had  not  even  a  com-
mon  name  by  which they  recognised each

I  Fauriel,  Histoire  de  la  Gaule  Merid.  iv.  47,  examines
this  point  more  in  detail.

§  Benedicti  Capitularia,  lib.  ii.  p.  322.  "  Velut  praeva-
ricator  catholicse  fidei  semper  a  Domino  reus  existat  qui-
cunque  regum  cajionis  hajus  censuram  permiserit  violan-
dam."  Lib.  iii.  346.  "  Constitutiones  contradecreta  prse-
sulum  Romanorum  nullius  sunt  momenti."

28

INTRODUCTION.

other:  during  the  period  of  their  migration,
they  fought  with  as  much  hostility  among
themselves  as  against  the  stranger,  and  allied
themselves  as  readily  with  the  latter  as  with
those  of  common  race.  Under  the  Merovin-
gian kings  they  were  further  divided  by  reli-
gious enmities ;  the  Saxons,  in  presence  of
Frankic  Christianity,  held  the  more  pertina-
ciously to  their  forms  of  government  and  to
their  ancient  gods.  It  was  not  till  Charlemagne
had  united  all  the  Germanic  tribes,  with  the
exception  of  those  in  England  and  Scandina-
via, in  one  and  the  same  temporal  and  spiritual
allegiance,  that  the  nation  began  to  acquire
form  and  consistency ;  it  was  not  till  the  be-
ginning of  the  ninth  centur}'',  that  the  German
name  appeared  as  contra-distinguished  from
the  Romanz  portion  of  the  empire.*

It  is  worthy  of  eternal  remembrance,  that
the  first  act  in  which  the  Germans  appear  as
one  people,  is  the  resistance  to  the  attempt  of
the  clergy  to  depose  their  emperor  and  lord.

The  ideas  of  legitimacy  which  they  had  in-
herited from  their  past  political  life  and  his-
tory, as  members  of  tribes,  would  never  have
led  them  to  derive  it  from  the  pretended  grace
of  God, — that  is  to  SdLj,  from  the  declaration
of  the  spiritual  authorities.  They  were  at-
tached to  Louis  the  Pious,  who  had  rendered
peculiar  services  to  the  Saxon  chiefs ;  their
aversion  to  his  deposition  was  easily  fanned
into  a  flame :  at  the  call  of  Louis  the  Ger-
manic, who  kept  his  court  in  Bavaria,  the
other  tribes,  Saxons,  Swabians,  and  Franks,
on  this  side  the  Carbonaria,  gathered  around
his  banner ;  for  the  first  time  they  were  united
in  one  great  object.  As  they  were  aided  by
an  analogous,  though  much  feebler,  movement
in  the  south  of  France,  the  bishops  soon  found
themselves  compelled  to  absolve  the  emperor
from  the  penance  they  had  imposed,  and  to
acknowledge  him  again  as  their  lord.  The
first  historical  act  of  the  united  nation  is  this
rising  in  favour  of  their  born  prince  against
the  spiritual  power.  Nor  were  they  any  longer
inclined  to  consent  to  such  a  deviation  from
their  own  law  of  succession,  as  was  involved
in  the  acknowledgment  of  a  single  heir  to  the
whole  monarchy.  When,  after  the  death  of
Louis  the  Pious,  Lothair,  in  spite  of  all  that
had  passed,  made  an  attempt  to  seize  the  reins
of  the  whole  empire,  he  found  in  the  Germans
a  resistance,  at  first  doubtful,  but  every  moment
increasing,  and  finally  victorious.  From  them
his  troops  received  their  first  important  defeat
on  the  Riess,  which  laid  the  foundation  of  the
severance  of  Germany  from  the  great  mon-
archy.!

Lothair  relied  on  his  claims  recognised  by
the  clergy;  the  Germans,  combined  with  the
southern  French,  challenged  him  to  submit
them  to  the  judgment  of  heaven  by  battle.
Then  it  was  that  the  great  array  of  the  Frankic

*  Riihs  Erläuterung  der  zehn  ersten  Capitel  von  Taci-
tus Germania,  p.  103;  Mone  Geschichte  des  Heidenthums
im  Nördlichen  Europa.  Th.  ii.  p.  6.

t  In  Retiense.  (Annales  Ruodolfi  Fuldensis ;  Monu-
menta  Germanioe  Hist.  i.  p.  352.)  According  to  Lang
(Baierische  Gauen,  p.  78.)  belonging  to  the  Svvabian  ter-
ritory.

empire  split  into  two  hostile  masses  ;  the  one
containing  a  preponderance  of  Romanz,  ■  the
other  of  Germanic  elements.  The  former  de-
fended the  unity  of  the  Empire  ;  the  latter
demanded,  according  to  their  German  ideas,  its
separation.  There  is  a  ballad  extant  on  the
battle  of  Fontenay,  in  which  one  of  the  com-
batants expresses  his  grief  at  this  bloody  war
of  fellow-citizens  and  brethren;  "on  that  bit-
ter night  in  which  the  brave  fell,  the  skilful
in  fight."  For  the  destiny  of  the  West  it  was
decisive.:];:  The  judgment  of  heaven  was  tri-
umiphantly  pronounced  against  the  claims  of
the  clergy  ;  three  kingdoms  were  now  actually
established  instead  of* one.  The  secular  Ger-
manic principles  which,  from  the  time  of  the
great  migration  of  tribes,  had  extended  widely
I  into  the  Romanz  world,  remained  in  possession
]  of  the  field  :  they  were  steadfastly  maintained
'  in  the  subsequent  troubles.
i  On  the  extinction  of  one  of  the  three  lines
i  in  which  the  unity  of  the  empire  should  have
rested,  dissensions  broke  out  between  the  two
others,  a  main  feature  of  which  was  the  con-
flict betv/een  the  spiritual  and  secular  princi-
ples.

j The  king  of  the  French,  Charles  the  Bald,
I  had  allied  himself  with  the  clergy  ;  his  armies
I  were  led  to  the  field  by  bishops,  and  he  aban-
doned the  administration  of  his  kingdom  in  a
;  great measure to Hinkmar, archbishop of
]  Rheims. Hence,  when  the  throne  of  Lothar-
ingia  became  vacant  in  the  year  869,  he  expe-
rienced the  warmest  support  #om  the  bishops
of  that  country. "  After,"  ^  say  they,  "  they
had  called  on  God,  w4io  bestows  kingdoms  on
i  whom  he  will,  to  point  out  to  them  a  Idng  after
his  own  heart ;  after  they  bad  then,  with  God's
help,  perceived  that  the  crown  was  of  right  his
to  whom  they  meant  to  confide  it,"  they  elected
Charles  the  Bald  to  be  their  lord.§ But  the
Germans  were  as  far  now  as  before  from  being
convinced  by  this  sort of  public  lav,'. The
elder  brother  thought  his  claims  at  least  as
valid  as those  of  the  younger ;  by  force  of
'  arms  he  compelled  Charles  to  consent  to  the
treaty  of  Marsna, by which he  first united
transrhenane  Germany  with  that  on  the  right
;  bank of  the Rhine. This same course of
;  events  was  repeated  in  the  year  875,  when  the
thrones  of  Italy  and  the  Empire  became  vacant.
At  first,  Charles  the  Bald,  aided  now  by  the
'  pope,  as  heretofore  by  the  bishops,  took  pos-
;  session  of  the  crown  without  difficulty.  || But
j  Carlmann,  son  of  Louis  the  Germanic,  resting
I  his  claim  on  the  right  of  the  elder  line,  and
I  also  on  his  nomination  as  heir  by  the  last  em-
peror, hastened  with  his  Bavarians  and  high
Germans  to  Italy ;  and  in  spite  of  the  opposi-
tion of  the  pope,  took  possession  of  it  as  his
unquestionable  inheritance. If  this  were  the
case  in  Italy,  still  less  could  Charles  the  Bald
succeed  in  his  attempts  on  the  German  fron-

X  Angilbertus  de  bella  quas  fuit  Fontaneto.

§  "  Caroli  Secundi  Coronatio  in  Regno  Hlotharii,  869."—
Monum.  iii,  512.

II  "  Papa  invitante  Romain  perrexit.  Beato  Petro  multa
et  pretiosa  munera  ofFerens,  in  imperatoreni  unctus  est."
— Annales  Hincmari  Remensis,  875  et  876 ;  Monum.  Germ.

CAROLINGIAN  TIMES,

29

tiers. He  was  defeated  in  both  countries ;  the  I
superiority  of  the  Germans  in  arms  was  so  de-  ,
cisive  that,  at  length,  they  became  masters  of  |
the  whole  Lotharingian  territory. Even  unde?
the  Carolingian  sovereigns,  they  marked  the
boundaries  of  the  mighty  empire  ;  the  crown
of  Charlemagne,  and  two-thirds  of  his  domin-
ions, fell  into  their  hands  :  they  maintained  the
independence  of  the  secular  power  with  daunt-
less energy^  and  brilliant  success.

SAXON  AND  FRANKIC  EMPERORS.

The  question  which  next  presents  itself  is,
what  course  was  to  be  pursued  if  the  ruling
house  either  became  extinct,  or  proved  itself
incapable  of  conducting  the  government  of  so
vast  an  empire,  attacked  on  every  side  from
without,  and  fermenting  within.

In  the  years  from  879  to  887,  the  several
nations  determined,  one  after  another,  to  aban-
don the  cause  of  Charles  the  Fat.  The  cha-
racteristic differences  of  the  mode  in  which
they  accomplished  this  are  well  worthy  of
remark.

In  the  Romanz  part  of  Europe  the  clergy
had  a  universal  ascendancy.  In  Cisjurane
Burgundy  it  was  "  the  holy  fathers  assembled
at  Mantala,  the  holy  synod,  together  with  the
nobles,"  who  "under  the  inspiration  of  the
Holy  Spirit,",  elected  Count  Boso  king.*  We
find  from  the  decretal  for  the  election  of  Guido
of  Spoleto,  that  "the  humble  bishops  assem-
bled together  from  various  parts  at  Pavia  chose
him  to  be  their  lord  and  king,j"  principally  be-
cause he  had  promised  to  exalt  the  holy  Roman
church,  and  to  maintain  the  ecclesiastical  rights
and  privileges."  The  conditions  to  which
Odo  of  Paris  gave  his  assent  at  his  coronation
are  chiefly  in  favour  of  the  clergy  ;  he  promises
not  only  to  defend  the  rights  of  the  church,
but  to  extend  them  to  the  utmost  of  *his  inform-
ation and  ability.t  Totally  different  was  the
state  of  things  in  Germany.  Here  it  was
more  especially  the  temporal  lords,  Saxons,
Franks  and  Bavarians,  who,  under  the  guid-
ance of  a  disaffected  minister  of  the  emperor,
assembled  around  Arnulf  and  transferred  the
crown  to  him.  The  bishops  (even  the  bishap
of  Mainz)  were  rather  opposed  to  the  measure  ;
nor  was  it  till  some  years  afterwards  that  they
■entered  into  a  formal  negotiation§  with  the
new  ruler :  they  had  not  elected  him ;  they
submitted  to  his  authority.

The  rights  and  privileges  which  were  on
every  occasion  claimed  by  the  clergy,  were  as
constantly  and  as  resolutely  ignored  by  the
Germans.  They  held  as  close  to  the  legiti-
mate succession  as  possible ;  even  after  the
com.plete  extinction  of  the  Carolingian  race,

*  "  jVutu  Dei,  per  suffragia  sanctorum,  ob  instantem
necessitatera." — Electio  Bosonis ;  Jilonum.  Wi.  547.

t  "  Nos  humiles  episcopos  ex  diversis  partibus  Papias
convenientibiis  pro  ecclesiarum  nostrarum  ereptione  et
omnis  Christianitatis  salvatione,"  &cc.— Electio  Widonis
Regis,  jMonum.  iii.  554.

1  Capitulum  Odonis  Regis. Ibid.

§  '-De  collegio'sacerdotum  gnaros  direxerunt  media-
tores  ad  pr;efatum  reeem,"  &LC.—Jirjiulfi  Concilium  Tri-
lurience,  Monum.  iii.  560.  He  says,  "  Nos,  quibus  regni
cura  et  solicitudo  ecclesiarum  commissa  est."

C*

the  degree  of  ^indred  with  it  was  one  of  the
most  important  considerations  which  deter-
mined the  choice  of  the  people,  first  to  Conrad,
and  then  to  Henry  I.  of  Saxony.
j  Conrad  had,  indeed,  at  one  time,  the  idea  of
I  attaching  himself  to  the  clergy,  who,  even  in
I  Germany,  were  a  ver}-  powerful  body  :  Henry,
j  on  the  contrary,  was  always  opposed  to  them.
I  They  took  no  share  in  his  election ;  the  conse-
cration by  the  holy  oil,  upon  which  Pepin  and
Charlemagne  had  set  so  high  a  value,  he  de-
clined ;  as  matters  stood  in  Germany,  it  could
be  of  no  importance  to  him.  On  the  contrary,
we  find  that  as  in  his  own  land  of  Saxony  he
kept  his  clergy  within  the  strict  bounds  of
obedience,  so  in  other  parts  of  his  dominions
he  placed  them  in  subjection  to  the  dukes ;  l|
so  that  their  dependence  on  the  civil  power
was  more  complete  than  ever.  His  only  soli-
citude was  to  stand  well  with  these  great
feudatories,  whose  power  was  almost  equal  to
his  own,  and  to  fulfil  other  duties  imperatively
demanded  by  the  moment.  As  he  succeeded
in  these  objects, — as  he  obtained  a  decisive
victory  over  his  most  dangerous  enemies,  re-
established the  Marches,  which  had  been
broken  at  all  points,  and  suffered  nothing  on
the  other  side  the  Rhine  that  bore  the  German
name  to  be  wrested  from  him,  —  the  clergy
were  compelled  by  necessity  to  adhere  to  him  :
he  bequeathed  an  undisputed  sceptre  to  his
house.  It  was  by  an  agreement  of  the  court
and  the  secular  nobles  that  Otho  was  selected
from  among  Henry's  sons  as  his  successor  to
the  throne.  The  ceremony  of  election  was
attended  only  by  the  dukes,  princes,  great  offi-
cers of  state,  and  warriors ;  the  elected  mon-
arch then  received  the  assembled  body  of  the
clergy.**  Otho  could  receive  the  unction  with-
out scruple ;  the  clergy  could  no  longer  imagine
that  they  conferred  a  right  upon  him  by  that
ceremony.  Whether  anointed  or  not,  Otho
would  have  been  king,  as  his  father  had  been
before  him.  And  so  firmly  was  this  sovereign-
ty established,  that  Otho  was  now  in  a  position
to  revive  and  carry  through  the  claims  founded
by  his  Carolingian  predecessors.  He  first
completely  realised  the  idea  of  a  Germanic
empire,  which  they  had  only  conceived  and
prepared.  He  governed  Lotharingia  and  ad-
ministered Burgundy ;  a  short  campaign  suf-
ficed to  re-establish  the  rights  of  his  Carolin-
gian predecessors  to  the  supreme  power  in
Lombardy.  Like  Charlemagne,  he  was  called
to  aid  by"  a  pope  oppressed  by  the  factions  of
Rome;  like  him,  he  received  in  return  for  his
succour  the  crown  of  the  western  empire  (2d
February,  962.)  The  principle  of  the  temporal
government,  the  autocracy,  which  from  the
earliest  times  had  held  in  check  the  usurpations
of  ecclesiastical  ambition, thus attained its

\\  "  Totius  Bajoarise  pontifices  tuee  suhjaceant  potes-
tati,"  is  the  promise  of  Liutprand  the  king  to  Duke  Ar-
nulf. Buchner, Geschichte  der  Baiern.  iii.  7,8.  shous  what
use  the  latter  made  of  it. See  Waiz,  Henry  I.,  p.  49.

**  WidukiveJi  Annales,  lib.  ii.  "  Duces  ac  pr^efectorum
principes  cum  cetera  principiim  railitumque  manu — fece-
runt  eum  regem;  dum  ea  geruntur  a  ducibus  ac  cEetero
magistratu,  pontifex  maxiinus  cum  universe  sacerdotali
ordiae  prasstolabatur."

20

INTRODUCTION.

culminating'  point,  and  was  triumphantly  as-
serted and  recognised  in  Europe.

At  the  first  glai^ce  it  would  seem  as  if  the
relation  in  which  Otho  now  stood  to  the  pope
was  the  same  as  that  occupied  by  Charle-
magne ;  on  a  closer  inspection,  however,  we
find  a  wide  difference.  |

Charlemagne's  connection  with  the  see  of  '
Rome  was  produced  by  mutual  need ;  it  was
the  result  of  long  epochs  of  a  political  combi-
nation embracing  the  development  of  various
nations  ;  their  mutual  understanding  rested  on
an  internal  necessity,  before  which  all  opposing
views  and  interests  gave  way.  The  sovereign-
ty of  Otho  the  Great,  on  the  contrary,  rested
on  a  principle  fundamentally  opposed  to  the
encroachment  of  spiritual  influences.  The  al-
liance was  momentary ;  the  disruption  of  it
inevitable.  But  when,  soon  after,  the  same
pope  v/ho  had  invoked  his  aid,  John  XIL,
placed  himself  at  the  head  of  a  rebellious
faction,  Otho  was  compelled  to  cause  him  to
be  formally  deposed,  and  to  crush  the  faction
that  supported  him  by  repeated  exertions  of
force,  before  he  could  obtain  perfect  obedience ;
he  was  obliged  to  raise  to  the  papal  chair  a
pope  on  whose  co-operation  he  could  rely.
The  popes  have  often  asserted  that  they  trans-
ferred the  empire  to  the  Germans ;  and  if  they
confined  this  assertion  to  tlie  Garolingian  race,
they  are  not  entirely  wrong.  The  coronation
of  Charlemagne  was  the  result  of  their  free
determination.  But  if  they  allude  to  the  Ger-
man emperors,  properly  so  called,  the  contrary
of  their  statement  is  just  as  true;  not  only
Carlmann  and  Otho  the  Great,  but  their  suc-
cessors, constantly  had  to  conquer  the  imperial
throne,  and  to  defend  it,  when  conquered,
sword  in  hand.

It  has  been  said  that  the  Germans  would
have  done  more  wisely  if  they  had  not  meddled
with  the  empire ;  or  at  least,  if  they  had  first
worked  out  their  own  internal  political  institu-
tions, and  then,  with  matured  minds,  taken
part  in  the  general  affairs  of  Europe.  But  the
things  of  this  world  are  not  wont  to  develop
themselves  so  methodically.  A  nation  is  often
compelled  by  circumstances  to  increase  its  ter-
ritorial extent,  before  its  internal  growth  is
completed.  For  w^as  it  of  slight  importance  to
its  inward  progress,  that  Germany  thus  re-
mained in  unbroken  connexion  with  Italy  "? —
the  depository  of  all  that  remained  of  ancient
civilisation,  the  source  whence  all  the  forms  of
Christianity  had  been  derived.  The  mind  of
Germany  has  always  unfolded  itself  by  contact
wdth  the  spirit  of  antiquity,  and  of  the  nations
of  Roman  origin.  It  was  from  the  contrasts
which  so  continually  presented  themselves
during  this  uninterrupted  connexion,  that  Ger-
many learned  to  distinguish  ecclesiastical  do-
mination from  Christianity.

For  however  signal  had  been  the  ascendancy
of  the  secular  power,  the  German  people  did
not  depart  a  hair's  breadth  either  from  the  doc-
trines of  Christianity,  the  ideas  upon  which  a
Christian  church  is  founded,  or  even  from  the
forms  in  which  they  had  first  received  those
doctrines  and  ideas. In  them  the  nation  had

first  risen  to  a  consciousness  of  its  existence
as  a  united  body ;  its  whole  intellectual  and
moral  life  was  bound  up  with  them.  The  Ger-
man imperial  government  revived  the  civilising
and  Christianising  tendencies  which  had  dis-
tinguished the  reigns  of  Charles  Martell  and
Charlemagne.  Otho  the  Great,  in  following
the  course  marked  out  by  his  illustrious  prede-
cessors, gave  it  a  fresh  national  importance  by
planting  German  colonies  in  Slavonian  coun-
tries, simultaneously  wnih  the  diffusion  of
Christianity.  He  Germanised  as  well  as  con-
verted the  population  he  had  subdued.  He
confirmed  his  father's  conquests  on  the  Saale
and  the  Elbe,  by  the  establishment  of  the
bishoprics  of  Meissen  and  Osterland.  After
having  conquered  the  tribes  on  the  other  side
the  Elbe  in  those  long  and  perilous  campaigns
where  he  commanded  in  person,  he  established
there,  too,  three  bishoprics,  which  for  a  time
gave  an  extraordinary  impulse  to  the  progress
of  conversion.*  In  the  midst  of  all  his  difli-
culties  and  perplexities  in  Italy,  he  never  lost
siglft  of  this  grand  object;  it  was  indeed  while
in  that  country  that  he  founded  the  archbishop-
ric of  Magdeburg,  whose  jurisdiction  extended
over  all  those  other  foundations.  And  even
where  the  project  of  Germanising  the  popula-
tion was  out  of  the  question,  the  supremacy  of
the  German  name  was  firmly  and  actively
maintained.  In  Bohemia  and  Poland  bishop-
rics were  erected  under  German  metropolitans  ;
from  Hamburg  Christianity  found  its  way  into
the  north  ;  missionaries  from  Passau  traversed
Hungary,  nor  is  it  improbable  that  the  influence
of  these  vast  and  sublime  eff"orts  extended  even
to  Russia.  The  German  empire  was  the  cen-
tre of  the  conquering  religion ;  as  itself  ad-
vanced, it  extended  the  ecclesiasti  co-military
State  of  which  the  Church  was  an  integral
part;  it  was  the  chief  representative  of  the
unity  of  w'estern  Christendom,  and  hence  arose
the  necessity  under  which  it  lay  of  acquiring
a  decided  ascendancy  over  the  papacy.

This  secular  and  Germanic  principle  long
retained  the  predominancy  it  had  triumphantly
acquired.  Otho  the  Second  offered  the  papal
chair  to  the  abbot  of  Clugny ;  and  Otho  the
Third  bestowed  it  first  on  one  of  his  kinsmen,
and  then  on  his  instructor  Gerbert.  All  the
factions  which  threatened  to  deprive  the  empe-
ror of  this  right  were  overthrown;  under  the
patronage  of  Henry  III.,  a  German  pope  de-
feated three  Roman  candidates  for  the  tiara.
In  the  year  1048,  when  the  see  of  Rome  became
vacant,  ambassadors  from  the  Romans,  says  a
contemporaneous  chronicler,  proceeded  to  Sax-
ony, found  the  emperor  there,  and  entreated
him  to  give  them  a  new  pope.  He  chose  the
Bishop  of  Toul,  (afterwards  Leo  IX.),  of  the
house  of  Egisheim,  from  which  he  himself
was  descended  on  the  maternal  side.  What
took  place  with  regard  to  the  head  of  the
church  was  of  course  still  more  certain  to  be-
fall the  rest  of  the  clergy.  Since  Otho  the
Great,  in  all  the  troubles  of  the  early  years  of
his  reign,  succeeded  in  breaking  down  the  re-

*  Adami  Brem.  Histor.  Ecclesiastica,  lib.  ii.  c.  17.

CAROLINGIAN TIMES

31

sistance  which  the  duchies  were  enabled  by
their  clan-like  composition  to  offer  him,  the
ecclesistical  appointments  remained'  without
dispute  in  the  hand  of  the  emperor.

How  magnificent  was  the  position  now  occu-
pied by  the  German  nation,  represented  in  tha
persons  of  the  mightiest  princes  of  Europe  and
united  under  their  sceptre ;  at  the  head  of  an
advancing  civilisation,  and  of  the  whole  of
western  Christendom ;  in  the  fulness  of  youth-
ful, aspiring  strength !

We  must  here  however  remark  and  confess,
that  Germany  did  not  wholly  understand  her
position,  nor  fulfil  her  mission.  Above  all,  she
did  not  succeed  in  giving  complete  reality  to
the  idea  of  a  western  empire,  such  as  appeared
about  to  be  established  under  Otho  I.  Inde-
pendent and  often  hostile,  though  Christian
powers  arose  through  all  the  borders  of  Ger-
many ;  in  Hungary,  and  in  Poland,  in  the
northern  as  well  as  in  the  southern  possessions
of  the  Normans ;  England  and  France  were
snatched  again  from  German  influence. Spain

which  they  propped  their  power  was  again
principally  the  clergy.  Even  Otho  the  Greai
owed  his  triumph  over  intestine  revolt  and  dis-
cord, in  great  measure  to  the  support  of  the
bishops ;  for  example,  of  his  brother  Bruno,
whom  he  had  created  Archbishop  of  Cologne,
and  who,  in  return,  held  Lotharingia  in  alle-
giance to  him  :  it  was  only  by  the  aid  of  the
clergy  that  Otho  conquered  the  Pope.f  Tlie
emperors  found  it  expedient  to  govern  by
means  of  the  bishops ;  to  make  them  the  in-
struments of  their  will.  The  bishops  were  at
once  their  chancellors  and  their  counsellors ;
the  monasteries,  imperial  farms.  The  uncon-
trollable tendency,  at  that  time,  of  all  power
and  office  to  become  hereditary  would  naturally
render  the  heads  of  the  church  desirous  of  com-
bining secular  rights,  which  they  could  dis-
pose of  at  pleasure,  with  their  bishoprics.
Hence  it  happened,  that  just  at  the  time  when
the  subjection  of  the  clergy  to  the  imperial
authority  was  the  most  complete,  their  power
acquired  the  greatest  extension  and  solidity,

laughed  at  the  German  claims  to  a  universal ->  Otho  I.  already  began  to  unite  the  temporal.

supremacy ;  her  kings  thought  themselves  em-
perors ;  even  the  enterprises  nearest  home  —
those  across  the  Elbe — were  for  a  time  station-
ary or  retrograde.

If  we  seek  for  the  causes  of  these  unfavour-
able results,  we  need  only  turn  our  eyes  on  the
internal  condition  of  the  empire,  where  we  find
an  incessant  and  tempestuous  struggle  of  all
the  forces  of  the  nation,  unfortunately  the
establishment  of  a  fixed  rule  of  succession  to

powers  of  the  count  with  the  proper  spiritual
authority  of  the  bishop.  We  see  from  the
registers  of  Henry  II.  that  he  bestowed  on
many  churches  two  and  three  countships ;  on
that  of  Gandersheim,  the  countship  in  seven
Gauen  or  districts.  As  early  as  the  eleventh
century  the  bishops  of  W'ürzburg  succeeded
in  totally  supplanting  the  secular  counts  in
their  diocese,  and  in  uniting  the  spiritual  and
temporal  power ;  a  state  of  things  which  the

the  imperial  crown  was  continually  prevented  i  other  bishops  now  strove  to  emulate,
by  events.  The  son  and  grand-son  of  Otho  j  It  is  evident  that  the  station  of  an  emperor
the  Great  died  in  the  bloom  of  youth,  and  the  of  Germany  was  no  less  perilous  than  august
nation  was  thus  compelled  to  elect  a  chief,  i  The  magnates  by  whom  he  was  surrounded,
The  very  first  election  threw  Germany  and  the  possessors  of  the  secular  power  out  of
Italy  into  a  universal  ferment ;  and  this  was  whose  ranks  he  himself  had  arisen,  he  could
shortly  succeeded  by  a  second  still  more  stormy,  ;  hold  in  check  only  by  an  unceasing  struggle,
since  it  was  necessary  to  resort  to  a  new  line —  '  and  not  without  force.  He  must  find  a  prop
the  Franconian.  How  was  it  possible  to  expect  |  in  another  quarter,  and  seek  support  from  the
implicit  obedience  from  the  powerful  and  re-  j  very  body  who  were  in  principle  opposed  to
fractory  nobles,  out  of  whose  ranks,  and  by  j  him.  This  rendered  it  impossible  for  him  ever
whose  will,  the emperor  was  raised  to  the to  attain  to  that  predominant  influence  in  the

throne  1  Was  it  likely  that  the  Saxon  race,
which  had  hitherto  held  the  reins  of  govern-
ment, would  readily  and  quietly  submit  to  a
foreign  family  "?  It  followed  that  two  factions
arose,  the  one  obedient,  the  other  opposed,  to
the  Franconian  emperor,  and  filled  the  empire
with  their  strife.  The  severe  character  of
Henry  III.  excited  universal  discontent.*  A
vision,  related  to  us  by  his  own  chancellor,
affords  a  lively  picture  of  the  state  of  things.
He  saw  the  emperor,  seated  on  his  throne,
draw  his  sword,  exclaiming  aloud,  that  he
trusted  he  should  still  avenge  himself  on  all
his  enemies.  How  could  the  emperors,  thus
occupied  during  their  whole  lives  with  intes-
tine dissensions,  place  themselves  at  the  head
of  Europe  in  the  important  work  of  social  im-
provement, or  really  merit  the  title  of  supreme
Lords  of  the  West  I

It  is  ren»arkable  that  the  social  element  on

*  Hermannus  Contractus  ad  an.  1053.  "  Regni  tarn
primores  quam  inferiores  magis  magisque  mussitantes,
regem  se  ipso  deteriorem  fore  causabantur  "

general  affairs  of  Europe  which  the  imperial
dignity  would  naturally  have  given  him.  How
strongly  does  this  everlasting  ebb  and  flow  of
contending  parties,  this  continual  upstarting  of
refractory  powers,  contrast  with  the  tranquil-
lity and  self-sufficiency  of  the  empire  swa5"ed
by  Charlemagne  !  It  required  matchless  vigour
and  fortitude  in  an  emperor  even  to  hold  his
seat.

In  this  posture  of  affairs,  the  prince  who
possessed  the  requisite  vigour  and  fortitude^
Henry  III.,  died  young  (A.  D.  105G),  and  a
child,  six  years  old,  in  whose  name  the  gov-
ernment was  carried  on  by  a  tottering  regency,
filled  his  place  : — one  of  those  incidents  which
turn  the  fortunes  of  a  world.

EMANCIPATION  OF  THE  PAPACY.

The  ideas  which  had  been  repressed  in  the

t  Rescriptum  patrum  in  concilio,  in  Liutprand,  lib.  vi.
contains  tlie  remarkable  declaration  :  "  Exconimunica-
tionem  vestram  parvipendemus,  eam  potius  in  vos  retor-
quebimus."

32

INTRODUCTION.

ninth  century  now  began  to  revive ;  and  with
redoubled  strength,  since  the  clergy,  from  the
highest  to  the  lowest,  were  become  so  much
more  powerful.

Generally  speaking, this  was  the age in
which  the  various  modifications  of  spiritual
power  throughout  the  world  began  to  assume
form  and  stability;  in  which  mankind  found
repose  and  satisfaction  in  these  conditions  of
existence. In  the  eleventh  century  Buddhaism
was  re-established  in  Thibet ;  and  the  hierar-
chy which,  down  to  the  present  day,  prevails
over  so  large  a  portion  of  Eastern  Asia,  was
founded  by  the  Lama  Dschu-Adhischa. The
Califate  of  Bagdad,  heretofore  a  vast  empire,
then  took  the  character  of  a  spiritual  authority,
and  was  greatly  indebted  to  that  change  for  j
the  ready  reception  it  met  with. At  the  same  j
period,  in  Africa  and  Syria  arose  the  Fatimite  :
Califate,  founded  on  a  doctrine  of  which  its  j
adherents  said,  that  it  was  to  the  Koran  what  j
the  kernel  is  to  the  shell.

In  the  West  the  idea  of  the  unity  of  the
Christian  faith  was  the  pervading  one,  and  had
taken  strong  hold  on  all  minds  (for  the  various  j
conversions  which  awakened  this  or  that  more  '
susceptible  nation  to  fresh  enthusiasm  belong
to  a  later  period). This  idea  manifested  itself  j
in  the  general  efforts  to  crush  Mahommedan-  i
ism  :  inadequately  represented  by  the  imperial  :
authority, which commanded but a limited
obedience,  it  now  came  in  povverful  aid  of  the
projects  and  efforts  of  the  hierarchy. For  to
whom  could  such  an  idea  attach  itself  but  to
the  bishop  of  the  Roman  Church,  to  which,  as
to  a  common  source,  all  other  churches  traced
back  their  foundation  ;  which  all  western  Eu-
ropeans regarded  with  a  singular  reverence?
Hitherto  the  Bishop  of  Rome  had  been  thrown
into  the  shade  by  the  rise  and  development  of
the  imperial  power. But  favouring  circum-
stances and  the  main  course of  events  now
united  to  impel  the  papacy  to  claim  universal
and  supreme  dominion.

The  minority  of  the  infant  emperor  decided
the  result.  At  the  court  of  Rome,  the  man
who  most  loudly  proclaimed  the  necessity  of  |
reform — the  great  champion  of  the  independent
existence  of  the  church — the  man  ordained  by
destiny  to  make  his  opinion  the  law  of  ages, —
Hildebrand,  the  son  of  a  carpenter  in  Tuscany,
acquired  supreme  influence  over  all  affairs.  He
was  the  author  and  instigator  of  decrees,  in
virtue  of  which  the  papal  elections  were  no
longer  to  depend  on  the  emperor,  but  on  the
clergy  of  the  Church  of  Rome  and  the  cardi-
nals. He  delayed  not  a  moment  to  put  them
in  force  ;  the  very  next  election  was  conducted
in  accordance  with  them.

In  Germany,  on  the  contrary,  people  were
at  this  time  entirely  occupied  with  the  conflicts
of  the  factions  about  the  court ;  the  opposition
which  was  spread  over  Italy  and  Germany
(and  to  which  Hildebrand  also  belonged)  at
length  got  a  firm  footing  in  the  court  itself:
the  adherents  of  the  old  Saxon  and  Salic  prin-
ciples (for  example.  Chancellor  Guibert)  were
defeated  ;  the  court  actually  sanctioned  an  elec-
tion which  had  taken  place  against  its  own

most  urgent  interest;  the  German  rulers,
plunged  in  the  di^ssensions  of  the  moment,
abandoned  to  his  fate  an  anti-pope  who  main-
tained himself  with  considerable  success  and
who  was  the  representative  of  the  ancient
maxims.

Affairs,  however,  changed  their  aspect  when
the  youthful  Salian,  with  all  his  spirit  and
talents,  took  iRe  reins  of  government  into  his
own  hand.  He  knew  his  rights,  and  was  de-
termined to  assert  them  at  any  price.  But
things  had  gone  so  far  that  he  fell  into  the  most
perilous  situation  at  the  very  outset  of  his
career.

The  accession  to  the  throne  of  a  young  mo-
narch, by  nature  despotic  and  violent,  and
hurried  along  by  vehement  passions,  quickly
brought  the  long-fermenting  internal  discords
of  Germany  to  an  open  breach.  The  German
nobles  aspired  after  the  sort  of  independence
which  those  of  France  had  just  acquired.  In
the  year  1073  the  Saxon  princes  revolted ;  the
whole  of  Saxony,  says  a  contemporary,  deserted
the  king  like  one  man.  Meanwhile  at  Rome
the  leader  of  the  hostile  party  had  himself
gained  possession  of  the  tiara,  and  now  ad-
vanced without  delay  to  the  great  work  of
emancipating  not  only  the  papacy  but  the
clergy  from  the  control  of  the  emperor.  In
the  year  1074  he  caused  a  law  to  be  pro-
claimed by  his  synod,  the  purpose  and  effect
of  which  was  to  wrest  the  nomination  to  spiri-
tual offices  from  the  laity ;  that  is,  in  the  first
place,  from  the  emperor.

Scarcely  was  Henry  IV.  seated  on  his  throne
when  he  saw  its  best  prerogatives,  the  crown
and  consummation  of  his  power,  attacked  and
threatened  with  annihilation.  He  seemed
doomed  to  succumb  without  a  contest.  The
discord  between  the  Saxons  and  Upper  Ger-
mans, which  for  a  time  had  been  of  advantage
to  him,  was  allayed,  and  their  swords,  yet  wet
with  each  other's  blood,  were  turned  in  concert
against  the  emperor;  he  was  compelled  to  j?ro-
pitiate  the  pope  who  had  excommunicated
him,  to  travel  in  the  depth  of  winter  to  do  that
penance  at  Canossa  hj  which  he  so  profoundly
degraded  the  imperial  name.

Yet  from  that  very  moment  we  may  date  his
most  strenuous  resistance.

We  should  fall  into  a  complete  error  were
we  to  represent  him  to  ourselves  as  crossing
the  Alps  in  remorse  and  contrition,  or  as  con-
vinced of  the  rightfulness  of  the  claims  ad-
vanced by  the  pope.  His  only  object  was  to
wrest  from  his  adversaries  the  support  of  the
spiritual  authority,  the  pretext  under  which
they  threatened  his  highest  dignity.  As  he
did  not  succeed  in  this, — as  the  absolution  he
received  from  Gregory  was  not  so  complete  as
to  restrain  the  German  princes  from  all  further
hostilities,* — as,  on  the  contrary,  they  elected^
another  sovereign  in  spite  of  it, — he  plunged
into  the  most  determined  struggle  against  the
assumptions  of  his  spiritual  as  well  as  of  his

*  Lambertus  Scliaffiiahurgensis :  {Pistor.  i.  p.  420.)
"  His  conditionibus  absolutus  est  ut  ....  accusationibus
respoiideret  et  ad  papte  sententiam  vel  retineret  regiium
....  vel  aequo  animo  amitteret."  »

EMANCIPATION  OF  THE  PAPACY.

33

temporal  foes.  Opposition  and  injury  roused
the  man  within  him.  Across  those  iVlps  which
he  had  traversed  in  penitential  lowliness,  he
hurried  hack  burning  with  warlike  ardour  ;  in
Carinthia  an  invincible  band  of  devoted  fol-
lowers gathered  around  him.  It  is  interesting
to  follow  him  with  our  e3'e,  subduing  the  spiri-
tual power  in  Bavaria,  the  hostile  aristocratical
clans  in  Swabia ;  to  see  him  next  marching
upon  Franconia  and  driving  his  rival  before
him. ;  then  into  Thuringia  and  the  r\Ieissen
colonies,  and  at  length  forcing  him  to  a  battle
on  the  banks  of  the  Elster,  in  which  he  fell.
Henry  gained  no  great  victories ;  even  on  the
Elster  he  did  not  so  much  as  keep  the  field  ;
but  he  was  continually  advancing ;  his  party
was  continually  gaining  strength ;  he  held  the
banner  of  the  empire  aloft  with  a  steady  and
vigorous  grasp.  After  a  few  years  he  vras  able
to  return  to  Italy  (a.  d.  1081).  The  empire
had  been  so  long  and  so  intimately  allied  with
the  episcopal  power  that  its  chief  could  not  be
without  adherents  among  the  higher  clergy  :
synods  were  held  in  the  emperor's  behalf,  in
which  it  was  resolved  to  maintain  the  old
order  of  things.  The  excommunications  of  the
pope  were  met  by  counter-excommunications.
Chancellor  Quibert,  who  had  suffered  for  his
adherence  to  Salic  principles,  was  nominated
pope  under  the  auspices  of  the  emperor ;  and
after  various  alternations  of  success  in  war,
was  at  length  conducted  in  triumph  to  Rome.
Henry,  like  so  many  of  his  predecessors,  was
crowned  by  a  pope  of  his  own  creation.  The
second  rival  king  whom  the  Saxons  opposed
to  him  could  gain  no  substantial  power,  and
held  it  expedient  voluntarily  to  withdraw^  his
pretensions.

"VVe  see  that  the  em.peror  had  attained  to  all
that  is  attainable  by  war  and  policy,  yet  his
triumph  was  far  from  being  as  complete  and
conclusive  as  we  might  thence  infer ;  for  the
result  of  a  contest  is  not  always  decided  on  a
field  of  battle.  The  ideas  of  which  Gregory
was  the  champion  were  intimately  blended
with  the  most  powerful  impulses  of  the  general
development  of  society  ;  while  he  was  a  fugi-
tive from  Rome,  they  gained  possession  of  the
world.  No  later  than  ten  years  after  his  death
his  second  successor  w^s  able  to  take  the
initiative  in  the  general  affairs  of  the  West — a
powder  which  was  conclusive  as  to  results.
One  of  the  gi-eatest  social  movements  recorded
in  history — the  Crusades  —  was  mainly  the
result  of  his  policy ;  and  from  that  time  -he
appeared,  as  the  natural  head  of  the  Romano-
Germanic  sacerdotal  and  military  community
of  the  West.  To  such  weapons  the  emperor
had  nothiifg  to  oppose.

The  life  of  Henry,  from  this  time  till  its
close,  has  something  in  it  which  reminds  us
of  the  antique  traged)^,  in  v;hich  the  hero  sinks,
in  all  the  glory  of  manhood  and  the  fulness  of
his  powers,  under  an  inevitable  doom.  For
what  can  be  more  like  an  overwhelming  fate
than  the  power  of  opinion,  v;hich  extends  its
invisible  grasp  on  every  side,  takes  complete
possession  of  the  minds  of  men,  and  suddenly

appears  in  the  field  with  a  force  beyond  all
control!  Henry  saw  the  world  go  over,  be-
fore his  eyes,  from  the  empire  to  the  papacy.
An  army  brought  together  by  one  of  the  blind
popular  impulses  which  led  to  the  crusades,
drove  out  of  Rome  the  pope  he  had  placed  on
the  throne  :  nay,  even  in  his  own  house  he
was  encountered  by  hostile  opinions.  His
elder  son  was  infected  with  the  zeal  of  the
bigots,  by  whom  he  was  incited  to  revolt
against  his  father ;  the  younger  v/as  swayed
by  the  influence  of  the  German  aristocracy,
and,  by  a  union  of  cunning  and  violence,
compelled  his  own  father  to  abdicate.  The
aged  warrior  went  broken-hearted  to  his  grave.

I  do  not  think  it  necessary  to  trace  all  the
various  alternations  of  the  conflict  respecting
the  rights  of  the  church.

Even  in  Rome  it  was  sometimes  deemed
impossible  to  force  the  emperor  to  renounce
his  claims.  Pope  Paschal  at  one  time  enter-
tained the  bold  idea  of  giving  back  all  that
the  emperors  had  ever  granted  to  the  church,,
in  order  to  effect  the  radical  separation  of  the
latter  from  the  state.*

As  this  proved  to  be  impracticable,  the  af-
fairs of  the  church  were  again  administered
for  a  time  by  the  imperial  court  under  Henry
v.,  as  they  had  been  under  Henry  IV. f

But  this  too  was  soon  found  to  be  intolera-
ble ;  new  disputes  arose,  and  after  long  con-
tention, both  parties  agreed  to  the  concordat
of  Worms,  according  to  which  the  preporiderr
ant  influence  was  yielded  to  the  emperor  in
Germany,  and  to  the  pope  in  Italy;  an  agree- -
ment,  however,  which  was  not  expressed  with
precision,  and  which  contained  the  germ  of
new  disputes.

But  though  these  results  were  little  calcula-
ted to  determine  the  rights  of  the  contending
powers,  the  advantages  which  gradually  ac-
crued to  the  papacy  from  the  course  of  events
vrere  incalculable.  From  a  state  of  total  de-
pendence, it  had  now  attained  to  a  no  less
complete  emancipation ;  or  rather  to  a  prepon
derance,  not  indeed  as  yet  absolute,  or  defined,
but  unquestionable,  and  every  momient  acquir-
ing strength  and  consistency  from  favouring
circumstances.

RELATION OF THE PAPACY  TO THE FRINGES OF
THE  EMPIRE.

The  most  important  assistance  which  the  pa-
pacy received  in  this  work  of  self-emancipation
and  aggrandisement  arose  from  the  natural  and
tacit  league  subsisting  between  it  and  the
princes  of  the  Germanic  empire.

The  secular  aristocracy  of  Germany  had,  at
one  time,  made  the  strongest  opposition,  on

*  Heinrici  Encyclica  de  Controversia  sua  cum  Papa.
Monum.  iv.  70.  The  emperor  asked,  most  justly,  what
was  to  become  of  the  imperial  authority,  if  it  were  to
lose  the  right  of  investiture  after  the  emperors  had  trans-
ferred so  large  a  share  of  their  privileges  to  the  bishops.

t  Epistola  Friderici  Coloniensis  archiepiscopi :  Codex
Vdalrici  Babenbergeusis,  n.  277.  "  Synodales  episcoporum
conventus,  annua  consilia,  omnes  denique  ecclesiastici
ordinis  administrationes  in  regalera  curiam  translata
sunt."

34

INTRODUCTION,

behalf  of  their  head,  to  the  encroachments  of
the  Church;  they  had  erected  the  imperial
throne,  and  had  invested  it  with  all  its  power :
but  this  power  had  at  length  became  oppressive
to  them ;  the  supremacy  of  the  imperial  govern-
ment over  the  clergy,  which  was  employed  to
keep  themselves  in  subjection,  became  their
most  intolerable  grievance.  It  followed  that
they  at  length  beheld  their  own  advantage  in
the  emancipation  of  the  papacy.

It  is  to  be  observed  that  the  power  of  the
German  princes  and  that  of  the  popes  rose  in
parallel  steps.

Under  Henry  III.,  and  during  the  minority
of  his  successor,  botli  had  laid  the  foundation
of  their  independence  :  they  began  their  active
career  together.  Scarcely  had  Gregory  YII.
established  the  first  principles  of  his  new  sys-
tem, when  the  princes  also  proclaimed  theirs  ;
—  the  principle,  that  the  empire  should  no
longer  be  hereditary.  Henry  IV.  maintained
his  power  chiefly  by  admitting  in  detail  the
claims  which  he  denied  in  the  aggregate :  his
victories  had  as  little  effect  in  arresting  the  pro-
gress of  the  independence  of  the  great  nobles
as  of  the  hierarchy.  Even  as  early  as  the  reign
of  Henry  V.  these  sentiments  had  gained  such
force  that  the  unity  of  the  empire  was  regarded
as  residing  rather  in  the  collective  body  of  the
princes  than  in  the  person  of  the  emperor.  For
what  else  are  we  to  understand  from  the  decla-
ration of  that  prince — that  it  v/as  less  danger-
ous to  insult  the  head  of  the  empire  than  to
give  offence  to  the  princes'?*  —  an  opinion
which  they  themselves  sometimes  expressed.
In  Würzburg  they  agreed  to  adhere  to  their
decrees,  even  if  the  king  refused  his  assent  to
them.  They  took  into  their  own  hands  the
arrangement  of  the  disputes  with  the  pope
which  Henry  found  it  impossible  to  terminate  :
they  were  the  real  authors  of  the  concordat  of
Worms.

In  the  succeeding  collisions  of  the  papacy
with  the  empire  every  thing  depended  on  the
degree  of  support  the  emperor  could,  on  each
occasion,  calculate  on  receiving  from  the
princes.

I  shall  not  here  attempt  to  give  a  complete
view  of  the  timics  of  the  W^elfs  -and  the  Ho-
henstaufen  ;  it  would  not  be  possible,  without
entering  into  a  more  elaborate  examination  of
particulars  than  is  consistent  with  the  object
of  this  short  survey :  let  us  only  direct  our
attention  for  a  moment  to  the  grandest  and
most  imposing  figure  with  which  that  epoch
presents  us — Frederic  I.

So  long  as  Frederic  I.  stood  well  with  his
princes  he  might  reasonably  entertain  the  pro-
ject of  reviving  the  prerogatives  of  the  em-
pire, such  as  they  were  conceived  and  laid
down  by  the  emperors  and  jurists  of  ancient
Rome.  He  held  himself  entitled,  like  Justi-
nian andTheodosius,  to  summon  ecclesiastical
assemblies  ;  he  reminded  the  popes  that  their
possessions  were  derived  from  the  favour  and

*  "  Uniiis  capitis  licet  summi  dejectio  reparabile  damp-
num  est,  principum  autem  coiicultatio  ruina  regni  est."
Fraginentum  de  Hoste  facienda.— JJfo7iM77i.  iv.  03.

bounty  of  the  emperor,  and  admonished  them
to  attend  to  their  ecclesiastical  duties.  A  dis-
puted election  furnished  him  with  a  favourable
occasion  of  acquiring  fresh  influence  in  the
choice  of  a  pope.

His  position  was,  however,  very  different
after  the  fresh  rupture  with  his  powerful  vas-
sal, Henry  the  Lion.  The  claims  of  that
prince  to  a  little  town  in  the  north  of  Germ.any,
—  Gosslar  in  the  Harz, — which  the  emperor
refused  to  admit,  decided  the  affairs  of  Italy,
and  hence  of  the  w^hole  of  western  Christen-
dom. *  In  consequence  of  this,  the  emperor
was  first  stripped  of  his  wonted  support ;  he
was  beaten  in  the  field  ;  and,  lastly,  he  v^as
compelled  to  violate  his  oath,  and  to  recognise
the  pope  he  had  rejected.

It  is  true  that,  having  turned  his  arms  against
his  rebellious  vassal,  he  succeeded  in  breaking
up  Henry's  collective  pow-er  :  but  this  very
success  again  was  advantageous  to  the  princes
of  the  second  rank,  by  whose  assistance  he
obtained  it,  and  whom,  in  return,  he  enriched
with  the  spoils  of  his  rival  ;  Avinle  the  advan-
tage which  the  papacy  thus  gained  was  never
afterwards  to  be  counter-balanced.

The  meeting  of  Frederic  I.  and  Alexander
HI.  at  Venice  is,  in  my  opinion,  far  more  im-
portant than  the  scene  at  Canossa.  At  Canossa,
a  young  and  passionate  prince  sought  only  to
hurry  through  the  penance  enjoined  upon  him  :
at  Venice,  it  was  a  mature  man  who  renounced
the  ideas  which  he  had  earnestly  and  strenu-
ously maintained  for  a  quarter  of  a  century  ;
he  v^■as  compelled  to  acknowledge  that  his
conduct  towards  the  church  had  been  dictated
rather  by  love  of  power  than  of  justice. f  Ca-
nossa was  the  spot  on  which  the  combat  be-
gan ;  Venice  beheld  the  triumph  of  the  church
fully  established.

For  whatever  might  be  the  indirect  share
which  the  Germans  had  in  bringing  about  this
result,  both  the  glory  and  the  chief  profit  of
the  victory  fell  entirely  to  the  share  of  the
papacy.  From  this  moment  its  domination
began.

This  became  apparent  on  the  first  important
incident  that  occurred  ;  viz.,  when,  at  the  end
of  the  twelfth  century,  a  contest  for  the  crown
arose  in  Germany.

The  papac)'',  represented  by  one  of  the  most
able,  ambitious,  and  daring  priests  that  ever
lived,  who  regarded  himself  as  the  natural
master  of  the  world,  —  Innocent  III.,  did  not
hesitate  an  instant  to  claim  the  right  of  deci-
ding the  question.

The  German  princes  were  not  so  blinded  as
not  to  understand  what  this  cl^ym  meant.
They  reminded  Innocent  that  the  empire,  out
of  reverence  for  the  see  of  Rome,  had  waived
the  right  which  it  incontestably  possessed  to
interfere  in  the  election  of  the  pope ;  that_  it
would  be  an  unheard-of  return  for  this  mode-
ration, for  the  pope  to  assume  an  influence

t  "  Dum  in  facto  ecclesiae  potius  virtutem  potentits
quam  rationera  justitice  volumus  exercere,  constat  nos  in
enorem  merito  devenisse."  Oratio  Imperatoris  in  Cou  ■■
ventu  YQneio.—Monum.  iv.  154.

THE  PAPACY  AND  THE  PRINCES.

35

over  the  election  of  the  emperor,  to  which  he
had  no  right  whatever.  Unfortunately,  how-
ever, they  were  in  a  position  in  which  they
could  take  no  serious  steps  to  prevent  the  en-
croachment ihey  deprecated.  They  must  first
have  placed  on  the  throne  an  emperor  equally
strong  by  nature  and  by  external  circumstances,
have  rallied  round  him,  and  have  fought  the
papacy  under  his  banners.  For  such  a  course
they  had  neither  the  inclination,  nor,  in  the
actual  state  of  things,  was  it  practicable.
They  had  no  love  for  the  papacy,  for  its  own
sake ;  they  hated  the  domination  of  tlie  clergy  ;
but  they  had  not  courage  to  brave  it.  Inno-
cent's resolute  spirit  was  again  victorious.  In
the  struggle  between  the  two  rivals,  the  one  a
Well',  the  other  a  Hohenstaufe,  he  at  first  sup-
ported the  Welf,  because  that  family  was  well
inclined  to  the  church;  but  vrhen,  after  the
accession  of  this  prince  to  power,  and  his
appearance  in  Italy,  he  manifested  the  usual
antipathy  of  the  empire  to  the  papacy,  Inno-
cent did  not  hesitate  to  set  up  a  Hohenstaufe
in  opposition  to  him.  He  had  contended
against  the  Hohenstaufen  with  the  resources
of  the  Welfic  party:  he  now  attacked  the
Welfs  with  those  of  the  Hohenstaufen.  It
was  a  struggle  in  which  the  agitations  of  the
rest  of  Europe  were  mingled.  Events,  both
near  and  remote,  took  a  turn  so  favourable,  that
Innocent's  candidate  again  remained  master
of  the  field.

From  that  time  the  papacy  exercised  a  lead-
ing influence  over  all  German  elections.

When,  after  the  lapse  of  many  years,  Fred-
eric II.,  (the  Hohenstaufe  whom  he  had  raised
to  power,)  attempted  in  some  particulars  to
restore  the  independence  of  the  empire,  the
})ope  thought  himself  justified  in  again  depo-
sing him.  Rome  now  openly  avowed  her
claim  to  hold  the  reins  of  secular  as  well  as
spiritual  authority.

"  ^Ve  command  you,"  writes  Innocent  IV.
to  the  German  princes  in  1246,  "since  our
beloved  son,  the  Lnnci grave  of  Thuringia,  is
ready  to  take  upon  himself  the  office  of  empe-
ror, that  you  proceed  to  elect  him  unanimously
without  delay."*

He  formally  signifies  his  approbation  of
those  who  took  part  in  the  election  of  William
of  Holland  ;  he  admonishes  the  cities  to  be
faithful  to  the  newly-elected  emperor,  that  so
they  may  merit  the  apostolical  as  well  as  the
royal  favour.

In  a  very  short  time  no  trace  of  any  other
order  of  things  remained  in  Germany.  Even
at  the  ceremony  of  homage,  Richard  of  Corn-
wall was  compelled  to  dispense  with  the  alle-
giance of  the  cities,  until  it  should  be  seen
whether  or  not  the  pope  might  choose  to  pre-
fer another  aspirant  to  the  throne.

After  Richard's  death,  Gregory  X.  called
upon  the  German  princes  to  prepare  for  a  new
election  :  he  threatened  that  if  they  delayed,
he  and  his  cardinals  would  nominate  an  em-
peror. The  election  being  terminated,  it  was

*  Ex  Actis  Inaocentii. Monum.

again  the  pope  who  induced  the  pretender,
Alfonso  of  Castile,  to  abandon  his  claim  and
to  give  up  the  insignia  of  the  empire ;  and  wiio
caused  the  chosen  candidate,  Rudolf  of  Habs-
burg,  to  be  universally  acknowledged.!

What  trace  of  independence  can  a  nation
retain  after  submitting  to  receive  its  head  from
the-hands  of  a  foreign  power]  It  is  manifest
that  the  same  influence  which  determines  the
elections,  must  be  resistless  in  every  other
department  of  the  state.

The  povrer  of  the  princes  of  Germany  had,
it  is  true,  been  meanwhile  on  the  increase.  In
the  thirteenth  century,  during  the  struggles
between  the  several  pretenders  to  the  tlfrone,
and  between  the  papacy  and  the  em-pire,  they
had  got  possession  of  almost  all  the  preroga-
tives of  sovereignty;  they  likewise  took  the
most  provident  measures  to  prevent  the  impe-
rial^ power  from  regaining  its  vast  preponder-
ance. At  the  end  of  the  thirteenth  and  the
beginning  of  the  fourteenth  century,  the  empe-
rors w^ere  chosen  almost  systematically  out  of
different  houses.  Consciously  or  unconscious-
ly, the  princes  acted  on  the  maxim,  that  when
povv-er  began  to  be  consolidated  in  one  quarter,
it  must  be  counterbalanced  by  an  increase  of
authority  in  another;  as,  for  example,  they
curbed  the  already  considerable  power  of  Bo-
hemia by  means  of  the  house  of  Habsburg,
and  this  again,  by  those  of  Nassau,  Luxem-
burg, or  Bavaria.  None  of  these  could  attain
to  more  than  tfansient  superiority,  and  in  con-
sequence of  this  policy,  no  princely  race  rose  to
independence  :  the  spiritual  princes,  who  con-
ducted the  larger  portion  of  the  public  busi-
ness, were  almost  of  more  weight  than  the
temporal.

This  state  of  things  tended  greatly  to  in-
crease the  power  of  the  papacy,  on  which  the
spiritual  princes  depended  ;  and  to  which  tlie
temporal  became  very  subordinate  and  submis-
sive. In  the  thirteenth  century  they  even  made
the  abject  declaration  that  they  were  planted
in  Germany  by  the  church  of  Rome,  and  had
been  fostered  and  exalted  by  her  favour.^  The
pope  was,  at  least,  as  much  indebted  to  the
German  princes  as  they  were  to  him ;  but  he
took  good  care  not  to  allude  to  his  obligations,
and  nobody  ventured  to  remind  him  of  them.
His  successive  victories  over  the  empire  had
been  gained  by  the  assistance  of  many  of  the
temporal  powers.  He  now  possessed,  tmcon-
tested,  the  supreme  sovereignty  of  Europe.
Those  plans  of  papal  aggrandisement  which
were  first  avowed  in  the  ninth  century,  and
afterwards  revived  in  the  eleventh,  were,  in
the  thirteenth,  crowned  with  complete  success.

During  that  long  period  a  state  of  things  had
been  evolved,  the  outlines  of  which  may,  I
think,  be  traced  in  a  few  words.

The  pretensions  of  the  clergy  to  govern  Eu=
rope  according  to  their  hierarchical  views  —
pretensions  which arose directly  out^  of  the

Cod.  Epist.  Rudolfi,  c.  iv

V.  3G1.

t  Gerbert,  Introductio
n.30.

J  Tractatus  cum  Nicolao  III.  Papa,  1279.  "Romana
ecclesia  Geimaniam  decoravit  plantans  in  ea  principes
tanquam  arbores  electas."— .¥o?i?m.  iv.  421.

INTRODUCTION.

ecclesiastical  institutions  of  Charlemagne  —
were  encountered  and  resisted  by  the  united
body  of  the  German  people,  still  thoroughly
imbued  with  the  national  ideas  of  ancient  Ger-
mania. On  this  combined  resistance  the  .im-
perial throne  was  founded.  Unfortunately,
however,  it  failed  to  acquire  perfect  security
and  stability ;  and  the  divisions  which  soon
broke  out  between  the  domineering  chief  and
his  refractory  vassals,  had  the  effect  of  making
both  parties  contribute  to  the  aggrandisement
of  that  spiritual  power  which  they  had  previ-
ously sought  to  depress.  At  first  the  emperors
beheld  in  a  powerful  clergy  a  means  of  hold-
ing their  great  vassals  in  check,  and  endowed
the  church  with  liberal  grants  of  lands  and
lordships ;  but  afterwards,  when  ideas  of
emancipation  began  to  prevail,  not  only  in  the
papacy  but  in  all  spiritual  corporations,  the
temporal  aristocracy  thought  it  not  expedient
that  the  emperor  should  be  stripped  of  the  re-
source and  assistance  such  a  body  afforded
him  ;  the  ehfeebling  of  the  imperial  authority
was  of  great  advantage,  not  only  to  the  church,
but  to  them.  Thus  it  came  to  pass  that  the
ecclesiastical  element,  strengthened  by  the  di-
visions of  its  opponents,  at  length  obtained  a
decided  preponderance.

Unquestionably  the  result  was  far  different
in  the  twelfth  and  thirteenth  centuries  from
what  it  vv^ould  have  been  in  the  ninth.  The
secular  power  might  be  humbled,  but  could
not  be  annihilated ;  a  purely  Merarchical  go-
vernment, such  as  might  have  been  established
at  the  earlier  period,  was  now  no  longer  within
the  region  of  possibility.  The  national  deve-
lopment of  Germany  had  been  too  deep  and
extensive  to  be  stifled  by  the  ecclesiastical
spirit;  while,  on  the  other  hand,  the  influence
of  ecclesiastical  ideas  and  institutions  unques-
tionably contributed  largely  to  its  extension.
The  period  in  question  displayed  a  fulness  of
life  and  intelligence,  an  activity  in  every  branch
of  human  industry,  a  creative  vigour,  which
we  can  hardly  imagine  to  have  arisen  under
any  other  course  of  events.  Nevertheless,  this
was  not  a  state  which  ought  to  satisfy  a  great
nation.  There  could  be  no  true  political  free-
dom so  long  as  the  most  powerful  impulse  to
all  public  activity  emanated  from  a  foreign
head.  The  domain  of  mind,  too,  was  enclosed
within  rigid  and  narrow  boundaries.  The  im-
mediate relation  in  which  every  intellectual
being  stands  to  the  Divine  Intelligence  was
veiled  from  the  people  in  deep  and  abiding
obscurity.

Those  mighty  developments  of  the  human
mind  which  extend  over  all  generations,  must,
of  necessity,  be  accomplished  slowly;  nor  is  it
always  easy  to  follow  them  in  their  progress.

Circumstances  at  length  occurred  which
awakened  in  the  German  nation  a  conscious-
ness of  the  position  for  which  nature  designed
it.

FIRST ATTEMPTS AT RESISTANCE TO THE
ENCROACHMENTS OF THE PAPA.CY.

The  first  important  circumstance  was,  that  the

papacy,  forgetting  its  high  vocation  in  the  plea-
sures of  Avignon,  displayed  all  the  qualities  of
a  prodigal  and  rapacious  court,  centralizing  its
pov/er  for  the  sake  of  immediate  profit.

Pope  John  XXII.  enforced  his  pecuniary
claims  with  the  coarsest  avidity,  and  interfered
in  an  unheard-of  manner  with  the  presentation
to  German  benefices  :  he  took  care  to  express
himself  in  very  ambiguous  terms  as  to  the  rights
of  the  electoral  princes  ;  while  on  the  contrary,
he  seriously  claimed  the  privilege  of  examin-
ing into  the  merits  of  the  emperor  they  had
elected,  and  of  rejecting  him  if  he  thought  fit;
nay,  in  case  of  a  disputed  election,  such  as  then
occurred,  of  administering  the  government  him-
self till  the  contest  should  be  decided*  :  lastly,
he  actually  entered  i^nto  negotiations,  the  object
of  which  was  to  raise  a  French  prince  to  the
imperial  throne.

The  German  princes  at  length  saw  what  they
had  to  expect  from  such  a  course  of  policy.
On  this  occasion  they  rallied  round  their  empe-
ror, and  rendered  him  real  and  energetic  assis-
tance. In  the  year  1338  they  unanimously
came  to  the  celebrated  resolution,  that  whoever
should  be  elected  by  the  majority  of  the  prince-
electors  should  be  regarded  as  the  true  and  legi-
timate emperor.  When  Louis  the  Bavarian,
wearied  by  the  long  conflict,  wavered  for  a
moment,  they  kept  him  firm  ;  they  reproached
him  at  the  imperial  diet  in  1334  with  having
shown  a  disposition  to  accede  to  humiliating
conditions.  A  change  easily  accounted  for;
the  pope  having  now  encroached,  not  only  on
the  Tights  of  the  emperor,  but  on  the  prescrip-
tive rights  of  their  own  body — on  the  rights  of
the  whole  nation.

Nor  were  these  sentiments  confined  to  the
princes.  In  the  fourteenth  century  a  plebeian
power  had  grown  up  in  Germany,  as  in  the  rest
of  Europe,  by  the  side  of  »the  aristocratic  fami-
lies which  had  hitherto  exercised  almost  des-
potic power:  not  only  were  the  cities  sum-
moned to  the  imperial  diets,  but,  in  a  great
proportion  of  them,  the  guilds,  or  trades,  had
got  the  municipal  government  into  their  own
hands.  These  plebeians  embraced  the  cause
of  their  emperor  with  even  more  ardour  than
most  of  the  princes.  The  priests  who  asserted
the  power  of  the  pope  to  excommunicate  the
emperor  were  frequently  driven  out  of  the  cities ;
these  were  then,  in  their  turn,  laid  under  ex-
communication ;  but  they  never  wouU  ac-
knowledge its  validity  ;  they  refused  to  accept
absolution  when  it  was  oflTered  them.|

Thus  it  happened  that  in  the  present  instance

*  "  Atteridentes  quod  imperii  Romani  rejrimen,  cura  ßt
administratio  (another  time  be  says,  imperii  Romani
jurisdictio,  regimen  et  administratio),  tempore  quo  illiid
vacare  contingit,  ad  nos  pertineat,  sicut  di^noscitur  per-
üiiere.''—Literce  Johannis  in  J^ninaldus,  1319;  and  Olen-
schluger.  Qesckichte  des  Rom.-Kaiscrthums,  S(C.,  in  der
ersten  Hälfte  des  14ten  Jahrhunderts,  p.  102.  In  the  year
1323  lie  declares  that  he  has  instituted  a  suit  against
Lewis  the  Bavarian;  "super  eo  quod  electione  sua  p^r
quosdnm  qui  vocem  in  electione  hujusmodi  habere  dicuntur,
per  sedem  apostolicam,  ad  quam  electionis  hujusmodi  et
persona;  electee  examinatio,  approhatio,  admissio  acetiani
reprobatio  et  repulsio  noscitur  pertinere,  non  adniissa,"
tz.c.—Olenscklüger,  Urk.  n.  36.

t  e.g.  Basel. Albertus  Argentinensjs  in  Urstisius,  142.

OPPOSITION  TO  THE  PAPACY.

37

the  pope  could  not  carry  the  election  of  his
candidate,  Charles  of  Luxemburg;  nobles  and
commons  adhered  almost  unanimously  to  Louis
of  Bavaria:  nor  was  it  till  after  his  death,  and
then  only  after  repeated  election  and  coronation,
that  Charles  IV.  was  gradually  recognised.

"Whatever  he  might  previously  have  promised
the  pope,  that  sovereign  could  not  make  con-
cessions injurious  to  the  interests  of  his  princes  ;
on  the  contrary,  he  solemnly  and  firmly  estab-
lished the  rights  of  the  electors,  even  to  the
long-disputed  vicariate  (at  least  in  all  German
states).  A  germ  of  resistance  was  thus  formed.
This  was  fostered  and  developed  by  the  dis-
orders of  the  great  schism,  and  by  the  disposi-
tions evinced  by  the  general  councils.

It  was  now,  for  the  first  time,  evident  that
the  actual  church  no  longer  corresponded  with
the  ideal  that  existed  in  men's  minds.  Nations
assumed  the  attitude  of  independent  members
of  it ;  popes  were  brought  to  trial  and  deposed  ;
the  aristocratico-republican  spirit,  Vv^hich  played
so  great  apart  in  the  temporal  states  of  Europe,
extended  even  to  the  papacy  (the  nature  of
which  is  so  completely  monarchical),  and
threatened  to  change  its  form  and  character.

The  ecclesiastical  assembly  of  Basle  enter-
tained the  project  of  establishing  at  once  the
freedom  of  nations  and  the  authority  of  coun-
cils ;  a  project  hailed  with  peculiar  approba-
tion by  Germany,  Its  decretals  of  reformation
were  solemnly  adopted  by  the  assembly  of  the
imperial  diet*=  :  the  Germans  determined  to
remain  neutral  during  its  controversies  with
Eugenius  IV. ;  the  immediate  consequence  of
which  was,  that  they  were  for  a  time  emanci-
pated from  the  court  of  yRome.|  By  threaten-
ing to  go  over  to  his  adversary,  they  forced  the
pope,  who  had  ventared  to  depose  two  spiritual
electors,  to  revoke  the  sentence  of  deposition.

Had  this  course  been  persevered  in  with
union  and  constancy,  the  German  Catholic
church,  established  in  so  many  great  principa-
lities, and  splendidly  provided  with  the  most
munificent  endowments  in  the  world,  would
have  acquired  a  perfectly  independent  position,
in  which  she  might  have  resisted  the  subse-
quent polemical  storms  with  as  much  firmness
as  that  of  England.

Various  circumstances  conspired  to  prevent
so  desirable  a  result.

In  the  first  place,  it  appears  to  me  that  the
disputes  between  France  and  Burgundy  react-
ed on  this  matter.  France  was  in  favour  of
the  ideas  of  the  council,  which,  indeed,  she
embodied  in  the  pragmatic  sanction  ;  Burgun-
dy was  for  the  pope.  Among  the  German
princes,  some  were  in  the  most  intimate  alli-
ance with  the  king,  others  Vv^ith  the  duke.

The  pope  employed  by  far  the  most  dexter-
ous and  able  negotiator.  If  we  consider  the
character  of  the  representative  and  organ  of

*  Johannes  de  Segovia;  Koch,  Sanctio  pragmatica,  p.
256.

t  Declaration  in  Müller,  Reichstagstheater,  unter  Fred.
III.  p.  31.  "In  sola  ordinaria  jurisdictione  citra  prrefa-
tomm  t£in  papse  quam  concilii  supreniani  aucturitatem
ecclesiastica'  politife  gubernacula  per  dioceses  et  territoria
nostra  gubernabimus."

the  German  opposition,  Gregory  of  Heimburg,
who  thought  himself  secure  of  victory,  and,
when  sent  to  Rome,  burst  forth  at  the  very  foot
of  the  Vatican  into  a  thousand  execrations  on
the  Curia ; — if  we  follow  him  there  as  lie  went
about  with  neglected  garb,  bare  neck,  and  un-
covered head,  bidding  defiance  to  the  court, —
and  then  compare  him  with  the  polished  and
supple  ^Eneas  Sylvius,  full  of  profound  quiet
ambition,  and  gifted  with  the  happiest  talents
for  rising  in  the  world  ;  the  servant  of  so  many
masters,  and  the  dexterous  confidant  of  them
all ;  we  shall  be  at  no  loss  to  divine  which
must  be  the  successful  party.  Heimburg  died
a  living  death  in  exile,  and  dependent  on  for-
eign bounty  ;  ^Eneas  Sylvius  ended  his  career,
wearing  the  triple  crov/n  he  had  so  ably  served.
At  the  very  time  we  are  treating  of,  ^Eneas
had  found  means  to  gain  over  some  councillors,
and  through  them  their  sovereigns,  and  thus
to  secure  their  defection  from  the  great  scheme
of  national  emancipation.  He  relates  this
himself  Math  great  satisfaction  and  self-com-
placency ;  nor  did  he  disdain  to  employ  bribe-
ry.t

The  main  thing,  however,  was,  that  the
head  of  the  empire.  King  Frederic  III.,  ad-
hered to  the  papal  cause.  The  union  of  the
princes,  which,  while  it  served  as  a  barrier
against  the  encroachments  of  the  church,  might
have  proved  no  less  perilous  to  himself,  was
as  hateful  to  him  as  to  the  pope.  iEneas  Syl-
vius conducted  the  negotiation  in  a  manner  no
less  agreeable  to  the  inferests  and  v.ishes  of
the  emperor  than  to  those  of  the  pope:  the
imperial  cofiTers  furnished  him  with  the  means
of  corruption.

Hence  it  happened  that  on  this  occasion  also
the  nation  fi^iled  to  attain  its  object.

At  the  first  moment,  indeed,  the  Easle  de-
cretals Vv'ere  accepted  at  Rome,  but  under  the
condition  that  the  Holy  See  should  receive
compensation  for  its  losses.  This  com.pensa-
tion,  however,  was  not  forthcoming ;  and  Fred-
eric III.,  who  treated  on  the  part  of  the  empire,
at  length  conceded  anew  to  Rome  all  her  old
privileges,  which  the  nation  had  been  endea-
vouring to  wrest  from  her.§  It  vv^ould  have
been  impossible  to  carry  such  a  m.easure  at  the
diet;  the  expedient  of  obtaining  the  separate
consent  of  the  princes  to  this  agreement  was
therefore  resorted  to.

The  old  state  of  things  was  thus  perpetuated.

X  Historia  Frederici  III.  ap.  Kollar,  Aiialecta,  ii.p.  127.

§  In  the  (=econd  half  of  the  foregoing  century  attention
had  been  strongly  drawn  to  the  assertion,  that  all  the
decrees  of  the  council  of  Bnsle,  whicli  had  not  been  ex-
pressly altered  by  the  concordat,  acquired  Ippal  validity
in  virtue  of  the  same.  Against  this,  Spittlcr  has  made
the  objection,  that  the  brief  runs  thus:  "donee  per  lega-
tum  concordatum  fuerit  vel  per  legatnm  nliter  fuerit  or-
dinatum;"  and,  assuming  that  an  "  aüter"  is  wanting  in
the  first  part  of  the  sentence,  has  concluded  tiiat  the
whole  of  tlie  decrees  had  only  been  suffered  to  hold  good
till  the  conclusion  of  the  concordat.  (Werke,  viii.  p.  47.1.)
But  in  the  relation  of  ,^neas  Sylvius  in  Koch,  Sanctio
pragmatica,  p.  323,  the  "  alitcr"  missed  by  Spittler  stands
expressly  next  to  "concordatum;"  "  usque  quo  cum  legato
aliter  fuerit  concordatum."  (Vide  Koch,  ii.  §  24.)  The
sense  of  these  woi-ds  cannot  therefore  be  doubted.  P'or
in  no  case  can  it  be  supposed  that  •'  aliter"  had  been  left
out  with  any  sinister  design.

38

INTRODUCTION.

Ordinances  which  the  papal  see  had  published
in  1335,  and  which  it  had  repeated  in  1418,
once  more  formed,  in  the  year  1448,  the  basis
of  the  German  concordat.  It  is  hardly  neces-
sary to  say  that  the  opposition  was  not  crashed.
It  no  longer  appeared  on  the  surface  of  events ;
but  deep  below  it,  it  only  struck  root  faster  and
acquired  greater  strength.  The  nation  was
exasperated  by  a  constant  sense  of  wrong  and
injustice.

ALTERED CHARACTER OF THE EMPIRE.

Ti-iE  most  remarlv&ble  fact  now  was,  that  the
imperial  throne  was  no  longer  able  to  afford
support  and  protection.  The  empire  had  as-:
sumed  a  position  analogous  to  j^at  of  the  pa-
pacy, but  extremely  subordinate  in  power  and
authority.

It  is  important  to  remark,  that  for  more  than
a  century  after  Charles  IV.  had  fixed  his  seat
in  Bohemia,  no  emperor  appeared,  endowed
with  the  vigour  necessary  to  uphold  and  govern
the  empire.  The  bare  fact  that  Charles's  suc-
cessor, Wenceslas,  w^as  a  prisoner  in  the  hands
of  the  Bohemians,  remained  for  a  long  time
unknown  in  Germany :  a  simple  decree  of  the
electors  sufficed  to  dethrone  him.  Rupert  the
Palatine  only  escaped  a  similar  fate  by  death.
VV^hen  Sigismund  of  Luxemburg,  (who,  after
many  disputed  elections,  kept  possession  of  the
field,)  four  years  after  his  election,  entered  the
territory  of  the  empire  of  which  he  was  to  be
crow^ned  sovereign,  he  found  so  little  sympathy
that  he  was  for  a  montent  inclined  to  return  to
Hungary  without  accomplishing  the  object  of
his  journey.  The  active  part  he  took  In  the
affairs  of  Bohemia,  and  of  Europe  generally,
has  given  him  a  name ;  but  in  and  for  the  em-
pire, he  did  nothing  worthy  of  note.  Between
the  years  ,1422  and  1430  he  never  made  his
appearance  beyond  Vienna;  from  the  autumn
of  1431  to  that  of  1433  he  was  occupied  with
his  coronation  journey  to  Rome;  and  during
the  three  years  from  1434  to  his  death  he  never
got  beyond  Bohemia  and  Moravia*:  nor  did
Albert  II.,  who  has  been  the  subject  of  such
lavish  eulogy,  ever  visit  the  dominions  of  the
empire.  Frederick  III.,  however,  far  outdid
all  his  predecessors.  During  seven-and-twenty
years,  from  1444  to  1471,  he  was  never  seen
within  the  boundaries  of  the  empire.

Hence  it  happened  that  the  central  action
and  the  visible  manifestation  of  sovereignty,
inasfar  as  any  such  existed  in  the  empire,  fell
to  the  share  of  the  princes,  and  more  especially
of  the  prince-electors.  In  the  reign  of  Sigis-
mund we  find  them  convoking  the  diets,  and
leading  the  armies  into  the  field  against  the
Hussites  :  the  operations  against  the  Bohemi-
ans were  attributed  entirely  to  them.f

In  this  manner  the  empire  became,  like  the
papacy,  a  power  which  acted  from  a  distance,

*  The  acts  of  his  reign  are  dated  from  Ofen,  Stuhlweis-
senburg,  from  Cronstadt  "  in  Transylvanian  Würzland,"
from  the  army  before  the  castle  of  Taubenburg  in  Sirfey
(Servia), Häberlin,  Reichsgescliichte,  v.  429,  439.

t  Matthias  Döring  in  Mencken,  iii.  p.  4.  "  Eodem
anno  principes  electores  exercitum  grandem  habentes
contra  Bohemos  se  transtulerunt  ad  Bohemiam."

and  rested  chiefly  upon  opinion.  The  throne,
founded  on  conquest  and  arms,  had  now  a  pa-
cific character  and  a  conservative  tendency.
Nothing  is  so  transient  as  the  notions  which
are  handed  down  with  a  name,  or  associated
with  a  title  ;  and  yet,  especially  in  times  when
unwritten  law  has  so  much  force,  the  whole
influence  of  rank  or  station  depends  on  the  na-
ture of  these  notions.  Let  us  turn  our  atten-
tion for  a  moment  to  the  ideas  of  Empire  and
Papacy  entertained  in  the  fifteenth  century.

The  emperor  was  regarded,  in  the  first  place,
as  the  supreme  feudal  lord,  who  conferred  on
property  its  highest  and  most  sacred  sanction;
as  the  supreme  fountain  of  justice,  from  whom,
as  the  expression  was,  all  the  compulsory  force
of  law  emanated.  It  is  very  curious  to  observe
how  the  choice  that  had  fallen  upon  him  was
announced  to  Frederic  III., — by  no  means  the
mightiest  prince  in  the  empire ;  how  immedi-
ately therefore  the  natural  relations  of  things
are  reversed,  and  "  his  royal  high  mightiness"
promises  confirmation  in  their  rights  and  dig-
nities to  the  very  men  who  had  just  raised  him
to  the  throne.^  All  hastened  to  obtain  his  re-
cognition of  their  privileges  and  possessions  ;
nor  did  the  cities  perform  their  act  of  homage
till  that  had  taken  place.  Upon  his  supreme
guarantee  rested  that  feeling  of  legitimacy,
security  and  permanence,  which  is  necessary
to  all  men,  and  more  especially  dear  to  Ger-
mans. "Take  away  from  us  the  rights  of  the
emperor,"  says  a  law-book  of  that  time,  "and
who  can  say,  this  house  is  mine,  this  village
belongs  to  me  ?"  A  remark  of  profound  truth  ;
but  it  foUovv'ed  thence  that  the  emperor  could
not  arbitrarily  exercise  rights  of  which  he  was
deemed  the  source.  He  might  give  them  up;
but  he  himself  must  enforce  them  only  within
the  narrow  limits  prescribed  by  traditional
usage,  and  by  the  superior  control  of  his  sub-
jects. Although  he  was  regarded  as  the  head
and  source  of  all  temporal  jurisdiction,  yet  no
tribunal  found  more  doubtful  obedience  than
his  own.

The  fact  that  royalty  existed  in  Germany
had  almost  been  suffered  to  fall  into  oblivion  ;
even  the  title  had  been  lost.  Henry  VII.
thought  it  an  affront  to  be  called  King  of  Ger-
many, and  not,  as  he  had  a  right  to  be  called
before  any  ceremony  of  coronation.  King  of
the  Romans. §  In  the  fifteenth  century  the
emperor  was  regarded  pre-eminently  as  the
successor  of  the  ancient  Roman  Caesars,  whose
rights  and  dignities  had  been  transferred,  first
to  the  Greeks,  and  then  to  the  Germans  in  the
persons  of  Charlemagne  and  Otho  the  Great;
as  the  true  secular  head  of  Christendom.  Em-
peror Sigismund  commanded  that  his  corpse
should  be  exposed  to  view  for  some  days ;  in
order  that  every  one  might  see  that  "  the  Lord
of  all  the  world  was  dead  and  departed."  ||

X  Letter  of  the  Frankfort  Deputies,  July  5, 1440.  Frank-
furter Arch.

§  Henrici  VII.  Bannitio  Florentise,  Pertz,  iv.  520,  "  sup-
primentes  (it  is  there  said)  ipsius  veri  nominis  (Regis
Romanorum)  dignitatem  in  ipsius  opprobrium  et  despec-
tum."

]J  Eberhard  Windeck  in  Mencken,  Scrip«,  i.  1278.

ALTERED  CHARACTER  OF  THE  EMPIRE.

39

"We  have  chosen  your  royal  grace,"  say
the  electors  to  Frederic  III.  (a.  d.  1440),  "to
be  the  head,  protector,  and  g-overnor  of  all
Christendom."  They  go  on  to  express  the
hope  that  this  choice  may  be  profitable  to  the
Roman  church,  to  the  whole  of  Christendom,
to  the  holy  empire,  and  the  community  of
Christian  people.-*^  Even  a  forei'vn  monarch,
Wladislas  of  Poland,  extols  the  felicity  of  the
newly-elected  emperor,  in  that  he  was  about
to  receive  the  diadem  of  the  monarchy  of  the
world. ]■  The  opinion  was  confidently  enter-
tained in  Germany  that  the  other  sovereigns
of  Christendom,  especially  those  of  England,
Spain,  and  France,  were  legally  subject  to  the
orown  of  the  empire :  the  only  controversy
was,  whether  their  disobedience  was  venial,
or  ought  to  be  regarded  as  sinful. 4:  The  Eng-
lish endeavoured  to  shovr  that  IVum  the  time
of  the  introduction  of  Christiaidty  tbey  had
never  been  subject  to  the  empire. §  The  Ger-
m^ans,  on  the  contrary,  jiot  onl}'  did  what  the
other  nations  of  the  West  were  bound  to  do —
they  not  only  acknov/ledged  the  holy  empire,
but  they  had  secured  to  themselves  th.e  faculty
of  giving  it  a  head  ;  and  the  strange  notion
was  current  that  the  electoral  princes  had  suc-
ceeded to  the  rights  and  dignities  of  the  Roman
senate  and  people.  They  themselves  expressed
this  opinion  in  the  thirteenth  century.  "  We,"
say  they,  J'  wbo  occupy  the  place  of  the  Roman
senate,  who  are  the  fathers  and  the  lights  of
the  empire»"  II  ....  In  the  fifteenth  century
they  repeated  the  same  opinion,**  ''  The  Ger-
mans," says  the  author  of  a  scheme  for  dimin-
ishing the  burthens  of  the  empire,  "  who  have
possessed  themselves  of  the  dignities  of  the
Roman  empire,  and  thence  of  the  sovereignty
over  all  lands. "||  ....  When  the  prince-elec-
tors proceeded  to  the  vote,  the}^  swore  that
"according  to  the  best  of  their  understanding,
they  would  choose  the  temporal  head  of  all
Christian  people,  i.  e.  a  Roman  king  and  fu-
ture emperor."  Thereupon  the  elected  sove-
reign was  anointed  and  crowned  by  the  Arch-
bishop of  Cologne,  who  enjoyed  that  right  on
this  side  the  Alps.  Even  when  seated  on  the
coronation  chair  at  Rheims,  the  King  of  France
took  an  oath  of  fealty  to  the  Roman  empire. ^:J:

*  Letter  of  the  Pritice-Electors,  Feb.  2,  1440,  h\  Chmel's
Materialien  zur  Oestreich.  Gesch.  No.  ji.  p.  70.
+  Liteiffi  Vladislai  ap.  KuUar  Ana!,  ii.  p.  830.
X  Petrus  fie  Andlo  de  Romano  Imperio :  an  important
book,  not  indeed  vrith  reference  to  the  actual  state  of
German  J',  but  to  the  ideas  of  the  time  in  which  it  was
written.  It  dates  from  between  14.5ß,  which  year  is  ex-
pressly mentioned,  and  1459,  in  which  year  happened
the  death  of  Diedricli  of  Mainz,  of  whum  it  speaks.  The
author  says,  ii.  c.  8  :  "  Hodie  plurimi  reges  plus  de  facto
quam  rfe  j'm?-«?' imperatorem  in  superiorem  lion  recogno-
scunt  et  suprema  jura  imperii  usiirpant."

§  Ciithbert  Tunsrall  to  Kiü^  Henry  VIII.,  Feb.  12, 1517,
in  Ellis's  Letters,  series  ],  vol.  i.  p.  ISG.  "  Your  Grace  is
not  nor  never  sitheu  the  Christen  faith  the  kines  of  Ens-
land  wer  s;ibgiet  to  t,h'  En:|)ire,  but  the  crown  of  England
is  an  Empire  of  hitself,  myth  hettyr  tJian  now  the  Em-
pire of  Rome  :  for  wliich  cause  your  Grace  werith  a  close
crown."

II  Conradi  IV.  electio  1237:  Pertz,  iv.  322.

**  P.  de  Andlo  ii..  iii.  "  Isti  principes  electores  succes-
serunt,  in  locum  senatus  populique  Komani."

tt  Intelliffentia  Principum  super  Gravaminibus  A^a-
tioais  GermaniccE. MS.  at  Coblenz, See  Appendix.

XX  /Eneas  Sylvius  (Historia  Friderici  III.  in  Kollar's

It  is  obvious  in  what  a  totally  different  rela-
tion the  Germans  stood  to  the  emperor,  who
was  elevated  to  his  high  dignity  from  amidst
themselves,  and  by  their  own  choice,  from  that
of  even  the  most  puissant  nobles  of  other  coun-
tries to  their  natural  hereditär}'"  lord  and  master.
The  imperial  dignity,  stripped  of  all  direct  ex-
ecutive power,  had  indeed  no  other  significancy
than  that  which  results  from  opinion.  It  gave
to  law  and  order  their  living  sanction;  to  jus-
tice its  highest  authority  ;  to  the  sovereignties
of  Germany  their  position  in  the  world.  It  had
properties  which,  for  that  period,  were  indis-
pensable and  sacred.  It  had  a  manifest  analogy
with  the  papacy,  and  was  bound  to  it  by  the
most  intimate  connection.

The  main  difference  between  the  two  powers
w^as,  that  the  papal  enjoyed  that  universal
recognition  of  the  Romano-Germanic  world
which  the  imperial  had  not  been  able  to  obtain  :
but  the  holy  Roman  church  and  the  holy  Roman
empire  v^ere  indissolubly  united  in  idea  ;  and
the  Germ^ans  thought  they  stood  in  a  peculiarly
intimate  relation  to  the  church  as  well  as  to  the
empire.  There  is  extant  a  treaty  of  alliance  of
the  Rhenish  princes,  the  assigned  object  of
vvhich  was  to  maintain  their  endowments,  dio-
ceses, chapters,  and  principalities,  in  dignity
and  honour  with  the  holy  Roman  empire  and
the  holy  Roman  church.  The  electors  lay
claim  to  a  peculiar  privilege  in  ecclesiastical
affairs.  In  the  year  14-24,  and  again  in  1446,
they  declare  that  the  Almighty  has  appointed
and  authorised  them,  that  they  should  endea-
vour, together  with  the  Roman  king,  the  princes,
lords,  knights,  and  cities  of  the  empire,  and
with  all  faithful  Christian  people,  to  abate  all
crimes  that  arise  in  the  holy  church  and  Chris-
tian community,  and  in  the  holy  empire. §§

Hence  we  see  that  the  German  people
thought  themselves  bound  in  allegiance  to  the
papal,  no  less  than  to  the  imperial  authority ;
but  as  the  former  had,  in  all  the  long  struggles
of  successive  ages,  invariably  come  off  victori-
ous, while  the  latter  had  so  often  succumbed,
the  pope  exercised  a  far  stronger  and  more
wide-spread  influence,  even  in  temporal  things,
than  the  emperor.  An  act  of  arbitrary  power,
which  no  emperor  could  ever  have  so  much  as
contemplated — the  deposition  of  an  electoral
prince  of  the  empire — was  repeatedly  attempt-
ed, and  occasionally  even  accomplished,  by  the
popes.  They  bestowed  on  Italian  prelates
bishoprics  as  remote  as  that  of  Camin.  By
their  annates,  pallia,  and  all  the  manifold  dues
exacted  by  the  curia,  they  drew  a  far  larger
(Maximilian  I.  said,  a  hundred  times  larger)
revenue  from  the  empire,  than  the  emperor:
their  vendors  of  indulgences  incessantly  tra-
versed the  several  provinces  of  the  empire.
Spiritual  and  temporal  principalities  and  juris-
dictions were  so  closely  interwoven  as  to  afford
them  continual  opportunities  of  interfering  in

Anal.  ii.  288.)  tries  to  make  a  distinction  between  the
three  crowns,  and  to  assign  them  to  the  different  king-
doms ;  but  in  this  case  we  do  not  ask  what  is  true,  but
what  was  commonly  thought.  The  opinions  which  he
disputes  are  exactly  thoseof  importance  in  our  eyes:
namely,  those  generally  entertained.
§S  Müller  Rlth.  Fr.  iii.  305.

40

INTRODUCTION.

the  civil  affairs  of  Germany.  The  dispute  be-
tween Cleves  and  Cologne*  about  Soest,  that
between  Utrecht  and  East  Friesland  about
Groningen,  and  a  vast  number  of  others,  were
evoked  by  the  pope  before  his  tribunal.  In
1472  he  confirmed  a  toll,  levied  in  the  electo-
rate of  Treves  f  :  like  the  emperor,  he  granted
privilegia  de  nnn  evocando.

Gregory  VII.'s  comparison  of  the  papacy  to
the  sun  and  the  empire  to  the  moon  was  now
verified.  The  Germans  regarded  the  papal
power  as  in  every  respect  the  higher.  When,
for  example,  the  town  of  Basle  founded  its  high
school,  it  was  debated  whether,  after  the  re-
ceipt of  the  brief  containing  the  pope's  appro-
bation, the  confirmation  of  the  emperor  was
still  necessary ;  and  at  length  decided  that  it
was  not  so,  since  the  inferior  power  could  not
confirm  the  decisions  of  the  superior,  and  the
papal  see  was  the  well-head  of  Christendom.:!:
The  pretender  to  the  Palatinate,  Frederic  the
Victorious,  whose  electoral  rank  the  emperor
refused  to  acknowledge,  held  it  sufficient  to
obtain  the  pope's  sanction,  and  received  no  fur-
ther molestation  in  the  exercise  of  his  privileges
as  member  of  the  empire.  The  judge  of  the
king's  court  having  on  some  occasion  pro-
nounced the  ban  of  the  empire  on  the  council
of  Lübeck,  the  council  obtained  a  cassation  of
this  sentence  from  the  pope.§

It  was  assuredly  to  be  expected  that  the  em-
peror would  feel  the  humiliation  of  his  position,
and  would  resist  the  pope  as  often  and  as
strenuously  as  possible.

However  great  was  the  devotion  of  the
princes  to  the  see  of  Rome,  they  felt  the  op-
pressiveness of  its  pecuniary  exactions;  and
more  than  once  the  spirit  of  the  Basle  decrees,
or  the  recollections  of  the  proceedings  at  Con-
stance, manifested  themselves  anev/.  We  find
draughts  of  a  league  to  prevent  the  constitution
of  Constance,  according  to  which  a  council
should  be  held  every  ten  years,  from  falling
into  utter  desuetude. []  After  the  death  of
Nicholas  V.  the  princes  urged  the  emperor  to
seize  the  favourable  moment  for  asserting  the
freedom  of  the  nation,  and  at  least  to  take  mea-
sures for  the  complete  execution  of  the  agree-
ment entered  into  with  Eugenius;  but  Frederic
III.  was  deaf  to  their  entreaties.  yEneas  Syl-
vius persuaded  him  that  it  was  necessary  for
him  to  keep  well  with  the  pope.  He  brought
forward  a  few  common-places  concerning  the
instability  of  the  multitude,  and  their  natural
hatred  of  their  chief; — just  as  if  the  princes  of
the  empire  were  a  sort  of  democracy :  the  em-
peror, said  he,  stands  in  need  of  the  pope,  and
the  pope  of  the  emperor  ;  it  would  be  ridiculous
to  offend  the  man  from  whom  we  want  assist-
ance.** He  himself  vv^as  sent  in  1456  to  tender

*  Schüren,  Chronik  von  Cleve,  p.  288.

t  Hontheim,  Prodromus  Historias  Trevirensis,  p.  320.

t  Ochs,  Geschichte  von  Basel,  iv.  p.  60.

§  Sartoriiis,  Gesch.  des  Hanse,  ii.  p.  222.

II  e.  g.  Resolution  of  the  spiritual  Electors,  &c. :  Pro-
perly, a  report  upon  the  means  of  restoring  tranquillity
to  the  empire,  and  upon  the  necessity  of  a  council,  of
about  the  year  1453,  in  the  archives  of  Coblenz.  See
Appendix.

**  Gobellini  Commentarii  de  Vita  Pii.ii.  p.  44.

unconditional  obedience  to  Pope  Calixlus.
This  immediately  revived  the  old  spirit  of  re-
sistance. An  outline  was  drav/n  of  a  prag-
matic sanction,  in  which  net  only  all  the
charges  against  the  papal  see  were  recapitu-
lated in  detail,  and  redress  of  grievances  pro-
posed, but  it  was  also  determined  what  was  to
be  done  in  case  of  a  refusal;  what  appeal  was
to  be  made,  and  how  the  desired  end  was  to  be
attained.]"!  But  what  result  could  be  antici-
pated while  the  emperor,  far  from  taking  part
in  this  plan,  did  every  thing  he  could  to  thwart
if?  He  sincerely  regarded  himself  as  the  na-
tural ally  of  the  papacy:.

The  inevitable  efifect  of  this  conduct  on  his
part  was,  that  the  discontent  of  the  electors,
already  excited  by  the  inactivity  and  the  absence
of  the  emperor,  occasionally  burst  out  violently
against  him.  As  early  as  the  year  1456  they
required  him  to  repair  on  a  given  day  to  Nürn-
berg, for  that  it  was  his  ofiice  and  duty  to  bear
the  burthen  of  the  ©inpire  in  an  honourable
manner  :  if  he  did  not  appear,  th(^^  would,  at
an}'"  rate,  meet,  and  do  what  was  incumbent
on  them.±:|:  As  he  neither  appeared  then  nor
afterwards,  in  1460  they  sent  him  word  that
it  was  no  longer  consistent  with  their  dignity
and  honour  to  remain  without  a  head.  They
repeated  tiieir  summons  that  he  would  appear
on  the  Tuesda}^  after  Epiphany",  and  accompa-
nied it  with  still  more  vehement  threats.  'I'hey
began  seriously  to  take  measures  for  setting
up  a  king  of  the  Romans  in  opposition  to  him.

From  the  fact  that  George  Podiebrad,  king
of  Bohemia,  was  the  man  on  whom  they  cast
their  eyes,  it  is  evident  that  the  opposition  was
directed  against  both  emperor  and  pope  jointly.
What  must  have  been  the  consequence  of
placing  a  Utraquist  at  the  head  of  the  ern])ire]
This  increased  the  zeal  and  activity  of  Pope
Pius  II.  (vvhom  we  have  hitherto  knov/n  as
J^neas  Sylvius),  in  consolidating  the  alliance
of  the  see  of  Rome  with  the  emperor,  who,  on
his  side,  was  scarcely  less  deeply  interested  in
it.  The  independence  of  the  prince-electors
was  odious  to  both.  As  one  of  the  claims  of
the  emperor  had  always  been,  that  no  electoral
diet  should  be  held  without  his  consent,  so
Pius  IL,  in  like  manner,  now  wanted  to  bind
Diether,  Elector  of  Mainz,  to  summon  no  such
assembly  without  tlie  approbation  of  the  papal
see.  Diether's  refusal  to  enter  into  any  such
engagement  was  the  main  cause  of  their  quar-
rel. Pius  did  not  conceal  from  the  emperor
that  he  thought  his  ov/n  powder  endangered  by
the  agitations  which  prevailed  in  the  empire.
It  was  chiefly  ov/ing  to  his  influence,  and  to
the  valour  of  Markgrave  Albert  Achilles  of
Brandenburg,  that  they  ended  in  nothing.

From  this  time  we  find  the  imperial  and  the
papal  povv'ers,  w^hich  had  come  to  a  sense  of
their  common  interest  and  reciprocal  utility,
more  closely  united  than  ever.

The  diets  of  the  empire  were  held  under
their  joint  authority ;  they  were  called  royal

ft  Mne^  Sylvii  Apologia  ad  Martinum,  Mayer,  p.  710 ;
and  the  above-cited  Intelligentia.

XX  Frankfurt,  Sep.  10,  1456;  a  hitherto  unknown  and
very  remarkable  document. Frankf.  Arch.

THE  EMPIRE  IN  THE  15TH  CENTURY.

41

and  papal,  papal  and  royal  diets.  In  the
reign  of  Frederic,  as  formerly  in  that  of  Sigis-
mund,  we  find  the  papal  legates  present  at  the
meetings  of  the  empire,  which  were  not  opened
till  they  appeared.  The  spiritual  princes  took
their  seats  on  the  right,  the  temporal  on  the
left,  of  the  legates :  it  was  not  till  a  later
period  that  the  imperial  commissioners  were
introduced,  and  proposed  measures  in  concert
with  the  papal  functionaries.

It  remains  for  us  to  inquire  how  far  this  very
singular  form  of  government  Vv^as  fitted  to  sat-
isfy the  v.-ants  of  the  empire.

STATE OF GERMANY IN THE MIDDLE OF THE
FIFTEENTH CENTURY.

We  have  seen  what  a  mighty  influence  had,
from  the  remotest  times,  been  exercised  by  the
princes  of  Germany.

First,  the  imperial  power  and  dignity  had
arisen  out  of  their  body,  and  by  their  aid  ;  then,
they  had  supported  the  emancipation  of  the
papacy,  which  involved  their  own  :  now,  they
stood  opposed  to  both.  Although  strongly  at-
tached to,  and  deeply  imbued  with,  the  ideas
of  Empire  and  Papacy,  they  were  resolved  to
repel  the  encroachments  of  either  :  their  power
was  already  so  independent,  that  the  emperor
and  the  pope  deemed  it  necessary  to  combine
against  them.

If  we  proceed  to  inquire  who  were  these
magnates,  and  upon  what  their  power  rested,
we  shall  find  that  the  temporal  hereditär}"
sovereignty,  the  germ  of  which  had  long  ex-
isted in  secret  and  grown  unperceived,  shot  up
in  full  vigour  in  the  fifteenth  century  ;  and  (if
we  may  be  allowed  to  continue  the  metaphor),
after  it  had  long  struck  its  roots  deep  into  the
earth,  it  now  began  to  rear  its  head  into  the
free  air,  and  to  tower  above  all  the  surrounding
plants.

All  the  puissant  houses  which  have  since
held  sovereign  sway  date  their  establishment
from  this  epoch.

In  the  eastern  part  of  North  Germany  ap-
peared the  race  of  Hohenzollern ;  and  though
the  land  its  princes  had  to  govern  and  to  defend
was  in  the  last  stage  of  distraction  and  ruin,
they  acted  with  such  sedate  vigour  and  cau-
tious determination,  that  they  soon  succeeded
in  driving  back  their  neighbours  within  their
ancient  bounds,  pacifying  and  restoring  the
marches,  and  re-establishing  the  very  peculiar
bases  of  sovereign  power  which  already  existed
in  the  country.

Near  this  remarkable  family  arose  that  of
Weitin,  and  by  the  acquisition  of  the  electorate
of  Saxon}^,  soon  attained  to  the  highest  rank
among  the  princes  of  the  empire,  and  to  the
zenith  of  its  power.  It  possessed  the  most
extensive  and  at  the  same  time  the  most
flourishing  of  German  principalities,  as  long
as  the  brothers,  Ernest  and  Albert,  held  their
imited  court  at  Dresden  and  shared  the  govern-
ment; and  even  when  they  separated,  both
lines  remained  sufficiently  considerable  to  play
a  part  in  the  affairs  of  Germany,  and  indeed
of  Europe.

6  , D*

In  the  Palatinate  we  find  Frederic  the  Vic-
torious. It  is  necessary  to  read  the  long  list
of  castles,  jurisdictions,  and  lands  which  he
vron  from  all  his  neighbours,  partly  by  con
quest,  partly  by  purchase  or  treaty,  but  which
iiis  superiority  in  arms  rendered  emphatically
his  own,  to  form  a  conception  what  a  German
prince  could  in  that  age  achieve,  and  how
widely  he  could  extend  his  sway.

The  conquests  of  Hessen  were  of  a  more
peaceful  nature.  By  the  inheritance  of  Ziegen-
hain and  Nidda,  but  more  especially  of  Katzen-
elnbogen,  a  fertile,  highly  cultivated  district,
from  which  the  old  counts  had  never  sutfered
a  village  or  a  farm  to  be  taken,  whether  by
force  or  purchase,  it  acquired  an  addition
nearly  equal  to  its  original  territory.

A  similar  spirit  of  extension  and  fusion  was
also  at  work  in  many  other  places.  Juliers
and  Berg  formed  a  junction.  Bavaria-Lands-
hut  was  strengthened  by  its  union  with  Ingol-
stadt ;  in  Bavaria-^Munich,  Albert  the  Wise
maintained  the  unity  of  the  land  under  the
most  difficult  circumstances ;  not  without
violence,  but,  at  least  in  this  case,  with  bene-
ficial results.  In  Wiirtemberg,  too,  a  multi-
tude of  separate  estates  were  gradually  incor-
porated into  one  district,  and  assumed  the
form  of  a  German  principality.

New  territorial  powers  also  arose.  In  East
Friesland  a  chieftain  at  length  appeared,  be-
fore whom  all  the  rest  bowed  ;  Junker*  Ulrich
Cirksena,  who,  by  his  own  conquests,  ex-
tended and  consolidated  the  power  founded  on
those  of  his  brother  and  his  father.  He  also
conciliated  the  adherents  of  the  old  Fokko
Uken,  who  were  opposed  to  him,  by  a  mar-
riage with  Theta,  the  granddaughter  of  that
chief.  Hereupon  he  was  solemnly  proclaimed
count  at  Emden,  in  the  year  1463.  But  it  was
to  Theta,  who  was  left  to  rule  the  country
alone  during  twenty-eight  years,  that  the  nev/
sovereignty  chiefly  owed  its  strength  and  sta-
bility. This  illustrious  woman,  Vv-hose  pale,
beautiful  countenance,  brilliant  eyes  and  raven
hair  survive  in  her  portrait,  was  endowed  with
a  vast  understanding  and  a  singular  capacity
for  governing,  as  all  her  conduct  and  actions
prove.

Already  had  several  German  princes  raised
themselves  to  foreign  thrones.  In  the  year
1448,  Christian  I.,  Count  of  Oldenburg,  sign-
ed the  declaration  or  contract  which  made  him
king  of  Denmark:  in  1450,  he  was  invested
with  the  crown  of  St.  Olaf,  at  Drontheim ;  in
1457,  the  Swedes  acknowledged  him  as  their
sovereign;  in  1460,  Holstein  did  homage  to
him,  and  was  raised  on  his  account  to  the  rank
of  a  German  duchy.  These  acquisitions  were
not,  it  is  true,  of  so  stable  and  secure  a  char-
acter as  they  at  first  appeared ;  but,  at  all
events,  they  conferred  upon  a  German  princely
house  a  completely  new  position  both  in  Ger-
many and  in  Europe.

The  rise  of  the  princely  power  and  sove-

*  Junker,  literally,  the  younger  son  of  a  noble  house,
became  the  title  of  the  lesser  aristocracy  of  Germany.  It
corresponds  pretty  nearly  to  squire  in  its  common  Englisll
accept  ation  .—Tr  Ä.NSL.

42

INTRODUCTION,

reignty  was,  as  we  see,  not  the  mere  result  of
the  steady  course  of  events ;  the  noiseless  and
progressive  development  of  political  institu-
tions ;  it  was  brought  about  mainly  by  adroit
policy,  successful  war  and  the  might  of  per-
sonal character.

Yet  the  secular  princes  by  no  means  pos-
sessed absolute  sovereignty;  they  were  still
involved  in  an  incessant  struggle  with  the
other  powers  of  the  empire.

These  were,  in  the  first  place,  the  spiritual
principalities  (whose  privileges  and  internal
organization  were  the  same  as  those  of  the  se-
cular, but  whose  rank  in  the  hierarchy  of  the
empire  was  higher),  in  which  nobles  of  the
high  or  even  the  inferior  aristocracy  composed
the  chapter  and  filled  the  principal  places.  In
the  fifteenth  century,  indeed,  the  bishoprics
began  to  be  commonly  conferred  on  the  young-
er sons  of  sovereign  princes  :  the  court  of
Rome  favoured  this  practice,  from  the  convic-
tion that  the  chapters  could  only  be  kept  in
order  by  the  strong  hand  a^d  the  authority  of
sovereign  power;*  but  it  was  neither  univer-
sal, nor  was  the  fundamental  principle  of  the
spiritual  principalities  by  any  means  abandon-
ed in  consequence  of  its  adoption.

There  was  also  a  numerous  body  of  nobles
who  received  their  investiture  wi!h  the  banner,
like  the  princes,  and  had  a  right  to  sit  in  the
same  tribunal  with  them ;  mf,  there  were
even  families  or  clans,  which,  from  all  time,
claimed  exemption  from  those  general  feudal
relations  that  formed  the  bond  of  the  state,  and
held  their  lands  in  fee  from  God  and  his  bless-
ed sun.  They  were  overshadowed  by  the
princely  order;  but  they  enjoyed  perfect  inde-
pendence notwithstanding.

Next  to  this  class  came  the  powerful  body
of  knights  of  the  Empire,  vrhoso  castles  crown-
ed the  hills  on  the  Rhine,  in  Swabia  and  Fran-
conia  ;  they  lived  in  haughty  loneliness  amidst
the  wildest  scenes  ;  girt  round  by  an  impreg-
nable circle  of  deep  fosses,  and  within  walls
four-and-twenty  feet  thick,  where  they  could
set  all  authority  at  defiance:  the  bond  of  fel-
lowship among  them  was  but  the  stricter  for
their  isolation.  Another  portion  of  the  nobility,
especially  in  the  eastern  and  colonized  princi-
palities in  Pomerania  and  Mecklenburg,  Meis-
sen and  the  Marches,  were,  hov/eyer,  brought
into  undisputed  subjection;  though  this,  as  we
see  in  the  example  of  the  Priegnitz,  was  not
brought  about  without  toil  and  combat.

There  was  also  a  third  class  who  constantly
refused  to  acknowledge  any  feudal  lord.  The
Craichgauer  and  the  Mortenauer  would  not  ac-
knowledge the  sovereignty  of  the  Palatine,  nor
the  ßökler  and  Lövven-ritter,f  that  of  Bavaria.
We  find  that  the  Electors  of  Mainz  and  Treves,
on  occasion  of  some  decision  by  arbitration,
feared  that  their  nobles  would  refuse  to  abide

*  "  Si  episcopum  potentem  sorliantur,  virgam  correc-
tionis  timent." — JEneas  Sylvius.

t  In  14S8,  Albert  IV.,  of  Bavaria,  imposed  a  tax.instead
of  personal  service.  Tlie  Order  of  Knigiits  having  vainly-
protested  against  this,  formed  the  association  called  the
Lion  League  (Löwenbund),  and  entered  into  alliance
with  the  Swabian  League.  The  other  associations  v^'ere
probably  of  a  similar  kind. — Transl.

by  it,  and  knew  not  what  measure  to  resort  to
in  this  contingency,  except  to  rid  themselves
of  these  refractory  vassals  and  withdraw  their
protection  from  them-ij:  It  seems,  in  some
cases,  as  if  the  relation  of  subject  and  ruler
had  become  nothing  more  than  a  sort  of  alli-
ance.

Still  more  completely  independent  was  the
attitude  assumed  by  the  cities.  Opposed  to  all
these  difleient  classes  of  nobles,  which  they
regarded  as  but  one  body,  they  were  founded
on  a  totally  different  principle,  and  had  strug-
gled into  importance  in  the  midst  of  incessant
hostility.  A  curious  spectacle  is  aflforded  by
this  old  enmity  constantly  pervading  all  the
provinces  of  Germany,  yet  in  each  one  taking
a  different  form.  In  Prussia,  the  opposition
of  the  cities  gave  rise  to  the  great  national
league  against  the  supreme  power,  which  was
here  in  the  hands  of  the  Teutonic  Order.  On
the  Wendish  coasts  was  then  the  centre  of  the
Hanse,  by  which  the  Scandinavian  kings,  and
still  more  the  surrounding  German  princes,
were  overpowered.  The  i)uke  of  Pomerania
himself  was  struck  with  terror,  when,  on  com-
ing to  succour  Henry  the  Elder  of  Brunswick,
he  perceived  by  what  powerful  and  closely
allied  cities  his  friend  was  encompassed  and
enchained  on  every  side.  On  the  Rhine,  we
find  an  unceasing  struggle  for  municipal  inde-
pendence, which  the  chief  cities  of  the  eccle-
siastical principalities  claimed,  and  the  Elect-
ors refused  to  grant.  In  Franconia,  Nürnberg
set  itself  in  opposition  to  the  rising  power  of
Brandenburg,  which  it  rivalled  in  successful
schemes  of  aggrandisement.  Then  followed
in  Swabia  and  the  Upper  Danube  (the  true
arena  of  the  struggles  and  the  leagues  of  im-
perial free  cities),  the  same  groups  of  knights,
lords,  prelates,  and  princes,  who  here  approach-
ed most  nearly  to  each  other.  Among  the  Alps,
the  confederacy  formed  against  Austria  had
already  grown  into  a  regular  constitutional
government,  and  attained  to  almost  complete
independence.  On  every  side  we  find  differ-
ent relations,  different  claims  and  disputes,  dif-
ferent means  of  carrying  on  the  conflict;  but
on  all,  men  felt  themselves  surrounded  by  hos-
tile passions  v/hich  any  moment  might  blow
into  a  flame,  and  held  themselves  ready  for
battle.  It  seemed  not  impossible  that  the  mu-
nici])al  principle  might  eventually  get  the  upper
hand  in  all  these  conflicts,  and  prove  as  de-
structive to  the  aristocratical,  as  that  had  been
to  the  imperial,  power.

In  this  universal  shock  of  efforts  and  pow-
ers,— with  a  distant  and  feeble  chief,  and  inev-
itable divisions  even  among  those  naturally
connected  and  allied,  a  state  of  things  arose
which  presents  a  somewhat  chaotic  aspect;
it  was  the  acre  of  universal  private  warfare.'
The  Fehde^  is  a  middle  term  between  duel  and

t  Jan.  12,  1458.  Document  in  Hontheim,  ii.  p.  432.
"  So  sail  der  von  uns,  des  updersaiss  he  ist,  siner  missig
gain  und  iine  queine  schirm,  zulegunge  oder  handha-
bunge  Widder  den  anderen  von  uns  doin." —  "  Then  shall
that  one  of  us,  whose  vassal  he  is,  abandon  him  and  yield
him  no  protection,  support  or  defence,  against  the  rest
of  us."

§  Some  resemblance  in  sound  probably  led  to  the  use

THE  EMPIRE  IN  THE  15TH  CENTURY.

43

war.  Every  affront  or  injury  led,  after  certain
formalities,  to  the  declaration,  addressed  to  the
offending-  party,  that  the  aggrieved  party  would
be  his  foe,  and  that  of  his  helpers  and  helpers'-
helpers.  The  imperial  authorities  felt  them-
selves so  little  able  to  arrest  this  torrent,  that
they  endeavoured  only  to  direct  its  course ;  and,
while  imposing  limitations,  or  forbidding  par-
ticular act3,  they  confirmed  the  general  permis-
sion of  the  established  practice.*

The  right  which  the  supreme,  independent
power  had  hitherto  reserved  to  itself,  of  resort-
ing to  arms  when  no  means  of  conciliation  re-
mained, had  descended  in  Germany  to  the  infe-
rior classes,  and  was  claimed  by  nobles  and
cities  against  each  other ;  by  subjects  against
their  lords,  nay,  by  private  persons,  as  far  as
their  means  and  connections  permitted,  against
each  other.

In  the  middle  of  the  fifteenth  century  this
universal  tempest  of  contending  powders  was
arrested  by  a  conflict  of  a  higher  and  more  im-
portant nature — the  opposition  of  the  princes
to  the  emperor  and  the  pope;  and  it  remained
to  be  decided  from  whose  hands  the  world
could  hope  for  any  restoration  to  order.

Two  princes  appeared  on  the  stage,  each  of
them  the  hero  of  his  nation,  each  at  the  head
of  a  numerous  party ;  each  possessed  of  per-
sonal qualities  strikingly  characteristic  of  the
epoch — Frederic  of  the  Palatinate,  and  Albert
of  Brandenburg.  They  took  opposite  courses.
Frederic  the  Victorious,  distinguished  rather
for  address  and  agility  of  body  than  for  size
and  strength,  owed  his  fame  and  his  success  to
the  forethought  and  caution  -with  which  he  pre-
pared his  battles  and  sieges.  In  time  of  peace
he  busied  himself  with  the  study  of  antiquity,
or  the  mysteries  of  alchemy;  poets  and  min-
strels found  ready  access  to  him,  as  in  the
spring-time  of  poetry  :  he  lived  under  the  same
roof  with  his  friend  and  songstress,  Clara  Det-
tin,  of  Augsburg,  whose  sweetness  and  sense
not  only  captivated  the  prince,  but  were  the

of  the  word  feud  (feodum),  as  the  equivalent  of  Fehde
(faida),  a  confusion  which,  however  sanctioned  bv  cus-
tom, 1  liave  thouirht  it  better  to  avoid.  Eichliorn  (Deutsche
Staats  und  Rechtsgeschichte,  vol.  i.  p.  441,)  says  :  — "  In
case  of  robbery,  murder,  &c.,  the  injured  party,  or  his
heirs,  was  not  bound  to  pursue  the  injurer  at  law:  but
private  help  or  self-revenjre  (rrivathulfe  und  Selbstraclie"!
— Fehde  (faida),  was  lawful  ;  and  the  Befehdete  (faidosus)
could  only  escape  this  by  paying  the  appointed  fine."

For  the  earliest  mention  ofJhis  fine,  he  refers  to  Taciti
(Germ.  21).  It  is  remarkable,  too,  that  the  authority
from  which  he  quotes  these  terms,  is  the  laws  of  Fries-
land,  a  country  where,  as  is  well  known,  feudalism  never
existed.  And  indeed  the  parties  by  whom  diffidations
{Fehdebriefe)  were  often  sent,  were  obviously  subject  to
no  feudal  relations.  Although  we  appear  to  have  lost
the  English  cognate  of  the  Anglo-Sa.Ton  Foehthe  {capitaljs
inimicitia),  it  is  found  in  the  Scotch  feid,fede,feijde,  (see
Gawin  Douglas,  Jamieson's  Diet.,  &:c.),  and  in  most  of
the  Teutonic  languages.— Transl.

*  e.  g.  the  "  Reformation"  of  Frederic  III.  of  1442  or-
ders, "(lass  nymand  dem  andern  Schaden' tun  oder  zufü-
gen soll,  er  habe  ihn  denn  ztivor— zu  landläufigen  Rech-
ten erfordert."  — "^Ihat  none  should  do,  or  caiise  to  be
done,  injury  to  another,  unless  iie  have  previously  chal-
lenged him,  according  to  the  customary  laws  of  the  land."
Tlie  clause  of  the  golden  bull,  de  Diffidationibus,  is  then
repeated.— [This  clause  is  as  follows  :— "  Eos  qui  de  cetero
adversus  aliquos  Justam  diffidationis  causam  se  habere
fingentes,  ipsos  in  locis,  ubi  domicilia  non  obtinent  aut
ea  communiter  non  inhabitant,  intenipestive  diffidant ;
declaramus  damna  per  incendia,  spolia,  vel  rapinas,  diffi-
datis  ipsis,  cum  honore  suo  inferre  non  posse."  Bulla
Aurea,  cap,  xvii.— Transl.]

charm  and  delight  of  all  around  him.  He  had
expressly  renounced  the  comforts  of  equal
marriage  and  legitimate  heirs ;  all  that  he  ac-
complished or  acquired  was  for  the  advantage
of  his  nephew  Philip.

The  towering  and  athletic  frame  of  Mark-
grave  Albert  of  Brandenburg  (surnamed  Achil-
les), on  the  contrary,  announced,  at  the  first
glance,  his  gigantic  strength  :  he  had  been  vic-
tor in  countless  tournaments,  and  stories  of  his
courage  and  warlike  prowess,  bordeiing  on  the
fabulous,  were  current  among  the  people  ; —
how,  for  example,  at  some  siege  he  had  mount-
ed the  walls  alone,  and  leaped  down  into  the
midst  of  the  terrified  garrison;  how,  hurried
on  by  a  slight  success  over  an  advanced  party
of  the  enemy,  he  had  rushed  almost  unattended
into  their  main  body  of  800  horsemen,  had
forced  his  way  up  to  their  standard,  snatched
it  from  its  bearer,  and  after  a  momentary  feel-
ing of  the  desperateness  of  hife  position,  rallied
his  courage  and  defended  it,  till  his  people
could  come  up  and  complete  the  victory.
Ji^neas  8)^1  vi  us  declares  that  the  Markgrave
himself  assured  him  of  the  fact.j-  His  letters
breathe  a  passion  for  war.  Even  after  a  defeat
he  had  experienced,  he  relates  to  his  friends
with  evident  pleasure,  how  long  he  and  four
others  held  out  on  the  field  of  battle ;  how  he
then  cut  his  way  through  with  great  labour
and  severe  fighting,  and  how  he  w^as  deter-
mined to  re-appear  as  soon  as  possible  in  the
field.  In  time  of  peace  he  busied  himself  with
the  affairs  of  the^  empire,  in  which  he  took  a
more  lively  and  efficient  part  than  the  emperor
himself.  We  find  him  sharing  in  all  the  pro-
ceedings of  the  diets  ;  or  holding-  a  magnificent
and  hospitable  court  in  his  Franconian  territo-
ries ;  or  directing  his  attention  to  his  posses-
sions in  the  Mark,  which  were  governed  by  his
son  with  all  the  vigilance  dictated  by  the  awe
of  a  grave  and  austere  father.  Albert  is  the
worthy  progenitor  of  the  warlike  house  of
Brandenburg.  He  bequeathed  to  it  not  only
wise  maxims,  but,  what  is  of  more  value,  a
great  example.

About  the  year  1461  these  two  princes  em-
braced, as  vv'e  have  said,  different  parties.
Frederic,  v.'ho  as  yet  possessed  no  distinctly
recognised  power,  and  in  all  things  obeyed  his
personal  impulses,  put  himself  at  the  head  of
the  opposition.  Albert,  who  always  follov/ed
the  trodden  path  of  existing  relations,  under-
took the  defence  of  the  emperor  and  the  pope  ;:|:

t  Historia  Frederici  III.,  in  the  part  first  published  by
Kollar,  Anal.  ii.  p.  166.

X  In  the  collection  of  imperial  documents  in  the  Frank-
furt Archives,  vol.  v.  there  is  a  very  remarkable  report  by
Johannes  Brun,  of  an  audience  which  he  had  of  Albrecht
Achilles,  in  Oct.  1461.  He  had  to  entreat  him  for  a  re-
mission of  the  succours  demanded.  Markgrave  Albrecht
would  not  grant  this  ;  "  Auch  erzalte  er,  was  Furnemen
gen  unssen  gn.  Herrn  den  Keyser  gevvest  wäre  und  wy
ein  Gedenken  nach  dem  Ryche  sy,  auch  der  Kunigvon
Behemen  ganz  Meynung  habe  zu  Mittensommer  für
Francfort  zu  sin  und  das  Rych  zu  erobern,  und  darnach
wie  u.  g.  H.  der  Keiser  yne,  sine  Schweher  von  Baden
und  Wirtenberg  angerufen  und  yne  des  Ryches  Banyer
bevolhen  habe,  über  Herzog  Ludwig,  um  der  Geschieht
willen  mit  dem  Bischof  von  Eystett,  den  von  Werde  und
Dinkelsböl  und  umb  die  Pene,  darin  er  deshalben  verfal-
len sy  ;— in  den  Dingen  er  uf  niemant  gebeitet  oder  gese-
hen, sondern  zu  Stund  mit  den  sinen  und  des  von  Wirten-

44

INTRODUCTION.

fortune  wavered  for  a  time  between  them.
But  at  last  the  Jorsika,  as  George  Podiebrad
was  called,  abandoned  his  daring  plans.  Die-
ther  of  Isenburg  v/as  succeeded  by  his  antag-
onist, Adolf  of  Nassau;  and  Frederic  the
Palatine  consented  to  give  up  his  prisoners  :
victory  leaned,  in  the  main,  to  the  side  of
Brandenburg.  The  ancient  authorities  of  the
Empire  and  the  Church  were  once  more  upheld.

These  authorities,  too,  now  seemed  seriously
bent  on  introducing  a  better  order  of  things.
By  the  aid  of  the  victorious  party,  the  emperor
found  himself,  for  the  first  time,  in  a  position
to  exercise  a  certain  influence  in  the  empire  ;
Pope  Paul  II.  wished  to  fit  out  an  expedition
against  the  Turks  :  with  united  strengrth  they
proceeded  to  the  work  at  the  diet  of  Nürnberg
(a.,d.  146G).*

It  was  an  assembly  which  distinctly  be-
trayed the  state  of  parties  under  which  it  had
been  convoked.  •  Frederick  the  Palatine  ap-
peared neither  in  person  nor  by  deputy  ;  the
ambassadors  of  Podiebrad,  who  had  fallen
into  fresh  disputes  with  the  papal  see,  were
not  admitted :  nevertheless,  the  resolutions
passed  there  were  of  great  importance.  It
was  determined  for  the  next  five  years  to  re-
gard every  breach  of  the  Public  Peace|  as  a

Wrg  mit  des  Ryclis  Banyer  zu  Feld  gelegen  und  uiiscrn
Herrn  den  Keyser  gelediget  und  die  Last  uf  sich  genom-
men, darin  angesehen  sine  Ffliclit,  und  was  er  habe  das
er  das  vom  Ryclie  habe,  und  meyne  Lip  und  Gut  von,u.
H.  dem  Kaiser  nit  zu  scheiden."  —  "He  also  recounted
what  manner  of  enterprise  there  l)ad  been  against  our
gracious  lord  the  emperor,  and  how  there  was  a  design
npon  the  empire;  also  how  the  king  of  Hohemia  had  the
full  intention  of  being  at  Frankfort  at  midsummer,  and
of  getting  possession  of  the  empire:  and  hou',  thereupon,
our  gracious  lord  the  emperor  had  summoned  him,  his
brothers-in-law  of  Baden  and  Wirtenburg,  and  committed
the  banner  of  the  empire  to  him  rather  than  to  Duke
Ludwig,  by  reason  of  tlie  affair  with  the  bishop  of  Eystett,
those  of  VVerde  and  Dinkelsböl,  and  of  the  punisiiment
he  had  incurred  on  that  account;  in  these  things  he  had
tarried  or  looked  for  no  one,  but  forthwith  taken  the  field
with  his  men  and  those  of  h#m  of  Wirtenberg,  with  the
banner  of  the  empire,  and  relieved  our  lord  the  emperor,
and  taken  the  burthen  upon  himself,  and  had  therein  be-
held his  duty;  and  that  what  he  had,  he  had -from  the
empire,  and  had  no  thought  of  separating  his  life  and
lands  from  the  cause  of  the  emperor."  As  to  the  prayer
of  the  cities,  he  says;  —  "  wywol  yme  das  Geld  nutzer
wäre  und  er  mer  schicken  wolle  mit  den  die  er  in  den
Sold  gewönne  denn  mit  den  die  in  von^den  Städten  zu-
geschicket  werden,  ye  doch  so  stehe  es  ime  nit  zu  und
habe  nit  Macht  eynich  Geld  zu  dehmen  und  des  Keilers
Gebote"  abzustellen."  "Although  money  v\'as  needful  to
him,  and  he  should  spend  more  with  troops  he  took  into
his  pay  than  with  those  the  cities  should  send  him,  still
it  would  not  become  him,  and  he  had  not  power  anyhow
to  take  money  and  to  set  aside  the  emperor's  command."
Dispositions  such  as  befit  a  prince  of  the  empire.  It  were
much  to  he  wished  there  were  some  one  capable  of  giving
a  more  full  and  accurate  account  of  the  life  and  deeds  of
this  remarkable  prince.

*  Proceedings  at  the  papal  and  imperial  diet  held  at
Nürnberg  on  account  of  the  Turkish  campaign,  in  the  4th
vol.  of  the  Frankfort  Acts  of  the  Diet  of  the  Empire,  as
published  by  Schilter  and  Müller,  with  some  small  varila-
tions.

t  Landfriede—Vence  of  the  land.  The  expression,  pub-
lic peace,  which,  in  deference  to  numerous  and  high  au-
thorities, I  have  generally  used  in  the  text,  is  liable  to
important  objections.  M  breach  of  the  public  peace  means,
in  England,  any  open  disorder  or  outrage.  But  the  Land-
friede (Pax  publica)  was  a  special  act  or  provision  di-
rected against  the  abuse  of  an  ancient  and  established
institution,— the  Fehderecht  (jus  diffidationis,  or  right  of
private  warfare).  The  attempts  to  restrain  this  abuse
were,  for  a  long  time,  local  and  temporary;  as, for  exam-
ple, in  the  year  1382,  Markgrave  Sigismund  of  Branden-
burg, and  some  of  the  neighbouring  princes,  concluded  a
Landfriede  for  six  years. In  such  cases  tribunals  called

crime  against  the  majesty  of  the  empire,  and
to  punish  it  with  the  ban.  It  was  found  that
the  spiritual  tribunals  must  come  in  aid  of  the
temporal  sword;  and  accordingly  the  pope
denounced  the  heaviest  spiritual  penalties
against  violators  of  the  Public  Peace.  The
emperor  formally  adopted  these  resolutions  at
an  assembly  at  Neustadt,  in  the  year  14G7,and
for  the  first  time  revoked  the  articles  of  the
Golden  Bull  and  the  Reformation  of  1412,  in
which  private  wars  were,  under  certain  con-
ditions, permitted.:!:  A  peace  was  proclaimed,
"enjoined  by  our  most  gracious  lord  the  king
of  the  Romans,  and  confirmed  by  our  holy
father  the  pope,"  as  the  electors  express  them-
selves.

Sometime  afterwards — at  Regensbnrg,  in  the
year  1471 — the  allied  powers  ventured  on  a
second  yet  more  impqrtant  step,  for  the  further-
ance of  the  war  against  the  Turks,  which  they
declared  themselves'at  length  about  to  under-
take :  'they  attempted  to  impose  a  sort  of
property  tax  on  the  whole  empire,  called  the
Common  Penny, §  and  actually  obtained  an
edict  in  its  favour.  They  named  in  concert
the  officers  charged  with  the  collection  of  it  in
the  archiepiscopal  and  episcopal  sees  ;  and  the
papal  legate  threatened  the  refractory  with  the
sum  of  all  spiritual  punishments,  exclusion
from  the  community  of  the  church.]]

These  measures  undoubtedly  embraced  what
was  most  immediately  necessary  to  the  in-
ternal and  external  interests  of  the  empire.
But  how  was  it  possible  to  imagine  that  they
would  be  executed  1  The  combined  powers
were  by  no  means  strong  enough  to  carry
through  such  extensive  and  radical  innovations.
The  diets  had  not  been  attended  by  nearly  suf-

Peace  Courts (FriedensgericJite),  for  trying  offences  against
the  Landfried&^^vere  instituted  and  expired  together  with
the  peace.  The  first  energetic  measure  of  the  general
government  to  put  down  private  wars  was  that  of  the
diet  of  Nürnberg  (]466).

Peace  of  the  realm,  internal  or  domestic  peace  (as  dis-
tinguished from  foreign  or  iiiternational),  would  come
nearer  to  the  meaning  of  Landfriede.  It  is  sufficient,
however,  if  the  reader  bears  in  mind  that  it  is  opposed
not  to  chance  disorder  or  tumult,  but  to  a  mode  of  void-
ing differences  recognised  by  the  law,  and  limited  by  cer-
tain forms  and  conditions  ;  as  e.  g.  that  a  Befehdete  (fai-
dosus)  could  not  be  attacked  and  killed  in  church  or  in
his  own  house.  See  Eichhorn,  Deutsche  Staats-und-
Rechtsgeschichte,  vol.  ii.  p.  453. — Transl.

t  The  constitution  of  the  18th  of  August,  1467,  in  Mül-
ler Rtth.  ii.  293.  The  provisions  for  the  maintenance  of
peace  contained  in  those  lam's  were  not  to  be  annulled,
"dann  allain  in  den  Artickel  der  gulden  Bull,  der  do
inhellt  von  Widersagen,  und  in  den  ersten  Artickel  der
Reformation,  der  da  inhellt  von  Angreifen  und  Beschedi-
gen;  dieselben  Artickel  sollen  die  obgemeldten  fünf  Jar
ruhen,— auf  dass  zu  Vehde  Krieg  und  Aufrur  Anlass  ver-
mitten  und  der  Fride  Stracks  gehrlten  werde."  "Then
alone  in  th.e  article  of  the  Golden  Bull,  concerniiig  chal-
lenges, and  the  first  article  of  the  Reformation,  concern-
ing assaults  and  damages  :  these  articles  shall  remain
unaltered  the  above-mentioned  five  years,— that  all  occa-
sion of  challenge,  war,  and  disorder,  be  avoided,  and  peace
be  thoroughly  maintained."  Unluckily  the  worthy  Mül-
ler read  Milbenstadt  for  Neuenstadt  in  this  important
passage,  a  mistake  which  has  found  its  way  into  a  num.
ber  of  histories  of  the  empire.

§  Das  gemeine  Pfennig. — I  have  not  been  able  to  find  in
any  French  or  English  writer  the  literal  translation  of
this  name  given  to  the  first  attempt  at  general  taxation
in  the  empire  ;  but  I  have  retained  it  as  characteristic  of
the  age,  and  of  the  nature  of  the  tax.— Transl.

II  Tlie  Duke  of  Cleves  was  named  executor  for  Bremen.
Münster,  and  Utrecht ;  Duke  Ludwig  of  Bavaria,  for  Rtt
gensburg  and  Passau.

THE  EMPIRE  IN  THE  15TH  CENTURY.

45

ficient  numbers,  and  the  people  did  not  hold
themselves  bound  by  the  resolutions  of  a  party.
The  opposition  to  the  emperor  and  the  pope
had  not  attained  its  object,  but  it  still  subsisted  :
Frederic  the  Victorious  still  lived,  and  had  now
an  inflnence  over  the  very  cities  which  had
formerly  opposed  him.  The  colJection  of  the
Common  Penny  was,  in  a  short  time,  not  even
talked  of;  it  was  treated  as  a  project  of  Paul
II.,  to  whom  it  was  not  deemed  expedient  to
grant  such  extensive  powers.

The  proclamation  of  the  Public  Peace  had
also  produced  little  or  no  effect.  After  some
time  the  cities  declared  that  it  had  occasioned
them  more  annoj'ance  and  damage  than  they
had  endured  before.*  It  was  contrar}'^  to  their
wishes  that,  in  the  year  1474,  it  was  renewed
with  all  its  actual  provisions.  The  private
wars  went  on  as  before.  Soon  afterwards  one
of  the  most  powerful  imperial  cities,  Regens-
burg, the  very  place  where  the  Public  Peace
was  proclaimed,  fell  into  the  hands  of  the  Ba-
varians. The  combined  powers  gradually  lost
all  their  consideration.  In  the  j^ear  1479  the
propositions  of  the  emperor  and  the  pope  were
rejected  in  a  mass  by  the  estates  of  the  em-
pire, and  were  answered  v,'ith  a  number  of
complaints.

And  yet  never  could  stringent  measures  be
more  im.periously  demanded.

I  shall  not  go  into  an  elaborate  description
of  the  evils  attendant  on  the  right  of  diifidation
or  private  warfare  {Fekderecht) :  they  were  pro-
bably not  so  great  as  is  commonly  im.agined.
Even  in  the  century  we  are  treating  of,  there
Vv'ere  Italians  to  whom  the  situation  of  Germany
appeared  happy  and  secure  in  comparison  with
that  of  their  own  country,  where,  in  all  parts,
one  faction  drove  out  another.|  It  was  only
the  level  country  and  the  hioh  roads  which
were  exposed  to  robbery  and  devastation.  But
even  so,  the  state  of  things  was  disgraceful
and  insupportable  to  a  great  nation.  It  ex-
hibited the  strongest  contrast  to  the  ideas  of
lav/  and  of  religion  upon  v.'hich  the  Empire
was  so  peculiarly  founded.

One  consequence  of  it  was,  that  as  every
man  was  exclusively  occupied  with  the  care  of
his  own  security  and  defence,  or  could  ot  best
not  extend  his  view  beyond  the  horizon  imme-
diately surrounding  him,  no  one  had  any  atten-
tion to  bestow  on  the  common  weal ;  not  only
were  no  more  great  enterprises  achieved,  but
even  the  frontiers  were  hardly  defended.  In
the  East,  the  old  contlict  between  the  Germans

*  "Dass  die  erbb.  Städte  und  die  jren  in  Zeitten  sol-
lichs  gemainen  Friden  und  wider  des  tnlialt  tmd  Mainuiiir
mer  Unsremachs  Beschädigung  verderbiicher  Rost  Schaden
und  Unfrid  an  jren  Leuten  Leiben  und  Guten  s^elitten,
dann  sy  vorher  in  vil  Jaren  und  Ze\  tten  je  empfansen."
"  That  the  hereditary  cities  and  their  people,  in  times  of
such  common  peace,  and  contrary  to  the  intent  and
nieanin», had  suffered  under  more  inconvenience,  damage,
cost,  mischief,  and  disturbance,  to  the  persons  and  pos-
sessions of  their  inhabitants,  than  had  been  undergone
before  during  many  years  and  se,a.sonsr— Proceedings  at
Regensburg,  1474. Frankfurter  AA.,  vol.  viii.

t  ^neas  Sylvius,  Dialogi  de  Autoritate  Concijii,  intro-
duces in  the  second  of  these  dialogues  a  Novanese,  who
calls  out  to  the  Germans  :  "  Bona  vestra  vere  vestra  sunt
pace  omnesfruimini  et  libertate  in  communi,  magisque
ad  naturam  quam  ad  opinionem  vivitis.  Fugi  ego  illos
Italise  turbines."— Ä?War,  jinal.  ii.  704.

and  the  Lettish  and  Slavonian  tribes  was  de-
cided in  favour  of  the  latter.  As  the  King  of
Poland  found  allies  in  Prussia  itself,  he  ob-
tained an  easy  victory  over  the  Order,  and  com-
pelled the  knights  to  conclude  the  peace  of
Thorrr  (a.  d.  1466),  by  which  the  greater  part
of  the  territories  of  the  Order  were  ceded  to
him,  and  the  rest  were  held  of  him  in  fee.
Neither  emperor  nor  empire  stirred  to  avert  this
incalculable  loss.  In  the  West,  the  idea  of
obtaining  the  Rhine  as  a  boundary  first  awoke
in  the  minds  of  the  French,  and  the  attacks  of
the  Dauphin  and  the  Armagnacs  were  onl)'
foiled  by  local  resistance.  But  what  the  one
line  of  the  house  of  Valois  failed  in,  the  other,
that  of  Burgundy,  accomplished  with  brilliant
success.  As  the  wars  between  France  and
England  were  gradually  terminated,  and  no-
thing more  was  to  be  gained  in  that  field,  this
house,  with  all  its  am^bition^and  all  its  good
fortune,  threw  itself  on  the  territory  of  Lower
Germany.  In  direct  defiance  of  the  imperial
authorit}',  it  took  possession  of  Brabant  and
Holland ;  then  Philip  the  Good  took  Luxem-
burg, placed  his  natural  son  in  Utrecht,  and
his  nephev/  on  the  episcopal  throne  of  Liege;
after  which  an  unfortunate  quarrel  betv.'een
father  and  son  gave  Charles  the  Bold  an  op-
portunity to  seize  upon  Guelders.  A  power
was  formed  such  as  had  not  arisen  since  the
time  of  the  great  duchies,  and  the  interests  and
tendencies  of  which  were  naturally  opposed  to
those  of  the  empire.  This  state  the  restless,
Charles  resolved  to  extend,  on  the  one  side,
towards  Friesland,  on  the  other,  along  thtj
Upper  Rhine.  When  ät  length  he  fell  upon
the  archbishopric  of  Cologne  and  besieged
Neuss,  some  opposition  was  made  to  him,  but
not  in  consequence  of  any  concerted  scheme  or
regular  armament,  but  of  a  sudden  levy  in  the
presence  of  imminent  danger.  The  favourable
moment  for  driving  him  back  v.'ithin  his  own
frontiers  had  been  neglected.  Shortl}'-  after,
on  his  attacking  Lotharingia,  Alsatia,  and
Switzerland,  those  countries  v/ere  left  to  defend
themselves.  Meanwhile,  Italy  had  in  fact
completel}^  emancipated  herself  If  the  em^-
peror  desired  to  be  crowned  there,  he  must  go
unarmed  like  a  mere  traveller  ;  his  ideal  power
could  only  be  manifested  in  acts  of  grace  and
favour.  The  King  of  Bohemia,  who  also  pos-
sessed the  tvro  Lusatias  and  Silesia,  and  an
extensive  feudal  dominion  within  the  empire,
insisted  loudly  on  his  rights,  and  would  hear
nothing  of  the  corresponding  obligations.

The  life  of  the  nation  must  have  been  already
extinct,  had  it  not,  even  in  the  midst  of  all
these  calamities,  and  vrith  the  prospect  of  fur-
ther imminent  peril  before  it,  taken  m.easures
to  establish  its  internal  order  and  to  restore  its
external  power;  —  objects,  however,  not  to  be
attained  v/ithout  a  revolution  in  both  its  spir-
itual and  temporal  affairs.

The  tendency  to  development  and  progress
in  Europe  is  sometimes  more  active  and  pow-
erful in.  oiie  direction,  sometimes  in  another.
At  this  moment  temporal  interests  were  most
prominent;  and  these,  therefore,  must  first
claim  our  attention.

BOOK  I.

ATTEMPT  TO  REFORM  THE  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  EMPIRE.

1486—1517.

Similar  disorders,  arising  from  kindred
sources  and  an  analogous  train  of  events,
existed  in  all  the  other  nations  of  Europe.  It
may  be  said,  that  the  offspring  and  products
of  the  middle  ages  were  engaged  in  a  universal
conflict  which  seemed  likely  to  end  in  their
common  destruction.

The  ideas  upon  which  human  society  is
based  are  but  partially  and  imperfectly  embued
with  the  divine  and  eternal  Essence  from  which
they  emanate  ;  for  a  time  they  are  beneficent
and  vivifying,  and  new  creations  spring  up  un-
der their  tfreath.  But  on  earth  nothing  attains
to  a  pure  and  perfect  existence,  and  therefore
nothing  is  immortal.  When  the  times  are
accomplished,  higher  aspirations  and  m.ore  en-
lightened schemes  spring  up  out  of  the  totter-
ing remains  of  former  institutions,  which  they
utterly  overthrow  and  efface;  for  so  has  God
ordered  the  world.

If  the  disorders  in  question  were  universal,
the  efforts  to  put  an  end  to  them  v/ere  not  less
so.  Powers  called  into  life  by  the  necessity
of  a  change,  or  growing  up  spontaneously,
arose  out  of  the  general  confusion,  and  v/ith
vigorous  and  unbidden  hand  imposed  order  on
the  chaos.

This  is  the  great  event  of  the  fifteenth  cen-
tury. The  names  of  the  energetic  princes  of
that  time,  whose  task  it  was  first  to  awaken
the  nations  of  Europe  to  a  consciousness  of
their  own  existence  and  importance,  are  known
to  all.  In  France  we  find  Charles  VII.  and
Louis  XI.  The  land  was  at  length  delivered
from  the  enemy  v^ho  had  so  long  held  divided
sv/ay  in  it,  and  was  united  under  the  standard
of  the  Lilies;  the  monarchy  was  founded  on  a
military  and  financial  basis ;  crafty,  calculating
policy  came  in  aid  of  the  practical  straightfor-
ward sense  v/hich  attained  its  ends,  because  it
aimed  only  at  what  was  necessary;  all" the
daring  and  insolent  powers  that  had  bid  defi-
ance to  the  supreme  authority  were  subdued
or  overthrowm :  the  new  order  of  things  had
already  attained  to  sufficient  strength  to  endure
a  long  and  stormy  minority.

Henry  VII.  of  England,  without  attempting
to  destroy  the  ancient  liberties  of  the  nation,
laid  the  foundation  of  the  power  of  the  Tudors
on  the  ruins  of  the  two  factions  of  the  aristo-
cracy, with  a  resolution  nothing  could  shake
and  a  vigour  nothing  could  resist.  The  Nor-
man times  were  over; — modern  England  be-
gan. At  the  same  time  Isabella  of  Castile
reduced  her  refractory  vassals  to  submission,
by  her  union  with  a  powerful  neighbour,  by

the  share  she  had  acquired  in  the  spiritual
power,  and  by  the  natural  ascendency  of  her
own  grand  and  womanly  character,  in  which
austere  domestic  virtue  and  a  high  chivalrous
spirit  were  so  singularly  blended.  She  suc-
ceeded in  completely  driving  out  the  Moors
and  pacifying  the  Peninsula.  Even  in  Italy,
some  stronger  governments  were  consolidated;
five  considerable  states  were  formed,  united  by
a  free  alliance,  and  for  a  while  capable  of
counteracting  all  foreign  influence.  At  the
same  time  Poland,  doubly  strong  through  her
union  with  Lithuania,  climbed  to  the  highest
pinnacle  of  power  she  ever  possessed ;  while
in  Hungary,  a  native  king  maintained  the
honour  and  the  unity  of  his  nation  at  the  head
of  the  powerful  army  he  had  assembled  under
his  banner.

However  various  were  the  resources  and  the
circumstances  by  which  it  was  surrounded,
Monarchy  —  the  central  power — was  every
where  strong  enough  to  put  down  the  resisting
independencies;  to  exclude  foreign  influence ;
to  rally  the  people  around  its  standard,  by  ap-
pealing to  the  national  spirit  under  whose  guid-
ance it  acted  ;  and  thus  to  give  them  a  feeling
of  unity.

In  Germany,  however,  this  was  not  possible.
The  two  powders  which  might  have  effected  the
most  were  so  far  carried  along  by  the  general
tendency  of  the  age,  that  they  endeavoured  to
introduce  some  degree  of  order;  we  have  seen
with  what  small  success.  At  the  very  time  in
which  all  the  monarchies  of  Europe  consolida-
ted themselves,  the  emperor  was  driven  out  of
his  hereditary  states,  and  wandered  about  the
other  parts  of  the  empire  as  a  fugitive.*  He
was  dependent  for  his  daily  repast  on  the
bounty  of  convents,  or  of  the  burghers  of  the
imperial  cities  ;  his  other  wants  were  supplied
from  the  slender  revenues  of  his  chancery :  he
might  sometimes  be  seen  travelling  along  the
roads  of  his  own  dominions  in  a  carriage
drawn  by  oxen  ;  never — and  this  he  himself
felt — was  the  majesty  of  the  empire  dragged
about  in  meaner  form  :  the  possessor  of  a  power
which,  according  to  the  received  idea,  ruled  the
vv^orld,  was  become  an  object  of  contemptuous
pity.

If  any  thing  was  to  be  done  in  Germany,  it
must  be  by  other  means,  upon  other  principles,
with  other  objects,  than  any  that  had  hitherto
been  contemplated  or  employed.

*  See  Unrest,  Chronicon  Austriacum;  Hahn.  660-^688.
Kurz,  Oestreich  unter  Friedrich  III.  vol.  ii.

(46)

)kI.

FOUNDATION  OF  A  NEW  CONSTITUTION.

47

FOUNDATION  OF  A  NEW  CONSTITUTION.

It  is  obvious  at  the  first  glance,  that  no
ttempt  at  reform  could  be  successful  which
id  not  originate  with  the  States  themselves,
ince  they  had  taken  up  so  strong  a  position
gainst  the  two  co-ordinate  higher  powers,  they
?ere  bound  to  show  how  far  that  position  was
.kely  to  prove  beneficial  to  the  public  interests.

It  was  greatly  in  their  favour  that  the  empe-
3r  had  sunk  into  so  deplorable  a  situation.

Not  that  it  was  their  intention  to  make  use
f  this  to  his  entire  overthrow  or  destruction  ;
n  the  contrary,  they  were  determined  not  to
How  him  to  fall.  What  for  centuries  only
ne  emperor  had  accomplished,  and  he,  in  the
ulness  of  his  power  and  by  dispensing  extra-
rdinary  favours  (viz.  to  secure  the  su<5cession
0  his  son),  Frederic  III.  achieved  in  the  mo-
ncnt  of  the  deepest  humiliation  and  vreakness.
^'he  prince-electors  met  in  the  year  1486,  to
hoose  his  son  IMaximilian  king  of  the  Romans,
n  this  measure,  Albert  Achilles,  of  Branden-
lurg,  took  the  most  prominent  and  active  part.
'Notwithstanding  his  advanced  age,  he  came
mce  more  in  person  to  Frankfurt :  he  caused
limself  to  be  carried  into  the  electoral  chapel
tn  a  litter,  whence,  at  the  close  of  the  proceed-
ngs,  he  presented  the  sceptre;  he  was  in  the
ict  of  performing  his  high  function  as  arch-
;hamberlain  of  the  empire,  when  he  expired,
t  could  not  escape  the  electors,  that  the  clai'ms
if  the  house  of  Austria  to  the  support  of  the
'rapire  were  greatly  strengthened  by  this  event,
vlaxirailian,  the  son-in-law  of  Charles  the
3old,  who  had  undertaken  to  uphold  the  rights
;f  the  house  of  Burgundy  in  the  Netherlands,
mcountered  there  difficulties  and  misfortunes
lot  much  inferior  to  those  which  beset  his
ather  in  Austria,  and  must,  on  no  account,  be
abandoned.  His  election  could  hardly  be  re-
garded as  fully  accomplished,  until  the  coun-
ries  which  had  hitherto  maintained  a  hostile
ittitude  were  subjected  to  him,  and  thus  re-
stored to  the  empire.  It  was  precisely  by  de-
ermining  to  send  isuccours  in  both  directions,
hat  the  states  acquired  a  two-fold  right  to  dis-
cuss internal  affairs  according  to  their  ovvn
judgment. They  had  rendered  fresh  services

0  the  reigning  house,  which  could  not  defend
ts  hereditary  possessions  without  their  aid,
md  their  voices  must  now  be  heard.

At  this  moment,  too,  a  coolness  arose  be-
Aveen  the  emperor  and  the  pope. There  was

1  large  party  in  Europe  which  had  always  re-
garded the  rise  of  the  Austrian  power  with  dis-
ike,  and  was  now  greatly  offended  at  the  elec-
ion  of  IMaximilian  to  the  Roman  throne.  To
;his  party,  in  consequence  of  the  turn  Italian
ifFairs  had  taken,  Pope  Innocent  VII.  belong-
3d.  He  refused  the  emperor  aid  against  the
Hungarians,  and  even  against  the  Turks.  The
■mperial  am.bassador  found  him,  as  Frederic
3omplained  to  the  diet,  "  very  awkward  to  deal
with"  {gar  ungeschickt,"^)  and  could  do  nothing
with  him.  There  was  also  a  difference  with
bhe  pope  about  the  nomination  to  the  see  of

*  Muller,  Rtth.  unter  Friedrich  III.,  v.  122.

Passau,  as  well  as  about  a  newly-imposed
tithe.  In  short,  the  intervention  of  the  Roman
see  was,  for  a  moment,  suspended.  For  the
first  time,  during  a  long  period,  we  find  nume-
rous assemblies  of  German  princes  without  the
presence  of  a  papal  legate.

Under  these  circumstances  the  deliberations
of  the  States  were  opened  with  a  better  pros-
pect of  useful  results.

It  was  evidently  not  necessary  to  begin  from
the  beginning;  all  the  elements  «of  a  great
commonw'ealth  were  at  hand.  The  diets  had
long;  been  regarded  as  the  focus  of  legislation
and  of  the  general  government :  peace  (Land-
frieden had  been  proclaimed  throughout  the
realm;  an  imperial  court  of  justice  existed;
as  long  ago  as  the  Hussite  war  a  census  had
been  taken  with  a  view  to  the  general  defence
of  the  empire.  ,  Nothing  remained  but  to  give
to  these  institutions  that  steady  and  pervading
action  v/hich  they  had  liitherto  entirely  wanted.

To  this  effect  deliberations  were  incessantly
held  from  the  year  1486  to  1489.  Ideas  em^
bracing  the  whole  land  of  the  German  people,
and  directed  to  the  restoration  of  its  unity  and
strength,  were  in  active  circulation.  In  order
to  obtain  a  more  complete  and  accurate  concep-
tion of  the  several  important  points,  we  v,-ill
consider  them,  not  in  their  historical  connexion
either  with  each  other  or  with  contemporane-
ous events,  but  each  separately.

The  first  was  the  Public  Peace,  which  had
again  been  broken  on  every  side,  and  now,
proclaimed  anew  in  1486,  had  been  rendered
clear  by  some  more  precise  provisions  annexed
in  1487;  yet  it  differed  little  from  those  which
had  gone  before  it.  The  execution  of  it  Vv^as
now,  as  heretofore,  left  to  the  tumultuous  levy
of  the  neighbourhood  within  a  circle  of  from^
six  to  ten  miles  (German)  ;  nay,  the  declara-
tion of  1437  expressly  declares  that  a  party  in
Vv'hose  favour  sentence  had  been  pronounced
might  use  force  to  secure  its  execution.f  The
only  difference  was  that  the  co-operation  of  the
pope  was  no  longer  invited.  There  was  no
further  m.ention  of  sending  papal  conservators
with  peculiar  powers  of  executing  justice,  in
order  to  the  raaintena^nce  of  the  Public  Peace.
This,  however,  rendered  it  doubtful  whether
the  clergy,  to  whom  the  pope  and  the  church
were  much  more  proximate  and  formidable
than  the  emperor  and  the  state,  would  choose
to  regard  themselves  as  bound  by  the  peace.
No  other  means  could  be  found  to  obviate  this
evil  than  that  the  emperor  should  declare,  as
the  bishops  had  done  in  regard  to  their  own
j  nobility,  that  he  Vv-ould  put  the  disobedient  out
I  of  the  favour  and  protection  of  the  law,  and
j  would  not  defend  them  from  any  aggression  or
injury.

W^e  see  what  a  state  of  violence,  insubordi-
nation, and  mutual  independence  still  prevail-
ed, and  even  manifested  itself  in  the laws :

t  Muller,  Rtth.  Fr.  VI.,  115.  "  Wo  aber  tier,  der  eewal-
tisre  Tate  tiirnenie  imd  ube,  das  thete  uf  beliapte  Urtheil,
so  solt  darüber  nyemaiit  dem  Bekriegten  das  mahl  Hilf

I  zuzi!j<:liicken  schuldig:  seyu."  '•  When,  however,  any  one,
undertaking  and  exercising  acts  of  violence,  does  so  upon
judgment  received  in his  fav(?ur,  then  shall  no  one  be

)  bound  to  send  help  thereupon  to  him  who  is  attacked."

48

FOUNDATION  OF

Book  I.

and  how  necessary  it  was  to  establish  internal
regulations,  by  the  firmness  and  energy  of
which  arbitrary  power  might  be  held  in  check,
and  the  encroachments  of  an  authority  which,
at  the  very  first  meeting  of  the  estates,  was
regarded  as  foreign,  might  be  repelled.

The  most  essential  point  was  to  give  to  the
imperial  diets  more  regular  forms  and  greater
dignity;  and  especially  to  put  an  end  to  the
resistance  offered  to  their  edicts  by  the  cities.

The  cities,  which  were  so  often  hostilely
treated  by  the  other  estates,  and  which  had  in-
terests of  so  peculiar  a  nature  to  defend,  held
themselves  from  the  earliest  period  studiously
aloof.  During  the  Hussite  war  they  were  even
permitted  to  send  into  the  field  a  separate  mu-
nicipal army  under  a  captain  of  their  own  ap-
pointment.* In  the  year  1460  they  declined
going  to  council  with  the  pripces,  or  uniting
in  a^common  answer  to  the  emperor's  propo-
sals.! ■'■"  ^^^  J^^^  14:74:  the  deputies  refused
to  approve  the  Public  Peace  concluded  by  the
emperor  and  princes,  and  obstinately  persisted
that  they  would  say  nothing  to  it  till  they  had
consulted  their  friends. ^  In  148G  the  princes
having  granted  some  subsidies  to  the  emperor
10  which  the  cities  were  called  upon  to  contri-
bute, they  resisted,  and  the  more  strenuously,
aince  the}^  had  not  even  been  summoned  to  the
meeting  at  which  the  grant  was  made.  Fred-
eric replied  that  this  had  not  been  done,  be-
cause they  would  have  done  nothing  without
sending  home  for  instructions.

It  was  evident  that  this  state  of  things  could
not  be  maintained.  The  imperial  cities  justly
deemed  it  an  intolerable  grievance  that  they
should  be  taxed  according  to  an  arbitrary  as-
sessment, and  a  contribution  demanded  of  them
as  if  it  were  a  debt;  on  the  other  hand,  it  was
*just  as  little  to  be  endured  that  they  should
obstruct  ßvery  definitive  decision,  and  send
home  to  consult  their  constituents  on  every  in-
dividual grant.

So  powerful  was  the  influence  of  the  pre-
vailing spirit  of  the  times,  that,  in  the  year
•1487,  the  cities  came  to  a  resolution  to  abandon
the  course  they  had  hitherto  pursued.

The  emperor  had  summoned  only  a  small

*  In  the  3'ear  T431. Datt  de  Pace  Publica,  167.

t  Protocol  in  Müller,  i.  p.  782 :  with  this  atliiition-,  how-
ever, "  Sie  weiten  solch  frandlich  Furbringen  ihren  Frun-
den  berumen."  "  They  would  commend  so  friendly  a  pro-
position to  their  friends."

J  The  answer  given  »by  them  in  Müller,  ii.  p.  623,  is
vague  and  obscure.  In  the  Frankfurt  Archives  (vol.  viii.)
it  runs  thus  :  "  Als  die  des  Friedens  notlmrfiis  und  beger-
lich  sind,  setzen  sy  (die  Städte)  in  kein  Zweifel,  E.  K.  I\I.
(werde)  gnediglich  darob  und  daran  seyn,  dass  der  vestig-
]ich  gehandhabt  und  gehalten  werde  :  dazu  sy  aber  irent-
halb  zu  reden  nit  bedacht  sind,  auch  kein  ßefel  haben,
unterteniglich  bittend,  das  S.  K.  M.  das  also  in  Gnaden
und  Guten  von  in  versten  und  sy  als  ir  allerünedigster
Herr  bedenken  wolle."  —  "As  they  have  need,  and  are
desirous  of  peace,  they  (the  cities)  niake  no  doubt,  your
Imperial  Majesty  will  graciously  strive  to  bring  about
that  it  be  firmly  maintained  and  kept ;  but  beyond  this
they  have  no  thought  of  speaking  on  their  own  behalf,
nor  have  any  command  so  to  do,  subuiissively  entreating,
that  his  Imperial  Majesty  will  therefore  take  this  in  good
and  gracious  understanding  from  them,  and  think  of  them
like  their  most  gracious  master."  It  is  evident  that  tlieir
acceptance  is  only  very  general,  and  that  they  would  not
suffer  the  more  essential  resolutions  to  be  pressed  upon
them;  the  emperor  at  last  concedes  the  point  relating  to
the  instructions.

number  of  them  to  the  diet  of  this  year ;.  they
determined,  however,  this  time  to  send  the
whole  body  of  their  deputies,  and  not  to  re-
quire them  to  send  home  for  instructions.  The
Emperor  Frederic  received  them  at  the  castle
of  Nürnberg,  sitting  on  his  bed,  "  of  a  feeble
countenance,"  as  ^they  express  themselves,§
and  caused  it  to  be  said  to  them  that  he  was
glad  to  see  them,  and  would  graciously  ac-
knowledge their  coming.  The  princes  too
were  v/ell  satisfied  therewith,  and  allowed  the
cities  to  take  part  in  their  deliberations.  Com-
mittees were  formed — a  practice  that  afterwards
became  the  prevailing  one — in  which  the  cities
too  were  included.  The  first  which  sat  to  de-
liberate on  the  Public  Peace  consisted  of  six
electors,  ten  princes,  and  three  burghers.
From  the  second, — to  consider  the  measures  to
be  adopted  against  the  Hungarians,— the  cities
were  at  first  excluded,  but  afterwards  were
summoned  at  the  express  desire  of  the  empe-
ror. Our  reporter,  Dr.  Paradeis  of  Frankfurt,
was  one  of  the  members  of  this  committee.
Nor  was  the  share  taken  by  the  burgher  dele-
gates barren  of  substantial  results ;  of  the
general  grant  of  100,000  gulden,  nearly  the
entire  half,  (49,390  gulden)  was  at  first  as-
sessed to  them  :  they  struck  off  about  a  fxfth
from  this  estimate,  and  reduced  it  to  40,000
gulden,  which  they  apportioned  to  each  city  at
their  own  discretion.

At  the  next  diet,  in  1489,  the  forms  of  gene-
ral deliberation  were  settled.  For  the  first
time,  the  three  colleges,  electors,  princes,  and
burghers,  separated  as  soon  as  a  measure  was
proposed  ;  each  party  retired  to  its  own  room,
the  answer  was  drawn  up  by  the  electoral  col-
lege, and  then  presented  for  acceptance  to  the
others.  Thenceforth  this  continued  to  be  the
regular  practice.  At  this  juncture  there  was
a  possibility  of  the  constitution  of  the  empire
assuming  a  form  like  that  which  arose  out  of
similar  institutions  in  other  countries,  viz.  that
the  commons,  who  regarded  themselves  (in
Germany  as  elsewhere)  as  the  emperor's  lieges
(Leute), — as  in  an  especial  manner  his  sub-
jects,— might  have  made  common  cause  with
him  against  the  aristocracy,  and  have  formed
a  third  estate,  or  Commons'  House.  Sigis-
mund  was  very  fond  of  joining  his  complaints
of  the  princely  power  v/ith  theirs  :  he  reminded
them  that  the  empire  had  nothing  left  but
them,  since  everything  else  had  fallen  into  the
hands  of  the  princes;  he  liked  particularly  to
treat  with  them,  and  invited  them  to  come  to
him  with  all  their  grievances,  j]  But  the  im-
perial power  was  far  too  weak  to  foster  these
sympathies  to  any  practical  maturity,  or  to
give  a  precise  and  consistent  form  to  their
union ;  it  was  incapable  of  affording  to  the
cities  that  protection  which  vv^ould  have  excited

§  Dr.  Ludwig  zum  Paradeis  of  Frankfurt,  Monday  after
Juilica,  April  2, 1487.  With  this  diet  of  the  empire  begin
the  detailed  reports  of  the  Frankfurt  deputies.  The  ear-
lier ones  were  more  fragmentary.— Us.  j9.,  vol.  xii.

11  See  Sigismund's  Speech  to  the  Friends  of  the  Council
at  Frankfurt.  Printed  by  Aschbach,  ATeschichte  Kaiser
Sigmunds,  i.  453.  He  there  says,  he  will  discuss  witfi
them  "was  ir  Brest  (Gebrechen)  sy," — "what  may  be
their  wants."

Book  I.

A  NEW  CONSTITUTION.

49

or  justified  a  voluntary  adherence  to  the  head
of  the  empire  on  their  part.  The  German  Es-
tates generally  assumed  a  very  different  form
from  all  others.  Elsewhere  the  lords  spiritual
and  temporal  used  to  meet  separately  :  in  Ger-
many, on  the  contrar)-,  the  electors,  who  united
the  spiritual  and  temporal  pov.'er  in  their  own
persons,  had  so  thoroughly  defined  a  position,
such  distinct  common  privileges,  that  it  was
not  possible  to  divide  them.  Hence  it  hap-
pened that  the  princes  formed  a  single  college
of  spiritual  and  temporal  members  :  the  com-
mittees were  generally  composed  of  an  equal
number  of  each.  The  cities  in  Germany  were
not  opposed,  but  allied  to  the  magnates.  These
two  estates  together  formed  a  compact  cor-
poration, against  which  no  emperor  could
carry  any  measure,  and  which  represented  the
aggregate  power  of  the  empire.

in  the  consciousness  of  their  own  strength
and  of  the  necessity  of  the  case,  they  now  made
a  proposal  to  the  emperor,  which,  however
moderate  in  its  tone,  opened  the  widest  pros-
pect of  a  radical  change  in  the  constitution.

It  was  obvious  that  if  order  and  tranquillity
were  really  restored,  and  all  were  compelled  to
acknovv'ledge  him  as  the  supreme  fountain  of
justice,  the  emperor  would  necessarily  acquire
an  immense  accession  of  power.  This  the  es-
tates werer  little  inclined  to  concede  to  him ;  the
less,  since  justice  was  so  arbitrarily  adminis-
tered in  his  tribunal,  which  was  therefore  ex-
tremely discredited  throughout  the  empire.  As
early  as  the  year  1467,  at  the  moment  of  the
first  serious  proclamation  of  the  Public  Peace,
a  proposal  was  made  to  the  emperor  to  establish
a  supreme  tribunal  of  a  new  kind  for  the  en-
forcement of  it,  to  which  the  several  estates
should  nominate  twenty-four  inferior  judges  *
from  all  parts  of  Germany,  and  the  emperor
onl)''  one  as  president. |  To  this  Frederick
paid  no  attention :  he  appointed  his  tribunal
after,  as  he  had  Irefore,  alone ;  caused  it  to  fol-
low his  court,  and  even  decided  some  causes
in  person;  revoked  judgm.ents  that  had  been
pronounced,  and  determined  the  amount  of  costs
and  fees  at  his  pleasure.  He  of  course  excited
universal  discontent  by  these  proceedings ;
people  saw  clearly  that  if  any  thing  was  to  be
done  for  the  empire,  the  first  step  must  be  to
establish  a  better  administration  of  justice.
The  subsidies  which  they  granted  the  emperor
in  the  year  1486  v.-ere  saddled  with  a  condition
to  that  effect.  The  estates  were  not  so  anxious
to  appoint  the  judges  of  the  court,  as  to  secure
to  it  first  a  certain  degree  of  independence ;
they  w-ere  even  willing  to  grant  the  judge  and
his  assessors  a  right  of  co-optation  for  the  offices
becoming  vacant.  The  main  thing,  however,
\vas,  that  the  judge  should  have  the  faculty  of
sentencing  the  breakers  of  the  Public  Peace  to

*  The  passage,  as  Harpprecht,  Archiv,  i.  par.  109,  gives
it,  is  quite  unintelligible,  for  instead  of  urtailsprecher
(utterer  of  a  sentence),  urtel  sprechen  (to  pronounce  sen-
tence) is  printed,  just  as  if  the  states  themselves  were  to
sit  in  judgment.  It  is  more  exact  and  connected  in
König  von  Königsthal,  ii.  p.  13.

t  The  words  in  the  text  are  Urtheiler  and  Richter. As
Urtheil  is  judffment  or  decision,  and  Recht,  law  or  right,
these  titles  seem  to  imply  some  analogy  with  the  oflices
of  the  English  jury  and  judge.— Transl.
7  E

the  punishment  upon  which  the  penal  force  of
the  law  for  the  preservation  of  that  peace — the
punishment  of  the  ban — mainly  rested,  as  well
as  the  emperor  himself;  and  also  that  it  should
rest  with  him  to  take  the  necessary  measures
for  its  execution.  So  intolerable  was  the  per-
sonal interference  of  the  emperor  esteemed,  that
people  thought  they  should  have  gained  every
thing  if  they  could  secure  themselves  from  this
evil.  They  then  intended  in  some  degree  to
limit  the  power  of  the  tribunal,  by  referring  it
to  the  statutes  of  the  particular  part  of  the  em-
pire in  which  the  particular  case  arose,  and  by
having  a  fixed  tax  for  the  costs  and  fees.ij:

But  the  aged  emperor  had  no  mind  to  re-
nounce one  jot  of  his  traditional  power.  He
replied,  that  he  should  reserve  to  himself  the
right  of  proclaiming  the  ban,  "  in  like  manner
as  that  had  been  done  of  old"  {iminaassen  das
vor  Alters  geweseri).  The  appointmxcnt  of  as-
sessors also  must  in  future  take  place  only  with
his  knowledge  and  consent.  Local  statutes
and  customs  should  only  be  recognised  by  the
court  in  as  far  as  they  were  consistent  with  the
imperial  written  law,  i.  e.  the  Roman  (a  curious
proof  how  much  the  Idea  of  the  Empire  con-
tributed to  thejntroduction  of  the  Roman  law):
vrith  regard  to  taxing  the  costs  and  fees,  he
would  be  unrestrained,  as  other  princes  were,
in  their  courts  of  justice  and  chanceries. §  He
regarded  the  supreme  tribunal  of  the  realm  in
the  light. of  a  patrimonial  court.  It  was  in
vain  that  the  electors  observed  to  him  that  a
reform  of  the  supreme  court  was  the  condition
attached  to  their  grants ;  in  vain  they  actually
stopped  their  payments,  and  proposed  other  and
m.ore  moderate  conditions :  the  aged  monarch
"\vas  inflexible.

Frederic  III.  had  accustomed  himself  in  the
course  of  a  long  life  to  regard  the  affairs  of  the
world  with  perfect  serenity  of  mind.  His  co-
temporaries  have  painted  him  to  us ; — one
while  weighing  precious  stones  in  a  gold-
smith's scales  ;  another,  with  a  celestial  globe
in  his  hand,  discoursing  with  learned  men  on
the  positions  of  the  stars.  He  loved  to  mix
metals,  compound  healing  drugs,  and  in  impor-
tant crises,  predicted  the  future  himself  from
the  aspects  of  the  constellations :  he  read  a
man's  destiny  in  his  features  or  in  the  lines  of
his  hand.  He  w^as  a  believer  in  the  hidden
powers  that  govern  nature  and  fortune.  In  his
youth  his  Portuguese  wife,  with  the  violent
temper  and  the  habitual  opinions  of  a  native  of
the  South,  urged  him  in  terms  of  bitter  scorn
to  take  vengeance  for  some  injury :  he  onl}"
answered,  that  every  thing  was  rewarded,  and
punished,  and  avenged  in  tim.e.  |j  Complaints
of  the  abuses  in  his  courts  of  justice  made  little
impression  on  him:  he  said  "  things  did  not
go  quite  right  or  smooth  anywhere."  On  one
occasion  representations  were  made  to  him  by
the  princes  of  the  empire,  against  the  influence
which  he  allowed  his  councillor  Prüschenk  to

J  Essav  on  an  Ordinance  of  the  Imperial  Chamber  ;
Müller,  vi.  29.

§  Moruta  Cassareanorum ;  Müller,  vi.  69.

II  Grunbeck,  Historia  Frederic!  et  Maximilian!  in
Chmel,  Oestreichischer  Geschichtsforscher,  i.  p.  C9.

50

FOUNDATION  OF

Book  I.

exercise:  he  replied,  "every  one  of  them  had
his  own  Priischenk  at  home."  In  all  the  per-
plexities of  affairs  he  evinced  the  same  calm-
ness and  equanimity.  In  1449,  when  the  cities
and  princes,  on  the  eve  of  war,  refused  to  ac-
cept him  as  a  mediator,  he  was  content :  he
said  he  would  wait  till  they  had  burnt  each
other's  houses  and  destroyed  each  other's
crops ;  then  they  would  come  to  him  of  their
own  accord,  and  beg  him  to  bring  about  a  re-
conciliation between  them  ;  —  which  shortly
after  happened.

The  violences  and  cruelties  which  his  here-
ditary dominions  of  Austria  suffered  from  King
Matthias  did  not  even  excite  his  pity  :  he  said
they  deserved  it ;  they  Vv'ould  not  obey  him,
and  therefore  they  must  have  a  stork  as  king,
like  the  frogs  in  the  fable.  In  his  own  affairs
he  was  more  like  an  observer  than  a  party  in-
terested ;  in  all  events  he  saw  the  rule  by  which
they  are  governed,  —  the  universal,  inflexible
principle  which,  after  short  interruptions,  inva-
riably recovers  its  empire.  From  his  youth  he
had  been  inured  to  trouble  and  adversity.
When  compelled  to  yield,  he  never  gave  up  a
point,  and  always  gained  the  mastery  in  the
end.  The  maintenance  of  his  prerogatives  was
the  governing  principle  of  all  his  actions;  the
more,  because  they  acquired  an  ideal  value
from  their  connection  with  the  imperial  dignity.
It  cost  bim  a  long  and  severe  struggle  to  allow
his  son  to  be  crowned  king  of  the  Romans  ;  he
wished  to  take  the  supreme  authority  undivided
with  him  to  the  grave:  in  no  case  would  he
grant  Maximilian  any  independent  share  in  the
administration  of  government,  but  kept  him,
even  after  he  was  king,  still  as  "  son  of  the
house;"*  nor  would  he  ever  give  him  anything
but  the  countship  of  Cilli:  "for  the  rest,  he
would  have  time  enough."  His  frugality  bor-
dered on  avarice,  his  slowness  on  inertness,  his
stubbornness  on  the  most  determined  selfish-
ness :  yet  all  these  faults  are  rescued  from  vul-
garity by  high  qualities.  He  had  at  bottom  a
sober  depth  of  judgment,  a  sedate  and  inflexi-
ble honour ;  the  aged  prince,  even  when  a  fu-
gitive imploring  succour,  had  a  personal  hear-
ing which  never  ailov%^ed  the  majesty  of  the
empire  to  sink.  All  his  pleasures  were  charac-
teristic. Once,  when  he  was  in  Nürnberg,  he
had  all  the  children  in  the  city,  even  the  infants
who  could  but  just  walk,  brought  to  him  in  the
'city  ditches;  he  feasted  his  eyes  on  the  rising
generation,  the  heirs  of  the  future ;  then  he
ordered  cakes  to  be  brought  and  distributed,
that  the  children  might  remember  their  old
master,  whom  they  had  seen,  as  long  as  tbey
lived.  Occasionally  he  gave  the  prihces  his
friends  a  feast  in  his  castle.  In  proportion  to
his  usual  extreme  frugality  was  now  the  mag-
nificence of  the  entertainment:  he  kept  his
guests  with  him  till  late  in  the  night  (always
his  most  vivacious  time),  w^hen  even  his  wonted
taciturnity  ceased,  and  he  began  to  relate  the
history  of  his  past  life,  interspersed  with
strange  incidents,  decent  jests  and  wise  saws.

*  Letter  from  Maximilian  to  Albert  of  Saxony,  1492,
in  tlie  Dresden  Archives.

He  looked  like  a  patriarch  among  the  princes,
who  were  all  much  younger  tban  himself.

The  Estates  saw  clearly  that  with  this  sort
of  character,  with  this  resolute  inflexible  being,
nothing  was  to  be  gained  by  negotiation  or
stipulation.  If  they  wished  to  carry  their  point
they  must  turn  to  the  young  king,  who  had
indeed  no  power  as  yet,  but  who  must  shortly
succeed  to  it.  On  his  way  from  the  Nether-
lands, whence  he  was  hastening  to  rescue
Austria  from  the  Hungarians,  for  wliich  end  he
had  the  most  urgent  need  of  the  assistance  of
the  empire,  they  laid  their  requests  before  him
and  made  a  compliance  with  these  the  condi-
tions of  their  succours.  Maximilian,  reared
in  the  constant  sight  of  the  troubles  and  cala-
mities into  which  his  father  had  fallen,  had,  as
often  happens,  adopted  contrary'-  maxims  of
conduct;  he  looked  only  to  the  consequences
of  the  moment :  he  had  all  the  buoyant  confi.-
dence  of  youth  ;  nor  did  he  think  the  safety  of
the  empire  involved  in  a  tenacious  adherence
1  to  certain  privileges.  His  first  appearance  in
I  public  life  was  at  the  diet  at  Nürnberg,  in  1439,
I  where  he  requited  the  support  granted  him  by
the  empire  with  ready  concessions  as  to  the
administration  of  justice.  He  could  indeed  only
promise  to  use  every  means  to  induce  his  father
to  have  the  Imperial  Chamber  (Kammerge-
richt) established  as  soon  as  possible  on  the
plan  proposed.  In  this,  as  v/as  to  be  expected,
he  did  not  succeed  ;  but  he  was  at  all  events
morally  bound  to  fulfil  the  expectations  he  had
raised :  it  was  a  first  step,  though  the  conse-
quences of  it  lay  at  a  distance.  This  promise
was  registered  in  the  recess  of  the  diet."|"

This  was  the  most  important  point  of  the
administration  of  the  empire.  All  internal
order  depended  on  the  supreme  court  of  justice.
It  was  of  the  highest  moment  that  it  should  be
shielded  from  the  arbitrary  will  of  the  emperor,
and  that  a  considerable  share  in  the  constitu-
tion of  it  should  be  given  to  the  States.

Maximilian  too  now  received  the  succours
he  required  for  the  restoration  of  the  Austrian
power.  While  one  of  the  bravest  of  German
princes,  Albert  of  Saxony,  called  the  Right
Arm  of  the  empire,  gradually,  to  use  his  own
expression,  "  brought  the  rebellious  Nether-
lands to^eace,":i[:  Maximilian  himself  hastened
to  his  ancestral  domains.  Shortly  before,  the
aged  Archduke  Sigismund  of  Tyrol  had  al-
lowed himself  to  be  persuaded  to  give  the
emperor's  daughter,  who  had  been  confided  to
him,  in  marriage  to  Duke  Albert  of  Bavaria-
Munich  ;  and  had  held  out  to  that  prince  the
hope  that  he  would  leave  him  Tyrol  and  the
Vorlande  as  an  inheritance.  But  the  sight  of
Maximilian  awakened  in  the  kindhearted  and
childless  old  man  a  natural  tenderness  for  the
manly  and  blooming  scion  of  his  own  race  ;
he  now  dwelt  with  joy  on  the  thought  that  this
was  the  rightful  heir  to  the  country,  and  in-
stantly determined  to  bequeath  it  to  him.  At
this  moment  King  Matthias  of  Hungary,  who

t  Muller,  vi.  p.  171.  A  register  of  this  imperial  diet  in
the  Frankfurt  Archives,  vol.  xiii.

J-From  a  letter  of  Albrecht  to  his  son,  in  Langenn,
Duke  Albert,  p.  205,

Book  I.

A  NEW  CONSTITUTION.

51

was  still  in  possession  of  Austria,  died.  Tiie
land  breathed  again,  when  the  rightful  young
prince  appeared  in  the  field  surrounded  by  the
forces  of  the  empire  and  by  his  own  merce-
naries;  drove  the  Hungarians  before  him,  de-
livered Vienna  from  their  hands,  and  pursued
them  over  their  own  borders.  We  find  this
event  recorded,  even  in  the  journals  of  private
persons,  as  the  happiest  of  their  lives:* — a
district  that  had  been  mortgaged  raised  the
mortgage  money  itself,  that  it  might  belong
once  more  to  its  ancient  lords.  I

Such  was  the  vast  influence  of  the  good  un-  j
derstanding  between  Maximilian  and  the  States
of  the  empire,  on  the  re-establishment  of  the
power  of  Austria. '  It  had,  at  the  same  time,
another  great  effect  in  conducing  to  the  con-
ciliation of^  one  of  the  most  eminent  of  the
princes,  and  to  the  consolidation  of  all  internal
affairs.

The  Dukes  of  Bavaria,  spite  of  the  family
alliance  into  which  they  had  been  forced  with
the  emperor  by  the  marriage  above  mentioned,
adhered  to  the  opponents  of  Austria — the  Ro-
man see,  and  King  Matthias. f  They  would
hear  nothing  of  furnishing  aids  to  the  emperor
against  the  king ;  they  refused  to  attend  the
diets,-  or  to  accept  their  edicts  :  on  the  con-
trary, they  made  encroachments  on  the  domains
of  their  neighbours,  enlarged  the  jurisdiction
of  their  own  courts  of  justice,  and  threatened
neighbouring  imperial  cities  —  for  example,
Memmingen  and  Bibrach.  Regensburg  had
already  fallen  into  the  possession  of  Duke  Al-
bert of  Munich.if

Immediately  after  the  renewal  of  the  Public
Peace,  m  the  year  1487,  it  became  evident  that
there  -yvas  no  chance  of  its  being  observed  if
these  partial  and  turbulent  proceedings  were
not  pat  an  end  to.

This  was  the  immediate  and  pressing  cause
of  the  Swabian  league,  concluded  in  February
1488,  by  the  mediation  of  the  emperor,§  and

*  Diarium  Joannis  Tichtelii,  in  Raucli,  Scriptt.  Tier.
Auslriacarum,  ii.  559,  He  writes  the  name  of  Maximi-
lian four  times,  one  after  the  other,  as  if  unable  to  write
it  often  enough  for  his  own  satisfaction.

t  In  I.ent,  1482,  Albert  and  George  determined,  "  with
their  several  states,  that,  without  the  countenance  of  the
holy  father,  help  should  not  be  civen  to  Kin^  Matthias
against  the  emperor."  "  Mit  ihr  beder  Landschaft  dass
man  ohne  Gunst  des  h.  Vaters  dem  Kaiser  wider  König
Matthias  nit  helfen  sollte."  Anonymous  contemporary
Chronicle  in  Freiberg's  Collection  "of  Historical  Papers
and  Documents,  i.  159.  All  these  circumstances'deserved
a  closer  examination.  For  the  modern  relations  and  po-
litical system  of  these  states  did  not  !)egin  so  late  as  is
believed.  From  Hagek,  Pohsnischer  Chronik,  p.  828,  it
appears  that  the  Bohemians  would  not  put  up  with  their
exclusion  from  the  election  of  IMaximiüau.  They  entered
into  a  league  with  Matthias,  drawing  Poland  into  it  also.
(Pelzel.  Geschichte  von  Böhmen,  i.  49-1).  The  deputies  of
Matthias  tried  to  set  the  Italian  princes  in  motion.  (Phi-
lippus  Bergomas.  Supplemcntum  Chronicorum.)  France
likev.'ise  belonged  to  this  party.  The  reason  why  Bava-
ria joined  it  is  evident.  T!ie  eyes  of  her  dukes  were
always  turned  either  towards  Loa^bardy  or  the  N^ether-
lands.  Freiberg  :  Geschichte  der  ßaierischen  Landstünde,
1.  655.

X  Pfister,  Geschichte  von  Schwaben,  v.  p.  272.

§  In  his  very  first  address  the  emperor  declares  the  object
of  the  league  to  be,  that  the  states,  "  bei  dem  heiligen
Reiche  und  ihren  Freiheiten  bleiben,"  "should  remain
in  adherence  to  the  holy  empire,  and  in  possession  of
their  liberties."— Da«,  de  Pace  Pub.  272.  Who  could  be-
lieve, that  for  the  history  of  this  most  important  of  all
early  leagues  we  have  still  to  refer  chiefly  to  Datt  ?

some  of  the  more  powerful  princes.  The  order
of  knights,  who  the  year  before  had  renewed
their  old  company  of  St.  George's  shield,
quickly  joined  the  league,  as  did  also  the
cities.  They  mutually  promised  to  oppose  a
common  resistance  to  all  strangers  who  sought
to  impose  foreign  (/.  e.  not  Swabian)  laws
upon  them,  or  otherwise  to  injure  or  offend
them.  But  in  order  to  secure  themselves  from
disputes  or  disorders  among  themselves,  and
at  the  same  time  to  observe  the  Public  Peace
— for  this  general  object  was,  from  the  very
first,  included  among  the  more  particular  ones,
and  gave  the  whole  union  |l  legitimate  charac-
ter,—  they  determined  to  settle  their  mutual
differences  by  the  decision  of  arbitrators,  and
appointed  a  council  of  the  league,  composed
of  an  equal  number  of  members  chosen  from
each  body.  In  a  very  short  time  the  league
was  joined  by  neighbouring  princes,  especially
Würtenberg  and  Brandenburg,  and  formed,  as
contra-distinguished  from  the  knights  and  the
cities,  a  third  body,  taking  equal  share  in  its
council,  submitting  to  the  decisions  of  the
arbitrators,  and  promising,  in  case  of  a  war,  to
send  the  contingent  agreed  upon  into  the  field.
Here,  in  the  very  focus  of  the  old  quarrels,  a
firm  and  compact  union  of  the  several  classes
arose,  affording  a  noble  representation  of  the
Ideas  of  the  constitution  of  the  empire,  and  of
public  order  and  security;  though  its  main
and  proximate  object  was  resistance  to  the
encroachments  of  Bavaria.  Nevertheless,
Duke  Albert  held  himself  aloof  in  haughty
defiance,  while  the  emperor,  relying  on  the
league,  would  hear  of  no  reconciliation  till  the
pride  of  the  Duke  was  humbled.  At  length
resort  was  had  to  arms.'  In  the  spring  of  1492
the  troops  of  the  league  and  of  the  empire
assembled  on  the  Lechfeld.  Frederic  of  Bran-
denburg, "  whose  doublet  had  long  been  hot
:  against  Bavaria,"  carried  the  banner  of  the
:  empire  ;  Maximilian  was  there  in  person.  At
I  this  moment  Albert,  abandoned  by  his  kins-
1  men,  at  strife  v/ith  his  knights,  felt  that  he
i  could  not  withstand  such  an  overwhelming
I  force;  he  relinquished  the  opposition  which
j  he  had  hitherto  maintained,  consented  to  give
I  up  Regensburg,  and  to  abandon  all  claims
j  founded  on  the  assignments  made  by  Sigis-
I  mund.  By  degrees  even  the  old  emperor  wag'
I  appeased,  and  received  his  son-in-law  and  his
I  granddaughters  with  cordiality.  After  some
j  time  Albert  himself  found  it  expedient  to  join
I  the  Sv/abian  league.

We  see  that  the  reign  of  Frederic  III.  was
by  no  means  so  insignificant  as  is  commonly
believed.  His  latter  years  especially,  so  full
of  difficulties  and  reverses,  were  rich  in  great
results.  The  house  of  Habsburg,  by  the  ac-
quisition of  Austria  and  the  Netherlands,  had
I  acquired  a  high  rank  in  Europe.  A  short
campaign  of  Maximilian's  sufficed  to  establish
its  claims  to  Hungary.  || The  intestine  wars

|[  The  treaty  of  Oedenburg,  1463,  July  29,  had  already
secured  the  succession  to  the  liouse  of  Austria,  upon  the
extinction  of  the  Hunniads.  The  new  treaty,  1491,
Nov.  7,  the  Monday  after  the  feast  of  St.  Leonard,  re-
newed this  right  in  case  of  failure  of  male  issue  froia
Wladislas.

52

DIET  OF  WORMS,  1495.

Book  I.

of  Germany  were  almost  entirely  suppressed.  I
The  Svvabian  league  gave  to  the  house  of
Austria  a  legitimate  influence  over  Germany,
such  as  it  had  not  possessed  since  the  time  of
Albert  I.  The  diets  had  acquired  a  regular
form,  the  Public  Peace  was  established  and
tolerably  secured,  and  important  steps  were
taken  towards  the  formation  of  a  general  con-
stitution. What  form  and  character  this  should
assume,  mainly  depended  on  the  conduct  of
Maximilian,  on  whom,  at  the  death  of  his
father  (August  19,  1493),  the  administration
of  the  empire  now  devolved.

DIET OF WORMS, 1495.

Ideas  had  long  been  universally  current,  and
schemes  suggested,  pregnant  with  far  more
extensive  and  important  consequences  than  any
we  have  yet  contemplated.

Among  the  most  remarkable  were  those  put
forth  by  Nicholas  von  Kus,  whose  capacious
and  prophetic  mind  was  a  storehouse  of  new
and  just  views  on  the  most  various  subjects.
At  the  time  of  the  council  of  Basle  he  devoted
himself  with  earnest  zeal  and  perspicacious
judgment  to  the  internal  politics  of  the  empire.
He  began  by  observing  that  it  was  impossible
to  improve  the  church  without  reforming  the
empire  ;  since  it  was  impossible  to  sever  them,
even  in  thought.*  He  therefore  urgently  re-
commends, though  an  ecclesiastic,  the  eman-
cipation of  the  secular  authority.  He  is  en-
tirely opposed  to  the  right  claimed  by  the
papacy,  of  transferring  the, empire  to  whom  it
will :  he  ascribes  to  the  latter  a  mystical  re-
lation to  God  and  Christ,  absolute  independ-
ence, and  even  the  right  and  the  duty  of  taking
part  in  the  government  of  the  church.  He
desires  that  the  confusion  arising  from  the
jurisdiction  of  the  spiritual  and  temporal  courts
be  put  an  end  to.  He  proposes  a  plan  for  su-  j
perior  courts  of  justice,  each  provfded  with  j
three  assessors,  chosen  from  the  nobles,  clergy,  |
and  citizens  respective! y,f  and  empowered  not !
only  to  hear  appeals  from  the  inferior  courts,
but  to  decide  the  differences  between  the
princes  in  the  first  instance :  it  was  only  by
such  means,  he  thought,  that  the  legal  prac-
tice could  be  brought  into  greater  harmony
with  the  principles  of  natural  justice.  Above
all,  however,  he  looked  to  the  establishment
of  yearly  diets  for  the  revival  of  the  authority,
unity,  and  strength  of  the  empire  {Reich)  \  for
he  clearl}''  perceived  that  no  such-  results  were
to  be  expected  from  the  power  of  the  emperor

*  Nicolai  Cusani  de  Concordantia  Cathnlica,  lib.  iii.
Schardius,  Sylloge  de  Jurisdictione  Imperiali,  f.  465.

t  Lib.  iii.  c.  xxxiii.  "  Pronunciet  et  citet  quisque
judicum  secundum  conditionem  disceptantium  peisoa-
arutn,  nobilis  inter  nohiles,  ecclesiasticns  inter  eccie-
eiasticos,  pnpularis  inter  populäres;  nulla  tarnen  defi-
nitiva  feratur  nisi  ex  communi  deliberatione  omninm
trium.  Si  vero  unus  ducbus  dissenserit,  vincat  opinio
majoris  numeri."  It  is  not  to  be  believed  that  the  cus-
toms of  German  law  also  had  not  given  rise  to  many
complaints.  It  is  here  said;  '-Scepe  siniplices  paupores
percavillationes  causidicorum  extra  causam  ducuntur,  et
a  lota  causa  cadunt,  quoniam  qui  cadit  a  syllaha,  cadit  a
causa ;  ut  srepe  vidi  par  Treverensem  diocesim  accidere.
ToUanturconsuetudinesqus  adniittuntjuramentum  con-
tra quoscunque  et  cujuscunque  numeri  testes."— iii.  c.
38.

(Kaiserthiim)  alone. :|:  Either  in  May  or  in
September  he  would  have  a  general  meeting
of  the  Estates  held  at  Frankfurt,  or  other  con-
venient city,  in  order  to  arrange  any  existing
dissensions,  and  to  pass  general  laws,  to  which
every  prince  should  affix  his  signature  and
seal,  and  engage  his  honour  to  observe  them.
He  strenuously  contends  that  no  ecclesiastic
shall  be  exempted  from  their  operation ;  other-
wise he  would  want  to  have  a  share  in  the
secular  power,  which  was  to  be  exercised  for
the  general  g^ood.  He  goes  on  to  remark  that,
in  order  seriously  to  maintain  order  and  law
and  to  chastise  the  refractory,  it  is  necessary
to  have  a  standing  army ;  for  to  what  end  is  a
law  without  the  penal  sanction  1  He  thinks
that  a  part  of  the  revenues  of  the  numerous
tolls  granted  to  individuals  might  be  kept  back
by  the  state,  and  a  fund  thus  formed,  the  ap-
plication of  which  should  be  every  year  de-
termined at  the  diet.  There  would  then  be  no
more  violence  ;  the  bishops  would  devote  them-
selves to  their  spiritual  duties;  peace  and
prosperity  and  power  would  return.

It  is  clear  that  the  reforms  suggested  by  this
remarkable  man  were  precisely  those  which  it
was  the  most  important  to  put  in  practice;  in-
deed the  ideas  which  are  destined  to  agitate
the  world  are  always  first  thrown  out  by  some
one  original  and  luminous  mind.  In  the  course
of  time  some  approach  was  made,  even  on  the
part  of  the  authorities  of  the  empire,  to  the  exe-
cution of  these  projects.

Even  during  their  opposition  to  Frederic  III.
in  1450 — 1460,  the  Electors  were  of  opinion
that  the  most  salutary  measure  for  the  empire
would  be,  when  they  were  with  the  emperor  in
person  —  for  example,  in  an  imperial  city, — to
form  a  sort  of  consistory  around  him,  like  that
of  the  cardinals  around  the  pope,  and  from  this
central  point  to  take  the  government  of  the  em-
pire into  their  own  hands,  and  to  provide  for
the  preservation  of  public  order.  It  was  their
notion  that  a  permanent  court  of  justice  should
be  established,  like  that  of  the  parliament  of
Paris,  whose  judgments  should  be  executed  by
certain  temporal  princes  in  the  several  circles
of  the  empire;  the  ban  should  be  pronounced
by  the  emperor  according  to  justice  and  con-
science, and  should  then  be  duly  executed  and
obeyed. §

Similar  suggestions  appeared  from  time  to
time.  In  the  archives  of  Dresden  there  is  a
report  of  a  consultation  of  the  year  1491,  in

X  This  is  one  passage  among  many  in  which  the  want
of  two  words  corresponding  to  Reich  and  Kaiserthum,
both  Englished  by  empire,  is  grievously  felt :  Reich,  and
its  numerous  derivatives  and  compounds,  Reichstag,
Reichsabschied,  &c.,  always  relate  to  the  great  Germanic
bodv  called  the  Empire.  Kaiserlhum,  to  the  office  and
state  of  Kaiser,  relates  to  the  personal  dignity,  power,
functions,  &c.,  of  (he  individual  occujjying  the  imperial
throne.  As  it  is  impossible  every  time  these  words  occur
to  resort  to  a  long  paraphrase,  the  meaning  is  often  lost
or  obscured.  Reich  is  also  applied  to  a  monarchical
state,  and  then  stands  in  a  like  relation  to  Konigthum
(the  kinglv  office  or  state) ;  somewhat  as  reabn  does  to
roi/alty.  "''The  title  of  a  former  section  presents  a  diffi-
cu'ltv  of  a  somewhat  similar  nature,— it  is,  Papsthum
andFurstenlhuni-^Popedom  and  Princedom  ;  for  the  for-
mer we  have  Papacy  ;  for  the  latter  abstraction,  nothing.
— Transl.

§  Final  Edict  of  the  spiritual  Electors. See  j).  58.  n.  1.

Book  I.

DIET  OF  WORMS,  1495.

53

which  dissatisfaction  is  expressed  with  the
plan  of  a  supreme  court  of  justice,  and  a  scheme
of  a  general  government  and  military  constitu-
tion for  the  whole  empire,  not  unlike  that  of
Nicholas  von  Kus,  is  proposed ;  an  annual  diet
for  the  more  important  business  of  the  general
government,  and  a  military  force,  ready  for  ser-
vice at  a  moment's  notice,  proportioned  to  the
six  circles  into  which  it  was  proposed  to  divide
the  empire,  and  under  twelve  captains  or  chiefs.

With  the  accession  of  a  young  and  intelli-
gent prince,  a  tendency  to  improvement  and  a
leaning  tov/ards  innovation  took  the  place  of
the  invincible  apathy  of  the  old  emperor;  and
these  dispositions,  both  in  the  chief  of  the  em-
pire and  the  Estates,  were  strengthened  by
other  circumstances  attending  the  new  reign.

Maximilian  had  received  some  offences  of  an
entirely  personal  nature  from  the  King  of
France.  According  to  the  terms  of  a  treaty  of
peace,  that  prince  was  to  marry  Maximilian's
daughter,  and,  till  she  reached  years  of  matu-
rity, she  was  confided  to  French  guardianship  :
Charles  now  sent  her  back.  On  the  other
hand,  Maximiilian  was  betrothed  to  the  princess
and  heiress  of  Bretagne,  an  alliance  on  which
the  people  of  Germany  founded  various  plans
reaching  far  into  the  future,  and  hoped  to  draw
that  province  under  the  same  institutions  as
they  intended  to  give  to  the  empire.  Charles
yill.,  however,  got  the  young  princess  into  liis
power  by  violence,  and  forced  her  to  acbept  his
hand.*  The  rights  of  the  empire  were  imme-
diately affected  by  these  hostile  acts.  AVhilst
Maximilian  was  preparing  to  go  to  Rome  to
be  crowned,  and  cherished  the  hope  of  resto-
ring the  imperial  dignity  and  consideration  in
Italy,  the  French,  anticipating  him,  crossed  the
Alps,  marched  unchecked  through  the  Penin-
sula from  north  to  south,  and  conquered  Naples.
We  cannot  affirm  that  Charles  YIII.  had  any
positive  design  of  seizing  the  imperial  crown  ;
but  it  is  undeniable  that  a  power,  §uch  as  he
acquired  throughout  Italy  by  the  nature  and
the  success  of  his  enterprise,  was  calculated  to
oppose  a  direct  obstacle  to  the  revival  of  the
authority  of  the  German  empire.

Irritated  by  such  reiterated  wrongs,  and
deeply  impressed  with  the  necessity  of  making
a  stand  against  French  aggression ;  availing
himself  of  his  incontestable  right  to  demand
succours  from  the  States  for  his  journey  to
Rome ;  urged  likewise  by  his  Italian  allies,
Maximilian  now  appeared  at  Worms,  and  on
the  2Gth  March  opened  his  diet  with  a  descrip-
tion of  the  political  state  of  Europe.  "  If  we
continue,"  exclaimed  he,  "  to  look  on  passively
at  the  proceedings  of  the  French,  the  holy
Roman  Empire  will  be  wrested  from  the  Ger-
man nation,  and  no  man  will  be  secure  of  his

*  The  old  emperor  says  in  liis  proclamation  of  the  4th
of  June,  1492,  "Rather  would  we  depart  in  peace  and
blessedness  from  this  world,  than  suffer  so  unchristiun-
like  and  foul  a  deed  to  remain  unpunished,  and  the  Holy
Empire  and  German  people  to  put  up  with  this  scanda-
lous and  irreparable  injury  under  our  rule."  "Wir  —
lieber  von  dieser  Welt  seliglich  scheiden,  dann  einen  sol-
chen unkristlichen  snoden  Handel  ungestrafft  beleiben
■und  das  heil  Reich  und  deutsche  Nation  in  diesen  lester-
lichen  und  unwiederpringlichen  Vall  bei  unserer  Regie-
rung wachsen  lassen  wollen."

honour,  his  dignity,  or  his  liberties."  He
wished  to  invoke  the  whole  might  and  energy
of  the  empire  to  take  part  in  this  struggle,  in-
dependent of  a  hasty  levy  to  keep  alive  the
resistance  of  Italy,  he  likewise  demanded  a
permanent  military  establishment  for  the  next
ten  or  twelve  years,  in  order  that  he  might  be
able  to  defend  himself,  "  whenever  an  attack
was -attempted  against  the  Holy  Empire."  He
pressed  for  it  with  impetuous  earnestness;  he
was  in  a  position  in  which  the  interests  of  the
public  were  identical  with  his  own.

The  Estates  also,  which  had  assembled  in
unusual  numbers,  were  full}^  impressed  with
the  necessity  of  resisting  the  French.  But  in
the  first  place,  they  regarded  affairs  with  more
coolness  than  the  young  emperor  ;  and,  second-
ly, they  deemed  the  accession  of  a  new  sove-
reign who  had  already  pledged  himself  to  them
and  was  now  in  need  of  considerable  assist-
ance, a  moment  well  adapted  for  the  prosecu-
tion of  their  schemes  of  reform  and  the  intro-
duction of  order  into  their  internal  affairs.
They  met  the  warlike  demands  of  the  king
with  one  of  the  most  comprehensive  schemes
ever  drawn  up  for  the  constitution  of  the  em-
pire.

They  too  assumed  the  necessity  of  a  strong
military  organization,  but  they  found  the  feu-
dal system,  now  in  its  decline,  no  longer  avail-
able ;  they  deem.ed  it  better  to  impose  a  gene-
ral tax,  called  the  Common  Penny.  This  tax
was  to  be  levied  not  according  to  the  territorial
extent,  but  the  population  of  the  several  parts
o£  the  empire.  The  application  of  it  was  not
to  devolve  on  the  king,  but  to  be  entrusted  to
a  council  of  the  empire  composed  of  members
of  the  States,  the  cities  included.  This  coun-
cil was  to  be  invested  with  large  general  pow-
ers. It  was  to  execute  the  laws,  to  put  down
rebellion  and  tumult;  to  provide  for  the  rein-
tegration of  any  domains  that  had  been  sub-
tracted from  the  empire  ;  to  conduct  the  defen-
sive war  against  the  Turks  and  other  enemies
of  the  Holy  Empire  and  of  the  German  na-
tion; in  short,  it  is  evident  that  it  v."as  to  have
the  sum  of  the  powers  of  government  in  its
hands  ;f  and  certainly  a  large  share  of  inde-
pendence was  to  be  awarded  to  it  for  that  pur-
pose. The  weightiest  affairs  it  was  bound  to
lay  before  the  king  and  the  electors,  subject  to
the  revision  of  the  latter ;  but  in  all  other  re-
spects the  members  were  to  be  freed  from  the
oath  whereby  they  were  hound  to  the  king  and
the  Estates,  and  act  only  in  conformity  with
the  duties  of  their  office. :f

The  ideas  by  which  this  project  was  dictated
show  a  very  strong  public  spirit ;  for  it  was

t  See  the  first  schense  which  the  elector  of  Mainz  com-
municated first  to  the  kiiiir.  and  then  to  the  cities.  Pro-
tocol ill  Datt,  de  Pace  Pub.  p.  630.  The  protocol  is  the
same  with  that  found  in  the  Frankfurt  Acts,  vol.  xv.

J:  The  latter  is  a  provision  of  thelartrer  draft,  p.  838,  nr.
17.  '•  Sollen  dieselben  President  und  Personen  des  vorge-
nieldten  Rathes  aller  Geliibd  und  Aide  —  damit  sie  uns
oder  inen  (denen  von  welchen  sie  gesetzt  u'orden)  ver-
bur^len  oder  verstrickt  wären,  genfzlich  ledig  seyn."
"The  same  president  and  persons  of  the  before  men-
tioned council  shall  be  wholly  freed  from  all  promise  and
oath,  having  the  effect  of  binding  them  to,  or  connecting
them  with,  us  or  them"  (those  by  whom  they  had  been
appointed).

54

DIET  OF  WORMS,  1495.

Book  I.

by  no  means  the  king  alone  whose  poyi^er  was
limited.  The  general  interests  of  the  country-
were  represented  in  a  manner  which  would
admit  of  no  division  or  exclusion.  How  utter-
ly, for  example,  is  the  idea  of  a  general  tax,
to  be  collected  by  the  parish  priest,  and  deliv-
ered under  his  responsibility  to  the  bishop,  at
variance  with  any  further  augmentation  of  the
inÜuence  of  the  territorial  lords  !  Which  among
the'ui  would  have  been  strong  enough  to  resist
a  central  national  power,  such  as  this  must
have  become"?

Tiie  first  result,  however,  would  have  beqn
that  the  power  of  the  monarch — not  indeed  that
which  he  exercised  in  the  usual  troubled  state
of  things,  but  that  which  he  claimed  for  bet-
ter times — would  have  been  limited.

It  remained  now  to  be  seen  what  he  would
say  to  this  project.  The  fiefs  which  he  granted
out,  the  knightly  festivities  devised  in  his
honour,  or  given  by  him  in  return,  the  mani-
fold disputes  between  German  princes  which
he  had  to  accommodate,  occupied  him  fully.
It  was  not  till  the  2'2d  of  June  that  he  gave
his  answer,  v/hich  he  published  as  an  amend-
ment of  the  project.  On  closer  examination,
however,  its  effect  was  in  fact  entirely  to  an-
nul it.  He  had  said  at  the  beginning  that  he
would  accept  the  project  with  reservation  of
his  sovereign  prerogatives ;  novv^,  he  declared
that  he  thought  these  assailed  in  every  clause.
I  will  give  an  example  of  the  alterations  he
made.  According  to  the  project,  the  council
of  the  empire  was  charged  t(^  sec  that  no  new
tolls  were  erected  without' the  previous  know-
ledge of  the  electors;  a  precaution  suggested
by  the  tolls  continually  granted  by  Frederic
and  Maximilian.  The  clause,  in  its  altered
state,  set  forth  that  the  council  of  the  empire
should  itself  take  care  to  erect  no  toll  without
the  previous  knowledge  of  the  king.

Strange  that  such  a  complete  reversal  of  an
original  scheme  should  be  announced  as  an
amendment!  but  such  were  the  manners,  such
the  courtesy  of  that  time.  The  opposition  in
temper  and  opinion  was  not  the  less  violent  on
that  account.  A  visible  irritation  and  ill-
humour  prevailed  at  the  diet.  The  king  one
day  summoned  to  his  presence  the  princes  on
whose  friendship  he  could  most  confidently
rely, — Albert  of  Saxony,  Frederic  of  Branden-
burg, and  Eberhard  of  Würtenberg,  to  consult
them  on  the  means  of  maintaining  his  sove-
reign dignity,*

So  directly  opposed  were  the  views  of  the
monarch  and  those  of  the  States  at  the  very
commencement  of  this  reign.  Both  parties,
however,  made  the  discovery  that  they  could
not  attain  their  ends  in  the  way  they  had  pro-
posed to  themselves.  Maximilian  clearly  per-
ceived that  he  should  obtain  no  subsidies
without  concessions.  The  States  saw  that,  at
present  at  least,  they  would  not  be  able  to
carry  through  their  scheme  of  a  general  gov-
ernment.-j- While  trying,  however,  to  hit  upon

some  middle  course,  they  came  back  to  experi-
ments attempted  under  Frederic  III.

In  the  first  place,  they  settled  the  basis  of
that  Public  Peace  which  has  rendered  this  diet
so  celebrated.  On  a  more  accurate  examina-
tion, we  find  indeed  that  it  is  in  detail  rather
less  pacific  than  the  former  ones ;  as,  for  ex-
ample, it  restores  a  right,  lately  abrogated,  of
the  injured  party  to  make  forcible  seizure  of  a
mortgaged  estate;  the  only  advantage  was,
that  this  peace  was  proclaimed,  not  as  before
for  a  term  of  years,  but  for  ever.  By  this  act
the  law,  in  fact,  ceased  to  contemplate  the  pos-
sibility of  any  return  to  the  old  fist  law
(Faustrecht).

The  question  of  the  Imperial  Chamber
(Kammergericht),  or  supreme  court  of  justice
for  the  empire,  was  next  discussed.  Maxi-
milian had  hitherto  treated  this  tribunal  ex-
actly as  his  father  had  done :  he  made  it  fol-
low his  court;  in  1493  it  accompanied  him  to
Regensburg,  in  1494  to  Mechlin  and  Antwerp,
in  1495  to  Worms.  We  have,  however,  seen
that  he  was  bound  by  the  concessions  he  made
in  1489  to  reform  the  administration  of  justice.
When,  therefore,  the  proposals  formerly  laid
before  his  father  were  submitted  to  him,  he  felt
himself  compelled  to  accept  them.  Under
what  pretext,  indeed,  could  he  have  rejected
an  institution,  the  establishment  of  which  he
had  so  solemnly  undertaken  to  promote  with
all  his  might]  This,  however,  was  one  of  the
most  important  events  in  the  history  of  the
empire.  Maximilian  gave  his  assent  to  the
maxim  that  the  statute  lav/  should  have  force
in  the  supreme  court,  and  that  no  more  than
the  regular  fees  should  be  exacted  ;  above  all,
he  ceded  to  the  judge  the  office  of  proclaiming,
the  ban  of  the  empire  in  his  name  ;  nay,  he
bound  himself  not  to  remove  the  ban  when
pronounced,  without  the  consent  of  the  injured
party.  When  we  reflect  that  the  judicial
power  was  the  highest  attribute  of  the  impe-
rial crown,  we  feel  all  the  importance  of  this
step.  Nor  was  it  only  that  the  supreme  court
of  .the  empire  was  secured  from  the  arbitrary
interference  which  had  hitherto  been  so  inju-
rious to  it — its  ofl[ices  were  also  appointed  by
the  Estates.  The  king  nominated  only  the
president  (Kammerrichter)  ;  the  assessors  v/ere
appointed  by  the  Estates ;  and  the  cities,  to
their  great  joy,  were  invited  to  propose  certain
candidates  for  that  office  :  a  committee  was
then  appointed  to  examine  and  decide  on  the
presentations.:}:  Later  jurists  have  disputed
whether  the  court  derived  its  penal  sanction

*  Notice  in  the  Archives  of  Berlin,  which  contains,
however,  only  fragmentary  remarks  upon  this  imperial
diet.

t  Later  Declaration  of  the  Elector  Berthold  of  Mainz

in  Datt,  p.  871.  "  Dariif  wäre  erst  fürgenommen  ain
Ordnung  im  Reich  aufzurichten  und  Sr.  ko.  Mt.  furge-
halten,  darab  S.  M.  etwas  Beswtrung  und  Missfallens
gehabt,  hetten  die  Stende  davon  gestanden."  "There-
upon it  was  first  determi  ned  to  establish  a  regular  govern-
ment in  the  empire  and  submitted  to  his  Royal  Majesty,
so  that  if  H.  M.  had  any  objection  or  dislike  to  it,  the
States  would  have  desisted  from  it."  Whether  Müller,
Rtth.  unter  M.  (i.  329),  be  right  in  maintaining  that  a
second  scheme  of  a  similar  kind  had  also  been  presented,
whereupon  Maximilian  had  offered  to  appoint,  instead
of  the  imperial  council,  a  court  council,  I  must  leave  un-
determined. It  would,  in  fact,  have  been  but  another
evasive  proposition.

X  Notice  from  a  document  of  later  date  in  Harpprecht,
Staats-archiv,  des  Reichskaramergerichts,  ii.  p.  249.

Book  I.

DIET  OF  WORMS.  1495.

55

solely  from  the  emperor,  or  from  the  emperor
and  the  princes  :  but  thus  much  is  certain,  that
it  changed  its  whole  chara(tter ;  and  from  a
simply  monarchical  institution,  became  de-
pendent on  the  whole  body  of  the  States.  It
followed,  of  course,  that  it  was  no  longer  an
appendage  to  the  court  and  a  companion  of  the
emperor's  travels ;  but  held  its  stated  sittings
in  one  fixed  spot  in  the  empire.

This  great  concession  was  met  by  the  States
•with  a  grant  of  the  Common  Pcüny,  on  the
produce  of  which  they  allowed  tlie  king-,  who
seemed  intensely  desirous  of  it  on  accuunt  of
the  state  of  his  aflairs  in  Italy,  to  raise  a  loan.
The  tax  itself  is  a  combination  of  poll-tax  and
property-tax,  not  ver}:^  different  from  that  for-
merly levied  by  the  kings  of  Jerusalem,  and
also  occasionally  proposed  in  Germany ;  for
example,  in  the  year  1207,  by  King  Philip.
In  the  fifteenth  century,  frequent  mention  of
such  taxes  is  made  as  being  applied  sonietimes
to  the  maintenance  of  the  Hus&ite,  sonietii'jes
of  the  Turkish  war.  The  Common  Penny
was  levied  on  the  following  plan: — Plalf  a
gulden  was  levied  on  every  five  hundred,  a
whole  one  on  every  thousand,  gulden  ;  among
persons  of  small  means,  every  four-and-twenty
above  fifteen  years  of  age,  v.ithout  exception,
men  and  women,  priests  and  layn^ien,  wtre  to
contribute  one  gulden;  the  more  woalth5Mvere
to  p^iy  according  to  their  own  estijnate  of  their
property.  The  idea  of  taxation  was  still  in
some  degree  mixed  up  with  that  of  alms;*
the  priests  v/ere  to  admonish  the  people  from
the  pulpit  to  give  something  more  than  what
was  demanded.  The  whole  plan  v.-as  still
extremely  imperfect.  Its  importance  consisted
only  in  its  being  (as  the  whole  course  of -the
transaction  proved)  a  serious  attempt  at  a  ge-
neral systematic  taxation  of  the  empire,  des-
tined for  purposes  both  of  peace  and  war,  for
1,he  maintenance  of  the  supreme  court  of  jus-
tice, the  payment  of  the  Italian  allies,  and  the
equipment  of  an  army  against  the  Turks.

It  was  in  accordance  with  this  character  of
a  general  tax  that  the  choice  of  the  treasurer
of  the  empire,  w^hose  oflice  it  was  to  receive
the  money  from  the  commissioners  or  collect-
ors stationed  in  all  parts  of  the  country,  was
also  entrusted  to  the  States.  Maximilian  en-
gaged to  levy  the  Common  Penny  in  the  Aus-
trian and  Burgundian  dominions  upon  the  same
plan,  and  to  set  the  example  herein  to  all  other
sovereigns.

But  if  the  collection  of  the  money  could  not
safely  be  entrusted  to  the  king,  still  less  could
its  application.  After  the  proposal  for  a  coun-
cil of  the  empire  had  been  suffered  to  drop,  the
idea  of  a  yearly  meeting  of  the  Estates  of  the
empire  for  the  purpose  of  controlling  the  pub-
lic expenditure,  first  suggested  by  Nicholas
von  Kus,  and  then  proposed  in  the  project  of
1491,  was  revived.  This  assembly  was  to
meet  every  year  on  the  first  of  February,  to
deliberate  on  the  most  important  affairs,  inter-
nal and  external. To  this  body  the  treasurer

*  So  the  taxes  levied  by  the  contemporary  King  of
England,  Henry  VIII.,  were  called  "  benevol^ncesl"  —
Transl.

of  the  empire  was  to  deliver  the  money  he  had
received  from  the  taxes ;  and  in  it  v.'as  to  be
vested  :the  exclusive  power  of  deciding  on  the
a)ipli<'aiicn  of  the  same:  neither  ihe  king  nor
his  son  V.  vis  to  declare  war  without  its  consent ;
every  conquest  was  to  accrue  to  the  empire.j
To  this  bodv  was  also  committed  a  peremptory
authorit}''  for  the  maintenance  of  the  Public
Peace.  The  question  was,  when  this  tribunal
(thus  rendered  independent  of  the  crown  and
emanating  from  the  Estates)  should  have  pro-
nounced the  ban,  to  whom  the  execution  of  it
was  to  be  entrusted.  The  king  of  the  Romans
wished  that  it  should  be  left  to  liira.  The
States,  true  to  the  principle  on  which  their
legislation  was  founded,  committed  it  to  the
annual  assembly  of  the  empire.

It  is  obvious  that  the  States,  though  they
gave  up  their  original  plan,  kept  constantly  in
view  the  idea  on  w^hich  it  was  founded.  In
the  conflict  of  the  interests  of  the  monarch  and
those  of  the  States,  the  balance  clearly  inclin-
ed in  favour  of  the  latter.  Maximilian  had
cause  to  complain  that  he  was  made  to  feel
this  personally ;  that  he  had  been  forced  to
withdravv%  and  to  wait  before  the  door,  till  the
resolution  was  passed.  He  w^as  often  inclined
to  dissolve  the  diet;  and  it, was  only  the  w^ant
of  a  fresh  subsidy  (which  he  then  obtained)
that  restrained  him.:^  On  the  Tth  of  August,
he  accepted  the  project  in  the  form  last  given
to  it.

There  is  a  grand  coherency  in  its  provisions.
All  Germans  are  once  more  seriously  and  prac-
tically regarded  as  subjects  of  the  empire  ;  and
the  public  burthens  and  public  exertions  were
to  be  common  to  all.  If  the  States  thus  lost
something  of  their  independence,  they  received
in  comipensation  (according  to  their  ancient
organization  and  their  respective  ranks)  a  legiti-
mate share  in  the  supreme  administration  of  jus-
tice, as  well  as  of  the  government.  The  king
submitted  himself  to  the  same  ordinances,  and
to' the  same  community.  He  retained  undimin-
ished the  supreme  dignity,  the  prerogatives  of
a  sovereign  feudal  lord ;  but  in  the  conduct  of
public  business,  he  was  to  be  regarded  only  as
president  of  the  college  of  the  Estates  of  the
empire.  The  constitution  proposed  was  a  mix-
ture of  monarchical  and  federal  government,
but  with  an  obvious  preponderance  of  the  lat-
ter element;  a  political  union,  preserving  the
forms  of  the  ancient  hierarchy  of  the  empire.
The  question  whether  these  projects  could  be
carried  into  execution,  was  now  of  the  highest
importance  to  the  whole  future  destiny  of  Ger-
many.

t  Maintenance  of  Peace  and  Law  established  at  Worms.
Müller,  Rtlh.  Max.  i.  p.  454.

J  This  second  «rant  amounted  to  150.000  jrnlden.  "  Da-
mit S.  Könipl.  Giiad  unserm  h.  Vater  Papist  und  Italien,
bis  der  fiemein  Pfennig  einbracht  werde,  dester  stattlicher
Hülfe  than  möchte."  "  In  order  that  his  Royal  Grace
may  be  .=:o  much  the  more  able  to  give  more  liberal  help
to  our  holy  father  tlie  pope  and  Italy,  until  the  common
penny  be  collected."  To  collect  the  loan,  the  king  des-
patched emissaries  to  single  states  :  e.  g.  Prince  Magnus
of  Anhalt  and  Dr.  Heinrich  Friese  to  tlse  following;  the
Abbot  of  Fulda,  contributing  300  uulden  ;  the  two  Counts
of  Hanau,  500;  the  Count  of  Eisenberg,  300;  the  city  of
Freiberg,  400  ;  and  the  city  of  Frankfort,  2,100.  InstruB
lion  in  Comm.  Archiv,  at  Dessau.

5C

DIET  OF  LINDAU,  1496.

Book  I.

Resolutions  of  so  comprehensive  a  kind  can
be  regarded  as  views  only  ; — as  ideas,  to  which
an  assembly  has  expressed  its  assent,  but  to
the  execution  of  which  there  is  a  long  way  yet
to  be  traversed.  It  is  the  ground-plan  of  a
building  which  is  intended  to  be  built;  but
the  question  remains  whether  the  power  and
the  means  will  correspond  with  the  intention.

DIFFICULTIES. DIET OF LINDAU,  i

496.

A  GREAT  obstacle  to  the  execution  of  the  re-
solutions of  the  diet  occurred  at  once  in  the
defective  nature  of  its  composition.  A  large
number  of  powerful  Estates  had  not  been  pre-
sent, and  as  the  obligatory  force  of  the  resolu-
tions of  an  assembly  upon  those  not  present
was  as  yet  far  from  being  determined,  it  was
necessary  to  open  separate  negotiations  with
the  absent.  Among  others,  the  Elector  of  Co-
logne v/as  commissioned  to  negotiate  with  the
bishops  in  his  neighbourhood,  tFiose  of  Utrecht,
Münster,  Osnabrück,  Paderborn,  and  Bremen ;
the  Elector  of  Saxony  with  Lüneburg,  Gruben-
hagen, and  Denmark  ;  and  it  was  by  no  means
certain  what  w^ould  be  their  success.  Here
again  we  find  the  possibility  that  some  one
might  not  choose  to  be  included  in,  or  to  con-
sent to,  the  Public  Peace,  assumed.*

A  still  more  important  organic  defect  was,
that  the  knightly  order  had  taken  no  part  in  the
diet.  It  is  manifest  that  the  mighty  develop-
ment which  a  government  composed  of  differ-
ent estates  {eine  ständische  Verfassung)  had
reached  in  England,  mainly  rests  on  the  union
of  the  lower  nobility  and  the  cities  in  the
House  of  Commons.  In  Germany  it  was  not
the  ancient  usage  to  summon  the  nobility  to  the
diet.  The  consequence  of  this  was,  that  the
nobles  refused  to  conform  to  the  resolutions
passed  at  it,  especially  when  (as  in  the  present
case)  these  related  to  a  tax.  The  Franconian
knights  assembled  in  December  at  Schwein-
furt, and  declared  that  they  were  free  Franco-
nians,  nobles  of  the  empire,  bound  to  shed
their  blood,  and  in  every  war  to  guard  the  em-
peror's crown  and  sceptre  at  the  head  of  all
their  youth  capable  of  bearing  arms ;  but  not
to  pay  taxes,  which  was  contrary  to  their  liber-
ties, and  would  be  an  unheard  of  innovation.
This  declaration  had  the  assent  of  all  their
compeers.  Unions  of  the  same  kind  were
formed  in  the  several  circles. f

We  observed  how^  much  stress  was  laid  at
an  earlier  period  on  the  spiritual  authorisation.
The  consequence  of  the  want  of  it  now  was
that  the  abbots  of  the  empire  refused  to  recog-
nise the  authority  of  so  purely  secular  a  tribu-
nal as  the  Imperial  Chamber.

There  were  yet  other  Estates  whose  obedi-
ence was  very  doubtful.  The  Duke  of  Lor-
raine declared  that,  beyond  the  jurisdiction  of
his  own  tribunals,  he  was  amenable  to  no
other  authority  than  that  of  the  king  in  person.
The  Swiss  confederates  did  not  indeed  as  yet
dispute  the  sovereignty  or  the  jurisdiction  of

*  Recess  and  ordinances  in  Müller,  459.
t  Müller,  Rtth.  688,  689.

the  empire,  but  at  the  first  exercise  of  it  they
were  offended  and  irritated  into  resistance.
The  king  of  Poland  declared  that  Dantzig  and
El1)ing  were  Polish  cities,  and  rejected  all
claims  made  upon  them  on  the  part  of  the  em-
pire. As  the  first  effect  of  a  vigorous  medicine
is  to  set  the  whole  frame  in  agitation,  so  the
attempts  to  organise  the  Germanic  body  had
the  immediate  result  of  calling  into  activity
the  hostile  principles  hitherto  in  a  state  of
repose.

But  if  so  strong  an  element  of  resistance  ex-
isted on  the  side  of  the  States,  to  whom  the
resolutions  were  clearly  advantageous,  what
vv'as  to  be  expected  from  the  king,  whose  power
they  controlled,  and  on  whom  ihey  had  been
forced  1  In  contriving  the  means  for  their  exe-
cution, every  thing  had  been  calculated  on  his
sympathy  and  co-operation  ;  w^hereas  he  inces-
santly showed  that  he  set  about  the  task  with
repugnance.

He  certainly  organised  the  Imperial  Chamber
according  to  its  new  forms.  It  held  its  first
sittings  at  the  Grossbraunfels  at  Frankfurt-on-
Main,^  on  the  3d  of  November.  On  the  2 1st
of  Februar}'-  it  exercised  its  right  of  pronouncing
the  ban  for  the  first  time :  the  judge  and  his
assessors,  doctors  and  nobles,  appeared  in  the
open  air;  the  proclamation  of  the  ban,  by
which  the  condemned  was  deprived  of  the  pro-
tection of  the  law,§  and  all  and  every  man  per-
mitted to  attack  his  body  and  goods,  was  pub-
licly read  and  torn  in  pieces.  Yet  the  king
was  far  from  allowing  the  court  of  justice  to
take  its  free  course.  On  more  than  one  occa-
sion he  commanded  it  to  stop  the  proceedings
in  a  cause ;  he  would  not  suffer  his  fiscal,  when
judgment  was  given  against  him,  to  pay  the
usual  fine  of  the  defeated  party:  he  sent  an  as-
sessor from  the  Netherlands  whom  his  col-
league refused  to  admit,  because  he  had  not
been  regularly  appointed ;  he  made  no  provi-
sion for  the  pay  of  the  assessors  as  he  was
bound  at  first  to  do:  after  appointing  Count
Eitel  fried  rick  of  Zollern,  against  the  will  of
the  States,  who  preferred  another,l|  he  very
soon  removed  him,  because  he  wanted  him  for
other  business.  Nor  did  he  take  any  measures
for  collecting  the  Common  Penny  in  his  own
dominions,  as  he  had  promised.  The  meeting
had  been,  as  we  saw,  fixed  for  the  1st  of  Feb-

X  Excerpta  ex  Collectaneis  Jobi  de  Rorbacli;  H^rp-
precht,  ii.  210.  In  the  Fraiikfiut  Imp.  Archiveg,  a  letter
is  still  extant  from  Arnold  SchwartzenL-cHrsr  to  the  council
of  Frankfurt,  dated  on  tlie  Friday  after  the  Feast  of  the
Assumption  (Au?.  21):  "  Item  uf  Samstag  IJ  L  F.  Abend
hat  Graf  Wüii  von  Wernherp-  nacli  mir  gescliickt,  und
vorgehalten,  das  Kammerffericht  werde  gelegt  gen  Frank-
furt, wo  man  ein  Iluss  dazu  bekonnnen  mocht  und  ein
Stuben  daneben  zum  Gfspreche."  "  Also  upon  the  even-
ing of  Saturday,  the  feast  of  Our  Blessed  Lady,  Count
Hugh  of  VVernberg  sent  to  me  and  represented,  that  the
Imperial  Chamber  was  transferred  to  Frankfurt,  where  it
might  be  possible  to  get  a  house,  and  a  room  close  to  it
for  conferences."  The  price  of  meat  and  fish  was  to  be
determined,  and  the  citizens  were  to  be  admonished  to
behave  in  a  seemly  and  discreet  manner  ("zimlich  glimp-
flich") towards  the  members,

§  "  Ans  dem  Frieden  in  den  Unfrieden  gesetzt"-^ lite-
rally,  put  out  of  the  peace  into  unpeace.— Transl.

II  To  the  Prince  Magnus  of  Anhalt,  he  says  in  one  of
his  own  notes,  "  Conventus  me  elcgerunt,  sed  revocavit
rex."

Book  I.

DIET  OF  LINDAU,  1496.

57

ruary,  but  he  did  not  appear,  and  consequently
it  did  not  take  place.*

It  is  a  matter  of  astanishment  that  the  repu-
tation of  founder  of  the  constitution  of  the  em-
pire has  so  long  and  so  universally  been  given
to  a  sovereign,  on  whom  the  measures  tending
to  that  object  were  absolutely  forced,  and  who
did  far  more  to  obstruct  than  to  promote  their
execution.

There  is  no  doubt  that  all  attempts  at  reform
would  have  been  utterly  defeated,  had  not  the
king's  designs  been  counteracted  by  a  prince
who  had  embraced  most  of  the  opinions  on
which  ii  was  founded  ;  who  had  been  the  chief
agent  in  bringing  it  thus  far,  and  was  not  in-
clined now  to  let  it  drop — Berthold,  Elector  of
Mainz,  born  Count  of  Henneberg. j-  Even
under  Frederic  III.,  whose  service  he  entered
at  an  early  age,  he  had  taken  an  active  share
in  all  attempts  to  introduce  better  order  into  the
affairs  of  the  empire.  In  1486,  he  became
Elector  of  Mainz,  and  from  that  time  might  be
regarded  as  the  most  eminent  member  of  the
States.  There  are  men,  whose  whole  existence
is  merged  in  their  studies  or  their  business :
there  we  must  seek  them  if  we  wish  to  know
them;  their  purely  personal  qualities  or  history
attract  no  attention.  To  this  class  of  men  be-
longed Berthold  of  Mainz.  Nobody,  so  far  as
I  have  been  able  to  discover,  has  thought  it
worth  while  to  give  to  posterity  a  description
of  his  personal  appearance  or  characteristics :
but  we  see  him  distinctly  and  vividly  in  the
administration  of  his  diocese.  At  iirst  people
feared  his  severity ;  for  his  administration  of
justice  was  as  inexorable  as  it  was  impartial,
and  his  economy  was  rigorous  ;  but  in  a  short
time  every  body  was  convinced  that  his  austere
demeanour  was  not  the  result  of  temper  or  of
(Xiprice,  but  of  profound  necessity  :  it  was  tem-
pered by  genuine  benevolence  ;  he  lent  a  ready
ear  to  the  complaints  of  the  poorest  and  the
meanest. ±  He  was  peculiarly  active  in  the
affairs  of  the  empire.  He  was  one  of  the  vene-
rable men  of  that  age,  who  earnestly  strove, to
give  to  ancient  institutions  which  had  lost  their
original  spirit  and  their  connection  with  higher
things,  the  new  form  adapted  to  the  necessities
of  the  times.  He  had  already  conducted  the
negociations  of  i486;  he  next  procured  for  the
towns  the  right  of  sitting  in  the  committees  ;
it  was  mainly  to  him  that  Germany  owed  the
promises  made  by  Maximilian  in  the  year
1489,  and  the  projects  of  Worms  were  chiefly
his  work.  In  every  circumstance  he  evinced
that  serene  and  manly  spirit,  which,  while  it
keeps  its  end  steadily  in  view,  is  not  self-willed
as  to  the  means  or  manner  of  accomplishing  it,
or  pertinacious  on  merely  incidental  points  ;  he
was  wearied  or  discouraged  by  no  obstacles,
and  a  stranger  to  any  personal  views  :  if  ever

*  In  the 'Frankfurt  Archives,  we  meet  with  several
letters  from  Jülich,  Colin,  Mainz,  &c.,  bespeaking  a
lodging,  but  also  a  letter  dated  from  Frankfurt  itself  on
the  Saturday  after  Invocavit,  to  the  eflect  that  no  one
had  as  yet  appeared.

t  Of  the  Romhilde  line,  born  in  1442.  Diplomatische
Geschichte  des  Hauses  Henneberg,  p.  377.

I  Serarius,  Res  MoguntinoB,  p.  799.

a  man  bore  his  country  in  his  inmost  heart,  it
was  he.

In  the  summer  of  149G,  at  Ihe  diet  of  Lindau,
this  prince  acquired  a  degree  of  independent
power  such  as  he  had  not  enjoyed  before.

In  the  midst  of  the  troubles  of  that  summer,
Maximilian  thought  he  discerned  the  favoura-
ble moment  in  which  he  needed  only  to  show
himself  in  Italy,  in  order,  with  the  help  of  his
allies  there,  to  re-establish  the  supremacy  of
the  imperial  power.  He  summoned  the  States
to  repair  to  Lindau,  whither  they  were  to  bring
the  amount  of  the  Common  Penny,  together
wüth  as  many  troops  as  it  would  suffice  to  pa}^,
and  whence  they  were  immediately  to  follow
him  ;  at  the  same  time  declaring  that  he  would
not  wait  for  them,  but  must  cross  the  Alps
without  delay  with  what  force  God  had  given
him.

While  he  put  this  in  execution,  and,  equip-
ped rather  as  for  some  romantic  enterprise  of
knight-errantry  than  for  a  serious  expedition,
rushed  on  to  Italy,  the  States  of  the  empire
gradually  assembled  in  Lindau.  They  brought
neither  troops,  money,  nor  arms  ;  their  atten-
tion was  directed  exclusively  to  internal  af-
fairs. How  greatly  in  acting  thus,  they  relied
on  Elector  Berthold,  is  shown  (among  other
documents)  by  the  instructions  to  the  ambas-
sador of  Brandenburg,  ordering  him  implicitly
to  follow  the  course  pursued  by  that  prince. §

On  the  31st  of  August,  1496,  the  princes,  as
many  as  were  assembled,  embarked  in  boats
and  fetched  the  king's  son,  Archduke  Philip
of  Bregenz,  across  the  river ;  on  the  7th  of
September,  the  first  sitting  was  held.  The
Elector  of  Mainz  took  his  place  in  the  centre,
on  his  right  sat  the  princes,  the  archduke,  for
the  first  time,  amongst  them ;  on  his  left,  the
ambassadors  or  delegates  of  those  who  did  not
appear  in  person ;  in  front  of  him  stood  the
deputies  of  the  cities.  In  the  middle  was  a
bench  for  the  king's  councillors,  Conrad  Stur-
ze! and  Walter  von  Andlo.

The  Elector  conducted  the  proceedings  with
unquestioned  authority.  If  he  absented  him-
self, which  was  never  but  for  a  short  time,
they  were  stopped  ;  when  he  returned,  he  was
the  chief  speaker,  whether  in  the  assembly  or
the  committee;  he  brought  forward  the  pro-
positions, demanded  the  grants,  and  found
m.eans  to  keep  the  plenipotentiaries  stead 3^  to
them.  He  did  not  conceal  the  grief  he  felt  at
seeing  the  empire  in  such  a  state  of  decline.
"  Even  in  the  time  of  Charles  IV.  and  Sigis-
mund,"  exclaimed  he,  "the  sovereignty  of  the
empire  was  acknowledged  in  Italy,  which  is
now  no  longer  the  case.  The  king  of  Bohe-
mia is  an  elector  of  the  empire,  and  what  does

§  In  theBerlin  Archives  there  is  a  Convolute  concerning
this  Diet  of  the  Empire,  which,  along  with  the  Instruc-
tion, contains  1st,  the  letters  received  up  to  the  time  of
the  arrival  of  the  deputies,  and  the  propositions  made  by
the  foreign  deputies:  2d,  the  protocol  of  the  proceedinjrs
on  the  Friday  after  the  feast  of  St.  Dionysius,  Oct.  14.
What  is  especially  remarkable  in  this  protocol,  is,  that
the  most  distinguished  of  the  plenipotentiaries,  Erasmus
Brandenburg,  parish  priest  of  Cotbus,  was'a  member  of
the  committee,  and  is  the  reporter  of  its  transactions.
The  greater  part  is  in  his  handwriting.

58

DIET  OF  LINDAU,  1496.

Book  I.

he  do  for  the  empire  1  has  he  not  even  wrested
Moravia  and  Silesia  from  it  1  Prussia  and
Livonia  are  liable  to  incessant  attacks  and  op-
pression, and  no  one  troubles  bimself  about
them  ;  nay,  even  the  little  which  remains  to
the  empire  is  daily  wrested  from  it,  and  given
to  one  or  the  other.  The  ordinances  of  Worms
were  made  to  preserve  the  empire  from  decay  ;
but  the  union  and  mutual  confidence  which
alone  could  sustain  it  are  wanting.  Whence
comes  it  that  the  confederation  enjoys  such
universal  respect'?  that  it  is  feared  by  Italians
and  French,  by  the  pope,  nay,  by  every  body  1
The  only  reason  is,  that  it  is  united  and  of  one
mind.  Germany  ought  to  follow  the  example.
The  ordinances  of  Worms  should  be  revived,
not  to  prate  about,  but  to  execute  them."*

Berthold's  was  that  powerful  eloquence
Avhich  is  the  expression  of  convictions  founded
on  actual  experience.  The  committee  resolved
to  look  into  the  matter,  and  to  see  that  the
em.pire  was  better  ordered.  On  the  motion  of
the'  Brandenburg  ambassador,  the  members
examined  their  credentials,  and  found  that
they  were  sufficient  for  that  purpose.  Such
being  the  dispositions  of  the  States,  affairs
now  took  a  decisive  turn.

The  Imperial  Chamber,  which  had  closed
its  sittings  in  June,  was  induced  to  open  them
again  in  November.  It  was  determined  to  ap-
propriate the  tax  which  was  to  be  levied  on
the  Jews  in  Regensburg,  Nürnberg,  "Worms,
and  Frankfurt,  to  the  payment  of  the  assessors.
The  Elector  insisted  that  the  sentences  of  the
court  should  be  executed,  that  no  sovereign
should  recal  his  assessor,  and  that  the  cities
should  have  justice  against  the  princes.  It
was  resolved  to  transfer  the  chamber  to  Worms  :
the  reason  assigned  for  which  was,  that  it  was
easier  from  thence  to  reach  the  four  universities
of  Heidelberg,  Basle,  Mainz,  and  Cologne,
whenever  it  was  necessary  "to  ask  the  law."

On  the  23d  of  December,  the  edict  for  levy-
ing the  Common  Penny  was  renewed  in  the
most  stringent  form.  The  knights  (Ritter-
schaft) who  complained  of  the  demand  made
upon  them  by  the  king,  were  reminded  that  it
was  not  the  king  who  imposed  this  tax,  but
the  empire  ;  that  it  was  the  most  equal  and
the  least  oppressive  that  could  be  devised,  and
would  be  of  advantage  to  their  Order,  if  they
would  only  get  to  horse  and  endeavour  to  earn
the  pay  for  which  this  fund  was  in  part  raised.
.  Another  meeting  of  the  States  was  appointed
to  consider  of  the  disbursement  of  the  Common
Penny.

Other  points  were  discussed  ;— the  necessity
of  instant  and  effective  succours  for  the  at-
tack; new  regulations  of  the  courts  of  justice
and  of  the  mint;  above  all,  the  firmest  deter-
mination was  expressed  to  maintain  unaltered
the  measures  passed  at  Worms.  Should  any
attempt  be  made  to  thwart  or  oppose  them  or
those  of  the  diet  of  Lindau,  the  matter  was  to
be  referred  to  the  Archbishop  of  Mainz,  who

*  These  words  were  spoken  by  the  Elector  on  the  28th
Nov.  A  similar  eftnsion  is  cited  in  Sclierer's  extract,  and
in  Fels,  Erster  Beitrag  zur  Reichsgesch.  Preface,  §  7.  In
these  contributions  is  to  be  found  the  protocol  of  Lindau,
contained  in  the  Frankf.  A.  A.  vol.  xvi.

should  be  authorised  thereupon  to  convoke
other  members,  in  order  that  an  answer  from
the  whole  body  of  the  States  might  be  given,
and  public  order  and  tranquillity  be  defended
by  them  in  concert.f

AU  these  resolutions  the  Archbishop  carried
without  much  difficulty.  If  there  was  occa-
sionally some  attempt  at  opposition  on  the  pari
of  the  envoys  of  the  princes,  those  of  the
electors  and  of  the  cities  always  supported
him  and  compelled  the  former  to  give  way.
They  were,  therefore,  incorporated  in  the  Re-
cess ;  the  usual  practice  as  to  which  was,  that
each  member  should  first  write  out  for  himself
the  resolutions  which  had  been  passed  :  these
were  then  compared  in  the  assembly,  a  fixed
formula  was  determined  on,  and  signed  by  the
whole  body.

On  the  10th  of  February  1497,  the  diet  of
Lindau  v/as  closed.  The  States  thanked  the
Archbishop  for  the  trouble  he  had  taken,  and
entreated  his  pardon  for  their  negligences.
The  Elector,  on  the  other  hand,  excused  him-
self for  having,  perhaps,  sometimes  addressed
them  with  too  great  earnestness,  and  exhorted
them  faithfully  to  enforce  the  resolutions  that
had  been  passed,  each  in  his  own  territory  or
sphere,  that  so  the  empire  might  be  profited.

DIET OF WOUMS AND FREIBURG,  1497, 1498.

The  matter  was,  however,  but  half  settled ;
the  difficulties  which  had  arisen  among  the
States  had  been  removed,  but  as  yet  no  in-
fluence had  been  obtained  over  the  king,  whose
co-operation  and  executive  power  were  indis-
pensable.

Maximilian's  romantic  enterprise  had  ended
as  was  to  be  expected  :  the  same  excitable
fancy  which  had  flattered  him  with  exaggerat-
ed hopes,  had  prevented  him  from  perceiving
the  true  state  of  affairs.  After  a  short  time  the
allies,  w^hose  assistance  was  all  he  had  to  rely
on,  had  quarrelled  among  themselves  ;  he  had
returned  to  Germany  filled  with  shame,  dis-
gust and  vexation.  Here  he  found' the  finances
of  his  hereditary  domains  exhausted  and  in  the
utmost  disorder ;  the  empire  in  an  attitude  of
defiance  and  sullen  reserve,  and  disastrous
tidings  following  each  other  in  quick  succes-
sion." When  Louis  Xll.  ascended  the  throne
in  1498,  Maximilian  hoped  that  troubles  would
arise  in  France,  and  that  his  allies  would  sup-
port him  in  a  fresh  attack  upon  that  power.
The  very  contrary  took  place  :  Louis,  by  pa-
cific and  prudent  measures,  won  from  his  sub-
jects a  degree  of  consideration  such  as  no  king
had  ever  before  possessed ;  the  Italian  league
endeavoured  to  bring  about  an  accommodation
with  him :  but  the  most  unexpected  thing  was,
that  Maximilian's  own  son.  Archduke  Philip,
instigated  by  his  Netherland  councillors,  with-

t  In  order  to  avoid  the  appearance  of  a  conspiracy,
it  iiad  been  previously  resolved,  "Die  Handhabung,  zu
Worms  vorsi^folt,  vorzunehmen  und  aus  d'ersell)en  ain
Grund  und  Einung  und  Verstendniss  zu  nehmen  und,was
des  zu  wenig  seyn  will  zu  erweitern."  "To  take  the
declaration  sealed  at  Worms,  and  from  it  to  construct  a
croundwork,  union,  and  agreement,  and  in  those  respects
where  it  may  coine  short,  to  enlarge  iV— Brandenburg
Protocol.  •

Book  I.

DIET  OF  WORMS  AND  FREIBURG,  1497-8.

59

out  consulting'  his  father  entered  into  a  treaty
with  France,  in  which  he  promised  not  to
agitate  any  of  his  claims  on  Burgundy  so  long
as  Louis  XII.  lived,  and  never  to  attempt  to
enforce  them  by  arms,  or  otherwise  than  by
amicable  and  legal  means.  The  only  con-
sideration in  return  for  this  vast  concession
was  the  surrender  of  a  few  strong  places.
Maximilian  learned  this  when  he  had  already
begun  his  preparations  for  war;  in  June  1498,
in  a  state  of  the  most  violent  irritation,  he
summoned  the  assembly  of  the  empire  which
he  could  no  longer  do  without.

The  assembly  had  opened  its  sittings,  as  had
been  determined,  in  Worms,*  but  had  trans-
ferred them  at  the  king's  request  to  Freiburg.
Although,  in  consequence  of  the  proceedings
at  Lindau,  affairs  were  in  a  much  better  state
than  before, — the  Common  Penny  began  to  be
really  collected,  the  Imperial  Chamber  at
Worms  held  its  regular  sittings  for  the  admin-
istration of  justice,  and  the  diet  itself  exercised
an  uncontested  jurisdiction  as  between  the  sev-
eral Estates,  in  the  more  vs^eighty  and  difficult
cases  ;  yet  it  was  daily  felt  that  so  long  as  the
king  remained  in  the  equivocal  and  half  hostile
attitude  he  had  assumed,  nothing  permanent
would  be  accomplished.  Before  the  very  eyes
of  the  assembled  States,  Elector  John  of  Treves,
with  the  help  of  his  secular  neighbours,  Baden,
the  Palatinate,  Hessen  and  Juliers,  invaded  tlie
town  of  Boppard,  and  forced  it  to  submit  and
to  do  homage  to  him.  The  Swiss  resisted  a
sentence  of  the  Imperial  Chamber  against  St.
Gall,  held  the  most  insolent  language,  and
were  very  near  issuing  formal  diffidations.
The  States  pointed  out  to  the  king,  in  remon-
strances incessantly  reiterated,  that,  without
his  presence,  neither  the  Public  Peace  could  be
maintained,  nor  the  law  executed,  nor  the  taxes
duly  collected.

At  length,  on  the  8th  June,  1498,  he  arrived
in  Freiburg,  but  neither  with  the  view^s,  nor  in
the  temper,  that  his  subjects  wished.  His  soul
was  galled  by  the  failure  of  all  his  plans  ;—
deeply  wounded  by  the  defection  of  the  Nether-
lands, and  ardently  excited  by  the  thought  of  a
war.^with  France;  the  more,  I  think,  from  a
feeling  of  the  difficulty,  nay,  impracticability
of  it.  At  the  very  first  audience  (38th  June)
he  vented  all  this  storm  of  passion  upon  the
princes.  He  said  that  he  did  not  come  to  ask
their  advice,  for  he  was  resolved  to  make  war
upon  France,  and  he  knew  that  they  would
dissuade  him  :  he  only  wished  to  hear  whether
they  would  support  him  as  they  were  bound  to
do,  and  as  they  had  promised  at  Worms.  It
was  possible  that  he  might  accomplish  nothing

*  Transactions  of  the  States  of  the  Holy  Empire  at  the
Royal  Diet  at  Worms,  Fr.  A.  vol.  xvii.  We  see  by  them,
amongst  other  things,  as  a  matter  of  complete  certainty,
that  Maximilian  did  not  appear  at  Worms.  As  Häber-
lin  (ßeichsgeschichte,  ix.  84),  however,  assumes  that  he
did,  he  must  have  been  deceived  by  certain  documents
which  were  only  laid  before  the  Imperial  Diet  in  the
King's  name.  At  Freiburg,  July  3d,  the  Tuesday  after
the  Visitation  of  the  Holy  Virgin,  Maximilian  made  ex-
cuses for  not  having  appeared  at  Worms:  "  he  had  been
obliged  to  establish  an  excellent  government  (Regiment)
in  his  hereditary  states,"  &c.,  "  it  had  been  commented
on  as  folly  in  him,"  &c.,  "  but  now  he  was  present."
(Brand.  Protocol.)

decisive ;  but,  at  any  rate,  he  would  give  the
kino-  of  France  a  slap  in  the  face  (Bj'--ken-
streich,)  sucli  as  should  be  remembered  for  a
hundred  years.  "  1  am  betrayed  by  the  Lom-
bards," said  he,  "  I  am  abandoned  by  the  Ger-
mans :  but  I  will  not  allow  myself  again  to  be
bound  hand  and  foot  and  hung  upon  a  nail,  as
I  did  at  Worms.  War  I  must  make,  and  I  will
make,  let  people  say  what  they  may.  Rather
than  give  it  up,  I  would  get  a  dispensatimi  from
the  oath  that  I  swore  behind  the  altar  at  Frank-
furt; for  I  have  duties  not  only  to  the  empire,
but  to  the  House  of  Austria :  I  say  this,  and  I
must  say  it,  though  I  should  be  forced  on  that
account  to  lay  the  crown  at  my  feet  and  tram-
ple on  it."

The  princes  listened  to  him  wäth  amazement.
"  Your  Majesty,"  replied  the  Elector  of  Mainz,
"  is  pleased  to  speak  to  us  in  parables,  as  Christ
did  to  his  disciples !"  They  begged  him  to
bring  his  proposals  before  the  assembly,  wliicli
would  then  proceed  to  deliberate  upon  thera.f
Strange  meeting  of  this  monarch  with  this  as-
sembly !  Maximilian  lived  in  the  interests  of
his  House  ;  in  the  contemplation  of  the  great  -
political  relations  of  Europe;  in  the  feeling
that  he  was  the  bearer  of  the  highest  dignity
of  Christendom,  which  was  now  in  jeopardy  :
he  was  ambitious,  warlike,  and  needy.  The
States,  on  the  other  hand,  had  their  attention
fixed  on  internal  affairs  \,  v/hat  they  desired
above  all  things  was  a  government  of  order
and  law ;  they  were  cautious,  pacific,  frugal :
they  wanted  to  check  and  control  the  king ;
he  to  excite  and  hurry  on  the  States.

Nothing  less  than  the  singular  prudence,
moderation,  and  sense  which  distinguished  the
Archbishop  of  Mainz  were  necessary  to  pre-
vent a  total  breach  betvveen  them.

He  conciliated  the  king  by  placing  before
his  eyes  the  prospect  of  the  revenue  likely  to
accrue  from  the  Common  Penny.  He  prevail-
ed on  the  assembly  to  offer  the  king  immediate
payment  of  the  sum  formerly  proposed  at
Worms  ;  on  the  understanding  that  Maximilian
should  himself  contribute  to  the  fuller  and
more  exact  collection  of  the  tax  by  his  own
example  and  assistance.  This  brought  on  a
more  distinct  explanation.  Every  individual
was  called  upon  to  state  how  much  of  the
Common  Penny  he  had  collected.  A  slight
review  of  these  statements  will  give  us  an  in-
sight into  the  situation  of  the  German  princes
of  that  day.

Elector  Berthold  of  Mainz  has  collected  and
paid  in  the  tax;  but  some  persons  in  his  do-
minions had  resisted.  To  these  he  has  an-
nounced that  they  subjected  themselves  to  the
ban  of  the  empire,  from  which  he  would  not
protect  them. — Cologne  and  Treves  have  re-
ceived only  a  part  of  their  share  of  the  tax:
they  have  met  with  not  less  refractory  subjects,
who  excused  themselves  with  the  delays  of
the  Netherlands. — The  Electors  of  Branden-
burg and  of  Saxony  have  collected  the  greater

t  The  Brandenburg  protocol,  our  chief  source  of  in-
formation  regarding  the  Diet  of  Freiburg,  adds,  the  king
spoke  "  with  many  marvellous  words  and  gestures,  so  as
to  be  completely  obscure  and  incomprehensible."

CO

DIET  OF  WORMS  AND  FREIBURG,  1497-8.

Book  I.

part  of  the  tax,  and  are  ready  to  pay  it  in ;  but
there  are  certain  lords  in  Saxony  of  whom  the
Elector  says,  he  can  do  nothing  with  them ;
he  does  not  answer  for  them.* — The  ambassa-
dor of  the  Elector  Palatine,  on  the  other  hand,
has  not  even  instructions  to  give  any  distinct
explanation;  George  of  Landshut,  too,  gave
only  an  evasive  answer.  Albert  of  Bavaria
expressed  himself  better  disposed,  but  he  com-
plained of  the  great  number  of  recalcitrants  he
met  with.  Nor  was  this  to  be  regarded  as  a
pretext :  the  Bavarian  states  had,  in  fact,  made
great  difficulties  ; — they  had  enough  to  do  with
the  wants  of  their  own  country ;  they  thought
it  strange  that  the  empire,  also,  should  make
claims  upon  them.f  The  resistance  in  Fran-
conia  was  not  less  vehement ;  the  Margraves
of  Brandenburg  were  forced  in  some  cases  to
resort  to  distraint. — The  cities,  already  prepar-
ed for  contributions  of  this  kind,  had  a  much
easier  task.  Only  three  out  of  the  whole  num-
ber were  still  in  arrear — Cologne,  Mühlhausen,
and  Nordhausen ;  the  others  had  paid  in  their
whole  contingent.

Although  the  matter  was,  as  we  see,  far  from
being  perfectly  accomplished,  it  was  put  into  a
good  train,  and  Maximilian  was  highly  satisfied
with  the  result.  He  now  condescended  to  give
a  report  of  what  his  own  hereditary  dominions
had  raised.  From  Austria,  Styria,  and  Tyrol
he  had  collected  27,000  gulden ;  in  the  Nether-
lands, on  the  contrary,  great  resistance  had
been  made.  "  Some,"  says  the  king's  report,
"  those  of  the  Welsch  (i.  e.  foreign,  not  Ger-
man) sort,  said  they  were  not  under  the  empire.
Those  who  hold  to  the  German  nation,  on  the
other  hand,  declared  that  they  would  wait  and
see  what  their  neighbours  on  the  Rhine  did."

Unfortunately  it  is  impossible,  from  the  re-
ports before  us,  to  arrive  at  any  statistical  re-
sults. The  payments  were  too  unequal,  and
the  accounts  are  generally  wanting.

It  was,  however,  for  the  moment  a  great
point  gained,  that  the  States  could  either  pa,y
the  king  the  money  he  required  immediately,
or  at  least  promised  it  with  certainty.  He  was
thus  induced,  on  his  side,  to  devote  his  atten-
tion and  interest  to  the  affairs  of  the  empire.

The  Public  Peace  was  guarded  with  fresh
severe  clauses,  especially  against  the  abettors
of  the  breakers  of  it.  The  president  of  the  Im^-
perial  Chamber  was  empowered,  in  peculiarly
weighty  and  dangerous  cases,  to  call  together
princes  of  the  empire  at  his  own  discretion,  and
to  require  their  help.  A  former  proposition  of
the  Imperial  Chamber,  viz.  to  confer  the  right
of  representation  on  the  heir,  was  at  length
carried,  in  spite  of  the  objection  that  a  third
part  of  the  nation  held  to  the  rules  of  the  Sach-
senspiegel (Mirror  of  Saxony),  which  were  at
direct  variance  with that  right.it^ A  regular

*  In  the  Instruction  of  the  Elector  of  Brandenburg  it
was  further  said,  "  Scarcely  half  of  the  Common  Penny
had  been  got  in,  on  account  of  the  great  mortality.  His
electoral  Grace  would  either  deliver  up  what  had  been
hitherto  received,  separately,  or  would  be  responsible  for
the  whole  together."

t  Freiberg,  Gesch.  der  Baier.  Landst.  i.  568,  663.

J  A  very  important  protocol,  which  serves  to  complete
the  others,  in  Harpprecht,  ii.  p.  341.  In  the  Berlin  Ar-
chives, we  find  the  document,  which  Müller,  ii.  442,  gives

criminal  procedure  was  taken  into  considera-
tion, chiefly  on  account  of  the  frequent  illegal
infliction  of  the  punishment  of  death.  In  order
to  put  a  stop  to  the  confusion  in  the  currency,
it  was  resolved  to  coin  all  gulden  of  the  size
and  form  of  the  gulden  of  the  Rhenish  electors.
In  short,  this  diet  of  Frieburg,  which  opened
so  stormily,  gradually  despatched  more  busi-
ness of  various  kinds  than  any  that  had  yet
met.

The  question  now  remained  what  view  the
States  would  take  of  European  affairs.  The
French  had  made  the  proposal  that  Genoa  and
Naples  should  be  ceded  to  them,  in  which  cas-e
they  would  not  disturb  Milan,  and  would  con-
clude a  permanent  peace  on  all  other  points  ; —
a  proposal  which,  if  sincere,  had  much  to  re-
commend it,  and  was  especially  agreeable  to
the  German  princes.  They  urged  that  Genoa
was  little  to  be  depended  upon  in  any  case,  and
was  seeking  a  new  master  every  day;  and
what  had  the  empire  to  do  with  Naples  and
Sicily  1  It  would,  in  fact,  be  far  more  advan-
tageous to  them  to  have  a  powerful  prince
there,  who  could  hold  the  Turks  in  check.  The
sovereignty  of  Italy  was  a  matter  of  indiffer-
ence to  them  ;  they  declared  themselves  gene-
rally opposed  to  all  alliances  with  the  Welsch
(non-Germans).  Such,  however,  was  not  the  '
opinion  of  the  electors,  and  least  of  all,  the  ec-
clesiastical. They  reminded  their  opponents
that  Genoa  had  been  called  by  Frederic  I.  a
chamber  of  the  empire;  that  Naples  was  a  fief
of  the  papal  see,  and  must  therefore  be  held  by
the  King  of  the  Romans,  the  steward  of  th«
church.  But  above  all,  that  they  must  not
suffer  the  King  of  France  to  become  too  pow-
erful, lest  he  should  attempt  to  get  possession
of  the  empire.  They  would  not  abate  a  single
iota  of  the  idea  of  the  Germanic  empire,  with
which  indeed  their  own  importance  was  indis-
solubly  associated.  These  sentiments,  which
rendered  them  at  once  partisans  of  the  king,
vv^ere  at  length  triumphant :  the  negotiations
which  Frederic  of  Saxony  had  set  on  foot  with
Louis  XII.  fell  to  the  ground  :  at  the  moment
when  the  States  had  placed  the  institutions  of
the  empire  on  something  like  a  firm  footing,
they  were  forced  into  a  war.

Two  great  conflicting  tendencies  had  been  at
work  from  the  beginning  of  this  reign ;  that
of  the  king,  to  hurry  the  nation  into  warlike
enterprises;  and  that  of  the  States,  to  establish  ^
its  internal  tranquillity.  They  now  seemed  re-
solved on  concession,  union,  and  concert.  The
king  had  confirmed  and  established  the  pro-
ceedings of  W^orms,  which  were  disagreeable
to  him  ;  and  the  States  acceded  to  his  desire  to
defend  the  majesty  of  the  empire  by  arms.

EVENTS OF THE WAR.

It  remained  however  to  be  asked,  whether
either  party  had  distinctly  conceived,  or  ma-
under the  title  "  An  Explanation  of  the  Imperial  Cham-
ber," with  some  additions,  however;  e.  g.  "with  respect
to  the  article  concerning  the  succession  of  daughters  and
grandchildren,  this  article  has  been  deferred  till  the  ar-
rival of  the  king's  majesty."  The  presence  of  the  king
himself  was  needful  to  bring  the  afiair  to  a  conclusion.

Book  I.

EVENTS  OF  THE  WAR,  1498.

61

turely  weighed,  with  what  they  were  about  to
undertake.

There  may  be  gorernments  to  which  war  is
a  source  of  strength ;  but  it  can  never  be  so  to
those  which  have  a  strong  federative  element,
yet  in  which  the  danger  attendant  on  failure  is
not  common  to  the  whole  body.  For  Germany,
nothing  was  more  necessary  than  peace,  in
order  that  institutions  yet  in  their  infancy  might
be  allowed  tranquil  growth,  and  identify  them-
selves with  the  habits  of  the  people ;  and  the
scarcely  recognised  principle  of  obedience  have
time  to  take  root.  The  collection  and  expen-
diture of  the  Comgaon  Penny  needed  above  all
to  become  habitual.  But  the  diet  at  which
these  measures  had  been  concluded  was  hardly
closed  when  the  nation  rushed  forth  to  war.

Nor  was  this  all.  The  power  they  were
about  to  attack  was  the  earliest  and  the  most
completely  consolidated  of  any  in  Europe ;  a
new  sovereign,  who  had  long  enjoyed  universal
consideration,  had  assumed  the  reins  of  gov-
ernment and  commanded  the  entire  and  cordial
obedience  of  his  subjects.  Such  was  the
monarch,  and  such  the  kingdom,  which  IMaxi-
milian,  in  daring  reliance  on  the  assistance  of
the  empire,  now  proceeded  in  person  to  attack.
After  having  regained  for  his  troops  the  ad-
vantages they  had  lost  in  Upper  Burgundy,*
he  fell  upon  Champagne  with  a  considerable
army.  A  truce  was  now  offered  by  the  enemy,
which  he  declined.

I  do  not  doubt  that  the  leading  princes  saw
the  danger  of  the  course  Maximilian  was
taking;  but  they  could  not  prevent  it.  The
agreement  they  had  come  to  at  Freiburg  was
obtained  solely  by  the  consent  of  the  States  to
assist  him  in  his  campaign : — the)'-  must  let
him  try  his  fortune.

The  great  superiorit)^  of  the  political  position
which  Louis  XII.  had  contrived  to  acquire,
now  manifested  itself.  He  had  gained  over
the  old  allies  of  Maximilian  in  Spain,  Italy,
and  even  the  Netherlands.  Milan  and  Naples,
which  he  had  resolved  to  attack,  had  no  other
allies  than  the  King  of  the  Romans  himself.

But  even  in  German)^  itself,  Louis  found
means  to  excite"  enmities  sufficient  to  furnish
Maximilian  with  occupation.  The  Palatinate
'  had  always  maintained  a  good  understanding
with  France;  active  negotiations  were  set  on
foot  with  Switzerland  and  the  Grisons.  Duke
Charles  of  Gueldres,  (of  the  houseof  Egaiont,
deposed  by  Charles  the  Bold,  but  which  had
never  renounced  its  claims,)  was  the  first  to
take  up  arms.

Maximilian  was  driven  out  of  Champagne
by  incessant  rain  and  the  overflow  of  the  rivers.
He  turned  his  arms  upon  Gueldres,  and,  with
the  assistance  of  Juliers  and  Cleves,  gained
som^e  advantages  ;  but  they  were  not  decisive  :
the  country  adhered  faithfully  to  Duke  Charles,
who  had  secured  its  attachment  by  granting  it
new  privileges.  Hence  it  happened,  that
Maximilian  could  not  attend  the  assembly  of

*  'J'he  Fnsjger  lAIS.  relates  at  lenstli  that  tlie  Germans
had  kept  the  advantage  in  a  skirmisli,  Sept.  2-2,  1198,  and
had  re  conquered  castles  the}' had  previously  lost.  It  is
incredible  that  Maximilian,  as  ZuriTa  asserts,  should
have  had  25,000  infantry,  and  5000  horse  in  the  held.

the  empire  fixed  to  be  held  on  the  eve  of  St.
Catherine  (November  21st)  at  Worms,  indis-
pensable as  that  was  to  the  completion  and
execution  of  the  ordinances  agreed  on  :  this
meeting,  where,  if  he  had  been  present,  reso-
lutions of  the  utnaost  practical  importance
would  probably  have  been  passed,  broke  up
without  doing  any  thing.f  But,  besides  this,
the  troubles  in  Switzerland  now  broke  out  in
the  form  of  regular  war.  The  empire  was  as
5'et  far  from  renouncing  its  sovereignty  over
the  confederated  cantons  :  it  had  cited  them
before  the  imperial  chambers,  nor  had  any  ob-
jection been  taken  to  the  legality  of  such  a
proceeding;  the  Common  Penny  had  been
levied  in  them;  so  lately  as  at  the  diet  of
Freiburg,  the  resolution  was  passed  "  to  keep
the  powerful  cities  of  the  Confederation  which
bear  the  imperial  eagle  in  their  arms,  in  their
duty  and  allegiance  to  the  empire,  and  to  invite
them  again  to  attend  the  meetings  of  the  States.
But  these  invitations  could  have  no  effect  in  a
country  where  the  v.-ant  of  internal  peace  was
not  felt,  because  they  had  secured  it  for  them-
selves and  W'ere  already  in  possession  of  a
tolerably  well-ordered  government.  A  party
which  had  always  been  hostile  to  the  King  of
the  Eomans,  and  which  found  it  more  expe-
dient to  earn  French  money  than  to  adhere  to
the  empire,  gained  the  upper  hand.  In  this
state  of  things,  the  Grisons,  who  were  threat-
ened by  Tyrol  on  account  of  the  part  they  had
taken  injurious  to  the  peace  of  the  empire,  bv
sheltering  persons  under  the  king's  ban,  found
immediate  assistance  from  the  confederates.
In  one  moment  the  whole  frontier,  T3^rol  and
Grisons,  Swabia  and  Switzerland,  stood  in
hostile  array.

Strange  that  the  measures  taken  to  introduce
order  into  the  empire  should  have  had  results
so  directly  contrary  to  the  views  with  which
they  were  undertaken  !  The  dem.ands  of  the
diet  and  of  the  imperial  chamber  set  the  Swiss
Confederation  in  a  ferment;  the  summoning
of  the  Grisons  to  deÜA-^er  up  a  fugitive  under
ban  occasioned  their  defection.  If,  on  the
other  side,  the  city  of  Constance,  after  long
hesitation,  joined  the  Swabian  league,  this  act
w^as  regarded  with  the  utmost  disgust  by  the
Sv,'iss,  because  the  city  possessed  the  juris-
diction over  the  Thurgau,  a  district  of  which
it  had  obtained  possession  some  years  before.
Independently  of  this,  there  existed,  ever  since
the  formation  of  the  league,  a  hatred  betvreen
Swabia  and  Switzerland  which  had  long  vented
itself  in  mutual  insults  and  now  broke  out  in
a  wild  war  of  devastation.

The  constitution  of  the  empire  was  far  from
being  strong  enough — its  unity  w^as  far  from
having  sunk  deeply  enough  into  the  mind  and
consciousness  of  the  people — to  allow  it  to  put
forward  its  full  strength  in  the  conflict  with
France  :  the  States  convened,  or  rather' huddled
together  in  the  utmost  hurry  at  Mainz,  passed
partial  and  infirm  resolutions;  it  was,  in  fact,

t  Letter  from  Maximilian  to  Bishop  Henry  of  Bam-
berg: Harpprecht,  ii.  399.  The  king  invited  the  assembly
to  meet  at  Cologne,  where,  however,  many  of  the  mem-
bers did  not  appear,  as  their  instructions  only  spoke  of
Worms.  "

62

DIET  OF  AUGSBURG,

Book  I.

only  the  members  of  the  Swahian  league  who
supported  the  king^  and  even  these  were  not
inclined  to  risk  their  lives  in  a  battle  with
sturdy  peasants.

Under  these  circumstances  the  empire  was
«in  no  condition  to  make  a  successful  resistance
to  those  designs  of  Kin^  Louis  upon  Italy
which  Maximilian  had  vainly  desired  to  pre-
vent. Whilst  the  Upper  Rhine  was  torn  by
private  wars,  the  French  crossed  the  Alps  and
took  Milan  without  difficulty.  Maximilian  was
compelled  to  make  a  very  disadvantageous
peace  with  the  Swiss,,  by  which  not  only  the
jurisdiction  of  the  Thurgau  was  lost,  but  their
general  independence  was  fixed  on  an  immov-
able basis.

A  successful  war  would  have  strengthened
the  constitution  of  the  empire :  the  inevitable
effect  of  these  reverses  w^as  to  overthrow,  or,
at  the  least,  to  modify  it.

DIET  OF  AUGSBURG,  AND  ITS  CONSEQUENCES.

The  immediate  result  of  this  assembly  was
that  the  authority  of  the  king  was  even  more
limited  than  before;  the  principle  of  represent-
ative government  (ständische  Princip)  gained
another  victory,  by  which  it  appeared  to  have
secured  a  fresh  and  lasting  ascendanc3^*

At  the  diet  which  was  opened  at  Augsburg
on  the  lOih  of  April,  1500,  it  w^as  agreed  that
the  means  Vv^hich  had  been  hitherto  adopted
for  the  establishment  of  a  military  organisa-
tion and  a  more  regular  government  were  in-
sufficient. The  prospect  of  collecting  the  Com-
mon Penny  was  too  remote ;  events  succeeded
each  other  too  rapidly  to  allow  of  the  possi-
bility of  the  States  constantly  assembling  first
for  the  purpose  of  guiding  or  controlling  them.
Adhering  to  the  idea  which  had  got  possession
of  their  minds,  they  now  resolved  to  try  other
means  to  the  same  end.  They  proposed  to
collect  the  forces  they  v/anted  by  a  sort  of
levy.  Every  four  hundred  inhabitants,  assem-
bling according  to  their  parishes,  were  to  fur-
nish and  equip  one  foot  soldier,  —  a  method
which  had  been  tried  some  time  before  in
France  :  the  cavalry  proportioned  to  this  in-
fantry was  to  be  raised  by  the  princes,  counts,
and  lords,  according  to  a  certain  scale.  A  tax
was  to  be  laid  on  those  who  could  not  take  an
active  share  in  the  war,  —  clergy,  Jews,  and
servants,  and  the  amount  was  to  form  a  fund
for  the  war ;  propositions  which,  as  it  will  be
seen,  are  immediately  connected  with  the  for-
mer ones,  and  w^hich  assume  an  equally  com-
plete and  comprehensive  unity  of  the  empire.

*  Ständsche  Princip  is  not  literally  "representative
principle,"  or  ratlier,  it  is  that  and  something  more.
Ständisch,  the  adjective  of  Stand,  (status,  class,  order,)
as  applied  to  government,  signifies  representation  of  the
several  states  or  orders  of  the  nation.  The  English  and
the  Swedish  constitutions  are  ständisch;  the  American,
though  representative,  is  not  ständisch  at  all,  since  there
are  no  Stände  to  represent.  I  may  here  point  out  another
difficulty  arising  out  of  the  double  and  often  equivocal
use  of  the  w^ord  state,  which  represents  both  Staat  and
Stand  — two  words  of  totally  different  meaning.  Staat,
the  state,  is  the  whole  civil  and  political  body  of  the  na-
tion ;  Stand  (status)  is  a  class  or  order  of  the  nation.
The  United  States  of  Americß  are  Staaten;  the  States  of
the  Empire  were  Stände.— Tb.a.nsl.

Maximilian  embraced  them  with  joy ;  he  made
his  calculations,  and  gave  the  Spanish  ambas-
sador to  understand  that  he  would  shortly  have
30,000  men  in  the  field.  On  the  other  hand,
he  adopted  a  plan  which  he  had  rejected  five
years  before,  and  which  must  have  been  odi-
ous to  a  man  of  his  character ;  he  now  acknow-
ledged the  necessity  of  having  a  permanent
imperial  council,  which  might  relieve  him  and
the  States  from  incessant  recurrence  to  the
diets,  and  to  whose  vigilance  and  energy  the-
execution  of  the  ordinances  when  issued  might
be  entrusted. f  A  committee  was  formed  for
a  fresh  discussion  of  this  institution,  and  its
suggestions  were  then  submitted  to  the  general ,
assembly  of  the  States.  Every  member  had
the  right  of  proposing  amendments  in  writing.
The  business  was  treated  with  all  the  gravity
it  deserved.  There  were  two  points  to  be  con-
sidered ;  the  composition,  and  the  rights  and
functions,  of  the  proposed  council.  In  the  first
place,  a  position  suited  to  their  high  rank,  and
to  the  influence  they  had  hitherto  possessed  in
the  country,  was  assigned  to  the  electors.
Each  of  them  was  to  send  a  delegate  to  the
council ;  one  of  them,  according  to  regular  ro-
tation, to  be  always  present.  The  much  more
numerous  college  of  princes  was  less  favoura-
bly treated.  The  intention  had  at  first  been  to
let  the  spiritual  side  be  represented  according
to  the  archbishoprics  ;  the  temporal,  according
to  the  so-called  countries,  Sv/abia,  Franconia,
Bavaria,  and  the  Netherlands;^  but  these  divi-
sions neither  corresponded  with  the  idea  of  a
compact  and  united  empire,  nor  with  the  exist-
ing state  of  things ;  and  the  assembly  now  pre-
ferred to  include  spiritual  and  temporal  princes
together  within  certain  circles  or  districts.  Six
of  these  Avere  marked  out,  and  were  at  first
called  provinces  of  the  German  nation,  Franco-
nia, Bavaria,  Sw^abia,  Upper  Rhine,  Westpha-
lia, and  Lower  Saxony ;  they  were,  however,  not
as  yet  called  by  these  names,  but  were  dis-
tinguished according  to  the  several  states  which
inhabited  them.§  The  interests  whose  dissev-
erance would,  in  any  case,  have  been  absurd
and  purposeless  were  thus  more  closely  united.
Counts  and  prelates  and  cities  were  all  inclu-
ded within  these  circles.  It  was  also  deter-
mined that  one  temporal  prince,  one  count  and
one  prelate  should  always  have  a  seat  in  the
council.  Austria  and  the  Netherlands  were  to
send  two  delegates.  Little  notice  had  at  first
been  taken  of  the  cities;  nor,  indeed,  in  spite
of  the  original  intention,  had  they  at  a  later
period  been  admitted  to  a  place  in  the  imperial
chamber ;  but  they  thought  this  extremely  in-
jurious to  them,  and  the  more  unjust  since  the

t  Protocol  of  the  Imperial  Diet  of  Angsbnrg,  in  the
Frankfurt  Archives,  vol.  xix.,  unfortunately  not  so  cir-
cumstantial as  might  be  wished ;  e.  g.  the  objections
which  the  cities  had  made,  contained  in  three  bills  or  ad-
'vertiseraents,  are  not  inserted,  "  as  every  city  deputy
knew  them."

X  These  are  Salzburg,  Magdeburg,  Bremen,  and  Besan-
con  ;  the  electorates  were  of  course  excluded  ;  the  Nether-
lands on  the  Maass  were  instead  of  Saxony.  Datt,  de
Pace  Publica,  p.  C03.

§  Order  of  the  Regency  (Regiment)  established  at  Augs-
burg, in  the  collections  of  the  Recesses  of  the  Imperial
Diets.

Book  I.

AND  ITS  CONSEQUENCES,  1500.

burthen  of  raising  the  funds  for  the  expenses
of  the  States  must  fall  mainly  upon  them  ;  and
at  length  they  succeeded  in  obtaining  the  right
of  sending  two  members  to  the  imperial  coun-
cil. The  cities  which  were  to  enjoy  this  privi-
lege in  turn  were  immediately  named  :  Cologne
and  .Strasburg  for  the  circle  of  the  Rliine;
Augsburg  and  Ulm  for  the  Swabian;  Nürnberg
and  Frankfurt  for  the  Franconian  ;  Lübeck  and
Gosslar  for  the  Saxon :  the  delegates  were
always  to  be  sent  by  two  of  these  districts.*
A  curious  illustration  of  the  old  and  fundamen-
tal principle  of  the  Germanic  empire,  —  that
every  right  should  be  attached  as  soon  as  cre-
ated, in  a  certain  form,  to  a  certain  place ;  so
that  the  general  right  wears  the  air  of  a  special
privilege.

Thus  the  three  colleges  of  which  the  diet
consisted  were  also  the  component  parts  of  the
imperial  council,  which  may,  indeed,  be  re-
garded as  a  permanent  committee  of  the  States.
The  king  had  no  other  right  there  than  to
preside  in  person,  or  to  send  a  representative
{Statthalter).  The  preponderance  was  doubt-
less on  the  side  of  the  States,  and  especially
in  the  hands  of  the  electors,  who  were  now  so
firmly  united  and  so  strongly  represented.

This  council,  the  character  of  w^hich  was  so
decidedly  that  of  class  representation  {stän-
diach),  was  immediately  invested  with  the
most  important  powers.  Every  thing  that  re-
garded the  administration  of  justice  and  the
iriaintenance  of  public  tranquillity;  every  thing
relating  to  the  measures  of  defence  to  be  taken
against  the  infidels  arid  other  enemies ;  foreign
as  well  as  internal  affairs,  lay  within  its  do-
main ;  it  had  power  "  to  originate,  to  discuss,
to  determine."  It  is  evident  that  the  essential
business  of  the  government  was  transferred  to
it,  and  indeed  it  assumed  the  title  of  the
government  or  regency  of  the  empirej"  (Reichs-
regiment).t

It  seemed  now  as  if  not  onl}^  the  judicial  but
the  legislative  and  administrative  parts  of  the
government  must  assume  a  thoroughl}'  repre-
sentative ständisch  character.

If  Maximilian  suffered  himself  to  be  per-

*  ChiefiV  from  the  letter  of  Johann  Revsse  to  the  City
of  Frauki'.irt,  Aug.  17,  1500.  "So  die  Fürsten  kair.en
von  Stetteu  zu  Rttichsraidt  verordnet  hatten,  so  haben
die  Stette  bedacht,"  &:c.  "  As  the  princes  ha.i  anpoinred
none  of  the  cities  to  the  council  of  the  empire,  tlie  cities
had  therefore  bethoujiht  themselves,"  &c.  He  further  re-
marks, that  the  princes  immediately  caused  three  candi-
dates to  be  proposed  to  them  from  each  city,  out  of  whom
they  chose  one.

T  That  this  was  regarded  as  a  sort  of  abdication  is
shovi^n  by  tlie  expression  of  the  Venetian  anibassador.
Relatione  di  S.  Zaccaria  Contarini,  venuto  orator  del  re
di  Romani  1002 ;  in  Sanuto's  Cinonicle,  Vienna  Archives,
vol.  iv.  "  Fo  terminato  et  fo  opinion  del  re  rinnntiar  il
suo  poterin  lG,1iominati  il  senato  imperial,  qualifossero
quelli  avesse  (i  quali  avessero)  a  chianiar  Ic  diete  e  tuor
le  impresse."

J  The  translation  commonly  in  use  for  Reichsregiment
(council  of  regency)  does  not  convey  any  definite  or  cor-
rect idea  to  the  mind  of  the  reader,  nor  does  any  better
suggest  itself  Das  Regiment,  is  as  nearly  as  possible,
the  government,  according  to  the  common  and  inaccurate
use  of  the  v\'ord,  hut  that  is  far  too  vague  and  general.
What  its  powers  and  functions  were  we  see  in  the  text.
Eichhorn  (vol.  iii.  p.  127,)  says:  "This  institution  was
agreeable  neither  to  the  emperor  nor  to  the  States.  For
the  former  it  was  too  independent,  and  for  the  latter  too
active :  and  hence  it  remained  only  two  vears  assembled."
— Transl.

suaded  to  make  such  large  concessions  in
Augsburg,  it  was,  doubtless,  only  because  the
preparations  for  war  depended  on  them  ;  be-
cause he  hoped  by  this  means  to  obtain  from
the  States  a  durable,  voluntary,  cordial  and
effective  support  in  his  foreign  enterprises.
On  the  14th  of  August,  after  every  thing  was
concluded,  he  urged  the  States  to  take  example
from  him,  and  to  do  something  for  the  empire,
as  he  had  done.  He  worked  himself  up,  as  it
were  intentionally,  to  the  expectation  that  this
would  take  place ;  he  v/ished  to  believe  it ;
but  his  hopes  alternated  with  secret  fears  that,
after  all,  it  would  not  take  place,  and  that  he
should  have  surrendered  his  rights  in  vain.
He  betrayed  the  greatest  agitation  of  mind  ;  a
feeling  of  impending  danger  and  of  present
wrong,  as  he  himself  expressed  it.  Whilst  he
reminded  the  assembly  of  the  oaths  and  vows
by  which  each  of  them  was  bound  to  the  holy
empire,  he  added  that  unless  more  and  better
Vv'as  done  than  before,  he  would  not  wait  till
the  crown  Vv^as  torn  from  his  head,  he  would
rather  himself  cast  it  down  at  his  feet.§

Very  little  time  elapsed  before  he  got  into
various  disputes  with  the  vStates.  He  was
obliged  to  consent  to  publish  an  edict  against
the  disobedient,  the  penalties  attached  to  which
vrere  of  a  less  severe  nature  than  he  deem.ed
necessary.

A  Captain-general  of  the  empire,  Duke  Al-
bert of  Bavaria,  was  appointed,  v/ith  v.hom
Maximilian  speedily  felt  that  he  could  never
agree.

The  armament  of  the  succours  agreed  upon
did  not  proceed,  in  spite  of  the  new  council  of
the  em.pire,  which  assembled  in  the  year  1500.
In  April,  1501,  the  lists  of  the  population  of
the  several  parishes,  which  were  the  necessary
basis  of  the  whole  levy,  were  not  yet  sent  in.

Lastly,  the  imperial  council  assumed  an
attitude  utterly  disagreeable  to  the  king.  Ne-
gotiations were  set  on  foot,  and  a  truce  con-
cluded, with  Louis  XII.  of  France,  whom
Maximilian  had  thought  to  crush  with  the
weight  of  the  empire.  The  council  was  not
averse  to  grant  the  king  of  France  Milan  as  a
fief  of  the  empire,  at  his  request.jl

At  this  the  whole  storm  of  anger  and  disgust
v,-hi(;h  Maximilian  had  so  long  with  difficulty
restrained  burst  forth.  He  saw  himself  thralled
and  fettered  as  to  internal  affairs,  and  as  to
external,  not  supported.  His  provincial  Estates
in  Tyrol  remarked  to  him  how  insignificant  he
was  become  in  the  empire.

He  appeared  for  a  moment  at  the  Council
of  Regency  in  Nürnberg,  but  only  to  complain
of  the  indignities  offered  him,**  and  of  the  in-

§  Letter  from  Reysse,  Aug.  17.

il  Müller  Reichstagsstaat,  p.  63.

**  In  this  Maximilian  was  not  entirely  wrong.  It  is
not  to  be  believed  to  what  lengths  the  French  Ambassa-
dor went.  He  said  without  reserve,  that  tlie  reason  why
Maximilian  took  the  part  of  Naples  so  warmly  was,  that
he  had  been  paid  30,000  ducats,  though  the  negotiator  of
the  aftair  had  pocketed  one  half  of  the  sum,  and  the  re-
mainder only  had  come  into  the  hands  of  the  emperor.
He  said  the  king  of  France  had  no  thought  of  injuring
the  empire.  But  if  they  made  war  on  him,  then  the  king
would  find  his  way  into  the  enemies'  quarters  as  readily
as  they  into  his. —  And  yet  to  this  ambassador  the
I  cotincil  of  the  empire  gave  a  testimonial,  to  the  effect

ei

DIET  OF  AUGSBUEG,

Book:  I.

creasing  disorders  of  the  empire.  He  remained
but  a  few  days.

It  had  been  determined  that  the  Council  of
Regency  should  be  empowered  to  summon  an
assembly  of  the  States  in  cases  of  urgency.
The  state  of  things  now  appeared  to  that  body
highly  urgent,  and  it  did  not  delay  to  use  the
right  conferred  upon  it.  The  king  did  every
thing  he  could  to  thwart  it.

Another  ordinance  bound  the  king  not  to
grant  the  great  fiefs  without  consulting  the
electors.  As  if  to  punish  the  States  for  their
negotiations  with  Louis  XII.,  he  now  granted,
of  his  own  sole  authority,  the  fief  of  Milan  to
this  his  old  enemy .=^

But  if  the  king  had  not  power  enough  to
enforce  order  in  the  empire,  he  had  enough  to
trouble  that  which  was  as  yet  but  imperfectly
established.  In  the  beginning  of  the  year
1502,  every  thing  that  had  been  begun  in
Augsburg  had  fallen  into  a  state  of  utter  dis-
solution. The  Council  of  Regency  and  the
assessors  of  the  imperial  chamber,  who  neither
received  their  salaries  nor  were  allowed  to  ex-
ercise their  functions,  dispersed  and  w^ent
home.  To  the  king,  this  was  rather  agreeable
than  othervk'ise.  He  erected  a  court  of  justice
exactly  similar  to  that  of  his  father,  with  as-
sessors ajbitrarily  appointed,  over  which  he
presided  himself.  It  is  evident  from  one  of
his  proclamations  that  he  meditated  establish-
ing in  like  manner  a  government  (Regilnent)
nominated  solely  by  himself,  and,  by  its  means,
carrying  into  execution  the  plan  of  a  military
organisation  determined  on  in  Augsburg.

This  conduct  necessarily  excited  a  universal
ferment.  A  Venetian  ambassador,  Zaccharia
Contarini,  who  was  in  Germany  in  the  year
1502,  was  astonished  at  the  great  unpopularity
•  of  the  king,  —  how  ill  people  spoke  of  him,
how  little  they  respected  or  cared  for  him.
Maximilian  himself  said,  "  He  would  he  were
Duke  of  Austria,  then  people  v/ould  think
something  of  him ;  as  King  of  the  Romans  he
received  nothing  but  indignities. "f

Once  more  did  the  electors  resolve  jointly
and  resolutely  to  oppose  his  Vküll.  On  the
30th  of  June,  1502,  at  a  solemn  congress  at
Gelnhausen,  they  bound  themselves  to  hold
together  in  all  important  arlairs  ;  to  act  as  one
man  at  the  imperial  diets;  and  always  to  de-
fend the  wishes  of  the  majority;  to  allov/  of
no  oppressive  mandates,  no  innovations,  no
diminution  of  the  empire  ;  and,  lastly,  to  meet
four  times  every  year,  for  the  purpose  of  delib-
erating on  the  public  affairs  and  interests.  It
does  not  distinctly  appear  whether  they  really,
as  was  reported,  came  to  the  resolution  to  de-
throne the  king ;  but  what  they  did  was  in  fact

that  if  lie  had  not  accomplisbed  the  king's  object,  the
fauU  laj'  not  in  him  but  ia  circumstances.  Recreditive,
May  25,  1501 ;  Müller,  p.  110.

*  Contarini  alleges  the  foUowinqf  very  pecnliav  motive  :
— "Lo  episcopo  di  Magonza  voleva  per  il  sigillo.SOm  due.
onde  parse  al  re  di  Koniani  d'acordarsi  et  aver  lui  questi
danari."

■j-  Relatione,  1.  c.  of  1502.  "  II  re  e  assa  odiato,  a  poca
obedientia  in  li  tre  stadi :  questi  ser-atori  eiecti  e  venuti
Tiimici  del  re ;  adeo  il  re  dice  mal  di  loro  e  loro  del  re.  II
re  a  ditto  piu  volte  vorria  esser  duca  d'Austria,  perche
saria  stimato  duca,  che  Imperator  e  vituperato."

the  same  thing.  Without  consul  ting  him,  they
announced  a  meeting  of  the  empire  on  the  I'st
of  the  November  following;  every  member
communicated  to  the  one  seated  next  him  the
topics  on  which  they  were  to  deliberate.  They
were  the  same  which  had  formed  the  subject
of  all  former  deliberations  of  the  Germanic
body  :  the  Turkish  war,  the  relations  with  the
pope,  the  public  expenditure,  but,  above  all,
the  establishment  of  law,  tranquillity  and  or-
der ;  with  a  view  to  the  maintenance  of  which,
some  new  ordinances  were  presently  inserted,
to  come  into  force  after  the  Imperial  Chamber
and  Council  of  Regency  should  cease  to  exist.:^

The  Elector  Palatine,  who  had  rather  op-
posed the  former  m.easures  of  the  diet,  now
that  it  had  come  to  a  breach  with  the  king,
distinguished  himself  by  his  active  and  zealous
co-operation.

Maximilian  was  in  the  greatest  perplexity.
While  ho  complained  that  attacks  were  made
on  the  sovereignty  which  was  his  of  right  as
crowned  king  of  the  Romans, — while  he  sought
to  take  credit  for  having  of  his  own  accord
established  the  Council  of  Regency  and  the
Chamber,§  he  did  not  feel  himself  strong
enough  to  forbid  the  proposed  assembly  of  the
empire ;  he  therefore  took  the  course  of  pro-
claiming it  himself;  announcing  that  he  v/ould
be  present  at  it,  and  would  take  counsel  witli
the  princes  and  electors  on  an  expedition  against
the  Turks ;  the  necessity  for  which  daily  be-
came more  urgent.  ,  This  was,  in  truth,  not
very  unlike  the  conduct  of  King  Rupert,  or  the
manner  in  which,  at  a  later  period,  the  kings
of  France  put  themselves  at  the  head  of  fac-
tions which  they  could  not  subdue.

But  the  electoral  princes  of  German}^  would
not  even  make  this  concession.  Some  had
already  arrived  at  Gelnhausen  for  the  proposed
diet;  among  them  a  papal  legate;  and  many
others  had  bespoken  dwellings,  when  a  proc-
lamation of  the  Elector  Palatine  of  the  18th
October  was  circulated,  putting  off  the  dict.|j

To  compensate  for  tiiis  they  held  an  extra-
ordinary meeting  in  Würzburg,  at  which  they
renewed  their  opposition,  and  announced  a
general  assembly  of  the  empire  for  the  next
Whitsuntide.

Maximilian,  who  was  about  to  set  out  on  a
journey  to  the  Netherlands,  issued  a  procla-
mation, in  which  he  invited  the  States  to  re-
pair to  his  court,  and  to  consiilt  with  him  con-
cerning the  Turkish  war  and  Council  of  Re-
gency.**

X  I  found  thein  in  the  Archives  of  Berlin  asid  Dresden  ;
to  the  Duke  of  Saxony  they  had  sent  the  united  electors
of  Brandenburg  and  Saxony.  Müller  has  but  a  very  un-
satisfactory notice  of  the  subject.

§  Letter  "from  SchwUbischvverd,  Nov.  2.  Frankf.  R.  A.,
torn.  XX.

II  Hinsburjr,  near  Frankfurt,  Oct.  20.  (Thursday  after
Galli.)  Gelnhausen  sent  to  Frankfurt  the  letter  of  the
elector  Berthokl,  which  arrived  on  the  19tli,  wherein  the
latter  also  declared  "  the  diet  appointed  at  Gelnhausen
was  delayed  from  special  causes,  and  removed  to  another
place."

**  Antorf,  April  7.  Fr.  A.  "  Des  Reichsreisiments  wegen
der  Personen  so  daran  geordnet  seyen  wir  dann  nit  so
paid  erlangen  haben  mügen  und  dadurch  wiederum  in
Anstand  kommen  ist."— "As  to  the  Council  of  Regency,
on  account  of  the  persons  fitted  for  it,  we  have  not  been
able  to  create  it  so  quickly,  and  accordingly  it  is  again
delayed,"

Book  I,

AND  ITS  CONSEQUENCES,  1602.

65

Of  the  meeting  summoned  by  the  king  there
exists  not  a  trace ;  that  appointed  by  tlie  elec-
tors, however,  certainly  took  place  in  June
1503,  at  Mainz,  though  we  are  unable  to  dis-
cover whether  it  was  numerously  attended.
Maximilian's  measures  were  here  opposed,  on
the  ground  that  they  were  injurious  to  the  em-
pire. As  there  was  nothing  to  be  feared  from
his  Council  of  Regency  (since  he  was  obliged
to  confess  that  he  had  iDeen  unable  to  find  fit-
tings members),  the  meeting  contented  itself
with  attacking  his  tribunal.  They  declared  to
him  that  no  prince  of  the  empire  would  con-
sent to  submit  to  its  decisions.  They  remind-
ed him  of  the  ordinances  passed  at  Worms  and
Augsburg,  and  urged  him  to  adhere  to  them.

Such  was  the  result  of  the  attempts  made
in  the  year  1503  to  constitute  the  Germanic
body.

The  authority  of  the  empire  v/as  restored
neither  in  Italy,  nor  in  the  Swiss  Confedera-
tion, nor  on  the  eastern  frontier,  where  the  Teu-
tonic knights  were  incessantly  pressed  upon
by  the  Poles  and  Russians.  At  home,  the  old
disorders  had  broken  out  anew.  Not  only  had
the  attempt  to  establish  a  firm  and  durable  con-
stitution for  war  and  peace  utterly  failed,  but
there  was  no  longer  any  tribunal  of  universally
recognised  authority.

The  highest  powers  in  the  nation,  the  king
and  his  electors,  had  fallen  into  irreconcilable
discord.  In  Elector  Berthold,  especially,  Max-
imilian beheld  a  dangerous  and  determined  foe.
It  had  already  been  reported  to  him  from  Augs-
burg that  Mainz  had  spoken  contemptuously
of  him  to  the  other  princes ;  and  obsequious
people  had  given  him  a  list  of  not  less  than
twenty-two  charges  which  the  Elector  brought
against  him.  Maximilian  had  stifled  his  an-
ger, and  had  said  nothing ;  but  the  impression
now  made  upon  him  by  every  opposition  he
encountered,  by  every  consequence  of  the  Augs-
burg constitution  that  he  had  not  anticipated,
was  the  more  profound ;  he  ascribed  every-
thing to  the  crafty  schemes  of  the  sagacious
old  man.  A  hostile  and  bitter  correspondence
took  place  between  the  king  and  the  arch-chan-
cellor.* Maximilian  retorted  upon  his  adver-
sary a  list  of  charges,  twenty-three  in  num-
ber;—  one  more  than  those  brought  against
himself  by  Mainz,  which  he  still  kept  conceal-
ed, but  with  whose  contents  he  only  fed  his
resentment  the  more  constantly  in  secret. j"

A  state  of  things  most  perilous  to  himself.

The  other  Electors  adhered  fi.rmly  to  Ber-
thold,  who,  in  the  midst  of  all  these  troubles,
had  formed  a  fresh  and  strict  alliance  with  the
Palatinate.  The  cities  clung  to  him  as  closely
as  ever.  There  was  a  general  feeling  through
the  nation  that  th&  fate  of  Wenceslas  v/as  im-
pending over  Maximilian; — that  he  would  be
deposed.  It  is  said  that  the  Elector  Palatine
had  formally  proposed  this  measure  in  the  elec-

*  Guuenus  IV.,  547,  551.

t  "Konijl  Maj  Anzeigen,  item  die  Ursach  danimb  des
Reiclie  Regiment  und  Wolfart  zu  Augsburg  aufgericiit
stocken  beliben  ist."  —  "  Declarations  of  his  Royal  Ma-
jesty, also  the  cause  why  the  government  and  welfare  of
the  empire  established  at  Augsburg  have  stood  stock-still."
—Frankf.  j1.  j1.

toral  council ;  that  shortly  after,  the  king  ar-
rived one  day  unexpectedly  at  a  castle  belong-
ing to  that  prince  where  his  wife  was  residing,
and  that  during  their  morning's  repast,  he  gave
her  to  understand  that  he  was  perfectly  ac-
quainted with  her  husband's  designs.  Such,
however,  was  the  grace  and  charm  of  his  man-
ner and  the  imposing  dignity  of  his  person  and
bearing,  that  the  project  was  abandoned. :|:
However  this  may  be,  his  affairs  were  in  as
bad  a  situation  as  possible.  The  European
opposition  to  Austria  once  more  obtained  that
influence  on  the  interior  of  Germany,  formerly
acquired  through  Bavaria,  and  now  through
the  Palatinate,  which  maintained  a  close  con-
nexion with  France  and  Bohemia.

Yet  Maximilian  had  still  powers  and  re-
sources in  store ;  and  it  was  the  Palatinate
which  soon  afforded  him  an  opportunity  to  rally
and  to  apply  them.

IMPROVED  FORTUNES  OF  MAXIMILIAN. DIET  OF
COLOGNE  AND  CONSTANCE  ;  1505  AND  1507.

In  the  first  place  Maximilian  had  connected
himself  with  one  of  the  most  powerful  houses
of  Europe.  The  marriage  of  his  son  Philip
with  the  Infanta  Johanna  of  Spain  not  only
directly  opened  very  brilliant  prospects  to  his
famaly,  but  indirectly  afforded  it  a  defence
against  the  aggressions  of  France,  in  the
claims,  the  policy,  and  the  arms  of  Spain.
After  a  momentary  good  understanding  in  Na-
ples, a  war  had  just  broken  out  between  these
two  powers,  the  results  of  which  inclined  in
favour  of  Spain ;  so  that  the  consideration  of
France  began  to  decline  in  Germany,  and  the
public  confidence  in  the  fortunes  of  Austria,  to
revive.

Moreover,  Maximilian  had  (which  was  much
more  important)  a  party  at  home  among  the
States.  If  the  electors  and  the  cities  in  alli-
ance with  Mainz  were  hostile  to  him,  he  had
won  over  devoted  friends  and  adherents  among
the  princes,  both  spiritual  and  temporal.

For  the  name  and  state  of  King  of  the  Ro-
mans v/as  not  an  empty  sound.  In  the  general
affairs  of  the  realm  his  power  might  be  con-
trolled; but  the. functions  and  the  sacred  dig-
nity of  sovereign  head  of  the  empire,  still  gave
him  considerable  influence  over  individual
families,  districts  and  towns.  He  was  exactly
the  man  to  turn  this  influence  to  advantage.

By  means  of  unremitting  attention  and  timely
interference  he  gradually  succeeded  in  getting
a  certain  number  of  bishoprics  filled  according
to  his  wishes.  We  find  among  them  the  names
of  Salzburg,  Freisingen,  Trent,  Eichstädt,
Augsburg,  Strasburg,  Constance,  Bamberg:
all  these  sees  were  now,  as  far  as  their  chap-
ters would  permit,  partisans  of  Maximilian,
and  favourers  of  his  projects. §  In  these  eccle-
siastical affairs  his  connexion  with  the  pope
was  especially  useful  to  him. For  example.

J  Anecdote  in  Fugger,  the  truth  of  which,  hov/ever,  I
will  not  warrant.

§  Pasqualigo,  Relatione  di  Germania  (MS.  in  the  Court
Library  at  Vienna),  to  whom  I  am  indebted  for  this  re-
mark, says  of  the  bishops:  "  Li  quali  tutti  dependono  dal
re  come  sue  fatture,  e  seguono  le  voglie  sue."

66

IMPROVED  FORTUNES  OF  MAXIMILIAN.

Book  I,

when  a  prebend  of  the  cathedral  of  Augsburg
became  vacant  in  1500,  it  was  the  papal  legate
who  conferred  it  on  the  king's  chancellor,  Ma-
thew  Lang  (the  vacanc}'  having  occurred  in  a
papal  month).  The  chapter  raised  a  thousand
objections ;  it  would  admit  no  man  of  the
burgher  class,  and,  least  of  all,  a  son  of  a
burgher  of  Augsburg^:  but  Maximilian  said,
one  who  was  good  enough  to  be  his  councillor
and  chancellor  was  good  enough  to  be  an  Augs-
burg canon.  At  a  solemn  mass  Matthew  Lang
was  unexpectedly  placed  among  the  princes,
and  afterwards  seated  within  the  altar.  At
4ength  the  canons  were  satisfied,  upon  Lang's
promising  them  that  if  he  delegated  to  another
the  business  of  the  provostship,  he  would  ap-
point no  one  whom  the  chapter  did  not  approve.
Still  more  direct  was  the  influence  M'hich
Maximilian  gained  over  the  secular  princes.
In  most  cases  he  attached  them  to  his  cause,
partly  by  military  service,  partly  by  the  favours
which  he  had  to  dispense  as  head  of  the  em-
pire. Thus  the  sons  of  Duke  Albert  of  Saxony
were  indissolubly  bound  to  the  Netherland
policy  of  Austria  by  the  possession  of  Fries-
land,  which  Maximilian  granted  to  their  father
as  a  reward  of  his  services.  Albert's  son-in-
law,  too,  Erich  of  Calenberg,  connected  through
him  with  the  house  of  Austria,  gained  fame  in
the  Austrian  wars :  the  whole  house  of  Welf
was  attached  to  Austria.  Henry  der  Mittlere*
of  Lüneburg,  as  well  as  his  cousins,  won  new
privileges  and  reversions  of  estates  in  the  ser-
vice of  the  king.  In  the  same  position  stood
Henry  IV.  of  Mecklenburg.f  Bogislaw  X.  of
Pomerania  did  not  indeed  accept  the  service
offered  him  at  his  return  from  the  East ;  never-
theless Maximilian  thought  it  expedient  to  con-
ciliate him  by  the  grant  of  the  tolls  of  Wolgast
and  other  favours. ij:  The  granting  of  tolls  was,
indeed,  with  Maximilian,  as  with  his  father,
one  means  of  carrying  on  the  government:
.Tuliers,  Treves,  Hessen,  Würtenburg,  Lüne-
burg, Mecklenburg,  the  Palatinate  even,  and
many  others,  acquired  at  different  times  new
rights  of  toll.  Other  houses  transferred  to
Austria  their  ancient  alliances  with  Burgundy.
Count  John  XIV.  'of  Oldenburg  alleged  that  a
secret  treaty  had  existed  between  his  ancestors
and  Charles  the  Bold,  in  consideration  of  which
the  king  promised  to  support  him  in  his  claims
on  Delmenhorst.§  Count  Engilbert  of  Nassau
fought  by  the  side  of  Charles  at  Nancy,  and  of
Maximilian  at  Guinegat,  for  which  he  was
made  Stadtholder-General  of  the  Netherlands
in  1501.  From  this  moment  we  may  date  the
firm  establishment  of  the  power  of  that  house
(w^hich  shortly  after  gained  possession  of
Orange)  in  the  Low  Countries.  |1  Hessen  and
Wurtenberg  were  won  over  by  Maximilian
himself.  He  at  length  determined  to  grant  the
Landgrave  of  Hessen  the  investiture  which  he
had  always  refused  his  father. At  the  diet  of

*  Der  Mittlere— the  mid-brother  of  three.— Transl.
t  Liitzow,  Geschichte  von  Meklenburg,  ii.  p.  458.
X  Kaiizov^,  Pomerania,  ii.  p.  260. Barthold  im  Berlin
Kai.  1838,  p,  41.
§  Hamelmann,  Oldenb.  Chronik,  p.  309.
11  Arnoldi,  Gesch.  v.  Oranien,  ii.  202.

1495  he  presented  himself  in  front  of  the  throne
with  the  great  red  banner,  upon  which, "round
the  arms  of  Hessen,  were  displayed  not  only
the  bearings  of  Wal  deck,  but  of  Kaizenelnbo-
gen,  Diez,  Ziegenhain,  and  Nidda :  the  banner
was  so  splendid  that  it  was  not  torn  up,  as  was
usual  on  such  occasions,  but  was  borne  in
solemn  procession  and  consecrated  to  the
Virgin  Mary,**  Such  was  the  investiture  of
the  house  of  Hessen  ;  and  we  find  that  William
der  Mittlere  took  an  ardent  share  in  Maximi-
lian's campaigns.

Still  more  intimate  was  the  connexion-  of
Wurtenberg  with  Austria.  Maximilian  put
the  seal  to  the  acquisitions  of  centuries  made
by  the  counts  of  that  house  by  consolidating
them  into  a  duchy ;  from  that  time  he  took  a
warmer  interest  in  the  affairs  of  that  state  than
in  any  other:  in  the  year  1503,  in  defiance  of
the  lav/,  he  declared  the  young  Duke  Ulrich  of
age  when  only  in  his  sixteenth  year,  and  thus
secured  his  entire  devotion.  The  Markgraves
of  Brandenburg  were  still  true  to  the  ancient
allegiance  of  their  founder.  Later  historians
complain  bitterly  of  the  costly  journeys  and  the
frequent  campaigns  of  Markgrave  Frederic,
whose  succours  always  far  exceeded  his  con-
tingent. We  find  his  sons  also,  from  the  year
1500,  commanding  small  bodies  of  men  in  the
Austrian  service.

■■  These  princes  were,  for  the  most  part,  young
men  who  delighted  in  war  and  feats  of  arms,
and  at  the  same  time  sought  profit  and  advance-
ment in  the  king's  service.  The  gay  and  high-
spirited  Maximilian,  eternally  in  motion  and
busied  v/ith  ever-new  enterprises,  good-natured,
bountiful,  most  popular  in  his  manners  and  ad-
dress, a  master  of  arms  and  all  knightly  exer-
cises, a  good  soldier,  matchless  in  talents  and
inventive  genius,  was  formed  to  captivate  the
hearts  and  to  secure  the  ardent  devotion  of  his
youthful  followers.

How  great  was  the  advantage  this  gave  him^
was  seen  in  the  year  1504,  when  the  Landshut
troubles  broke  out  in  Bavaria.  Duke  George
the  Eich  of  Landshut,  who  died  on  the  first  of
December,  1503,  in  defiance  of  ^the  feudal  laws
of  the  empire  and  the  domestic  treaties  of  the
house  of  Bavaria,  made  a  v/ill,  in  virtue  of
which  both  his  extensive  and  fertile  domains,
and  the  long-hoarded  treasures  of  his  house,
would  fall,  not  to  his  next  agnates,  Albert  and
Wolfgang  of  Bavaria-Munich,  but  to  his  more
distant  cousin,  nephew,  and  son-in-law,  Rupert
of  the  Palatinate,  second  son  of  the  elector,  to
whom,  even  during  his  lifetime,  he  had  ceded
his  most  important  castles.

Flad  the  Council  of  Regency  continued  to
exist,  it  would  have  been  empowered  to  prevent
the  quarrel  between  the  Palatinate  and  Bavaria
which  this  incident  rekindled  with  great  vio-
lence; or  had  the  Imperial  Chamber  still  been.
constituted  according  to  the  decrees  of  Worms
and  Augsburg,  members  of  the  States  of  the
empire  would  have  had  a  voice  in  the  decision
of  the  question  of  law :  but  the  Regency  had

**  The  ballad  on  this  subject,  which  Müller,  Rtth.  unter
Max.  I.  538,  has  inserted,  is  of  later  date ;  the  thing  itself
is  correct.

Book  I.

BAVARIAN  DISPUTES,  1504.

67

fallen  to  nothing,  and  the  court  of  justice  was
constituted  by  the  king  alone,  according-  to  his
own  views  ;  he  himself  was  once  more  regarded
as  "the  living  spring  of  the  law,"*  and  every
thing  was  referred  to  his  decision.

His  conduct  in  this  case  is  extremely  charac-
teristic. He  insisted  upon  the  preservation  of
peace :  he  then  appeared  in  person,  and  pre-
sided at  long  sittings  of  the  diet,  in  order  to
preserve  a  good  temper  and  understanding :  he
did  not  shrink  from  the  labour  of  hearing  both
parties,  even  to  the  fifth  statement  of  each  ;
and,  lastly,  he  summoned  the  judge  and  asses-
sors of  his  chamber  to  assist  him  in  forming  a
just  and  lawful  decision. t  But  in  all  these
laudable  efforts  he  had  chiefly  his  own  interest
(he  calls  it  him.self  by  that  name)  in  view.

He  now  called  to  mind  all  the  losses  he  had
sustained  on  account  of  Bavaria  ; — for  example,
how  the  expedition  to  the  Lechfeld  had  caused
him  to  neglect  the  defence  of  his  rights  in
Brittany  and  Hungar}''.  He  found,  on  the  one
side,  that  Duke  George  had  incurred  heavy  pe-
nalties by  his  illegal  will ;  on  the  other  that
Albert's  claims,  founded  on  family  contracts,
were  not  incontestably  valid,  since*  those  con-
tracts had  never  been  confirmed  by  the  emperor
or  the  empire.  Hereupon  he  himself  set  up  a
claim  to  one  part  of  the  land  in  dispute,  and  a
not  inconsiderable  one.

Duke  Albert,  the  king's  brother-in-law,  was
quickly  persuaded  to  acquiesce,  and  at  length
published  a  formal  renunciation  of  the  disputed
districts.  This  was  not  surprising ;  he  was
not  yet  in  actual  possession  of  them,  and  he
hoped  by  this  compliance  to  establish  a  claim
to  still  larger  acquisitions.  On  the  other  hand,
the  Count  Palatine  Rupert  was  utterly  inflexi-
hle.  Whether  it  were  that  he  reckoned  on  his
father's  foreign  alliances,  or  that  the  hostile
spirit  of  the  electoral  college  towards  the  king
gave  him  courage, — he  rejected  all  these  pro-
posals of  partition.  Maximilian  had  an  inter-
view with  him  one  night,  and  told  him  that  his
father  would  bring  ruin  on  himself  and  his
house :  but  it  was  all  in  vain ;  Rupert  imme-
diately afterwards  had  the  audacity  to  take
possession  in  defiance  of  the  king. /

Upon  this  Maximilian  lost  all  forbearance.
The  lands  and  securities  left  by  Duke  George
were  awarded  by  a  sentence  of  the  Chamber  to
the  Duke  of  'Bavaria-IMunich  ;  the  crown  fiscal
demanded  the  proclam.ation  of  the  ban,  and  on
the  same  day  (23d  April,  1501)  the  King  of
the  Romans  uttered  it  in  person  in  the  open
air.t

The  neighbours  of  the  Palatine  attached  to
the  king's  party  only  waited  for  this  proclama-
tion to  break  loose  upon  him  from  all  sides.
The  recollection  of  all  the  injuries  they  had
been  compelled  to  endure  from  '•  that  wicked
Fritz  "  (so  they  called  Frederic  the  Victorious),
and  the  desire  to  avenge  themselves  and  redress
'their  wrongs,  was  aroused  within  them. Duke

*  Expression  of  Lamparter  in  his  address  to  the  States
at  Landshut ;  Freiberg,  ii.  p,  178.  Gesch.  der  baier.  Land-
stände, ii.  p.  38.

t  Harpprecht,  Archiv  des  Karamergerichts,  ii.  p.  178.

X  Frieberg,  passim,  ii.  p.  52.

Alexander  the  Black  of  Veldenz,  Duke  Ulrich,
of  Würtenberg;  Landgrave  William  of  Hessen,
vv'ho  led  the  Mecklenburg  and  Brunswick  aux-
iliaries, fell  with  devastating  bands  upon  the
Rhenish  Palatinate. §  In  the  territory  on  the
Danube,  the  troops  of  Brandenburg,  Saxony,
and  Calenberg  joined  the  magnificent  army
which  Albert  of  Munich  had  collected.  The
Swabian  league,  once  so  dangerous  an  enemy,
was  now  his  most  determined  partisan  ;  Nürn-
berg, which  indeed  wished  to  make  conquests
for  itself,  sent  succours  to  the  field  four  times
as  great  as  had  originally  been  required  of  it.  j]
The  King  of  the  Romans  first  appeared  on  the
Danube.  It  added  not  a  little  to  his  glor}',  that
it  was  he  who  had  gone  in  quest  of  a  body  of
Bohemian  troops  —  the  only  allies  who  had  re-
mained faithful  to  the  Count  Palatine — and
had  completely  defeated  them  behind  his  own
Wagenburg,  near  Regensburg.  He  then
marched  on  the  Rhine ;  the  bailiwick  of  Ha-
genau  fell  into  his  hands  without  resistance.
Here,  as  on  the  Danube,  his  first  care  was  to
take  possession  of  the  places  to  which  he  him-
self had  claims.  The  Palatinate,  in  any  case
little  able  to  withstand  so  superior  and  general
an  assault,  was  now  totally  incapacitated  by
the  death  of  the  young  and  warlike  Count  Pa-
latine, the  author  of  the  whole  disturbance,  who
fell  in  battle.  The  old  elector  was  obliged  to
employ  another  son  (whom  he  had  sent  to  b«
educated  at  the  Court  of  Burgundy)  as  his  me-
diator with  Maximilian.  An  assembly  of  the
empire,  which  had  been  talked  of  in  the  sum-
mer of  1504,  had  at  that  time  been  evaded  by
the  king.  It  was  not  till  the  superiority  of  his
arms  was  fully  established  in  February,  1505,
that  he  concluded  a  general  truce,  and  sum-
moned a  diet  at  Cologne  (which  assembled  in
the  June  of  that  year),  for  the  settlement  of
all  the  important  questions  arising  out  of  this
affair,  and  now  once  more  referred  to  his  de-
cision.**

How  different  was  his  present  from  his  for-
mer meeting  with  the  States !  He  now  ap-
peared among  them  at  the  close  of  a  war  suc-
cessfully terminated,  with  added  renown  of
personal  valour,  currounded  by  a  band  of  devo-
ted adherents,  who  hoped  to  retain  by  his  fa-
vour the  conquests  they  owed  to  their  own
prowess ; respected even by  the conquered,

§  Trithemius,  Zayner,  and  others,  describe  this  devas-
tation minutely.  See  Ranke,  Gesch.  der  ronaanisch-ger-
man. Völker,  p.  231.

j!  In  the  true  historical  account  of  the  cities  usurped  by
Nürnberg,  &c.,  1791,  par.  15,  this  reproach'is  again  brought
against  that  city.

**  One  of  the  strangest  reports  of  these  occurrences  is
to  be  found  in  the  Viaggio  in  Alemagna  di  Francesco
Vettori,  Paris,  1837,  p.  95r,  from  the  mouth  of  a  goldsmith
at  LTeberlinsen.  First,  the  Count  Palatine  is  in  leag'ie
with  the  Swiss  and  the  French;  even  the  Swiss  war  js
brought  about  by  him  :  hereupon  Maximilian  concludes  a
treatV  with  France  at  Hagenau,  in  1502  (it  took  place,  a;-3
we  knov\',  in  ]505),  and  forthwith  attacks  the  Count
Palatine,  who  calls  upon  the  Bohemians  for  help,  but  then
leaves  them  himself  in  the  lurch,  so  that  they  get  beaten.
This  is  another  example  how  rapidly  history  turns  into
ravth  ;  every  detail  is  incorrect,  while  the  whole  is  not
entirely  devoid  of  truth.  Vettori  himself  finds  the  state-
ments of  the  goldsmith  wanting  in  order,  and  not  to  be
depended  on  ;  but  he  readily  admits  them  into  his  book,
which  has  more  the  air  of  the  Decameron  than  of  a  Diary
of  a  Journey.

IMPROVED  FORTUNES  OF  MAXIMILIAN.

Book  I.

who  surrendered  their  destiny  into  his  hands.
Nor  was  this  all.  The  affairs  of  Europe  were
propitious.  Maximilian's  son  Philip  was  be-
come King  of  Castile,  upon  the  death  of  his
mother-in-law.  Many  a  good  German  che-
rished the  hope  that  his  mighty  and  glorious
chief  was  destined  to  chase  the  Turks  from
Europe,  and  to  add  the  crown  of  the  Eastern
empire  to  that  of  the  West.  They  thought
that  the  united  force  of  the  empire  was  so  great,
that  neither  Bohemians,  Swiss,  nor  Turks  could
v/ithstand  it.*

The  first  matter  discussed  at  Cologne  was
the  decision  of  the  Landshut  differences.  The
king  had  the  power  of  dptermining  the  fate  of  a
large  German  territory.  He  recurred  to  the
proposals  which  he  had  made  before  the  begin-
ning of  the  war:  for  the  issue  of  the  Count
Palatine  Rupert,  he  founded  the  new  Palatinate
on  the  other  side  the  Danube,  which  was  to
yield  a  rent  of  24,000  gulden;  the  constituent
parts  of  it  were  calculated  to  produce  that
amount.  Landshut  now,  indeed,  devolved  on
the  Munich  line,  but  not  without  considerable
diminution :  the  dukes  themselves  had  been
compelled  to  pay  by  cessions  of  lands  for  the
succours  they  had  received;  the  king  kept  back
what  he  had  advanced  to  others  before  the  sen-
tence was  pronounced :  not  only  did  he  not
sacrifice,  he  promoted,  his  own  interests.  The.
Palatinate  sustained  still  greater  losses  ;  the
loans,  the  claims  to  ceded  lands,  and  the  king's
claims,  were  more  considerable  in  that  territory
than  in  any  other.  It  availed  little  that  the  old
elector  could  not  bring  himself  to  accept  the
terms  offered  him ;  he  was  only  the  more  en-
tirely excluded  from  the  ro3-al  favour :  some
tim.e  later  his  son  was  obliged  to  conform  to
them.  If  the  possessions  of  the  two  houses
of  Wittelsbach  were  regarded  as  a  w^hole,  it
had  suffered  such  losses  by  this  affair  as  no
house  in  Germany  had  for  ages  sustained  ;  and
it  left  so  deep  and  lasting  a  resentment  as  might
have  proved  dangerous  to  the  empire,  had  not
their  mutual  animosity  been  enkindled  anew  by
the  war,  and  rendered  all  concert  between  them
impossible.

The  position  of  Maximilian  w^as,  hov/ever,
necessarily  changed,  even  as  to  the  general  po-
licy of  the  empire,  by  the  course  things  had
taken.

The  union  of  the  electors  was  broken  up.
The  humiliation  of  the  Palatinate  was  follovved
by  the  death  of  the  Elector  of  Treves  in  the  year
1503,  to  whose  place  Maximilian,  strengthened
by  his  alliance  with  the  court  of  Rome,  suc-
ceeded in  promoting  one  of  his  nearest  kins-
men, the  young  Markgrave  .Tames  of  Baden ;f
and,  on  the  21st  December,  1504,  by  the  death
rf  the  leader  of  the  electoral  opposition,  Ber-
thold  of  Mainz.  How  rarely  does  life  satfsfy
even  the  noblest  ambition !  It  was  the  lot  of
this  excellent  man  to  live  to  see  the  overthrow

*  The  senfiment  of  the  admirable  sons,  "  die  behemsch
Schlacht"  (the  Bohemian  Fight),  1594,  by  Hormayr,  from
some  publication  of  the  day,  and  repeated  by  Soltau,  p.
193.

t  Browerus,  p.  320.  Re  saw  the  Brief  by  which  the
Pope  recommended  the  candidate  of  the  king  of  the  Ro-
mans.

of  the  institutions  which  he  had  laboured  so
earnestly  to  establish,  and  the  absolute" supre-
macy of  the  monarch  on  whom  he  had  sought
to  impose  legal  and  constitutional  restraints.

Maximilian  had  now  a  clear  field  for  his
own  enterprises.  It  seemed  to  him  possible  to
use  the  ascendency  which  he  felt  he  had  ac-
quired, for  the  establishment  of  organic  institu-
tions. Whilst  he  endeavoured  to  ascertain
why  the  measures  taken  at  Augsburg  had  failed
(the  blame  of  w^hich  he  mainly  attributed  to
Berthold  of  Mainz),  he  published  a  plan  for
carrying  them  into  execution,  with  certain  mo-
difications,:|:

His  idea  was,  at  all  events,  to  form  a  govern-
ment {Begimeni)  composed  of  a  viceroy,  chan-
cellor, and  twelve  counsellors  of  the  empire;
and  for  their  assistance,  and  under  their  super-
vision, to  appoint  four  marshals,  each  with
twenty-five  knights,  for  the  administration  of
the  executive  power  in  the  districts  of  the
Upper  and  Lower  Rhine,  the  Danube,  and  the
Elbe.  The  imposition  of  the  Common  Penny
was  again  expressly  mentioned.

But  a  glance  is  sufficient  to  show  the  wide
difference  between  this  scheme  and  the  former.
The  king  insisted  on  having  the  right  of  sum-
moning this  governing  body  to  attend  his  per-
son and  court;  it  was  only  to  be  empowered
to  decide  in  the  more  insignificant  cases;  in
all  matters  of  importance'  it  was  to  recur  to
him.  He  would  himself  nominate  a  captain-
general  of , the  empire,  if  he  could  not  come  to
an  understanding  with  Albert  of  Bavaria.

In  short,  it  is  clear  that  the  obligations  and
burdens  of  government  would  have  remained
with  the  states ;  the  power  w^ould  have  fallen
to  the  lot  of  the  king.

His  ascendancy  was,  however,  not  yet  so
great  as  to  induce,  or  compel,  the  empire  to
accept  such  a  scheme  as  this  at  his  hands.

Was  it  indeed  possible  to  revert  to  institu-
tions which  had  already  proved  so  impractica-
ble 1  Was  not  the  sovereignty  of  the  lords  of
the  soil  far  too  firmJy  and  fully  developed  to
render  it  probable  that  they  would  lend  or  even
submit  themselves  to  such  extensive  and  radi-
cal changes  ]  The  only  condition  under  w'hich
this  could  have  been  imagined  possible  was,
that  a  committee  chosen  from  the  body  of  the
princes  should  be  invested  with  the  sovereign
power;  but  that  they  would  voluntarily  aban-
don their  high  position  in  favour  of  the  king,
it  v^^ould  have  been  absurd  to  expect.

The  diet  of  Cologne  is  remarkable  for  this
—  that  people  began  to  cease  to  deceive  them-
selves as  to  the  real  state  of  things.  The
opinions  which  prevailed  during  the  last  years
of  Frederic's  and  the  first  of  Maximilian's
reign ;  the  attempts  made  to  establish  an  all-
embracing  unity  of  the  nation,  —  a  combined
action  of  all  its  powers,  —  a  form  of  govern-
ment which  might  satisfy  all  minds  and  supply
all  wants,  are  to  be  held  in  eternal  and  honour-
able remembrance ;  but  they  v/ere  directed
towards  an  unattainable  Ideal. The  estates

J  Protocol  of  the  Imperial  Diet  in  the  Frankfnrt  Act?,
which  adds  considerably  to  the  particulars  found  in  Miil-
ler's  Reichstagsstaat.

Book  I.

DIET  OF  COLOGNE,  1505.

69

were  no  longer  to  be  reduced  to  the  condition
of  subjects,  properly  so  called  :  the  king  was
not  contented  to  be  nothing  more  than  a  pre-
sident of  the  estates.  It  was  therefore  neces-
sary to  abandon  such  projects.

The  estates  assembled  at  Cologne  did  not
refuse  to  afford  succours  to  the  king,  but
neither  by  a  general  tax  (Common  Penny)
nor  by  an  assessment  of  all  the  parishes  in  the
empire,  but  by  a  matricula.*'  The  difference
is  immeasurable.  The  former  plans  were
founded  on  the  idea  of  unity,  and  regarded  the
whole  body  of  the  people  as  common  subjects
of  the  empire ;  the  matricula,  in  which  the
States  were  rated  severally,  according  to  their
resources,  was,  in  its  very  origin,  based  on  the
idea  of  the  separateness  of  the  territorial  power
of  the  several  sovereigns.

They  declined  taking  any  share  in  a  central
or  general  government  (Beichsregiment)  of  the
empire.  They  said  his  majesty  had  hitherto
ruled  wisely  and  well ;  they  were  not  disposed
to  impose  restraints  upon  him.

Public  opinion  took  a  direction  far  less  ideal,
far  less  satisfactory  to  those  who  had  cherished
aspirations  after  a  common  fatherland,  but  one
more  practical  and  feasible.

jMaximilian  demanded  succours  for  an  expe-
dition against  Hungary;  not  against  the  king,
with  whom,  on  the  contrary,  he  was  on  a  good
footing,  but  against  a  portion  of  the  Hungarian
nobles.  The  last  treat\^,  by  which  his  here-
ditary rights  were  recognised,  had  been  agreed
to  only  by  a  few  of  them  individually;  it  was
not  confirmed  at  the  diet.  The  Hungarians
now  began  to  declare  that  they  would  never
again  raise  a  foreigner  to  the  throne,  alleging
that  none  had  consulted  the  interests  of  the
nation.  A  resolution  to  this  effect  which  was
as  offensive  to  their  monarch  as  it  was  injuri-
ous to  the  rights  of  Austria,  was  solemnly
passed  and  sent  into  all  the  counties. f  This
INIaximilian  now  resolved  to  oppose.  He  ob-
served that  the  maintenance  of  his  rights  was
important  not  only  to  himself  but  to  the  Holy
Empire,  for  which  Bohemia  had  been  recover-
ed, and  with  which  Hungary  was,  through
him,  connected.

In  a  proclamation,  in  which  the  edicts  con-
cerning the  Council  of  Regency  {Regiynent)
and  the  Common  Penny  were  expressly  re-
pealed, Maximilian  asked  for  succours  of  four
or  five  thousand  men  for  one  year.  He  ex-
pressed a  hope  that  this  might  perhaps  also
suffice  for  his  expedition  to  Rome.  The  States
assented  without  difficulty  :  they  granted  four
thousand  men  for  a  year,  raised  according  to  a
matricula.  The  levy  was  to  consist  of  1058
horse,  and  3038  foot.  Of  these,  the  secular
princes  were  to  farnish.  the  larger  proportion
of  horse,  namely,  422;  the  cities  the  larger  of
foot, — 1106 :  on  the  whole,  the  electors  had  to
bear about  a seventh, the archbishops and

*  The  Matricula  partook  of  the  nature  both  of  census
and  rate  or  assessment.  It  was  the  list  of  the  contin-
gents, in  men  and  monp_v,  which  the  several  States  were
bound  to  furnish  to  the  empire,  and  was  founded  on
their  population  and  pecuniary  resources  respectivelj'.—
Transl.

t  Istuanöy,  Historia  Eegni  Hungarici,  p.  32.

bishops  a  half,  the  prelates  and  counts  not
quite  a  third  ;  of  the  remaining  seven  parts,
about  one  half  was  borne  by  the  secular
princes,  the  other  half  by  tiie  States.

These  more  moderate  levies  had  at  least  one
good  result — the}'-  were  really  executed,  'i'he
troops  which  had  been  granted,  were,  if  not
entirely  (Avhich  the  defective  state  of  the  census
rendered  impossible)^  yet,  in  great  measure,
furnished  to  the  king,  and  did  him  good  ser-
vice. His  appearance  on  the  frontier  at  the
head  of  forces  armed  and  equipped  by  the  em-
pire, made  no  slight  impression  in  Hungary;
some  magnates  and  cities  were  quickly  re-
duced to  obedience.  As  a  son  was  just  then
born  to  King  AYladislas,  whereby  the  prospect
of  a  change  of  dynasty  became  more  remote,
the  Hungarian  nobles  determined  not  exactly
to  revoke  their  decree,  but  not  to  enforce  it.  A
committee  of  the  States  received  unconditional
powers  to  conclude  a  peace,  which  was  accor-
dingl)'-  concluded  in  July  1506  at  Vienna ;
Maximilian  having  again  reserved  to  himself
his  hereditary  right.  Although  the  recognition
of  the  states  of  Hungary  expressed  by  accept-
ing this  treaty  is  only  indirect,  Maximilian
thought  his  own  rights  and  those  of  the  Ger-
man nation  sufficiently  guaranteed  by  this
treaty.

He  now  directed  his  attention  and  his  forces
upon  Italy.  Till  he  was  in  possession  of  the
crown  and  title  of  emperor  he  did  not  think  he
had  attained  to  his  full  dignity.:]:

It  was,  evident,  however,  that  he  would  not
be  able  to  accomplish  his  purpose  with  the
small  body  of  men  that  followed  him  from
Hungary.

Louis  XII.,  w~ith  whom  he  had  shortly  be-
fore concerted  the  most  intimate  union  of  their
respective  houses,  was  led  into  other  views  by
his  States.  He  no  longer  thought  it  advisable
to  permit  the  ambitious,  restless  Maximilian,
sustained  by  the  power  of  a  warlike  nation,  to
get  a  footing  in  Italy.  In  this  the  Venetians
agreed.  At  the  moment  when  Maximilian  ap-
proached their  frontiers,  the}^  hastened  (favour-
ed by  a  revolt  among  the  Landsknechts,  which
gave  them  time)  to  organise  a  very  strong  de-
fence. Maximilian  saw  that,  if  he  would  ob-
tain the  crown,  he  must  conquer  it  by  force  of
arms  and  in  strenuous  warfare.  He  hastened
to  summon  a  new  diet.

Once  more,  in  the  spring  of  1507,  the  States
assembled  in  the  plenitude  of  their  loyalty  and
devotion  to  the  king.  They  were  still  under
the  influence  of  recent  events ;  strangers  were
astonished  at  their  unanimity,  and  at  the  high
consideration  the  king  of  the  Romans  enjoyed
among  them.  A  remark  made  by  the  Italians
is  not  Vv'ithout  foundation — that  a  calamity
which  had  befallen  the  king  had  been  of  advan-

i t  In  his  declaration  to  the  states,  Maximilian  desi?-
'  nates  the  convention  of  Vienna  as  a  treaty  "  whereby
i  his  Imperial  Majesty  and  the  German  nation, *Gori  will'
!  ins:,  might  suffer  no  loss  of  their  rights  in  the  kingdom
of  Hungary,  when  the  crown  becomes  vacant:"  —  "da-
durch 1.  K.  Mt.  und  deutsche  Nation,  ob  Gott  will,  aa
ihrer  erblichen  und  andern  Gerechtigkeit  des  Königreichs
Unsrern,  wenn  es  zu  Fällen  kommt,  nicht  Maugel  liabea
werde."

70

DIET  OF  CONSTANCE,  1507.

Book  I.

tage  to  him  in  the  affairs  of  Germany.*  His
son  Philip  had  hardly  ascended  the  throne  of
Castile  when  he  died  unexpectedly  in  Septem-
ber, 1506.  The  German  princes  had  always
regarded  the  rising  greatness  of  this  young
monarch  with  distrust.  They  had  feared  that
his  father  would  endeavour  to  make  him  elector,
or  vicar  of  the  empire,  and,  after  his  own  coro-
nation, king  of  the  Romans  ;  and  this  first  idea
of  a  union  of  the  imperial  authority  with  the
power  of  Burgundy  and  of  Castile  had  filled
them  with  no  little  alarm.  The  death  of  Philip
freed  them  from  this  fear;  the  sons  he  left  were
too  young  to  inspire  anxiety.  The  princes  felt
disposed  to  attach  themselves  the  more  cor-
dially to  their  king;  the  more  youthful  hoped
to  conquer  new  and  large  fiefs  in  his  service.

On  the  27th  of  April,  1507,t  iV^aximilian
opened  the  diet  at  Constance,  in  the  immediate
neighbourhood  of  Italy.  Never  was  he  more
impressed  with  the  dignity  of  his  station  than
at  this  moment.  He  declared,  with  a  sort  of
shame,  that  he  would  no  longer  be  a  little
trooper  {kein  Meiner  Reiier),  he  would  get  rid
of  all  trifling  business,  and  devote  his  attention
only  to  the  great  afiairs.  He  gave  the  assembly
to  understand  that  he  would  not  only  force  his
way  through  Italy,  but  would  engage  in  a  de-
cisive struggle  for  the  sovereignty  of  Italy.
Germany,  he  said,  was  so  mighty  that  it  ought
to  receive  the  law  from  no  one;  it  had  count-
less foot  soldiers,  and  at  least  sixty  thousand
horses  fit  for  service  ;  they  must  now  make  an
effort  to  secure  the  empire  for  ever.  It  would
all  depend  on  the  heavy  fire-arms;  the  true
knights  would  show  themselves  on  the  bridge
over  the  Tiber.  He  uttered  all  this  with  ani-
mated and  confiding  eloquence.  "I  wish,"
writes  Eitel  wolf  von-  Stein  to  the  elector  of
Brandenburg,  "  that  your  grace  had  heard
him."

The  States  replied,  that  they  w^ere  deter-
mined to  aid  him,  according  to  their  several
means,  to  gain  possession  of  the  imperial
crown.  I

There  remained,  indeed,  some  differences  of
opinion  between  them.  When  the  king  ex-
pressed his  determination  of  driving  the  French
out  of  Milan,  the  States  dissented.  They  were
only  disposed  to  force  a  passage  through  the
country  in  defiance  of  them,  for  a  regular  war
with  France  was  not  to  be  engaged  in  without

*  Somaria  di  la  Relatione  di  Vic.  Q-uerini,  Dottor,  ri-
tornato  dal  Re  di  Romani,  1507,  Nov,  Sanuto's  Chroni-
cle, Vienna  Archives,  torn.  vii.  He  is  of  opinion,  that
the  Elector  of  Saxony  indulged  the  hope  of  one  day  get-
ting possession  of  the  crown.  "  II  re  a  gran  poder  in
Alemagna,"  he  also  says,  "  e  molto  amato,  perche  quelli
non  r  ubediva  e  morti."

t  Tuesday  after  the  feast  of  St.  Mark.  Letter  from
Eitelvvolf  von  Stein  to  the  elector  of  Brandenburg,  April
6,  1507,  in  the  Berlin  Archives.  The  previous  accounts
are  incorrect.

X  Answer  of  the  States,  Frankf.  A.  A.,  torn,  xxiii.:
"They  had  appeared  at  this  Imperial  Diet,  at  his  majes-
ty's request,  as  his  lieges  fully  inclined  to  advise,  and  ac-
cording to  their  ability  to  aid  in  obtaining  the  imperial
crown,  and  to  offer  resistance  to  the  design  of  the  King
of  F.d'nce,  which  he  is  practising  against  the  holy  em-
pire."—" Sie  syen  uf  diesen  Richstag  uf  irer  Mt.  Erford-
ern als  die  Gehorsame  erschienen,  ganz  Gemütz  zu  raten
und  ires  Vermögens  die  kaiserliche  Krone  helfen  zu  er-
langen und  des  Königs  von  Frankreich  Fürnemen,  des  er
wider  das  h.  Reich  in  Uebung  steht,  Widerstand  zu  tun."

negotiations.  Nor  would  they  grant  the  whole
of  the  supplies  the  king  at  first  demanded.
Nevertheless,  the  subsidy  which  they  assented
to,  in  compliance  with  a  second  proposal  of
his,  was  unusually  large.  It  amounted  to  three
thousand  horse,  and  nine  thousand  foot.

Maximilian,  who  doubted  not  that  he  should
accomplish  some  decisive  stroke  with  this  force,
now  promised,  on  his  side,  to  govern  any  con-
quests he  might  make  according  to  the  coun-
sels of  the  States.  He  hinted  that  the  revenue
she  might  derive  from  these  new  acquisitions
would  -perhaps  sufiice  to  defray  the  charges  of
the  empire. §

The  States  accepted  this  offer  with  great  sat-
isfaction. Whatever,  whether  land  or  people,
cities  or  castles,  might  be  conquered,  was  to
remain  for  ever  incorporated  with  the  empire.

This  good  understanding  as  to  foreign  affairs,
was  favourable  to  some  progress  in  those  of
the  nation.  The  diet  of  Cologne,  while  it  gave
up  all  the  projects  of  institutions  founded  upon
a  complete  community  of  interests  and  of  pow-
ers, had  continued  to  regard  a  restoration  of
the  Imperial  Chamber  as  necessary.  This,
however,  they  had  never  been  able  to  accom-
plish :  the  Chamber  which  Maximilian  had
established  by  his  own  arbitrary  act  had  held
no  sittings  for  three  years ;  the  salaries  of  the
procurators  had  even  been  stopped.  ||  Now,
however,  the  diet  assembled  at  Constance  re-
solved to  re-establish  the  Imperial  Chamber
according  to  the  edicts  of  Worms.  In  the
nomination  of  the  members  of  it  the  electors
were  to  retain  their  privileges ;  for  the  other
estates,  the  division  into  circles  which  had  been
determined  on  in  Augsburg  was  adopted,  so
that  it  v;as  not  entirely  suffered  to  drop  :  no
notice  was  taken  of  the  cities.  The  question
now  was,  how  this  tribunal  was  to  be  main-
tained 1  Maximilian  was-,  of  opinion  that  it
would  be  best  that  each  assessor  should  be  at
the  charge  of  the  government  which  had  ap-
pointed him  :  he  would  take  upon  himself  that
of  the  judges  and  the  chancery  of  the  court.
Unquestionably  however  the  States  were  right
in  desiring  to  avoid  the  predominancy  of  pri-
vate interests  which  this  arrangement  would
have  favoured  :**  they  offered  to  tax  themselves

§  In  thß  declaration  in  which  he  asks  for  12,000  men,
he  adds:  "And  if  the  States  now  show  themselves  in
such  measure  ready  and  prompt  with  help,  then  is  his
imperial  majesty  willing  to  act  after  their  counsel,  with
respect  to  what  money,  goods,  land  and  people  will  be
requisite,  how  the  same  should  be  managed  and  applied,
how  also  the  conquered  domains  and  people  are  to  be
treated  and  supported  by  the  empire,  so  that  the  burdens
in  all  future  times  may  be  taken  off  the  Germans,  and,
according  to  whast  is  reasonable,  laid  upon  another  na-
tion ;  also,  how  every  king  of  the  Romans  may  be  sup-
ported honourably  in  due  state  Vvithout  heavily  burden-
ing the  German  nation  "  —  "  Und  wo  sich  die  Stend  des
Reichs  jetzo  dermaassen  dapferlich  mit  der  Hilf  erzaigen,
so  ist  k.  Mt.  willig  jetzo  nach  irem  Rat  zu  handeln,  was
von  Geld  Gut  Land  und  Liiten  zuston  wird,  wie  dasselb
gehandelt  und  angelegt  werden  soll,  wie  auch  die  eroberte
Herrschaften  und  Lut  by  dem  Rieh  zu  hanndliaben  und
zu  erhalten  syn,  dadurch  die  Bürden  in  ewig  Zeiten  ab
den  Deutschen  und  der  Billichait  nach  uf  andre  Nation
gelegt,  auch  ein  jeder  romisch  Konig  eehrlich  und  stat-
lich  on  sunder  "ßeswerung  deutscher  Nation  erhalten
werden  mög."

|(  Harpprecht,  ii.  §  240,  §  253.

**  "  Es  sy  not,  das  Cammergerichte  als  ain  versampt
Wesen  von  ainem  Wesen  unterhalten  und  derselbtige

Book  I.

DIET  OF  CONSTANCE,  1507.

71

to  a  small  amount  in  order  to  pay  the  salaries
of  the  law  officers.  They  did  not  choose  that
the  court  should  be  stripped  of  the  character
of  a  tribunal  common  to  the  whole  body  of  the
States,  which  had  originally  been  given  to  it,
Vvith  this  view  they  determined  that  every
year  two  princes,  one  spiritual,  the  other  tem-
poral, should  investigate  its  proceedings,  and
leport  upon  them  lo  the  States.

If  we  pause  a  moment  and  reflect  on  what
preceded  the  diet  of  Constance,  and  on  what
followed  it,  we  perceive  its  great  importance.
The  matricular  assessment  (or  register  of  the
lesources  of  the  en:ipire)  and  the  Imperial
Chamber  were,  during  three  centuries,  the  most
eminent  institutions  by  which  the  unity  of  the
empire  was  represented  ;  their  definitive  estab-
lishment and  the  connexion  between  them  were
the  work  of  that  diet.  The  ideas  which  had
>  given  birth  to  these  two  institutions  were  ori-
ginally founded  on  opposite  principles;  but
this  was  exactly  what  now  recommended  them
to  favour;  the  independence  of  the  several
sovereignties  was  not  infringed,  while  the  idea
cf  their  community  was  kept  in  view.

Another  extremely  important  affair,  that  of
Switzerland,  was  also  decided  here.

Elector  Berthold  had  been  desirous  of  incor-
porating the  Swiss  in  the  diet,  and  giving  them
a  share  in  all  the  institutions  he  projected.  But
exactly  the  reverse  ensued.  The  Confederates
had  been  victorious  in  a  great  war  with  the
King  of  the  Romans.  In  tlie  politics  of  Eu-
rope they  generally  adhered  to  France,  and  they
continued  to  draw  one  city  after  another  into
their  league;  and  yet  they  pretended  to  remain
members  and  subjects  of  the  empire.  This
Avas  a  state  of  things  which  became  manifestly
intolerable  when  disputes  with  France  arose.
Whenever  war  broke  out  with  France  and  Ita-
ly, a  diversion  was  to  be  feared  on  the  side  of
Switzerland,  the  more  dangerous  because  it
was  impossible  to  be  prepared  for  it.

The  diet  resolved  to  come  to  a  clear  under-
standing on  this  point.  An  embassy  was  sent
by  the  States  of  the  empire  to  Switzerland  for
that  purpose.

I'he  members  of  it  were,  however,  by  no
means  confident  of  success.  "God  send  his
Holy  Spirit  upon  us,"  exclaims  one  of  them:
"  if  we  accomplish  nothing,  we  shall  bring
down  war  upon  the  Swiss,  and  be  compelled
to  regard  them  as  our  Turks."

But  the  Confederates  had  already,  in  the
course  of  their  service,  fallen  out  with  the
French,  so  that  the  ambassadors  found  them
more  tractable  than  they  had  expected.  They
recalled  all  their  troops  still  in  Italy  at  the  first
admonition.  They  promised  without  the  slight-
est hesitation  to  remain  faithful  to  the  empire.
A  deputation  from  them  appeared  at  Constance,
and  was  most  graciously  received  by  the  king,
who  kept  them  there  at  his  own  expense  and
dismissed  them  with  presents,  after  entering
into  an  agreement  to  take  into  pay,  in  the  next

miderlialtung  nit  zerteilt  werden."—"  It  is  needful  that
the  imperial  chamber,  as  a  collective  body,  he  maintained
by  one  body,  and  that  the  maintenance  of  the  same  be
not  divided."— Pro^oco^  of  the  Imperial  Diet  in  Harpprecht,
ii.  442

war,  six  thousand  Swiss  under  the  baimers  of
the  empire.

On  the  other  hand,  Maximilian  made  a  most
im.portant  concession  to  them.  He  formally
emancipated  them  from  the  jurisdiction  of  the
imperial  courts;  declaring  that  neither  in  crim-
inal nor  in  civil  causes  should  the  Confedera-
tion, or  any  member  of  it,  be  subject  to  be
cited  before  the  imperial  chamber  or  any  other
royal  tribunal.*

This  measure  decided  the  fate  of  Switzer-
land to  all  succeeding  ages.  At  the  very  time»
when  the  empire  agreed  to  subject  itself  to  a
general  assessment  and  enrolment,  and  to  the
jurisdiction  of  the  imperial  chamber,  it  aban-
doned all  claim  to  impose  them  on  the  Swiss  :
on  the  contrary,  it  took  their  troops  into  its
pay  and  renounced  its  jurisdiction  over  them.
They  were,  as  Maximilian  expressed  himself,
"  dutiful  kinsmen  of  the  empire,"  who  how-
ever must  be  kept  in  order  when  they  were  re-
fractory.

Although  it  is  not  to  be  disputed  that  the
real  political  grounds  of  these  concessions  was
the  increasing  inclination  of  the  Swiss  to  a
separation  from  the  empire,  still  it  was  the
most  fortunate  arrangement  for  that  m^oment.
The  quarrel  was  for  a  time  appeased.  Maxi-
milian appeared  more  puissant,  more  magnifi-
cent than  ever.  Foreigners  did  not  doubt  that
he  would  have,  as  they  heard  it  affirmed,  thirty
thousand  men  to  lead  into  the  field  :  the  war-
like preparations  which  they  encountered  in
some  of  the  Swabian  cities  filled  them  with
the  idea  that  the  empire  was  rousing  all  its
energies.

Maximilian  indulged  the  most  ambitious  and
romantic  hopes.  He  declared  that  with  the
noble  and  efficient  aid  granted  to  him,  he  hoped
to  reduce  to  obedience  all  those  in  Italy  w^ho
did  not  acknowledge  the  sovereignty  of  the
holy  empire.  But  he  would  not  stop  there.
When  he  had  once  reduced  that  country  to
order,  he  would  confide  it  to  one  of  his  cap-
tains, and  would  himself  march  without  delay
against  the  infidels ;  for  he  had  vowed  this  to
Almighty  God.

The  slow  march  of  the  imperial  troops,  the
procrastination  of  the  Swiss,  the  well-defended
Venetian  passes,  doubly  difficult  to  force  in  the
approaching  winter  season,  were  indeed  cal-
culated to  rouse  him  from  these  dreams  of  con-
quest, and  turn  his  attention  on  what  was  really
attainable.  But  his  high  spirit  did  not  quail.
On  the  2d  of  February  he  caused  a  religious
ceremony  to  be  performed  in  Trent,  as  a  con-
secration of  his  intended  expedition  to  Rome.
Nay,  as  if  the  very  object  for  which  he  was
going  thither  was  already  accomplished,  he
assumed,  on  the  very  same  day,  the  title  of
elected  emperor  of  the  Romans. |  Foreigners
always  called  him  so,  and  he  well  knew  that
the  pope,  at  this  moment  his  ally,  would  not
oppose  it.  He  was  led  to  this  act  by  different
motives :  on  the  one  side,  the  sight  of  the  for-
midable opposition  he  had  to  encounip^r,  so  that

*  Fryheitsbiill  bei  Anshelm,  iii.  321.
f  There  is  a  closer  examination  of  this  point  in  the  Ex-
cursus upon  Fugger.

72

VENETIAN  WAU.

B(

I.

he  already  feared  he  should  not  succeed  in
getting  to  Rome ;  on  the  other,  the  feeling  of
the  might  and  independence  of  the  empire,  for
which  he  was  anxious  at  all  events  to  rescue
the  prerogative  of  giving  a  supreme  head  to
Christendom  :  the  mere  ceremony  of  corona-
tion he  did  not  regard  as  so  essential.  To
Germany,  too,  his  resolution  was  of  the  utmost
importance  :  Maximilian's  successors  have  al-
ways assumed  the  title  of  Emperor  immedi-
ately after  their  coronation  at  Aix-la-Chapelle;
^though  only  one  of  the  whole  line  was  crowned
by  the  pope.*  Although  Pope  Julius  appeared
well  pleased  at  this  assumption,  it  was,  in
fact,  a  symptom  of  the  emancipation  of  the
German  crown  from  the  papacy.  Intimately
connected  with  it,  was  the  attempt  of  Maxi-
milian at  the  same  time  to  revive  the  title  of
King  of  Germany,  which  had  not  been  heard
for  centuries.  Both  were  founded  on  the  idea
of  the  unity  and  independence  of  the  German
nation,  whose  chief  was  likewise  the  highest
personage  in  Europe.  They  were  expressions
of  that  supremacy  of  the  nation  which  Maxi-
milian still  asserted  :  a  supremacy,  however,
which  rapidly  declined.

VENETIAN  WAR. DIET  OF  WORMS.

It  had  been  debated  at  Constance  whether
the  imperial  forces  should  first  attack  the
French  or  the  Venetian  possessions  in  Italy.
Whatever  conquests  might  be  made,  it  was  not
the  intention  of  the  diet  to  grant  them  out  as
fiefs  (Milan  had  not  even  been  restored  to  the
Sforza),  but  to  retain  them  in  the  hands  of  the
empire,  as  a  source  of  public  revenue.

Among  the  princes  some  were  advocates  for
the  IMilanese,,  others,  who  like  the  dukes  of
Bavaria  had  claims  against  Venice,  for  the
Venetian,  expedition.  Even  among  the  impe-
rial councillors,  difference  of  opinion  prevailed.
Paul  von  Lichtenstein,  who  was  on  good  terms
w'ith  Venice,  was  for  attacking  iVIilan ;  iMatthew
Lang  and  Eitelfriz  of  Zollern,  on  the  other
hand,  deemed  it  easier  to  make  conquests  from
the  Venetians  than  from  the  French, f

The  latter  opinion  at  length  prevailed.  The
Venetians  were  not  to  bebroughtto  declare  that
they  would  not  take  part  against  the  king  of
the  Romans :  on  the  other  hand,  France  held
out  hopes  that  if  no  attempt  was  made  upon
Milan,  she  would  offer  no  obstacle  to  the  steps

*  The  title  of  Emperor,  though  commonly  given  to
Maximilian,  belonsred,  of  right,  only  to  those  who  had
been  crowned  at  Rome  by  the  hands  of  the  Pope,— condi-
tions which,  as  we  shall  see,  Maximilian  was  never  able
to  fulfil.  At  the  head  of  the  "Holy  Roman  empire  (Reich)
of  the  German  nation,"  stands  the  King,  elected  by  the
German  estates  of  the  empire,  who,  however,  by  his
election  and  his  coronation  in  Germany  (at  Aachen)  ob-
tains only  the  rights  and  title  of  King  of  the  Romans,
(Romischen  Koniss.)  and  acquires  the  rights  and  title  of
Roman  Emperor  (Romischen  Kaisers)  only  by  his  corona-
tion at  Rome ;  to  which  all  the  vassals  of  the  empire
must  accompany  him,  and  which  the  Pope,  if  he  be  law-
fully and  duly  elected,  cannot  refuse  him.  His  successor
bears  the  title  of  King  of  the  Romans.  Eichhorn,  Deut-
sche Staats-und  Yechts-geschichte,  vol.  ii.  p.  365.— Transl.

fRelati'rne  di  Vicenzo  duirini.  He  mentioned  some
of  the  'Council  by  name  as  nottri  "capitali  inimici;"  for
a  t/me,  Maximilian  said:  "I  Venetiani  non  mi  a  fato
dis'piacer  e  Franza  si.  E  su  queste  pratiche  passa  11
tempo."

taken  by  the  empire  for  the  assertion  of  its
other  claims  in  Italy. :^  Strongly  as  the  Alps
were  defended,  Maximilian  was  not  to  be  de-
terred from  trying  his  fortune  there.  At  first
he  was  successful.  "  The  Venetians,"  he  says,
in  a  letter  to  the  Elector  of  Saxony,  dated  the
10th  of  March,  "  paint  their  lion  with  two  feet
in  the  sea,  one  on  the  plain  country,  the  fourth
on  the  mountains ;  we  have  nearly  caught  the
foot  on  the  Alps  ;  there  is  only  one  claw  miss-
ing, which,  with  God's  help,  we  will  have  in
a  week ;  and  then  we  hope  to  conquer  the  foot
on  the  plain. "§

But  he  had  engaged  in  an  enterprise  which
was  destined  to  plunge  his  afl^airs  in  general,
and  those  of  Germany  in  particular,  into  inex-
tricable diiheulties.

In  Switzerland,  spite  of  all  treaties,  the
French  faction,  especially  supported  by  Lucern,
soon  revived;!!  the  confederate  troops  hung
back.  This  so  greatly  weakened  the  German
forces  (the  emperor  having  intended  to  draw
two-thirds  of  the  infantry  from  Switzerland),
that  the  Venetians  soon  had  the  advantage  of
the  imperialists.  They  did  not  rest  satisfied
with  driving  the  Germans  from  their  territory,
they  fell  on  the  emperor's  own  dominions,  just
where  he  was  least  prepared  for  an  attack.
Görz,  V»  ippach,Triest,  and  forty-seven  places,
more  or  less  strongly  fortified,  rapidly  fell  into
their  hands.

Germany  was  struck  Vv-ith  astonishment  and
consternation.  After  subsidies  which  had  ap-
peared so  considerable,  after  the  exertions
made  by  every  individual  for  the  empire,  after
such  high-raised  expectations,  the  result  was
shame  and  ignominy.  It  was  in  vain  that  the
emperor  alleged  that  the  levies  had  not  been
furnished  complete;  the  fault  of  this  was  in
part  ascribed  to  himself.  The  Duke  of  Liine-
berg,  for  example,  had  never  received  the  esti-
mate of  his  contingent.  But  putting  that
aside: — To  set  out  vvithout  having  the  least
assurance  of  success ! — to  risk  his  vi'hole  for-
tunes on  the  levies  of  a  Swiss  diet !  The  com-
mon lot — loss  of  reputation  for  one  abortive  un-
dertaking— now  fell  with  double  and  triple
force  on  Maximilian,  v»'hose  capacity  and  cha-
racter had  alv/ays  been  doubted  by  many,

CDmpelled  to  return  immediately  to  Germa-
ny, Maximilian's  first  act  was  to  call  the  elect-
ors together.  The  elector  palatine  he  did  not
include  with  the  rest;  Brandenburg  was  too
far  ;  he  contented  himself  with  sending  a  mes-
senger to  him. But  the  others  assembled  in

I  Pasqualigo.  Relatione.  "  Non  saria  molto  diiücil  cosa
che  la  (S.  M.)  Dirizzasse  la  sua  inipresa  contra  questo
stato,  massime  per  il  dubbio  che  li  e  firmato  nelF  animo
che  le  Eccze  Vostre  siano  pertorre  I'arme  in  mano  contra
a  lei  quando  la  fusse  sul  bello  di  cacciar  ii  Frances!  d'tta-
lia,  et  a  questo  ancora  1'  inclineria  assai  11  onorati  partiti
che  dal  re  di  Francia  li  sono  continuamente  offerti  cgni
volta  che  la  voglia  la.ssar  la  impre.sa  di  Milano  e  rlcuperar
le  altre  jurisditioni  imperiall  che  ha  in  Italia."

§  Letter  from  Sterzing,  March  1,  accompanied  by  a  let-
ter from  Flans  Renner  of  the  same  date.  He  also  has  tlie
best  hopes.

II  In  the  Relatione  dellu  Nazione  delli  Suizzeri  1508,
Informm.  politiche,  tom.  lx..,the  different  persons  who
brought  about  this  change  are  mentioned,  but  their  names
are  difficult  to  decipher  in  our  copy  ;  '•  Amestaver  at  Zug,
Nicolo  Corator  at  Solothurn,  Manforosinl  at  Frieburg."
Lucerne  was  the  centre  of  the  whole  movement.

B(

I.

DIET  OF  WORMS,  1508.

73

the  beginning  of  May  1508,  at  Worms.  Maxi-
milian declared  to  them  that  he  called  on  Ihem
first,  on  whom  the  empire  rested  as  on  its  foun-
dations, for  their  aid  in  his  great  peril  :  he
craved  their  counsel  how  He  might  best  obtain
valiant,  safe,  and  effective  succours  ;  but,  he
added,  without  employing  the  Swabian  league  ;
w'hose  help  he  should  stand  in  need  of  else-
where ;  and  without  convoking  a  diet  of  the
empire.*

Among  the  assembled  princes,  Frederic  of
Saxony  was  the  most  powerful.  By  his  advice
they  declined  the  emperor's  invitation  to  meet
him  in  Frankfurt;  principally  because  they
found  it  impossible  to  come  to  any  resolution
Vvithout  a  previous  conference  with  the  other
states  of  the  empire.f  Maximilian  replied  that
he  was  in  the  most  perilous  situation  in  the
world ;  if  the  troops  of  the  empire,  whose  pay
was  in  arrear,  were  now  to  withdraw,  his
country  of  Tyrol  was  inclined  to  join  the
French  and  the  Venetians,  out  of  resentment
against  the  empire,  by  which  it  was  not  pro-
tected :  he  could  in  no  case  wait  for  a  diet ;  the
loss  of  time  would  be  too  great ;  the  utmost
that  could  be  done  would  be  hastily  to  call  to-
gether the  nearest  princes.:|:  The  electors  per-
sisted in  demanding  a  diet.  They  would  not
believe  that  the  Swabian  league  entertained  the
thought  of  separating  itself  from  the  other
states;  to  grant  anything  on  their  own  respon-
sibility and  in  the  absence  of  the  others,  said
they,  would  bring  hostility  upon  them,  and  be
useless  to  the  king.§  They  were  worked  upon
by  the  pressing  and  obvious  exigency  of  the
case,  only  so  far  as  to  facilitate  a  loan  of  the
emperor's,  by  their  intercession  and  guarantee.

The  consequences  of  war  must,  in  every  age
and  country,  have  an  immense  influence  on  the
current  of  internal  affairs.  We  have  seen  how
all  the  attempts  to  give  to  the  empire  a  consti-
tution agreeable  to  the  wishes  and  opinions  of
the  States  were  ultimately  connected  with  the
alliance  by  which  Maximilian  v/as  elected  king
of  the  Romans,  Austria  and  the  Netherlands
w^ere  defended,  and  Bavaria  reduced  to  subjec-
tion. On  the  other  hand,  at  the  first  great  re-
verse— the  unfortunate  combat  with  Switzer-
land,— that  constitution  received  a  shock  from
which  it  never  recovered.  The  position  too
which  the  king  himself  assumed,  rested  on  the
success  of  his  arms  in  the  Bavarian  war.  It
was  no  wonder,  therefore,  that  after  the  great
reverses  he  had  now  sustained,  the  whole  fabric
of  his  power  tottered,  and  the  opposition  which
seemed  nearly  subdued  arose  in  new  strength.

*  The  instruction  for  Matthias  Lan?,  Bishop  of  Gnrk  ;
Adolf,  Count  of  Nassau:  Erasmus  Dopier,  prebendary
of  St.  Sebaldus  at  Nürnberg;  and  Dr.  Ulrich  von  Schel-
lenber?,  is  dated  the  last  day  of  April,  the  feast  of  St.
Wendel,  1508. (Weimar  Archives.)

j  The  Archives  at  Weimar  contain  the  advice  of  Fred-
eric, and  the  answer.  (May  8.  Monday  after  Misericor-
dia.)

I  Letters  of  Maximilian  from  Linz,  May  7,  and  from
Siegburff,  May  10. (Weimar  Archives.)

§  Answer,  dated  May  13,  Saturday  after  Misericordia.
(Weimar  Archives.)  In  return  for  their  guarantee,  they
desired  some  security  from  the  emperor.  The  latter  re"-
plied,  ''  he  could  bind  himself  to  nothing  further,  than  to
release  them  from  their  guarantee  within  a  year's  time,
upon  his  good  faith."

10  G

Success  is  a  bond  of  union;  misfortune  decora-
poses  and  scatters.

Nor  was  this  state  of  the  public  mind
changed  by  the  circumstance  that  Maximilian,
favoured  by  the  disgust  which  the  encroach-
ments of  the  Venetians  had  excited  in  other
quarters,  now  concluded  the  treaty  of  Cambrai,
by  which  not  only  the  pope  and  Ferdinand  the
Catholic,  but  the  King  of  Bavaria,  against
whom  he  had  just  made  war,  combined  with
him  against  Venice.!]  This  hasty  renunciation
of  the  antipathy  to  France  which  he  had  so
loudly  professed,  this  sudden  revolution  in  his
policy,  was  not  calculated  to  restore  the  confi-
dence of  the  States.

Perhaps  the  present  might  really  have  been
the  moment  in  which,  Avith  the  co-operation  of
such  powerful  allies,  conquests  might  have
been  made  in  Italy;  but  there  was  no  longer
sufficient  concert  among  the  powers  of  Ger-
many for  any  such  undertaking.  On  the  21st
of  April,  1509,  the  emperor  made  his  warlike
entry  into  the  city  of  Worms  (where,  after
long  delays,  the  States  had  assembled),**
armed  from  head  to  foot,  mounted  on  a  mailed
charger,  and  followed  by  a  retinue  of  a  thou-
sand horsemen,  among  whom  were  Stradiotes
and  Albanians.  He  was  destined  to  encounter
such  an  opposition  as  never  awaited  him  be-
fore.

He  represented  to  the  States  the  advantages
which  would  accrue  to  the  empire  from  the
treaty  just  concluded,  and  exhorted  them  to
come  to  his  aid  with  a  formidable  levj''  of
horse  and  foot  as  quickly  as  possible,  at  least
for  a  year.ff  The  States  answered  his  appeal
with  complaints  of  his  internal  administration.
A  secret  discontent,  of  which  the  fiery  im.petu-
ous  Maximilian  seemed  to  have  no  suspicion,
had  taken  possession  of  all  minds.

The  chief  complaints  arose  from  the  cities;
— and  indeed  with  good  reason.

Under  Elector  Berlhold  they  had  risen  to  a
very  brilliant  station,  and  had  taken  a  large
share  in  the  general  administration  of  affairs.
All  this  was  at  an  end  since  the  dissolution  of  the

II  Matthias  von  Gurk  informs  the  elector  Frederic,  Sept.
24,  that  he  v/as  going  with  certain  councillors  and  the
daughter  of  the  emperor  to  a  place  on  the  French  fron-
tier, in  order  to  treat  concerning  the  peace  with  the  Car-
dinal de  Rohan,  who  was  also  "to  come  thither.  ''  Frau
Margareta  handelt  und  muet  sich  mit  allem  Vleiss  und
Ernst  umb  ain  Frid."  "  The  Lady  Margaret  negotiates
and  exerts  herself  with  all  industry  and  earnestness  for  a
peace."  ^

**  By  a  letter  of  summons,  Cologne,  May  37, 1508,  after
the  above-mentioned  meeting  of  the  electors,  "ein  eilen-
der Reichstag,"  "a  speedy  diet  of  the  empire"  was  an-
nounced for  July  16  :  deferred  at  Boppart,  June  26,  "bis
wir  des  Reichs  Nothdurft  weiter  bedenken,"  —  "till  we
have  further  considered  the  necessities  of  the  empire,"  at
Cologne,  July  16,  fixed  for  All  Saints' day;  at  Brussels,
Septr  12,  this'  term  is  once  more  resolved  upon  ;  at  ?.Iech-
lin,  Dec.  22,  the  reason  of  the  fresh  delay  is  explained,
viz.  the  negotiations  with  France;  at  last,  INIarch  15,
1.509,  the  emperor  renews  his  letter  of  summons,  and
fixes  the  term  for  Judica. Fr.  Ar.,  vols.  xxiv.  and  xxv.

tt  Verhandelung  der  Stennde  des  h.  Reichs  ufl'  dem
kaiserlichen  Tage  zu  Worms  ao  dni  1509.  Frankft.  Ar.
vol.  xxiv.  Address  of  his  majesty,  Sunday,  April  22.  at
one  o'clock.  "  Wo  S.  Heiligkeit  "nit  gewest,  hätte  Kais.
Mt.  den  Verstand  und  Practica  nit  anjrenonimen."  Had
it  not  been  for  his  holiness,  his  imperial  majesty  would
not  have  accepted  the  treaty.  Yet  >te  remarks,  the  affair
"  werde  sich  liederlich  und  mit  kleinen  Kosten  ausführen
lassen," — "  might  be  executed  easily  and  at  little  cost."
\

74

VENETIAN  WAR.

Book  I.

Council  of  Regency  {Regiment.')  Nor  were
any  municipal  assessors  admitted  into  the  Im-
perial Chamber.  Nevertheless,  they  were
compelled  to  contribute  not  only  to  all  the
other  taxes,  as  well  as  to  the  expenses  of  the
administration  of  justice,  but  the  rate  imposed
on  them  at  Constance  was  disproportionately
high.  Even  at  Cologne  they  were  not  spared,
as  we  saw;  they  were  compelled  to  furnish
nearly  two-sevenths  of  the  subsidies;  but  at
Constance  a  full  third  of  the  whole  amount  of
foot  soldiers  and  of  money  vras  levied  upon
them.*  Na}^,  as  if  this  was  not  enough,  im-
mediately after  the  diet  the  emperor  caused  the
plenipotentiaries  of  the  cities  to  be  cited  before
the  fiscal  of  the  empire,  who  called  them  to
account  for  the  continuance  of  the  great  mer-
chants' company,  which  had  been  forbidden
by  previous  imperial  edicts,  and  demanded  a
fine  of  90,000  gulden  for  carrying  on  unlawful
traffic.  The  merchants  loudly  protested  against
this  sentence  ;  they  said  that  they  were  treated
like  serfs  ;  it  were  better  for  them  to  quit  their
native  country,  and  emigrate  to  Venice  or
Switzerland,  or  even  France,  where  honourable
trade  and  dealing  was  not  restricted  ;  but  they
W'ere  forced  at  last  to  compound  b}'  means  of  a
considerable  suiti.  The  cities  were  not  so
weak,  however,  as  to  submit  quietly  to  all  this  ;
they  had  lield  town-meetings  {Slädtetag)  and
had  determined  to  put  themselves  in  an  atti-
tude of  defence  at  the  next  imperial  diet;")"  the
members  of  the  Swabian  league  as  well  as  the
others.  They  had  not  the  slightest  inclination
to  strain  their  resources  against  a  republic  with
w^hich  they  carried  on  the  most  advantageous
commercial  intercourse,  and  which  they  were
accustomed  to  regard  as  the  model  and  the
natural  head  of  all  municipal  communities.:!:  ■
Among  the  princes,  too,  there  was  much  bad
blood.  The  demands  of  the  imperial  chamber,
the  irregularities  in  the  levies  of  men  and  mo-
ney, vv'hich  we  shall  have  occasion  to  notice
again,  had  disgusted  the  most  powerful  among
them.  The  Palatinate  vras  still  unreconciled.
The  old  Count  Palatine  was  dead  ;  his  sons
appeared  at  Worms,  but  they  could  not  succeed
in  obtainincr  their  fief. The  warlike  zeal  which

*  Accounts  in  the  genuine  Fiisser.  It  appears  to  me
that  the  sum  amounted  to  20,000  gulden.  See  Jäger,
ScJiwiiliisches  Städtewesen,  677.

t  The  resolutions  of  these  municipal  diets  deserve  much
more  accurate  examination.  A  letter  from  the  Swabian
league,  Oct.  21,  1508,  calls  to  mind,  "  welchermaass  auf
verii-ar.gen  gemeinem  Frei  und  Reichsstett-Tag  zu  Speier
der  Beschwerden  halben,  so  den  Stettboten  uf  dem  Reich-
stag zu  Costnitz  begegnet  sind,  gerathschlagt  und  sun-
derlicli  verlassen  ist,  so  die  Rom.  Königl.  Mt.  wiederum
ein  Reichstair  fürnehmen  wird,  dass  alsdann  gemeine
Frei  und  Reichsstette  gen  Speier  beschrieben  werden
sollten."  — "  In  what  manner,  at  a  former  common  diet
of  the  free  and  imperial  cities  held  at  Spires  by  r,eason  of
complaints  with  regard  to  the  treatment  the  deputies  of
the  cities  had  met  with  at  the  imperial  diet  at  Constance,
it  had  been  discussed  and  specially  resolved  on,  in  case
his  majesty,  the  King  of  the  Romans,  should  again  pro-
pose a  diet  of  the  empire,  that  then  the  free  and  imperial
cities  should  be  convened  in  common  at  Spires."

X  Very  curious  indications  of  the  light  in  which  Venice
was  regarded  by  the  trading  towns  of  Germany  are  still
to  be  found  at  Nürnberg.  That  magnificent  city  endea-
voured in  all  its  institutions  to  imitate  the  queen  of  the
Adriatic.  I  ha\-e  seen,  in  MS.,  an  application  from  the
council  of  Nürnberg  to  the  senate  of  Venice  for  the  rules
,of  an  orphan  asylum,  in  which  this  sentiment  is  strongly
expressed.— TßAKSL.

had  recently  inflamed  many  for  the  emperos,
had  greatly  subsided  after  the  bad  results  of  his
first  campaign.

But  the  circumstance  which  made  a  stronger
impression  than  all  the  rest,  was  the  conduct
of  Maximilian  with  regard  to  his  last  treaties.
At  the  diet  of  Constance,  the  States  had  pro-
posed sending  an  embassy  to  France  in  order
to  renew  negotiations  with  that  power ;  for
they  did  not  choose  to  commit  the  whole  busi-
ness of  the  empire  implicitly  to  its  chief.  Max-
imilian had  at  that  time  rejected  all  these  pro-
posals, and  professed  an  irreconcilable  enmity
to  the  French.  Now,  on  the  contrary,  he  had
himself  concluded  a  treaty  with  France,  and
without  consulting  the  States  ;  nay,  he  did  not
even  think  himself  called  upon  to  communicate
to  them  the  treaty  when  ratified. §  No  wonder
if  these  puissant  princes,  who  had  so  lately
entertained  the  project  of  uniting  all  the  powers
of  the  empire  in  a  government  constituted  by
themselves,  were  profoundly  disgusted.  They
reminded  the  emperor,  that  they  had  told  him
at  Constance  that  the  grant  he  then  received
was  the  last ;  and  that  he,  on  his  side,  had
abandoned  all  claim  to  further  aids.  He  was
persuaded,  they  said,  by  his  councillors,  that
the  empire  must  help  him  as  often  as  he  chose
to  require  help;  but  this  notion  must  not  be
allowed  to  take  root  in  his  mind,  or  they  would
have  perpetually  to  suffer  from  it.

A  very  strong  opposition  thus  arose  on  vari-
ous grounds  to  the  king's  proposals.  It  made
no  change  in  public  opinion,  that  the  French
obtained  a  brilliant  victory  over  the  Venetians,
and  that  the  latter  for  a  moment  doubted  Avhe-
ther  they  should  be  able  to  retain  their  posses-
sions on  the  main  land.  On  the  contrary,  the
first  obstacle  to  the  victorious  career  of  the
league  of  Cambrai  was  raised  in  Germany.
At  the  same  moment  in  which  the  Venetian
cities  in  Apulia,  Romagna  and  Lombardy  fell
into  the  hands  of  the  allies  after  the  battle  of
Aguadello,  a  committee  of  the  States  advised,
and  the  whole  body  thereupon  resolved,  that
an  answ^er  should  be  sent  to  the  emperor,  re-
fusing all  succours.  They  declared  that  they
were  neither  able  to  support  him  in  the  present
war,  nor  were  they  bound  to  do  so.  Unable,
because  the  last  subsidies  had  been  announced
to  their  subjects  as  final,  and  no  fresh  ones
could  be  levied  without  great  difficulties  and
discontents:  not  bound,  since  the  treaty  had
not  even  been  communicated  to  them,  as  was
the  custom  from  time  immemorial  in  all  cases
of  the  kind. II

§  The  Weimar  Archives  contain  an  opinion  upon  the
necessity  of  refusing  succours,  in  which  persons  are  espe-
cially co'mpiained  of,  "  so  bei  S.  Kais.  Mt.  sein  und  sich
allwege  geflissen  Ks.  Mt.  dahin  zu  bewegen  Hilf  bei  den
Stenden  "des  Reiches  zu  suchen  zu  solchem  Füriiemen,  das
doch  ohne  Rad  und  Bewusst  der  Stennde  des  h.  Reichs
beschehen  ist."— "who  are  about  his  imperial  majesty,
and  in  all  ways  strive  to  move  his  imperial  majesty  to
seek  help  from  the  states  of  the  empire,  towards  such
undertaking,  which,  however,  has  been  entered  upon
without  the  advice  and  knowledge  of  the  states  of  the
holy  empire."

11  Transactions,  &r.  "  Dweile  die  Stende  des  Reichs
davon  kein  gründliches  Wissen  tragen,  so  hab  I.  Ks.  Mt.
wol^l  zu  ermessen,  dass  wo  ichts  darin  begriffen  oderver-
leipt  das  dem  h.  Reich  jetzo  oder  in  Zukunft  zu  Nach-
theil thate  reichen,  es  were  mit  Herzogthum  Mailand

Book  I.

DIET  OF  WORMS,  1509.

The  emperor's  commissioners  (for  he  had
quitted  the  diet  again  himself  a  few  days  after
his  arrival,  in  order  to  hasten  the  armaments
on  the  Italian  frontier,)*  were  in  the  utmost
perplexity.  What  would  the  church,  what
would  France,  say  if  the  holy  empire  alone  did
not  fulfil  its  conditions  1  The  States  declined
any  further  explanation  on  the  matter;  if  the
commissioners  had  any  proposition  to  make
concerning  law  and  order,  concerning  the  ad-
ministration of  justice,  or  the  coinage,  the
States  were  ready  to  entertain  it.  The  com-
missioners asked  whether  this  was  the  unani-
mous opinion  of  all  the  States ;  the  States
replied,  that  was  their  unanimous  resolution.
The  commissioners  said,  that  nothing  then
remained  for  them  but  to  report  the  matter  to
the  emperor,  and  await  his  answer.

It  may  easily  be  imagined  what  a  tempest
of  rage  he  fell  into.  From  the  frontiers  of
Italy  —  from  Trent — he  dispatched  a  violent
answer,  printed,  though  sealed.  He  began  by
justifying  his  own  conduct;  especially  the
conclusion  of  the  last  treaty,  for  which  he  had
power  and  authority,  "  as  reigning  Roman
Emperor,  according  to  the  ordinance  of  the
Almighty,  and  after  high  counsel  and  delibera-
'tion  ;"  he  then  threw  the  blame  of  his  reverses
back  on  the  States,  alleging,  as  the  cause  of
them,  the  incompleteness  of  the  subsidies.
Their  inability  he  could  not  admit.  They
should  not  try  to  amass  treasure,  but  think  of
the  oath  they  had  sworn,  and  the  allegiance
they  owed  to  him.  Nor  was  that  the  cause  of
their  refusal ;  it  was  the  resentment  which
some  had  conceived  because  their  advice  was
not  taken.

Before  this  answer  arrived,  the  States  had
dispersed. No  final  Recess  was  drawn  up.

DIET OF AUGSBURG, 1510; OF TREVES AND
COLOGNE, 1512.

Before  I  proceed  further,  I  feel  bound  to
make  the  confession  that  the  interest  with
which  I  had  followed  the  development  of  the
constitution  of  the  empire,  began  to  decline
from  this  point  of  my  researches.

That,  at  so  important  a  moment,  when  the
most  desirable  conquest  was  within  their  grasp
—  a  conquest  which  would  have  more  than
freed  them  from  the  burdens  they  bore  so  re-
luctantly, and  would  have  constituted  an  inter-

oiler  anderm,  dem  Reich  zuständig,  dass  sie  darin  nit
wiilisen  können."  —  "  Seeing  tiiat  the  states  of  the  em-
pire have  no  thorough  knowledge  thereof,  his  imperial
majesty  has  to  consider  well  that  if  anything  be  therein
contaiiiied  or  embodied  which  misht  tend  now  or  hereaf-
ter to  the  injury  of  the  lioly  empire,  he  it  with  regard  to
the  dachy  of  Milan,  or  any  other  belonging  to  the  empire,
they  cannot  give  their  consent  thereunto."

*  Not  Out  of  anger,  as  has  been  commonly  believed.
He  declared  as  early  as  the  2-2d  of  April,  that  he  could  not
await  the  conclusion,  and  went  away  two  days  after-
wards, before  the  diet  had  fully  met :  the  real  proposition
of  the  diet  took  place  only  on  May  16,  Wednesday  before
the  Feast  of  the  Assumption,*  Casimir  of  Brandenburg
acting  as  his  Lieutenant  {Staithalier).  Adolf  von  Nassau
and  Frauenberg  as  his  councillors.  Frankf.  Ar.,  vol.
Xiiv.  Tne  letters  of  the  Frankfurt  friend  of  the  council
{Rathsfreund),  Johannes  Frosch,  repeat  nearly  what  is
contained  in  the  Archives,  with  some  additions.  It  ap-
pears from  lioth  that  no  final  resolution  was  come  to,
altbough  Müller  and  Fels  seem  to  imply  the  contrary.

est  common  to  all  the  States — they  came  to  no
agreement,  shows  that  all  these  efiforts  were
doomed  to  end  in  nothing,  and  that  the  impos-
sibility of  reaching  the  proposed  end  lay  in  the
nature  of  things.

Although  the  emperor  by  no  means  took  the
active,  creative  part  which  has  been  ascribed
to  him  in  the  establishment  of  national  institu-
tions, he  evinced  a  strong  inclination  towards
them ;  he  had  a  lofty  conception  of  the  unity
and  dignity  of  the  empire;  and  occasionally
he  submitted  to  constitutional  forms,  the  effect
of  which  was  to  limit  his  power.  Nor  were
there  ever  States  so  profoundly  convinced  of
the  necessity  of  founding  settled  coherent  in-
stitutions, and  so  ready  to  engage  in  tlie  work,
as  those  over  which  he  presided.  Yet  these
two  powers  could  not  find  the  point  of  coin-
cidence'of  their  respective  tendencies.

The  States  saw  in  themselves,  and  in  their
own  union,  the  unity  of  the  empire.  They  had
in  their  minds  a  government  composed  of  re-
presentatives of  the  several  orders  in  the  em-
pire {ständisches  Itegimeni)\  such  as  really
existed  in  some  of  the  separate  territories  of
the  empire;  by  which  they  thought  to  main-
tain the  dignity  of  the  emperor,  or,  if  occasion
demanded,  to  set  fixed  bounds  to  his  arbitrary
rule ;  and  to  introduce  regularity  and  order
into  the  establishments  for  war,  finance,  and
law,  even  at  the  expense  of  the  power  of  the
territorial  sovereigns.  But  the  calamities  of
an  ill-timed  carapai'^n,  and  the  dissatisfaction
of  the  emperor  with  the  part  they  took  in
foreign  affairs,  had  destroyed  their  work.

Maximilian  then  undertook  to  renovate  the
empire  by  means  of  similar  institutions,  only
with  a  firmer  maintenance  of  the  monarchical
principle;  resolutions  to  that  effect  were  actu-
ally passed,  not  indeed  of  such  a  radical  and
vital  character  as  those  we  have  just  mentioned,
but  more  practicable  in  their  details  :  but  when
these  details  came  tobe  carried  into  execution,
misunderstandings,  reluctances  without  end
appeared,  and  suddenly  every  thing  was  at  a
stand.

The  States  had  been  more  intent  on  internal,
Maximilian  on  external,  affairs ;  but  neither
would  the  king  so  far  strip  himself  of  his  ab-
solute power,  nor  the  States  part  with  so  much
of  their  influence,  as  the  other  party  desired.
The  States  had  not  power  to  keep  the  emperor
within  the  circle  they  had  drawn  round  him,
while  the  emperor  was  unable  to  hurry  them
along  in  the  path  he  had  entered  upon.

For  such  is  the  nature  of  human  affairs,  that
little  is  to  be  accomplished  by  deliberation  and
a  nice  balance  of  things :  solid  and  durable
foundations  can  only  be  laid  by  superior  strength
and  a  firm  will.

Maximilian  always  maintained,  and  not  with-
out a  colour  of  probability,  that  the  refusal  of
the  empire  to  stand  by  him  gave  the  Venetians
fresh  courage.:}: Padua,  which  was  already

t  See  note,  p.  C2. __

X  Rovereyt,  Nov.  8,  1509.  "  Als  uns  der  Stend  Hilf  und
Beistand  vorzigen  und  abgeschlagen,  und  den  Venedigern
das  kund,  wurden  sy  mehr  gestärkt,  suchten  erst  all  ir
Vermögen  und  bewegten  daneben  den  gemein  Popl  in
Statten."—"  When  the  help  and  assistance  of  the  states

7G

VENETIAN  WAR.

Book  I.

invested,  was  lost  again,  and  Maximilian  be-
sieged this  powerful  city  in  vain.  In  order  to
carry  on  the  war,  he  was  obliged  to  convoke
the  States  anew.  On  the  6th  of  March,  1510,
a  fresh  imperial  diet  was  opened  at  Augsburg.*
Maximilian  represented  the  necessity  of  once
more  bringing  an  army  against  Venice.  Al-
ready he  had  extended  the  empire  over  Bur-
gundy and  the  Netherlands,  and  established
an  hereditary  right  to  Hungary  ;  he  would  now
annex  to  it  these  rich  domains,  on  which  the
burdens  of  the  state  might  fall,  instead  of  rest-
ing wholly  on  Germany.

The  prospect  thus  held  out  produced  a  cer-
tain impression  on  the  States,  yet  they  still  re-
mained very  pacific.  They  wished  to  bring
the  affair  to  a  conclusion  by  a  negotiation  with
Venice.  The  Republic  had  already  promised
a  payment  of  100,000  gulden  down,  and  10,000
gulden  yearly  tax,  and  the  diet  was  extremely
inclined  to  treat  on  this  basis.  This  will  ap-
pear intelligible  enough,  when  it  is  remember-
ed with  how  much  difficulty  a  grant  of  a  few
hundred  thousand  gulden  was  obtained.  It
Avould  at  least  have  relieved  them  from  the
small  tax  raised  for  the  support  of  the  Imperial
Chamber,  which  was  collected  with  great  diffi-
culty.f

To  the  emperor,  however,  these  offers  ap-
peared almost  insulting.  He  calculated  that
the  war  had  cost  him  a  million ;  that  Venice
derived  an  annual  profit  of  500,000  gulden  from
Germany ;  he  declared  that  he  would  not  suf-
fer himself  to  be  put  off  so.

The  misfortune  was  now,  as  before,  that  he
could  not  inspire  the  States  with  his  own  war-
like ardour.  All  projects  that  recalled  the
Common  Penny  or  the  four-hundredth  man,
were  rejected  at  the  first  mention.  A  grant
was  indeed  at  length  agreed  on ;  they  consent-
ed to  raise  succours  according  to  the  census
and  rate  (raatricula)  fixed  at  Cologne  (for  they
rejected  that  of  Constance),  and  to  keep  them
in  the  field  for  half  a  year:^  but  how  could
they  hope  to  drive  the  Venetians  from  tl?e  terra
firma  by  so  slight  an  effort  1  The  papal  nun-
cio spoke  on  the  subject  in  private  to  some  of

was  withdrawn  and  refused  us,  and  this  became  known
to  the  Venetians,  they  felt  further  strengthened,  and  ex-
amined into  all  their  resources,  and  moreover  stirred  up
the  common  people  in  the  cities." — Frankf.  Ar.

*  Häberlin  is  uncertain  whether  the  imperial  diet  had
been  summoned  for  the  feast  of  the  three  kings,  or  for
the  I2th  of  Jan.  The  summons  is  addressed  to  the  ob-
servers of  the  feast  of  the  three  kings,  f.  e.  Jan.  13.

t  Proceedings  at  the  Imperial  Diet  held  at  Augsburg  in
1510.  (Fr.  Ar.)  Answer  of  the  States,  second  Wednesday
after  Judica.  They  advised  the  measure,  in  order  neither
to  let  the  matterdrop  entirely  for  the  future,  "oder  veil
nachtheiliger  und  beschwerliciier  Rachtigung  annehmen
zu  müssen,  als  Jetzt  dem  heil.  Reich  zu  Ehr  und  Lob
erlangt  werden  möge  :" — "  nor  to  he  obliged  to  accede  to
a  more  disadvantageous  and  oppressive  arrangement,
than  might  now  be  got  to  the  honour  and  praise  of  the
holy  empire."

X  The  emperor  desired  a  free  promise  of  "  the  grant
made  at  Constance  for  as  long  as  his  majesty  should  have
need  of  it."  He  was  willing  to  give  a  secret  promise  in
return,  that  he  wanted  them  for  one  year  only.  The
States  proposed  the  levy  of  Cologne.  The  emperor  re-
plied that  this  shocked  him;  that  many  of  the  States
were  able  to  contribute  more  than  that  singly.  They
persisted,  however,  and  all  they  resolved  on  was,  to  grant
the  levy  of  Cologne  for  half,  as  they  had  before  done  for  a
whole,  year.

the  most  influential  princes.  They  answered
him  without  reserve,  that  the  emperor  was  so
ill-supported  because  he  had  undertaken  the
war  without  their  advice.

It  followed  by  a  natural  reaction,  that  Maxi-
milian felt  himself  bound  by  no  considerations
towards  the  empire.  When  he  was  requested
at  Augsburg  not  to  give  up  his  conquests  at
his  own  pleasure,  he  replied,  that  the  empire
did  not  support  him  in  a  manner  that  would
make  it  possible  to  do  otherwise  ;  he  must  be
at  liberty  to  conclude  treaties,  and  to  make  ces-
sions as  he  found  occasion.  So  little  advance
was  made  at  this  diet  towards  a  good  under-
standing and  co-operation  between  the  emperor
and  the  States.

The  emperor  rejected  even  the  most  reason-
able and  necessary  proposals.  The  States  re-
quired that  he  should  refrain  from  all  interfer-
ence with  the  proceedings  of  the  Imperial
Chamber.  This  had  been  the  subject  of  con-
tinual discussion,  and  was  at  total  variance
with  the  idea  upon  which  the  whole  institution
was  founded.  Maximilian,  however,  did  not
scruple  to  repl)^  that  the  Chamber  sometimes
interfered  in  matters  beyond  its  competence :
that  he  could  not  allow  his  hands  to  be  tied.

No  wonder  if  the  States  refused  to  assent  t»
a  plan  which  he  submitted  to  them  for  the  exe-
cution of  the  sentences  of  the  Imperial  Cham-
ber, notwithstanding  its  remarkable  merits,
r^Iaximilian  proposed  to  draw  out  a  scheme  of
a  permanent  levy  for  the  whole  empire,  calcu-
lated on  the  scale  of  Cologne,  of  from  one  to
fifty  thousand  men,  so  that,  in  any  exigency,
nothing  would  be  needed  but  to  determine  the
amount  of  the  subsidy  required.  For,  he  said,
a  force  was  necessary  to  chastise  the  rebellious
who  break  the  Public  Peace  or  disregard  the
ban  of  the  Chamber,  or  otherwise  refuse  to
perform  the  duties  of  subjects  of  the  empire.
The  fame  of  such  an  organisation  would  also
intimidate  foreign  enemies.  A  committee  might
then  sit  in  the  Imperial  Chamber,  charged  v.-ith
the  duty  of  determining  the  employment  of
this  force  in  the  interior.§  This  was  evidently
a  consistent  mode  of  carrying  out  the  matricu-
lar  system.  Maximilian,  with  the  acuteness
and  sagacity  peculiar  to  him,  had  once  more
touched  and  placed  in  a  prominent  light  the
exact  thing  needed.  The  States  declared  that
this  scheme  vras  the  offspring  of  great  wisdom
and  reflection  ;  but  they  were  not  to  be  moved
to  assent  to  it — they  would  only  engage  to  take
it  into  consideration  at  the  next  diet.  This
was  natural  enough.  The  very  first  employ-
ment of  the  levy  would  have  certainly  been  in
Maximilian's  foreign  wars.  The  emperor's
councillors,  too,  with  whom  the  States  were

§  Commissioners  for  the  maintenance  of  the  law.
"  Also  dass  Kais.  Mt.  Jemand  dazu  verordnet,  desgleichen
auch  das  Reich  von  jedem  Stand  etliche,  mit  voller  Ge-
walt, zu  erkennen,  ob  man  Jemand  der  sich  beklagt  dass
ihm  Unrecht  gescliehen.  Hülfe  schuldig  sey  und  wie
gross." — "  So  that  his  imperial  majesty  do  appoint  some
one;  in  the  same  manner,  also,  the  empire,  certain  per-
sons from  eacli  state,  with  full  pou  er  to  discover  whether
help,  and  to  what  extent,  be  due  to  any  man  complain-
ing that  wrong  has  been  done  him."  In  each  quarter  of
the  empire  was  to  be  a  president,  who  would  summon
help  upon  such  discovery.  There  was  also  to  be  a  gene-
ral captain  for  the  empire.

Book  I.

DIET  OF  TREVES  AND  COLOGNE,  1512.

77

extremely  dissatisfied,  would  have  gained  a
new  support  in  their  demands.

It  was  not  to  be  expected  that  affairs  would
turn  out  otherwise  than  thej'  did.

No  new  disputes  arose  at  Augsburg" :  to  ap-
pearance a  tolerable  harmön)'  prevailed,  but  in
essentials  no  approach  was  made  to  union.

-INIaximilian  carried  on  the  Venetian  war  for
a  few  years  longer,  with  various  success,  and
involved  in  ever  new  complications  of  European
policy.  He  interwove  some  threads  in  the
great  >web  of  the  history  of  that  age,  but  ail
his  attempts  to  draw  the  empire  into  a  fuller
participation  in  his  views  and  actions  were
vain  :  neither  the  cities,  nor  even  the  Jews  who
inhabited  them,  gave  ear  to  his  demands  for
money  ;  the  results  of  his  levies^were  so  inade-
quate that  he  was  obliged  to  dismiss  them  as

already  overladen  with  burthens,  and  that  it
would  be  impossible  to  extort  more  from  them.
He  then  requested  that  at  least  the  tax  might
be  granted  until  so  long  as  it  should  have  pro-
duced a  million  of  gulden.  The  States  re-
plied that  the  bare  mention  of  such  a  sum
would  fill  the  people  with  terror.

The  emperor's  other  proposition,  concerning
the  execution  of  the  sentences  of  the  Imperial
Chamber,  was  received  and  discussed  v.  iih
greater  cordiality.  Rejecting  the  division  of
the  empire  into  four  quarters,  which  Maximil-
ian, like  Albert  IL,  had  once  thought  of
adopting,  the  States  conceived  the  idea  of  em-
plo5'ing  the  division  into  circles  (hitherto  used
only  for  the  elections  for  the  Council  of  Re-
gency and  the  Imperial  Chamber)  for  that
purpose,  and  of  rendering  it  more  generally

useless;  the  utmost  he  could-hope  was,  that  applicable  to  public  ends.  The  electoral  and
the  succours  granted  him  in  Augsburg  would  |im,perial  hereditary  domains  were  also  to  be
arrive  at  last. The  surrender  of  one  city  after  j  included among the circles. Saxony and

another,  the  loss  of  the  hope  of  some  allevia
lion  of  the  public  burthens,  were  partly  the
consequence,  partly  the  cause,  of  all  tliese  mis-
understandings.

In  April,  1512,  a  diet  again  assembled  at
Treves,  whence  its  sittings  were  afterwards
transferred  to  Cologne.*

The  emperor  began  by  renewing  his  proposal
for  a  permanent  rate  and  census,  and  by  pray-
ing for  a  favourable  answer.  The  princes
answered,  that  it  was  impossible  to  carry  this
measure  through  in  their  dominions,  and  with
their  subjects;  they  begged  him  to  propose  to
them  other  ways  and  means. T^Iaximilian  re-

Brandenburg,  with  their  several  houses,  were
to  form  the  seventh  ;  the  four  Rhenish  elector-
ates the  eighth,  Austria  the  ninth.  Burgundy
the  tenth  circle.  In  each  a  captain  or  governor
was  to  be  appointed  for  the  execution  of  the
law.

But  this  subject  also  gave  rise  to  the  most
important  difierences.  The  emperor  laid  claim
to  the  nomination  of  these  captains,  and  de-
manded moreover  a  captain-general,  whom  he
might  employ  in  war,  and  a  Council  of  eight
members  who  should  reside  at  his  court;  a
sort  of  ministry  {Jiegtrueni),  from  whose  par-
ticipation in  affairs  he  promised  himself  pecu-

plied,  that  he  trusted  they  would  then  at  least  j  liar  influence  in  the  empire. The  States
revert  to  the  resolutions  of  the  year  1500,  and  ;  the  contrary,  would  hear  nothing  either  of  these
grant him the four-hundredth m.an that he  '  councillors,  or  of  the  captain-general,  and  they

might  gain  the  victory  over  the  enem}^  and  a
Common  Penny  wherewith  to  maintain  the
victory  when  gained. The  States  did  not  ven-

insisted  on  reserving  to  themselves  the  nomi-
nation of  the  captains  of  their  circles.

These  points  gave  rise  to  fresh  and  violent

ture  entirely  to  reject  this  proposal,  feeling  |  disputes  at  Cologne,  in  August,  1512.  On  one
themselves,  as  they  did,  bound  by  the  promises  I  occasion  the  emperor  refused  to  receive  the
made  at  Augsburg.  The  scheme"^of  a  Commion  j  answer  sent  by  the  States,  which,  he  said,  was
Penny  was^now°resumed,  but  with  modifica-  no  answer,  and  should  not  rem.ain  a  moment  in
tions  which  robbed  it  of  all  its  importance  : his  hands.

they  lowered  the  rate  extremely  ;  before,  they  j  It  was  only  through  the  zealcus  endeavours
had  determined  to  levy  a  tax  of"  one  gulden  on  j  of  the  Elector  of  INIainz,  that  the  proposal  for
every  thousand,  capital;  now,  it  was  to  be  I  the  eight  councillors  was  at  length  accepted,
only  one  on  every  four  thousand.-}-  They  like-  |  Their  chief  office  was  to  be  that  of  putting  an
wise  exempted  themselves :  before,  princes  I  end  to  quarrels  by  conciliation.  Of  the  rap-
and  lords  vrere  to  contribute  according  to  their  ;  tain-general,  no  further  mention  occurs.  I  do
property ;  now  they  alleged  they  had  other  |  not  find  that  there  was  any  intention  of  limit-
charges  for  the  empire,  to  defray  out  of  their  \  ing  the  circles  in  the  nomination  of  the  subor

own  exchequer.  Even  the  representations  of
the  knights  were  immediately  yielded  to;  they
were  only  to  be  bound  to'  include  their  vassals
and  subjects  within  the  assessment.  iNlaxi-
milian  made  less  objection  to  this,  than  to  the
insufficiency  of  the  tax  generally;  but  the
States  answered  that  the  common  people  were

*  The  acts  of  this  diet  are  to  be  found  tolerably  cnni-
plete  in  vol.  xxxi.  of  the  Frankfurt  Collection.  The  let-
ters of  the  Frankfurt  deput.v,  Jacob  Heller,  from  the  -Ith
of  ?=Iay  to  the  29th  of  June,  are  dated  from  Treves;  one
on  the  lith  of  July  from  Cologne,  in  vol.  xx'ix.

t  This  is  the  principle  :— Whoever  possessed  50  gulden
was  to  pay  one-sixtieth  of  a  Rhenish  gulden;  between
50  and  100,  one-fortieth  ;  100  and  400,  one-twentieth ;  400
and  1000,  one  tenth;  1000  and  1500.  one-fifth;  2000  and
4000,  one-half;  4000  and  10,000,  one  gulden.

dinate  captains.  The  subsidy  was  granted  in
the^way  determined  by  the  States,  and  the  em-
peror abandoned  his  demand  for  a  million.

At  length,  therefore,  resolutions  were  passed,
and  finally  em.bodied  in  a  Recess  of  the  em-
pire.

When,  hovrever,  v/e  come  to  examine
whether  it  was  executed,  we  find  not  a  trace
of  it.  There  was  a  numerous  party  which  had
never,  from  the  first,  assented  to  the  resolu-
tions, though  they  had  not  b  en  able  to  prevent
their  adoption;  at  the  head  of  which  was  one
of  the  most  experienced  and  the  most  respected
princes  of  the  empire — Frederic,  Elector  of
Saxony. The projected subsidy  was never

78

INTESTINE  DISORDERS.

Boos:  I.

even  called  for,  much  less  raised.  The  eight
councillors  were  never  appointed,  nor  the  cap-
tains, whether  supreme  or  subordinate.  The
division  of  the  empire  into  ten  circles  did  not
assume  any  positive  character  till  ten  years
later.

liSTESTiNE  Disorders.

Had  the  attempts  to  give  a  constitution  to
the  empire  succeeded,  a  considerable  internal
agitation  must  necessarily  have  ensued,  until
an  adaptation  and  subordination  of  the  several
parts  to  the  newly-created  central  power  had
taken  place.  But  that  attempts  had  been  made,
and  had  not  succeeded, — that  existing  institu-
tions had  been  rudely  shaken  and  no  real  or
vital  unity  been  produced, — could  result  in
nothing  but  a  universal  fermentation.

The  reciprocal  rights  and  duties  of  the  head
of  the  empire  and  the  States,  were  now  for  the
first  time  thrown  into  utter  uncertainty  and  con-
fusion. The  States  had  demanded  a  share  in
the  jurisdiction  and  the  government;  tlie  em-
peror had  conceded  some  points  and  had  held
tenaciously  to  others ;  no  settled  boundary  of
their  respective  powers  had  been  traced.  It
was  an  incessant  series  of  demands  and  refu-
sals— extorted  grants,  inadequate  supplies —
without  sincere  practical  efforts,  without  mate-
rial results,  and  hence,  without  satisfaction  on
any  side.  Formerly  the  union  of  the  electors
had,  at  least,  possessed  a  certain  independence,
and  had  represented  the  unity  of  the  empire.
Since  1501  this  also  was  dissolved.  Lastly,
Mainz  and  Saxony  had  fallen  into  a  bitter  strife,
which  entirely  broke  up  the  college.  The  only
institutions  which  had  come  to  any  real  matu-
rity, were  the  Imperial  Chamber  and  the  matri-
cula.  But  how  carelessly  was  this  construct-
ed !  Princes  who  no  longer  existed,  except  in
old  registers,  were  entered  in  the  list;  while
no  notice  was  taken  of  the  class  of  mediate
proprietors  which  had  gradually  arisen.  Count-
less appeals  were  the  consequence.  The  em-
peror himself  named  fifteen  secular,  and  five
spiritual  lordr,,  whose  succours  belonged  to  the
contingent  of  his  own  dominions,  and  not  to  the
matricula  of  The  empire;  Saxony  named  fifteen
secular  lords  and  three  bishops*;  Brandenburg,
two  bishops  and  two  counts;  Cologne,  four
counts  and  lords;  every  one  of  the  greater
States  put  forward  mediate  claims  which  had
not  been  thougfht  of. A  number  of  cities,  too.

*  In  the  Archives  at  Dresden  there  is  an  instruction
from  D;ike  George  for  Dr.  G.  von  Breyttenbach,  accord-
ing to  which  the  latter  was  to  declare  at  Worms  (in  1509),
"  das  wir  uns  nicht  anders  zu  erinnern  wissen,  denn  das
alles,  so  wir  uf  dem  Reychstage  zu  Costnitz  zu  Under-
haltung  des  Kammergerichtes  zu  geben  bewilligt,  mit
Protestation  beschehen,  also  das  dye  ßischoffe  und  Stifte
desgleichen  Graven  und  Herrn  die  uns  mit  Lehen  ver-
wandt und  auch  in  unseru  Fürstenthumen  sesshaftig
seyn,  welche  auch  an  dem  Kammergericht  nie  gestanden,
jchtes  dabei  zu  thun  nicht  schuldig,  bei  solcher  Freiheit
bleiben."—"  That  we  have  no  other  remembrance  than
that  all  which  we  consented  to  give  at  the  diet  at  Con-
stance for  the  maintenance  of  the  Imperial  Chamber,
was  accompanied  with  a  protest;  that  thus  the  bishops
and  chapters  of  such  counts  and  lords  as  hold  of  us  by
feudal  tenure  and  are  vassals  of  our  principalities,  and
who  have  never  appeared  before  the  Imperial  Chamber
and  are  under  no  obligation  to  do  so,  continue  to  be
exempt."

were  challenged.  Gelnhausen,  by  the  Palati-
nate; Göttingen,  by  the  house  of  Brunswick;
Duisburg,  Niederwesel,  and  Soest,  by  Juliers;
Hamburg,  by  Holstein. f  In  the  acts  of  the
diets  v/e  find  the  memorial  of  an  ambassador  of
Denmark-Holstein  to  the  States  of  the  empire^
wherein  he  pleads  that  he  has  travelled  two
hundred  miles  (German)  to  the  emperor,  but
could  obtain  no  answer  either  from  him  or  his
councillors;  and  now  addressed  himself  to  the
States,  to  inform  them  that  there  was  a  city
called  Hamburg,  lying  in  the  land  of  Holstein,
which  had  been  assessed  as  an  imperial  city,
but  of  which  his  gracious  masters  were  the  na-
tural hereditary  lords  and  sovereigns.:^  There
was  no  dispute  about  the  principle.  It  was  al-
ways declared  in  the  Recesses,  that  the  States
should  retain  their  right  over  all  the  succours
which  belonged  to  them  from  remote  times ;
yet  in  every  individual  case  the  question  and
the  conflicting  claim  were  always  revived.
Even  the  most  powerful  princes  had  to  com-
plain that  the  fiscal  of  the  Imperial  Chamber
issued  penal  mandates  against  their  vassals.

In  short,  the  Imperial  Chamber  excited  op-
position from  every  side.  The  princes  felt
themselves  controlled  by  it,  the  inferior  States,
not  protected.  Saxony  and  Brandenburg  re-
minded the  diet  that  they  had  only  subjected
their  sovereign  franchises  to  the  chamber  under
certain  conditions.  Joachim  I.  of  Brandenburg
complained  that  this  tribunal  received  appeals
from  the  courts  of  his  dominions;  which  had
never  been  done  in  his  father's  time.§  The
knights  of  the  empire,  on  the  other  hand,  were
discontented  at  the  influence  exercised  by  the
powerful  princes  over  the  chamber;  when  a
prince,  they  said,  saw  that  he  would  be  de-
feated, he  found  means  to  stop  the  course  of
justice.  Maximilian,  at  least,  did  not  think
their  complaints  unfounded  :  "  Either,"  says
he,  "  the  poor  man  can  get  no  justice  against
the  noble,  or  if  he  does,  it  is  '  so  sharp  and  fine
pointed'  that  it  avails  him  nothing."  Nor
were  the  cities  backward  with  their  complaints.
They  thought  it  insufferable  that  the  judge
should  receive  the  fiscal  dues  ;  they  prayed  for
the  punishment  of  the  abandoned  men  by
whose  practices  many  cities  were,  without  any
crime  or  oflTence,  dragged  before  the  court :  in
the  year  1512  they  again  demanded  that  two
assessors  appointed  by  the  cities  should  have
seats  in  the  chamber  ;|| — of  course,  all  in  vain.

The  natural  consequence  of  this  inability  of
the  supreme  power  either  to  enforce  obedience

t  Proceedings  concerning  the  Imperial  Chamber,  and
such  as  claim  exemption  from  its  jurisdiction.  Harp-
precht,  Staats  Archiv,  iii.  p.  405.

I  We  know  that  he  did  not  succeed.»  The  decision  of
the  imperial  diet  of  1510  is  the  main  foundation  of  the
freedom  of  the  empire  possessed  by  Hamburg.  Liinig,
Reichsarch.  Pars  Spec.  Cont.  iv.  p.  965.

§  Letter  from  Frederic  of  Saxony  to  Renner,  on  the
Wednesday  after  the  feast  of  the  Tliree  Kings,  3509
(Weim.  Ar.);  Joachim  I.  die  crps.  Christi,  1510.

II  Jacob  Heller  to  the  city  of  Frankfurt,  June  11.  "  Wir
Stett  sein  der  Meinung  auch  anzubringen  zween  Assess-
ores  daran  zu  setzen  auch  Gebrechen  und  Mangel  der
Versammlung  fürzutragen." — "We  cities  are  of  the  opin-
ion that  we  should  introduce  two  assessors  to  sit  there
(in  the  court),  and  to  bring  forward  the  abuses  and  de-
fects of  the  assembly."

Book  I.

INTESTINE  DISORDERS.

79

or  to  conciliate  approbation  and  respect,  was
an  universal  striving  after  separate  and  inde-
pendent power  —  a  universal  reign  of  force,
which  singularly  characterizes  this  period.
It  is  worth  while  to  try  to  bring  before  us  the
several  States  under  this  aspect.

I.  In the principalities, the power  of  the
territorial lord was much extended and  in-
creased. In  particular  ordinances  we  clearly
trace  the  idea  of  a  legislation  for  the  whole
territory,  intended  to  supersede  local  unions  or
associations, traditional rules and customs;
and of  an equally  general supervision,  em-
bracing all  the  branches  of  administration. A
remarkable  example  of  this  may  be  found  in
the  ordinances  issued  by  Elector  Berthold  for
the government of his archbishopric* In
some  places,  a  perfect  union  and  agreement
subsisted between  the  princes  and  their  es-
tates ;  e.  g.  in  the  dominions  of  Brandenburg,
both  in  the  Mark  and  Franconia :  the  estates
contract  debts  or  vote  taxes  to  pay  the  debts
of  the  sovereign.! In  other  countries,  indi-
vidual administrators  become  conspicuous.  We
distinguish  the  names  of  such  men  as  George
'Gossenbrod  in  Tyrol,  created  by  PJaximilian,
Regimentsherr  (master  or  chief  of  the  govern-
ment), and  keeping  strict  watch  over  all  the
hereditary  rights  of  the  sovereign. In  Styria,
we  find  Wallner,  the  son  of  that  sacristan  of
Altöttingen  in  Bavaria  who  accumulated  the
treasure  of  Landshut;  in  Onolzbach,  the  ge-
neral accountant  Pracker,  who  for  more  than
thirty  years  conducted  the  whole  business  of
the  privy  chancery  and  tlie  chamber  of  finance.
It  is  remarkable  too  that  these  pou'erful  officials
seldom  came  to  a  good  end. We  often  see
them  dragged before  the  tribunals  and  con-
d8m.ned  to  punishment :  Wallner  was  hanged
at  the  door  of  the  \erj  house  in  which  he  had
entertained  princes,  counts,  and  doctors  as  his
guests ;  Gossenbrod  was  said  to  have  ended
his life by  poison ;  Wolfgang  of  Kolberg,!
raised  to  the  dignity  of  count,  died  in  prison  ;
Prucker  was  forced  to  retreat  to  a  prebend  in
Plassenburg.§ In  order  to  put  an  end  to  the
arbitrary  acts  of  the  detested  council  of  their
duke, the  Würtenbergers extorted  the  treaty
of  Tübingen  in  1514. Here  and  there  we  see
the  princes  proceeding  to  open  vrar  in  order  to
extend  their  territory. In  the  year  1511  Bruns-
wich,  Lüneburg,  Bremen,  Minden,  and  Cleves
fell  with  united  forces  on  the  country  of  Hoya,
Vv^hich could offer  them no resistance. In
1514,  Brunswick,  Lüneburg,  Calenberg,  Old-
enburg, and  Duke  George  of  Saxony,  turned
their arms against the römnant of  the  free
Frieslanders  in  the  marshes. The  Butjadinger
swore  they  would  rather  die  than  live  exposed
to  the  incessant  vexations  of  the  Brunswick
officials,  and  flew  to  arms  behind  the  impassa-
ble  ramparts of  their  country ;  but  a  traitor
showed  the  invading  army  a  road  by  which  it

fell  upon  their  rear :  they  were  beaten,  and
their  country  partitioned  among  the  conquerors
and  the  Worsaten  and  Hadeler  compelled  to
learn  the  new  duty  of  obedience  to  a  master,  [j

In  some  cases  the  princes  tried  to  convert
the  independence  of  a  bishop  into  complete
subjection;  as,  for  example,  Duke  Magnus  of
Lauenburg  demanded  of  the  bishop  of  liatze«
burg  the  same  aids'"''*  as  were  granted  him  by
his  States,  perhaps  with  twofold  violence,  be-
cause that  prelate  had  formerly  served  in  his
chancer}^ ;  he  encountered  a  stout  resistance,
and  had  to  resort  to  open  force."("|  Or  a  spiritual
prince  sought  to  extort  unwonted  obedience
f'rom  the  knights  of  his  dominions,  who  there-
upon, with  the  aid  of  a  secular  neighbour,
broke  out  in  open  revolt;  as  the  dukes  of
Brunswick  took  the  knights  of  Hildesheim,
and  the  counts  of  Henneberg  the  chapter  of
Fulda  and  the  nobility  connected  with  it,  under
their  protection.

IL  For  the  increasing  power  of  the  princes
v\^as  peculiarly  oppressive  to  the  knights.  In
Svrabia  the  associations  of  the  knights  of  the
empire  (Reichsritterschaft)  consolidated  them-
selves under  the  shelter  of  the  league.  In
Franconia  there  were  similar  struggles  for  in-
dependence ;  occasionally  (as,  for  instance,  in
1511  and  1515),  the'  six  districts  (Orte)  of  the
Franconian  knights  assembled,  mairih^  to  take
measures  for  subtracting  their  business  under
litigation  from,  the  tribunals  of^  the  sovereign  :
the  results  of  these  efforts,  however,  were  not
lasting;  here  and  on  the  Rhine  every  thing
remained  in  a  very  tumultuous  state.  We  still
see  the  warlike  knights  and  their  mounted  re-
tainers, in  helm  and  breastplate  and  with  bent
cross-bow  before  them  —  for  as  yet  the  horse-
men had  no  fire-arms — riding  up  and  dovrn  the
well-known  boundary  line,  marking  the  halting
places,  and  lying  in  ambush  day  and  night  in
the  woods,  till  the  enemy  whom  they  are
watching  for  appears;  or  till  the  train  of
merchants  and  their  wares,  coming  from  the
city  they  are  at  war  Avith,  is  seen  winding
along  the  road :  their  victory  is  generally  an
easy  one,  for  their  attack  is  sudden  and  un-
expected ;  and  they  return  surrounded  by  pri-
soners and  laden  with  booty  to  their  narrow
stronghold  on  hill  and  rock,  around  which
they  cannot  ride  a  league  without  descrying
another  enem}',  or  go  out  to  the  chase  without
harness  on  their  back  :  squires,  secret  friends,
and  comrades  in  arms,  incessantl)^  come  and
go,  craving  succour  or  bringing  warnings,  and
keep  up  an  incessant  alarm  and  turmoil.  The
whole  night  long  are  heard  the  bowlings  of
the  wolves  in  the  neighbouring  forest. While

*  Boddmann,  Rheingauische  Alterchümer,  ii.  535.
t  Buchholz,  aseschichle  der  Mark,  iii.  363. Lang,  i.  p.
111.
J  Report  in  the  manuscript  Fugger.
§  Lang,  i.  p.  147.

II  Rehtmeier,  Eraunschweigsche  Chronik.,  ii.  p.  861.

**  5ec?e— precarja  ;  (betev,  to  pray)— grants  of  money  to
the  prince  on  extraordinary  occasions,  such  as  attend-
ance on  the  emperor,  the  marriage  of  a  daughter,  &c. —
TraN^sl.

ft  Chytrteus,  Saxonia,-p.  222.  By  Prlasch,  Gesch.  von
Ratzeburg,  p.  421,  we  perceive  that  there  were  many
other  poi^its  of  dispute.  On  the  28th  of  March,  1507,
bishop  and  chapter  were  obliged  to  promise,  "  that  when
the  sovereign  received  a  land-tax  from  his  knights,  it
should  be  p^aid  by  the  peasants  on  the  church  lands  just
as  by  the  peasants  of  any  other  lords."

80

INTESTINE  DISORDERS.

Book  I.

the  States  of  the  empire  were  consulting'  at
Treves  as  to  the  means  of  ensuring  the  execu-
tion of  the  laws,  Berliching-en  and  Selbitz
seized  the  train  of  Nürnberg  merchants  coming
from  the  Leipzig-  fair,  under  the  convoy  of
Bamberg,  and  thus  began  the  open  war  against
the  bishop  and  the  city.  The  decrees  of  the
diet  were  of  little  avail.*  Götz  von  Ber-
iichingen  thought  himself  entitled  to  complain
of  the  negotiations  that  were  opened  ;  for
otherwise  he  would  have  overthrown  the  Nürn-
bergers and  their  Bürgermeister  "  with  his
gold  chain  round  his  neck  and  his  battle-mace
in  his  hand."f  At  the  same  time  another  no-
torious band  had  collected  under  the  command
of  the  Frieding-ers  in  Hohenkrähn  (in  the
Hegau),  originally  against  Kaufbeoern,  to
avenge  the  affront  offered  to  a  nobleman  who
had  sued  in  vain  to  the  fair  daughter  of  a
citizen :  afterwards  they  became  a  mere  gang
of  robbers,  who  made  the  country  unsafe  ;  so
that  the  Swabian  league  at  length  stirred  itself
against  them,  and  the  emperor  himself  sent
out  his  best  men,  the  Weckauf  (Wake  up)  of
Austria,  and  the  Burlebaus, — at  whose  shots,
as  the  historical  ballad  says,  "the  mountain
tottered,  the  rocks  were  rent,  and  the  walls

*  Emperor  and  Stales  disputed  as  to  the  amount  of  tlie
levy  necessary.  The  emperor  thought  they  wanted  to
put  the  affair  otT,  and  reminded  them  tiiat  what  had  hap-
pened to-day  to  Bamberg,  miglit  happen  to-morrow  to
another  city.  If  the  succours  demanded  appeared  too
considerable,  he  would  ask  Bambei"?  to  be  content  with
a.  hundred  horses  fit  for  service.  This  the  States  agreed
to  ;  but  only  under  the  condition  that  the  ban  must  be
lirst  proclaimed  against  outlaws  or  suspected  persons
before  the  troops  were  employed.  (Frankf.  A.)  The
universal  state  of  division  extended  even  to  this  matter.

t  Götzens  von  Berlichingen  ritterliche  Thaten.  Aus-
gabe von  Pistorius,  p.  127.  RJüllner's  Chronicle  (MS.)
relates  the  whole  affair,  after  the  documents  in  the
Nürnberg  Archives,  in  the  following  manner  :  —  Tlie  at-
tac'c  \-;:s  made  between  Forchheim'and  Neusess.  May  18,
15\-J.,l  ;:  a  band  of  ]30  horse;  31  persons  were  carried  off;  the
daaia;;?  done  amounted  to  8S00  gulden;  the  liorseswere fod-
dered and  the  booty  divided  in  a  wood  near  Schweinfurt.
The  jirisoners  were  concealed  by  the  knights  of  Thüngcn,
Eberstein,  Biichenau.  The  council  of  Nürnberg  hereupon
took  600  foot  soldiers  into  their  pay,  and  announced  to
the  Great  fcouncil  their  determination  to  do  everything
to  bring  the  perpetrators  to  punishment.  Meanwhile,
"  solten  sie  litre  Kaufmannschaft  so  enge  esseyn  könnte,
einziehen,  bis  die  Leufte  etwas  besser  würden  :'■•—"  they
must  draw  in  their  dealings  as  much  as  possible  till  the
ways  became  somewhat  better."  And  he  actually  pro-
duces a  proclamation  of  ban  of  the  15th  of  July,  accom-
panied, however,  by  a  proposal  for  a  commission  before
vvhicli  the  accused  might  clear  themselves.  Some  did  thus
clear  themselves:  others  not.  Among  the  last  are  men-
tioned, Caspar  von  Rabenstein,  Balthasar  and  Reichart
Steinrück,  Wilhelm  von  Schaumburg,  Dietrich  and  Georg
Fuchs,  Conrad  Schott.  Among  them  are  many  Würzburg
officials,  who  were  jointly  declared  under  ban  by  the  Im-
perial Chamber.  As  in  the  mean  time  a  number  of  fresh
attacks  had  taken  place,  at  Vilseck,  Ochsenfurt,  Mergen-
theim (in  which  the  Commander  of  the  Order  »t  Mergen-
theim  liad  drawn  suspicion  upon  himself),  the  Swabian
leac-iie  at  last  came  forward  with  an  armed  force,  to
which  the  Nürnbergers  added  COO  men  on  foot,  a  squad-
ron of  cavalry,  and  a  small  body  of  artillery.  Gangolf
von  Geroltlseck  led  tlie  troops  of  the  league;  their  first
move  was  against  Frauenstein,  belonging  to  Hans  von
Selbitz:  several  castles  were  carried,  and  lands  taken,
and  at  last  the  way  was  opened  to  a  treaty.  The  em-
peror decreed  that  tlie  knights  should  pay  i4,000  gulden
as  compensation.  Müller  asserts  that  of  this  sum  the
Bishop  of  Würzburg  paid  7000  gulden,  the  Count  Palatine
Ludwig  2000,  the  Duke  of  Würtenberg  as  much,  the  Mas-
ter of  Mergentheim  1000,  and  Götz  himself  2000.  He  in-
fers that  those  princes,  "dieser  Fehd  heimlich  verwandt
gewesen,"— "had  been  privily  concerned  in  this  Feid."
On  the  other  hand,  he  speaks  with  praise  of  the  bishop
of  Bamberg  and  Markgrave  Frederic  of  Brandenburg.

riven,  till  the  knights  fled,  their  people  sur-
rendered, and  the  castle  was  razed  to  the
ground.":^  But  there  was  also  many  a  castle
in  Bavaria,  Swabia,  and  Franconia  for  which
a  similar  fate  was  reserved.  Tlie  insecurity
of  the  roads  and  highways  was  greater  than
ever ;  even  poor  travelling  scholars  who  begged
their  way  along,  were  set  upon  and  tortured  to
make  them  give  up  their  miserable  pittance. §
"  Good  luck  to  us,  my  dear  comrades,"  cried
Götz  to  a  pack  of  Avolves  which  he  saw  fall
upon  a  flock  of  sheep,  "  good  luck  to  us  all
and  every  where."  He  took  it  for  a  good
omen.

Sometimes  this  fierce  and  lawless  chivalry
assumed  a  more  imposing  aspect,  and  constitu-
ted a  sort  of  tumultuary  power  in  the  State.
Franz  von  Sickingen  had  the  audacity  to  take
under  his  protection  the  enemies  of  the  council
which  had  just  been  re-established  in  Worms
by  the  emperor;  he  began  the  war  with  that
city  by  seizing  one  of  its  vessels  on  the-Rhine.
He  was  immediately  put  under  ban.  His  an-
swer to  this  was,  instantly  to  appear  before  the
walls  of  that  city,  to  fire  upon  it  with  carron-
ades  and  culverins,  lay  v/aste  the  fields,  tear
up  the  vineyards,  and  prevent  all  access  to  the
town.  The  Whitsuntide  fair  could  not  be  held
either  in  1515  or  151G.  The  States  of  the  cir-
cle of  the  Rhine  assembled,  but  dared  not  come
to  any  resolution  ;  they  thought  that  could  only
be  done  at  an  imperial  diet.  ||  It  is  indisputable
that  some  princes,  out  of  opposition  either  to
the  emperor  or  to  the  Swabian  league,  favoured,
or  at  least  connived  at,  these  acts  of  violence.
The  knights  were  connected  with  the  party
among  the  princes  which  was  inclined  neither
to  the  emperor  nor  to  the  league.

in.  The  cities  were  exposed  to  annoyance
and  injury  from  all  sides ;  from  the  imperial
government,  which  continually  imposed  fresh
burthens  upon  them;  from  these  lawless
knights,  and  from  the  princes,  who  in  1512
agitated  the  old  question  of  the  Pfahlbürger.**
But  they  made  a  most  gallant  defence.  ^How
many  a  robber  noble  did  Lübeck  drag  from  his
stronghold  !  Towards  the  end  of  the  fifteenth
century  that  city  concluded  a  treaty  with  neigh-
bouring mediate  cities,  the  express  object  of
which  was  to  prevent  the  landed  aristocracy
from  exceeding  the  powers  they  had  hitherto
exercised.  It  availed  nothing  to  King  John
of  Denmark  that  the  Eir.peror  Maximilian  for
a  time  favoured  his  attempts.  In  the  year
1509,  the  Hanse  towns  or  rather  a  part  of  them,

J  Anonymi  Carmen  de  Obsidione  ^t  Expugnatione
Arcis  Ilohenkrayen,  1.512.  Fugger,  both  MS.  and  printed.
Gassari  Annales  ad  ann.  1512.

§  Plater's  Lebensbeschreibung.  The  period  he  speaks
of  is  about  the  year  1515,  as  he  immediately  afterwards
mentions  the  battle  of  Marignano.

|(  Zorn's  Wormser  Chronik,  in  Munch' s  Sickingen,  iii.

**  Pfahlbürger  (from  Ffahl,  pale  or  stake)  were  origin-
ally persons  inhabiting  a  town,  but  not  enjoying  all  the
rights  of  citizenship.  (See  Golden  Bull,  cap.  16.)  They
were  often  free  peasants,  subject  to  the  sovereign  lord's
jurisdiction,  but  not  his  serfs.  It  seems  that  they  avail-
ed themselves  of  the  protection  and  security  afii^-ded  by
the  cities  to  the  prejudice  of  the  lord's  feudal  rights,  and
formed  associations  to  resist  him.  (See  Eichhorn,  ii.
162.)

Book  I.

INTESTINE  DISORDERS.

81

attacked  his  islands,  beat  his  ships  at  Helsin-
gor,  carried  away  his  bells  for  their  chapels,
and  remained  absolute  masters  on  the  open  sea.
A  Lübeck  vessel  boarded  by  three  Danish  ones
near  Bornholm  beat  olf  two  of  them  and  cap-
tured the  third:  in  the  year  1511  the  Lübeck
fleet  returned  to  the  Trave  with  eighteen  Dutch
ships  as  prizes.*

Nor  did  the  inland  cities  make  a  less  spirit-
ed resistance  to  those  aggressions  from  which
they  were  not  protected  by  the  Swabian  league.
How  admirably  did  Nürnberg  defend  herself  I
For  every  injury  she  sustained,  she  carried  her
vengeance  home  to  the  territory  of  the  aggres-
sor, and  her  mounted  bands  frequently  made
rieh  captures.  Woe  to  the  nobles  who  fell
into  their  hands !  No  intercession  either  of
kinsmen  or  of  neighbouring  princes  availed  to
save  them ;  the  council  was  armed  with  the
ever-ready  excuse  that  the  citizens  absolutely
demanded  the  punishment  of  the  oiFender.  In
vain  did  he  look  out  from  the  bars  of  his  pri-
son tov/ards  the  forest,  watching  whether  his
friends  and  allies  were  not  coming  to  his  res-
cue :  Berlichingen's  story  suiTiciently  shows
us  wiih  how  intense  a  dread  even  those  of  her
neighbours  who  delighted  the  most  in  wild  and
daring  exploits  regarded  the  towers  of  Nürn-
berg. Noble  blocd  was  no  security  either  from
the  horrors  of  the  question  or  the  axe  of  the
executioner.f

Sometimes,  indeed,  commercial  difiiculties
arose — for  example,  in  the  Venetian  war  —
which  could  not  be  met  with  the  same  vigour
by  the  inland  towns  as  the  Hanseats  displayed
at  sea,  bat  the  effects  of  which  they  found
other  means  to  elude.  All  intercourse  with
Venice  was  in  fact  forbidden,  and  the  Scala
which  had  obtained  the  proclamation  of  the
ban,  often  arrested  the  merchandise  travelling
along  that  road ;  though  this  was  done  only  in
order  to  extort  money  from  the  ovrners  for  its
redemption.  I  find  that  one  merchant  had  to
pay  the  emperor  three  thousand  ducats  transit
duty,  on  three  hundred  horse-load  of  goods  :
the  Tyrol  governm.ent  had  formerly  appointed
a  commissary  in  Augsburg,  vrhose  business  it
was  to  collect  regular  duties  on  those  consign-
ments of  goods  the  safety  of  which  it  then
guaranteed.  The  towns  accommodated  them-
selves to  the  times  as  they  could ;  thankful
that  their  trade  was  not  utterly  destroyed.  The
connexion  with  the  Netherlands,  established
by  the  house  of  Austria,  had  meanwhile  open-
ed a  wide  and  magnificent  field  for  commercial
enterprise.  Merchants  of  Nürnberg  and  Augs-
burg shared  in  the  profits  of  the  trade  to  the
East  and  West  Indies.t  Their  growing  pros-
perity and  indispensable  assistance  in  all  pe-
cuniary business  gave  them  influence  in  all
courts,  and  especiall}''  that  of  the  emperor.  In
defiance  of  all  decrees  of  diets,  they  maintain-

*  Becker,  Geschichte  von  Lübek,  vol.  i,  p.  488.

t  Müllner's  Chronicle  is  full  of  anecdotes  of  this  kind.

t  Gassarns  (Annales  in  Mencken,  i.  1743)  names  those
of  th^  Weiser,  Gossenhrot,  Fugeer,  Hochstetter,  Foeiin  ;
the  last  are  without  douht  the  Vehlin.  He  reckons  the
dividends  from  the  first  voyage  to  Calcutta  at  175  per
cent.

ed  "their  friendly  companies;"  associations
to  whose  hands  the  smallest  affairs  as  well  as
the  largest  were  committed.  There  is  sufli«
cient  ground  for  the  belief  that  they  gave  oc-
casion to  many  just  complaints  of  the  monop-
oly wiiich  was  thus  vested  in  few  hands  ;  since
the  importers  of  wares  had  it  in  their  power  to
regulate  the  price  at  will.§  But  they  neverthe-
less maintained  a  strong  position  in  the  assem-
blies of  the  empire.  The  abortive  results  of
the  diets  held  from  1509  to  1513  were  chiefly
caused  by  their  opposition.  They  found  means
to  get  the  proposed  measures  concerning  the
Pfahlbürger,  in  virtue  of  which  goods  were  to
pay  duty,  not  to  the  town  in  which  the  owner
of  them  lived,  but  to  the  sovereign  or  lord  in
whose  dominions  that  town  was  situated,  inde-
finitely adjourned, (a.  d.  1512.)!|

It  is  evident  that  the  peaceful  securit}',  the
undisturbed  prosperity,  which  are  often  ascribed
to  those  times,  had  no  existence  but  in  imagi-
nation. The  cities  kept  their  ground  only  {33/
dint  of  combination,  and  of  unwearied  activity,
both  in  arms  and  in  negotiation.

There  was  also  a  vehement  and  continual
ferment  in  the  interior  of  the  tov^^ns.  The  old
struggle  between  the  town  councils  and  the
commons  or  people  was  continually  revived  by
the  increasing  demands  for  money  made  by  the
former  and  resisted  by  the  latter;  in  some
places  it  led  to  violence  and  bloodshed.  In  the
year  1510  the  Vierherr**  Heinrich  Kellner  was
executed  in  Erfurt  for  having,  in  the  financial
straits  of  the  city,  allowed  the  house  of  Saxony
to  redeem  Capellendorf  for  a  sum  of  money;
all  the  following  years  were  marked  v/ith  vie-
lence  and  disorder.  In  Regensburg  the  aged
and  honest  Lykircher,  who  had  frequently  held
the  offices  of  chamberlain,  hansgrave,  and  judge
of  the  peace,  was  brought  to  trial ;  and,  though
the  treasonable  acts  of  which  he  was  accused
were  never  proved  against  him,  was  barbarous-
ly tortured  in  the  Holy  Week  of  1513,  and
shortly  afterwards  put  to  death,  jf  In  Worms,
first  the  old  council,  and  afterv,-ards  its  suc-
cessor, was  driven  out.  In  Cologne  the  com-
mons were  furiously  incensed  against  the,  new
contributions  with  which  they  were  vexed  ;  and
still  more  against  an  association  or  company
called  the  Garland,  to  which  the  most  criminal
designs  were  imputed. :j:i:  Similar  disturbances
took  place  in  Aix-la-Chapelle,  Andernach,
Speier,  Hall  in  Swabia,  Lübeck,  Schweinfurt,

§  Jäger,  Schwäbisches  Städtewesen,  i.  669.  As  early
as  1495.  the  plan  was  entertained  of  taxing  the  great
companies.  Datt.  p.  844.  nr.  16.  Things  remained  in
this  state  from  one  diet  to  another.

!'  A  counter  representation  from  Wetzlar  and  Frank-
furt: "  Es  würde  dem  Reich  und  ihnen  ein  merklicher
Abbruch  seyn  und  wi'der  ihre  Privilegien  laufen."—"  It
would  be  a  signal  injury  to  the  empire  and  to  them,  and
go  against  their  privileges." (Fr.  A.)

**  Vierherr  and  Hansgraf  are  among  the  numerous
titles  of  magistrates  used  in  different  pa"rts  of  Germany.
The  former"' was  probably  the  title  of  the  four  chief
magistrates,  like  the  four  Syndics  of  Hamburg.  The
Hanssraf  was  a  sort  of  president  of  the  board  of  trade
(if  I  may  so  apply  the  words)  in  the  Hanse  towns.  There
are  still,  I  am  told,  t\\  0  Hansgrafen  in  Lübeck.— Transl.

tt  Chronicle  of  Regensburg,  vol.  iv.  part  iii.

It  Rhythmi  de  Seditione  Colonieusi  in  Senkenberg,  Se-
lecta  Juris  et  Hist.  iv.  nr.  6.

11

S2

INTESTINE  DISORDERS.

Book  I.

and  Nürnberg:*  in  every  direction  we  meet
with  imprisonments,  banishments,  executions.
Domestic  grievances  u'ere  often  aggravated  by
the  suspicion  of  a  criminal  understanding  with
neighbouring  states.  In  Cologne  it  was  Guel-
ders ;  in  Worms  and  Regensburg,  Austria  ;  in
Erfurt,  Saxony,  which  was  the  object  of  their
suspicions.  The  feeling  of  public  insecurity
burst  forth  in  acts  of  the  wildest  violence.

IV.  Nor  was  this  excitement  and  agitation
confined  to  the  populations  of  towns;  through-
out the  whole  breadth  of  the  empire,  the  pea-
santry was  in  an  equal  state  of  ferment.  The
peasants  of  the  Swiss  mountains  had  complete-
ly changed  their  relation  to  the  empire :  from
the  condition  of  subjects,  they  had  passed  to
that  of  free  and  independent  allies  :  those  of  the
marches  of  Friesland  on  the  contrary  had  suc-
eumbed  to  the  neighbouring  sovereigns  ;  the
Ditmarschers  alone  stood  for  a  while  after  a
glorious  and  successful  battle,  like  a  noble  ruin
amidst  modern  edifices.  The  antagonist  prin-
ciples which,  in  distant  lands  and  from  the'fur-
thest  marches  of  the  empire,  gave  rise  to  these
conflicts,  came  into  contact  under  a  thousand
different  forms  in  the  heart  of  the  country.  The
subsidies  for  the  empire  and  its  growing  neces-
sities fell  ultimately  on  the  peasant;  the  de-
mands of  the  sovereign,  of  the  holders  of  church
lands,  and  of  the  nobility,  were  all  addressed
to  him.f  On  the  other  hand,  in  some  countries
the  common  people  were  made  to  bear  arm. s  ;
they  formed  the  bands  of  landsknechts  which
acquired  and  maintained  a  name  am.ongst  Eu-
ropean troops  ;  they  once  more  felt  the  strength
that  was  in  them.  The  exampiß  of  the  Swiss
was  very  seducing  to  the  south  of  Germany.
In  the  country  round  Schletstadt,  in  Alsatia,  a
society  of  discontented  citizens  and  peasants,
the  existence  and  proceedings  of  which  were
shrouded  in  the  profoundest  secrecy,  was  formed
as  early  äs  the  year  1493.  Traversing  almost
impassable  ways,  they  met  at  night  on  solitary
mountains,  and  swore  never  in  future  to  pay
any  tax  which  was  not  levied  v/ith  their  own
free  consent;  to  abolish  tolls  and  duties,  to
curtail  the  privileges  of  the  clergy,  to  put  the
Jews  to  death  without  ceremony,  and  to  divide
their  possessions.  They  admitted  new  mem-
bers with  strange  ceremonies,  specially  intend-
ed to  appal  traitors.  Their  intention  was  in
the  first  place  to  seize  on  Schletstadt,  immicdi-
ately  after  to  display  the  banner  with  the  device
of  the  peasant's  shoe:|:,  to  take  possession  of
Alsatia,  and  to  call  the  Swiss  to  their  aid.§

*  Baselii  Auctariiim  Naucleri,  p.  lOiG.  "  Ea  peslis  pes-
Eimse  rebellionis  adversus  senatum  in  plerisque  —  civi-
tatibus  irrepsit.  Trithemiiis  (Chronic.  Hirsaiig.  ii.  p.  689)
reckons  them  up,  adding  the  remarks,  "et  in  aliis  qua-
rum  vocabula  memoria;  non  occurrunt."

t  Rosenblüt  complains  that  the  noble  dravvs  his  main-
tenance from  the  peasant,  and  yet  does  not  insure  him
any  peace :  that  he  is  constantly  pushing  his  demands
further,  whereupon  the  peasant  answers  with  abuse,  and
the  noble  rides  down  his  cattle.

I  The  Bundschuh  ;  the  large  rude  shoe  bound  on  the
foot  with  thongs  of  leather,  commonly  worn  by  the  Swa-
bian  peasantry,  and  borne  on  their  banner  in  the  servile
war  to  w'hich  they  were  driven  by  intolerable  oppression.
The  Bund  or  league  of  the  peasants,  was  afterwards
called  the  Bundschuh. (See  Vol.  II.)— Transl.

§  Herzog,  Edelsasser  Chronik.,  c.  71,  p.  162.

But  in  spite  of  the  fearful  menaces  which  ac-
companied the  admission  to  the  society,  they
were  betrayed,  dispersed,  and  punished  with
the  utmost  severity.  Had  the  Swiss  in  1499
understood  their  own  advantage  and  not  ex-
cited the  hatred  of  their  neighbours  by  their
cruel  ravages,  the  people  along  their  whole
frontier  would,  as  contemporaries  affirm,  have
flocked  to  join  their  ranks.  An  incident  shows
the  thoughts  that  were  afloat  among  the  people.
During  the  negotiations  preceding  the  peace
of  Basle,  a  peasant  appeared  in  the  c'lothes  of
the  murdered  Count  of  Fürstenberg.  "  We
are  the  peasants,"  said  he,  "  who  punish  the
nobles."  The  discovery  and  dispersion  of  the
conspiracy  above-mentioned  by  no  means  put
an  end  to  the  Bundschuh.  In  the  year  1502
traces  of  this  symbol  were  found  at  Bruchsal,
from  whence  the  confederates  had  already
gained  over  the  nearer  places,  and  were  extend-
ing their  ramifications  into  the  more  remote.
They  declared  that  in  answer  to  an  inquiry  ad-
dressed to  the  Swiss  they  received  an  assurance
that  the  Confederation  would  help  the  right,
and  risk  life  and  limb  in  their  cause.  There
was  a  tinge  of  religious  enthusiasm  in  their  no-
tions. They  were  to  say  five  Pater  nosters  and
Ave  Marias  daih^  Their  war-cry  was  to  be,
"  Our  Lady  !"  They  were  to  take  Bruchsal,
and  then  march  forth  and  onward,  never  re-
maining more  than  twenty-four  hours  in  a
place.  The  whole  peasantry  of  the  empire
would  join  them,  of  that  there  was  no  doubt ;
all  men  must  be  brought  into  their  covenant,
that  so  the  righteousness  of  God  might  be
brought  upon  earth.  ||  But  they  were  quickly
overpowered,  scattered,  and  their  leaders  pun-
ished with  death.

The  imperial  authorities  had  often  contem-
plated the  danger  of  such  commotions.  Among
the  articles  which  the  electors  projected  dis-
cussing at  their  diet  of  Gelnhausen,  one  related
to  the  necessity  of  alleviating  the  condition  of
the  common  people.**  It  v^'as  always,  the  con-
clusive argument  against  taxes  like  the  Com-
mon Penny,  that  there  was  reason  to  fear  they
would  cause  a  rebellion  among  the  people.  In
the  year  1513,  the  authorities  hesitated  to  pun-
ish some  deserters  from  the  Landsknechts,  be-
cause they  were  afraid  that  they  might  enter
into  a  combination  vrith  the  peasants,  whose
permanent  conspiracy  against  the  nobles  and
clergy  had  been  discovered  from  the  confessions
of  some  who  had  been  arrested  in  the  Breisgau.
In  the  year  1514,  they  rose  in  open  and  com-
plete rebellion  in  Wiirtenberg  under  the  name
of  Poor  Kunz  (-der  armer  Kunz)  :  the  treaty  of
Tübingen  did  not  satisfy  the  peasants ;  it  was
necessary  to  put  them  down  by  force  of  arms.f  f
We  hear  the  sullen  mutterings  of  a  fierce  un-

II  Frankf.  Acten,  vol.  xx. Baselii  Auctarium,  p.  997.

**  "  Der  mit  Fron  Diensten  Atzung  Stcure  geistlichen
Gerichten  und  andern  also  merklich  boschvi'ert  ist,  dass
es  in  die  Harre  nicht  zu  leiden  feyn  wird." — "  Who  is  so
signally  burthened  with  feudal  services,  taxes,  ecclesias-
tical courts,  and  other  things,  that  in  the  long  run  it  will
not  be  to  be  borne."

ft  Wahraftig  Unterrichtung  der  Ufrur  bei  Sattler  Her-
zoge, i.  App.  no.  70.

Book  I.

INTESTINE  DISORDERS.

83

tamed  element,  incessantly  going  on  under  the
very  earth  on  which  we  stand.

While  such  was  the  state  of  Germany,  the
emperor  was  wholly  occupied  with  his  Vene-
tian war; — at  one  time  fighting  with  the  French
against  the  Pope  and  the  Venetians,  at  another
with  the  Pope  and  the  English  against  the
Fren<'-h  :  the  Swiss,  now  in  alliance  with  him,
conquer  Milan  and  lose  it  again;  lie  himself,
at  tjie  head  of  Swiss  and  Landsknechts,  makes
an  attempt  to  recover  it,  but  in  vain.  We  see
liim  repeatedl}^  travelling  from  Tyrol  to  the
Netherlands,  from  the  sea-coast  back  to  the
Italian  Alps;  like  the  commander  of  a  belea-
guered fortress,  hurrying  incessantly  from  bas-
tion to  bastion,  and  Vvatching  the  propitious
moment  for  a  soitie.  But  this  exhausted  his
whole  activity;  the  interior  of  Germany  was
abandoned  to  its  own  impulses. ^

A  diet  was  appointed  to  'be  held  at  W^orms
again,  in  the  year  1513;  and  on  the  1st  June
we  find  a  certain  number  of  the  States  actually
assembled.  The  em.peror  alone  was  wanting.
At  length  he  appeared,  but  his  business  did  not
allow  him  to  remain  :  under  tiie  pretext  that  he
must  treat  in  person  with  the  dilatory  electors
of  Treves  and  Cologne,  he  hurried  down  the
Rhine,  proposing  to  the  States  to  follow  him  to
Coblentz.  They  chose  rather  to  disperse  alto-
gether.* "Of  a  truth,  writes  the  Altbürger-
nieister  of  Cologne  to  the  Frankfurters,  "you
have  done  wisely  that  you  stayed  at  home;
you  have  spared  much  cost,  and  earned  equal
thanks."

It  was  not  till  after  an  interval  of  five  years
(a.  d.  1517),  when  not  only  Sickingen's  pri-
vate wars  threw  the  whole  of  Upper  Germany
into  confusion,  but  the  universal  disorder  of
the  country  had  become  intolerable,  that  a  diet
\vas  held  again; — this  time  at  Mainz,  in  the
chapter  house  of  which  city  it  was  opened  on
the  ist  July.

The  imperial  commissioners  demanded  vast
succours  for  the  suppression  of  the  disturbances
—  not,  as  before,  every  four  hundredth,  but
every  fiftieth  man;  the  States,  however,  did
not  deem  it  advisable  to  resort  to  arms.  The
poor  hysbandman,  already  suffering  under  the
torments  of  w^ant  and  famine,  might,  "  in  his
furious  temper,"  be  still  further  exasperated ;
the  rage  which  had  long  gnawed  at  his  heart
miuht  burst  forth ;  a  universal  rebellion  was

*  In  the  Frankfurt  Acts,  vol.  xxx.,  there  is  a  letter
from  Worms  to  Frankfurt,  accordine  to  which  the  States
present,  "  prima  Siinii  nech?t  verrückt  einhelliiilich  ent-
schlossen und  den  kais.  Conimissarien  für  enrllich  Ant-
wort-jreben,  dass  sie  noch  zehn  Tag  allhie  bei  einander
verziehen  und  bleiben,  und  wo  inen  in  niitler  Zeit  nit
weiter  Geschefte  oder  Befel  von  Kais.  Mt.  zukonnnen,
wollen  sie  alsdann  sich  alle  wieder  von  dannen  anheim
thun." — "  On  the  first  of  June  just  past,  unanimously  re-
solved, and  give  this  their  tinal  answer  to  the  imperial
commissioners,  that  they  sh;i!l  tarry  and  remain  here  to-
gether ten  days  longer,  and  if,  meantime,  no  further  bu-
siness or  command  reach  them  from  his  imperial  majes-
ty, they  shall  all  in  that  case  betake  themselves  thence
home."  In  an  address  of  the  20th  of  August,  Maximilian
announces  a  new  diet  of  the  empire,  '"Die  geringe  An-
zahl dererschieneaen  Stande  habe  ihren  Abschied  genom-
men, da  sie  sich  keiner  Handlung  verfangen  mögen." —
"The  small  number  of  states  which  had  appeared,  had
taken  their  leave,  as  they  were  unwilling  to  meddle  with
any  business."

to  be  feared.  They  desired  rather  to  put
down  the  prevailing  disturbances  by  lenity  and
conciliation ;  they  entered  into  negotiations  on
all  sides  —  even  with  Sickingen;  above  all,
they  appointed  a  committee  to  inquire  into  the
general  state  of  the  country,  and  into  the
causes  of  the  universal  outbreak  of  disturb-
ances. The  imperial  commissioners  wanted
to  dissolve  the  assembly  on  tlie  ground  that
they  could  do  nothing  without  ascertaining  the
opinion  of  his  imperial  majesty  ;  but  the  States
would  not  consent  to  be  put  off  so :  the  sit-
tings of  the  committee,  two  members  of  which
were  nominated  by  the  cities,  were  solemnly
opened  by  a  mass  for  the  invocation  of  the
Holy  Ghost  (Missa  Sancti  Spiritus).  On  the
7th  August,  1517,  they  laid  their  report  before
the  diet.

It  is  very  remarkable  that  the  States  discover
the  main  source  of  the  whole  evil  in  the  high-
est and  most  important  institution  that  had
been  founded  in  the  empire — in  the  Imperial
Chamber;  and  in  the  defects  in  its  constitu-
tion and  modes  of  procedure.  The  eminent
members  ofthat  tribunal,  they  said,  were  gone,
and  incapable  ones  put  in  their  places.  The
procedure  was  protracted  through  years;  one
great  cause  of  which  was,  that  the  court  re-
ceived so  many  appeals  on  trifling  matters  that
the  important  business  could  not  be  despatched.
Nor  was  this  all.  The  court  had  not  free
course ;  it  was  often  ordered  to  stay  all  pro-
ceedings. If,  after  long  delays  and  infinite
trouble,  a  suitor  succeeded  in  getting  judgment
pronounced,  he  could  not  get  it  executed  ;  his
antagonist  obtained  mandates  to  prevent  its
execution.  The  consequence  was,  that  the
highest  penalties  of  the  ]d,w,  the  ban  and  reban
{Acht  und  Aberacht),  had  no  longer  terrors  for
any  one.  The  criminal  under  ban  found  shel-
ter and  protection ;  and  as  the  other  courts  of
justice  were  in  no  better  condition — in  all,  in-
capable judges,  impunit}?-  for  misdoers,  and
abuses  without  end — disquiet  and  tumult  had
broken  out  in  all  parts.  Neither  by  land  nor
by  water  were  the  ways  safe;  no  safe-conduct,
whether  of  the  head  or  the  members  of  the
empire,  was  the  least  heeded  ;  there  was  no
protection,  whether  for  subjects  or  for  such
foreigners  as  were  entitled  to  it:  the  husband-
man, by  whose  labours  all  classes  were  fed,
was  ruined ;  w-idows  and  orphans  were  de-
serted ;  not  a  pilgrim  or  a  messenger  or  a
tradesman  could  travel  along  the  roads,  whether
to  fulfil  his  pious  duty,  or  to  deliver  his  mes-
sage, or  to  execute  his  business.  To  these
evils  were  added  the  boundless  luxury  in
clothing  and  food ;  the  wealth  of  the  country
all  found  its  way  into  foreign  lands,  especially
to  Rome,  where  new  exactions  were  daily  in-
vented :  lastly,  it  was  most  mischievous  to
allow  the  men  at  arms,  who  had  sometimes
been  fighting  against  the  emperor  and  the  em-
pire, to  return  to  their  homes,  where  they
stirred  up  the  peasantry  to  rebellion.

And  while  such  v/as  the  statement  of  public
grievances,  the  particular  petitions  and  remon-
strances were  countless.' The  inhabitants  of

84

INTESTINE  BISORDERS.

Book  I.

Worms  complained  of  "  the  inhuman  private
warfare  (Fehde)  which  Franciscns  von  Sick-
ingen,  in  despite  and  disregard,  of  his  honour,
carried  on  against  them  ;"  to  which  the  depu-
ties from  Spires  added,  tliat  Sickingen's  troops
had  the  design  to  burn  down  the  Spital  of  their
city.  Mühlhausen  complained  in  its  own
name,  and  those  of  Nordhausen  and  Gosslar,
that  they  paid  tribute  for  protection  and  were
not  protected  :  Lübeck  enumerated  all  the  in-
juries it  sustained  from  the  King  of  Denmark,
from  nobles  and  commons ;  it  could  obtain  no
help  from  the  empire,  by  which  it  was  so
heavily  burthened;  it  must  pay  its  money  to
the  Imperial  Chamber,  which  always  gave
judgment  against  it,  and  never  in  its  favour.
Other  towns  said  nothing  of  their  grievances,
because  they  saw  it  was  of  no  avail.  Mean-
time the  knights  held  meetings  at  Friedberg,
Gelnhausen,  Bingen,  and  Vvimpfen,  whither
the  emperor  sent  delegates  to  appease  them.
Anna  of  Brunswick,  the  widowed  Landgravine
of  Hessen,  appeared  in  person  at  the  diet,  and
uttered  the  bitterest  complaints  :  she  said  she
could  obtain  no  justice  in  Hessen;  that  she
vainly  followed  the  emperor  and  the  Imperial
Chamber  from  place  to  place;  her  dowry  of
Melsungen  was  consumed  ;  she  was  reduced
to  travel  about  like  a  gipsy,  with  a  solitary
maid-servant,  and  to  pawn  her  jewels  and  even
her  clothes  ;  she  could  not  pay  her  debts,  and
must  soon  beg  her  bread.

"  Summa  Summarum,"  writes  the  delegate
from  Frankfurt,  "  here  is  nothing  but  com-
plaint and  wrong ;  it  is  greatly  to  be  feared
that  no  remedy  will  be  found.* The  States

*  Philip  Furstenbersr,  July  26.  In  the  32d  vol.  of  the
Frankf.  A.,  where  generally  the  transactions  of  this  diet
are  to  be  found.  "  Wo  Kais.  Mt."  he  says,  on  the  ]ßth
«of  Aug.,  of  the  representations  which  were  made,  "  die-
eelbig  als  billig  und  wol  ware  verwilligen  wurde,  hoff
ich  alle  Dinge  sollten  noch  gut  werden,  wo  nicht,  so  helft
uns  Gott." "  If  his  imperial  majesty  would  comply  with

made  the  most  urgent  appeals  to  the  emperor:
they  conjured  him  for  God's  sake,  for  the  sake
of  justice,  for  his  own,  for  that  of  the  holy
empire,  of  the  German  nation,  nay  of  all
Christendom,  to  lay  these  things  to  heart; — to
remember  how  many  mighty  states  had  fallen,
through  want  of  inward  tranquillity  and  order ;
to  look  carefully  into  what  was  passing  in  the
minds  of  the  common  people,  and  to  find  a
remedy  for  these  great  evils.

Such  were  the  words  addressed  to  him  ;  but
they  were  hut  words.  A  remedy — a  measure
of  the  smallest  practical  utility — was  not  so
much  as  suggested;  the  diet  was  dissolved
without  having  even  proceeded  to  one  resolu-
tion.

And  already  the  excited  mind  of  the  nation
was  turned  towards  other  evils  and  other  abuses
than  those  which  affected  its  civil  and  political
condition.

In  consequence  of  the  intimate  union  betv/een
Rome  and  Germany,  in  virtue  of  which  the
Pope  was  always  a  mighty  power  in  the  em-
pire, a  grave  discussion  on  spiritual  affairs  had
become  inevitable.  For  a  time,  they  had  fall-
en into  the  back-ground,  or  been  the  subject
only  of  chance  and  incidental  mention :  now,
however,  they  attracted  universal  attention ;
the  vigorous  and  agitated  spirit  of  the  nation,
weary  and  disgusted  with  the  present  and  the
past,  and  eagerly  striving  after  the  future,  seiz-
ed upon  them  with  avidity.  As  a  disposition
was  immediately  m^anifested  to  go  to  the  bot-
tom of  the  subject,  and  to  proceed  from  a  con-
sideration of  the  external  interference  of  the
church,  to  a  general  and  thorough  examination
of  its  rights,  this  agitation  speedily  acquired
an  importance  which  extended  far  beyond  the
limits  of  the  internal  policy  of  Germany.

the  same,  as  were  reasonable  and  right,  I  should  hope
that  all  things  might  yet  go  well ;  if  not,  then  God  help
us."

BOOK  II.

EARLY  HISTORY  OF  LUTHER  AND  OF  CHARLES  V.

1517—1521

CHAPTER  1.

ORIGIN  OF  THE  RELIGIOUS  OPPOSITION.

Whatever  hopes  we  may  entertain  of  the
final  accomplishment  of  the  prophecies  of  an
universal  faith  in  one  God  and  Father  of  all
which  have  come  down  to  us  in  the  Hebrew
and  Christian  Scriptures,  it  is  certain  that  after
the  lapse  of  more  than  ten  centuries  that  faith
had  by  no  means  overspread  the  earth.  The
world  v/as  filled  with  manifold  and  widely  dif-
fering modes  and  objects  of  worship.

Even  in  Europe,  the  attempts  to  root  out  pa-
ganism had  been  but  partially  successful;  in
Lithuania,  for  example,  the  ancient  worship  of
the  serpent  endured  through  tlie  whole  of  the
15th  and  16th  centuries,  and  was  even  invest-
ed with  a  political  significancy  ;*  and  if  this
was  the  case  in  Europe,  how  much  more  so  in
other  portions  of  the  globe !  In  every  clime
men  continued  to  symbolise  the  powers  of  na-
ture, and  to  endeavour  to  subdue  them  by  en-
chantments or  to  propitiate  them  by  sacrifices  :
throughout  vast  regions  the  memory  of  the
dead  was  the  terror  of  the  living,  and  the  rites
of  religion  were  especially  designed  to  avert
their  destructive  interference  in  human  things;
to  v/orship  only  the  sun  and  moon  supposed  a
certain  elevation  of  soul,  and  a  considerable
degree  of  civilisation.

Refined  by  philosophy,  letters,  and  arts,  re-
presented by  vast  and  powerful  hierarchies,
stood  the  mightiest  antagonists  of  Christianity
— the  Indian  religion  and  Islam  ;  and  it  is  re-
meirrkable  how  great  an  internal  agitation  pre-
vailed within  them  at  the  epoch  of  which  we
are  treating.

Although  the  Brahmihical  faith  was,  per-
haps, originally  founded  on  monotheistic  ideas,
it  had  clothed  these  in  a  multiform  idolatry.
But  at  the  end  of  the  15th  and  beginning  of
the  16th  century,  we  trace  the  progress  of  a
reformer  in  Hindostan.  Nanek,  a  native  of
Lahore,  endeavoured  to  restore  the  primitive
ideas  of  religion,  and  to  show  the  advantages
of  a  pure  morality  over  a  merely  ceremonial
worship  :  he  projected  the  abolition  of  castes,
nay,  even  a  union  of  Hindoos  and  Moslem ;
he  presents  one  of  the  most  extraordinary  ex-
amples of  peaceful  unfanatical  piety  the  world
ever  beheld.f Unfortunately,  his  efforts  were

unsuccessful.  The  notions  he  combated  were
much  too  deeply  rooted  ;  even  those  who  call-
ed themselves  his  disciples — the  Sikhs — paid
idolatrous  honours  to  the  man  who  laboured  to
destroy  idolatry.

A  new  and  very  important  development  of
the  other  branch  of  the  religions  of  India —
Buddhism  —  also  took  place  in  the  fifteenth
century.  The  first  regenerated  Lama  appeared
in  the  monastery  of  Brepuno,  and  was  uni-
versally acknowledged  throughout  Thibet;
the  second  incarnation  of  the  same  (from  1463
to  1542)  had  similar  success  in  the  most  re-
mote Buddhist  countries  ;:j:  from  that  time  hun-
dreds of  millions  revere  in  the  Dalailama  at
L'Hassa  the  living  Buddha  of  the  present, —
the  unity  of  the  divine  trinity,  —  and  throng
thither  to  receive  his  blessing.  It  cannot  be
denied  that  this  religion  had  a  beneficial  in-
fluence on  the  manners  of  rude  nations ;  but,
on  the  other  hand,  what  fetters  does  such  a
fantastic  deification  of  human  nature  impose
on  the  mind  !  Those  nations  possess  the  ma-
terials for  forming  a  popular  literature,  a  wide
diffusion  of  the  knowledge  of  the  elements  of
science,  and  the  art  of  printing;  but  the  litera-
ture itself — the  independent  exercise  and  free
utterance  of  the  mind,  can  never  exist ;  §  nor
are  such  controversies  as  those  between  the
married  and  unmarried  priests,  or  the  yellow
and  the  red  professions  vv'hich  attach  them-
selves to  different  chiefs,  at  all  calculated  to
give  birth  to  it.  The  rival  Lamas  make  pil-
grimages to  each  other,  and  reciprocally  re-
cognise each  other's  divine  character.

The  same  antagonism  which  prevailed  be-
tween Brama  and  Buddha,  subsisted  in  the
bosom  of  Islam,  from  its  very  foundation,
between  the  three  elder  Chalifs  and  Ali ;  in
the  beginning  of  the  sixteenth  century  the
contest  between  the  two  sects,  which  had  been
dormant  for  awhile,  broke  out  with  redoubled
violence.  The  sultan  of  the  Osmans  regarded
himself  (in  his  character  of  successor  to  Abu-
bekr  and  the  first  Chalifs)  as  the  religious  head

*  ^iieas  Silvius  de  Statu  Euvopse.  c.  20. Alexander
Guagninus  in  Resp.  Poloniae. Elz,  p,  276.

t  B'hai  Guru  the  B'hale  in  Malcolm's  Translation,
Sketch  of  the  Sikhs.  Asiatic  Researches,  xvi.  271.  That
holy  man  made  God  the  Supreme  known  to  ail  —  he  re-
stored to  virtue  her  strength,  blended  the  four  castes  into
or.o— established  one  mode  of  salutation.
H

J  Fr.  Georffi  Alphabetum  Tibetanum,  p.  32G.,  says  of
it:  "  Pergit  fnter  Tartaros  ad  amplificandam  religionem
Xacaicam  in  regno  Kokonor  eis  rnurnm  magnum  Sino-
rum:  inde  in  Kang:  multa  erigit  asceteria:  redit  in
Brepung."  He  bears  the  name  of  So-nam-kiel  vachiam-
tzho,  and  is  notwithstanding  the  old  Reval-Kedun,  who
died  in  1399.

§  Hodgson,  Notice  sur  la  Langue,  la  Literature,  et  la
Religion  des  Boudhistes.  "  L'6criture  des  Tubetains  n'est
jamais  employee  a  rien  de  plus  utile  que  des  notes  des
affaires  ou  de  plus  instructif  que  les  reves  d'une  mytho-
logie  absurde,"  &c.  The  objections  of  Klaproth,  Nouv.
Journ.  Asiatique,  p.  99,  are  not  in  my  opinion  of  much
weight,  as  the  question  is  not  concerning  a  literature,
which  may  be  old,  or  the  existence  of  which  may  be  un.
known,  but  a  living  one  of  the  present  day.

^  (85)

86

ORIGIN  OF  RELIGIOUS  OPPOSITION.

Book  II.

of  all  Sunnites,  whether  in  his  own  or  foreign
countries,  from  Morocco  to  Bokhara.  On  the
other  hand,  a  race  of  mystic  Sheiks  of  Erdebil,
who  traced  their  origin  from  Ali,  gave  birth
to  a  successful  warrior,  Ismail  Sophi,  who
founded  the  modern  Persian  monarchy,  and
secured  once  more  to  the  Shiites  a  powerful
representation  and  an  illustrious  place  in  his-
lory.  Unfortunately,  neither  of  these  parties
lelt  the  duty  or  expediency  of  fostering  the
germ  of  civilisation  which  had  lain  in  the  soil
since  the  better  times  of  the  early  Chalifat.
They  only  developed  the  tendency  to  despotic
autocracy  which  Islam  so  peculiarly  favours,
and  worked  up  political  hostility  to  an  incre-
dible pitch  of  fury  by  the  stimulants  of  fanati-
cism. The  Turkish  historians  relate  that  the
enemy  who  had  fallen  into  Ismail's  hands
were  roasted  and  eaten.*  The  Osman,  Sultan
Selim,  on  the  other  hand,  opened  the  war
against  his  rival  by  causing  all  the  Shiites  in
his  land,  from  the  age  of  seven  to  seventy,  to
be  hunted  out  and  put  to  death  in  one  day ;
"forty  thousand  heads,"  says  Seadeddin,
"  with  base  souls."  The  antagonists  were,
as  we  perceive,  worthy  of  each  other.

In  Christendom,  too,  a  division  existed
between  the  Grseco-Oriental  and  the  Latin
church,  which,  though  it  did  not  lead  to  acts
of  such  savage  violence,  could  not  be  healed.
Even  the  near  approach  of  the  resistless  torrent
of  Turkish  power  which  threatened  instant
destruction,  could  not  move  the  Greeks  to
accede  to  the  condition  under  which  the  as-
sistance of  the  West  was  offered  them  —  the
adoption  of  the  distinguishing  formulae  of  con-
fession— except  for  the  moment,  and  ostensi-
bly. The  union  which  was  brought  about  at
Florence,  in  the  year  1439,  with  so  much
labour,  met  with  little  sympathy  from  some,
and  the  most  violent  opposition  from  others  :
the  patriarchs  of  Alexandria,  Antioch,  and
Jerusalem,  loudly  protested  against  the  depar-
ture from  canonical  and  synodal  tradition,
which  such  a  union  implied ;  they  threatened
the  Greek  emperor  with  a  schism  on  their  own
part,  on  account  of  the  indulgence  he  show^ed
to  the  Latin  heterodoxy. j"

If  we  inquire  which  of  these  several  religions
had  the  greater  external  and  political  strength,
we  are  led  to  the  conclusion  that  Islam  had
unquestionably  the  advantage.  By  the  con-
([uests  of  the  Osmans  in  the  15th  century,  it
liad  extended  to  regions  where  it  had  been
hitherto  unknown,  almost  on  the  borders  of
Europe ;  combined  too  with  political  institu-
tions which  must  inevitably  lead  to  the  un-
ceasing progress  of  conversion.  It  reconquered
that  sovereignty  over  the  Mediterranean  which
it  had  lost  since  the  eleventh  century.  Its
triumphs  in  India  soon  equalled  those  in  the
West.  Sultan  Baber  was  not  content  with
overthrowing  the  Islamite  princes  who  had
hitherto  held  that  land.  Finding,  as  he  ex-
pressed it,  "that  the  banners  of  the  heathen
waved  in  two  hundred  cities  of  the  faithful —

*  Hammer,  Osmanische  Gesch.,  ii.  345.
t  Passages  from  their  letter  of  admonition,  in  Gieseler,
Kirchengeschichte,  ii.  4,  p.  545.

that  mosques  were  destroyed  and  the  women
and  children  of  the  Moslem  carried  into
slavery,"  he  proclaimed  a  holy  war  against
the  Hindoos,  as  the  Osmans  had  done  against
the  Christians.  On  the  eve  of  a  battle  he
resolved  to  abjure  the  use  of  wine;  he  re-
pealed taxes  which  were  inconsistent  wiih  the
Koran,  and  enkindled  the  ardour  of  his  troops
by  a  vow  sworn  upon  this  their  sacred  book;
his  reports  of  his  victories  are  conceived  in  the
same  spirit  of  religious  enthusiasm,  and  he
thus  earned  the  title  of  Gazi.ij:  The  rise  of
so  mighty  a  power,  actuated  by  such  ideas,
necessarily  gave  a  vast  impulse  to  the  propa-
gation of  Islam  throughout  the  East.

But  if,  on  the  other  hand,  we  endeavour  to
ascertain  which  of  these  different  systems  pos-
sessed the  greatest  internal  force, — which  was
pregnant  with  the  most  important  consequences
to  the  destiny  of  the  human  race, — we  can  as
little  fail  to  arrive  at  the  conviction  (whatever
be  our  religious  faith),  that  the  superiority  was
on  the  side  of  Latin  Christendom.

Its  most  important  peculiarity  lay  in  this —
that  a  slow  but  sure  and  unbroken  progress  of
intellectual  culture  had  been  going  on  within
its  bosom  for  a  series  of  ages.  While  the  East
had  been  convulsed  to  its  very  centre  by  tor-
rents of  invasion  like  that  of  the  Mongols,
the  West  had  indeed  always  been  agitated  by
wars,  in  which  the  various  powers  of  society
were  brought  into  motion  and  exercise ;  but
neither  had  foreign  tribes  overrun  the  land,  nor
had  there  been  any  of  those  intestine  convul-
sions which  shake  the  foundations  of  a  society
in  an  early  and  progressive  stage  of  civilisation.
Hence  all  the  vital  and  productive  elements  of
human  culture  were  here  united  and  mingled  :
the  development  of  society  had  gone  on  natu-
rally and  gradually ;  the  innate  passion  and
genius  for  science  and  for  art  constantly  re-
ceived fresh  food  and  fresh  inspiration,  and
were  in  their  fullest  bloom  and  vigour;  civil
liberty  was  established  upon  firm  foundations  ;
solid  and  symmetrical  political  structures  arose
in  beneficent  rivalry,  and  the  necessities  of
civil  life  led  to  the  combination  and  improve-
ment of  physical  resources ;  the  laws  which
eternal  Providence  has  impressed  on  human
affairs  were  left  to  their  free  and  tranquil  oper-
ation ;  what  had  decayed  crumbled  away  and
disappeared,  while  the  germs  of  fresh  life  con-
tinually shot  up  and  flourished  :  in  Europe
were  found  united  the  most  intelligent,  the
bravest,  and  the  most  civilised  nations,  still  in
the  freshness  of  youth.

Such  was  the  world  which  now  sought,  like
its  eastern  rival,  to  extend  its  limits  and  its  in-
fluence. Four  centuries  had  elapsed  since,
prompted  by  religious  motives,  it  had  made  at-
tempts at  conquest  in  the  East;  but  after  a
momentary  success  these  had  failed — only  a
few  fragments  of  these  acquisitions  remained
in  its  possession.  But  at  the  end  of  the  fif-
teenth century,  a  new  theatre  for  boundless  ac-
tivity was  opened  to  the  West. It  was  the

t  Baber's  own  Memoirs,  translated  into  English  by
Leyden  and  Erskine,  into  German  by  Kaiser,  1828,  p.  537,
and  tlie  two  firmans  thereto  annexed.

Chap.  L

POSITION  OF  PAPACY  TO  RELIGION.

87

time  of  the  discovery  of  both  Indies,  All  ele-
ments of  European  culture — the  study  of  the
half-effaced  recollections  of -antiquity,  technical
improvements,  the  spirit  of  commercial  and
political  enterprise,  religious  zeal  —  all  con-
spired to  render  the  newly-discovered  countries
tempting  and  profitable.  All  the  existing  rela-
tions of  nations,  however,  necessarily  under-
went a  change;  the  people  of  the  West  ac-
quired a  new  superiority,  or  at  least  became
capable  of  acquiring  it.

Above  all,  the  relative  situation  of  religions
was  altered.  Christianity,  especially  in  the
forms  it  had  assumed  in  the  Latin  Church,
gained  a  fresh  and  unexpected  ascendancy  in
the  remotest  regions.  It  was  therefore  doubly
important  to  mankind,  what  might  be  the  pre-
sent or  the  future  form  and  character  of  the
Latin  Church.  The  pope  instantly  put  forth  a
claim,  which  no  one  contested,  to  divide  the
countries  that  had  been,  or  that  yet  might  be
found,  between  the  two  States  by  which  they
were  discovered.

POSITION OF THE PAPACY WITH REGARD TO
RELIGION.

The  question,  at  what  periods  and  under
what  circumstances  ihe  distinguishing  doc-
trines and  practices  of  the  Roujish  Church
were  settled,  and  acquired  an  ascendancy,
merits  a  minute  and  elaborate  dissertation.

It  is  sufficient  here  to  recal  to  the  mind  of
the  reader,  that  this  took  place  at  a  compara-
tively late  period,  and  precisely  in  the  century
of  the  great  hierarchical  struggles.

It  is  well  known  that  the  institutions  of  the
Seven  Sacraments,  whose  circle  embraces  all
the  important  events  of  T.he  life  of  man,  and
brings  them  into  contact  with  the  church,  is
ascribed  to  Peter  Lombard,  who  lived  in  the
twelfth  century.*  It  appears  upon  inquiry
that  the  notions  regarding  the  most  important
of  them,  the  Sacrament  of  the  Altar,  were  by
no  means  very  distinct  in  the  church  itself,  in
the  time  of  that  great  theologian.  It  is  true
that  one  of  those  synods  which,  under  Gregory
VIL,  had  contributed  so  much  to  the  establish-
ment of  tlie  hierarchy,  had  added  great  weight
to  the  doctrine  of  the  real  presence  by  the  con-
demnation of  Berengar:  but  Peter  Lombard  as
3'et  did  not  venture  to  decide  in  its  favour  ;  the
word  transubstantiation  first  became  current  in
his  time;  nor  was  it  until  the  beginning  of  the
thirteenth  century,  that  the  idea  and  the  word
received  the  sanction  of  the  church:  this,  as  is
well  known,  w^as  first  given  by  the  Lateran
confession  of  faith  in  the  year  1215;  and  it
was  not  till  later  that  the  objections  which  till
then  had  been  constantly  suggested  by  a  deeper
view^  of  religion,  gradually  disappeared.

It  is  obvious,  however,  of  what  infinite  im-
portance this  doctrine  became  to  the  service  of
the  church,  which  has  crystallized  (if  I  may

*  It'would  amount  to  little,  if  what  Schrockh  (Kirchen -
geschichte,  xxviiK  p.  45)  assumes  were  true ;  viz.  that
Olto  of  Bamberg  had  already  preached  this  doctrine  to
the  Pomeranians  ;  but  it  has  been  justly  remarked,  that
the  biography  of  Otto,  in  which  this  statement  appears,
was  written  at  a  later  time.

use  the  expression)  around  the  mystery  it  in-
volves. The  ideas  of  the  mystical  and  sensible
presence  of  Christ  in  the  church  were  thus  em-
bodied in  a  living  image;  the  adoration  of  the
Host  was  introduced;  festivals  in  honour  of
this  greatest  of  all  miracles,  incessantly  re-
peated, were  solemnized.  Intimately  connect-
ed w-ith  this  is  the  great  importance  attached
to  the  worship  of  the  Virgin  Mary,  the  mother
of  Christ,  in  the  latter  part  of  the  middle  ages.

The  prerogatives  of  the  priesthood  are  also
essentially  connected  with  this  article  of  fiiith.
The  theory  and  doctrine  of  the  priestly  cha-
racter were  developed  ;  that  is,  of  the  powder
communicated  to  the  priest  by  ordination,  "to
make  the  body  of  Christ"  (as  they  did  not
scruple  to  say)  "  to  act  in  the  person  of
Christ."  It  is  a  product  of  the  thirteenth  cen-
tury, and  it  is  to  be  traced  principally  to  Alex-
ander of  Hales  and  I'homas  Aquinas. f  This
doctrine  first  gave  to  the  separation  of  the
priesthood  from  the  laity,  which  had  indeed
other  and  deeper  causes,  its  full  significancy.
People  began  to  see  in  the  priest  the  mediator
between  God  and  man.ij:

This  separation,  regarded  as  a  positive  insti^
tution,  is  also,  as  is  well  known,  an  offspring
of  the  same  epoch.  In  the  thirteenth  century,
spite  of  all  opposition,  the  celibacy  of  the
priesthood  became  an  inviolable  law.  At  the
same  time  the  cup  began  to  be  withheld  from
the  laity.  It  w^as  not  denied  that  the  eflicacy
of  the  Eucharist  in  both  kinds  was  more  com-
plete ;  but  it  was  said  that  the  more  worthy
should  be  reserved  for  the  more  worthy — for
those  by  whose  instrumentality  alone  it  was
produced.  "It  is  not  in  the  participation  of
the  faithful,"  says  St.  Thomas,  "  that  the  per-
fection of  the  sacrament  lies,  but  solely  in  the
consecration  of  the  elements."  §  And  in  fact
the  church  appeared  far  less  designed  for  in-
struction or  for  the  preaching  of  the  Gospel,
than  for  the  showing  forth  of  the  great  mys-
tery ;  and  the  priesthood  is,  through  the  sacra-
ment, the  sole  depository  of  the  power  to  do
this  ;  it  is  through  the  priest  that  sanctification
is  imparted  to  the  multitude.

This  very  separation  of  the  priesthood  from
the  laity  gave  its  members  boundless  influence
over  all  other  classes  of  the  communi;)^

It  is  a  necessary  part  of  the  theory  of  the
sacerdotal  character  above  alluded  to,  that  the
priest  has  the  exclusive  powder  of  removing  the
obstacles  which  stand  in  the  way  of  a  partici-
pation in  the  mysterious  grace  of  God  :  in  this
not  even  a  saint  had  power  to  supersede  him.  Ij
But  the  absolution  which  he  is  authorized  to
grant  is  charged  wäth  certain  conditions,  the

t  See  the  researches  of  Thomas  Aquinas  concerninjr
the  Birth  of  Christ,  "  Utrum  de  pnrissimis  sanguinibus
virginis  formatus  fuerit,  &c."  SummiE,  pars  iii.'quaestio
31. It  is  evident  what  value  was  set  upon  tlie  point.

J  '■  Sacerdos,"  says  Thomas,  "constitniturmedius  inter
Daum  et  populum.  Sacerdos  novce  legis  in  persona  Christi
operatur." Summte,  pars.  iii.  qurestio  22,  art  4,  concl.

§  "  Perfectio  hujus  sacrampnti  iion  est  i^n  usu  fidelium
sed  in  consecratione  materise."  — Pars  iii.  qu.  SO,  a.  12,
c.  2m.

|[  Summa;  Suppl.  Qu.  17,  a.  2,  c.  1^.  "  Character  et  po
testas  conticiendi  et  potestas  claviumest  unum  et  idem."
But  I  refer  to  the  entire  question.

POSITION  OF  THE  PAPACY

Book  II.

most  imperative  of  which  is  confession.  In
the  beginninor  of  the  thirteenth  century  it  was
peremptorily  enjoined  on  every  believer  as  a
duty,  to  confess  all  his  sins,  at  least  once  in  a
year,  to  some  particular  priest.

It  requires  no  elaborate  argument  to  prove
what  an  all-pervading  influence  auricular  con-
fession, and  the  official  supervision  and  guid-
ance of  consciences,  must  give  to  the  (clergy.
With  this  was  connected  a  complete,  organised
system  of  penances.

Above  all,  a  character  and  position  almost
divine  was  thus  conferred  on  the  high-priest,
the  pope  of  Rome;  of  whom  it  was  assumed
that  he  occupied  the  place  of  Christ  in  the
mystical  body  of  the  church,  which  embraced
heaven  and  earth,  the  dead  and  the  living.
This  conception  of  the  functions  and  attributes
of  the  pope  was  first  filled  out  and  perfected
in  the  beginning  of  the  thirteenth  century ;
then,  too,  was  the  doctrine  of  the  treasures  of
the  church,  on  which  the  system  of  indulgences
rests,  ^rst  promulgated.  Innocent  III.  did  not
scruple  to  declare,  that  w^hat  he  did,  God  did,
through  him.  Glossators  added,  that  the  pope
possessed  the  uncontrolled  will  of  God  ;  that
his  sentence  superseded  all  reasons  :  with  per-
verse and  extravagant  dialectic,  they  pro-
pounded the  question,  whether  it  were  possible
to  appeal  from  the  pope  to  God,*  and  answered
it  in  the  negative;  seeing  that  God  had  the
same  tribunal  as  the  pope,  and  that  it  v/as  im-
possible to  appeal  from  any  being  to  himself.

It  is  clear  that  the  papacy  must  have  already
gained  the  victory  over  the  empire,  —  that  it
could  no  longer  have  any  thing  to  fear,  either
from  master  or  rival, — before  opinions  and  doc-
trines of  this  kintl  could  be  entertained  or
avowed.  In  the  age  of  struggles  and  con-
quests, the  theory  of  the  hierarchy  gained
ground  step  by  step  with  the  fact  of  material
power.  Never  were  theory  and  practice  more
intimately  connected.

Nor  was  it  to  be  believed  that  any  inter-
ruption or  pause  in  this  course  of  things  took
place  in  the  fifteenth  century.  The  denial  of
the  right  of  the  clergy  to  vi-ithhold  the  cup
was  first  declared  to  be  heresy  at  ^the  council
of  Constance :  Eugenius  IV.  first  formally
accepted  the  doctrine  of  the  Seven  Sacraments  ;
the  extraordinary  school  interpretation  of  the
miraculous  conception  was  first  approved  by
the  councils,  favoured  by  the  popes,  and  ac-
cepted by  the  universities,  in  this  age.f

It  might  appear  that  the  worldly  dispositions
of  the  popes  of  those  times,  whose  main  ob-
ject it  was  to  enjoy  life,  to  promote  their  de-
pendents and  to  enlarge  their  secular  domin-
ions, would  have  prejudiced  their  spiritual
pretensions.  But,  on  the  contrary,  these  were
as  vast  and  as  arrogant  as  ever.  The  only
eifect  of  the  respect  inspired  by  the  councils
was,  that  the  popes  forbade  any  one  to  appeal
to  a  council  under  pain  of  damnation. :|: With

*  Augustini  Triumphi  Summa  in  Giqseler,  Kirchen-
geschichte, ii.  iii.  95.

t  Baselii  Auctarium  Naucleri,  p.  993.

I  Bull  of  Pius  II.  of  the  18th  of  Jan.  1460.  (XV.  Kal.
Febr.,  not  X.,  as  Rain,  has  it.)  Bullar.  Cocq.  torn.  iii.
pars  iii.  p.  97.

what  ardour  do  the  curialist  writers. labour  to
demonstrate  the  infallibility  of  the  pope  !  John
of  Torquemada  is  unwearied  in  heaping  to-
gether analogies  from  Scripture,  maxims  of
the  lathers  and  passages  out  of  the  false
decretals,  for  this  end ;  he  goes  so  far  as  to
maintain  that,  w^ere  there  not  a  head  of  the
church  who  could  decide  all  controversies  and
remove  all  doubts,  it  might  be  possible  to
doubt  of  the  Holy  Scriptures  themselves,  which
derived  their  authority  only  from  the  church;
which,  again,  could  not  be  conceived  as  ex-
isting without  the  pope.§  In  the  beginning
of  ihe  sixteenth  eentury,  the  well-lmown  Do-
minican, Thomas  of  Gaeta,  did  not  hesitate  to
declare  the  church  a  born  slave,  who  could
have  no  other  remedy  against  a  bad  pope,  than
to  pray  for  him  without  ceasing.  ||

Nor  were  any  of  the  resources  of  physical
force  neglected  or  abandoned.  The  Domini-
cans, who  taught  the  strictest  doctrines  in  the
universities  and  proclaimed  them  to  the  people
from  the  pulpit,  had  the  right  to  enforce  them
by  means  of  fire  and  sword.  Many  victims
to  orthodoxy  were  offered  up  after  John  Huss
and  Jerome  of  Prague.  The  contrast  between
the  worldly-mindedness  and  sensuality  of
Alexander  VI.  and  Leo  X.,  with  the  addi-
tional stringency  and  rigour  they  gave  to  the
pov/ers  of  the  Inquisition,  is  most  glaring.*'^'
Under  the  authority  of  similarly  disposed  pre-»
decessors,  this  institution  had  recently  ac-
quired in  Spain  a  more  fearful  character  and
aspect  than  it  had  ever  yet  presented  to  the
world ;  and  the  example  of  Germany  shows
that  similar  tendencies  w^ere  at  work  in  other
countries.  The  strange  distortion  of  the  fancy
which  gave  birth  to  the  notion  of  a  personal
intercourse  with  Satan,  served  as  the  pretext
for  bloody  executions  ;  the  "  Hexenhammer"
(Hammer  for  Witches)  was  the  v.-ork  of  two
German  Dominicans.  The  Spanish  Inquisi-
tion had  originated  in  a  persecution  of  the
Jews :  in  Germany,  also,  the  Jevv^s  were  uni-
versally persecuted  in  the  beginning  of  the
sixteenth  century,  and  the  Dominicans  of
Cologne  proposed  to  the  emperor  to  establish
an  Inquisition  against  them.  The)^  had  even
the  ingenuity  to  invent  a  legal  authority  for
such  a  measure.  They  declared  that  it  was
necessary  to  examine  how  far  the  Jews  had
deviated  from  the  Old  Testament,  which  the
emperor  was  fully  entitled  to  do,  since  their
nation  had  formally  acknowledged  before  the
judgment-seat  of  Pilate  the  authority  of  the
imperial  m/ajesty  of  Rome.j|  If  they  had  suc-
ceeded, they  would  certainly  not  have  stopped
at  the  Jews.

§  Johannes  de  TiuTecreniala  de  Potestate  Papali  (I?nc-
caherti,  torn.  ?:iii.),  c.  11-3.  "  Gredendiun  est,  quod  Ro-
maiiUH  jMiiUifex  in  judicio  eoruiu  qua?  fidei  sunt,  spiritu
sancto  rejratur  et  per  consequGiis  in  illis  non  erret :  alias
possit  qui?  eadem  facilitate  dicere,  quod  erratum  sit  in
electione  quatiior  evanirelionnn  et  epistolarum  canonis."
He  laments,  however,  over  the  "  multa  turba  adversario-
rum  et  inimicorum  Romanas  sedis,"  who  will  not  believe
this.

Il  De  Autoritate  Papas  etConcilii.  Extracts  in  Rainal-
dus,  1.512,  nr.  18.

**  Decretals  in  Rainaldus,  1498,  nr.  25, 1516,  nr.  34.

It  Report  in  Reuchlin's  Augenspiegel  (Mirror),  printed
by  V.  d.  Hardt,  Historia  Liter.  Reformationis,  iii.  61.

Chap.  T.

V/ITH  REGARD  TO  RELIGION.

Meanwhile  the  whole  intellectual  energy  of
the  age  flowed  in  the  channels  marked  out  by
the  church.  Germany  is  a  striking  example
to  what  an  extent  the  popular  mind  of  a  nation
of  the-  West  received  its  direction  from  eccle-
siastical principles.

The  great  workshops  of  literature,  the  Ger-
man universities,  were  all  more  or  less  colo-
nies or  branches  of  that  of  Paris  —  either  di-
rectly sprang  from  it,  like  the  earlier;  or  indi-
rectly, like  the  later.  Their  statutes  sometimes
begin  with  a  eulog}'  on  the  Alma  Mater  of  Pa-
ris.* From  that  most  ancient  seat  of  learning,
too,  had  the  w'hole  system  of  the  schoolmen,
the  controversy  between  Nominalism  and  Real-
ism, the  preponderancy  of  the  theological  fac-
ulty,— "that  brilliant  star  from  which  every-
thing received  liijht  and  life," — passed  over  to
them.  In  the  theological  faculty  the  Professor
of  Sentences!  had  the  precedency,  and  the
Baccalaureus  who  read  the  Bible  was  obliged
to  allow  him  to  determine  the  hour  of  his  lec-
ture. In  some  universities,  none  but  a  clerk
who  had  received  at  least  inferior  ordination,
could  be  chosen  Rector.  The  whole  of  edu-
cation, from  the  first  elements  to  the  highest
dignities  of  learning,  w^as  conducted  in  one  and
the  same  spirit.  Dialectical  distinctions  intru-
ded themselves  into  the  very  rudiments  of
g;rammar  ;:|:  and  the  elementary  books  of  the
eleventh  and  twelfth  centuries  were  constantly
retained  as  the  groundwork  of  learning  :§  here,
too,  the  same  road  was  steadily  pursued  which
had  been  marked  out  at  the  time  of  the  founda-
tion of  the  hierarchical  power.

Art  was  subject  to  the  same  influences.  The
ministers  and  cathedrals,  in  which  the  doctrines
and  ideas  of  the  church  are  so  curiousl}^  sj'm-
bolised,  rose  on  every  side.  In  the  year  1482,
the  tow-ers  of  the  church  of  St.  Sebaldus  at
Nürnberg  were  raised  to  their  present  height ;
in  1494,  a  new  and  exquisitely  wrought  gate
was  added  to  Strasburg  minster;  in  1500,  the
king  of  the  Romans  laid  the  first  stone  of  the
choir  of  the  Reichsgotteshaus  (Church  of  the
Empire)  St.  Ulrich,  in  Augsburg,  with  sil-
ver trowel,  rule,  and  hod  ;  he  caused  a  mag-
nificent block  of  stone  to  be  brought  from  the
mountains,  out  of  which  a  monument  was  to
be  erected  "  to  the  well-beloved  lord  St.  Ü1-

*  Principium  Statutorum  Facultatis  Theologicw  Studii
Vieniiensis  ap.  Kollar  Analecta,  i.  137,  p.  240,  n.  2.  Sta-
tute of  Cologne  in  Bianco,  Endowments  for  Students  at
Cologne,  p.  4Ö1 :  "  Divins  sapientis  iiuvius  descendens  a
patre  luminuni  —  ah  alveo  Parisiens.  studii  tanquam  cis-
terna  conductu  capto  percanalia  prorunipit  Rheni  partes
ubertando."  Tiie  srenealngy  is  as  follows:  —  From  the
university  of  Paris  issued  tliose  of  Prague,  Vienna,  Hei-
delberg, and  Cologne;  from  Prague,  —  Leipzig,  Rostock,
Greifswald;  and  for  the  greater  part,  Erfurt ;  from  Co-
logne,—  Louvain  and  Treves;  from  Vienna,  —  Freiburg,
and,  according  to  the  Statutes.  Ingolstadt.  At  Basle  and
Tübingen  at  first,  deference  was  paid  to  Bologna  also  ;
but  even  in  Basle,  the  first  Bursa  was  called  the  Parisian
and  in  Tübingen  the  first  teacher  of  Theology  was  ä  ma-
gister  from  Paris.

4t  Professor  Sententiarum,  the  expositor  of  the  "  Sen-
tentiae"  of  Peter  Lombard. — Transl.

%  Geiler,  Navicula  :  "  In  prima  parre  de  subjecto  attri-
butionis  et  de  habitibns  intellectualibus,  quod  scire  jam
est  magistrorum  provectorum."

§  Johannes  de  Garlandia,  Alexander's  Doctrinale. Du-
fresne,  Praefatio  ad  Glossarium,  42,  43.
12  H*

rich,  our  kinsman  of  the  house  of  Kyburt^ :"
upon  it  was  to  stand  a  king  of  the  Romans,
sword  in  hand.  ||  In  1513,  the  choir  of  the  ca-
thedral of  Freiburg,  in  1517,  that  of  Bern,  was
finished  ;  the  porch  on  the  northern  transept
of  the  church  of  St.  Lawrence  in  Nürnberg-
dates  from  1520.  The  brotherhoods  of  the
masons,  and  the  secrets  which  arose  in  the
workshops  of  German  builders,  spread  wider
and  wider.  It  was  not  till  a  later  period  that
the  redundancy  of  foliage,  the  vegetable  char-
acter, which  so  remarkably  distinguishes  the
so-called  gothic  architecture,  became  general.
At  the  time  we  are  speaking  of,  the  interior  of
churclies  was  principally  adorned  with  count-
less figures,  either  exquisitely  carved  in  wood,
or  cast  in  precious  metals,  or  painted  and  en-
closed in  gold  frames,  which  covered  the  altars
or  adorned  the  aisles  and  porches.  It  is  not
the  province  of  the  arts  to  produce  ideas,  but
to  give  them  a  sensible  form ;  all  the  creative
powers  of  the  nation  were  now  devoted  to  the
task  of  representing  the  traditional  conceptions
of  the  church.  Those  wondrous  representa-
tions of  the  Mother  of  God,  so  full  of  sw-eet
and  innocent  grace,  which  have  im.mortalized
Baldung,  Schaff'ner,  and  especially  I\Iartin
Schön,  are  not  mere  visions  of  an  artist's  fan-
cy ;  they  are  profoundly  connected  with  that
w^orship  of  the  Virgin  which  was  then  pecu-
liarly general  and  fervent.  I  venture  to  add
that  they  cannot  be  understood  vvithout  the
rosary,  which  is  designed  to  recal  the  several
joys  of  the  Holy  Mary; — the  angelic  saluta-
tion, the  journey  across  the  mountains,  the
child-bearing  without  pain,  the  finding  of  Je-
sus in  the  temple,  and  the  ascension ;  as  the
prayer-books  of  that  time  more  fully  set  forth.
These  pra3'er-books  are  altogether  singular
monuments  of  a  simple  and  credulous  devo-
tion. There  are  prayers  to  which  an  indul-
gence for  1*46  days,  others  to  which  one  for
7000  or  8000  years,  are  attached  :  one  morning
benediction  of  peculiar  efiicacy  was  sent  hy  a
pope  to  a  king  of  Cyprus ;  whosoever  repeats
the  prayer  of  the  venerable  Bede  the  requisite
number  of  times,  the  Virgin  Mary  will  be  at
hand  to  help  him  for  thirty  days  before  his
death,  and  will  not  suffer  him  to  depart  unab-
solved. The  most  extravagant  expressions
were  uttered  in  praise  of  the  Virgin :  "  The
eternal  Daughter  of  the  eternal  Father,  the
heart  of  the  indivisible  Trinity  :"  it  was  said,
"  Glory  be  to  the  Virgin,  to  the  Father,  and  to

the  Sc

Thus,  t(Ä),  were  the  saints  invoked

as  meritorious  servants  of  God,  who,  by  their
merits,  could  win  our  salvation,  and  could  ex-
tend peculiar  protection  to  those  who  believed
in  them;  as,  for  example,  St.  Sebaldus,  "the
most  venerable  and  holy  captain,  helper  and
defender  of  the  imperial  city  of  Nürnberg."

Relics  were  collected  with  great  zeal.  Elec-
tor Frederick  of  Saxony  gathered  together  in

|(  Account  in  the  Fusger  MS.  We  remember  that  St,
Ulrich  was  the  first  saint  canonised  by  a  pope  (Johannes,
XV.  973)  for  the  whole  church.

**  Extracts  from  the  prayer-books :  Hortulus  Anime,
Salus  Animpe,  Gilgengart,  and  others  in  Riederer,  Nach
richten  zur  Büchergeschichte,  ii.  157—411.

90

POSITION  OF  THE  PAPACY  TO  RELIGION.

Book  II.

the  cluircli  he  endowed  at  Wittenberg,  5005
particles,  all  preserved  in  entire  standing  figures,
or  in  exquisitely  wrought  reliquaries,  which
were  shown  to  the  devout  people  every  year
on  the  Monday  after  iMisericordia.*  In  the
presence  of  the  princes  assembled  at  the  diet,
the  high  altar  of  the  cathedral  of  Treves  was
opened,  and  "the  seamless  coat  of  our  dear
Lord  Jesus  Christ,"  found  in  it;  the  little
pamphlets  in  which  this  miracle  was  represent-
ed in  wood-cuts,  and  announced  to  all  the
world,  are  to  be  found  in  the  midst  of  the  acts
of  the  diet.f  Miraculous  images  of  Our  Lady
were  discovered  ; — one,  for  example,  in  Eischei
in  the  diocese  of  Constance ;  at  the  Iphof
boundary,  by  the  road-side,  a  sitting  figure  of
the  Virgin,  whose  miracles  gave  great  otfence
to  the  monks  of  Birklingen,  who  possessed  a
similar  one;  and  in  Regensburg,  the  beautiful
image,  for  which  a  magnificent  <;hurch  was
built  by  the  eontributions  of  the  faithful,  out
of  the  ruins  of  a  synagogue  belonging  to  the
expelled  Jews.  I\liracles  were  worked  with-
out ceasing  at  the  tomb  of  Bishop  Benno  in
Meissen  ;  madmen  were  restored  to  reason,  the
deformed  became  straight,  those  infected  with
the  plague  were  healed ;  nay,  a  fire  at  Merse-
burg was  extinguished  by  Bishop  Bose  merely
uttering  the  name  of  Benno;  while  those 'who
doubted  his  power  and  sanctity  were  assailed
by  misfortunes. :|:  When  Trithemius  recom-
mended this  miracle-worker  to  the  pope  for
canonization,  he  did  not  forget  to  remark  that
he  had  been  a  rigid  and  energetic  supporter  of
the  church  party,  and  had  resisted  the  tyrant
Henry  IV.§  So  intimately  v,'ere  all  these  ideas
connected.  A  confraternity  formed  for  the  pur-
pose of  the  frequent  repetition  of  the  rosary
(which  is,  in  fact,  nothing  more  than  the  de-
vout and  affectionate  recollection  of  the  joys
of  the  Holy  Virgin),  was  founded  by  Jacob
Sprenger,  the  violent  and  fanatical  restorer  of
the  Inquisition  in  Germany, — the  author  of  the
"  Hexenharamer."

For  it  v.'as  one  single  and  wondrous  struc-
ture which  had  grown  up  out  of  the  germs
planted  by  former  ages,  wherein  spiritual  and
temporal  power,  wild  fancy  and  dr}^  school-
learning,  the  tenderest  devotion  and  the  rudest
force,  religion  and  superstition,  were  mingled
and  confounded,  and  were  bound  together  by
some  mysterious  quality  common  to  them  all ;
— and,  amidst  all  the  attacks  it  sustained,  and
all  the  conquests  it  achieved  —  amidst  those
incessant  conflicts,  the  decisions  of  which  con-
stantly assumed  the  character  of  laws,  —  not
only  asserted  its  claim  to  universal  fitness  for
all  ages  and  nations — for  this  world  and  the
next — hut  to  the  regulation  of  the  minutest  par-
ticulars of  human  life.

I  know  not  whether  any  man  of  sound  un-

*  Zavcrun?  des  Hnchlobwürtiissten  Heiliffthums,  1509.
(^The  Showing  of  the  most  venerable  Relics,  1509.)  Ex-
tract in  Heller's  Lucas  Kranach,  i.  p.  350.

t  Chronicle  of  Limpiirff  in  Hontheim.p.  1122.  Browerus
is  again  very  solemn  on  this  occasion.

X  Miracula  S.  Bennonis  ex  impresso,  Romas  1521,  in
Mencken,  Scriptores  Rer.  Germ.  ii.  p.  1887.

§  His  letter  in  Rainaldus,  1506,  nr.  42.

derstanding — any  man,  not  led  astray  by  some
phantasm,  can  seriously  wish  that  this  state  of
things  had  remained  unshaken  and  unchanged
in  Europe;  whether  any  man  persuades  him-
self that  the  will  and  the  power  to  look  the
genuine,  entire  and  unveiled  truth  steadily  in
the  face — the  manly  piety  acquainted  with  the
grounds  of  its  faith  —  could  ever  have  been
matured  under  such  influences.  Nor  do  I  un-
derstand how  any  one  could  really  regard  the
diffusion  of  this  most  singular  condition  of  the
human  mind  (\vhich  had  been  produced  by  cir-
cumstances wholly  peculiar  to  the  West)  over
the  entire  globe,  as  conducive  to  the  welfare
and  happiness  of  the  human  race.  It  is  well
known  that  one  main  ground  of  the  disinclina-
tion of  the  Greeks  to  a  union  with  the  Roman
church,  la}^  in  the  multitude  of  rules  which
were  introduced  among  the  Latins,  and  in  the
oppressive  autocracy  which  the  See  of  Rome
had  arrogated  to  itself. j|  Nay,  was  not  the
Gospel  itself  kept  concealed  by  the  Roman
church?  In  the  ages  in  which  the  scholastic
dogmas  were  fixed,  the  Bible  was  forbidden  to
the  laity  altogether,  and  even  to  the  priesthood,
in  the  mother  tongue.  It  is  impossible  to  deny
that,  without  any  serious  reference  to  the  source
from  which  the  whole  system  of  faith  had  pro-
ceeded, men  went  on  to  construct  doctrines  and
to  enjoin  practices,  shaped  upon  the  principle
which  had  become  the  dominant  one.  We
must  not  confound  the  tendencies  of  the  period
now  before  iis  with  those  evinced  in  the  doc-
trines and  practices  established  at  the  Council
of  Trent ;  at  that  time  even  the  party  which
adhered  to  Catholicism  had  felt  the  influences
of  the  epoch  of  the  Reformation,  and  had  begun
to  reform  itself:  the  current  was  already  ar-
rested.** And  this  was  absolutely  necessary.
It  v/as  necessary  to  clear  the  germ  of  religion
from  the  thousand  folds  of  accidental  forms
under  which  it  lay  concealed,  and  to  place  it
unincumbered  in  the  light  of  day.  Before  the
Gospel  could  be  preached  to  all  nations,  it  must
appear  again  in  its  own  lucid,  unadulterated
purity.

It  is  one  of  the  greatest  coincidences  pre-
sented by  the  history  of  the  world,  that  at  the
moment  in  which  the  prospect  of  exercising
dominion  over  the  other  hemisphere  opened  on
the  Romano-Germanic  nations  of  the  Latin
church,  a  religious  movement  began,  the  object
of  which  was  to  restore  the  purity  of  revelation.

Whilst  other  nations  were  busied  in  the  con-
quest of  distant  lands,  Germany,  which  had
little  share  in  those  enterprises,  undertook  this
mighty  task.  Various  events  concurred  to  give
that  direction  to  the  mind  of  the  country,  and
to  incite  it  to  a  strenuous  opposition  to  the  See
of  Rome.

11  Humbertus  de  Romania  (in  Petrus  de  Alliaco  de  Re-
form. Eccles.  c.  2.)  "dicit  quod  causa  dispositiva  schisma-
tis  GrcBcornm  inter  alias  una  fuit  propter  gravamina  Ro-
mansB  ecclesise  in  exaclionibus,  excommunicationibus.^t
statiitis."

**  I  hold  it  to  be  the  fundamental  error  of  Möhler's  Sym-
bolik, that  he  considers  the  doifiua  of  the  Council  of  Trent
as  the  doctrine  from  which  the  Protestants  seceded ;  whilst
it  is  much  nearer  the  truth  to  say,  tiiai  itself  produced
Prolestanlisni  by  a  reaction.

Chap.  I.

OPPOSITION  RAISED  BY  THE  SECULAR  POWERS.

91

OPPOSITION RAISED  BY  THE SECULAR POWERS.

The  efforts  to  obtain  a  regular  and  well-com-
pacted constitution,  which  for  some  years  had
occupied  the  German  nation,  were  very  much
at  variance  with  the  interests  of  the  papacy,
hitherto  exercising  so  great  an  influence  over
the  g-overnment  of  the  empire.  The  pope
would  very  soon  have  been  made  sensible  of
the  change,  if  that  national  government  which
was  the  object  of  such  zealous  and  ardent  en-
deavours had  been  organised.

The  very  earliest  projects  of  such  a  consti-
tution, in  the  year  1487,  were  accompanied
with  a  warning  to  the  pope  to  abolish  a  tithe
which  he  had  arbitrarily  imposed  on  Germany,
and  which  in  some  places  he  had  actually
levied.*  In  1495,  when  it  became  necessary
to  form  a  council  of  the  empire,  the  intention
was  expressed  to  authorize  the  president  to
take  into  consideration  the  complaints  of  the
nation  against  the  church  of  Rome,  j  Scarcely
had  the  States  met  the  king  in  1498,  when  the}"
resojved  to  require  the  pope  to  relinquish  the
Annates  which  he  drew  to  so  large  an  amount
from  Germany,  in  order  to  provide  for  a  Turkish
war.  In  like  manner,  as  soon  as  the  Council
of  Regency  was  formed,  an  embassy  was  sent
to  the  pope  to  press  this  request  earnestly  upon
him,  and  to  make  representations  concerning
various  unlawful  encroachments  on  the  gift  and
employment  of  German  benefices.:!:  A  papal
legate,  who  shortly  after  arrived  for  the  purpose
of  causing  the  jubilee  to  be  preached,  was  ad-
monished by  no  means  to  do  anything  without
the  advice  and  knowledge  of  the  imperial  go-
vernment ;§  care  was  taken  to  prevent  him
from  granting  indulgences  to  breakers  of  the
Public  Peace  :  on  the  contrary,  he  was  charged
expressly  to  uphold  it;  imperial  commissioners
were  appointed  to  accompany  hirn,  without
Avhose  presence  and  permission  he  could  not
receive  the  money  when  collected.

We  find  the  Emperor  Maximilian  occasion-
ally following  the  same  course. In  the  year

1510  he  caused  a  more  detailed  and  distinct
statement  of  the  grievances  of  the  German  na-
tion to  be  drawn  up,  than  had  hitherto  existed ;
he  even  entertained  the  idea  of  introducing  into
Germany  jj  the  Pragmatic  Sanction,  which  had
proved  so  beneficial  to  France. In  the  year

1511  he  took  a  lively  interest  in  the  convo-
cation of  a  council  at  Pisa :  we  have  an  edict
of  his,  dated  in  the  January  of  that  year,  where-
in he  declares  that,  as  the  court  of  Rome  delays,
he  will  not  delay ;  as  emperor,  steward  and
protector  of  the  Church,  he  convokes  the  coun-
cil of  which  she  is  so  greatly  in  need.  In  a
brief  dated  June,  he  promises  to  those  assem-

*  Letter,  with  the  seals  of  Mainz,  Saxoiiv,  and  Bran-
denburg ;  June  28,  14S7,  in  Müller,  Etth.  Fr."vi.  130.

t  Datt,  de  Pace  Publ.  p.  840.

1  Instructions  of  the  Imperial  Embassy.  Müller,  Reich-
staggsstaat,  117.  .

§  Articuli  tractati  et  conclusi  inter  Revmam  Dominatio-
nem  D"um  Legatum  ac  senatum  et  con ventum' Imperii  in
Müller,  Reichstagästaat,  p.  213.

I!  Avisamenta  GermanicEe  Nationis  in  Freher,  ii.  678.
Yet  more  remarkable  is  tiie  Epitome  pragmaticae  sanctio-
nis  in  Goidast's  Constitutt.  Imp.  ii.  123.

bled  his  protection  and  favour  till  the  close  of
their  sittings,  "  by  which  they  will,  as  he
hopes,  secure  to  themselves  the  approbation  of
God  and  the  praise  of  men.'"^^*  And,  in  fact,
the  long-cherished  liope  that  a  reform  in  the
church  would  be  the  result  of  this  council,  was
again  ardently  indulged.  The  articles  were
pointed  out  in  which  reforms  were  first  antici-
pated. For  example,  the  cumulation  of  bene-
fices in  the  hands  of  the  cardinals  was  to  be
prevented  ;  a  law  was  demanded,  in  virtue  of
which  a  pope  whose  life  was  stained  with  no-
torious vice,  might  be  summarily  deposed.||
But  neither  had  the  council  authority  enough  to
act  upon  ideas  of  this  sort,  nor  was  Maximi-
lian the  man  to  follow  them  out.  He  was  of
too  weak  a  nature ;  and  the  same  Wimpheling
who  drew  up  the  statement  of  grievances,  re-
marked to  him  how  many  former  em.perors  had
been  deposed  by  an  incensed  pope  leagued  with
the  princes  of  the  empire — certainly  no  motive
to  resolute  perseverance  in  the  course  he  had
begun.  Independent  of  this,  every  new  turn
in  politics  gave  a  fresh  direction  to  his  views
on  ecclesiastical  affairs. :|::[:  After  his  reconcilia-
tion with  Pope  Julius  II.  in  1513,  he  demanded
succours  from  the  empire  in  order  to  take  m^ea-
sures  against  the  schism  which  was  to  be  fear-
ed. Had  there  really  been  reason  to  fear  it,  he
himself  would  have  been  mainly  to  blame  for
the  encouragement  he  had  given  to  the  Council
of  Pisa.

It  is  sufiiciently  clear  that  this  opposition  to
Rome  had  no  real  practical  force.  The  want
of  a  body  in  the  state,  armed  with  independent
powers,  crippled  every  attempt,  every  move-
ment, at  its  very  commencement.  But  in  the
public  mind,  that  opposition  still  remained  in
full  force;  loud  complaints  were  incessantlj''
heard.

Hemmerlin,  whose  books  were  in  those  times
extensively  circulated  and  eagerlj^  read,  ex-
hausted the  vocabulary  for  expressions  to  paint
the  cheating  and  plunder  of  which  the  court  of
Rome  was  guilty .§§

In  the  beginning  of  the  sixteenth  century
there  were  the  bitterest  complaints  of  the  ruinous
nature  of  the  Annates.  It  was  probably  in  itself
the  most  oppressive  tax  in  the  empire  :  occasion-
ally a  prelate,  in  order  to  save  his  subjects  from
it,  tried  to  mortgage  some  lordship  of  his  see.
Diether  of  Isenburg  was  deposed  chiefly  be-
cause he  was  unable  to  fulfil  the  engagements
he  had  entered  into  concernino;  his  Pallium.

**  Tribursi  XVI.  mensis  Januarii  and  Muldorf  V.  Junii
in  Goldast,  i''.  421,  429.

it  In  the  Fugger  MS.  the  decrees  which  were  expected
are  noted  down.

JJ  Baselius.lllO.  "Admonitusprudentium  virorum  con-
silio— quem  incaute  pedem  cum  Gallis  contra  pontificem
firmaverat,  citius  retraxit."

§§  Felix  ?.IaI!eolus,  Recapitulatio  de  Anno  Jubileo.
"  Pro  nunc  do  prtesentis  pontificis  summi  et  aÜorum  sta-
tibuscomparationis  prteparationem  fedmus,  et  nunc  facie
ad  faciem  experientia  videmus  quod  nunquam  visus  est
execrabilioris  exorbitntionis  direptionis  deceptinnis  cir-
cumventionis  derogationis  decerptationis  deprsdationis
expoliationis  exactionis  corrosionis  et  omnis  si  audemus
dicere  simoniacs  pravitatis  adinventionis  novceet  reno-
vationis  usus  et  exercitatio  continua  quam  nunc  est
tempore  pontificis  moderni  (Nicolas  Y.)  et  in  dies  dilata'
tiir.'*

93

OPPOSITION  RAISED  BY

Book  II.

The  more  frequent  the  vacancies,  the  raore  in-
tolerable was  the  exaction.  In  Passau,  for
example,  these  followed  in  1482,  I486,  1490,
1500 :  the  last-appointed  bishop  repaired  to
Rome  in  the  hope  of  obtaining  some  alleviation
of  the  burthens  on  his  see;  but  he  accomplish-
ed nothing,  and  his  long  residence  at  the  papal
court  only  increased  his  pecuniary  difficulties.*
The  cost  of  a  pallium  for  Mainz  amounted  to
20,000  gulden ;  the  sum  was  assessed  on  the
several  parts  of  the  see  :  the  Rheingau,  for  ex-
ample, had  to  contribute  1000  gulden  each
time. I  In  the  beginning  of  the  sixteenth  cen-
tury vacancies  occurred  three  times  in  quick
succession — 1505,  1508,  1513;  Jacob  von  Lie-
benstein said  that  his  chief  sorrow  in  dying
was  that  his  country  would  so  soon  again  be
forced  to  pay  the  daes;  but  all  appeal  to  the
papal  court  was  fruitless;  before  the  old  tax
was  gathered  in,  the  order  for  a  new  one  v/as
issued.

We  may  imagine  what  was  the  impression
made  by  the  comparison  of  the  laborious  ne-
gotiations usually  necessary  to  extract  even
trifling  grants  from  the  diet,  and  the  great  dif-
ficulty Vv'ith  which  they  were  collected,  with
the  sums  which  flowed  without  toil  or  trouble
to  Rome.  They  were  calculated  at  300,000
gulden  yearly,  exclusive  of  the  costs  of  law
proceedings,  or  the  revenues  of  benefices  which
lapsed  to  the  court  of  Rome.:]:  And  for  what
purpose,  men  asked  themselves,  was  all  this  1
Christendom  had,  nevertheless,  lost  tv/o  em-
pires, fourteen  kingdoms,  and  three  hundred
towns  within  a  short  space  of  time:  it  was
continually  losing  to  the  Turks;  if  the  Ger-
man nation  were  to  keep  these  sums  in  its
own  hands  and  expend  them  itself,  it  would
meet  its  hereditary  foe  on  other  terms,  under
the  banners  of  its  valiant  commanders.

The  financial  relations  to  Rome,  generally,
excited  the  greatest  attention.  It  was  calcu-
lated that  the  barefooted  monks,  who  were  not
permitted  by  their  rule  to  touch  money,  col-
lected a  yearly  income  of  200,000  gulden;  the
whole  body  of  mendicant  friars,  a  million.

Another  evil  was  the  recurrence  of  collisions
between  the  temporal  and  spiritual  jurisdic-
tions, which  gradually  became  the  more  fre-
quent and  obvious,  the  more  the  territorial
sovereignties  tended  towards  separation  and
political  independence.  In  this  respect  Saxony
was  pre-eminent.  In  the  different  possessions
of  the  two  lines,  not  only  the  three  Saxon

*  Sclireitwein,  Episcopi  Patavieuses,  in  Rauch,  Scriptt.
ji.  5-27.

t  This  is  shown  by  the  Articles  of  the  inhabitants  of
the  Rheiuirau  in  Schunck's  Beitrügen,  i.  p.  183.  Jacob
of  Treves  also  reckons  in  1500,  "  Das  Geld,  so  sich  an  dem
päpstlichen  Hofe  für  die  päpstlichen  Bullen  und  Briefe,
darüber  Anhaten,  Minuten,  Servitien,  und  anders  dem-
seiben  a  nhangend,  zu  geben  gebüret,"  "  the  money,  which
it  behoves  to  give  to  the  papal  court  for  the  papal  bulls
and  briefs,  moreover  annats,  minutes,  services,  and  the
rest  belong!  ng  to  the  same,"  at  20,000  guldens.  Document
in  Hontheim,  ii.  ser.  xv.

I  This  is,  for  instance,  the  calculation  of  the  little  book,
Ein  klägliche  Klag  (A  mournful  Complaint)  1521,  which,
however,  I  am  not  for  adopting.  It  might  very  likely  be
impossible  to  reckon  the  gains  of  the  RomislAcourt.  The
tax  of  the  annates  at  Treves,  for  instance,  legally  amount-
ed to  10,000  gulden,  and  yet  the  actual  charge  was  20,000.

bishops,  but  the  archbishops  of  Mainz  and
Frag,  the  bishops  of  Würzburg  and  Bamberg,
Halberstadt,  Havelberg,  Brandenburg  and  Le-
bus,  had  spiritual  jurisdiction.  The  confusion
which  must,  at  all  events,  have  arisen  from
this,  was  now  enormously  increased  by  the
fact  that  all  disputes  between  laity  and  clergy
could  only  be  decided  before  spiritual  tribunals,
so  that  high  and  low  were  continually  vexed
with  excommunication.  In  the  year  1454,  we
find  Duke  William  complaining  that  the  evil
did  iiot  arise  from  his  good  lords  and  friends
the  bishops,  but  from  the  judges,  ofiicials,  and
procurators,  who  sought  therein  only  their
own  profit.  In  concurrence  with  the  counts,
lords,  and  knights  of  his  land,  he  issued  certain
ordinances  to  prevent  this  abuse,§  in  support
of  which,  privileges  granted  by  the  popes  were
alleged ;  but  in  1490  the  old  complaints  were
revived^  the  administration  of  justice  in  the
temporal  courts  was  "greatly  obstructed  and
thwarted  by  the  spiritual,  and  the  people  were
impoverished  by  the  consequent  delays  and
expenses.  II  In  the  year  1518,  the  princes  of
both  lines,  George  and  Frederic,  combined  to
urge  that  the  spiritual  jurisdiction  should  be
restricted  to  spiritual  causes,  and  the  temporal
to  temporal ;  the  diet  to  decide  what  was  tem-
poral and  what  spiritual.  Duke  George  was
still  more  zealous  in  the  matter  than  his
cousin.**  But  the  grievances  and  complaints
which  fill  the  proceedings  of  the  later  diets
were  universal,  and  confined  to  no  class  or
portion  of  the  empire.

The  cities  felt  the  exemptions  enjoyed  by
the  clergy  peculiarly  burthensome.  It  was  im-
possible to  devise  any  thing  more  annoying  to
a  vv^ell-ordered  civic  community,  than  to  have
within  their  walls  a  corporate  body  which
neither  acknowledged  the  jurisdiction  of  the
city,  nor  contributed  to  bear  its  burthens,  nor
deemed  itself  generally  subject  to  its  regula-
tions. The  churches  were  asylums  for  crimi-
nals, the  monasteries  the  resort  of  dissolute
youth  ;  we  find  examples  of  monks  who  made
use  of  their  exemption  from  tolls,  to  import
goods  for  sale,  or  to  open  a  tavern  for  the  sale
of  beer.  If  any  attempt  was  made  to  assail
their  privileges,  they  defended  themselves  with
excommunication  and  interdict.  We  find  the
municipal  councils  incessantly  occupied  in
putting  some  check  to  this  evil.  In  urgent
cases  they  arrest  offenders  even  in  sanctuary,
and  then  take  measures  to  be  delivered  from
the  inevitable  interdict  by  the  interposition  of
some  powerful  protector;  they  are  vv'ell  in-
clined to  pass  over  the  bishops  and  to  address
themselves  directly  to  the  pope ;  they  try  to
effect  reforms  in  their  monasteries.  They
thought  it  a  very  questionable  arrangement
that  the  parish  priest  should  take  part  in  the
collection  of  the  Common  Penny  ;  the  utmost

§  Ordinance  of  Duke  William;  Gotha,  Monday  after
Exaudi,  1454,  in  Müller,  Rtth.  Fr.  i.  130.

11  Words  of  an  ordinance  of  Duke  George  in  Langenn's
Duke  Albrecht,  p.  319.

**  Articles  of  the  negotiations  of  the  diet,  as  my  gra-
cious lord  has  caused  them  to  be  given  in.  1518.  In  the
Dresden  Archives,

Chap.  I.

THE  SECULAR  POWERS.

that  they  would  concede  was  that  he  should
he  present,  but  without  takin^r  any  active
share.*  The  cities  always  vehemently  op-
posed the  emperor's  intention  of  appointing  a
bishop  to  be  judge  in  the  Impexial  Chamber.

Tiie  general  disapprobation  excited  by  the
church  on  such  weighty  points,  naturally  led
to  a  discussion  of  its  other  abuses.  Hemmer-
lin  zealously  contends  against  the  incessant
augmentation  of  ecclesiastical  property,  through
which  villages  disappeared  and  districts  be-
came waste ;  against  the  exorbitant  number
of  holidays,  which  even  the  council  of  Basle
had  endeavoured  to  reduce  ;  against  the  celi-
bacy of  the  clergy,  to  which  the  rules  of  the
Eastern  Church  were  much  to  be  preferred;
against  the  reckless  manner  in  which  ordina-
tion was  granted,  as,  for  example,  that  two
hundred  priests  v/ere  yearly  ordained  in  Con-
stance :  he  asks  to  what  all  this  is  to  lead.j"

Things  had  gone  so  far  that  the  constitution
of  the  clergy  was  offensive  to  public  morals :
a  multitude  of  ceremonies  and  rules  v/ere  at-
tributed to  the  mere  desire  of  making  money  ;
the  situation  of  priests  living  in  a  state  of  con-
cubinage and  burthened  with  illegitimate  chil-
dren, and  often,  spite  of  all  purchased  absolu-
tions, tormented  in  conscience  and  oppressed
with  the  fear  that  in  performing  the  sacrifice
of  the  mass  they  committed  a  deadly  sin,  ex-
cited mingled  pity  and  contempt :  most  of
those  who  embraced  the  monastic  profession
had  no  other  idea  than  that  of  leading  a  life
of  self-indulgence  without  Jabour.  People
sav/  that  the  clergy  took  from  every  class  and
station  only  v/hat  was  agreeable,  and  avoided
what  was  laborious  or  painful.  From  the
knightly  order,  the  prelate  borrowed  his  bril-
liant company,  his  numerous  retinue,  the  splen-
didly caparisoned  horse,  and  the  hawk  upon
his  fist :  with  women,  he  shared  the  love  of
gorgeous  chambers  and  trim  gardens  ;  but  the
weight  of  the  mailed  coat,  the  troubles  of  the
household,  he  had  the  dexterity  to  avoid.  If
a  man  wishes  to  enjoy  himself  for  once,  says
an  old  proverb,  let  him  kill  a  fat  fowl ;  if  for
a  year,  let  him  take  a  wife ;  but  if  he  would
live  joyously  all  the  days  of  his  life,  then  let
him  turn  priest.

Innumerable  expressions  of  the  same  senti-
ment were  current;  the  pamphlets  ofthat  time
are  fall  of  them.:|:

CHARACTER AND TENDENCIES OF THE  POPULAR
LITERATURE.

This  state  of  the  public  mind  acquired  vast
importance  from  its  coincidence  with  the  first
dawnings  of  a  popular  literature,  which  thus,
at  its  very  commencement,  became  deeply  and
thoroughly  imbued  with  the  prevE^ent  senti-

ment of  disapprobation and  disgust  towards
the  clergy.

It  will  be  conceded  on  all  sides  that  in
naming  Rosenblüt  and  Sebastian  Brant,  the
Eulenspiegel  (Owleglass)  and  the  edition  of
Reineke  Fuchs  (Reynard  the  Fox)  of  the  year
1498,  we  cite  the  most  remarkable  productions
of  the  literature  of  that  time.  And  if  we  in-
quire what  characteristic  they  have  in  common,
we  find  it  to  be  that  of  hostility  to  the  Church
of  Rome.  The  Fastnachtspiele  (Carnival
Sports)  of  Hans  Rosenblüt  have  fully  and  dis-
tinctly this  character  and  intention  ;  he  intro-
duces the  Emperor  of  Turkey,  in  order  through
his  mouth  to  say  the  truth  to  all  classes  of  the"
nation. §  The  vast  success  of  the  Eulenspiegel
was  not  to  be  attributed  so  much  to  its  own
clownish  coarseness  and  practical  jokes,  as  to
the  irony  which  was  poured  over  all  classes ;
the  wit  of  the  boor,  "  who  scratches  himself
with  a  rogue's  nails,"  put  that  of  all  others  to
shame.  It  was  under  this  point  of  view  alone
that  the  German  w^riter  recast  the  fable  of  the
fox;  he  saw^in  it  the  symbolic  representation
of  the  defects  and  vices  of  human  society,  and
he  quickly  detected  its  application  to  the
several  classes  of  men,  and  laboured  to  develop
the  lesson  which  the  poet  reads  to  each.  The
same  purpose  is  obvious  to  the  first  glance  in
Brant's  Ship  of  Fools.  The  ridicule  is  not
directed  against  individual,follies  :  on  the  one
side  is  vice,  naj''  crime,  on  the  other,  lofty  as-
pirations and  pursuits  which  rise  far  above
vulgar  ends,  (as,  for  example,  where  the  devo-
tion of  the  whole  mind  to  the  tasLof  describing
cities  and  countries,  the  attempt  to  discover
how  broad  is  the  earth,  and  how  wide  the  sea,)
are  treated  as  folly.  ||  Glory  and  beauty  are
described  as  transient;  "nothing  is  abiding
but  learning."

In  this  general  opposition  to  the  prevailing
state  of  things,  the  defects  in  the  ecclesiastical
body  are  continually  adverted  to.  The  Schnep-
perer declaims  violently  against  the  priests,
"  who  ride  high  horses,  but  will  not  do  battle
with  the  heathen."  The  most  frequent  sub-
ject of  derision  in  the  Eulenspiegel  is  the
common  priests,  with  their  pretty  ale-wives,
well-groomxcd  nags,  and  full  larders  ;  they  are
represented  as  stupid  and  greed3^  In  Reineke
too  the  Papemeierschen  —  priests' households,
peopled  with  little  children — play  a  part.  The
commentator  is  evidently  quite  in  earnest ;  he
declares,  that  the  sins  of  the  priests  will  be
rated  more  highly  than  those  of  the  laity  on
account  of  the  evil  example  they  set.  Doctor
Brant  expresses  his  indignation  at  the  prema-
ture admission  into  the  convent,  before  the  age
of  reason ;  so  that  religious  duties  are  per-
formed without  the  least  sentiment  of  devotion :
he  leads  us  into  the  domestic  life  of  the  un-
called priests,  who  are  at  last  in  want  of  the

*  Jäger,  Schwäbisches  Städtewesen :  Müllner's  Nürn-
berger Annalen,  in  several  passages.

t  The  books  De  Instilutione  novorum  Officiorum,  and
De  Libertate  Ecclesiasticä,  are  especially  remarkable
with  reference  to  this  matter.

t  Wimpheling  also  mentions,  "  scandalura  odium  mur-
mur populi  in  omnem  clerum,"

§  In  the  description  also  of  the  battle  of  Hem  bach  in
Reinhart's  Beitrage  zur  Historie  Frankenlandes,  the  no-
bles are  mentioned  "  as  a  sharp  scourge,  which  chastises
us  on  account  of  our  sins ;"  "  their  hearts  are  harder  than
adamant."

II  Dr.  Brant's  Farrenschiff.  1506,  f.  83.

94

POPULAR  AND  LEARNED  LITERATURE.

n.

means  of  subsistence,  while  their  soul  is  heavy-
laden  with  sins ;  "  for  God  regardeth  not  the
sacrifice  which  is  offered  in  sin  by  sinful
hands."*

This,  however,  is  not  the  exclusive,  nor,  in-
deed, the  principal  matter  of  these  books;
their  significance  is  far  more  extensive  and  ge-
neral.

While  the  poets  of  Italy  were  employed  in
moulding  the  romantic  materials  furnished  by
the  middle  ages  into 'grand  and  brilliant  works,
these  excited  little  interest  in  Germany :  Titu-
rel  and  Parcival,  for  example,  were  printed,
but  merely  as  antiquarian  curiosities,  and  in  a
""language  even  then  unintelligible.

While,  in  Italy,  the  opposition  v/hich  the
institutions  of  the  middle  ages  encountered  in
the  advancing  development  of  the  public  mind,
took  the  form  of  satire,  became  an  element  of
composition,  and  as  it  were  the  inseparable  but
mocking  companion  of  the  poetical  Ideal ;  in
Germany  that  opposition  took  up  independent
ground,  and  directed  its  attacks  immediately
against  the  realities  of  life,  not  against  their
reproduction  in  fiction.

In  the  German  literature  of  that  period  the
whole  existence  and  conduct  of  the  several
classes,  ages  and  sexes  were  brought  to  the
standard  of  the  sober  good  sense,  the  homely
inoraliiy,  the  simple  rule  of  ordinary  life ;
which,  however,  asserted  its  claim  to  be  that
"whereby  kings  hold  their  crovv-ns,  princes
their  lands,  and  all  powers  and  authorities  their
due  value."

The  universal  confusion  and  ferment  which
is  visible  in  the  public  affairs  of  that  period,
proves,  by  inevitable  contrast,  that  the  sound
common  sense  of  mankind  is  av.akened  and
busy  in  the  mass  of  the  nation ;  and  prosaic,
homely,  vulgar,  but  thoroughly  true,  as  it  is,
constitutes  itself  judge  of  all  the  phenomena
of  the  world  around  it.

We  are  filled  with  admiration  at  the  specta*-
cle  afforded  by  Italy,  where  men  of  genius,  re-
minded by  the  remains  of  antiquity  around
them  of  the  significancy  of  beautiful  forms,
strove  to  em.ulate  their  predecessors,  and  pro-
duced works  which  are  the  eternal  delight  of
cultivated  minds  ;  but  their  beauty  does  not
blind  us  to  the  fact  tha^  the  movement  of  the
national  mind  of  Germany  was  not  less  great,
and  that  it  was  still  m.ore  \mportant  to  the  pro-
gress of  mankind.  After  centuries  of  secret
growth  it  now  became  aware  of  its  ow^n  exis-
tence, broke  loose  from  tradition,  and  examined
the  affairs  and  the  institutions  of  the  world  by
the  light  of  its  own  truth.

Nor  did  Germany  entirely  disregard  the  de-
mands of  form.  In  Reinecke  Fuchs,  it  is  cu-
rious to  observe  how  the  author  rejects  every
thing  appropriate  to  the  style  of  romantic  poe-
try; how  he  seeks  lighter  transitions,  works
out  scenes  of  common  life  to  more  complete
and  picturesque  reality,  and  constantly  strives
to  be  more  plain  and  vernacular  (for  example,
uses  all  the  familiar  German  names)  :  his  main
object  evidently  is  to  popularise  his  matter, —

*  The  72d  Fool.  fol.  94.

to  bring  it  as  much  as  possible  home  to  the  na-
tion ;  and  his  work  has  thus  acquired  the  form
in  which  it  has  attracted  readers  for  more  than
three  centuries.  Sebastian  Brant  possesses  an
incomparable  talent  for  turning  apophthegms
and  proverbs ;  he  finds  the  most  appropriate
expression  for  simple  thoughts ;  his  rhymes
come  unsought,  and  are  singularly  happy  and
harmonious.  "  Here,"  says  Geiler  von  Keiser-
sperg,  "  the  agreeable  and  the  useful  are  united  ;
his  verses  are  goblets  of  the  purest  \tine  ;  here
we  are  presented  with  royal  meats  in  finely
wrought  vessels."!  ^^^  ^"  these,  as  well  as
in  many  other  works  of  that  time,  the  matter  is
the  chief  thing; — the  expression  of  the  opposi-
tion of  the  ordinary  morality  and  working-day
sense  of  mankind  to  the  abuses  in  public  life
and  the  corruptions  of  the  times.

At  the  same  period  another  branch  of  litera-
ture,— the  learned,  took  an  analogous  direc-
tion ;  perhaps  with  even  greater  force  and  de-
cision.

CONDITION

lnd  character  of  learned
literature.

UPON  this  department  of  letters  Italy  exer-
cised the  strongest  influence.

In  that  country  neither  the  metaphysics  of
the  schools,  nor  romantic  poetry,  nor  Gothic
architecture,  had  obtained  complete  dominion:
recollections  of  antiquity  survived,  and  at
length  in  the  fifteenth  century,  expanded  into
that  splendid  revival  which  took  captive  all
minds  and  imparted  anew  life  to  literature.

This  reflorescence  of  Italy  in  time  reacted  on
Germany,  though  at  first  only  in  regard  to  the
mere  external  form  of  the  Latin  tongue.

In  consequence  of  the  uninterrupted  inter-
course with  Italy  occasioned  by  ecclesiastical
relations,  the  Germans  soon  discovered  the  su-
periority of  the  Italians ;  they  saw  themselves
despised  by  the  disciples  of  the  grammarians
and  rhetoricians  of  that  country,  and  began  to
be  ashamed  of  the  rudeness  of  their  spoken,
and  the  poverty  of  their  written  language.  It
was  not  surprising,  therefore,  that  young  aspi-
ring spirits  at  length  determined  to  learn  their
Latin  in  Italy.  At  first  they  were  only  a  few
opulent  nobles — a  Dalberg,  a  Langen^:,  a
Spiegelberg,  who  not  only  acquired  knowledge
themselves,  but  had  the  merit  of  bringing  back
books,  such  as  gi-ammatical  treatises  and  better
editions  of  the  classics,  which  they  communi-
cated to  their  friends.  A  man  endowed  with
the  peculiar  talent  necessary  for  appropriating
to  himself  the  classical  learning  of  the  age  then
aldose — Rudolf  Huesmann  of  Groningen,  called
Agricola.  His  scholarship  excited  universal
admiration ;  he  was  applauded  in  the  schools

t  Geiler,  Navicula  Fatuorum,  even  more  instructive  as
to  the  history  of  morals,  than  the  original ;  J,  u.  "  Est
hie,"  he  continues,  "in  hoc  speculo  Veritas  moralis  sub
fijiuris  sub  vulgari  et  vernacula  lingua  nostra  teutonica
sub  verbis  similitudinibusque  aptis  et  pulchris  sub  rhit-
mis  quoque  concinnis  et  instar  cimbalorum  concineuti-
bus."

J  Hamelmann  published  in  1580  an  Oratio  de  Rodolpho
Langio,  which  has  some  merit,  but  vi'hich  has  also  given
rise  to  many  errors.

Chap.  I.

LEARNED  LITERATURE.

95

as  a  Roman,  a  second  Virgil.*  He  had,  in-
deed, no  other  object  but  his  own  advancement
in  learning;  the  weary  pedantries  of  the  schools
v/ere  disgusting  to  liirn,  nor  could  he  accommo-
date himself  to  the  contracted  sphere  assigned
to  a  learned  man  in  Germany.  Other  careers
which  he  entered  upon  did  not  satisfy  his  aspi-
rations, so  that  he  fell  into  a  rapid  decline,  and
died  prematurely.  He  had,  however,  friends
who  found  it  less  difficult  to  adapt  themselves
to  the  necessities  of  German  life,  and  to  whom
he  was  ever  ready  to  afford  counsel  and  help.
A  noble  and  intimate  friendship  was  formed  in
Deventer,  between  Agricola  and  Hegius,  who
attached  himself  to  him  with  all  the  humility
and  thirst  for  knowledge  of  a  disciple  ;  he  ap-
plied to  him  for  instruction,  and  received  not
only  assistance  but  cordial  sympathy. f  Another
of  his  friends,  Dringenberg,  followed  him  to
Schletstadt.  The  reform  which  took  place  in
the  Lovv'. German  schools  of  Münster,  Hervord,
Dortmund,  and  Hamm,  emanated  from  Deven-
ter, which  also  furnished  them  with  competent
teachers.  In  Nürnberg,  Ulm,  Augsburg,
Frankfurt,  iilemmingen,  Hagenau,  Pforzheim,
&c.,  we  find  schools  of  poetry  of  more  or  less
note.:}:  Schletstadt  at  one  time  numbered  as
many  as  nine  hundred  students.  It  will  not  be
imagined  that  these  literati,  who  had  to  rule,
and  to  instruct  in  the  rudiments  of  learning,  a
rude  undisciplined  youth  compelled  to  live
mainly  on  alms,  possessing  no  books,  and  wan-
dering from  town  to  town  in  strangely  organ-
ized bands,  called  Bachantes  and  Schützen,  §
v/ere  very  eminent  scholars  them.selves,  or
made  such;  nor  was  that  the  object:  their
merit,  and  a  sufficient  one,  was  that  they  not
only  kept  the  public  mind  steady  to  the  impor-
tant direction  it  had  taken,  but  carried  it  on-
Y/ards  to  the  best  of  their  ability,  and  founded
the  existence  of  an  active  literary  public.  The
school  books  hitherto  in  use  gradually  fell  into
neglect,  and  classical  authors  issued  from  the
German  press.  As  early  as  the  end  of  the  fif-
teenth centur}'.  Geiler  of  Keisersberg,  vrho  was
not  himself  devoted  to  tiiese  pursuits,  reproach-
ed the  learned  theologians  with  their  Latin,
which,  he  said,  was  rude,  feeble,  and  barba-
rous— rueither  German  nor  Latin,  but  both  and
neitherJI

*  Erasnii  Adagia. Ad.  de  Cane  et  Baltieo.

t  Adanii,  Vit»  Philosophoruin,  p.  1-2,  mentions  thiscor-
respondeiico  "  unde  tuni  ardor  proficiendi,  turn  candor  in
communicando  elucet."

X  They  are  so  called,  e.  ?.  in  tlie  Chronicle  of  Regens-
burg/  A  list  of  the  ?cliools,  very  incomplete,  however,  is
given  by  Erhard,  Hist,  of  the  Restoration  of  the  Sciences,
i.  427.  Eijerlin  \'on  Günzbiirg  names  in  ]521,  as  piotis
schoolmasters,  "deren  ti'ewe  Unterweisungfast genützt,"
"whose  fiiithfiil  instruction  had  been  profitable,"  Crato
and  Sapidj'.s  at  Schletstadt,  Mich  Hilspach  at  Hasenau,
SpifWer  and  Gerbellius  at  Pforzheim,  Erassicanus  and
Henriclimann  at  Tübingin,  Egid.  Krautu'asser  at  Stutt-
gart and  Horb,  Joh.  Schmidlin  at  Memmingen,  also  Co-
cleus  at  Nürnberg,  and  Nisenus  at  Frankfurt.  See  Dr.
Karl  Hagen,  Deutchlands  literarische  und  relisiöse  Ver-
haltnisse im  Reformations  Zeitalter,  1841,  vol.  i.  p.  164—
23^7.

§  Platter's  Autobiography  places  this  practice  in  a  very
lively  manner  before  us.  (Thomas  Platter,  after  the  au-
tograph manuscript  lately  edited  by  Fechner,  Basle,  1840.)

II  Geiler,  Introductorium,  ii.  c.  "  duale  est  illud  eorum
Latinum,  quo  utuntur,  etiam  dum  sederint  in  sede  ma-
jestatis  suse,  in  doctoralis  cathedra  lecturis !"

For  since  the  school  learning  of  the  univer-
sities, which  had  hitherto  entirel3*given  the
lone  to  elementary  instruction,  adhered  to  its
wonted  forms  cf  expression,  a  collision  between
the  new  and  humanistic  method,  now  rapidly
gaining  ground,  and  the  old  modes,  was  inevi-
table. Kcr  could  their  collision  fail  to  extend
from  the  universal  element  of  language  into
other  regions.

It  was  this  crisis  in  the  history  of  letters  that
produced  an  author  whose  who^le  life  was  de-
voted to  the  task  of  attacking  the  scholastic
forms  prevailing  in  universities  and  monaste-_
ries  ;  the  first  great  author  of  the  modern  oppo-
sition, the  champion  of  the  modern  views, — a'
Lovv'  German,  Erasmus  of  Rotterdam.

On  a  review  of  the  first  thirty  years  of  the
life  of  Erasmus,  we  find  that  he  had  growli  up
in  ceaseless  contradiction  with  t!ie  spirit  and
the  systems  which  presided  over  the  conventual
life  and  directed  the  studies  cf  that  time;  —
indeed  that  this  had  made  him  what  he  was.
We  might  say  that  he  was  begotten  and  born
in  this  contradiction,  for  his  parents  had  not
been  able  to  marry,  because  his  father  was  des-
tined to  the  cloister.  He  had  not  been  admit-
ted to  a  imiversity,  as  he  wished,  but  had  been
kept  at  a  very  imperfect  conventual  school,  from
which  he  soon  ceased  to  derive  any  profit  or
satisfaction ;  and,  at  a  later  period,  every  art
was  practised  to  induce  him  to  take  the  vows,
and  with  success.  It  was  not  till  he  had  actu-
ally taken  them,  that  he  felt  all  the  burthen
they  imiposed  '/  he  regarded  it  as  a  deliverance
when  he  obtained  a  situation  in  a  college  at
Paris :  but  here,  too,  he  was  not  happy ;  he
was  compelled  to  attend  Scotist  lectures  and
disputations;  and  he  complains  that  the  un-
wholesome food  and  bad  wine  on  which  he  Avas
forced  to  live,  had  entirely  destroyed  his  health.
But  in  the  meanwhile  he  had  come  to  a  con-
sciousness of  his  own  powers.  While  yet  a
boy,  he  had  lighted  upon  the  first  trace  of  a
new  method  of  study,*'''  and  he  now  followed  it
up  with  slender  aid  from  without,  but  with  the
infallible  instinct  of  genuine  talent;  he  had
constructed  for  himself  a  light,  flowing  style,
formed  on  the  model  of  the  ancients,  not  by  a
servile  imitation  of  particular  expressions,  but
in  native  correctness  and  elegance  far  surpass-
ing any  thing  which  Paris  had  to  offer.  Lie
now  emancipated  himself  from  the  fetters  which
bound  him  to  the  convent  and  the  schools,  and
boldly  trusted  to  the  art  of  ^vhich  he  was  mas-
ter, for  the  means  of  subsistence.  He  taught,
and  in  that  way  formed  connections  which  net
only  led  to  present  success,  but  to  security  for
the  future ;  he  published  some  essays  which,
as  they  were  not  less  remarkable  for  discreet
choice  of  matter  than  for  scholar-like  execution,
gained  him  admirers  and  patrons ;  he  gradually
discovered  the  wants  and  the  tastes  of  the  pub-
lic, and  devoted  himself  entirely  to  literature.
He  composed  school-books  treating  of  method
and  form  of  instruction;  translated  from  the
Greek,  which  he  learned  in  the  process ;  edited

**  He  cannot,  however,  be  properly  considered  as  a
scholar  of  Hegius.  "  Hegium,"  he  says  in  the  Compen-
dium VitEB,  "  testis  diebus  audivi." It  was  the  exception.

9Ö

CONDITION  AND  CHARACTER  OF

Book  IL

the  classics  of  antiquity,  and  imitated  them,
especially  JLucian  and  Terence.  His  works
abound  with  marks  of  that  acute  and  nice  ob-
servation which  at  once  instructs  and  delig-hts;
but  great  as  these  merits  were,  the  grand  secret
of  his  popularity  lay  in  the  spirit  which  per-
vades all  he  wrote.  The  bitter  hostility  to  the
forms  of  the  devotion  and  the  theology  of  that
time,  which  had  been  rendered  his  habitual
frame  of  mind  by  the  course  and  events  of  his
life,  found  vent  in  his  writings;  not  that  this
was  the  premeditated  aim  or  purpose  of  them,
hut  it  broke  forth  sometimes  in  the  ver}''  middle
of  a  learned  disquisition — in  indirect  and  unex-
pected sallies  of  the  most  felicitous  and  ex-
haustless  humour.  In  one  of  his  works,  he
adopts  the  idea,  rendered  so  popular  by  the
fables  of  Brant  and  Geiler,  of  the  element  of
folly  w^hich  mingles  in  ail  human  affairs.  He
introduces  Folly  herself  as  interlocutor.  Moria,
the  daughter  of  Plutus,  born  in  the  Happy
Islands,  nursed  by  Drunkenness  and  Rudeness,
is  mistress  of  a  powerful  kingdom,  which  she
describes,  and  to  which  all  classes  of  men
belong.  She  passes  them  all  in  review,  but
dwells  longer  and  more  earnestly  on  none  than
on  the  clergy,  who,  though  they  refuse  to  ac-
knowledge her  benefits,  are  under  the  greatest
obligations  to  her.  She  turns  into  ridicule  the
labyrinth  of  dialectic  in  which  theologians
have  lost  themselves,  —  the  syllogisms  with
which  they  labour  to  sustain  the  church  as  At-
las does  the  heavens, — the  intolerant  zeal  with
which  they  persecute  every  difference  of  opin-
ion. She  then  comes  to  the  ignorance,  the
dirt,  the  strange  and  ludicrous  pursuits  of  the
monks,  their  barbarous  and  objurgatory  style
of  preaching;  she  attacks  the  bishops,  who
are  more  solicitous  for  gold  than  for  the  safety
of  souls ;  who  think  they  do  enough  if  they
dress  themselves  in  theatrical  costume,  and
under  the  name  of  the  most  reverend,  most
holy,  and  most  blessed  fathers  in  God,  pro-
nounce a  blessing  or  a  curse;  and  lastly,  she
boldly  assails  the  court  of  Rome  and  the  pope
himself,*  who,  she  says,  takes  only  the  plea-
sures of  his  station,  and  leaves  its  duties  to
St.  Peter  and  St.  Paul.  Am.ongst  the  curious
wood-cuts,  after  the  marginal  drawings  of
Hans  Holbein,  with  Vv^hich  the  book  was
adorned,  the  pope  appears  with  his  triple
crown.

This  little  work  brought  together,  with  sin-
gular talent  and  brevity,  matter  which  had  for
some  time  been  current  and  popular  in  the
world,  gave  it  a  form  which  satisfied  all  the
demands  of  taste  and  criticism,  and  fell  in  v/ith
the  rnost  decided  tendency  of  the  age.  It  pro-
duced an  indescribable  effect :  twenty-seven
editions  appeared  even  during  the  lifetime  of
Erasmus  ;  it  was  translated  into  all  languages,
and  greatly  contributed  to  confirm  the  age  in
its  anticlerical  dispositions.

But  Erasmus  coupled  with  this  popular  war-

fare a  more  serious  attack  on  the  state  of  learn-
ing. The  study  of  Greek  had  arisen  in  Italy
in  the  fifteenth  century  ;  it  had  found  its  way
by  the  side  of  that  of  Latin  into  Germany  and
France,  and  now  opened  a  new  and  splendid
vista,  beyond  the  narrow  horizon  of  the  eccle-
siastical learning  of  the  West.  Erasmus  adopt-
ed the  idea  of  the  Italians, — that  the  sciences
were  to  be  learned  from  the  ancients ;  geogra-
phy from  Strabo,  natural  history  from  Pliny,
mythology  from  Ovid,  medicine  from  Hippo-
crates, philosophy  from  Plato;  and  not  out  of
the  barbarous  and  imperfect  schoolbooks  then
in  use :  but  he  went  a  step  further — he  requir-
ed that  divinity  should  be  learned  not  out  of,
Scotus  and  Thomas  Aquinas,  but  out  of  the
Greek  fathers,  and,  above  all,  the  New  Testa-
ment. Following  in  the  track  of  Laurentius
Valla,  whose  example  had  great  influence  gen-
erally on  his  mind,  he  showed  that  it  was  not
safe  to  adhere  to  the  Vulgate,  wherein  he  point-
ed out  a  multitude  of  errors  ;j"  and  he  then  him-
self set  about  the  great  work, — the  publication
of  the  Greek  text;  which  w^as  as  yet  imper-
fectly and  superficially  known  to  the  Vvest.
Thus  he  thought,  as  he  expresses  it,  to  bring
back  that  cold  word-contender.  Theology,  to
her  primal  sources;  he  showed  the  simplicity
of  the  origin  whence  that  wondrous  and  com-
plicated pile  had  sprung,  and  to  which  it  must
return.  In  all  this  he  had  the  sympathy  and
assent  of  the  public  for  which  he  wrote.  The
prudence  wherewith  he  concealed  from  view
an  abyss  in  the  distance,  from  wii ich  that  pub-
lic would  have  shrunk  with  alarm,  doubtless
contributed  to  his  success.  While  pointing
out  abuses,  he  spoke  only  (Ä  reforms  and  im-
provements, which  he  represented  as  easy ;
and  was  cautious  not  to  offend  against  certain
opinions  or  principles  to  which  the  faith  of  the
pious  clung.:^  But  the  main  thing  was  his
incomparable  literary  talent.  He  worked  in-
cessantly in  various  branches,  and  completed
his  works  with  great  rapidity ;  he  had  not  the
patience  to  revise  and  polish  them,  and  accord-
ingly most  of  them  were  printed  exactly  as  he
threw  them  _out;  but  this  very  circumstance
rendered  them  universally  acceptable ;  their
great  charm  was  that  they  communicated  the
trains  of  thought  which  passed  through  a  rich,
acute,  witty,  intrepid,  and  cultivated  mind,  just
as  they  arose,  and  without  any  reservations.
Who  remarked  the  many  errors  which  escaped
him  ]  His  manner  of  narrating,  which  still
rivets  the  attention,  then  carried  every  one
av/ay.  He  gradually  became  the  most  cele-
bi;ated  man  in  Europe;  public  opinion,  whose
pioneer  he  bad  been,  adorned  him  with  her
fairest wreaths; presents rained npOn his

*  Miaplas  eyKiliniov.  0pp.  Erasmi,  t.  iii.  ','  Quasi  sint
ulli  liostes  ecclesia?  pernicinsiores  quam  impii  ponlifices,
qui  et  silcntio  Christiun  sinuiit  abolnscere  et  qiirestiiariis
legibus  alligant  et  coactis  interpretationibus  adulterant
et  pestilente  vita  jugulant."

t  In  the  edition  of  Alcala  de  Keiiafes,  on  thr  other
hand,  the  Greek  text  has  been  changed  according  to  the
Vulffate  ;  e.  ij.  1  Joh.  v.  7.  Schrockh,  KGsch.  xxxiv.  83
As  to  the  rest,  this  adherence  to  the  Vulgate  was  regarded
at  a  later  period,  and  especially  whfn  his  canonisation
was  talked  of,  as  the  chief  merit  of  Ximenes,  "  ut  hoc
inodo  melius  intelligeretur  nostra  vulgata  in  suo  rigf>re
et  puritate. "—jScta  Toletana  in  Rainaldus,  1517,  nr.  107.

X  A  few  years  later  ho  thus  describes  his  situation  :
"  Adnixus  sum  «t  bonc3  literce,  quas  scis  hactenus  apud
Ttalos  fere  pa,<tanas  fuisse,  consnescerent  de  Christo
loqni."  Epistola  ad  Cretium,  9  Sept.  1526.  0pp.  lU.  i.
p.  953.

Chap.  L

LEARNED  LITERATURE.

97

house  at  Basle ;  visitors  flocked  thither,  and
invitations  poured  in  from  all  parts.*  His  per-
son was  small,  with  light  hair,  blue,  half-clos-
ed eyes,  full  of  acute  obäervation,  and  humour
playing  about  the  delicate  mouth  :  his  air  was
so  timorous  that  he  looked  as  if  a  breath  would
overthrow  him,  and  he  trembled  at  the  very
name  of  death.

If  this  single  example  sufficed  to  show  how
much  the  exclusive  theology  of  the  universities
had  to  fear  from  the  new  tendency  letters  had
acqirired,  it  was  evident  that  the  danger  Vv'ould
become  measureless  if  the  spirit  of  innovation
should  attempt  to  force  its  way  into  these
fortresses  of  the  established  corporations  of
learning.  The  universities,  therefore,  defended
themselves  as  W"ell  as  they  could.  George
Zingel,  pro-chancellor  of  Ingolstadt,  who  had
been  dean  of  the  theological  faculty  thirty
times  in  three-and-thirty  years,  would  hear
nothing  of  the  introduction  of  the  study  of
heathen  poets.  Of  the  ancients,  he  would  ad-
mit only  Prudentius ;  of  the  moderns,  the
Carmelite  Baptista  of  Mantua :  these  he
thought  were  enough.  Cologne,  which  had
from  the  very  beginning  opposed  the  intro-
duction of  new  elementar}^  books,]"  would  not
allow  the  adherents  of  the  new  opinions  to
settle  in  their  tov/n:  Rhagius  was  banished
for  ten  years  by  public  proclamation ;  Mur-
mellius,  a  pupil  of  Hegius,  was  compelled  to
give  way  and  to  become  teacher  in  a  school ;
Conrad  Celtes  of  Leipzig, 'was  driven  away
almost  by  force ;  Hermann  von  dem  Busch
could  not  maintain  his  ground  either  in  Leipzig
or  Rostock;  his  new  edition  of  Donatus  was
regarded  almost  as  a  heresy.:]:  This  was  not,
however,  universal.  According  to  the  consti-
tution of  the  universities,  every  man  had,  at
Ibast  after  taking  his  degree  as  Master  of  Arts,
a  right  to  teach,  and  it  was  not  every  one  who
afforded  a  reason-  or  a  pretext  for  getting  rid
of  him.§  In  some  places,  too,  the  princes  had
reserved  to  themselves  the  right  of  appointing
teachers.  In  one  way  or  another,  teachers  of
grammar  and  of  classical  literature  did,  as  we
find,  establish  themselves  ;  in  Tübingen,  Hein-
rich Bebel,  who  formed  a  numerous  school ;  in
Ingolstadt,  Locher,  who,  after  much  molesta-
tion, succeeded  in  keeping  his  ground,  and
left  a  brilliant  catalogue  of  princes,  prelates,
counts,  and  barons,  who  had  been  his  pupils;!]

*  He  afterwards  complains  of  tlie  want  of  contradiction.
"Longe  plus  attulissent  utilitatis  duo  tresve  fidi  moni-
tores  quam  multa  laudantiuai  millia."  Epp.  III.  i.  924.

t  Accordin;?  to  Chytraus  (Saxonia,  p.  90,)  Conrad  Rith-
berg,  the  bishop  of  Münster,  was  warned  by  the  uni-
versity of  Cologne  against  the  establishment  of  a  school
upon  the  new  method,  but  he,  who  had  himself  been  in
Italy,  was  far  more  strongly  worked  on  by  the  recommen-
dations which  Langen  had  brought  with  him  thence  ;  e.  g.
even  trom  Pope  Sixtus.

1  Hamelniann,  Oratio  de  Euschio,  nr.  49.

§  Err.smi  Epistolte,  i.  p.  689.  In  the  Epp.  Obsc.  Vir.  ed.
Munch,  p.  102,  a  Socius  from  Moravia  is  complained  of
who  wanted  to  lecture  at  Vienna  without  having  taken
a  degree.  ,

li  "  Qui  ncstri  portarunt  signa  Wi&^XxV—Caialogus  II-
lustrium  Auditorum  Philoviusi.  "  Doctorum  insigniuni
magistrorum  nobilium  ac  canonicorum  infinitum  pene
numerum  memorare  nequeo,  qui  ore  magnifico  laudiso-
naque  voce  me  prsceptorem  salutare  gestiunt.  Hcec  citra
omnem  jactantiam  apposuimus." — Extract  in  Zapf.  Jacoi
Locker,  called  Philomusiis,  p.  27.

13  I

Conrad  Celtes  in  Vienna,  where  he  actually
succeeded  in  establishing  a  faculty  of  poetry
in  the  year  1501 ;  and  in  Prague,  Hieronymo
Balbi,  an  Italian,  who  gave  instructions  to  the
young  princes,  and  took  some  share  in  public
affairs.  In  Freiburg  the  new  studies  were
connected  with  the  Roman  law ;  Ulrich  Zasius
united  the  two  professorships  in  his  own  per-
son with  the  most  brilliant  success  ;  Pietro
Tommai  of  Ravenna,  and  his  son  Vincenzo,
were  invited  to  Greifswald,  and  afterwards  to
Wittenberg  in  the  same  double  capacity  f^*  it
was  hoped  that  the  combined  study  of  anti-
quity and  law  would  raise  that  university.
Erfurt  felt  the  influence  of  Conrad  Muth,  who
enjo3^ed  his  canonry  at  Gotha  "in  blessed
tranquillity"  ("m  glückseliger  Ruhe''')  diS  the
inscription  on  his  house  says:  he  was  the
Gleim  of  that  age  —  the  hospitable  patron  of
young  men  of  poetical  temperament  and  pur-
suits. Thus,  from  the  time  the  new  spirit  and
method  found  their  way  into  the  lower  schools,
societies  of  grammarians  and  poets  were  gra-
dually formed  in  most  of  the  universities,
completely  opposed  to  the  spirit  of  those  es-
tablishments as  handed  down  from  their  foun-
tain-head, Paris.  They  read  the  ancients,  and
perhaps  allowed  something  of  the  petulance
of  Martial,  or  the  voluptuousness  of  Ovid,  to
find  its  way  into  their  lives  ;  they  made  Latin
verses,  which,  stitt  and  barbarous  as  they
generally  were,  called  forth  an  interchange  of
admiration;  they  corresponded  in  Latin,  and
took  care  to  interlard  it  with  a  few  sentences
of  Greek ;  they  Latinised  and  Grscised  their
names. "j-f  Genuine  talent  or  accoinplished  scho-
larship were  very  rare ;  but  the  life  and  power
of  a  generation  does  not  manifest  itself  in  mere
tastes  and  acquirements :  for  a  few  individuals
these  may  be  enough,  but,  for  the  many,  the
tendency  is  the  important  thing.  The  cha
racter  of  the  universities  soon  altered.  The
scholars  were  no  longer  to  be  seen  with  their
books  under  their  arms,  walking  decorously
after  their  Magister;  the  scholarships  were
broken  up,  degrees  were  no  longer  sought
after — that  of  bachelor  especially  (which  was
unfrequent  in  Italy)  was  despised.  On  some
occasions  the  champions  of  classical  studies
appeared  as  the  promoters  of  the  disorders  of
the  students  ;:[::|:  and  ridicule  of  the  dialectic
theologians,  nominalists  as  well  as  realists,
was  hailed  with  delight  by  the  young  men.

The  world,  and  especially  the  learned  world,
must  be  other  than  it  is  for  such  a  change  to
be  effected  without  a  violent  struggle.

The  manner,  however,  in  which  this  broke
out  is  remarkable.  It  was  not  the  necessity
of  warding  oii  a  dangerous  attack  or  a  declared
enemy  that  furnished  the  occasion :  this  was
reserved  for  the  most  peaceful  of  the  converts

**  Tiraboschi  also  mentions  them,  vi.  p.  410.  Their
catastrophe  at  Cologne  is  not  5'et,  however,  thoroughly
cleared  up.

tt  Chracbenberger  entreats  Reuchlin  to  find  some  Greek
name,  "  quo  honeslius  in  Latinis  uteris  quam  hoc  barbaro
uti  possim." Lynz,  Febr.  19,  1493.

II  Acta  Facultatis  Artium  Friburgensis  in  Riegger,
Vita  Zasii,  i.  42.  "  Conclusum,  ut  dicatur  doctori  Zasio,
quod  scholaribus  adhaereat  faciendo  eos  rebelles  in  uni-
versitatis  proejudicium."

CONDITION  AND  CHARACTER  OF

Book  II

to  the  new  system,  who  had  already  fulfilled
the  active  task  of  life,  and  at  that  moment  de-
voted himself  to  more  abstruse  studies, — John
Reuchlin.

Reuchlin,  probably  the  son  of  a  messenger
at  Pforzheim,  was  indebted  to  his  personal
gifts  for  the  success  which  attended  him  in  his
career.  A  fine  voice  procured  him  admittance
to  the  court  of  Baden ;  his  beautiful  hand-
writing maintained  him  during  his  residence
in  France;  the  pure  pronunciation  of  Latin
which  he  had  acquired  by  intercourse  with  for-
eigners, caused  him  to  be  appointed  member
of  an  embassy  to  Rome,  and  this  led  to  an  im-
portant post  and  considerable  influence  at  the
court  of  Wiirtembcrg,  and  the  Swabian  league
generally.*  His  qualities,  both  external  and
internal,  were  very  unlike  those  of  Erasmus.
He  was  tall  and  well  made,  and  dignified  in
all  his  deportment  and  actions,  while  the  mild-
ness and  serenity  of  his  appearance  and  man-
ner won  instant  confidence  towards  his  in-
tellectual superiority.!  As  an  author,  he
could  never  have  gained  the  applause  of  the
large  public  of  Latin  scholars  ;  his  style  is  not
above  mediocrity,  nor  does  he  evince  any  nice
sense  of  elegance  and  form.  On  the  other
hand,  he  was  inspired  by  a  thirst  for  learning,
and  a  zeal  for  communicating,  which  were
without  a  parallel.  He  describes  how  he
picked  up  his  knowledge  bit  by  bit, — crumbs
that  fell  from  the  lord's  table— at  Paris  and  in
the  Vatican,  at  Florence,  Milan,  Basle,  and  at
the  Imperial  Court;  hov/,  like  the  bird  of
ApoUonius,  he  left  the  corn  for  the  other  birds
to  eat.ij:  He  fafcilitated  the  study  of  Latin  by
a  dictionary,  v/hich  in  great  measure  supplanted
the  old  scholastic  ones,  and  of  Greek,  by  a
small  grammar;  he  spared  neither  labour  nor
money  to. get  copies  of  the  classics  brought
across  the  Alps,  either  in  manuscript,  or  as
they  issued  from  the  Italian  press.  What  no
ptince,  no  wealthy  city  or  community  thought
of  doing,  was  done  by  the  son  of  a  poor  errand
man  ;  it  was  under  his  roof  that  the  m.ost  v\'on-
drous  production  of  distant  ages — the  Homeric
poems — first  came  in  contact  with  the  mind  of
Germany,  which  was  destined  in  later  times
to  render  them  more  intelligible  to  the  world.
His  Hebrew  learning  was  still  more  highly
esteemed  by  his  contemporaries  than  all  his
other  acquirements,  and  he  himself  regarded
his  labours  in  that  field  as  his  most  peculiar
claim  to  distinction.  "  There  has  been  none
before  me,"  exclaims  he  with  v.-ell-grounded
self-gratulation,  to  one  of  his  adversaries,
"  who  has  been  able  to  collect  the  rules  of  the
Hebrew  language  into  a  book;  though  his
heart  should  burst  with  envy,  still  I  am  the

*  Schnurrer,  Nachrichten  von  den  I^ehrern  dor  Hebräi-
schen Literatur,  p.  11.  A  small  essay  of  Michael  Cocci-
nius,  De  Imperii  a  Grtecis  ad  Germanos  Translatione,1505,
is  dedicated  to  Reuchlin,  together  with  his  two  colleagues
in  the  court  of  the  Swabian  league,  Streber  and  Winkel-
hofer  (confcederatorum  Suevorum  judicibus  consistoriali-
bus  et  triumviris.)

t  Joannis  Hiltebrandi  Prsefatio  in  Illustrlum  Virorum
Epistolas  ad  Reuchlinum.

t  Praefatio  ad  Rudimenta  Lingus  Hebraica;,  lib,  ill.  Cf.
Burkhard,  de  Fatis  Linguae  Latins,  p.  152.

first.  Exegi  monumentum  eere  perennius."§
In  this  work  he  was  chiefly  indebted  to  the
Jewish  Rabbis  whom  he  sought  out  in  all  di-
rections, not  suffering  one  to  pass  by  without
learning  something  from  him  :  by  them  he  was
led  to  study  not  only  the  Old  Testament,  but
other  Hebrew  books,  and  especially  the  Cab-
bala. Reuchlin's  mind  was  not  one  of  those
to  which  the  labours  of  a  mere  grammarian  or
lexicographer  are  sufficient  for  their  own  sake.
After  the  fashion  of  his  Jewish  teachers,  he
applied  himself  to  the  study  of  the  mystical
value  of  words.  In  the^ame  of  the  Deity  as
written  in  the  'Holy  Scriptures,  in  its  elemen-
tary composition,  he  discovers  the  deepest
mystery  of  his  being.  For,  he  says,  "  God,
v/ho  delights  in  intercourse  with  a  holy  soul,
will  transform  it  into  himself,  and  will  dwell
in  it:  God  is  Spirit;  the  Word  is  a  breath;
Man  breathes  ;  God  is  the  Word.  The  names
which  He  has  given  to  Himself  are  an  echo
of  Eternity ;  in  them  is  the  deep  abyss  of  his
mysterious  working  expressed  ;  the  God-Man
called  himself  the  Word."||  Thus,  at  its  very
outset,  the  study  of  language  in  Geroiany  was
directed  towards  its  final  end  and  aim  —  the
knowledge  of  the  mysterious  connection  of
language  with  the  Divine — of  its  identity  with
the  spirit.  Reuchlin  is  like  his  cotemporaries,
the  discoverers  of  the  New  World,  who  sailed
some  north,  some  south,  some  right  on  to  the
west,  found  portions  of  coast  which  they  de-
scribed, and  while  at  the  beginning,  often
thought  they  had  reached  the  end.  Reuchlin
was  persuaded  that  he  should  find  in  the  road
he  had  taken,  not  only  the  Aiistotelic  and
Platonic  philosophers,  which  had  already  been
brought  to  light,  but  that  he  should  add  to  them
the  Pythagorean, — an  oflTspring  of  Hebraism.
He  believed  that  by  treading  in  the  footsteps
of  the  Cabbala,  he  should  ascend  from  symbol
to  symbol,  from  form  to  form,  till  he  should
reach  that  last  and  purest  form  which  rules  the
empire  of  mind,  and  in  which  human  muta-
bility approaches  to  the  Im.mutable  and  Di-
vine.**

But  v/hile  living  in  this  world  of  ideas  and
abstractions,  it  was  his  lot  to  be  singled  out  by
the  enmity  of  the  scholastic  party  :  he  unex-
pectedly found  himself  involved  in  the  heat  of
a  violent  controversy.

iWe  have  already  alluded  to  the  inquisitorial
attempts  of  the  Dominicans  of  Cologne,  and
their  hostility  to  the  Jews.  In  the  year  1508,
a  book  was  published  by  an  old  Rabbi,  who  at
the  age  of  fifty  had  abandoned  his  wife  and
child,  and  become  a  Christian  priest.  In  this
he  accused  his  former  co-religionists  of  the
grossest  errors  ;  for  example,  adoration  of  the
sun  and  moon;  but,  above  all,  of  the  most
horrible  blasphemies  against  the  Christian
faith,  which  he  endeavoured  to  prove  from  the
Talmud. ff It  was  mainly  on  this  ground  that

§  Reuchlini  Consilium  pro  Libris  JudiEorum  non  abo-
lendis  in  v.  d.  Hardt,  Historia  Ref.  p.  49.  This  is  more-
over a  fine  specimen  of  German  prose.

11  Reuchlin  de  Verbo  Mirifico,  ii.  6,  15  ;  iii.  3,  19.

**  Reuchlin  de  Arte  Cabbalistica,  \\  614,  620,  696.

tt  Notices  of  this  little  Jewish  book  in  Riederer's  Nach-

Chap.  I.

LEARNED  LITERATURE.

99

the  theologians  of  Cologne  urged  the  emperor
to  order  the  publication  of  the  Talmud,  and
gave  him,  at  his  request,  the  opinion  in  which
they  affirmed  his  right  to  proceed  against  the
Jews  as  heretics.  The  Imperial  Council,  how-
ever, deemed  it  expedient  to  consult  another
master  of  Hebrew  literature.  They  referred
the  matter  to  the  reviver  of  the  cabbalistic
philosophy — Reuchlin.

Reuchlin  gave  his  opinion,  as  might  be  ex-
pected, in  favour  of  the  Judaical  books.  Kis
report  is  a  beautiful  monument  of  pure  dispas-
sionate judgment  and  consummate  sagacity.
But  these  qualities  .were  just  those  fitted  to
draw  down  the  whole  storm  of  fanatical  rage
upon  himself.

The  Cologne  theologians,  irritated  to  fury
by  the  rejection  of  their  proposition,  which
they  ascribed,  not  without  reason,  to  the  ad-
verse opinion  of  Reuchlin,  incited  one  of  their
satellites  to  attack  him;  he  answered:  they
condemned  his  answer;  he  rejoined,  upon
which  they  appointed  a  court  of  inquisition  to
try  him.

This  was  the  first  serious  encounter  of  the
two  parties.  The  Dominicans  hoped  to  esta-
blish their  tottering  credit  by  a  great  stroke
of  authority,  and  to  intimidate  the  adversa-
ries who  threatened  to  become  dangerous  to
them,  by  the  terrors  which  were  at  their  dis-
posal. The  innovators — the  teachers  and  dis-
ciples of  the  schools  of  poetry  whom  we  have
mentioned — were  fully  sensible  that  Reuchlin's
peril  was  their  own  ;  but  their  efforts  and  aspi-
rations were  checked  by  the  consciousness  of
opposition  to  existing  authority,  and  of  the
dubious  position  which  they  occupied.

In  October,  1513,  a  court  of  inquisition  was
formed  at  Mainz,  composed  of  the  doctors  of
the  university  and  the  officers  of  the  archbish-
opric, under  the  presidency  of  the  inquisitor
of  heretical  wickedness  — Jacob  Hogstraten  ;
and  it  remained  to  be. seen  whether  such  a  sen-
tence as  that  pronounced  some  years  before
against  John  of  Wesalia,  would  nov/  be  given.

But  times  were  totally  altered.  That  in-
tensely Catholic  spirit  which  had  rendered  it
so  easy  for  the  Inquisition  to  take  root  in  Spain,
was  very  far  from  reigning  in  Germany.  The
Imperial  Council  must  have  been,  from  the
outset,  indisposed  towards  the  demands  of  the
Cologne  divines,  or  they  would  not  have  ap-
pealed to  such  a  man  as  Reuchlin  for  advice.
The  infection  of  the  prevalent  spirit  of  litera-
ture had  already  spread  too  widely,  and  had
created  a  sort  of  public  opinion.  We  have  a
whole  list  of  members  of  the  higher  clergy
who  are  cited  as  friends  of  the  literary  innova-
tion—  Gross  and  Wrisberg,  canons  of  Augs-
burg, Nuenar  of  Cologne,  Adelmann  of  Eich-
stadt,  Andreas  Fuchs,  dean  of  Bamberg,  Lo-
renzo Truchsess,  of  Mainz,  Wolfgang  Tanberg,
of  Passau,  Jacob  de  Bannissis,  of  Trent.  Car-
dinal Lang,  the  most  influential  of. the  empe-
ror's councillors,  shared  these  opinions.  The
superior  clergy  were  not  more  disposed  than

richten,  I.  i.  p.  34. It  appeared  in  Latin  in  1509,  as  an
*'  opus  aureum  ac  novum."

the  people  to  allow  the  Inquisition  to  regain  its
power.

Elector  Diether  had  consented  to  the  trial  of
Wesalia,  against  his  will,  and  only  because  he
feared  the  puissant  Dominicans  might  a  second
time  effect  his  deposition;*  now,  however,  the
heads  of  the  church  were  no  longer  so  timor-
ous, and  after  the  tribunal  had  already  taken
its  seat  to  pronounce  judgment,  Dean  Lorenz
Truchsess  persuaded  the  Elector  to  command
it  to  suspend  its  proceedings,  and  to  forbid  his
own  officers  to  take  part  in  them.|

Nay,  another  tribunal,  favourable  to  Reuch-
lin, was  appointed  to  hold  its  sittings  under
the  Bishop  of  Spires,  in  virtue  of  a  commis-
sion obtained  from  Rome ;  the  sentence  pro-
nounced by  this  court  on  the  24th  April,  1514,
was,  that  the  accusers  of  Reuchlin,  having
falsely  calumniated  him,  were  condemned  to
eternal  silence  and  to  the  payment  of  the
costs. ij:

So  widely  diffused  and  so  powerful  was  the
antipathy  which  the  Dominicans  had  excited.
So  lively  was  the  sympathy  which  the  higher
and  educated  classes  testified  in  the  efforts  of
the  new  school  of  literature.  So  powerful
already  was  the  opinion  of  men  of  learning.
It  was  their  first  victory.

Persecuting  orthodoxy  found  no  favour  either
with  the  emperor  or  with  the  higher  clergy  of
Germany.  But  its  advocates  did  not  give  up
the  contest.  At  Cologne,  Reuchlin's  books
were  condemned  to  be  burnt :  unanimous  sen-
tences to  the  same  effect  were  obtained  from
the  faculties  of  Erfurt,  Mainz,  Louvaine,  and
Paris ;  thus  fortified,  they  applied  to  the  su-
preme tribunal  at  Rome ;  the  representatives
of  orthodox  theolog}'^  presented  tjiemselves  be-
fore the  pope,  and  urged  him  to  give  his  infal-
lible decision  in  aid  of  the  ancient  champions
of  the  Holy  See  against  innovators.

But  even  Rome  was  perplexed.  Should  she
offend  public  opinion  represented  by  men  so
influential  from  their  talents  and  learning  1
Should  she  act  in  opposition  to  her  owm  opin-
ions ]  On  the  other  hand,  would  it  be  safe  to
set  at  nought  the  judgment  of  powerful  uni-
versities'? to  break  with  the  order  which  had
so  zealously  contended  for  the  prerogatives  of
the  Roman  see,  and  had  preached  the  doctrine
and  furthered  the  sale  of  indulgences  all  over
the  world  H

In  the  commission  appointed  by  the  pope  at
Rome,  the  majority  was  for  Reuchlin,  but  a
considerable  minority  was  against  him,  and
the  pope  held  it  expedient  to  defer  his  decision.
He  issued  a  mandatum  de  supersedendum.\\

Reuchlin,  conscious of  a  just cause,  was

*  Cogentibus  Thomistis  quibusdam,  veritns  ne  denuo
ab  episcopatu  ejiceretur  jussu  ßomano  pontificis." — Exa-
men WesalicB,  fasc.  i.  327.

+  Hutten's  Preface  to  Livy,  opp.  iii.  p.  334  ed.  Munch
proves  the  share  of  Lorenz  Truchsess  "  quodara  suo  divine
consilio."

X  Acta  judiciorum  in  v.  d.  Hardt,  Hist.  Lit.  Reforma-
tionjs,  114.  The  chief  source  of  information  respecting
these  events.

§  Erasmus  ad  Vergaram,  Opp.  Ill ;  1015.  "  Q.uis  enim
magis  timet  monachos  quam  Romani  pontifices?"

|(  Reuchlin  de  Arte  Cabbalistica,  p.  730.  Acta  Judiciorum,
p.  130.

10»

CONDITION  AND  CHARACTER  OF  LEARNED  LITERATURE.

Book  IL

not  perfectly  satisfied  with  this  result,  espe-
cially after  all  that  had  gone  before :  he  ex-
pected a  formal  and  complete  acquittal ;  never-
theless, even  this  Avas  to  be  regarded  as  little
less  than  a  victory.  The  fact  that  the  party
which  assumed  to  represent  religion  and  to
have  exclusive  possession  of  the  true  doctrines,
had  failed  to  carry  through  their  inquisitorial
designs,  and  even,  as  secret  reports  said,  had
only  escaped  a  sentence  of  condemnation  by
means  of  gold  and  favour,*  was  enough  to  en-
courage all  their  adversaries.  Hitherto  the
latter  had  only  stood  on  the  defensive ;  they
now  assumed  an  attitude  of  open,  direct  offence.
Reuchlin's  correspondence,  which  was  pub-
lished expressly  to  show  the  respect  and  admi-
ration he  enjoyed,  shows  how  numerously  and
zealously  they  rallied  round  him.  We  find
the  spiritual  lords  we  have  mentioned  ;  patri-
cians of  the  most  important  cities,  such  as
Pirkheimer  of  Nürnberg,  who  delighted  in
being  considered  as  the  leader  of  a  numerous
band  of  Reuchlinists  ;  Peutinger  of  Augsburg,
Stuss  of  Cologne;  preachers  like  Capito  and
OEcolampadius ;  the  Austrian  historians,  La-
zius  and  Cuspinian;  doctors  of  medicine — all,
in  short,  who  had  any  tincture  of  letters;  but
chiefly  those  poets  and  orators  in  the  schools
and  universities  who  beheld  their  own  cause
in  that  of  Reuchlin,  and  nov/  rushed  in  throngs
to  the  newly-opened  arena ;  at  their  head  Busch,
Jäger,  Hess,  Hütten,  and  a  long  list  of  emi-
nent names. "I"

The  remarkable  production  in  which,  the
whole  character  and  drift  of  their  labours  is
summed  up,  is,  the  Epistolaj  Obscurorum  Vi-
rorum.  That  popular  satire,  already  so  rife  in
Germany,  but  hitherto  confined  to  generals,
here  found  a  particular  subject  exactly  suited
to  it.  We  must  not  look  for  the  delicate  ap-
prehension and  tact  which  can  only  be  formed
in  a  highly  polished  state  of  society,  nor  for
the  indignation  of  insulted  morality  expressed
by  the  ancients  :  it  is  altogether  caricature, —
not  of  finished  individual  portraits,  but  of  a
single  type;  —  a  clownish,  sensual  German
priest,  his  intellect  narrowed  by  stupid  wonder
and  fanatical  hatred,  who  relates  with  silly
naivete  and  gossiping  confidence  the  various
absurd  and  scandalous  situations  into  which
he  falls.  These  letters  are  not  the  work  of  a
high  poetical  genius,  but  they  have  truth,  coarse
strong  features  of  resemblance,  and  vivid  col-
ouring. As  they  originated  in  a  widely-diffus-
ed and  powerful  tendency  of  the  public  mind,
they  produced  an  immense  effect :  the  See  of
Rome  deemed  it  necessary  to  prohibit  them.

It  may  be  affirmed  generally  that  the  genius
of  the  literary  opposition  was  triumphant.  In
the  3^ear  1518,  Erasmus  looked  joyfully  around
him ;-  his  disciples  and  adherents  had  risen  to
eminence  in  every  university — even  in  Leipsig,

which  had  so  long  resisted : they  were all
teachers  of  ancient  literature.:]:

Was  it  indeed  possible  that  the  great  men
of  antiquity  should  have  lived  in  vain  ?  That
their  works,  produced  in  the  youth-time  of  the
human  race, — works  with  whose  beauty  and
profound  wisdom  nothing  that  has  since  arisen
is  to  be  compared,  should  not  be  restored  to
later  ages  in  their  primitive  form  and  perfec-
tion 1  It  is  an  event  of  the  greatest  historical
importance,  that  after  so  many  convulsions  by
which  nations  were  overthrown  and  others
constituted  out  of  their  ruins, — by  which  the
old  world  had  been  obliterated  and  all  its  ele-
ments replaced  by  other  matter, — the  relics  of
its  spirit,  which  could  now  exercise  no  other
influence  than  that  of  form,  were  sought  with
an  avidity  hitherto  unknown,  and  widely  dif-
used,  studied,  and  imitated.

The  study  of  antiquity  was  implanted  in
Germany  as  early  as  the  first  introduction  of
Christianity;  in  the  10th  and  11th  centuries  it
had  risen  to  a  considerable  height,  but  at  a
later  period  it  was  stifled  by  the  despotism  of
the  hierarchy  and  the  schools.  The  latter
now  returned  to  their  original  vocation.  It
was  not  to  be  expected,  that  great  works  of
literary  art  could  as  yet  be  produced  ;  for  that,
circumstances  w^ere  not  ripe.  The  first  effect
of  the  new  studies  showed  itself  in  the  nature
and  modes  of  instruction  —  the  more  natural
and  rational  training  of  the  youthful  mind
which  has  continued  to  be  the  basis  of  German
erudition.  The  hierarchical  system  of  opinions
which,  though  it  had  been  wrought  up  to  a
high  point  of  brilliancy  and  refinement,  could
not  possibly  endure,  was  thus  completely
broken  up.  A  new  life  stirred  in  every  de-
partment of  human  intelligence.  "•  What  an
age  !"  exclaims  Hütten,  "  learning  flourishes,
tlie  minds  of  men  awake ;  it  is  a  joy  to  be
alive."  This  was  peculiarly  conspicuous  in
the  domain  of  theology.  The  highest  eccle-
siastic of  the  nation.  Archbishop  Albert  of
Mainz,  saluted  Erasmus  as  the  restorer  of
theology.

But  an  intellectual  movement  of  a  totall)'-
different  kind  was  now  about  to  take  place.

EARLY  CAREER  OF  LUTHER.

The  authorities,  or  the  opinions  which  rule
the  world,  rarely  encounter  their  most  dan-
gerous enemies  from  without;  the  hostilities
by  which  they  are  overthrov^n  are  usually
generated  and  nurtured  within  their  own
sphere.

In  the  bosom  of  theological  philosophy  itself,
discords  arose  from  which  a  new  era  in  the
history  of  life  and  thought  may  be  dated.

We  must  not  omit  to  notice  the  fact,  that
the  doctrines  of  Wickliffe,  which  had  spread
from  Oxford  over  the  whole  of  Latin  Chris-

*  Tn  Hogstratus  Ovans,  336,  it  is  said,  through  the  in-
tercession of  Nicolaus  von  Schotnberg.

t  Even  before  the  letters  to  ReuQhIin,  we  find  set  down
the  Exercitus  Reuchlinistarum.  Pirkheimer,  Epistola
Apologetica,  in  Hardt,  p.  136,  has  another  list.  Later
lists,  e.g.  in  Mayerhoff,  must,  in  several  cases,  be  taken
with  restrictions.

I  In  the  Essay  De  Ratione  conscribendi  Epistolas,  the
dedication  of  which  belongs  to  the  year  1522,  he  exclaims
(ed.  of  1534,  p- 71),  "  Videmus  quantum  profectum  sit
paucis  annis.  Ubi  nunc  est  Michael  Modieta,  ubi  glo?-
sema  Jacobi,  ubi  citatur  Catholicon  brachylogus  aut
Mammcetrectus,  quos  olim  ceu  rarum  thesaurum  aureis
Uteris  descriptos  habebant  monachorum  bibliothecs."
It  is  evident  how  much  the  method  had  changed.

Chap.  I.

EARLY  CAREER  OF  LUTHER.

101

tendom,  and  broke  out  with  such  menacing
demonstrations  in  Bohemia,  had  not,  in  spite
of  all  the  barbarities  of  the  Hussite  wars,
been  extirpated  in  Germany.  At  a  much  later
period  we  find  traces  of  them  in  Bavaria,
where  the  Böklerbund  drew  upon  itself  the
suspicions  of  Hussite,  opinions;  in  Svvabia
and  Pranconia,  where  the  council  of  Bamberg
at  one  time  thought  it  necessary  to  compel  all
the  men  in  that  city  to  abjure  the  Hussites;
and  even  in  Prussia,  where  the  adherents  of
Wickliffite  and  Hassite  doctrines  at  length
submitted,  though  only  in  appearance.*  It
was  the  more  remarkable  that  after  such  mea-
sures, the  society  of  the  Bohemian  brethren
arose  out  of  the  fierce  tempest  of  Hussite
opinions  and  parties,  and  once  more  exhibited
to  the  world  a  Christian  community  in  all  the
purity  and  simplicity  of  the  primitive  church.
Their  religion  derived  a  new  and  singular
character  from  the  fundamental  principle  of
their  secession — that  Christ  himself  was  the
rock  on  which  the  church  was  founded,  and
not  Peter  and  his  successors. j-  Their  settle-
ments were  in  those  districts  where  the  Ger-
man and  Slavonic  elements  are  intermingled,
and  their  emissaries  went  forth  and  traversed
unnoticed  the  w'ide  domain  of  either  language,
seeking  those  already  allied  to  them  in  opinion,
or  endeavouring  to  gain  over  new  proselytes.
Nicholas  Kuss  of  Rostock,  whom  they  visited
several  times,  began  at  this  period  to  preach
openly  against  the  pope  (a.  d.  1511. ):|:

The  opposition  to  the  despotism  of  the  Do-
minican system  still  subsisted  in  the  universi-
ties themselves.  Nominalism,  connected  at
the  very  moment  of  its  revival  with  the  adver-
saries of  the  papacy,  had  found  great  accept-
ance in  Germany,  and  was  still  by  no  means
suppressed.  The  most  celebrated  nominalist
of  that  time,  Gabriel  Biel,  the  collector,  is
mainly  an  epitomizer  of  Occam.  This  party
was  in  the  minority,  and  often  exposed  to  the
persecutions  of  its  enemies  who  wielded  the
powers  of  the  Liquisition  ;§  but  it  only  struck
deeper  and  firmer  root.  Luther  and  J\ielanch-
thon  are  the  offspring  of  nominalism.

And  perhaps  a  still  more  important  circum-
stance was,  that  in  the  15th  century  the  stricter
Augustinian  doctrines  were  revived  in  the  per-
sons of  some  theologians.

Johann  de  Wesalia  taught  election  by  grace ;
he  speaks  of  the  Book  in  w^hich  the  names  of
the  elect  are  written  from  the  beginning.  The
tendency  of  his  opinions  is  shown  by  the  defi-
nition of  the  Sacrament  which  he  opposes  to
that  given  by  Peter  Lombard  :  the  former  is
that  of  St.  Augustine  in  its  original  purity,
while the latter  is an extension of  it;  the

*  Zschokke,  Baier.  Gesell,  ii.  429.  Pfister,  Gescli.  von
Schwaben,  v.  378. Baczko,  Gesch.  von  Preussen,  i.  256.

t  What  it  was  which  appeared  danjrerous  in  their  doc-
trines is  shown  particularly  in  the  Refutations  of  the
Dominican  Heinrich  Jnstitoris,  from  which  ßinaldus
(1498,  nr.  25,)  gives  copious  extracts.

X  Woltii  Lectiones  memorabiles,  ii.  27.

§  In  the  Examen  Magistrale  Driä  Joh.  de  Wesalia,  the
Concipient  describes  these  disputes  at  the  conclusion:
"  adeo  ut  si  universalia  quisquam  realia  negaverit,  exis-
timeturin  spiritum  sanctum  peccavisse,  immo  — contra
deiim,  contra  Christianam  religionem,— deliquisse."
I*

general  aim  of  his  w'orks  is,  the  removal  of
the  additions  made  in  later  times  to  the  primi-
tive doctrines  of  the  church.  ||  He  denies  the
binding  force  of  priestly  rules,  and  the  efficacy
of  indulgences ;  he  is  filled  with  the  idea  of
the  invisible  church.  He  was  a  man  of  great
intellectual  powers,  capable  of  playing  a  dis-
tinoruished  part  at  a  university  like  that  of
Erfurt :  he  arrived  at  these  convictions  by  de-
grees, and  when  convinced  did  not  conceal
them  even  in  the  pulpit;  nor  did  he  shrink
from  a  connexion  with  Bohemian  emissaries.
At  length,  however,  when  advanced  in  age,  he
was  dragged,  leaning  on  his  staff,  before  the
Inquisition,  and  thrown  into  prison,  where  he
died.

Johann  Pupper  of  Goch,  who  founded  a
convent  of  nuns  of  the  rule  of  St.  Augustine
at  Mechlin  about  the  year  1460-7Q,  made  him-
self remarkable  by  accusing  the  dom/inant
party  in  the  church  of  a  leaning  to  Pelagia-
nism.**  He  calls  Thomas  Aquinas  the  prince
of  error.  He  attacked  the  devotion  to  cere-
monies, and  the  Pharisaism  of  vows,  upon
Augustinian  principles.

How  often  have  the  antagonists  of  the
church  of  Rome  made  this  the  ground  of  their
opposition!  —  from  Claudius  of  Turin  in  the
beginning  of  the  ninth,  to  Bishop  Janse  in  the
17th  century,  and  his  followers  in  the  ISth
and  19th.  The  deeper  minds  within  her  pale
have  always  felt  compelled  to  point  back  to
those  fundamental  doctrines  on  which  she  was
originally  based.

The  principles  of  the  opposition  now  as-
sumed the  form  of  a  scientific  structure.  In
the  works  of  Johann  Wessel,  of  Groningen,
we  see  a  manly  mind  devoted  to  truth,  work-
ing itself  free  from  the  bonds  of  the  mnghty
tradition  Avhich  could  no  longer  satisfy  a  reli-
gious conscience.  Wessel  lays  dovv-n  the
maxim  that  prelates  and  doctors  are  to  be  be-
lieved only  so  far  as  their  doctrines  are  in  con-
formity with  the  Scriptures,  the  sole  rule  of
faith,  which  is  far  above  pope  or  church  ;|j'  he
writes  almost  in  the  spirit  of  a  theologian  of
later  times.  It  was  perfectly  intelligible  that
he  was  not  permitted  to  set  foot  in  the  uni-
versity of  Heidelberg.

Nor  were  these  efforts  completelj''  isolated.

At  the  time  of  the  council  of  Basle,  the
German  provincial  society  of  the  Augustin
Eremites  had  formed  themselves  into  a  se-
parate congregation,  and  had  from  that  mo-
ment made  it  their  chief  endeavour  to  uphold
the  more  rigorous  doctrines  of  the  patron  of
their  order.  This  was  peculiarly  the  aim  of
the  resolute  and  undaunted  Andreas  Proles,
who  for  nearly  a  half  century  administered  the
Vicariate  of  that  province. :f::|: Another  and  a

11  Joh.  de  Wesalia,  Disputatio  adversus  indulgrentias  in
Walch,  Mouinienta  Medii  ^vi,  torn.  i.  fttsc.  p.  I'M.

**  Dialoüfus  de  Quataor  Erroribus  circa  Legem  Evansre-
licara  in  Walch,  Blonim.  I.  iv.  p.  131.  "  Htec  fuit  insania
Pelagii  hcEretici,  a  qna  error  Thomistarum  non  solum 'in
hoc  loco  sed  etiam  in  multis  aliis  non  multum  degene-
rare  videtur."  What  impression  this  made,  we  perceive
from  Pantaleon's  description.

tt  Ullmann,  Johann  Wesse],  p.  303.

XI  Joh.  Pelz,  Supplemenlum  AiirifodiniE,  1504,  in  Kapp,
Nachlese,  iv.  p.  460.  ,

102

EARLY  CAREER  OF  LUTHER.

Book  IL

cong-enial  tendency  came  in  aid  of  this  in  the
beginning  of  the  16th  century.  The  despotism
of  the  schools  had  been  constantly  opposed  by
all  those  who  were  inclined  to  mystical  con-
templation:  the  sermons  of  Tauler,  which  had'
several  times  issued  from  the  press,  became
extremely  popular  from  their  mild  earnestness,
their  depth  of  thouglit  and  reason,  and  the  tone
of  sincerity  so  satisfactory  to  the  German  mind
and  heart.  The  Book  of  German  Theology,
which  appeared  at  that  time,  may  be  regarded
as  an  offspring  of  Tauler's  teaching.  It  chiefly
insisted  on  the  inability  of  the  creature,  of  him-
self, to  comprehend  the  Infinite  and  the  Per-
fect, to  attain  to  inward  peace,  or  to  give  him-
self up_  to  that  Eternal  Good,  which  descends
upon  him  of  its  own  free  motion.  Johann
Staupitz,  the  successor  of  Proles,  adopted  these
ideas,  and  laboured  to  develope  and  to  diffuse
them.*  If  we  examine  his  views  of  the  sub-
ject,—  as  for  example,  the  manner  in  which
he  treats  of  the  love  "  which  a  man  can  neither
learn  of  himself  nor  from  others,  nor  even  from
the  Holy  Scriptures, — which  he  can  only  pos-
sess through  the  indwellingof  the  Holy  Spirit,"
— we  are  struck  with  their  perfect  connexion
and  accordance  with  the  stricter  ideas  of  grace,
faith,  and  free-will;  a  connexion,  indeed,  with-
out which  these  doctrines  would  not  have  been
intelligible  to  the  age.  We  must  not  assume
that  all  Augustine  convents,  or  even  all  the
members  of  the  one  in  question,  were  con-
verted to  these  opinions ;  but  it  is  (tertain  that
they  first  struck  root  among  this  order,  whence
they  spread  abroad  and  tended  to  foster  the
resistance  to  the  prevailing  doctrines  of  the
schools.

It  is  manifest  that  all  these  agitations  of
opinion,  from  whatever  source  they  proceeded,
were  allies  of  the  literary  opposition  to  the
tyranny  of  the  Dominican  system.  The  fact
that  these  various  but  converging  tendencies
at  length  found  representatives  within  the  cir-
cle of  one  universit}'^,  must  be  regarded  as  in
itself  an  important  event  for  the  whole  nation.

In  the  year  1502,  Elector  Frederic  of  Saxony
founded  a  new  university  at  Wittenberg.  He
accomplished  this  object  chiefly  by  obtaining
the  pope's  consent  to  incorporate  a  number  of
parishes  with  the  richly  endowed  chun^h  at-
tached to  the  palace,  and  transforming  the
whole  into  a  foundation,  the  revenues  of  which
he  then  allotted  to  the  new  professors.  The
same  course  had  been  pursued  in  Treves  and
in  Tübingen;  the  clerical  dignities  of  the  in-
stitution were  connected  with  the  offices  in  the
university.  The  provost,  dean,  scholaster,
and  syndic  formed  the  faculty  of  law;  the
archdeacon,  cantor,  and  warden,  that  of  theo-
logy;  the  lectures  on  philosophy  and  the  exer-
cises of  the  candidates  for  the  degree  of  master
of  arts  were  attached  to  five  canonries.  The
eminent  Augustine  convent  in  the  town  was  to
take  part  in  the  work.-j-

*  Grimm  de  Joanne  Staupitzio  ejusqiie  in  sacrorum
Christianorum  restaurationem  meritis,  in  Illgen  Zeits-
chrift für  die  Hist.  Theologie,  N.  F.  i.  ii.  78.

t  The  papal  privilege  in  Grohmann,  Geschichte  der
Universität  Wittenberg,  comp.  p.  110.

We  must  recollect  that  the  universities  were
then  regarded  not  only  as  establishments  for
education,  but  as  supreme  tribunals  for  the
decision  of  scientific  questions.  In  the  charter
of  Wittenberg,  Frederic  declares:|:  that  he,  as
well  as  all  the  neighbouring  states,  would
repair  thither  as  to  an  oracle;  "  so  that,"  says
he,  "  when  we  have  come  full  of  doubt,  we
may,  after  receiving  the  sentence,  depart  in
certainty."

Two  men,  both  unquestionably  belonging  to
the  party  hostile  to  the  reigning  theologico-
philosophical  system,  had  the  greatest  in-
fluence on  the  foundation  and  first  organization
of  this  university.  The  one  was  Dr.  Martin
Pollich  of  Meirichstadt,  physician  to  the  elector,
whose  name  stands  at  the  head  of  the  list  of
the  rectors  of  the  Leipzig  university,  where  he
was  previously  established.  We  know  that
he  had  contended  against  the  fantastic  exag-
gerations of  scholastic  learning,  and  the  strange
assertions  to  which  they  gave  birth  ;  such  as
that  the  light  created  on  the  first  dajMvas  the-
olog)^ ;  that  discursive  theology  was  inherent
in  the  angels.  We  know  that  he  had  already
perceived  the  necessity  of  grounding  that
science  on  a  study  of  letters  generally. §

The  other  was  Johann  Staupitz,  the  mystical
cast  of  whose  opinions,  borrowed  from  St.
Augustine,  we  have  just  mentioned ;  he  was
the  first  dean  of  the  theological  faculty,  the
first  act  of  which  was,  the  promotion  of  Martin
Pollich  to  the  doctor  of  theology  :  ]|  as  director
of  the  Augustine  convent,  he  likewise  enjoyed
peculiar  influence.  It  was  not  an  insignificant
circumstance  that  the  university  had  just  then
declared  vSt.  Augustine  its  patron.  Notwith-
standing his  strong  tendency  to  speculation,
Staupitz  was  obviously  an  excellent  man  of
business;  he  conducted 'himself  with  address
at  court,  and  a  homely  vein  of  wit  which  he
possessed,  enabled  him  to  make  his  part  good
with  the  prince  ;  he  undertook  an  embassy,
and  conducted  the  negotiation  with  success ;
but  the  deeper  spring  of  all  his  conduct  and
actions  is  clearly  a  genuine  feeling  of  true  and
heartfelt  religion,  and  an  expansive  benevo-
lence.

It  is  easy  to  irnagine  in  what  spirit  these
men  laboured  at  the  university.  But  a  new-
star  soon  arose  upon  it.  In  the  year  1508,
Staupitz  conducted  thither  the  young  Luther.

W^e  maist  pause  a  moment  to  consider  the
early  years  of  this  remarkable  man.

"I  am  a  peasant's  son,"  says  he;  "my
father,  grandfather,  and  ancestors  were  genuine
peasants  ;  afterwards,  my  father  removed  to
Mansfeld,  and  became  a  miner  ;  that  is  my  na-
tive place."**  Luther's  family  was  from  Möhra,
a  village  on  the  very  summit  of  the  Thuringian
forest,  not  far  from  the  spot  celebrated  for  the

t  Confirmatio  diicis  Frederici,  ib.  p.  19.

§  Löscher,  in  the  unoffending  accounts  of  1716,  and  in
the  Acts  of  the  Reformation,  i.  88,  has  given  extracts
from  his  writings.  In  his  epitaph  in  the  parish  church
at  Wittenberg,  lie  is  rightly  called  hujus  gymnasii  primus
rector  et  parens,

II  Liber  deranorum  facultatis  theologorum  Vitebergen-
sis,  ed.  Foerstemann,  p.  2.

**  Tischreden,  p.  581.

Chap.  f.

EARLY  CAREER  OF  LUTHER.

103

first  preaching  of  Christianity  by  Boniface  ;  it
is  probable  that  Luther's  forefathers  had  for
centuries  been  settled  on  their  hide  of  land
(Hufe)  as  was  the  custom  with  those  Thurin-
gian  peasants,  one  brother  agnong  whom  always
inherited  the  estate,  while  the  others  sought  a
subsistence  in  other  ways.  •  Condemned  by
such  a  destiny  to  seek  a  home  and  hearth  for
himself,  Huns  Luther  was  led  to  the  mines  at
Mansfeld,  where  he  earned  his  bread  by  the
sweat  of  his  brow,  while  his  wife,  Margaret,
often  fetched  wood  from  the  forest  on  her  back.
Such  were  the  parents  of  Martin  Luther.  He
was  born  at  Eisleben,  whither  his  sturdy  mother
had  walked  to  the  yearly  fair;  he  grew  up  in
the  mountain  air  of  Mansfeld.

The  habits  and  manners  of  that  time  were
generally  harsh  and  rude,  and  so  w'as  his  edu-
cation. Luther  relates  that  his  mother  once
scourged  him  till  the  blood  came,  on  account
of  one  miserable  nut;  that  his  father  had  pun-
ished him  so  severely  that  it  was  with  great
difficulty  that  he  could  get  over  the  child's
terror  and  alienation ;  at  school  he  was  flogged
fifteen  times  in  one  forenoon.  He  had  to  earn
his  bread  by  singing  hymns  before  the  doors
of  houses,  and  new  year's  carols  in  the  villages.
Strange — that  people  should  continuall}:^  exalt
and  envy  the  happiness  of  childhood,  in  which
the  only  certain  foretaste  of  coming  )'ears  is
the  feeling  of  the  stern  necessities  of  life ;  in
which  existence  is  dependent  on  foreign  help,
and  the  will  of  another  disposes  of  every  day
and  hour, with  iron  sway.  In  Luther's  case,
this  period  of  life  was  full  of  terrors.

From  his  fifteenth  year  his  condition  was
somewhat  better.  In  Eisenach,  where  he  was
sent  to  the  high  school,  he  found  a  home  in  the
house  of  some  relations  of  his  mother;  thence
he  went  to  the  university  of  Erfurt,  where  his
father,  Avhose  industry,  frugality  and  success
had  placed  him  in  easier  circumstances,  made
him  a  liberal  allowance*:  his  hope  vv^as,  that
his  son  would  be  a  lawyer,  marry  Vn'oU  and  do
him  honour.

,  But  in  this  weary  life  the  restraints  of  child-
hood are  soon  succeeded  by  troubles  and  per-
plexities. The  spirit  feels  itself  freed  from
the  bonds  of  the  school,  and  is  not  yet  distract-
ed by  the  wants  and  cares  of  daily  life;  it
boldly  turns  to  the  highest  problems,  such  as
the  relation  of  man  to  God,  and  of  God  to  the
world,  and  while  eagerly  rushing  on  to  the  so-
lution of  them^  it  falls  into  the  most  distressing
state  of  doubt.  We  might  be  almost  tempted
to  think  that  the  Eternal  Source  of  all  life  ap-
peared to  the  youthful  Luther  only  in  the  light
of  the  inexoralDle  judge  and  avenger,  who  pim-
ishes  sin  (of  which  Luther  had  from  nature  an
awful  and  vivid  feeling)  with  the  torments  of
hell,  and  can  only  be  propitiated  by  penance,
mortification  and  painful  service.  As  he  was
returning  from  his  father's  house  in  Mansfeld
to  Erfurt,  in  the  month  of  July,  1505,  he  was
overtaken  in  a  field  near  Stotternheim  by  one
of  those  fearful  tempests  which  slowly  gather
on  the  mountains  and  at  length  suddenly  burst

*  Luther's  Erklärung  der  Genesis,  c.  49,  v.  15;  Attenb.
torn.  ix.  p.  1525.,

over  the  whole  horizon.  Luther  was  already
dejjressed  by  the  unexpected  death  of  an  inti-
mate friend.  There  are  moments  in  which  the
agitated  desponding  heart  is  completely  crushed
by  one  overwhelming  incident,  even  of  the
natural  world.  Luther,  traversing  his  solitary
path,  saw  in  the  tempest  the  God  of  wrath
and  vengeance ;  the  liohtning  struck  some
object  near  him;  in  his  terror  he  made  a
vow  to  St.  Anne,  that  if  he  escaped,  he  w^ould
enter  a  convent.  He  passed  one  more  evening
with  his  friends,  enjoying  the  pleasures  of
wine,  music,  and  song;  it  was  the  last  in
which  he  indulged  himself;  he  hastened  to
fulfil  his  vow,  and  entered  the  Augustine  Con-
vent at  Erfurt.

But  he  was  little  likely  to  find  serenity
there;  imprisoned,  in  all  the  buoyant  energy
of  youth,  within  the  narrow  gates  and  in  the
low  and  gloomy  cell,  with  no  prospect  but  a
few  feet  of  garden  within  the  cloisters,  and
condemned  to  perform  the  lowest  offices.  At
first  he  devoted  himself  to  the  duties  of  a  no-
vice with  all  the  ardour  of  a  determined  will.
"  If  ever  a  monk  got  to  heaven  by  monkish
life  and  practices  {durch  Möncher  ei)  ^  I  resolved
that  I  would  enter  there,"  were  his  words. f
But  though  he  conformed  to  the  hard  duty  of
obedience,  he  was  soon  a  prey  to  the  most
painful  disquiet.  Sometimes  he  studied  day
and  night,  to  the  neglect  of  his  canonical  hours,
which  he  then  passed  his  nights  in  retrieving
with  penitent  zeal.  Sometimes  he  went  out
into  some  neighbouring  village,  carrying  with
him  his  midday  re'past,  preached  to  the  shep-
herds and  ploughmen,  and  then  refreshed  him-
self with  their  rustic  music  ;  after  which  he
went  home,  and  shucting  himself  up  for  days
in  his  cell,  would  see  no  one.  All  his  former
doubts  and  secret  perplexities  returned  from
time  to  time  with  redoubled  force.

In  the  course  of  his  study  of  the  Scriptures,
he  fell  upon  texts  which  struck  terror  into  his
soul ;  one  of  these  was,  "  Save  me  in  thy  righ-
teousness and  thy  truth."  "I  thought,"  said
he,  "  that  righteousness  was  the  fierce  wrath
of  God,  wherewith  he  punishes  sinners."  Cer-
tain passages  in  the  Epistles  of  St.  Paul  haunt-
ed him  for  days.  The  doctrine  of  grace  was
not  indeed  unknown  to  him,  but  the  dogma  that
sin  w^as  a:t  once  taken  away  by  it,  produced
upon  him,  w^ho  was  but  too  conscious  of  his
sins,  rather  a  sense  of  rejection — a  feeling  of
deep  depression,  than  of  hope.  He  says  it
made  his  heart  bleed — it  made  him  despair  of
God.it:  "  Oh,  my  sins,  my  sins,  my  sins !"  hp
writes  to  Staupitz,  w^ho  was  not  a  little  aston-
ished when  he  received  tlie  confession  of  so
sorrowful  a  penitent,  and  found  that  he  had  no
sinful  acts  to  acknowledge.  His  anguish  was
j  the  longing  of  the  creature  after  the  purity  of
the  Creator,  to  whom  it  feels  itself  profoundly
and  intimately  allied,  yet  from  whom  it  is
severed  by  an  immeasurable  gulph  :  a  feeling
which  Luther  nourished  by  incessant  solitary

't  Short  answer  to  Duke  George.  Altenhurg.  t.  vi.  p.
22. Exposition  of  the  eighth  chapter  of  John,  V.  770.

X  He  relates  this  in  the  Sermo  die  S.  Joh.  1516,  in  Lö-
scher, Reformations  Acta,  i.  p.  258.

104

EARLY  CAREER  OF  LUTHER.

Book  IL

brooding,  and  whi(ih  had  taken  the  more  pain-
ful and  complete  possession  of  him  because  no
penance  had  power  to  appease  it;  no  doctrine
truly  touched  it,  no  confessor  would  hear  of  it.
There  were  moments  when  this  anxious  me-
lancholy arose  with  fearful  might  from  tlie
mysterious  abysses  of  his  soul,  waved  its
dusky  pinions  over  its  head,  and  felled  him  to
the  earth.  On  one  occasion  when  he  had  been
invisible  for  several  days,  some  friends  broke
into  his  cell  and  found  him  lying  senseless  on
the  ground.  They  knew  their  friend ;  with
tender  precaution  they  struck  some  chords  on
a  stringed  instrument  they  had  brought  with
them  ;  the  inward  strife  of  the  perplexed  spirit
was  allayed  by  the  well-known  remedy;  it  was
restored  to  harmony  and  awakened  to  healthful
consciousness.

But  the  eternal  lav/s  of  the  universe  seem  to
require  that  so  deep  and  earnest  a  longing  of
the  soul  after  God  should  at  length  be  appeased
with  the  fulness  of  conviction.

The  first  who,  if  he  could  not  administer
comfort  to  Luther  in  his  desperate  condition,  at
least  let  fall  a  ray  of  light  upon  his  thick  dark-
ness, was  an  old  Augustine  friar  who  with
fatherly  admonitions  pointed  his  attention  to
the  first  and  simplest  truth  of  Christianit}^ —
the  forgiveness  of  sins  through  faith  in  the  Re-
deemer; and  to  the  assertion  of  St.  Paul
(Rom.  iii.),  that  man  is  justified  without  works,
by  faith  alone:*  doctrines  Avhich  he  might
indeed  have  heard  before,  but  obscured  as  they
were  by  school  subtleties,  and  a  ceremonial
worship,  he  had  never  rightly  understood.
They  now  first  made  a  full  and  profound  im-
pression on  him.  He  meditated  especially  on
the  saying,  "  The  just  shall  live  by  faith."  He
read  St.  Augustine's  commentary  on  this  pas-
sage. "  Then  was  I  glad,"  says  he,  "  for  I
learned  and  saw  that  God's  righteousness  is
his  mercy,  by  which  he  accounts  and  holds  us
justified  ;  thus  I  reconciled  justice  with  justifi-
cation, and  felt  assured  that  I  v/as  in  the  true
faith."  This  was  exactly  the  conviction  of
which  his  mind  stood  in  need :  it  was  manifest
to  him  that  the  same  eternal  grace  whence  the
•whole  race  of  man  is  sprung,  mercifully  brings
back  erring  souls  to  itself  and  enlightens  them
with  the  fulness  of  its  own  light-;  that  an  ex-
ample and  irrefragable  assurance  of  this  is
given  us  in  the  person  of  Christ:  he  gradually
emerged  from  the  gloomy  idea  of  a  divine  jus-
tice only  to  be  propitiated  by  the  rigours  of
penance.  He  was  like  a  man  who  after  long
wanderings  has  at  length  found  the  right  path,
and  feeling  more  certain  of  it  at  every  step,
walks  boldly  and  hopefully  onward.

Such  was  Luther's  state  when  he  was  re-
moved to  Wittenberg  by  his  provincial  (a.  d.
1508).  The  philosophical  lectures  which  he
was  obliged  to  deliver,  sharpened  his  desire  to
penetrate  the  mysteries  of  theology,  "  the  ker-
nel of  the  nut,"  as  he  calls  it,  "the  heart  of

*  Short  notice  by  Melancthon  on  the  Life  of  Luther.
Works.  Attenb.  viii.  876.  See  Matthesius,  Historien  Dr.
Luther.^.  First  Sermon,  p,  12.  Bavarus  ia  Seckendorf,
Hist.  Lutheranismi,  p.  21.

the  wheat."  The  books  which  he  studied
were,  St.  Paul's  Epistles,  St.  Augustine  against
the  Pelagians,  and,  lastly,  Tauler's  sermons :
he  troubled  himself  little  with  literature  foreign
to  this  subject;  be  cared  only  to  strengthen
and  work  out  the  convictions  he  had  gained. f

A  few  years  later  we  find  him  in  the  most
extraordinary  frame  of  mind,  during  a  journey
which  he  took  for  the  affairs  of  his  order  to
Rome.  As  soon  as  he  descried  the  towers  of
the  city  from  a  distance,  he  threw  himself  on
the  ground,  raised  his  hands  and  exclaimed,
"  Hail  to  thee,  O  holy  Rome  !"  On  his  arrival,
there  was  no  exercise  in  use  among  the  most
pious  pilgrims  which  he  did  not  perform  with
earnest  and  deliberate  devotion,  undeterred  by
the  levity  of  other  priests ;  he  said  he  was
almost  tempted  to  wish  that  his  parents  were
dead,  that  so  he  might  have  been  able  certainly
to  deliver  them  from  the  fire  of  purgatory  by
these  privileged  observances. :|:  Yet,  at  the
same  time,  he  felt  how  little  such  practices
Vv-ere  in  accordance  with  the  consolatory  doc-
trine which  he  had  found  in  the  Epistle  to  the
Romans  and  in  St.  Augustine.  While  climb-
ing the  Scala  Santa  on  his  kne^s  in  order  to
obtain  the  plenary  indulgence  attached  to  that
painful  and  laborious  work  of  piety,  he  heard
a  reproving  voice  continually  crying  within
him,  "The  just  shall  live  by  faith. "§

After  his  return  in  1513,  he  became  Doctor
of  the  Holy  Scripture,  and  from  year  to  year
enlarged  his  sphere  of  activity.  He  lectured
at  the  university  on  both  the  Old  and  New
Testament ;  he  preached  at  the  Augustine
church,  and  performed  the  duties  of  the  priest
of  the  parochial  church  of  the  town  during  his

t  In  the  "  Histori,  so  zwen  Aiiiriistinerordens  gemartert
seyn  zii  Bruxel  in  Prol)a!Klt,"—""nistor_v,  how  two  monks
of  the  order  of  St.  Augustine  underwent  martyrdom  at
Brussels  in  Brabaiidt," — there  is  in  sheet  B  the  following
excellent  and  authentic  passage  upon  Luther's  studies.
"  In  welchen  Verstand  (dass  er  die  Schrift  co  klar  und
guadeiircicli  erkläre)  er  kummen  ist  erst  durch  maniche
t-laupendye  er  erlitten  hat  von  Got,  und  mit  vleissigeu
Bitteil  zu  Got,  steten  Lesen,  und  nemlich  Aii.Tüstinus
wider  die  Pelagianer  hat  ym  grosse  hiltf  gethan  tznr  er-
kerindnuss  Pauli  yn  seyn  Episteln.  Sunderlich  ein  Pre-'
digbiichlin  der  Tawicr  genanndt  yhm  deutschen  das  iikt
or  uns  oft  zu  erkauffen  ermant  unter  &if?ym  lesen  yn  der
Schul,  welches  yn  gefiirt  hat  yn  geist.  als  er  oü\  uns  be-
kannt: audi  ist  eyn  Biichlyn  genandt  die  deutsch  Theo-
logen, hat  Er  allzeyt  hochgebrifft,  als  er  den  schreibtt  yn
der  Vorrede  gedachten  I3üch!yns.  —  Hat  auch  oft  gesagt,
das  seyn  Kunst  mer  yhm  geben  sey  auserfarendenn  lesen,
und  das  vyll  Bücher  nit  gelert  machon.  Darnmb  findt
man  (Spater,  1523)  yhn  sginer  VVonung  nit  vyll  Bücher,
den  eyn  Bibel  und  Concordanz  der  Bybel."  —  "To  what
understanding  (enabling  him  to  explain  the  Scriptures
with  such  clearness  and  crace)  he  has  arrived,  first  by
manifold  chastisements  which  he  has  suffered  from  God,
and  through  diligent  prayer  to  God,  and  constant  read-
ing;  and  for  instance,  Augustine  against  the  Pelagians
has  been  of  great  help  to  him  towards  the  comprehension
of  Paul  in  liis  Ejiistles.  Especially  a  little  book  of  ser-
mons by  Tawler,  he  has  often  admonished  us  to  buy,  in
the  middle  of  his  teaching  in  the  school,  as  v/hat  has
guided  him  in  spirit,  as  he  as  often  ackriowleged  to  us ;
there  is  also  a  liule  book  (.'ailed  the  German  Theology,
which  he  has  at  all  times  highly  praised,  as  he  writes  in
the  preface  to  the  said  little  book.  He  has  also  often
said,  that  his  skill  was  given  him  more  by  experience
than  reading,  and  that  many  books  do  not  make  a  man
learned.  Therefore  many  books  are  not  to  be  found  (this
is  later,  in  1523)  in  his  dwelling;  but  one  Bible  and  a
Concordance  of  the  Bible."

X  Exposition  of  the  117lh  Psalm  to  Hans  von  Sternberg.
Luthers  Werke,  Altenb.  v.  25].

§  Story  told  by  Luther  in  the  Table  Talk,  p.  609.

Chap.  I.

EARLY  CAREER  OF  LUTHER.

105

illness;  in  1516,  Staupitz  appointed  him  ad- j
ministrator  of  the  order  durino^  his  absence  on  \
a  journey,  and  we  trace  him.  visiting  all  the  ;
monasteries  in  the  province,  appointing  or  dis-  \
placing  priors,  receiving  or  removing  monks,  j
While  labouring  to  introduce  a  profounder  spi-
rit of  piety,  he  did  not  overlook  the  smallest
economical  details ; and  besides  all  this,  he
had  to  manage  his  own  crowded  and  extremely
poor convent. Some things,  written  in  the
years 1515 and 1516, enable us better  to
understand  the  state  and  workings  of  his  mind  |
during  that  period. Mystical  and  scholastic  j
ideas  had  still  great  influence  over  him. In  j
the  first  words  of  his  on  religious  subjects  in  i
the  German  language  which  we  possess,  —  a
sketch  of  a  sermon  dated  Xoveml^er,  1515, —
he  applies,  in  somewhat  coarse  terms,  the  sym-
bolical language  of  the  Song  of  Songs  to  the
operations  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  which  acts  on
the  spirit  through  the  flesh ;  and  also  to  the  in-
ward  harmony  of the Holy Scriptures. In
another,  dated  December  of  the  same  year,  he
endeavours  to  explain  the  mystery  of  the  Tri-
nity by  the  Aristotelic  theory  of  being,  motion,
and rest.* ^Meanwhile his thoughts were
already  turned  to  a  grand  and  general  reform
of  the  church. In  a  speech  which  appears  to
have  been  intended  to  be  uttered  by  the  provost
of  Lietzkau  at  the  Lateran  council,  he  sets
forth  that  the  corruption  of  the  world  was  to
be  ascribed  to  the  priests,  who  delivered  to  the
people  too  many  maxims  and  fables  of  human
invention,  and  not  the  pure  word  of  God. For,
he  said,  the  word  of  life  alone  is  able  to  work
out  the  regeneration  of  man. It  is  well  worthy
of  remark,  that,  even  then,  Luther  looked  for
the  salvation  of  the  world  far  less  to  an  amend-
ment of  life,  which  was  only  secondary  in  his
eyes,  than  to  a  revival  of  the  tme  doctrines  :
and  there  was  none  with  tiie  importance  of
which  he  was  so  penetrated  and  filled  as  with
that  of  justification  by  faith. He  continually  ;
insists  on  the  absolute  necessity  of  a  man  de-
nying himself,  and  fleeing  for  refuge  under  the
wings  of  Christ;  he  seizes  every  opportunity  ,
of  repeating  the  saying  of  St.  Augustine,  that  \
faith  obtains  what  the  law  enjoins.j We  see  ;
that  Luther  was  not  yet  completely  at  one  with  |
himself:  that  he  still  cherished  opinions  funda-  !
mentally  at  variance  with  each  other ;  but  all  ;
his  writings  breathe  a  powerful  mind,  a  youth-  '
ful  courage,  still  restrained  within  the  bounds  ■
of  modesty  and  reverence  for  authority,  though  ■
ready  to  overleap  them ;  a  genius  intent  on  es-  :
sentials,  tearing  asunder  the  bonds  of  system,  '
and  pressing  forward  in  the  new  path  which
it  has  discovered. In  the  year  1516.  we  find
that  Luther  was  busily  occupied  in  defending
and  establishing  his  doctrine  of  iustification.x
He  was  greatly  encouracred  by  the  discovery
of  the  spuriousness  of  a  book  attributed  to  Au-
gustine, on  which  the  schoolm.en  had  founded  '

*  Sermo  Lutheri  in  Xativitate  Christi,  1515.

t  Fides  impetrat  qufe  lex  imperat.

i  From  the  Serrao  de  propria  Sapientia.  it  appears  that  i
he  bad  already  been  attacked  on  this  point.  "  Efficitur  i
mihi  et  errans  et  falsum.  dictum."'  i

many  doctrines  extremely  offensive  to  him,  and
which  was  quoted  almost  entire  in  Lombard's
book,  "De  vera  et  falsa  Penitentiä ;"  and  he
now  took  heart  to  attack  the  doctrine  of  the
Scotists  on  love,  and  that  of  the  Magister  Sen-
tentiarum  on  hope  ;  he  was  already  convinced
that  there  was  no  such  thingf  as  a  work  in  and
for  itself  pleasing  to  God — such  as  prayer,  fasts
and  vigils;  for,  as  their  whole  efficacy  depend-
ed on  their  being  done  in  the  fear  of  God,  it
followed  that  every  other  act  or  occupation  was
just  as  good  in  itself.

In  opposition  to  some  expressions  of  Ger-
man theologians  which  appeared  to  him  of  a
Pelagian  tendency,  he  embraced  with  uncom-
promising firmness  even  the  severer  views  of
Augustine  :  one  of  his  disciples  held  a  solemn
disputation  in  defence  of  the  doctrine  of  the
subjection  of  the  will,  and  of  the  inability  of
man  to  fit  himself  for  grace,  much  more  to  ob-
tain it,  by  his  own  powers. §

If  it  be  asked  wherein  he  discovered  the
mediating  p.ower  between  divine  perfection  and
human  sinfulness,  we  find  that  it  was  solely
in  the  mystery  of  the  redemption,  and  the  re-
vealed word  ;  mercy  on  the  one  side,  and  faith
on  the  other.  These  opinions  led  him  to  doubt
of  many  of  the  main  dogmas  of  the  church.
He  did  not  yet  deny  the  efficacy  of  absoiution  ;
but  no  later  than  the  year  1516,  he  was  per-
plexed by  the  doubt  how  man  could  obtain
grace  by  such  means :  the  desire  of  the  soul
vras  not  appeased  by  it,  nor  was  love  infused  ;
those  effects  could  only  be  produced  by  the
enlightenment  of  the  mind,  and  the  kindling
of  the  will  by  the  immediate  operation  of  the
Eternal  Spirit;  for,  he  added,  he  could  con
ceive  of  religion  only  as  residing  in  the  inmost
depth  of  the  heart.]  He  doubted  whether  all
those  outward  succours  for  which  it  was  usual
to  invoke  the  saints,  ought  to  be  ascribed  to
them.  "*

Such  vrere  the  doctrines,  such  the  great  gen-
eral direction  of  mind  immediately  connected
v/ith  the  opinions  implanted  by  Pollich  and
Staupitz,  which  Luther  disseminated  amono;
the  Augustine  friars  of  his  convent  and  his
province,  and,  above  all,  among  the  members
of  the  university.  For  a  tim.e  Jodocus  Trut-
vetter  of  Eisenach  sustained  the  established
opinions ;  but  after  his  death  in  the  year  1513,
Luther  was  the  master  spirit  that  ruled  the
schools.  His  colleagues,  Peter  Lupinus  and
Andreas  Carlstadt,  who  for  a  time  withstood
his  influence,  at  length  declared  themselves
overcomie  and  convinced  by  the  arguments  of
Augustine  and  the  doctrines  of  the  Holy  Scrip-
ture v.-hich  had  made  so  deep  an  impression  on
him  ;  they  were  almost  more  zealous  than  Lu-
ther himself.  A  totally  difierent  direction  was
thus  given  to  the  university  of  Wittenbersffrom
that  in  which  the  other  seats  of  learning  con-
tinued to  move. Theology  itself,  mainly  in-

'  Qusestio  de  viribus  et  voluntate  hominis  sine  gratia,
iu'Löscher,  i.  32S.

Sermo  X^a  post  Trinitatis.  He  still  savs  himself  oc-
casionally, "  Ego  non  satis  intelligo  banc  rem ;  manet

dubiura,"  izc— Löscher,  p.  761.

u

106

EARLY  CAREER  OF  LUTHER.

Book  IL

deed  in  consequence  of  its  own  internal  devel-
opment, made  similar  claims  to  those  asserted
by  general  literature.  In  Wittenberg  arose  the
opposition  to  the  theologians  of  the  old  and  the
new  way,  the  nominalists  and  the  realists,
and  more  especially  to  the  reigning-  thomis-
lical  doctiines  of  the  Dominicans ;  men  now
turned  to  the  scriptures  and  the  fathers  of
the  church,  as  Erasmus  (though  rather  as  a
conscientious  critic  than  an  enthusiastic  reli-
gionist) had  recommended.  In  a  short  time
there  were  no  hearers  for  the  lectures  given  in
the  old  spirit.

Such  was  the  state  of  things  in  Wittenberg
■  when  the  preachers  of  papal  indulgences  ap-
peared in  the  country  about  the  Elbe,  armed
with  powers  such  as  had  never  been  heard  of
before,  but  which  Pope  Leo  X.  did  not  scruple,
under  the  circumstances  in  which  he  found
himself,  to  grant.

,  For  no  fear  whatever  was  now  entertained
at  Rome  of  any  important  division  in  the
church.

In  the  place  of  the  council  at  Pisa,  one  had
been  convoked  at  the  Lateran,  in  which  devo-
tion to  the  see  of  Rome,  and  the  doctrine  of
its  omnipotence,  reigned  unalloyed  and  undis-
puted.

At  an  earlier  period,  the  college  of  Cardinals
had  often  made  an  attempt  to  limit  the  powers
of  the  papacy,  and  to  adopt  measures  with  re-
gard to  it  like  those  employed  by  the  German
chapters  towards  their  bishoprics;  they  had
elected  Leo  because  they  thought  he  would
submit  to  these  restraints.  But  the  event
proved  how  utterly  they  had  miscalculated.
The  men  who  had  chiefly  promoted  Leo's  elec-
tion were  precisely  those  who  now  most  se-
verely felt  his  power.  Their  rage  knew  no
bounds.  Cardinal  Alfonso  Petrucci  several
times  went  to  the  college  v.'ith  a  dagger  con-
cealed beneath  the  purple ;  he  would  have  as-
sassinated the  pope  had  he  not  been  withheld
by  the  consideration  of  the  effect  which  the
murder  of  a  pope  by  a  cardinal  would  produce
on  the  world.  He  therefore  held  it  to  be  more
expedient  to  take  another  and  less  violent  way
to  the  same  end — ^o  get  rid  of  the  pope  by  poi-
son. But  this  course  required  friends  and  al-
lies among  the  cardinals  and  assistants  in  the
palace,  and  thus  it  happened  that  he  was  be-
trayed.*

What  stormy  consistories  followed  this  dis-
covery !  The  persons  standin^j-  without,  says
the  Master  of  the  Ceremonies,  heard  loud  cla-
mours,— the  pope  against  some  of  the  cardi-
nals, the  cardinals  against  each  other,  and
against  the  pope.  Whatever  passed  there,  Leo
did  not  allow  such  an  opportunity  of  establish-
ing his  powder  for  ever,  to  escape  him.  Not
only  did  he  get  rid  of  his  formidable  adversa-
ry, but  he  proceeded  to  create  at  one  stroke
thirty-one  cardinals,  thus  insuring  to  himself  a

*  All  doubts  whatsoever  in  the  reality  of  ttiis  conspi-
racy cease,  upon  reading:  the  discourse  held  by  Bandinelli
upon  receiving  his  pardon,  in  which  he  acknowledges,
"qualiter  ipse  conspirarat  cum  Francisco  Maria,  .  .  .  ct
cum  Alfonso  Petrutio  machinatus  erat  in  mortem  sancti-
tatis  vestrae  praeparando  venena,"  &.c.  &c.

majority  in  all  contingencies,  and  a  complete
supremacy."!"

The  state,  too,  was  convulsed  by  a  violent
storm.  Francesco  Maria,  Duke  of  Urbino,
who  had  been  driven  out  of  his  territory,  had
returned,  and  had  set  on  foot  a  vv^ar,  the  result
of  which  long  kept  the  pope  in  a  state  of  min-
gled exasperation  and  shame  :  gradually,  how
ever,  he  mastered  this  opposition  also;  the
war  swallowed  up  streams  of  gold,  but  means
were  found  to  raise  it.

The  position  which  the  pope,  now  absolute
lord  of  Florence  and  master  of  Siena,  occu-
pied, the  powerful  alliances  he  had  contracted
with  the  other  powers  of  Europe,  and  the
views  which  his  family  entertained  on  the  rest
of  Italy,  rendered  it  absolutely  indispensable
for  him,  spite  of  the  prodigality  of  a  govern-
ment that  knew  no  restraint,  to  be  well  sup-
plied with  money.  He  seized  every  occasion
of  extracting  extraordinary  revenues  from  the
church.

The  Lateran  council  was  induced,  immedi-
ately before  its  dissolution  (15th  of  March,
1517),  to  grant  the  pope  a  tenth  of  all  church
property  throughout  Christendom.  Three  dif-
ferent commissions  for  the  sale  of  indulgences
traversed  Germany  and  the  northern  states'  at
the  same  moment.:|:

These  expedients  were,  it  is  true,  resorted  to
under  various  pretexts.  The  tenths  v/ere,  it
was  said^  to  be  expended  in  a  Turkish  war,
which  was  soon  to  be  declared ;  the  produce
of^indulgences  was  for  the  building  of  St.
Peter's  Church,  where  the  bones  of  the  martyrs
lay  exposed  to  the  inclemency  of  the  elements.
But  people  had  ceased  to  believe  in  these  pre-
tences.

Devoted  as  the  Lateran  council  was  to  the
pope,  the  proposition  was  only  carried  by  two
or  three  votes :  an  extremely  large  minority
objected  to  the  tenths,  that  it  was  impossible
to  think  of  a  Turkish  war  at  present.§  Who
could  be  a  more  zealous  catholic  than  Cardinal
Ximenes,  who  then  governed  Spain?  Yet
even  in  the  year  1513,  he  had  opposed  the  at-
tempt to  introduce  the  sale  of  indulgences  into
that  country  ;  ||  he  made  vehement  professions
of  devotion  to  the  pope,  but  he  added,  as  to  the
tenths,  it  must  first  be  seen  how  they  were  to
be  applied.**

For  there  was  not  a  doubt  on  the  mind  of
any  reasonable  man,  that  all  these  demands
were  mere  financial  speculations.  There  is  no
positive  proof  that  the  assertion  then  so  gene-
rally made — that  the  proceeds  of  the  sale  of
indulgences  in  Germany  was  destined  in  part
for  the  pope's  sister  Maddelena  —  was  true.
But  the  main  fact  is  indisputable,  that  the
ecclesiastical  aids  were  applied  to  the  uses  of
the  pope's  family.  We  have  a  receipt  now
lying  before  us,  given  by  the  pope's  nephew

t  Paris  de  Grassis,  in  Rainaldus,  1517,  95.  Comp.  Jo-
vius,  Vita  Leonis,  iv.  67.

X  Leoni,  Vita  di  Francesco  Maria  d' Urbino,  p.  205.

§  Paris  de  Grassis,  in  Sainaldus,  1517,  un.  16,

11  Gomez,  Vita  Ximenis,  in  Schott,  Ilispania  illustrata,
i.  p.  1065.

**  Argensola,  Anales  de  Aragon,  p.  354.

Chap.  I.

SALE  OF  INDULGENCES.

107

'  Lorenzo  to  the  king  of  France,  for  100,000
livres  which  that  monarch  paid  him  for  his
services.  Herein  it  is  expressly  said  that  the
"  king  was  to  receive  this  sum  from  the  tenths
which  the  council  had  granted  to  the  pope  for
the  Turkish  war.*  This  was,  therefore,  pre-
cisely the  same  thing  as  if  the  pope  had  given
the  money  to  his  nephew ;  or,  perhaps  even
worse,  for  he  gave  it  him  before  it  was
raised.

The  only  means  of  resistance  to  these  impo-
~  sitions  were  therefore  to  be  sought  in  the  pow-
eh  of  the  state,  which  were  just  now  gradually
acquiring  stability,  as  we  see  by  the  example
of  Ximenes  in  Spain ;  or  in  England,  where
the  decision  of  the  Lateran  council  could  not
have  reached  the  government,  at  the  time  when
it  forced  the  papal  collectors  to  take  an  oath
that  they  would  send  neither  money  nor  bills
of  exchange'  to  Rome.j  But  who  was  there
capable  of  protecting  the  interests  of  Germany  1
The  Council  of  Regency  no  longer  existed  ;
the  emperor  was  compelled  by  his  uncertain
political  relations  (especially  to  France)  to  keep
up  a  good  understanding  with  the  pope.  One
of  the  most  considerable  princes  of  the  empire,
the  Archchancellor  of  Germany,  Elector  Albert
of  Mainz,  born  Markgrave  of  Brandenburg,
had  the  same  interests  as  the  pope, — a  part  of
the  proceeds  were  to  go  into  his  own  exche-
quer.

Of  the  three  commissions  into  which  Ger-
many was  divided,  the  one  which  was  admin-
istered by  Arimbold,  a  member  of  the  Roman
prelature,  embraced  the  greater  part  of  the  dio-
ceses of  Upper  and  Lower  Germany  ;  another,
which  included  only  Switzerland  and  Austria,
fell  to  the  charge  of  Cristofero  Numai  of  Forli,:|:
general  of  the  Franciscans  ;  and  the  Elector  of
Mainz  himself  had  undertaken  the  third  in
his  own  vast  arehiepiscopal  provinces,  Mainz
and  Magdeburg ;  and  for  the  following  rea-
sons.

We  remember  what  heavy  charges  had  been
brought  upon  the  archbishopric  of  Mainz  by
the  frequent  recurrence  of  vacancies.  In  the
year  1514  the  chapter  elected  Markgrave  Albert
for  no  other  reason  than  that  he  promised  not
to  press  heavily  on  the  diocese  for  the  expenses
of  the  Pallium.  But  neither  was  he  able  to
defray  them  from  his  own  resources.  The  ex^
pedient  devised  was,  that  he  should  borrow
30,000  gulden  of  the  house  of  Fugger  of  Augs-
burg, and  detain  one  half  of  the  money  raised
by  indulgences to  repay  it.§ This  financial

*  Molini,  Documenti  storici,  t.  i.  p.  71.

t  Oath  of  Silvester  Darius,  the  papal  collector  (in  cnriu
cancellaria  in  aulapalatii  Westmoiiasteriensis)  April 22,
1517,  in  Rymer"s  Fcedera,  vi.  i.  p.  133.

J  His  deputy  plenipotentiary  was  Samson,  of  whom  it
was  said  in  a  pamphlet  of  1521:  er  habe  den  Bauern
"  Bassporten  geben  in  den  Hymel  durch  ein  Tolhnetschen,
von  welchem  Kaufmannschätz  hatt  er  gut  silberin  Plat-
ten gefiretgen  Mailand."  —  He  had  given  the  peasants
"passports  into  Heaven  through  an  interpreter,  by  means
of  which  stock  in  trade  he  had  taken  good  silver  coin
back  to  Milan."

§  Notices  from  a  manuscript  essay^  from  which  Rath-
mann  Gesch.  von  Masdeburg,  iii.  p.  302,  has  made  ex-
tracts. In  Erhard's  Überlieferungen  zur  vaterländ.  Gesch.
part  iii.  p.  12,  is  to  be  found  a  calculation  addressed  to
Leo  X.,  and  a  motuproprio  by  him  referring  to  this  point.
The  money  advanced  by  the  Fuggers  to  the  archiepisco-

operation  was  perfectly  open  and  undisguised.
Agents  of  the  house  of  Fugger  travelled  about
with  the  preachers  of  indulgences.  Albert  had
authorized  them  to  take  half  of  all  the  money
received  on  the  spot,  "  in  payment  of  the  sum
due  to  them."  |[  'I'he  tax  for  the  plenary  indul-
gence reminds  us  of  the  measures  taken  for  the
collection  of  the  Common  Penny.  V\e  possess
diaries  in  virhich  the  disbursements  for  spiritual
benefits  are  entered  and  calculated  together
with  secular  purchases.**

And  it  is  important  to  examine  what  were
the  advantages  w-hich  were  thus  (btained.

The  plenary  indulgence  for  all,  the  alleged
object  of  which  was  to  contribute  to  the  com-
pletion of  the  Vatican  Basilica,  restored  the
possessor  to  the  grace  of  God,  and  completely
exempted  him  from  the  punishment  of  purga-
tory. But  there  were  three  other  favours  to  be
obtained  by  further  contributions  :  the  right  of
choosing  a  father  confessor  who  could  grant
absolution  in  reserved  cases,  and  commute
vows  which  had  been  taken  into  other  good
works  ;  participation  in  all  prayers,  fasts,  pil-
grimages, and  whatever  good  works  were  per-
formed in  the  church  militant;  lastly,  the  re-
lease of  the  souls  of  the  departed  out  of  purga-
tory. In  order  to  obtain  plenary  indulgence,
it  was  necessary  not  only  to  confess,  but  to
feel  contrition ;  the  three  others  could  be  ob-
tained without  contrition  or  confession,  by
money  alone. ft  It  is  in  this  point  of  view-
that  Columbus  extols  the  worth  of  money  :
"he  who  possesses  it,"  says  he  seriously,
"  has  the  power  of  transporting  souls  into  Par-
adise."

Never  indeed  were  the  union  of  secular  ob-
jects with  spiritual  onmipotence  more  strikingly-
displayed  than  in  the  epoch  we  are  now  con-
sidering. There  is  a  fantastic  sublimity  and
grandeur  in  this  conception  of  the  church,  as  a
community  comprehending  heaven  and  earth,
the  living  and  the  dead  ;  in  which  all  the  pen-
alties incurred  by  individuals  were  removed
by  the  merit  and  the  grace  of  the  collec^tive
bod3^  What  a  conception  of  the  power  and
dignity  of  a  human  being  is  implied  in  the
belief  that  the  pope  could  employ  this  accumu-
lated treasure  of  merits  in  behalf  of  one  or
another  at  his  pleasure  l^t  The  doctrine  that
the  powder  of  the  pope  extended  to  that  inter-
mediate state  betw^een  heaven  and  earth,  called
purgatory,  was  the  growth  of  modern  times.

pal  oratores  in  Rome  towards  the  payment  for  the  pal-
lium amounted  to  2L0G0  ducats  (100  ducats  are  equal  to
140  gold  gulden):  the  Fuggers  received  500  Rhenish  gul-
den  over,  as  commission.  ~

II  Gudenus,  Diplom.  Moguntiac,  iv.  587.

**  e.  g.  Johannis  Tichtelii  Diarium,  in  Ranch,  ji.  558.
"Uxor  imposuit  pro  se  duas  libras  denariorum,  pro  pa-
rentibus  dimidiam  1  d.,  pro  domino  BartholomtBO  dimi-
diani  1  d."

tt  Instructio  summaria  ad  subcommissarios,  in  Gerdes,
Historia  Evangelii,  i.  App.  n.  ix.  p.  83.  For  the  most
part  agreeing  word  for  word  with  the  Avvisanienti  of
Arcimbold  in  liapp's  Nachlese.

XX  Summa  diyi  Thomas  Suppl.  Q,u.  25  art.  I  concl.
"Prcedicta  merita  sunt  communia  totius  ecclesife :  ea
autem  qus  sunt  alicujus  multitudinis  communia,  distri-
buuntur  singulis  de  multitudine  secundum  arbitrium  ejus
qui  multitudini  praeest."  Further:  art.  2,  "Nee  divinae
justitiiE  derogatur,  quia  nihil  de  poena  dimittitur,  sed
unius  poena  alteri  computatur  "

108

EARLY  CAREER  OF  LUTHER.

Book  IL

The  pope  appears  in  the  character  of  the  great
dispenser  of  all  punishment  and  all  mercy.
And  this  most  poetical,  sublime  idea  he  now
dragged  in  the  dust  for  a  miserable  sum  of
money,  which  he  applied  to  the  political  or
domestic  wants  of  the  moment.  Mountebank
itinerant  commissioners,  who  were  very  fond
of  reckoning  how  much  they  had  already
raised  for  the  papal  court,  while  they  retained
a  considerable  portion  of  it  for  themselves,  and
lived  a  life  of  ease  and  luxury,  outstripped
their  powers  with  blasphemous  eloquence.
They  thought  themselves  armed  against  every
attack,  so  long  as  they  could  menace  their
opponents  with  the  tremendous  punishments
of  the  church.

But  a  m.an  was  now  found  who  dared  to  con-
front them.

While  Luther's  whole  soul  was  more  and
more  profoundly  embaed  with  the  doctrine  of
salvation  by  faith,  which  he  zealously  diffused
not  only  in  the  cloister  and  the  university,  but
in  his  character  of  parish  priest  of  Wittenberg,
there  appeared  in  his  neighbourhood  an  an-
nouncement of  a  totally  opposite  character,
grounded  on  the  merest  external  compromise
with  conscience,  and  resting  on  those  ecclesi-
astical theories  which  he,  with  his  colleagues,
disciples  and  friends,  so  strenuously  combated.
In  the  neighbouring  town  of  Jüterbock,  the
multitude  flocked  together  around  the  Domini-
can friar,  John  Tetzel,  a  man  distinguished
above  all  the  other  pope's  commissioners  for
shamelessness  of  tongue.  IMemorials  of  the
traffic  in  which  he  was  engaged  are  preserved
(as  was  fitting)  in  the  ancient  church  of  the
town.  Among  the  buyers  of  indulgences
were  also  some  people  from  Wittenberg ;  Lu-
ther saw  himself  directly  attacked  in  his  cure
of  souls.

It  was  impossible  that  contradictions  so
absolute  should  approach  so  near  w^ithout
coming  into  open  conflict.

On  the  vigil  of  All  Saints,  on  which  the
parochial  church  was  accustomed  to  distribute
the'  treasure  of  indulgences  attached  to  its
relics, — on  the  31st  October,  1517, — Luther
nailed  on  its  gates  ninety-five  propositions ; —
"a  disputation  for  the  purpose  of  explaining
the  power  of  indulgences."

We  must  recollect  that  the  doctrine  of  the
treasure  of  the  church,  on  which  that  of  in-
dulgences rested,  was  from  the  very  first  re-
garded as  at  complete  variance  with  the  sacra-
ment of  the  power  of  the  keys.  The  dispen-
sation of  indulgences  rested  on  the  overflowing
merits  of  the  church  :  all  that  was  required  on
the  one  side  was  sufficient  authority :  on  the
other,  a  mark  or  token  of  connexion  with  the
church, — any  act  done  for  her  honour  or  advan-
tage. The  sacrament  of  the  keys,  on  the  con-
trary, was  exclusively  derived  from  the  merits
of  Christ ;  for  that,  sacerdotal  ordination  was
necessary  on  the  one  side,  and,  on  the  other,
contrition  and  penance.  In  the  former  case
the  measure  of  grace  was  at  the  pleasure  of
the  dispenser ;  in  the  latter,  it  must  be  deter-
mined by  the  relation  between  the  sin  and
the  penitence. In  this  controversy,  Thomas,

Aquinas  Rad  declared  himself  for  the  doctrine
of  the  treasure  of  the  church  and  the  validity
of  the  indulgences  which  she  dispensed  :  he
expressly  teaches  that  no  priest  is  necessary,
a  mere  legate  can  dispense  them ;  even  in
return  for  temporal  services,  so, far  as  these
were  subservient  to  a  spiritual  purpose.  In
this  opinion  he  was  followed  by  his  school.*

The  same  controversy  was  revived,  after  the
lapse  of  ages,  by  Luther ;  but  he  espoused  the
contrary  side.  Not  that  he  altogether  denied
the  treasures  of  the  church ;  but  he  declared
that  this  doctrine  was  not  sufficiently  clear,
and,  above  all,  he  contested  the  right  of  the
pope  to  dispense  them.  For  he  ascribed  only
an  inward  efficacy  to  this  mysterious  com-
munity of  the  church.  He  maintained  that  all
her  members  had  a  share  in  her  good  works,
even  without  a  pope's  brief;  that  his  power
extended  over  purgatory  only  in  so  far  as  the
intercessions  of  the  church  were  in  his  hand ;
but  the  question  must  first"  be  determined
whether  God  would  hear  these  intercessions  :
he  held  that  the  granting  indulgences  of  any
kind  whatsoever  without  repentance,  was  di-
rectly contrary  to  the  Christian  doctrine.  He
denied,  article  by  article,  the  authority  given
to  the  dealers  in  indulgences  in  their  instruc-
tions. On  the  other  hand,  he  traced  the  doc-
trine of  absolution  to  that  of  the  authority  of
the  keys.f  In  this  authority,  which  Christ
delegated  to  St.  Peter,  lay  the  power  of  the
pope  to  remit  sin.  It  also  extended  to  all
penances  and  cases  of  conscience ;  but  of
course  to  no  punishments  but  those  imposed
for  the  purpose  of  satisfaction  ;  and  eveij  then,
their  whole  efficacy  depended  on  whether  the
sinner  felt  contrition,  which  he  himself  was
not  able  to  determine,  much  less  another  for
him.  If  he  had  true  contrition,  complete  for-
giveness was  granted  him ;  if  he  had  it  not,
no  brief  of  indulgence  could  avail  him :  for
the  pope's  absolution  had  no  value  in  and  for
itself,  but  only  in  so  far  as  it  was  a  mark  of
Divine  favour.

It  is  evident  that  this  attack  did  not  originate
in  a  scheme  of  faith  new  to  the  church,  but  in
the  very  centre  of  the  scholastic  notions ;  ac-
cording to  which  the  fundamental  idea  of  the
papacy  —  viz.  that  the  priesthood,  and  more
especially  the  successors  of  St.  Peter,  were
representatives  and  vicegerents  of  Christ, —
was  still  firmly  adhered  to,  though  the  doctrine
of  the  union  of  all  the  povv'ers  of  the  church  in
the  person  of  the  pope  was  just  as  decidedly
controverted.  It  is  impossible  to  read  theäe
propositions  without  seeing  by  what  a  daring,
magnanimous,  and  constant  spirit  Luther  was
actuated.  The  thoughts  fly  out  from  his  mind
like  sparks  from  the  iron  under  the  stroke  of
the  hammer.

*  Scti  Tliomse  SumrriEE,  Suppleraentum  tertiiE  partis
CluEestio  XXV.  art.  ii.,  expounds  this  doctrine  very  clearly.
Its  main  ground,  however,  always  remains  the  same,
that  the  clmrch  says  thus  :  for,  "  si  in  prsedicatione  «ccle-
siffi  aliqua  falsitas  deprehenderetur,  non  esseiit  docu-
ments ecclesicE  alicujus  autoritatis  ad  roborandam  fidem."

t  Just  as  tlie  adversaries,  whom  Thomas  Aquinas  re
futes,  maintained :  "  indulgentiee  non  habent  effectuni
nisi  ex  vi  claviura."

Chap.  I.

DISPUTE  COXCERXIXG  IXDULGEXCES.

109

Let  us  not  for<ret  to  remark,  however,  that
as  the  abuse  complained  of  had  a  double  cha-
racter, religious  and  political,  or  financial,  so
also  political  events  came  in  aid  of  the  oppo-
sition emanating  from  religious  ideas.

Frederick  of  Saxony  had  been  present  when
the  Conncil  of  Regency  prescribed  to  Cardinal
Raimund  v.ery  strict  conditions  for  the  indul-
gence then  proclaimed  (a.  d.  1501) :  he  had
kept  the  money  accruing  from  it  in  his  own
dominions  in  his  possession,  with  the  determi-
nation not  to  part  with  it,  till  an  expedition
against  the  infidels,  which  was  then  contem-
plated, should  be  actually  undertaken ;  the
pope  and,  on  the  pope's  concession,  the  em-
peror had  demanded  it  of  him  in  vain  :*  he
held  it  for  what  it  really  was — a  tax  levied  on
his  subjects;  and  after  all  the  projects  of  a
■  war  against  the  Turks  had  come  to  nothing,  he
had  at  length  applied  the  money  to  his  uni-
versity. Nor  was  he  now  inclined  to  consent
to  a  similar  schem-e  of  taxation.  His  neigh-
bour, Elector  Joachim  of  Brandenburg,  readily
submitted  to  it :  he  com.manded  his  States  to
throw  no  obstacles  in  the  way  of  Tetzel  or  his
sub-commissioners  ;f  but  his  compliance  was
clearly  only  the  result  of  the  consideration  that
one  half  of  the  amount  would  go  to  his  brother.
For  this  ver}'"  reason,  hovvever,  Elector  Fre-
derick made  the  stronger  resistance :  he  was
already  irritated  against  the  Elector  of  INIainz
in  consequence  of  the  affairs  of  Erfurt,  and  he
declared  that  Albert  should  not  pay  for  his  pal-
lium out  of  the  pockets  of  the  Saxons.  The
sale  of  indulgences  at  Jiiterbock  and  the  resort
of  his  subjects  thither,  was  not  less  offensive
to  him  on  financial  grounds  than  to  Luther  on
spiritual.

Not  that  the  latter  were  in  any  degree  ex-
cited by  the  former;  this  it  would  be  impossi-
ble to  maintain  after  a  careful  examxinatiön  of
the  facts ;  on  the  contrary,  the  spiritual  mo-
tives were  more  original,  powerful,  and  inde-
pendent than  the  temporal,  though  these  were
important,  as  having  their  proper  source  in  the
general  condition  of  Germany.  The  point
•whence  the  great  events  arose  which  were
soon  to  agitate  the  world,  was  the  coincidence
of  the  two.

There  was,  as  we  have  already  observed,  no
one  who  represented  the  interests  of  Germany
in  the  matter.  There  were  innumerable  per-
sons who  saw  through  the  abuse  of  religion,

*  At  the  Diet  of  Ausfstiurg,  1510,  the  Saxon  deputies
declared  to  the  papal  nuncio,  as  appeared  in  one  of  their
letters  to  Frederic  the  Wise  :  -'es  habe  Tp.  Heiligkeit
leiden  mögen,  das  E.  Gn.  das  Geld  so  in  iren  Landen  ge-
fallen zu  sich  genommen,  mit  einer  Verpflichtung  wann
es  zum  Streit  wider  die  Ungläubigen  komme  es  wyderum
darzulegen  :  aus  der  Ursach  hab  E.  Gn,  wyewol  mehrmal
darum  angesucht  von  Keys  Mt.  wejen,  "die  auch  gerne
E.  Gn.  gemelte  Summe  um  ihre  Schuld  gelien  hätt,  dy
Summa  noch  wy  sy  gefallen  ist."'  "  His  Papal  Holiness
has  been  obliged  to  ~a!!o\v  that  your  Grace  should  take
into  your  keeping  the  money  collected  in  your  States,
under  an  obligation  to  produce  it  again  whenever  a  war
with  the  infidels  should  come  about ;  from  this  cause,  your
Grace,  although  many  times  applied  to  for  it,  on  behalf
of  his  Imperial  Majesty,  who  would  gladly  have  given
the  before-mentioned  sum  to  your  Grace  in  payment  of
debts,  still  has  the  entire  sum,' as  it  was  collected."

t  Mandate  of  Joachim  in  Walch,  Werke  Luthers,  sv.
415,

K

but  no  one  who  dared  to  call  it  by  its  right
name  and  openly  to  denounce  and  resist  it.
But  the  alliance  between  the  monk  of  Witten-
berg and  the  sovereign  of  Saxony  was  formed  ;
no  treaty  was  negotiated  ;  they  had  never  seen
each  other ;  yet  they  were  bound  together  by
an  instinctive  mutual  understanding.  The  in-
trepid monk  attacked  the  enemy ;  the  prince
did  not  promise  him  his  aid  —  he  did  net
even  encourage  him ;  he  let  things  take  their
course.

Yet  he  must  have  felt  very  distinctly  what
was  the  tendency  and  the  importance  of  these
events,  if  we  are  to  believe  the  story  of  the
dream  which  he  dreamt  at  his  castle-  of
Schweinitz,  where  he  was  then  staying,  on  the
night  of  All  Saints,  just  after  the  theses  were
stuck  up  on  the  church  door  at  "\Vittenberg.
He  thought  he  saw  the  monk  writing  certain
propositions  on  the  chapel  of  the  castle  at  Wit-
tenberg, in  so  large  a  hand  that  it  could  be  read
in  Schweinitz;  the  pen  grew  longer  and  longer,
till  at  last  it  reached  to  Rome,  touched  the
pope's  triple  crown,  and  made  it  totter  ;  he  was
stretching  out  his  arm  to  catch  it,  when  he
woke.t

Luther's  daring  assault  was  the  shock  which
awakened  Germany  from  her  slumber.  That  a
man  should  arise  who  had  the  courage  to  un-
dertake the  perilous  struggle,  was  a  source  of
universal  satisfaction,  and  as  it  were  tranquil-
lised  the  public  conscience. §  The  most  pov.-
erful  interests  were  involved  in  it; — that  of
sincere  and  profound  piety,  against  the  most
purely  external  means  of  obtaining  pardon  of
sins ;  that  of  literature,  against  fanatical  per-
secutors, of  whom  Tetzel  was  one ;  the  reno-
vated theology  against  the  dogmatic  learning
of  the  schools,  which  lent  itself  to  all  these
abuses ;  the  temporal  povrer  against  the  spir-
itual, whose  usurpations  it  sought  to  curb ;
lastly,  the  nation  against  the  rapacity  of
Rome.

But  since  each  of  these  interests  hacl  its  an-
tagonist, the  resistance  could  not  be  much  less
vehement  than  the  support.  A  numerous  body
of  natural  adversaries  arose.

The  university  of  Frankfurt  on  the  Oder,  like
that  of  Wittenberg,  was  an  off-shoot  of  Leip-
zig, only  founded  at  a  later  date,  and  belonging
to  the  opposite  party.  Determined  opponents
to  all  innovation  had  found  appointments  there.
Conrad  Koch,  surnamed  Wimpina,  an  old
enemy  of  Pollich,  who  had  often  had  a  literary
skirmish  with  him,  had  acquired  a  similar  in-
fluence^ there  to  that  possessed  by  Pollich  at
Wittenberg.  Johann  Tetzel  now^  addressed
himself  to  Wimpina,  and  with  his  assistance
(for  he  was  ambitious  of  being  a  doctor  as  well
as  his  Augustine  adversary)  published  two
theses,  on  one  of  which  he  intended  to  hold  a
disputation  for  the  degree  of  licentiate,  on  the

i  A  divine  and  scriptural  dream  from  Caspar  Rothen,
Gloria  Lutheri,  in  Tentzefs  Histor.  Bericht,  p.  239.

§  Erasmus  to  Duke  George  of  Saxony,  Dec.  12,  1524.
"  Cum  Lutherus  aggrederetur  hanc  fabulum,  totus  muu-
dus  illi  magno  consensu  applausit, — susceperat  enim  op-
tinam  causam  adversus  corruptissimos  scholarum  et  ec-
clesiiB  mores,  qui  eo  progressi  fuerant  ut  res  jam  nuUi
bono  viro  tolerabilis  videretur."

110

EARLY  CAREER  OF  LUTHER.

Book  IL

other,  for  that  of  doctor:  both  were  directed
against  Luther.  In  the  first  he  attempted  to
defend  the  doctrine  of  indulgences  by  means
of  a  new  distinction  between  expiatory  and
saving  punishment.  The  pope,  he  said,  could
remit  the  former,  though  not  the  latter.*  In
the  second  thesis  he  extols  most  highly  the
power  of  the  pope,  who  had  the  exclusive  right
of  settling  the  interpretation  of  Scripture,  and
deciding  on  articles  of  faith  ;  he  denounces
Luther,  not  indeed  by  name,  but  with  sufficient
distinctness,  as  a  heretic,  nay  a  stiff-necked
heretic.  This  now  resounded  from  pulpit  and
chair.  Hogstraten  thundered  out  invectives,
and  clearl}?^  intimated  that  such  a  heretic  was
worthy  of  death  ;  while  a  manuscript  confuta-
tion by  an  apparent  friend,  Johann  Eck  of  In-
golstadt, was  circulated,  containing  insinua-
tions concerning  the  Bohemian  poison. j-  Lu-
ther left  none  of  these  attacks  unanswered  :  and
in  every  one  of  his  polemical  writings  he
gained  ground.  Other  questions  soon  found
their  way  into  the  controversy ;  e.  g.  that  con-
cerning the  legend  of  St.  Anne,  the  authenti-
city of  which  was  disputed  by  a  friend  of
Luther's  at  Zwickau,  but  obstinately  maintain-
ed by  the  Leipzig  theologians.j;:  The  Witten-
berg views  concerning  the  Aristotelian  philos-
ophy and  the  merit  of  works  spread  abroad :
Luther  himself  defended  them  at  a  meeting  of
his  order  at  Lleidelberg;  and  if  lie  experienced
opposition  from  the  elder  doctors,  a  number  of
the  younger  members  of  the  university  became
his  adherents.  The  whole  theological  world
of  Germany  was  thrown  into  the  most  violent
acritation.

But  already  a  voice  from  Rome  was  heard
through  the  loud  disputes  of  excited  Germany.
Silvester  Mazolini  of  Prierio,  master  of  the
sacred  palace,  a  Dominican,  who  had  given  out
a  very  equivocal  and  cautious  opinion  concern-
ing the  necessity  of  repentance  and  the  sinful-
Ficss  of  lying,  but  had  defended  the  system  of
teaching  practised  by  his  order  with  inflexible
zeal ; — who,  in  Reuchlin's  controversy,  had
been  the  only  member  of  the  commission  that
had  prevented  it  from  coming  to  a  decision  fa-
vourable to  that  eminent  scholar,  now  deemed
himself  called  upon  to  take  up  arms  against
this  new  and  far  more  formidable  assailant.
He  rose,  as  he  said,  from  the  commentary
in  "  Prim.am  Secundae  "  of  St.  Thomas,  in  the
composition  of  which  he  was  absorbed,  and
devoted  a  few  days  to  throw  himself  like  a
buckler  between  the  Augustine  monk  and  the
Roman  See,  against  which  he  had  dared  to  rear
his  head  § ;  he  thought  Luther  sufficiently  con-
futed by  the  mere  citation  of  the  opinions  of
his  master,  St.  Thomas. An  attack  emanating

*  Disputatio  prima,  J.  Tetzelii  Thesis,  14.  To  this  re-
fers the  jiapsaje  in  Luther's  second  sermon  on  Indulg-
ences, in  which  he  calls  such  a  distinction  mere  talk.

t  Obelisci  Ockii,  nr.  18  et  22.
- t  Job.  Sylvii  Apologia  contra  Calumniatores  suos,  in
qua  Annam  niipsisse  Cleophce  et  Salomse  evangelicis  tes-
timonjis  refellitur. Reprinted  in  Rittershusii  Commen-
tarius  de  Gradibus  Cognationum,  1674.

§  Dialogus  revdi  patris  fratris  Sylvestri  Prieriatis  — in
prsBsumptuosas  Martini  Luthericonclusiones,  in  Löscher,
ii.  12.

from  Rome  made  some  impression  even  upon
Luther :  feeble  and  easy  to  confute  as  Silves-
ter's writing  appeared  to  him,  he  now  paused  ;
he  did  not  wish  to  have  the  Curia  his  open  and
direct  foe.  On  the  30th  May  he  sent  an  expla-
nation of  his  propositions  to  the  pope  himself,
and  seized  this  occasion  of  endeavouring  to
render  his  opinions  and  conduct  generally  in-
telligible to  the  Holy  Father.  He  did  not  as
yet  go  so  far  as  to  appeal  purely  and  exclusive-
ly to  the  Scriptures;  on  the  contrary,  he  de-
clared that  he  submitted  to  the  authority  of  the
fathers  who  were  recognized  by  the  church,  and
even  to  that  of  the  papal  decrees.  But  he  could
not  consider  himself  bound  to  accept  the  opin-
ions of  Thomas  Aquinas  as  articles  of  faith,
since  his  works  were  not  yet  sanctioned  by  the
church.  "I  may  err,"  he  exclaims,  "  but  a
heretic  I  will  not  be,  let  my  enemies  rage  and
rail  as  they  will."

Affairs,  however,  already  began  to  wear  the
most  threatening  aspect  at  Rome.

The  papal  fiscal,  Mario  Perusco,||  the  same
who  had  rendered  himself  celebrated  by  the
investigation  of  the  conspiracy  of  cardinals,
commenced  criminal  proceedings  against  Lu-
ther; in  the  tribunal  which  was  appointed,  the
same  Silvester  who  had  thrown  down  the
gauntlet  to  the  accused  on  the  literary  ground
was  the  only  theologian.  There  was  not  much
mercy  to  be  expected.

There  is  no  question  that  German  infl-uences
were  also  at  work  here.  Elector  Albert,  who
instantly  felt  that  the  attack  from  Wittenberg
was  directed  in  part  against  himself,  had  re-
ferred Tetzel  to  Wimpina ;  the  consequence
of  this  was,  that  Frederic  was  attacked  in  Tet-
zel's  Theses  (indirectly  indeed,  but  with  the
utmost  bitterness),  as  a  prince  who  had  the
power  to  check  the  heretical  wickedness,  and
did  not — who  shielded  heretics  from  their  right-
ful judge.**  Tetzel  at  least  affirms,  that  the
Elector  had  had  an  influence  in  the  trial.  Per-
sonal differences,  and  the  jealousies  of  neigh-
bouring states,  had  influenced,  from  the  very
beginning,  the  course  of  these  events. ff

Such  was  the  state  of  the  spiritual  power  in
Germany.  As  yet,  a  secession  or  revolt  from
the  pope  v;as  not  thought  of;  as  yet,  his  power
was  universally  acknowledged,  but  indignation
and  resistance  rose  up  against  him  from  all
the  depths  of  the  national  feeling  and  the  na-
tional will.  Already  had  his  sworn  defenders
sustained  a  defeat ; — already  some  of  the  found-
ations of  the  edifice  of  dogma,  on  which  his
power  rested,  tottered  ;  the  intense  desire  of
the  nation  to  consolidate  itself  into  a  certain
unity,  took  a  direction  hostile  to  the  authority
of  the  Court  of  Rome.  An  opposition  had
arisen  which  still  appeared  insignificant,  but
which  found  vigorous  support  in  the  temper
of  the  nation  and  in  the  favour  of  a  powerful
prince  of  the  empire.

II  Guicciardini  (xiii.  p.  384)  and  Jovius  mention  him.
'  **  Disputatio  secunda,  J.  Tetzelii  Thesis,  47,  48.

tt  Tetzel  to  Miltitz  in  Löscher,  ii.  568:  "so  doch  hoch-
benannter Erzbischof  inen  bestellt  hat  zu  citiren  und
nicht  ich."—"  Thus  then  the  above-named  archbishop  has
summoned  him  (Luther)  and  not  L"

Chap.  II.

DIET  OF  AUGSBURG,  1518.

Ill

CHAPTER  II.

DESCENT OF  THE IMPERIAL  CROWN  FROM  MAXI-
MILIAN TO  CHARLES  V.

DIET  OF  AUGSBURG,  1518.

Had  there  been  at  this  moment  a  powerful
emperor,  he  might  have  turned  these  agitations
to  vast  account.  Supported  by  the  nation,  he
would  have  been  able  to  revive  the  ancient  op-
position to  the  papacy,  and  to  inspire  his  peo-
ple with  a  new  life  founded  upon  religious
ideas.

Maximilian  was  by  nature  far  from  being
inaccessible  to  such  a  project.  Indeed,  the  ex-
pression he  once  let  fall  to  Elector  Frederic,
thathe  wished  "  to  take  good  care  of  the  monk,"
for  that  it  might  be  possible  some  time  or  other
to  make  use  of  him,  betrays  what  was  passing
in  his  mind ;  but  for  the  moment  he  was  not
in  a  condition  to  follow  it  out.

In  the  first  place,  he  was  old,  and  wished  to
secure  to  his  grandson  Charles  the  succession
to  the  empire.  He  regarded  this  as  the  closing
business  of  his  life.  He  had  laboured  all  his
days,  as  he  said,  to  aggrandize  his  house :  all
his  trouble  v/ould,  however,  be  lost,  if  he  did
not  attain  this  his  final  aim.*  But,  for  this,
he  especially  required  the  support  of  the  spiri-
tual power;  for  the  minds  of  men  were  not
yet  so  far  emancipated  from  the  ideas  of  the
middle  ages,  as  that  they  could  be  brought  to
recognize  in  him  the  full  dignity  of  emperor,
without  the  ceremony  of  coronation.  While
meditating  the  project  of  raising  his  grandson
to  the  rank  of  king  of  the  Romans,  the  first
difficulty  that  occurred  to  Maximilian  was,  that
he  himself  had  not  been  crowned.  He  con-
ceived the  idea  of  causing  himself  to  be  crown-
ed, if  not  in  Rome,  at  least  with  the  genuine
crown  of  a  Roman  emperor,  which  he  hoped
to  induce  the  papal  court  to  send  across  the
Alps,  and  opened  negotiations  with  that  view.
It  is  evident  how  necessary  it  became  for
him,  not  only 'not  to  irritate,  but  to  conciliate
the  pope.

On  another  point  also,  advances  were  made
towards  a  good  understanding  between  the  em-
peror and  the  pope.  We  have  mentioned  the
grant  of  a  tenth  for  a  Turkish  war,  Vvh.ich  the
Lateran  council  was  induced  to  coi>sent  to,  just
before  its  close.  It  is  a  very  significant  fact,
that  while  this  excited  amazement  and  resist-
ance throughout  Europe,  Maximilian  acqui-
esced in  it.  He,  too,  wished  nothing  more
earnestly  than  once  more  to  levy  a  large  tax
on  the  whole  empire;  we  know,  however,
what  a  mighty  opposition  he  encountered,  and
that  even  the  grants  which  he  wrung  from  the
States  had  been  fruitless :  he  now  hoped  to
obtain  his  end  in  conjunction  with  the  pope.
He  therefore  assented  without  a  question  to  the
plan  of  the  Court  of  Rome.  It  seems  as  if
not  only  his  self-interest  was  moved,  but  his
imagination  captivated. He  exhorts  the  pope,

*  Letter  of  the  24th  of  May,  1518.

in  letters  of  the  greatest  ardour  and  vivacity,
to  undertake  the  campaign  in  person,  surround-
ed by  his  cardinals,  under  the  banner  of  the
cross ;  then,  he  says,  every  one  would  hasten
to  his  aid  :  he,  at  least,  had  from  his  youth  had
no  higher  ambition  than  to  do  battle  against
the  Turks. f  The  victories  of  Selim  I.  over
the  Mamelukes  revived  his  sense  of  the  gene-
ral danger.  He  convoked  the  States  of  the
empire,  in  order  at  length  to  conclude  on
means  of  raising  efficacious  succour  against
the  Turks,  to  whom  already  all  Asia,  as  far
as  the  domains  of  Prester  John,  belonged;  by
whom  Africa  was  occupied,  and  whom  it  would
soon  become  utterly  impossible  to  resist.:[:  He
hoped  that  the  moment  was  come  for  realising
his  long-cherished  project  of  establishing  a
permanent  military  constitution.  Thus,  after
long  interruption,  the  ancient  union  of  the
spiritual  and  temporal  powers  was  once  more
beheld  at  the  diet.  Instead  of  opposing  the
pope,  the  emperor  united  with  him;  while  the
pope  sent  a  le^-ate  to  assist  the  emperor  in  his
negotiations  with  the  States. ,

His  choice  fell  on  the  Dominican,  Thomas
de  Yio,  the  same  who  had  so  zealously  defend-
ed the  papal  prerogatives ;  this  had  opened  to
him  the  way  to  higher  dignities,  which  had
terminated  in  that  of  cardinal.  The  brilliant
appointment  of  legate,  now  superadded,  placed
him  at  the  summit  of  his  ambition.  lie  deter-
mined to  appear  with  the  greatest  magnificence,
and  almost  acted  in  earnest  upon  the  pretension
of  the  Curia,  that  a  legate  was  greater  than  a
king.§  At  his  nomination  he  made  special
conditions  as  to  the  state  and  splendour  of  his
equipments;  for  example,  that  a  white  palfrey
with  bridle  of  crimson  velvet,  and  hangings
for  his  room  of  crimson  satin,  were  to  be  pro-
vided for  him  :  even  his  old  master  of  the  cere-
monies could  not  refrain  from  laughing  at  the
multiplicity  of  demands  which  he  had  to  make.
Vvhen  at  Augsburg  he  delighted  beyond  all
things  in  magnificent  ceremonies  ;  such  as  the
high  mass  which  he  celebrated  before  all  the
princes,  spiritual  and  temporal,  in  the  .cathedral,
on  the  1st  of  xiugust;  when  he  placed  the  car-
dinal's hat  on  the  head  of  the  Archbishop  of
Mainz,  kneeling  at  the  altar,  and  delivered  to
the  emperor  himself  the  consecrated  hat  and
sword — the  marks  of  papal  grace  and  favour.
He  indulged  also  in  the  most  extravagant  ideas.
W"hile  exhorting  the  emperor  to  m.arch  forth
against  the  hereditary  enemy  who  thirsted  for
the  blood  of  Christendom,  he  reminded  him
that  this  was  not  only  the  day  on  which  Au-
gustus had  become  master  of  the  world  at  the
battle  of  Actium,  but  also  that  it  was  sacred  to
St.  Peter :  the  emperor  might  accept  it  as  an
augury  of  the  conquest  of  Constantinople  and
Jerusalem,  and  the  extension  of  the  emipire  and

t  Letter  of  Maximilian,  Feb.  28,  in  Rainaldus,  1617,
2-5.

t  Address  of  the  9th  Febniaiy  in  the  Frankf.  A.,  vol.
xxxiii.  B}'  a  letter  from  Fürsten  berg  (July  3, 1518)  it  ap-
pears that  the  States  had  met  by  the  beginning  of  July.

§  "  Legati  debent  esse  supra  reges  quoscunque." — Faris
de  Grassis  in  Hofmanni  Scriptores  novi,  p.  408.

112

DIET  OF  AUGSBUKG,  1518.

ir.

the  church  to  the  farthest  ends  of  the  earth. =*
Such  was  the  style  of  a  discourse,  framed  ac-
cording to  all  the  rules  of  rhetoric,  which  he
delivered  to  the  assembly  of  the  States.

It  may  easily  be  imagined,  that  it  cost  him
no  labour  to  persuade  the  emperor;  after  a
short  deliberation  they  now  made  the  joint
proposal,  that  in  order  to  bring  an  army  against
the  Turks  into  the  field,  every  fifty  house-
holders should  furnish  one  man,  and  theciergy
should  pay  a  tenth,  the  laity  a  twentieth,  of
their  income  for  its  maintenance.

It  w^as  extremely  difficult,  however,  to  carry
this  measure  through  the  States.  Whatever
were  the  real  designs  of  the  emperor,  people
refused,  whether  in  Germany  or  abroad,  to  be-
lieve that  he  was  in  earnest.  Publications
appeared,  in  which  the  intention  of  the  See  of
Rome  to  make  war  on  the  infidels  was  flatly
denied;  these  were  all  Florentine  arts,  it  was
affirmed,  to  cajole  the  Germans  out  of  their
money  ;  the  proceeds  of  indulgences  were  not
even  applied  to  the  building  which  was  repre-
sented as  so  urgently  wanted  ;  the  materials
destined  for  the  building  of  St.  Peter's  wan-
dered by  night  to  the  palace  of  Lorenzo  de
Medici ; — the  Turks  whom  they  ought  to  make
war  upon  were  to  be  found  in  Italy. |  As  to
the  emperor,  it  was  suggested  that  bis  object
was  to  impose  a  tax  on  the  empire  under 4hese
pretexts.

The  ansvv-er  which  the  States  returned  on
the  27th  of  August,  therefore,  was  a  decided
negative.  They  observed,  that  it  would  be
impossible  to  raise  so  considerable  a  tax,  in  the
state  to  which  the  country  had  been  reduced
during  the  last  years  by  war,  scarcity,  and  in-
testine disorder.  But  that,  independently  of
this,  the  common  people  complained  of  all  the
money  that  was  sent  out  of  Germany  to  no
purpose ;  the  nation  had  already  frequently
contributed  funds  for  a  Turkish  war  by  means
of  indulgences  and  cruciata,  but  it  had  never
yet  heard  that  any  expedition  against  the
Turks  had  been  attempted.  The  refusal  thus
assumed  the  character  of  an  accusation.  The
States  seized  the  opportunity  afforded  by  the
demand  on  the  part  of  the  See  of  Rome  to
retort  upon  it  a  multitude  of  grievances :  e.  g.
the  annates  which  were  now  exacted  from
abbeys,  prebends,  and  parishes  ;  the  constantly
increasing  costs  of  the  confirmation  in  spiritual
offices  caused  by  the  creation  of  new  officia;
the  apparently  eternal  burthens  imposed  by  the
rules  of  the  Roman  chancery ;  all  the  various
encroachments  on  the  right  of  patronage;  the
appointment  of  foreigners  to  spiritual  posts  in
Upper  and  Lower  Germany ;  and,  generally,
an  incessant  violation  of  the  concordat  vväth
the  German  nation. 4: A  memorial  presented

*  Jncohi  Manlii  Historiolfi  duoruin  Actuum;  Frehev,
ii.  p.  700.

t  Oratio  Dissuasoria  ;  Frehor,  ii.  701.  Tlie  "  conclusion
of  this  discourse  makes  against  the  opinion  that  it  is  by
Hütten.  But  how  is  the  fact  to  be  explained,  that  the
dialogue,  unquestionably  Hutten's, '  Pasquillus  Exul,"  has
so  extraordinary  a  resemblance  in  many  passages  to  this
discourse,  that  it  cannot  possibly  be  accidental  ?  It  might,
however,  very  well  have  had  an  influence  upon  the  con-
sultations, as  it  reached  Wittenberg  on  the  2d  of  Septem-
ber."— Luther's  Letters,  i.  nr.  79.

by  the  Bishop  of  Liege  to  the  head  and  princes
of  the  empire,  served  to  give  additional  force
to  these  complaints.  It  contained  a  complete
catalogue  of  acts  of  injustice  which  the  Ger-
man church  had  to  suffer  from  the  courtiers  of
Rome  ;  those  mighty  huntsmen,  sons  of  Nim-
rod,  as  it  said,  sallied  forth  daily  in  chase  of
benefices ;  day  and  night  they  meditated  on
nothing  but  how  to  thwart  the  canonical  elec-
tions ;  the  German  gold,  formerly  too  heavy
for  an  Atlas,  had  fled  across  the  Alps.§  Such
a  writing,  "so  full  of  boldness,"  said  the
Frankfurt  envoy,  had  never  been  seen.

How  greatly  had  the  emperor  deceived  him-
self in  imagining  that  he  should  more  readily
attain  his  end  by  the  aid  of  the  spiritual
power !

Charges  against  the  pope  w^ere  now  also
advanced  at  the  discussions  on  the  grievances
which  had  been  brought  forward  a  year  be-
fore at  l\iainz ;  e.  g.  his  encroachment  on  the
right  of  collation;  the  conduct  of  the  clergy
generally ;  above  all,  the  use  of  excommuni-
cation, to  which  the  people  had  no  mind  to
concede  a  validity  equal  to  that  of  the  sentence
of  the  civil  tribunals.  But  in  urging  these
complaints,  they  did  not  lose  sight  of  those
against  the  emperor.  They  again  demanded
a  better  composition  of  the  courts  of  justice,
and  a  more  perfect  execution  of  the  judgments
of  the  Imperial  Chamber;  a  commission  was
appointed  in  order  to  deliberate  on  the  code  of
criminal  procedure.

Nor  was  this  all;  the  opposition  to  the
imperial  authority  took  a  perfectly  new  di-
rection in  the  important  discussions  on  the
Turkish  war.

The  States  did,  indeed,  after  m.uch  debate,
at  length  seem  to  come  to  some  agreement  as
to  the  nature  and  mode  of  a  new  tax;  it  was
actually  decreed  in  the  Recess,  that  for  three
years  every  one  who  communicated  at  the
Lord's  Supper  should  pay  at  least  a  tenth  of  a
gulden,  and  that  the  sum  resulting  from  this
collection  should  be  kept  by  the  government
till  the  commencement  of  a  Turkish  war ;  but
even  a  grant  of  so  strange  and  equivocal  a
kind  was  rendered  nearly  illusory  b}'-  a  condi-
tion attached  to  it.  The  princes  declared  that
they  must  first  consult  with  their  subjects  upon
it.  The  emperor's  answer  shows  how  aston-
ished he  was  at  this  innovation.  He  said,  that
was  not  the  usage  in  the  Holy  Empire;  the
princes  were  not  bound  by  the  consent  of  their
subjects  ;  it  was  the  duty  of  the  latter  to  exe-
cute the  decisions  of  their  lords  and  rulers.  |1

X  Answer  of  the  States,  Friday  after  the  Feast  of  St.
Bartliolomev/. Frankft.  A.

§  Erardus  de  Marca  Sacram»  Cffis®  ?^ajestati.  Kapps
Nachlese,  ii.  nr.  1.

II  Declaration  of  the  emperor  on  the  9th  of  Sept.  "  Item,
dass  in  dem  allen  Churfürsten  Fürsten  und  Stände  kein
Ausred  noch  Entschuldigung  füniemen,  noch  solch  Zu-
sage thun  mit  cynicher  Weigerung  oder  Condicion  auf
ihre  ünterthanen,  denn  sollichs  in  bisher  bewilligten
Hülfen  nie  bedacht  worden  und  daruf  gestellt  ist,  sondera
Churff.  FF.  und  Stend  haben  allezeit  "frei  gehandelt  und
bewilligt,  nachdem  sy  Kais^  Mt.  und  des  Reichs  Churf.
belehnt  seyen,  auch  die  Ünterthanen  schuldig  seyn  den
Willen  der  Fürsten  und  Obern  und  nit  die  Fürsten  und
Obern  der  Ünterthanen  Willen  zu  verfolgen  und  Gehor-
sam zu  beweisen."  "Also,  that  in  all  these  things  the
electors,  princes,  and  States,  take  upon  themselves  no

Chap.  IL

DIET  OF  AUGSBUEG,  1518.

113

The  princes  replied,  that  they  had  often  made
promises  without  consulting  their  subjects,  and
the  consequence  had  been,  that  it  had  gene-
rally been  found  impossible  to  execute  them  :
continuance  in  such  a  course  could  end  in  no-
thing but  disgrace  and  contempt.  The  Recess,
accordingly,  contained  nothing  more  than  that
the  princes  promised  to  treat  with  their  sub-
jects, and  to  report  the  result  at  the  next
diet.

It  is  evident  that  the  disposition  which  this
betrays  must  have  rendered  it  impossible  to
come  to  any  agreement  on  the  other  affairs  of
the  empire.

A  great  deal  was  done  about  the  Imperial
Chamber,  but  without  any  results.*  The  Elec-
tors protested  in  a  body  that  in  virtue  of  their
franchises  they  were  not  subject  to  the  Impe-
rial Chamber:  they  could  not  agree  on  the
suggestions  for  a  reform;  the  old  objections  to
the  matricula  for  the  contributions  were  urged
again ;  its  operation  was  no  longer  felt,  and  in
a  short  time  it  was  entirely  at  a  stand. f

Disorder  once  more  prevailed  on  all  sides.
The  same  torrent  of  complaints  poured  in  upon
the  diet  at  Augsburg,  as  the  year  before  at
Mainz.

The  Count  von  Helfenstein  invoked  assist-
ance against  Wiiitemberg,  Ludwig  von  Boyne-
burg  against  Hessen,  the  Archbishop  of  Bre-
men against  the  Worsats :  all  in  vain.  The
disputes  between  the  city  of  Worms  and  their
bishop,  between  the  Elector  Palatine  and  a
company  of  merchants  who  were  robbed  when
under  his  escort,  were  brought  to  no  conclu-
sion. The  behaviour  of  the  Elector  Palatine
in  this  affair,  and  the  support  which  he  ap-
peared to  find,  raised  the  indignation  of  the
city  to  the  highest  pitch. if:  There  was  hardly
a  part  of  the  country  which  was  not  either  dis-
tracted by  private  warfare,  or  troubled  by  in-

evasion  or  excuse,  nor  make  such  promise  with  any  hesi-
tation or  condition  having  reference  to  their  subjects,  for
none  such  had  ever  been  made,  nor  grounded  thereon,  on
occasion  of  succours  granted  heretofore  ;  but  electors,
princes,  and  estates,  have  in  all  times  freely  acted  and
made  grants,  as  lieges  of  his  Imperial  Majesty  and  elec-
tors of  the  empire  •  also  the  vassais  are  bound  to  follow
the  wills  of,  and  to  show  obedience  to,  princes  and  supe-
riors, and  not  princes  and  superiors  to  follow  the  will  of,
and  to  show  obedience  to,  subjects." — Frankft.  j3cten.

*  TJie  reason  of  the  bad  appointments  lies  in  the  bad
pay.  Fürstenberg  (Letter  of  the  8th  of  Sept.)  remarks
that  no  better  pay  could  be  obtained.  "  Daraus  folgt,
dass  es  auch  nit  mit  dem  Inkommen,  so  jetzunder  geben
vyird,  mit  gelehrt  fromm  und  verständig  Leuten  besetzt
mag  werden."  "Thence  follows,  that  it  (the  Imperial
Chamber)  cannot,  with  the  income  which  is  now  given,
be  provided  with  learned,  pious  and  sensible  men."

t  Fürsteuberg,  Sep.  14.  "  Somma  Sommarum  aller  Han-
delung die  uf  diesem  Reichstag  gehandelt  ist,  dass  von
Friede  und  Recht  nichts  beschlossen  wird,  dass  die  Schät-
zung des  Türkenzugs,  wie  K.  Mt.  dawider,  bei  den  Un-
terthanen  anbracht  (wird).  "The  sum  total  of  all  the
affairs  which  have  been  transacted  at  this  Imperial  Diet
is,  that  nothing  is  determined  as  to  the  peace  and  the
Jaws,  and  that  the  taxation  for  tlie  Turkish  war,  although
his  Imperial  Majesty  is  opposed  to  it,  is  laid  on  the  vas-
sals."

t  Fürsten  berg,  in  transmitting  the  correspondence,  ex-
presses his  dissatisfaction.  "  Hie  ist  nit  anders  ;  ein  jeder
sehe  sich  für.  Die  Churf.  Fürsten  und  Andre  haben  nit
alle  ob  der  Handlung  Gefallens :  es  will  aber  diess  Mal
aus  Ursachen  nit  anders  seyn.  Gott  erbarms."  "Here
things  are  not  otherwise:  let  each  man  look  to  himself.
The  electors,  princes,  and  others,  are  not  all  content  with
the  transaction  ;  but  this  time  there  are  causes  why  it
cannot  be  otherwise.  God  have  raercv  on  us,"
15  K*

ternal  divisions,  or  terrified  by  the  danger  of
an  attack  from  some  neighbouring  pjwer.
Those  who  wished  for  peace  must  take  their
own  measures  to  secure  it :  it  was  in  vain  to
reckon  upon  the  government.

Such  a  state  of  anarchy  necessarily  led  to  a
general  conviction  that  things  could  not  go  on
thus.  For  a  long  time  the  emperor  could
come  to  no  agreement  with  the  Estates  on  any
measure  M^hatever,  whether  for  tranquillity  at
home,  or  against  the  enemy  abroad  :  what  he
had  been  unable  to  accomplish  single-handed,
he  had  tried  to  effect  in  conjunction  with  the
pope  —  an  attempt  which  had  ended  in  more
signal  failure  than  before.  The  highest  au-
thorities could  no  longer  fulfil  the  prime  duties
of  a  government.

In  so  far  it  was  of  great  importance  that  the
States  of  the  Empire  made  the  innovation  we
have  just  mentioned  ;  viz.  to  render  the  grants
dependent  on  the  will  of  their  subjects.  The
life  of  the  nation  showed  a  tendency  to  fall  off
from  what  had  hitherto  been  its  centre,  and  to
form  itself  into  independent  self-sufiicing  pow-
ers in  the  several  territories.  This  tendency
was  now  greatly  increased  by  the  interests
connected  with  the  election  of  an  emperor,
which  were  already  very  active  in  Augsburg,
and  shortly  afterwards  began  to  occupy  all
minds.

In  fact,  we  cannot  advance  a  step  further
without  some  preliminary  inquiry  into  the  re-
lations of  the  German  principalities.

MUTUAL  RELATIONS  OF  THE  GERMAN  PRINCES.

It  was  impossible  as  yet  to  speak  of  Ger-
man states,  properly  so  called.  The  unity  of
even  the  larger  principalities  was  not  yet  suf-
ficiently cemented  : —  attempts  were  here  and
there  made  at  a  common  government,  which,
however,  seldom  succeeded,  so  that  people
constantly  returned  to  the  principle  of  divi-
sion ;  —  nor  was  there  any  settled  system  of
representation.  A  vast  number  of  independent
powers  and  privileges  still  existed,  incompati-
ble with  any  form  of  government  whatever.
But,  in  the  larger  territories,  there  were  efforts
towards  the  establishment  of  unity  and  order;
in  the  smaller,  local  associations  took  the  place
of  the  princely  power :  in  all  directions  the
force  of  the  local  spirit  struggled  for  ascend-
ancy with  the  imperial  authorities,  and  with
the  greater  success,  the  more  vain  v>'ere  the
attempts  of  the  latter  at  concentration  and
general  efficient  control.

It  was  unquestionably  an  important  circum-
stance, that  the  head  of  the  empire  was  less
intent  on  the  tranquil  exercise  of  his  legal  so-
vereignty, than  on  acquiring  influence  by  per-
sonal and  irregular  interference.  It  was  only
in  moments  of  enthusiasm  and  excitement  that
Emperor  Maximilian  beheld  his  high  station
in  its  national  point  of  view ;  in  ordinary  mo-
ments he  regarded  it  rather  as  a  fraction  of  his
personal  power.  The  nature  of  his  adminis-
tration was  exactly  calculated  to  excite  agita-
tions of  every  kind  in  the  somewhat  formless
world  around  him.

114

MUTUAL  RELATIONS  OF

Book  IL

In  Upper  Germany  the  emperor  had  natu-
rally, after  all  that  had  passed,  to  encounter
much  opposition.  The  Elector  Palatine  could
not  yet  forget  the  injuries  he  had  sustained  in
the  last  war;  he  was  still  unappeased,  nor  had
he  received  his  investiture.  Although  the  em-
peror had  then  espoused  the  party  of  Bavaria,
the  people  of  that  country  were  not  the  less
sensible  to  what  the  two  branches  of  the  sove-
reign house,  'viewed  collectively,  had  lost.
The  young  princes,  William  and  Louis,  had
such  a  profound  sense  of  this,  that  they  ar-
ranged the  disputes  which  had  broken  out  be-
tween them  as  to  their  respective  shares  in  the
government,  as  quickly  as  possible,  when  they
thought  they  detected,  on  the  part  of  the  em-
peror, a  design  of  turning  their  disagreements
to  advantage  in  order  to  promote  another  inte-
rest, as  in  the  year  1504.*  They  remembered
what  Bavaria  had  been  stripped  of;  and  the
first  act  of  their  combined  government  was  to
pledge  themselves  niutually  to  reconquer  all
that  had  been  lost,  as  soon  as  the  emperor,
their  uncle,  was  dead.f

It  appeared  that  Maximilian  might  reckon
more  securely  on  Duke  Ulrich  of  Würtenberg,
whom  he  had  declared  of  age  before  the  legal
term,  who  had  accompanied  him  in  his  wars,
had  made  conquests  under  his  banner,  and  to
whom  he  had  given  a  consort :  Ulrich  seemed
bound  to  him  by  every  tie  of  gratitude.  But
this  prince  soon  began  to  display  a  determ.ined
spirit  of  resistance  to  the  emperor's  designs,
inspired  by  the  most  arrogant  self-conceit.  He
was  displeased  that  he  was  of  so  little  import-
ance in  the  Swabian  league.  He  considered
it  an  insufferable  abridgement  of  his  pov/er,
that  of  the  one-and-twenty  votes  in  the  council
of  that  body,  fourteen  belonged  to  the  lower
states,  —  prelates,  counts,  knights,  and  above
all,  cities ;  and  had  the  right  of  deciding  on
peace  and  war;  so  that  "his  will  and  posses-
sion were  in  the  hands  of  strangers. "4:  In  the
year  1512,  when  the  league  was  renewed,  he
obstinately  refused  to  join  it.  He  thus  oßended
the  league,  began  consequently  to  fear  its  hos-
tility, and  allied  himself  with  its  enemies,  es-
pecially the  Elector  Palatine  and  the  Bishop
of  Würzburg.  He  thus  got  into  innumerable
difficulties  and  quarrels  with  the  emperor,  with
all  his  neighbours,  and  even  with  his  ow^n
states  and  councils,  which  would  rather  have
adhered  to  the  emperor  and  the  league.  In  all
these  affairs  his  behaviour  became  more  and
more  violent,  harsh,  and  overbearing.  The
peasants  revolted  against  his  taxes ;  the  estates
.of  his  dominions  compelled  him  to  sign  a  con-
tract limiting  his  authority,  which  he  showed
an  inclination  to  break  :  his  councillors  medi-
tated setting  a  regency  over  him,  which  filled

*  From  a  letter  of  Duke  Ludwig  ;  Freiberg,  LanJstände,
ii.  149.

t  The  first  document  in  the  Urkundenbuch  to  Stumpf,
Baierns  Politische  Gesch.  i.

X  "  Beswerung  so  wir  Herzog  Ulrich  zu  Wirtemperg  ha-
ben, des  Pundts  Schwaben  Erstreckung  anzunemen."
"  Difficulty  which  we,  Duke  Ulrich  of  Würtenberg,  have
to  consent  to  the  extension  of  the  Swabian  League."
Sattler,  Herzoge,  i. Appendix,  nr.  56,  p.  129.

him  with  rage.  At  length  the  consummation
of  all  these  evils  burst  upon  him  in  his  own
house;

Unhappily  he  had  suffered  himself  to  be
carried  away  by  an  inclination  for  the  wife  of
one  of  his  courtiers,  Flans  von  Hütten,  his
comrade  in  the  field  and  the  chase.  liutten  at
length  seized  an  occasion  to  speak  to  his  lord,
on  this  subject;  the  duke  threw  himself  at  his
feet,  extended  his  arms  imploringly  to  him,
and  conjured  him  to  permit  him  to  see  and  to
love  her;  he  had  tried  in  vain,  he  said,  to
conquer  his  passion — he  could  not.§  It  is  re-
ported, that  in  a  short  time  they  exchanged
characters  ;  Hutten  became  the  lover  of,  the
duchess  Sabina.  One  day~ Ulrich  thought  he
saw  the  betrothing  ring  which  he  had  given
his  wife,  on  Hutten's  finger,  and  fell  into  the
most  violent  transports  of  jealousy.  It  is  im-
possible, in  the  dearth  of  authentic  accounts,^
to  say  how  much  of  the  story  is  true.  Ac-
cording to  the  legal  documents,  what  peculiarly
incensed  the  duke  was,  that  Hutten  had  not
kept  the  secret  of  his  master's  passion,  and  had
given  currency  to  reports  by  which  he  appeared
at  once  vicious  and  ridiculous.  It  seemed  that
the  servant  was  little  alarmed  at  the  anger
which  his  lord  gave  vent  to  on  this  occasion  ;
he  thought  he  should  have  to  encounter  some
sharp  words,  to  which  he  could  return  others
as  sharp  and  as  proud.  But  Ulrich  was  now
worked  up  to  deeds  of  vengeance.  They  were
riding  together,  and  as  they  came  into  the
Boblinger  wood,  the  duke  took  the  knight
aside,  upbraided  him  v;ith  his  falsehood,  called
out  to  him  to  defend  his  life;  f^nd,  as  Hutten
was  not  armed,  overpowered  and  killed  him.**
lie  then  stuck  his  sword  into  the  ground,  and
tied  the  lifeless  body  fast  to  it  with  a  girdle
twisted  round  the  neck.  He  said  that  as  Frei-
schöffe, as  initiated  member  of  the  Fehme,  he
had  the  right  and  authority  to  do  so.  He  car-
ried home  the  bloody  sword,  and  laid  it  by  his
wife's  bedside.  Alarmed  for  her  freedom,  and
even  for  her  life,  she  fled,  first  to  her  uncle  the
emperor,  who  was  taking  the  diversion  of
hunting  in  the  neighbourhood,  and  then  to  her
brothers  in  Bavaria,  between  whom  and  Ulrich
there  was  already  much  bad  blood.  Sabina
accused  her  husband  to  the  emperor,  and  de-
manded that  her  enemies  should  be  delivered
up.  Ulrich,  on  the  other  hand,  persecuted
with  vindictive  fury  her  friends  and  all  those
whom  he  regarded  as  adherents  of  the  emperor
and  the  league.  Attempts  at  reconciliation
only  served  to  bring  the  secret  hostilities  fully
to  light: a  treaty  was  concluded,  but  imme-

§The  printed  address  of  the  family  of  von  Hutten  in
Sattler,  ä.  a.  O.  p.  213.

II  See  Heyd,  Duke  Ulrich,  i.  p.  394.  It  is  not  to  be  for-
gotten that  a  certain  respect  was  observed  in  the  state-
ment in  spite  of  all  its  violence.  The  Huttens  vv'ould  not
have  brought  forward  the  connection  with  the  wife  of  the
murdered  man,  had  not  the  Duke  first  mentioned  it.

**  Address  of  Duke  Ulrich,  a.  a.  O.  p.  305.  The  rela-
tions maintained,  that  Hutten  had  been  positively  invited
to  join  in  the  ride;  the  Duke,  that  he  had  been  warned
and  yet  had  obstinately  accompanied  them.  The  account
of  the  Duke  seems  to  me  to  have  greater  moral  probabi-
lity.

Chap.  IL

THE  GERMAN  PRINCES.

115

diately  broken;  letters  injurious  to  the  honour
of  both  parties  were  interchanged  :  never,  in
short,  did  a  prince  rend  asunder  all  the  ties
that  bound  him  to  a  party,  as  whose  ally  and
associate  he  had  risen  to  power,  with  greater
violence  than  Duke  Ulrich.  At  the  diet  of
1518  it  was  reported  that  he  had  arrested  fol-
lowers of  the  emperor,  put  them  to  horrible
tortures,  and  threatened  them  with  death.  On
the  other  hand,  Maximilian  intimated  that  he
would  appoint  a  criminal  tribunal  to  try  the
duke,  and  would  execute  whatever  sentence  it
might  pronounce  •.■^'  he  immediately  issued  a
special  writ  to  the  States,  not  only  authorising,
but  summ.oning  them  to  set  at  liberty  their
lord's  prisoners. f  This  furnished  an  additional
motive  to  the  emperor  for  desiring  a  reconcilia-
tion with  the  Elector  Palatine.  This  he  ac-
complished so  far  that  that  prince  appeared  at
the  diet  and  received  his  investiture.  It  is
clear  that  the  emperor's  policy  acquired  by  this
event,  and  by  his  influence  over  the  league  and
Bavaria,  the  ascendency  in  Upper  Germany ;
nevertheless,  affairs  wore  a  very  perilous  aspect,
and  it  was  easy  to  foresee  that,  be  the  event
what  it  might,  differences  could  not  be  adjusted
in  an  amicable  manner.  Their  ramifications
extended  over  the  whole  empire.

Another  and  far  more  formidable  opposition
to  the  emperor  arose  out  of  the  affairs  of  Lower
Germany  connected  with  the  house  of  Bur-
gundy.

One  of  the  earliest  acts  of  Maximilian's
government,  in  1486,  the  year  of  his  election,
had  been  to  grant  the  reversion  of  Juliers  and
Berg  to  the  house  of  Saxony,  in  case  that  those
provinces  should,  "  by  reason  of  failure  of
lineal  heirs  male,"  become  vacant.41  In  the
year  1495  he  confirmed  this  for  himself  and  all
his  successors  in  the  empire,  "  now  as  then,
and  then  as  now."  The  event  in  question
seemed  not  far  distant,  since  Duke  William
VII.  had  only  a  daughter ;  this  opened  to  the
house  of  Saxony  a  prospect  of  a  more  com-
manding, indeed  of  what  might  be  called  an
European  position,  since  Friesland  had  then
been  transferred  to  the  younger  line.

But  difficulties  soon  arose.  This  assign-
ment to  so  distant  a  master  was  by  no  m.eans
popular  in  the  country  itself,  which  would
have  thought  itself  better  provided  for  by  an
union  with  the  neighbouring  province  of  Cle-
ves.  Princes  and  states  were  unanimous  in
this  opinion.  In  the  year  1496  they  already
determined  to  marry  the  daughter  of  the  Duke
of  Juliers  with  the  heir  of  Cleves,  and  to  unite
the  two  countries. A  solemn  treaty,  v/hich

*  Fürstenberg,  Sept.  9,  calls  it,  "  eine  scharfe  und  über-
messliche  Antwort :"  "  a  sharp  and  immoderate  answer."
"  Wo  er  sich  nicht  fiie;e,  wolle  ihm  S.  M.  ein  Hals£;ericht
setzen,  daas  er  daselbst  in  Schranken  homme,  und  wess
von  anderen  und  Sr.  Maj.  Interessen  wegen  an  ihn  er-
lanjrt  wird,  dass  dem  auch  Vollzug  geschetie." — "  In  case
he  do  not  yield,  his  Majesty  will  s^it  in  judsment  on  him,
that  he  may  be  thereby  brought  within  bounds,  and  what-
ever, by  reason  of  his  Majesty's  and  other  interüsts  may
be  decreed  against  him,  that  the  same  may  also  be  exe-
cuted."

t  July  17, 1518. Sattler,  i.  App.  263.

I  Document  in  Müller,  Imp.  Utth.  Fr.  vi.  48.

may  be  regarded  as  effecting  a  union  of  all
thesö  provinces,  was  entered  into  and  signed
by  nobles  and  cities. §  They  prayed  the  em-
peror to  confirm  it,  and  to  acknowledge  the
Princess  of  Juliers  as  heiress  of  her  father's
possessions.

The  emperor,  however,  would  have  paid
little  attention  to  this  petition,  and  would  have
adhered  to  the  grant  of  reversion,  had  not  cer-
tain political  events  occurred  to  change  his
designs.

From  the  time  that  Duke  Charles,  son  of
the  Duke  of  Gueldres,  formerly  deposed  by
Charles  the  Bold,  had  returned  to  his  heredi-
tary dominions,  and,  in  defiance  of  the  unfa-
vourable decrees  of  the  empire,  had  found
means,  with  the  aid  of  his  estates,  to  maintain
himself,  there  had  not  been  one  moment's
peace  in  those  parts.  He  was  closely  allied
with  France  ;  all  the  enemies  of  Austria  found
in  him  an  ever-ready  protector.  It  was,  there-
fore, a  serious  thing  to  make  another  powerful
enemy  in  that  neighborhood.  The  Duke  of
Cleves  threatened,  in  case  his  petition  was
refused,  to  enter  into  a  matrimonial  connexion
and  an  indissoluble  alliance  with  the  Duke  of
Gueldres  —  a  threat  which  filled  the, Nether-
lands with  alarm.**  The  Governess  Margaret,
Maximilian's  daughter,  thought  it  wonld  be
impossible  to  wrest  Juliers  and  Berg  from  the
Duke  of  Cleves  ;  the  only  effect  would  be  to
cause  him  to  unite  vv'ith  Gueldres,  Arenberg,
and  Liege,  all  foes  of  the  house  of  Burgundy :
this  would  furnish  a  power  strong  enough
even  to  drive  the  emperor's  posterity  out  of  the
Netherlands.

In  Saxony  it  was  believed  that  the  emperor
connected  schemes  of  another  kind  with  this
design.  Elector  Frederic  enjoyed  singular
consideration  in  the  empire.  He  steadily  ad-
hered to  the  principles  and  sentiments  of  the
old  electors,  and  his  power  was  constantly  on
the  increase.  His  intellectual  superiority
checked  the  inclination  which  his  cousin
George  now  and  then  betrayed  to  oppose  him ;

§  Treaty  of  Marriage  and  Agreement  in  Teschenma-
cher,  Anuales  Clivite,  Cod.  dipl.  nr.  98,  99,  wherein  the
two  princes  promised  one  another— the  Duke  of  Juliers,
that  his  daughter  should  bring  the  son  of  his  brother  of
Cleves  his  principalities  of  Juliers,  Berg,  his  countship
of  Ravensburg,  with  all  his  other  lordships,— the  Duke
of  Cleves,  that  his  son  should  bring  the  daughter  of  his
brother  of  Juliers  his  principality  of  Cleves,  his  ^count-
ship  of  the  Mark,  and  all  his  other  lordships,  now  actually
possessed,  or  still  to  be  acquired.

**  The  emperor  says  to  Cesar  Pflug;  "Die  klevisch
Tochter  hindre  I.  M.  Frau  Tochter  Margr."  "  The  daugh-
ter of  the  Duke  of  Cleves  stands  in  the  way  of  the  Lady
Margaret,  his  Imperial  Majesty's  daughter."  Renner
states:  "  Clef  lässt  sich  vernehmen,  wolt  man  die  Lehen
nit  thun,  so  musste  sich  Clef  mit  den  Herrn  verbinden,
von  denen  es  Trost  und  Hülf  haben  mecht  das  Sine  zu
erhalten."  "Cleves  says  thus— if  they  will  not  bestow
the  fief,  then  Cleves  must  join  the  lords  from  whom  she
may  have  comfort,  and  help  to  hold  her  own." — Weimar
Acts.  Comp.  Correspondance  de  I'Empereur  Maxim.ilien
I.  et  de  Marguerite  d'Autriche  I.  p.  .390.  Margaret  further
wrote  in  1511  to  the  emperor,  as  is  said  in  his  answer:
"Clue  se  povons  taut  faire  que  nostre  cousin  le  due  de
Zaxssen  voulsist  quieter  ou  du  moins  mectre  en  delay  la
queretle  qu'il  pretend  a  la  duche  de  Juillers,  le  jeusneduc
de  Cleves  et  san  pere  se  condescendroient  facilement  a
eulx  declairer  ä  la  guerre  et  aydier  ii  la  eduction  de  nostre
pays  de  Gheldrcs."  Tlie  emperor  hoped  to  conciliate  the
elector  at  the  approaching  imperial  diet,  but  in  this  he  did
not  succeed.

116

MUTUAL  RELATIONS  OF

Book  IL

so  that  the  house  of  Saxony  might  still  be  re-
garded as  one  power.  His  brother  Ernest  had
been  Archbishop  of  Magdeburg  up  to  the  year
1513,  and  certainly  one  of  the  best  that  see
had  ever  possessed ;  his  cousin  Frederic  was
Grand  Master  in  Prussia ;  his  sister  Margaret,
Duchess  of  Lüneburg,  ancestress  of  that  house.
It  is  evident  how  extensive  was  the  influence
of  this  family ;  an  influence  further  augmented
J)y  the  act  of  the  States  of  Hessen,  which,  on
the  death  of  Landgrave  "William,  in  1510,  ex-
cluded his  wddow"  Anne  from  the  guardianship
of  the  minor,  claimed  by  her,  and  committed
it  to  the  elector  and  house  of  Saxony,  to  which
the  regency  thereupon  appointed  was  subject.
Boyneburg,  the  governor  of  the  province,  who
was  at  the  head  of  afliairs,  was  entirely  de-
voted to  Frederic*  It  appeared  to  the  empe-
ror highly  inexpedient  to  thrown  Juliers,  and
Berg  also,  which  must  soon  be  without  a
sovereign,  into  the  hands  of  this  pov/erful
prince,  who  might  thus  become  too  mighty  a
vassal.

Under  the  influence  of  these  considerations,
Maximilian  retracted  the  promise  he  had  made
at  the  time  of  his  election  (and  doubtless  with
a  view  to  that),  and  in  various  documents  of
the  years  1508-9  revoked  the  contingent  rights
on  Juliers  and  Berg  which  had  been  conferred  :
he  declared  that  the  duke's  daughter,  IMaria,
was  the  worthy  and  competent  successor  of
her  father.f  In  the  year  1511  William  VII.
died ;  his  son-in-law,  John  of  Cleves,  took
possession  of  the  country  without  opposition.
All  attempts  to  recall  the  past,  all  persuasions
and  negotiations  on  the  part  of  the  house  of
Saxony,  were  vain.

The  effect  of  this  certainly  was  to  induce
Cleves  to  refuse  the  alliance  with  Gueldres,
and  to  adhere  faithfully  to  Austria.  Saxon)^
on  the  contrary,  declined  in  importance.  The
spiritual  principalities  which  were  occupied  by
members  of  that  house  passed  into  other  hands
on  the  death  of  their  possessors.  Boyneburg,
by  his  somewhat  tyrannical  mode  of  governing,
provoked  the  discontent  of  the  States  of  Hes-
sen, and  especially  of  the  cities  (a.  d.  1514).
By  a  sort  of  revolution,  the  Princess  Anne  was
restored  to  the  guardianship  of  w^iich  she  had
been  deprived ;  Elector  Frederic  retaining  no-
thing more  than  the  name.  Another  proof  of
this  anti-Saxon  spirit  was,  that  the  emperor,  at
the  suggestion  of  the  order  of  knights,  declared
the  young  Landgrave  Philip  of  age  when  only
fourteen  years  old  (March  1518)  ;  alleging  that
he  would  be  better  off  so,  than  under  any
guardianship  or  tutelage  whatsoever.  In  these
Hessian  transactions,  Duke  George  took  part
against  the  elector:  so  far  from  raising  any
cordial  opposition  to  the  designs  of  Anne,  he
betrothed  his  son  with  her  daughter.  Mean-
while he  had  already  resto.red  Friesland  to
Austria.

In  this  case,  too,  the  policy  of  Austria  was

triumphant ;  the  dreaded  coalition  of  the  Ne-
therland  adversaries  was  prevented,  and  Saxo-
ny kept  at  a  distance  and  depressed.^;:  On  the
other  hand,  however,  the  hostility  of  the  most
able  and  prudent  of  all  the  princes  of  the  em-
pire was  provoked.  What  the  weight  of  that
hostility  w^as,  soon  appeared  at  the  diet  of  Co-
logne (a.  d.  1512).  Frederic's  resistance  suf-
ficed  to  defeat  all  the  emperor's  plans  ;  at  least
his  biographer  imputes  to  his  opposition  the
rejection  of  the  project  of  a  new  tax.  This
enmjty  affected  even  the  Netherlands  through
another  channel.  The  niece  of  the  elector,  a
Lüneburg  princess,  married  Charles  of  Guel-
dres (of  whom  we  have  already  spoken),  who
thus  secured  in  two  of  the  most  powerful
princely  houses,  such  a  support  as  he  had  ne-
ver before  been  able  to  obtaip.

While  the  house  of  Saxony  was  thus  weak-
ened by  a  contest  with  Austria.  Brandenburg
rose  upon  her  favour.  It  was  with  the  empe-
ror's assistance  that  Brandenburg  princes  suc-
ceeded to  those  of  Saxony  both  in  the  grand
mastership  of  the  Teutonic  Order  and  the  see  of
IMagdeburg:  he  then  further  favoured  the  ele-
vation of  the  young  archbishop,  who  w^as  also
bishop  of  Halberstadt,  to  the  Electorate  of
Mainz,  which  had  formerly  been  enjoyed  by  a
brother  of  Elector  Frederic :  we  have  already
seen  what  was  the  nature  of  the  relations
which  subsisted  between  these  two  princes.
Maximilian  also  renewed  his  alliance  with  the
Franconian  line  of  this  house.  He  confirmed
the  removal  of  the  old  Margrave,  who  had
been  declared  idiotic,  from  the  government;
and  marrying  the  Margrave's  eldest  son  Casi-
mir to  his  own  niece,  Susanna  of  Bavaria,  he
gave  that  prince  the  whole  support  of  his  au-^
thority  and  an  important  advantage  over  his
brothers.  For  this  very  reason,  however,  he
did  not  win  them  over  completely;  with  one
of  them,  indeed,  the  Grand  Master,  he  had  a
serious  difference.  The  emperor  had  at  first
induced  him  to  assume  a  hostile  attitude  to-
wards KintT  Sigfismund  of  Poland,^  who  was

*  See  Rommel,  Philipp  der  Grossmüthige,  vol.  i.  p.  26.
t  The  document  in  Teschenmacher,  nr.  100,  is  inconclu-
sive ;  nr.  101,  leaves  no  room  for  doubt.

t  The  Saxon  councillors,  as  early  as  1512,  dreaded  fur-
ther disfavour:  "  Darum  er  (der  Kaiser,  nach  jener  Erk-
lärung für  Cleve)  fort  und  fort  auf  Wege  trachten  mocht,
Ewer  Aller  Fürstl.  Gnaden  zuzuschieben  so  viel  ihm  mö-
glich, damit  Ew.  Aller  Fürsti.  Gn.  in  Dempfung  und  Ab-
fall kämen." — "  Lest  he  (the  emperor,  after  that  declara-
tion in  behalf  of  Cleves)  should  more  and  more  strive
after  means  of  embarrassing  your  most  Princely  Grace  as
much  as  possible,  so  that  your  most  Princely  Grace  may
fall  into  weakness -ftnd  decline."  —  Letter  from  Cologne
■written  Thursday  after  Jacobi,  1512. TVeimar  Records.

§  The  Fuffger  MS.  "  Desweffen  die  Kais.  Maj.  nach  sol-
chem Wege'getrachtet,  dieweil  S.  M.  erachtet,  dass  König
Sigmund  seinem  Schwager  Graf  Hansen  von  Trentschin
Grossgrafen  in  Ungarn  Rath  und  Hülfe  erzeiget  und  den-
selben nach  Absterben  des  Köniss  Lasslew  zu  dem  Reich
Ungarn  .  .  .  befordern  macht,  dass  er  demselben  etliche
Könige  und  Fürsten  zu  Feinden  machen  wollt,  und  ward
durch  S.  Mt.  so  vil  gehandelt,  dass  P/larkg.  Albrecht  von
Brandenburg  Hochmeister  in  Preussen  den  Hochernann-
ten König  Sigmundt  von  Polen  anfeindet."  "  His  Impe-
rial Majesty  on  this  account,  because  his  Majesty  cons*
dered  that  KingSigismund  had  yielded  counsel  and  aid  Ui
his  brother-in-law,  Count  Hans  %'on  Trentschin  Gross-
graf in  Hungary,  and  after  the  decease  of  King  Ladislas
might  advance  the  same  to  the  kingdom  of  Hungary,  that
he  wished  to  render  sundry  kings  and  princes  enemies  to
the  same;  and  so  much  was  done  by  his  Majesty,  that
Margrave  Albert  of  Brandenburg,  Great  Master  in  Prus-
sia, opposes  the  above-named  King  Sigismund  of  Poland."
The  alliance  with  Russia  was  concluded  expressly  for  the

Chap.  IL

THE  GERMAN  PRINCES.

117

rendered  extremely  formidable  to  the  Austrian
claims  on  the  king-dom  of  Hungar}',  by  his
connexion  with  the  Hoüse  of  Zapolj^a.  Älaxi-
milian  wished  to  hold  him  in  check,  on  the
one  side  by  the  Grand  Dake  of  Moscow,  on
the  other  by  the  Teutonic  Order.  But  the  situ-
ation of  things  was  now  much  altered.  In  the
year  1515,  Sigisraund  of  Poland  had  formed
very  amicable  relations  with  the  emperor;  he
now  recognised  the  hereditary  right  of  Austria
to  Hungary,  and  took  a  wife  out  of  the  Italian
branch  of  that  house.  IMaximilian,  on  his  side,
waived  the  claims  of  the  empire :  he  granted
Danzig  and  Thorn  an  exemption  from  the  juris-
diction of  the  Imperial  Chamber  in  1515,  as
he  had  to  Switzerland  in  1507;  a  measure  the
more  important  in  this  case,  since  it  substitut-
^  a  Polish  for  a  German  jurisdiction;  it  was,
in  fact,  a  sort  of  cession.  It  may  readily  be
imagined  how  mu||[i  less  inclined  he  must  now
be  to  interpose  earnestly  on  behalf  of  the  Or-
der ;  and  accordingly  we  find  it  stated  in  the
preamble  to  the  agreement,  that  the  emperor
recognised  the  peace  of  Thorn, — the  very  thing
against  which  the  Grand  Master  protested,  and
by  which  he  had  been  made  a  vassal  of  the
crown  of  Poland.  Prussia  was  thus  again
alienated  from  the  emperor,  and  this  re-acted
on  the  other  members  of  the  house  of  Branden-
burg. Elector  Joachim,  at  least,  was  not  dis-
inclined to  give  the  same  support  to  the
Grand  IMaster  as  he  did  to  his  brothers  in
Franconia.

It  ma)^  easily  be  imagined  that  the  position
of  the  other  sovereign  houses  was  affected  in
various  ways  by  all  these  friendships  and  en-
mities.

Pomerania,  forced  to  give  way  before  the
claims  of  Brandenburg  to  the  supreme  feudal
lordship,  was  alienated  from  Austria  by  the
support  its  rival  received  from  that  power.  The
Pomeranian  historians  ascribe  it  to  the  influ-
ence of  Joachim  I.  that  the  projected  marriage
of  a  Pomeranian  princess  with  King  Christian
II.  of  Denmark  did  not  take  place ;  and  on
the  contrary,  that  that  monarch  married  a
grand-daughter  of  IMaximilian.*  The  result
of  this  again  was,  that  the  uncle  and  rival  of
Christian  Frederic  of  Holstein,  who  thought
himself  unjustly  dealt  with  in  the  partition  of
the  ducal  inheritance,  and,  as  king's  son,  be-
lieved himself  to  have  claims  even  on  Nor-
way,! ^°""^  sought  to  ally  himself  with  the
house  of  Pomerania ;  whilst  the  third  member
of  this  house,  the  Count  of  Oldenburg,  adher-
ed firmly  to  the  Austro-burgundian  alliance,
and  once  more  received  a  stipend  from  the  Ne-
therlands. Every  event  that  occurred  in  the
northern  states  immediately  affected  the  dynas-

re-conquest  of  the  lands  of  the  Order  seized  on  by  Poland.
This  is  the  famous  document  in  which  Zar  was  translated
into  Kaiser  (emperor).  —  Karamsin,  Hist,  of  Russia,  vii.
45,  450.

*  Kanzow,  Pomerania,  ii.  313.

t  Chief  points  of  complaint,  as  set  forth  in  the  different
publications  on  the  dispute;  Christiani,  Neuere  Gesch.
von  Schleswig-Holstein,  i.  p.  318.  These  complaints  suf-
ficiently refute  the  supposition  of  a  good  understanding,
to  which  Christiani  previously  adheres.

tic  houses  of  Germany  through  these  various
combinations.

It  must  not  be  imagined  that  open  hostility
broke  out  amongst  them.  There  v/as  a  greater
or  lesser  influence  of  the  House  of  Austria;  a
more  or  less  visible  favour  shown  by  or  inclina-
tion tov/ards  it ;  but  they  remained  on  the  foot-
ing of  good  neighbours,  met  at  diets,  inter-
cha;|^ged  visits  at  farail}^  festivals,  endured  what
they  could  not  alter,  and  kept  their  eye  steadily
on  the  point  in  view.

The  discord  was  most  fierce  and  undisguised
in  the  house  of  the  turbulent  Welfs.  Calen-
berg  and  Wolfenbüttel  held  to  the  friendship
of  Austria ;  indeed  it  was  in  her  service  that
the  duke  of  the  former  state  had  revived  the
ancient  warlike  renown  of  his  house.  Lüne-
burg sided  with  the  opposition.  There  were  a
multitude  of  old  disputes  between  them,  mainly
caused  by  an  attempt  of  the  Bishop  of  Minden,
a  Wolfenbüttler  by  birth,  to  appropriate  to
himself  the  countship  of  Diepholz,  to  vv-hich
Lüneburg  had  ancient  contingent  claims.^:
Lauenburg  Avas  now  drawn  into  these  quarrels.
During  the  absence  of  the  Archbishop  of  Bre-
men—  another  Wolfenbüttel  —  the  Worsats,
who  had  recently  been  conquered,  killed  his
officers;  Magnus  of  Lauenburg,  to  whom  they
appealed  as  the  true  Duke  of  Lower  Saxony,
lent  them  aid,  and  destroyed  the  fortress  erected
by  the  archbishop. §  On  his  return,  open  war
among  all  these  princes  appeared  imminent,
and  was  only  prevented  from  breaking  out  by
Mecklenburg,  which  stood  in  a  tolerably  im-
partial situation  in  the  midst  of  all  these  dis-
putes ;  or  rather,  in  that  of  an  ally  of  both
parties.

This  example  suffices  to  prove  that  there  was
but  little  distinction  between  temporal  and  spi-
ritual princes.

For  the  highest  posts  in  the  church  had  long
been  distributed,  not  in  consequence  of  spiritual
merits,  but  in  compliance  with  the  wishes  of
some  powerful  prince,  especially  the  emperor;
or  of  the  interests  of  the  neighbouring  nobles,
who  had  seats  in  the  chapters  :  indeed  it  was,
as  we  have  seen,  a  maxim  of  the  court  of  Rome,
ever  since  the  last  century,  to  use  its  influence
in  promoting  the  younger  sons  of  sovereign
houses. !|  In  the  beginning  of  the  sixteenth
century  this  policy  had  been  pursued  with  suc-
cess in  many  sees.  In  Lower  Germany,  Bruns-
wick, and  Lauenburg  in  particular,  rivalled
each  other  in  this  respect.  The  house  of
Brunswick- Wolfenbüttel  and  Grubenhagen  had
got  possession  of  the  archbishopric  of  Bremen,
the  bishoprics  of  Minden,  Verden,  Osnabrück
and  Paderborn ;  the  house  of  Lauenburg,  of
Münster  and  Hildesheim.  We  have  seen  how*
richly  Brandenburg  was  provided  for.  We
find  princes  of  Lorraine  as  bishops  of  Metz,
Toul  and  Verdun.  The  palatinate  possessed
Freisingen,  Regensburg,  Speier,  Naumburg,
and afterwards Utrecht. Bavaria obtained

J  Delius,  Hildesheimische  Stiftsfehde,  p.  96.
§  ChytrEBUs,  Saxonice  Chronicon,  lib.  vii.  p.  227.
jl  See  p.  16. .iEneas  Sylvius,  Epistola ad  Martinum
Maier,  p.  679.

118

MAXIMILIAN.

Book  II.

Passau.  In  the  year  1516,  the  chapter  of
Schwerin  chose  Princö  Magnus  of  Mecklen-
burg, although  not  j^et  seven  years -old,  its
bishop.*  It  were  impossible  to  enumerate  all
the  prebends  which  came  into  the  hands  either
of  members  of  the  l^ss  powerful  houses,  or
favourites  of  the  emperor.  Melchior  Pfinzing,
his  chaplain  and  secretary,  was  dean  of  St.
Sebald,  in  Nürnberg,  of  St.  Alban  and  St.  Vic-
tor in  Mainz;  and  prebendary  both  in  Trent
and  Bamberg.  Hence  it  follow^ed  that  the  in-
terests of  the  house  to  which  a  dignitary  of  the
church  belonged,  or  to  which  he  owed  his  ele-
vation, influenced  the  exercise  of  his  functions  :
we  fmd  the  spiritual  principalities  implicated
in  all  the  intrigues  or  dissensions  of  the  tempo-
ral rulers.

These  circumstances  re-acted  on  the  other
states  of  the  empire,  though  perhaps  less  ob-
viously. The  cities  of  the  Oberland,  for  ex-
ample, W'hose  strength  was  the  main  support
of  the  Swabian  league,  belonged  to  the  one
party ;  while  the  Franconian  knights,  who  were
at  open  war  with  the  league,  sided  more  with
the  other.

For  imperfect  and  undefined  as  all  relations
w^ere,  the  powers  of  Germany  may  be  ranged
under  two  great  political  parties.  On  the  side
of  Austria  w^ere  Bavaria,  the  League,  Bran-
denburg (for  the  most  part),  Hessen,  Cleviss,
the  Count  of  East  Friesland  (which  had  lately
joined  this  party),  Oldenburg,  Denmark,  Ca-
lenberg,  Wolfenbüttel,  and  Albertine  Saxony.
On  that  of  the  opposition,  w^ere  Ernestine  Sax-
ony, Pomerania,  Lauenburg,  Lüneburg,  the
Franconian  knights,  Würtemberg,  and  Guel-
dres.  The  Duke  of  Gueldres  was  indeed  in  a
state  of  open  warfare.  In  the  year  151T,  his
troops  devastated  the  whole  of  Holland  ;  he
gave  up  Alkmaar  to  pillage  for  eight  days :  in
the  year  1518,  the  Frisian  corsair,  Groote  Pier,
appeared  in  the  Zuyder  Zee,  and  made  him-
self complete  master  of  it  for  a  considerable
time.  The  duke  employed  all  his  influence  to
keep  the  Frieslanders  in  a  continual  state  of
revolt.  The  palatinate  and  Mecklenburg  oc-
cupied a  sort  of  neutral  or  middle  ground  be-
tween these  two  parties.  The  Elector  palatine
inclined  to  the  house  of  Austria  for  a  singular
reason.  His  brother  Frederic,  who  had  served
for  many  years  at  the  court  of  Burgundy,  had
form.ed  an  attachment  to  the  Princess  Leonora.
One  of  his  letters  was  found  in  her  possession,
and  excited  such  displeasure,  that  the  unhappy
prince  w^as  obliged  to  quit  the  court,  with  the
persuasion  that  he  had  thus  thrown  away  all
his  well-earned  claims  on  the  emperor's  favour,
unless  he  could  re-establish  them  by  still  more
important  services.  But  his  brother  was  not
disposed  to  forget  what  he  had  suffered  in  the
war  of  inheritance.  On  the  contrary,  the  brave
knight  who  had  risen  to  fame  and  ^honour  in
his  service,  Franz  von  Sickingen,  now  took
revenge  on  Hessen  for  those  very  injuries. f

While  the  diet  was  sitting  at  Augsburg,  he
marched  an  army  of  500  horse  and  8000  foot
upon  the  fortified  town  of  Darmstadt,  and  ex-
torted from  the  inhabitants  contributions  to  the
amount  of  45,000  gulden,  on  the  hardest  and
most  oppressive  terms.  A  deputation  of  the
empire  made  representations  to  the  emperor
against  this  breach  of  the  Public  Peace ;  but
he  did  not  venture  to  do  anything;  he  had  for-
merly taken  Sickingen  into  his  own  service,
and  he  had  no  mind  to  alienate  the  palatinate
again.

Such  is  the  situation  in  which  w^e  find  Maxi-
"unilian  towards  the  close  of  his  career.
^  The  received  opinion  which  recognises  in
him  the  creative  founder  of  the  later  constitu-
tion of  the  empire,  must  be  abandoned.  We
saw  above  that  the  ideas  of  organisation  which
first  became  currrent  in  the  early  years  of  hisi,
reign  experienced  far  more  «|)position  than  en-
couragement from  him ;  and  that  he  w^as  in-
capable of  carrying  even  his  ov/n  projects  into
execution.  We  now  see  that  he  had  not  the
power  of  keeping  the  princes  of  the  empire
together;  that,  on  the  contrary,  everything
about  him  split  into  parties.  It  followed  of
necessity  that  abroad  he  rather  lost  than  gained
ground.  In  Italy  nothing  was  achieved :  Switz-
erland acquired  greater  independence  than  she
possessed  before ;  Prussia  w^as  rather  endan-
gered than  secured.  The  policy  of  France
had  obtained  new  influence  in  the  heart  of
Germany ;  first  Gueldres  and  then  Würtem-
berg openly  declared  for  that  power.

The  glory  which  surrounds  the  memory  of
Maximilian,  the  high  renow^n  which  he  en-
joyed even  among  his  contemporaries,  were
therefore  not  won  by  the  success  of  his  en-
terprises, but  by  his  personal  qualities.

Every  good  gift  of  nature  had  been  lavished
upon  him  in  profusion ;  health  up  to  an  ad-
vanced age,'  so  robust  that  when  it  was  de-
ranged strong  exercise  and  copious  draughts
of  W' ater  w^ere  his  sole  and  sufficient  remedy  ;:|:
not  beauty,  indeed,  but  so  fine  a  person,  so
framed  for  strength  and  agility,  that  he  outdid
all  his  followers  in  knightly  exercises,  out-
wearied  them  in  exertions  and  toils ;  a  memory
to  which  everything  that  he  had  learnt  or  wit-
nessed w^as  ever  present;  so  singular  a  natural
acuteness  and  justness  of  apprehension,  that
he  w^as  never  deceived  in  his  servants ;  he  em-
ployed them  exactly  in  the  services  for  which
they  were  best  fitted ;  an  imagination  of  une-
qualled richness  and  brilliancy ;  everything
that  he  touched  came  new  out  of  his  hands ;  a
mind,  as  we  have  already  remarked,  which
always  seized  with  unerring  instinct  on  the
necessary,  though  unfortunately  the  execution
of  it  was  so  often  embarrassed  by  other  condi-
tions of  his  situation !  He  was  a  man,  in
short,  formed  to  excite  admiration,  and  to  in-
spire enthusiastic  attachment ; formed  to  be

*  Born  July  4,  1509,  elected  June  21,  1516.  Rudloff,
Mecklenburgische  Gesch.  iii.  ],  37.

t  That  this  was  the  motive,  is. asserted  in  the  Chronicle
of  Flersheim,  by  Munch,  iii,  210.

J  Pasquajrlio,  Relatione  di  3507:  "  IVon  molto  bello  di
volte  nia  bene  proportionato,  robustissimo,  di  comples-
sione  san^uinea  e  collerica,  e  per  1' eta  sua  molto  sano,
ne  altro  il  molesto  che  un  poco  di  catarro  che  continua-
mente  li  discende,  per  rispetto  del  quale  ha  usato  e  usa
sempre  far  nelle  caccie  gran  esercitio."

Chap.  IL

MAXIMILLVrN.

119

the  romantic  hero,  the  exhaustless  theme  of
the  people.

What  wondrous  stories  did  they  tell  of  his
adventures  in  the  chase  I  How,  in  the  land
beyond  the  Ens,  he  had  stood  his  ground  alone
ag-ainst  an  enormous  bear  in  the  open  coppice  :
how  in  a  sunken  way  in  Srahant  he  had  killed
a  stag  at  the  moment  it  rushed  upon  hirn  :  how,
when  surprised  by  a  wild  boar  in  the  forest  of
Brussels,  he  had  laid  it  dead  at  his  feet  with
his  boar-spear,  without  alighting  from  his
horse.  But  above  all,  what  perilous  adven-
tures did  they  recount  of  his  chamois  hunts  in
the  high  Alps,  vrhere  it  was  he  who  sometimes
saved  the  practised  hunter  that  accompanied
him,  from  danger  or  death.  In  all  these  scenes
he  showed  the  same  prompt  and  gallant  spirit,
the  same  elastic  presence  of  mind.  Thus,  too,
he  appeared  in  face  of  the  enemy.  '\Yithin
range  of  the  enemy's  fire,  we  see  him  alight
from  his  horse,  form  his  order  of  battle,  and
win  the  victory:  in  the  skirmish,  attacking
four  or  five  enemies  single  handed :  on  the
field,  defending  himself  in  a  sort  of  single
combat  against  an  enemy  who  selected  him  as
his  peculiar  object ;  for  he  was  always  to  be
found  in  the  front  of  the  battie,  always  in  the
hottest  of  the  fight  and  the  danger.*  Proofs
of  valour  which  served  not  merely  to  amuse
an  idle  hour,  or  to  be  celebrated  in  the  romance
of  Theuerdank  :  the  Venetian  ambassador  can-
not find  words  to  express  the  confidence  vrhich
the  German  soldiers  of  every  class  felt  for  the
chief  who  never  deserted  them  in  the  mom.ent
of  peril.  He  cannot  be  regarded  as  a  great
general;  but  he  had  a  singular  gift  for  the
organization  of  a  particular  body  of  troops,  the
improvement  of  the  several  arms,  and  the  con-
stitution of  an  array  generally  :  the  militia  of
the  Landsknechts,  by  which  the  fame  of  the
German  foot  soldiers  was  restored,  was  founded
and  organised  by  him.  He  also  put  the  use
of  fire-arms  on  an  entirely  new  footing,  and
his  inventive  genius  displayed  itself  pre-emi-
nently in  this  department;  he  surpassed  even
the  masters  of  the  art,  and  his  biographers
ascribe  to  him  a  number  of  very  successful
improvements  :]■  they  add,  that  he  brought
even  the  Spaniards  who  served  under  him  to
the  use  of  fire-arms.  AYherever  he  was  pre-
sent he  found  means  to  allay  the  mutinous
disorders  which  often  arose  in  these  bands  of
mercenaries,  in  consequence  of  the  irregular
state  of  h^s  finances. We  are  told  that  once

*  See  the  Geschichtbibel  of  Seb.  Frank  ;  and  particu-
larly the  Key  to  Theuerdank,  reprinted  in  the  edition  of
Theuerdank  by  Haltaus,  p.  111.

t  Grünheck  in  Chinel,  p.  9ö.  "  Bellicas  machinas  in
minutas  partes  resolvere.  parvis  viribus  bigis  aptari  et
squocunque  fert  voluntas  faciliter  deduct  primus  invenit."
The  FusserMS.  '^  Durch  S.  Mt.  Erfindung  sind  die  Poller
und  Mörser  zu  dem  vs^erfen,  auch  die  langen  Ror  zu  dem
weitraich^n,  desgleichen  die  weited  kurzen  Ror  zu  dem
Haglschiessen  in'die  Streichwehre  darin  auch  etwa  eisern
Ketten  und  Schrot  geladen  werden,  alsdann  auch  die
grossen  Karthaunen  von  neuen  erfunden  und  zu  gebrau-
chen aufbracht  worden."  "By  his  majesty's  invention,
rnortars  for  throwing,  also  long  tubes  for  distant  range,
likewise  broad  short  tubes  for  firing  canister  shot  from
fortifications,  and  which  may  also  be  loaded  with  iron
chains  and  bails;  moreover  large  carronades  have  been
afresh  discovered  and  brought  into  use."

in  extremity  he  appeased  the  discontent  of  his
men  by  the  jests  and  antics  of  a  court  fool,
whom  he  sent  among  them.  He  had  a  match-
less talent  for  managing  men.  The  princes
who  were  oiTended  and  injured  by  his  policy
could  not  withstand  the  charm  of  his  personal
intercourse.  "  Never,"  says  the  sagacious
Frederic  of  Saxony,  "  did  I  behold  a  more
courteous  man."  The  wild  turbulent  knights
against  whom  he  raised  the  empire  and  the
league,  yet  heard  such  expressions  from  his
lips,  that  it  was,  as  Götz  von  Berlichingen
said,  "a  joy  to  their  hearts;  and  they  could
never  bear  to  do  any  thing  against  his  Imperial
rjajesty  or  the  house  of  Austria."  He  took
part  in  the  festivals  and  amusements  of  the
citizens  in  their  towns — their  dances  and  their
shooting  matches,  in  which  he  was  not  unfre-
quently  the  best  shot ;  and  offered  prizes  —
damask  for  the  arquebusiers,  or  a  few  ells  of
red  velvet  for  the  cross-bowmen  :  he  delighted
to  be  among  them,  and  found  in  their  company
and  diversions  a  relief  from  the  arduous  and
weary  business  of  the  diet.  At  the  camp  be-
fore Padua  he  rode  up  to  a  suttler  and  asked
for  something  to  eat.  John  of  Landau,  who
was  with  him,  offered  to  taste  the  food;  the
emperor  inquired  where  the  woman  came  frona-.
From  Augsburg,  was  the  reply.  "  Ah  !"  ex-
claimed he,  "  then  there  is  no  need  of  a  taster,
for  they  of  Augsburg  are  God-fearing  people.'
In  his  hereditary  dominions  he  often  adminis-
tered justice  in  person,  and  if  he  saw  a  bash-
ful man  vvho  kept  in  the  back-ground,  he  called-
him  forward  to  a  more  honourable  place.  He
was  little  dazzled  by  the  splendour  of  the  su-
preme dignity.  "  My  good  fellow,"  said  he  to
an  admiring  poet,  "  thou  knowest  not  me  nor
other  princes  aright."^  All  that  we  read  of
him  shows  freshness  and  clearness  of  appre-
hension, an  open  and  ingenuous  spirit.  He
was  a  brave  soldier  and  a  kind-hearted  man ;
people  loved  and  feared  him.

And  in  his  public  life,  we  should  do  him
injustice  if  we  dwelt  exclusively  on  his  abor-
tive attempts  to  re-constitute  the  empire.  It
is  an  almost  inevitable  defect  of  that  form  of
government  which  excites  a  competition  be-
tween the  highest  person  in  the  state  and  a  re-
presentative body  or  bodies,  that  the  sovereign
separates  his  personal  interests  from  those  of
the  communit}^.  Maximilian,  at  least,  was^ar
less  intent  on  the  prosperity  of  the  empire
than  on  the  future  fortunes  of  his  house.
When  a  youth  of  eighteen,  he  went  to  the
Netherlands,  and,  by  the  union  of  Burgundy
and  Austria,  founded  a  new  European  power.
In  states,  as  in  the  world  of  science,  there  are
certain  minds  whose  vocation  it  is  to  act  as  the
pioneers  of  those  gifted  with  the  genius  of
construction.  Incapable  of  bringing  any  thing
new  into  existence,  thej'  are  actively  employed
in  preparing  the  materials  and  the  instruments
with  which  their  more  creative  successors  are

t  The  Fugger  MS.  Cuspinian.  duerini  paints  him,
Nov.  1507,  as  "homo  virtuoso,  religioso,  forte,  liberal,
quasi  prodego.  Adeo  tutti  T  ama  :  ma  raancha  di  pruden-
tia..''—Sanuto,  vol.  vii.

120

MAXIMILIAN.

Book  II.

to  work.  The  force  that  was  in  embryo  did
not  assume  its  complete  form  under  Maximil-
ian. But  by  maintaining  the  sovereign  pre-
rogatives in  the  Netherlands,  as  well  as  in
Austria;  by  defending  the  former  against  the
French,  the  latter  against  the' Hungarians  ;  by
securing  for  his  house  the  great  JSpanish  in-
heritance; by  definitively  founding  that  of
Hungary  and  Bohemia,  he  exerted  a  vast  and
permanent  influence  on  succeeding  ages.  How
different  was  the  position  of  his  grandson  from
that  of  his  father,  an  exile  from  his  paternal
land,  or  from  his  own,  a  prisoner  in  Bruges  !
Never  did  a  family  enjoj  more  magnificent  or
more  extensive  prospects  than  those  which
now  lay  before  that  of  Austria.  This  was  the
point  of  view  from  which  Maximilian  regarded
the  aflfairs  of  Germany.  Until  the  latter  half
of  the  fifteenth  century,  Austria  was  almost
shut  out  from  Germany :  she  now  interfered
with  a  high  hand  in  the  affairs  of  every  state
and  province,  temporal  or  spiritual — territories
of  cities  or  of  knights ;  nothing  could  stir,
whether  in  an  amicable  or  a  hostile  direction,
by  which  she  was  not  immediately  affected.
If  it  be  undeniable  that  the  empire,  regarded
as  a  wiiole,  had  sustained  losses,  it  is  not  less
true  that  it  was  the  union  of  the  house  of
Austria  with  Burgundy  which  restored  the
province  of  the  Low  Countries  again  to  a  con-
scious connection  with  Germany ;  and  that
the  remote  prospects  which  were  involved  in
the  Hungarian,  and  still  more  in  the  Spanish
family  alliance,  opened  a  new  theatre  of  ac-
tivity to  the  nation.  The  shadows  of  coming
events  continually  flitted  before  the  mind  of
Maximilian  :  it  was  this  presentiment  which
influenced  his  whole  conduct  and  actions,  and
produced  all  that  was  apparently  unsteady,
mysterious,  and  one-sided  in  his  policy.  It
was  not  given  to  him  to  perfect  or  to  found  ;
his  mission  was  solely  to  prepare,  to  maintain,
and  to  extend  the  views  and  the  claims  of  his
house,  amidst  the  conflicting  powers  of  the
world.

The  last  decisive  moment  still  remained  ;
and  although  he  would  never  hear  any  thing
on  the  subject  at  an  earlier  period  of  his  reign,
it  is  clear  how  earnestly  he  must  have  desired
to  secure  his  grandson's  succession.

From  the  situation  of  things  in  Germany
which  we  have  just  contemplated,  it  is  easy  to
infer  what  was  the  support  he  might  reckon
upon,  and  what  the  obstacles  he  v,-as  likely  to
encounter.  He  had  already  made  great  pro-
gress in  his  negotiations  at  the  diet  of  Augs-
burg. The  renewal  and  confirmatio«  of  his
good  understanding  with  the  Hohenzollern,
and  the  large  promises  he  made  to  that  family,
secured  to  him  two  electoral  votes,  those  of
Brandenburg  and  of  Mainz,  both  of  which  had
very  recently  been  extremely  dubious.* Her-

*  Albert  and  Joachim  had  made  preliminary  promises
in  1517  to  the  king  of  France,  which  they  now  retracted.
The  state  of  things  appears  from  a  memorandum  which
the  emperor  had  drawn  up  for  his  grandson  in  Oct.  3518,
wherein  it  is  said  :  "  Le  mariage  de  dame  Catherine  avec
le  fils  du  Marquis  Joachim  n'importe  pas  moins;  le  mar-
quis pour  donner  sa  voix,  Charles  a  du  renoncer  a  son
mariage  avec  dame  Renee  de  France  et  ä  une  grande
-  somme  d'argent  que  le  roi  de  France  luy  avoit  promis."

mann  of  Cologne,  of  the  family  of  Wied,  who
was  intimately  connected  with  Cleves,  and
hence  well  inclined  to  the  emperor,  was  com-
pletely won  by  presents  made  to  hiinself,  and
by  pensions  promised  to  his  brothers  and  kins-
men :f  lastly,  the  old  misunderstandings  with
the  palatinate  were  arranged  by  the  mediation
of  the  Count  Palatine  Frederic;  the  elector
received  his  investiture,  entered  into  an  agree-
ment with  Austria  as  to  the  inheritance,  and
gave  his  sanction  to  the  order  of  succession.
After  certain  preliminary  arrangements  had
taken  place,  these  four  electors  had  a  meeting
with  the  emperor,  who  was  surrounded  by  his
own  council  and  that  of  his  nephew,  on  the
27th  August,  1518,  and  ratified  their  consent
by  a  formal  treaty.  The  ambassadors  of  Bo-
hemia, who  was  now  restored  to  her  place  in
the  Germanic  body  (as  since  the.  league  of
1515,  Austria  was  sure  of  her  vote),  gave  their
assent.

On  the  other  hand,  Frederic  of  Saxony,  as
may  readily  be  believed,  did  not  forget  his
numerous  wrongs  and  affronts,  and  was  not  to
be  propitiated.  With  him  .was  Elector  Richard
of  Treves,  a  Greifenklau  by  birth,  who  had
already  been  opposed  to  the  Prince  of  Baden,
and  had,  at  a  more  recent  vacancy,  obtained
the  electorate.  Their  chief  objections  were,
that  it  was  an  unheard-of  thing  to  place  a  king
of  the  Romans  by  tlie  side  of  an  uncrowned
emperor,  and  that  a  papal  constitution  forbade
the  union  of  the  kingdom  of  Naples,  which
Charles  possessed,  with  the  crowTi  of  Germany.

Maximilian  laboured  incessantly  to  remove
these  objections,  as  well  as  the  deeper  reasons
for  which  they  were  only  a  cover.  Active
negotiations  were  carried  on  with  the  court  of
Rome,  both  as  to  the  sending  of  the  crown
across  the  Alps,:|:  and  the  repeal  of  the  above-
mentioned  constitution.  The  strangest  plans
were  suggested.  Maximilian  once  thought  of
abdicating  and  passing  the  rest  of  his  life  at
Naples ;  not,  indeed,  without  receiving  the
crown  of  that  country  as  compensation  for  the
one  which  he  renounced,  so  as  to  remove  both
of  those  obstacles  at  once.  Besides  this,  the
ph5'sicians  had  told  him  he  might  recover  his
health  in  Naples.  The  German  negotiations
he  thought  he  should  conclude  at  a  meeting
which was to take place in  the following

t  Argent  Comptant  et  Pensions  pour  I'Archevesque  de
Coulongne:  Mone,  Anzeiger  für  Kunde  der  teutschen
Vorzeit,  1838,  p.  409.  The  records  therein  inserted  from
the  Archives  of  Lille  have  all  been  of  great  use  to  me.
M.  Mone  had,  however,  left  a  great  many  untouched,
from  which  M.  Gachard  of  Brussels  has  lately  given  an
extract  in  a  "  Rapport  ä  Monsieur  le  Ministre  de  I'Int6-
rieur  siir  les  Archives  de  Lille,"  Annexe  C.  p.  146.  In
addition  to  printed  sources,  I  made  use  of  a  correspond-
ence of  the  Venetian  ambassador  at  Rome,  who  trans-
mits home  the  news  which  reaches  him,  and  paints  admi-
rably the  varying  dispositions  of  the  court.

J  Maximilian  even  demanded  that  the  pope  himself
should  come  to  Trent  and  crown  him.  He  alleged  that
the  pontifi^  had  gone  to  meet  Francis  I.  at  Bologna.  But
the  master  of  the  ceremonies  held  a  coronation  out  of
Rome  to  be  thoroughly  inadmissible.  Even  were  pope
and  emperor  in  one  province,  the  pope  might  not,  he
said,  then  and  there  crown  the  emperor;  he  must  rather
suffer  him  to  proceed  alone  to  Rome  and  be  there  crowned
by  a  cardinal.  —  Paris  de  Orassis,  in  Hoffmann,  p.  425.
Another  idea  was,  that  the  cardinals,  Giulio  de'  Medici
and  Albert  of  Mainz,  should  perform  the  ceremony  at
Trent.

Chap.  II.

ELECTION  OF  EMPEROR  IN  1519.

121

March  at  Frankfurt.  He  hedged  Elector  Fre-
deric in  the  most  urgent  manner  not  to  fail  to
be  present,  and  added  that  he  himself  intended
to  set  out  soon  after  the  new  year.

But  this  was  not  permitted  him.  He  fell
sick  on  the  journey,  at  Wels,  within  his  own
dominions.  His  illness  did  not  prevent  him
from  carrying  on  the  negotiations  concerning
the  succession :  in  his  sleepless  nights  he  had
the  genealogical  history  of  his  early  progeni-
tors read  to  him ;  he  was  occupied  with  the
past  and  the  future  fortunes  of  his  race,  when
he  expired,  on  the  12th  January,  1519.

His  death  suddenly  plunged  the  issue  of  the
pending  negotiations  into  fresh  uncertainty.
The  engagements  already  entered  into  related
only  to  the  election  of  a  king,  as  next  in  dig-
nity and  succession  to  the  emperor ;  the  affair
altered  its  aspect  now  that  the  subject  of  them
was  an  immediate,  reigning  king  and  emperor.
But  so  much  more  weighty  was  noAv  the  deci-
sion, both  as  it  regarded  the  distant  future,  and
the  present,  pressing,  tempestuous  moment.

Possibilities  of  every  kind  still  presented
themselves.

ELECTION OF EMPEROR IN 1519.

Had  the  powers  and  functions  of  the  head
of  the  empire  been  defined  by  a  regular  con-
stitution, such  as  was  once  contemplated,  the,
most  illustrious  princes  of  the  empire  might
have  chosen  one  out  of  their  own  body  to  fill
that  station.  But  as  the  project  had  failed,
who  among  them  all  would  have  been  power-
ful enough  to  allay  the  storm  of  hostilities  that
raged  on  all  sides,  and  to  uphold  the  dignity
of  the  empire  among  the  powers  of  Europe  ]
It  was  a  great  question  whether  any  one  of
them  would  venture  upon  such  a  task.

Maximilian  had  entertained  and  declared
various  singular  projects  before  he  would  suffer
it  to  be  known  that  he  had  designs  for  his
grandson.  He  had  offered  the  succession  to
the  king  of  England :  in  one  of  the  most  extra-
ordinary documents  existing,  he  at  another
time  nominated  the  young  king  Louis  of  Hun-
gary and  Bohemia,  administrator  of  the  empire
during  his  lifetim.e,  and  after  his  death,  his
successor ;  and  these  two  princes  now  actually
cherished  some  hopes, of  the  imperial  crown:
but  the  one  was  at  too  great  a  distance,  the
other  not  sufficiently  powerful  at  home;  it
was  impossible  to  entertain  serious  thoughts
of  either.

In  declaring  himself  openly  in  favour  of  his
grandson.  Archduke  Charles,  King  of  Spain
and  Naples,  Maximilian  now  proposed  a
scheme  which  had  much  to  recommend  it..
Charles  was  of  German  blood,  heir  to  Austria,
and  to  many  provinces  of  the  German  Nether-
lands, and  sprung  of  the  house  which  had
already  acquired  a  sort  of  title  to  the  imperial
dignity.  There  was,  however,  no  want  of
objections  to  this  young  prince.  It  was  ob-
served that  he  did  not  even  understand  Ger-
man, and  had  given  no  proofs  of  personal
valour  or  ability;  the  multitude  of  his  domi-
nions would  leave  him  no  time  to  devote  to
16  L

the  empire ;  lastly,  he  was  expressly  excluded
by  the  papal  constitution.  His  prospects,  in-
deed, began  to  be  overclouded.  The  electors,
as  we  have  observed,  did  not  think  themselves
bound  by  their  promises  ;  nor  did  Maximilian's
daughter  INIargaret,  who  now  conducted  the
negotiations,  deem  it  expedient  to  lay  before
them  the  sealed  copies  of  their  several  com-
pacts, as  she  had  been  advised  to^do;  she
contented  herself  with  reminding  them  in
general  terms  of  their  expressions  of  good-
will. ,.  Added  to  this,  disturbances  of  a  very
serious  nature  had  broken  out  in  Austria  aftei
Maximilian's  death,  in  which  the  States  estab-
lished a  government  of  their  own*  without
troubling  themselves  about  the  young  and
absent  princes  ;  "  poor  boys,  of  whom  nobody
could  tell  whether  they  would  ever  be  seen  in
Germany."  In  Tyrol  similar  troubles  broke
out.f  Louis,  King  of  Hungary,  thought  it
expedient  to  recall  his  sister  Anna  from  Aus-
tria, where  she  had  already  arrived  in  order  to
conclude  her  marriage  with  one  of  the  brothers.

Under  these  circumstances,  a  foreign  mon-
arch, already  the  natural  rival  of  the  Austro-
Burgundian  power, — Francis  I.  of  France, —
determined  to  grasp  at  the  supreme  dignity  of
Christendom.:!:

The  fortune  and  fame  of  Francis  were  still
in  the  ascendant.  ^Fhe  battle  of  Blarignano,
by  vrhich  he  had  reconquered  Milan,  and  the
personal  valour  which  he  had  displayed  there,
had  secured  him  a  high  station  in  Europe,  and
a  great  name.  He  was  on  an  intimate  footing
Vv'ith  Leo  X.  We  find  that  this  pope  commu-
nicated the  briefs  Which  he  intended  to  address
to  the  German  princes,  first  to  the  court  of
France.  King  Henry  of  England,  after  a  short
hesitation,  promised  him  his  co-operation  '•  by
word  and  deed,"  A  still  more  essential  thing
was,  that  he  had  gained  an  influence  over  at
least  a  portion  of  the  German  opposition.
We  have  spoken  of  the  Dukes  of  Gueldres
and  Würtemberg;  the  existence  of  the  one,
and  all  the  hopes  of  the  other,  depended  on
France :  old  relations,  never  entirely  broken,
united  the  palatinate  to  that  country,  and  Duke
\Henry  der  Mittlere  of  Lüneburg  now  also  took
|)art  with  the  king.  "  I  rejoice  in  his  good  for-
tune," says  he  in  a  letter,  "  I  grieve  at  his  bad
fortune ;  whether  he  be  up  or  dovrn  I  am  his."
The  king  affirmed  that  he  v.'as  solicited  by  Ger-
many to  try  to  acquire  the  crown.  His  adher-
ents insisted  particularly  on  his  bravery  ;  they
urged  that  no  other  prince  was  so  well  fitted
to  conduct  the  war  against  the  Turks,  which,  '
sooner  or  later,  must  be  undertaken.

*  Narratio  de  Dissensionibus  Provincialium  Austria.
Fez.  Scriptt.  ii.  990.

t  Zevenberghen  to  IMargaret,  I\Iarch  23,  Mone,  p.  292.

X  II  CI.  di  Bibbiena  al  CI.  de'  Medici,  13  Ott.  1518.  He
gives  an  account  of  an  audience  he  had  of  Ihe  king  re-
lating to  the  elettion  del  Catholico  (the  grants  wliich  had
beenrnade  at  Augsburg  for  Charles):  "  sopra  che  in  sus-
tanza  mi  disse,  in  grandissimo  secreto,  sua  opinione  et
volontä  esscre,  che  per  Nostro  Sijrnore  (the  pope)  e  per
sua  Mtä  si  faccia  ogni  opera  possibile,  accioche  ella  non
vada  innanzi  et  che  si  corrompano  con  danari  et  con
promesse  et  con  ogni  possibil  mezzo  gli  elettori." — Lettere
di  Principi,  i.  p.  47.  The  whole  correspondence,  which  is
printed  in  this  collection,  ought  to  be  read:  it  perfectly
shows  the  relations  between  Leo  X.  and  Francis  I

122

ELECTION  OF  EMPEROR  IN  1519.

Book  II.

Kino's  of  France,  both  before  and  after  Fran-
cis, have  entertained  similar  projects — for  ex-
ample, Philip  of  Valois  and  Louis  XIV. ;  but
none  ever  had  so  much  encouragement  from
the  posture  of  affairs,  none  such  favourable
prospects,  as  Francis  I.

Two  things  M^ere  necessary  to  the  success
of  his  undertaking ;  the  electors  must  be  won
over,  and  the  anti-Austrian  party  must  be  sup-
ported and  strengthened.  Francis  was  resolv-
ed to  do  everything  in  his  power  to  accomplish
both  these  ends,  especially  to  spare  no  money ;
he  gave  out  that  he  would  spend  three  millions
of  kronthalers  to  become  emperor.  In  February
1519,  Germany  was  again  filled  with  his  emis-
saries. Somewhat  later,  his  confidential  minis-
ter, Admiral  Bonnivet,  in  whose  talents  the  pub-
lic had  great  confidence  from  his  late  successful
conclusion  of  the  peace  with  England  and  Spain,
set  out  for  the  Rhine,  largely  provided  with  mo-
ney ;  whence  he  ventured,  but  in  profound  se-
crecy, further  into  the  interior  of  Germany.*

At  one  time  it  really  appeared  as  if  the  king
would  attain  his  object  with  the  electors. f

He  had  long  had  the  most  perfect  understand-
ing with  Richard  ^  Greifenklau,  Elector  of
Treves.  Whatever  were  the  cause, — whether
ancient  dissensions  between  Treves  and  the
house  of  Burgundy  concerning  their  claims  on
Luxemburg,  or  perhaps  the  hope  which  the
Elector  (who  was  already  "  Archchancellor
through  Gallia  and  the  kingdom  of  Aries")
might  entertain  of  an  accession  to  his  power
and  importance  in  case  France  were  once  more
so  closely  united  to  the  empire, — it  is  certain
that  Elector  Richard  had  been  equally  deaf  to
the  seductions  of  Maximilian  and  to  the  pray-
ers of  delegates  from  the  Spanish  Netherlands.
On  the  other  hand,  the  terms  of  the  credentials
given  him  by  Francis  show  the  most  implicit
confidence  in  him.  "  Convinced  of  his  fidelity,
his  zeal,  his  honour,  and  his  prudence,"  the
king  nominated  him  his  lawful  and  unques-
tioned procurator,  envoy  and  commissary,  with
full  powers  to  grant  to  the  remaining  electors
and  their  confidential  servants,  or  to  any  other
princes  of  the  empire,  as  much  money  as  he
thought  fit,  either  in  one  sum,  or  in  the  form
of  yearly  pension ;  and  to  that  intent,  to  mort-
gage the  crown  lands  in  the  name  of  the  king,
and  even  in  that  of  his  successors :  Vv'hatever
he  agreed  to  v/as  to  have  the  same  force  and
validity  as  if  concluded  by  the  king  in  person.
While  he  declared  himself  ready  to  protect  the
rights  and  privileges  of  the  princes,  the  nobles
and  the  cities ;  and,  generally,  to  do  every-
thing appertaining  to  an  emperor, — especially
to  undertake  the  war  against  the  Turks  for  the
defence  and  extension  of  the  faith,  —  he  em-

*  In  Rome  it  was  asserted,  "che  1' era  in  Augusta  el
dito  Arnirante,"  accordin<j  to  letters  of  the  1st  of  April ;
but  I  find  no  further  proof  of  it.

t  The  statements  of  Flassans,  Histoire  de  la  Diplom.
Fr.  i.  321,  are  not  of  importance.  But  he  there  mention.s
a  "  liasse  contenant  des  memoires,  lettres  et  instructions
donnees  par  Francois  I.  ä  ses  envoyös  aupres  des  elec-
teurs,"  in  the  Tresor  des  Chartes.  ([  looked  them  over
myself  in  the  year  1839,  and  have  extracted  from  them
some  remarkable  notices.)  The  accounts  of  the  jeune
aventureux  (Memoires  de  Fleuranges,  Coll.  univ.  xvi.
227,)  though  vv^ell  worth  reading,  do  not  go  deep  enough.

powered  the  Elector  of  Treves,  should  the  oc-
casion present  itself,  to  take  the  required  oath  .
on  the  salvation  of  his  soul.  ^

Nor  were  the  king's  negotiations  fruitless  in
other  quarters.  A  complete  outline  of  a  treaty
with  the  Elector  Palatine  was  drawn  up  by  his
envoys,:!;:  and  in  the  beginning  of  April  that
prince  raised  his  pecuniary  demands  on  Austria
threefold,  and  revived  his  claim  to  the  Stew-
ardship {Landvogtei)  of  Ilagenau.  Cologne
received  a  warning  from  Austria  not  to  allow
herself  to  be  seduced  into  the  wron^  way?
while  the  French  sometimes  thought  them-
selves nearly  sure  of  her  support.

All  these  Rhenish  electors  feared  the  vio-
lence and  vengeance  of  Francis  I.  in  case  they
resisted  him  ;  they  were  alarmed  at  perceiving
no  refuge  or  defence  on  the  other  side.  But
the  support  of  the  See  of  Rome  was  still  more
advantageous  to  the  king's  cause,  than  the
fears  or  the  sense  of  weakness  of  these  princes.
Pope  Leo  X.  indeed  sometimes  expressed
hnnself  doybtfuUy,  and  it  appeared  as  if  he
would  not  take  part  against  Austria;  but  he
was  far  too  deeply  versed  in  the  policy  of  Italy,
not  to  see  the  dangers^that  would  impend  over
himself  if  Naples  were  united  to  the  empire.
The  Venetian  ambassador,  who  enjoyed  his
confidence,  affirms  that  Leo  would  on  no  ac-
count consent  to  that.§  Nor  was  the  court  of
Spain  deceived  ;  King  Charles  once  ordered
the  pope's  messengers  to  be  arrested  in  Tyrol,
in  order  to  obtain  proof  of  the  illicit  practices
of  the  court  of  Rome  in  that  country.||  He
knew  that  the  legate  spoke  ill  of  him ;  one  of
his  councillors  was  astonished  when  the  Elec-
tor of  Mainz  showed  him  all  the  letters  he  had
received  from  the  papal  court  in  the  interest  of
the  French.  Of  all  the  electors  he  was  the
one  whom  it  was  the  most  important  to  gain ;
and  who  had  such  ample  means  of  gaining
him  as  the  pope  1  One  of  the  favourite  objects
of  the  elector  of  Mainz  was  to  get  himself  no-
minated legate  of  Germany,  like  Araboise  in
France  and  Wolsey  in  England.  It  is  well
known  how  difficult  it  was  to  induce  the  See
of  Rome  to  grant  that  dignity  to  a  native ;  but
at  the  present  moment,  and  in  favour  of  Fran-
cis L,  it  was  disposed  to  do  so.  In  a  letter
dated  from  St.  Peter's,  March  14,  1519,  and
bearing  the  seal  of  the  fisherman's  ring,  Leo
X.  authorized  the  king,  in  the  event  of  his  ob-
taining the  imperial  crown  by  the  vote  and  in-
fluence of  the  Elector  of  Mainz,  to  promise,  the
same  the  dignity  of  legate  in  Germany :  he,
Leo  X.,  binding  himself,  on  the  word  of  a  true
pope  of  Rome,  to  fulfil  the  engagement.  There
seem.ed  little  reason  to  doubt  that  the  elector
would  yield  to  such  a  temptation. =^*

X  In  the  extract  in  Stumpf,  Baierns  polit.  Gesch.  i.  p.
24.

§  "  II  papa  dice  vol  far  osni  cosa  in  favor  del  re  chris-
tianissimo,  et  non  vol  sia  il  re  cattolico  perniuno  partido
per  esserli  troppo  vicino,  e  poi  S.  S'^  e  in  lisa  col  re  chris-
tianissimo  dicendo  aver  raandato  al  re  cattolico  il  jura-
mento  ha  fatto  per  il  reame  di  Napoli  accio  si  aricordi ;
poi  prego  I'orator  tenesse  silentio." Roma,  ]2.April.

II  "Pour  d6voiier  ses  illicitos  poursuites."  From  the
letter  of  the  31st  of  March  in  Gacharri.

**  I  give  in  the  Appendix  the  letter  from  the  Archives
of  Paris.

Chap.  II.

ELECTION  OF  EMPEROR  IN  1519.

123

The  bait  which  he  held  out  to  Joachim  I.,

Elector  of  Brandenburg,  brother  of  the  Cardi-
nal, was  at  least  equally  alluring-.  Joachim,
to  whom  IMaximilian  had  promised  his  grand-
daughter Catherine,  the  sister  of  Charles,  in
marriage  to  the  hereditary  prince,  with  a  very
large  dowry,  had  conceived  some  suspicions
that-  there  was  a  design  to  disappoint  him.
The  contract  was  indeed  ratified,  but  only  by
Charles,  not  by  the  princess,  without  whose
consent  it  could  not  be  considered  binding.
The  Fuggers  declared  themselves  not  autho-
rized to  fulfil  the  pecuniary  obligations  con-
tracted with  the  Elector.  Joachim,  whether
at  home  or  in  his  foreign  relations,  was  fiery,
resolute,  and  suspicious ;  in  money  matters,
above  all,  he  was  not  to  be  trifled  with.  He
was  already  mortified  that  the  affair  had  not
been  terminated  a  year  sooner,  as  he  wished.
He  therefore  fixed  a  term  within  v\iiich  the
promises  made  him  were  to  be  fulfilled,  and
meanwhile  gave  audience  to  the  French  am-
bassador, de  la  Motte.  The  French  now  in
their  turn  promised  him  a  princess  of  the  blood
for  his  son,  —  Madame  Renee,  daughter  of
Louis  Xn.  and  Queen  x\nne,  —  with  a  still
larger  dowrj'',  for  the  payment  of  vrhich  they
oflfered  greater  security  than  their  rival.  But
they  did  not  fail  to  accompany  these  promises
■with  others  of  a  far  more  extensive  character.
In  case  Francis  I.  w^as  really  chosen,  they  de-
clared themselves  empowered  to  acknowledge
the  elector  his  lieutenant  or  viceroy  ;  but  if  that
was  found  to  be  impracticable,  they  would  use
all  their  influence  to  raise  Joachim  himself  to
the  throne.  Joachim  was  not  so  free  from  am-
bition as  not  to  be  captivated  by  proposals  of
such  a  kind.  The  moment  of  Brandenburg's
greatness  seemed  to  him  arrived.  It  was  some-
thing that  he  should  be  lieutenant  of  the  future
emperor;  his  brother,  legate  of  the  pope;  the
highest  secular  and  spiritual  honours  would
thus  be  united  in  his  house.  Behind  these,
floated  the  far  more  splendid  vision  of  the  im-
perial (trown.

While  however  the  French  became  thus
deeply  implicated  with  the  house  of  Branden-
burg, they  did  not  desist  from  attempts  to  gain
over  the  elector  of  Saxony.*  We  have  no  ac-
curate knowledge  of  the  negotiations  carried
on  with  him,  but  we  have  evidence  that  the
French  were  perfectly  well  informed  of  the
disgusts  the  elector  had  latterly  had  to  endure
respecting  the  Netherlands;  and  presumed  that
he  would  not  be  very  willing  to  recognize  the
sovereign  of  that  province  as  his  emperor.

During  these  negotiations,  which  awakened
such  lively  hope,  the  opposition  in  the  interests
of  France,  so  long  kept  down  by  the  late  em-
peror, broke  out  in  acts  of  open  violence.  Ul-
rich of  Würtemberg,  even  on  his  way  home
from  the  obsequies  of  Maximilian,  made  an
attack  on  Reutlingen,  where  one  of  his  stew-
ards was  killed,  took  the  town,  and,  w^ith  the
aid  of  French  money, |  collected  a  numerous

*  Letter  from  the  Venetian  ambassador,  dated  Poisy,
March  28 :  "  Del  duca  di  Saxonia  si  confida  ;  non  vorrä  il
re  catolico."

t  Francis  complained  afterwards  that  Ulrich  had  de-
dared  the  sum  which  lie  had  received. See  Sattler,  ii.

army,  with  which  he  thought  to  revenge  him-
self on  all  his  enemies,  especially  the  Duke  of
Bavaria,  He  negotiated  with  the  Swiss,  and
hoped  to  excite  them  to  take  up  arms  against
the  Swabian  league.  Somewhat  later,  the
Bishop  of  Hildesheim  also  put  himself  at  the
head  of  his  troops,  and,  during  Passion  week,
unxler  the  invocation  of  the  Blessed  Virgin,
inflicted  the  most  fearful  devastations  on  the
territory  of  his  Brunswick  enemies.  The  D«ke
of  Lüneburg,  who  had  also  received  money
from  France,  acted  in  concert  with  him,  gained
friends  on  all  sides,  and  made  magnificent  pre-
parations for  war.  The  Duke  of  Gueldres  had
promised  to  send  him  succours,  and  took  troops
into  his  service.

The  French  endeavoured  to  gain  over  other
military  chiefs,  as  for  example,  in  Upper  Ger-
many, Sickingen ;  in  Lower,  Henry  of  Meck-
lenburg. The  latter  was  to  bind  himself  to
appear  with  his  troops  at  Coblentz  in  the  ter-
ritory of  Treves,  immediately  after  the  elec-
tion, in  order  to  earn  the  pension  premised  him
by  the  king.^i  French  money  was  offered  to
the  Counts  of  the  Harz,  and  to  the  nobles  of
Westphalia,  through  the  mediation  of  Guel-
dres.§

The  idea  of  the  French  doubtless  was,  that
they  should  best  attain  their  end  by  a  union
of  negotiation  and  warlike  demonstrations, —
of  persuasion  and  terror.  The  court  already
regarded  the  event  as  nearly  certain.  It  is
said  that  the  king's  mother  had  ordered  the
jewels  in  which  she  meant  to  appear  at  the
coronation.])  The  ambition  of  her  son  took  a
higher  flight.  When  the  English  ambassador
asked  him  whether  it  was  his  serious  intention,
if  he  became  emperor,  to  take  any  active  mea-
sures as  to  the  long-talked  of  Turkish  war,  he
solemnly  assured  him,  laying  his  hand  on  his
heart,  that  in  three  5'ears  he  would  either  not
be  alive,  or  be  in  Constantinople.**

But  he  was  far  from  being  so  near  the  goal
of  his  wishes  as  he  and  his  courtiers  imagined.
The  attachment  to  Austria  was  not  so  weak
in  Germany  as  to  have  lost  all  its  force  on  the
death  of  the  emperor.  The  electors  might  in-
deed vacillate,  but  they  were  not  yet  won  by
France.  Enemies  of  the  House  of  Austria
might  arise,  but  it  found  friends  who  adhered  to
it  with  constancy.  A>.bove  all,  too,  that  house
possessed  a  head  resolved  to  defend  his  claims,
prepared  to  accept  the  challenge  of  his  French
rival,  and  to  sustain  the  combat  to  the  last.

Some  former  councillors  of  Maximilian,
Matthew  Lang,  Villinger,  Renner,  and  cer-
tain delegates  from  the  court  of  the  Ne-
therlands, among  whom  the  most  con-
spicuous was  Maximilian  of  Zevenberghen,
formed a commission in Augsburg,  v/hich,

92.  A  letter  in  Sanuto,  dated  April  27,  3519.  "  S.  M.
Xma  era  quello  che  dava  danari  al  duca  de  Virtemberg,
accio  teuesse  la  guerra  in  Germania."

X  Rudlnir,  Neuere  Gesch.  von  Mecklenberg,  1.  p.  50.

§  The  Count  of  Schvvarzbur<j  declared,  according  to  a
letter  of  Nassau,  of  the  20th  of  March,  in  Mone  (p.  136),
that  a  peusion  of  600  livres  for  his  life  had  been  offered
him,  and  that  he  had  not  accepted  it.

|(  Le  Ferron,  v.  118.

**  Sir  Thomas  Boleyn  to  King  Henry.  Ellis  Letters,  i,
147.

124

ELECTION  OF  EMPEROR  IN  1519.

Book  II.

under  the  presidency  of  Margaret,  watched
over  the  interests  of  Austria.  Able  and  de-
voted as  these  men  vi^ere,  they  sometimes  took
a  very  gloomy  viev7  of  aftairs,  and  feared  for
the  event.  At  one  time  the  thought  passed
through  their  minds,  that  it  would  be  better  to
put  forv/ard  the  Archduke  Ferdinand,  Charles's
brother,  who  was  just  arrived  in  the  Nether-
lands from  Spain :  they  were  at  all  events  very
desirous  that  he  should  come  to  Germany  with-
out loss  of  time.  But  they  little  knew  their
master,  King  Charles,  if  they  thought  this
could  be  agreeable .  to  him.  He  was  not  only
displeased,  but  incensed  at  it.  He  declared  to
the  Archduchess  Margaret,  that  he  was  abso-
lutely determined  to  have  the  crown  himself,
hj  whatever  means  it  was  to  be  obtained,  and
at  whatever  cost ;  he  forbade  his  brother's  jour-
ney.* He  who  united  in  his  person  so  many
monarchies,  felt  that  his  ambition  would  be  un-
satisfied till  he  had  achieved  the  supreme  dig-
nity of  Christendom.  He  had  long  reflected
not  only  on  the  advantages  likely  to  result  from
it,  but  on  the  disadvantages  he  had  to  expect  if
he  failed,  and  that  dignity  was  bestowed  on
another.  He  resorted  without  delay  to  every
form  of  canvass.  To  the  electors  he  represent-
ed that  his  great-grandfather,  and  his  grand-
father, the  late  Maximilian,  when  invested  with
the  imperial  majesty,  had  governed  the  German
nation  long  and  well ;  he  was  resolved  to  tread
in  their  footsteps,  and  to  protect  all  franchises,
spiritual  and  temporal,  particular  and  general ;
and  to  abate  everything  which  could  be  preju-
dicial to  the  liberties  of  Germany.  He  declared
that  his  sole  object  was  to  maintain  peace
throughout  Christendom ;  and,  after  the  pattern
of  his  other  grandfather,  the  King  of  Arragon,
to  make  war  upon  the  unbelievers,  and  to  re-
serve his  whole  force  for  the  defence  and  diffu-
sion of  the  Catholic  faith.f  From  this  time
Ferdinand  was  no  more  thought  of:  the  coun-
cillors reverted  to  their  original  project  —  to
raise  their  elder  lord,  the  King  of  Spam,  to  the
station  of  "  Prince  of  prmces,"  at  whatever  risk
or  sacrifice.

We  must  here  examine  a  little  in  detail
what  v/ere  the  means  to  which  they  resorted,
what  the  circumstances  which  favoured  them,
and  what  the  obstacles  they  encountered.

Their  greatest  advantage  was  precisely  that
from  which  their  antagonist  had  hoped  the
most — the  connection  between  Francis  and  the
Pope.

At  a  meeting  of  the  Rhenish  electors  at
Wesel,  in  the  beginning  of  April,  the  papal
legate  formally  admonished  them,  in  virtue  of
a  prohibitory  bull  of  Clement  IV.,  not  to  elect
the  King  of  Naples,  which  country,  he  said,
was  the  property  of  the  Church  of  Rome.
Though  the  negotiations  between  the  French
and  the  electors  were  at  that  moment  pecu-
liarly active,  such  a  demand  as  this  roused
their  spirit  of  independence.  They  replied
that  they  were  astonished  that  the  Pope  should

endeavour  to  throw  a  prohibition  in  the  way  of
the  election — a  thing  which  the  See  of  Rome
had  never  done ;  and  expressed  their  hope  that
his  holiness  would  desist  from- such  an  attempt.
The  legate  answered  with  some  bitterness ;  he
reminded  them  of  their  not  altogether  lawful
transactions  with  Maximilian.  A  correspond-
ence arose  which  betrayed  great  irritation,  and
was  not  much  fitted  to  advance  the  cause  the
pope  had  espoused.^

The  warlike  movements  of  Francis  and  his
allies  were,  if  possible,  yet  more  advantageous
to  his  rival ;  above  all,  the  rising  of  the  restless
Würtemburger.  Some  few  of  the  imperial
council  thought  to  settle  the  affair  in  good  Ger-
man fashion,  by  peaceful  means ;  but  the  more
sagacious  prevented  this :  they  foresaw  with
certainty  on  whose  side  the  superior  strength
lay,  who  would  be  victorious,  and  what  an  ad-
vantage would  result  to  the  interests  of  the
election;  they  wished  for  war. §  The  Swabian
league,  irritated  by  former  and  by  recent  af-
fronts, and  now  strengthened  by  considerable
subsidies,  was  ready  to  take  the  field.  Franz
von  Sickingen  at  length  accepted  a  yearly  pen-
sion from  the  house  of  Burgundy,  broke  off  all
negotiations  with  France,  and  promised  to  come
to  the  aid  of  the  league  with  his  cavalry.  It
was,  however,  at  the  same  time,  necessary  to
restrict  the  struggle  within  these  limits,  to  pre-
vent a  general  conflagration,  and  especially  to
keep  the  Swiss  from  siding  with  Wlirtemberg.

Duke  Ulrich  had  already  taken  16,000  Swiss
into  his  pay ;  and  it  was  to  be  feared  that  the
old  hostility  between  the  Confederation  and  the
Swabian  league  might  break  out  anew,  as  it
had  done  twenty  years  before.  This  would
have  been  as  welcome  a  sight  to  Francis  as  it
was  to  his  predecessor  Louis  XII.  It  was  all-
important  not  only  that  it  should  be  avoided,
but  that  contrary  dispositions  should  be  excited.

The  election  of  emperor  had  already  been
discussed  in  the  Swiss  diet.  French  ambassa-
dors had  presented  themselves  to  seek  the  sup-
port of  the  Confederation :  the  Swiss  in  Paris,
among  them  Albert  von  Stein,  advised  their
countrymen  to  declare  for  tlie  king,  were  it  only
in  order  to  enjoy  the  credit  and  the  favour  result-
ing from  an  event  which  was  no  longer  to  be
averted.il  The  Confederation  was  not,  however,
so  decidedly  French  as  to  follow  this  course.
The  Cardinal  von  Sitten,  the  old  enemy  of  the
French,  well  skilled  in  all  the  secret  ways  of
diplomacy,  was  then  in  Zürich,  and  in  the  en-
joyment of  great  consideration.  In  the  middle
/3f  March,  Zevenberghen  came  from  Augsburg
to  his  aid.  They  had,  indeed,  no  easy  task.
Zevenberghen  makes  loud  complaints  of  the
bad  words  and  threats  he  was  obliged  to  endure
from  the  pensionaries  and  speakers;  what  it

*  Margaret  to  Zevenberghen,  May  15.  "  Absolument
le  roi  est  delibörö  de  luirmesme  parvenir  ä  I'empire,  com-
ment que  ce  soil  et  quoi  que  il  luy  doibve  couster."

t  Papiers  d'Etat  du  CI.  Granvelle,  t.  i.  p.  132.

X  Correspondence  in  Bucholtz,  iii.  670.  Acta  Legationis
in  Goldast,  Political  Inaper.,  p.  102.  This  coincides  with
the  fact  of  the  electors  demanding  back  so  seriously  and
pressingly  their  circular  letters  from  Augsburg.

6 Letter  from  Zevenberghen,  March  28.  Mone.  Matth.
Schiner.  Feb.  12.  "  Q.ue  ce  Due  de  Wirtemberg  estoit  le
plus  grand  ami  du  roi  (Charles)— car  a  cause  de  sa  folie  la
grande  lighe  ferout  de  si  grosses  arm6es  qui  feront  crainte
aux  Francois  et  autres  qui  veuillent  empescher  son  elec-
tion."

I  Anshelm,  Chronicle  of  Berne,  v.  375.

Chap.  II.

ELECTION  OF  EMPEROR  IN  1519.

125

cost  him  to  acknowledg-e  "  this  low  rabble  as
gentlemen,  and  to  pay  them  respect;  he  would
rather  carry  stones ;"  but  he  bore  it  all :  he  did
among-  them,  he  said,  as  if  at  a  fair — paid  much
and  promised  more ;  at  length  he  succeeded.
The  main  cause  of  his  success  was,  indeed,  the
interests  of  Switzerland  herself;  not  onl}^  the
recollection  of  the  Swiss  blood  shed  in  the  late
wars,  or  of  the  numerous  claims  which  still
remained  unsatisfied ;  but  above  all,  the  consi-
deration that  France  vrould,  by  the  acquisition
of  the  imperial  dignity,  become  too  migbty,
would  no  longer  need  the  assistance  of  the
Swiss,  and  would  consequently  trouble  herself
no  more  about  them^still  less,  pay  their  pen-
sions. On  the  18th  of  March,  the  Swiss  diet
came  to  a  formal  resolution  to  oppose  the  elec-
tion of  the  French  king  to  the  imperial  crown,
with  body  and  soul  (as  they  expressed  it) ;  and
on  the  contrary  to  promote  the  election  of  a
German  prince,  whether  an  elector  or  another.
In  pursuance  of  this  they  wrote  to  the  electors,
and  to*  Francis  himself;  they  took  the  liberty
to  admonish  the  latter  to  content  liimself  with
his  own  kingdom.  The  Austrian  ambassadors
wished  the  Confederation  to  declare  openly  for
King  Charles,  but  this  they  could  not  accom-
plish. "  Wherever  they  fall,"  says  Zevenber-
ghen,  "there  they  ai3ide."*  JN^evertheless,
much  was  effected.  The  ancient  union  with
Austria  was  renewed."  The  diet  determined
to  recall  from  the  field  those  of  their  people
who  had  joined  the  duke,  and  with  such  una-
nimous earnestness  that  they  should  not  dare
to  resist.

This  decided  Duke  Ulriclis  rum.  Zeven-
berghen  justly  gloried  in  having  persuaded  the
diet  to  pass  such  a  resolution.

At  the  moment  when  letters  of  challenge
(Fehdebriefe)  poured  in  upon  the  duke  from  ail
sides — when  even  some  of  his  own  vassals  re-
nounced their  allegiance,  and  the  powerful
troops  o^  the  league  were  preparing  to  fall  upon
his  country — at  that  moment  he  was  abandoned
by  those  who  alone  could  have  defended  him.
His  Würtemberg  militia  did  not  understand
regular  warfare ;  his  cavalry  was  no  match
whatever  for  that  of  the  league.  The  league
encountered  no  resistance.  On  the  21st  of
April  they  took  Tubingen,  where  the  duke's
children  were  residing :  and  he  himself  was
compelled  to  abandon  his  country.

So  complete  a  victory — deciding  the  con-
quest of  a  considerable  principality  —  turned
the  scale  in  favour  of  the  Austrian  hiterest
through  the  whole  of  Upper  Germany.

A  simuar  change  soon  followed  in  Lovv'er
Germany.  Towards  the  end  of  May  the  dukes
of  Calenberg  and  Wolfenbuttel  had  completed
their  preparations,  and  appeared  in  the  field,
with  their  auxiliaries  from  Hessen  and  Meissen,
in  undisputed  superiority.  They  destroyed
Waidenstein,  stormed  Peine,  and  plundered
the  Lüneburg  territory.  Fifty  villages  were
seen  in  flames  at  once  on  their  path,  nor  did
they  spare  a  single  church ;  they  defaced  the

*  Mars  22.  "  La  ou  ils  tombent,  ils  demeurent  corame
tels  gens  qu'ils  sont."  Gachard,  178.  See  Maroton  to
Margaret,  April  10,  Mone,  397.

arms  of  their  own  house,  the  house  of  Welf,  on
their  cousin's  castle,  and  carried  off  rich  booty,
"  They  were  of  a  proud  spirit,"  says  a  song  of
that  day  ;  "  they  had  silver  and  the  red  gold ;
they  went  m  velvet  with  golden  chains ;  they
had  two  thousand  chariots  with  them."  They
challenged  the  Duke  of  Lüneburg  in  mockery
to  do  battle,  while  he  was  still  waiting  for  the
succour  promised  him  from  Gueldres.

But  if  the  French  thought  to  attain  their  end
by  the  aid  of  the  intestine  wars  of  Germany,
they  soon  found  how  completely  they  had  de-
ceived themselves.  Exactly  at  the  decisive
moment,  these  private  wars  took  a  turn  in  fa-
vour of  Austria.

Under  the  impressions  produced  by  these
events,  the  plenipotentiaries  of  King  Charles
renewed  their  negotiations  with  the  electors
with  the  greatest  diligence.

Towards  the  end  of  April,  a  Spanish  charge-
d'affaires  arrived,  bringing  the  archbishop  of
Mainz  the  assej^t  to  all  his  demands.  Very  re-
markable concessions  and  promises  v/ere  made
to  him;  fiill  power  over  the  chancery  of  the
empire ;  the  protection  of  the  emperor  in  the
dispute  of  the  archbishopric  with  Saxony  about
Erfurt,  and  in  that  Vvath  Hessen  about  a  nev.dy-
erected  toll;  the  emperor's  intercession  with
the  pope  that  he  would  allovv^  the  archbishop  to
hold  a  fourth  bishopric  in  Germ.any ;  and,  lastly,
(for  the  example  of  France  was  to  be  followed
m  this)  his  appointment  as  legate  of  the  Apos-
tolical See  in  the  empire.  Moreover,  the  pen-
sions promised  hhn  v.'ere  secured  to  him  hy
special  legal  instruments  fi-om  Mechlin  and
Antwerp.!  From  this  time  we  find  the  arch-
bisliop,  who  had  vacillated  for  a  moment,  un-
shaken in  his  attachment  to  Austria  and  doubl}'"
zealous  m  her  cause.  He  threw  the  whole
weight  which  the  dignity  of  archchancellor
gave  him  in  Germany,  mto  the  scale  of  Kmg
Charles.

The  elector  palatine's  support  was  secured
by  similar  means.  He  had  wavered,  only  be-
cause the  publication  of  his  new  agreement
with  Austria  as'to  the  succession,  and  the  pro-
mised compensation  for  the  stewardship  of
Hagenau  were  delayed;  while,  on  the  other
hand,  the  Swabian  league  threatened  to  espouse'
the  pecuniary  claims  urged  against  him  by  the
Rhenish  merchants.  The  Austrian  plenipoten-
tiaries hastened  to  allay  these  troubles ;  they
satisfied  the  demands  of  the  merchants  at  their  •
ovrn  cost.  Count  Palatine  Frederic,  moreover,
exerted  all  his  influence  with  his  brother  in
favour  of  Austria,  and  considerable  sums  of
money  v\'ere  granted  to  both.:}:  Though  the
elector  had  said  at  first,  that  whatever  wind
blevv%  he  would  alwaj^s  be  for  Austria,  he  had
not  entirely  kept  his  word ;  but  he  gradually
returned  to  his  first  intention,  and  remained
constant  to  it.

The  difliculties  with  Cologne  were  not  so
gTeat.  The  Count  of  Nassau,  who  conducted
the  negotiations  in  this  part  of  the  country,  un-

tCarolus  ad  Albertum  12  Martii,  in  Gudenus,  iv.  C07.
Jean  de  le  Sauche  ä  Marguer. 2Sth  April ;  Mone,  p.  403.

J  Correspondence  in  Mone,  p.  34.  See  Hubert  Tliomas
Leodius,  Vita  Friderici  Palatini,  iv.  p.  100.  sq.

126

ELECTION.  OF  EMPEROR  IN  1519.

Book  II.

derstood  the  means  of  conciliating-  the  Rhenish
counts  generally,  and  the  archbishop — who  was
by  birth  one  of  that  body — in  particular.  The
concessions  made  to  that  prelate  at  Aug-sburg
were  now  extended.  We  have  a  letter  of  his,
dated  the  6th  of  June,  in  which  he  treats  the
affair  of  the  election  as  settled,  as  soon  as  Bo-
hemia shall  be  secured.*

The  King  of  Bohemia  had  indeed  at  first
contemplated  availing  himself  of  the  engage-
ments entered  into  with  him  by  Maximilian,
^and  had  in  consequence  sent  his  ambassadors
to  Italy ;  but  he  soon  saw  how  little  he  had  to
expect.  The  pope  treated  his  documents  with
the  greatest  contempt,  as  some  of  the  many
privilegia  v/hich  Maximilian  had  created  in
order  to  put  money  into  the  pockets  of  his
clerks.  Upon  this  the  government  of  Bohemia
resolved  to  support  the  house  of  Austria,  with
which  it  was  about  to  enter  into  so  near  a
family  alliance.  Perhaps  the  circumstance
that  John,  brother  of  the  Margrave  George  of
Brandenburg,  who  had  great  mfluence  at  that
court,  vv&s,  just  married  to  the  widow  of  Fer-
dinand the  Catholic,  and  nominated  Viceroy
of  Valencia,!  contributed  greatly  to  this  result.

There  remained,  therefore,  only  Treves,
Brandenburg,  and  Saxony;  and  the  Austrian
plenipotentiaries  shov/ed  no  lack  of  zeal  in
their  endeavours  to  secure  these  important
votes.

With  Treves  there  was  nothing  to  be  done.
Although  the  dependents  of  the  elector  gave
some  hope,  he  himself  declared  he  would  keep
his  vote  free,  and  fi'om  this  resolution  no  re-
presentations could  induce  him  to  depart.  If,
notwithstanding  this,  he  had  entered  into  the
close  connexion  with  France  which  we  have
already  noticed,  it  must  have  been  under  some
reservation  which  secured  to  him  his  freedom
of  voting  at  the  decisive  moment.  Such,  at
least,  was  the  case  with  Brandenburg.

On  the  20th  of  April,  the  plenipotentiaries
of  King  Charles,  the  Count  of  Nassau,  M.  de
la  Roche,  and  Nicholas  Ziegler,  who  enjoyed
the  especial  confidence  of  the  archbishop  of
Mainz,  arrived  at  Berlin.  They  w^ere  com-
missioned to  renew  to  Elector  Joachim  all  the
promises  wdiich  had  formerly  been  made  to
him,  especially  in  relation  to  the  marriage  of
his  son  with  the  archduchess  and  infanta  Cathe-
rine. They  brought  with  them  the  infanta's
ratification,  and  placed  it  in  the  hands  of  a
kinsman  of  the  elector,  Markgrave  Casimir.
But  they  found  Joachim  little  disposed  to  listen
to  them.  The  utmost  that  he  w^ould  promise
was,  that  he  would  vote  for  Charles,  if  the  four
electors  who  preceded  him  had  done  so;  and
even  for  this  very  unsatisfactory  engagement,
he  made  greater  demands  than  they  were  em-
powered to  grant.  Nor  had  he  given  any  pro-
mise to  the  King  of  France,  but  with  the  con-
dition that  two  electors  should  have  voted  on
that  side  before  it  came  to  his  turn ;  yet  that
sovereign  had,  in  addition  to  various  other  con-

cessions, agreed  to  these  exorbitant  demands.
According  to  the  first  proposal  made  by  Mar-
garet, her  ambassadors  certainly  gave  the  elec-
tor reason  to  hope  that  he  would  have  the
lieutenancy  of  the  empire,  but  I  do  not  find
whether  this  was  confirmed  by  Charles  or  not.
The  ambassadors  did  not  accede  to  a  sugges-
tion of  Joachim's  as  to  the  vicariate  of  the  em-
pire for  the  Saxon  provinces ;  still  less  would
they  permit  him  to  hope  for  the  crown,  in  any
case  or  under  any  condition.  As  this  was
the  prospect  that  first  allured  the  elector,  we
need  not  wonder  that  they  had  no  success  with
him.

It  was  the  more  important  to  obtain  the  vote
of  him  whom  Austria  had  lately  so  deeply
offended,  and  whom  the  councillors  regarded  as
their  most  formidable  opponent — Frederic  of
Saxony.  I  As  the  Bohemian  vote  did  not  carry
great  weight  (and  indeed  the  last  election  was
concluded  without  Bohemia),  the  vote  of  Sax-
ony v/as  necessary  to  the  formation  of  a  majority
that  would  be  universally  recognised.  The
refusal  of  the  elector  to  take  part  in  the  mea-
sures agreed  on  at  Augsburg,  which  excited
great  discontent  in  the  nation  when  they  were
known,  had  increased  the  already  high  consi-
deration he  enjoyed.  Moral  authority  and  the
consent  of  public  opinion  were  attached  to  this
vote ;  every  effort  must  be  made  to  secure  it.

The  elector  himself  remained  inaccessible.
He  would  hear  of  no  promises ;  he  forbade  his
servants  to  receive  presents,  and,  referred  all
inquiries  to  the  day  of  election,  when  it  would
be  seen  to  whom  he  gave  his  vote ;  till  theh  he
would  keep  it  free.

But  there  is  no  position  on  earth  so  lofty  or
so  impregnable,  that  it  cannot  be  reached  by
some  means  or  other.  The  deputies  determined
to  take  a  step  which,  if  successful,  would  cer-
tainly put  an  end  to  all  the  animosities  that  had
been  accumulating  between  Saxony  and  Aus-
tria. They  now  offered  the  Archduchess
Catherine,  sister  of  King  Charles,  who  had  just
been  the  subject  of  their  fruitless  negotiations
with  Joachim  I.,  to  Duke  John,  brother  of  the
elector,  for  his  son,  John  Frederic,  the  future
heir  to  the  electorate.

To  this  proposal  Duke  John  replied,  that  the
king  would  be  able  to  place  his  sister  in  a  more
exalted  position.  The  ambassadors  answered,
that  the  king  only  wished  to  renew  the  ancient
alliance  of  the  two  houses.  They  overruled
the  objections  raised  by  his  modesty  in  the  most
dexterous  and  flattering  manner,  by  reminding
him  that  the  sister  of  Emperor  Frederic  was
the  grandmother  of  the  dukes  of  Saxony.  §

The  elector  took  no  part  in  these  negotia-
tions, but  he  allowed  them  to  go  on.  The  am-
bassadors thought  they  discovered  that  the
whole  business  of  the  election  depended  on  the
success  of  them.  They  v/rote  first  from  Lo-
chau,  and  again  on  the  16th  of  May  from  Ru-
dolstadt,  to  the  king,  in  Spain,  urging  him  to
send  them  full  powers  to  conclude  this  treaty .

*  Bucholtz,  iii.  671.

t  Letter  from  Charles  to  Casimir  on  this  subject,  March
6,  1519  :  öpiess,  Brandenburgische  Münzbelustigungen,  i.
p.  389.

X  Marnix  to  Margaret,  March  16,  traces  the  unfavour-
able disposition  of  Bohemia,  amongst  other  sources,  to
Saxony. Mone,  p.  131.

§  Müller,  Geschichte  der  Protestation,  p.  689.

..IL

ELECTION  OF  EMPEROR  IN  1519.

127

of  marriage  as  quicldy  as  possible,  if  he  would
not  have  their  endeavours  prove  fruitless ;  this
was  the  only  means  of  arrivino-  at  the  desired
end.*  This  was  so  obvious  to  the  king-  that  he
did  not  hesitate  an  mstant.  On  the  30th  of
May  he  signed  the  act  empowering  his  envoys
to  negotiate  this  marriage  and  everythmg  re-
latmg  to  it,  in  his  name,  and  to  arrange  the
terms  with  an  authority  equal  to  his  o\Yn.\
Hereupon  Duke  John  granted  his  council  full
powers  to  treat ;  in  the  preamble  to  which  lie
said  that,  "  bearmg  in  mind  the  dignity  of  the
crown  of  Spain,  and  the  name  and  race  of  the
honourable  house  of  Austria,  he  wished  most
especially  to  see  his  son,  who  was  also  well
inclined  thereto,  advised  to  a  friendly  marriage
v/ith  the  most  illustrious  princess,  the  Lady
Catherine."  The  Austrian  ambassadors  had
now  only  to  ascertain  what  effect  this  good  un-
derstanding with  the  duke  was  likely  to  have
on  the  elector,  and  to  act  accordmgly.

At  all  events,  it  is  evident  that  they  had  suc-
cessfully employed  the  interest  of  the  house
they  served.

But  the  affair  was  not  decided  thus,

Austria  had  now  unquestionably  a  majority
of  declared  friends  in  the  electoral  college ;
but  the  Frencii,  too,  could  reckon  on  more  than
one  partisan,  and  did  not  relmquish  the  hope  of
gaining  over  one  or  tvro  of  the  others.  They
had  just  m.ade  a  vehement,  and,  as  they  be-
lieved, successful  attempt  on  the  elector  of
Cologne :  they  thought  that  even  if  the}^  had
only  three  votes,  the  pope  Vvould  declare  the
election  valid ;  and  his  legate,  at  least,  adhered
firmly  to  their  side  up  to  the  middle  of  June,

Austria  was  mdeed  victorious,  and  remained
with  arms  in  her  hands ;  but  the  partisans  of
France  in  Lower  Germany  were  by  no  means
crushed.  We  find  traces  of  very  extensive  and
unexpected  plans  ;  e.  g.  an  original  document,
in  which  Francis  promises  to  pay  whatever
troops  the  electors  of  Treves  and  Brandenburg-
should  levy  in  Germany,  under  the  extraordi-
nary pretext  that  they  were  to  m.aintain  the
neace  of  the  country  and  the  freedom  of  the
roads  for  the  meeting  in  Frankfurt.  The  Duke
of  Gueldres  Vv^as  already  up  in  arms  again.
The  Frenqh  troops  did  not  yet  advance  upon
the  German  frontier,  but  they  v/ere  prepared  to
do  so.  I

The  two  powers  vied  with  each  other  in  pro-
digal expenditure  of  money.  It  was  a  peculiar
advantage  on  the  side  of  Austria  that  the  great
mercantile  house  of  Fugger,  vv'hich  conducted
nearly  the  whole  m.onetary  business  of  Ger-
many, refused  its  services  to  the  Fi*ench.5
Admiral  Bonnivet  had,  however,  brought  large
sums  in  hard  mioney  to  Germany,  whicli  many
might  think  better  than  any  bills  of  exchange
whatsoever.

*Nassou  ec  Peine,  May  16,  Mone,  p.  406.

t  Document  in  Arnoldi's  Denkwürdigkeiten,  p.  8.

X  Letter  from  France,  May  26.  "  In  Franza  non  e
alcun  raotivo  di  arme,  ma  ben  la  zente  preparata."

§  Letter  from  Zevenbershen  ;  Mone.  p.  36.  Li  the  Neth-
erlands Margaret  forbade  business  reiatins  to  French  bills
of  exchange  to  be  transacted.  Ibid.  p.  293.  But  we  find
the  imperial  agents  not  always  on  a  good  understanding
with  the  Fuggers.  The  Welsers  seeui  to  have  done  busi-
ness on  lower  terms.

Had  the  event  depended  exclusively  on  pe-
cuniary interests,  its  decision  would  have  re-
mained very  doubtful.

But  considerations  of  a  totally  different  nature
evidently  had  weight.

We  must  do  the  princes  of  Germany  in  old
times  the  justice  to  admit,  that,  spite  of  the
many  scandalous  transactions  they  engaged  in,
the  mterests  of  the  nation  always  prevailed  at
last.

To  uphold  the  ancient  privileges  of  the  em-
pire against  all  attacks  or  encroachments  of  the
See  of  Rome,  was  tlie  motive  Vv'hich  led  the
Rhenish  electors  to  reject  the  proposals  and
arguments  of  the  legate.

But  was  not  Francis  also  a  foreigner  ]  Could
the  electoral  college  venture  so  lightly  to  alien-
ate from  the  nation  that  imperial  crown  which,
at  every  diet,  they  solemnly  promised  to  main-
tain? There  were  those  who  did  not  fail  to
remark  that  Francis  was  an  absolute  monarch,
accustomed  to  implicit  obedience  and  possessed
of  great  pov/er,  under  whose  sceptre  the  main-
tenance of  German  liberties  could  hardly  be
expected.  The  violent  acts  of  his  partisans
were  not  calculated  to  make  quiet  patriots  his
Ixiends.

On  the  other  hand,  the  young  King  of  Spain
Vv'as  without  question  a  German.  He  remmded
the  German  princes  that  the  true  stem  and  the
first  blossom  of  his  nobility  were  fi'om  Austria ,
V7ere  he  not  a  Gennan,  had  he  not  land  and
lordships  in  Germany,  he  would  Vvdthdraw  from
the  contest.

How  profound  an  effect  was  produced  by  this
difference  m  the  pretensions  of  the  rivals,  is
distinctly  shown  by  a  remark  of  the  papal  dele-
gates. They  say,  every  one  will,  in  the  end,
deem  it  infaujous  to  receive  money  from  France ;
but  to  take  it  fi"om  King  Charles,  is  thought
nothing  of.

Public  opinion  had  also  already  declared
itself  on  the  matter.  The  electors  had  it  in
their  power  to  choose  one  of  their  ov/n  body-—
a  German  prince.  Had  they  chosen  the  King
of  France,  takmg  money  too  for  their  votes,
the  result  might  have  been  dangerous  to  them-
selves.

All  these  things  were  gradually  so  distinctly
felt,  that,  by  the  middle  of  June,  Charles's  su-
periority vras  decided,  and  no  further  doubt  vras
entertained  of  the  event,

Henry  YIIL  of  England  for  a  moment  che-
rished the  hope  of  placing  the  crovm  on  his
own  head,  during  the  contest  of  the  other  two
sovereigns ;  but  his  ambassador  acted  v;ith  great
discretion  and  reserve.  He  looked  at  the  afiair
like  a  man  of  business,  and,  on  calculation,  he
found  his  crown  too  dear  a  purchase  for  its
value  and  utility.  H  A  letter  of  his,  of  the  12th
of  June,  shows  that  he  had  then  given  up  all
hope.

At  this  conjuncture  Carracciolo,  one  of  the
pope's  charges-d'affaires,  caused  himself  to  be
carried,  ill  as  he  vras,  to  the  archbishop  of
Mainz,  in  order  that  he  might  once  more  re-
commend to  that  prelate  the  interests  of  the

il  Richard  Pace ;  Ellis,  i.  156. See Herbert, Life  of
Henry  VIIL,  p.  74.

123

ELECTION  OF  EMPEROR  IN  1519.

Book  II.

church  and  of  the  King  of  France.  The  arch-
bishop answered,  that  he  took  upon  his  own
head  the  affairs  of  the  church,  but  that  he  would
have  nothing  to  do  with  the  King-  of  France.
The  envoy  asked  upon  whom  the  choice  of  the
electors  would  fall !  The  cardmal  said,  on  the
King  of  Spain ;  and,  if  not  upon  him,  then  upon
the  Elector  of  Saxony.  The  envoy  was  per-
fectly astonished  that  the  cardinal,  notwith-
standing such  repeated  misunderstandmgs,  still
preferred  the  Elector  of  Saxony  to  the  King  of
France.*  These  words  perhaps  decided  the
conduct  of  the  Roman  see.  When  Pope  Leo
found  what  the  dispositions  of  Germany  were,
he  was  heard  to  exclaim  that  it  Vv'ould  not  do
to  run  one's  head  against  the  wall ;  an-^xpres-
sion  characteristic  of  his  policy,  which  was
always  that  of  giving  way  before  an  obstinate
resistance.  After  having  so  long  held  out,  he
at  length  yielded  (June  24tli),  and  announced
to  the  electors  his  assent  to  the  election  of  the
King  of  Spain  and  Naples.

When  the  electors  assem.bled  in  Frankfurt
there  was  not  the  smallest  hope  left  for  Francis:
the  only  remaining  obstacle  to  Charles's  suc-
cess was  the  wish  which  had  existed  among
them,  of  having  a  native  of  the  soil  of  Germany
for  their  emperor. f  The  elector  Joachim,  who
now  put  forward  urgent  claims,|  was  thought
of;  but  his  own  relations,  above  all  his  brother
of  Mamz,  were  against  him ;  they  found  that
the  maintenance  of  the  imperial  dignity  would
necessitate  exertions  and  expenses  v/hich  Vv'ould
consume  the  resources  of  the  Mark,  and  those
of  their  whole  family ;  they  knev»%  too,  that  the
princes  of  the  empire  would  not  choose  a  liead
of  so  harsh,  severe  and  self-willed  a  character.
Joachim  would  never  have  conciliated  a  suffi-
cient number  of  voices.  A  far  more  formida-
ble rival  existed  in  the  person  of  Frederic  of
Saxony,  on  whom  the  eyes  of  the  assembly
v/ere  nov/  turned.  Richard  of  Treves  went  to
him  once  by  night,  and  offered  to  take  a  part
of  the  labour  of  the  canvass  on  himself  His
own  hopes  behig  utterly  at  an  end,  the  King  of
France  determined  to  use  his  influence  in  fa-
vour of  Frederic.  Considering  the  conduct  of
that  prince  in  the  Lutheran  affairs,  and  the
national  tendencies  with  which  these  affairs
v/ere  connected,  this  certainly  opened  one  of
the  grandest  prospects  for  the  destiny  of  Ger-
many. The  electors  were,  on  the  whole,  well
disposed  towards  the  measure ;  indeed  it  was
afterwards  said,  in  the  way  of  reproach,  tliat
if  there  had  been  one  among  them  "  capable
of  sustaining  the  empire,"  he  would  have  been

*"  Lzesso  Mojjuntino  habbi  jrran  iniinicitia  con  Saxo-
nia,  lo  vul  avanti  che  il  re  christian issinio."

tThe  Italians,  for  instance,  could  not  at  all  compre-
hend why  such  an  one  was  not  chosen.  "Li  electori,"
,  says  Lippomano,  the  Venetian  ambassador  at  Rome,
"  saranno  pazzi  a  non  si  far  uno  di  loro."  On  this  ground
they  v.illingly  believed  tliat  the  Elector  of  Brandenburg
would  be  chosen.  "  Scrive  ii  CI.  Sedunese,  sarä  il  Bran-
denburg, 5  Giugno."  Hereon  rests  also  Vettori's  opinion,
that  Leo  had  never  wished  to  dve  his  support  to  tl)e  kin^,
in  whose  behalf,  however,  he  iiad  expressed  himself  far  too
decisively.

X  According  to  a  letter  from  the  admiral,  of  the  17th  or
18th  of  June,  "  11  Treverese  havea  rimosso  il  Marchese  di
Brandenburg  qual  volea  esser  electo  lui  ;"  but  he  con-
cluded thence,  that  the  king  had  fresh  hope.

chosen.  Had  Frederic  only  been  inspired  by
a  more  daring  ambition !  Had  he  not  been  of
so  cautious  a  nature,  rendered  still  less  enter-
prising by  age  !  But  he  had  too  long  and  too
profound  an  acquaintance  with  the  history  of
the  empire,  not  to  know  that  a  vast  preponder-
ance of  power  was  necessary  to  hold  together
m  union  and  subordination  these  haughty,  ener-
getic princes  and  states,  all  striving  for  inde-
pendence.

Although  liis  resolution  was  taken,  he  once
asked  his  follower,  Philip  of  Solms,  his  opi-
nion. Philip  replied,  that  he  feared  his  lord
would  not  be  able  to  use  his  power  of  punish-
ing with  due  severity.  Frederic  answered,
that  he  was  of  the  same  opinion ;  and  declined
the  proffered  support.  5  The  time  was  come,
too,  when  no  more  reserves  could  be  mamtain-
ed:  he  declared  himself  openly  for  King
Charles.  This  declaration  decided  those  who
had  till  then  been  wavering.

On  the  2Sth  of  June,  the  tocsin  was  sounded,
according  to  ancient  custom,  and  the  electors
assembled,  clad  in  their  scarlet  robes  of  state,
in  the  small  dark  chapel  in  the  choir  of  the
church  of  St.  Barthplomew,  which  served  them
as  conclave.  They  were  already  unanknous.
Mainz  addressed  himself  first,  accordmg  to
ancient  precedent,  to  Treves,  who  replied  that
he  voted  for  the  Archduke  Charles  of  Austria,,
Prince  of  Burgundy,  King  of  Spain.  So  said
they  all ;  the  King  of  France  had  not  a  vote.ji

The  electors  were  however  mindful,  in
choosing  so  puissant  a  prince,  immediately  to
take  measures  for  securing  the  rights  of  the
empire.  They  laid  before  the  elected  King
of  the  Romans  a  rigorous  capitulation,  con-
structed on  the  principles  which  had  been  eßta-
blished  during  the  last  negotiations  with  Maxi-
milian.^ In  this  it  was  decided  that  the  public
ofhces  should  be  filled  exclusively  by  Germans,
the  public  proceedings  carried  on  exclusively
in  the  .  German  language,  and  the  assemblies
of  the  empire  invariably  held  vrithin  the  fron-
tiers of  the  German  nation.  Nor  did  the  elec-
tors forget  their  own  pri-\-ileges.  They  stipu-
lated that  they  were  to  have  seats  in  the
Council  of  Regency ;  that  no  war  was  to  be
declared,  no  alliance  concluded,  no  diet  con-
voked— it  is  hardly  necessary  to  add,  no  tax
imposed — Vv'ithout  their  consent ;  whatever  was
acquired  by  the  counsel  and  aid  of  tlie  States
in  war,  should  remam'for  ever  the  property  of
the  empire.**

And  here  another  reflection  suggests  itself
The  princes,  it  is  true,  elected  a  puissant  mon-
arch as  their  chief  But  it  may  be  asked,  v/as
not  his  position,  v.-hich  rendered  inevitable  his
^frequent  absence,  favourable  to  the  development
of  their  own  power  1  ,

§  Extract  from  Lucas  Geierberg,  Leben  Philipsen,  Gra-
fen von  Solms,  after  the  preface  to  Gobel's  Beiträgen  zur
Staatsgeschichte  von  Europa,  p.  19.

II  Protocollum  Electionis  in  Goldast's  Polit.  Reichshün-
deln,  p.  4L  The  speeches  said  to  have  been  delivered  on
this  occasion  are  fictitious.  See  Ranke,  Zur  Kritik
neuerer  Geschichtschreiber,  p.  62.

¥  Revers  in  Bucholtz,  iii.  668.

*''=  Capitulation,  amongst  others,  in  Dtimont,  iv.  1.  Un-
fortunately 1  have  not  been  able  to  examine  the  docu-
ments.

ghap.  ir.

KEV/  GOVERNMENT.

12(5^

Under  a  prince  like  this,  who  had  to  govern
•  so  many  countries,  to  provide  against  so  many
I  wars,  they  could  most  easily  obtain  that  repre-
j  sentative  constitution,  that  share  in  the  g-overn-
\  ment  of  the  «mpire,  which  it  had  been  the
i  constant  object  of  their  endeavours  to  acquü*e
under  JMaximilian.

How  strange  a  mixture  of  the  most  hetero-
geneous m.otives  combmed  to  bring  about  the
election  of  .Charles  V. !  Pecuniary  bribes  (it
is  not  to  be  denied)  to  a  large  amount,  both  to
the  princes,  among  whom  were  even  Treves
and  Duke  John  of  Saxony,  and  to  their  depend-
ents and  councillors ;  the  concession  of  new
privileges;  family  alliances,  near  or  remote,
which  either  already  existed,  or  were  now  con-
cluded, or  ^  contracted  for  the  f jture :  on  the
other*  hand,  som-O  degree  of  dread  of  the  army
of  the  Swabian  league,  which  was  still  in  the
field  and  in  the  pay  of  Austria  ;*  and,  lastly,
antipathy  to  the  stranger,  in  spite  of  his  still
more  profuse  offers  of  money ;  attachment  to
the  house  which  had  already  given  several  em-
perors to  Germany,  and  which  enjoyed  tradi-
tional respect;  the  dangers  attending  everj-
other  course ;  the  expectation  of  good  results
from  that  pursued;  —  in  sliort,  a  mixture  of
purely  personal  considerations  and  of  sincere
regard  for  the  public  weal !  Among  the  various
influences  which  determined  the  event,  we  must
not  omit  to  add  that  of  luck.  On  the  very  day,
nay  the  very  hour,  of  election,  an  event  took
place  hi  Lower  Saxony,  which,  had  it  occurred
earlier,  might  easily  have  rendered  the  issue
once  more  doubtful,  and  have  revived  the  hopes
of  the  French  party.

The  cavalry  of  Gueldres  had  at  length  joined
Duke  Henry  of  Lüneburg,  vrho  had  set  out
without  delay  to  seek  in  the  field  the  pkinder-
laden  army  of  his  cousins.  He  came  up  with
this  near  So],tau  on  the  Haide,  and  began  tlie
attack  without  vraiting  for  his  infantry.  His
strength  lay. in  his  cavalry,  which  rushed  up  to
the  enemy's  artillery  and  took  it,  then  broke
tiie  lines  of  the  infantry,  partly  mercenaries,
who  took  to  flight  and  threw  their  arms  into
tiie  sand :  animated  by  this  success,  the  con-
quering troop  then  made  a  violent  attack  on
tlie  squadron  of  Calenberg  horse.  Here  they
met  Vvdth  a  gallant  resistance ;  Duke  Eric  of
Calenberg,  distinguishable  by  his  white  plume,
forced  his  way  into  their  ranks ;  hut,  in  spite
of  his  bravery,  the  Limeburgers'  overpovrered
him  by  their  numbers,  and  gained  a  complete
victory.  Eric  himself,  his  brother  William,
and  a  hundred  and  twenty  knights,  were  made
prisoners  by  the  partisans  of  the  King  of
France.f

But  since,  as  v/e  have  observed,  the  election
of  the  emperor  was  concluded  on  the  same  day,
this  victory  was  utterly  firuitless.  The  victors
were  now  compelled  to  avoid  all  coimexion
with  France,  while  the  vanquished  found  favour
and assistance fi:om the commissioners of

*Eichard  Pace  to  Cardinal  Wolsey,  i.  ]57.  "  Suerly
tbey  wold  nott  have  electidde  him  j-ff.fere  of  these  per-
sons hadde  not  dryven  them  thereunto."

t  Chytraeus,  Saxonia,  lib.  viii.  p.  207.  Carmen  prolisius,
in  Leibnitz,  Scriptores  ßer.  Brunsv.  iii.  257.

17

/

Charles  V.  at  x\ugsburg.  In  October,  Henry
the  Younger  of  Wolfenbüttel  took  up  arms
anew,  aided,  as  it  was  believed,  by  money  fi-om
Augsburg,  and  committed  devastations  in  Hil-
desheim, estimated  at  a  hundred  and  fifly  thou-
sand gulden ;  and  it  was  with  difiiculty  that  he
could  be  induced  by  the  neighbouring  princes
to  grant  a  truce.  He  would  agree  to  no  defin-
itive terras  proposed  by  the  mediators.  He
quitted  Zerbst,  where  they  were  assembled,  by
night,  Vv'ithout  bidding  them  fiirewell,  and  only
leaving  word  that  he  must  reserve  the  matter
for  the  depision  of  his  imperial  majesty- (May
1520).  If  France  had  defended  the  Lünebm-g-
ers,  Austria  and  her  fortunes  now  lent  more
powerful  support  to  then-  adversaries.

The  aftliirs  of  Upper  Germany  at  the  same
moment  took  a  still  more  decisive  turn  in  the
same  direction.  Würtemberg  passed  entirely
into  Austrian  hands.

The  cause  of  this  was  that  Duke  Ulrich,  in
this  unexpected  attack  m  August,  had  driven
out  the  government  of  the  league,  taken  the
coimtry  again  into  his  own  possession,  and  was
only  expelled  from  it  by  renewed  efforts  of  that
body. I  This  conquest  was  now  burdensome  to
the  conquerors :  the  expenses  of  the  former
war,  for  vrhich  they  earnestly  desired  some
compensation,  were  now,  on  the  contrary,  in-
creased by  new  ones.  The  members  of  the
league,  therefore,  joynally  accepted  the  empe-
ror's proposition  to  take  into  his  charge  and
custody  the  country,  together  with  the  duke's
children ;  and  in  consideration  of  this  conces-
sion, he  promised  to  accede  to  the  demands  of
the  States.  5  In  February  1520,  the  imperial
commissioners  took  the  administration  into  their
ov\"n  hands;  and  by  confirm.ing  the  treaty  of
Tübingen,  which  Uh'ich  at  his  return  had  been
imprudent  enough  to  revoke,  they  secured  a
considerable  party  in  the  country.

This  first  act  of  Charles's  government  wore
a  very  arbitrary  aspect.  For  it  vras  utterly
unheard  of  that,  as  the  Swiss  expressed  it,  "  a
prince  of  the  Holy  Empire  should  be  driven
from  his  illustrious  house,  contrary  to  all  law,
and  forcibly  despoiled  of  the  principality  which
v.^as  his  by  paternal  inheritance  and  right."
But  the  commissioners  regarded  the  election  as
a  triumph  of  the  Austrian  party,  and  were  only
anxious  to  turn  it  to  then-  ov,m  advantage.

This  had  not  been  the  intention  of  the  elect-
ors— least  of  ail  that  of  Frederic  of  Saxony ;
on  the  contrary,  they  had  immediately  consi-
dered how  to  introduce  an  uniform  representa-
tive govermnent,  to  convoke  an  imperial  diet,
and  to  appoint  a  Council  of  Regency.  The
court  of  Spain  appeared  to  approve  cordially
of  these  measures ;  a  proclamation  arrived,  in
which  Elector  Frederic  v/as  nomhiated  lieute-
nant (Statthalter)  of  the  Regency,  and  was
also  entreated  to  give  his  good  counsel  in  public
afiairs.  But  the  commissioners  did  not  think
fit  to  convoke  a  diet,  still  less  to  nominate  a
Council  of  Regency. They  carefiilly  avoided

J  Stiimphart,  Chronica  gvs-altiger  Verjagung  Herzog  Ul-
richs (Chronicle  of  the  forcible  Expulsion  of  Duke  Ulrich)
Sattler,  Herzgoge,  ii.  Appendixes,  p.  43.

§Gwalt  K.  Karls  V.  auf  seine  Commissarien,  ibid.  p.  79

130

CAJETAN.

Book  IL

consulting  the  elector,  and  kept  the  diploma
of  his  nomination  to  themselves.  They  were
as  fully  determined  now,  as  under  Maximilian,
to  resist  all  interference  on  the  part  of  the
States ;  they  chose  to  retain  the  whole  of  the
public  business  in  their  own  hands.

This  ought  to  eicite  no  wonder.  These
imperial  functionaries  remained  firmly  attached
to  those  views  which  had  become  current  under
Maximilian,  and  regarded  the  new  government
as  a  mere  continuation  of  the  old.

It  therefore  became  a  matter  of  double  soli-
citude to  ascertain  in  what  light  the  young
prince,  on  his  arrival  in  Germany,  and  those
around  him,  v/ould  regard  affairs,  or  in  what
spirit  he  would  undertake  their  management.
His  commanding  station  and  wide  sovereignty
naturally  led  people  to  expect  views  propor-
tionally grand  and  elevated ;  and  such  indeed
were  displayed  in  all  his  letters.  He  \^Tote  to
Elector  Frederic  that  he  should  find  that  he
had  given  his  vote  to  the  most  grateful  of
princes ;  that  he  would  shortly  appear  in  per-
son, hold  a  diet,  and  order  the  affairs  of  the
empire  with  the  counsel  and  approbation  of  his
well-beloved,  the  Elector ;  "  for,"  said  he,  "  we
esteem  marvellously  the  designs,  the  counsel,
and  the  wisdom  of  thy  rule."*

Before,  liov>'ever,  Charles  could  arrive,  the
religious  aftairs  of  Germany  had  assum.ed  a
character  which  rendered  the  question,  what
course  he  would  embrace,  no  less  important  to
the  church  than  to  the  empire.

CHAPTER  ni.

FI2ST  DEFECTION  FR03I  THE  PAPACY,  1519-20.

CAJETAN  AND  MILTITZ.

During  the  interval  Ave  have  been  treating
of,  it  had  more  than  once  appeared  probable
that  the  Lutheran  controversy  v,'ould  be  brought
to  a  peacefiil  termination;  to  this  both  sides
v/ere  inclined.

Daring  the  diet/ at  Augsburg,  Elector  Fre-
deric prevailed  on  himself  to  pay  a  visit  to  the
papal  legate,  and  to  invite  his  mediation.  I  do
not  find  that  the  latter  had  any  special  com-
mission from  Rome  to  this  effect,  but  his  gene-
ral powers  gave  him  full  liberty  to  accept  such
an  office.  He  promised  the  elector  to  listen  to
the  monk  whenever  he  should  appear  before
him,  and  to  dismiss  him  with  paternal  fcmd-
-iiess.f

The  business  of  the  meeting  was  already
ended,  v/hen  Luther,  well  pleased  at  not  being
obliged  to  go  to  Rome,  set  out  to  present  him-

*  Instruction  to  Hieronymus  Brunner,  Barselona,  Sept.
25,  ]519,  in  a  register  in  the  Weimar  archives,  which  lays
open  the  whole  of  the  circumstances.

t  Frederic's  letter  to  Cajetan  (Löscher,  ii.  543):  "  Per-
suaseramus  nobis,  vestram  pietatem  audito  Martino  se-
cundum vestram  multiplicem  promissionem  eum  paterne
et  benevole  dimissuram  esse."  See  Luther,  wider  Hans
Worst  Altenb.  vii.  462.  Letter  to  Lang  in  de  Wette,  i.
HL

self  before  the  cardinal.  He  travelled  indeed
in  a  most  lowly  guise ;  the  cowl  he  wore  was
borrowed,  and  he  wandered  on,  craving  hospi-
tality from  convent  to  convent,  lQ,  and  some-
times exhausted  even  to  faintin^.|  He  often
said  afterwards,  that  if  the  cardinal  had  treated
him  kindly,  he  might  easily  have  induced  him
to  keep  silence.  -  When  he  came  into  his  pre-
sence, he  fell  down  at  his  feet.

Unhappily,  however,  this  legate,  Thomas  de
Vio  of  Gaeta  (Cajetan),  was  not  only  a  repre-
sentative of  the  Curia,  but  a  most  zealous
Thomist.  His  mother,  it  is  said,  dreamt  when
she  was  with  child  of  him,  that  she  saw  St.
Thomas  in  person  teaching  him,  and  afterwards
bearing  him  to  heaven. §  In  his  sixteenth  year,
in  spite  of  the  great  reluctance  of  his  family,
he  was  not  to  be  withheld  fi'om  entering  a
Dominican  convent,  where  laying  aside  his
origmal  name  of  James,  he  took  that  of  his
saint,  and  exerted  all  his  powers  thoroughly  to
imbue  his  mind  with  the  doctrines  of  St
Thomas,  whom  he  esteemed  the  most  perfect
theologian  that  ever  existed.  He  undertook
to  defend  his  great  work,  the  Summa,  step  by
step,  agaiast  the  objections  of  the  Scotists.||

Luther,  therefore,  was  already  extremely
odious  to  him  as  a  nominalist,  as  an  impugner
of  the  theological  despotism  of  St.  Thomas,
and  as  leader  of  an  active  opposition  party  in  a
newly-created  university.  At  first  he  replied
to  Luther's  humility  vv-ith  the  official  fatherl)''
condescension  of  a  spiritual  superior.  But  the  "
natural  antagonism  between  them  soon  broke
out.  The  cardinal  was  not  disposed  to  be  satis-
fied with  mere  silence,  nor  would  he  permit
the  matter  to  come  to  a  disputation,  as  Luther
proposed  ;  he  thought  he  had  demonstrated  the
monk's  error  to  him  in  a  few  words,  and  de-
manded a  recantation.  This  awakened  in  Lu-
ther a  feelmg  of  that  complete  contrariety  of
opinions  and  systems,  which  acknowledges  no
subordhiation,  whether  spiritual  or  temporal.
It  appeared  to  him  that  the  cardinal  did  not
even  understand  his  idea  of  faith,  far  less  con-
fute it :  a  conversation  arose  in  which  Luther
displayed  more  reading,  more  distinctness  and
depth  of  views,  than  the  legate  had  given  him
credit  for ;  speculations  of  so  extraordinary  a
kind  had  never  come  before  him  ;  the  deep-set
glittering  eyes,  fixed  upon  his,  inspired  him
with  a  sort  of  horror ;  at  length  he  exclaimed
that  Luther  must  either  recant  or  never  ven-
ture mto  his  sight  a^ain.^f

It  was  the  dominican  system  which  here,
clad  in  purple,  repulsed  its  antagonist.  .  Luther,
though  furnished  with  a  safe-conduct  from  the
emperor,  thought  himself  no  longer  secure
from  violence ;  he  drew  up  an  appeal  to  the
pope,  praying  him  to  inquire  into  the  matter.

t  Luther  to  Spalatin,  Oct.  10,  1518,  in  de  W.  142.

§So  says  the  Biography  in  Roccaberti,  Bibl.  Max.  t.
xix.  p.  443.

!,'"  Divi  ThomaB  Summa  cum  commentariis  Thomae  de
Vio,  Lugduni,  J587.  Prasfatio  :  Inter  theologos  quern  divo
Thomce  Aquinati  praeferre  ausis,  invenies  neminem."

TT  Luther^s  report  in  the  Acta  Augustana,  his  letters,  the

addresses  of  the  legate,  finally  a  letter  from  Staupitz,  in

Grimm  (passim,  p.  123"),  give  sufficient  information  about

this  interview. It  is  to  be  regretted  that  the  account  sent

1  by  the  legate  to  jaome  lias  neVer  come  to  light.

Chap.  III.

MILTITZ.

131

and  took  to  flight.  His  going  corresponded
with  his  coming.  Escaping  through  a  secret
gate  which  his  Augsburg  friends  opened  for
him  by  night,  mounted  on  a  horse  procured  for
him  by  his  provincial,  Staupitz,  habited  in  his
cowl,  and  without  any  proper  riding  garments,
be  rode,  accompanied  by  a  mounted  guide,
eight  long  German  miles  the  first  day ;  on
alighting,  he  fell  half  dead  from  fatigue  by  the
side  of  his  horse  on  the  straw.  But  he  was
happily  out  of  the  immediate  jurisdiction  of  the
legate.

Cajetan's  accusations  soon  followed  him  to
Saxony.  He  conjured  the  elector  not  to  stain
the  glory  of  his  house  for  the  sake  of  an  here-
tical friar  ;  if  he  did  not  choose  to  send  him  to
Rome,  at  least  to  get  rid  of  him  out  of  his
country ;  he  declared  that  Rome  would  never
suffer  this  affair  to  drop.  But  he  could  no
longer  produce  any  impression ;  his  indiscreet
and  violent  conduct  had  robbed  him  of  all
credit  with  Frederic.  The  university  wrote  to
then-  prince  that  they  Imew  no  otherwise  than
that  Luther  showed  all  due  reverence  for  the
church,  and  even  for  the  pope ;  were  there
wickedness  in  the  man,  they  would  be  tlie  first
to  notice  it.  This  corporation  Vv^as  irritated  that
the  legate  should  treat  one  of  its  members  as
a  heretic,  before  any  sentence  had  been  pro-
nounced.* Thus  seconded,  Frederic  replied
to  the  legate,  that  it  had  not  yet  been  shown
by  any  of  the  numerous  learned  men  in  his
own  states,  or  those  contiguous,  that  Luther
was  a  heretic  ;  and  refused  to  banish  hirn.f

Luther  however  did  not  conceal  from  him-
self that  the  sentence  pronounced  by  Rome
-might  very  probably  be  unfavourable  to  him..
He  hastened  to  secure  himself  against  tliis  as
far  as  possible  by  a  fresh  appeal  to  the  general
council  vdiich  was  just  about  to  be  called.

But  the  conduct  of  the  cardinal  did  not  ob-
tain the  approbation  of  Rome.  That  court  vras
not  disposed  to  alienate  so  considerable  and  re-
spected a  sovereign  as  Frederic,  who  had  just
acquired  twofold  weight  by  his  conduct  at  the
election,  and  with  whom,  it  had  probably  rested
to  raise  the  King  of  France  to  the  miperial
throne,  as  the  pope  had  desired.  Leo  there-
fore now  made  an  attempt  to  bring  the  discus-
sion concerning  Luther  to  an  amicable  conclu-
sion. He  determined  to  send  the  elector  the
golden  rose,  a  mark  of  the  apostolical  favour,
for  which  that  prince  had  ah.vays  been  very
anxious.  In  order  to  draw  the  loosened  ties
closer  betvv-een  them,  lie  likewise  despatched  a
native  of  Saxony,  and  agent  of  the  elector  at
Rome,  to  him  as  nuncio.

Karl  von  Miltitz  unquestionably  showed
great  address  m  the  manner  in  which  he  set
about  the  affah*.

On  his  arrival  in  Germany  he  abstained
from  visitmg  the  legate,  who  indeed  had  lost
all  mfluence,  and  now  showed  a  sullen  resent-
ment against  the  elector ;  even  on  the  journey,
Miltitz  contracted  an  intimacy  with  one  of

*  With  regard  to  the  brief  in  which  mention  is  made
of  a  sentence  already  passed  (in  Löscher,  ii.  438).  I  think
I  have  shown  in  an  Excursus,  that  it  is  not  genuine;

t  Correspondence  in  Löscher,  537-512.

Frederic's  privy  councillors,  Degenhard  PfefSn-
ger.  He  did  not  scruple  among  friends,  over
the  convivial  table,  or  even  in  mns  and  taverns,
to  join  in  the  complaints  which  were  made  in
Germany  of  the  Curia,  and  of  the  abuses  of
the  church ;  nay,  to  confirm  them  by  anecdotes
of  what  he  had  himself  witnessed.  But  he
assured  his  hearers  that  he  knew  the  pope,  and
had  influence  with  him,  and  that  Leo  did  not
approve  these  things.  He  pronounced  the
most  entire  and  distmct  disapprobation  of  the
scandalous  proceedings  of  the  vendors  of  in-
dulgences ;  and  m  short  the  reputation  which
preceded  him  was  such  that  Tetzel  did  not  dare
to  present  himself  before  hLm,|

On  the  other  hand,  the  prince,  towards
whom  he  maintained  the  demeanour  of  a  sub-
ject and  servant,  and  Luther  himself,  whom
he  treated  very  indulgently,  conceived  great
confidence  in  him.  Without  much  trouble,  ho
succeeded  in  bringing-  about  that  degree  of  ap-
proximation between  himself  and  the  anti-
dominican  party,  which  was  absolutely  neces-
sary to  the  success  of  his  negotiation.

On  the  3d  January,  1519,  he  had  an  inter-
view with  Luther  at  Altenburg.  The  nuncio
represented  to  the  monk  the  evils  which  arose
from  his  vehemence,  and  the  great  breach
which  he  would  thus  make  in  the  church :  he
implored  him  with  tears  to  lay  these  thmgs  to
heart.  Luther  promised  to  remedy,  by  a  pub-
lic explanation  of  his  doctrine,  whatever  mis-
chief he  might  have  done.  On  the  other  hand,
the  nuncio  gave  up  the  idea  of  bringing  Lu-
ther to  a  recantation.  They  came  to  an  agree-
ment that  the  matter  should  be  referred  to  a
German  bishop,  and  that,  mea],iwlnle,  both  par-
ties should  be  bound  to  observe  silence.  ^  So,
thought  Luther,  the  controversy  would  die
away. Tliey  embraced  and  parted.

The  explanation  which  Luther  soon  afler
published,  in  consequence  of  this  conversation,
is  very  remarkable.  He  touches  on  all  the
controverted  points  of  the  moment.  Without
abandoning  the  free  attitude  he  had  assumed,
he  shows  that  he  considers  himself  as  still
within  the  pale  of  the  Roman  church  ;  for  ex-
ample, he  maintains  that  the  sahits  ought  to  be
invoked  for  spiritual,  rather  than  for  temporal
gifts,  but  he  does  not  deny  that  God  works
miracles  at  their  graves ;  he  still  admits  the
doctrine  of  purgatory,  and  of  indulgences  in  a
certain  sense ;  he  wishes  for  some  relaxation
of  the  com.mandments  of  the  church,  but  is  of
opinion  that  this  could  only  be  granted  by  an
ecclesiastical  council ;  although  he  ascribes
salvation  to  the  fear  of  God  and  the  state  of  the
thoughts  and  intentions,  he  does  not  entirely
reject  good  worte.  It  is  evident  that  on  every
point  he  insists  on  inward,  rather  than  outward
influences  and  merits;  but  he  does  so  with
great  moderation,  and  endeavours  to  maintain
external  observances.  In  the  same  spirit  he
speaks  of  the  church. He  sees  her  essence  m

IHis  letter  of  apolojry,  subscribed  "Brotlier  Tetzel,  on
the  last  day  of  Dec.  1519,"  {i.  e.  1518,)  in  Walch.  xv.  p.
860.  The  rest  of  Miltitz's  Correspondence,  first  published
by  Cyprian,  is  also  to  be  found  in  Walch.

§  "In  ir  selbs  vorgehn."  — Xitf.^er  to  the  Electors,  in  De
Wette,  i.213.

132

MELANCHTHON.

Bpok  II.

"  inward  unity  and  love ;"  but  he  does  not  re-
ject her  constitution;  he  acknowledges  the
supremacy  of  the  church  of  Rome,  "  where
St.  Peter  and  St.  Paul,  forty-six  popes,  and
liundreds  of  thousands  of  martyrs,  poured  out
their  blood,  and  overcame  hell  and  the  world :"
no  sin  that  can  be  committed  m  her  can  justify
us  m  Separating-  ourselves  from  her,  or  in  re-
sisting the  commands  of  the  pope.*

With  this  explanation  the  ecclesiastical  au-
thority might  for  the  moment  be  content — and
indeed  was  forced  to  be  content.  For,  if  Elec-
tor Frederic  chose  to  accept  it,  there  was  no
other  powder  that  could  be  turned  against  Lu-
ther :  so  great  was  the  interest  which  the  na-
tion already  took  in  his  cause ;  so  strong  the
aversion  which  repelled  all  interference  of  the
court  of  Rome.

Li  the  early  months  of  the  year  1519,  when
the  demands  of  the  last  diet  in  behoof  of  the
Turkish  war  were  made  to  the  several  States
in  all  parts  of  Germany,  the  doubts  expressed
in  that  assembly  as  to  the  reality  of  the  inten-
tion Vv'hich  served  as  pretext  were  now  repeat-
ed in  various  circles,  and  were  more  and  more
■widely  diffused;  all  the  well-founded  com-
plaints wdiich  had  there  been  more  distmctly
stated .  than  ever,  were  now  the  topic  of  dis-
course through  the  whole-  nation.

Moreover,  the  interest  which  the  papal  legate
had  evinced  in  the  views  of  Francis  I.  on  the
imperial  crown,  excited  great  disgust.  It  is  a
fact  well  worth  notice,  that  the  whole  Austrian
party  thus  naturally  fell  into  a  state  of  hostility
to  the  Roman  see.  At  the  court  of  its  leader,
the  Elector  of  Mainz,  there  appeared  satires
in  which  tlie  pompous  inanity  of  the  legate,  his
personal  peculiarities  and  the  oppressive  nature
of  his  office,  were  ridiculed  in  tlie  bitterest
manner.  In  the  spring  of  1.519,f  it  was  with
difficulty  tiiat  he  could  find  a  boatman  in  Mainz
w^ho  would  consent  to  take  him  down  the  river
to  Niederwesel,  where  the  Rhenish  electors
held  a  meeting  :  he  was  once  told  that  he  must
renounce  all  his  French  schemes  if  he  wished
to  get  home  in  a  whole  skin.t

This  universal  unpopularity  compelled  the
court  of  Rome  to  observe  a  discreet  reserve,  to
which  its  interest  in  the  election  contributed ;
and  thus  it  happened  that  Rome  once  more
tried  by  every  means  in  its  power  to  be  upon  a
footing  of  amity  with  Elector  Frederic.  An-
other plenipotentiary  of  the  Curia  besides  Mil-
titz  appeared  in  Saxony.  The  legate,  although
with  obvious  ill  will,  was  at  length  prevailed
upon  to  deliver  to  the  elector  the  golden  rose
v/hich  had  been  entrusted  to  him,  and  which
he  had  till  now  withheld.  The  prospect  of
putting  an  end  to  the  controversy  in  Germany
was  desirable  and  commodious  even  to  him.
The  Archbishop  of  Treves  vv^as  selected  as
judge.  §

*  D.  M.  L.  Unterricht  auf  etliche  Artikel  so  ihm  von
seinen  Abgönnern  aufgeleght  worden:  Walch,  xv.  8'22.

t  Hutten's  Febris  Prima  (op.  ill.  109,)  belongs  to  this
period.

I  Letter  to  Zürich  in  Anselm,  Berne  Chronik,  v.  373.

§  Miltitz  to  the  Electors:  Walch,  xv.  879  :  he  had  seen
the  legate  at  Coblentz.  The  instruction  to  Miltitz,  1.  1,
must  likewise  be  assigned  to  the  month  of  May,  as  it  re-

ARRIVAL  OF  MELAjyCHTHON.

The  state  of  suspended  controversy  and  pre-
liminary calm  that  now  arose  was  peculiarly
advantageous  to  the  university  of  Wittenberg.
There  wms  a  general  sentiment  of  an  under-
taking successfully  begun,  increasmg  in  force
of  opposition,  but  yet  not  obnoxious  to  the  con-
demnation of  the  church.  The  members  of  the
university  had  time  to  carry  forward  the  proper
studies  of  the  place  in  the  spirit  that  had  from
the  first  presided  over  them.  The  most  emi-
nent teachers  still  held  the  same  opinions  on
the  main  question.  Besides  this,  in  the  summer
of  1518,  they  had  acquired  a  youthful  assistant,
whose  labours  from  the  first  moment  gave  new
life  to  their  whole  proceedings.

Philip  Schwarzerd,  surnamed  Melanchthon,
was,  in  the  truest  and  most  perfect  sense,  a
disciple  of  Reuchlin.  Reuchlin  was  one  of  his
nearest  relations,  and  had  directed  his  educa-
tion :  the  young  man  followed  the  precepts  and
example  of  his  master  with  intelligent  docility ;  ^
the  native  powejs  which  well-conducted  studies
never  fail  to  develop,  the  sympathy  he  received
from  his  fellow-students,  and,  above  all,  a
matchless  capacity,  certain,  fi-om  the  first,  of
its  vocation,  led  him  rapidly  forwards.  In  his
17th  or  18th  year  he  had  already  begun  to
teach  in  Tübingen,  and  had  published  two  or
three  little  books  on  grammatical  subjects.il

But  the  mind  of  the  pupil,  like  that  of  the
master,  was  not  satisfied  with  philological  stu-
dies. He  attended  lectures  in  all  faculties ;  for
the  sciences  were  not  as  yet  cultivated  in  such
detail,  or  in  so  special  a  manner,  as  to  render
tliat  impossible ;  tliey  could  still  furnish  nutri-
ment to  a  large  and  liberal  curiosity.  Melanch-
thon  felt  peculiarly  attracted  towards  the  study
of  philosophy,  in  comparison  v\äth  Avhich  all  his
other  pursuits  appeared  to  him  mere  v.^aste  of
time.  Bat  the  rigid,  stationary  spirit  of  the  old
universities  still  reigned  in  Tübingen;  and
while  his  whole  intellectual  powers  were
stretching  forward  to  unlmown  regions,  his
instructors  sought  to  bind  hmi  down  to  a  life-
less routine.

A  circumstance,  hovvever,  occurred  which
decided  both  his  outward  destiny  and  the  direc-
tion of  his  mind.  In  the  spring'  of  1.518,  Elector
Frederic  applied  to  Reuchlin  to  send  huTi  a
teacher  of  the  Greek  language  for  his  univer-
sity. Without  a  moment's  hesitation,  Reuchlin
recommended  "  his  kinsman  and  friend,"  whom
he  himself  had  instructed. IT  This  might  be
regarded  as  mvolving  Melanchthon's  decision ;
for  between  master  and  disciple  there  was  that
noble  relation  which  exists  between  a  youth
who  beholds  the  world  in  the  imperfect  light
shed  over  distant  objects,  and  the  admitted  su-
periority of  a  matured  judgment.  "  Whither
thou  wilt  send  me,"  writes  Melanclithon  to
Reuchlin,  "  there  will  I  go ;  wdiat  thou  wilt

fers  to  his  journey  into  Saxon}-,  which  he  mentions  in
his  letter,  dated  Wednesday  after  Misericordia,  May  11.

II  Schnurrer  de  Phil.  Melanchthonis  rebus  Tubingensi-
bus:  Orationes  Academ.  ed.  Paulus,  p.  52.  Prasfatio  in
primam  editionem  operum.  Bretschneiders  Corpus  Re-
formatorum,  iv.  715.

IF  Correspondence  in  the  Corp.  Ref  i.  28.

Chav.  III.

DISPUTATION  AT  LEIPZIG.

1.33

make  of  me,  that  I  will  become."  "  Get  thee
out,"  answered  Reuchlin, "  from  th}^  country  and
from  thy  kindred."  With  the  words  once  ad-
dressed to  Abraham,  he  blessed  him  and  bade
hhn  depart.

In  August  151 8,  Melanchthon  came  to  Wit-
tenberg. His  first  determmation  was,  as  he
says,  to  devote  himself  entirely  to  the  univer-  i
sity,  and  to  raise  its  fame  in  tlie  classical  stu- '
dies,  which  had  as  yet  been  cultivated  with
little  success.  With  the  high  spirits  of  youth
he  reckoned  up  the  labours  he  had  before  him,
and  hastened  to  enter  upon  them."*-'  Before
September  was  over,  he  dedicated  to  the  elector
the  translation  of  one  of  Lucian's  works ;  in
October  he  printed  the  Epistle  to  Titus  and  a
little  dictionary;  in  November  he  wrote  the
preface  to  a  Hebrew  Grammar.  He  imme-
diately undertook  a  more  elaborate  work — his
Rhetoric,  which  appeared  in  three  books,  in
January  1519.  In  February  followed  another
discourse ;  in  March  and  April,  editions  of  se-
veral of  Plutarch's  \\Titings,  with  a  preface —
all  during  an  equally  varied  and  laborious
course  of  teaching ;  for  the  youthful  stranger
undertook  to  give  instructions  in  Hebrew  as
well  as  Greek,  f

Yet  these  immediate  occupations  led  neither
to  the  scope,  nor  to  the  results,  of  his  laborious
studies.

It  was  an  important  circumstance  that  a
perfect  master  of  Greek  arose  at  this  moment
at  a  university,  where  the  development  of
the  Latin  theology  already  led  to  a  return  to
the  first  genuine  documents  of  primitive  Chris-
tianity. Luther  now  began  to  pursue  this
study  with  earnestness.  His  mhid  was  relieved,
and  his  confidence  strengthened,  when  the
sense  of  a  Greek  phrase  threw^  a  sudden  light
on  his  theological  ideas ;  when,  for  example,  |
he  learned  that  the  idea  of  repentance  (pceni-
tentia),  which,  according  to  the  languao-e  of  the
Latin  church,  signified  expiation  or  satisfaction,
in  the  original  conception  of  the  Founder  and
the  apostles  of  Christianity  signified  nothing
but  a  change  in  the  state  of  mind  ;|  it  seemed
as  if  a  mist  was  suddenly  withdravm  from  be-
fore his  eyes.

It  was  also  of  inestimable  value  to  Melanch-
thon that  he  could  here  devote  him.self  to  sub-
jects which  filled  his  whole  soul,  and  that  he
nov/  found  the  substance  of  those  forms  to  which
his  attention  had  hitherto  been  principally  di-
rected. He  embraced  v/ith  enthusiasm  the
theological  views  of  Luther,  and,  above  all,  his
profound  exposition  of  the  doctrine  of  justifica-
tion. But  he  was  not  form^ed  to  receive  these
opinions  passively.  He  Vv-as  one  of  those  ex-
traordinary spirits,  appearing  at  rare  intervals,
who  attam  to  the  full  possession  and  use  of  then-
powers  at  an  early  period  of  life.  He  was  now
but  just  twenty-one.  With  the  precision  which
solid  philological  studies  seldom  fail  to  impart,
v/ith  the  nice  instinct  natural  to  the  frame  of

*  To  Spalatin,  Sept.  1518. Corp.  Ref.  i.  43.

t  Lather  to  Spalatin,  Jan.  25,  in  de  Wette,  i.  214.  Upon
these  two  correspondences,  as  may  be  imagined,  my
whole  narrative  is  founded.

lliETavoia.

M

his  mind,  he  seized  the  theological  element
which  was  offered  to  his  grasp.

The  somewhat  unfavourable  impression
which  the  youthful  and  unpretendmg  appear-
ance of  the  new-comer  had  at  first  rnade,  was
quickly  effaced.  The  scholars  caught  the  in-
fection of  their  teacher's  zeal.  "  They  are  as
industrious  as  ants  at  the  university,"  says
Luther.  Reforms  m  the  method  of  instruction
were  proposed.  With  the  approbation  of  the
court,  lectures  were  discontmued  which  had  no
value  but  for  the  scholastic  system,  and  others
Vv'ere  instituted,  founded  on 'classical  studies;
the  conditions  upon  which  academical  degrees
were  granted  were  rendered  less  severe.  Tliese
measures  unquestionably  tended  to  place  Wit-
tenberg in  stronger  contrast  to  the  other  uni-
versities ;  new  views  and  ideas  were  introduced.
Luther's  letters  show  the  ferment  that  was
going  on  withhi  him,  but  they  equally  show
that  neither  he  nor  those  associated  with  him
were  conscious  of  being  mvolved  in  a  general
straggle  with  the  church  of  Rome.  We  saw
how-  carefully  Luther  kept  within  the  bounds
prescribed  by  the  church;  and  Melanchthon,
in  one  of  his  prefaces,  extols  the  services  ren-
dered by  his  sovereign  to  monasteries.^^  This,
as  well  as  the  conduct  pursued  by  Miltitz,  and
finally  also  by  the  legate,  shows  that  every
thing  wcfre  a  peacefi.ü  aspect.

But  at  this  very  moment,  when  external
peace  at  least  was  restored,  and  when,  though
vehement  struggles  were  to  be  anticipated
from  differences  of  opLuion  and  of  education,  it
vras  possible  they  might  be  confined  within  the
region  of  school  learning,  there  arose  a  contest
touching  those  important  doctrines  whereon  the
Church  and  the  State  are  founded,  and  lighting
up  that  war  which  has  never  smce  been  extin-
guished. It  must  be  admitted  that  Luther  was
not  the  person  who  caused  its  outbreak.

DISPUTATION  AT  LEIPZIG.

Dühing  the  diet  of  1518,  Eck  had  appeared
in  Augsburg,  dissatisfied  that  his  polemical
writings  had  as  yet  procured  him  neither  emo-
lument nor  honour: II  he  had  called  on  Luther,
and  had  agreed  with  him,  in  a  perfectly  ami-
cable manner,  publicly  to  fight  out  an  old  con-
troversy which  he  had  with  Dr.  Carlstadt  in
'Wittenberg,  concerning  grace  and  free  w'ül.
Luther  had  readily  offered  his  mediation,  in
order,  as  he  says,  to  give  the  lie  to  the  opinion
that  theologians  cannot  differ  without  hostility.
Carlstadt  consented  to  dispute  v/ith  Eck  in
Erfi.n-t  or  Leipzig;  upon  which  Eck  imme-
diately published  a  prospectus  of  the  disputa-
tion, and  made  it  Imown  as  widely  as  possible.

Luther's  astonisliment  v/as  extreme  when  he
saw  in  this  prospectus  certain  opinions  an-
nounced as  the  subject  of  the  debate,  of  v/hich
he  was  far  more  the  champion  than  Carlstadt.
He  held  this  tor  an  act  of  faithlessness  and
duplicity  which  he  was  called  upon  openly  to
resist;  the  agTeement  he  had  just  concluded

§  Dedication  of  Lucian  in  Caluraniam. C.  R.  i.  47.

11  Bartholini  Commentariiis  de  coraitiis  Augustanis.  p.
645.

134

DISPUTATION  AT  LEIPZIG.

Book  II.

with  Miltitz  seemed  to  him  broken;  he  was
determined  to  take  up  the  gauntlet.*

It  was  of  vast  importance  that  Eck  had  an-
nexed to  the  dogmatic  controversy,  a  proposi-
tion as  to  the  origin  of  the  prerogatives  of  the
papacy.  At  a,  moment  vdien  anti-papal  opi-
nions were  so  decidedly  triumphant  throughout
ohe  nation,  he  had  the  clumsy  servility  to  stir
a  question,  always  of  very  difficult  and  dubious
solution,  yet  from  which  the  whole  system  of
the  Church  and  State  depended,  and,  when
once  agitated,  certain  to  occupy  universal  at-
tention :  he  ventured  to  irritate  an  adversary
v/ho  knew  no  reservations,  who  was  accustom-
ed to  defend  his  opinions  to  the  utmost,  and  who
had  already  the  voice  of  the  nation  on  his  side.
In  reference  to  a  former  assertion  of  Luther's,
which  had  attracted  little  attention.  Eck  pro-
pounded the  maxim,  that  the  primacy  of  the
Pope  of  Rome  w^as  derived  from  Christ  him.self,
and  from  the  times  of  St.  Peter ;  not,  as  his
opponent  had  hinted,  from  those  of  Constantine
and  Sylvester.  The  consequences  of  this  gross
imprudence  were  soon  apparent.  Luther,  who
now  began  to  study  the  original  documents  of
the  papal  law — the  decretals,  and  had  often  in
the  course  of  this  study  felt  his  Christian  con-
victions wounded,  answered  v/ith  a  much  bolder
assertion,  namely,  tliat  the  primacy  of  Rome
had  been  first  established  by  the  deci^etals  of
the  later  popes  in  the  last  four  centuries  (he
meant,  perhaps,  since  Gregory  VIL),  and  that
the  primitive  church  knew  nothing  of  it.f

It  is  not  surprising  that  the  ecclesiastical
8.uthorities  in  Saxony,  (for  example,  the  bishop
of  Merseburg)  and  even  the  theologians  of  the
university,  were  not  much  pleased  that  a  dis-
putation of  the  kind  at  last  agreed  upon  be-
tween the  parties,  should  be  held  in  Leipzig.
Even  the  elector  hesitated  for  a  moment
whether  he  should  allow  Luther  to  go.  But  as
lie  had  the  firmest  conviction  that  hidden  truth
would  best  be  brought  to  light  in  this  manner,
he  at  length  determined  that  it  should  take
place,  and  endeavoured  to  obviate  every  objec-
tion that  stood  in  its  way.  It  was  settled  that,
together  with  various  other  important  points
of  doctrine  on  the  mysteries  of  faith,  the  ques-
tion, whether  the  papacy  was  estalDlished  by
God,  or  whether  it  was  instituted  by  man,  and
consequently  might  be  abolished  by  man  (for
that  is  in  fact  the  point  at  issue  in  the  two  doc-
trines), was  to  be  argued  in  a  public  disputa-
tion, at  a  great  university,  in-  the  face  of  all
Germany ;  that  this  question,  the  very  one  in
which  all  political  and  ecclesiastical  mterests
met  as  in  a  point,  was  to  be  thus  discussed  in  a
period  of  ferment  and  of  ardent  innovation.

At  the  very  moment  when  the  electors  as-
sembled at  Frankfurt  to  choose  an  emperor,
(June,  1519,)  the  theologians  met  to  perform
an  act  of  no  less  importance.

Eck  arrived  first  fi-om  Ingolstadt.  Johann
Mayr  von  Eck  was  unquestionably  one  of  the
most  eminent  scholars  of  his  time — a  reputa-

■■  Luther's  letters  to  Sylvius,  Feb.  3  ;  Spalatin,  Feb.  7;
J^ang,  April  13.

t  Contra  novos  et  veteres  errores  defendet  D.  Martinas
Lutherus  has  sequentes  positiones  in  studio  Lipsensi.
It  is  the  thirteenth  proposition. Opp.  lat.  Jen.  i.  221.

tion  which  he  had  spared  no  pains  to  acquire.
He  had  visited  the  most  celebrated  professors
in  various  universities :  the  Thomist  Süstern
at  Cologne,  the  Scotists  Sum^nhard  and  Scrip-
toris  at  Tübingen ;  he  had  attended  the  law
lectures  of  Zasius  in  Freiburg,  those  on  Greek
of  Reuchlin,  on  Latin  of  Bebel,  on  cosmogra-
phy of  Reusch.  In  his  twentieth  year  he  began
to  write  and  to  lecture  at  Ingolstadt  upon
Occam  and  BieFs  canon  law,  on  Aristotle's
dialectics  and  physics,  the  most  difiicult  doc-
trines of  dogmatic  theology,  and  the  subtleties
of  nominalistic  morality ;  he  then  proceeded  to
the  study  of  the  mystics,  whose  most  curious
works  had  just  fallen  into  his  hands:  he  set
himself,  as  he  says,  to  establish  the  connexion
between  their  doctrines  and  the  Orphicoplatonic
philosophy,  the  sources  of  which  are  to  be
sought  in  Egypt  and  Arabia,  and  to  discuss  the
whole  in  five  parts. J  He  was  one  of  those
learned  men  who  held  that  the  great  questions
which  had  occupied  men's  minds  were  essen-
tially settled ;  who  worked  exclusively  with
the  analytical  faculty  and  the  memory ;  who
were  always  on  the  watch  to  appropriate  to
themselves  a  new  subject  with  which  to  excite
attention,  to  get  advancement,  and  to  secure  a
life  of  ease  and  enjoyment.  His  strongest
taste  was  for  disputation,  in  which  he  had  made
a  brilliant  figure  in  all  the  universities  we  have
mentioned,  as  well  as  in  Heidelberg,  Mainz,
and  Basle  :  at  Freiburg  he  had  early  presided
over  a  class  (the  Bursa  zum  Pfauen)  where
the  chief  business  was  practice  in  disputation ;
he  then  took  long  journeys, — for  example,  to
Vienna  and  Bologna, — expressly  to  dispute
there.  It  is  most  amusing  to  see  in  his  letters
the  satisfaction  with  which  he  speaks  of  his
Italian  journey:  how  he  was  encouraged  to
undertake  it  by  a  papal  nuncio ;  how,  before
his  departure,  he  was  visited  by  the  young
Markgrave  of  Brandenburg;  the  very  honour-
able reception  he  experienced  on  his  way,  in
Italy  as  well  as  in  Germany,  from  both  spiritual
and  temporal  lords,  who  invited  him  to  their
tables ;  how,  when  certain  young  men  had
ventured  to  contradict  him  at  one  of  these  din-
ners, he  had  confuted  them  with  the  utmost
ease,  and  left  them  filled  Vv^ith  astonishment
and  admiration ;  and  lastly,  how,  in  spite  of
manifold  opposition,  he  had  at  last  brought  the
most  learned  of  the  learned  in  Bologna  to  sub-
scribe to  his  maxims.  ^  He  regarded  a  dispu-
tation with  the  eye  of  a  practised  fencer,  as
the  arena  of  unfailing  victory  ;  his  only  wish
was  to  find  new  adversaries  on  whom  to  try
his  weapons.  Pie  therefore  seized  with  avidity
on  an  opportunity  of  extending  his  fame  in
North  Germany.  He  was  now  seen  in  the
midst  of  the  Leipzig  professors  (who  welcomed
him  as  an  ally  against  their  neighbouring  rival
and  enemy),  taking  part  in  the  procession  of
the  Corpus  Christi,  dressed  in  his  priestly  gar-
ments and  with  an  air  of  great  devotion.  In
his  letters  we  find  that  he  did  not  neglect  to
institute  a  nice  comparison  between  the  Saxon

X  Eckii  Epistola  de  ratione,  studiorura  suorum,  in  Stro-
bel's  Miscellaneen,  iii.  p.  97.
§  Riederer,  Nachrichten,  «Sec,  iii.  47.

Chap.  III.

DISPUTATION  AT  LEIPZIG.

133

beer  and  that  of  Bavaria ;  and  also  that  the  |
fah-  sinners  of  Leipzig  did  not  escape  his  no- 1
tice.*  i

On  the  24th  of  June  the  Wittenbergers
arrived ;  the  professors  in  low  open  waggons
on  rollers  or  solid  wooden  wheels  (Rollwagen),
Carlstadt  first,  then  Luther  and  IMelanchthon,
and  some  young  licentiates  and  bachelors ;
with  them  was  Duke  Barnim  of  Pomerania,'
who  was  then  studying  in  Wittenberg  and
held  the  dignity  of  rector ;  around  them,  on
foot,  some  hundreds  of  zealous  students  armed
with  halberds,  battle-axes,  and  spears.  It  v/as
observed  that  the  Leipzigers  did  not  come  out
to  meet  tliem,  as  was  the  custom  and  the
courtesy  of  those  times,  f

With  the  m.ediation  of  Duke  George,  the
terms  of  the  combat  v/ere  next  settled :  Eck
reluctantly  acquiesced  in  the  condition  that  the
speeches  and  rejoinders  should  be  written  down
by  notaries  ;  while  Luther  was  forced  to  con-
cede that  the  decision  was  to  be  left  to  certain
universities;  he  himself  proposed  Paris  and
Erfurt,  The  duke  insisted,  v\'ith  peculiar  earn-
estness, on  these  things ;  he  treated  the  aftair
like  a  trial  at  law,  and  wanted  to  send  the
documents,  as  it  were  to  a  court  of  appeal  for
its  decision.  Meanwhile  he  ordered  a  spacious
hall  in  the  castle  to  be  got  ready  for  the  literary
duel ;  two  pulpits  were  placed  opposite  to  each
other,  covered  with  tapestry,  on  which  were
the  figures  of  the  vrarrior  saints,  St.  George
and  St.  Martin ;  there  was  ample  provision  of
tables  for  the  notaries,  and  of  benches  for  tlie
audience.  '  At  length,  on  the  27th  of  June,  the
action  was  commenced  with  a  mass  and  mvo-
cation  of  the  Holy  Ghost.

Carlstadt  had  insisted  on?  his  right  of  opening
the  debate,  but  he  acquired  little  glory  from  it.
He  brought  books,  out  of  which  he  read  pas-
sages, then  hunted  for  others,  then  read  again ;
the  objections  which  his  opponent  advanced
one  day,  he  answered  the  next.:j:  How  differ-
-ent  a  disputator  was  Johann  Eck !  His  know-
dedge  was  all  at  his  comm.and,  ready  for  use  at
the  moment ;  he  required  so  little  time  for  pre-
paration, tliat  immediately  after  his  return  from
a  ride  he  mounted  the  chair.  He  was  tall,  witli
large  muscular  limbs,  and  loud  penetrating-
voice,  and  walked  backwards  and  forwards
Mobile  speaking  ;  he  had  an  exception  ready  to
take  against  every  argument ;  his  memory  and
address  dazzled  his  hearers.  In  the  njatter
itself — the  explanation  of  the  doctrine  of  grace
and  free-will  —  no  progress  v/as,  of  course,
made.  Sometimes  the  combatants  approxima-
ted so  nearly  in  opinion,  that  each  boasted  he
had  brought  over  the  other  to  his  side,  but  they
soon  diverged  again.  With  the  exception  of  a
distinction  made  by  Eck,  nothing  new  was  pro-
duced ;5  the  most  important  points  were  scarce-
ly touched  upon ;  and  the  whole  affair  was
sometimes  so  tedious  that  the  hall  was  emptied.

*Eck  to  Haven  and^Burkavd,  July  1,in  Walcli,  xv.  p.
1456. In  this  respect  lie  had  the  very  worst  reputation.

fPfeiter's  Beschreibung,  ibid.  p.  1425.

JRubeus,  in  Walch,  xv.  1491.

§Rogatiis  largireturne  totum  opus  bonum  esse  a  dec
respondit ;  tptuni  quidem,  non  autem  tofdhter.—Melanch-
t'/an.

M

The  interest  was  therefore  the  more  intense^
when  at  length,  on  Monday  the  4th  of  July,  at
seven  m  the  morning,  Luther  arose  ;  the  anta-
gonist whom  Eck  most  ardently  desired  to  meet,
and  whose  rising*  fame  he  hoped  to  crush  by  a
brilliant  victory, Luther  was  of  the  middle
size,  at.  that  time  so  thin  as  to  be  mere  skin  and
bone  ;  he  possessed  neither  the  thundering  or-
gan, nor  the  ready  memory  stored  with  various
knowledge,  nor  the  skill  and  dexterity  acquired
in  the  gladiatorial  exercises  of  the  schools,  that
distinguished  his  opponent. But  he,  too,  stood
in  the  prime  of  manhood,  and  in  the  fulness  of
his  strength :  he  was  in  his  thirty-sixth  year ;
his  voice  was  melodious  and  clear ;  he  was  per-
fectly versed  in  the  Bible,  and  its  aptest  sen-
tences presented  themselves unbidden  to  his
mind ;  above  all,  he  inspired  an  irresistible  con-
,  viction  that  he sought  the truth. He  was
!  always  cheerful  at  home,  and  a  joyous,  jocose
;  companion  at  table ;  he  even,  on  this  grave
occasion,  ascended  the  platform  with  a  nosegay
in  his  hand ;  but,  when  there,  he  displayed  the
intrepid  and  self-forgetting  earnestness  arismg
,  fi-om  the  depths  of  a  conviction  till  now  unfa-
thomed,  even  by  himself He  drew  forth  new
thoughts,  and  placed  them  in  the  fire  of  the
battle,  with  a  determination  that  knew  no  fear
and  no  personal  regards. His  features  bore  the
traces  of  the  storms  that  had  passed  over  his
soul,  and  of  the  courage  with  v.diich  he  was
prepared  to  encounter  those  that  yet  awaited
I  him ; his whole aspect breathed profound
'  thought,  joyousness  of  temper,  and  confidence
m  the  future. The  battle  immediately  com-
menced on  the  question  of  the  authority  of  the
j  papacy,  which,  at  once  intelligible  and  imports
ant,  riveted  universal  attention. Tvv'o  sons  of
j  German  peasants  (for  Eck,  too,  was  the  son  of
a  peasant — Michael  Mayr,  w^ho  was  for  many
i  years  Amnnann||  of  Eck,  as  Luther's  father  was
I  Rathsherrll  of  Mansfeld)  represented  the  two
I  gTeat  tendencies  of  opinion  wdiich  divided  the
world  then,  and  divide  it  now ;  the  future  con-
dition of  the Church  and  the State  mainly
I  hung  on  the  issue  of  their  conflict  —  on  the
j  success  of  the  one  in  attack,  and  of  the  otlier
1  in  defence.

I It  was  immediately  obvious  that  Luther  could

i  not  maintain  his  assertion  that  the  pope's  pri-

I  macy  dated  only  from  the  last  four  centuries :

i  he  soon  found  himself  forced  from  this  position

I  by  ancient  documents ;  and  the  rather,  that  no

I  criticism  had  as  yet  shaken  the  authenticity  of

!  the  false  decretals. But  his  attack  on  the  doc-

!  trine  that  the  primacy  of  the  pope  (whom  he

still  persisted  in  regarding  as  the  ecumenical

bishop)  was  founded  on  Scripture  and  by  divine

right,  was  far  more  formidable. Christ's  words,

"  Thou  art  Peter,  feed  my  sheep,"  which  have

always  been  cited  in  this  controversy,  were

brought  forvv^ard :%  Luther  laboured  to  support

the  already  well-known  explanation  of  them.

[(Titles  of  local  magistrates.— Transl.

TT  In  the  exposition  by  Nicolaus  von  Lire  (Lyranus)
also,  of  which  Luther  znade  the  most  use,  there  occurs
this  explanation,  differing  from  that  of  the  curia,  of  the
passage  in  Matthew,  chap,  xvi, ;  "Claia  tu  es  Petrus,  i.  e.
confessor  vera;  petrs  qui  est  Christus  factus  ; —  et  super
banc  petram,  quam  confessus  es,  i.  e.  super  Christum,
sedificabo  ecclesiam  meam."

136

DISPUTATION  AT  LEIPZIG.

Book  II.

at  variance  with  that  of  the  curia,  by  other  pas-
sages which  record  similar  commissions  given
to  the  apostles.  Eck  quoted  passages  from  the
Fathers  in  support  of  his  opinions,  to  which  j
Luther  opposed  others  from  the  same  source,  j
As  soon  as  they  got  into  these  more  recondite  !
regions,  Luther's  superiority  became  incontest-
able. One  of  his  main  arguments  was  that  the
Greeks  had  never  acknowledged  the  pope,  and
yet  had  not  been  pronounced  heretics;  the
Greek  church  had  stood,  was  standing,  and
would  stand,  without  the  pope ;  it  belonged  to
Christ  as  much  as  the  Ronmn.  Eck  did  not  '.
hesitate'  at  once  to  declare  that  the  Christian  \
and  the  Roman  church  were  one ;  that  the  \
churches  of  Greece  and  Asia  had  fallen  away,  I
not  only  from  the  pope,  but  from  the  Christian
faith — they  were  unquestionably  heretics:  in;
the  Vv^hole  circuit  of  the  Turkish  empire,  for
instance,  there  was  not  one  soul  that  could  be
saved,  with  the  exception  of  the  few  who  ad-
hered to  the  pope  of  Rome.  "How?"  said
Luther,  "  would  you  pronounce  damnation  on
the  whole  Greek  church,  which  has  produced
the  most  eminent  fathers,  and  so  many  thou-
sand saints,  of  whom  not  one  had  even  heard
of  a  Roman  primate "?  Would  Gregory  of  Na-
zianzen,  would  the  great  Basil,  not  be  saved  ]
or  would  the  pope  and  his  satellites  drive  them
out  of  heaven  1"  These  expressions  prove  how
greatly  the  omnipotence  and  exclusive  validity
of  the  forms  of  the  Latin  church,  and  the  iden-
tity with  Christianity  wJiich  she  claimed,  were
shaken  by  the  fact  that,  beyond  her  pale,  the
ancient  Greek  church,  which  she  had  herself
acknowledged,  stood  in  all  the  venerable  au-
thority of  her  great  teacliers.  It  v/as  now
Eck's  turn  to  be  hard  pressed :  he  repeated  that
there  had  been  many  heretics  in  the  Greek
church,  and  that  he  alluded  to  them,  not  to  the
Fathers — a  miserable  evasion,  which  did  not  in
the  least  touch  the  assertion  of  his  adversary.
Eck  fe]t  this,  and  hastened  back  to  the  domain
of  the  Latin  church.  He  particularly  insisted
that  Luther's  opinion  —  that  the  primacy  of
Rome  was  of  human  instittition,  and  not  of  di-
vine right — was  an  error  of  the  poor  brethren
of  Lyons,  of  Wickliffe  and  Huss ;  but  had  been
condemned  by  the  popes,  and-  especially  by  the
general  councils  wherein  dwelt  the  spirit  of
God,  and  recently  at  that  of  Constance.  This
new  fact  v/as  as  indisputable  as  the  former.
Eck  was  not  satisfied  with  Luther's  declaration
that  he  had  nothing  to  do  with  the  Bohemians,
nay,  that  he  condemned  their  scliism ;  and  that
he  would  not  be  answered  out  of  the  Collecta-
nea of  inquisitors,  but  out  of  the  Scriptures.
The  question  had  now  arrived  at  its  most  criti-
cal and  important  moment.  Did  Luther  ac-
knowledge the  direct  influence  of  the  Divine
Spirit  over  the  Latin  church,  and  the  binding
force  of  the  decrees  of  her  councils,  or  did  he
not  1  Did  he  invv^ardly  adhere  to  her,  or  did  he
not  1  We  must  recollect  that  we  are  here  not
far  from  the  frontier  of  Bohemia ;  in  a  land
which,  in  consequence  of  the  anathema  pro-
nounced in  Constance,  had  experienced  all  the
horrors  of  a  long  and  desolating  war,  and  had
placed  its  glory  in  the  resistance  it  had  offered

to  the  Hussites :  at  a  university  founded  in  op-
position to  the  spirit  and  doctrine  of  John  Huss :
in  the  face  of  princes,  lords  and  commoners,
whose  fathers  had  fallen  in  this  struggle;  it
v\'as  said  that  delegates  from  the  Bohemians,
who  had  anticipated  the  turn  which  this  con-
flict must  take,  were  also  present :  Luther  saw
the  danger  of  his  position.  Should  he  really
reject  the  prevailing  notion  of  the  exclusive
power  of  the  Roman  church  to  secure  salva-
tion ]  oppose  a  council  by  which  John  Huss  had
been  condemned  to  the  flames,  and  perhaps
draw  down  a  like  flite  upon  himself?  Or
should  he  deny  that  higher  and  more  compre-
hensive idea  of  a  Christian  church  which  he
had  conceived,  and  in  which  his  whole  soul
lived  and  moved  1  Luther  did  not  waver  for  a
moment.  He  had  the  boldness  to  affirm,  that
among  the  articles  on  which  the  council  of
Constance  grounded  its  condemnation  of  John
Huss,  some  were  fundamentally  Christian  and
evangelical.  The  assertion  v^^as  received  with
universal  astonislnnent.  Duke  George,  who
was  present,  put  his  hands  to  his  sides,  and,
shaking  his  head,  uttered  aloud  his  wonted
curse,  "  A  plague  upon  it  !"*  Eck  nov/  gathered
fresh  courage.  It  was  hardly  possible,  he  said,
that  Luther  could  censure  a  council,  since  his
Grace  the  Elector  had  expressly  forbidden  any
attack  upon  councils.  Luther  reminded  him
tliat  the  council  of  Constance  had  not  con-
demned all  the  articles  of  Huss  as  heretical,
and  specified  some  which  were  likewise  to  be
found  in  St.  Augustine.  Eck  replied  that  all
were  rejected ;  the  sense  in  which  these  parti-
cular articles  were  understood  was  to  be  deemed
heretical ;  for  a  council  could  not  err.  Luther
answered  that  no  Council  could  create  a  new
I  article  of  faith;  how  then  could  it  be  main-
i  tained  that  no  council  whatever  was  subject  to
i  error  ]  "  Reverend  father,"  replied  Eck,  "  if
I  you  believe  that  a  council  regularly  convoked
can  err,  you  are  to  me  as  a  heathen  and  a  pub-
lican."

Such  were  the  results  of  this  disputation. |
It  was  continued  for  a  time,  and  opinions  more
or  less  conflicting  on  purgatory,  indulgences,
and  penance  were  uttered. Eck  renewed  the
I  interrupted  contest  with  Carlstadt ;  the  reports
I  were  sent,  after  the  solemn  conclusion,  to  both
'  universities ;  but  all  these  measures  could  lead
j  to  nothing  further. The  main  result  of  the
meeting  was,  that  Luther  no  longer  acknow-
ledged the  authority  of  the  Roman  church  in
j  matters  of  faith. A.t  first,  he  had  only  attack-
i  ed  the  instructions  given  to  the  preachers  of
I  indulgences,  and  the  rules  of  the  later  school-
I  men,  but  had  expressly  retained  the  decretals
of  the  popes :  then  he  had  rejebted  these,  but
with  appeal  to  the  decision  of  a  council ;  he
now  emancipated  himseh^  from this last  re-
maining human  authority  also ;  he  rdcognised
none  but  that  of  the  Scriptures.

*  "  This  I  myself  heard  and  saw." — Fr'uschsVs  Report  in
Walch,  XV.  1400.

X  "  Dispiitatio  Excellentissimorum  Theologorum  Johan-
nis  Eccii  et  D.  Martini  LuUieri  Augustiniani  quae  Lip-
si:s  coepta  fuit  iv  die  Julii  ao  1519.  Opera  Lutheri,  Jen.
i.  231.

iJHAP.  III.

PROGRESS  OF  THEOLOGICAL  OPPOSITION.

137

PROGRESS  OF  THE  THEOLOGICAL  OPPOSITION.

At  this  period  Luther  conceived  an  idea  of
the  Church  different  from  any  he  had  before
entertained — deeper  and  more  comprehensive.
He  recognised  in  the  Oriental  and  Greek
Christians  true  members  of  the  universal
church :  he  no  longer  admitted  the  necessity
of  a  visible  head;  he  acknowledged  none  but
the  Invisible,  the  ever-living  Founder,  whom
be  regarded  as  standing  in  a  mystical  relation
to  his  faithful  disciples  of  every  nation  and
clime.  This  was  not  only  a  dogmatical  inno-
vation, but  at  the  same  time  the  recognition
of  an  incontestable  fact — the  validity  of  Chris-
tianity w^ithout  the  pale  of  the  Latin  church.
In  asserting  this  opinion,  Luther  nov/  took  up  a
position  which  enabled  him  to  appropriate  all
the  various  elements  of  opposition  to  the  papacy
that  were  afloat  in  the  world.  He  m.ade  him-
self better  acquainted  with  the  doctrines  of  the
Oreek  church,  and  finding,  for  example,  that
't  did  not  admit  the  doctrine  of  purgatory,  of
which  he  also  found  no  mention  in  Scripture,
he  ceased  to  maintain  it,  as  he  had  done  even
m  Leipzig.*  A  far  stronger  impression  was
made  on  him  by  the  works  of  John  Huss,  which
now  reached  him  from  Bohemia ;  he  was  per-
fectly astonished  at  finding  therein  the  doc-
trines expounded  by  St.  Augustine,  and  de-
rived fi-om  St.  Paul,  which  he  had  adopted  after
such  violent  mental  struggles.  "I  taught
Huss's  opinions,"  says  he,  in  February,  1520,
"  without  knowing  them,  and  so  did  Staupitz :
we  are  all  Hussites,  without  knowing  it.  Paul
and  Augustine  are  Hussites:  I  do  not  know
what  to  think  for  amazement."  He  denounces
woe  to  the  earth,  and  predicts  the  fearful  judg-
ments of  God,  because '  evangelical  truth  had
been  known  for  a  century,  and  had  been  con-
demned and  burnt.f  It  is  evident  that  he  not
only  receded  in  opinion  fi-om  the  church  of
Rome,  but  at  the  same  time  conceived  a  re-
ligious disgust,  nay  hatred,  of  her.  In  the
same  month,  the  treatise  of  Laurentius  Valla,
on  the  donation  of  Constantine,  first  fell  into
his  hands.  It  was  a  discovery  to  him  that  this
donation  was  a  -fiction :  his  German  honesty
w^as  shocked  and  exasperated  at  finding  that,
as  he  says,  "  such  shameless  lies  had  been  in-
corporated into  the  decretals,  and  almost  made
articles  of  faith."  "  What  darkness !"  ex-
clarnis  he:  "what  wickedness!"  All  spirits
and  powers  that  had  ever  waged  war  against
the  papacy  now  gathered  around  him ;  those
which  had  never  submitted  from  the  begin-
ning ;  those  which  had  emancipated  themselves
and  never  been  reclaimed ;  and  all  the  tenden-
cies of  the  opposition  that  existed  in  the  bosom
of  Lathi  Christendom,  whether  theological  or
literary.  He  had  no  sooner  begjin  to  study
4he  papal^aws,  than  he  thought  he  perceived
^hat  they  were  in  contradiction  to  the  Scrip-
tures :  he  was  now  persuaded  that  the  Scrip-
tures and  the  papacy  stood  irreconcilably  op-
posed. It  is  quite  in  accordance  with  Luther's
Character  that,  while  seeking  a  solution  of  the

*  Letter  to  Spalatin,  Nov.  7.
t  To  Spalatin,  in  De  Wette,  nr.
18  M*

problem,  how  this  could  be  permitted  by  Divine
providence ;  while  struggling  to  recover  the
broken  unity  of  his  religious  convictions,  he
fell,  after  violent  contention  and  torture  of
mind,  on  the  hypothesis  that  the  pope  was  the
antichrist  whom  the  world  was  taught  to  ex-
pect.:}: This  mythical  notion  tended,  no  doubt,
to  obscure  the  historical  view  which  might
perhaps  have  been  obtained  of  the  subject ;  but
it  had,  in  fact,  no  other  meaning  than  that  the
doctrine  of  the  clmrch  was  corrupted,  and
must  be  restored  to  its  original  purity.

Melanchthon,  meanwhile,  who  had  taken  the
part  of  an  ally  and  adviser  in  the  Leipzig  dis-
putation, was  occupied  with  a  parallel,  bwt
peculiar  tram  of  speculation,  and  now  devoted
himself  to  theological  studies  with  the  quiet
ardour  natural  to  him ;  with  the  enthusiasm
which  a  successful  and  steady  progress  in  a
new  path  always  excites.

The  principles  on  Vv^hich  protestant  theology
rest  are  to  be  traced,  at  least  as  much  to  him
as  to  Luther.  One  of  the  first  that  he  enounced,
referred  immediately  to  the  controversy  in
Leipzig.

Maxim.s  of  the  Fathers  of  the  church  were
appealed  to  by  each  side,  and  with  equal  jus-
tice. To  extricate  the  matter  from  this  con-
tradiction, Melanchthon  laid  it  down  in  a  little
treatise,  published  August,  1519,  that  the
Scripture  was  not  to  be  expounded  according
to  the  Fathers,  but  that  these  were  to  be  un-
derstood to  the  sense  of  Scripture.^  He  main-
tained that  the  expositions  of  the  great  pillars
of  the  Latin  church,  Ambrose,  Jerome  and
even  Augustine,  were  often  erroneous.  This
principle- — that  a  Cliristian  (or,  as  he  expresses
it,  a  Catholic)  is  not  bound  to  receive  any  thing
but  whtit  is  contained  in  Scripture — he  treated
more  at  large  in  September,  1519.  What  he
had  said  of  the  Fathers,  he  now  repeated  of
councils — that  their  authority  was  of  no  ac-
count when  compared  to  that  of  Scripture,
Having  reached  this  point,  doubt  on  doubt  in-
evitably presented  itself  to  his  mind,  as  to  the
entire  system  of  authoritative  dogmas.  If  Lu-
ther was  resolute  in  action,  Melanchthon  was
no  less  so  in  speculation.  Even  in  September,
1519,  he  stated  the  polemical  maxims  in  which
he  attacked the two most  important  funda-

J  To  Spalatin,  Feb.  23,  (not  24,)  1.520,  nr.  204.  "  Ego  sic
angor  ut  prope  non  diibitem  papain  esse  proprie  anti-
christum."  This  notion  sprang  from  the  old  chiliastic  no-
tions still  maintained  in  the  West  (see  the  passage  of
Comniodian  ;  "  venturi  sunt  sub  antichristo  qui  viiicunt,"
in  Gieseler,  Kirchengeschichte,  i.  281),  and  was  especially
cherished  in  Germany.  One  of  the  oldest  German  works
in  print,  the  first  mentioned  by  Panzer  in  the  Annal  ender
älteren  deutsdien  Literatur,  is,  Das  Buch  vom  Entkrist
(The  Book  of  Antichrist),  or  also,  "Biichlin  von  des
Endte  Christs  Leben  und  Regierung  durch  verhengniss
Gottes,  wie  er  die  W^elt  tuth  verkeren  mit  seiner  falschen
Lere  und  Eat  des  Teufels,  auch  wie  darnach  die  zween
Propheten  Euoch  und  Helyas  die  Christenheit  wieder  be-
keren  mit  predigen  den  Christen  Glauben."  "Little  Book
concerning  Antichrist's  Life  and  Rule  through  God's  Pro-
vidence, how  he  doth  pervert  the  World  with  his  false
Doctrine  and  Counsel  of  the  Devil  ;  also  how,  thereafter,
the  two  Prophets,  Enoch  and  Elias,  again  convert  Chris-
tendom with  preaching  of  Christ's  faith."  In  1516,  this
book  was  reprinted  at  Erfurt.  We  see  bow  it  came
about  that  Luther  was  occasionally  called  Elias  by  his
followers.

§  Defensio  contra  J.  Eckium :  C.  R.  i.  p.  1813.  "  Patres
judice  Scriptura  recipianlur."

138

HÜTTEN.

Book  IL

mental  doctrines  of  the  whole  system ;  that  of
transubstantiation,  and  that  of  the  sacerdotal
character ;  whereon  the  mystery  of  the  visible
church,  as  well  as  the  sacramental  ritual  which
governs  the  whole  course  of  human  life,  rest.*
The  boldness  of  the  attack,  and  the  ing-enuity
v/ith  which  it  was  carried  on,  filled  every  one
with  surprise.  "  He  has  now  appeared  to  all,"
says  Luther,  "  as  wonderful  as  he  really  is.
He  is  the  most  powerful  enemy  of  Satan  and
of  the  schoolmen ;  he  knows  their  folly  and
the  rock  of  Christ ;  he  has  the  power  and  the
v/ill  to  do  the  deed.  Ame7i."  Melanchthon
now  applied  himself  with  fresh  fervour  to  t|ie
study  of  the  New  Testament.  He  was  en-
chanted by  its  simplicity,  and  found  in  it  true
and  pure  philosophy :  he  refers  the  studious  to
it  as  the  only  refreshment  to  the  soul,  and  the
afiiicted,  as  pouring  peace  and  joy  into  the
heart.  In  his  course  of  study,  too,  he  thought
he  perceived  that  much  was  contained  in  the
doctrines  of  former  theologians,  which  not  only
could  not  be  deduced  from  Scripture,  but  was
at  variance  with  it,  and  could  never  be  brought
into  accordance  with  its  spirit.  In  a  discourse
on  the  doctrines  of  Paul,  pronounced  on  the
18th  of  January,  1520,  he  first  declared  this
v/ithout  reserve.  In  the  follov/ing  month  he
remarked  that  his  objections  to  transubstantia-
tion and  the  sacerdotal  character,  were  appli-
cable to  many  other  doctrines ;  he  finds  traces
of  Jewish  ceremonies  in  the  seven  sacraments,
and  esteems  the  doctrine  of  the  pope's  infalli-
bility an  arrogant  pretension,  repugnant  to
Holy  Scripture  and  to  common  sense : — most
pernicious  opinions,  he  says,  which  we  ought
to  combat  with  all  our  might ;  more  than  one
Hercules  is  needed  for  the  work.f

Thus  we  perceive  that  Ivlelanchthon  arrives
at  the  same  point  which  Luther  had  already
reached,  though  by  a  calmer  and  more  philoso-
phical path.  It  is  remarkable  how  each  ex-
presses himself  concerning  the  Scripture,  in
which  both  live.  "  It  fills  the  soul,"  says  Me-
lanchthon ;  "  it  is  heavenly  ambrosia. "|  "  The
word  of  God,"  exclaims  Luther,  "  is  a  sword,
and  war,  and  destruction :  it  meets  the  children
of  Ephraim  like  a  lioness  in  the  forest."  The
one  views  it  in  reference  to  the  inward  thoughts
of  man,  with  which  it  has  so  strong  an  affinity ;
the  other,  in  its  relation  to  the  corruptions  of
the  world,  against  which  it  wars;  but  they
come  to  the  same  conclusion.  They  quitted
each  other  no  more.  "  That  little  Greek
(  Griechlein),"  says  Luther,  "  outdoes  me  even
in  theolog}V'  "He  will  make  up  to  you,"
exclaims  he,  "for  many  Martins."  All  his
solicitude  is  that  any  of  those  misfortunes
should  befall  him  v»diich  are  incident  to  s'reat

*  Unluckily  these  propositions,  which  play  a  chief  part
in  the  construction  of  the  protestant  system"  of  belief,  are
no  longer  to  be  met  with.  From  a  letter  of  Melanchthon
to  John  Hess,  Feb.  .1520,  (C.  R.  i.  138,)  we  get  a  know-
ledge of  three  of  them,  which  are  moreover  the  most  im-
portant. According  to  Luther's  letter  to  Staupitz,  in  de
Wette,  i.  nr.  162,  they  must  date  from  the  month  of  Sep-
tember. The  propositions  which  appear  in  the  C.  R.  p.
126,  are,  as  Forstemann  there  remarks,  of  later  origin;
seemingly  of  the  date  of  July,  1520.

t Dedication  to  Bronner,  C.  R.  p.  138. Letter  to  Hess.

I  To  Schwebel,  Dec,  1519,  128.

minds.  On  the  other  hand,  Melanchthon  was
deeply  impressed  and  penetrated  with  the  tho-
rough comprehension  of  St.  Paul,  peculiar  to
Luther ;  he  prefers  the'  latter  to  the  fathers  of
tlie  church ;  he  finds  him  more  admirable  every
time  he  sees  him ;  even  in  ordinary  intercourse,
he  will  not  admit  the  justice  of  the  censures
which  his  joyous  and  jocose  humour  brought
upon  him.  It  was  truly  a  divine  dispensation
that  these  two  men  lived  together  and  united
at  this  crisis.  They  regarded  each  other  as
tw^o  of  God's  creatures  endowed  with  different
gifts,  each  worthy  of  the  other,  joined  in  one
object,  and  holding  the  same  convictions;  a
perfect  picture  of  true  friendship.  Melanch-
thon is  careful  not  to  trouble  Luther's  mind. 5.
Luther  confesses  that  he  abandons  an  opinion
when  Melanchthon  does  not  approve  it.

So  immeasurable  was  the  influence  which
the  literary  spirit  had  obtained  over  the  new
and  growing  theology ;  an  influence  which  we
shall  now  see  it  exercising-  in  another  manner.

The  minds  which  took  part  in  -the  poetical
and  philological  movement  of  Germany  of
wdrich  we  have  treated,  may  be  arranged  under
two  distinct  classes.  Those  of  the  one  class,
eager  to  acquire  and  apt  to  give  instruction,
sought  by  tranquil  and  laborious  study  to  mas-
ter the  erudition  they  were  afterwards  to  dif-
fuse. The  whole  character  of  their  labours,
which  fi-om  the  first  were  directed  to  the  Holy
Scriptures,  was  represented  by  Melanchthon,
and  had  formed  in  his  person  the  most  intimate
union  with  the  deeper  theological  tendencies
which  were  exhibited  in  that  of  Luther,  and
had  gained  an  ascendency  at  the  university  of
Wittenberg.  We  have  seen  what  were  the
results  of  tliis  union.  The  peaceful  study  of
letters  acquired  solidity,  depth,  and  mtensity
of  purpose ;  theology,  scientific  form  and  an
erudite  basis.  But  literature  exhibited  another
phase:  by  the  side  of  the  tranquil  students
were  to  be  seen  the  combative  poets  ;~:well
content  with  the  ground  they  had  gained,  self-
satisfied  and  arrogant ;  incensed  at  the  opposi-
tion they  had  experienced,  they  filled  the  world
with  the  noise  of  their  war.  At  the  beginning
of  the  Lutheran  controversy,  which  they  re-
garded as  a  mere  dispute  between  two  monastic
orders,  they  had  remained  neutral.  But  now
that  this  revealed  a  character  of  such  vastness,
and  opened  a  vista  so  remote — now  that  it  ap-
pealed to  all  their  sympathies,  they  too  took
part  in  it.  Luther  appeared  to  them  in  the
light  of  a  successor  of  Reuchlin;  John  Eck  as
another  Ortwin  Gratiul,  a  hired  adherent  of  the
Dominicans,  and  in  that  character  they  attacked
him.  In  March  1520,  a  satire  appeared  with
the  title  of  "The  Planed-off' Angle,'.* (Der  ab-
geliobelle  Eck),  which  for  fantastic  invention,
striking  and  crushing  truth,  and  Aristophanic
wit,  far  exceeded  the  "  Liters  Obscurorum
Virorum,"  which  it  somewhat  resembled. And

§  To  John  Lange,  Aug.  1520,  "  Spiritum  Martini  nolim
temere  in  hac  causa,  ad  quam  destinatus  {1770  -npovoiai
videtur,  interpeliare." (C.  R.  i.  221.)

Chap.  III.

HÜTTEN.

im

at  this  moment  a  leader  of  the  band  entered
the  lists,  not  nameless  like  the  others,  but  with
his  visor  up.  It  was  Ulrich  von  Hütten,  the
temper  of  whose  weapons  and  his  skill  in  wield-
ing- them  had  long'  been  well  known.

The  whole  course  of  Hutten's  life  had,  like
that  of  Erasmus,  been  determined  by  his  being-
very  early  condemned  to  the  cloister ;  but  to
hmi  this  constraint  was  far  more  intolerable :
he  was  the  first-born  of  one  of  the  most  distin-
guished equestrian  families  of  the  Buchen,
which  still  laid  claim  to  the  freedom  of  the
empire.  On  his  friends  earnestly  pressing  him
to  take  the  vows,  he  ran  away,  and  sougiit  his
fortune,  as  Erasmus  had  done,  in  the  newly
opened  career  of  literature.*  He  encountered
every  variety  of  sufferino-:  plague  and  ship-
wreck ;  the  banishment  of  a  teacher  whom  he
followed ;  robbery,  and  disease  ;  the  scorn  with
which  indigence  and  a  mean  garb  are  com-
monly regarded,  especially  in  a  strange  land ;
the  utter  neglect  of  his  family,  who  acted  as
if  he  did  not  belong  to  them  ;  nay,  his  father
even  treated  him  with  a  sort  of  irony.  But  his
courage  remained  buoyant,  his  mind  free  and
unshackled ;  he  bid  defiance  Jo  all  his  enemies,
and  a  state  of  literary  warfare  became  a  second
nature  to  him.  Sometimes  it  was  his  ovv'n  per-
sonal quarrels  which  he  fought  out  on  the  field
of  literature;  for  example,  the  ill-treatment  he
sustained  from  his  hosts  at  Greif|wald,  v:ho
robbed  him ;  he  called  upon  all  his  companions
of  the  school  of  poets  to  take  part  against  this
act  of  injustice,  which  was,  as  it  were,  com-
mitted against  them  all.f  Another  time  he
replied  to  the  reproach  which  even  in  that  age
he  had  to  encounter,  tliat  a  man  must  he  some-
thing, i.  e.  must  fill  some  ofiice,  or  hold  some
title ;  or  some  deed  of  violence,  like  the  unjus-
tifiable conduct  of  the  Duke  of  Würtemberg
to  one  of  his  cousins,  moved  him  to  vehement
accusation.  But  his  warlike  muse  was  still
more  excited  by  the  aflairs  of  his  countrv:

The  study  of  Roman  literature,  in  vrhich  the
Germans  have  taken  so  eminent  a  part,  has  not
unfrequently  had  the  effect  of  awakening-  the
patriotism  of  their  descendants.  The  ill-success
of  the  emperor  in  the  Venetian  war  did  not
deter  Hütten  from  eulogizing  him,  or  from
treating  the  Venetians,  in  their  contest  with
him,  as  upstart  fishermen;  he  contrasts  the
treachery  of  the  pope  and  the  insolence  of  the
French,  v,\ith  the  achievements  of  the  Lands-
knechts and  the  fame  of  Jacob  von  Ems.  He
writes  long  poems  to  prove  that  the  Germans
have  not  degenerated,  that  they  are  still  the
ancient  race.  Just  as  he  returned  from  Italy,
the  contest  between  the  Reuchlinists  and  the
Dominicans  had  broken  out,  and  he  rushed  to
the  side  of  his  natural  ally,  armed  with  all  the
weapons  of  mdignation  and  of  ridicule  ;  he  ce-
lebrated the  triumph  of  his  master  in  <iiiis  best
hexameters,  which  were  embellished  with  an
ingenious  wood-cut.  Hütten  is  not  a  great
scholar,  nor  is  he  a  very  profound  thhiker ;  his

*  Mohnike,  Ulricli  H-attens  Jugendleben,  p.  43.  Hutteti
was  born  in  1488;  in  1499  he  entered  the  convent,  and  in
1504  deserted  it.

t  Q-uerelarum,  lib.  ii.  eleg..x.  "  nostros,  communia  vul-
nera  casus."

excellence  lies  more  in  the  exhaustlessness  of
his  vein,  which  gushes  forth  with  equal  impe-
tuosity, equal  freshness,  in  the  most  various
forms — in  Latin  and  in  German,  in  prose  and
in  verse,  in  eloquent  invective  and  in  brilliant
satirical  dialogue.  Nor  is  he  without  the  spirit
of  acute  observation ;  here  and  there  (for  ex-
ample in  the  Nemo)  he  soars  to  the  bright  and
clear  regions  of  genuine  poetry :  his  hostilities
have  not  that  cold  malignant  character  which
disgusts  the  reader ;  they  are  always  connected
v/ith  a  cordial  devotion  to  the  side  he  advocates :
he  leaves  on  tlie  mind  an  impression  of  perfect
veracity,  of  uncompromising  franlmess  and  ho-
nesty ;  above  all,  he  has  always  great  and  sin-
gle purposes  v/hich  command  universal  sympa-
thy ;  he  has  earnestness  of  mind,  and  a  passion
(to  use  his  own  words)  "  for  godlike  truth,  for
common  liberty."  The  victory  of  the  Reuch-
linists had  turned  to  his  advantage  also :  he
had  found  an  asylum  at  the  court  of  the  Elector
Albert  of  Mainz,  and  formed  an  intimacy  with
the  formidable  Sickingen ;  he  was  cured  of  his
illness,  and  now  tliought  of  m-anying  and  en-
tering upon  his  paternal  inheritance ;  he  thus
hoped  to  enjoy  the  tranquillity  of  domestic  life,
while  the  brilliancy  of  the  reputation  he  had
already  acquired  secured  to  him  an  eminent
station.  Under  these  circumstances,  the  spirit
vrhich  Luther  had  awakened  in  the  nation
breathed  upon  him;  a  prospect  opened,  com-
pared to  which  all  previous  results  had  been
mere  child's-play;  it  took  possession  of  his
whole  convictions,  of  every  impulse  and  energy
of  his  mind.  For  a  moment  Flutten  deliberated.
The  enemy  to  be  attacked  was  the  mightiest
in  existence,  who  had  never  been  subdued,  and
who  wielded  power  with  a  thousand  hands;
whoever  engaged  in  a  conflict  with  him  must
be  avv-are  that  he  would  never  more  find  peace
so  long  as  he  lived.  Hütten  did  not  disguise
this  from  himself;  it  was  discussed  in  the
family,  who  dreaded  the  losses  and  evils  to
Vv'hich  it  would  expose  them.  "  My  pious  mo-
ther vrept,"  said  he.  But  he  tore  himself  away,
renounced  his  paternal  inheritance,  and  once
more  took  up  arms.t

In  the  beginning  of  the  year  1.5*20  he  wrote
some  dialogues,  for  which  he  "could  never  hope
to  obtain  pardon.  In  the  one,  called  the  Spec-
tators {Anschaifenden),  the  jests  on  the  papal
legate  are  no  longer,  as  before,  confined  to  cer-
tain externals;  all  his  spiritual  faculties,  his
anathema  and  excommunication  which  he  hurls
against  the  sun,  are  treated  with  the  bitterest
scorn  and  derision.  In  another — Vadiscus,  or
the  Roman  Trinity — the  abuses  and  pretensions
of  the  Curia  are  described  in  striking  triplets :
in  confirmation  of  the  Wittenberg  opinion  that
the  papacy  was  inconsistent  with  the  Scriptures,
Hütten  drevv^  a  picture  of  the  actual  state  of  the
court  of  Rome,  in  which  he  represented  it  as
an  abyss  of  moral  and  religious  corruption,
which  the  duty  of  Germans  to  God  and  their
country  equally  called  upon  them  to  shun.§  His

J  Apolo<j3'  for  Uh-ich  von  Hütten  in  Meiner's  Lebens-
beschreibungen berühmter  Manner,  &c..  iii.  749.

§  Vadiscus,  Dialogus  qui  et  Trias  Romana  inscribitur.
Inspicientes  Dialogus  Hutteni.  Opera  ed,  Munch,  iii.
427,  511.

14a

BULL  OF  LEO  X.

Book  IL

ideas  were  profoundly  national  An  old  apolo-
gy for  Henry  IV.  having  accidentally  fallen
into  his  hands,  he  published  it  in  March,  1520,
with  a  view  of  reviving  the  recollections  of  the
great  strug'gle  with  Gregory  VIL,  and  the  ex-
tinct sympathy  of  the  nation  with  the  empire,
and  of  the  empire  with  the  nation.*  He  sent
it  to  the  young  Archduke  Ferdinand,  who  had
just  arrived  in  the  Netherlands  from  Spain,
with  a  dedication,  in  which  he  calls  upon  him
to  lend  his  aid  to  the  restoration  of  the  ancient
independence  of  Germany,  Vv^hich  had  with-
stood the  warlike  and  victorious  Romans  of  old,
and  was  now  become  tributary  to  the  effeminate
Romans  of  modern  times.f  It  appeared  as  if
the  nation  might  reasonably  look  with  hope  to
the  two  brothers  of  tJie  house  of  Austria,  whose
elevation  to  the  throne  had  been  so  earnestly
opposed  by  the  papal  court.  Most  of  their
friends  v/ere  indeed  at  this  moment  enemies  of
the  papacy.  We  have  already  alluded  to  the
disposition  of  the  court  of  Mainz.  In  Switzer-
land, all  who  had  approved  Luther's  first  book
were  adherents  of  Cardinal  von  Sitten,  who
liad  so  successfully  conducted  the  affairs  of  the
house  of  Austria  at  the  diet,  partly  by  their
assistance.  Sickingen,  w^lio  had  contributed  so
much  to  the  decision  taken  by  Würt.emberg,
was  likewise  a  partisan  of  Reuchlin,  and  found
means  to  compel  the  Cologne  Dominicans,
althougli  the  process  was  still  pending  in  Rome,
to  obey  the  sentence  of  the  Bishop  of  Spires,
and  to  pay  the  costs  to  which  they  had  there
been  condemned.  No  one  had  contributed  more
to  the  election  of  Charles  V.  than  Frederic  of
Saxony :  by  the  protection  which  he  had  af-
forded to  Luther  and  his  university,  he  had
rendered  possible  the  national  movement  in  that
prince's  favour.  He  now  absolutely  refused  to
allow  Luther  to  be  tried  at  Rome.  On  the  day
of  tlie  emperor's  election  the  Archbishop  of
Treves  had  actually  undertaken  the  office  of
umpire,  and  Elector  Frederic  declared  that  no
steps  should  be  taken  against  Lutlier  till  that
prelate  had  pronounced  his  decision,  by  which
he  would  abide.|  There  was  a  secret  connec-
tion between  all  these  incidents,  these  various
manifestations  of  opinion — people  were  resolved
to  get  rid  of  the  interference  of  Rome.  Hütten
preached  in  all  parts,  that  Germany  must  aban-
don Rome  and  return  to  her  awn  bishops  and
primates.  "  To  your  tents,  O  Israel !"  exr
claimed  he ;  and  we  perceive  that  sovereigns
and  cities  responded  to  his  appeal. §  He  deemed
himself  destined  to  accomplish  this  change,
and  hastened  to  the  court  of  the  archduke,  in
order,  if  possible,  to  gain  him  over  by  personal
intercourse,  and  to  inspire  him  with  his  own
ardour.  He  felt  the  most  confident  assurance
of  success. In  an  essay  written  on  the  road,

*  Waltiainus  de  Unitate  EccLesiee  conservaiiria,  etc.,  in
Schardius,  Sylloge,  Part  I.

t  Praefatio  ad  Ferdinandum. 0pp.  iii.  55J.

J  Transactions,  Walch,  XV.  916,  919.  The  chief  reason
why  this  did  not  come  to  pass  was,  that  Frederic  wanted
to  bring  Luther  with  him  to  the  Imperial  Diet,  which  was
to  be  held  in  Nov.  1519,  but  which  the  Imperial  Commis-
sioners prevented.

§  Agrippa  a  Nettesheim  Johanni  Rogerio  Brennonio
ex  Colonia,  16  Junii,  1520.  (Epp.  Agrippse,  lib.  ii.  p.  99.)
"Relinquat  Romanos  Germania  et  revertatur  ad  pri-
mates et  episcopos  sues."

lie  predicted  that  the  tyranny  of  Rome  would
not  long  endure ;  already  the  axe  was  laid  to
the  root  of  the  tree.  He  exhorted  the  Germans
only  to  have  confidence  in  their  brave  leaders,
and  not  to  faint  in  the  midst  of  the  fight ;  for
they  must  go  on— on,  in  this  propitious  "state  of
things,  with  this  good  cause,  with  these  noble
energies.  "  Liberty  for  ever — .Tacta  est  alea,"
was  his  motto.  The  die  is  cast ;  I  have  ven-
tured all  upon  the  throw.  ||

Such  was  the  turn  which  Luther's  cause  nov/
took — not  without  great  faults  on  the  side  of
the  defenders  of  the  See  of  Rome.  The
attack,  which,  tliough  only  levelled  at  one  side
of  the  great  system,  would  unquestionably  have
been  very  troublesome  to  the  head  of  the
Church,  was  now  directed  against  his  entire
position  and  functions, — against  that  idea  of
his  authority  and  prerogative  which  he  had  so
successfully  laboured  to  establish.  It  was  no
longer  confined  to  the  domain  of  theology  ;  for
tlie  first  time,  the  literary  and  political
elements  of  opposition  existing  in  the  nation
came  into  contact  and  mutual  mtelligence,  if
not  into  close  union,  with  the  theological;
thus  allied,  they  turned  their  united  strength
against  the  prerogatives  of  the  Pope  of  Rome.

This  led  to  a  similar  combination  on  the
other  side ;  and  the  See  of  Rome,  which  had
hitherto  always  maintained  reserve,  was  nov/
induced  to  pronounce  a  definitive  sentence.

i  BULL  OF  LEO  X.

We  must  bear  in  mind  that  the  advocates  of
the  old  opinions  were  not  satisfied  with  opposing
Luther  with  all  the  authority  they  possessed
(for  example,  the  Dominican  universities  of
Louvain  and  Cologne  pronounced  a  solemn
condemnation  of  his  works),  but  sought  to
prove  themselves  the  strictest  and  most  faithful
allies  of  the  Roman  See.  The  attacks  of  the
Germans  furnished  them  with  an  opportunity
to  exalt  the  omnipotency  of  the  papacy  more
extravagantly  than  ever.  Silvestro,Mazzolini,
the  Master,  of  the  Sacred  Palace,  of  whom  we
have  spoken,  published  a  pamphlet,^  in  which,
indignant  that  Luther  had  dared  to  appeal
from  his  judgment  to  the  pope,  and  in  the  last
resort  to  a  council,  he  tries  to  demonstrate  that
there  can  be  no  judge  superior  to  the  pope ;
that  tlie  Roman  pontiff  is  the  infallible  arbiter
of  all  controversies  and  of  all  doubts ;  and
further  sets  forth  that  the  papal  sovereignty  is
the  only  true  monarchy,  the  fifth  monarchy
mentioned  by  Daniel;  that  the  pope  is  the
prince  of  all  spiritual,  and  the  father  of  all
temporal  princes;  the  head  of  the  whole
world,  nay,  that  he  is,  virtually,  the  whole
world.** In  his  former  work,  he  had  only  said

|(  Ad  lib^os  in  Germania  omnes. 0pp.  iii.  563<
IT  De  Jurldica  et  Jrrefragabibili  Veritate  Romanae  Ec
clesias  Romanique  Pontiticis :  Roccaberti,  Bibl.  Max.  torn,
xix.  p.  264.

**  C.  iv.  "  Etsi  ex  jam  dictis  constat  Romannm  prce
sulem  esse  caput  orbis  universi,  quippe  qui  primus  hier-
archa  et  princeps  sit  omnium  spiritualiüm  ac  pater  om-
nium temporalium  principum,  tarnen  quia  advensarius
negat  eum  esse  ecclesiam  catholicam  virtualiter  aut  etiam
esse  ecclesiffi  caput,  eapropter  ostendendum  est  quod  sit
caput  orbis  et  consequenter  orbis  totus  in  virtute."

Chap.  III.

BULL  OF  LEO  X.

141-

that  the  whole  collective  church  was  in  the
pope  ;  now  he  affected  to  prove  that  the  pope
was  the  world.  In  another  place,  too,  he  did
not  hesitate  to  declare  that  all  the  power  of
temporal  sovereigns  was  a  sub-delegation  of
the  papal.*  The  pope,  he  says,  is  more  supe-
rior to  the  emperor  than  gold  to  lead  :  a  pope
can  appoint  or  depose  an  emperor ;  appoint  or
depose  electors ;  make  or  abolish  positive  laws :
the  emperor,  he  exclaims,  together  with  all
laws  and  all  Christian  peoples,  could  effect
nothing  contrary  to  his  will.f  The  proofs  that
he  adduces  in  support  of  his  opinion  are,  indeed,
strange  enough,  but  it  was  not  necessary  to
substantiate  them ;  it  was  enough  that  they
w^ere  adduced  by  a  man  of  so  eminent  a  station,
and  that  they  emanated  from  tlie  papal  palace.
German  obsequiousness  hastened  to  furnish
Roman  arrcygance  with  a  somewhat  better
groundwork  for  its  pretensions.  In  February,
1520,  Eck  also  completed  a  treatise  on  the
primacy,  in  which  he  promises  triumphantly
and  clearly  to  confute  LutJiers  assertion,  "  that
it  is  not  of  divine  right,"  and  also  to  '.set  forth
various  other  rare  and  notable  things,  collected
with  great  labour,  partly  from  manuscripts
which  he  had  most  diligently  collated,  "  Ob-
serve, reader,"  says  he,  "and  thou  shalt  see
that  I  keep  my  word,"|  Nor  is  his  work  by
any  means  devoid  of  learning  and  talent ;  it  is
an  armoury  of  very  various  weapons;  but  it
affords  the  most  distinct  evidence  of  the  im.por-
tance  of  this  controversy  to  science,  indepen-
dent of  all  theological  considerations,  and  of
the  profound 'darkness  in  which  all  true  and
critical  history  still  lay  buried.  EcJc  assumes,
without  the  slightest  hesitation,  that  Peter
resided  twenty-five  years  at  Rome,  and  was  a
perfect  prototype  of  all  succeeding  popes;
whereas,  historical  criticism  has  shown  that  it  is
a  matter  of  doubt  whether  the  apostle  ever  was
at  Rome  at  all:  he  finds  cardinals,  and  even
under  that  title,  as  early  as  the  year  770,  and
assigns  the  rank  and  functions  of  cardinal  to
St.  Jeromg.  In  the  second  book,  he  adduces
the  testimony  of  the  Fathers  of  the  Church  in
support  of  the  divine  right  of  the  pope,  and
places  at  their  head  Dionysius  Areopagita,
whose  works  are,  unfortunately,  spurious.-—
Among  his  favourite  documents  are  the  decre-
tals of  the  elder  popes,  from  which  nmch
certainly  is  derived  that  we  should  not  other-
wise be  inclined  to  believe ;  the  only  misfortune
is,  that  they  are  altogether  forgeries.  He  re-
proaches Luther  with  understandhig  nothing
v/hatever  of  tlie  old  councils ;  the  sixth  canon
of  the council  of  Nice,  from Vvdiich Luther

*Ds  Papa  et  ejus  Potestate,  ibid.  p.  339.  "  Tenia  po-
testas  (the  first  is  ihat  of  the  Pope,  tlie  second  that  of  the
prelates)  est  in  ministerium  dnta,  lit  ea  qua)  est  impera-
toris  et  etiam  principiim  terreiioruni,  quse  respectu  I^apos
est  siibdelegata  subordinata."

f'Papa  est  imperatore  major  digiiitate,  plus  quam
aurnin  plumbo  (371).  —Potest  eligere  imperatoreiii  per  se
jpsiiin  immediate^— ex  quo  sequitur  quod  etiam  possit  elr-
gere  electores  imperatoris  et  mutare  ex  causa  :  ejus  etiam
est  electum  confirmare,— et  diguum  depositione  deponere
(372).  —  Nee  imperator  cum  oinuibus  legibus  et  omnibus
Christianis  possent  contra  ejus  voluntatem  quicquam
statuere."

I  De  Primatu  Petri.  In  Eckii  0pp.  contra  Lutherum,
torn.  i.  f.  iii.

deduced  the  equality  of  the  ancient  patriarch-
ate, he  interprets  in  a  totally  different  manner ;
but  here  again  he  had  the  ill  luck  to  rest  his
arguments  on  the  spurious  canon,  which  belongs
not  to  the  Nicene,  but  the  Sardicene,  synod.
And  so  on.

It  is  important  to  have  a  distinct  idea  of  the
actual  state  of  things.  With  these  claims  of
an  absolute  power,  mcluding  all  other  earthly
powers,  were  connected,  not  only  dogmatic
theology  as  elaborated  in  the  schools,  but  this
gigantic  fiction,  this  falsfication  of  history,  rest-
ing on  mnumerable  forged  documents;  which,
if  not  overthrown,  as  it  subsequently  Vv^as  (and
Vv^e  must  add  chiefiy  by  truly  learned  men  of
the  Catholic  church  itself),  would  have  made
all  authentic  and  well-founded  history  impossi-
ble :  the  human  mind  would  never  have  arrived
at  the  true  knowledge  of  ancient  times,  or  at
the  consciousness  of  the  stages  itself  had  passed
through.  The  newly-awakened  spirit  of  the
German  nation  seized  at  once  upon  this  entire
system,  and  laboured  energetically  to  open  new
paths  in  every  direction  of  human  thought  and
action — politics,  religion,  science  and  letters.
Equal  zeal,  was  displayed  ori  the  other  side  in
iTiaintaining  the  old  system  entire.  As  soon  as
Eck  had  finished  his  book,  he  hastened  to  Rome
to  present  it  himself  to  the  pope,  and  to  invoke
the  severest  exercise  of  the  ecclesiastical  au-
thority against  his  opponents.

It  was  asserted  at  the  time  that  Eck  was  in
fact  sent  to  Rome  by  the  house  of  Fugger,
which  was  alarm.ed  at  the  prospect  of  losing
the  profit  arising  from  the  money  exchanges
between  Rome  and  Germany.  It  is  at  least
certain  that  the  doctor  had  some  intimate  con-
nection with  those  eminent  merchants.  It  was
in  their  behalf  that  he  defended  usury  in  his
disputation  at  Bologna.  §

But  his  chief  aid  was  derived  from  the  judg-
ment pronounced  against  the  new  opinions  by
Cologne  and  Louvain.  Cardinals  Campeggi
and  Vio,  wlio  vrere  well  acquainted  with  Ger-
many, gave  him  all  the  support  in  their  power.
His  book  was  fully  calculated  to  place  the  im-
minence of  the  danger  before  their  eyes.  A
commission  of  seven  or  eight  zealous  theolo-
gians was  appointed,  of  which  Giovan  Pietro
Caraffa,  Aleander,  and  probably  also  Silvestro
]\Iazzolini  and  Eck  himself,  were  members;
their  judgment  could  not  be  for  one  moment
doubtful ;  "already,  in  the  beginning  of  May,  the
draft  of  the  bull  by  which  Luther  was  con-
demned was  prepared.

In  the  trial  of  Reuchlin,  it  was  matter  of
doubt  how  far  the  See  of  Rome  made  common
cause  with  the  Dominicans;  nov/,  however,
that  order  ha.d  completely  succeeded  in  restor-
ing the  ancient  alliance.  In  the  present  case
the  trial  was  hardly  begun,  when  we  hear  that
the  monks  at  Cologne  triumphed  in  a  sentence

§  Liters  cuju^lam  e  Roma.  From  the  Pirkheimer
papers  in  Riederer,  Nacln-ichfen  zur  Kirchen  Gelehrten
und  Büchergeschichte,  i.  p.  .178.  As  a  letter,  this  docu-
ment certainly  inspires  me  with  some  suspicion;  at  all
events,  however,  it  is  of  the  same  date,  and  expresses  the
opinion  of  a  well-informed  contemporary.  Weiser  also
saj's,  (Augspurgische  Chroniken,  ander  theil,  p.  275,)  that
that  disputation  had  been  held  "  at  the  cost  of  Jacob  Fug-
ger and  his  partners."

142

BULL  OF  LEO  X.

Book  H.

which  had  been  pronounced  in  their  favour,
and  caused  it  to  he  affixed  on  their  church-
doors.*

The  Elector  of  Mainz  was  called  to  account
for  the  protection  he  had  afforded  to  Ulrich  von
Hütten,  and  exhorted  to  show^  severity  against
the  author  of  so  many  libels.  The  main  object,
however,  was  the  condemnation  of  Luther,
The  jurists  of  the  Curia  were  of  opinion  that  a
citation  and  fresh  hearing  of  the  accused  were
necessary,  adding  that  "God  had  summoned
even  Cam  once  and  again  before  him ;"  but  the
theologians  would  accede  to  no  furtiier  post-
ponement. They  at  length  came  to  a  compro-
mise, and  determined  that  the  propositions  ex-
tracted from  Luther's  w^ritings  were  to  be
judged  without  delay,  but  that  an  interval  of
sixty  days  Vv'as  to  be  granted  to  him  for  recant-
ation. The  draft  of  the  bull,  framed  by  Car-
dinal Accolti,  underwent  many  alterations.  A
consistory  was  held  four  times,  to  consider  of
each  separate  proposition ;  Cardinal  Vio,  though
suffering  under  a  severe  attack  of  illness,  would
on  no  account  stay  away ;  he  was  carried  to
the  meeting  every  time.  A  smaller  conference
met  in  the  presence  of  the  pope  himself,  at  his
country-house  at  Malliano,  and  in  this  Eck  took
part.  At  length,  on  the  16th  of  June,  the  bull
.was  completed.  Forty-one  propositions  from
Luther's  writings  v/ere  declared  false,  danger-
ous, scandalous,  or  a,bsolute]y  heretical ;  and
the  damnatory  decrees  of  the  universities  of
Louvain  and  Cologne  as  learned,  true,  and  even
holy.  Christ  was  invoked  to  protect  his  vine-
yard, the  management  of  which  he  had,  at  his
ascension,  entrusted  to  St.  Peter.  St.  Peter
was  besought  to  take  the  cause  of  the  Church
of  Rome,  the  mistress  of  the  faith,  under  his
care.  Luth'er,  if  he  did  not  recant  within  the
sixty  days  allowed  him,  w^as  to  be  considered  a
etubborn  heretic,  and  to  be  hewn  off,  as  a  sere
and  withered  branch,  from  Christendom.  All
Christian  authorities  were  exhorted  to  seize  his
person  and  to  deliver  him  into  the  hands  of  the
pope.f

It  appears  that  no  doubt  of  the  complete  suc-
cess of  this  measure  w^as  entertained  in  Rome.
Two  vigorous  champions  who  had  a  personal
interest  in  the  matter,  Aleander  and  John  Eck
himself,  w^ere  entrusted  with  its  execution.  In
Germany  there  was  no  need  of  a  royal  placet;
the  commissioners  had  their  hands  completely
free.

*Letter  from  Hedios  to  Zwingliiis  in  Meiners,  passim,
p.  236.  This  matter  deserved  closer  examination.  Tiiat
it  had  been  really  agitated  again  in  Rome  at  that  very
time,  is  clear  from  the  letters  of  the  Elector  Palatine  and
the  Dominicans,  assembled  at  Frankfurt,  (Friedlander,
Beitrage  zur  Reformations-geschichle,  pp.  113,  116),  May
10  and  20,  1520.  But  might  not  the  letter  of  the  Domini-
cans have  been  merely  a  consequence  of  the  extorted
agreement  with  Sickingen  ?  If  so,  no  weight  could  be  at-
tached to  it  by  the  court  of  Rome.  Even  at  Leipzig,  Eck
had  drawn  attention  to  the  necessity  ofthat  reunion;  lie
blamed  the  pope  for  his  leaning  to  the  grammarians
(grammaticelli),  adding  that  he  was  not  proceeding  in
Ihe  via  regia  :  July  24,  1519  (not  1520) ;  in  Luther'»  0pp.
Lat.ii.  p.  469.

t  Frequently  printed  in  Luther's  and  Hutten's  works.
The  authentic  copy  is  in  Bull.  Cocq.  III.  iii.  p.  487.  It
surprises  me  that  Rainaldus,  who  gives  it,  should  have
taken  it  from  Cochlaus.  On  all  these  subjects  he  is  very
scanty.  Pallavicini  is  somewhat  better.  A  few  notices
are  to  be  found  in  the  Parnassus  Boicus,  iii.  p.  205.

How  proud  and  elated  was  Eck  on  reappear-
ing in  Germany  wäth  the  new  title  of  papal
protlionotary  and  nuncio !  He  instantly  hastened
to  the  scene  of  the  conflict,  and  in  the  month
of  September  caused  the  bull  to  be  fixed  up  in
public  places  in  Meissen,  Merseburg  and  Bran-
denburg. Meanwhile  Aleander  descended  the
Rhine  for  the  same  purpose.

It  is  said,  and  with  perfect  truth,  that  they
did  not  every  wdiere  meet  wnth  the  best  recep-
tion ;  but  the  arms  they  wielded  were  still  ex-
tremely terrible.  Eck  had  received  the  unheard
of  permission  to  denounce  any  of  the  adherents
of  Luther  at  his  pleasure,  when  he  published
the  bull ;  a  permission  which,  it  will  readily  be
believed,  he  did  not  allow  to  pass  unused.
Amongst  others,  he  had  named  Adelmann  of
Adelmannsfeld,  his  brother  canon  at  Eichstädt,
w^ith  whom  he  had  once  nearly  gone  to  blows
at  dinner  concerning  the  questions  of  the  day.
In  pursuance  of  the  bull,  the  bishop  of  Augs-
burg now  set  on  foot  proceedings  against  Adel-
mann,  who  was  compelled  to  purge  himself  of
the  Lutheran  heresy  by  oath  and  vow.  Eck
had  not  scrupled  also  to  denounce  two  eminent
and  respected  members  of  the  council  or  senate
of  Nürnberg — Spengler  and  Pirkheimer :  the
intercessions  of  the  city,  of  the  Bishop  of  Bam-
berg, even  of  the  Dukes  of  Bavaria,  w^ere  of  no
avail;  they  were  forced  to  bow  before  Eck,
who  made  them  feel  the  whole  weight  of  the
authority  of  one  commissioned  by  the  See  of
Rome.ij:  In  October  1520,  Luther's  books  were
seized  in  all  the  bookseller's  shops  of  Ingol-
stadt, and  sealed.  §  Moderate  as  w^as  the  Elector
of  Mainz,  he  w^as  obliged  to  exclude  from  his
court  Ulrich  von  Hütten,  wdio  had  been  ill  re-
ceived in  the  Netherlands,  and  to  throw  the
printer  of  his  writings  into  prison.  Luther's
works  were  first  burnt  in  JVIainz.  Aleander's
exultation  at  this  was  raised  to  a  pitch  of  insane
insolence.  He  let  fall  expressions  like  those
of  Mazzolini — that  the  pope  could  depose  kmg
and  emperor ;  that  he  could  say  to  the  emperor,
"  Thou  art  a  tanner"  (rDu  bist  ein  Qerber)  :  he
would  soon,  he  said,  settle  the  business  of  a  few
miserable  grammarians;  and  even  that  Duke
Frederic  would  be  come  at  by  some  means  or
other.  II

But  though  this  storm  raged  far  and  wdde,  it
passed  harmless  over  the  spot  w^hich  it  w'as
destined  to  destroy.  Wittenberg  was  un-
scathed ;  Eck  had  mdeed  mstructions,  if  Luther
did  not  submit,  to  execute  on  him  the  menaces
of  the  bull,  with  the  aid  of  the  surrounding-
princes  and  bishops.op  He  had  been  authorized
to  punish  as  a  heretic  the  literary  adversary
wliom  he  was  unable  to  overcome  ;  a  commis-
sion against  which  the  natural  instinct  of  mo-
rality so  strongly  revolted,  that  it  more  than

jRiederer's  little  work,  Beiträge,  &c.,  is  specially  de-
voted to  these  events.  The  privilege  possessed  by  Eck
appears  from  a  paragraph  of  his  Instructions,  quoted  by
him  word  for  word,  p.  79.

§  Letter  of  Baumgartner  to  the  Council  of  Nürnberg,
Oct.  17.

IIErasmi  Responsio  ad  Albertum  Pium,  in  Hardt,  Hist.
Lit.  Ref.  i.  169,  For  the  SnrXiüixarocpdpos  is  no  other  than
Aleander.

TT  Extract  from  the  Breve  Apostol.  15  Kal.  Aug.  Win-
ter, Geschichte  der  Evangel.  Lehre,  in  Baiern,  i.  p.  53.

Chap.  III.

CRISIS  OF  SECESSION.

143

l\

once  endangered  Eck's  personal  safety,  and
which,  moreover,  it  was  found  impossible  to
execute.  The  Bishop  of  Brandenburg  had  not
the  power,  even  had  he  had  the  will,  to  exer-
cise the  rights  of  an  ordinary  in  Wittenberg ;
the  university  was  protected  by  its  exemptions,
and,  on  receiving  the  bull  from  Eck,  he  resolved
not  to  publish  it.  The  authorities  assigned  as
a  reason  that  his  Holiness  either  knew  nothing
about  it,  or  had  been  misled  by  the  violent  m-
stigations  of  Eck.  That  Eck  had,  on  his  ov\ti
authority,  specified  by  name  tv/o  other  mem-
bers of  the  university,  Carlstadt  and  Johann
Feldkirciien,  as  partisans  of  Luther,  created
universal  indignation.  Luther  and'  Carlstadt
were  allowed  to  be  present  at  th^e  sittings
in  which  the  resolutions  as  to  the  bull  were
passed.*  Already  the  university  had  greater
authority  m  this  part  of  Germany  than  the
pope.  Its  decision  served  as  a  rule  to  the  elec-
toral government,  and  even  to  the  official  of  the
bishopric  of  Naumburg-Zeiz.

The  only  question  novv^  was,  what  the  Elector
of  Saxony,  who  Vv^as  just  gone  to  meet  the
emperor  on  his  arriva.1  at  the  Rhine,  would  say.
Aleander  met  him  in  Cologne  and  insumtly
delivered  the  bull  to  him.  But  he  received  a
very  ungracious  answer.  The  elector  was
indignant  that  the  pope,  notv/ithstanding  his
request  that  the  affair  m.ight  be  tried  m  Germa-
ny,  notwithstanding  the  com.mission  sent  to  the
Archbishop  of  Treves,  had  pronounced  sentence
in  Rome,  at  the  instigation  of  a  declared  and
personally  irritated  enemy,  who  had  then  come
himself  to  publish,  in  the  sovereign's  absence,
a  bull,  which,  if  executed,  would  ruin  the
university,  and  must  inevitably  cause  the  great-
est disorder  in  the  excited  country.  But,
besides  this,  he  was  convinced  that  injustice
was  done  to  Luther.  Erasmus  had  already
said  to  hrni  at  Cologne,  that  Luther's  sole
crime  was  that  he  attacked  the  pope's  crown
and  the  monks'  bellies.f  This  was  likewise
the  prince's  opinion;  it  was  easy  to  .read  in
his  face  how  much  these  words  pleased  hhn.
His  personal  dignity  was  insulted,  his  sense
of  justice  outraged ;  he  determined  not  to
yield  to  the  pope.  He  reiterated  his  old  demand,
that  Luther  should  be  heard  by  his  equals,
learned  and  pious  judges,  in  a  place  of  safety ;
he  would  hear  nothing  of  the  bull.i  This,  too,
w^as  the  opinion  of  his  court,  his  brother,  and
his  nephew, — the  fixture  successor  to  the
throne — nay,  of  the  whole  country.^

For  it  was  in  the  nature  of  things  that  the
partial  and  ill-considered  proceedings  of  the
See  of  Rome  should  awaken  all  antipathies.
We  may  safely  affirm,  tliat  it  'was  the  bull

*  Peter  Burcard  (Rector)  to  Spangler. Rieuerer,  p.  C9.

jSpalatin,  Life  of  Frederic,  p.  132.  The  "Axiomata
Erasmi  Roterodami  pro  causa  Lutheri  Spalatiiiu  tradita,
5  Nov,  1500,  in  Lutheri  0pp.  Lat.  ii.  p.  Ö14,"  are  very  re-
markable, as  throwing  light  upon  the  notions  of  Erasmus.

t  Narrative  of  the  proceedings  at  Cologne  (W.  xv.
1919);  the  idea  that  this  is  by  Heinrich  von  Ziitphen,  is
an  error  caused  by  the  signature  in  the  earlier  edition,
which,  however,  only  refers  to  an  annexed  correspond-
ence.

§  Veit  Warbeck  ;  Walch,  xv.  1876.

which  first  occasioned  the  v/hole  m.ass  of  publie
mdignation  to  burst  forth.

CRISIS  OF  SECESSIOX.

Durmg  the  early  m.onths  of  the  year  1-520,
Luther  had  remained  comparatively  passive,
and  had  only  declared  himself  against  auricu-
lar confession  and  against  the  administration
of  the  Lord's  Supper  in  one  kind,  or  defended
the  propositions  he  had  advanced  at  Leipzig ;
but  v;hen  the  tidings  of  Eck's  success  at  Ronie,
and  of  the  impending  excommunication,  reach-
ed liim,  at  fi.rst  as  a  vague  rumour,  but  daily
acquiring  consistency, and  strength,  his  ardour
for  spiritual  com/bat  avvoke:  the  convictions
wliich  had  meanwhile  been  ripening  in  him
burst  forth ;  "  at  length,"  exclaimed  he,  "  the
mysteries  of  Antichrist  must  be  unveiled  :"  in
the  course  of  June,  just  as  the  bull  of  excom-
munication had  been  issued  at  Rome,  he  wrote
his  Book  to  the  Christian  Nobility  of  the
German  Nation,  which  was,  as  his  fi-iends
justly  observed,  the  signal  for  a  decisive  attack.
The  tv.'o  nnncios,  with  their  bulls  and  instruc-
t'ons,  v.-ere  met  by  tliis  book,  which  was  pub-
lished in  August  at  Wittenberg.  i|  It  consists
of  a  fevi  sheets,  th.e  matter  of  which  hovv^ever
was  destined  to  affect  the  history  of  the  world,
and  the  development  of  the  human  mind  ; — •
at  once  preparative  and  prophetic.  Hov/  loud
had  been  the  complaints  uttered  in  all  coun-
tries at  this  time  of  the  abuses  of  the  Curia,
and  the  misco];iduct  of  the  clergy !  Had  Luther
done  nothing  more,  it  would  have  signified
little ;  but  he  brought  into  application  a  great
principle  which  had  taken  firm  hold  on  hia
mind  since  Melancthcn's  disputation  ;  he  denied
the  cliaracter  indelehilis  conferred  by  ordina-
tion, and  thus  shook  the  whole  ground  vrork  of
the  separation  and  privileges  of  the  clergy.
He  came  to  the  decision  that  in  regard  to
spiritual  capacity,  all -Christians  are  equal;  this
is  the  meaning  of  his  somewhat  abrupt  express
sion  that  "  all  Cliristians  are  priests."  Hence
follovv^ed  two  '  consequences ;  first,  that  the
priesthood  can  be  nothing  but  a  fimction  ;  "  no
otherwise  separate  or  superior  in  dignity,'*
says  he,  "  than  that  the  clergy  must  handle
the  Word  of  God  and  the  Sacraments ;  that  is
their  work  and  office;"  but  also  that  they
)nust  be  subject  to  the  sovereign  power,  which
has  another  office  to  perform ;  '■  which  holds
the  svrord  and  the  rod  in  its  hand  \^'herewith
to  punish  the  wicked  and  to  protect  the  good."*r
These  few^  words  run  counter  to  the  whole
idea  of  the  papacy  as  conceived  Ihi  the  middle
ages;  on  the  other  hand  they  furnish  a,  new
basis  to  the  secular  pov/er,  for  which  they
vindicate  the  scriptural  idea  of  sovereignty ;
and  they  include  in  themselves  the  sum  of  a
new  and  grand  social  movement  Vvhich  was
destined by its character to be prolonged

ll  Probably,  hovrever,  in  the  beginning  of  August.  On
the  third  of  August,  Lutlier  writes  to  his  brother  Augus-
tine, Voigt,  "jß?7i  edo  librura  viilgarum  contra  Papam  de
statu  ecciesiJE  emendando." (De"V.  i.  475.)

IT  An  den  christlichen  Adel  deutschen  Nation  ;  von  des
christlichen  Standes  Besserung.  Altenb.  Ausg.  Werke,
i.  483.

144

CRISIS  OF  SECESSION.

Book  IJ.

through  centuries.  Yet  Luther  was  not  of
opinion  that  the  pope  should  be  overthrown.
He  would  have  him  remain,  neither,  of  course,
as  lord  paramount  of  the  emperor,  nor  as  pos-
sessor of  all  spiritual  power;  hut  with  w^ell-
defined  limited  functions,  the  most  important
of  which  would  be  to  settle  the  differences
betv/een  primates  and  archbishops  and  to  urge
them  to  the  fulfilment  of  their  duties.  lie
vvould  retain  cardinals  also,  but  only  as  many
as  should  be  necessary — about  twelve — and
they  should  not  monopolise  the  best  livirigs
throughout  the  world.  The  national  churches
should  be  as  independent  as  possible ;  in
Germany,  especially,  there  should  be  a  primate
with  his  own  jurisdiction  and  his  chanceries
of  grace  and  justice,  before  which  the  appeals
of  the  German  bishops  should  be  brought ;  for
the  bishops,  too,  should  enjoy  greater  indepen-
dence. Luther  strongly  censured  the  interfer-
ence v/hich  the  See  of  Rome  had  recently  been
guilty  of  in  the  diocese  of  Strasburg.  The
bishops  should  be  freed  from  the  oppressive
oaths  with  which  they  were  bound  to  the  pope :
convents  might  still  be  suffered  to  exist,  but  in
smaller  number,  and  under  certain  strict  limi-
tations :  the  inferior  clergy  should  be  free  to
marry.  It  is  not  necessary  to  enumerate  all
the  changes  which  were  connected  with  these
in  his  mind ;  •  his  meaning  and  purpose  are
clear.  It  could  not  be  said  that  he  wished  to
break  up  the  unity  of  Latin  Christendom,  or
completely  destroy  the  constitution  of  the
church.  Within  the  bounds  of  their  vocation,
he  acknowledges  the  independence,  nay,  even
the  authority  of  the  clergy;*  but  to  this  voca-
tion he  wishes  to  recall  them,  and  at  the  same
time  to  nationalise  them  and  render  them  less
dependent  upon  the  daily  interference  of
Rome.  This  wish,  indeed,  he  shared  with
every  class  of  the  community.

This  v/as,  however,  only  one  point  of  his
attack — the  mere  signal  tor  the  battle,  which
soon  after  followed  in  all  its  violence.  In  Oc-
tober, 1520,  appeared  the  treatise  on  the  Baby-
lonish captivity  of  the  church  ;f  for  Luther  re-
garded the  gradual  establishment  of  the  Latin
dogmas  and  usages,  which  had  been  effected
by  the  co-operation  of  the  schools  and  the  hie-
rarchy, in  the  light  of  a  power  conferred  on  the
church.  He  attacked  them  in  the  very  centre
of  their  existence — in  the  doctrine  of  the  sacra-
ments— and,  in  the  first  place,  in  the  most  im-
portant of  these,  the  Eucharist.  We  should  do
him  injustice  w^ere  w^e  to  look  for  a  thoroughly
elaborated  theory  on  this  subject;  he  only
points  out  the  contradictions  vv^hich  subsisted
between  the  original  institution  and  the  pre-
vailing doctrine.  He  opposes  the  refusal  of  the
cup,  not  because  he  did  not  believe  that  the
bread  contained  the  v^^hole  sacrament,  but  be-
cause nobody  ought  to  attempt  to  make  the
smallest  change  in  the  original  institutions  of
Christ. He  does  not,  however,  counsel  the  re-

*"  It  does  not  beseem  the  pope  to  exalt  himself  above
the  temporal  power,  save  only  in  spiritual  otfices,  such  as
preaching  and  absolving." (p.  494.)

t  De  Captivitate  Babj^lonica  EcclesiaB  Prfeludium  M.  L.,
ubi  prsecipue  de  natura,  numero  et  usu  sacramentorum
agitur. 0pp.  ed.  Jen.  ii.  259.

sumption  of  the  cup  by  force  ;|  he  only  combats
the  arguments  with  which  it  had  been  attempted
to  justify  the  refusal  of  it  from  Scripture,  and
zealously  traces  out  the  vestiges  of  the  pure
and  primitive  practice.  He  then  treats  of  the
doctrine  of  transubstantiation.  The  reader  will
recollect  that  Peter  Lombard  had  not  ventured
to  maintain  the  transformation  of  the  substance
of  the  bread.  Later  theologians  did  not  hesi-
tate to  do  this ;  they  taught  that  the  accidens
alone  remained ;  a  theory  which  they  supported
by  a  pretended  Aristotelic  definition  of  subject
and  accident.  §  This  was  the  point  taken  up
by  Luther.  The  objections  raised  by  Peter  of
Ailly  to  this  hypothesis  had,  at  a  former  period,
made  a  great  impression  upon  him ;  but  he  now
also  thought  it  dishonest  to  introduce  into  Scrip-
ture any  thing  v/hich  v/as  not  found  in  it,  and
that  its  w^ords  were  to  be  taken  in  their  plainest
and  most  precise  meaning;  he  no  longer  ac-
knowledged the  force  of  the  argument,  that  the
Church  of  Rome  had  sanctioned  this  hypothesis ;
since  she  was  that  same  Thomist  Aristotelic
church,  with  which  he  was  engaged  in  a  mor-
tal struggle.  Moreover,  he  believed  himself
able  to  prove  that  Aristotle  had  not  even  been
understood  on  this  point  by  St.  Thomas.  |1  But
a  yet  more  important  doctrine,  ?ts  affecting  the
practical  views  of  Luther,  was,  that  the  cele-
bration of  the  sacrament  was  a  meritorious
work — a  sacrifice.  This  dogma  was  connected
Vv'itli  the  m^/sterious  notion  of  the  identity  of
Christ  with  the  Church  of  Rome,  which  Luther
now  entirely  rejected.  He  found  nothing  of  it
in  the  Scripture ;  here  he  read  only  of  the  pro-
mise of  redemption  connected  with  the  visible
sign  or  token,  and  v/ith  the  faith ;  nor  could  he
forgive  the  schoolmen  for  treating  only  of  the
sign,  and  passing  over  in  silence  the  promise
and  the  faith.^  How  could  any  man  maintain
that  it  was  a  good  work — a  sacrifice — to  re-
member a  promise  ?  That  the  performance  of
this  act  of  remembrance  could  be  profitable  to
another,  and  that  other  absent,  was  one  of  the
most  false  and  dangerous  doctrines.  In  com-
bating these  dogmas,  he  does  not  conceal  from
himself  the  consequences : — that  the  authority
of  countless  writings  must  be  overthrown ;  the
whole  system  of  ceremonies  and  external  prac-
tices altered :  but  he  looks  this  necessity  boldly
in  the  face ;  he  regards  himself  as  the  advocate
of  the  Scripture,  which  was  of  higher  signifi-
cance and  deserved  more  careful  reverence
than  all  the  thoughts  of  men  or  angels.  He
said  he  only  proclaimed  the  Word  in  order  to
save  his  own  soul ;  the  world  might  then  look

J  "Contra  tam  patentes  potentes  scripluras;  contra
evidentes  Dei  scripturas,"  p.  262.

§Oue  principal  passage  is  in  the  Summa  Divi  Thorns,
pars  iii.  qu.  75,  art.  iv.  c.  1™.  v.'4.

llOpiniones  in  rebus  fidci  non  modo  ex  Aristotele,  tra-
dere,  sed  et  super  eum,  quem  non  intellexit,  conatus  est
stabilire:  infeiicissimi  fundanienti  infelicissima  slruc-
tura. (p.  2Ü.3.)

TT  If  at  a  later  period,  Bollarmin,  as  Mohler,  p.  25.5,'re-
lales,  requires  before  all  tilings  "  exparte  suscipientis  vo-
hnnatem  fidem  et  pcRuitentiam,"  still  it  was  exactly  con-
clusions of  this  kind  which  Luther  missed  in  the  then
prevailing  thomistic  writings;  and  before  we  blame  him,
it  must  be  shown  that  these  doctrines  had  been  really
taught  and  inculcated  in  his  time.  Their  readniissioti
into  the  Roman  church  is,  as  has  been  said,  only  the  re-
action of  the  spirit  of  reform.

CflAl'.  III.

CRISIS  OF  SECESSION,

145

to  it  whetlier  it  would  follow  tliat  Word  or  not.
He  would  no  longer  adhere  to  the  doctrine  of
the  seven  sacraments.  Thomas  Aquinas  de-
lights to  show  how  their  order  corresponds  with
the  incidents  of  the  natural  and  social  life  of
man  —  baptism  with  his  birth ;  confirmation
with  his  growth ;  the  eucharist  with  the  nutri-
ment of  his  body ;  penance  with  the  medicine
of  his  diseases ;  extreme  unction  with  his  entire
cure : — how  ordination  sanctified  public  busi-
ness; marriage,  natural  procreation.*  But
these  images  were  not  calculated  to  make  any
impression  on  Luther ;  he  only  inquired  what
was  to  be  clearly  read  in  the  Scriptures ;  what
was  the  immediate  relation  between  a  rite,  and
faith  and  redemption :  he  rejected,  almost  with
the  same  arguments  as  those  to  be  found  in  the
confession  of  the  Moravian  brethren,  four  of  the
sacraments,  and  adhered  only  to  baptism,  the
Lord's  Supper,  and  penance.  The  others  could
not  even  be  derived  from  the  See  of  Rome ;
they  were  the  product  of  the  scliools,  to  v/hich,
indeed,  Rome  was  mdebted  for  all  she  possess-
ed ;f  and  hence  there  was  a  great  difference
between  the  papacy  of  a  thousand  years  ago
and  that  of  the  present  day.

The  hostile  systems  of  opinion  on  the  destiny
and  duties  of  man,  and  on  the  plan  of  the  uni-
verse, now  stood  confronted  in  all  their  might.
Whilst  the  papal  see  proclaimed  anew  in  every
bull  all  the  privileges  which  it  had  acquired
during  the  gradual  construction  of  its  spirituo-
temporal  state  in  the  middle  ages,  and  the  prin-
ciples of  faith  connected  with  them,  the  idea
of  a  new  ecclesiastical  constitution  according
to  which  the  priesthood  should  be  brought  back
to  a  merely -spiritual  office,  and  of  a  system  of
faith  emancipated  from  all  the  doctrines  of  the
schools,  and  deduced  from  the  original  princi-
ples of  its  first  apostles — an  idea  conceived  by
one  or  two  teachers  in  a-  university,  and  ema-
nating from  a  little  town  in  Germany — arose
and  took  up  its  station  as  antagonist  of  the
time-hallowed  authority.  This  the  pope  hoped
to  stifle  in  its  birth.  What  if  he  could  have
-  looked  down  that  long  vista  of  ages  through
which  the  conflict  between  them  was  destined
to  endure !

We  have  already  observed  that  the  pope's
bull  did  not  touch  Wittenberg.  Luther  had
even  the  audacity  to  denounce  the  pope  as  a
suppresser  of  the  divine  word,  for  which  he
substituted  his  own  opinions — nay,  even  as  a
stubborn  heretic.  Car'stadt  also  raised  his  voice
against  the  fierce  Florentine  lion,  who  had
never  wished  any  good  to  Germany,  and  who
now  condemned  the  truest  doctrines,  contrary
to  laws  divine  and  human,  without  even  having
granted  the  defenders  of  them  a  hearing.  The
whole  university  rallied  more  and  more  firmly
round  its  hero,  who  had  in  fact  given  it  exist-
ence and  importance.  When  the  intelligence
arrived  that  in  some  places  the  authorities  had
begun  to  execute  the  bull,  and  to  burn  Luther's

*  Tertia  pars,  qu.  Ixv.  conclnsio.

tL'Neque  enim  staret  tyrannis  papistica  tanta,  nisi
tantum  accepissßt  ab  universiiatibus,  cum  vix  fuerit  in-
ter celebres  episcopatus  alius  quispiara  qui  minus  liabuerit
eruditionem  pontificura."

19  N

books,  the  monk  felt  himself  sufficiently  strong
to  revenge  this  arbitrary  act  on  the  pope's  writ-
ings. On  the  10th  of  December,  1520,  the
academic  youth,;];  summoned  by  a  formal  pro-
clamation posted  on  a  black  board,  assembled
in  unwonted  numbers  before  the  Elster  Gate  of
Wittenberg ; ,  a  pile  of  wood  was  collected,  to
which  a  Master  of  Arts  of  the  university  set
fire :  in  the  full  feeling  of  the  orthodoxy  of  his
secession,  the  mighty  Augustine,  clad  in  his
cowl,  advanced  to  the  fire,  holding  in  his  hand
the  pope's  bull  and  decretals  :  "  Because  thou
hast  vexed  the  Lord's  saints,"  exclaimed  he,
"  mayst  thou  be  consumed  in  eternal  fire  !"  and
threw  it  into  the  flames.  Never  was  rebellion
more  resolutely  proclaimed.  "  Highly  needful
v.-ere  it,"  said  Luther  another  day,  "that  the
pope  (that  is,  the  papacy)  with  all  his  doctrhies
and  abominations  should  be  burnt."

The  attention  of  the  whole  nation  was  now
necessarily  drawn  to  this  open  resistance.
What  had  fi.rst  procured  for  Luther  the  general
sympathy  of  the  thinking  and  serious-minded
among  his  contemporaries,  was  his  theological
writmgs.  By  the  union  of  profound  thought
and  sound  common  sense  which  distinguishes
them,  the  lofty  earnestness  which  they  breathe,
their  consolatory  and  elevating  spirit,  they  had
produced  an  universal  effect.  "  That  know  I,'^
says  Lazarus  Spengler  in  the  letter  which  was
imputed  to  him  as  a  crime,  "  that  all  my  life
long  no  doctrine  or  sermon  has  taken  so  strong
hold  on  my  reason.  Divers  excellent  and  right
leaimed  persons  of  spiritual  and  temporal  estate
are  thankful  to  God  that  they  have  lived  to  this
hour,  that  they  might  hear  Dr.  Luther  and  his
doctrine." §  The  celebrated  jurist  Ulrich  Za-
sius  in  the  most  explicit  and  animated  terms
proclaims  his  adoption  of  Luther's  opinions  as
to  absolution,  confession  and  penance ;  hiswTit-
ings  on  the  ten  commandments,  and  on  the
EpistletotheGalatians.il  The  collections  of
letters  ofthat  time  afford  abundant  proof  of  the
interest  which  the  religious  publications — for
example,  the  exposition  of  the  Lord's  Prayer,,
or  the  new  edition  of  the  German  Theology — '
excited  ;  societies  of  friends  were  formed  for
the  purpose  of  communicating  them  to  each
other,  of  getting  them  reprinted  and  then  dis-
tributed by  messengers  sent  about  with  these
books  and  no  others,  in  order  that  the  attention
of  the  buyers  might  not  be  diverted  ;  preachers
recommended  them  from  the  pulpit. IT

The  boldness  of  this  attack,  so  formidable
and  so  immediately  connected  v.-itli  the  deepest
feelings  of  religion,  was  another  cause  of  popu-
lar interest.  Some,  and  among  them  Zasius
whom  we  have  just  quoted,  disapproved  the
turn  it  had  taken,  but  its  temerity  only  served

t  According  to  Sennert,  Athenae  et  Inscriptiones  Vite-
bergenses,  pp.  58  and  59,-tiie  names  in  tlie  university-
books  amounted  in  the  year  15J2  to  208;  in  1513  to  151  ;
in  1514  to  213 ;  in  1515  to  218 ;  in  1516  to  162 ;  in  1517  to
232;  in  the  year  1518  the  number  of  the  students  entered
already  rose  to  273 ;  in  1519  to  458  ;  in  1520  to  578.

§  Speech  in  defence,  Riederer,  p.  202.

II  Zasii  Epp.  p.  394.  I  cannot  possibly  believe  this  letter
to  be  spurious,  as  the  same  opinion  reappears  in  so  many
others.

ITBeatus  Khenanus  to  Zwiaglius.  Huldrici  Zwinglii
Opera,  torn.  vii.  pp.  77,  81.

146

CRISIS  OF  SECESSION.

Book  II.

to  heig-liten  the  admiration  and  the  sj^-mpathy
of  the  majority;  all  the  elements  of  opposition
naturally  cong-regated  arouhd  a  doctrine  which
afibrded  them'that  of  which  they  stood  most  in
need — jastiiication  in  their  resistance  on  reli-
gious grounds.  Even  Aleander  remarked  that
a  great  proportion  of  jurists  declared  themselves
against  the  ecclesiastical  law ;  but  how  great
w^as  his  error  if  he  really  thought  what  he  as-
serted— that  they  only  Vväshed  to  be  rid  of  their
canonical  studies :  he  little  knew  the  scholars
of  Germany,  who  were  actuated  by  a  far  differ-
ent motive, — the  vexatious  collisions  between
the  spiritual  and  temporal  courts,  complaints  of  j
Vv^hich  had  been  laid  before  so  many  diets  and
assemblies  of  the  empire.  The  very  latest
proceedings  of  the  court  of  Rome  had  drawn
.down  severe  criticism  from  the  lawyers  of  Ger-
many. Jerome  of  Endorf,  an  imperial  council-
lor, declared  that  the  mode  taken  by  the  pope
of  enforcing  his  bull  by  the  threat  of  "  attain-
der for  high  treason,  loss  of  inheritance  and
fief,"  was  an  encroachment  of  the  spiritual
power  on  the  temporal,  which  he  exhorted  the
emperor  not  to  endure.*  It  was  not,  however,
the  jurists  alone,  but  even  the  clergy,  whom
Aleander  found  wavering,  especially  the  infe-
rior clergy,  who  severely  felt  the  pressure  of
the  hierarchical  power;  he  w^as  of  opinion  that
throughout  Germany  they  approved  Lather's
doctrines.!  Nor  did  it  escape  him  that  the  re-
ligious orders  too  were  infected:  among  the
Augustines  this  arose  from  the  influence  of  the
later  vicars,  and  partiality  for  a  brother  of  their
own  order;  with  others,  from  hatred  of  the
tyranny  of  the  Dominicans.  It  was  also  inevi-
table that  in  the  heart  of  many  a  reluctant  in-
mate of  a  cloister,  the  events  nov/  passing  would
awaken  the  wish  and  the  hope  of  sliaking  off
his  fetters.  The  schools  of  the  humanists  be-
longed of  course  to  this  party ;  no  dissension
had  as  yet  broken  out  among  them,  and  the
literary  public  regarded  Luther's  cause  as  their
own.  Already  two  attempts  had  been  made  to
interest  the  unlearned  in  the  movement.  Hütten
perfectly  understood  the  advantage  he  possessed
in  writing  German  :  "  I  wTote  Latin,"  he  says,
"  formerly,  which  not  every  one  understands ;
now  I  call  upon  my  fatherland."  The  whole
catalogue  of  the  sins  of  the  Roman  Curia,
which  he  had  often  insisted  upon,  he  now  ex-
hibited to  the  nation  in  the  new  light  thrown
upon  it  by  Luther,  in  German  verses. |  He
indulged  the  hope  that  deliverance  was  at  hand,
nor  did  he  conceal  that  if  things  came  to  the
worst,  it  was  to  the  swords  and  spears  of  brave
men  that  he  trusted ;  by  them  would  the  ven-
geance of  God  be  executed.  The  most  remark-
able projects  began  to  be  broached  ;  some  par-
ticularly regarding  the  relation  of  the  German
church  to  Rome ;  as  tliat  no  man  should  for  the
future  possess  an  ecclesiastical  dignity,  who
could  not  preach  to  the  people  in  the  German
tongue; that  the prerogatives  of  the papal

.*To  the  Landeshauptmann  of  Styria,  Siegin.  v.  Die-
trichstein. Walch,  XV.  1902.

t  Extracts  from  the  Report  of  Aleander  in  Pallavicini.

t  Klage  und  Vermanung  gegen  die  ungeistlichen  Geist-
lichen.

months,  accesses,  regresses,  reservations,  and,
of  course,  annates,  should  be  abolished ;  that
no  sentence  of  excommunication  issued  by
Rome  should  have  any  validity  in  Germany ;
that  no  brief  should  have  any  force  till  a  German

'  council  had  pronounced  whether  it  were  to  be

I  obeyed  or  not ;  the  bishops  of  the  country  v/ere
always  to  hold  in  check  the  papal  power.  §  "Others

I  added  proposals  for  a  radical  retbrm  in  details ;

I  tliat  the  number  of  holydays  should  be  dimin-
ished, the  curates  regularly  paid,  fit  and  deco-
rous preachers  appointed,  fasts  observed  only
on  a  few  days  in  the  year,  and  the  peculiar
habits  of  the  several  orders  laid  aside ;  a  ye^arly
assembly  of  bishops  should  watch  over  the
general  aftairs  of  the  German  church.  'The
idea  even  arose  that  a  christian  spirit  and  life
would,  by  God's  especial  ordinance,  spread  from
the  German  nation  over  the  whole  wprld,  as
once  from  out  Judsea.  Thereunto,  it  was  said,
the  seeds  of  all  good  had  sprung  up  unobserved
— "  a  subtle  sense,  acute  thought,  masterly  skill
in  all  handicrafts,  knowledge  of  all  writings
and  tongues,  the  useful  art  of  printing,  desire
for  evangelical  doctrine,  delight  in  truth  and
honesty."  To  this  end,  too,  had  Germany  re-
mained obedient  to  the  Roman  emperor.  ||

xA.ll  hopes  now  rested  on  Charles  V.,  v/ho  was
at  this  moment  ascending  the  Rhine.  Those
who  opposed  the  new  opinions  wished  him  the
wisdom  of  Solomon  and  of  Daniel,  "  who  at  as
early  an  age  v/ere  enlightened  by  God ;"  they
even  thought  the  state  of  things  so  desperate,
that  if  not  changed  by  a  serious  and  thorough
reformation,  the  last  day  must  quickly  come.""!!
The  partisans  of  innovation  approached  him
with  the  boldest  suggestions.  '  He  was  aslsed
to  dis\niss  the  grey  friar  his  confessor,  who
boasted  that  he  ruled  him  and  the  empire ;  to
govern  with  the  counsels  of  tem.poral  electors
and  princes ;  to  entrust  public  business,  not  to
clerks  and  financiers,  but  to  the  nobles,  who
now  sent  their  sons  to  study ;  to  appoint  Hütten
and  Erasmus  members  of  his  council,  and  to
put  an  end  to  the  abuses  of  Rome  and  to  the
mendicant  orders  in  Germany.  Then  M^ould
he  have  the  voice  of  the  nation  for  him ;  he

§"  Etliche  Artickel  Gottes  Lob  und  des  heyligen  Eo-
mischen  Reichs  und  der  ganzen  Deutschen  Nation  ere  und
fremeinen  nutz  belangend."  "Divers  articles  touching
God's  praise,  and  the  honour  and  the  common  profit  of
the  holy  Roman  empire  and  of  the  whole  German  na-
tion." At  the  end,  printed  at  Hagenau,  by  Thomas  An-
shelm,  in  Feb.  15-21.

|("  Ein  Klagliche  Klag  an  den  Christlichen  Rom.  Kay-
ser  Caroluni  von  wegen  Doctor  Luthers  und  Ulrich  von
Hütten,"  <fcc. —"  A  Doleful  Complaint  to  the  Christian
Roman  Ernpcror  Charles,  relating  to  Dr.  Luther  and  Ul-
rich von  Hütten,"  &c. ;  the  work  known  by  the  title  of
"  'I'he  Fifteen  Confederates."  Panzer,  Annals  of  the
earlier  German  Literature,  ii.  p.  39,  has  shown  that  it  is
by  Eberlin  von  Günzburg.  In  the  Epistola  Vdekmis  Cym-
bri  Cusani  de  E.vustione  Librorum  Lutheri,  1^20,  the  con-
trast between  the  Romans  and  the  Germans  is  described
in  the  following  manner ;  "  Nos  Christum,  vos  chrysum,
nos  publicum  commodum,  vos  privatum  luxuni  colitis,  vos
vestrani  avaritiam— et  extremam  libidinem,  nostram  nos
innocentiam  et  libertatem  tuentes  pro  suis  qu^sque  bonis
animose  pugnabimus."

?r  Verbatim,  from  Hieronymus  Emser  against  the  un-
christian book  of  Martin  Luther  the  Augustine,  sheet  iv
He  adds,  all  ranks  are  sinful,  and  "foremost  the  clergy,
from  the  highest  to  the  lowest."  He  also  applies  to  them
the  saying,""  from  the  heel  to  the  crown  of  the  head  there
is  no  soundness."

Chap.  IV.

INTERNAL  AFFAIRS.

147

would  no  longer  stand  in  need  of  pope  or  car-
dinal, but,  on  the  contrary,  they  would  receive
confirmation  from  him ;  "  then,"  said  one,  "will
the  strong  Germans  arise  with  body  and  goods,
and  go  with  thee  to  Rome,  and  make  all  Italy
subject  to  thee ;  then  wilt  thou  be  a  mighty
king.  If  thou  wilt  settle  God's  quarrel,  he  will
settle  thine."*

"  Day  and  night,"  exclaims  Hütten  to  him,
"  will  I  serve  thee  without  fee  or  reward ;
many  a  proud  hero  will  I  stir  to  help  thee ;
thou  shalt  be^  the  captain,  the  beginner,  and
the  finisher ;  thy  command  alone  is  wanting."

CHAPTER  IV.

DIET OF AVORMS. A.  D.  1521.

The  most  important  question  for  the  intellec-
tual and  moral  progress  of  the  nation  now  un-
questionably was,  in  what  light  Charles  V.
would  regard  exhortations  of  this  kind ;  what
disposition  he  would  evince  towards  the  great
movements  of  the  national  mind.

We  have  seen  that  as  yet  every  thing  vras
wavering  and  unsettled :  no  form  had  been
found  for  the  government ;  no  system  of  finance,
no  military  organisation  perfected ;  there  was
no  supreme  court  of  justice ;  the  public  peace
was  not  maintained.  All  classes  in  the  empire
were  at  strife — princes  and  nobles,  knights  and
citizens,  priests  and  laymen ;  above  all,  the
higher  classes  and  the  peasa.nts.  In  addition
to  all  these  sources  of  confusion,  arose  the  reli-
gious movement,  embracing  every  region  of
mind,  originating  in  the  depths  of  the  national
consciousness,  and  now  bursting  forth  in  open
revolt  against  the  head  of  the  hierarchy.  The
existing  generation  was  powerful,  intelligent,
inventive,  earnest,  thoughtfiil.  It  had  a  pre-
sentiment that  it  contained  the  germ  of  a  great
moral  and  social  revolution.

The  want  of  a  sovereign  and  chief,  fel,t  by
all  mankmd,  is  in  fact  but  the  conscious  neces-
sity that  their  manifold  purposes  and  endea-
vours should  be  collected  and  balanced  in  an
individual  mind ;  that  one  will  should  be  the
universal  will;  that  the  many-voiced  debate
should  ripen  into  one  resolve,  admitting  of  no
contradiction.  This,  too,  is  the  secret  of  power ;
when  all  the  energies  of  a  nation  give  volun-
tary obedience  to  its  commands,  then,  and  then
only,  can  it  wield  all  its  resources.

This  v/as  the  important  result  which  now
hung  upon  the  question,  whether  Charles
would  understand  the  sentiments  and  the  wants
of  his  nation,  and  thence  be  able  to  secure  its
full  obedience.

In  October,  1520,  he  proceeded  from  the  |
Netherlands  to  Aix-la-Chapelle,  Vs'here  he  was  I
to  be  crowned.  The  newly  elected  emperor  !
was  a  young  man  of  twenty,  still  imperfectly  |
developed, who  had  just  learned  to  sit  his  |

*  Ein  Klagliche  Klag,  sheet  ftlll.

horse  well  and  to  break  a  lance  ;_  but  of  feeble
health,  a  pale  and  melancholy  countenanöe,
with  a  grave,  though  benevolent  expression.
He  had  as  yet  given  few  proofs  of  talent,  and
left  the  conduct  of  business  to  others ;  it  was
principally  in  the  hands  of  the  high  chamber-
lain, William  of  Croi,  Lord  of  Chievres,  who
possessed,  as  it  was  said,  absolute  authority
over  finances,  court  and  government.  The
minister  wsls  as  moderate  as  his  master,  who
had  formed  himself  upon  his  model ;  his  man-
ner of  listening  and  answering  satisfied  every
body ;  nothing  was  heard  to  fall  from  his  lips
but  sentiments  of  peace  and  justice.f

On  the  23d  October  Charles  was  crowned ;
he  took  the  title  of  Roman  Emperor  Elect,|
which  his  predecessor  had  borne  in  the  latter
years  of  his  life.  No  later  than  December  we
find  him  in  Worms,  where  he  had  convoked
his  first  diet,  and  whither  the  sovereigns  and
states  of  Germany  now  flocked  together.  His
whole  soul  was  filled  with  the  high  significance
of  the  imperial  dignity.  He  opened  the  diet
on  the  28th  January,  1521,  the  day  sacred  to
I  Charlemagne.  The  reigning  idea  of  his  open-
!  mg  speech  was,  that  no  monarchy  on  earth
I  was  to  be  compared  with  the  Roman  empire,
!  which  the  whole  world  had  once  obeyed,  to
which  "  God  himself  had  paid  honour  and  al-
legiance, and  had  left  behind  him_."  Unhappi-
ly it  was  now  but  the  shade  of  what  it  had
been,  but  he  hoped,  with  the  help  of  the
monarchies,  the  powerful  countries  and  the
alliances  which  God  had  granted  him,  to  raise
it  again  to  its  ancient  glory. §

This  seemed-  the  echo  of  the  common  wish
of  Germany ;  it  remained  to  be  seen  how  he
would  understand  his  work — how  he  would
endeavour  to  perform  it.

SECULAR  A?n)  INTERNAL  AFFAIRS  OF  THE  EMPIRE.

Charles's  first  care  at  the  diet  was  to  strength-
en the  advantageous  relation  in  which,  from
the  circumstances  attending  his  election,  he
stood  to  the  several  German  sovereigns.  The
Elector  of  Mainz  received  an  extension  of  his
powers  as  arch-chancellor.  Whenever  he
was  present  in  person  at  court,  the  despatch
of  all  the  internal  business  of  the  empire  was
to  rest  with  him ;  but  in  his  absence,  to  be  in

t"E.elatione  di  Francesco  Corner  venuto  orator  di  la
Cesaecatolica  M'a  6  Zugno  1521.  Chievres:  zentilhuomo
per  esser  il  secondo  genito  non  di  inolta  facolta,  ma  adesso
piu  non  potria  essere,  per  haver  al  governo  suo  non  solum
la  persona  del  re,  ma  la  caxa  li  stati  li  danari  e  tutto
quello  e  sotto  la  S.  M^a.  E  homo  di  bon  ingegno,  parla
pocho,  perho  molto  humanamente  ascolta  e  benignainente
risponde:  non  dimostra  esser  colerico,  ma  piu  presto  pa-
cifico  e  quieto  che  desideroso  di  guerra,  et  e  molto  sobrio
nel  suo  viver,  il  che  si  ritrova  in  pochi  Fiaminghi."

I  A  description  of  the  place  (in  which  the  journey  of
Charlemagne  to  Jerusalem  is  still  treated  as  an  historical
fact)  and  of  the  ceremonies,  by  an  eye-witness,  in  Pas-
sero,  Giornale  Napol.  p.  284.

§The  Proposition,  which  is  the  first  document  in  the
Frankfurt  and  Berlin  Archives  relating  to  this  Imperial
Diet,  was  followed  on  the  14th  of  March,  Monday  after
Oculi,  bv  a  special  statement,  which  explains  it;  this  is
given  also  by  Olenschlager,  Explanation  of  the  Golden
Bull.  Records,  nr.  vii.  p.  15.  One  of  the  best  printed
works  of  that  time,  but  not,  however,  quite  exact.  As-
to  the  rest,  Charles's  statement  recalls  strongly  some  pas-
sages in  Peter  von  Audio.

148

DIET  OF  WORMS,  A.  D.  1521.

Book  IL

the  charge  of  a  secretary  appointed  by  him-
self, to  act  v/ith  the  grand  chancellor.^'  The
Elector  of  Saxony  obtained  the  sanction  of  his
nephew's  marriage  with  the  infanta  Catharine.
As  the  Saxon  government  wished,  on  account
of  the  expense,  to  avoid  a  marriage  by  proxy,
the  emperor  pledged  himself  to  see  that  the
infanta  should  arrive  in  Germany  six  months
after  his  own  return  to  Spain.  Markgrave
Casimir  of  Brandenburg  had  the  reversion  of
the  next  considerable  fief  of  the  empire  which
might  fall  vacant  in  Italy  The  Count  Pala-
tine Frederic,  v/ho  had  been  promised  the  dig-
nity of  Viceroy  of  Naples,  received  as  compen'

domains  for  himself,  and  to  appoint  a  govern-
ment for  the  joint  administration  of  them ;  but
he  did  not  carry  this  into  execution  ;  with  great
magnanimity  he  left  first  the  government  and
then  the  possession  of  thern  to  his  brother,  as
his  alter  ego.'^  Many  thought  Ferdinand  a
man  of  greater  talents  than  Charles;  at  all
events  he  was  evidently  more  animated,  daring
and  v/arlike,  and  kept  a  vigilant  eye  on  what
occurred  in  every  direction.

It  cannot  be  said  that  in  these  transactions
Charles  showed  a  constant  regard  to  the  na-
tional feelings  or  interests.  He  suffered  him-
self to  be persuaded to  strip the  Bishop  of

sation  the  post  of  imperial  lieutenant  in  the  j  Lübeck  of  the  inferior  feudal  dominion  of  Hol-
Council  of  Regency;  Calenberg,  and  Wolfen-  |  stein,  to  which  he  had  a  right,  and  to  transfer
biittel,  the  old  and  devoted  friends  of  Austria,  j  it  to  the  King  of  Denmark  and  his  heirs :  he
were  readily  favoured  m  the  matter  of  Hildes-  forbade  the  duke,  "  under  pain  of  his  grievous
heim,  upon  which  the  Lüneburgers  quitted  displeasure  and  that  of  the  empire,"  to  oppose,
the  diet  in  disgust ;  they  saw  that  they  should  any  obstacle.  He  had  certainly  no  other  mo-
have  to  pay  severely  for  their  inclination  I  tive  for  this  measure  than  that  the  king  v/as
towards  the  French.  Shortly  after,  a  very  \  his  brother-in-law,  and  forgot  that  that  monarch
ungracious  decree  was  issued  against  them.f  v/ould  never  be  reo-arded  in  any  other  light
The  proceedings  of  the  Swabian  league,  on  than  as  a  foreign  prince.**  Nor  was  his  con-
the  other  hand,  met  with  a  no  less  cordial  appro-  duct  towards  Prussia  untainted  by  similar  con-
bation.  The  exiled  Duke  of  Würtemberg,  siderations:  the  emperor  negotiated  a  truce
v/ho  had  neglected  to  repair  to  the  Nether-  between  the  Grand  Master  and  the  King  of
lands,  as  he  had  promised,  now  declared  him-  Poland  for  four  years,  within  which  time  he
self  ready  to  appear  at  the  diet.  He  received  promised,  with  the  aid  of  his  brother  and  the
for  answer,  that  it  was  no  longer  convenient  King  of  Hungary,  to  endeavour  to .  adjust  the
to  his  imperial  majesty  to  give  audience  to  the  difterence.  The  Grand  Master  would  acknow-
duke ;  nor  would  any  mtercession  induce ;  ledge  no  other  allegiance  than  that  he  ov/ed
Charles  to  change  this  determination. '  Pro-  j  to  the  emperor  and  empire,  and  rejected  every
ceedings  v/ere  instituted  against  him,  which ;  other  demand.  The  emperor  took  this  occa-
terminated  as  unfavourably  as  those  of  Lüne-  sion  to  institute  an  inquiry  w-hether  his  vassal
burg :  both  were  shortly  after  placed  under ',  could,  or  could  not,  render  feudal  service  to  a
ban.|  The  aftair  of  Würtemberg  was  the  !  foreign  king.  He  appointed  the  King  of  Hun-
more  important,  since  that  country  belonged  gary  one  of  the  umpires;  that  prince  being  now
to the territory which it was proposed to related  to  the  house  of  Austria  through  the  Ja-

incorporate  into  the  newly  constituted  state  of
Austria.  Archduke  Ferdinand,  the  emperor's
brother,  who  was  educated  in  Spain,  but  had
been  fortunately  removed  from  that  country,  ^
where  he  might  have  become  dangerous,  re-
ceived the five Austrian duchies, which

gellon  alliance,  which,  as  we  have  observed,
was  the  main  cause  of  the  change  in  the  late
emperor's  policy  with  regard  to  Prussia.

It  is  evident  that  it  was  Charles's  earnest
purpose  to  maintain  the  position  prepared  by
Maximilian,  and  occupied,  even  before  his  ar-

Maxhnilian  had  once  entertained  the  project  rival,  by  his  own  commissioners.  Kinsmen  and
of  raising  into  a  kingdom  in  his  favour,  as  his '  old  partisans  were  favoured,  and,  as  far  as  pos-
portion  of  _the hiheritance of the German :  sible, promoted ; recently acquired friends,

"  '  more  closely  attached ;  the  decision  of  difficult

disputes,  for  example,  those  between  Cleves  and
Saxony,  Brandenburg  and  Pomerania,  Hessen

domains.  The  day  on  which  this  contract
was  ratified  (28th  April,  1521),!!  is  one  of  the
most  memorable  in  German  history.  It  witness-
ed the  foundation  of  the  German  line  of  the  and  Nassau,  v/ere,  if  possible,  postponed,  and
liouse  of  Burgundian  Austria,  which  was  des- 1  rendered  dependent  on  future  favour  :  the  old
tined  to  occupy  so  great  and  conspicuous  a  |  opposition  was,  for  the  moment,  broken  up  and
station  not  only  in  Germany  but  in  the  whole  I  reduced  to  inactivity.

of  western  Europe.  Emperor  Maximilian's  I  .  Such  were  the  auspices  under  which  the  de-
former  plans  were  adopted;  and  those  recipro- 1  liberations  on  the  institutions  of  the  empire  now
cal engagements with the royal  houses  of  |  commenced.

Bohemia  and  Hungary  which  were  pregnant  I  We  shall  not  examine  what  would  have
with  such  vast  and  immediate  results,  were  |  happened,  or  what  course  Charles's  councillors
contracted.  The  emperor  at  first  intended  to  I  v/ould  have  entered  on,  if  their  hands  had  been
keep  Würtemberg  and  the  upper  hereditary '  perfectly  free. It  is  enough  to  'say  that  this

was  not  the  case.

In  the  third  article  of  the  election  capitula-
tions, the  emperor  had  promised  to  establish  a
government,  or  Council  of  Regency,  "  such  as

-  *  Haberlin,  Reicbsgeschichte,  x.  p.  375.

t  In  Deliiis  Stiftsfehde,  p.  175.

I  Sattler,  Herzöge,  ii.  p.  75.

§  Corner;  "Credo  non  si  hanno  fidato  di  lassarlo  in
Spagtia  ne  al  governo  di  Spagnoli  diibitando  di  qualche
novita."

I  Bucholtz,  Ferdinand,  i.  p.  155.

IT  Extracts  from  the  Records,  ib.  158.

**  Copies  of  the  Records,  printed  in  Christian!,  i.

541.

Chap.  IV.

COUNCIL  OF  REGENCY.

149

had  formerly'  been  devised  and  had  been  in
course  of  formation,  of  pious,  acceptable,  brave,
wise  and  honest  persons  of  the  German  nation,
together  with  certain  electors  and  princes."
The  purpose  of  this  stipulation  was  not  doubt-
ful. The  nation  wished  now  to  establish,  on  a
permanent  basis,  the  representative  form  of
government  which  had  been  under  discussion
in  1487,  planned  and  proposed  in  1495,  and
brought  into  operation  in  1500,  but  abolished
again  by  Maximilian.  The  opinions  and  de-
signs of  Archbishop  Berthold  were  now  revived.

At  Worms  the  electors  renewed  their  an-
cient union,  and  interchanged  their  word  to
press  for  the  performance  of  the  promises  con-
tained in  the  capitulations.  In  March  a  scheme
of  the  Council  of  Regency  was  submitted  to
the  emperor.  This  scheme  was  no  other  than
a  repetition  of  the  ordinance  for  the  establish-
ment of  the  Regency  of  the  year  1500.  It  was
to  be  composed  exactly  in  the  same  manner : —
a  lieutenant  of  the  emperor  as  president,  dele-
gates from  the  electors  and  the  six  circles  (for
the  division  of  the  empire  into  ten  circles  was
not  yet  carried  into  effect),  and  representatives
of  the  difierent  states  in  rotation:  to  remain  in
existence  and  in  force  when  the  emperor  was
present  within  the  empire,  as  well  as  in  his  ab-
sence ;  to  have  power  to  carry  on  negotiations,
in  urgent  cases  to  contract  alliances  and  to  de-
cide feudal  questions.  In  short,  now,  as  at  the
former  period,  the  greater  part  of  the  powers
and  functions  of  emperor  were  tobe  transferred
to  tills  representative  body.

It  was  not  in  the  nature  of  things  that  the
emperor  should  assent  to  such  a  project.  He
was  surrounded  by  the  same  school  of  German
councillors  who  had  been  about  his  predecessor :
ihe  ideas  of  Elector  Berthold  were  once  more
encountered  by  the  views  of  Maximilian.  The
emperor  declared,  that  his  predecessor  on  the
throne  had  found  that  the  Council  of  Regency
tended  to  the  diminution  of  his  ovv'n  power
and  to  the  prejudice  of  the  empire,  and  there-
fore had  not  established  it ;  that  it  could  not  be
expected  of  him  to  attempt  to  repeat  the  expe-
riment of  an  institution  which  could  only  iovv'er
his  dignity  in  the  eyes  of  foreign  nations.  He
sent  the  States  a  scheme  of  a  totally  different
nature  for  their  consideration;  according  to
which  the  most  important  element  of  the
Regency 'was  six  permanent  imperial  coun-
cillors ;  the  fourteen  councillors  named  hj
the  Estates,  who  were  to  be  assessors  to  the
former,  were  to  be  constantly  changed.  Al-
though the  interests  of  the  emperor  would
thus  be  far  more  powerfully  represented  than
before,  yet  the  Council  of  Regency  thus  consti-
tuted was  neither  to  m.ake  alliances,  nor  to  de-
cide important  feudal  questions  ;  nor  to  remain
in  existence,  except  during  the  emperor's  resi-
dence out  of  the  limits  of  the  empire.  The
oath  was  to  be  pronounced,  not  to  the  emperor
and  the  empire,  but  to  the  emperor  alone.  The
imperial  hereditary  dominions,  which  it  was
one  of  the  main  objects  of  the  States  to  render
subject  to  the  common  duties  and  burdens  of  the
empire,  Charles  insisted  on  keeping  under  a
perfectly  independent  administration;  even
2r*

Würtemberg  was  not  included  within  the  boun-
dary he  had  assigned  to  the  circles.

This  led  to  a  very  animated  encounter.  The
States  considered  the  expressions  about  IMaxi-
milian  as  "more  than  highly  vexatious."  Had
not  that  prince,  they  said,  suffered  himself  to
be  persuaded  by  false  friends  to  recede  from
the  original  plan,  it  would  have  been  honour-
able, useful,  and  glorious  for  himself  and  the
holy  empire,  and  terrible  to  all  adversaries.
And  this  time  they  were  hnmovably  steadfast
to  their  project.  The  emperor  could  obtain
nothing  but  some  mitigation  of  subordinate
points.

The  most  vexatious  thing  to  him  was  the
mention  of  an  administration  of  the  empire
which  should  continue  its  functions  during  his
presenee.  He  regarded  this  as  a  sort  of  tute-
lage— a  stain  upon  his  honour.  On  this  point
they  yielded  to  him,  and  acceded  to  the  title
he  proposed,  "  His  Imperial  ]\Iajesty's  Regency
in  the  Empire;"  also  that  it  should  at  first  be
established  only  for  the  period  of  his  absence.
This  was  subject  to  the  less  difficulty,  because
its  duration  could  not  be  fixed,  and  the  emperor
on  his  part  promised  to  decide  whether  the
existence  of  the  institution  should  be  prolonged
or  not,  according  to  the  situation  of  affairs  at
the  time  of  his  return.

Concessions  were  made  to  the  emperor  on
some  other  matters  of  detail.  The  com.position
of  the  Council  of  Regency,  which  was  the
most  important  matter,  was  mdeed  to  be  pre-
cisely on  the  model  of  the  former,  but  the
number  of  assessors  was  increased  from  twenty
to  twenty-two,  the  two  additional  members  to
be  nominated  by  the  emperor.  On  the  more
important  feudal  questions,  and  in  alliances
with  foreign  powers,  the  approbation  of  the
emperor  was  justly  made  a  necessary  condition ;
but  the  initiative  in  affairs,  and  the  negotiation
of  them,  were  to  be  left  to  the  Regency. —
Würtemberg  was  restored  to  the  Swabian
circle.  Austria  and  the  Netherlands  v\'ere  to
send  deputies  as  before.  The  oath  was  un-
questionably to  be  taken  in  the  first  place  to
the  emperor,  but  a  distinct  pledge  was  given
that  the  honour  and  welfare  of  the  Holy
Empire  were  to  be  mentioned  immediately
after  in  the  formula  of  the  oath.*

In  a  word,  the  emperor  succeeded  in  mn.in-
taining  his  honour  and  authority — a  point  on
v/hich  he  showed  great  susceptibility ;  but,  at
the  same  time,  the  States  carried  through
their  long-cherished  idea,  and  obtained  a  share
in  the  government  of  the  empire,  which  Maxi-
;  milian,  after  the  first  experiment,  would  never
'  again  grant  them.  The  Electors  of  Saxony
\  and  of  Treves  were  peculiarly  satisfied  with
I  the  result.

I  The  Imperial  Chamber,  which  had  fallen
I  into  utter  decay,  was  reconstituted  upon  the
same  principles. The  original  scheme  was  a

*  The  documents  exchanfred  in  this  contest  are  toler-
ably complete  in  Harpprecht.  In  the  Frankfurt  Archives
there  is,  besides,  an  essay:  "  un^everlich  Anzeyg,  v.as  in
Keys.  Mt.  iibergebcnem  Regiment  zugesetzt  und  umbgan-
gen  ist" — "  a  tolerably  exact  Account  of  what  has  been
determined  and  done  in  the  Keg'ency  appointed  fur  his
Imperial  Majesty."

150

DIET  OF  WORMS,  A.  D.  1521.

Book  IT.

very  extensive  one.  As  there  were  about
three  thousand  causes  undecided,  it  was  pro-
posed to  name  so  mariy  assessors  that  they
might  be  divided  into  two  senates ;  the  one  of
which  should  be  entirely  occupied  m  disposmg
of  old  causes.  There  was  a  project.for  reform-
ing the  procedure  on  the  model  of  the  Rota
Romana  and  the  parliament  of  France.  But
it  was  soon  evident  how  little  could  be  done.
"I  have  as  yet  seen  no  doctor,"  writes  the
Frankfurt  delegate  home,  "  who  has  proposed
any  good  scheme  of  reform.  People  say  the
judges'  hearings  should  be  increased,  the  holy-
days  curtailed,  and  proceedings  the  only  purpose
of  Vv'hich  is  delay,  abolished :  any  peasant  might
have  advised  that."  "  They  are  deliberating,"
says  he,  another  time,  "  on  the  reform  of  the
Imperial  Chamber;  but  that  is  like  a  wild
beast,  every  body  knovv's  his  strength,  but
nobody  where  to  attack  him  ;  one  advises  here,
the  other  there."  At  last  the  States,  with
whom  this  proposal  likewise  originated,  came
to  the  conviction  that  nothing  coutd  be  invented
more  expedient  than  the  old  ordinance  of  the
year  1495,  with  the  improvements  it  had  after-
wards undergone,  and  some  new  additions.*
The  chief  alteration  was,  that  the  emperor
should  be  allowed  to  appoint  two  new  assessors
to  the  court  of  justice  as  well  as  to  the  Regency.
The  constitution  of  the  court  was  in  other
respects  the  same  as  that  agreed  to  at  Con-
stance ;  here,  too  the  division  of  the  six  circles
was  retained.  The  three  spiritual  electors  and
the  three  first  circles,  Franconia,  Svrabia  and
Bavaria,  were  to  send  assessors  learned  m  the
law ;  the  three  temporal  electors  and  the  three
last  circles.  Upper  Rhine,  Westphalia  and
Saxony,  assessors  of  the  knightly  class.  Charles
V,  promised  to  send  from  his  hereditary  domin-
ions two  of  the  former  and  two  of  the  latter
description. He  Jiad  also  the  joint  nomination,

*  The  ordinance  of  the  Imperial  Chamber  of  1521  is
almost  word  for  word  the  same  as  this  project  of  the
states.  The  beginning  only  is  different.  "  Dienstaj?  nach
Lätare,"'  lautet  er,  "ist  auf  Römisch.  Ks.  Mt.  unsres  Al-
lerg-nädigsten  Herrn  Beger  von  Churfürsten  Fürsten
Stennden  des  heil.  Rom.  Reychs  beratschlagt,  da  hievor
auf  erstgehalltenem  Reychstag  allhie  zu  Wormbs  im
xcv.  I.  ain  Ordnung  desselben  Kaiser).  Cammergerichts
aufgericht,  welche  nachmals  zu  vorgehalten  Reychstagen
zum  Thail  weiter  declarirt  und  gebessert  worden,  das  die-
selbe als  notturfdeglich  und  hochlich  ermessen  und  be-
dacht, im  h.  R.  zu  hallten  und  zu  vollziehen  auch  nach-
mals nit  wol  stattlicher  zu  machen  oder  zu  ordnen  seyn
mocht  dann  wie  hernach  folgt;  darum  Ir  der  Stennde  ge-
treur  Rate,  das  die  kais.  Mt.  jetzo  solich  (Ordnung?)
wider^  allhie  gegen  und  mit  den  Stennden  des  heyl.
Reychs  und  herwiderumb  sambt  hernachgemeldten  En-
derungen Ratschlag  und  Zusatz  genädigklich  annem,  ap-
probir'und  wie  bei  S.  K.  Mt.  Anherrn  geschehen  verp-
fhcht  und  dieselben  also  zu  halten  und  zu  vollziehen  als
Römischer  Keiser  handhabe."—"  On  Thursday  after  Lag-
tare,"  it  proceeds,  "  at  the  desire  of  the  Roman  emperor,
our  most  gracious  lord,  the  electors,  princes,  and  states
of  the  Roman  empire  have  debated  on  a  new  constitu-
tion of  the  Kammergericht  having  been,  on  a  former  diet
here  at  Worms,  in  1495,  decreed,  which  constitution  after-
wards, at  other  diets,  has  been  farther  interpreted  and
amended  ;  that  the  same,  as  requisite  and  highly  fitting
and  well-considered,  should  be  kept  and  executed  in  the
empire,  since  the  same  could  not  well  be  made  or  consti-
tuted more  excellent  than  here  follows.  Therefore  it  is
the  loyal  advice  of  the  said  states,  that  his  imperial  ma-
jesty do  now,  in  a  common  accord  with  the  states  of  the
empire,  with  the  alterations,  suggestions,  and  additions
hereafter  mentioned,  graciously  accept  and  approve  of
the  said  constitution,  and,  like  his  imperial  majesty's
predecessors,  engage  to  keep  and  execute  the  same  and
uphold  it  as  Roman  emperor."

I  with  the  States,  of  the  judge  or  president  of
j  the  court,  and  of  the  two  assessors  out  of  the
i  class  of  counts  and  lords.  The  character  of
the  tribunal,  as  we  perceive,  remained  essenti-
I  ally  that  of  class  representation  {ständisch) ;
I  and  this  was  the  more  unequivocal,  since  it
I  v.'as  to  hold  its  sittings  in  the  same  place  as
I  the  Council  of  Regency,  which  was  so  decided-
I  ly  representative,  and  was  to  be  subject  to  the
supervision  of  that  body.

What  likewise  contributed  to  impress  this
character  on  it  was,  that  the  States  took  upon
themselves  (as  indeed  they  had  from  the  iirst
ofiered  to  do)  the  maintenance  of  all  these  au-
thorities. Many  extensive  plans  were  devised
j  for  that  end :  e.  g.,  the  keeping  back  the  an-
nates and  the  revenues  of  spiritual  fiefs,  which
i  now  went  to  Rome ;  or  a  tax  on  the  Jews ;  or
!  the  imposition  of  an  import  duty  throughout  the
I  empire,  which  had  the  most  numerous  and  the
j  warmest  advocates ;  at  last,  however,  they  came
j  back  to  a  matricula  on  the  pattern  of  that  pro-
i  posed  at  Constance,  only  that  the rate  was
j  much  higher. The  cost  of  the  courts  of  justice
!  was  estimated  at  13,410  gulden;  that  of  the
j  Council  of  Regency,  the  assessors  of  which
[  must  receive  much  higher  salaries,  at  28,508.1
I  But  as  it  was  foreseen  that  there  would  be
j  many  deficits,  it  was  determined  to  make  the
j  estimates  at  50,000  gulden. The  assessment
,  of  Constance  was  altered  as  follows :  the  prin-
ciple was,  to  multiply  the  contributions  then
j  required  by  five ;  and  this  rule  was  generally
1  adhered  to,  though  not  without  many  excep-
tions. Many  of  the  counts  and  lords,  who  were
always  very  intractable,  were  left  at  the  old
assessment ;  others  were  raised,  but  only  three-
:  fold  at  the  highest. On  the  other  hand,  some
{  cities  which  had  the  reputation  of  being  very
!  flourishing  and wealthy,  were competed  to
j  submit  to  a  contribution  above  fivefold  higher
I  than  the  last. Nürnberg  and  Ulm  were  raised
I  from  100  to  600  gulden ;  Danzig,  from  70  to
I  400. In  this  m^anner  was  the  only  permanent
impost  on  the  States  of  the  empire,  which,  to-
gether with  the  supreme  tribunal,  had  begun
tc»  fall  into  oblivion,  revived,
i Larger  demands,  with  a  view  to  a  military
,  organisation,  and  also  more  immediately  to  the
emperor's  coronation  journey  to  Rome,  neces-
sarily came  under  discussion.

It  might  have  been  thought  that  the  projects
of  a  general  tax,  and  of  a  military  trainmo-  of
the  people  in  parishes,  would  have  been  revived
in  conjunction  with  that  of  the  Council  of  Re-
gency ;  representative  government  and  popular
i  arm^ament  had  always  hitherto  been  kindred
I  notions. On  this  occasion,  however,  the  latter
was  not  suggested;  either  because  it  had  al-
ways been  found  to  be  impracticable,  or  be-
cause, since  it  was  last  entertained,  the  power
of  the  princes  had  so  greatly  increased. On
the  21st  of  March,  Charles  V.  appeared  in  per-
i  son  in  the  assembly  of  the  States,  and,  with
j  much  circumlocution,  dem.anded,  through  the
mouth  of  Dr.  Lamparter,  succours  for  his  ex-

!  t  Harpprecht  IV.,  iii.  35,  has,  it  is  true,  only  27,508  gui-
{  den,  but  this  is  an  error.  In  the  Frankfurt  copy  the  sums
j  are  given  more  correctly  than  in  Harpprecht.

Chap.  IV.

MATRICULA.

151

pedition  to  Rome,  which  he  himself  estimated
at  400Ü  horse  and  20,000  foot,  for  a  year.  He
then  promised  to  contribute  16,000  foot  soldiers,
2000  heavy  horse,  and  a  considerable  body  of
light  horse,'at  his  own  cost.  Elector  Joachim
of  Brandenburg  answered  in  the  name  of  the
States,  "  his  brothers,  lords  and  good  friends,"*
and  prayed  time  for  consideration.  To  the
demand  itself,  which  was  founded  on  the  an-
cient customs  of  the  empire,  or  to  the  number
of  troops  specified,  which  was  not  unreasona-
ble, there  was  no  objection  to  be  urged.  But
agam  the  States  would  promise  nothing,  till
they  were  certain  of  tlie  establishment  of  the
supreme  court  and  of  the  Council  of  Regency,
.  which  latter  institution  they  more  than  ever
felt  bound  in  duty  to  insist  on.  At  length  they
granted  the  required  number  of  troops,  but  only
for  half  a  year ;  it  was  also  agreed  that  they
should  furnish  the  men,  and  not  money  for ,
raising  them  ;  they  would  not  give  occasion  a  |
second  time  to  all  the  disorders  that  had  pre- ,
vailed  in  this  matter  under  Maximilian.f
Lastly,  care  was  taken  that  the  German  troops
should  not  be  left  to  the  command  of  foreign-
ers :  they  were  all  to  march  under  their  ov\m
officers :  the  emperor  was  only  to  have  the  ap-
pointment of  the  commafider-in-chief,  who  also
must  be  a  German.  For  every  leader  wished
to  see  his  own  men  m  the  field  under  his  own
banner.  A  matricula  was  drawn  out  on  the
prmciples  of  that  of  Constance  of  1507.  As  to
the  cavalry,  it  was  almost  exactly  the  same ;
in  addition  to  the  3t91  men  then  registered,
there  were  now  240  from  Austria  and  Burgun-
dy, so  that  all  the  electors,  and  many  other  of
the  states,  had  only  to  furnish  their  old  contin-
gent. For  the  infantry  (to  which  Austria  and  ;
Burgundy  now  contributed  600  men  each),  the
former  demand  of  4722  was'  generally  quadru-
pled, though  with  many  exceptions. |  Thus
arose  the  matricula  of  1521,  which  was  the
last,  and  formed  the  model  for  the  military  or-
ganisation of  the  German  empire  for  ages.

Such  were  the  most  important  measures  pro-
posed by  the  new  emperor  at  this  first  diet.  It
could  not  be  said  that  they  were  fully  adequate
to  the  wants  of  the  nation.  The  resolutions
adopted  were  chiefly  to  the  advantage  of  the
sovereign  princes ;  the  preliminary  ordhiances
concerning  the  execution  of  the  judgments  of
the  Imperial  Chamber — which  was  chiefly  in-
trusted to  them — were,  for  example,  manifestly
in  their  favour:  even  m  his  capitulation,  the
emperor  had  proposed  to  forbid  alliances  or
leagues  between  the  nobles  and  vassals ;  and
this  might  have  the  effect  of  forming  more  com-
pact local  powers.  On  tjie  other  hand,  nothing
was  done  for  tlie  mass  of  the  people,  among
vdiom  such  a  ferment  prevailed,  though  it  had
been  so  much  and  so  often  talked  of. The  no-

*  Letter  from  Fürstenburg  to  Frankfart,  March  24.
"  S.  Maj.  sey  audi  willens  gen  Rom  zu  ziehen  und  dasje-
nige so  dem  Reich  entwandt,  wieder  zu  orlancren."  —
"  His  majesty  purposes  to  ijo  to  Rome,  and  to  regain  pos-
session ofthat  which  has  been  wrested  from  the'empire."

t  Fürstenber?,  May  13 :  "Damit  i<ein  Finantz  in  den
gesucht  werde."  —  •'  In  order  tliat  it  might  not  be  turned
into  a  matter  of  financial  speculation."

t  Neueste  Sammlung  der  Reichsabschiede,  ii.  p.  211.

bility  remained  excluded  from  alJ  share  in  the
busmess  of  the  empire ;  counts,  lords  and  no-
bles were  in  a  constant  state  of  excitement
concerning  the  legal  decision  of  their  disputes
with  princes  and  electors,  which  they  Avanted
to  have  more  expeditious  and  equitable,  and
some  ratlier  acrimonious  correspondences  on
this  subject  passed  at  the  diet.  The  cities  had
vainly  demanded  a  seat  in  the  Imperial  Cham-
ber for  their  deputies ;  the  great  subsidies  of
the  empire  were  discussed  and"  voted  without
consultmg  them;  many  of  them  were  recently
aggrieved  by  the  new  rate  of  contributions  im-
posed on  them ;  and,  besides  this,  they  were
tlireatened  with  an  import  duty  for  the  whole
empire,  from  which  they  feared  a  universal  dis-
turbance to  commerce.  They  made  incessant
complaints,  and  at  last  only  agreed  to  the  pro-
ject because  they  would  not,  as  they  said,  be
the  only  members  of  the  empire  who  resisted ;
they  would  not  have  to  bear  the  blame  if  peace
and  justice  were  not  established.  J

Notwithstanding  these  defects,  it  was  a  great
point  gamed  that  the  disorders  of  the  last  years
of  Maximilian's  reign  were  checked ;  and  that
the  ideas  of  a  representative  government,  which
had  never  been  realised  under  hhn,  were.re^
vived  with  such  considerable  success.  The
constitution  of  1521,  like  that  of  1507,  was
founded  on  a  combination  of  matricular  jvith
representative  forms ;  but  the  latter  were  now
far  more  comprehensive,  since  they/ did  not,  as
on  the  former  occasion,  regard  the  admmistra-
tion  of  justice  only,  but,  according  to  the  pro-
positions of  1495  and  1500,  formed  the  basis  of
a  Council  of 'Regency,  enjoying  considerable
independence  of  the  emperor.  The  attempt  to
revive  an  admmistration  adapted  to  the  mo-
mentary mterests  of  the  policy  of  the  house  of
Austria,  such  as  that  constantly  carried  on  by
Maximilian,  was  met  by  a  national  institution,
which,  if  it  could  but  acquire  consistency  and
development,  promised  the  most  important
future  results.

FOREIGN  RELATIONS. LUTHER.

\^Tiile  these  political  arrangements  were
concluded,  the  spiritual  interests  of  the  empire
were  also  frequently  discussed :  they  opened
another  field  to  the  emperor's  policy.

On  all  the  other  questions  which  came  be-
fore him,  he  had  been  able  to  keep,  in  view
Germany,  his  relation  to  the  interior  of  the
empire,  and  the  interests  of  his  family;  but

§  Hans  Bock  and  Dr.  Peutinger,  who  had  sat  in  the
committee,  got  little  credit.  '•  Etlich  geben,"  schreibt
Fürstenberg,  am  20  sten  Mai,  "  Hr.  Hansen  Bock  etwa
spitz  Wort,  als  ob  er  sich  und  die  rheinischen  Städte  er-
halten und  sie  im  Pfeffer  habe  stecken  lassen.  Dazu  ver-
driesst  sie  und  uns  alle,  dass  sie  die  Grafen  fast  gelächert
(erleichtert)  unddie  Beschwerung  auf  uns  getrieben  haben,
Dr.  Peutinger  der  ist  der  aller  onlustigst,  er  wolt  gern
dass  man  es  beim  alten  Anschlag  Hess,  will  nit  ansehn
dass  Eine  Stadt  aufgellt  die  andre  in  Abfall  kommt."  —
"Some  give."  writes  Fürstenberg  on  the  20th  of  Maj',
"  Herr  Hans  Bock  hard  words,  as  if  he  had  taken  care  of
himself  and  the  Rheni.sh  cities,  and  left  them  (the  others)
in  the  lurch.  Moreover,  it  vexes  them  and  all  of  us  that
they  have  greatly  relieved  the  counts,  and  forced  the  bur-
den upon  us.  Dr.  Peutinger  is  the  most  discontented  of
all:  he  would  gladly  have  abided  by  the  old  assessment;
he  does  not  like  to  see  that  whilst  one  city  rises,  another
falls  into  decline."

152

DIET  OF  WORMS,  A.  D.  1531.

Book  II.

the  Lutheran  agitation  extended  so  widely  that
it  affected  even  the  most  important  foreign
relations,

Charles  V.  was  the  child  and  nursling  of  that
Burgundian  court  which  had  been  mainly  com-
posed of  French  elements  under  Philip  the
Good  and  Charles  the  Bold,  and  had  followed
the  peculiar  line  of  policy  dictated  by  the  posi-
tion of  those  princes.  Even  as  opposed  to  Fer-
dinand the  Catholic  and  the  Emperor  Maximi-
lian, this  court  had  maintained  and  acted  on
its  own  independent  views,  often  in  direct  hos-
tility to  the  former.  The  prospects  which  had
been  contemplated  under  Charles  the  Bold,  and
opened  under  Philip  I,,  appeared  to  find  a  ne-
cessary fulfilment  in  the  position  and  the  rights
of  Charles  V.  The  court  of  Brussels,  which
was  not  properly  a  sovereign  court  and  wielded
no  extraordinary  powers,  was  suddenly  called,
by  the  hereditary  rights  of  its  prince,  to  play
the  greatest  part  in  Europe.  To  take  possession
of  this  pre-eminent  station  was  of  course  its
first  care.

For  the  attainment  of  this  end,  the  policy  of
the  Netherlands  was  conducted  with  singular
prudence  and  success  by  the  Archduchess  Mar-
garet and  the  Lord  of  Chievres.  Friesland
had  been  annexed  to  the  Netherlands,  which
had  also  been  strengthened  by  the  appointment
of  a  khisman  to  the  bishopric  of  "Utrecht,  and
by  the  closest  alliance  with  Liege  and  Cleves,
The  crowns  of  Castile  and  Aragon,  with  all
their  dependencies,  had  been  taken  possession
of  Rebellious  commotions  had  indeed  been
universal,  even  in  Naples  and  Sicily,  but  they
had  all  been  put  down :  the  national  pride  of
the  Castilians,  offended  by  the  dominion  of  a
court  composed  of  foreigners,  burst  forth  in  an
insurrection  of  the  communes ;  but  the  mon-
arch possessed  natural  allies  there  in  the  clergy
and  the  grandees,  and  needed  not  to  fear  the
people.

The  inheritance  of  Maximilian  v,'as  now  add-
ed to  these  vast  territories.  The  Austrian  he-
reditary dominions,  with  all  their  rights  or
expectancies  in  the  east  of  Europe,  w^hich  had
been  acquired  by  the  late  emperor,  were  now
left  to  the  younger  scion  of  the  house,  who,
however,  was  kept  in  constant  dependence  by
his  need  of  assistance :  the  empire  Charles  took
into  his  own  liands,  and  founded  the  ascendency
of  his  house  in  Germany — with  what  care,  we
have  just  seen.

All  this  was  carried  hito  effect  in  the  midst
of  continual  irritations  and  collisions  with
France,  originating  in  the  disputes  between
former  dukes  and  kings ;  but  matters  were  so
skilfully  conducted  in  Brussels,  that  peace  was
maintained  under  the  most  difficult  circum-
stances. The  successors  of  Louis  XL  Vv'ere
compelled,  however  reluctantly,  to  allow  the
posterity  of  Charles  the  Bold  to  consolidate  a
power  which  infinitely  exceeded  all  that  could
have  been  anticipated  in  his  time.

Nothing  now  remained  but  for  the  Burgun-
dian monarch  to  take  possession  of  the  imperial
rights  in  Italy,  which  appeared  the  more  practi-
cable, since  he  already  ruled  Naples  and  Sicily,
and  since  his  expedition  to  Rome  would  be

supported  by  the  whole  might  of  the  Spanish
monarchy; — a  combination  which  had  never
existed  before.  The  Proposition*  with  which
he  opened  the  diet  sufficiently  showed  that  the
young  emperor  was  determined  to  avail  him-
self of  it.  During  the  proceedings,  frequent
allusion  was  made  to  the  recovery  of  the  impe-
rial dominions  that  had  been  lost,  and  grants
for  that  purpose  were  made  by  the  diet ;  nego-
tiations were  entered  into  with  the  Swiss,  even
at  WormiS.

The  maintenance  of  peace  with  France,  the
country  the  most  nearly  interested,  was  no
longer  possible.  Francis  L  held  the  duchy  of
Milan  without  having  received  or  even  sought
the  investiture ;  the  emperor's  first  efforts  must
be  directed  to  this  point.  Other  plans,  which
gradually  attained  to  maturity,  lay  in  the  back
ground  ;  for  example,  that  of  recovering  the
duchy  of  Burgundy,  taken  by  Louis  XL,  the
loss  of  which  the  Netherlands  had  never  learn-
ed to  brook.  The  consolidation  of  two  great
European  powers  completely  opposed  to  each
other,  which  had  long  been  silently  preparing,
became  at  this  moment  fully  manifest.  France,
— ^by  her  internal  unity  and  her  wide-spread
connexions,  both  eaiiy  in  the  14th  and  (after
the  expulsion  of  the  English)  at  the  close  of  the
15th  and  beginning  of  the  16th  centuries,  un-
questionably the  most  powerful  country  in  Eu-
rope,— saw  herself  surrounded  and  overshadow-
ed on  all  her  frontiers  by  a  vassal  who  had
gradually  arisen  to  pov/er,  whom  she  thought
she  had  crushed,  but  who,  by  a  few  easy  and
fortunate  matrimonial  alliances,  had  come  into
possession  of  a  combination  of  crowns  and  do-
minions si:ch  as  the  world  had  never  beheld.
Here  v.^e  first  perceive  the  hidden  motives
which  rendered  Francis  so  eager  to  obtain  the
imperial  crown ;  he  could  not  endure  that  his
ancient  vassal  should  rise  to  a  dignity  superior
to  his  own.  That  this  nevertheless  had  come
to  pass, — ^that  his  rival  could  now  set  up  legiti-
mate claims  to  the  very  country  the  possession
of  which  Vv^as  peculiarly  dear  to  the  king  as
the  conquest  of  his  own  sword, — inflamed  him
with  bitter  and  restless  irritation.  Growing  ill
will  was  observable  in  all  the  negotiations,  and
it  became  evident  that  a  breach  was  inevitable
between  these  two  powers.f

This  was  the  grand  conjuncture  destined  to
develope  the  political  life  of  Europe ;  the  seve-
ral states  of  which  necessarily  inclined  to  the
one  side  or  the  other,  according  to  their  pecu-
liar interests.  Its  more  immediate  consequence
was,  to  determine  the  position  of  the  empire
and  the  application  of  its  forces.

For  however  highly  Charles  V.  estimated  the
imperial  dignity,  it  was  natural  that  he  should
not  look  upon  Germany  as  the  central  point  of
his  policy.  The  sum  of  all  his  opinions  and
feelings  was,  of  necessity,  the  result  of  the  ag-
gregate of  his  various  dominions  and  relations.

*  The  Proposition  was  the  f'peech  with  which  tlie  em-
peror opened  the  diet.  It  contained  the  topics  proposed
for  discussion.— Transl.

t  What  were  the  mutual  reproaches  appears  in  the
French  Apolojjiaj  Madritae  Conventionis  Dissuasoria,  and
the  Imperial  Refutatio  Apologise  in  Goldast,  Politica  Im-
perialia,  pp.  863,  864.

Chap.  IV.

FOREIGN  RELATIONS.

153

He  ever  felt  himself  the  Burgiindian  prmce
who  united  the  highest  dignity  of  Christendom
with  the  numerous  crowns  he  had  inherited
.from  his  ancestors ;  and  he  thus,  like  his  grand-
father, necessarily  regarded  the  rights  he  en-
joyed as  emperor  as  only  a  part  of  his  power ;
indeed  the  extent  and  variety  of  the  countries
subject  to  his  sway  rendered  it  even  more  im-
possible for  him  to  devote  himself  completely
to  the  internal  ajEfairs  of  Germany,  than  it  had
oeen  for  Maximilian.

Of  the  workings  of  the  German  mind,  he
had  not  the  faintest  idea ;  he  understood  neither
the  language  nor  the  thoughts  of  Germany.

It  was  a  singular  destiny  that  the  nation,  in
the  moment  of  an  internal  agitation  so  mighty,
so  peculiar  to  itself,  had  called  to  its  head  a
stranger  to  its  character  and  spirit ;  in  whose
policy,  which  embraced  a  much  wider  sphere,
the  wants  and  viäshes  of  the  German  people
could  appear  but  as  a  subordinate  incident.

Not  that  religious  questions  were  indifferent
to  the  emperor — they  were  very  interesting  to
him ;  but  only  in  as  far  as  they  affected  or
threatened  the  pope,  and  afforded  a  new  view
of  his  own  connexion  with  the  court  of  Rome,
or  new  weapons  with  which  to  encounter  it.

Amidst  all  the  various  political  relations  of
the  emperor,  this,  however,  was  unquestionably
now  the  most  important.

For  as  a  conflict  with  France  was  obviously
inevitable — a  conflict  of  which  Italy  must  be
the  principal  scene — the  main  question  for  the
emperor  was,  whether  he  should  have  the  pope
with  him  or '  not.  The  two  monarchs  already
rivalled  each  other  in  then*  eflbrts  to  gain  Leo's
favour.  Both  were  lavish  in  their  promises ;
the  king,  in  case  he  should  conquer  Naples,
which  he  was  resolved  to  attack ;  the  emperor,
in  the  event  of  an  attempt  upon  Milan,  which
he  was  about  to  make  in  favour  of  the  pretender
and  the  house  of  Sforza,  and  for  the  purpose  of
restoring  the  rights  of  the  empire  over  that
province.

This,  however,  was  not  the  only  close  rela-
tion of  the  emperor  to  the  see  of  Rome  ;  others
of  an  ecclesiastical  nature,  but  involving  not
less  important  results,  existed  in  his  other  do-
minions, and  especially  in  Spam.

It  is  matter  of  notoriety  that  the  main  prop
of  the  government  of  that  country,  as  consti-
tuted under  Ferdinand  the  Catholic,  was  the
inquisition.  Bat  this  institution  Vv'as  now  the
object  of  a  simultaneous  attack  in  Castile,  Ara-
gon and  Catalonia.  That  powerful  body,  the
Cortes  of  Aragon,  had  applied  to  the  pope,  and
had  actually  obtained  li-om  him  some  briefs,
according  to  which  the  whole  constitution  of
the  inquisition  was  to  be  altered  and  approxi-
mated to  the  forms  of  the  common  law.*  In
the  spring  of  1520,  Cliarles  sent  an  ambassador
to  Rome  to  effect  a  revocation  of  these  briefs,
which  he  foresaw  must  have  important  conse-
quences m  his  other  dominions,  and  endanger
his  whole  government.

The  negotiations  were  pending  when  Charles
arrived  in  the  Netherlands,  and  a  loud  and  al-

*  Llorente,  Hist,  de  I'lnquisition,  i.  p.  395,  nr.  x.
20

most  universal  voice,  expressing  both  a  political
and  a  religious  opposition,  called  upon  him  to
assume  a  bold  attitude  of  resistance  to  the
pope.

Charles's  acute  and  able  envoy,  who  arrived
in  Rome  while  Eck  was  tliere,  and  Luther's
controversy  gave  rise  to  so  many  deliberations
of  the  theologians  and  sittings  of  the  consistory,
immediately  perceived  all  the  advantage  which
might  accrue  from  it  to  his  master.  "Your
Majesty,"  he  writes  to  the  emperor  on  the  12th
of  May,  1520,  "  must  go  to  Germany,  and  there
confer  som.e  favour  upon  a  certain  Martin  Lu-
ther, who  is  at  the  court  of  Saxony,  and  ex-
cites great  anxiety  in  the  court  of  Rome  by  the
things  he  preaches."f  This  view  of  the  case
was  actually  adopted  at  the  imperial  court.
When  the  papal  nuncio  arrived  there  with  the
bull  against  Luther,  the  prime  minister  let  fall
the  expression,  that  the  emperor  would  do  what
was  agreeable  to  the  pope,  if  his  holiness  would
oblige  him,  and  not  support  his  enemies. t  On
another  occasion,  Chievres  said  that  if  the  pope
embarrassed  the  affairs  of  the  emperor  (with
France),  other  people  would  stir  up  embarrass-
ments fbrhim,  out  of  which  he  v.'ould  not  easily
extricate  himself

This,  therefore,  was  the  real  point  on  which
the  aflair,  fi'om  the  first  moment,  turned;  not
the  objective  truth  of  the  opinions,  nor  the  great
interests  of  the  nation  connected  with  them —
of  which  the  newly  arrived  sovereign  was  not
conscious,  and  with  which  he  coürd  have  no
sympath}^ ;  but  the  general  situation  of  politics,
the  support  which  the  pope  was  willing  to  grant
the  emperor,  and  the  footing  upon  which  the
former  intended  to  place  himself  with  regard  to
to  him.

This  was  well  known  at  Rome.  Great  pains
were  taken  to  gain  over  the  emperor's  confess-
or, Glapio,  a  Franciscan,  who  was  not  well  dis-
posed towards  Rome,  "  by  civilities."  It  was
determined,  afler  long  hesitation,  to  nominate
the  Bishop  of  Liege,  Eberhard  of  the  Mark,
who  had  gone  over  from  the  side  of  France  to
that  of  Austria,  cardinal,  offensive  as  this  must
be  to  the  former  power.  §  The  same  motives
had  dictated  the  mission  of  Aleander,  who  had
been  in  the  bishop's  service  before  he  came  to
Rome,  and  from  the  mfluence  Vv^hich  that  pre-
late enjoyed  over  the  government  of  the  Ne-
therlands, appeared  there  as  the  natural  medi-
ator between  Rome  and  the  empire.  This
bishop,  Aleander  thought,  too,  would  be  an
active  mstrument  in  securing  a  favourable  re-
sult to  the  negotiations  with  the  empire,  though
his  language  was  generally  frank  and  auda-
cious. All  the  measures  which  the  nuncio
suggested  or  employed  were  conceived  in  this
spirit.  The  Bishop  of  Tuy,  who  had  followed
the  emperor  fi-om  Spain,  and  enjoyed  great
consideration  with  the  prime  minister,  \yas  to

t  Extract  from  Manuel's  Despatches :  Llorente,  i.  p.
398.

J  From  Aleander's  letters:  Pallavicini,  i.  c.  24,  p.  136.
To  what  does  the  emperor  refer,  when  he  afterwards  re-
proaches the  court  of  Rome  with  having  tried  to  delay
the  coronation  at  Aix?  Caroli  ßescr.  Goldast,  Const,  p.
992.

§  Molini,  Documenti  di  Storia  Italiani,  i.  p.  84.

154

DIET  OF  WORMS,  A.  D.  1521.

Book  II.

be  coPxciliated  by  the  gift  of  a  benefxce  which
had  been  already  promised  to  one  who  had
every  possible  claim  to  it,  Aleander  paid  one
of  the  imperial  secretaries  fifty  gulden,  for
which  sum  the  latter  engaged  to  render  him
"secret  and  good  service;"  and  promised  the
same  man  a  pension  for  some  years,  in  consid-
eration of  his  pledging  himself  to  report  to  him
all  the  deliberations  of  the  Council  of  Regency
hostile  to  the  court  of  Rome.  He  expresses
himself  persuaded  that  most  of  these  council-
lors and  secretaries,  although  they  hate  the
papacy,  will  "  dance  to  Rome's  piping,"  if  they
do  but  see  her  gold*  His  bribes  extended
even  to  the  door-keepers  and  beadles  who  were
to  seize  Luther's  works ;  his  sole  andconthiual
complaint  is,  that  his  employers  send  him  too
little  money.  By  a  similar  course  of  "  cunning
pjid  promptitude,"  as  he  boasts,  he  had  carried
into  effect  the  mandate  for  the  burning  of  Lu-
ther's books  in  Flanders :  "  the  emperor  and  his
councillors  saw  the  books  burning,  before  they
were  fully  aware  that  they  had  assented  to  the
mandate." Aleander's  letters  present  an  odious

was  a  general  belief  that  the  emperor  was
determined  to  destroy  Luther,  and  if  possible
to  exterminate  his  followers.]:  A  brief  arrived,
probably  together  with  the  last  concessions,
wherein  the  pope  exhorted  the  emperor  Id
give  the  force  of  law  to'  his  bull  by  an  imperial
edict,  "  He  had  now  an  opportunity  of  show-
ing that  the  unity  of  the  church  was  as  dear
to  him  as  to  the  emperors  of  old.  Vainly
would  he  be  girded  with  the  sword,  if  he  did
not  use  it,  not  only  against  the  infidels,  but
against  heretics,  who  were  far  worse  than
infidels,"  5

One  day  in  the  month  of  February  on  which
a  tournament  was  to  be  held,  the  em.peror's
banner  was  already  displayed,  when  the
princes  were  summoned,  not  to  the  lists,  but
to  the  imperial  quarters,  where  this  brief  was
read  to  them,  and  at  the  same  time  an  edict
commanding  the  rigorous  execution  of  the  bull
was  laid  before  them.

Strange  and  unlocked  for  entanglement  of
events  !  The  Lutheran  controversy  led  the  pope
to  revoke  that  mitigation  of  the  severities  of  the

and  disgusting  spectacle ;  a  most  immoral  mix-  inquisition  in  Spain  which  he  had  already  deter
ture  of  cunning,  cowardice,  arrogance,  affected  I  mined  on  at  the  request  of  the  cortes;  while  in
devotion  and  mean  ambition ;  the  vilest  means Germany,  on  the  other  hand,  the  emperor  prepar-

employed  in  so  great  a  cause.  It  is  not  prob;
ble  that  these  were  without  influence,  though
of  course  others  were  needed  to  produce  a  de-
cisive effect.  But  what  had  not  been  put  in
practice "?  In  the  matter  of  the  inquisition,
especially,  the  pope  agreed  to  make  the  most
important  concessions.  On  the  21st  of  October,
1520,  he  declared  to  the  grand  inquisitor  of
Spain,  that  he  would  give  no  further  encour-
agement to  the  demands  of  the  cortes  of  Ara-
gon ;  that  he  v/ould  not  confirm  the  briefs  he
had  issued,  and  that  he  would  introduce  no  in-
novation in  the  affairs  of  the  inquisition  without
the  approbation  of  the  emperor.  Even  this  did
not  satisfy  Charles;  he  demanded  the  entire
revocation  of  the  briefs.  On  the  12th  of  De-
cember, the  pope  ofl?ered  to  declare  all  steps
that  had  been  taken  against  the  inquisition  null
and  void.  On  the  16th  of  January,  1521,  he
at  length  actually  permitted  the  emperor  to
suppress  the  briefs,  and  expressed  the  wish  that
they  might  be  sent  back  to  Rome  in  order  that
he  might  annul  them,f

It  is  obvious  that  this  state  of  things  was
little  calculated  to  meet  the  wishes  of  the
people  of  Germany,  Charles's  position  and
connexions  required  of  him  an  alliance  with
the  pope,  instead  of  that  opposition  which  the
spirit  of  the  nation  would  have  dictated.  How
grievously  were  the  hopes  which  such  men  as
Hütten  and  Sickingen  had  placed  on  the  young
emperor  disappointed!  The  papal  bull  was
executed  without  hesitation  in  the  Low  German
hereditary  dominions,  where  the  higher  clergy
and  confessors  seemed  to  engross  all  the  con-
sideration of  the  court:  in  January,  1521,  there

*  He  asks  on  one  occasion  for  "  denari  si  ppr  mio  vivere
come  per  donar  a  spgretarii  et  a  sbirri,  U  quali  ancorche
siino  infensissimi  alia  corte  di  Roma,  tiitta  volta  qualclie
danaro  li  farebbe  saltar  a  nostra  niodo  :  quia  aliter  nihil
fit  et  vix  faciemus  aViquid."  — Extracts  from  oleander's
Letters  in  Münster,  Beitrüge  zur  Kirchengeschichte,  p.  78.

t  Extracts  iu  Llorente,  i.  pp.  396  and  405,

ed  to  crush  the  monk  who  so  audaciously  incited
the  people  to  rebel  against  the  authority  of  Rome.
The  resistance  to  the  power  of  Dominican  inqui-
sitors was  in  both  countries  a  national  one, —
This  fully  explains  the  fact  that,  among  the
Spaniards  who  accompanied  the  court,  those
at  least  of  the  middle  classes  took  the  liveliest
interest  in  Luther  and  his  writings.

In  Germany  however  the  emperor  could  ac-
complish nothing  without  the  approbation  of
the  empire  ;  and  in  submitting  the  draft  of  the
mandate  before  alluded  to  to  the  States,  he
had  added,  "  that  if  they  knew  of  any  thing
better,  he  was  ready  to  hear  it."  This  gave
rise  to  a  very  warm  discussion  in  the  imperial
council,  "  The  monk,"  says  the  Frankfurt
deputy,  "  makes  plenty  of  work.  Some  would
gladly  crucify  him,  and  I  fear  he  will  hardly
escape  them  ;  only  they  must  take  care  that  he
does  not  rise  again  on  the  third  day."  The
same  doubt  and  fear,  that  condemnation  by  a
party  would  produce  no  permanent  effect,  pre-
vailed in  the  States.  The  emperor  had  intend-
ed to  publish  the  edict  without  fiarther  trial,  |j

X  Spenffler  to  Pirkheimer,  Dec.  29.  Jan.  10,  in  Riederer,
pp.113,  131.

§  "  Deus  accinxit  te  terrente  potestatis  supremo  gladio,
quern  fiiistraprofectogereres  juxta  Pauli  apostoJi  senten-
tiam,  nisi  eo  uterere  cum  contra  infideles  turn  contra  in-
fidclibus  miilto  deterioies  liaBreticos." — Fr.  Arch.

II  In  the  draft  it  is  said  :  "  Und  (weil)  dann  der  gedacht
Martin  Luther  alles  das,  so  muglichen  gewesen  ist,  öffent-
lichen gebredigt,  geschrieben  und  ausgebraitet,  und  yetzt
am  jüngsten  etlich  Articui,  so  inn  viel  Orten  in  Behem
gehalten  werden  und  die  von  den  hailigen  Concilien  für
kätzerisch  erkannt  und  erklärt  seyn,  angenommen,  und
ine  darum  die  papstlich  Heyligkeit  für  einen  offenbaren
Ketzer  wie  obstet  erklärt  und  verdammt  hat  und  deshal-
lien  inen  weiter  zu  hören  nit  rat  noch  geburlich  ist."—
"  Anrl  (since)  then  the  said  Martin  Luther  lias  openly
preached,  written,  and  sju-ead  all  this  as  much  as  possi-
ble, and  lias  now  lately  accepted  certain  articles  Avliicli
are  maintained  in  many  places  in  Bohemia,  and  which
are  recognised  and  declared  by  the  holy  councils  to  be
heretical,  and  his  papal  holiness  has,  therefore,  as  before-
said,  declared  and  condemned  him  as  an  avowed  heretic,
and  therefore  it  is  neither  advisable  nor  fitting  to  hear
him  further."

Chap.  IV.

GRAVAMINA.

155

according  to  the  advice  of  Aleander,  who  de-
clared that  the  sentence  of  condemnation  al-
ready pronounced  was  sufficient ;  Doctor  Eck,
too,  sent  in  a  little  memorial,  full  of  flatteries
and  admonitions,  to  the  same  effect.*  It  was
the  same  question  which  had  been  discussed
in  the  curia,  but  the  Estates  of  Germany  were
not  so  obsequious  as  the  jurists  of  Rome.  They
begged  the  emperor  to  reflect  what  an  impres-
sion would  be  made  on  the  common  people,  in
whose  minds  Luther's  preaching  had  awaken-
ed various  thoughts,  fantasies,  and  wishes,  if
he  were  sentenced  by  so  severe  a  mandate,
without  being  even  called  to  take  his  trial.
They  urged  the  necessity  of  granting  him  a
safe-conduct,  and  summoning  him  to  appear
and  defend  himself  But  a  new  question
arose.  On  what  basis  was  this  trial  to  be  con-
ducted ?  The  states  distinguished  between
two  branches  of  Luther's  opinions;  the  one
relating  to  church  government  and  discipline,
which  they  were  for  handling  indulgently,
even  if  he  refused  to  recant  (and  they  seized
this  occasion  of  once  more  strongly  impressing
on  the  emperor  the  complaints  of  the  nation
against  the  See  of  Rome) ;  the  other,  agamst
the  doctrine  and  the  faith  "  which  they,  their
fathers,  and  fathers'  fathers,  had  always  held."
Should  he  also  persist  in  these,  and  refuse  to
recant,  they  declared  themselves  ready  to
assent  to  the  imperial  mandate,  and  to  main-
tain the  established  faith  without  further  dis-
putation,!

Such  were  the  views  with  which  Luther
was  summoned  to  Worms.  "  We  have  deter-
mined," says  the  imperial  citation,  "  we  and
tlie  States  of  the  Holy  Roman  empire,  to  re-
ceive information  from  thee  concerning  the
doctrine  and  the  books  that  have  been  uttered
by  thee."  An  imperial  herald  was  sent  to  con-
duct him.

With  regard  to  the  opposition  to  tlie  tempo-
ral interference  of  Rome,  the  States  were  es-
sentially of  the  same  opinion  with  Luther.  As
the  emperor  was  bound  even  by  his  capitulation
to  restore  and  maintain  the  Concordat  and  the
ecclesiastical  liberties  of  the  nation,  which  had
been  continually  violated  to  an  insuflerable  ex-
tent, the  lesser  committee  was  now  employed  in
drawing  up  a  complete  statement  of  the  griev-
ances of  the  nation  against  the  See  of  Rome.
Their  manner  of  proceeding  was  this;  ea,ch
prmce  delivered  in  a  list  of  the  grievances  of
which  he  had  more  particularly  to  complain,  and
every  charge  alleged  by  more  than  one  was  re-
ceived and  recorded. Already  it  was  feared  that

*  "  Ad  Carolum  V.  de  Ludderi  causa  :  Ineoldstadt,  18
Feb.  Saxones  sub  Caiolo  magno  colla  fidei  et  imperio
dedere :  absit  ut  sub  Carolo  maximo  Ludder  Saxo  alios
fidem  veram  et  unicam  deponere  faciat."

t  "  Der  Stennd  Antwurt  auf  keyserlicher  Mt.  Beger  des
Mandats."—"  The  answer  of  tlie  States  to  the  desire  of
his  imperial  majesty  to  the  mandate."  Without  a  date.
Unfortunately,  also",  Fiirstenbergr  has  not  dated  his  letters
precisely.  The  one,  for  instance,  which  refers  to  this
resolution,  he  has  inscribed  Saturday  after  Marthee.
Saturday  after  Matthije,  March  2,  is  certainly  meant.  In
which  case  this  resolution  of  the  States  is  of  that  date.
For  that  their  answer  should  have  referred  to  a  command
of  the  emperor  of  the  7th  of  March,  is  impossible,  since
the  letter  of  summons  to  Luther  is  dated  the  6th  of
March.

the  spiritual  princes  would  drav/  back ;  but  the
councillors  of  the  temporal  were  determined  in
that  case  to  carry  the  matter  on  to  the  end
alone.  A  statement  of  grievances  was  pro-
duced which  reminds  us  of  the  writings  of
Hütten  and  the  Book  to  the  German_Nobles ;
so  strong  was  the  censure  of  the  papal  See  ge-
nerally, and  above  all,  of  the  government  of
Pope  Leo  X.|  It  is  filled  with  the  cunning
and  malignant  devices,  the  roguery  and  cheat-
ing, which  prevailed  at  the  "court  of  Rome.
The  curia  was  also  directly  accused,  in  prac-
tice, of  simony.  If  Luther  had  done  nothing
more  than  attack  the  abuses  of  the  curia,  he
could  never  have  been  deserted  by  the  States ;
the  opinion  he  had  expressed  on  this  subject
was  the  general  one,  and  was  indeed  their  own.
Probably  the  emperor  himself  would  not  have
been  able  to  withstand  it ;  his  father  confessor
had  threatened  him  with  the  chastisements  of
Heaven  if  he  did  not  reform  the  church.

We  feel  almost  tempted  to  wish  that  Luther
had  remained  for  the  present  satisfied  with  this.
The  nation,  engaged  under  his  conduct  in  a
common  struggle  against  the  temporal  sway  of
the  church  of  Rome,  would  have  become  for
the  first  time  strongly  united  and  completely
conscious  of  its  own  unity.  But  the  answer  to
this  is,  that  the  strength  of  a  mind  like  his
would  have  been  broken,  had  it  been  fettered
by  any  consideration  not  purely  religious.  Lu-
ther had  been  incited  not  by  the  wants  of  the
nation,  but  by  his  own  religious  convictions,
without  which  he  would  never  have  done  any
thing,  and  which  had  indeed  led  him  further
than  would  have  been  either  necessary  or  ex-
pedient in  a  political  struggle.

Some  still  hoped,  however,  that  he  would
recall  one  step ;  that  he  would  at  least  not  per-
sist in  his  last  most  oftensive  expressions  which
occurred  in  the  Book  of  the  Babylonish  Cap-
tivity. This  was  in  particular  the  opinion  of
the  emperor's  confessor.  He  did  not  regard
the  papal  anathema  as  an  insuperable  obstacle
to  an  amicable  adjustment.  Luther  had  not
yet  had  a  hearing ;  a  door  remained  open  to  the
pope  for  restoring  him  to  the  bosom  of  the
church,  if  he  would  but  consent  to  retract  this
last  book,  which  was  full  of  the  most  untenable
assertions  and  not  comparable  to  his  other  writ-
ino-s.  But  by  maintaining  these  passages  he
laid  a  stumbling  block  in  his  own  path ;  he
would  cause  that  the  precious  Vv^ares  which  he
might  otherwise  bring  safely  to  port  would  be
shipwrecked. §  At  first  he  proposed  to  the
Elector  of  Saxony  to  nominate  two  or  three
councillors  with  whom  he  could  consult  as  to
the  means  of  arranging  the  affair.  The  elector
replied  that  he  had  not  learned  councillors  suf-

l  This  document  is  republished  from  the  old  printed
edition,  in  VFalch.  xv.  2058.  The  copy  in  the  Frankfurt
Archives,  which  agrees  with  the  printed  one,  shows  more
fjlainly  that  the  work  consists  of  three  parts;  the  first
reaching  to  E  iiii,  upon  which  follows  an  episode;  the
second,  with  a  fresh  superscription,  touching  especially
the  usurpations  of  the  spiritual  courts  of  justice,  reaching
to  Giii;  finally,  a  third,  containing  chiefly  the  complaints
of  the  clergy  themselves,  and  of  the  ordinaries,  against
the  court  of  Rome,  which  was  presented  on  the  Monday
after  Jubilate,  April  22,  Luther  himself  being  by.

5  Seckendorf,  Comra.  de  Lutheranisrao,  i.  142.

156

DIET  OF  WORMS,  A.  D.  1521.

Book  IL

ficient.  Glapio  hereupon  asked  whether  the
parties  would  sabmit  the  matter  to  chosen  arbi-
trators, by  whose  decision  the  pope  himself
would  abide.  The  elector  did  not  believe  it
possible  to  induce  the  pope  to  consent  to  this,
especially  since  the  emperor  intended  so  soon
to  leave  Germany.  On  hearmg-  this,  Glapio
sighed.  The  silent,  reserved  prince,  who  re-
pelled all  attempts  at  intimacy  or  sympathy
from  others,  and  who  was  in  fact  the  only
human  being-  that  had  any  influence  over  Lu-
ther, was  absolutely  unapproachable :  it  was
impossible  to  obtain  from  him  even  a  private
audience.  The  confessor,  therefore,  addressed
himself  to  other  friends  of  Luther.  He  went  to
the  Ebernburg  to  visit  Sickingen,  who  had  just
then  re-entered  the  emperor's  service  and  was
esteemed  one  of  Luther's  most  disthiguished  :
patrons,  in  the  hope  of  obtaining  his  mediation.
Here,  too,  Glapio  expressed  himself  in  such  a  '
manner  on  some  points,  that  he  might  have
been  supposed  to  be  an  adherent  of  Luther.  I
am  not  of  opinion  that  this  was  a  stratagem,  as
so  many  have  assumed ;  Aleander,  at  least,  was
very  uneasy  about  it,  and  neglected  no  means
of  interrupting  the  course  of  the  negotiations.
It  is  obvious  that  Luther's  opposition  to  the  pope
promised  to  be  a  doubly  powerful  instrument  of
the  imperial  policy,  if  the  government  did  not
find  itself  compelled  absolutely  to  condemn  him
on  account  of  his  open  schism,  and  could  keep
the  matter  pending  before  a  court  of  arbitration.
Sickingen  sent  an  invitation  to  Luther  to  visit
him  in  passing  by.*

For  Luther  was  already  on  his  way  from
Wittenberg  to  Worms.  He  preached  once  on
the  road,  and  in  the  evening  when  he  arrived
at  his  inn,  amused  himself  with  playing  the
lute ;  he  took  no  interest  whatever  in  politics,
and  his  mind  was  elevated  far  above  all  subjects
of  mere  personal  interest,  whether  regarding
himself  or  others.  At  various  places  on  the
road  he  had  to  pass  through,  might  be  seen
posted  up  the  decretal  condemning  his  books,
so  that  when  they  arrived  at  Weimar  the  herald
asked  him  whether  he  would  go  on.  He  re-
plied that  he  would  rely  on  the  emperor's  safe-
conduct.  Then  came  Sickingen's  invitation.
He  replied,  if  the  emperor's  confessor  had  any
thing  to  say  to  him,  he  could  say  it  in  Worms.
Even  at  the  last  station,  a  councillor  of  his  so-
vereign sent  him  word  that  he  had  better  not
come,  for  that  he  might  share  the  fate  of  Huss.
"  Huss,"  replied  Luther,  "  was  burnt,  but  not
the  truth  with  him :  I  will  go,  though  as  many
devils  took  aim  at  me  as  there  are  tiles  on  the
roofs  of  the  houses."!  Thus  he  reached  Worms,
on  the  18th  of  April,  1521,  one  Tuesday,  about
noon,  just  as  people  sat  at  dinner.  When  the
v/atchman  on  the  church  tower  blew  his  trum-

*  See  Luther's  Narrative.  Works,  Altenb.  Ed.  t.  i.  p.
733.

t  Müller,  Staatscabinet,  viii.  296.  I  retain  the  expres-
sion, which  he  himself  makes  use  of  in  a  subsequent  let-
ter: "Wenn  ich  hätte  gewusst,  dass  so  viel  Teufel  auf
mich  gehalten  hätten,  als  Ziegel  auf  den  Dachern  sind,
ware  ich  dennoch  mitten  unter  sie  gesprungen  mit  Freu-
den."— "If  I  had  known  that  as  many  devils  would  have
s^et  upon  me  as  there  are  tiles  on  the  roofs,  T  should  still
have  sprung  into  the  midst  of  them  with  ioy"— Letters,
ii.  139.

pet,  every  body  crowded  into  the  streets  to  see
the  monk.  He  sat  in  the  open  waggon  (Boll-
wagen)  which  the  council  of  Wittenberg  had
lent  him  for  the  journey,  in  the  cowl  of  his
order;  before  him  rode  the  herald,  with  his
tabard,  embroidered  with  the  imperial  eagle,
hung  over  his  arm.  Thus  they  passed  through
the  wondering,  gaping  crowd,  regarded  by  some
with  sympathy,  by  all  with  various  and  unquiet
emotions.  Luther  looked  down  upon  the  as-
sembled multitude,  and  his  daring  courage  rose
to  the  height  of  firm  confidence  :  he  said,  "  God
will  be  with  me."  In  this  state  of  mind  he
alighted.

The  very  next  day  towards  evening  he  was
conducted  into  the  assembly  of  the  empire.
The  young  emperor,  the  six  electors  (among
whom  was  his  own  master),  a  body  of  spiritual
and  temporal  princes  before  whom  their  sub-
jects bowed  the  knee,  numerous  chiefs  cele-
brated for  deeds  in  war  and  peace,  worshipful
delegates  of  cities,  friends  and  foes,  were  there,
awaiting  the  entrance  of  the  monk.  The  sight
of  this  majestic  and  splendid  assemblage  seemed
for  a  moment  to  dazzle  him.  He  spoke  in  a
feeble,  and  almost  inaudible  voice.  Many
thought  he  was  frightened.  Being  asked  whe-
ther he  would  defend  his  books  (the  titles  of
which  were  read  aloud)  collectively,  or  consent
to  recant,  he  replied  that  he  begged  for  time  to
consider :  he,  claimed,  as  we  have  seen,  the
benefit  of  the  forms  and  customs  of  the  empire.

The  following  day  he  appeared  again  before
the  diet.  It  was  late  before  he  was  admitted ;
torches  were  already  lighted ;  the  assembly
was  perhaps  more  numerous  than  the  day  be-
fore; the  press  of  people  so  great,  that  the
princes  hardly  found  seats ;  the  interest  in  the
decisive  moment,  more  intense.  Luther  now
exhibited  not  a  trace  of  embarrassment.  The
same  question  as  before  being  repeated  to  him,
he  answered  with  a  firm,  distinct  voice,  and
with  an  air  of  joyful  serenity.  He  divided  his
works  into  books  of  Christian  doctrine,  writings
against  the  abuses  of  the  See  of  Rome,  and
controversial  writings.  To  be  compelled  to
retract  the  first,  he  said,  would  be  unheard  of,
since  even  the  papal  bull  acknowledged  that
they  contained  much  that  was  good ;  the  second,
would  afford  the  Romanists  a  pretext  for  the
entire  subjugation  of  Germany;  the  third,  would
only  give  his  adversaries  new  courage  to  resist
the  truth : — an  answer  which  was  more  direct-
ed against  the  erroneous  form  in  which  the
questions  had  been  arranged,  than  agamst  the
views  with  which  the  States  had  entered  on
the  trial.  The  official  of  Treves  put  the  mat-
ter in  a  more  tangible  shape,  by  advising  Lu-
ther not  to  give  a  total  and  unqualified  refusal
to  the  proposal  to  retract.  Had  Arius,  he  said,
retracted  some  points,  his  good  books  would  not
have  been  destroyed  together  with  the  bad.  In
his  (Luther's)  case,  too,  means  would  be  found
to  rescue  some  of  his  books  from  the  flames,  if
he  would  recant  what  had  been  condemned  by
the  Council  of  Constance,  and  what  he  had  re-
peated in  defiance  of  that  condemnation.  The
official  insisted  more  on  the  infallibility  of  coun-
cils than  on  that  of  the  pope.

Chap.  IV.

LUTHER  AT  WORMS,  A.  D.  1521.

157

But  Luther  now  believed  as  little  in  the  one
as  in  the  other;  he  replied,  that  even  a  council
might  err. This  the  official  denied, Luther  _
repeated  that  he  would  prove  that  this  might  i
happen,  and  that  it  had  happened. The  official
could  not  of  course  go  into  the  inquiry  in  that
assembly. He  asked  again  definitively  whether
Luther  meant  to  defend  all  his  works  as  ortho-
dox, or  to  retract  any  part. He  announced  to
him  that,  if  he  utterly  refused  to  recant,  the
empire  would  knov/  how  to  deal  with  a  heretic.
Luther  had  expected  that  a  disputation  or  con-  \
futation,  or  some  attempt  at  demonstrating  his  :
errors,  awaited  him  in  Vv'orms ;  when,  there-  \
fore,  he  found  himself  at  once  treated  as  a  false  j
teacher,  there  arose  in  his  mind  during  the  con-  !
versation  the  full  consciousness  of  a  conviction  |
dependent  on  no  act  of  the  will,  founded  on  j
God's  word,  regardless  of  and  untroubled  by
pope  or  council :  threats  alarmed  him  not ;  the
universal  sympathy,  the  Vv-arm  breathings  of  ;
which  he  felt  around  him,  had  first  given  him
strength  and  courage :  his  feeling-  was,  as  he
said  at^oing  out,  that  had  he  a  thousand  heads
he  would  ]et  them  all  be  struck  oil  sooner  than
recant. He  repeated  now,  as  he  had  done  be-
fore, that,  unless  it  were  demonstrated  to  hhn
by  texts  from  the  Holy  Scripture  that  he  was
in  error,  he  could  not  and  Vvould  not  recant,  ',
since  his  conscience  was  captive  to  God"s  vrord.  |
"  Here  I  stand,"  exclaimed  he :  "  I  can  do  no
otherwise ;  God  help  me  ! Amen."*

It  is  remarkable  hov/  difierent  was  the  im-
pression which  Luther  made  upon  those  pre-
sent. The  Spaniards  of  high  rank,  who  had
always  spoken  of  him  with  aversion  and  con-
tempt, who  had  been  seen  to  take  a  book  of
Luther's  or  Hutten's  from  a  book-stall,  tear  it
in  pieces  and  trample  it  in  the  mire,f  thought
the  monk  imbecile.  A  Venetian,  who  w^as
otherwise  perfectly  impartial,  rema.rks,  that
Luther  showed  himself  neither  very  learned
nor  remarkably  wise,  nor  even  irreproachable
in  hi5  life,  and  that  he  had  not  answered  to  the
expectations  conceived  of  hhn.|  It  is  easy  to
imagine  what  was  Aleander's  judgment  of  him.
But  even  the  emperor  had  received  a  similar
impression.  "  That  man,"  said  he,  "  will  never
make  a  heretic  of  me."  The  next  day  (19th
of  April)  he  announced  to  the  states  of  the  em-
pire, in  a  declaration  written  in  French  and
with  his  own  hand,  his  determination  to  main-
tain the  faith  which  had  been  held  by  his  pre-
decessors, orthodox  emperors  and  catholic
kings.  Li  that  word  he  nicluded  all  that  had
been  established  by  councils,  and  especially
that  of  Constance.  To  this  he  would  devote
his  whole  power,  body  and  soul.  After  the  ex-
pressions of  obstinacy  which  they  had  yester-
day heard  from  Luther,  he  felt  remorse  that  he
had  spared  him  so  long,  and  would  now  proceed

*  Acta,  Revdi  Patris  Matini  Lutheri  coram  Cssa  jMa-
jestate,  etc.  Opp.  Latiieri,  lat.  ii.  p.  413.  The  account
which  Pallavicini  drew  from  the  letters  of  Aleander  con-
tains somewhat  more  :  a  good  deal  of  the  detail  which  he
gives,  as  well  as  ditTerent  pieces  of  news,  I  found  in  the
letters  of  the  Frankfurt  delegates,  Fürstenberg  and  Holz-
liausen.

t  Buschius  ad  Hutteniim. 0pp.  Hutt.  iv,  p.  237.

t  Contarenus  ad  MattliE  im  Dandulum  Vormatice,  26oio
d.  April,  1521,  in  the  Clironicle  of  Sanuto,  torn.  xxx.
o

against  him  as  against  an  avowed  heretic.  He
called  upon  the  princes  to  act  hi  the  same  spi-
rit, according  to  their  duty  and  their  promises.

Luther  ha^,  on  the  contrary,  completely  sa-
tisfied his  own  countrymen.  5  The  hardy  v/ar-
riors  were  delighted  with  his  undaunted  cour-
age ;  the  veteran  George  of  Frundsperg  clapped
him  on  the  shoulder  encouragingly,  as  he  went
in ;  the  brave  Erich  of  Brunswick  sent  him  a
silver  tankard  of  Limbeck  beer  through  all  the
press  of  the  assembly.  At  going  out  a  voice
was  heard  to  exclaim,  •'  Blessed  is  the  mother
of  such  a  man !"  Even  the  cautious  and
thoughtful  Frederic  was  satisfied  v/ith  his  pro-
missor:  "  Oh,"  said  he  to  Spalatin'm  the  even-
ing, in  his  own  chamber,  "hov7  well  did  Doctor
Martinus  speak  before  the  emperor  and  states  !"
He  was  particularly  delighted  at  the  ease  and
ability  with  which  Luther  had  repeated  his
German  declaration  in  Latin.  From  this  time,
the  princes  rivalled  each  other  in  the  frequency
of  their  visits  to  him.  "  If  you  be  right,  Sn-
Doctor,"  said  Landgrave  Philip  of  Hessen,  after
a  few  jocose  words,  Vv'hich  Luther  gently  re-
buked with  a  smile,  "may  God  help  you."
Luther  had  already  been  told,  that  if  his  ene-
mies burned  him,  they  must  burn  all  the  Ger-
man princes  with  him.  Their  latent  sympathy
was  aroused  and  set  in  motion  by  the  emperor's
peremptory  manifesto,  so  foreign  to  all  the
forms  of  the  empire.  A  paper  vras  found  in  his
apartments  on  which  were  written  the  words,
"  Wo  to  the  land  vrhose  king  is  a  child  !"  A
declaration  of  open  hostility  v\'as  fixed  on  the
town-hall,  on  the  part  of  four  hundred  allied
knights  agamst  the  Romanists,  and  especially
against  the  Archbishop  of  Mainz,  for  trampling
under  foot  honour  and  divine  justice.  They
had  sv7orn  not  to  abandon  the  upright  Luther.
"  I  am  ill  at  wTitmg,"  said  the  author  of  this
proclamation ;  "  but  I  mean  a  great  mischief,
vdth  8000  foot  soldiers  at  my  back.  Bund-
schuh, Bundschuh,  Bimdschuh  !"ji  This  seemed
to  announce  a  combination  between  the  knights
and  the  peasants  to  protect  Luther  against  his
enemies.  In  fact,  the  courtiers  did  not  feel
perfectly  at  ease,  when  they  saw  themselves
thus  unarmed  and  defenceless,  hi  the  midst  of
a  warlike  nation  in  a  state  of  violent  excitement
amd  agitated  by  conflicting  passions.

For  the  moment,  however,  there  was  notbnng
to  fear,  since  Sickingen  and  many  other  knights
;  and  captains  had  entered  Charles's  service,  in
I  the  hope  of  soon  reaping  an  ample  harvest  of
I  glory  and  gain  under  his  banners.
I Before  the  States  entered  on  the  discussion
;  of  the  emperor's  proclamation,  they  proposed
j  that  an  attempt  should  be  made  to  induce  Lu-
j  ther  to  renounce  his  most  ofiensive  opinions ;
they  inthnated  that  there  was  danger  of  a  re-
bellion, if  the  proceedings  ag-ainst  him  were  of

§  -'Contarenus  ad  Tiepoliim,  Söfn"  d.  Apr. Habet  in-

teiitissinios  inimicos  et  maximos  fa  uteres ;  res agitur

I  tanta  contentione  quantam  nemo  crederet." — Letter  of

1 Tonstall  from  the  Diet  of  Worms,  in  Fidde's  Life  of  Wol-

se2j,  p.  242. The  Germans  everywhere  are  so  addicted  Co

Luther,  that  rather  thaa  he  shall  be oppressed  by  the

pope's  authority,  a  hundred  thousand  of  the  people  will

I  sacrifice  theix  lives.

I  li  The  war-crv  of  the  league  of  the  peasants  of  the  Upper
1  Rhine  in  1501-2. (See  note,  p.  82).— Transl.

158

EDICT  OF  WORMS,  A.  D.  1521.

Book  II.

so  hasty  and  violent  a  kind :  for  this  purpose  the  |
emperor  granted  a  delay  of  some  days.  i

But  it  was  easy  to  foresee  that  little  could  be
accomplished  by  such  means.  Representations
were  made  to  Luther  concerning  his  opinions
on  the  councils ; — he  persisted  in  affirming  that
Huss  was  unjustly  condemned  at  Constance.
He  was  again  asked  to  acknowledge  the  em-
peror and  statesas  judges  of  his  doctrines; — he  '
declared  that  he  would  not  allow  men  to  be  the
judges  of  God's  word.  ,

Aleander  maintains  that  Luther  had  really,
at  one  moment,  been  advised  to  abandon  some
of  the  opinions  he  had  last  proclaimed,  and  to
defend  only  those  immediately  directed  against
Rome,  No  trace  of  this  is  to  be  found  in  Ger-
man authorities.  It  does  not  even  appear  that
the  question  contained  in  the  memorial  of  the
States  wa»  very  precisely  put ;  but  all  his  de-
clarations were  so  clear  and  explicit,  so  pro-
foundly religious,  that  no  personal  considera-
tions were  to  be  expected  from  him :  he  had
emancipated  himself  for  ever  from  the  forms  of
the  church  of  Rome  ;  in  rejecting  the  decision
of  one  council,  he  rejected  the  whole  idea  on
which  it  rested :  a  compromise  was  now  impos-
sible.

But  as  he  quitted  Worms  without  having
consented  to  tlie  smallest  limitation  of  his  opin-
ions, the  former  resolution  of  the  States,  which
had  given  occasion  to  his  being  summoned  be-
fore them,  was  now  put  in  force  as  an  instru-
ment of  his  condemnation.  The  emperor,  at
least,  could  not  have  contemplated  a  revision  of
this  decree  or  a  fresh  debate  upon  it,  since  he
had  just  formed  the  most  intimate  relations
with  the  See  of  Rome.

The  ill-concealed  hostile  disposition  in  which
Don  Juan  Manuel  had  found  the  court  of  Rome
in  the  spring  of  1520,  had  been  converted  into
the  strictest  union  by  his  eübrts,  within  the
space  of  a  year.  On  the  8th  of  May,  1521,  an
alliance  was  concluded  betv/een  Charles  and
Leo,  in  which  they  mutually  promised  "  to  have
the  same  friends  and  the  same  enemies,  with-
out exception;  the  same  vrill  in  consent  and
denial,  in  attack  and  defence."  They  began
by  making  common  cause  against  France ;  the
pope  having  at  length  determined  completely
to  take  the  side  of  the  em.peror,  and  to  exert  all
his  povrers  to  drive  the  French  out  of  Milan  and
Genoa.  The  immediate  object,  however,  was
the  spiritual  affairs  of  Germany.

In  the  16th  article  of  the  treaty,  the  emperor
promised  that,  "  inasmuch  as  certain  men  had
arisen,  who  fall  off  from  the  Catholic  faith  and
vac kedly  slander- the  apostolic  see,  he  would
em.ploy  all  his  powers  in  pimishing  them  and
avenging  the  wrong  they  had  committed  ao-ainst
the  apostolic  see,  In  like  manner  as  if  it  had
been  done  against  himself"  *

It  cannot  be  affirmed  that  the  conduct  of
Charles  V.  in  the  affair  of  Luther  was  dictated
exclusively  by  political  motives;  it  is  very  pro-
bable that  a  denial  of  the  infallibility  of  coun-

*  TabuloB  Foederis,  &c.  in  Duraont,  t.  iv.  part  iii.  p.  98.
"  Q,iioniain  sanctissimo  domino  nostro  cura  est  aliquanto
etiam  major  rerum  spiritualium  etpastoralis  officii  quam
temporalium "

cils  and  an  attack  on  the  sacraments,  was  as
offensive  as  it  was  unintelligible  to  him ;  but  it
is  perfectly  clear  that  he  was  mainl}^  deter-
mined by  politics.  To  what  purposes  might
not  Luther  have  been  turned,  if  he  had  mode-
rated his  tone  so  as  to  render  it  unnecessary  to
condemn  him  ]  But  as  this  was  not  to  be  avoid-
ed, it  was  made  a  condition  of  the  great  war
which  was  about  to  be  declared.

There  was,  however,  still  a  certain  difficulty
in  adopting  decisive  measures,  arising  from  the
universal  sympathy  which  Luther  had  excited
during  his  presence.  The  resolution  passed
by  the  States  Vv'as  now  repugnant  to  a  considera-
ble number  of  them.  The  question  was,  wheth-
er they  would  acquiesce  without  contest  in  an
edict  founded  upon  this  resolution.

In  order  to  obtain  this  result,  the  following
course  was  adopted.

Nothing  was  said  for  some  time ;  meanwhile
many  quitted  Worms,  as  all  the  other  business
was  ended.

On  the  25th  of  May,  Avhen  the  emperor  ap-
peared at  the  town-hall  to  go  through'the  for-
malities of  receiving  the  resolutions  concerning
the  Council  of  Regency,  the  courts  of  justice,
and  the  matricula,  in  person,  he  requested  the
States  to  adjourn  their  departure  for  three
days,  in  order  to  terminate  some  matters  which
were  still  imdecided.f  According  to  ancient
usage,  the  members  of  the  diet  escorted  him
back  to  the  bishop's  palace,  where  he  resided  ;
the  electors  of  Saxony  and  the  Palatinate  had
left  Worms,  but  the  four  others  were  present.
On  their  arrival  at  the  palace,  they  found  the
papal  nuncios  awaiting  them.  In  consequence
of  Aleander's  urgent  representations  of  the
necessity  of  sending  this  mark  of  honour,  briefs
had  arrived  from  the  pope  to  the  electors,  and
were  presented  to  the  nuncios.  A  brief  had
also  arrived  addressed  to  the  emperor,  the  publi-
cation of  which  had  been  designedly  delayed  till
this  moment.  Under  the  impressions  made  by
these  flattering  communications,  the  emperor
now  declared  that  he  had  caused  an  edict  on
the  Lutheran  affair  to  be  drawn  up,  en  the
basis  of  the  former  resolution  of  the  States.
This  document  had  even  been  composed — such
was  the  confidence  now  prevailing  between  em-
peror and  pope — by  one  of  the  nuncios ;  the  pre-
sent was  esteemed  the  favourable  moment  for
communicating  it  to  these  members  of  the  diet.
There  was  now  no  legitimate  or  efficient  line
of  opposition  open  to  them,  even  had  they  been
disposed  to  pursue  it;  and  the  Elector  of
Brandenburg,  Joachim  L,  replied  that  the  opin-
ion of  the  States  v/as  certainly  conformable  to
the  measure  in  question.  Aleander  hastened
to  place  this  instantly  on  official  record.J

We  perceive  that  the  edict  was  not  laid  be-
fore the  States  in  Assembly ;  it  was  not  sub-
mitted to  any  new  deliberation; it  was  an-

t  Letter  of  Fürstenberg,  May  2o. Frankf.  Arch.

i  \  J  Pallavicini,  lib.  i.  c.  28,  from  Aleander's  Letters. It

;  is  eA'ident  ^vliat  pleasure  tlie  narrator  takes  in  the  success

of  so  dexterous  a  proceeding:  "Era  ignoto  il  misterio

air  istesso  Grancancelliere  —  crucciava  forte  i  ministri

di  papa,  veggendo  nel  discioglimento  della  dieta  rimanerse

con  le  mani  vacue ;  nia  i  principi  se  vogliono  adoperare

1  prudentemente,  conviene,"  &;c.  &c.

CflAP.  IV.

EDICT  OF  WORMS,  A.  D.  1521.

159

nounced  to  them  unexpectedly,  in  the  emperor's
apartments,  and  after  every  artifice  had  been
employed  to  incline  them  to  listen  favourably
to  any  proposal :  their  assent,  which  cannot
even  -be  called  a  formal  one,  was  extorted  by  a
sort  of  surprise.*

It  was,  however,  as  severe  and  peremptory
as  possible.  Sentence  of  ban  and  re-ban  was
declared  against  Luther  as  a  member  lopped
ofi:'  from  the  church  of  God  ;  together  witJi  all
his  adherents,  patrons  and  friends.  His  writ-
ings and  those  of  his  followers  were  prohibited
and  sentenced  to  be  burnt.  And  that  no  similar
works  might  appear  in  future,  a  censorship  was
appointed  to  control  the  press.f

Aleander  had  thus  attained  the  long-desired
object  of  all  his  negotiations.  In  the  course
of  the  day  he  had  two  fair  copies  made,  the  one
in  German,  the  other  in  Latin :  the  next  morn-
ing— Sunday — he  hastened  Vv^ith  them  to  the
emperor ;  he  found  him  with  the  States  and  the

courtin  the  church,  but  even  this  did  not  prevent
him  from  laying  the  paper  before  Charles  on
the  spot ;  in  the  cliurch  it  received  the  impe-
rial signature.  This  was  on  the  26th  of  May ;
but  Aleander  had  thought  it  expedient  to  date
it  the  8th,  at  which  time  the  assembly  was  still
tolerably  hill.

By  this  act  the  temporal  power,  as  Vv^ell  as
the  spiritual,  declared  open  resistance  to  the
spirit  of  religious  innovation  which  v.^as  awak-
ened in  the  nation.  The  opposition  had  not
succeeded,  as  they  had  hoped,  in  inspiring  the
emperor  with  their  own  hostility  to  the  papacy ;
on  the  contrary,  he  had  drawn  closer  all  the
ties  which  bound  him  to  the  pope.  The  two
representatives  of  the  secular  and  ecclesiasti-
cal powers  had  united,  in  order  to  uphold  the
established  constitution  of  the  church.

Whether  they  would  succeed  was,  indeed,
another  question.

BOOK  III.

ENDEAVOURS  TO  RENDER  THE  REFORMATION  NATIONAL  AND

COMPLETE.

1521— 1525,

INTRODUCTION.

The  peculiar  character  and  form  which  the
Latin  church  had  gradually  assumed  gave  rise,
as  we  have  already  seen,  to  the  necessit}''  for
its  reform ; — a  reform  demanded  by  the  state
of  the  v/orld,  and  prepared  by  the  national  ten-
dencies of  the  German  mind,  the  advancement
of  learning,  and  the  divergencies  of  theological
opinion.  We  have  likewise  remarked  how  the
abuse  of  the  traffic  in  indulgences,  and  the  dis-
putes to  which  it  gave  birth,  led,  without  de-
sign or  premeditation  on  the  part  of  any  con-
cerned, to  a  violent  outbreak  of  opposition.

While  we  regard  this  as  inevitable,  we  can-
not proceed  further  without  pausing  to  make
some  observations  on  its  extreme  danger.

For  every  member  and  every  interest  of  so-
ciety is  eniinked  with  the  whole  established
order  of  thino-g  which  forms  at  once  its  base

t  Dr.  Caspar  Riffel,  in  his  Ciiristl.  Kirchengesch.  der
T'fi^uesteu  Zeit,  vol.  i.  p.  214,  cannot,  in  fact,  avoid  admit-
Tiii'j  this.  But  he  rejoices,  that  "the  emperor,  by  means
of  this  '  surprise,'  removed  all  opportunity  for  even  one
of  them  (the  princes)  to  break  his  word  at  the  decisive
moment."  It  could  not  well  be  said  more  plainly  that  a
serious  difference  prevailed  between  the  emperor  and  the
princes.

X  Edict  of  Worms  in  Walch,  xv.  2204.  It  is  remarkable
that  in  all  other  departments  the  censorship  is  conferred
on  the  bishop  alone  ;  but  in  that  of  theology,  only  in  con-
junction with  "  the  faculty  of  the  Holy  Scriptures  of  the
uearest  situated  university."— §  30.

{  and  its  shelter;  if  once  the  vital  powers  which
]  animate  this  mass  are  thrown  into  conflict,  who
1  can  say  where  the  victorious  assailants  will
;  find  a  check,  or  whether  every  thing  will  not
j  be  overwhelmed  in  common  ruinT
j  No  institution  could  be  more  exposed  to  this
I  danger  than  the  papacy,  which  had  for  centu-
!  ries  exercised  so  mighty  an  influence  over  the
I  whole  existence  of  the  European  nations.
:  The  established  order  of  things  in  Europe
was,  in  fact,  the  same  military-sacerdotal  state
I  which  had  arisen  in  the  eighth  and  ninth  cen-
I  turies,  and,  notwithstanding  all  the  changes
!  that  had  been  introduced,  had  always  remained
j  essentially  the  same — compounded  of  the  same
I  fundamental  elements.  Nay,  even  those  very
changes  had  generali}''  been  favourable  to  the
i  sacerdotal  element,  whose  commanding  posi-
I  tion  had  enabled  it  to  pervade  every  form  of
I  public  and  private  life,  every  vein  of  intellec-
I  tual  culture.  How  then  would  it  have  been
!  possible  to  assail  it  without  producing  an  uni«
versal  shock;  to  question  it,  without  endanger-
ing the  whole  fabric  of  civilisation  1

It  must  not  be  supposed  that  so  resistless  a
power  of  persuasion  resided  in  a  merely  dog-
-matic  faith,  wrought  out  by  the  hierarchy  and
the  schools.  The  establishment  of  this  would,
on  the  contrary,  have  exciteci  incessant  contro-
versy, which,  though  generally  confined  within

160

INTRODUCTION.

Book  III.

the  region  of  received  ideas,  would  sometimes
have  been  carried  beyond  that  limit.  But  the
intimate  connexion  which  the  papacy  maintain-
ed with  all  established  authorities  had  defeated
every  attempt  at  opposition.  How,  for  exam-
ple, could  an  emperor  have  ventured  to  take
under  his  protection  religious  opinions  opposed
to  the  dominant  system  of  faith,  not  on  particu-
lar and  unimportant  points,  but  profoundly  and
essentially  1  Even  as  against  a  pope  on  whom
he  was  making  war,  he  could  noi  have  daied
to  do  it;  he  must  have  feared  to  undermine  the
spiritual  basis  on  which  his  own  rank  and
power  were  founded ;  to  be  the  first  to  break
through  the  circle  of  ideas  and  associations  by
which  the  minds  of  men  were  bounded.  The
civil  authorities  felt,  at  every  moment,  the  in-
dissoluble nature  of  their  connexion  with  the
hierarchy,  and  generally  made  themselves  the
instruments  of  the  persecution  of"  all  who  dis-
sented from  the  faith  prescribed  by  the  church.

It  was  now  also  to  be  considered  that  pro-
jects and  attempts  of  the  most  dangerous  kind
had  been  conaected  with  the  more  recent  at-
tacks on  the  doctrine  and  discipline  of  the
church  of  Rome.

A  century  and  a  half  had  elapsed  since  John
Wicliffe  had  engaged  in  a  similar  contest  with
the  papacy  in  England  (with  nearly  the  same
weapons,  and  supported  by  the  same  national
impulses)  to  that  which  Luther  now  entered
upon  in  Germany ;  this  was  instantly  accom-
panied by  a  tum.ultuous  rising  of  the  lowest
classes  of  the  people,  who,  not  content  with
reforms  in  the  creed,  or  an  emancipation  from
the  see  of  Rome,  aimed  at  the  abolition  of  the
whole  beneficed  clergy,*  and  even  at  the  equal-
isation of  the  nobleman  and  the  peasant ;  i.  e.
at  a  complete  overthrow  of  Church  and  State.
It  is  uncertain  whether  Wicliffe  had  any  share
in  these  proceedings  or  not.  At  all  events,  the
resentment  they  excited  fell  upon  him,  and  he
was  removed  fi'om  Oxford,  the  scene  of  his
labours,  whence  he  might  have  exercised  a  sin-
gular influence  over  England  and  the  world,  to
the  narrow  and  obscure  sphere  of  a  country
parish.

The  disorders  in  Bohemia,  which  broke  out
in  consequence  of  the  teaching  and  the  condem-
nation of  Huss,  at  first  related  exclusively  to
the  spiritual  matters  vviience  they  arose  ;f  but
the  severity  with  wliich  they  were  repressed
soon  excited  an  extremely  dangerous  fanati-
cism. The  Taborites  not  alone  rejected  the
doctrines  of  the  Fathers  of  the  church  equally
with  those  of  later  times,  but  they  demanded
the  destruction  of  all  the  books  in  which  those
doctrines were contained. They  declared  it

*  See  -Prions  et  Capituli  Cantuareiisis  Alandatnm,
Sept.  16,  1381,  in  VVilkins's  Concilia  Magnce  Britannice,
iii.  p.  133.

t  One  chief  cause  of  this  movement  which  is  commonly
overlooked,  is  mentioned  by  the  well-informed  Hemmer-
lin  in  his  tract  De  Libertate  Ecclesiaslica.  I  will  give
this  in  his  own  words.  "  In  regno  BohemiiB  quasi  omnes
possessiones  et  terrarura  portiones  et  portiones  porlionum
quasi  per  singulos  passus  fuerunt  occupatse,  intricatce,  et
aggravatae  per  census,  reditus  et  proveritus  clero  debitos.
Unde  populeres  nimis  exasperati — insultarunt  in  cleriun
et  religiosos— et  terram  prius  occupatam  penitus  libera-
rant."

vain  and  unevangelical,  nay,  sinful,  to  prose-
cute studies  and  to  take  degrees  at  the  univer-
sities :|: ;  they  preached  that  God  would  destroy
the  world,  and  would  only  save  the  righteous
men  of  five  cities  § ;  their  preachers  deemed
themselves  the  avenging  angels  of  the  Lord,
sent  to  execute  his  sentence  of  annihilation.
Had  their  power  corresponded  with  their  will,
they  would  have  transformed  the  earth  into  a
desert  in  the  name  of  the  Lord.

For  a  thirst  for  destruction  is  inevitably  ex-
cited by  successful  opposition,  and  is  the  more
violent,  the  more  powerful  the  enemy  with
whom  it  has  to  contend.

Was  not  then,  we  must  now  inquire,  a  simi-
lar storm  to  be  feared  in  Germany,  where  the
pope  had  hitherto  wielded  a  portion  of  the  im-
perial power  1

Tlie  nation  was  in  a  state  of  .universal  fer-
ment; a  menacing  revolt  against  the  constitu-
ted authorities  was  already  stirring  in  the
depths  of  societ)^;  would  not  this  be  called  into
action  by  an  attack  on  the  highest  of  all  ac-
knowledged earthly  authorities?  Would  not
the  destructive  forces  which  every  society  har-
bours in  its  bosom,  and  which  this  sacerdotal-
military  state  had  certainly  not  been  able  to
neutralise  or  destroy,  now  rear  their  heads  ?

The  whole  future  destiny  of  the  Germ.an  na-
tion was  involved  in  the  question  whether  it
could  withstand  this  danger  or  not;  whether  it
would  succeed  in  severing  itself  from  the  papa-
;  C5%  without  imperilling  the  state  and  the  slow-
i  ly  won  trcfisures  of  civilisation  in  the  process ;
I  and  what  form  of  constitution — for  without  po-
litical changes  the  separation  was  impossible —
the  nation  would  then  assume.  On  the  answer
;  to  these  questions  rested,  at  the  same  time,  the
possible  influence  of  Germany  on  the  rest  of
,  the  world.

The  immediate  course  of  events  assumed  a
most  menacinsf  and  dangerous  character.

CHAPTER  1.

DISTURBAKCES AT WITTENBERG — OCTOBER,
1521, TO MARCH, 1523.

Once  more  had  the  supreme  temporal  power
in  Germany  allied  itself  vAth  the  papacy,  and
this  at  first  could  not  fail  to  make  a  deep,  im-
pression. The  edict  of  Worms  was  published
in  all  parts  of  the  empire;  and  in  some  places
the  confessors  were  instructed  by  the  bishops
to  refuse  absolution  to  every  one  who  should  be
guilty  of  avowing  Lutheran  tenets.  Luther's
own  sovereign  could  only  save  him  by  seizing
him  on  his  wa}''  through  the  Thuringian  forest,
and  carrying  him,  in  feigned  captivity,  to  the
safe  asylum  of  the  AVartburg. A  report  was

J  Formula  fidei Taboritarnm apud Laur. ByzyniuBi
(Brzezina  :)  Ludewig  Reliquiae  MSS.,  torn.  vi.  p.  191.
§  Byzynii  Diarium  belli  Hussitici,  ib.  p.  155.  sq.

CffAP.  I.

DISTURBANCES  AT  WITTENBERG.

161

spread  that  an  enemy  of  the  elector  had  im-
prisoned and  perhaps  killed  him.

It  soon  however,  became  manifest  how  little
had  been  effected  by  these  severities.

In  the  towns  of  the  Netherlands  in  which
Charles  happened  to  be  residing-,  Luther's
writings  w^ere  collected  and  publicly  burned ;
but  the  emperor  might  be  seen  to  smile  ironi-
cally as  he  passed  these  bonfires  in  the  market-
place, nor  do  we  find  any  trace  of  such  execu-
tions in  the  interior  of  Germany.  On  the  con-
trary, the  events  of  the  diet  and  the  new  edict
only  gained  fresh  partisans  for  Luther's  cause.
It  appeared  a  powerful  argument  for  the  truth
of  his  doctrines,  that  when  he  publicly  avowed
his  books  at  Worms,  and  declared  that  he  was
ready  to  retract  them  if  any  one  could  confute
him,  no  one  had  ventured  to  accept  the  chal-
lenge.* "  The  more  Luther's  doctrine  is  pent
up,"  says  Zasius,  "the  more  it  spreads. "|  If
this  was  the  experience  of  the  university  of
Freiburg,  where  the  orthodox  party  was  so
strong,  what  must  it  have  been  elsewhere]
The  Elector  of  Mainz  did  not  think  it  expe-
dient to  grant  the  JMinorites  the  permission
begged  by  their  provincial,  to  preach  against
Luther  in  his  diocese,  fearing  that  it  would  but
increase  the  agitation  of  the  public  mind.±  In
despite  of  the  new  regulations  for  the  censor-
ship contained  in  the  edict,  pamphlet  after  pam-
phlet appeared  in  favour  of  the  new  doctrines.
These  were  mostl}'-  anonymous,  but  Hütten
ventured  to  put  his  name  to  a  direct  attack  on
the  pope's  nuncio,  Aleander,  the  author  of  the
edict.  In  this  he  asks  him  whether  he  ima-
gines that  he  can  crush  religion  and  freedom
by  means  of  a  single  little  edict,  artfully
wrung  from  a  youthful  prince  ;  or  that  an  im-
perial command  had  any  power  against  the
immutable  word  of  God.  Were  not  rather  the
opinions  of  a  prince  subject  to  change]  The
emperor,  he  believed,  "would  learn  to  think
very  differently  in  time."^  The  agents  of
Rome  themselves  were  astonished  to  find  of
how  little  avail  w^as  the  edict  they  had  obtain-
ed with  so  much  difiicult3^  The  ink,  they
said,  w^as  scarcely  dry  with  which  the  empe-
ror had  signed  it,  when  already  it  was  violated
on  every  side.  They  are  said,  however,  to
have  consoled  themselves  with  the  reflection,
that  if  it  had  no  other  results,  it  must  lay  the
foundation  for  inevitable  dissension  among  the
Germans  themselves.

It  was  a  most  significant  circumstance  that
the  university  of  Wittenberg  was  as  little  af-
fected by  the  imperial  edict  as  it  had  been  by

*  "  Ein  schöner  dialogus  und  jresprech  zwischen  eini
Pfarrer  und  eim  Schulthayss,  betreffend  allen  übelstand
der  Geystlichen,"  ifcr,  "  A  line  dialogue  and  conversation
between  a  parish  priest  and  a  sheriff  touching  the  ill  con-
dition of  the  clergy,"  &c.,  doubtless  written  immediately
after  the  meeting^of  the  diet ;  in  which  are  these  words:
"Warum  hand  ir  dan  nit  Doctor  Luther  mit  disputiren
yez  zu  TVorms  überwunden."  "Why  did  you  not  then
overcome  Doctor  Luther  in  the  disputation  now  held  at
Worms  ?"  This  is  the  arsrumenl  with  which  the  sheriff
brings  over  the  parish  priest  to  his  views.

t  Epp.  i.  50.

;  Capito  ad  Zwinglium  Hallis,  iv.  Aug.  152L  (Epp.
Zw.,  i.  78.)  He  required  sermons,  "  citra  perturbationem
vulgi,  absque  tam  atrocibus  affectibus."

§  Invectiva  in  Aleandrum. Opera,  iv.  p.  240.

21  0*

the  papal  bull.  There  the  new  doctrines  had
already  taken  root  and  flourished  independently
of*  Luther's  personal  influence,  and  thither  the
flower  of  the  German  youth  flocked  to  receive
and  adopt  them.  It  made  indeed  but  little  dif-
ference whether  Luther  was  present  or  not;
the  lecture  rooms  w^ere  always  crov/ded,  and
his  doctrines  j]  were  defended  with  the  same
enthusiasm,  both  orally  and  in  writing.  In
short,  this  infant  university  now  took  the  boldest
ground.  When  the  Sorbonne  at  last  broke  si-
lence, and  declared  itself  against  Luther,  Me-
lanchthon  thought  himself  not  only  bound  to
undertake  the  defence  of  his  absent  friend,  but
he  even  dared  to  fling  back  the  accusation  upon
the  university  of  Paris,  the  source  of  all  theo-
logical learning,  the  parent  stem  of  which  the
German  universities  were  branches,  the  Alm"a
Plater  to  whose  decision  the  w^hole  world  had
ever  bowed,  and  to  charge  her  herself  with
falling  off  from  true  Christianity.  He  did  not
hesitate  to- declare  the  whole  of  the  doctrines
purrent  at  the  universities,  especially  the  the-
ology of  the  schools,  false  and  heretical  when
tried  by  the  standard  of  Scripture.^  The
highest  powers  in  Christendom  had  spoken,
the  pope  had  issued  an  anathema,  and  his  sen-
tence had  been  confirmed  by  that  of  the  great
mother  university,  and,  finally,  the  emperor
had  ordered  it  to  be  executed  ;  and  yet,  in  the
small  town  of  AYittenberg,  which  a  few  years
before  was  hardly  known,  a  professor  little
more  than  twenty  years  of  age,  in  wiiose  slight
figure  and  modest  bearing  no  one  could  have
detected  any  promise  of  heroism  or  boldness,
dared  to  oppose  all  these  mighty  powers,  to
defend  the  condemned  doctrines,  nay,  to  claim
for  them  the  exclusive  glory  ,of  Christianity.

One  cause  of  this  singular  phenomenon  was,
that  it  was  well  knovrn  that  the  appearance
was  more  formidable  than  the  reality : — the
motives  which  had  determined  the  course  taken
by  the  court  of  Rome  (chiefly  dominican  in-
fluence), and  the  means  by  which  the  edict  had
been  extorted  from  the  emperor,  and  the  man-
ner of  its  publication,  were  no  secret.  The
three  men  from  whom  the  condemnation  in
Paris  originated  were  pointed  out,  and  called
by  the  most  opprobrious  names..**  The  re-
formers, on  the  other  hand,  were  conscious  of
pure  motives,  and  a  firm  and  impregnable  foun-
dation for  their  opinions.  The  influence  of
their  prince,  who  afforded  them  undoubted
though  unacknowledged  protection,  was  a  safe-
guard against  actual  violence.

But  those  who  ventured  to  take  up  so  inde-
pendent and  imposing  a  position,  at  variance

\l  Spalatini  Annales,  152L  October.  "  Scholastici,  quo-
rum supra  millia  ibi  turn  fuerunt."  Nevertheless,  in  the
course  of  the  winter,  the  electors  of  Brunswick  and  Bran-
denburg forbade  their  subjects  to  attend  this  University.
Mencken,  Script,  ii.  611.  The  number  of  matriculations
fell  off  considerably  during  the  winter  term.  Seunert,
p.  59.

IT  Adversus  furiosura  Parisiensium  theologastrorum
decretum  Phil.  Melanchthonis  pro  Luthero  Apologia.
Corp.  Reformatorum  i.  398.

**  Glareanus  ad  Zwinglium  Lutetiee  4non.  Julii,152l.
Beda,  Quercus,  Christophorus  :  Bellua,  Stercus,  Christoto-
mus.  Epp.  Zw.  p.  176.  The  work  of  Glareanus,  p.  156.,
in  which  the  death  of  Leo  X.  is  mentioned,  does  not  be
long  to  the  year  1520,  but  to  the  following  year.

163

DISTURBANCES  AT  WITTENBERG.

Book  III.

with  all  established  authorities,  and  supported
only  by  opinions  which  had  not  yet  attained
their  full  development  nor  acquired  a  precise
form,  obviously  incurred  an  enormous  weight
of  responsibility/  In  carrying  out  the  princi-
ples professed,  it  was  necessary  to  be  the  pio-
neers of  a  numerous,  susceptible  and  expecting
crowd  of  sympathising  spirits.  Here,  where
all  the  elements  of  a  state  at  once  military  and
sacerdotal  were  to  be  found  as  abundantly  as
elsewhere,  the  experiment  was  tobe  tried,  how
far  the  authority  of  the  priesthood  might  be  de-
stroyed without  endangering  the  safet}^  of  the
state.

It  was,  however,  become  impossible  to  re-
main stationarjr.  Men's  minds  were  too  much
excited  to  be  content  with  doctrines  alone.
On  the  faith  which  was  now  so  profoundl}/"
shaken,  were  founded  practices  that  influenced
every  day  and  hour  of  common  life;  and  it
was  not  to  be  expected  that  an  energetic  gene-
ration, conscious  of  its  own  power,  and  im-
pelled by  new  and  mighty  ideas,  should  do
violence  to  its  own  convictions  and  submit  to
ordinances  it  had  bepun  to  condemn.

The  first  remarkable  incident  that  occurred
was  of  a' purely  personal  nature.  Two  prie-sts
in  the  neighbourhood,  Jacob  Seidler  and  Bar-
tholomew Bernhardi,  both  professing  the  doc-
trines of  Wittenberg,  solemnly  renounced
their  vows  of  celibacy.  Of  all  the  institutions
of  the  hierarchy,  this,  indeed,  was  the  one
which,  from  the  strong  taste  for  domestic  life
inherent  in  the  nation,  had  always  been  most
repugnant  to  the  German  clergy,  and,  in  its
consequences,  most  profoundly  oflensive-to  the
moral  sense  of  the  people.  The  two  priests
declared  their  conviction  that  neither  pope  nor
synod  were  entitled  to  burden  the  church  with
an  ordinance  which  endangered  both  the  body
and  the  soul.  *  Hereupon  they  were  both
claimed  for  trial  by  the  spiritual  authorities;
Seidler  alone,  who  resided  in  the  territory  of
Duke  George  of  Saxony,  was  given  up  to
them,  and  perished  in  prison;  the  Elector  Fre-
deric refused  to  lend  his  authority  to  the  Bishop
of  Magdeburg  against  Bernhardi ;  he  refused,
as  Spalatin  expresses  it,  to  let  himself  be  em-
ployed as  a  constable.  Carlstadt  now  took
courage  to  attack  the  institution  of  celibacy  in
a  work  of  considerable  length.

As  the  vow  of  celibacy  was  originally  con-
fined to  the  monastic  orders,  and  had  subse-
quently been  extended  to  the  whole  priesthood,
its  dissolution  necessarily  affected  the  w^hole
idea  of  the  monastic  system.  In  the  little  Au-
gustine church  which  had  been  the  scene  of
Luther's  first  appearance,  Gabriel  Zwilling,
one  of  his  most  able  fellow-labourers,  preached
a  series  of  fervent  discourses,  in  which  he  at-
tacked the  very  essence  of  monachism,  declar-
ing that  it  was  not  only  lawful  but  necessary
to  renounce  it ;  for  that  "  under  the  cowl  there
was  no  salvation."  Thirteen  Augustine  monks
left  the  convent  at  once,  and  took  up  their
abode,  part  among  the  students  and  part  among

*  "Cluid  statuerint  Pontificii  canones,  nihil  refert
CimstianoYumy— Epistle  from  the  Theologians  of  Witten-
berg to  the  Bishop  of  Meissen,  Corp.  Ref.  i.  418.

the  townspeople.  One  of  them  who  understood
the  trade  of  a  cabinet-maker,  applied  for  the
right  of  citizenship  and  proclaimed  his  inten-
tion of  marrying. f  This  was  followed  by  a
general  disturbance  :  the  Augustines  who  had
stayed  in  the  convent  thought  themselves  no
longer  safe ;  and  the  Carmelite  convent  in  Wit-
tenberg had  to  be  protected  every  night  by  a
strong  guard.

Meanwhile  Brother  Gabriel  made  another
still  more  formidable  attack  upon  the  Catholic
church.  He  carried  Luther's  doctrines  about
the  sacrament  so  far  as  to  declare  the  adoration
of  it,  and  even  the  celebration  of  the  mass  with-
out communicants,  simply  as  a  sacrifice  (the
so-called  private  mass),  an  abuse  and  a  sin.^:
In  a  short  time  the  prior  of  the  convent  was
compelled  by  the  general  agitation  to  discon-
tinue the  celebration  of  private  masses  in  his
church,  in  order,  as  he  said,  to  avoid  still
greater  scandal.  This  of  course  produced  a
great  sensation  both  in  the  towm  and  university.
On  the  3d  of  December,  1521,  when  mass  was
going  to  be  sung  in  the  parish  church,  several
of  the  students  and  younger  burghers  came
with  knives  under  their  coats,  snatched  away
the  mass  books  and  drove  the  priests  from  the
altar.  The  town  council  summoned  the  oflfend-
ers  subject  to  its  jurisdiction,  and  shov/ed  an
intention  of  punishing  them  ;  upon  which  the
townspeople  rose  tumultuously  and  proposed
terms  to  the  council,  in  which  they  demanded
the  liberation  of  the  prisoners  in  a  tone  almost
amounting  to  open  rebe]lion.§

All  these  were  attempts  made  without  plan
or  deliberation  to  overthrow  the  existing  form
of  divine  worship.  The  Elector,  to  whose
decision  such  affairs  were  always  referred,
wished,  as  was  usual  with  him,  to  take  the
opinion  of  some  constituted  authority.

His  first  step  was  to  summon  to  Wittenberg
a  council  of  Augustines  from  the  provinces  of
Meissen  and  Thuringia.  These  monks  all
more  or  less  shared  Luther's  opinions  and  re-
garded his  cause  as  their  own.  Their  judg-
ment, as  he  afterwards  declared,  coincided  with
his  own,  even  during  his  absence  ;  they  did  not
go  so  far  as  brother  Gabriel,  who  denounced
the  monastic  vows  as*  sinful,  but  they  no  longer
acknowledged  them  to  be  binding.  Their  de-
cision was  as  follows  :  "  Every  creature  is  sub-
ject to  the  word  of  God,  and  needs  not  allow

t  Report  of  Gregorius  Brück  to  the  Elector,  Oct.  11.
Corp.  Ref.  i.  459.

J  Report  from  Helt  the  prior  of  the  Augustines  to  the
Elector,  Nov.  12. Corp.  Ref.  p.  483.

§  The  Council  of  Wittenberg  to  the  Elector.  Dec.  3.
arul  5.  Corp.  Ref.  p.  487.  The  impression  made  by  these
innovations  in  distant  countries  is  remarkably  displayed
by  a  passage  in  vol.  xxxii.  of  the  Venetian  Chronicle  of
Sanuto,  in'the  Archives  of  Vienna.  "  Novitä  di  uno  or-
dine  over  uso  de  la  fede  Christiana  comenzada  in  Vinti-
bergia.  Li  frati  heremitani  di  S.  Angustino  hanno  tro-
vato  e  provato  per  le  St.  Scripture  che  le  messe  secondo
che  se  usano  adesso  si  e  gran  peccato  a  dirle  o  a  odirle
(thus  i.t  appears  that  the  whole  innovation  was  looked
upon  as  an  inventiort  of  the  Augustine  order)  e  dapoi  el
zorno  di  S.  Michiel,-1521,  in  qua  ogni  zorno  questo  hanno
predicliadoe  ditto,  e  stanno  saldi  in  questa  soa  oppinione,
e  questo  etiam  con  le  opre  observano  e  da  poi  la  domerii-
ga  di  S.  Michiel  non  hanno  ditto  piu  messe  nella  chiesia
del  suo  monasterio,  e  per  questo  e  seguito  gran  scandalo
tra  el  popolo  11  cantori  e  acnonici  spiritual!  e  temporali

Chap.  I.

DISTURBANCES  AT  WITTENBERG.

163

himself  to  be  oppressed  by  burdensome  human
institutions ;  every  man  is  at  liberty  to  leave
the  convent  or  to  remain  in  it;*  but  he  who
leaves  it  must  not  abuse  his  freedom  according
to  the  lusts  of  the  flesh ;  he  who  prefers  to  stay,
Avill  do  well  to  wear  the  cowl  and  render  obe-
dience to  his  superiors  from  choice  and  affec-
tion." They  determined  at  the  same  time  to
desist  from  the  practice  of  begging,  and  to
abolish  votive  masses.

Meanwhile  the  prince  had  called  upon  the
university  to  pronounce  an  opinion  on  the  mass
in  general.  A  commission  was  accordingly
chosen,  of  which  Melanchthon  was  a  member,
and  which  decided  for  the  entire  abolition  of
the  mass,  not  only  in  V>'ittenberg  but  through-
out the  countr}^  be  the  consequences  what  they
might."!"  When,  however*  the  moment  arrived
for  the  whole  corporation  to  confirm  this  sen-
tence, they  absolutely  refused  to  do  so;  several
•  of  the  most  influential  members  stayed  awaj-
from  the  meeting,  declaring  that  they  were
too  insignificant  to  undertake  to  reform  the
church.:!:

Thus  as  neither  the  Augustine  order  nor  the
urfiversity  declared  themselves  distinctly  in
favour  of  the  innovators,  the  Elector  refused  to
move  any  further  in  the  matter,  saying  that  if
even  in  Wittenberg  they  could  not  agree,  it
was  not  probable  that  the  rest  of  the  world
would  think  alike  on  the  proposed  change:
they  might  go  on  readingf,  disputing  and
preaching  about  it,  but  in  the  mean  while  they
must  adhere  to  established  usages. §

The  excitement  was,  however,  already  too
great  to  be  restrained  by  the  command  of  a
princ6  whose  leniency  was  so  well  known;
and  accordingly  Dr.  Carlstadt  announced,  in
spite  of  it,  that  on  the  feast  of  the  circumcision
he  should  celebrate  the  mass  according  to  a
new  rite,  and  administered  the  Lord's  Supper
in  the  words  of  the  Founder.  He  had  already
attempted  something  of  the  kind  in  the  month
of  October,  but  with  only  twelve  communi-
cants, in  exact  imitation  of  the  example  of
Christ.  As  it  seemed  probable  that  difflculties
would  be  thrown  in  his  way,  he  determined
not  to  wait  till  the  day  appointed,  and  on
Christmas  Day,  1521,  he  preached  in  the  pa-
rish church  on  the  necessity  of  abandoning  the
ancient  rite  and  receiving  the  sacrament  in  both
kinds.  After  the  sermon  he  went  up  to  the
altar  and  said  the  mass,  omittinfj  the  words
which  convey  the  idea  of  a  sacrifice,  and  the
ceremony  of  the  elevation  of  the  host,  and  then
distributed  first  the  bread  and  next  the  wine,
with  the  words,  "This  is  the  cup  of  my  blood
of  the  new  and  everlasting  covenant."  This
act  was  so  entirel)'  in  harmony  with  the  feel-
ings of  the  congregation  that  no  one  ventured

*  Decreta  Augastiniar.orum.  Corp.  Ref.  i.  456.  This
aneeting  is  not  to  be  placed  in  the  month  of  October,  but
rather  in  December  or  in  the  beginning  of  January,  as  is
remarked  by  Seckendorf  (Historia  Luther,  i.  s.  54.  §  129.)
on  the  auUioriiv  of  a  contemporarv  letter.  See  Spa'latini
Ann.  610.

t  Ernstlich  Handlung  der  Universität,  t.c.  Corp.  Eef.  i.
-465.

X  Report  of  Christian  Beiers,  Dec.  13.  ib.  500.

§  Instruction  of  the  Elector,  Lochau,  Dec.  19.  ib.  507.

to  oppose  it. On  New  Year's  Day  he  repeat-
ed this  ritual,  and  continued  to  do  so  every  '
succeeding  Sunday ;  he  also  preached  every
Friday,  li

Carlstadt  belonged  to  a  class  of  men  not  un-
common in  Germany,  who  combine  with  a
natural  turn  for  deep  speculation  the  boldness
to  reject  all"  that  has  been  established,  or  to
maintain  all. that  has  been  condemned;  yet
without  feeling  the  necessity  of  first  arriving
at  any  clear  and  precise  ideas,  or  of  resting
those  ideas  upon  arguments  fitted  to  carry  ger
neral  conviction.  Caristadt  had  at  first  adcrpt-
ed  the  doctrines  of  the  schoolm.en ;  he  was  af-
j  tervvards  urged  by  Luther  to  the  study  of  the
'  sacred  wrhings,  though  he  had  not,  like  him,
patience  to  acquire  their  original  languages ;  nor
did  he  hesitate  at  the  strangest  and  most  arbi-
trary interpretations,  in  wbich  he  followed  only
the  impulse  of  his  own  mind.  This  led  him
into  strange  aberrations ;  even  at  the  time  he
was  preparing  for  the  disputation  of  Leipzig,
he  used  the  most  singular  expressions  with  re-
gard to  the  Holy  Scriptures,  applying  to  them
as  a  whole  that  Vv-hich  has  generally  been  un-
derstood of  the  lavw  only;  viz.  that  they  lead
to  transgression,  sin,  and  death,  and  do  not  af-
ford the  true  consolation  the  soul  requires.  In
the  year  15'20  he  entertained  doubts  whether
Moses  was  really  the  author  of  the  books
which  bear  his  name,  and  whether  the  Gospels
have  come  down  to  us  in  their  genuine  form  ;
speculations  which  have  since  given  so  much
occupation  to  learning  and  criticism,  presented
themselves  at  this  early  period  to  his  mind.'lf
At  that  time  he  was  overawed  by  the  presence  y
and  authorit)'-  of  Luther ;  now,  however,  he
was  restrained  by  no  one  ;  a  wide  arena  for  the
display  of  his  am^bition  lay  before  him,  and  he
was  surroimded  by  an  enthusiastic  public.
Under  these  circumstances  he  was  himself  no
longer  the  same;  the  little  swarthy  sun-burnt
man,  who  formerly  expressed  himself  in  indis-
tinct and  ambiguous  language,  now"  poured
forth  with  the  most  vehement  eloquence  a  tor-
rent of  mystical  extravagant  ideas,  relating  to
a  totally  nev/  order  of  things,  which  carried
away  all  imaginations.

Towards  the  end  of  the  year  15-21  he  was
joined  by  allies  who  had  entered  on  a  similar
career  from  another  direction,  and  who  pursued
it  with  still  greater  audacity.

It  is  well  known  that  at  the  beginning  of
the  LIussite  troubles,  two  strangers,  Nicolas
and  Peter  of  Dresden,  who  had  been  banished
by  the  Bishop  of  Meissen  and  found  an  asylum
in  Prague,  were  the  persons  who,  during  the
absence  of  Huss  and  Jerome,  instigated  the
populace  to  demand  a  change  of  the  ritual,  es-
pecially in  the  administration  of  the  sacrament ;
and  that  various  other  fanatical  opinions  were
quickly  combined  with  these.**

I  Zeitung  aus  Wittenberg  account  of  what  took  place
in  1Ö-21,  &€. ;  in  Strobel's  Miscellanien,  v.  121.

TT  See  extracts  from  his  works  in  Löscher's  Historia
Motuum,  i.  15.

**  The  notice  of  this  is  very  remarkable  in  Pelzel's
Wenceslas,  ii.  (Urkunden,  nr.  238.  ex  MS.  coaevo  capituli.J
They  declared  at  the  very  beginning  "  quod  papa  sit  anti
Christus  cum  clero  sibi  subjecto."

164

DISTURBANCES  AT  WITTENBERG.

Book  III.

Whether  it  was  that  these  opinions  re-acted
on  the  country  in  which  they  originated — or
whether  they  had  from  the  first  taken  deeper
and  more  lasting  root  there, — the  same;  spirit
which  had  formerly  directed  the  movement  at
Prague,  now  revived  at  Zwickau  (a  town  in
the  Erzgebirge,  where  Peter  of  Dresden  had
for  some  time  resided),  and  appeared  likely  to
guide  the  agitation  now  prevailing  at  Witten-
berg. _

This  spirit  was  remarkably  displayed  in  a
sect  which  congregated  round  a  fanatical
weaver  of  the  name  of  Claus  Storch,  of  Zwic-
kau, and  professed  the  most  extravagant  doc-
trines. Luther  did  not  go  nearly  far  enough
for  these  people.  Very  different  men,  they
said,  of  a  much  more  elevated  spirit,  were  re-
quired;  for  what  could  such  servile  observance
of  the  Bible  avail  1  That  book  was  insufficient
for  man's  instruction ;  he  could  only  be  taught
by  the  immediate  inspiration  of  the  Holy
Ghost.*  Their  fanaticism  soon  rose  to  such  a
pitch  as  to  convince  them  that  this  was  actu-
ally granted  to  them  ;  that  God  spoke  to  them
in  person,  and  dictated  to  them  how  to  act  and
what  to  preach. f  On  the  strength  of  this  im-
mediate inspiration  from  Heaven,  they  pressed
for  various  alterations  in  the  services  of  the
church.  Above  all,  they  maintained  that  a
sacrament  had  no  meaning  without  faith,  and
therefore  entirely  rejected  the  baptism  of  in-
fants, who  are  incapable  of  faith.  But  their
imaginations  took  a  inuch  wilder  flight.  They
asserted  that  the  world  was  threatened  with  a
general  devastation,  of  which  the  Turks  v/ere
perhaps  to  be  the  instruments  ;  no  priest  was
to  remain  alive,  not  even  those  who  were  now
contracting  marriage,  nor  any  ungodly  man;
but  after  this  bloody  purification  the  kingdom
of  God  would  commence,  and  there  would  be
one  faith  and  one  baptism. :|:  They  seemed
well  inclined  to  begin  this  work  of  violent  con-
vulsion themselves.  Finding  resistance  from
the  moderate  portion  of  the  citizens  and  town
council  of  Zwickau,  they  collected  arms  in  the
house  of  one  of  their  party,  with  the  design  of
falling  suddenly  on  their  opponents  and  put-
ting them  all  to  death.  Fortunately  they  were
anticipated  by  Wolf  of  Weissenbach,  the  chief
magistrate  of  the  place;  he  arrested  a  number
of  the  misguided  men,  kept  the  peace  and  com-
pelled the  ring-leaders  to  quit  the  tovvn.§  The
fanatics  hoped  to  accomplish  abroad  what  they
had  failed  in  at  home.  Some  of  them  went  to
Prague  with  a  view  to  reviving  the  old  Tabor-
ite  sect  there, — an  attempt  which  proved  abor-

*  A  report  sent  from  Zwickau  to  the  elector,  of  which
he  informs  the  university,  gives  this  account  of  their
opinions.  Acta  Einsiedefii  cum  Melanthonio,  C.  R.  p.
536.  The  statements  in  Enoch  Widemann  Chronicon
Curife,  in  Mencken,  Scriptt.  R.  G.,  iii.  744.,  show  a  some-
what later  developement  of  the  fantasies  of  Storch.  To-
bias Schmidt's  Cronica  Cygnea,  1656,  is  not  without  its
value  for  the  events  of  the  thirty  years'  war,  but  is  insuf-
ficient for  the  times  of  the  Reforniation.

t  Official  Report  of  Melanchthon,  Jan.  1.  1522.  C.  R.,  i.
533.,  from  which  it  is  evident  that  half  a  year  before,
these  people  had  not  begun  to  boast  of  this  communion
-with  God.

J  Zeitung  ana  Wittenberg,  p.  ^27.

§  According  to  G.  Fabricius,  Vita  Ricii,  in  Melchior
Adam,  Vitfe  Piiilosophorum,  p,  72.

tive.  The  others,  of  whom  it  is  more  especially
our  business  to  speak,  came  to  Wiitenoerg,
where  they  found  the  ground  admirably  pre-
pared for  the  seed  they  had  to  sow,  by  the  uni-
versal restlessness  of  minds  craving  for  some
unknown  novelty,  not  only  among  the  excita-
ble class  of  students,  but  even  among  the
townspeople.  We  accordingly  find  that  after
their  arrival  in  Wittenberg  the  agitation  as-
sumed a  bolder  character.

Car] Stadt,  with  whom  they  immediately  al-
lied themselves,  introduced  more  striking  inno-
vations every  day.  The  priestly  garments
were  abolished  and  auricular  confession  dis-
used. People  went  to  receive  the  sacram.ent
without  preparation,  and  imagined  that  they
had  gained  an  important  point,  when  they  took
the  host  with  their  own  hands  instead  of  re-
ceiving it  from  those  of  the  priest.  It  was
held  to  be  the  mark  of  a  purer  Christianity  to
eat  eggs  and  meat  on  fast  da3^s  especially.
The  pictures  in  the  churches  Avere  now  es-
teemed an  abomination  in  the  holy  place.
Carlstadt  disregarded  the  distinction  which
had  always  been  made  between  reverence  and
adoration,  and  applied  all  the  texts  in  the  Bible
directed  against  idolatry  to  the  worship  of
images.  He  insisted  upon  the  fact  that  people
bowed  and  knelt  before  them,  and  lighted  ta-
pers, and  brought  offerings  ;  that,  for  example,
they  contemplated  the  image  oF  St.  Christo-
pher, in  order  that  they  might  be  preserved
against  sudden  death  ;  he  therefore  exhorted
his  followers  to  attack  and  destroy  "  these
painted  gods,  these  idol  logs."  He  would  not
even  tolerate  the  crucifix,  because  he  said  men
called  it  their  God,  whereas  it  could  only  re-
mind them  of  the  bodily  sufferings  of  Christ.
It  had  been  determined  that  the  images  should
be  removed  from  the  churches,  but  as  this  was
not  immediately  executed,  his  zeal  became
more  fiery||  ;  at  his  instigation  an  iconoclast
riot  now  commenced,  similar  to  those  which
half  a  century  afterwards  broke  out  in  so  many
other  countries.  The  images  were  torn  from
the  altars,  chopped  in  pieces  and  burnt.  It  is
obvious  that  these  acts  of  violence  gave  a  most

II  Von  Abtuhung  der  Bylder.  Und  das  keyn  Betdler
untherden  Christen  seyn  Soil.  Carolstatt  in  der  christ-
lichen Statt  Wittenberg.  Bog.  D.  (Concerning  the  Abo-
lition of  Images.  And  thatthere  should  be  no  worship-
per among  Christians.  Carlstadt  in  the  Christian  Town
of  Wittenberg,  Sheet  D.)  The  decree  was  made  on
Friday  after  St.  Sebastian.  Jan.  24. 1522.  The  dedication
to  the  paper  on  the  first  sheet,  which  also  was  first  print-
ed, is  dated  Monday  after  the  conversion  of  St.  Paul,  27th
Jan.  Carlstadt  then  liad  the  greatest  hopes.  The  date
shows  how  zealous  he  was.  When  he  came  to  the  fourth
sheet,  he  plainly  saw  that  matters  would  not  proceed  so
rapidly.  "  Ich  hette  auch  gehofft,  der  lebendig  got  soll
seine  eingegeben  werk  das  ist  guten  willen  tzu  abtuhang
der  bilder  volzogen  und  yns  eusserlich  w^erk  gefurt  haben.
Aber  ess  ist  noch  kein  execution  geschehen,  vileicht  der-
halben,  das  got  seinen  tzorn  vber  vns  lest  treuffen  yn
meynung  seynen  gantzen  tzorn  ausszuschüden,  wu  wir
alsso  blind  bleiben  vnd  fürchten  vns  vor  dem  dass  vns
nicht  kaa  thun.  Das  weiss  ich  das  die  Obirsten  deshalb
gestrafft  werden.  Dan  die  schrifil  leugt  ye  nit." — "  I  had
also  hoped  that  the  living  God  would  have  carried  into
execution  and  openly  brought  to  bear  his  appointed  work,
that  is,  good  will  towards  the  abolition  of  images.  But
no  execution  has  yet  taken  place,  perhaps  because  God
lets  his  anger  drip  upon  us,  intending  Jo  pour  out  all  his
wrath,  if  we  remain  thus  blind,  andfear  not  that  which
he  is  able  to  do.  Thus  much  I  know,  that  they  in  high
places  will  be  punished  therefor.  For  the  Scripture
IJeth  not."

Chap.  I.

DISTURBANCES  AT  WITTENBERG.

165

dangerous  and  menacing  character  to  the  whole
controversy.  Carlstadt  not  only  quoted  the
Old  Testament  to  show  that  the  secular  autho-
rities had  power  to  remove  from  the  churches
whatever  could  give  scandal  to  the  faithful,
but  added,  that  if  the  magistrates  neglected  this
duty,  the  communit)^  was  justified  in  carrying
out  the  necessary  changes.  Accordingly  the
citizens  of  Wittenberg  laid  a  petition  before
the  council,  in  which  they  demanded  the  for-
mal abolition  of  all  unbiblical  ceremonies,
masses,  vigils,  and  processions,  and  unlimited
libert}''  for  their  preachers.  The  council  vv^as
forced  to  concede  these  points  one  after  the
other;*  nor  did  even  these  concessions  satisfy
the  innovators.  Their  project  was  to  realise
without  delay  their  ovv'n  conception  of  a  strictly
Christian  community.  The  council  was  called
upon  to  close  all  places  of  public  amusement,
not  only  those  which  the  law  prohibited,  but
those  which  it  had  sanctioned  ;  to  abolish  the
mendicant  orders  who,  they  said,  ought  not  to
exist  in  Christendom,  and  to  divide  the  funds
of  the  religious  communities,  which  were  pro-
nounced to  be  altogether  mischievous  and  cor-
rupt, among  the  poor.  To  these  suggestions
of  a  bigoted  fanaticism,  blind  to  the  real  nature
and  interests  of  society,  were  added  the  most
pernicious  doctrines  of  the  Taborites.  An  old
professor  like  Carlstadt  suffered  himself  to  be
carried  away  by  the  contagion  to  such  a  degree
as  to  maintain  that  there  was  no  need  of  learn-
ed men,  or  of  a  course  of  academic  study,  and
still  less  of  academic  honours.  In  his  lectures
he  advised  his  hearers  to  return  home  and  till
the  ground,  for  that  man  ought  to  eat  his  bread
by  the  sweat  of  his  brovv^  One  of  his  most
zealous  adherents  was  George  Mohr,  the  rector
of  the  grammar  school,  who  addressed  the  as-
sembled citizens  from  the  window  of  the  school-
house,  exhorting  them  to  take  away  their  chil-
dren. Of  what  use,  said  he  Avould  learning  be
henceforth  1  They  had  now  among  them  the
•divine  prophets  of  Zwickau,  Storch,  Thomä,
and  Stübner,  who  conversed  with  God,  and
were  filled  with  grace  and  knowledge  without
any  study  whatsoever.  The  common  people
w^ere  of  course  easily  convinced  that  a  layman
or  an  artisan  was  perfectly  qualified  for  the  of-
fice of  a  priest  and  teacher.

Carlstadt  himself  went  into  the  houses  of
the  citizens  and  asked  them  for  an  explanation
of  obscure  passages  in  Scripture  ;  acting  on  the
text  that  God  reveals  to  b^bes  what  he  hides
from  wise  men.  Students  left  the  university
and  went  home  to  learn  a  handicraft,  saying
that  there  w^as  no  longer  any  need  of  stutly.|

The  conservative  ideas  to  which  Luther  had
still  clung  were  thus  abandoned ;  the  idea  of
temporal  sovereignty,  on  which  he  had  tagten
his  stand  to  oppose  the  encroachments  of  the
priesthood,  w^as  now  rejected  with  no  less  hos-
tility than  the  spiritual  domination.  Luther
had  combated  the  reigning  faith  with  the  wea-
pons of  profound  learning ;  one  of  the  rudest

*  Strobel,  v.  128.

t  Froschel:  Tractat  vom  Priesterthum  (Appendix,)
1505.  Reprinted  in  the  Unschuldigen  Nachrichten,  1731,
p.  698.

theories  of  inspiration,  that  has  ever  been
broached  now  threatened  to  take  its  place.  It
is  evident,  however,  that  its  success  was  im-
possible. All  the  powers  of  the  civilized  world
w-ould  have  arisen  against  such  a  wild,  de-
structive attempt,  and  would  either  have  utterl}'-
crushed  it,  or  at  all  events  have  driven  it  back
within  the  narrov\'est  limits.  Had  such  anar-
chical dreams  ever  become  predominant,  they
must  have  destroyed  every  hope  of  improve-
ment which  the  world  could  attach  to  the  re-
forminpr  party.

In  Wittenberg  there  was  no  one  capable  of
resisting  the  general  frenzy.  Melanchthon  was
then  too  young  and  inexperienced,  even  had  he
possessed  sufficient  firmness  of  character.  He
held  some  conferences  w^ith  the  prophets  of
Zwickau ;  and  finding  not  only  that  they  were
men  of  talent,  but  well  grounded  in  the  main
articles  of  a  faith  v/hich  was  likewise  his  own ;
being  also  unable  to  refute  their  arguments  con-
cerning infant  baptism,  he  did  not  feel  himself
competent  to  enter  the  lists  against  them.  We
find  disciples  and  friends  of  Melanchthon
among  their  adherents.^

The  elector  was  equally  incapable  of  offer-
ing any  efficient  resistance.  We  are  already
acquainted  with  the  character  of  this  prince, —
his  temporising  policy,  his  reluctance  to  inter-
fere in  person,  his  habit  of  letting  things  take
their  own  course.  His  was  the  most  peaceful
nature  produced  by  this  troubled  and  warlike
age ;  he  never  had  recourse  to  arms  ;  when  ad-
vised to  seize  Erfurt,  on  the  plea  that  he  might
accomplish  it  with  the  loss  of  only  five  men,
he  replied,  "  One  were  too  m.any."§  Yet  his
quiet,  observant,  prudent. and  enlightened  poli-
cy had  ever  been  crowned  with  ultimate  suc-
cess. His  pleasure  was  to  adorn  his  own  ter-
ritories, which  he  thought  as  beautiful  as  any
on  earth,  with  castles,  like  those  of  Lochau,
Altenburg,  Weim.er  and  Coburg ;  to  decorate
his  churches  with  pictures  from  the  admirable
pencil  of  Lucas  Kranach,  whom  he  invited  to
his  court;  to  keep  up  the  high  renown  of  his
chapel  and  quire,  which  was  one  of  the  best  in
the  empire,  and  to  improve  the  university  he
had  founded.

Although  not  remarkable  for  popular  and  ac-
cessible manners,  he  had  q,  sincere  affection  for
the  people.  He  once  paid  back  the  poll-tax
Vv  jiich  had  been  levied,  when  the  purpose  to
which  it  was  to  be  applied  was  abandoned.
'•  Truly,"  said  he  of  .somebody,  "he  is  a  bad
man,  for  he  is  unkind  to  the  poor  folk."  Once,
vAien  on  a  journey,  he  gave  money  to  the
children  who  were  playing  by  the  road-side  :
"  one  day,  "  said  he,"  they  will  tell  how  a  duke
of  Saxony  rode  by  and  gave  each  of  them
something."  We  read  of  his  sending  rare
fruits  to  a  sick  professor. ||  The  elector  was
now  in  jb^lys  ;  most  of  the  older  German  princes
v/ith  whom  he  had  lived  in  habits  of  intimacy,

J  e.  g.  Martin  Borrhaus  (Cellarius)  olf  Stuttgard  had  set
on  foot  a  private  school  for  Melanchthon.  Adam,  Vitas
Theolog.  p.  191.

§  Luther  to  John  Frederic  and  Moritz,  1542.

11  Epistola  Carlstadii  ad  Spalatinum  in  Gerdes  Scri-
nium,  vii.  ii.  345.

166

DISTURBANCES  AT  WITTENBERG.

Book  III.

"  his  good  comrades  and  friends,"  as  he  called
them,  were  dead,  and  he  had  many  annoyances
and  vexations  to  bear.  He  was  in  doubt  and
perplexity  as  to  the  real  inclinations  of  the
young  emperor.  "  Happy  is  the  man,"  he  ex-
claimed, "  who  has  nothing  to  do  with  courts  !"
The  disagreement  between  himself  and  his
nearest  neighbour  and  cousin,  the  turbulent
Duke  George,  became  more  and  more  serious
and  evident.  "  Ah,  my  cousin  George  !"  said
he, — "truly  I  have  no  friend  left  but  my  bro-
ther;"— and  to  him  he  gradually  confided  the
greater  share  of  the  government.  The  protec-
tion he  afforded  to  Luther  had  arisen  naturally
out  of  the  course  of  events  ;  at  first,  partly  from
political  motives,  then  from  a  feeling  of  duty
and  justice.*  Nor  was  this  all;  he  conscien-
tiously shared  the  profound,  unquestioning  ve-
neration for  the  Scriptures  inculcated  by  Luther.
He  thought  that  every  thing  else,  however  in-
genious and  plausible,  might  be  confuted  ;  the
word  of  God  alone  was  holy,  majestic,  and
truth  itself:  he  said  that  this  word  should  be
"  pure  as  an  eye."  He  had  a  deep  reverential
fear  of  opposing  or  disobeying  it.  The  basis
of  all  religion  is  this  sense  of  what  is  sacred —
of  the  moral  mystery  of  the  universe  ;  this  awe
of  offending  against  it  under  the  momentary
influence  of  im.purer  motives.  Such  was  emi-
nently the  religion  of  Frederic  the  Wise,  and
it  had  withheld  him  from  interfering  decidedly
and  arbitrarily  in  Luther's  behalf;  but  it  also
hindered  him  from  exerting  his  power  to  put
downthese  new  sectarians  in  Wittenberg,  dis-
pleasing as  they  were  to  him.  He  did  not  ven-
ture, any  more  than  Melanchthon,  to  pronounce
an  absolute  condemnation  of  them.  After  lis-
tening to  the  doubts  and  scruples  of  his  coun-
sellors and  learned  men  at  Prettin  on  this  sub-
ject, he  appeared  perplexed  and  overpowered
at  the  idea  that  these  people  might  possibl)''  be
in  the  right.  He  said  that  as  a  layman  he
could  not  understand  the  question;  but  that,
rather  than  resist  the  will  of  God,  he  would
take  his  stalT  in  his  hand  and  leave  his  coun-
try.j

It  certainly  might  have  come  to  this.  The
movement  that  had  begun  could  lead  to  nothing
short  of  open  rebellion, — to  the  overthrow  of
civil  government  in  order  to  make  room  for  a
new  Christian  republic ;  violence  would  then
certainly  have  called  forth  violence,  and  good
and  evil  would  have  perished  together.

How  much  now  depended  on  Luther !  Even
these  disturbances  w^ere  the  offspring  or  the
consequence  of  ideas  that  he  had  set  afloat,  or
were  closely  connected  with  them  :  if  he  sanc-
tioned them,  who  w^ould  be  able  to  stem  the
torrent?  if  he  opposed  them,  it  seemed  doubt-
ful whether  his  opposition  would  have  any  ef-

*  His  counsellors  in  Wittenberor  declared,  on  the  2d
Jan.  15-2-2,  "  S.  Ch.  G.  hatt  sich  Doctor  Martinus  Sachen
bisher  nicht  anders— angenommen,  denn  allein  weil  er
sich  zu  Recht  erboten,  dass  er  nicht  bewältigt  würde."—
"His  Christian  grace,  the  elector,  had  as  yet  taken  up
D»",  Maioinus's  cause  in  no  other  way  beyond  offering  to
isee  that  he  had  justice,  and  was  not  overpowered  by
force."— Corp.  Ref.  p.  537.

t  Spalatin,  Leben  Friedrichs  des  Weisen.  Vermischte
Abhaodlungen  zur  sächsischen  Gesch. B.  v.

fect,  or  whether  he  himself  would  not  be  over-
whelmed in  the  common  ruin.

During  ihe  whole  of  this  time  he  was  in  the
Wartburg,  at  first  keeping  closely  within  the
walls,  then  venturing  out  timidly  to  gather
strawberries  on  the  castle  hill,  and  afterwards,
grown  bolder,  riding  about  as  Junker  George,
accompanied  by  a  groom.  He  once  even  ven-
tured into  Wittenberg,  trusting  to  the  disguise
of  his  long  hair  and  beard,  and  completely
cased  in  armour.  But  though  his  mode  of  life
and  his  accoutrements  were  those  of  a  Reiter,
his  soul  was  ever  in  the  heat  of  ecclesiastical
warfare.  "  When  hunting,"  says  he,  "I  the-
ologized :"  the  dogs  and  nets  of  the  hunters  re-
presented to  him  the  bishops  and  stewards  of
antichrist  seeking  to  entrap  and  devour  unhap-
py souls. :|:  In  the  solitude  of  the  castle  he
was  again  visited  by  some  of  the  struggles  and
temptations  which  had  assailed  him  in  the  con-
vent. His  chief  occupation  was  a  translation
of  the  New  Testament,  and  he  likewise  formed
the  project  of  giving  to  the  German  nation  a
more  correct  translation  of  the  Bible  than  the
Latin  church  possesses  in  the  Vulgate. §  Whilst
endeavouring  to  fortify  his  resolution  (or  the  ac-
complishment of  this  work,  and  only  wishing
to  be  in  W' ittenberg  that  he  might  have  the  as-
sistance of  his  friends,  he  heard  of  the  excite-
ment and  disorder  prevailing  there.  He  was
not  for  a  moment  in  doubt  as  to  their  nature.
He  said  that  nothing  in  the  whole  course  of
his  life  had  given  him  greater  pain;  all  that
had  been  done  to  injure  himself  v/as  nothing
in  the  comparison.  The  pretensions  of  these
men  to  tliß  character  of  divinely  inspired  pro-
phets and  to  immediate  communion  with  God,
did  not  impose  on  him  ;  for  he  too  had  fathomed
the  mysterious  depths  of  the  spiritual  world,
and  had  gained  a  far  deeper  insight  into  it,  and
a  far  too  exalted  conception  of  the  divine  na-
ture, to  allow  himself  to  be  persuaded  that  God
would  appear  visibly  to  his  creatures,  converse
Y/ith  them,  or  throw  them  into  ecstacies.  "  If
you  want  to  know  the  time  and  place  and  na-
ture of  -the  divine  communications,"  writes  he
to  Melanchthon,||  "  hear  ;  '  Like  as  a  lion  he
hath  crushed  my  bones;'  and  'I  am  cast  out
from  before  thy  countenance,  my  soul  is  filled
with  heaviness,  and  the  fear  of  hell  is  upon
me.'  God  spake  by  the  mouths  of  his  prophets,
because  if  he  spoke  himself  we  could  not  en-
dure it."  He  wishes  his  prince  joy  of  the
cross  which  God  has  laid  upon  him,  and  says
that  the  Gospel  was  not  only  persecuted  by
Annas  and  Caiaphas,  but  that  there  must  be  a
Juda^  even  among  the  apostles;  he  also  an-
nounces his  intention  of  going  to  Wittenberg
himself.  The  elector  entreated  him  not  to
leave  his  retreat  so  soon,  saying  that  as  yet  he
could  do  no  good,  that  he  had  better  prepare
his  defence  for  the  next  diet,  at  which  it  was
to  be  hoped  he  would  obtain  a  regular  hearing.^
But  Luther  was  no  longer  to  be  restrained  by

t  To  Spalatin,  15th  Aug.  D.  W.,  ii.  43.

§  To  Amsdorf,  13th  Jan.  p.  123.

|(  13  Jan.  1522,  to  Amsdorf,  p.  125.

IT  Instructions  to  Oswald,  Corp.  Kef.  i.  561.

Chap.  I.

DISTURBANCES  AT  WITTENBERG.

167

these  arguments :  never  had  he  been  more  firm-
ly convinced  that  he  was  the  interpreter  of  the
divine  word  and  that  his  faith  woukl  be  a  suf-
ficient protection  ;  the  occurrences  in  Witten-
berg seemed  to  him  a  disgrace  to  himself  and
to  the  Gospel.*  /  He  accordingly  set  out  on  his
way,  regardless  of  the  pope's  excommunication
or  the  emperor's  ban,  bidding  his  prince  have
no  care  about  him.  He  was  in  a  truly  heroic
state  of  mind.

A  party  of  young  Swiss  who  were  on  their
way  to  the  University  of  Wittenberg  stopped
to  dine  at  the  sign  of  the  Black  Bear  at  Jena.
On  entering  they  savv-  a  horseman  who  sat  at
the  table  resting  his  right  hand  on  the  hilt  of
his  sword,  with  a  Hebrew  psalter  before  him  ;
this  horseman,  as  they  afterwards  discovered,
\Xas  Luther,  and  we  read  in  the  notes  of  one
of  them,  how  he  invited  them  to  dine  with  hie;,
and  hovv-^gentle  and  dignified  was  his  deport-
ment.|  On  Friday  7th  of  March  he  arrived  at
W'ittenberg;  on  the  Saturday  the  same  Swiss
found  him  surrounded  by  his  friends,  inquiring
minutely  into  all  that  had  occurred  during  his
absence.  On  Sunday  he  began  to  preach,  in
ofder  immediately  to  ascertain  whether  his  pop-
ularity and  influence  were  still  sufScient  to  ena-
ble him  to  allay  the  disturbance.  Small  and
obscure  as  was  the  scene  to  which  he  returned.
his  success  or  failure  was  an  event  pregnant
with  important  results  to  the  whole  world ;  for
it  involved  the  question,  whether  the  doctrine
which  had  forced  itself  on  his  conviction  from
its  own  inherent  weight,  and  which  vv'as  des-
tined to  give  such  an  impulse  to  the  progress
of  mankind,  had  also  power  to  subdue  the  ele-
liients  of  destruction  fermenting  in  the  public
mind,  that  had  already  undermined  the  foun-
dations of  society  and  now  threatened  it  with
total  ruin.  It  had  now  to  be  tried  whether  it
were  possible  to  reform  without  destroying ;  to
open  a  fresh  career  to  mental  activity,  without
annihilating  the  results  of  the  labours  of  former
generations.  Luther's  view  of  the  question
was  that  of  a  preacher  and  pastor  of  souls;  he
did  not  denounce  the  changes  that  had  been
made  as  utterly  pernicious,  nor  tlie  doctrines
from  which  the}^  had  spruno-  as  fundamentaily
bad,  and  he  carefully  refrained  from  any  per-
sonal 'attacks  on  the  leaders  of  the  nev\-  sect.
He  merely  said  that  they  had  acted  v/ith  pre-
cipitation, and  had  thus  laid  a  stumbling-block
in  the  way  of  the  weak  and  transgressed  the
commandment  of  charity.  -He  allowed  that
there  were  practices  which  undoubtedly  ought
to  be  abolished  ;  such,  for  instance,  as  private
masses  ;  but  that  these  reforms  ought  to  be  ef-
fected v/ithout  violence  or  scandal.  As  to  a
number  of  other  usages,  he  thought'it  indiffer-
ent whether  a  Christian  observed  them  or  not.
That  it  was  a  matter  of  very  small  importance
whether  a  man  received  the  Lord's  Supper  in
one  kind  or  in  both,  or  whether  he  preferred  a
private  confession  to  the  general  one,  or  chose
rather  to  remain  in  his  convent  or  to  leave  it,
to  have  pictures  in  the  churches,  and  to  keep

*  To  the  elector,  5th  March,  ii.  137.

t  From  the  Ciironicle  of  Kessler,  in  Bernet,  Leben  Kess-
)ers,  p.  22

fasts  or  not^,  but  that  to  lay  down  strict  rules
concerning  these  things,  to  raise  violent  dis-
putes, and  to  give  offence  to  weaker  brethren,
did  more  harm  than  good,  and  was  a  transgres-
sion of  the  commandment  of  charity.

The  danger  of  the  anarchical  doctrines  now
broached,  lay  in  the  assumption  that  they  were
an  indispensable  part  of  true  Christianity;  an
assumption  maintained  v>-ith  the  same  vehe-
mence and  confidence  on  the  side  of  the  ana-
baptists, as  the  divine  and  thence  infallible  ori-
gin of  every  decree  of  the  church  was  on  that
of  the  papists.

These  doctrines,  therefore,  like  those  of  the
papacy,  were  intimatel}^  bound  up  with  the
whole  system  of  morals,  and  the  wiiole  fabric
of  civil  life.  It  was  therefore  most  important
to  show  that  religion  recognised  a  neutral  and
independent  province,  over  v.liich  she  vras  not
required  to  exercise  a  direct  sv/ay,  and  where
she  needed*not  to  interfere  in  the  guidance  of
every  individual  thought.  This  Luther  did
with  the  mildness  and  forbearance  of  a  father
and  a  guide,  and  with  the  authority  of  a  pro-
found avid  comprehensive  mind.  These  ser-
mons are  certainly  among  tlie  most  remarkable
that  he  ever  preached;  they  are,  like  those  of
Savonarola,  popular  harangues,  not  spoken  to
excite  and  carry  away  his  hearers,  but  to  ar-
rest them  in  a  destructive  course,  and  to  as-
suage and  calna  their  passions.^  Hov/  could
his  flock  resist  the  vrell-known  voice,  the  elo-
quence which  carried  the  conviction  it  express-
ed, and  which  had  first  led  them  into  the  w^ay
of  inquiry  ?  The  (jonstruction  commonly  put
upon  moderate  counsels,  namely,  that  they
arise  from  fear  of  consequences,  could  have  no
place  here.  Never  had  Luther  appeared  in  a
more  heroic  light;  he  bid  defiance  to  the  ex-
communication of  the  pope  and  the  ban  of  the
emperor,  in  order  to  return  to  his  flock;  not
only  had  his  sovereign  warned  him  that  he  was
unab'.e  to  protect  him,  but  he  had  himself  ex-
pressly renounced  his  claim  to  that  protection ;
he  exposed  himself  to  the  greatest  personal
danger,  and  that  not  (as  man}""  others  have
done)  to  place  himself  at  the  head  of  a  move-
ment, biu  to  check  it;  not  to  destroy,  but  to
preserve.  At  his  presence  the  tumult  was
hushed,  the  revolt  quelled,  and  order  restored  ;
a  few  even  of  the  most  violent  party  leaders
were  converted  to  his  opinions  and  joined  hirh.
j  Carlstadt,  wlio  could  not  be  brought  to  confess
I  his  error,  was  condemned  to  silence.  He  was
I  reprotiched  with  having  intruded  himself  un-
j  called  into  the  ministry,  and  was  forbidden  to
enter  the  pulpit  again.  Some  approximation
took  place  between  the  moderated  opinions
now  maintained  by  Luther,  and  those  of  the
civil  authorities,  who  vrere  delivered  from  the
danger  that  had  threatened  the  state.  A  trea-
tise of  Carlstadt's,  written  in  the  same  spirit
as  heretofore,  part  of  w-hicli  was  already  print-
ed, was  suppressed  by  the  universit3^  and  a

t  "  Sieben  Predigten  D.  M.  L.  so  er  von  dem  Sontage
Invocavit  bis  auf  den  andern  Sontag  gethan,  als  er  ans
seiner  Pathmus  zu  Wittenberg  weider  ankommen."
("  Seven  sermons  Of  Doctor  Martin  Luther,  delivered  by
him  during  the  week  between  the  Sunday  Invocavit  and
the  following  Sundav,  when  he  Returned  from  his  Patmos
to  Wittenberg."— ./i/i.  i^  99.

DISTURBANCES  AT  WITTENBERG.

Book  III.

report  of  it  sent  to  the  elector.  The  Zwiekau-
ers  once  more  sought  an  interview  with  Lu-
ther; he  exhorted  them  not  to  suffer  themselves
to  be  deceived  by  the  illusions  of  the  devil;
they  answered,  that  as  a  proof  of  their  divine
mission,  they  vfould  tell  him  what  were  his
thoughts  at  that  instant^  to  this  he  agreed,
upon  which  they  said  that  he  felt  a  secret  in-
clination towards  themselves.  "  God  rebuke
thee,  Satan !"  exclaimed  Luther.  He  after-
wards acknowledged  that  he  had,  indeed,  been
conscious  of  such  a  leaning;  but  their  guess-
ing it,  he  held  to  be  a  sign  of  powers  derived
from  Satan  rather  than  from  God  ;*  he  accord-
ingly dismissed  them  with  a  sort  of  challenge
to  their  demon  to  resist  his  God.  If  we  soften
the  coarseness  of  his  language,  this  struggle
between  two  antagonist  spirits,  the  one  destruc-
tive, the  other  tutelary,  is-  the  expression  of  a
mighty  and  profound  truth.

Wittenberg  was  now  once  mor^  quiet ;  the
mass  Avas  as  far  as  possible  restored,  preceded
by  confession,  and  the  host  was  received  as  be-
fore with  the  lips.  It  was  celebrated  in  hal-
lowed garments,  with  music  and  all  the  cus-
tomary ceremonies,  and  even  in  Latin ;  nothing
was  omitted  but  the  wprds  of  the  canon  which
expressly  denote  the  idea  of  a  sacrifice. f  In
every  other  respect  there  was  perfect  freedom
of  opinion  on  these  points,  and  latitude  as  to
forms.  Luther  himself  remained  in  the  con-
vent and  wove  the  Augustine  dress,  but  he  of-
fered no  opposition  to  others  who  chose  to  re-
turn to  the  w^orld.  The  Lord's  Supper  was
administered  in  one  kind  or  in  both  ;  those  who
vvere  not  satisfied  with  the  general  absolution,
v/ere  at  full  liberty  to  require  a  special  one.
Questions  were  continually  raised  as  to  the
precise  limits  of  what  was  absolutely  forbid-
den, and  what  might  still  be  permitted.  The
maxim  of  Luther  and  Melanchthon  was,  to
condemn  nothing  that  had  not  some  authentic
passage  in  the  Bible, — "  clear  and  undoubted
Scripture,"  as  the  phrase  was, — against  it.
This  was  not  the  result  of  indifference;  reli-
gion withdrew  within  the  bounds  of  her  own
proper  province,  and  the  sanctuary  of  her  pure
and  genuine  influences.  It  thus  become  pos-
sible to  develope  and  extend  the  new  systern
of  faith,  without  waging  open  warfare  with
that  already, established,  or,  by  the  sudden  sub-
version of  existing  authorities,  rousing  those
destructive  tendencies,  the  slightest  agitation
of  v.'hich  had  just  threatened  such  danger  to
society.  Even  in  the  theological  exposition
of  these  doctrines,  it  was  necessary  to  keep  in
view  the  perils  arising  from  opinions  subver-
sive of  all  sound  moralit3^  Luther  already  be-
gan to  perceive  the  danger  of  insisting  on  the
saving  power  of  faith  alone;  already  he  taught
that  faith  should  show  itself  in  good  conduct,
brotherly  love,  soberness  and  quiet.:^

*  Camerarius,  vita  Molanchthonis,  cap.  sv.
t  "  Luther  voa  beider  Gestalt  des  Sacraments  zu  neh-
men.'''—j^ltenb.  ii.  p.  12G.

X  Eberlin  of  Günzberg  quotes  a  remarkable  passage
from  one  of  his  sermons:  "Vermanun?  an  alle  frumen
Christen  zu  Aujrsburg  am  Lech  :"—•' Ich- hab  gehört,"
says  he,  "  von  D.  Martin  Luther  in  aincr  Predig  ain  gross

The  new  religious  opinions,  in  assuming  the
character  of  a  distinct  creed,  threw  off  from
themselves  all  that  was  incongruous,  and  as-
sumed a  more  individual,  and  at  the  same  time
a  more  universal  character, — the  character  in-
separable from  its  origin  and  tendency.  As
early  as  December  1521,  in  the  heat  of  the
disturbances,  appeared  the  first  elementary
work  on  theology,  founded  on  the  new  princi-
ples of  faith — Melanchthon's  'Loci  Com-
munes.' This  was  far  from  being  a  complete
vv'ork ;  indeed  it  was  originally  a  mere  collec-
tion of  the  opinions  of  the  apostle  Paul  con-
cerning sin,  the  law,  and  grace,  made  strictl}'-
in  accordance  with  those  severe  viev\'S  to  which
Luther  had  owed  his  conversion,  but  remarka-
ble on  account  of  its  entire  deviation  from  all
existing  scholastic  theology,  and  from  being
the  first  book  a\  liich  had  appeared  for  several
centuries  in  the  Latin  church  containing  a  S)' s-
tem  constructed  out  of  the  Bible  only.  Sanc-
tioned by  Luther's  approbation,  it  had  great
success,  and  in  the  course  of  repeated  editions
it  was  recast  and  perfected. §  The  translation
of  the  New  Testament  by  Luther,  which  he
corrected  with  Melanchthon's  assistance  on  his
return  to  Wittenberg,  and  published  in  Sep-
tember 1522,  had  a  still  more  extensive  effect,
and  acted  immediately  on  the  people.  Whilst
with  one  hand  he  emancipated  them  from  the
forms  imposed  on  religion  by  the  schools  and
the  hierarchy,  with  the  other  he  gave  to  the
nation  a  faithful,  intelligent  and  intelligible
translation  of  the  earliest  records  of  Christi-
anity. The  national  mind  had  just  acquired
sufijcient  ripeness  to  enable  it  tcT apprehend  the
meaning  and  value  of  the  gift :  in  the  most  mo-
mentous stage  of  its  development  it  was  touch-
ed and  penetrated  to  its  very  depths  by  the
genuine  expression  of  unveiled  and  unadulte-
rated religion.  From  such  influences  every-
thing was  to  be  expected.  Luther  cherished
the  noble  and  confident  hope  that  the  doctrine
alone  would  accomplish  the  desired  end;  that  ^
wherever  it  made  its  way,  a  change  in  the  out-
ward condition  of  society  must  necessarily  fol-
low.

The  course  pursued  by  the  authorities  of  the
empire,  in  the  altered  form  the}'  had  mean-
war  wort,  da?  er  sagt :  wie  man  die  sach  anfacht,  so  felt
unrat  darauf:  predict  man  den  glauben  allein,  als  man
thon  sol,  so  unterlesst  man  alle  zucht  und  ordnun?,
predict  man  zucht  und  Ordnung  so  felt  man  so  gantz
daraufi'  das  man  alle  selickait  ■  darein  setzt  und  ver-
gisst  des  glauben  ;  das  mittel  aber  were  gut,  das  man
also  den  glauben  yebte  das  er  ausbreche  in  zucht  und
ordnnnjr,  und  also  übte  sich  in  guten  ^iten  und  iu
briederiicher  liebe  das  man  doch  selickait  allein  durch
dan  glauben  ge wertig  were." — "  An  Exhortation  to  all
pious  Christians  at  Augsburg  on  the  Lech." — "I  have
heard  in  one  of  Luther's  sermons  a  great  and  true  saying:
that  as  you  stir  up  the  matter,  some  mischief  arises;  if  a
man  preach  faith  alone,  as  he  should  do, 'he  omits  all  so-
berness and  order,  he  insists  upon  them  alone,  and  places
all  salvation  therein,  forgetting  faith  ;  the  middle  course,
liowever,  would  be  the  best,  that  man  should  so  use  faith
that  it  should  break  out  in  soberness  and  order,  and  that
they  should  so  exercise  themselves  in  good  habits  and  in
brotherly  love,  as  to  look  for  salvation  only  through
faith."

§  The  original  composition  of  this  book  is  to  be  seen  by
a  comparison  of  the  first  sketch  of  it  in  I.'jSO  (which  ap-  -
pears  written  by  manv different  iiands,  in  Strobel's  I\ipiien
Beiträgen,  v.  323.)  with  the  first  edition  of  1521,  printed
in  V.  D.  Hardt's  Hist.  Lit.  Kef.,  iv.

Chap.  II.

COUNCIL  OF  REGENCY.

169

while  acquired,  not  onl^  justified  this  hope,  but
led  to  results  calculated  to  give  it  still  greater
assurance.

CHAPTER  II.

TEMPORAL AND SPIRITUAL TENDENCIES OF THE
COUNCIL OF REGENCY.

1521—1523.

It  is  a  remarkable  and  striking  coincidence,
that  the  mighty  national  movement  we  have
just  been  considering  was  exactly  coeval  with
the  institution  of  that  representative  {siändiscli)
form  of  government  which  had  been  the  object
of  such  various  and  persevering  exertions.

The  emperor,  powerful  as  he  was,  had  been
forced  to  grant  it  as  the  condition  of  his  elec-
tion ;  the  plan  was  agreed  upon  at  Worms,  and
was  carried  into  execution  in  the  autumn  of
1521.  The  electors  and  the  circles  severally
elected  deputies,  who,  as  we  find,  were  freed
from  their  feudal  obligatWis,  and  exhorted  to
attend  only  to  thegener*  welfare  of  the  em-
pire. The  old  acts  of  the  Imperial  Cham.ber,
weighing  many  hundred  weight,  and  contain-
ing the  pleadings  in  about  3500  long  pending
and  yet  undecided  suits,  and  a  vast  number  of
fresh  plaints  on  v/hich  no  proceedings  had  yet
been  taken,  were  transported  to  Nürnberg.*
One  by  one  the  deputies  arrived  ;  those  from
the  emperor,  the  last  of  all.  During  the  course
of  the  month  of  November  they  got  so  far  as
to  open  first  the  Council  of  Regency,  and  then
the  Imperial  Chamber.

At  first  they  had  to  endure  a  great  deal  from.
ihe  interference  of  the  imperial  councillors  ;j
the  same,  for  the  most  part,  with  whom  the
States  had  had  such  frequent  disputes  under
Maximilian,  and  who  were  still  umvilling  to
give  up  any  of  their  lucrative  privileges,  and
still,  as  formerly,  accused  of  taking  bribes.
Very  strange  things  occurred ;  among  others,

*  Hansv.  d.  Planitz  to  Friedericli  v.  Sacksen,  18  Oct.
1521,  according  to  communication  made  by  Adam  v.
Beichüngen.  The  correspondence  of  Planitz,  in  two
volumes,  and  a  smaller  pamphlet  in  the  Archives  of  Wei-
mar, are  the  authorities  for  the  following.  Ilarpprecht
and  Müller  (Statts  Cabinett,  i.)  give  very'superficial  in-
formation.

t  Planitz  sa^-s,  as  early  as  the  16th  October,  "  Churfiii;-
Pten  Fürsten  und  Andre  so  itzund  ailhie  vorhanden  haben
Beisor^re,  es  v^^erde  bei  etzlichen  Kaiserischen  jrefleissij^t,
ol»  siilch  Vornenieri  des  Regiments  in  Verhinderung  oder
Aenderung  gestellt  \^'erden  mecht." — "The  electors,
princes,  and  others,  at  this  present  here  assembled,  have
a  fear  that  some  of  the  imperial  court  are  busied  in  en-
deavours to  hinder,  or  M  least  to  alter,  this  project  of  the
Council  of  Regency."  On  the  14lh  of  May  he  mentions  a
certain  Rem,  who  after  Ions  imprisonment  succeeded  in
obtaining  an  imperial  absolution.  "  1st  vermutlich,  weil
das  Regiment  die  Sach  zu  sich  forderet  und  die  Sach  den
Hofretten  nicht  gestatten  wollte,  hierin  zu  handeln,  das
sie  die  Absolution  gefürdert,  damit  das  Regiment  auch
nichts  daran  haben  solt."— "  [t  is  probable,  since  the  Re-
gency brought  the  matter  within  its  own  jurisdiction,  and
did  not  allow  the  imperial  councillors  to  act  in  it  at  all,
that  the  latter  furthered  the  absolution,  in  order  to  take
it  out  of  the  hands  of  the  Regency."  The  letters  are  full
of  similar  expressions.

the  Bishop  of  Würzburg  had  seized  the  person
of  a  certain  Raminger,  who  was  furnished  with
a  safe  conduct  from  the  emperor,  and  kept  him
prisoner.  The  Council  of  Regency  very  pro-
perly took  the  injured  man  under  their  protec-
tion. Their  surprise  may  be  conceived  when
a  declaration  arrived  from  the  emperor,  that  he-
had  given  the  safe  conduct  without  reflection,
and  that  it  could  not  be  supposed  that  the
Bishop  of  Würzburg  had  violated  a  real  im-
perial safe  conduct.  It  made  no  difference
whether  the  States  supported  the  Regency  or,
not.  The  States  met  in  .March  1522,  and  both
bodies  jointly  interceded  for  the  Bishop  of  Hil-
desheim, vrho  complained  of  the  ban  which
had  been  pronounced  against  him  and  his
friends,  without  any  previous  summons  and
trial.  But  the  emperor  would  not  endure  any
interference  with  "his  affairs,"  and  rejected
the  intercession  with  some  short  unmeaning
answer.

Towards  the  end  of  IM  ay  the  emperor  quitted'
the  Netherlands.  His  presence  was  required
in  Spain  to  quiet  the  disturbances  of  tha  Comu-
nidades,  and  his  mind  fully  occupied  with  the
perplexities  of  the  war  he  had  begun  in  Italy,
and  with  the  extraordinär}''  conquests  and  dis-
coveries made  on  a  distant  continent  by  a  hand-
ful of  fortunate  and  intelligent  Castilian  adven-
turers serving  under  his  banner.  Even  the
German  councillors  who  accompanied  him
could  not  possibly  influence  the  details  of  the
administration  of  Germany  from  so  distant  a
country  as  Spain.  At  tiiis  time^  therefore,  the
Council  of  Ilßgency  first  acquired  complete  in-
dependence. The  young  emperor's  presence
had  been  needed  to  confer  upon  it  the  authori-
ty vrhich  his- absence  now  left  it  at  libert}^  to
exercise.

Let  us  first  consider  the  temporal  part  of  its
administration.

Several  very  important  matters  had  come
under  consideration ;  above  all,  the  executive
ordinance,  on  the  plan  proposed  in  the  year
1512,  and  then  so  violently  resisted  by  Maxi-
milian, was  determined  upon ;  namely,  that
the  circles  should  elect  their  own  captains  or
governors.  The  affairs  of  Turkey  and  Hunga-
ry'also  urgently  demanded  attention.  Whilst
the  two  principal  rulers  of  Christendom  in-
flamed their  natural  jealousy  into  bitterer  anti-
pathy in  the  Italian  wars,  the  potentate  of  the
Osman  empire  led  out  his  armies,  fired  by
hatred  of  the  Christians  and  love  of  conquest,
and  took  possession  of  Belgrade,  the  ancient
buhvark  of  Christendom,  which  was  but  feebH'
defended  on  that  frontier.  Germany  was  not
insensible  to  the  danger :  the  States  met  ex-
pressly on  this  account  in  the  spring  of  1523. ±

1  The  summons  is  dated  Feb.  12. :  for  the  Sunday  Oculi
(Riarch  23,  1522),  so  as  to  allow  time  to  arm.  On  Ma-i-ch
28,  a  number  of  the  States  were  present,  and  procession.-;
and  prayers  Vv'ere  ordered  :  "Damit  S.  göttlich  Barmher-
zigkeit den  Zorn,  ob  und  wie  wir  den  durch  unsre  Schuld
und  Kissethat  verschuldet  hätten,  von  uns  wende."—"  in
order  that  the  Almighty  mercy  may  turn  from  us  the
v/rath  which  we  have  brought  upon  ourselves  by  our
guilt  and  misdeeds."  The  Proposition  was  made  on  the
Tth  of  April:  the  emperor  therein  declared  that  he  gave
up  the  supplies  voted  for  his  expedition  to  Rome  to  be  ap-
plied to  the  war  against  tiie  Turks.  The  States  deter-
mined to  vote  three-eighths  thereof  to  the  war,— not,  how-

170

COUNCIL  OF  REGENCY.

Book  III.

and  again  in  the  autumn ;  a  part  of  the  sup-
plies which  had  been  granted  to  the  emperor
for  his  expedition  to  Rome  were,  with  his  per-
mission, appropriated  to  the  succour  of  the
Hungarians.  Schemes  for  the  complete  equip-
ment of  an  army,  to  be  kept  always  in  readi-
ness for  the  same  purpose,  were  proposed  and
discussed.  The  main  point,  however,  on  which
every  thing  else  depended,  was  the  secure  es-
tablishment of  the  form  of  government  itself.
Every  day  show^ed  the  inconveniencies  of  al-
lowing the  salaries  of  the  members  of  the  Im-
perial Chamber  and  the  Regency  to  be  depen-
dent on  the  matricular  taxes,  which  v/ere
granted  from  year  to  year,  and  w^ere  always
difHcultto  collect;  neither  would  it  do  to  leave
these  salaries  to  be  paid  by  the  emperor,  as  it
was  justly  feared  he  would  then  raise  a  claim
to  appoint  the  members  himself.  IMany  other
expedients  were  proposed,  such  as  the  applica-
tion of  the  annates  to  this  purpose;  a  tax  upon
the  Jews ;  or  finall}'-,  the  le-imposition  of  the
Common  Penny,  in  connection  with  a  perma-
nent war  establishment.  But  all  were  alike
impracticable.  For  the  annates,  a  previous
agreement  with  the  see  of  Rome  was  necessa-
ry, and  that  was  not  so  easily  made.  The
towns  which  had  obtained  from  earlier  empe-
rors the  riglit  of  taxing  their  owm  Jews  (a  right
which  they  had  lately  maintained  in  opposition
to  the  imperial  fiscal)  absolutely  refused  to
surrender  it.  As  to  a  return  to  the  Common
Penny,  it  did  not  get  beyond  aanere  project,
and  w;as  not  even  seriously  debated.  Under
these  circumstances,  the  Council  of  Regency
adopted  a  plan  which  had  formerly  been  enter-
tained, and  which,  in  itself,  must  have  been
productive-  of  very  important  national  conse-
quences, besides  being  connected  with  other
views  of  the  administration  of  the  empire  well
worthy  of  our  attention.

Among  the  charges  and  complaints  which
the  several  classes  of  the  comrAunity  made
against  each  other  in  those  times,  one  which
was  urged  with  the  greatest  frequency  and  ve-
hemence was  directed  against  the  merchants.

Commerce  still  travelled  along  its  accus-
tomed roads;  the  Hanse  Towns  still  enjoyed
most  of  their  privileges  in  foreign  countries;
peace  had  restored  the  markets  of  Venice  ;  but
the  splendour  and  importance  of  this  traffic  was
eclipsed  b)''  the  brilliant  and  adventurous  com-
merce across  the  seas,  to  W'hich  the  discovery
■of  both  the  Indies  had  given  rise.  Some  of
the  great  commercial  houses  of  Upper  Germa-
ny placed  themselves  in  immediate  communi-
cation with  Lisbon,  or  shared  in  the  West  In-

■ever.in  men,  but  in  money ;  everything  was  done  in  haste,
as  a  better  method  of  equipment  was  to  be  arranged  in  a
conference  with  the  Hunsarian  commi.'^:*ioners.  The
Frankfurt  deputy  thought  iliat  iittie  would  be  effected,
but  "aufs  fürderlichste  wieder  zum  Timr  hinaus."—
"That  tl?ey  would  be  out  of  the  gate  again  as  fast  as
possible."  The  chief  delay  was  caused  by  the  disputes  in
the  sessions  of  the  colleges.  '•  Der  Sachen  halber  bleiben
andre  lliindel  unansgerichtet  und  wir  verzehren  das
Unsre  oline  Nutzen."—"  For  the  sake  of  these,  other  af-
fairs remained  undetermined,  and  we  eat  up  our  sub-
stance without  profit."  The  order  is  dated  May  7.  (Frank.
A.)  At  the  following  diet,  in  Dec.  1522,  two-fourths  more
of  the  money  intended  for  the  expedition  to  Rome  were
voted  for  this  service.

dian  enterprises  of  the  Spaniards.  Antwerp
owed  its  prosperity  chiefly  to  being  the  empo-
rium of  German  maritime  trade.

In  Germany,  however,  no  one  was  satisfied  ;
the  stricter  part  of  the  community  disapproved
the  importation  of  new  luxuries  and  wants;
others  complained  of  the  quantity  of  money
sent  out  of  the  country,  and  almost  all  were
discontented  at  the  high  prices^  of  the  wares.
During  the  years  151G  to  L522,  especially,  a
general  rise  in  prices  was  observed.  Cinnamon
cost  upwards  of  a  gulden  the  pound,  sugar  from
twelve  to  twenty  gulden  the  cwt.,  and  some  of
the  East  Indian  spices  had  risen  to  four  times
their  former  price.*  Several  causes  might
conduce  to  this  effect;  such  as  increased  luxury
and  consequent  demand ;  the  Venetian  war,
which  had  interrupted  the  course  of  trade,  and
a  diminution  of  the  value  of  money,  arising
from  the  importation  of  precious  metals  from
America,  which  began  to  be  felt,  though  far
from  what  it  afterwards  became.  At  that
period,  however,  the  cause  was  chiefly  sought,
and  perhaps  not  without  justice,  in  the  system
of  monopoly  arising  from  the  combination  of
the  great  commercial  houses  ;  a  practice  which
had  continued  to  increase,  in  spite  of  the  re-
peated enactments  of  the  diets.  They  were
already,  it  was  al  Wed,  possessed  of  such  an
amount  of  capital  and  such  numerous  and
extensive  factories;  that  no  one  could  possibly
compete  with  them.  They  were  willing  to
give  the  King  of  Portugal  higher  prices  even
thaii  he  had  previously  asked,  only  on  condition
that  he  would  demand  still  higher  from  those
who  came  after  them.  It  was  calculated  that
every  year  30,000  cwt.  of  pepper  and  2000  cwt.
of  ginger  were  imported  into  Germany,  and  that
within  a  few^  j^ears,  t"he  first  had  risen  in  price
from  18  to  33  kreutzers  per  lb.,  and  the  second
from  21  kreutzers  to  one  gulden,  3  kreutzers  ;
this  must,  of  course,  have  afforded  an  enormous
profit.

As  Rome  was  constantl}''  assailed  for  her  sale
of  indulgences,  and  the  knights  for  their  rob-
beries, so  the  mierchants  and  commercial  towns
were  now  incessantly  inveighed  against  for
their  extortions.  At  all  events,  the  Frankfurters
attributed  the  disfavour  shown  them  for  some
time  past  in  their  transactions  with  the  Estates
of  the  empire,  almost  exclusively  to  the  unpop-
ularity of  monopolists.

At  the  diet  of  1522-23,  the  resolution  was
taken  to  interdict  all  companies  posses'sing  a
capital  of  more  than  50,000  gulden  :  they  were
to  be  allowed  a  year  and  a  half  to  dissolve  their

*  I  have  extracted  the  following  tables  from  a  decree

of  the  select  Committee  on  Monopolies  in  1523  (Frank.

A.):-

The  best  saffron  from  Cablonia,

which  in  t516  cost  3  g«  6  kr.,  cost,  in  1522,  4  ?.  15  kr.

Second  rate  do.  - - - - 1519  2  ?.  21  to  27  kr. —4?.

Cloves 1512  ]9schill. — — 2  e;.

Stick  cinnnmou  - - - - 1516  1  c.  IS  kr. — 1518  2  e.  3  ort.

Short  do. 1515  3  ort.  — 1519  1  g.  21  kr.

Nutme» 1519  27  kr.  — 1522  3  g.  28  kr.

Mnce J518  1  e.  6  kr. — — 4  e.  6  kr.

Be~t  pepper  in  the  husk  - 1518  IS  kr.  — — 32  kr.

Ginger,  formerly  from  21  to  24  kr.  . ~ 1516  1  g.  3  kr.

Galingal  —  1  g.  36  kr.  _ _ l  ^.  39  kr.

Sugar,  the  hundred  weight 1516  11  to  12  g. ~ 1518  20  g.

Sugar  candy 1516  16  to  17  g. — 1522  20  to  21  g.

Venetian  almonds,  the  cwt.  1518  S  g.  —  _ _ 12  g.

Do.  raisins 1518  5  g.  —  — — 9  g.

Do.  .flgs 1518  3g.  2sch. — — 4  g.  1  ort.

Chap.  IL

COUNCIL  OF  REGENCY,  1522.

171

partnership.  It  was  hoped  that  this  would
enable  the  smaller  commercial  houses  to  enter
into  com\Detition  with  the  great  ones,  and  w'ould
also  have  the  etTect  of  preventing  the  accumu-
lation of  money  and  merchandise  in  few  hands.

Overlooking  the  enormous  advantages  af-
forded by  foreign  commerce,  however  carried
on,  the  diet  conceived  the  idea  of  covering  the
general  deficiencies  of  the  state  by  a  tax  upon
trade.  It  was  notorious  that  each  individual
prince  drew  the  gi-eater  part  of  his  revenues
from  the  tolls,  the  right  of  levying  which  had
been  granted  to  him  by  former  emperors  ;  and
as  it  was  evident  that  no  direct  tax  could  bte
collected,  a  plan  was  adopted  fc?it  an  Jfidirect
one,  in  the  form  of  a  general  system-o^npor^t
duties  to  be  levied  for  the  use  of  the  emph'e.'

This  project  is  worthy  of  a  moment's  atten-
tion ;  if  carried  into  execution  it  must  hate  pro-
duced incalculable  results ;  bat  it  is  remarkable
that  it  could  even  be  entertained.  So  early  as
the  year  15-21  it  was  discussed  ;  the  Elector  Jo-
achim I.  of  Brandenburg  adopted  it  with  great
eagerness  and  continually  recommended  it. ^

In  the  spring  of  152-2  the  States  were  really
resolved  to  accede  to  it,  principally  because  it
did  not  appear  burdensome  to  the  common  peo-
ple; but  in  order  to  make  sure  of  carrying  it
into  effect,  they  determined  to  ask  the  previous
consent  of  the  emperor,  before  taking  any  fur-
ther step.

This  consent  having  been  received  from
Spain,  accompanied,  however,  with  the  condi-
tion that  the  further  provisions  should  be  again
submitted  to  him  for  approbation,  a  commisäion
was  appointed  at  the  diet  of  15-22--33,  by  the
general  vote  of  the  Slates,  to  work  out  the  plan
in  detail.*

The  commission  went  on  the  principle  of
leaving  all  the  necessaries  of  life  duty-free.
Under  this  head  were  classed  corn,  v;ine,  beer,
cattle  for  draught  and  slaughter,  and  leather.
All  other  articles  were  to  pay  both  an  import
and  export  duty,  not  to  be  regulated  either  by
weight  or  by  a  tariff,  which  would  have  occa-
sioned a  great  deal  of  troublesome  investigation,
but  by  the  price  at  whi'ch  the  article  was  bought,
to  be  stated  b}^  the  purchaser ;  upon  this  the
duty  was  to  be  four  per  cent.

The  whole  extent  of  the  Homan  em.pire  inha-
bited by  the  German  race  w^as  tobe  surrounded
by  a  line  of  custom-houses,  which  was  to  begin
at  Nikolsburg  in  r\Ioravia,  and  thence  pass  to-
w^ards  Hungary  through  Vienna  and  Grätz  to
Villach  or  Tarvis  ;  thence  to  extend  along  the
Alps  towards  Yenice  and  Milan.  Custom-
house stations  were  to  be  erected  in  Trent,
Brunegg,  Insbruck,  and  Feldkirchen.  The
frontier  of  Switzerland,  vvhich  refused  to  subm.it
to  the  imposition  of  the  duty,  was  to  be  guarded
by  custom-houses  ;  the  line  was  then  to  cross
the  Rhine  and  run  through  Strasburg,  Metz,
Luxemburg,  and  Treves,  to  Aix-la-chapelle  ;
which  would  bring  it  near  the  coast  and  within
the  region  of  maritime  commerce. The  Nether-

*  "Ordnung  ains  gemainen  Reichs  Zolls  in  Ratschlag
verfast."— Fr.  Ar.  vol.  xxxviii.  "Ordinance  for  customs'
dmies  for  the  whole  empire,"— a  document  which  I  intend
to  give  in  the  Appendix.

lands  v/ere  without  hesitation  considered  as
part  of  the  empire  ;  Utrecht  and  Dordrecht,  as
well  as  Cologne  and  Wesel,  were  proposed  as
custom-house  stations  for  inland-  trade ;  Ant-
werp, Bruges  and  Bergen-op-zoom,  for  mari-
time trade,  especially  that  with  England  and
Portugal.  The  line  was  thence  to  follow  the
coast  northward  and  eastward.  Towards  Den-
marlv|, which  according  to  public  law  was  still
regarded  as  a  permanent  confederate  of  the  em-
.ptr^jjthe  Hanse  towns,  from  Hamburg  to  Dan-
zig'inclusive,  were  to  be  the  custom-house
ports;  towards  Poland,  Königsberg  in  the
Newmark  and  Frankfurt  on  the  Oder,  besides
a  few  other  towns  in  Silesia  and  Lusatia.  ,

Much  was  still  left  undetermine(^  in  this
project;  for  instance,  it  was  immediately  pro-
posed that  the  frontiers  should  be  surveyed,  in
order  to  ascertain  whether  better  places  could
not  be  found  for  the  prevention  of  smuggling,
than  those  already  named  :  it  was  still  a  matter
of  doubt  whether  Bohemia  could  be  included,
and  neither  Prussia  nor  Livonia  had  yet  been
taken  into  consideration ;  jbut  all  these  were
mere  details  which  could  easily  be  ^determined
when  the  project  was  carried  into  execution;—
the  main  point  was  seriously  resolved  upon.

As  might  have  been  expected,  the  whole
commercial  body  thought  it  would  be  injured
by  this  measure,  which  it  attributed  merely  to
the  hostility  generally  shown  towards  itself,
and  accordingly  raised  numerous  objections  to
it,  more  or  less  well  founded.  An  attempt  was
made  to  answ^er  all  these  objections  at  length.
The  example  of  neighbouring  kingdoms  Vvas
cited,  where  much  heavier  restrictions  existed,
and  where,  jnevertheless,  trade  was  most
flourishing.  It  was  argued  that  the  duty  by
no  means  fell  on  the  merchant,  but  on  the  con-
sumer; and  that  it  would  be  a  prodigious  ad-
vantage to  commerce  if,  by  means  of  this  tax,
the  disturbances  in  the  empire  could  be  put
down,  and  general  security  restored.

At  all  events,  it  cannot  be  denied  that  this
project  might  have  been  the  means  of  producing
the  most  important  results  for  the  future  fate
of  Germany.  The  establishment  of  accurately
defined  and  well  guarded  frontiers,  the  entire
circumference  of  which  were  closely  bound  to
a  common  active  centre,  w^ould  in  itself  have
been  a  great  advantage  ;  this  alone  v/ould  have
at  once  awakened  a  universal  feeling  of  the
unity  of  the  empire.  Besides,  the  whole  ad-
ministration would  have  assumed  a  different
character.  The  most  important  national  insti-
tution, the  Council  of  Regency,  the  formation
of  which  had  cost  so  much  labour,  would  by
this  means  have  acquired  a  natural  and  firm
basis,  and  sufficient  power  for  the  maintenance
of  order.  As  yet  there  was  no  peace  through-
out the  country;  all  the  roads  were  unsafe  ;  it
v/as  impossible  to  reckon  on  the  execution  of
any  sentence  or  decree.  But  had  this  ordinance
been  vigorously  carried  into  effect,  the  Regency
would  have  had  the  means  of  paying  the
governors  and  councillors  in  the  circles,  so
often  discussed,  and  of  maintaining  a  certain
number  of  troops  under  their  own  orders  and
those  of  the  subordinate  authorities.

172

COUNCIL  OF  REGENCY,  1522.

Book  III.

In  the  spring  of  1523  it  seemed  as  if  this
point  would  certainly  be  achieved :  the  plan
was  again  sent  for  final  confirmation  to  the
emperor,  who  was  already  bound  by  his  former
consent.

It  is  evident  that  the  Council  of  Regency
entertained  the  project  of  constituting  itself  a
powerful  central  government,  and,  in  conjunc-
tion with  the  States,  resorted  to  every  possible
expedient  to  accomplish  this  end,  in  spite  of  all
opposition.

Hence  the  question,  what  course  this  rising
power  would  take  with  respect  to  the  religious
movement,  acquired  additional  importance.

At  the  beginning  of  the  year  1522  the  feel-
ings of%e  Council  of  Regency  were  much
opposed  to  the  innovation.  Duke  George  of
Saxony  was  present,  in  whom  a  natural  attach-
ment to  traditionary  opinions,*  the  various  old
quarrels  with  his  cousins  of  the  Ernestine  line,
and  a  personal  dislike  to  the  bold  and  reckless
monk,  combined  to  raise  a  violent  and  active
hostility  to  the  new  doctrines.  The  disturb-
ances in  Wittenberg  happened  opportunely  to
give  more  weight  to  his  accusations ;  and  he
actually  obtained  an  edict  in  which  the  Regency
exhorted  the  neighbouring  bishoprics  of  Naum-
burg, Meissen,  and  Merseburg  not  to  allow  the
innovations  to  be  forced  upon  them,  but  to
maintain  the  customary  rites  and  practices  of
the  church. f

But  in  the  course  of  the  next  three  m.onths,
when  news  arrived  that  the  disturbances  had
ceased,  the  feelings  of  the  Council  of  Regency
underwent  a  total  change.  One  subject  of  dis-
cussion, of  course,  was  Luther's  return  to
Wittenberg,  by  which  he  had  openly  bidden
defiance  to  the  imperial  ban,  and  Duke  George
even  proposed  an  appeal  to  the  immediate
intervention  of  the  emperor;  this,  however,
merely  wounded  the  -self-love  of  the  Council
of  Regency.  John  of  Planitz,  the  envoy  of
Elector  Frederic,  would  not  hear  his  master
blamed  for  permitting  Luther  to  remain  in
Wittenberg ;  nor  would  he  allow  it  to  be  said
that  the  monk's  doctrine  was  heresy.  "  The
receiving  the  sacraments  in  both  kinds,  the
marriage  of  a  few  priests,  and  the  desertion  of
the  convent  by  a  few  monks,  could  not,  he
said,  be  called  heresies ;  these  acts  were
merely  opposed  to  regulations  established  not
long  since  by  popes  and  councils,  and  whica
would  perhaps  be  eventually  abolished. If,  on

*  Duke  George  said  to  our  informant  Planitz:  "  Wftnn
S.  F.  Gn.  nirht  micht  der  Tatt  und  Gewalt  dazu  that,
würd  S.  Gn.  Land  schyr  gar  ketzerisch:  wollten  alle  die
behemische  Weis  au  sich  nemen,  und  sub  utraque  com-
launiciren  :  er  geduckt  es  aber  mit  Gewalt  zu  lerere."—"  If
liis  princely  grace  did  not  interfere  with  might  and  deed,
his  grace's  subjects  would  soon  become  sheer  heretics,  for
they  all  wanted  to  follow  the  Bohemian  fashion,  and  to
communicate  sub  utraque  ;  but  that  he  intended  to  prevent
it  by  force:'— Letter  of  the  2rf  Jan.  1522.

t  Resolution  und  Decisum,  fee,  20th  Jan.  1522.  Walch
XV.  2Ö1G.  The  Appendix  No.  10  is  remarkable:  "Bis  so
lang  durch  Versehung  der  gemeinen  Reichsstände,  christ-
liche Versammlung  oder  Concilia  solcher  Sachen  halben,
eine  bedachtlir.he  wohlerwogene  gegründete  gewisse  Er-
klärung—vorgenommen werde."—"  Until  such  time  as,
by  the  care  of  the  general  Estates  of  the  empire,  a  chris-
tian assembly,  of  council  for  such  matters,  shall  have
made  a  prudent,  deliberate,  well  grounded,  and  certain
declaration  of  faith."  From  this  passage  we  may  perceive
the  existence  of  another  tendency,  although  as  yet  vague.

the  other  hand,  Luther  were  banished,  imitators
of  him  would  arise,  but  animated  with  a  dif-
ferent spirit ;  who,  instead  of  preaching  only
against  the  dogmas  of  the  church,  might  de-
claim against  Christianity  and  God  himself;-
and>nöt  only  a  rebellion,  but  complete  unbelief
might  be  the  result."  This  envoy  was  a  man
of  talent,  equally  resolute  and.  dexterous  :  he
was  strongly  in  favour  of  'Luther,  less  indeed
from  religious  belief — although  in  the  main  their
opinions  were  the  same — than  from  the  convic-
tion that  Luther's  cause  was  equally  the  cause
of  his  prince,  of  the  Council  of  Regency,  and
of  the  empire.

In  the  summer  of  1522  it  was  the  turn  of  the
Elector  Frederic  to  attend  the  Council  of  Re-
gency in  person.  He  was  one  of  the  few  who
remained  of  the  old  school  of  princes,  to  whgm
that  body  owed  its  establishment,  and  he  had
lately  taken  the  most  active  part  in  the  firm
settlement  of  its  constitution.  He  had  already
been  frequently  consulted  concerning  questions
of  form.  His  calm  judgment,  his  well-known
experience,  and  the  universal  respect  paid  to
his  acknowledged  integrity  and  talents  for
business,  invested  him  with  singular  authority.:}:
He  might  indeed  at  this  time  be  said  to  govern
the  empire,  in  as  far  as  it  could  be  governed  at
all.

Under  these  circumstances,  it  is  evident  that
Luther,  who  enjoyed  so  fully  the  favour  of  this
prince,  had  nothing  to  fear  from  the  Council  of
Regency.  Duke  George  continued  to  attack
him  before  that  assembly  :  he  repeatedly  com-
plained of  the  monk's  violence,  and  of  the
abuse  which  he  poured  forth  against  the  princes
of  the  empire,  the  emperor,  and  the  pope.
Never  perhaps  was  a  more  evasive  answer
given  than  that  which  he  received  from  the
Council  of  Regency,  to  one  of  these  accusa-
tions. "  We  perceive,"  they  write  on  the  16th
of  August,  "  that  your  grace  feels  displeasure
at  insults  to  the  pope's  holiness  and  the  empe-
ror's majesty,  and  we  thereupon  make  known
to  your  grace,  that  we  would  not  patiently  en-
dure insult  or  injury  to  the  emperor's  majesty,
wherever  we  should  see  or  hear  of  it."§  No
wonder  that,  when  the  duke  afterwards  com-
plained of  this  answer  to  the  lieutenant  of  the
empire.  Count  Palatine  Frederic,  he  replied
that  at  that  time  there  was  nothing  to  be  done
in  matters  of  this  kind.

An  independent  party  favourable  to  Luther
was  now  forming  in  the  Council  of  Regency.
It  was,  it  is  true,  subject  to  fluctuations  from
the  entrance  of  new  members  every  quarter  of
a  year ;  but  from  the  permanent  operation  of

J  The  Elector  of  Treves  hearing  that  Frederic  was  ill,
sent  him  word  through  his  minister,  "  E.  Ch.  Gn.  solten
vest  halten,  nicht  krank  werden  noch  abgehen,  denn  mau
hett  im  Reich  E.  Ch.  Gn.  nye  als  wol  bedurft  als  itzund,
nachdem  E.  Ch.  Gn.  wusste,  wye  es  allenthalben  im
Reiche  stünde."—"  Your  Electoral  Grace  must  stand  firm,
and  not  fall  sick  nor  die,  for  your  Electoral  Grace  was
never  so  greatly  needed  by  the  empire  as  now,  for  your
Electoral  Grace  knows  how  matters  stand  in  the  empire."
—Planitz,  1st  Nov.  1521.

§  Instruction  to  the  Regency  at  A^ürnberg.  Answer  to
the  same ;  letter  from  Duke  George,  dated  the  Tuesday
after  the  Nativity  of  the  Virgin  (9th  Sept.),  and  from
Otto  Pack  to  the  duke,  the  Monday  before  the  XlmiUe
Virginum  (20th  Oct.)— Dresden  .archives

Chap.  II.

DIET  OF  1522-23.

173

principles  once  imbibed,  it  always  regained
the  upper  hand,  and,  in  tact,  constituted  a
majority.  Here  was,  indeed,  a  wonderful,
change  in  the  aspect  of  affairs  ! — In  1521  the
emperor  published  sentence  of  ban  against  Lu-
ther, and  in  1522-23,  the  body  which  repre-
sented the  imperial  power,  took  him,  though
still  under  ban,  under  its  protection,  and  even
approximated  to  his  opinions.  That  body  was,
of  course,  not  affected  by  the  political  combina-
tions which  had  influenced  the  emperor.

The  bias  it  had  received  was  all  the  more
important,  since  the  States  had  assembled
during  the  last  months  of  the  one  year  and  the
first  of  the  ensuing  ;  and  at  the  instigation  of
the  new  pope,  Adrian  VI.,  were  to  come  to  a
decision  concerning  the  Lutheran  affairs.

Adrian  VI.  was  undoubtedly  an  extremely
well-intentioned  man.  He  had  formerly  been
professor  at  Louvain,  and  had  even  then  zeal-
ously reproved  the  arrogance  of  the  priesthood,
and  the  waste  and  misapplication  of  church
.  property.*  He  subsequently  became  tutor  to
Charles  V.,  and  took  part  in  the  administration
of  affairs  in  Spain,  where  he  imbibed  a  thorough
disgust  of  the  worldly  tendencies  of  the  papacy.
He  was  therefore  strongly  disposed  to  attempt
some  reform.  He  declared  that  he  had  only
bent  his  neck  under  the  yoke  of  the  papal
dignity,  in  order  to  restore  the  defiled  bride  of
Christ  to  her  original  purity.  At  the  same
time  he  was  a  decided  opponent  of  Luther,  and
belonged  to  those  '  Magistri  nostri'  of  Lou-
vain, who  had  so  long  waged  war  against  the
innovating  literature  and  theology ;  he  had  ex-
pressed unqualified  approbation  of  the  opinions
professed  by  that  university.  The  orthodox-
dorainican  tendency,  which,  as  early  as  1520,
had  once  more  formed  a  close  alliance  with  the
court  of  Rome,  had  now  obtained  a  temporary
sovereignty  in  his  person.

In  conformity  with  these  sentiments  v.'ere
the  instructions  which  Adrian  gave  to  his
nuncio  Chieregati,  whom  he  sent  to  the  Ger-
man diet.  He  looked  upon  the  spread  of  Lu-
theran doctrines  as  a  punishment  for  the  sins  of
the  prelates.  "  We  are  aware,"  said  he,  "  that,
some  years  ago,  many  abominations  took  place
in  this  chair:  every  thing  was  turned  to  evil,
and  the  corruption  spread  from  the  head  to  the
members,  from  the  pope  to  the  prelates."
Whilst  he  now  declared  himself  willing  to  re-
form the  existing  abuses,  he  at  the  same  time
exhorted  the  States  of  Germany  to  offer  a  de-
termined resistance  to  the  diffusion  of  Luther's
opinions  ;|  and  brought  forward  eight  arguments
in  favour  of  that  course,  vrhich  he  thought  of
irresistible  cogency.

An  answer  to  these  propositions  of  the  pope
had  now  to  be  given,  and  a  resolution  to  be
formed  upon  them.  This  duty  devolved  on  the
Council  of  Regency.

At  the  first  appearance  of  the  nuncio,  a  trial

*  Extracts  from  his  "  Commentary  in  Gluartiim  Senten-
tianim,"  in  the  letter  of  Joli.  Lanoy  to  Henr.  Barillon  ;
Burman's  Vita  Adriani,  p.  360.

t  "  Expergiscantur,  excitentur — et  ad  executionera  sftn-
tentiaB  apostolicas  acimperialis  edicti  prtefati  omnino  pro-
cedant. Detur  venia  iis  qui  errores  suos  abjurare  vuJue-
Tim^—Instructio pro  Cheregato.
p  *

of  strength  ensued  between  the  two  parties  in
that  body.  The  orthodox  minority  brought
forward  a  complaint  from  the  nuncio,  concern-
ing two  or  three  preachers  who  proclaimed  the
Lutheran  tenets  under  the  very  eyes  of  the
Regency,  to  their  and  his  serious  offence.  Arch-
duke Ferdinand,  who  then  filled  the  office  of^
lieutenant  of  the  empire,  and  the  Elector  of
Brandenburg,  who  was  the  next  in  succession
for  the  ensuing  quarter,  declared  themselves  in
favour  of  the  nuncio.  The  majority,  hov;ever,
led  byPlanitz,  resolutely  opposed  them.  This
gave  rise  to  several  violent  discussions.  Fer-
dinand exclaimed,  "  I  am  here  in  the  place  of
the  emperor."  —  "Yes,  certainly,"  irejoined
Planitz,  "but  in  conjunction  with  the  Council
of  Regency,  and  subject  to  the  lavv's  of  the
empire;" — and,  in  accordance  with  his  sugges-
tion, the  affair  was  referred  to  the  States  ;:j:  i.  e.
indefinitely  adjourned.  It  is  easy  to  imagine
that  this  increased  the  boldness  and  vehemence
of  the  Lutheran  preachers.  "  Even  if  the  pope,"
exclaimed  one  of  them  in  the  church  of  St.
Lawrence,  "  had  a  fourth  crown  added  to  the
three  he  already  wears,  he  should  not  make  me
forsake  the  word  of  God."  Thus  was  defiance
hurled  from  the  pulpit  against  the  pope,  before
the  very  eyes  of  his  nuncio.

Under  these  circumstances  the  Council  of
Regency  appointed  a  committee  to  draw  up  the
answer  which  the  States  should  give  to  the
nuncio.  This  committee,  like  the  Regency
itself,  contained  representatives  of  both  parties  ;
some  of  its  members  belonging  to  the  clergy,
and  others  to  the  laity,  and  for  a  time  it  was
doubtful  which  side  had  the  majority.  This
was  however  very  soon  decided.

The  most  influential  member  was  undoubt-
edly Johann  von  Schwarzenberg,  the  Hofmeister
of  Bamberg,  who  was  now  advanced  in  life.
In  his  early  youth  he  had  quitted  the  dissipa-
tion of  a  court  which  had  threatened  to  hurry
him  along  in  its  vortex,  and,  in  consequence
of  his  father's  admonition,  had  formed  earnest
and  effectual  resolutions  of  a  virtuous  life ;
from  that  time  he  had  devoted  himself  with
untiring  perseverance  to  study  and  to  the  service
of  the  state.  We  have  translations  of  some
of  Cicero's  works,  bearing  his  name,  in  which
he  has  carefully  adopted  the  purest  and  most
intelligible  forms  of  the  language  of  his  age.§
The  first  criminal  code  for  Bambercr,  if  not

t  Planitz  relates  this  himself,  on  the  4th  Jan.  152:?.
The  States  answered,  that  it  was  a  srave  matter  which
reqnired  much  consideration  :  they  asked  for  copies  of  the
brief  and  of  the  instruction,  and  wished  "  etzliche  darüber
verordnen,  die  die  Sach  mit  Fleiss  bewegen."  "In  der
Stadt  ist  gross  Murmeln,  will  nicht  rathen,  das  man  einen
gefangen  annehme."— "  To  appoint  certain  people  who
should  manage  the  matter  with  diligence."  "  In  the
town  is  much  nnirmuring.  I  cannoj,  advise  that  any
person  should  be  imprisoned."

§  e.  ff.  De  Senectute.  Neuber's  was  revised  andcollate'd
with  the  text  by  Hütten,  and  put  into  Hoffränkisch
Deutsch  by  Schwarzenberg.  Neuber's  translation  of  the
De  OfSciis  was  put  into  "zierlicher  Hochteutsch," —
"elegant  High  German," — by  Schwarzenberg,  and  then
revised  by  a  third  person  to  see  "  obsdem  Lateyn  gemess
sey,^" — "  whether  it  were  according  to  the  Latiu."  Christ
praises  it  for  the  "emergens__e  stilo  nativa  et  vere  Ger-
manica siniplicitas."  De  Amicitia  was  translated  "  voa
Synnen  zu  Synnen,  nicht  von  Worten  zu  Worten," —
"  from  sense  to  sense,  not  from  words  to  words."— -See
Degen,  Literatur  der  Übersetzungen,  i.  55.

174

REPORT  OF  THE  COMMITTEE.

B(

III.

entirely  his  work,  was  at  least  in  great  measure
constructed  by  him.  In  this  he  evinces  as
much  capacity  for  appreciating  the  value  of
traditional  and  local  usages  (for  he  adheres  in
the  main  to  the  old  customary  law  of  the  city
of  Bamberg)  as  the  scientific  inerits  of  the
Roman  lavv^.  Wherever  he  applies  the  prin-
ciples of  the  latter  to  supply  some  deficiency,
he  does  it  in  a  manner  corresponding  with  ex-
isting maxims.*  He  was,  as  we  see,  a  man
of  original  and  productive  talent,  both  in  lite-
rature and  in  politics  :  he  expressed  his  wonder
hov/any  one  could  find  the  time  too  long.  He
eagerly  embraced  the  Lutheran  cause  at  its
very  first  appearance,  finding  in  it  the  scientific
and  practical  tendencies  of  his  own  mind  ex-
alted by  an  alliance  with  religious  sentiments
and  aims.  He  accordingly  exchanged  several
very  serious  letters  on  the  subject  with  one  of
his  sons,  and  removed  one  of  his  daughters
from  her  convent;  indeed  his  mind  was  entirely
engrossed  by  the  new  opinions.")-  With  all  the
force  of  a  full  and  well-grounded  conviction,
armed  against  every  objection,  he  adopted  them,
and,  partly  perhaps  owing  to  the  high  and  im-
portant station  he  filled,  he  carried  with  him
the  minds  of  his  colleagues ;  some  because
they  already  inclined  to  those  opinions — like
Sebastian  von  Rotenhan  and  Dr.  Zoch,  and
others,  like  the  Bishop  of  Augsburg,  because
they  knew  not,  just  then  at  least,  what  resist-
ance to  offer.  Those  who  did  not  share  these
opinions,  such  as  Dr.  v.  Werthern,  the  envoy
from  Duke  George,  and  the  Archbishop  of
Salzburg,  found  it  better  to  stay  away  from  the
assembly.  Thus,  with  very  slight  opposition,
this  committee,  which  now  represented  the
central  government  of  the  empire,  agreed  upon
a  report  in  a  spirit  of  decided  opposition  to  the
papacy,  and  of  the  greatest  importance  to  the
whole  future  progress  of  the  new  doctrines.

This  report  was  based  on  the  admissions  and
promises  of  reform  made  by  the  pope,  which
the  committee  accepted,  but  without  giving  in
return  the  promise  which  the  pope  demanded,
—to  unite  with  him  in  the  endeavour  to  crush
the  Lutheran  doctrines.  On  the  contrary,  it
declared  that  these  admitted  abuses  rendered  it
impossible  to  carry  into  execution  the  bull  of
Leo  X.  and  the  edict  of  Worms,  for  that
Luther  had  been  the  first  to  expose  these
abuses,  and  any  display  of  rigour  towards  him
would  make  every  one  believe  that  it  was  the
object  of  the  government  "  to  suppress  the
truth  of  the  Gospel  by  tyranny,  and  to  main-
tain unchristian  abuses,  wherefrom  nothing
could  arise  but  resistance  to  authority,  sedition
and  heresy."  The  pope  was  exhorted  to  ad-
here to  the  concordats,  to  redress  the  grievances
of  the  German  nation,  and  above  all,  to  abolish
annates ;  it  was  not  indeed  pretended  that
these  reforms  would  now  suffice  to  put  an  end
to  the  schism ;  that,  it  was  said,  could  only  be
effected  by  a  council. The  convocation  of  a

*  Zöpfi  das  alte  Bamberger  Eecht  als  Quelle  der  Caro-
lina, pp.  166,  170.

t  There  is  a  notice  of  him  in  Strobe!  Vermischte  Bei-
trüge, 1775,  No.  1.  Heller,  Reformationsgeschichte  von
Bamberg,  p.  45.

council,  which  would  occupy  men's  minds  for
half  a  century,  had  already  been  the  subject
of  a  serious  conversation  between  the  nuncio
and  Planitz,  and  was  now  officially  agitated
by  the  committee  of  the  Council  of  Regency.
Some  of  the  conditions  v/ere  at  once  stated  by
it ;  they  were  as  follovv's  : — The  council  to  be
convoked  by  the  pope's  holiness,  with  the  as-
sent of  the  emperor's  majesty,  as  befitted  the
respective  privileges  of  the  two  sovereigns ;
to  be  held  at  a  convenient  neutral  town  without
delay ;  to  begin  within  a  year,  and  under  a
form  materially  differing  from  any  previous
council.  One  important  innovation  was,  that
the  laity  were  to  be  allowed  a  seat  and  a  voice
in  it,  and  all  present  were  to  be  absolved  from
every  obligation  which  might  restrain  them
from  bringing  forward  whatever  might  be  of
service  in  "godly,  evangelical,  and  other  ge-
nerally profitable  affairs."  An  assembly  thus
constituted  would  have  answered  to  the  Lu-
theran ideas  respecting  the  Church,  and  would
have  been  totally  different  from  what  the  Coun-
cil of  Trent  afterwards  was.  In  answer  to
the  inquiry,  what  course  would  be  pursued  till
the  council  had  given  its  decision,  the  com-
mittee answered,  that  they  should  hope,  in
case  the  pope  agreed  to  their  proposals,  to
prevail  on  the  Elector  Frederic  and  on  Luther,
that  neither  the  latter  nor  his  followers  should
write  or  preach  any  thing  which  might  occasion
irritation  and  disorder  ;  they  should  only  teach
the  Holy  Gospel  and  the  authentic  Scriptures
according  to  the  true  Christian  sense.  These
last  conditions  were  of  course  the  most  im-
portant; all  the  rest  was  vague  and  remote,
but  these  would  serve  as  a  rule  of  conduct  for
the  present  moment.  They  were,  as  may  be
easily  perceived,  entirely  in  accordance  with
the  opinions  which  prevailed  at  Wittenberg
and  at  the  court  of  Saxony,  and  were  evidently
proposed  with  the  intention  of  promoting  the
free  development  of  the  doctrine  embraced
there.  The  13th  January,  1523,  was  the  day
on  which  this  ever-memorable  decision  of  the
States  was  announced  for  further  discussion.
Hans  von  Planitz  joyfully  sent  it  to  his  master
on  the  very  same  day.4:

A  great  fermentation,  and  sharp  collisions
between  the  clerical  and  lay  members  began
moreover  to  be  observable  in  the  States.  It  had
indeed  at  first  appeared  as  if  both  intended  to
make  common  cause  against  Rome,  and  at
Worms  the  bishops  had  stated  their  own  pecu-
liar grievances  in  addition  to  those  of  the  Ger-
man nation  ;  yet  it  was  there  that  the  division
began ;  the  clergy  found  that  their  interests  were
touched  by  tlie  complaints  of  the  laity,  and  re-
solved to  defend  their  prescriptive  rights.  Sev-
eral outbreaks' of  this  animosity  had  already
taken  place  in  that  assembly.  A  memorial  from
the  cities,  full  of  the  most  violent  invective,
was  read,  and  the  head  of  the  German  clergy,  ^
the  Elector  of  Mainz,  v/armly  expressed  his

J  "  Wessder  Ausschuss  zu  pepstlicher  Heiligkeit  Ant.;'
wurdt  den  lutherischen  Handell  betreffen  verordnet  der,,
halb  gerathschlagt  hat."—"  What  the  committee  argued
and  decided  with  respect  to  his  papal  holiness's  answer
concerning  the  Lutheran  affairs."— Frank/.  It.  A.  A.,  torn,
xrxviii.  f.  99.

Chap.  IL

DEBATES.

175

displeasure  at  it.  It  appeared,  he  said,  as  if  the
clergy  were  to  be  treated  like  criminals,  and
not  to  be  secure  from  personal  violence.  But
even  the  most  zealously  catholic  lay  princes
demanded  reforms;  and  if  a  prince  had  given
no  instructions  on  the  subject  b.imseif,  his  coun-
cillors of  their  own  accord  inclined  to  that  side.
The  grievances  of  the  nation  v<ere  again  recapi-
tulated ; — this  time  indeed  without  the  parlici-
V  pation  of  the  clergy,  but  with  much  more  vehe-
mence, and  with  many  additions,  chiefly  directed
against  the  clergy  themselves  ;  for  the  thousand-
fold abuses  enumerated,  no  reform  was  more
strongly  urged  than  the  separation  of  the
spiritual  from  the  t^emporal  jurisdiction.

Nothing  could  be  more  calculated  to  drive
these  twoiiostile  parties  into  open  warfare  than
the  report  which-the  committee  of  the  Council
of  Regency  had  sent  in  to  the  States.

The  clergy  did,  however,  succeed  in  intro-
ducing some  modifications  into  it.

First  of  all,  the  admissions  quoted  from  the
papal  brief  were  only  allowed  to  stand  as  far
as  they  regarded  the  pope  himself:  the  words
relating  to  priests  and  prelates  were  struck  out.*
Then  no  mention  was  made  of  the  claims  of  the
laity  to  a  seat  and  voice  in  the  council.  A  sin-
gle phrase  was  frequently  the  cause  of  violent
disputes ;  for  instance,  the  clergy  would  not
admit  the  word  "  evangelical''  into  the  article
concerning  obligations  ;  whereupon  such  offen-
sive expressions  'were  used  by  the  lay  party,
that  the  Elector  of  Mainz  left  the  assembly  and
rode  home  to  his  lodging.  In  the  end  however
the  majority  decided  in  his  favour,  and  the
word  was  omitted.

Whatever  were  the  changes  made  in  parti-
cular expressions,  the  main  point  was  left  unal-
tered ;  the  States  declined  to  carry  into  execution
the  edict  of  Worms  ;"[■  a  council  was  demanded,
which  was  to  begin,  if  possible,  within  a  year,
in  a  German  town,  and  with  the  co-operation
,  of  the  emperor  :  a  suggestion  was  even  made  to
alter  the  form  of  such  an  assembly,  and  the
participation  of  the  temporal  states  in  it  was
tacitly  assumed  ;  both  clergy  and  laity  were  to
be  relieved  from  all  oblig-ations  restrictive  of

*  In  the  rough  draft  it  is  stated;  "  1st  von  Ppl.  Heilig-
keit .  .  .  woll  arifjezeifft  dass  soIcIirs  von  wegen  der  Sund
!)eschee  und  dass  die  Sund  des  Volks  von  den  Sunden  der
Priester  und  Prälaten  herfiiessen,  und  dass  darum  diesel-
iienznförderst  und  am  ersten  als  die  endlich  Ursach  solcher
Krankheit  von  der  Wurzel  geheilt  gestraftund  abgewendet
Vv'erden  soll." — "It  is  well  shown  b.y  his  holiness  the  pope
that  such  things  happen  on  account  of  sin,  and  that  the
sinfulness  of  tlie  people  flows  from  the  sins  of  the  priests
and  prelates;  that  these  therefore  should,  first  and  fore-
most, as  the  ultimate  cause  of  sucli  evil,  he  cured  from  tlie
root  upwards,  and  should  be  cured,  punished  and  turned
from  their  evil  ways."  This  passage  is  wanting  in  the
answer  w'lich  was  really  sent  to  the  papal  nuncio.— -See
the  reprint  in.  Walch,  xv.  p.  2551.  No.  8.

t'Thiswas  expressed  in  the  following  manner  in  the
answer  given  to  the  nuncio:  "Majori  namque  populi
parti  jam  pridem  persuasuni  est  .  .  .  nationi  Germanic«  a
curia  Romana  per  certos  abusus  multa  et  magna  grava-
mina et  incommoda  illata  esse:  ob  id,  si  pro  executione
apostoiicte  sedis  sententis  vel  imperatorioe  majestatis
edicti  quinpiam  acerbius  attemptatum  esset,  mox  popu-
laris  niultit(]do  sibi  hanc  opinionem  animoconcepisset  ac
si  talia  facerent  pro  evertenda  evangelica  veritate  et  sus-
tinendis  nianutenenriisque  malis  abusibus,  unde  nihil
aliud  quam  gravissimi  tumnltus  populäres  intestinaque
beila  speranda  assent." — Fr.  A,

the  free  utterance  of  opinion.  In  short,  the
party  which  strove  to  alter  the  entire  constitu-
tion of  the  Church  had  now  decidedly  the  upper
hand  in  both  estates  of  the  empire.  The  clergy
were  aware  of  the  necessity  of  a  change,. and
the  laity  eagerly  pressed  for  it ; — it  is  said  that
even  Duke  Louis  of  Bavaria  insisted  upon  it,
in  spite  of  the  opposition  of  the  adherents  of
Rome. 4:

The  only  points  that  now  remained  to  be  dis-
cussed— and  for  the  present  the  most  important
— were,  the  conduct  of  affairs  in  the  interval
before  the  convocation  of  the  council,  and  the
degree  of  liberty  of  speech  and  action  which
was  to  be  allowed  to  writers  and  preachers. '

On  this  question  the  clergy  succeeded  in
introducing  still  further  r(?strictions.  The)''
insisted  that  the  elector  should  be  requested  not
alone  to  prohibit  whatever  might  lead  to  disor-
der, but  to  allow  nothing  w^hatever  to  be  written,
printed  or  done  by  Luther  or  his  followers  ;  and
also  that  the  request  should  be  made  imme-
diately, without  waiting  for  the  pope's  consent
to  the  council.  The  Saxon  envoy  to  the  diet,
Philip  vonFeilitzsch,  endeavoured  to  maintain
the  terms  proposed  by  the  Council  of  Regency,
and  failing  in  this,  protested  that  "  his  prince
could  not  consider  himself  bound  hy  this  reso-
lution, and  would  always  know  how  to  act  in
a,  christian,  praiseworthy  and  irreproachable
manner."

Thus  we  see  that  in  this  contest  the  victory
inclined  first  to  one  side  and  then  to  the  other.
The  two  parties  collected  all  their  forces  for  the
last  point  at  issue,  which  w^as,  perhaps,  still
more  important  than  the  preceding  one,  as  it
was  to  decide  the  latitude  to  be  allowed  to
preaching ;  a  matter  which  immediately  con-
cerned the  mass  of  the  people.  The  clergy
w^ere  not  satisfied  with  merely  directing  the
preachers  to  confine  themselves  to  the  Gospel
and  to  writers  approved  by  the  Church,  but
required  a  more  accurate  specification  of  what
was  meant  by  the  latter,  and  wished  to  include
the  four  great  Latin  fathers,  Jerome,  Augustin,
Ambrose  and  Gregory,  to  whom  they  ascribed
canonical  authority.  This  is  the  more  remark-
able, since  a  century  earlier  fhe  more  explicit
of  the  Hussite  doctrines  had  been  regarded
mainly  as  a  departure  from  these  four  founders
of  the  Latin  church.  But  the  nation  was  now
so  deeply  imbued  with  the  spirit  of  Luther's
teaching,  that  it  w^ould  no  longer  be  bound  b}'-
the  particular  form  and  character  assumed  by
the  Latin  church  ;  the  common  sense  of  the
people  revolted  against  the  imputing  to  St.  Paul
less  authority  than  to  Ambrose.  The  time  was
past  in  which  the  clergy  could  carry  theii
point.  After  a  great  deal  of  debating,  a  resolu-
tion Vv'as  passed,  which  was  in  reality  only  a
more  complete  expression  of  the  meaning  of
the  original  proposition.  It  was  decreed,  that
nothing  should  be  taught  but  the  pure,  true  and
holy  Gospel ;  mildly,  piously  and  in  a  Christian
spirit,  according  to  the  doctrine  and  interpreta-
tion of  writings  approved  and  accepted  by  the

I  Planitz  names  him  as  early  as  on  tha  18th  Jan.  with
Schwarzenburg  and  Feilitzsch.

176

DIET  OF  1522-23.

Book  III.

Christian  church.*  Perhaps  the  adherents  of
the  established  faith  were  satisfied  by  the
decision,  because  it  recognised  the  authority  of
the  expositions  of  the  Latin  fathers;  but  this
recommendation  was  couched  in  vague,  general
and  uncertain  language;  whereas  that  of  the
evangelical  doctrine  was  precise,  decided  and
emphatic,  and  therefore  was  alone  likely  to
make  an  impression.

Thus,  after  all,  the  answer  went  back  to  the
Council  of  Regency,  having  undergone  a  few
partial  changes,  but  agreeing  in  the  main  with
the  spirit  of  the  original  plan.  Contrary  to  all
expectation,  it  caused  another  vei^y  stormy  de-
bate in  that  assembly.  Some  of  the  members
(among  whom  was  the  Bishop  of  Augsburg)
who  had  repented  of  the  part  they  had  taken  in
the  original  scheme,  made  another  attempt  to
retain  the  express  mention  of  the  four  fathers
of  the  Church.  Planitz  reports  that  he  had  to
endure  many  proud  and  wicked  words,  and  to
resist  a  violent  storm  on  this  question.  He
expresses  the  greatest  indignation  at  the  apos-
tacy  of  the  bishop,  whom,  he  says,  God  had
raised  out  of  the  dust  and  made  a  ruler  over
his  people,  and  who  in  return  persecuted  the
Gospel. f  However,  with  resolution  and  pa-
tience, and  the  assistance  of  Schwarzenberg,
he  succeeded  in  maintaining  the  form  which
had  at  last  been  decided  upon,  and  the  answer
was  delivered  to  the  nuncio  as  it  had  been  re-
turned from  the  assembly  of  the  States.^

The  nuncio  did  not  attempt  to  conceal  his
astonishment  and  vexation.  Neither  the  pope
nor  the  emperor,  nor  any  other  sovereign,  he
said,  had  expected  such  a  decision  from  them.
He  renewed  his  request  for  the  execution  of  the
edict  of  Worms  and  the  establishment  of  an
episcopal  censorship  ;  but  it  was  impossible  to
persuade  a  body  Vvdiich  moved  so  slowly  and
with  so  much  difficulty,  to  think  of  retracting
a  resolution  once  formed,  and  all  his  endeavours
were  fruitless.

The  substance  of  the  answer  was  published
in  an  imperial  edict.  The  Elector  of  Saxony
and  Luth'er  himself  were  highly  pleased  with
it;  Luther,  indeed,  thought  that  the  ban  and
excommunication  which  had  been  proclaimed
against  him  were  virtually  revoked  by  it.

It  is  indisputably  true  that  these  decisions

*  "  duodnihil  prfeter  verum  purilm  sincerum  et  sanctum
evangelium  et  approbatam  scripturam  pie  mansuete
Christiane  juxta  doctrinara  et  expositionem  approbatis  et
ab  ecclesia  Christiana  receptae  scripturrp.  doceant."  Tiiis
is  the  passage  in  the  answer  given  to  the  papal  nuncio,

t  Planitz,  4th  Feb. :  "  Ich  will  aber  Patienz  und  Geduld
tragen.  Es  haben  die  Stünde  ohangezeigte  wort  (he  has
inserted  them  in  his  letter)  haben  wollen  und  nil  die  vier
Doctorcs  zu  benennen  und  sulchs  dem  Regiment  anzeigen
lassen,  dabei  es  blieben." — "I  will,  however,  have  pa-
tience and  temper.  The  States  would  ha\T?  the  words  I
have  before  mentioned,  and  would  not  allow  the  four  doc-
tors to  be  named  or  specified  to  the  Council  of  Eegency,
so  it  remained  as  it  was."

t  Planitz,  9th  Feb. :  "  Die  Schrift  1st  dem  päpstl  Nuntius
auf  die  Mass  übergeben  wie  ich  E.  Chf.  G.  zugeschickt.
Der  ist  der  nicht  zu  frieden  und  hat  darauf  repücirt.  .  .  .
Er  will  den  Kayser  dabei  nit  haben,  so  gefällt  ihm  auch
iiit  dass  es  so  gar  frei  seyn  soll  wie  begehrt."—"  The
paper  is  handed  over  to  the  papal  nuncio,  on  the  whole
much  as  I  have  sent  it  to  your  electoral  grace.  The
nuncio  is  not  satisfied  with  it,  and  has  replied,  he  will
not  allow  the  ertiperor  to  be  mentioned  in  it,  nor  does  he
like  that  there  should  be  so  much  freedom  as  is  demanded."

of  the  diet  of  Nürnberg  were  exactly  the  con-
trary of  those  passed  at  Worms.  The  important
step  which  had  been  expected  of  Charles  V.,
namely,  that  he  would  place  himself  at  the
head  of  the  national  movement,  was  now
actually  taken  by  the  Council  of  Regency.
The  political  opposition  which  had  so  long
been  gathering  its  forces,  offered  a  more  vigor-
ous resistance  than  ever  to  the  pope  :  allied
with  it,  and  protected  by  the  representatives  of
the  imperial  power,  religious  discussion  was
now  left  to  its  free  and  unfettered  course.

CHAPTER  in.

DIFFUSION OF THE NEW DOCTRINES.

15p2— 1524.

No  new  arrangement  needed  to  be  made,
no  plan  to  be  concerted,  no  mission  to  be  sent :
like  the  seed  which  shoots  up  on  the  ploughed
field  at  the  first  genial  rays  of  the  sun  in  spring,
the  new  opinions,  the  way  for  which  had  been
prepared  by  all  the  events  and  discussions  we
have  endeavoured  to  trace,  now  spread  abroad
through  the  whole  land  where  the  German
language  was  spoken.

A  religious  order  was  destined  to  afford  the
first  common  centre  to  the  various  elements  of
opposition.

The  Augustines  of  Meissen,  and  of  ThurJn-
gia  generally,  had  madexthe  first  step  towards
emancipation,  by  a  formal  resolution.  Among
them  were  old  friends  of  Luther,  who  had
followed  the  same  career  of  studies  and  of
opinions  as  he  had  :  even  among  the  more  dis-
tant Augustine  convents,  there  were  few  in
which  similar  questions  had  not  been  agitated,
and  similar  changes  of  opinion  manifested  ;
indeed,  a  list  is  still  extant,  of  those  who  took
part  in  the  movement  at  Magdeburg,  Osnabrück,
Lippe,  Antwerp,  Regensburg,  Dillingen,  Nürn-
berg and  Strasburg,§  and  in  the  territories  of
Hessen  and  Würtemberg.  Many  of  these  re-
formers were  men  advanced  in  life,  who  had
held  these  doctrines  ever  since  the  time  of
Johann  Proles,  and  v;ho  now  exulted  to  see
them  attain  a  fuller  development  and  greater
power;  others  again  were  youthful  and  fiery
spirits,  inspired  with  admiration  for  their  vic-
torious brother  of  Wittenberg.  Johann  Stiefel
of  Esslingen  beheld  in  him  the  angel  of  the
Apocalypse  flying  through  the  heavens,  and
holding  in  his  hand  the  everlasting  Gospel;
he  composed  a  mystical  and  heroic  poem  in  his

§  According  to  Eberlin's  "  Syben  frumme  aber  trostlose
Pfaffen,"  "  Seven  devout  but  comfortless  Priests,"  Dr.
Casper  Amon,  "  ain  erwirdig  Man,"  "  a  reverend  man,"
taught  at  Dillengen.  This  is  doubtless  the  same  person
who  in  1523  published  a  Psalter  done  into  German  from
the  genuine  text  in  the  Hebrew  tongue, — "  geteutscht
nach  warhaftigem  text  der  hebreischen  zungen."  The
dedication  of  this  book  is  dated  Lauingen.  Panzer,  ii.  p.
131.

Chap.  III.

DIFFUSION  OF  THE  NEW  DOCTRINES.

177

praise.*  This  body,  moreover,  had  the  glory
of  being  the  first  to  draw  down  persecution  on
itself.  ^Two  or  three  Augustine  friars  at  Ant-
werp were  the  first  martyrs  of  the  new  faith.
Jean  Chatelain  of  ^letz  was  soon  afterwards
condemned  to  the  flames  for  the  attacks  he  had
made  on  the  prerogatives  of  the  clergy  in  the
Advent  of  1523,  and  the  Lent  of  1524.

A  number  of  Franciscans,  not,  like  the  Au-
gusiines,f  supported  by  their  order,  but  sepa-
rating themselves  entirely  from  it,  and,  as  v»-e
may  infer  from  that  act,  men  of  more  energetic
temper,  were  the  next  to  join  the  new  sect.
Some  of  these  were  learned  men,  like  Johann
Brismann  of  Cottbus,  who  had  been  for  many
years  devoted  to  the  study  of  the  schoolmen
an4  had  become  doctor  of  theology,  but  who
now,  like  Luther,  drew  from  their  works  en-
tirel}^  opposite  opinions.ij:  Others  were  spirits
full  of  deep  religious  yearnings,  which  the
conventual  rule  and  discipline  failed  to  satisfy  ;
such  was  Friedrich  M5'conius.  It  is  related
that  on  the  night  following  his  investiture,  he
dreamed  that  whilst  wandering  in  steep  and
tortuous  paths,  he  was  met  by  a  holy  man,
baldheaded,  and  clothed  in  an  antique  dress,  as
St.  Paul  is  painted,  who  led  him  first  to  a
fountain  whose  waters  flowed  from  a  crucified
body,  whereat  he  slaked  his  thirst,  and  then
through  endless  fields  of  thick  standing  corn,
in  which  the  reapers  were  making  ready  for
the  harvest.§  This  vision  is  sufficient  to  show
the  turn  of  his  mind  ;  and  we  may  easily  infer
from  it  the  impression  which  must  have  been
produced  on  him  by  the  revival  of  the, apos-
tolical doctrine,  and  the  prospect  of  an  active
co-operation  in  its  diifusion.  Others  again
vrere  men  who  in  the  various  intercourse  with
the  lower  classes,  to  which  the  duties  of  a
Franciscan  convent  leads,  had  perceived  the
pernicious  effects  of  the  doctrine  of  justifica-
tion by  works,  and  now  attacked  it  with  all
their  might; among  these  were Eberlin  of

*  Von  der  christformigen  rechtgegriindeteu  Lehre  Doc-
toris  Martini  Luthers:

"  Er  th'jt  sicli  worlich  fyegen  zu  Got  in  rechten  mut,
Gwalt  mag  ihn  auch  nit  biegen:  er  geb  er  drum  sein

blut.
Zu  Worms  e;-  sich  erzeyget  :  er  trat  keck  auf  den  plan.
Sein  feynd  hat  ergeschueyget:  keiner  dorft  ihn  wenden

an."
-"Concerning  the  Christian-like  well-grounded  doctrine
of  Doctor  Martin  Luther:
"  rie  trusted  truly  in  God  with  a  good  courage.
Force  could  not  bend  him:  for  it  (the  cause)  he  would

liave  spilled  his  blood.
He  proved  himself  at  Worms  :  stepping  boldiv  into  the

field.
He  silenced  his  enemies  ;  none  could  answer  him."
See  Strobel's  J^eue  Beitrüge,  i.  p.  10.

t  The  Reimchronik  of  Metz  speaks  very  favourably  of
this  Augustine  monk.

"A  Metz  prescha  ung  caresme,
devaiu  grand  peuple  homme  et  femme,
qui  en  sa  predication
avoient  grande  devotion."
His  persecutor  says  to  him,—

"  Tu  as  presche  de  nostre  estat,
je  te  hai  plus  qu'un  apostat :
as  tousche  sur  le  gens  d'eglise  ;
maintenant  te  tiens  a  mä  guise.

Calmet,  Histoire  de  Lorraine,  ii.,  Preuves  cxix.
t  Extract  from  hi^sermous  in  Seckendorf,  Historia  Lu-
theran ismi,  i.  p.  272.
§  Adami  Vitee  Theologoram,  edition  of  1705,  p,  S3.
23

Günzbnrg,  and  Heinrich  of  Kettenbach,  who
came  out  of  the  same  convent  at  Ulm,  and  who
possessed,  in  an  extraordinary  degree,  the  gift
of  popular  orator3^  Eberlin's  opponents  said
of  iiim,  that  he  alone  had  power  to  mislead  a
whole  province  ;  so  great  was  the  efiect  of  his
eloquence  on  the  common  people.  Among
them  were  found  the  most  steadfast  champions,
like  Stephen  Kempen,  whose  brave  and  vrarlike
bearing  was  worthy  of  his  name.  The  Fran-
ciscans were  almost  everywhere  among  the
fixrst  reformers  :  Kempen  was  the  founder  of
the  new  doctrines  in  Hamburg,  where  he  de-
fended them  nearly  single-handed  for  three
years  against  all  opponents.

But  there  was  not,  perhaps,  a  single  religious
order  which  did  not  furnish  partisans  to  the
new  opinions,  many  of  whom  were  among  its
most  celebrated  champions.  Martin  Butzer
had  been  appointed  professor' of  the  Thomist
doctrines  by  the  Dominicans  ;  but  he  dissolved
his  connexion  with  that  order  by  a  kind  of
lawsuit,  and  from  that  time  forward  took  a
most  active  and  successful  part  in  the  estab-
lishment of  the  new  system  of  faith.  Otto
Brunnfels  came  out  of  the  Carthusian  convent
at  Mainz  and  became  the  follower  of  Hütten,
whose  labours  he  shared  with  rival  ardour.
The  young  reading-master  of  the  Benedictine
abbey  of  Alperspach,  P.  Ambrosius  Blaurer,
was  incited  by  the  general  ferment  to  the  study
of  the  sacred  writings,  and  formed  opinions
which  soon  rendered  a  longer  residence  in  the
convent  impossible  to  him.  (Ecolampadius,
who  had  but  lately ~taken  the  vows  in  the  con-
vent of  St.  Bridget  at  Altomünster,  raised  his
voice  in  favour  of  the  new  views :  he  had
hoped  to  find  in  the  convent  undisturbed  leisure
for  the  learned  works  he  purposed  to  write ;
but  the  conviction  which  soon  forced  itself  on
his  mind  hurried  him  into  an  eager  participa-
tion in  all  the  mental  conflicts  of  the  Firnes.
The  brothers  of  Our  Lady  of  Mount  Carmel
at  Augsburg  declared  themselves  for  Luther
from  the  very  first,  with  the  prior  at  their  head  ;
and  to  them  belonged,  for  a  time  at  least,  Urban
RegiusJ|  one  of  the  most  devoted  and  favourite
disciples  of  Johann  Eck,  whom  he  now,  how-
ever, deserted  for  the  new  cause  :*^  he  supported
it  with  great  effect,  first  in  Upper,' and  after-
wards still  more  successfully  in  Lower  Ger-
many. Here  he  was,  after  a  while,  assisted  by
Johann  Bugenhagen,  who  had  also  for  a  long
time  followed  a  very  different  course  of  studies
and  opinions,  in  a  convent  of  Prsemonstratenses
at  Belbuck  in  Pomerania.  Bugenhagen,  as
his  history  of  Pomerania,  written  in  1518,  and
vigorously  attacking  the  abuses  prevailing  in
the  Church,  shows,  was  even  then  convinced
of  the  necessity  of  a  complete  change  in  the
body of  the clergy-;** but he  was no less

1;  Braun,  Geschichte  der  Bischöfe  von  Aussburff,  iii.
230.  He  is  also  called  a  Carmelite  in  Welser's  Augsburger
Chronik.  '

IT  There  are  a  few  letters  which  passed  l^tween  them
in  Adami,  p.  35.  Eck  is  violent  and  bitter.  Resius
(König),  in  spite  of  the  firmness  of  his  opposition,  never
forgets  the  accustomed  reverence  towards  his  master.

**  J.  H.  Balthasar,  Preefatio  in  Bugenhagii  Pomeraniam,
p.  5.

178

DIFFUSION  OF  THE  NEW  DOCTRINES.

Book  III.

strongly  opposed  to  Luther  ;  and  when  Luther's
book  on  the  Babylonish  captivity  was  brought
to  him  one  day  as  he  sat  at  dinner,  he  ex-
claimed, that  since  the  Passion  ofv  Christ  a
more  pernicious  heretic  had  never  existed.  But
this  very  book  w^rought  a  complete  revolution
in  his  mind :  he  took  it  home  with  him,  read
it,  studied  it,  and  became  convinced  that  the
whole  world  was  in  error  and  that  Luther  alone
saw  the  truth.  Of  this  change  of  sentiments
he  informed  his  colleagues  at  the  conventual
school  over  which  he  presided,  his  abbot,  and
all  his  friends.*  Similar  conversions  took
place  in  all  the  religious  orders.  The  superiors
were  often  the  most  strongly  impressed,  like
the  priors  of  the  Augustine  and  Carmelite
convents,  of  whom  we  have  spoken  :  among
others  were  Eberhard  Widensee,  provost  of  the
convent  of  St.  John  at  Halberstadt,  and  by  his
influence,  Gottes-Gnaden  and  St.  Moritz,  pro-
vosts of  Nuenwerk  and  Halle,  and  Paul  Lem-
berg,  abbot  of  Sagan,  who  openly  declared
that  if  any  one  of  his  monks  felt  his  conscience
burdened  by  remaining  in  the  convent,  so  far
from  attempting  to  keep  him  there,  he  would
rather  carry  him  out  of  it  on  his  own  shoulders. f

On  a  careful  examination,  I  do  not  find,
however,  that  love  of  the  world,  or  any  licen-
tious desire  to  be  freed  from  the  restraints  of
the  convent,  had  much  effect  in  producing
these  resolutions ;  at  all  events,  in  the  most
conspicuous  cases,  where  motives  have  been
recorded  by  contemporaries,  they  were  always
the  result  of  a  profound  conviction  ;  in  some,
gradually  develo])ed,  in  others,  suddenly  forced
on  the  mind,  sometimes  by  a  striking  passage
in  the  Bible  :  many  did  not  leave  the  convent
of  their  own  accord,  but  were  driven  out  of  it ;
others,  though  of  a  most  peaceful  nature  them-
selves, found  their  abode  between  the  narrow
walls  embittered  by  the  frequent  disputes  which
arose  ^out  of  the  state  of  men's  minds.  The
mendicant  friars  felt  disgust  at  their  own  trade  :
one  of  them,  a  Franciscan,  entered  a  smithy  at
Nürnberg  with  his  alms-box  in  his  hand,  and
was  asked  by  the  master  why  he  did  not  rather
earn  his  bread  by  the  v/ork  of  his  hands :  the
robust  monk  immediately  threw  off  his  habit
and  became  a  journeyman  smith,  sending  back
his  cowl  and  box  to  the  convent.

There  is  no  doubt  that  the  monastic  institu-
tions, of  the  West  were  originally  founded  in
imitation  of  the  Hindu  penitents,  who  live  in
lonely  forests,  clothed  in  the  bark  of  trees,
eating  only  herbs  and  drinking  only  Avater,  free
from  desires,  masters  of  their  passions,  beati-
fied even  in  this  life,  and  a  sure  refuge  to  the
afflicted.^  But  how  widely  had  the  recluses
of  Europe  departed  from  their  model !  They
took  part  in  all  the  pursuits,  dissensions  and
troubles  of  the  world,  and  their  main  object
was  the  m.aintenance  of  a  dominion  at  once
temporal  and  spiritual,  aided  by  masses  ac-
tuated by  the  same  sentiments  and  working  to

*  Cliytrai  Saxonia,  p.  287.  Lanjre,  Leben  Bugenhageus,
1731,  contains  nothing  of  importance.

t  C.italogus  Abhatum  Saganensium.in  Stenzel's  Scriptt.
Rer.  Siles.,  i.  p.  457.

X  Nalas,  twelfth  song.

the  sara,e  ends ;  they  were  held'  together  by
servile  vows,  frequently  taken  from  interested
motives,  and  as  muchi  as  possible  disregarded.
No  sooner,  therefore,  had  the  validit}^  of  these
vows,  and  their  religious  efficacy  to  the  sou],
become  doubtful,  than  the  whole  stnicture  fell
in  pieces :  nay  more,  the  institution  on  which
the  Western  Church  mainly  rested,  sent  forth
the  most  sturdy  antagonists  to  its  further  hie-
rarchical development.

This  general  movement  am.ong  the  regular
clergy  was  now  seconded  by  all  ranks  of  the
secular  priesthood.

There  was  one  even  among  the  bishops,
Polenz  of  Samland,  who  openly  declared  him-
self for  Luther,  occasionally  preached  hjs  doc-
trines from  the  pulpit  at  Königsberg,  and  took
care  to  appoint  preachers  of  his  own  way  of
thinking  to  a  number  of  places  in  his  diocese.
Luther  was  overjoyed  at  this';  such  a  peaceable
and  lawful  change  was  exactly  what  he  desired. §

A  few  other  bishops  were  also  supposed  to
be  favourably  inclined  to  the  new  doctrine.
Johann  Eberlin  of  Günsburg  mentions  the
Bishop  of  Augsburg,  who  did  not  conceal  that
"  the  life  and  conversation  of  the  Lutherans
were  less  sinful  than  those  of  their  adversa-
ries ;"  the  Bishop  of  Basle,  who  was  pleased
when  Lutheran  books  were  brought  to  him,  and
always  read  them  diligently  ;  the  Bishop  of
Bamberg,  who  no  longer  opposed  the  preaching
of  Lutheran  doctrines  in  his  city,  and  the
Bishop  of  Merseburg,  who  sent  for  the  writer
to  consult  him  concerning  the  reforms  which
were  wanted.  He  assures  us  that  several  others
sent  their  canons  to  study  at  Wittenberg.  Most
of  tlie  names  which  we  find  in  the  list  of
Reuchlin's  patrons  appear  among  those  who
took  part  in  the  religious  innovation.

They  were  also  joined  by  the  patrician  pro-
vosts of  the  great  towns,  such  as  a  Wattenwyl
in  Berne,  and  a  Besler  and  Bömer  in  Nürn-
berg, under  whose  protection  the  evangelical
preachers  were  established  in  the  churches  of
their  respective  cities.

Even  without  this  encouragement,  a  great
number  of  the  officiating  priests  and  preachers
in  Lower,  and  still  more  in  Upper,  German}^,
declared  themselves  converts  to  Luther's
opinions.  The  name  of  Hermann  Tast,  one
of  the  twenty-four  papal  vicars  in  Schleswig,
is  well  knowm.  In  the  church5^ard  at  Husum
stood  two  lime-trees,  which  were  called  the
Mother  and  the  Daughter ;  under  the  largest
of  the  two,  the  Mother,  Tast  used  to  preach,
escorted  to  and  from^  the  place  of  meeting  by
his  hearers,  who  went  armed  to  fetch  him
and  conduct  him  home.  At  Emden,  in  East
Friesland,  Georg  von  der  Dare  was  driven
out  of  the  great  church  when  he  began  to
preach  Luther's  doctrines ;  but  the  people,
after  flocking  to  hear  him  for  some  time  in  the
open  air,  at  length  obtained  re-admittance  for
him  into  the  church. Johann  Schwanhäuser,

§  "  Lntheri  Declicatio  in  Deuteronomium  ;  Reverendo
Georgio  de  Polentis  vere  episcopo.  Tibi  gratia  donata  est,
nt  non  modo  verbum  susciperes  et  crederes,  sed  pro  epis-
copali  autoritate  etiam  palam  et  publice  confessusdoceres
docerique  pertuam  diocesim  curares,  liberaliter  his  qui  in
verbo  laborant  provisis."— 0;?p.  iii.  p.  75.  HartknocKs
Preussische  Kirchengeschichte,  i,  p.  273.

Chap.  III.

DIFFUSION  OF  THE  NEW  DOCTRINES.

179

custos  of  St.  Gangolph  in  Bamberg,  declaimed,
in  the  language  of  a  Carlstadt,  against  the
adoration  of  the  saints.*  The  parish  priest
of  Cronach  was  one  of  the  first  who  married.
At  Mainz,  it  was  tlie  preacher  in  the  cathedral,
Wolfgang  Köpfl  (for  a  long  time  the  confi-
dential adviser  of  the  elector)  ;  at  Frankfort,
the  preacher  in  the  church  of  St.  Catharine,
Hartmann  Ibach  ;  at  Strasburg,  the  parish
priest  of  St.  Laurence,  Matthew  Zell  ;  at  Mem-
mingen,  the  preacher  of  St.  Martin's,  Schap-
peler,  who  were  the  first  to  propagate  the  new
doctrines.  In  the  imperial  city  of  Hall,  Johann
Brenz,  a  mere  youth,  but  deeply  impressed
with  the  doctrines  of  St.  Paul,  and  an  imitator
of  the  apostle's  style  of  speaking,  pronounced
his  sermon  of  trial  in  September,  1523,  and
drove  his  antagonists,  the  guardian  and  the
reader  of  the  Minorite  convent,  out  of  the  field
without  further  contest,  by  the  doctrine  of  the
sole  merit  of  Christ.|  In  the  Kreichgau,  a
band  of  village  priests,  united  by  similarity  of
opinion,  collected  around  Erhard  Schnepf,
under  the  protection  of  the  Gemmingen.  In
Basle,  at  the  procession  of  the  Corpus  Christi,
Röubli,  the  priest  of  St.  Alban's,  carried  a
splendidly-bound  Bible  instead  of  the  host,
declaring  that  he  alone  bore  the  true  Holy  of
holies.  Next  followed,  at  the  minister  of
Zürich,  the  great  secular  priest,  Ulrich  Zwingli,
equally  courageous  and  influential  in  politics
and  in  religion,  and  in  whom  the  vicar  of  Con-
stance soon  thought  he  beheld  a  second  Luther.
We  may  follow  these  movements  even  into  the
lofty  regions  of  the  Alps.  The  leading  men
of  Schwytz  often  timed  their  Tides  so  as  to
arrive  at  Freienbach,  where  a  friend  of  Zwingli's
preached,  at  the  time  of  divine  service,  after
which  they  stayed  and  dined  with  him.:]:  It
made  no  difference  that  they  were  Swiss,  for
in  those  days  the  feeling  of  nationality  had  not
yet  separated  them  from  Germany ;  indeed  the
people  of  the  Valais  called  the  territory  of  the
confederate  cities,  Germany.  The  new  doc-
trines then  followed  the  course  of  the  moun-
tains as  far  as  the  valley  of  the  Inn,  where  .Jacob
Strauss  first  expounded  them  to  many  thousand
converts;  then  to  Salzburg,  where  Paul  von
Spretten  made  the  cathedral  resound  with  them,
and  fijially  into  Austria  and  Bavaria.  At  Al-
tenöttingen,  where  there  was  one  of  the  most
popular  miraculous  pictures,  the  regular  priest,
Wolfgang  Russ,  had  the  courage  to  declaim
against  pilgrimages.

It  may  be  concluded  that  all  these  changes
were  not  brought  about  without  stout  resistance
and  a  hard  struggle.  Many  were  compelled
to  yield,  but  some  persevered  ;  and  at  all  events
the  persecution  did  no  harm  to  the  cause.
When  that' zealous  Catholic,  Bogislas  X.  of
Pomerania,  destroyed  the  Protestant  society  at
Belbuck,  and  confi.scated  the  property — for  the
seizure  of  church  lands  began  on  that  side —
the  only  result  was,  that  one  of  their  teachers
accompanied  some  young  Livonians,  who  had
been  studying  there,  to  Riga,  and  thus  scat-

*  Extracts  from  his  sermons  in  Heller,  p.  62.
t  Hartmann  and  Jäger,  Johann  Brenz,  i.  43.  59.
X  Hettinger,  Geschichte  der  Eidgenossen.

tered  the  seed  of  the  Word  over  the  most  re-
mote parts  of  Germany. §

Paul  von  Spretten  was  expelled  from  Salz-
burg, after  which  we  find  him  preaching  in
St.  Stephen's  church  at  Vienna,  and  v.'hen
driven  thence,  at  Iglau  in  Moravia  :  there  also
he  was  in  imminent  danger,  and  at  last  found
a  safe  asylum  in  Prussia.  With  this  scene  of
action,  the  ardent  Amandus  was  not  content;
he  soon  left  it  and  went  to  Stolpe,  where  he
challenged  the  monks  to  a  disputation  on  the
truth  of  the  old  or  the  new  system :  he  told
them  they  might  prepare  a  stake  and  faggots,
and  burn  him  if  he  was  overcome  in  argument ;
and  that  if  he  obtained  the  victory,  the  sole
punishment  of  his  opponents  should  be  con-
version.

As  yet  no  attention  was  paid  to  the  place
where  the  Gospel  was  preached.  It  is  almost
symbolic  of  the  ecclesiastical  opposition,  that
at  Bremen  it  was  a  church  standing  under  an
interdict,  in  which  two  or  three  Augustine
friars  who  had  escaped  the  stake  in  Antwerp,
first  assembled  a  congregation.  At  Goslar,  the
new  doctrine  was  first  preached  in  a  church  in
the  suburbs;  and  when  that  was  closed,  a
native  of  the  town,  who  had  studied  at  Wit-
tenberg, proclaimed  it  on  a  plain  covered  with
lime-trees  (the  Lindenplan),  whence  its  ad-
herents were  there  called  Lindenbrüder  (bro-
thers of  the  lime-tree). II  In  Worms  a  mova-
ble pulpit  was  put  up  against  the  outer  walls
of  the  church.  The  Augustine  Monk,  Caspar
Güttel  of  Eisleben,  at  the  request  of  the  in-
habitants of  Arnstadt,  preached  seven  sermons
in  the  market-place  there,  according  to  ancient
custom.  At  Danzig  the  people  assembled  on
a  height  outside  the  town,  to  hear  a  preacher
who  had  been  driven  from  within  its  walls.

But  even  if  none  of  the  clerg)''  had  embraced
the  new  faith,  it  would  have  found  many  pro-
claimers  and  defenders  among  the  laity,  'At
Ingolstadt,  under  the  very  eyes  of  Dr.  Eck,  an
enthusiastic  journeyman  weaver  read  aloud
Luther's  writings  to  assembled  crowds  ;  and
when,  in  the  same  town,  a  young  Master  of
Arts,  called  Seehofer,  who  had  begun  to  teach
from  Melanchthon's  pamphlets,  was  forced  to
recant,  his  defence  was  undertaken  by  a  lady,
Argula  von  Staufen,  whose  attention  having
been  directed  by  her  father  to  Luther's  books,
she  had,  in  conformity  with  their  precepts,
devoted  herself  exclusively  to  the  study  of  the
Scriptures.  Believing  herself  fully  able  to
compete  v/ith  them  in  knowledge  of  the  Bible,
she  now  challenged  all  the  members  of  the
university  to  a  disputation,  and  hoped  to  main-
tain the  superiority  of  her  own  faith  in  the
presence  of  the  prince  and  the  whole  commu-
nity.! It  was  in  this  intimate  acquaintance

§  Andreas  Cnoph  von  Ciistrin.  "  Er  hat  viel  herrlicher
und  geistreicher  Lieder,  darin  die  Summa  von  der  Lehre
von  der  Gerechtigkeit,  dem  Glauben  und  des?elbigen
Früchten  .  .  .  verfasset."  — "  He  has  composed  many
most  beautiful  and  ingenious  songs,  wherein  is  contained
the  essence  of  the  doctrine  of  righteousness— faith  and
its  fruits."— iJiarn,  Lieflündische  Oesch.,  book  v.  p.  193.

11  Hamelmann,  Historia  renati  Evangelii.  0pp.  Hist.
Gen.,  p.  869.  ^

IT  Winter,  Gesch.  der  evang.  Lehie  in  Baiern,  i.  120.  f.

180

DIFFUSION  OF  THE  NEW  DOCTRINES.

Book  IIL

with  Scripture  that  the  leaders  of  the  religious
movement  trusted.  Heinrich  von  Kettenbach
cxultingly  enumerates  countries  and  cities —
Nürnberg,  Augsburg,  Ulm,  the  Rhenish  prg-
vinces,  Switzerland  and  Saxony — where  women
and  maidens,  serving-men  and  artisans,  knights
and  nobles,  were  more  learned  in  the  Bible
than  the  high  schools.*

There  was  indeed  something  very  extraordi-
när)'' in  this  simultaneous  and  universal  con-
viction, unquestionably  religious  in  its  origin,
rising  up  in  opposition  to  forms  of  ecclesiastical
and  political  life  which  had  been  revered  for
centuries,  though  now  men  could  see  in  them
only  their  wide  departure  from  true  primitive
Christianity,  and  their  subservience  to  an  op-
pressive and  odious  power.

As  every  effort  on  the  one  side  was  followed
b}^  a  re-action,  and  every  attack  by  persecutioii,
it  was  of  great  importance  that  there  should  be
one  spot  in  Germany  where  such  was  not  the
case : this  spot  was  the  electorate  of  Saxony.

In  the  year  1522  the  neighbouring  bishops
made  another  attempt  to  re-establish  their  power
here  also,  in  consequence  of  the  favourable
tone  of  the  first  proclamation  of  the  imperial
government;  and  the  Elector  Frederic  offered
no  opposition  to  them  so  long  as  they  promised
to  send  preachers  who  should  combat  the  Word
with  the  Word.-j-  When,  however,  not  content
with  this,  they  demanded  that  the  priests  who
had  married  or  dared  to  administer  the  Lord's
Supper  in  both  kinds,  and  the  monks  who  had
quitted  their  convents,  should  be  given  up  to
them,  he  declared,  after  brief  consideration,  that
the  imperial  edict  did  not  oblige  him  to  this.ij:
By  withdrawing  his  countenance  from  them,
he  of  course  annihilated  their  influence.

This  naturally  induced  all  those  who  were
forced  to  fly  from  other  places,  to  take  refuge
in  his  dominions,  where  no  spiritual  authorities
could  reach  them.  Eberlin,  Stiefel,  Strauss,
Seehofer,  Ibach  from  Frankfurt,  Bugenhagen
from  Pomerania,  Kauxdorf  from  Magdeburg,
Mustpeus  from  Halberstadt,  where  he  had  been
barbarously  mutilated,§  and  numbers  more,
flocked  together  from  all  parts  of  Germany;
they  found  a  safe  asylum,  and  in  many  cases
temporary  employment,  and  then  went  forth
again,  confirmed  in  their  faith  by  intercourse
with  Luther  and Melanchthon. Wittenbergr

*  "  Ein  new  Apologia  vnnd  Verantwortung  Martini
Luthers  wj'der  der  Papisten  Mortsreschroy,  die  zelien
klagen  wyder  jn  ussblasinircn  so  wyt  die  Christenheyt
ist,  1523."— "A  new  Apology  and  Answer  of  Martin  Liitlier
against  the  Papist's  Cry  of  Murder,  who  trumpet  forth
Ten  Complaints  against  him  throughout  Christendom."

t  Frederic  instructs  his  officers,  "An  Verkündigung  des
Wortes  Gottes  nicht  zu  hindern."— "  Not  to  hinder  the
preaching  of  the  Word  of  God."  He  takes  for  granted,
"  sie  würden  die  Ehre  Gottes  und  die  Liebe  des  Nüchsten
suchen"—"  that  they  would  seek  the  honour  of  God  and
the  love  of  their  neighbour."

t  Geuterhock,  St.  Lucastag.  The  very  remarkable  corre-
spondence in  the  Sammlung  vermischter  Nachrichten  zur
sächsischen  Geschichte,  iv.  282,

§  What  cruelties  then  took  place!  "Aliquot  ministri
canonicorum  capiunt  D.  Valentinum  Mustsum,"— "  with
the  sanction  of  the  burgher-master  he  had  preached  the
Gospel  in  Neustadt,"  "et  vinctum  manibus  pedibusque,
injecto  in  ejus  os  freno,  deferunt  pertrabesin  inferiores
coenobii  partes  ibique  in  cellacerevisiaria  eum  castrant."
—Hamelmanv,  1.  c.  p.  880.

was  the  centre  of  the  whole  movement ;  without
the  existence  of  such  a  centre,  the  unity  of
direction,  the  common  progress,  which  we  ob-y
serve,  would  have  been  impossible  ;  we  may
add,  that  the  admixture  of  foreign  elements  was
of  great  importance  to  the  development  of  the
public  mind  of  Saxony.  The  university  espe-
cially thus  acquired  the  character  of  a  national
body, — incontestahly  the  true  character  of  a  great
German  high  school.  Both  teachers  and  hearers
resorted  from  all  parts  of  Germany,  and  went
forth  again  in  all  directions.,

Wittenberg  became  equally  important  as  a
metropolis  of  literature.

It  was  the  agitation  of  these  important  ques-
tions which  first  obtained  for  the  German  popu-
lar literature  general  circulation  and  influence.
Up  to  the  year  1518  its  productions  w^ere  far
from  numerous,  and  the  range  of  its  subjects
very  narrow.  During  the  last  twenty  years
of  the  fifteenth  century  there  appeared  about
40  German  works ;  in  1513  about  35  ;  in  1514,
47,  in  1515,  46;  in  1516,  55;  in  1517,  37:
these  were  chiefly  mirrors  for  the  laity,  little
works  on  medicine,  books  on  herbs,  religious
tracts,  newspapers,  official  announcements,  and
travels, — in  short,  the  books  fitted  to  the  com-
prehension of  the  many.  The  most  original
productions  w^ere  always  those  of  the  poetical
opposition — the  satires  which  we  have  already
noticed.  The  increase  in  the  number  of  German
publications  which  followed  Luther's  ap-
pearance before  the  public  was  prodigious.  In
the  year  1518  we  find  71  enumerated  ;  in  151Ö,
111;  in  1520,208;  in  1521,  211 ;  in  1522,347;
in  1523,  498.  If  we  inquire  whence  this  won-
derful increase  emanated,  we  shall  find  it  was
from  Wittenberg,  and  the  chief  author,  Luther
himself.  In  the  year  1518  we  find  20  books
published  with  his  name ;  in  1519,  50  ;  in  1520,
133  ;  in  1521,  when  he  was  interrupted  by  his
journey  to  Worms,  and  hindered  by  a  forced
seclusion,  about  40;  in  1522,  again  130;  and
in  1523,  183. II  In  no  nation  or  age  has  a  more
autocratic  and  powerful  writer  appeared ;  and
it  would  be  difiicult  to  find  any  other  w^ho  has
united  so  perfectly  popular  and  intelligible  a
style,  and  such  downright  homely  good  sense,
to  so  much  originality,  pow'er  and  genius  ';  he
gave  to  German  literature  the  character  by
which  it  has  been  ever  since  distinguished,  of
investigation,  depth  of  thought,  and  strenuous
conflict  of  opinions.  He  began  the  great  dis-
cussion which  has  heen  carried  on  in  Germany
through  all  the  subsequent  centuries^;  though
often  grievously  interrupted  by  acts  of  violence
and  by  the  influences  of  foreign  policy.  In  the
beginning  he  stood  quite  alone,  but  by  degrees,
especially  after  the  year  1521,  disciples,  friends,
and  rivals  began  to  appear  in  the  field. In  the

1(1  rely  upon  Panzer's  Annalen  der  altern  Deutschen
Literatur,  1788—1802.  That  his  information,  useful  as  it
is,  is  not  quite  complete,  is  a  defect  this  has  in  common
with  most  statistical  works.  We  can,  however,  gather
from  them  the  general  facts,  which  is  all  we  here  have  to
do  with.  According  to  Adam,  Vit»  Jurisconsult.,  p.  62.,
it  wasSchneidewin's  father-in-law — ex  honorata  familia,
qufe  nomen  gentilitiuin  Turingorum  habiiit,  agnomen
vero  Aurifabrorum— who  established  the  first  printing-
press  at  Wittenberg,  socio  Luca  pictore  seniore.  This  is
anothex  of  Lucas  Cranach's  merits.

Chap.  III.

DIFFUSION.  OF  THE  NEW  DOCTRINES.

181

year  1523,  besides  his  own  works,  there  were
published  215  by  others,  in  favour  of  the  new
opinions ;  that  is,  more  than  four-fifths  of  all
that  appeared,  while  we  do  not  find  above  20
decidedly  catholic  publications.  It  was  the
first  time  that  the  national  mind,  uninfluenced
by  foreign  models,  and  manifesting  itself  purely
in  the  form  impressed  on  it  by  the  great  events
of  the  times,  and  the  high  destinies  to  which
Germany^  was  called,  found  a  general  expres-
sion ;  moreover,  this  expression  regarded  the
most  important  interests  that  can  occupy  the
attention  of  man,  and  its  very  first  utterance
was  prompted  by  ideas  of  religious  freedom.

It  was  a  singular  felicity,  that  at  the  very
instant  of  full  intellectual  awakening,  the  Holy
Scriptures,  both  of  the.  New  and  Old  Testa-
ment, were  laid  open  to  the  nation.  It  is  true
that  the  Bible  had  long  been  known  in  transla-
tions ;  but  it  is. impossible  to  conceive,  without
reading  them,  how  full  of  errors,  how  rude  in
style,  and  how  unintelligible  these  versions
are.  Luther,  on  the  contrary,  spared  no  labour
to  obtain  an  accurate  knowledge  of  the  mean-
ing of  the  original,  and  gave  it  utterance  in
German,  with  all  the  clearness  and  energy  of
which  that  language  is  capable.  The  im-
perishable records  of  the  earliest  ages  of  the
world,  characterised  by  the  freshness  of  the
youth  of  mankind,  and  the  sacred  writings  of
later  date,  in  which  true  religion" appears  in  all
its  child-like  candour,  w^ere  now  put  into  the
hands  of  the  German  people  in  their  own  ver-
nacular tongue,  piece  by  piece,  like  a  periodical
work  which  relates  to  the  immediate  interests
of  the  day,  and  were  devoured  with  equal
avidity.

There  is  one  production  of  the  German  mind
which  ov/es  its  origin  directly  to  this  concur-
rence of  circumstances.  In  translating  the
Psalms,  Luther  conceived  the  project  of  making
a  paraphrase  of  them  for  the  purpose  of  con-
gregational singing;*  for  the  idea  of  a  Church,
such  as  he  had  described  and  besfun  to  call
into  existence,  supposed  that  the  congregation
should  take  a  far  more  considerable  part  in  the
service  than  it  had  ever  done  before.  In  this
case,  however,  as  in  some  others,  a  mere  para-
phrase did  not  suffice.  The  devout  spirit,  tran-
quil in  the  conviction  of  possessing  the  re-
vealed Word  of  God;  elevated  by  the  strife
and  danger  in  which  it  was  placed,  and  in-
spired by  the  poetical  genius  of  the  Old  Testa-
ment, poured  forth  lyrical  ^compositions,  at
once  poetry  and  music ;  words  alone  would
have  been  insufficient  to  express  the  emotions
of  the  soul  in  all  their  fulness,  or  to  excite  and
sustain  the  feelings  of  a  congregation.  This  j
could  onl}""  be  done  by  the  melody  which
breathed  in  the  solemn  old  church  music,  and
the  touching  airs  of  popular  songs.  Such  was
the  origin  of  the  evangelical  hymns,  which  we

*  Luther's  preface  to  Johann  Walter's  Hymns  recalls
"das  Exempel  der  Propheten  und  Könise  imalten  Testa-
ment, die  mit  singen  und  klingen,  mit  dichten  und  allerlei
Seitenspiel  Gott  gelobet  haben," — "the  example  of  the
prophets  and  kings  in  the  Old  Testament,  who,  with
songs  and  music,. with  verses  and  all  manner  of  stringed
instruments,  praised  God."— Jlltenb.  A.,  ii.  p.  751.
Q

may  date  from  the  year  1523.|  Detached
hymns  by  Luther  and  Spretten  acquired  imme-
diate popularity,  and  lent  their  aid  to  the
earliest  struggles  of  the  reforming  spirit;  but
it  was  many  years  later  that  the  (jiennan  mind
displayed  its  whole  wealth  of  poetical,  and  still
more  of  musical,  productions  of  this  kind.

The  popular  poetry  also  devoted  itself  in
other  ways  to  the  new  ideas  with  that  spirit  of
teachableness,  and  at  the  same  time  resistance
to  arbitrary  power,  which  characterised  it.
Hütten  published  his  bitterest  invectives  in
verse ;  iMurner  depicted  the  corruption  of  the
clergy  in  long  and  vivid  descriptions  :  to  this
feeling  of  censure  and  reprobation  was  now
added,  if  not  in  Murner  himself,  at  any  rate  in
most  others,  a  positive  conviction  of  the  truth
of  the  new  doctrine,  and  a  profound  admiration
of  its  champion  ;  the  man  who  maintained  the
righteous  cause  among  crimson  barrets  and
velvet  caps  was  celebrated  in  verse.  The
pope  was  brought  on  the  stage  in  carnival  farces ;
he  congratulates  himself  that,  in  spite  of  his
knavery,  men  continue  to  ascribe  to  him  the
power  of  admitting  them  into  heaven  or  binding
them  in  hell,  which  brings  many  birds  to  his
net  to  be  plucked  ;  that  he  reaps  the  fruits  of
the  sweat  of  the  poor  man's  brow,  and  can  ride
with  a  retinue  of  a  thousand  horses — his  name
is  Entchristelo  ;  there  also  appear,  uttering  like
sentiments.  Cardinal  Highmind  {Hochmufli)^
Bishop  Goldmouth  Wolfsmaw  {Goldmurtd
WoIfsmage7i),  Vicar  Fabler  {Fabekr),  and  a
long  list  of  personages  held  up  to  ridicule  and
contempt  under  such  names ;  the  last  who
enters  is  the  Doctor,  who  expounds  the  true
doctrine  very  much  in  the  tone  of  a  sermon.:^
Under  the  influence  of  these  impressions  was
educated  Burckhardt  Waldis,  who  afterwards
made  such  a  happy  application  of  the  old  fable
of  the  beasts  to  religious  controversies.  ^  The
greatest  German  poet  of  that  day  vrarmly  em-
braced' Luther's  cause.  Hans  Sachs's  poem,
the  Nightingale  of  ^Yittenberg,  appeared  in
1523  ;  he  compares  the  faith  which  had  pre-
vailed for  four  hundred  years,  to  the  moonlight
vy-hich  had  led  men  astray  in  the  wilderness;
now,  however,  the  nightingale  announces  the
rising  sun  and  the  light  of  day,  while  she  her-
self soars  above  the  dark  clouds.  Thoughts
emanating  from  a  sound  understanding,  in-
structed by  the  infallible  YN'ord,  and  coniident
of  its  own  cause,  form  the  basis  of  the  many-
ingenious,  gay,  and  graceful  poems — not  the
less  attractive  for  a  slicrht  smack  of  the  work-

t  Riederer,  "von  Einführung  des  deutschen  Gesanges,"
p.  95.  The  remarkable  letter  to  Sjialatiu  concerning  the
translation  of  the  Psalms  into  German  verse,  in  De
Wette,  ii.  p.  4S0.,  is  doubtless  earlier  than  that  dated  14th
Jan.  1524,  ibid.  p.  4GJ.  In  it  we  see  what  the  Muse  Ger-
ma niece,  about  which  De  Wette  seems  to  be  in  doubt,
really  meant.  It  appears  from  the  letters  to  Hausmann,
that  Luther  was  employed  in  A'ovember  and  December,
1523,  in  the  composition  of  the  liturgy.

*"Ein  Fassnachtspyl,  so  zu  Bern  uf  der  Hern  Fass-
nacht  in  dem  ?iIDxXil.  Jare  von  Burgerssonen  olE^nt-
lich  gemacht  ist,  darinn  die  warlieit  in  Schimpffswyss  vom
Pabst  und  siner  Priesterschaft  gemeldet  würt." — "A  Car-
nival Play,  the  v.hich  was  publicly  enacted  in  the  Lord's
carnival  of  the  year  1522,  at  Bern,  by  the  sons  of  burghers,
wherein  the  truth  is  satirically  told  of  the  pope  and  of
his  priesthood."  Newly  printed  by  Grüneisen.— JVic^.
Manuel,  p.  339.

182

DIFFUSION  OF  THE  NEW  DOCTRINES.

Book  III.

shop — with  which  the  honest  master  delighted
all  classes  of  the  nation.

In  Germany,  the  proper  aim  of  art — to  teach
by  giving  a  sensible  form  to  ideas — had  never
been  lost  sight  of.  Hence,  there  is  no  less
fancy  displayed  in  her  symbols,  than  earnest-
ness in  her  character.  It  so  happened  that  one
of  the  great  masters  of  the  time,  Lucas  Kra-
nach,  went  to  live  at  Wittenberg,  and,  in  a
constant  familiar  intercourse  with  Luther,  be-
came thoroughly  imbued  with  the  modes  of
thinking  of  the  reformers,  and  consecrated  his
talents  to  embodying  them.  He  sometimes
entered  the  ranks  as  a  combatant.  Some  of  his
smaller  pictures,  such  as  the  Passion  of  Christ
and  Antichrist,  in  which  the  lowliness  and  hu-
mility of  the  Founder,  and  the  pride  and  pomp
of  his  vicegerent,  are  contrasted,  are  protests
against  Catholicism  ;  and  accordingly  wood-
cuts of  them  were  inserted  into  Luther's  writ-
ings. It  may  be  imagined  that  his  chaste
pencil  was  employed  in  no  works  but  such  as
harmonised  with  the  evangelical  faith.  The
grace  and  loveliness  with  which  he  had  for-
merly adorned  groups  of  beatified  female  saints,
he  now  shed  over  the  little  children  receiving
the  blessing  of  our  Saviour.  The  mysteries
shadowed  forth  in  early  art,  were  now  expressed
in  representations  of  the  sacraments  retained
by  Luther,  which  were  sometimes  painted  on
one  canvass,  and  of  the  sublime  work  of  Re-
demption. The  eminent  statesmen  and  divines
by  whom  he  was  surrounded,  presented  forms
and  features  so  remarkable  and  characteristic,
that  he  had  no  temptation,  except  in- the  cause
of  religion,  to  strive  after  the  ideal.  Albert
Dürer,  though  his  genius  had  already  reached
maturity,  was  p'owerfully  affected  by  the  pre-
vailing spirit :  the  most  perfect,  perhaps,  of  all
his  works — the  evangelists  Mark  and  John,
and  the  apostles  Peter  and  Paul — were  produced
under  the  impressions  of  these  times.  There
exist  studies  for  these  pictures  with  the  date
1523 :  they  reflect  the  image  suggested  by
Scripture  (now  rendered  accessible  to  new
views),  of  the  Vv'isdom,  devotedness  and  energy
of  these  first  witnesses  of  the  Christian  church.
Vigour  and  grandeur  of  conception  manifest
themselves  in  every  feature.*

The  general  development  of  the  German
mind  was  closely  connected  with  the  new  ideas ;
the  same  spirit  was  stirring  in  the  learned,  as
in  the  popular  branches  of  mental  activity.

Wittenberg  was  far  from  being  the  only
university  in  which  the  course  of  studies  was
changed.  At  Freiburg,  where  Luther  was
detested,  the  Aristotelian  philosophy  ceased  to
be  studied  and  inculcated  as  hitherto.  "  Pe-
trus Hispanus,"  says  Ulrich  Zasius,  "  has  had
his  day ;  the  books  of  Sentences  are  laid  aside ;
our  theologians  are  some  of  them  reading
Matthew  and  others  Paul ;  nay,  even  the  very
beginners,  those  who  are  but  just  arrived,  crowd
to  these  lectures."! Even  Zasius  himself,  one

*  How  Pirkheimer  and  Dürer  disputed  about  the  ques-
tion of  the  Lord's  Supper  in  Melanchthon's  presence:  re-
lated by  Peucer  in  StrobePs  "  Nachricht  von  Melanch-
thons  Aufenthalt  in  Nürnberg,"  p.  27.

tZasii  EpislolEB,  i.  63.

of  the  most  distinguished  German  jurists  of
that  time,  gives  a  remarkable  testimony  to  the
universal  diffusion  of  the  reforming  spirit.  He
complains  that  his  lecture-room  is  deserted ;
that  he  has  barely  half  a  dozen  hearers,  and
they,  all  Frenchmen  ;  and  at  the  same  time  he
can  find  no  better  mode  of  recommending  his
own  exertions  in  the  cause  of  learning,  than
by  comparing  them  to  the  labours  of  Luther.
The  glossators  of  the  genuine  texts  whom  he
was  engaging  in  combating,  appeared  to  him
in  the  same  light  as  the  schoolmen  on  whom
Luther  was  waging  war;  he  laboured  to  re-
store the  Roman  law  to  its  original  purity,  just
as  Luther  strove  to  revive  the  theology  of  the
Bible.

Of  all  departments  of  learning,  none,  how-
ever, stood  more  in  need  of  a  similar  reform
than  history.  There  existed  an  immense  ac-
cumulation of  materials  ;  but  the,  earlier  periods
were  obscured  by  the  learned  fables  which
were  continually  receiving  fresh  and  more
circumstantial  additions  ;  while  the  later  were
known  only  in  fragments  dressed  up  to  suit
the  interests  of  the  dominant  party  :  the  most
important  parts  had  been  intentionally  falsified,
in  consequence  of  their  necessary  connection
with  the  great  ecclesiastical  fiction.  It  was
impossible  to  arrive  at  a  true,  lively  and  con-
nected view  of  history  ;  even  minds  thirsting
for  real  information  shrank  from  such  insuper-
able masses  of  reading.  An  attempt  to  penetrate
them  was,  however,  made  just  about  this  time
by  Johann  Aventin,  who,  at  an  earlier  period,
had  sympathised  in  the  literary  tendencies  of
the  new  school  of  thinkers,  and  now  followed
its  religious  direction  with  the  liveliest  zeal.
In  writing  his  Bavarian  chronicle,  the  contents
of  which  are  interesting  to  Germany  generally,
and  even  to  the  world,  he  spared  no  pains  in
searching  libraries  and  archives  in  order  to
substitute  genuine  records  for  the  shallow  and
improbable  traditions  hitherto  current.  He
puts  the  reader  on  his  guard  against  the  re-
presentations of  the  ignorant;  especially  "peo-
ple who  have  seen  nothing  of  mankind,  who
know  nothing  of  cities  and  countries,  have  no
experience  of  earthly  or  heavenly  matters,  and
yet  pretend  to  judge  of  every  thing."  His
endeavour  is  to  understand  history  in  its  true
and  necessary  aspect,  "  such  as  it  should  be."
The  spirit  of  the  national  opposition  to  the
papacy  is  powerfully  at  work  within  him  :
whenever  he  strives  to  depict  the  simplicity
of  the  Christian  doctrine,  or  alludes  to  its
origin,  he  never  fails  to  contrast  with  it  the
spiritual  power  in  its  rise,  progress  and  ope-
ration. His  history  of  Gregory  VII.  is  even
now  the  best  extant :  he  takes  a  very  compre-
hensive view  of  the  results  arising  from  the
dominion  of  the  hierarchical  principle,  though
he  had  not  the  peculiar  talent  requisite  to
place  them  distinctly  before  the  reader.  His
works  are  indeed  generally  unfinished  ;  but  he
w^s  the  first  labourer  in  that  field  of  profound
and  penetrating  research  into  universal  history,
which  in  our  day  occupies  30  many  minds.

For  a  time,  it  seemed  as  if  the  interest  in
theological  questions  would  absorb  all  others.

Chap.  III.

DIFFUSION  OF  THE  NEW  DOCTRINES.

183

Erasmus  complains  that  nothing  was  read  or
bought  but  publications  for  or  against  Luther  ;
he  fears  that  the  study  of  the  humanities,
which  was  but  just  established,  would  be
stifled  under  a  new  system  of  school  learning.
The  chronicles  of  the  time  describe  how  the
contempt  into  which  the  clergy  had  fallen  re-
acted on  learning :  the  proverb,  "  Die  Gelehrten,
die  Verkehrten,"  (the  morei  learned,  the  more
wrongheaded,)  was  in  every  body's  mouth,  and
parents  hesitated  to  devote  their  children  to
studies  which  offered  so  doubtful  a  prospect.
This,  however,  was  only  a  momentary  aberra-
tion; the  mind,  roused  to  a  desire  for  authentic
knowledge,  could  not  reject  the  very  instru-
ment which  had  awakened  it.  In  the  year  15-24
Luther  published  a  letter  to  the  "  burgher-
masters  and  councillors,  of  all  the  towns  on
German  ground,"  exhorting  them  "  to  establish
Christian  schools."*  He  means  by  this,
especially  for  the  training  of  priests;  for,  he
says,  it  is  only  by  the  study  of  languages  that
the  Gospel  can  be  preserved  in  its  purity,  to
which  end  it  was  delivered  down  to  us  in
writing ;  otherwise  there  would  be  nothing  but
wild  and  perilous  disorder,  and  an  utter  confu-
sion of  opinions.  Yet  he  does  not  by  any
means  confine  his  recommendation  to  ecclesi-
astical schools;  far  from  it:  he  deplores  that
schools  have  been  so  exclusively  calculated  for
the  education  of  the  clergy,  and  his  chief. ob-
ject is  to  free  them  from  this  narrow  destination,
and  to  found  a  learned  class  among  the  laity.
He  holds  out  the  education  of  the  ancient
Romans  as  an  example  to  Germany ;  and  says
that  instructed  men  well  versed  in  history  are
absolutely  necessary  for  the  government  of  the
state ;  he  also  insists  upon  the  establishm.ent
of  public  libraries,  not  only  to< contain  editions
and  expositions  of  the  sacred  writings, ,  but
also  orators  and  poets,  whether  heathen  or  not;
besides  books  on  the  fine  arts,  law  and  medicine,
chronicles  and  histories ;  "for  they  be  profitable
for  the  learning  of  the  wonders  and  works  of
God."  This  letter  had  as  great  an  effect  on
secular  learning,  as  his  book  addressed  to  the
'German  nobility  had  on  the  general  condition
of  the  laity.  Luther  first  conceived  the  idea  of
that  learned  body  of  official  laymen  which  has
exercised  such  an  incalculable  influence  over
the  social  and  political  condition  of  Germany;
he  advocated  the  popular  cultivation  of  know-
ledge for  her  own  sake,  apart  from  the  church  ;
it  was  he  wh"o  laid  the  first  stone  of  that  edi-
fice of  learning  in  northern  Germany,  which
succeeding  labourers  have  reared  to  such  a
height.  In  this  he  was  vigorously  seconded
by  the  indefatigable  Melanchthon,  who  was
the  author  of  the  Latin  grammar  used  in  the
schools  throughout  the  North  of  Germany,  till
the  beginning  of  the  eighteenth  century. "j"  He
completed  it  in  the  year  1524,  beginning  from
- — — — «

*  Altenb.  eriitioii,  ii.  p.  804.  Eoban  Hess  caused  tlie
letters  which  he  had  received  on  this  subject  from  Luther,
Melanchthoti,  Jonas,  Draco  and  others,  to  be  printed  col-
lectively in  1523,  in  the  pamphlet,  "  De  non  contemneudis
Studiis  humanioribus."

t  The  editions  most  worthy  of  note  till  1737  are  enume-
rated in  Strobe],  Von  den  Verdiensten  Melanchlhons,  um
die  Grammatik. . . neue  Beiträge,  ii.  iii.  p.  43

some  notes  made  for  the  private  instruction  of
a  young  Nürnberger;  at  the  same  tiftie,  the
Greek  grammar,  of  v/hich  he  had  previously
drawn  up  the  plan,  received  the  form  in  which
it  was  taught  for  centuries  afterwards^  Teachers
were  formed  under  Melanchthon's  discipline,
who  adopted  all  his  ideas,  and  became  the
founders  of  the  German  school-training.  The
most  remarkable  of  these  was  Valentine  Trot-
zendorf,  who  was  called  from  Wittenberg  to
Goldberg  in  Silesia,  in  the  year  1523,  and  who
Vv'as  said  to  be  born  a  schoolmaster  as  much  as
Cfösar  was  born  a  general,  or  Cicero  an  orator.
Innumerable  German  schoolmasters  were  formed
by  him.

A  large  and  coherent  survey  of  all  these
facts  suffices  to  convince  us  that  the  Reforma-
tion was  by  no  means  confined  to  theological
dogmas;  a  whole  circle  of  aspirations  and
thoughts  of  a  peculiar  character,  and  pregnant
with  a  new  order  of  things,  had  arisen ;  closely
connected,  it  is  true,  with  the  theological  oppo-
sition, and  partly  developed  under  that  form,
but  the  existence  of  which  is  neither  to  be
ascribed  to,  nor  confounded  with  that  pheno-
menon. The  opposition  was  itself  merely  one
manifestation  of  this  spirit,  the  future  workings
of  which  were  entirely  independent  of  it.

The  first  object  of  the  awakened  mind  un-
doubtedly was,  deliverance  from  that  mighty
power  which  claimed  the  right  of  retaining  it
captive.

In  examining  more  closely  the  course  of
this  struggle,  as  it  displayed  itself  in  all  parts
of  Germany,  we  shall  fall  into  error  if  we  ex-
pect to  find  the  same  points  of  variance  which
exist  between  the  later  Protestant  and  the  re-
vived Catholic  systems.  The  ideas  and  intel-
lectual powers  which  were  then  arrayed  against
each  other,  stood  in  a  far  more  distinct,  broad,
and  intelligible  opposition.

One  of  the  most  violent  conflicts  was  that
concerning  faith  and  good  works.  We  must
not  understand  by  this  the  more  deep  and  ab-
struse controversy  which  has  since  arisen  out
of  the  subtilty  or  the  obstinacy  of  the  schools.
At  that  time  the  question  was  very  simple :  on
the  one  side,  by  good  works  were  meant  those
ritual  observances  through  which  men  then
really  hoped  to  merit  reward,  both  in  this  world
and  the  next — such  as  pilgrimages,  fasting,  the
foundation  of  masses  for  the  souls  of  the  dead,
the  recital  of  particular  prayers,  the  reverence
paid  to  certain  saints,  and  the  gifts  to  the
churches  and  the  clergy  which  formed  so  im-
portant a  part  of  the  piety  ofthe  middle  ages.  To
this  perversion  of  the  idea  of  moral  obligation,
which  had  been  so  culpably  allowed  to  gain
currency  and  strength,  the  other  party  opposed
the  doctrine  of  the  efficacy  of  faith  without
works.  But — especially  after  the  troubles  in
Wittenberg — no  one  now  ventured  to  inculcate
an  ideal,  abstract,  inactive  faith.  We  still  pos-
sess many  of  the  sermons  of  that  period,  and  it
would  be  difficult  to  find  one  in  which  faith  and
charity  are  not  spoken  of  as  indissolubly  united.
Caspar  Giittel  earnestly  inculcates  the  doctrine,
that  the  conduct  which  a  man  pursues  towards
his  neighbour  for  the  love  of  God  is  the  one

184

DIFFUSION  OF  THE  NEW  DOCTRINES.

Book  III.

essential  thing.*  The  preacher  blamed  those
who  spent  their  substance  in  enriching  the
clergy,  decorating  the  image  of  a  saint,  or
going  on  distant  pilgrimages,  and  at  the  same
time  forgot  the  poor.

The  same  thing  took  place  with  respect  to
the  opinions  concerning  the  church.  The  re-
formers entirely  refused  to  recognise  the  holy
church  of  Christ,  out  of  whose  pale  there  is  no
salvation,  in  the  persons  of  the  pope,  his  pre-
lates and  priests  ;  they  considered  it  profane  to
say  that  the  Church  commands  or  possesses
any  thing;  they  distinguished  that  ecclesiastical
institution,  which,  by  its  scandalous  govern-
ment, gave  the  lie  to  the  principles  on  which  it
was  founded,  from  the  mysterious  existence  of
that  holy  fellowship  which  appears  not  out-
wardly, which,  according  to  the  words  of  the
Symbol,  is  a  pure  object  of  faith,  and  which
unites  heaven  and  earth  indeed,  but  without
the  intervention  of  the  pope.j  "  Far  be  it  from
us  to  suppose,"  said  Pastor  Schmidt,  in  a
sermon  he  preached  with  great  effeqt  at  Küss-
nacht, "that  the  Christian  church  can  acknow-
ledge a  head  so  spotted  with  sin  as  the  pope ;
and°  thus  forsake  Christ,  whom  St.  Paul  so
often  calls  '  the  head  of  the  church.'  "ij:

In  like  manner  the  institution  of  the  Lord's
Supper,  freed  from  all  priestly  intervention,
was  contrasted  with  the  compulsory  obligation
of  confessing  every  individual  sin, — an  obliga-
tion which  led  and  still  leads  to  all  the  odious
abuses  of  the  confessional,  and  to  the  despotism
of  a  stern  and  tyrannical  orthodoxy.  The
discretionary  power  of  the  priest  to  grant  abso-
lution was  denied,  together  with  the  doctrine
of  the  actual  presence  ;  and  people  were,  even
dissuaded  from  too  nice  a  pondering  over  par-
ticular sins,  as  tending  to  stimulate  the  desires
anew,  or  to  produce  despair  :  nothing  was  re-
quired but  an  undoubting,  cheerful,  steadfast
reliance  on  the  mercy  of  God,  and  faith  in  his
present  favour. §

*  Sclnitzrede  wider  etzlicli  migezemte  Clamanteii.  The
very  sermons  preached  at  Arnstadt:  printed  in  Olearii
Syntagma  Rerum  Tharingicarum,  ii.  274;  an  edition
which  Panzer  does  not  mention  in  his  Annals,  ii.  p.  9:3.

t  Ain  Sermon  oder  Predig  von  der  christlichen  Kirchen
■welches  doch  seydie  hailisr  christlich  Kirche, davon  unser
Glaub  sagt,  geprediget  zu  Ulm  von  Bruder  Heinrich  von
"Kettenbach,  1522.— "  A  Sermon  or  Preaching  touching  the
Christian  Church— which  is  the  holy  Christian  Church  of
which  our  belief  speaketh  ?  Preached  at  Ulm  by  Brother
Henry  of  Ketten  bach."  Johann  Brenz  took  up  this
doctrine  very  vehemently.  He  will  not  allow  that  the
church  is  to  be  believed  because  it  received  Christ.  "  Juden
und  Heiden  die  haben  Christum  angenommen— und  sind
Tiachfolgends  die  äusserliche  christliche  Kirche  geworden,
und  hat  die  Kirche  ihren  Ursprung  von  den  frommen  Christ-
,  finmenschen  und  ist  nachfoltendsdie  äusserlichechristliche
Kirche  worden,  doch  nit  dass  die  Menschen  ihre  Seligkeit

haben  von  der  üusserlichen  Kirche Dieweil  die  Kirche

ein  geistliclier  verborgener  Leib  ist  und  nit  von  dieser
Well,  so  folgt,  dass  in^diesem  Leib  kein  weltlich  äusser-
lich  noch  sichtbar  haupt  ist."—"  Jews  and  Pagans  received
Christ,  and  thereupon  became  the  outward  Christian
church,  and  the  church  has  its  origin  ü-orn  pious  Christians,
and  is  thereafter  become  the  outward  Christian  church,
not  that  men  receive  salvation  from  the  outward  church.
...For  since  the  church  is  a  spiritual  hidden  body,  and
not  of  this  world,  it  follows  that  this  body  cannot  have  a
worldly,  outward,  and  visible  head."

I  Myconius  ad  Zwinglium.  Epp.  Zw.  p,  195.
§  "  Eyn  verstendig  trostlich  Leer  über  das  Wort  St.
Paulus":  Der  Mensch  sol  sich  selbst  probieren  und  alsso
von  dem  Brott  essen  und  von  dem  Kelch  trinken  :  zu  Hall
in  Inthall  von  D.  Jacob  Strauss  geprediget,  MDXXIL"—
'^\  reasonable  and  comfortable  Doctrine  concerning  the
Word  of  St.  Paul :  '  But  let  a  man  examine  himself,  and

But  perhaps  the  most  strongly  and  totally
opposed  Vv'ere the opinions as to creeds of
human  origin  and  the  pure  word  of  God. Here
again  the  dispute  was  not  concerning  tradition,
as  it  has  been  defined  by  the  more  ingenious
and enlightened controversialists  of modern
times ; that  is  to  say,  little more than the
Christian  spirit  propagating  itself  from  gene-
ration to  generation, — -the  Word  living  in  the
hearts  of  the  faithful. || What  the  reformers
combated,  was  the  entire  system  of  the  Latin
church,  developed  in  the  course  of  centuries  by
hierarchical  power  and school learning,  and
claiming  absolute  authority. They  remarked
that  the  fathers  of  the  church  had  erred,  Jerome
often,  and even  Augustin  occasionally  ; that
those holy men had themselves been  well
aware  of  it ; and  that  nevertheless  a .  system
from  which no deviation  was  allowed,  had
been  based on  their  decisions,  and  spun  oat
w^ith  the  aid  of  heathen  philosophy. Thus  it
came  to  pass  that  they  had  given  themselves
up  to  human  devices,  and  that  there  was  not
a  teacher  among  them  who  led  his  hearers  to
the  true  understanding  of  the  Gospel. And  to
this  human  doctrine,  which  neither  satisfied
the  reason  nor  consoled  the  heart — which  w^as
connected  with  all  sorts  of  abuses — they  now
opposed  the  eternal  word  of  God,  "which  is
noble,  pure,  cordial,  steadfast  and  comfortable,
and  should  therefore  be  kept  unadulterated  and
undefiled."^ They  exhorted  the  laity  to  work
out  their  own  salvation  ;  to  gain  possession  of
the  word  of  God,  which  had  now  come  forth
in  full  splendour  from  its  long  concealment,  to
take  it  as  a  sword  in  their  hands,  and  to  defend
themselves  with  it  against  the  preachers  of  the
contrary  faith.'*-'*

Such  were  the  questions  concerning  which
the  warfare  of  popular  literature — preaching,
was  mainly  carried  on.  On  the  one  side,  cer-
tain external  ecclesiastical  observances  were
deemed  meritorious  ;  the  idea  of  a  Church  was
identified  with  the  existing  hierarchy ;  the
mystery  of  the  individual  relation  to  God,
which  is  expressed  in  absolution,  was  made
dependent  on  absolute  obedience  to  the  clergy.
These  opinions  belonged  to  the  s^^stem  of  faith

so  let  him  eat  of  that  bread,  and  drink  of  that  cup.'
Preached  by  D.  Jacob  Strauss,  1522,  at  Hall,  in  the  valley
of  the  Inn."  The  body  and  blood  of  Christ  are  taken  as
the  surest  sign  of  his  merciful  promises  to  forgive  us  our
sins,  if  we  have  faith.  This  contradiction  appears  in
some  later  writings  of  this  author.

IJMöhler  Symbolik,  p.  361.

"ff  Das  hailig  ewig  Wort  Gots  was  das  in  im  kraft,  Sterke
frid,  fred,  erleuchtung  und  leben  in  aym  rechten  Christen
zu  erwecken  vermag— zugestelt  dem  elden  Piitter— Hern
Jörgen  von  Fron?perg;  von  Hang  Marscb.alk  der  genennt
■Wirt  Zoller  zu  Augsburg,  1523.—"  The  holy  eternal  word
of  God,  what  strength,  power,  peace  and  joy,  light  and
life  it  is  able  to  awaken  in  a  true  Christian.  Addressed
to  the  noble  Knight  George  von  Fronsperg,  by  Haug  Mar-
shalk,  who  was  named  tax-mae^ter  at  Augsburg  in  1523."
In  his  preface  he  praises  the  knight,  ,"  dass  Eur  Gestreng
yetzumal  so  hoch  benennt  und  gepreist  wird,  dass  das
edel  rain  lauter  und  unvermischt  Wort  Gottes,  das  heilig
evangelium  bey  eur  gestreng  statt  hat,  mid  in  eur  ritter-
lich ge'müt  und  herz"  eingemaurt  und  befestiget,"  &c.—
"  that  your  worship  is  now  so  highly  famed  and  praised,
for  that  the  noble,  clear,  plain,  and  pure  word  of  God,  the
holy  Gospel,  has  an  asylum  with  your  worship,  and  is
enclosed  and  made  fast  in  your  knightly  spirit  and
heart,"  &c.

**  Cunrad  Distelmar  von  Arberg;  ain  trewe  Ermannung,
Sec.  1523.

Chap.  III.

DIFFUSION  OF  THE  NEW  DOCTRINES.

185

which  defended  its  authority  with  fire  and
sword.  On  the  other  side,  was  the  obligation
of  faith  and  Jove  ;  the  idea  of  the  unity  of  an
invisible  Church  consisting  in  a  community  of
souls;  the  forgiveness  of  sins  through  faith  in
the  redemption,  and  reception  of  the  sacrament
without  the  necessity  of  confession ;  and,  finally,
belief  in  the  Bible  alone  as  a  rule  of  faith  and
doctrine.  We  are  not  now  treating  of  the
modifications  given  to  their  opinions  by  indi-
vidual theologians,  but  simply  of  the  prevalent
trains  of  ideas  which  vrers  at  war  in  every  part
of  Germany.

So  early  as  the  year  1521,  a  little  work  was
published  containing  the  allegory  of  this  con-
test, under  the  name  of  "  The  old  and  the  new
Gods."  On  the  title-page  we  see,  as  repre-
sentatives of  the  new  God,  the  pope,  some  of
the  fathers  of  the  church,  Aristotle,  and,. at  the
bottom  of  the  leaf,  Cajetan,  Silvester,  Eck  and
Faber ;  on  the  opposite  page,  the  true  and
ancient  God  in  his  triune  form,  the  four  evan-
gelists, St.  Paul  grasping  a  sword,  and  lastly,
Luther.  The  contents  of  the  book  were  quite
in  character  with  the  frontispiece.^  With  the
ceremonies,  rites,  and  articles  of  faith  which
had  grown  up  under  the  protection  of  the  rising
hierarchy  and  its  bloody  sword,  and  turned
Christianity  into  a  kind  of  Judaism,  is  con-
trasted the  old  God,  with  his  authentic  word,
and  the  simple  doctrine  of  the  redemption,  of
hope,  faith,  and  love.|

These  coarse  and  naked  expressions  sufiice
to  show  that  the  nation  felt  wliat  were  the  real
points  in  debate.  The  German  mind  became
conscious  that  the  hour  of  its  maturity  was
come;  boldly  resisted  the  tyranny  of  those
accidental  forms  which  had  governed  the  world,
and  returned  to  the  only  true  source  of  religicAis
instruction.^:

Considering  the  vast  agitation,  the  strong
feeling  of  conflict,  which  prevailed,  it  is  doubly
remarkable  how  much  control  men  had  over
themselves,  and  with  how  much  caution  they
often  acted.

Heinrich  of  Kettenhach  continued  to  assume
that  the  Church — by  which,  however,  he  un-

*  Panzer,  ii.  p.  20.

t  See  the  preface  by  Hartmann  Dulich,  printed  in
Veesenmeier's  Sammlung  von  Aufsätzen,  p.  135.  Tlie
following  passage  in  Eberlin  of  Giinzburg's  Fraindlicher
Vermanung,  p.  iii.,  shows  how  much  the  purpose  of  the
whole  movement  was  recognised  in  these  its  most  promi-
nent tendencies:  '-Ich  halt,  Luther  sey  von  Gott  gesandt
zu  säubern  die  ßiblia  von  der  lerer  auslegung  vnd  zwang,
die  gewissen  zu  erlösen  von  [wanden  der  menschlichen
gebot  od'  bapstgesetzen,  und  den  gaistlichen  abziehen  den
titel  Christi  un  seiner  kirclien,  dz  fürohyn  nit  mer  sollich
gross  büberey — strafflos  sey  und'  dem  heyligen  namen
Gottes  .  . .  auch  i.«t  der  Luther  gesant  dz  er  lere  das  creutz
vnd  glauben,  welche  schier  durch  alle  doctores  vergessen
seindt  ;  darzu  ist  Luther  beruft  von  Got  vnd  Got  gibt  im
weysshait,  kunst,  Vernunft,  sterke,  vnd  herz  dazu." — "I
hold  that  Luther  was  sent  by  God  to  free  the  Bible  from
the  empty  expositions  and  restrictions  of  the  teachers,  to
release  the  conscience  from  the  bondage  of  human  com-
mands or  popish  laws,  and  to  strip  ecclesiastics  of  the
title  of  Christ  and  of  his  church,  so  that  in  future  such
great  knavery  should  no  longer  remain  unpunished  in  the
holy  name  of  God.  Luther  is  likewise  sent  to  teach  the
cross  and  the  faith,  which  are  clean  forgotten  by  all  the
doctors.  Hereunto  was  Luther  called  by  God,  and  to  this
«end  has  God  given  him  wisdom,  knowledge,  prudence,
strength  and  courage."

1  Sermon  von  der  Kirche,  at  the  very  beginning.

24  Q*

derstands  an  invisible  community — possessed
the  treasure  of  the  merits  of  Christ,  of  the  Vir-
gin Mary,  and  of  all  the  elect.

Eberlin  of  Günzburg,  whilst  writing  from
Wittenberg  to  exhort  his  friends  in  Augsburg
to  procure  for  themselves  each  a  copy  of  the
New  Testament,  even  if  they  had  to  save  the
price  of  it  out  of  their  food  or  raiment,  admon-
ishes them  at  the  same  time  not  to  be  too  hasty
in  condemning  the  opinions  of  their  fathers.
There  were  many  things,  he  said,  which  God
in  his  wisdom  had  kept  secret,  and  which  they
needed  not  to  inquire  about ;  such  as  purgatory,
and  the  intercession  of  saints.  He  adds,  that
even  Luther  condemned  nothing  that  had  not
some  distinct  passage  of  Scripture  against  it.

A  young  Bohemian  critic  brought  forvv^ard  a
whole  train  of  arguments  to  prove  that  it  was
very  doubtful  whether  St,  Peter  had  ever  been
in  Rome  ;  and  the  Catholic  party  clearly  per-
ceived that  if  this  question  was  decided  in  the
negative,  the  whole  doctrine  of  the  primacy
would  be  overthrown.  But  the  theologians  of
Wittenberg  did  not  allow  them.selves  to  be
dazzled  by  the  brilliant  results  to  which  this
line  of  argument  would  lead  ;  they  pronounced
it  to  be  of  no  avail§  towards  furthering  faith
and  piety  ;  and,  indeed,  in  a  work  wherein  this
question  is  treated  at  length,  and  the  ill  effects
of  the  abuse  of  the  doctrine  of  primacy  set  forth
with  great  earnestness,  a  hope  is  expressed  that
the  new  Pope,  Adrian  VL,  would  renounce  all
existing  errors,  and  confine  himself  entirely  to
the  precepts  of  the  Bible — which  some  passages
in  his  writings  seemed  to  promise  ;  and  that
then  not  only  the  present  differences  v/ould  be
healed,  but  also  the  old  schism  ended,  and  that
even  Greeks  and  Bohemians  would  return  to
the  bosom  of  the  Church. ||

Others  who  were  less  sanguine,  were  yet  of
opinion  that  all  violent  measures  were  to  be
avoided,  and  that  the  abolition  of  abuses  should
be  left  to  the  government.  Some,  indeed,  ex-
horted their  followers  to  free  themselves  from
the  dominion  of  the  priesthood,  as  the  Israelites
did  from  that  of  Pharaoh.  But  even  such  men
as  the  vehement  Otho  of  Brunfels  opposed
them,  saying,  that  "the  Word  had  power  to
improve  the  state  of  the  world  without  trouble
or  the  sword  ;  and  that  things  rashly  and  in-
considerately begun  never  ended  well. "IT

This  v,'as  Luther's  opinion  also ;  and  for  a

§  Luther  to  Spalatin,  17th  Feb.  1520,  in  De  \V.,  i.  559.

|(  Apologia  Simonis  Hessi  adv.  dominum  Rofiensem
Episc.  Anglicanum  super  concertatione  ejus  cum  Vlrico
Veleno.  Julio  mense  1Ö-23.  The  author  maintains
chiefly,  "  quod  gentiliter  et  ambitiöse  pro  Petri  primatu
a  multis  pugnetur,  cum  hinc  nihil  hicri  accedat  pietati :
quod  impie  abusi  sint  potestate  sua  Romani  pontifices  in
statuendis  quibusdam  articulis  seditiosis  niagis  quam
piis."  The  passage  of  Adrian,  in  titulo  de  Sacram.  bap-
tismi,  is  :  "  Noverit  ecclesia  se  non  esse  dominam  sacra-
mentorum  sed  ministram,  nee  posse  magis  formam  sacra-
mentalem  destituere  aut  nova.m  instituere  quam  legem
aliquam  divinam  aboJere  vel  novum  aliquemfidei  articu-
lum  instituere.  Spero  fore,"  he  then  proceeds,  "  si  ille
perstat  in  sua  sententia,  ut  tota  catholica  ecclesia,  quse
nunc  in  sectas  videtur  divisa,  in  unam  fidei  unitatem
aggre^etur,  adeo  ul  et  Bohemos  et  Greecos  dexteras  daturos
confidam  bene  proesidenti  Romano  pontifici."

TT  Vom  evangelischen  Anstoss,  Neuenberg  in  Breisgau
Simonis  und  Judü,  1523.

186

OPPOSITION  TO  THE  REGENCY.

Book  III

long,  time  it  was  acted  on  throughout  the  whole
empire.

Ever}'-  thing  might  yet  be  hoped  from  the
guidance  of  the  Council  of  Regenc}? ;  for  in
directing  that  the  pure  word  of  God  should  be
preached,  and  in  avoiding  all  reference  by  name
to  the  fathers  of  the  Church,  who  were  looked
upon  as  the  corner-stones  of  modern  Rom.anism,
the  Council  of  Regency  had  adopted  the  most
important  ideas  of  the  reformer^.

In  the  year  1523  it  took  the  cause  of  reform
more  expressly  under  its  protection.

When  Faber,  thevicar  of  Constance,  received
a  commission  from  Rome  to  preach  against
Luther,  and  applied  to  the  Council  of  Regency
for  protection  and  safe  conduct,  they  gave  him
a  letter  purporting,  indeed,  to  have  that  elTect,
but  conceived  in  such  terms  that,  as  Planitz
says,  he  would  gladly  have  had  a  better.

Duke  George  made  fresh  complaints  to  the
Regency  of  Luther's  violent  attacks,  and  se-
veral members  of  that  body  were  of  opinion
that  the  elector  should  be  admonished  to  punish
him.  This,  however,  was  opposed  by  the
majority.  Count  Palatine  Frederic,  the  empe-
ror's lieutenant,  proposed  that  the  duke's  letters
should,  at  any  rate,  be  sent  to  the  elector.
"  Sir,"  said  Planitz,  "  the  voice  of  the  majority
decides  that  my  gracious  master  shall  not  be
written  to ;"  and  the  duke  was  told  that  he
might  make  the  application  to  the  elector  him-
self.

In  the  convocation  of  a  fresh  diet,  care  was
taken  to  make  no  allusion  to  the  religious
troubles.*

The  main  point,  however,  was  that  no  step
whatever  was  taken  towards  the  execution  of
the  edict  of  Worms  ;  but  the  new  doctrines
were  allowed  freely  to  take  their  course,  in  ex-
pectation of  the  ecclesiastical  council  which
had  been  demanded.

It  is  evident  of  what  importance  to  the  State
as  well  as  to  the  Church  was  the  question, —
whether  a  government  in  which  sentiments  of
this  kind  predominated,  would  be  able  to  main-
tain itself  or  not.

CHAPTER  IV.

OPPOSITION TO THE COUNCIL OF  REGENCY. —
DIET OF 1523-24.

Two  great  ideas  occupied  the  mind  of  the
whole  German  nation ;  that  of  a  national,  re-
presentative, and  at  the  same  tim?,  powerful
government,  and  that  of  a  complete  renovation
of  the  religious  condition  of  the  country  ;  both
these  ideas  were  now,  to  a  considerable  extent,
represented;  each  received  support  froni  the
other;  and,  united,  they  seemed  to  promise  a
future  equally  imporlant  in  a  political  and  in-
tellectual point  of  view.

All  endeavours,  however,  which  are  directed

*  Letter  from  Planitz,  dated  2etli  Feb.,  3d  March,  and
18th  August,  1523.

towards  ends  so  vast  and  comprehensive,  in-
evitably provoke  strong  and  various  opposition
from  many  quarters.

Not  that  the  connexion  between  these  two
important  objects  was  so  close  as  to  be  evident
to  all  minds,  or  that  the  antagonists  of  the  op-
position were  fully  aware  of  both  its  bearings ;
but  each  of  them  roused  the  peculiar  antipathies
of  a  class.  It  by  no  means  followed  that  those
who  opposed  the  Council  of  Regency  were
hostile  to  the^reformation  of  the  Church.

We  are  generally  inclined,  in  our  views  of
the  past,  to  fall  into  the  error  of  ascribinor  too
soon  an  exaggerated  influence  to  anew  element
of  social  and  political  life.  „However  powerful
it  may  be,  there  are  other  influences  at  work
which  it  cannot  immediately  overcome,  and
which  continue  to  exercise  their  own  indepen-
dent action.

The  hostility  to  the  Council  of  Regency
arose  from  two  causes  fundamentally  opposed.
In  the  first  place^That  hody  seemed  destined  to
become  a  powerful  and  efficient  government, —
a  prospect  which  was  far  from  w^elcome.to
every  one.  In  the  second,  it  was  at  present
very  feeble  ;  it  possessed  no  executive  power.
Hence  the  first  obstacle  it  encountered  was
disobedience.

SICiaNGEN AND HIS ADVERSARIES.

It  was  not  to  be  expected  that  the  Public
Peace  proclaimed  by  Charles  V.  would  be
better  observed  than  those  of  former  reigns.
Two  imperial  councillors,  Gregory  Lamparter
and  Johann  Lucas,  the  master  of  the  treasur}?-,
were  attacked  and  taken  prisoners  on  their  way
to  Augsburg  from  Worms,  wehere  they  had
assisted  at  the  closing  of  the  diet.  Nürnberg,
the  seat  of  government  and  of  the  couits  of
law,  and  at  this  time  in  a  certain  sense  the
capital  city  of  the  empire,  was  surrounded  on
all  sides  by  the  wildest  private  wars.  Hans
Thomas  of  Absberg,  doubly  irritated  by  the
resolutions  taken  against  him  by  the  Swabian
League,  assembled  again,  in  1522,  the  most
daring  and  reckless  reiters  from  all  the  sur-
rounding districts:  fresh  letters  of  challenge
were  brought  to  Nürnberg  every  day,  or  were
found  stuck  on  the  whipping-post  in  the  neigh-
bouring villages;  the  roads  east  and  west
became  unsafe.  There  was  a  lonely  chapel  at
Krügelstein,  in  the  territory  of  Bamberg,  where
mass  was  said  three  times  a  week.  Here,
under  colour  of  hearing  it,  all  tlie  bands  of
robbers  and  their  scouts  met  together.  Woe
to  the  company  of  merchants  that  fell  in  their
way,  for  they  not  only  plundered  them  of  all
their  wares,  but  had  now  adopted  the  barbarous
practice  of  cutting  off  the  right  hands  of  their
prisoners :  it  was  in  vain  that  the  wretched
sufferers  implored  them  at  least  to  cut  off  the
left  and  leave  the  right.  Hans  Thomas  of
Absberg  thrust  the  right  hand  of  a  shopkeeper,
W'hich  he  had  chopped  off,  into  the  bosom  of
the  unfortunate  man,  and  told  him  that  when
he  got  to  Nürnberg  he  might  give  it  to  the,
bürgermeister  in  his  name.f

t  Milliner's  Nürnberger  Annalen  for  the  )'ears  J522  and
1523  contain  tins  and  many  other  details;  for  example,

Chap.  IV.

SICKINGEN.

187

The  Frankfurt  Acts  of  1522  present  a  very
striking  example  of  the  general  insecurity.
Philip  Fürstenberg,  who  was  sent  by  the  town
of  Frankfurt  to  the  Council  of  Regency  to
take  part  in  the  government  of  the  empire,
found  the  road  he  had  to  travel  from  Milten-
berg to  Wertheim  so  unsafe,  that  he  quitted
his  carriage,  and  joining  a  party  of  some
'prentice  tailors  whom  he  met,  assumed  their
garb,  and  took  a  by-road  on  foot.  The  carriage
was  attacked  by  several  horseman  with  bent
cross-bows.  In  order  to  reach  Wertheim  he
was  forced  to  take  an  escort  of  five  or  six  men
armed  with  firelocks  or  cross-bows.*  "The
Reiters  are  angry,"  says  he:  "what  they  are
about  I  know  not."

In  this  state  of  things,  when  the  Council  of
Regency  could  not  even  protect  its  own  mem-
bers, there  broke  out  a  private  war,  more  violent
than  any  that  had  disturbed  the  peace  of  the
empire  during  Maximilian's  reign.-.  In  August,
1522,  Franz  von  Sickingen,  with  a  well-armed
force  of  infantry,  cavalry  and  artillery,  ven-
tured to  attack  an  elector  of  the  empire,  the
Archbishop  of  Treves,  in  his  own  country  and
strongly  fortified  capital.

In  the  main  this  was  merely  a  private  war
(Fehde)  like  many  others,  originating  in  a
persona]  quarrel  (this  same  elector  having  once
earnestly  entreated  the  assistance  of  the  empire
against  Sickingen's  outrages  in  Hessen)  ;  the
pretext  for  which  was  some  doubtful  legal
claims, — especially  concerning  a  fine  which
had  been  transferred  from  the  archbishop  to
Sickingen;  and  the  re^l  object,  the  plunder,
and,  if  possible,  the  conquest  of  the  fortified
towns.  There  exists  a  most  interesting  letter
from  an  old  confidential  friend  of  Sickingen's,
in  which  the  writer  dissuades  him  from  the
enterprise,  and  lays  before  him  all  the  6hances
of  success  or  failure."}"

Other  motives  were  also  at  work,  which  gave
public  importance  to  this  undertaking :  success
in  a  hostile  enterprise  was  no  longer  Sickingen's
ultimate  aim ;  he  had  an  eye  to  interests  of  far
greater  moment.

First  of  all,  to  those  of  the  whole  body  of
the  Knights  of  the  Empire.  We  have  seen
how  great  was  their  discontent  at  the  state  of
public  affairs  at  that  time :  at  the  Sv^abian
League,  which  took  upon  itself  to  be  at  once

Riidifikheim  und  Reuschlein  "haben  im  Junio2Wägen
Diit  Kupfer  beladen  z\yo  Meil  von  Fiankfurt  angenom-
men und  die  Fuhrleut  unsrescheut  benötliiget,  dasssie  das
Kupfer  in  das  Schloss  Rücking,  dem  von  Rüdigkheiin
zugehörig, führen  müssen." — "Rüdiskheim  andReuschiin
did  in  June  take,  two  miles  from  Frankfurt,  two  wagons
loaded  with  copper,  and  in  the  most  shameless  manner
constrained  the  drivers  to  convey  the  copper  to  the  castle
Bucking,  which  belonged  to  Rüdigkheiin."  Rüdigkheim
wrote  to  the  burgher  of  Nürnberg,  to  whom  the  copper
belonged,  that  if  he  wished  to  have  it  back,  he  might
come  and  buy  it  of  him.  Tliey  were  exasperated  because
the  citizens  of  Nürnberg  had  complained  to  the  emperor.

*  Fürstenberg  writes  from  Wertheim  on  St.  Peter's  and
Paul's  day,  1522:  •'  also  hab  ichmeyn  gnedigen  Herrn  ge-
beten, uns  gen  Wirtzburg  zu  verhelfen  :  ist  er  willig,  Gott
helf  uns  furter." — "  I  have  then  besought  my  gracious
Lord  to  assist  us  in  our  journey  to  Würzburg :  if  he  be
v.'ilhng,  God  help  us  further."

t  Balthazar  Scblör's  letter  to  Sickingen,  without  date,
but  immediately  before  the  outbreak  of  hostilities,  in
Gunther's  Coder  Diploma ticus  Rheuo-Mosellanus,  v.  p.
202.

accuser,  judge  and  executor  of  its  own  sen-
tences ;  at  the  Imperial  Chamber,  whose  pra-
ceedings  were  only  directed  against  the  weak,
and  left  the  strong  to  their  own  guidance  ;  at
the  encroachments  of  the  pririces,  their  courts
of  law,  taxes  and  feudal  privileges.-^-  In  the
spring  of  1522  the  nobility  of  the  Upper  Rhine
met  at  Landau,  and  resolved  that  they  would
only  allow  their  feudal  affairs  to  be  judged
before  feudal  judges  and  vassals,  according  to
old  custom  ;  and  their  difi'erences  with  those
of  other  classes,  before  tribunals  composed  of
impartial  judges,  of  knightly  rank  ;^  -wra^at
they  would  come  to  the  assistance  of  every
man  to  whom  this  was  refused.  They  elected
Franz  von  Sickingen  their  leader  in  this  matter.
An  address  to  the  imperial  towns,  written  by
Hütten  and  dated  1522, §  is  the  manifesto  of
the  opinions  entertained  by  Sickingen  and  his
followers.  Never  were  the  sovereign  princes
more  vehemently  accused  of  violence  and  in-;
justice  ;  the  towns  were  invited  to  accept  the
friendship  and  alliance  of  the  nobility,  and
above  all,  to  destroy  the  Council  of  Regency,
which  Hütten  looked  upon  as  the  representative
of  the  princely  power.

The  religious  dissensions  gave,  of  course,  a
strong  additional  impulse  to  hostilities  under-
taken against  one  of  the  most  powerful  of  the
spiritual  princes.  The  Ebernburg  was,  in  fact,
the  first  place  in  which  the  evangelical  service
was  regularly  celebrated  in  its  new  forms..
Sickingen's  followers  v.'ent  further  than  the
school  of  Wittenberg.  »JT-hej  considered  the
administration  of  the  Lord's  Supper  in  both
kinds  not  alone  lawful,  but  absolutely  necessary .^
John  CEcolampadius  was  the  first  who  con-
demned as  pernicious  the  spiritual  satisfaction
which  the  people  felt  at  listening  every  day  to
the  unintelligible  muttering  of  the  mass,  being
present  at  the  ceremony  of  benediction,  and
commending  themselves  to  God  without  much
expenditure  of  time  or  attention;  and  he  ac-
cordingly read  the  mass  only  on  Sundays,
omitting  the  elevation  of  the  host,  and  using
none  but  the  German  language.  1|  There  is  a
letter  extant  written  by  Sickingen  himself,  in
which  he  inveighs  against  the  use  of  pictures
in  churches,  and  pronounces  them  better  fitted
for  the  decoration  of  stately  halls  ;  he  also  de-
claims against  the  invocation  of  saints. The

X  "  . .  .wo  der  Kleger  den  Antwurter  erfordert  vor  sein
des  Antwurters  Genoss,  oder  ungefehrlich  dem  etwas
gemess  oder  darüber,  unparteilichs  Rechten  oder  Austrags,
vor  die,  so  inlendisch  der  Sachen  gesessen  oder  gelegen
seyn." — "  where  the  plaintiff  cites  the  defendant  before  a
tribunal  composed  of  his  own  and  the  defendant's  peers
(or  nearly  so),  and  having  jurisdiction  over  affairs  occur-
ring in  the  country."

§  "Beklagunge  der  Freistette  deutscher  nation."  —
"  Complaints  of  the  free  cities  of  the  German  nation." —
The  date  is  ascertained  by  these  words: —

"Der  (Kaiser)  zeuciit  nun  von  uns  wider  Alher;
Sis  wollen  nit,  dass  er  widerkheer."
"  The  emperor  now  leaves  us  again  ;
They  wish  he  may  not  come  back."

These  ideas  prevailed  in  the  following  year  also,  as  we
learn  from  a  writing  by  Kettenbach :  "  Practica  practi-
cirt,"  (Sec.  (Panzer,  ii.  ]90,)  wherein  the  cities  are  ex-
horted not  to  involve  themselves  in  the  disputes  between
the  nobles  and  the  princes.

!J  CEcolampadii  Epistola  ad  Hedionem  in  Gerdesius
Historia  Evaugelii,  torn.  i.  Monumenta,  p.  166.

188

iSICKINGEN.

Book  III.

marriage  of  Johann  Schwebel,  one  of  his
preachers,  was  arranged  by  him.  One  of  his
friends  was  Hartmuth  von  Kronenberg,  w^ho
may  be  considered  as  ihe  earliest  specimen  of
a  pious  and  earnest  Lutheran  in  the  style  of
more  modern  times.*

The  connexion  with  these  mighty  elements
gave  unwonted  importance  to  Sickingen's  en-
terprises. The  majority  of  the  whole  knight-
hood of  the  empire  was  on  his  side,  and  ex-
erted itself  in  his  favour ;  he  also  called  on
Luther,  to  whom  he  had  formerly  offered  pro-
tection, for  his  support.  And  assuredly  it
would  have  been  no  mean  alliance,  had  the
monk,  whom  the  nation  honoured  as  a  prophet,
taken  up  his  abode  with  the  brave  and  puissant
knight,  and  lent  to  the  formidable  bands  of  the
Ebernburg  the  powerful  aid  of  his  w^ord.\/But
Luther  had  the'  great  good  sense  to  avoid  all
political  connexions,  to  attempt  no  violence,
and  to  trust  solely  and  entirely  to  the  might  of
his  doctrines.  Sickingen  received  nothing
from  Saxony  but  dissuasions.  Nevertheless,
his  manifesto  to  the  inhabitants  of  Treves
shows  how  much  he  reckoned  on  the  prevailing
national  inclinations  ;  for  he  promises  that  "  he
will  deliver  them  from  the  heavy  antichristian
yoke  of  the  priesthooda.nd  lead  them  to  evan-
gelical freedom. "jAThe  ideas  and  sentiments
of  a  warlike  noble,  who  feels  himself  a  match
even  for  a  powerful  prince;  of  the  head  of  the
whole  order  of  knighthood  ;  and  of  a  champion
of  the  new  relig^ious  opinions,  were  all  blended
in  his  mindi--It  is  a  significant  fact  that  Hütten,
in  one  of  his  dialogues,  puts  into  the  mouth  of
Sickingen  an  ardent  panegyric  on  Ziska,  the
invincible  hero  who  cleared  his  country  of
monks  and  idle  priests,  em.ployed  their  pro-
perty for  the  genered  good,  and  put  a  stop  to
the  depredations  of  Rome.ij:

On  the  27th  of  August,  1522,  Sickingen
declared  war  against  the  archbishop,  chiefly  for
those  things  "  wherein  he  had  acted  against
God  and  the  emperor's  majesty."  Secretly
assisted,  rather  than  hindered,  by  the  Elector
of  Mainz,  he  arrived  before  Treves  on  the  7th
of  September,  having  taken  St.  Wendel.  He
crossed  the  jMarsberg  with  1500  horse,  5000
foot,  and  a  considerable  body  of  artillery  ;§
and  we  have  reason  to  believe  that  he  expected
to  be  joined  at  this  point  by  his  friends,  Ren-
nenberg, who  was  recruiting  for  him  in  Cleves
and  Juliers;  the  bastard  of  Sombreff,  who
was  doing  the  same  in  the  archbishopric  of
Cologne;  and  Hanz  Voss,  vrho  was  arming
in  the  territory  of  Limburg;  Nickel  Minkwitz,
too,  was  to  join  him  with  1500  men  out  of
Brunswick.  In  Sickingen's  camp,  it  was  ru-
moured that  he  would  soon  be  elector ;  nay,
perhaps  something  even  greater  stilL  The
eyes  of  .the  whole  empire  were  turned  upon  his

*  Letters  from  Kronenber?  to  the  four  mendicant
orders,  25th  June,  1522,  and  to  the  inhabitants  of  Krouen-
berg  ;  Münch's  Sickingen,  ii.  pp.  145  and  153.

t  E.xtract3  from  the  manifestoes  in  Meiner's  Leben
Huttens,  p.-3]7.

I  Monitor  Secundus  Opp.,  iv.  p-.  144.

§  This  number,  smaller  than  that  which  is  usually
given,  is  taken  from  the  Fiersheiraer  Chronik,  in  Münch's
Sickingen,  jii.  p.  215.

movements  ;  the  delegate  of  Duke  George  of
Saxony  wrote  to  his  master  that  nothing  so
dangerous  to  the  princes  of  the  empire  had
been' attempted  for  centuries. ||  Others  affirmed
that  affairs  were  in  such  a  state,  that  before
long  it  v>'ould  be  impossible  to  know  who  was
king  or  emperor,  prince  or  lord.

The  turbulent  and  anarchical  power  of  the
knights  thus  once  more  threatened  the  peace
and  security  of  the  whole  empire.  It  is  not
easy  to  imagine  what  would  have  been  the
result  had  they  been  successful.

It  is  scarcely  credible  that  a  tolerably  v.-ell-
organised  government  could  have  been  formed
out  of  the  several  knightships  which  were  now
become  absolute  and  independent  sovereignties ;
or  that  the  wild  and  arbitrary  courses  of  men
who  were  accustomed  to  look  to  their  swords
for  right  and  security,  could  easily  have  been
restrained  by  the  sermons  of  the  reformers  :  it
is  at  least  certain  that  fficolampadius  found  a
hard  and  ungrateful  soil  on  Sickingen's  moun-
tain fortress.  INIoreover,  the  elements  of  which
this  body  was  composed  were  of  the  most
heterogeneous  natures  :  the  knighthood — one
of  the  most  peculiar  products  of  the  middle
ages — arose  out  of,  and  existed  in,  the  disorga-
nization of  the  powers  of  the  state :  whereas
the  declared  tendency  of  the  new  religious
system  was  to  renovate  and  confirm  those
powers.  The  position  of  Sickingen  himself
was  anomalous  :  the  forces  which  he  led  were
by  no  means  of  a  chivalrous  kind  ;  he  was  at  the
head  of  a  hired  army  which  could  only  be  held
together  by  money,  and  furnished  with  the
apparatus  for  a  kind  of  warfare  -essentially
opposed  to  all  knightly  modes  of  combat.
Strange  spectacle  ! — the  forces  which  decided
the  fate  of  the  world  in  two  different  ages  were
here  in  contact,  and  it  was  imagined  that  they
could  be  brought  to  unite  and  co-operate  !  We,
in  our  days,  can  see  how  impossible  was  such
a  union ;  for  it  is  only  by  keeping  pace,  sin-
cerely and  energetically,. with  the  progress  of
society,  that  any  thing  permanent  can  be
effected.  Even  at  that  time,  however,  it  was
perceived,  that  if  the  power  of  the  princes
were  overthrown,  and  the  constitution  of  the
empire  (which  was  as  3'^et  by  no  means  firmly
establi^ed)  broken  up,  nothing  was  to  be  ex-
pected but  an  exclusive,  violent,  and  at  the
same  time  self-conflicting  rule  of  the  nobles.

The  question  then  was,  who  should  under-
take the  defence  of  public  order,  thus  fearfully
menaced.

The  Council  of  Regeiicy  did  all  that  was  in
its  power.  Remonstrances  were  sent  to  Sick-
ingen, and  mandates  to  all  the  neighbouring
princes,  enjoining  them  to  resist  his  attempts.
On  Sickingen,  the  warnings  from  the  Regency
made  little  impression:  he  yeplied,  that  he
himself  intended  to  introduce  a  new  order  of
things  into  the  empire.^ He  utterly  refused

li  Letter  in  the  Royal  Saxon  Archives.

TT  Planitz  to  the  Elector  Frederic,  13th  Sept. :  "  Sickingen
habe  gesagt,  er  wolle  sigh  eines  Thuns  unterstehn,  dessen
sich  kein  "lömischer  Kaiser  unterstanden.  28th  Sept.  er
habe  den  Boten  des  Regiments  gesagt :  er  wisst  vorwar,
sein  Herr  der  Kaiser  %verde  nicht  zürnen,  ob  er  den  Pfaffen
ein  w-enie  strafet  und  ihm  die  Kronen  eintränkt,  die  er

Chap.  IV.

SICKINGEN.

180

to  submit  to  a  decision  of  the  Imperial  Chamber,
and  said  that  he  had  a  court  of  justice  of  his
own,  composed  of  soldiers  who  argued  with
muskets  and  carronades.  It  is  very  probable
that  his  whole  army  did  not  t^ink  as  he  did;
at  any  rate,  the  Council  of  Regency  asserted
that  Franz's  following  and  power  were  greatly
diminished  in  consequence  of  their  efforts.  Eut
a  far  weightier  authority  was  required  to'  force
him  to  submission,  and  every  thing  depended
on  the  resistance  he  would  find  from  the  elector
and  his  allies.

Richard  von  Greiffenldau,  Archbishop  of
Treves,  had  made  the  best  possible  prepara-
tions. He  had  burned. dow"n  the  convent  of
St.  Maximin,  on  which  the  enemy  rec^koned
for  stores,  bringing  in  his  own  hand  the  first
torch  that  fired  it :  in  the  town,  his  presence
kept  down  the  disturbances  which  certainl}'
had  begun.  The  clergy  mounted  guard  round
the  cathedral,  the  citizens  in  the  market-place,
the  mercenaries  on  the  walls  and  in  the  towers  ;
and  the  conduct  of  the  war  was  entrusted  to
the  native  nobles  who  had  not  deserted  the
cause  of  the  see.

While  Sickingen,  who  had  calculated  on
making  a  coup-de-main,  now  met  with  an  un-
expected and  determined  resistance,  it  so  hap-
pened that  all  his  friends  and  allies,  v;hose
arrival  was  necessary  to  the  completion  of  his
force,  were  either  detained  or  beaten.  The
Duke  of  Cleves  and  the  Elector  of  Cologne
ordered  all  the  horsemen  v/ho  had  been  re-
cruited in  their  territories,  to  stay  at  home,
under  pain  of  forfeiture  of  their  fiefs,  and  even
of  their  lives.  The  young  Landgrave  of  Hessen
succeeded  in  defeating  Minkwitz's  troops  as
they  were  marching  from  Brunswick ;  taking
their  leader,  with  all  his  papers,  prisoner,  and
finally  inducing  the  soldiers  to  enter  his  own
service.*  All  these  reverses  deterred  the  Lüne-
burg and  Westphalian  troops  from  taking  the
field  at  all.

On  the  other  side,  tlie  Elector  Palatine,  Sick-
ingen'.s  former  patron,  as  well  as  his  old  and
bitter  enemy  the  Landgrave  of  Hessen,  took
arms  and  hastened  to  the  assistance  of  their
neighbour  and  ally,  the  Elector  of  Treves.

Sickingen,  deprived  of  the  support  he  had
expected,  and  encamped  before  a  bravely  de-
fended town,  in  an  open  country,  among  a
peoßle  exasperated  by  his  devastations,  did  not
dare  to  await  the  conjunction  of  forces  so  su-
perior to  his  own;  besides  this,  he  himself  did
not  evince  that  energy  and  those  resources  of
talent  and  bravery,  without  which  no  one  can
venture  with  impunity  on  such  hazardous  en-

penommeii  hätte."  "Sickingen  had  said  he  would  dare
to  do  a  deed  which  no  Roman  emperor  liad  j'et  darefl.
28th  Sept.  he  said  to  the  messenger  of  the  Regency,  he
knew  for  certain  that  his  lord  the  emperor  would  not  be
angry  because  he  punished  the  priest  a  little,  and  paid
him  oiF  for  the  crowns  he  had  taken."  People  really
began  to  believe  that  the  emperor  might  have  some  under-
standing with  him.  The  emperor  afterwards  said,  Franz
had  not  served  him  well  enough  to  induce  him  to  connive
at  matters  of  this  sort.

*  Letter  from  Landgrave  Philip  to  the  Elector  of  Treves,
5ih  Sept.  1522,  in  Rommel's  Geschichte  von  Hessen,  vol
V.  p.  858.

terprises.  On  the  14th  of  September  he  was
compelled  to  abandon  Treves,  j

That  one  week  sufficed  to  give  a  turn  to  the
whole  destiny  of  Germany.

The  three  sovereigns  who  represented  the
threatened  princely  power,  were  thus  triumphant
over  the  rebellious  knights  and  their  leaders.
They  were  not  content  with  clearing  the  arch-
bishopric of  its  enemies;  and  though,  strange
to  say,  they  did  not  pursue  Sickingen,  they
immediately  attacked  his  allies.

The  Elector  of  Mainz,  who  was  accused  of
allowing  a  detachment  of  Sickingen's  horse  to
pass  the  Rhine  unmolested,  was  forced  to  buy
his  peace  at  the  cost  of  25,000  gulden.ij:

Hartmuth  von  Kronenberg,  whom  the  land-
grave \vanted  above  all  to  punish  for  the'share
he  had  taken  in  Sickingen's  foray  on  Darm-
stadt, was  beleaguered  in  his  castle  near  Frank-
furt. The  landgrave  would  not  hear  of  pardon
or  conditions  ;  he  helped  to  point  the  cannon
with  his  own  hand.  The  knight  escaped  but
just  in  time,  for  his  fortress  was  forced  to  sur-
render on  the  16th  of  October.  The  three
princes  received  in  person  the  oaths  of  allegiance
from  the  inhabitants,  and  the  town  was  for  a
longtime  treated  as  Hessian. §

They  next  marched  against  Frov/en  von
Hütten,  "  because  he  had  taken  part  in  the  re-
bellion, and  received  proclaimed  outlaws  in  his
house  :"  his  castle  of  Saalmünster  was  taken.

The  same  fate  was  shared  by  Philip  Waiss
of  Haussen  in  the  Blark  of  Fulda,  and  by
Rudeken  in  Rukingen  ;  others  endeavoured  to
save  themselves  by  negotiation.

A  similar  storm  threatened  Sickingen's  allies
in  distant  parts  of  the  country.  The  Fran-
conian  nobles  had  not,  it  is  true,  directly  as-
sisted him,  but  they  had  encouraged  him  in  his
project,  and  had  generally  adhered  to  his  faction:
the  Swabian  League,  on  the  contrary,  had
made  common  cause  with  the  princes,  espe-
cially with  the  Elector  Palatine,  and  now
summbned  the  Franconian  knights  before  its
tribunal,  to  stand  their  trial  for  certain  breaches
of  the  Public  Peace.  The  knights  did  not
consider  themselves  bound  to  obey  this  citation,
and,  accordingly,  met  at  Schweinfurt  to  protest
against  it :  they  w^ere  still  determined  to  defend
themselves.  The  vassals  of  the  Bishop  of
Vvürzburg,  who  had  been  the  last  to  join  the
League,  were  so  exasperated  at  his  tardiness,
that,  in  the  beginning  of  the  year  1523,  they
deprived  him  of  all  his  offices.  This  threw
all  Swabia  and  Franconia  into  confusion.  From
the  very  superior  strength  of  the  League,  the
result  of  the  struggle  was  easily  foreseen,
unless  the  Council  of  Regency  had  power  to
prevent  it.

Events  indeed  now  acquired  a  totally  dif-
ferent  character and importance,  from their

t  These  events  at  Treves  are  described  by  Latomus  and
Browerns,  Annal.  Trev.  ii.  340,  who  has  also  quoted  La-
tomus Gesta  Trevirorum  in  Hontheim's  Prodromus,  p.
858,  Chronicon  S.  Maximini,  ibid.  p.  1035.

J  The  delegate  of  Duke  George  says  that  this  is  one  of
the  reasons  :  "  Die  andern  stecken  in  der  Feder." — "  The
others  stick  in  the  pen."

§  Tendel :  "  Beschreibung  der  Belagerung  von  Kronen-
berg."—Munch,  iii,  p.  28.

190

SICKINGEN.

Book  III.

ejffect  on  tins  supreme  administraÜTe  body  of
the  empire.

Its  authority  was  formerly  resisted  and  con-
temned by  Sickingen  and  his  friends,  for  which,
on  the  accusation  of  the  procurator  of  Treves,
Sickingen  had  been  outlawed  on  the  8th  of
October,  contrary  to  the  laws  of  the  empire,
without  summons  or  trial.  Now.  however,  his
enemies  placed  themselves  in  an  attitude  of
equal  defiance,  and  of  equal  peril  to  the  Council
of  Regency :  instead  of  pursuing  the  outlaw
himself,  they  attacked  his  supposed  allies,
frequently  without  proof  of  their  guilt,  and
took  their  fortified  dwellings.  The  Swabian
League,  vvhich  already  declared  that  it  had
only  acquiesced  in  the  creation  of  the  Council
of  Regency  on  the  supposition  of  its  union,
jww  openly  usurped  part  of  the  functions  of
the  Imperial  Chamber  by  the  citations  before
its  own  tribunal  to  which  we  have  alluded;
and  it  did  not  deign  even  to  return  an  answer
to  an  admonition  not  to  molest  people  about
the  Public  Peace.

]Me;}i's  pretensions  naturally  rise  with  their
power.  As  the  attempts  of  Sickingen,  and
the  insubordinate  spirit  of  the  Franc6nian  no-
bilit}-  had  not  been  put  down  by  the  Council
of  Regency,  but  by  the  superior  force  and  the
arms  of  their  neighbours,  it  was  natural  that
the  latter  should  now  continue  the  struggle
with  a  view  to  their  own  interests,  without
much  regard  to  the  supreme  authority  of  the
empire."^

Hence  it  happened  that  the  Council  of  Re-
gency soon  took  under  its  protection  the  very
men  it  had  but  just  before  treated  as  its  ene-
mies. Frowen  von  Hütten,  after  the  opinions
of  the  most  considerable  m.embers  of  the  Im-
perial Chamber  had  been  heard,  obtained
without  much  trouble  a  mandate  wherein  the
princes  were  required  to  restore  all  his  castles
to  him;  and  shortly  after  a  formal  judgment
was  given  in  his  favour.  At  the  same  time,
the  Council  of  Regency  pressed  the  princes  to
release  the  Elector  of  ^Mainz  from  the  conditions
so  arbitrarily  imposed  on  him.i  These  princes
had  wished  for  the  aid  of  the  empire  to  put
down  the  outlawed  Sickingen ;  but  this  they
found  it  impossible  to  obtain,  either  from  the
Regency  or  from  the  Estates  assembled  in  the
beginning  of  the  year  1523  ;  if  the  sentence  of
outlawry  had  not  already  been  pronounced,  we
may  safely  assume  that  it  would  not  have  been
pronounced  at  all.:j:  Some  members  of  the
Swabian  League  proposed  that  all  meetings
and  associations  among  the  order  of  knights
should  be  forbidden,  but  to  this  the  Regency
could  not  now  be  brought  to  consent 4  on  the
contrary,  it  proclaimed  its  intention  of  protect-
ing all  the  knights,  except  those  who  had
committed  any  offence  against  the  Public  Peace.

*  See  the  letter  from  the  Elector  of  Treves,  2d  Nov.
1522,  in  Munch,  iii.  33.

t  Planitz,  4th  Feb.  ]523,  says,  they  should  release  him
from  his  obligations,  and  give  Sickingen  an  amicable
hearing.

X  Planitz  thought  on  the  24th  Nov.  that  sentence  of
outlawry  would  not  be  pronounced  against  Sickingen,
"  man  hätte  ihn  denn  citiert ;  aber  geschehn  ist  geschehn"
— "without  citing  him  to  appear;  but  wiiat  is  done  is
done."

It  appears  to  me  that  the  knights  as  a  body
now  first  became  of  real  importance  to  the  or-
ganization and  progress  of  the  empire.  Their
wild  project  of  founding  an  independent  power
j  was  at  an  end.  The  Council  of  Regency  was
their  sole  support,  and  they  found  themselves
under  the  necessity  of  making  common  cause
with  it.  The  union  of  these  two  bodies,  esseii-
tially  distinct,  was  rendered  more  strict  by  the
circumstance  that  the  knights  and  the  Regency
had  both  embraced  the  evangelical  doctrines.
For  the  same  reason,  the  Elector  of  Saxony,
who  was  the  main  prop  of  the  Regency,  entered
into  a  kind  of  alliance  with  the  knights.  In
the  second  quarter  of  the  year  1523,  when  the
duty  of  personal  attendance  at  the  Council  of
Regency  fell  upon  the  Elector  of  Mainz,  his
place  was  filled  by  his  cousin,  the  grand  master,
Albert  of  Prussia,  whose  sole  purpose  was  to
m^aintain  the  dominion  of  his  order,  i.  e.  the
Teutonic  knights,  and  especially  those  of
Swabia  and  Franconia,  in.  their  own  country,
and  to  set  the  whole  pow-ers"  of  the  empire  in
motion  to  that  effect.

Little  as  it  had  been  to  be  desired  a  5'^ear  ago,
that  Sickingen  should  conquer  Treves,  it  was
of  great  importance  that  he  should  be  able  to
defend  himself  against  the  attacks  which  were
preparing  against  him  in  the  spring  of  1523.

Thus,  by  a  strange  turn  of  fate,  the  safety
of  the  knight  Avho  had  so  often  disturbed  the
Public  Peace,  and  committed  so  many  deeds
of  violence,  became  now,  after  he  was  out-
lawed, inextricably  bound  up  with  the  interests
of  order  in  the  empire.

Nor  did  he  by  any  means  give  up  his  cause  :

he  expected  to  receive  assistance  from  Lower

Germany,  and  from  the  LTpper  Rhine ;  to  be

joined by the Bohemian and Franconian

knights,  and  to  be  supported  by  the  Lutherans,

From  his  fortress  of  Landstuhl,  where  he  was

then living,  he one day  descried horsemen

among  the distant  underwood ; he  flattered

himself  that  they  were  Lutherans  who  were

coming  to  see  what  he  was  about,  but  they

]  came  no  nearer,  and  tied  their  horses  to  the

I  bushes. § What  he  saw  was the advanced

I  guard  of  the  enemy  who  were  approaching  to

j  besiege  him.

Meanwhile  he  had  no  apprehension. Hs

!  had  just repaired his fortress; and  had  no

doubt  that  he  would  be  able  to  stand  a  siege

of  three  months  at  least,  in  W'hich  time  his

allies  would  come  up  and  relieve  him. •

But  the  event  proved  that  he  had  not  rightly
calculated  the  improvement  that  had  taken
place  in  the  engines  cf  war  during  the  preceding
century.  Fie  had  no  other  means  of  defence
than  those  used  by  the  knights  of  old :  it  re-
mained to  be  seen  whether  theJofty  situation,
the  vaulted  towers — solid  as  the  rocks  they
stood  on — and  the  massive  walls,  could  afford
protection  against  artillery.  It  was  soon  evident
that  the  old  defences  were  far  too  weak  for  the
modern  arts  of  war.  On  the  30th  of  April
1523,  the  princes  began  to  bombard  the  castle
with  carronades  and  culverins,  well  supplied

§  Hubert  Th.  Leodius,  Acta  et  GestaTrancisci  de  Sick-
ingen in  Freher  Script.  Rer.  Germ.  iii.  p.  305.

Chap.  IV.

SICKINGEN.

191

with  ammunition  and  well  served.  The  young
landgrave,  who  appeared  in  the  dress  of  a
landsknecht,  showed  courage  and  skill  :*  the
great  tower,  which  commanded  and  threatened
their  camp,  fell  the  same  day :  the  nevv'ness  of
its  walls  made  them  less  able  to  withstand  the
shock  of  the  cannon-balls.  Sickingen  seeing
this  unexpected  misfortune,  went  to  a  loophole,
and  leaning  on  a  battering  engine,  sought  to
get  a  view  of  the  state  of  things,  and  of  what '*
was  to  be  done.  A  culverin  happened  at  the
moment  to  be  pointed  in  that  direction  with
but  too  sure  an  aim ;  the  implements  of  de-
fence were  scattered  in  all  directions,  and
Sickingen  himself  was  hurled  against  a  sharj)
beam  and  mortally  wounded  in  the  side.

The  whole  fortress  was  a  ruin  :  in  the  only
vault  which  remained  standing,  lay  the  lord  of
the  castle,  bereft  of  all  hope.  No  help  ap-
peared in  sight.  "  V\"here  now,"  said  Sick-
ingen, "  are  those  gentlemen,  my  friends,  who
promised  me  so  much  1  Where  is  Fürstenberg  ]
where  are  the  Swiss  and  the  Strasburgers  V
He  was  at  last  forced  to  capitulate. |

The  princes  having  refused  to  allow  him
liberty  to  evacuate  the  castle,  as,  according  to
custom,  he  proposed,  he  said,»  "I  will  not  be
their  prisoner  long."  He  had  scarcely  strength
enough  left  to  sign  the  conditions,  and  lay
dying  when  the  princes  entered  the  donjon.

The  Elector  of  Treves  said,  "^Yhat  charge
had  you  to  bring  against  me,  Franz,  that  you
attacked  me  and  my  poor  subjects  in  m}'  see  1"
"And  what  against  me,"  said  the  landgrave,
"  that  3'ou  invaded  my  land  in  my  nonage  ]"
Sickingen  replied,  "  I  have  now  to  render  an
account  to  a  greater  sovereign."

His  chaplain  Nicolas  asked  him  whether  he
wished  to  confess,  but  he  answered,  "I  have
already  confessed  to  God  in  mj  heart."

The  chaplain  addressed  to  him  some  last
words  of  consolation,  and  held  up  the  host;
the  princes  bared  their  heads  and  knelt  down  :
at  that  moment  Sickingen  expired,  and  the
princes  said  a  paternoster  for  his  souL:i:

Sickingen's  memory  will  live  for  ever  ;  net
on  account  of  any  great  achievements  productive
of  lasting  results,  nor  even  on  account  of  his
extraordinary  bravery,  or  of  any  eminent  moral
qualities  he  evinced,  but  for  the  novelty  and
importance  of  the  position  to  which  he  gradually
attained^  The  first  step  in  his  rise  v.-as  his
connexion  with  the  Elector  Palatine,  vv-ho  em-
ployed him  against  his  enemies,  opened  a
career  to  him,  and  afforded  him  support  and
assistance  both  publicly  and  in  secret.  Thus
in  a  short  time,  from  an  inconsiderable  knio-ht,
possessor  only  of  two  or  three  mountain  castles,
he  became  a  povrerfal  Condottiere,  who  could
bring  a  small  army  into  the  field  at  his  own
charges. The  more  considerable  he  became,

*  Lettera  da  Ispruch  a  dl  12  xMazo,  15-23,  al  S^  Mch.  di
Mantoa.  "  11  Landgrafio  si  e  portato  inagnaiiiinamente,
essendo  sempre  stato  de  li  primi,  in  zuppone  con  le  caize
tagliate  et  in  corsaietto  da  Lanzichenech,  et  e  giovane  di
18  amn.''—Sanuto's  Cron.  Ven.  vol.  xxx'iv.

t  Account  of  what  occurred  in  the  wars  of  Franz  Sick-
ingen ;  Spalatin,  Sammlung  zu  Sachs.  Gesch.,  v.  p.  148^

X  The  Flersheimer  Chronik  contains  the  most  authentic
account. Pdiinch,  iii.  222.

the  more  he  felt  tempted  to  pursue  his  own  line
of  policy,  and  justified  in  doing  so.  The
Würtemberg  war  was  the  first  occasion  on
which  he  separated  himself  from  the  elector,
who  did  not  cordially  approve  that  enterprise.
He  did  not,  however,  on  that  account  join
the  Swabian  League  ;  on  the  contrary,  he  soon
entered  into  the  closest  alliance  with  the  Fran-
conian  knights,  with  whom  that  body  was  at
enmity.  This  it  was  that  rendered  his  position
so  iiTiposing.  We  have  seen  how,  a  few  years
before,  Würtemberg,  the  Palatinate,  and
Würzburg  opposed  the  Swabian  League  with
■the  aid  of  the  knights.  Now%  hoAvever,  the
princes  had  been  forced  to  join  the  league,  and
Würtemberg  had  been  subdued;  so  that  Sick-
ingen and  the  knights  maintained  the  opposition
single-handed.  Visions  of  reviving  the  ancient
independence  of  the  nobilit}'^ ;  of  freeing  them-
selves from  the  territorial  jurisdiction  of  the
temporal  and  spiritual  princes,  and  of  opening
the  way  for  the  spread  of  tfie  new  religious
convictions,  iloated  before  their  minds.  Never
was  there  a  more  singular  combination  :  in  the
midst  of  the  deeds  of  violence  that  were  com-
mitted, there  was  a  lively  and  ready  apprehen-
sion of  great  ideas :  it  is  this  strange  union
which  characterizes  the  nobility  of  that  time.
Meanwhile  they  had  neither  the  intellectual
power  ncr  the  political  influence  necessary  to
carr}'  out  projects  of  such  a  nature.  When
Sickingen  at  last  decidedly  attacked  the
princely  authority,  mightier  powers  took  the
field  against  him ;  the  Palatinate  not  only
abandoned  him.,  but  combined  with  his  enemies
for  his  destruction. §  He  then  discovered  that
he  was  not  so  strong  as  he  believed  himself  to
be,  that  he  did  not  owe  his  elevation  to  his  own
powers  alone,  and  that  those  which  had  helped
to  raise,  were  now  turned  against  him.  In  this
confljkct  he  perished.

The  taking  of  Landstuhl  was  a  victory  of
the  order  of  princes  {FürstentJium)  over  that
of  knights  {Riiterthum)  ;  of  the  cannon  over
the  stronghold,  and  in  so  far,  of  the  new  order
of  things  over  the  old ;  it  fortified  the  newly
arisen  independent  powers  of  the  empire.

^11  the  castles  belonging  to  Sickingen  and
his  friends  now  fell  into  the  hands  of  the
princes.  They  were  twenty-seven  in  all,  in-
cluding those  taken  in  the  course  of  the  autumn.
Those  on  the  right  bank  of  the  Rhine  fell  to
the  share  of  the  landgrave,  those  on  the  left
were  divided  betw^een  the  elector  palatine  and
the  archbishop.  In  the  Ebernberg,  the  only
castle  that  defended  itself  for  any  length  of
time,  rich  booty  was  taken, — splendid  jewels
and  plate,  both  for  w^orldly  and  religious  pur-
poses ;  but  above  all,  thirty-six  pieces  of  artil-
lery, the  linest  of  which — the  Nightingale,
cast  by  Master  Stephen  of  Frankfurt^ — measured
thirteen  feet  and  a  half,  weighed  seventy  hun-

§  Contemporaries  saw  it  in  this  light,  as  is  shown  hy
the  dialogue  between  the  Fox  and  the  Vv^olf:  "Wolf:
Wie  niainstu  hat  der  Pfalzgraff  gethon,  wir  wollen  gut
feiste  Bolz  erlangt  han?  Fuths  :  es  ist  bei  Got  war,  der-
selb  hat  uns  allein  den  Schaden  thon  des  wir  uns  nit  ver-
sehen."—'"The  Wolf:  How  thinkest  thou,  has  the  elector
palatine  done— should  we  have  received  good  large  cross-
bow bolts?  The  Fox  :. It  is  true,  by  God;  h^  alone  has
done  us  the  mischief  against  which  we  had  not  guarded."

192

FRANCONIAN  KNIGHTS.

Book  III.

dred  weight,  and  was  decorated  with  the
figures  of  the  knight  and  his  lady,  their  re-
spective ancestors,  and  the  saint  for  whom  tliey
had  formerly  had  a  peculiar  devotion  —  St.
Francis.*  This  was  part  of  the  landgrave's
share.  The  princes  hound  themselves  to  aid
each  other  to  keep  what  they  had  won  in  com-
mon, after  which,  on  tire  6th  of  June,  they
separated.

At  the  same  moment  the  Swabian  League
held  a  meeting  at  Nördlingen,  to  which  all  the
Franconian  knights  accused  of  a  breach  of  the
Public  Peace  were  summoned  for  trial.  Some
of  them  succeeded  in  clearing  themselves  from
suspicion  :  others  appeared,  but  failing  to  prove
their  innocence,  they  were  not  admitted  to  their
oath.  Man)'-  altogether  disdained  to  present
themselves  before  the  councillors  of  the  league. |
Against  the  two  last  classes,  an  army  of  1500
horse  and  15,000  foot  assembled  on  the  15th
.Tune,  at  Dünkelspiel,  under  the  command  of
George  Truchsess :  the  cities  of  Augsburg,
Ulm,  and  Nürnberg  provided  the  artiHer5\:|:
Such  an  army  as  this  was  far  too  powerful  to
be  resisted  by  the  Franconian  nobles.  Bocks-
berg,  near  Mergentheim,  was  considered  the
strongest  castle  in  Franconia,  and  upon  it,  on
the  advice  of  the  Nürnbergers,  the  march  was
first  directed.  The  Rosenbergs,  to  whom  it
belonged,  had  orrginaljy  meant  to  defend  them-
selves, and  had  hired  a  troop  of  landsknechts
and  musketeers  to  serve  their  guns  ;  but  when
they  saw  such  an  overpowering  force,  they
gave  up  all  idea  of  defence,  and  surrendered
their  castle  with  its  stores.  This  example  put
an  end  to  all  resistance.  The  castle  of  Absberg
was  burnt,  and  nothing  left  standing  but  the
bare  walls.  In  the  Krügelstein  there  stood  a
tourer,  the  walls  of  which  were  eight  feet
thick,  even  at  the  top;  this  was  blown  up
with  gunpow^der.  Waldstein,  in  the  midst  cf
its  wilderness,  whither  many  a  prisoner  had
been  dragged,  was  blown  up  and  destro)'^ed  by
Wolf  von  Freiberg,  the  captain  of  the  city  of
Augsburg  :  twenty-six  castles  are  enumerated,
all  of  which  were  seized,  and  most  destroyed.
Some  of  these  Vv^ere  Bohemian  fiefs;  and  at
first  tlie  Bohemians  haU  made  a  show  of  re-
sistance in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  moun-
tains; but  the  League  ordered  its  commander
to  act  up  to  his  instructions,  without  regard  to
the  Bohemians,  v^'ho  accordingly  retreated,
leaving  him  to  fulfil  his  terrible  commission.

The  independent  knights  were  utterly  crushed.
Just  as  they  had  caught  the  inspiration  of  re-
ligion, and  had  hoped  by  its  influence  to  open
a  new  career  for  themselves,  their  power  was
broken  for  ever.  We  must  not  fail  to  observe
a  fact  intimately  connected  with  this  event.
The  man  who  first  brought  the  warlike  spirit  of
knighthood  into  contact  with  the  religious  agita-
tions of  the  times,  Ulrich  von  Hütten,  was  in-

*  Report  in  Spalatin,  p.  151.

t  Letter  from  Nörcllinsen  in  the  Dresden  Archives,  he-
ginning  of  Jime,  15-23,  "clor  Bund  geht  te_glich  zwir  in
Rath." — "The  league  meets  in  council  everv  day."
Chiefly  from  Miillner's  Annalen,  which  contains  a'joarnal
of  the  whole  expedition.  ^

I  Nürnberg  gave  2  cannon,  2  cai-ronadep,  2  nightingales,
•2  culverins,  6  rabinets,  6  mortars,  60  pole-axes.

volved  in  the  common  catastrophe.  He  had  given
to  Sickingen's  enterprises  the  incalculable  aid
of  a  zealous  counsellor  and  encouraging  friend  :
he  was,  therefore,  naturally  struck  with  con-
sternation at  his  fall.  He  dared  not  ^endanger
the  safety  of  his  relations  by  his  presence  ;  and
in  Upper  Germany  he  was  equally  obnoxious
to  the  vengeance  of  the  spiritual,  and  of  the
victorious  temporal  authorities ;  he  took  refuge
in  Switzerland,  as  others  had  done  in  Saxony.
There  he  fell  again  into  the  same  bitter  and
desponding  state  of  mind  which  he  had  once
laboured  under  in  his  youth.  Nor,  even  here,
did  he  always  find  a  welcome ;  he  wandered
from  place  to  place,  under  the  unhappy  neces-
sity of  asking  money  and  assistance  of  his
literary  friends,  many  of  whom  shunned  him
as  dangerous.  Erasmus,  who  carefully  kept
up  his  connexions  among  the  great,  was  fright-
ened at  the  idea  of  receiving  a  visit  from  him,
'and  avoided  and  repulsed  him.  In  addition  to
this,  his  old  disease  broke  out  again  in  a
dreadful  manner.  Yet  the  veteran  combatant
did  not  lose  his  courage ;  once  more  he  poured
forth  all  the  vehemence  of  his  rhetoric  against
Erasmus,  whom  he  looked  upon  as  an  apostate.
But  he  had  now  no  longer  strength  to  bear
such  violent  emotions  and  exertions,  and  before
he  could  receive  the  answer  of  Erasmus,  dis-
ease put  an  end  to  his  life  : — he  died  at  Ufnau,
on  the  lake  of  Zürich,  where  he  had  gone  at
Zwingli's  advice  to  consult  a  priest  skilled  in
the  healing  art.§

It  was  fortunate  for  Luther  that  he  had  made
no  closer  alliance  v/ith  the  knights  ;  as  both  he
and  tlie  doctrine  he  preached  vrould  have  been
involved  in  their  evil  destiny.

If  we  now  return  to  the  point  v;hence  we
started,  we  shall  clearly  perceive,  that  the
whole  turn  of  afiairs  Avas  unpropitious,  and
even  dangerous,  to  the  Council  of  Regency.
It  Vv'ould  indeed  have  been  unable  to  do  any
thing  for  Sickingen,  having  tied  its  own  hands
by  declaring  him  an  outlaw  ;  it  would  however
gladly  have  afl'orded  protection  to  the  knightly
order ;  but  what  resistance  could  it  possibly
m.ake  to  two  such  powerful  armies  as  those  of
the  League  and  of  the  princes  1  Moreover
these  two  powers,  emboldened  by  conquests,
assumed  an  attitude  of  still  greafer  defiance,
and  even  hostility.  The  princes  declared  the
judgment  in  favour  of  Frowen  von  Hütten
invalid  and  illegal, ||  and  rejected  the  proceed-
ings of  the  Regency  in  that  and  all  other  cases.

To  this  dangerous  hostility  another  no  less
formidable  was  soon  added.

THE CITIES AND THE IMPERIAL COURT.

Under  the  circumstances  we  have  been  de-
scribing, the  establishment  of  the  proposed
import duties,  by Vvhich the povv^er  of  the

§  Zwinglius  to  Wolfhardt,  11th  Oct.,  "  libros  nullos  ha-
buit,  supellectilem  nuiiam  praeter  calamum." — JEpp.,  u.
313.

!l  Pianitz,23d  July.  He  thinks  that,  under  such  circum-
stances, the  Council  of  Regency  could  not  last  long:
"Denn  der  dreier  Fürstent  und  des  Bunds  Vornehmen
will  sieht  mit  unsern  gethanen  Pflichten  gar  nicht  leiden."
—"The  intentions  of  the  three  princes  and  of  the  league
will  not  square  with  our  duties."

Chap.  IV.

THE  CITIES  AXD  THE  IMPERIAL  COURT,

193

Council  of  Regency  must  have  been  materially
increased,  could  not  have  failed  to  produce
important  results.  There  ought  to  have  been
no  hesitation  on  the  subject ;  the  States  had
resolved  on  it ;  the  emperor  had  given  his  con-
sent beforehand.  A  messenger  from  the  lieu-
tenant of  the  Empire  had  already  carried  the
acts  and  the  Recess  of  the  diet  to  Spain.

But  we  have  already  remarked  how  much
the  cities  thought  themselves  injured  and  en-
dangered by  such  an  interference  with  com-
merce :  they  were  determined  not  to  submit
to  it  without  resistance.

They  had  also  many  other  grievances  to
allege.

In  the  year  1521,  the  decree  concerning  the
levies  for  the  expedition  to  Rome  had  been
passed  without  summoning  the  cities,  according
to  ancient  usage,  to  the  deliberation.  The
cities  immediately  complained,  whereupon  an
explanation  was  given  which  satisfied  them
for  the  moment.

Since  then,  however,  the  attempts  made  to
meet  the  exigencies  of  the  empire  by  taxes
which  would  have  fallen  most  heavily  on  the
cities  ;  their  determined  resistance  ;  the  attacks
on  the  monopolies  on  the  one  side,  and  the
obstinate  maintenance  of  them  on  the  other,
had  been  continually  augmenting  the  ill-will
between  the  cities  and  the  higher  classes  ;  and
at  the  diet  of  1522-3  it  openly  burst  forth.

A  general  meeting  of  the  States  was  an-
nounced for  the  11th  of  December.  1522,  in
order  to  hear  and  discuss  proposals  to  be  made
by  the  Council  of  Regenby  and  the  committee,
for  succours  to  be  granted  to  the  Hungarians.
It  had  formerly  been  customary  for  the  Council
of  Regency,  after  submitting  a  proposition,  to
retire  and  leave  the  three  colleges  to  deliberate
thereupon.  On  this  occasion,  however,  the
Regency  did  not  retire  :  the  electors  and  princes
assented  to  its  proposal  without  separating,
and  it  was  then  laid  before  the  cities.  The
cities,  which  were  peculiarly  interested  in
questions  of  this  kind,  and  always  rather  hard  to
satisf}",  asked  time  for  consideration — only  till
the  afternoon.  Hereupon  they  received  an
answer  which  they  little  expected  :  they  were
told,  that  "  the  usage  in  the  empire  was,  that
when  a  thing  was  determined  on  by  the  electors,
princps  and  other  Estates,  the  cities  should  be
content  to  abide  by  it."  The  citizens,  on  their
side,  contended,  that  if  they  were  to  share
weal  and  woe  with  the  other  States,  they  ought
also  to  have  a  voice  in  the  deliberations ;  in
short,  that  those  who  took  their  purses  must
be  fain  to  take  their  counsel.  The  subsidies  in
money  were  what  they  particularly  objected
to;  like  the  other  States,  they  would  only
furnish  men.  But  no  attention  was  paid  by  the
assembly  to  a  resolution  they  drew  up  to  this
effect.  A  mandate  was  issued,  requiring  them
to  furnish  contributions  which  they  had  never
voted  :  they  asked  fresh  time  for  deliberation,
but  were  again  told  that  it  was  not  the  practice  :
they  were  preparing  to  reply  when  it  struck
eleven,  and  the  sittinor  was  dissolved.*

Letter from Holzhausen  to Frankfort,  Dec.  1522.
25  R

The  cities  were  the  more  confounded  at  this
proceeding,  on  being  told  that  it  was  by  special
favour  that  two  of  their  deputies  were  received
into  the  committee,  whereas  the  counts  had  only
one  :  thay  thought  this  betrayed  an  intention
of  excluding  them  from  the  committees  alto-
gether. In  the  year  14S7,  they  had  given  up
the  opposition  which,  as  a  body,  they  had  lon^
maintained,  because  the  Elector  Berthold  of
Mainz  had,  as  we  saw,  obtained  for  them  a
practical  share  in  the  deliberations ;  and  we
knov%-  how  powerfully  this  was  sometimes  ex-
ercised :  they  now  supposed  that  the  intention
was  to  strip  them  of  all  their  rights,  at  the  same
time  that  the  fulfilment  of  their  obligations
was  strictly  enforced.

As  measures  which  threatened  to  be  ex-
tremely injurious  to  their  trade  and  manufac-
tures were  now  resolved  on  with  reference  to
monopolies  and  import  duties,  and  as  a  fresh
petition,  in  which  all  their  grievances  past  and
present  were  set  forth,  had  proved  as  ineffectual
as  the  preceding  ones,  they  determined  to  resist
with  all  their  might.

They  steadily  withheld  their  assent  to  the

decisions  of  the  diet,  and  obstinately  refused

to  grant  a  loan  which  they  were  called  upon  to

advance,  andvwhich  was  to  be  repaid  out  of

the  proceeds  of  the  tax  for  the  Turkish  war.

,  Hereupon  the  princes  took  care  to  let  them  feel

I  their displeasure. "  The imperial towns,"

I  writes  the  deputy  from  Frankfurt,  j  "  are  depart-

I  ing under  heavy  disgrace : time alone can

show  wjiat  will  be  the  result;  but  my  journey

,  home  is  a  sad  one."

j It  was  fortunate  for  the  cities  that  the  de-
.  cisions  of  the  States  did  not  immediately  ac-
quire the  force  of  law,  but  had  first  to  be  sent
to  Spain  to  receive  the  emperor's  ratification.
Their  only  hope  lay  in  this. In  March,  1523,
the  cities  assembled  in  Spire,  and  resolved  to
send  an  embassy  of  their  own  to  Spain,  to  re-
present to  the  emperor  the  injury  they  appre-
.  bended  from  the  proposed  duties,  as  well  as
.  their  other  grievances.

The  report  of  this  mission  is  fortunately  still
extant,  and  we  will  pause  over  it  for  a  moment,
as  it  affords  us  a  curious  specimen  of  the
manner  in  which  the  affairs  of  Germany  were
conducted  at  the  Imperial  court  in  Spain.

The  journey  was  extremely  long  and  fa-
tiguing. On  the  15th  of  June,  the  delegates
met  at  Lyons,  and  it  was  not  till-  the  6th  of
Augfust  that  they  reached  Yalladolid :  the
chief  cause  of  delay  was  the  oppressive  heat,
which  even  caused  som.e  of  the  party  to  fall
sick.

They  began  by  visiting  Markgrave  Johann
of  Brandenburg,  the  high  chancellor,  and
above  all  the  councillors  to  whom  the  affairs
of  Germany  were  referred  ;  Herr  von  Rösch,
Hannart,  Provost  ]\Iärklin  of  ^Yaldkirchen,
and  ?»Iaximilian  von  Zevenberghen.

Hereupon,  on  the  9th  of  August,  the  em
peror  gave  them  a  formal  audience  in  the  pre-

Frankf.  Arch.,  vol.  xxxvi.,  particularly  f.  110.  Die  Supplik

der  Sttidte.

t  Holzhausen,  2öth,  26th,  29th  Jan.  15-33.  Vol.  sxxvii.
i  of  the  Frankf.  A.  is  here  my  chief  authority.

194

THE  CITIES  AND  THE  IMPERIAL  COURT.

Book  III.

sence  of  a  brilliant  assembly  of  grandees,
bishops  and  ambassadors  :  they  addressed  him
in  Latin,  and  were  answered  in  the  same  lan-
guage by  the  chancellor,  in  the  emperor's  name.

A  commission  was  then  appointed  to  discuss
affairs  with  them,  consisting  only  of  the  four
German  councillors  we  have  named  above :
the  proceedings  commenced  on  the  11th  of
August.

The  delegates  had  drawn  up  a  statement  of
their  grievances  under  six  heads  ; — adminis-
tration of  justice,  tolls,  subsidies.  Public  Peace,
monopolies,  and  other  things  of  less  import-
ance. These  they  laid  before  the  commis-
sioners in  German  and  Latin,  and  then  went
through  them  together,  which  gave  them  an
opportunity  of  expressing  their  vv'ishes  orally.

The  councillors  at  first  appeared  unfavour-
ably inclined.  They  thought  it  unjust  that
the  question  of  the  jurisdictions  should  not
have  been  brought  forward  till  now,  when  a
young  emperor  had  just  ascended  the  throne:
they  complained  that  no  class  in  the  empire
would  do  its  part,  although  neither  the  Coun-
cil of  Regency  nor  the  courts  of  justice  could
be  maintained  without  supplies  from  the
several  Estates :  they  exhorted  the  cities  to
submit  for  a  short  time  longer,  and  not  to  refuse
their  share  of  the  contributions  voted  by  the
diet  on  the  part  of  the  whole  empire,  in  aid
of  the  Hungarians.  A  draught  of  a  ratifica-
tion of  the  decree  of  the  diet  had  actually  been
prepared  at  the  instigation  of  another  imperial
councillor.  Doctor  Lamparter.  But  the  dele-
gates were  not  so  easily  put  off:  they  declared
that  the  cities  were  ready  to  contribute  their
share ;  for  example,  to  pay  two  members  of
the  Imperial  Chamber,  and  even  to  pay  the
contributions,  at  the  rate  determined  at  the  diet
of  Constance;  but  that  they  had  no  intention
of  submitting  to  the  unjust  demands  attempted
to  be  enforced  against  them.  They  supported
their  declarations  with  a  very  few  acute  and
stringent  remarks.  "  Who  can  foretell,"  said
they,  "what  will  become  of  the  revenues
raised  from  these  import  duties  1  It  is  reported
that  a  scheme  has  already  been  proposed  by
the  princes  for  sharing  the  proceeds  amongst
themselves ;  and  even  if  this  be  not  true,  there
is  a  project  of  electing  a  king  of  the  Romans,
who  would  be  able  to  maintain  his  power  out
of  the  revenue  thus  raised."  In  short,  they
made  it  appear  that  the  duty  would  be  dan-
gerous to  the  emperor  himself;  remarking,  at
the  same  time,  that  the  Council  of  Regency
was  not  composed  in  the  manner  most  favour-
able to  the  interests  of  the  emperor.  They
also  promised  the  councillors,  personal]}'-,  "  to
make  a  grateful  return  to  them  for  their  trouble."

The  cities  had  thus  hit  upon  the  means  by
which  any  thing  was  to  be  accomplished  at  the
imperial  court.

At  the  next  meeting  the  Provost  of  Wald-
kirchen  gave  them  to  understa,nd,  that  the
emperor,  finding  how  unpopular  it  was,  was
not  inclined  to  impose  the  duty  in  question ;
neither  was  it  his  intention  to  continue  the
Council  of  Regency;  but  he  must  then  ask,
what  the  cities  were  prepared  to  do  for  his  im-

perial majesty,  if  he  took  the  government  into
his  own  hands  ]  The  delegates  replied,  that  if
the  emperorgranted'theirpetition,  and  then  made
any  reasonable  suggestion  to  them,  they  would
show  themselves  grateful  and  obedient  subjects.
Waldkirchen  reminded  them  that  it  appeared
from  the  old  registers,  that  the  last  emperors
on  their  accession  had  received  a  gift  of  honour
from  the  cities ;  and  asked,  why  this  had  been
omitted  for  the  first  time  with  -the  young  em-
peror, who,  he  said,  placed  his  whole  confi-
dence in  the  cities,  and,  were  it  not  for  the
wars,  would  take  a  straightforward  and  royal
course  with  regard  to  them.

Another  matter  next  fell  under  discussion.
The  pope's  nuncio  had  complained  that  in
Augsburg,  Strasburg,  and  Nlirnberg,  Luther's
doctrines  were  received,  and  his  works  printed.
The  delegates,  on  being  chilled  to  account  for
this,  denied  the  fact.  They  declared  that  not
a  syllable  of  Luther's  writings  had  been  printed
in  their  towns  for  several  years ;  nay  more,
that  foreign  itinerant  venders  of  his  books  had
been  punished  ;  and  that,  however  much  the
common  people  might  thirst  after  the  Gospel
and  reject  human  doctrines,  it  was  not  from
the  towns  that  Luther  found  protection  :  it  w^as
well  known  who  his  defenders  were  ;  the  cities,
for  their  part,  were  resolved,  hereafter  as  here-
tofore, to  remain  Christian  members  of  the
Christian  church.

Hereupon  the  two  parties  came  to  an  agree-
ment on  the  most  important  points.  Another
conference  between  the  whole  commission  and
the  delegates  was  held  on  the  19th  of  August,
and  attended  also  by  the  Count  of  Nassau.
The  doors  having  been  carefully  closed,  the
delegates  were  informed,  that  the  emperor  in-
tended to  take  the  government  into  his  own
hands,  to  appoint  a  valiant  lieutenant,  and  a
noble  and  dignified  Imperial  Chamber,  and  not
to  allow  the  imposition  of  the  import  duties.
The  amount  of  the  sum  to  be  offered  to  him
w^as  left  to  the  discretion  of  the  delegates ;  but
they  promised  to  come  to  an  agreement  on  the
subject  with  Hannart,  who  was  to  go  to  Ger-
many as  the  imperial  commissioner.

The  delegates  were  also  to  treat  concerning
the  monopolies  ;  not  exactly  on  the  part  of  the
cities  as  a  body,  but  in  the  name  of  the  great
mercantile  companies.  The  omnipotence  of
money  and  its  possessors  soon  helped  them  to
the  attainment  of  their  object.  It  was  settled
that  the  Council  of  Regency  was  to  be  directed
to  pass  no  resolution  with  regard  to  the  mo-
nopolies, without  again  asking  the  consent  ot
his  imperial  majesty.*

Their  commission  being  thus  satisfactorily
executed,  the  delegates  quitted  Spain.  At
Lyons  they  had  an  audience  of  Francis  I.,
who  vented  upon  them  his  anger  against  the
emperor.  In  December  they  reached  Nürnberg,
where  a  fresh  diet  had  just  assembled.

*  "  Der  gemeynen  Frey  und  Reichs  Stadt  Potschafftea
Handlung  bei  Romisch  Kayserl.  Majestadt  zu  Valedolid
in  Castih'a."— "  The  Negotiation  of  the  Embassy  of  the
united,  free,  and  imperial  Cities,  with  his  Roman  Im-
perial Majesty  at  Valladolid  in  Castile."  In  the  montli
of  August,  anno  1523.  In  the  Frankf.  Arch.,  torn,  xxxix,
foL  39-56.

Chap.  IV.

DIET  OF  1524.

195

The  final  result  then  was,  that  the  imperial
court  had  entered  into  a  combination  with  the
cities,  against  the  existing  form  of  government
in  the  empire,  and  especially  against  the
Council  of  Regency.

And,  indeed,  it  was  only  natural  that  the
imperial  councillors,  who  had  always  been  in
competition  with  this  administrative  body,
should  *ake  advantage  of  any  international
dispute  to  rid  themselves  of  it.

Another  and  a  still  stronger  motive  existed.
The  idea  had  really  arisen  in  Germany,  as  the
towns  had  hinted,  of  electing'  a  king  of  the
Romans.  Ferdinand  of  Austria,  the  emperor's
own  brother,  was  the  man  pointed  out  by  the
public  voice.  It  was  believed,  as  far  as  I  can
discover,*  that  he  wo  aid  govern  in  concert
with  the  Council  of  Regency,  according  to  the
forms  of  the  constitution  which  had  just  been
established  ;  and  it  is  manifest  that  this  could
only  have  attained  its  completion,  had  Germany
possessed  a  sovereign  of  limited  power,  and
dependent  on  constitutional  forms.  No  wonder
that  the  m.ere  suggestion  should  be  very  ill
received  in  Spain  ;  in  fact,  it  almost  implied
an  abdication  on  the  part  of  the  emperor.

Moreover,  Ferdinand  was  very  unpopular
there.  He  w^as  constantly  making  fresh  de-
mands, while  frequent  complaints  were  pre-
ferred against  him ;  besides,  the  Spaniards
believed  his  most  confidential  adviser,  Sala-
manca, to  be  equally  ambitious  and  selfish.
When  Hannart  went  to  Germany,  he  was
commissioned,  if  possible,  to  effect  Salamanca's
dismissal,  and  to  counteract  all  his  ambitious
views.

DIET  OF 1524.

If  in  a  former  chapter  we  have  endeavoured
to  show  what  weighty  interests  of  church  and
state  were  involved  in  the  existence  of  the
Council  of  Regency,  we  must  nov/  turn  our
attention  to  the  might)'"  and  determined  oppo-
sition arrayed  against  it.

Three  warlike  and  victorious  princes ;  the
Swabian  League,  which  wielded  such  formi-
dable forces ;  wealthy  cities ;  and  finally,
though  as  yet  in  secret,  the  Emperor,  whose
whole  hope  of  regaining  unlimited  authority
rested  on  the  overthrow  of  this  representative
body.

The  Council  of  Regency  was  not,  however,
destitute  of  support.  Archduke  Ferdinand
promised  not  to  consent  to  its  overthrow,  and
some  of  his  councillors  were  its  decided  ad-
herents, as  might  be  expected,  from  the  pros-
pects it  held  out  to  him  and  to  them.  The
Elector  of  Saxony,  to  whom  it  chiefl}''  owed  its
existence,  attended  the  diet  in  person  in  order
to  defend  it.  The  Elector  of  Mainz,  who  had
suffered  from  the  oppression  of  the  three  princes
alluded  to,  together  with  the  whole  house  of
Brandenburg,  were  among  its  champions.  The
Regency  also  enjoyed  the  whole  sympathy  of

*  I  extract  from  a  roll  of  the  Weimar  Archives,  which
contains  a  number  of  scattered  papers  written  bv  the
chief  councillors  of  the  archduke  to  Elector  Frederic,  of
which  I  intend  to  give  some  farther  account  in  the  Ap.
pendij.

the  knightly  order  (whose  only  hopes  were
founded  upon  it),  and  of  the  partisans  of  the
religious  innovations.

Thus  it  still  stood  on  firm  ground  :  in  spite
of  all  the  changes  of  individual  members,  the
majority  once  established,  remained  :  those  who
did  not  belong  to  it,  like  the Chancellor  of
Treves,  Otto  Hundt  of  Hessen,  stayed  away.f
i  The  imperial  fiscal  commenced  the  proceedings
against  the  great  mercantile  companies,  and  a
[  judgment  against  the  three  princes  was  pre-
]  pared. Several  most  important  questions  were
i  laid  before  the  diet,  which  opened  on  the  14th
I  of January, 1524,  concerning  the  means of
I  maintaining  the  government  and  the  adminis-
!  tration  of  justice;  the  execution  of  decrees  of
j  the  diet,  the  code  of  criminal  procedure,:|:  &c.
j It  is  a  calamity  for  any  power  to  have  pro-
duced no  great  results ;  and  under  this  disad-
vantage the  Council  of  Regency  laboured. It
had  been  unable  to  maintain  the  Public  Peace,
or  to  control  either  Sickingen  or  his  adversaries.
The  great  scheme'of  customs'  duties,  on  wliich
all  the  resources  for  carrying  on  the  government
depended,  had  come  to  nothing. It  was  now
I  assailed  by  blow  upon  blow.
I On  the  1st  of  February  the  attorney  of  the
three  princes,  Dr.  Yenningen,  appeared  before
the  general  assembly  of  the  States,  and  made
a  long,  bitter,  and  insulting  speech  against  the
proceedings  of  the  Council  of  Regency.

A  mandate  from  the  emperor  was  produced,
by  which  the  proceedings  already  commenced
against  the  commercial  companies  Vv^ere  stayed.
!  The  court  of  Spain  demanded  to  have  the  docu-
ments relating  to  the  case  laid  before  it.

Hannart  next  arrived,  and  from  the  first  took
part  with  the  opponents  of  the  Regency — the
Elector  of  Treves,  in  whose  company  he  came,
and  the  cities,  from  w-hom  he  had  received  a
present  of  500  gulden.§  At  his  first  interview
with  the  archduke  he  did  not  pay  him  the  re-
spect which  that  prince  expected,  nor  did  he
attempt  to  conceal  that  the  emperor  wished  for
the  dissolution  of  the  existing  form  of  govern-
ment.

Such  were  the  circumstances  under  which
the  assembly  of  the  States  began  their  delibe-
rations :  the  debate  on  the  grant  necessary  to
the  maintenance  of  the  Council  of  Regency
must,  of  course,  bring  the  matter  to  a  decision.'
The  Regency  was,  after  all,  the  expression
of  the  power  of  the  several  States  of  the  em-
pire ;  was  it  then  credible  that  the  States  would
themselves  assist  in  its  dissolution]

We  have  seen  that  the  Regenc)''  obtained  a
majority  in  the  former  diets  of  the  empire  ;
though  after  laborious  efforts  and  with  pre-
carious results.  A  host  of  new  antipathies
were  now  added,  arising  out  of  the  interests
of  the  sovereign  princes  and  the  free  cities ;  of

t  Otto  von  Pack  to  Duke  George  of  Saxony,  the  Friday
after  St,  Lucia  (Dresden  Arch,),  thinks  that  they  were
driven  out.  "  Darnach  wissen  E.  F.  Gn.  wer  die  andern
seint,  welche  alle  E.  F.  Gn.  Abweuen  wol  erdulden
können." — "Your  princely  grace  will  by  this  know  who
the  others  are,  that  can  all  well  bear  your  grace's  absence."

J  Frankfurter  Acten,  vol.  xxxix.,  in  which  are  these
documents,  and  vol.  xl.,  containing  the  letters  of  Holz-
hausen  concerning  this  diet.

§  Letter  of  Ferdinand's  in  Bucholtz,  ii,  p.  46.

98

DIET  OF  1524.

Book  III

money  and  of  religion.  The  influence  of  the
great  capitalists  was  enormous  even  in  those
times.  The  Fuggers  were  instrumental  in  the
election  of  Charles  V.  ;  and,'in  all  probability,
in  the  publication  of  the  bull  of  Leo  X.  against
Luther.  They  brought  about  the  alliance  be-
tween the  court  and  the  discontented  towns ;
and  it  was  mainly  by  their  influence  that  the
projected  system  of  duties  was  abandoned  ;
and  now  they  had  the  audacity  to  turn  the
affair  of  the  monopolies,  which  had  called  forth
so  many  decrees  of  the  diet  against  themselves,
into  a  subject  of  accusation  against  the  Council
of  Regency ;  alleging  that  that  body  had  as-
sumed judicial  powers  which  properly  belonged
to  the  Imperial  Chamber  alone.*  The  Bishop
of  Würzburg  accused  the  Council  of  Regency
of  openly  favouring  the  new  creed :  he  said
that  it  had  set  at  liberty  two  members  of  his
chapter  whom  he  had  brought  before  the  eccle-
siastical court  on  the  charge  of  contracting
marriage,  and  that  it  had  given  a  safe-conduct
to  a  canon  whom  he  had  banished  for  Lutheran
opinions.  The  imperial  commissioner  was
informed  that  most  of  the  members  of  the
Council  of  Regency  were  zealous  Lutherans. |
The  majority  which  had  hitherto  been  in  favour
of  that  body  was  not  compact  enough  to  resist
such  a  multitude  of  hostile  influences,  and
after  some  debate  and  vacillation,  turned  against
it.  The  States  did  not,  indeed,  go  so  far  as  to
propose  its  total  abolition,  but  resolved  not  to
meet  on  the  20th  of  February  to  consider  the
means  for  its  maintenance,  unless  its  members
v\'er8  previously  changed  ;  tfnd  declared  they
could  by  no  means  consent  to  its  continuance,
composed  as  it  then  was.

This  was,  however,  decisive.  The  important
point  was,  the  establishment  of  a  vigorous
government,  chosen  out  of  the  body  of  the
States  ;  but  what  could  be  expected  for  the
future,  if  the  present  members,  who  had  been
really  earnest  in  the  performance  of  their  duties,
and  had  actually  begun  to  govern,  were  to  be
deprived  of  office,  without  any  charge  worthy
of  a  moment's  discussion  being  brought  against
them  1  Was  it  likely  that  their  successors
would  show  any  courage  or  independence  1

It  was  once  more  rendered  evident,  that  the
powerful  separate  elements,  of  which  the  em-
pire was  compounded,  could  never  be  controlled
by  one  central  government.

Frederic  the  Wise  of  Saxony  felt  the  whole
significance  of  this  decision.  He  now,  at  the
close  of  his  life,  saw  the  idea  of  a  representative
government,  which  had  been  the  object  of  his
whole  existence,  completely  wrecked.  He
said,  that  he  had  neA'"er  witnessed  such  a  diet  :^

*  Holzhausen,  12th  Feb.  1524.  It  appears  from  this
that  only  Augsburg  offered  any  resistance  to  the  imperial
edicts  in  the  matter  of  the  monopolies.  All  the  other
towns  were  in  favour  of  their  abolition.  Dr.  Rolinger
had  inserted  the  article  touching  monopolies  of  his  own
accord  in  the  instruction  given  to  the  d§legates  sent  to
Spain.

t  Hannart  to  the  emperor,  14th  March  :— "  Et  certes  je
me  suis  pour  vray  averty,  la  pluspart  du  regiment  sont
grands  Lutheriens;  car  en  beaucoup  de  choses  et  provi-
sions qu'ils  out  fait,  ils  eussent  bien  peu  user  de  plus
grande  discretion  et  moderation  qu'ils  n'ont  (use).

X  At  all  events  the  provost  of  the  cathedral  of  Vienna
excused  him  with  these  words,  to  Campeggi,  who  asked

he  left  it  on  the  24th  of  February,  and  never
appeared  at  one  again.

Archduke  Ferdinand,  it  is  true,  still  refused
his  assent  to  the  decision;  he  even  used  his
personal  influence  to  win  over  the  cities  to  the
side  of  the  Council  of  Regency;  but  in  the
course  of  a  short  time,  observes  the  Saxon
ambassador,  his  councillors  were  no  longer  of
the  same  opinion :  it  seemed  as  if  Hannart,
instead  of  destroying  Salamanca's  power,  had
gained  him  over;  at  all  events,  he  never  de-
livered the  letter  in  which  the  emperor  desired
the  Elector  of  Saxony  to  assist  in  getting  rid
of  Salamanca.  These  causes  at  length  pro-
duced their  effect  on  Ferdinand :  "  after  holding-
out  resolutely  for  nine  weeks,"  writes  the
Saxon  ambassador,  on  the  1st  of  March,  "  he
has  suddenly  fallen  away."  He  consented
that  not  a  single  member  of  the  old  Council
of  Regency  should  be  admitted  into  the  new.§

The  Imperial  Chamber  underwent  the  same
sort  of  purification.  No  inquiry  was  made  as
to  whether  the  m-embers  had  been  attentive  or
negligent,  capable  or  incapable;  but  merely
whether  they  had  supported  the  nobles  against
the  princes,  or  aided  the  fiscal  in  the  prosecu-
tion of  monopolists.  Their  conduct  as  to  re-
ligious matters  was  also  taken  into  considera-^
tion.  Dr.  Kreutner,  the  assessor  for  the  circle
of  Franconia,  was  dismissed  for  having  eaten
meat  on  a  fast-day,  without  considering  that  he
had  a  claim  for  upwards  «f  1000 gulden,  arrears.

This  brings  us  to  the  main  question, — hov/
far  these  great  changes  re-acted  on  the  conduct
of  spiritual  affairs.  The  cause  of  the  Council
of  Regency  and  that  of  the  religious  reforma-
tion were,  as  we  see  at  every  step,  connected,
though  not  indissolubly :  the  question  now
was,  whether  the  States,  which  had  abandoned
the  Regency  to  its  fate,  would  be  equally  un-
favourable to  the  new  faith.

After  the  early  and  unexpected  death  of
Adrian  VL,  the  purer  and  severer  spirit  which
he  had  introduced  and  exemplified, disappeared.
Clement  VII.,  who  next  ascended  the  papal
chair,  v^^as,  like  his  predecessors,  exclusively
bent  on  maintaining  the  papal  privileges  ;  and
on  applying  the  temporal  forces  of  the  Statefj
of  the  church  to  personal  or  political  ends,
without  troubling  himself  seriously  about  the
necessity  of  reform.  He  sent  to  the  German
diet  a  man  of  his  own  way  of  thinking, — Lo-
renzo Campeggi.

Campeggi  found  Germany,  which  a  few
years  before  he  had  traversed,  surrounded  with
the  halo  of  an  unshaken  and  sacred  authority,
in  a  state  of  complete  apostasy.  In  Augsburg
he  was  assailed  with  derision  and  mockery
when,  at  his  entrance  into  the  town,  he  raised

the  cause  of  his  absence.  Letter  from  Wolfstal,  14th
March,  Weimar  Arch.  The  Italians  thought  he  had  gone
away  because  the  legate  had  come.  "Assai  sdegnato,"  as
the  Venetian  Ziani  expresses  himself,  Disp.  29  Martio.
The  same  person  remarks  that  Nürnberg  had  already
entirely  fallen  aw*ay  from  Catholicism  :  "  Di  qui  e  total-
mente  scancellata  la  sincera  fede."

§  According  to  a  letter  of  Wolf  von  Wolfstals,  Ferdi-
nand, even  on  the  17th  of  April,  said,  "  Dass  Hannart
ihn  sampt  ihm  selbst  verführt,  wie  wenn  ein  Blinder  den
andern  führt."— "  That  Hannart  had  deceived  him,  as
well  as  himself,  like  as  when  the  blind  lead  the  blind."

'.IV.

DIET  OF  1524.

197

his  hand  to  give  the»  customary  benediction.
After  this  he  was  advised  by  others,  and  thought
it  most  prudent  himself,  to  enter  Nürnberg
without  any  ceremony  whatever.  He  did  not
wear  his  cardinal's  hat,  and  made  no  sign  of
benediction,  or  of  the  cross;  and  instead  of
riding  to  the  church  of  St.  Sebaldus,  where
the  clergy  were  assembled  to  receive  him,  he
rode  straight  to  his  lodging.*

His  presence,  instead  of  damping  the  zeal
of  the  reforming  preachers,  seemed  to  inflame
it  to  the  utmost.  The  pope  v/as  characterised
as  antichrist,  before  the  face  of  his  legate.  On
Palm-Sunday  no  palms  were  strewed  ;  and  in
Passion- Week  the  ceremony  of  laying  down
the  cross  and  raising  it  again,  w^s  omitted  :
thousands  received  the  sacrament  in  both  kinds,|
and  not  only  among  the  common  people;  se-
veral members  of  the  Council  of  Regency  were
among  the  communicants,  and  even  the  sister
of  the  archduke.  Queen  Isabella  of  Sweden,
partook  of  the  cup  at  the  castle  of  Nürnberg.

It  is  very  possible  that  these  public  demon-
strations produced  in  the  mind  of  Ferdinand,
on  whom  the  new  doctrines  had  made  no  im-
pression, and  who  had  been  brought  up  in  all
the  rigour  of  Spanish  Catholicism,  the  deter-
mination to  abandon  the  Council  of  Regency ;
and  it  is  also  likely  enough  that  the  pope's
legate  had  some  influence  in  the  same  direction.
At  all  events,  the  fall  of  the  Council  of  Re-
gency, which  had  taken  the  new  doctrines
under  its  protection,  w^ould  necessarily  be  very
favourable  to  the  maintenance  of  Catholicism.

Perhaps  the  legate  founded  on  this  a  hope
of  obtaining  from  the  States  a  decision  agree-
able to  his  wishes  on  religious  affairs  generally.
He  complained  of  the  innovations  which  were
made  before  his  eyes.  He  reminded  the  States
of  the  edict  published  at  Worms,  and  expressed
his  astonishment  that  ordinances  of  this  kind
were  so  imperfectly  enforced  in  the  empire.
Hannart  also  demanded  the  execution  of  the
edict  in  the  emperor's  name.

On  this  occasion,  however,  it  became  mani-
fest that  relig-ion  had  by  no  means  decided  the
course  of  affairs,  how^ever  it  might  ha.ve  in-
fluenced the  conduct  of  some  individuals.  Had
no  political  motives  existed,  the  councillors  of
the  Regency  would  never  have  been  dismissed
on  account  of  their  religious  inclinations.  The
complaints  of  the  legate  made  no  impression.
"  Some,"  writes  Planitz,  "  are  indignant,  but
most  only  laugh."  The  cities,  which  had,
contributed  so  greatly  to  the  overthrow  of  the
Council  of  Regency ,  were  furious  at  the  mention
of  the  edict.  They  declared  that  the  common
people  w^ere  so  eager  for  the  word  of  God,  that

*  The  Regency  recommended  him  "  dass  er  seinen
Sejren  und  Kreuz" zu  thuti  vermeyd,  ano^esehen  wie  es  de-
shalb jetzund  stee."— "  To  avoid  making:  the  sign  of  the
cross  or  the  benediction,  seeing  how  matters  then  stood-"
— Feilitzsch  to  Frederic  of  Saxony,  lltk  March.

t  Planitz  (2Sth  March)  reckons  4000.  "  1st  deshalb
Mühe  und  Erbetjt.  und  sunderlich,  dass  es  des  Regiments
Personen  eines  Theyis  also  genommen."  —  "On  this
account  is  trouble  and  labour,  and  especially  as  the  per-
sons of  the  Regency  have  in  part  received  it  thus."  He
remarks  that  Ferdinand  was  very  angry  at  such  a  mani-
festation of  his  sister's  opinions.  "  Nicht  weiss  ich  wie
es  gehn  will."—"  I  know  not  hovv  it  will  end."

to  deprive  them  of  it  would  cause  rebellion,
bloodshed  and  general  ruin;  and  that  the  re-
solutions of  the  preceding  year  must  be  abso-
lutely adhered  to.  In  short,  with  regard  to
religious  affairs,  those  who  were  hostile  to
Rome  still  constituted  the  majority  in  the  States.
The  legate  was  reminded  soon  after  his  arrival
of  the  hundred  grievances  of  the  nation  which
had  been  sent  to  Rome  by  his  predecessor.
This  had  been  foreseen  in  Rome ;  and  the
legate  had  been  instructed  to  feign  that  the
memorial  containing  these  complaints  had  not
been  delivered  in  the  names  of  the  princes.^:
Accordingly  Campeggi  answered  with  a  per-
fectly untroubled  countenance,  "  that  no  official
announcement  of  those  grievances  had  reached
Rome ;  that  three  printed  copies  had  been  sent
thither,  it  was  true,  one  of  which  he  had  seen
himself,  but  that  he  could  not  bring  himself  to
believe  that  any  thing  so  beyond  measure  ill-
j  WTitten  could  be  produced  by  the  diet."  This
was  certainly  not  at  all  calculated  to  satisfy
the  temporal  Estates,  w-ho  had  been  extremely
in  earnest  with  regard  to  the  grievances,  the
statement  of  which  had  cost  so  much  trouble
and-  deliberation.

Moreover,  the  personal  behaviour  of  the
legate,  who  was  accused  of  sordid  avarice,  and
of  revolting  oppression  towards  the  poorer
sort  of  German  priests,  was  far  from  favourable
to  the  success  of  his  negotiations.§

W^hen  the  decisive  discussion  on  religious
affairs  arrived,  the  order  necessary  to  the  trans-
action of  public  business  and  the  presence  of
the imperial  commissioner  so  far  influenced
the  States,  that  they  did  not  deny  the  obliga-
tion they  lay  under  to  carry  the  edict  of  Worms
into execution ; but  to  this admission they
added  a  clause  to  a  directly  contrary  effect ;
namely,  that  they  would  execute  it  "  as  far  as
was  possible," — a  modification  of  so  vague  a
nature  that  it  was  left  to  the  discretion  of  each
individual  to  do  v;hat  he  pleased. The  cities
had  already  represented  at  length  that  it  was
j  not  possible. At  the  same  time  the  demand
I  was  renewed,  that  the  pope  should  convene  a
I  council  in  the  German dominions,  wäth  the
I  emperor's  consent. This  the  legate  undertook
I  to  advocate  faithfully  to  his  holiness.

It  was,  however,  questionable  \vh ether  this
i  was  sufficient  to  tranquillise  men's  minds  ;  or
I  whether,  in  such  a  state  of  fermentation,  they
would  v.-ait  patiently  for  so  remote  an  event  as
the  convocation  and  decision  of  an  ecclesias-
tical assembly  :  lastly,  whether  the  German
nation  would  so  far  renounce  the  unity  of  its
anti-Romish  tendencies,  which  had  taken  so
deep  a  'root,  as  to  consent  to  abide  by  the
results  of  a  council  composed  of  all  nations.

No  sooner  were  the  representatives  of  the
reforming  principles  dismissed  from  the  Coun-

l  Pallavicini,  i.  p.  222:  "  che  dissimulasse  che  la  scrit-
tura  si  fosse  ricevuta  per  nome  dei  principi."

§  A  detailed  contemporary  account  of  the  manner  in
which  the  legate  induced  the  learned  but  poor  Schoner  to
present  to  him  his  mathematical  instruments,  on  the
promise  of  a  benefice,  and  then  neither  procured  him  the
benefice  nor  paid  him  for  his  instruments.  Btrobel,
Nachricht  vom  Aufenthalt  Melanchthons,  in  Nürnberg,
p.  18.

J98

ORIGIN  OF  THE  DIVISION  IN  THE  NATION.

Book  III

cil  of  Regency,  than  the  necessity  of  supplying
the  place  of  their  labours  in  some  other  manner
was  doubly  felt.  This  aroused  the  champions
of  the  new  doctrines  to  unite  in  forming  a  most
remarkable  determination.

The  question  which  had  once  before  been  so
important  was  still  unanswered  ;  namely,  what
was  to  be  done  in  Germany  in  the  interval  till
the  council  met.  Spite  of  all  opposition,  a
resolution  still  more  extraordinary,  and  of
which  the  results  were  still  more  incalculable
than  that  of  the  former  year,  was  adopted  on
this  point.  It  was  determined  that,  in  the
"month  -of  November  of  the  current  year,  a
meeting  of  the  States  should  be  convened  at
Spire,  and  should  there  hold  a  definitive  de-
liberation. To  this  end  the  sovereign  princes  !
were  to  direct  their  councillors  and  learned
clerks  to  draw  up  a  list  of  all  the  disputed
points  which  were  to  be  discussed  and  decided.
Besides  this,  the  grievances  of  the  nation  and
means  for  their  redress  v/ere  to  be  considered
anew.  Meanwhile  it  was  resolved,  as  the  year
before,  that  the  holy  Gospel  and  God's  word
should  be  preached.*

It  is  indeed  true  that  the  party  favourable  to
Rome,  emboldened  by  the  overthrow  of  the
Council  of  Regency,  had  regained  somewhat
of  its  influence  at  this  diet,  but  still  it  was  kept
in  check  by  a  large  majority  :  the  German
nation  asserted  its  claim  more  strenuously  than
ever,  to  complete  independence  in  ecclesiastical
affairs,  as  against  the  pope  and  the  unity  of  the
Latin  church.

CHAPTER  y.

ORIGIN OF THE DIVISION IN THE NATION.

There  are  probably  few  reflecting  men,
how^ever  well-disposed  on  other  grounds  to  the
cause  of  ecclesiastical  reform,  who  have  not
occasionally  felt  inclined  to  join  in  the  usual
condemnation  of  it,  as  the  cause  of  the  sepa-
ration of  Germany  into  two  parts, — often  at
open  war  and  never  thoroughly  reconciled  ; —
to  impute  to  the  adherents  of  the  new  opinions
all  the  blame  of  having  broken  up  the  unity,
not  only  of  the  church,  but  of  the  empire.

*  Decree  of  tbe  Diet  of  Nürnberg,  18th  April,  J524.
When,  after  this  decree,  we  read  Luther's  paper,—"  Zwei
kaiserliche  uneinige  und  widerwärtige  Gebote"  (Altenb.
ii.  7ti2),  "Two  imperial  contradictory  and  incompatible
Orders,"— we  are  astonished  that  he  was  so  ill  satisfied.
The  cause  of  this,  however,  is,  that  in  the  mandate
founded  on  the  Recess,  the  article  prescribing  the  teaching
of  the  holy  Gospel  was  omitted,  while,  on  the  other  hand,
preat  stress  was  laid  on  the  observance  of  the  edict  of
Worms.  The  clause  "  so  viel  möglich,"  indeed,  is  there  ;
but  almost  disappears  under  the  constant  reiterations  of
the  edict  of  Worms  ;  hence  we  perceive  the  influence
which  the  imperial  chancery  obtained  after  the  abolition
of  the  old  Council  of  Reeency.  Luther  does  not  appear
to  have  been  aware  of  \he  Recess,  and  still  less  of  the
preceding  negotiations.  The  imperial  delegate,  Hannart,
and  the  papal  legate,  took  a  far  more  complete  view  of
the  matter.  They  thought  it  a  great  gain  that  at  any
rate  the  name  of  national  council  had  been  avoided.
Nevertheless,  Hannart  concludes  his  letter  of  the  16th
April  with  the  words,  "  que  cependant  se  fera  ung  concil
national  d'Aliemasne."

So  long  as  we  regard  the  facts  from  a  dis
tance,  they  doubtless  wear  this  aspect;  but  if
we  approach  nearer  to  them  and  contemplate
the  events  which  brought  about  this  division,
the  result  we  shall  arrive  at  will,  if  I  mistake
not,  be  far  different. .

No  man,  to  whatever  confession  he  may
belong,  can  deny,  what  was  admitted  even  by
the  most  zealous  Catholics  of  that  day;  viz.
that  the  Latin  church  stood  in  need  of  reform.
Its  thorough  worldliness,  and  the  ever-increas-
ing rigidity  and  unintelligible  formalism  of  its
dogmas  and  observances,  rendered  this  neces-
sary in  a  religious  view  ;  while  the  interference
of  the  papal  court,  which  was  not  only  op-
pressive in  a  pecuniary  sense,  by  consuming
all  the  surplus  revenue,  but  destructive  of  the
unity  and  independence  of  the  nation,  made  it
not  less  essential  to  the  national  interests.

Nor  can  it  be  alleged,  either  on  religious  or
national  grounds,  that  any  unjustifiable  mea-
sures were  resorted  to  to  effect  this  change.

Independently  of  all  the  more  precise  articles
of  the  Protestant  creed,  which  were  gradually
constructed  and  accepted,  the  essence  of  the
religious  movement  lay  in  this, — that  the  spirit
of  Christianity,  so  deeply  implanted  in  the
German  mind,  had  been,  by  degrees,  ripened
to  a  consciousness  of  its  own  independence  of
all  accidental  forms;  had  gone  back  to  its
original  source, — to  those  records  which  di-
rectly proclaim  the  eternal  covenant  of  tbe
Godhead  with  the  human  race,-— and  had  there
become  confident  in  its  own  truth,  and  resolute
to  reject  ajl  untenable  theories  and  subjugating
claims.

No  one  could  shut  hiö  eyes  to  the  peril  im-
pending over  the  whole  existing  order  of  things
in  the  nation,  from  a  departure  from  those  es-
tablished ecclesiastical  forms  which  had  such
mighty  influence  over  domestic  as  well  as
public  life.  We  have,  however,  seen  with
what  care  all  destructive  elements  v/ere  rejected,
with  how  much  self-control  every  violent
change  was  avoided,  and  how  patiently  every
question  was  still  left  to  the  decision  of  the
empire..

Let  it  not  be  objected  that  discord  had  al-
ready arisen,  and  that,  as  we  have  remarked,
action  was  encountered  by  re-action ;  no  mo-
mentous crisis  in  the  life  of  a  great  nation  was
ever  unaccompanied  by  this  stormy  shock  of
conflicting  opinions.  The  important  point  is,
that  the  divisions  should  not  have  sufficient
power  to  overthrow  the  paramount  and  ac-
knowledged supremacy  of  the  principle  of
unity.

Such  was  the  tendency  of  affairs  in  Germany
in  the  year  1524.

The  adherents  of  the  new  faith  had  hitherto
always  submitted  to  the  constitutional  govern-
ment of  the  empire ;  in  the  hope  of  obtaining
from  its  proceedings  and  favour  a  reconstruc-
tion of  the  ecclesiastical  institutions,  in  ac-
cordance both  with  the  wants  of  the  nation
and  the  commands  of  the  Gospel.

The  majority  in  the  Council  of  Regency,  as
we  have  seen,  influenced  the  States  in  this
spirit. In  spite  of  all  the  efforts  of  opponents,

Chap.  V.

ORIGIN  OF  THE  DIVISION  IN  THE  NATION.

199

and  of  the  various  external  difficulties,  a  ma-
jority was  formed  in  the  diet,  favourable  to  the
reformation.  Two  Recesses  were  drawn  up
and  agreed  to  in  its  favour.  Even  after  the  fall
of  the  Regency,  this  majority  maintained  itself,
and  resolved  that  a  national  assembly  should
be  convened  at  an  early  date,  and  should  oc-
cupy itself  exclusively  with  the  endeavour  to
bring  the  religious  affairs  of  the  empire  to  a
definitive  conclusion.

A  nobler  prospect  for  the  unity  of  the  nation,
and  for  the  farther  progress  of  the  German
people  in  the  career  they  had  already  entered
upon,  certainly  never  presented  itself.

tained  its  object,  it  would  have  given  tc  that
unity  a  much  more  solid  foundation.

In  order  to  discover  who  it  was  that,  at  this
decisive  juncture,  broke  the  bond  of  the  national
unity,  we  must  examine  how  it  happened  that
an  assembly  for  which  such  solemn  prepara-
tion had  been  made,  never  took  place.

The  See  of  Rome  naturally  opposed  it  ;  for
in  proportion  as  the  prospect  it  afforded  was
full  of  hope  and  promise  to  the  German  nation,
it  was  threatening  and  disastrous  to  the  court
of  Rome.

We  have  the  report  of  a  congregation  held
at  this  crisis  by  Pope  Clement  VII.,  at  which-

To  form  some  notion  of  the  degree  to  which  means  were  discussed  for  carrying  into  effect
it  occupied  the  minds  of  men,  we  have  only  to  |  the  bull  against  Luther,  and  the  edict  of  Worms,
examine  the  state  of  Franconia,  where,  daring  "  "  -  -  -
the  summer  of  1524,  six  opinions  or  reports,
destined  to  be  laid  before  this  assembly,  ap-
peared, all  conceived  in  the  spirit  of  the  evan-
gelical party.  Luther  felt  contented  and
happy  when  he  saw  the  judgment  of  the
learned  men  of  Brandenburg ;  he  said  that
this  was  coin  of  the  right  stamp,  such  as  he
and  his  friends  at  Wittenberg  had  long  dealt
withal.  That  of  Henneberg  was  not  so  com-
pletely in  accordance  with  his  opinions.  Lu-
ther's doctrine  concerning  free  will  vras  com-
bated in  it ;  but  in  all  other  respects  it  was
soundly  evangelical,  and  condemned  the  invo-
cation of  saints,  the  seven  sacraments  and  the
abuses  of  the  mass.  The  reports  of  Wind-
sheim  and  Wertheim  were  particularly  violent
against  the  saints ;  that  of  Nürnberg,  against
the  pope.  One  of  the  two  parties  which  di-
vided Rothenburg  sent  in  an  opinion  favourable
to  the  evangelical  side.*  The  other  party,
however,  v/hich  was  more  faithful  to  the  ancient
doctrine,  was  no  less  active.  Ferdinand  re-
quired his  universities  of  Vienna  and  Freibyrg
to  send  in  full  and  minute  explanations  of  the
disputed  points.  At  the  former  university,  the
faculties  immediately  prepared  to  draw  up  their
report,  and  that  of  theology  exhorted  the  others
to  abstain  from  all  mutual  offence.f  It  is  evi-
dent that  the  most  various  modifications  of
opinion  must  have  been  in  agitation  and  in
conflict  at  Spire.  What  results  might  not  have
been  anticipated,  had  it  been  possible  to  execute
the  project  of  holding  a  peaceful  and  moderate
discussion, — of  endeavouring  to  sever  the  good
from  the  bad  !

It  is  true  that  another  evangelical  majority,
like  that  with  which  the  proposal  originated,
was  fully  to  be  expected  ;  but  this  was  the  in-
evitable consequence  of  the  present  state  of
things  ;  the  nation  had  no  alternative  ;  it  must
resist  the  encroachments  of  Rome,  or  fall ;  the
religious  movement  could  no  longer  be  sup-
pressed, it  could  only  be  guided.  This  was
the  part  assigned  to  the  national  assembly  ;  nor
can  it  be  said  that  the  unity  of  the  nation  was
thus  endangered  ;  on  the  contrary,  had  it  at-

*  E.\'tracts  from  v.  d.  Lith  Erläuterung  der  Frank.  Re-
formatiorisliist,  p.  41.

fRaupach  Evangel.  Oei?treich,  ii.  p.  29.  Struve  men-
tions a  similar  exhortation  from  the  elector  palatineto
the  University  of  Heidelberg  in  his  Pfälzische  Kirchen-
historie, p.  19.

in  spite  of  the  Recesses  by  which  they  were
counteracted.  A  vast  variety  of  schemes  were
suggested  ;  such  as,  that  Frederic  of  Saxony
should  be  deprived  of  his  electorate, — a  mea-
sure proposed  by  Aleander ;  or  that  the  kings
of  England  and  Spain  should  be  prevailed  on
to  threaten  to  put  a  stop  to  all  commerce  with
the  German  towns,  from  which  the  pope  anti-'
cipated  great  results.  The  only  conclusion
they  came  to,  however,  Vv'as  to  oppose  the
meeting  at  Spire,  both  to  the  emperor  and  the
States,  whom  the  legate  was  instructed  to  use
every  means  toprej  udice  against  that  assembly.^

The  question  for  immediate  decision  —  a
question  which  we  must  here  examine— was,
whether  there  could  be  found  estates  in  Ger-
many who  would  prefer  joining  with  the  pope
to  awaiting  the  decisions  of  a  general  assembly.

The  papal  court  had  already  found  means  to
secure  to  itself  allies  in  Germany :  it  had  won
over  one  of  the  most  powerful  of  the  sovereign
houses — that  of  the  dukes  of  Bavaria.

The  government  as  well  as  the  people  of
Bavaria  had  formerly  shared  the  common
aversion  of  the  German  nation  to  the  ascen-
dency of  Rome;  neither  the  bull  of  Leo  X.
had  been  carried  into  effect,  nor  the  edict  of
Worms  observed.§  The  dukes  had  -been  as
much  displeased  at  the  encroachments  made
by  the  spiritual  on  the  temporal  jurisdiction,
as  any  other  princes;  and  Luther's  doctrines
spread  among  the  learned,  the  clergy,  and  the
commons,  as  rapidly  and  as  widely  as  in  other
parts  of  the  empire.

Bu\  as  early  as  the  end  of  the  year  1521  the
dukes  began  to  incline  towards  Rome,  and  had
ever  since  been  becoming  miore  and  more  de-
cided partisans  of  the  old  faith.

Contemporary  writers  ascribed  this  to  the
great  power  and  extensive  possessions  of  the
regular  clergy  in  Bavaria  ;||  and  certainly  this

I  Pallavicini,  lib.  ii.  c.  x.  p.  227.

§  Winter,  Geschichte  der  Schicksale  der  evangelischen
Lehre  in  und  durch  Baiern,  i.  pp.  62,  76.

If^ Pamphlet  of  Reckenhofer  touching  the  affairs  of  See-
hofer: "Denn  sobald  du  für  München  herauskompst  auf
drey  Meyl  gegen  Burg,  und  fragst  Aves  ist  der  Grund,
Antwort :  1st  meines  gnedigen  Herrn  von  Degernsee,
Chiernsee,  Saunersee,  also  dass  mer  denn  der  halb  Teyi
des  Bayrlandes  der  Geistlichen  ist." — "For  as  soon  as
you  leave  Munich,  about  three  miles  towards  Burg,  and
ask  whose  is  the  land?  the  answer  is,  It  belongs  to  my
Lord  of  Degernsee,  Chiemsee,  Saunersee,  so  that  more
than  half  of  Bavaria  belongs  to  the  clergy."— Pß7i2sr
No.  2462.

200

CONNEXION  OF  THE  POPE  WITH  BAVARIA.

Book  III

had  an  influence,  thouorh  rather  of  a  different
kind  from  that  supposed.

The  first  symptom  of  an  intimate  connexion
between  Rome  and  Bavaria  was  a  draft  of  a
bull  which  Leo  X.  caused  to  be  prepared  on
the  14th  Nov.  1521,  wherein  he  authorises  a
commission  of  prelates,  before  proposed  by  the
dukes,  to  visit  the  convents  and  restore  order
and  discipline  in  them.*  He  died  before  this
bull  was  finished  ;  but  not  before  he  had  thus
pointed  out  to  the  Bavarian  g'overnment  what
might  be  done  in  this  direction.  A  standing-
commission,  independent  of  the  bishopric,  and
under  the  influence  of  the  sovereign,  was
charged  with  the  superintendence  of  spiritual
«affairs.

About  this  time  the  university  of  Ingolstadt
was  almost  broken  up  by  a  pestilential  disease.
When  the  contagion  had  ceased,  and  the  pro-
fessors re-assembled,  they  found  that  it  would
be  impossible  to  maintain  their  strict  catholic
discipline  without  other  support  than  that  of
the  spiritual  jurisdiction;  and  that  a  ducal
mandate  would  be  necessary  to  help  them  to
withstand  the  innovations  which  threatened  to
invade  even  their  own  body.  The  three  most
resolute  champions  of  the  old  system,  Franz
Burckhard,  George  Hauer,  and  Johann  Eck,
who  had  again  been  at  Rome  in  the  autumn,
joined  in  urgent  representations  of  the  neces-
sity of  such  a  measure ;"["  of  which  Duke
William's  chancellor,  Leonhard  von  Eck,  one
of  the  most  active  and  influential  statesmen  of
that  time,  was  fully  convinced.:}:

The  dukes  were  soon  won  over  to  the  same
opinion  ;  probably  the  report  of  the  riots  which
liad  just  then  broken  out  at  Wittenberg  (but
which  Luther  so  quickly  tranquillised)  made
them  anxious  to  prevent  similar  disturbances
in  their  own  territories.

On  Ash  Wednesday,  5th  of  March,  1522,
the  dukes  issued  a  mandate, §  wherein  they
commanded  their  subjects,  under  heavy  penal-
ties, to  adhere  to  the  faith  of  their  forefathers.
That  which  had  been  considered  necessary  for
the  university,  was  thus  extended  to  the  whole
nation.  The  duke's  ofircers  were  directed  to
arrest  all  refractory  persons,  ecclesiastics  as
well  as  laymen,  and  to  report  upon  their  offences.

In  spite  of  the  rigour  which  was  used,  these
measures  had  not,  at  first,  the  anticipated  effect.
In  Saxony  the  temporal  power  refused  to  lend
its  arm  to  support  the  episcopal  authority ;  in
Bavaria,  on  the  contrary,  the  bishops,  who  had
a  vague  perception  of  the  danger  which  must
accrue  to  their  independent  authority  from  such
an  alliance,  did  not  second  the  efforts  of  the
temporal  power  with  much  zeal.  The  followers
of  Luther,  arrested  by  the  civil  officers,  often
escaped  free  and  unpunished,  from  the  eccle-
siastical courtwhich  had  jurisdiction  over  them.

*  Winter,  ii.  p.  325.

t  He  could  not  have  gone  thither  before  October,  as  he
was  still  at  Polling  during  the  months  of  August  and
September.  Leben  des  berühmten  Joh.  Eckii  in  the  Par-
nassus Boicus,  i.  ii.  p.  521.

X  Winter,  passim,  p.  81.

§  "  Erstes  baierisches  Religionsmandat,  München  am
Eschermittiche  angeender  Vassten."— iözd  p.  310.

When  Dr.  Johann  Eck  returned  to  Rome  in
the  summer  of  1523,  at  the  invitation  of  Pope
Adrian, II  he  was  commissioned  by  the  dukes
to  make  a  formal  complaint  against  the  bishops
on  this  head,  and  to  request  an  extension  of  the
ducal  authority  in  the  proceedings  against  he-
retics.^ It  was  impossible  to  refuse  the  de-
mand of  the  orthodox  doctor,  who  took  part  in
the  most  secret  consultations  on  religious
affairs.  Pope  Adrian  therefore  published  a  bull
empowering  a  spiritual  commission  to  degrade
ecclesiastics  who  should  be  convicted  of  heresy,
and  to  deliver  them  over  to  the  temporal  cri-
minal tribunals,  even  without  the  concurrence
of  the  bishops.  Adrian  added  only  the  limit-
ation, that  the  bishops  v/ere  to  be  once  more
admonished  to  perform  their  duties  within  a
given  term  ;  but  this  was  subsequently  disre-
garded.

Thus  we  see  that  it  was  not  the  independent
authority  of  the  great  institutions  of  the  church,
I  that  the  dukes  took  under  their  protection  :  they
raised  up  a  collateral  authority,  standing  under
their  own  immediate  influence,  and  empowered
to  intervene  in  the  most  peculiar  sphere  of  ec-
clesiastical rights  and  duties.

Dr;  Eck  is  not  to  be  regarded  only  as  one  of
j  Luther's  theological  opponents.  He  exercised
an  extraordinary  influence  on  the  state,  as  well
as  the  church  in  Bavaria  ;  and  to  him  princi-
pally is  to  be  attributed  that  alliance  betvveen
the  ducal  power,  the  university  of  Ingolstadt,
and  the  papal  authority,  which  checked  the
progress  of  the  national  movement  in  that
country.

Nor  was  it  the  authorit}?-  alone  of*the  church
that  w^as  assailed  ;  claims  were  soon  advanced
to  her'possessions.

Pope  Adrian  granted  to  the  dukes  one-fifth
of  all  the  revenues  of  the  church  throughout
their  territories;  "for,"  said  he,  "the  dukes
have  declared  their  readiness  to  take  arms
against  the  enemies  of  the  true  faith."**  When
Pope  Clement  VII.  came  to  the  tiara,  he  re-
voked all  grants  of  this  nature ;  nevertheless
he  saw  reason  to  confirm  this  one  for  the  three
following  3"ears :  since  then,  it  has  been  re-
newed from  time  to  time,  and  has  always  re-
mained one  of  the  chief  foundations  of  the
Bavarian  financial  system. fj-

On  this  occasion  the  university  was  not  for-
gotten. Adrian  consented  that  in  every  chapter
in  Bavaria,  at  least  one  prebend  might  be  con-
ferred on  a  professor  of  theology,  "for  the
improvement  ofthat  faculty,  and  for  the  better

II  "  Er  entbot  denselben  durch  zwei  Brevia  nach  Rom.''
— "  He  summoned  him  by  two  briefs  to  Rome." — Parnas-
sus Boicus,  ii.  i.  p.  206.

TT  "Fragmentum  libelli  supplicis,  quem  Bavariaj  Ducis
oratores,  quorum  caput  Celebris  ille  Eckius,  Adriano  YI.
Romse  obtulerunt  anno  1521,"  ap.  CEfele,  ii.  274.  Tht3
date  is  wrong,, as  Adrian  was  not  pope  in  1521.  The  bull,
which  was  prepared  according  to  the  words  of  the  petition,
is  dated  June,  1523.  The  Bavarian  bishops  first  appealed
against  it  in  December,  1523,  so  that  there  can  be  no
doubt  that  that  is  the  proper  date.

**  Bull  of  the  1st  of  June.  It  is  there  said  of  the  dukes,
"Ad  arma  contra  perfidos  orthodoxas  fidei  hostes  sumenda
sese  obtulerunt."— J&id.  279.  The  Turks  were  also  in-
cluded in  this.

ft  See  Winter,  ii.  p.  321.

Chap.  V.

CONNEXION  OF  THE  POPE  WITH  BAVARIA.

201

extirpation  of  the  heresies  that  had  arisen  in
that,  as  well  as  in  other  German  countries."*

Thus,  before  any  form  of  government  con-
stituted according  to  evangelical  views,  could
be  thought  of,  we  find  an  opposing  body  orga-
nised expressly  for  the  purpose  of  supporting
catholic  principles,  which  gradually  became
of  immense  importance  to  the  destinies  of
Germany.

We  have  already  shown  that  the  disturbances
of  those  times  mainly  arose  out  of  the  struggle
between  the  spiritual  and  temporal  power.
The  rising  temporal  sovereignties  naturally
sought  to  defend  themselves  against  the  en-
croachments of  their  ecclesiastical  neighbours.
With  this  tendency,  Luther's  views  of  govern-
ment exactly  coincided ;  he  advocated  a  total
separation  of  the  two  powers.  The  dukes  of
Bavaria,  however,  found  that  such  a  separation
was  not  the  only  way  to  attain  the  desired  end  ;
they  took  a  directly  opposite  course,  which  was
both  shorter  and  more  secure.  What  others
were  striving  to  wrest  from  the  pope  by  hostile
measures,  they  contrived  to  obtain  with  his
concurrence.  By  this  means  they  at  once
gained  possession  of  a  large  share  of  the  eccle-
siastical revenues,  and  an  authority,  sanctioned
by  the  papal  see,  over  the  surrounding  bishops,
even  in  the  most  important  branch  of  the  spirit-
ual jurisdiction:  an  authority  w^hich  was  very
soon  manifested  in  the  proceedings  of  the  Ba-
varian council  for  religious  affairs.  These
were  advantages  which  the  adherents  of  the
new  faith  could  not  yet  so  much  as  contemplate.

There  was  still,  however,  this  immense
distinction ; — that,  while  the  latter  were  the
representatives  of  the  tendency  of  the  nation
to  emancipate  itself  from  Rome,  Bavaria  fell
into  much  more  absolute  subjection  to  that
pov/er,  from  whom  she  held  all  the  privileges
she  now  enjoyed.

Under  any  circumstances,  however,  so  de-
cisive a  step,  taken  by  one  of  the  most  powerful
houses  of  Germany,  and  the  example  of  the
advantages  resulting  from  a  renewed  connexion
with  Rome,  could  not  fail  to  have  a  great  effect
on  all  its  neighbours.

We  find  from  a  very  authentic  source,  the
transactions  of  the  Archbishop  of  Salzburg
with  his  states,  that  a  compact  had  already
heen  entered  into  between  Bavaria  and  Austria,
"  against  the  Lutheran  sect."f

It  is  certain  that  Archduke  Ferdinand  had
likewise  formed  a  closer  connexion  with  the
see  of  Rome,  and  had  obtained  thence,  in  be-

*  30th  of  Aii2ust,  CEfele.p.  277.  In  Mederer,  Annales,
Acad.  Ino^olstadt,  iv.  234,  is  to  be  found  the  bull  of  Clement
VII.  concerning  this  matter  ;  by  this  bull  the  dukes  of
Bavaria  are  entitled  always  to  promote  one  of  their
professors  of  theologry  at  Ingolstadt  to  a  prebendal  stall
in  the  chapters  of  Augsburg,  Freisingen,  Passau,  Regens-
burg, or  Salzburg.  Tliey  gave  out:  "quod  ecclesie  pre-
dicte  a  Ducibus  Bavarie  fundate  vel  donationibus  aucte
fuerunt."  The  reason  assigned  was,  that  they  wished  to
have  theologians  "hoc  tempore  periculoso,  quo  Lutheri-
ana  et  alie  plurime  hereses  contra  sedem  apostolicam . . .
propagantur,  qui  se  murum  pro  Israel  exponant  et  contra
hereses  predictas  legendo  predicando  docendo  et  scribendo
eas  confutent  dejiciant  et  exterminent."  This  is  the
more  important,  because  in  the  years  immediately  after
the  plague,  the  university,  as  is  mentioned  by  the  statutes
of  the  faculty  of  jurists,  was  almost  entirely  reconstituted.

t  Zauner,  Salzburgher  Chronik,  iv.  359.
26

half  of  his  defence  against  the  Turks,  the
enormous  grant  of  a  full  third  of  all  the  eccle-
siastical revenues.

Rome  did  not  neglect  to  conciliate  the  more
influential  spiritual,  as  well  as  temporal  princes.
The  long-contested  appointments  to  the  bishop-
rics of  Gurk,  Chiemsee,  Seckau,  and  Lavant,
were  granted  to  the  Archbishop  of  Salzburg,
even  during  the  disputed  months.

By  these  m.eans  the  papal  see  succeeded  in
regaining  a  party  in  the  States:  no  doubt  it  is
to  be  attributed  to  these  and  similar  causes^
that  catholic  opinions  were  more  strongly  re-
presented at  the  diet  of  1524  than  they  had
been  the  year  before.

Still,  as  we  have  already  seen,  they  were
not  triumphant  at  that  diet.  A  number  of
bishops  even,  offended  by  the  support  given  by
the  pope  to  the  claims  of  the  temporal  sove-
reigns, offered  a  determined  resistance  to  every
suggestion  emanating  from  Rome.

The  legate  Campeggi  plainly  saw  that
nothing  could  be  gained  from  a  general  as-
sembly in  which  Lutheran  sympathies  so
greatly  predominated.  He  complained  that  he
could  not  here  venture  to  speak  freely. ij;

On  the  other  hand,  as  he  saw  around  him  a
number  of  friends  holding  the  same  opinions,
he  hoped  that  he  should  be  able  to  effect  more
completely  all  he  wanted  at  a  provincial  meet-
ing, where  only  these  partisans  would  be
present.

Accordingly,  even  at  Nürnberg,  where  the
national  assembly  at  Spire  was  resolved  on,  he
proposed  another  which,  in  spirit,  was  directly
at  variance  with  it.  He  made  no  secret  that
I  his  object  was  to  obviate  the  danger  which
I  must  ensue  from  an  assembly  convoked  with
[  the  avowed  intention  of  listening  to  the  voice
I  of  the  people. §

This  proposal  was  first  agreed  to  b}''  Arch-
!  duke  Ferdinand  and  a  few  bishops,  and  then
I  by  the  dukes  of  Bavaria.  At  the  end  of  June,
I  1524,  the  meeting  was  held  at  Regensburg.
I  The  dukes,  the  archduke,  the  legate,  the  Arch-
I  bishop  of  Salzburg,  the  Bishop  of  Trent,  who
I  came  in  the  retinue  of  the  archduke,  and  the
I  administrator  of  Regensburg,  were  present.
Delegates  appeared  for  the  bishops  o£  Bamberg,
Augsburg,  Spire,  Strasburg,  Constance,  Basle,
Freising,  Passau,  and  Brixen  :  thus  not  only
Bavaria  and  Austria,  but  the  Upper  Rhine,
and  a  considerable  portion  of  Swabia  and
Franconia,  took  part  in  it.

The  legate  opened  the  meeting  with  a  dis-
course on  the  perils  with  which  the  religious
troubles  threatened  both  estates :  he  exhorted
them  to  abandon  their  disputes,  and  to  unite  in
measures  "for  extirpating  the  heretical  doc-
trines, and  making  men  live  after  the  ordinances
of  the  Christian  church."  Archduke  Ferdi-
nand supported  the  proposal,  and  strongly  in-
sisted to  the  assembly  on  the  pecuniary  grants
he  had  obtained.

The  prelates  then  divided  into  three com-

t  From  a  letter  of  Ferdinand's,  dated  Stuttgard,  19th
Blay,  in  Gemeiners  Regensburger  Chronik,  iv.  vi.  p.  514.

§  From  the  letter  of  the  legate,  dated  Hh  May.  Winter,
i.  p.  156.

202

CONGRESS  OF  REGENSBÜRG.

Book  III,

missions  :  the  first  of  which  was  to  consider
the  disputes  between  the  clergy  and  laity  ;  the
second,  the  reforms  to  be  immediately  under-
taken, and  the  third,  the  measures  to  be  taken
with  respect  to  doctrine.*

The  conference  lasted  for  sixteen  days  in  the
town  hall  at  Regensburg,  and  sittings  were
held  before  and  after  noon.  The  grave  course
of  affairs  vf  as  on  one  occasion  interrupted  by
a  festive  dance.

The  affair  of  the  pecuniary  grant  was  the
first  settled.

The  bishops  plainly  perceived  that  the  popular
ferment,  which,  from  its  first  origin,  had  been
constantly  increasing  in  strength  and  impetu-
osity, must  be  far  more  dangerous  to  them,
than  any  supremacy  of  the  temporal  sovereign.
There  were  few  among  those  we  have  named
who  had  not  had  to  struggle  with  a  growing
opposition  in  their  own  capitals.  A  year  before.
Cardinal  Lang  had  found  it  necessary  to  bring
six  troops  of  veteran  soldiers  into  Salzburg.
He  himself  rode  at  their  head  habited  in  a  red
slashed  siircoat,  under  which  glittered  a  polished
cuirass,  and  grasping  his  marshal's  baton  ;  and
thus  compelled  the  corporation  to  sign  fresh
declarations  of  submission.  Perhaps,  too,  a
few  such  prelates  may  have  been  favoured
with  fresh  concessions  from  the  pope  ;  we  find
many  decided  partisans  of  Rome  among  their
delegates,  for  example,  Andreas  Haniin  of
Bamberg,  who  was  once  himself  vicerector  at
Ingolstadt;]"  Eck  and  Faber  also  were  present.
The  spiritual  lords  ended  by  making  a  virtue
of  necessity ;  those  of  Bavaria  consented  to
pay  to  the  temporal  power  (as  near  as  I  can
discover)  a  fifth  part  of  their  revenues,  and
those  of  Austria  a  fourth.:]:

They  next  proceeded  to  consider  the  points
of  doctrine  and  life.

The  most  important  result  of  this  consulta-
tion v/as  a  decision  which  it  had  been  found
impossible  to  carry  at  the  meeting  of  the  States
of  1523.  The  preachers  were  directed  to  refer
principally  to  the  Latin  fathers  of  the  church
for  the  interpretation  of  difficult  passages  in
Scripture;  and  (which  could  not  be  accom-
plished on  a  former  occasion)  Ambrose,  Jerome,
Gregory  and  Augustin  were  specified  as  the
patterns  of  faith. In  former  days,  this  might

*  Letter  from  Ebner  and  Nützel  to  the  Elector  Frerleric,
wherein  they  inform  him,  "  was  eino  Schrift  enthält,  die
ihnen  vom  "Hofe  fürstlicher  Durchleuchtigkeit  (Ferdi-
nands) zugelcommen  ist," — "of  the  contents  of  a  letter
Vviiich  had  reached  them  from  the  court  of  his  Royal
Highness  (Ferdinand),"  8th  July,  1524.— Weimar.  A. .

t  Malier,  Reformationsgesch.  von  Bamberg,  p.  70.

t  Planitz,  who  had  been  at  Esslingen,  writes  to  the
Elector  Frederic,  Nürnberg,  2tith  July:  "Die  Geistlichen
in  des  Erzherzogs  Landen  haben  bewilligt,  ihm  den
vierten  Pfennig  zu  geben,  5  Jahr  lang,  und  die  Geistlichen
unter  den  Herrn  von  Baiern  geben  ihren  Fürsten  den
5ten  Pfennijr  5  Jahr,  allein  dass  sie  in  ihren  Fürstenthu-
men  die  lutherische  Lehr  nicht  zulassen  und  vest  über
ihnen  halten  wollen." — "The  ecclesiastics  in  the  arch-
duke's dominions  have  agreed  to  give  him  the  fourth
penny  for  5  years,  and  the  ecclesiastics  under  the  lords  of
Bavaria  will  give  to  their  princes  the  fifth  penny  for  5
years,  but  on  condition  that  they  shall  not  suffer  the  Lu-
theran doctrines  in  their  dominions,  and  that  they  will
keep  them  down  with  a  strong  hand."  I  have  not"  been
able  to  discover  whether  Planitz  was  rightly  informed  as
to  the  duration  of  this  impost.  According  to  Winter,  ii.
p.  322,  it  was  continued  for  several  years  longer.

have  been  looked  upon  as  a  concession  to  the
literary  tendencies  of  the  time,  since  it  relaxed
the  fetters  of  the  scholastic  system  ;  but  now,
it  mainly  betokened  opposition  to  Luther  and
to  the  majority  of  the  States  of  the  empire,  by
sanctioning,  at  any  rate,  the  authorities  on
which  rested  the  later  systems  of  the  Latin
church.  It  was  resolved  that  divine  service
should  be  preserved  unaltered  according  to  the
usages  of  former  generations,  and  an  attempt
was  made  to  put  an  end  to  Luther's  influence.
His  books  were  once  more  forbidden,  and  all
subjects  of  the  allied  princes  were  interdicted,
under  pain  of  forfeiture  of  their  patrimonies,
from  studying  at  the  university  of  Wittenberg.

At  the  same  time,  steps  were  taken  towards
the  removal  of  those  abuses  which,  had  occa-
sioned 5uch  a  general  ferment.  All  the  ex-
tortions of  the  inferior  clergy  which  raised  so
much  discontent  among  the  common  people,
the  enforcement  of  expensive  ceremonies,  the
burdensome  fees,«  the  refusal  of  absolution  on
account  of  debts,  were  abolished.  The  rela-
tion of  the  clergy  to  their  flocks  was  to  be  put
on  a  fresh  footing,  by  a  commission  composed
of  clerical  and  lay  members.  The  reserved
presentations  were  diminished,  the  number  of
holydays  materially  lessened,  the  practice  of
stations  abolished.  The  assembly  pledged  it-
self for  the  future  to  a  more  careful  considera-
tion of  personal  merit  in  the  appointment  of
ecclesiastics.  The  preachers  were  admonished
to  show  greater  earnestness,  and  to  avoid  all
fables  and  untenable  assertions;  and  the  priests,
to  follow  a  chaste  and  irreproachable  course  of
life.§

"VVe  are,  I  believe,  warranted  in  looking  on
these  resolutions  as  the  first  eff'ects  of  the  prin-
ciples of  the  reformation  in  reviving  the  pro-
founder  spirit  of  Catholicism.  As  the  alliance
of  the  sovereign  princes  with  the  papal  see
fulfilled  the  political  demands,  so  this  attempt
supplied  (at  first  indeed  very  inadequately)
the  religious  wants,  which  had  given  birth  to
the  reforming  spirit.  These  attempts  at  re-
generation were  unquestionably  more  important
and  effective  than  has  been  supposed,  even  by
the  catholic  party  itself;  and,  indeed,  modern
Catholicism  is  in  great  measure  based  upon
them  ;  but  neither  in  depth  of  religious  intuition,
in  the  genius  which  produces  a  permanent  im-
pression on  remote  nations  and  ages,  or  in
force  and  intensity  of  enthusiasm,  could  they
be  compared  to  those  movements  v/hich  took
their  name  from  Luther,  and  of  which  he  was
the  centre.  His  opponents  offered  nothing
original;  the  m.eans  they  adopted,  and  by
which  they  thought  to  keep  their  ground,  were
mere  analogical  imitations  of  what  he  had  al-
ready done.  Thus,  at  Campeggi's  suggestion,
Dr.  Eck  published,  as  a  corrective' to  Melanch-

§  "Constitutio  ad  removendos  abusus  et  ordinafio  ad
vitam  Cleri  reformandam  per  Rev'""'  D™  Laurentium,"
&:c. — Ratispona;  JVonis  Julii,  in  Goldast  Constitutt.  Impp-,
iii.  p.  487.  What  is  given  by  Strobel  (Miscel.  ii.  p.  WJ,
&c,),  from  an  old  prin^ted  book,  which  is  also  before  me,
by  no  means  embraces  the  whole  contents  of  the  Consti-
tution. The  abolition  of  a  great  number  of  holydays  in
the  21st  article,  which  differs  but  little  from  the  later
protestani  regulations,  is  very  remarkable.

Chap.  V.

ORIGIN  OF  THE  DIVISION  IN  THE  NATION.

203

thon's  "  Loci  communes,"  a  handbook  of  the
same  kind,*  and  Eraser  made  a  translation  of
the  Bible,  as  a  rival  to  that  of  Luther.  The
works  of  the  Wittenberg  teachers  had  issued
forth  in  the  natural  course  of  their  own  internal
development:  they  were  the  product  of  minds
goaded  by  a  resistless  impulse,  pressing  for-
ward in  their  own  peculiar  path,  and  were  filled
with  the  vigour  and  originalit}''  that  forces  con-
viction :  the  Catholic  books,  on  the  contrary,
owed  their  existence  to  external  motives  ; — to
the  calculations  of  a  system  which  looked
about  for  any  means  of  defence  against  the
danger  pressing  upon  it  from  every  side.

But  those  who  adopted  such  a  line  of  con-
duct, thus  cut  themselves  off  from  the  great
and  vigorous  expansion  which  the  mind  of  the
German  nation  was  now  undergoing.  The
questions  which  ought  to  have  been  discussed
and  determined  at  Spire,  with  a  view  to  the
unity  and  the  wants  of  the  nation,  were  dis-
posed of  by  the  allied  powers  in  a  narrow  and
one-sided  manner.  It  was  said  that  a  single
nation  had  no  right  to  decide  on  the  affairs  of
religion,  and  of  Christendom  generally  :  this
was  easily  asserted  ;  but  what  was  the  nation
to  do  if,  from  the  peculiarities  of  its  constitu-
tion and  character,  it  was  the  only  one  that
had  fallen  into  this  state  of  ferment  I  At  first
it  had  petitioned  for  the  immediate  convocation
of  a  council;  but  as  the  hope  of  this  grew
fainter  and  more  remote,  it  felt  the  necessity
of  taking  the  matter  into  its  own  hands.  This
is  sufficiently  proved  by  the  ordinances  issued
at  Regensburg.  The  difference  was  this — at
Spire,  in  all  probability,  resolutions  would
have  been  taken  in  opposition  to  the  Pope  of
Rome  ;  whereas  at  Regensburg  it  was  thought
expedient,  from  a  thousand  considerations,  to
form  a  fresh  alliance  with  him.  This  was  the
origin  of  the  divisions  in  the  riation.  The
national  duty  of  awaiting  the  decisions  of  a
general  assembly  which  was  already  fixed  ;  of
taking  part  in  its  deliberations ;  and,  let  us
add,  of  influencing  them  to  wise  ends,  was
sacrificed  to  the  narrow  and  partial  expediency
of  an  alliance  with  Rome.

One  part  of  the  projects  of  the  congregation
at  Rome  being  thus  executed  with  unhoped-for
success,  Campeggi  next  pointed  out  the  neces-
sity of  endeavouring  to  accomplish  the  other ;
which  w.as,  to  induce  the  emperor  to  give  the
cause  his  cordial  support. f

Not  a  moment  was  lost  at  Rome  in  gaining
over  Charles  V.  Whilst  the  official  proclama-
tions from  Regensburg  dwelt  only  upon  such
points  in  the  Recesses  as  were  favourable  to
the  papacy,  and  affected  to  consider  them  as
mere  confirmations  of  the  edict  of  Worms,  it
w^as  at  the  same  time  represented  to  the  em-
peror in  Spain  how  greatly  his  authority  must

*  "Enchiridion,  seu  Loci  Communes  contra  Heereticos:"
printed  in  1525,  and,  accordinnr  to  Eck,  composed,  "  Hor-
tatu  Cardinalis  de  Campegiis,  ut  simpliciores,  quibus
cortice  natare  opus  est,  summarium  liaberent  creden-
dorum,  ne  a  pseudoprophetis  subverterentur."

t  He  complained  ;  "  non  haver  quella  causa  (Luterana)
di  costa  (della  Spa^na)  il  caldo  che  bisogneria,  fa  che
d'ogni  provisione  che  si  faccia  si  trahe  poco  frutto." —
Giberto  Datari  agli  Oratoii  Fiorentini  in  Spagna,  Lettere
di  Princijpi,  i.  f.  133.

suffer  by  his  edict  being  limited  by  two  follow-
ing Recesses;  nay,  by  an  attempt  having" actu-
ally been  made  to  revoke  it,-— a  measure  which
he  himself  could  not  have  ventured  upon  :  it
was  evident,  they  said,  that  the  people  of  Ger-
many were  preparing  to  throw  off  all  obedience,
both  to  temporal  and  spiritual  authority.  And
what  insupportable  insolence  was  there  in
fixing  a  meeting  in  that  country,  to  decide  on
matters  of  faith,  and  the  affairs  of  Christianity
at  large ;  as  if  the  Germans  had  a  right  to
prescribe  laws  to  his  imperial  majesty  and  to  the
whole  world  !  ^^

Similar  arguments  were  vehemently  pressed
upon  Charles's  ally,  Henry  VIII.,  who  had
entered  into  a  literary  warfare  w4th  Luther,  to
induce  him  to  use  all  his  credit  with  Charles
V.  in  support  of  the  pope's  exhortations.

The  state  of  political  affairs  generally  was
highly  favourable  for  promoting  the  influence
of  the  papal  power  over  the  emperor.  War
had  been  formally  declared  against  Francis  L,
in  May,  1524,  and  was  now  raging  with  the
utmost  violence.  The  emperor  attacked  the
king  in  his  own'  territory,  from  the  side  of
Italy.  It  would  th-erefore  have  been  extremely
dangerous  to  offend  the  pope,  who  was  in  his
rear,  and  who  did  not  quite  approve  the  inva-
sion; or  to  refuse  him  a  request  which,  more-
over, was  consonant  to  the  Catholic  education
he  had  himself  received  in  his  youth.

Charles  V.  did  not  hesitate  a  single  moment.
On  the  27th  of  July,  he  despatched  a  proöla-
mation  to  the  empire  entirely  in  favour  of  the
pope,  and  expressed  with  unwonted  vehemence.
He  complained  that  his  mandate  from  Worms
w^as  disregarded,-  and  that  a  general  council
had  been  demanded,  without  even  the  due  de-
corum of  consulting  him.  He  declared,  that
he  neither  could  nor  would  allow  the  intended
assembly  to  take  place  ;  that  the  German  nation
assumed  to  do  what  would  be  permitted  to  no
other,  even  in  conjunction  with  the  pope, — to
alter  ordinances  which  had  been  so  long  held
sacred.  He  pronounced  Luther's  doctrines  to
be  inhuman,  and,  like  his  master,  Adrian,  he
compared  him  to  Mahomet.  In  short,  he
forbade  the  assembly,  on  pain  of  being  found
guilty  of  high  treason,  and  incurring  sentence
of  ban  and  reban.§

Thus did the court  of  Rome succeed in

J  We  have  not  indeed  the  verj'  letter  from  the  pope  to
the  emperor,  but  there  is  a  sufficient  account  of  it  in  the
despatch  from  the  papal  datari  us  to  the  nuncio  in  Eng-
land, Marchionne  Lango,  Lettere  di  Priucipi,  i.  124.  "  N.
Sr«'ha  di  cio  scritto  efficacemente  alia  M'^  Ces,  accioche
la  consideri,  che  facendo  quei  popoli  poco  contp  di  dio
tanto  meno  ne  faranno  alia  giornata  della  M^^  S.  e  degli
altri  Signori  temporaii :.  ..I'absenza  della  M'a  Cesarea  ha
accresciuta  I'aiidacia  loro  tanto  che  ardiscono  di  ritrattar
queir  editto,  cosa  che  Cesare  proprio  non  faria."  On
the  other  hand,  in  the  edict  given  at  Regensburg,  it  is
stated,  "Darumb  so  haben  wir  auf  des  hochwürdigsten
Herrn  Lorenzen,  etc.  Ersuchen  uns  vergleycht,  dass  wir
und  unser  Principal  obgemelt  Kaiserlich  Edict  zu  Worms,
auch  die  Abschied  auf  beyden  Reichstagen  zu  Nürnberg
deshalb  beschlossen,  .vollziehen."—"  Wherefore  we  have,
at  the  request  of  the  most  worshipful  master  Lorenzo,
&c.,  agreed,  that  we  and  our  principal  should  execute  the
above-named  imperial  edict  of  Worms,  and  the  recesses
of  both  diets  at  Nürnberg  confirming  the  same."

§  Frankf  A.  It  appears  from  a  letter  from  the  Elector
of  Saxony  to  Ebner,  dated  Oct.  1524,  Walch,  xv.  2711
that  in  the  letter  which  had  been  sent  to  him,  the  ex
pression,  "  bei  Vermeidung  criminis  lese  majestatis,  unser

204

ORIGIIN  OF  THE  DIVISION  IN  THE  NATION.

Book  III

gaining  over  to  its  cause  not  only  several
powerful  members  of  the  empire  in  Germany,
but  even  its  supreme  head  iri  Spain,  and  by
their  means,  inputting  a  stop  to  the  dangerous
resolutions  of  the  diet :  this  was  its  first  ener-
getic interference  with  the  ecclesiastical  affairs
of  Germany.

The  main  cause  of  this  was,  that  the  em-
peror, residing  in  Spain,  followed  a  line  of
policy,  on  which  the  character  and  the  opinions
of  Germany  had  not  the  slightest  effect,  and
suggested  solely  by  his  relations  with  other
countries.  His  government  during  the  first
years  of  his  reign  exercised  merely  a  negative,
decomposing  influence.  Without  taking  any
serious  steps  for  the  redress  of  the  grievances
charged  upon  Rome,  he  allowed  himself  to  be
induced  by  his  political  position  to  issue  the
edict  of  Worm^s,  which,  after  all,  could  not  be
carried  into  effect;  while  on  the  one  hand,  it
inflamed  the  antipathy  of  the  nation  to  the
utmost,  and,  on  the  other,  put  fresh"  arms  into
the  hands  of  the  adherents  of  the  curia.  He
first  checked  the  growing  consolidation  of  the
Council  of  Regency,  by  rejecting  the  system
of  import  duties  to  which  he  had  at  first  con-
sented, and  then  thought  it  advisable  to  over-
throw that  body  entirely.  Another  Council  of
Regency  was,  it  is  true,  formed  at  Esslingen  ;
but  it  took  Vv^arning  from  the  fate  of  the  former,
and  neither  enjoyed  authority,  nor  even  made
the  least  attempt  to  acquire  any ; — it  was  the
mere  shadow  of  a  government.  We  have  al-
ready shown  what  prospects  in  favour  of  re-
ligion and  of  national  unity  were  connected
with  the  projected  assembly  at  Spire.  This
assembly  was  forbidden  by  the  court  of  Spain,
as  if  it  w^ere  criminal.

The  unity  of  Germany  has  ever  depended,
not  so  much  on  forms  of  government,  or  deci-
sions of  the  diet,  as  on  an  intimate  understand-
ing among  the  more  powerful  sovereigns.
Maximilian  had  found,  during  the  latter  half
of  his  reign,  what  it  was  to  have  offended  and
alienated  the  Elector  of  Saxony ;  and  it  was
only  by  healing  this  breach,  and  entering  into
a  close  alliance  with  the  Ernestine  line  of
Saxony,  that  the  election  of  Charles  V.  could
be  secured  ;  from  that  time  the  Elector  Fre-
deric had  aUvays  been  treated,  in  externals  at
least,  with  the  confidence  and  consideration
due  to  a  powerful  and  undoubted  ally.  This
intimate  connexion  the  emperor  now  broke  off.
He  thought  it  more  advantageous,  and  more
suitable  to  his  own  station  amongst  the  powers
of  Europe,  to  marry  his  sister  Catharine  to
John  III.  of  Portugal,  than  to  the  nephew  of
the  Elector  of  Saxony,  to  whom  he  had  be-
trothed her.  Hannart  was  commissioned  to
communicate  this  resolution  to  the  court  of
Saxony.* We  may  remember  how  flattering

und  des  Reichs  Acht,"  &c.—"  on  pain  of  being  found
guilty  of  high  treason,  and  of  our  ban  and  that  of  the
empire,"  &;c.,  had  been  omitted.

*  Müller,  Geschichte  der  Protestation,  gives  the  parti-
culars of  this  event.  Hannart's  letter  to  the  emperor,
dated  14th  March,  shows  that  the  affair  was  to  have  come
before  the  diet,  which  Ferdinand  now  purposely  avoided.
"  II  a  semble  ä  mon  dit  S^  par  plusieurs  raisons  que  ne
debvai  parier  ä  M'  de  Saxen  de  la  matiere  secrete,  que
savez,  que  jusque  apres  la  fin  de  cette  journ6e  imperiale."

the  proposal  had  been  to  Duke  John,  Frederic's
brother,  the  objections  which  he  raised  from
mere  modesty,  and  his  ultimate  joyful  acqui-
escence. Hannart's  communication  was  pro-
portionally mortifying  to  him.  The  Saxon
court  was  deeply  offended.  Such  of  the
elector's  friends  as  were  about  the  archduke,
wanted  him  to  use  his  influence  to  prevent  so
offensive  a  proceeding  ;f  but  as  he  had  at  first
taken  no  personal  share  in  the  negotiation,
neither  did  he  now  say  one  word,  but  sup-
pressed his  vexationT  Duke  John  was  less
reserved.  With  wounded  pride  he  rejected
every  communication,  every  offer,  tendered  to
him  on  the  subject;  he  expressed  to  those
about  him  that  nothing  during  the  whole  course
of  his  life  had  ever  hurt  his  feelings  so  deeply.

With  the  other  sovereign  princes,  too,  Aus-
tria stood  but  ill.  The  house  of  Brandenburg,
which  had  supported  the  first  Council  of  Re-
gency for  the  sake  of  the  interests  both  of
Prussia  and  Mainz,  was  much  disgusted  by
its  overthrow,  and  concealed  that  feeling  so
little,  that  overtures  were  made  to  the  Grand
Master,  Albert,  by  France,  though,  indeed,  he
did  not  accept  them.  In  the  month  of  August,
the  Rhenish  electors  held  a  congress,  from
which  Archduke  Ferdinand  said  he  expected ,
no  good  either  to  himself  or  his  brother.:^  The
electoral  councillors  did  notattempt  to  disguise
from  the  imperial  commissioner  that  people
were  extremely  discontented  with  the  emperor  ;
that  his  capitulation  would  be  laid  before  the
meeting;  and  as  he  had  not  fulfilled  the  con-
ditions contained  in  it,  they  would  proceed  to
the  establishment  of  a  new  form  of  govern-
ment, either  under  a  lieutenant,  the  vicars  of
the  empire,  or  a  king  of  Rome,  -vvTiom  it  was
intended  to  elect.§  This  project  was  discussed
at  a  great  croös-bow  match  at  Heidelberg,
where  several  princes  were  met  together,  and
the  palatine  house  of  Bavaria  was  particularly
busied  with  negotiations  to  that  effect.  The
bond  of  Catholicism  between  Bavaria  and
Austria  was  not  strong  enough  to  prevent  Duke
William  of  Bavaria  from  conceiving  the  idea
of  obtaining  the  crown  for  himself.

Thus  the  unity  of  the  government  of  the
empire  was  again  dissolved,  almost  before  it
had  felt  its  own  purposes  jor  destinies.  At  a
crisis  so  immeasurably  eventful,  in  which  all
the  energies  of  the  nation  were  rushing  v/ith
boundless  activity  into  untried  regions,  and
eager  for  a  new  state  of  things,  all  directing
power  was  wanting.

Hence  it  happened that the local  powers

These  letters  altogether  show  a  better  understanding  be-
tween Hannart  and  the  archduke  than  the  Saxon  docu-
ments would  lead  one  to  imagine.

t  Among  the  secret  correspondence  between  Frederic's
and  Ferdinand's  councillors,  there  is  a  note  in  which  one
of  them  says',  "  S.  Fiirstl.  Durchlaucht  begeren  sonderlich,
das  der  Heiratli  vollzogen  werd,  damit  S.  F.  Gn.  desto
mer  Fug  und  Statt  hab,  S.  Chf  Gn.  als  irn  angenora-
menen  Vattern  urn  Rath  teglich  anzusuchen."— "His
princely  highness  greatly  desires  the  consummation  of
the  marriage,  so  that  liis  princely  highness  may  have
more  excuse  and  reason  for  daily  asking  counsel  of  his
electoral  grace  as  his  adopted  father," — a  wish  which
could  scarcely  have  been  shared  by  the  whole  court.

X  Letter  from  Ferdinand,  Bucholtz,  ii.  p.  68.

§  Letter  from  Hannartj  ib.  p.  70.

CttAP.  V.

PERSECUTIONS.

205

proceeded  to  act  upon  the  principles  which
severally  predominated  in  them.

Persecution  began  in  those  countries  which
had  combined  to  pass  the  resolutions  of  Regens-
burg.

In  Bavaria  we  find  priests  ejected  or  banished,

confession  and  the  mystery  of  the  communion,
was  condemned  to  make  a  recantation.  On  a
great  holy  day  —  the  nativity  of  the  Virgin
Mary — two  pulpits  were  erected  for  this  pur-
pose in  the  churchyard  of  St.  Stephen's ;  one
of  these  was  for  the  precentor,  the  other  for

and  nobles  driven  from  their  estates,  tillthey  !  Tauber,  to  whom  the  form  of  recantation  which
consented  to  recant.  The  tempestuous,  op-  [  he  was  to  read  was  given.  But  whether  it  was
pressive  atmosphere  of  the  times  is  most  strik-  ;  that  he  had  never  promised  this,  or  that  an
ingly  exemplified  in  the  fate  of  an  officer  of  the  \  opposite  conviction  suddenly  forced  itself  more

duke,  Bernhard  Tichtehvon  Tutzing.  He  was
travelling  towards  Niirnberg  on  the  duke's
business,  wiien  he  was  joined  on  the  road  by
Franz  Burkhard,  one  of  the  orthodox  profes-
sors of  Ingolstadt:  they  put  up  together  at
Pfafienhofen,  and  after  supper,  the  conversation
turned  on  religious  matters.  Tichtel  perhaps
knew  who  his  companion  was ;  he  reminded
him  that  conversations  of  this  kind  were  for-
bidden by  the  new  edict,  to  which  Burkhard
answered  that  that  did  not  signify  between
them.  Hereupon  Tichtel  did  not  conceal  his
opinion  that  the  edict  could  not  be  carried  into
effect,  and  w^ould  merely  be  a  disgrace  to  the
dukes ;  he  even  vrent  so  far  as  to  speak  some-
what equivocally  of  purgator}^  and  of  the  obli-
gation to  fast;  sanguinary  punishments  for
differences  of  opinion  he  condemned  altogether.
On  hearing  these  sentiments,  Burkhard,  who
had  advised  the  dukes  to  all  the  most  odious
measures,  was  seized  with  the  savage  fury  of
a  persecutor :  he  said,  in  so  many  words,
that  decapitation  was  the  proper  punishment
for  Lutheran  villains,  and  at  the  sam.e  time
called  Tichtel  himself  a  Lutheran.  At  parting
he  afi'ected  to  be  reconciled  to  him,  but  he
hurried  to  denounce  the  crime  lie  had  detected.
Tichtel  was  arrested  and  confined  in  the  Lai-
kenthurm,  subjected  to  an  inquisition,  and
compelled  to  recant :  it  was  only  b}^  dint  of
great  exertions  and  powerful  intercession,  that
he  escaped  a  most  degrading  punishment  which'
had  been  suggested  to  the  duke.*

In  the  territory  of  Salzburg  a  priest  arrested
for  Lutheranism  v/as  on  his  way  under  guard
to  Mittersill,  where  he  w^as  to  remain  impri-
soned for  life,  and  while  the  constables  were
carousing,  was  set  free  by  two  peasants'  sons.
For  this  offence  the  poor  3'ouths  were,  by  order
of  the  archbishop,  secretl}^  beheaded  without
public  trial,  early  in  the  morning,  in  a  meadow
in  the  Nonnthal  outside  the  town — a  place
never  used  for  execution.  Even  the  executioner
had  scruples,  because  the  condemned  prisoners
had  not  had  lawful  trial;  but  the  bishop's
officer  said,  "Do  xAvat  I  command  you,  and
let  the  princes  answer  for  iV\

A  citizen  of  Vienna,  one  Caspar  Tauber,

strongly  than  ever  on  his  mind,  he  declared
from  the  pulpit  whence  the  assembled  multi-
tude was  expecting  to  hear  his  recantation,
that  he  did  not  consider  himself  to  have  been
refuted,  and  that  he  appealed  to  the  Holy
Roman  Empire.  He  must  have  been  w-eil
aware  that  this  would  not  save  him :  he  was
beheaded  shortly  after,  and  his  body  burnt ;  but
his  courage  and  firmness  left  a  lasting  impres-
sion on  the  people.:^

There  were  some  other  people  arrested  with
Tauber,  who,  terrified  by  his  fate,  made  the
recantation  demanded  of  them,  and  escaped
with  banishment,§

The  same  severity  was  practised  throughout
the  Austrian  dominions.  The  three  govern-
ments of  Insbruck,  Stuttgart,  and  Ensisheim
appointed  a  commission  at  Engen,  whose
especial  business  itv»-as  to  suppress  the  move-
ment in  their  provinces.  The  people  of  V7ald-
shut  gained  nothing  by  dismissing  their
preacher,  Balthasar  Hubmaier :  the  Engen
commission  declared  that  they  should  be
punished,  or,  as  it  w^as  coarsely  expressed,
"  that  the  Gospel  should  be  banged  about  their
ears  till  the}-  were  fain  to  hold  their  liands  over
their  heads."  The  weeds  were  to  be  pulled
up  by  the  roots ;  and  already  the  other  tov/ns
had  been  summoned  to  furnish  subsidies  of
artillery  and  infantry  for  the  attack  on  Y\"ald-
shut,  when  a  body  of  Swiss  volunteers,  princi-
pally from  Zürich,  came  to  the  assistance  of  the
town,  and  caused  the  commission  to  pause
awhile.]!

Kenzingen  did  not  escape  so  well ;  the  little
town  was  actually  taken  and  invested.

Similar  disturbances  were  going  on  in  all
parts  of  the  country,  though  sometimes  the
measures  taken  stopped  short  of  bloodshed ;
Luther's  books  were  forbidden,  and  his  adher-
ents were  not  endured  in  the  pulpit  or  the
councils  of  the  princes,  but  were  exiled  from
their  country.  The  government  of  Würtem-
berg  wanted  to  break  off  all  communication
with  Reutlingen,  because  it  tolerated  evange-
lical preachers.  Neither  were  the  most  barba-,
reus  executions  wanting.  We  read  of  preachers
nailed  to  the  pillory  by  the  tongue,  so  that  in

who  had  expressed  anti-catholic  opinions  re-  |  order  to  get  free  they  were  forced  to  tear  them-
specting  the  intercession  of  saints,  puroator}'.

*  Another  of  the  same  party,  the  Chancellor  Leonhard
V.  Eck,  had  proposed  that  the  duke  should  follow  the
merciful  course  ("den  barmherzigen  Weg"),  viz.  that
Tichtel  should  only  be  placed  in  the  pillory,  his  crimes  be
there  read  aloud,  and  then  by  him  be  orally  confessed  and
renounced:  he  should  then,  as  a  mark  of  his  heretical
backsliding,  be  branded  on  both  cheeks ;  after  this  he  was
to  be  conveyed  back  again  to  the  Falkenthurm,  and  kept
there  until  further  orders  fom  the  duke.  See  the  Extracts
from  the  Acts,  Winter,  i.  pp.  182—199.

t  Zauner,  iv.  p.  381.

t  Ein  warhafilig  Geschieht,  wie  Caspar  Tawber,  Burger
zu  Wien  in  Osterreich  fürein  Ketzer  und  zu  dem  Tori t
verurtaylt  und  aussgefürt  worden  ist."  1524. — "The  true
History' how  Caspai-  Tawber,  a  burgher  of  Vienna  in
Austria,  was  condemned  and  executed  as  a  heretic."  The
execution  took  place  on  nth  Sept.

§  Sententia  contra  Joannem  Vagsel— one  of  the  con-
demned —  ult.  Septembr,  1524.  Raupach  Evangel.  Oes-
treich.  Erste  Fortsetzung  ;  Beilage,  No.  V.

|j  Letter  from  Balthasar  Hubmaier  in  the  Taschenbuch
für  Süddeutschland,  1839,  p.  67,  from  the  Archives  of
Switzerland  and  the  Upper  Rhine.

9Q6

DIVISION  IN  THE  NATION.

Book  III

selves  away,  and  were  thus  mutilated  for  life.
The  fanaticism  of  monkish  bigotry  was  awak-
ened, and  sought  its  victims  in  Lower  as  well
as  Upper  Germany.  The  most  awful  example
was  made  of  the  wretched  Heinrich  of  Zütphen,
at  Meldorf  in  Ditmarsch.  A  small  congrega-
tion had  formed  itself  there,  v.'hich  had  invited
this  Augustine  monk  from  Bremen  to  join  them
for  a  time :  they  had  obtained  permission  from
the  governers  of  the  country,  the  Forty-eight,
that  until  the  meeting  of  tlie  expected  ecclesi-
astical assembly,  the  Gospel  should  be  preached
pure  and  unchanged.  But  their  opponents,
the  prior  of  the  Dominicans  of  Meldorf  and  the
Älinorites  of  Lunden,  were  far  more  powerful  ;
and  in  combination  with  the  vicar  of  the  bishop's
of^cial,they  obtained  a  contrary  sentence,  which
delivered  t,he  poor  man  into  their  hands,  alleg-
ing that  he  had  preached  against  the  Mother  of
God.^  A  drunken  mob,  headed  by  monks
bearing  torches,  went  one  night  in  January  to
the  parsonage  and  dragged  forth  the  preacher,
whom  they  put  to  death  by  the  most  atrocious
tortures,  executed  with  equal  cruelty  and  un-
skilfulness.

Meanwhile  the  other  party  was  aroused  to  a
sense  of  the  necessity  of  taking  more  decisive
measures.'

Immediately  after  the  congress  at  Regens-
burg, the  cities,  seeing  the  danger  that  threat-
ened them  from  the  support  which  their  bishops
appeared  to  receive  from  the  princes,  held  a
great  tov/n  meeting  at  Spire,  and  resolved  in
direct  opposition  to  that  adherence  to  the  Latin
fathers  of  the  church  which  had  been  enjoined,
that  their  preachers  should  confine  themselves
wholly  to  the  Gospel  and  the  prophetic  and
apostolic  Scriptures. f  At  that  time  they  still
expected  that  the  assembly  would'  be  held  at
Spire,  and  their  intention  was  to  propose  some
common  resolution.  When,  however,  this
meeting  was  forbidden  by  the  emperor,  and  it
seemed  as  if  another  serious  attempt  would  be
made  to  carry  into  effect  the  edict  of  Worms,
they  assembled  towards  the  end  of  the  year  at
Ulm,  in  order  to  aid  each  other  in  resisting  all
measures  proposed  with  that  view.  Weissen-
burg.  Landau,  and  Kaufbeuren,  which  had  al-
ready received  some  rebukes,  were  admonished
as  to  their  future  conduct.

The  tow^ns  were  joined  by  a  part  of  the
nobility.  Count  Bernhard  of  Solms  appeared
at  the  meeting  in  the  name  of  the  counts  on
the  Rhine  and  the  Eifel,  of  the  Wetterau,  the
Westerwald,  and  the  Neiderland ;  and  asked
the  towns  their  opinion  concerning  a  proposed
levy  and  tax  of  the  empire  for  an  expedition
against  the  Turks,  and  also  concerning  the
Lutheran  matter.  The  towns  judged  rightly
that  this  combination  with  the  nobles  would  be

*  Neocorus,  edited  by  Dahlmann,  ii.  p.  24.  The  judg-
ment of  the  raag;istrate  runs  thus:  "  Desse  Bösewicht
hefft  gepredigt  wedder  de  Moder  Gadess  und  wedder  den
Christen  Gloven,  uth  welkerer  Orsake  ick  ehn  verordele
van  wegen  mines  genedigen  Herrn  Bischops  van  Bremen
thorn  Vaere."— "  This  miscreant  hath  preached  against
the  mother  of  God  and  the  Christian  faith,  for  which
reason  I  condemn  him  to  the  fire,  in  the  name  of  my
gracious  Lord  Bishop  of  Bremen.

t  Town  meeting  at  Spire,  St.  Margaret's  day,  1524.
Summary  extract  in  Fels  Zweiter  Beitrag,  p.  204.

very  advantageous  to  them ;  and  after  inter-
changing a  few  letters,  the  affair  was  concluded,
and  a  resolution  was  taken  on  the  spot  at  Ulm,
"  not  to  act  separately  in  affairs  of  such  weight,
and  during  such  perilous  times. "ij:

The  most  important  event  of  all  was,  that  a
considerable  number  of  the  princes  declared
their  complete  dissent  from  the  compact  of
Regensburg.

Markgrave  Casimir  of  Brandenburg,  who
had  certainly  never  shown  any  great  religious
enthusiasm,  could  no  longer  withstand  the
aroused  and  declared  convictions  of  his  whole
country:  he  rejected  the  proposal  of  becoming
a  party  to  that  compact,  alleging  the  general
expectation  of  the  assembly  at  Spire.  When
this  meeting  was  forbidden  by  the  emperor,  he
passed  a  decree  in  concert  with  his  estates,  that,
in  his  own  territories  at  least,  nothing  should
be  preached  but  the  Gospel  and  the  word  of
God  of  the  Old  and  New  Testament,  pure  and
undefiled,  and  according  to  the  right  and  true
interpretation.  Such  was  the  tenour  of  the
recess  of  the  Brandenburg  diet  of  the  1st  of
October,  1524.  His  brother  George,  who  lived
at  the  Hungarian  court  at  Ofen,  was  not  satis-
fied even  with  this.  He  thought  that  the  word
of  God  ought  not  only  to  be  preached,  but  to
be  implicitly  obeyed,  in  defiance  of  all  human
ordinances. §

A  most  unlooked-for  change  now  took  place
in  Hessen.  It  was  expected  that  the  three
warlike  princes  who  had  conquered  Sickingen
and  overthrown  the  Council  of  Regency,  would
also  combat  the  reforming  ideas  which  their
enemies  had  supported.  The  most  energetic
of  the  three,  however,  very  soon  followed  an
exactly  contrary  course.

In  May,  1524,  one  day  as  Landgrave  Philip
of  Hessen  was  riding  to  a  cross-bow  match  at
Heidelberg,  he  met,  near  Frankfurt,  Melanch-
thon,  whose  fame  was  well-known  to  hfm,  and
who  was  then  returning  from  a  visit  to  his
home  in  the  Palatinate,  accompanied  by  a  couple
of  intimate  friends  who  had  been  there  with
him.  The  landgrave  stopped  him,  made  him
ride  some  distance  by  his  side,  and  asked  him
several  questions  which  betrayed  the  deep  in-
terest he  felt  in  the  religious  dissensions ;  and,
at  last,  he  only  dismissed  the  surprised  and
embarrassed  professor,  on  condition  that  he
should  send  him,  in  writing,  his  opinion  on  the
most  important  points  under  discussion. ||  ■  Me-
lanchthon  executed  this  task  with  his  usual
mastery  of  his  subject;  his  letter  was  short,
logical,  and  convincing,  and  produced  a  strong
impression.  No^t  long  after  his  return  from  \J[\e
festivities,  on  the  18th  of  July,  the  landgrave
issued  a  mandate  (also  in  manifest  contradic-
tion to  the  resolutions  of  Regensburg),  wherein,
among  other  things,  he  commanded  that  the
Gospel  should  be  preached  pure  and  unadulte-
rated. From  day  to  day  he  became  more
deeply  imbued  with  the  peculiar  opinions  of
the  new  creed :  at  the  beginning_of  the  following

J  Fels  Zweiter  Beitrag,  p.  206. Nicolai,  1524.
§  Von  der  Lith,  pp.  61—65. ,

iJCarnerarius  Vita  Melanchthonis,  cap.  26. Strobel'S
Neue  Beiträge,  iv.  2,  p.  8&

Chaf.  V.

ORIGIN  OF  THE  DIVISION  IN  THE  NATION.

207

year,  he  declared  that  he  v/oiild  sooner  give
up  his  body  and  life,  his  land  and  his  people,
than  forsake  the  word  of  God.

It  appears  as  if  some  general  understanding
had  been  come  to  at  Heidelberg  on  the  subject
of  religion;  for,  at  first,  Philip  of  Hessen  fully
expected  that  the  Elector  Palatine  would  follow
his  example;  and  although  it  was  not  in  the
nature  of  that  prince  to  take  so  decided  a  part
as  the  landgrave,  at  least  he  did  not  allow
himself  to  be  hurried  into  any  acts  of  persecu-
tion.

The  banished  Duke  of  Würtemberg,  too,
might  already  be  regarded  as  a  convert  to  the
cause.  Lutheran  preachers  resided  with  him
at  Mümpelgard,  and  in  October,  1524,  Zwingü
expressed  his  wonder  and  joy  that  this  Saul
was  become  a  Paul.*

Duke  Ernest  of  Lüneburg,  the  nephew  of
Frederic  of  Saxon}^  w^ho  had  studied  at  Wit-
tenberg, showed  a  similar  leaning  to  the  doc-
trines of  the  reformers  and  was  strengthened
in  his  opposition  to  Austria  by  the  affair  of
Hildesheim.  The  first  beginnings  of  the  re-
formation at  Celle  under  his  protection,  date
from  the  year  1524,f

He  was  joined  by  Frederic  I.  of  Dennlark,
who,  a  year  before,  had  become  sole  master  of
Silesia  and  Holstein.  His  son  Christian  had
attended  the  Diet  at  Worms,  with  his  tutor
Johann  Ranzau :  they  both  returned  home
filled  with  admiration  of  Luther,  and  deeply
imbued  with  his  doctrines.  They  invited  Peter
Suave — the  very  man  who  had  accompanied
Luther  on  that  journey — to  Denmark  ;  by  de-
grees the  duke  himself  v/as  won  over  to  the
same  cause.  While  bloody  persecutions  were
set  on  foot  in  so  many  places,  Frederic  I.
published  an  edict,  dated  the  7th  August,  15-34,
wherein  he  made  it  a  capital  offence  to  molest
or  injure  any  one  on  account  of  his  religion:
every  one,  he  declared,  ought  so  to  arder  his
conduct  in  that  behalf,  as' he  could  best  answer
it  to  Almighty  God.ij:

A  still  more  important  circumstance  for  the
prospects  of  Lutheranism  was,  the  secession  of
a  powerful  spiritual  prince,  the  Grand  Master
Albert  of  Prussia,  from  the  doctrines  of  the
papacy.  At  the  diet  of  Nürnberg  he  had  been
much  impressed  by  Osiander's  preaching;  and
having  examined  the  Scriptures  himself,"heTe]t
convinced  that  the  order  to  which  he  belonged
was  not  in  accordance  with  the  word  of  God,§
Another  motive  probably  w^as,  that  the  fall  of
the  Council  of  Regency,  and  the  depressed
state  of  the  nobility  in  general,  deprived  him
of  the  last  hope  of  obtaining  assistance  from.
tbe  empire  against  Poland.  W'hat  then  must
have  been  his  feelings  when  no  hope  was  left

*  Zwinglins  CEcolampadio,  Tiguri,  9th  Oct.  Epp.i
Zwinglii,  i.  p.  163.

t  Hüne,  Geschichte  von  Hannover,  i.  p.  747.

%  Munter,  Kirchengeschichte  von  Dänemark,  ii.  p.  565.

§  Meinoranduin  of  a  conversation  between  Markgrave
Albrechr  and  Achatius  v.  Zeraen. Beitrüge  zur  Kunde

of  successfully  resisting  his  old  enemies,  while
at  the  same  time  his  mind  was  agitated  by
doubts  of  his  own  condition  and  calling.  He
returned  to  Saxony  in  the  company  of  Planitz,
the  Saxon  assessor  to  the  Regency,  witli  whose
sentiments  we  are  well  acquainted.  Here  he
sav/  Luther.  This  intrepid  and  resolute  man,
who  considered  all  things  with  relation  to  the
intrinsic  necessity  rather  than  the  outward
pressure  which  enforced  them,  advised  him  to
torsake  the  rules  of  his  order,  to  rnarr}^  and  to
convert  Prussia  into  an  hereditaryprincipality.
The  Grand  Pilaster  had  too  much  of  the  discre-
tion and  reserve  befitting  a  prince,  to  express
his  assent  to  this  suggestion  :  but  it  was  easy
to  read  in  his  countenance  how  strongly  he
inclined  towards  it.||  We  shall  see  how,  im-
pelled by  the  situation  of  his  country,  and  by
the  course  which  his  negotiations  took,  he  soon
proceeded  to  the  execution  of  this  project.

Such  were  the  results  of  the  prohibition  of
the  national  council,  the  announcement  of  which
had  excited  such  ardent  hopes.

It  cannot  be  affirmed  that  violence  was  met
by  violer^ce,  or  that  the  tenacity  with  which
the  old  doctrines  were  maintained  was  opposed
by  an  equally  resolute  adoption  of  the  new.

How  little  such  was  the  case,  is  shown  by
the  example  of  the  Elector  of  Saxony,  who  in
spite  of  Luther's  continual  and  violent  expostu-
lations, caused  the  mass  to  be  celelsrated
throughout  the  whole  of  the  year  1521,  in  his
chapel  of  All-Saints,  and  continually  reminded
the  chapter  of  their  clerical  duties.

The  state  of  things  may  rather  be  summed
up  as  follows.  The  empire  had  determined  to
I  hold  a  general  deliberation  on  the  important
affair  which  occupied  the  whole  mind  of  the
nation.  The  pope  succeeded  in  preventing  the
execution  of  this  project,  and  in  -drawing  a
certain  number  of  the  German  sovereigns  into
a  partial  combination  in  his  own  favour;  but
the  others  still  pursued  the  path  they  had
entered  upon  conformably  with  the  laws  of  the
empire.  They  were  indeed  forced  to  renounce
the  general  assembly,  since  the  emperor  so  pe-
remptorily forbade  it;  but  they  were  not  so
easily  persuaded  to  relinquish  the  old  decrees
I  of  the  empire.  They  determined  to  abide  by
j  the  provisions  of  the  Recess  of  1523,  which,  in
spite  of  a  few  additions  and  amendments,  had
in  the  main  been  confirmed  in  1524.  Indeed
all  the  various  mandates  of  that  year  have
:  fundamentally  the  same  character  and  purport.

Such  was  the  origin  of  a  division  which  has
I  never  since  been  healed  ;  which  has  constantly
!  been  kept  open  by  the  same  foreign  influences
that  originally  caused  it.  It  is  very  remarkable
;  that  all  the  different  party  leanings  which  have
:  lasted  through  successive  centuries,  manifested
I  themselves  thus  early.  We  have  still  to  ob-
serve their  establishment  and  further  progress ;
but  the  first  moment  of  their  existence  revealed
the  incalculable  amount  of  the  danger  with
which  they  were  pregnant.

Preussens,  vol.  iv.

Letter  from  Lutlier  to  Brismann  in  de  W.,  ii.  526.

208

PEASANTS'  WAR.

Book.  III.

CHAPTER  VI.

THE PEASANTS WAR.

Public  order  rests  on  two  foundations— first,
tlie  stability  of  the  governing  body  ;  secondly,
trie  consent  and  accordance  of  public  opinion
with  the  established  government ;  not,  indeed,
in  every  particular,  which  is  neither  possible
nor  even  desirable,  but  with  its  general  tenour.

In  every  age  and  country  there  must  be
disputes  concerning  the  administration  of  the
government ;  but  so  long  as  the  foundations  of
public  confidence  remain  unshaken,  the  danger
is  rot  great.  Opinions  are  in  perpetual  flux
and  perpetual  progress;  so  long  as  a  strong
government  is  actuated  by  the  same  general
spirit,  and  feels  the  necessity  of  moving  in  the
same  direction,  no  violent  convulsion  need  be
feared.  "*

But  when  the  constituted  powers  doubt,  va-
cillate, and  conflict  with  one  another,  v/hilst  at
the  same  moment  opinions  essentially  hostile
to  the  existing  order  of  things  become  predomi-
nant, then,  indeed,  is  the  peril  imminent.

The  first  glance  will  suffice  to  show  us  that
such  was  now  the  state  of  Germany.

The  government  of  the  empire,  which  it  had
cost  so  much  labour  to  constitute,  and  which
certainly  enjoyed  the  general  confidence  of  the
nation,  was  now  broken  up,  and  its  place  filled
by  the  mere  shadow  of  a  name.  The  emperor
was  at  a  distance,  and  recently  the  authority  he
had  exercised  was  merely  negative;  he  had
only  prevented  the  execution  of  whatever  was
resolved  on.  The  two  hierarchies,  the  spiritual
and  the  temporal,  which  had  been  the  work  of
past  centuries,  were  now  separated  by  a  deep
and  vvide  chasm.  The  good  understanding  of
the  more  powerful  sovereigns,  on  which  the
unity  of  the  empire  had  always  depended,  was
destroyed.  On  the  most  important  aflair  that
had  ever  presented  itself,  all  hope  of  framing
measures  in  concert  was  at  an  end.'

This,  of  course,  reacted  very  powerfully  on
the  state  of  opinion.  A  sort  of  understanding,
with  regard  to  which  it  was  .unnecessary  to  fix
?  any  precise  terras,  had  hitherto  been  evinced
in 'the  tendencies  of  the  imperial  government,
and  the  moderated  tone  adopted  by  Luther ;
and  this  it  was  that  had  enabled  them  to  crush
the  destructive  opinions  which  arose  in  1522.
iBut  now  that  all  hop^  of  further  change  being
effected  by  a  decree  of  the  empire  was  over,
Luther  could  no  longer  maintain  the  authorita-
tive position  he  had  assumed,  and  the  anarchical
theories  he  had  helped  to  stifle  broke  out  afresh :
they  had  found  an  asylum  in  the  territory  of
his  ovv'n  sovereign — in  electoral  Saxony.

In  0 riamünde,  one  of  the  cures  which  had
been  incorporated  w\ith  the  endowments  of
Wittenberg  for  the  benefit  of  that  University,
Carlstadt  now  preached.  He  had  entered  into
possession  of  the  cure  in  an  irregular  manner,
in  opposition  to  the  proper  patrons  of  it,  partly
by  means  of  a  certain  claim  which  he  raised
as  belonging  to  the  chapter,  but  mainly,  by  the

election  of  the  parishioners.  He  now  removed
the  pictures,  performed  divine  service  after  his
own  fashion,  and  promulgated  the  most  extra-
ordinary opinions  concerning  the  doctrines  of
the  church,  and  especially  the  obligations  of
the  Mosaic  law.  We  find  mention  of  a  man
who,  by  Carlstadt's  advice,  u'cinted  to  marry
two  wives.*  His  rash  and  confused  mind  led
him  entirely  to  confound  the  national  with  the
religious  element  of  the  Old  Testament.  Lu-
ther expected  that  before  long  circumcision
would  be  introduced  at  Orlamünde,  and  thought
it  necessary  seriously  to  warn  the  elector  against
attempts  of  this  nature.

« At  Eisenach,  Johann  Strauss  had  already
struck  into  a  like  crooked  path. He  was  par-
ticularly violent  against  the  practice  of  receiv'-
ing  interest  on  a  loan. He  declared  that  the
heathenish  laws  of  the  jurists  were  not  binding,
;  and  that  the  ^Mosaic  institution  of  the  year  of
jubilee,  "  wherein  every  man  shall  return  unto
'  ti'.e  inheritance  he  had  sold,"  still  continued  to
be  a  valid  commandment  from  God  ;  thus  call-
:  ing  all  vested  rights  of  property  in  question. |
I 'Not  far  from  thence,  Thomas  Münzer  had
j  founded  a  church  on  the  doctrines  which  had
j  been  suppressed  at  Zwickau  and  Wittenberg.
Like  the  former  propagators  of  those  doctrines,
he  assumed  as  its  sole  basis,  those  inward  re-
velations to  which  alone  he  attached  any  im-
portance ; and  he  far  surpassed  them  in  the
vehemence  with  w^hich  he  preached  theTaborite
doctrine,  that  unbelievers  were  to  be  extermi-
nated with  the  sword,  and  that  a  kingdom
should  be  established,  composed  of  the  faithful
only.

These  doctrines  could  not  fail  to  find  a
welcome  and  an  echo  in  allparts  of  German3^
In  Würtemberg,  too,  the  Israelitish  year  of
jubilee  was  preached  to  the  peasants.  "  Oh,
beloved  brethren!"  said  Dr.  IMantel,  "oh,  ye
poor  christian  men,  were  these  yccirs  of  jubilee
to  arrive,  they  would  indeed  be  blessed  years  V^
Otto  Brunfels,  Vv'ho  had  previouslybeen  very
moderate  in  his  language,  in  1524  published  at
Strasburg  a  series  of  essays  on  tithes,  wherein
he  declared  them  to  be  an  institution  of  the
Old  Testament,  which  was  abrogated  by  the
New,  and  entirely  denied  the  right  of  the  clergy
to  them.§

While  new.  champions  of  these  opinions
started  in  various  parts  of  German}',  Nicolas
Storch  re-appeared  at  Hof,  where  he  found
believers  in  his  revelations,  and  gathered  round

I  ..

*  Letter  of  Luther  to  Brück,  13th  Jan.  1524.  (De  W.,
ii.  No.  572.)

t"Dasswucherzu  nemen  und  geben  unserm  christlichen
Glauben  entgegen  ist,  1524." — "To  give  and  take  usurious
interest  is  against  our  Christian  faitli."  C.  iii.  it  is  said  :
"  So  dann  in' der  Ordnung  des  Jubel  Jars  im  Text  offen-
barlich  aussgedruckt  wirt  das  Gebot,  das  die  notürlftig
bruderlich  Lieb  fordert,  muss  alle  Einrede  still  halten  und
allen  Christen  desgleychen  zu  thun  gebotien  ungezvA'efielt
seyn." — "  Seeing,  then,  in  the  text,  ordaining  the  year  of  -
jubilee,  the  command  requiring  brotherly  love  is  clearly
expre^^reu,  ?o  all  disputes  miisf  cease ;  and  there  can  be
no  doubt  that  all  Christians  are  commanded  to  do  like-
wise."

t  Sattler,  Würtenbergische  Geschichte,  Herz,  ii.  p.  105.

§  "De  Ratione  Decimarum  Ottonis  Brunfelsii  Proposi-
tiones."  Among  others,  prop.  1J5:  "Proditores  Christi
sunt  Juda  jiejores  et  sacerdotihns  Baal,  qui  pro  missis  Pa-
pisticis  et  Canonicis  preculis  decimas  recipiunt."

Cflxp.  VI.

PEASANTS'  WAR.

209

him  twelve  apostles  who  were  to  disseminate
his  doctrine  throughout  the  nation.*

The  exile  of Münzer  and Carlstadt  from
Saxony,  which  was  partly  effected  b)'-  Luther's
influence, f  greatly  contributed  to  the  spread  ,
and  the  force  of  the  agitation. They  both  went  i
to  the  Upper  Rhine,  wl>ere  Carlstadt  began  I
by  unreservedly  proclaiming  his  doctrine  of  j
the  Lord's  Supper; and,  however untenable!
was  his  own  exposition  of  it,  the  excitement  j
he  thus  occasioned  was  most  violent,  and  pro-  :
ductive  of  incalculable  results. ]Miinzer  pro-  i
ceeded  through Nürtiberg;  to  Basle and the  !
frontier  of  Switzerland,  where  he  was  soon  |
surrounded  by  fanatics  who  called  themselves
"the  3'oung  Münzers,"  as  Carlstadt  was  by
men  of  learning. He  confirmed  them  in  tiie
rejection  of  infant  baptism,  which  by  degi'ees
was  become  the  watchword  of  the  part}"  that
meditated  a  universal  revolution.

Thus,  to  the  disorganisation  of  the  supreme
authorities,  was  added  the  general  revolt  of
opinion  against  all  existing  institutions ;  a
state  of  the  public  mind,  which  opened  a
boundless  vista  of  possible  changes  in  the
order  of  things.

The  result  was  inevitable.

We  have  already  seen  in  what  a  state  of
ferment  the  peasantry  of  all  parts  of  the  em-
pire had  been  for  more  than  thirty  years  ;  how^
many  attempts  they  had  made  to  rise;  hov/
violent  was  their  hatred  to  all  constituted  autho-
rities. Long,  however,  before  the  Reformation
had  been  even  thought  of,  their  political  schemies
were  tinged  with  a' religious  character;  this
■was  shown  in  the  case  of  the  Capuchins  at
Eichstadt,  in  that  of  Hans  Behaim  in  the
Würzbürg  dominions,  and  of  the  peasantr}'' in
Untergrumbach.  Joss  Fritz,  vrho  in  1513  re-
nevv'ed  the  Bundschuh  at  Lehen,  in  the  Brisgau,
Vf'as  encouraged  in  his  purpose  by  the  parish
priest,  "because  justice  would  be  furthered
by  it :  God  approved  the  Bundschuh,  as  might
be  shown  from  the  Scriptures ;  it  Vv'as,  there-
fore, a  godly  thing.":|:  Poor  Kunz  of  Vv  ürtem-
berg  declared,  in  1514,  "that  he  vrould  stand
up  for  righteousness  and  divine  justice."  It
was  immediately  after  a  sermon  of  a  former
very  orthodox  professor  of  catholic  theology,
Br.  Gaislin,  that  the  tumult  first  broke  out  on
the  banks  of  the  Glems.§  j

It  was  the  manifest  and  inevitable  tendency  |
of  the  reforming  movement,  which  shook  the  i
authority  of  the  clergy  from  its  very  founda-
tions, to  foster  ideas  of  this  kind  ;  but  it  is  not
less  clear  that  the  evangelical  preaching-,  which
was  undertaken  with  far  different  views  and  j
aims,  was  likely  to  be  affected  by  an  excitem.ent  |
*  Wideruann,  Chron.  Ciiriense:  Mencken,  iii.  p.  744.

t  Who  has  not  read  the  scenes  in  Jena,  where  Luther
is  said  to  have  given  Carlstadt  a  gulden  to  write  a-rainst
him,  and  to  be  his  enemy?  Acta  Jenensia,  Walch,  xv.
24a;2.  Luther  always  complained  of  the  malignity  of
tli^e  stories.  That  they  are  received  in  Luther's  works
does  not  prove  their  truth,  as  Fuessli  says  in  his  Life  of
Carlstadt,  p.  65.  Luther  was  placed  in  ä  false  position  by
hinting  that  Carlstadt's  opinions  were  seditious,  like
those  of  Mii-izer,  which  could  not  be  clearly  proved.

1  Confession  of  Hans  Hummel;  Schneider,  Bundschuh
zu  Lehen,  p.  99.

§  Heyd  Herzog  Ulrich  von  Würtenberf,  i.  u.  243
27  s*

already  so  powerful. The  political  excitement
was  not  produced  by  the  preaching,  but  the
religious  enthusiasts  caught  the  political  fevei.
For  all  had  not  the  sound  sense  and  the  pene-
tration of  Luther. It  was  now  taught  that  as
all  were  the  children  of one  father,  and all
equally  redeemed  by  the  blood  of  Christ,  there
should  no  longer  be  any  inequality  of  wealth
or  station. !| To  the  complaints  of  the  miscon-
duct of  the  clergy,  were  added  the  old  accusa-
tions against  lords  and  rulers  :  their  wars  ;  the
harsh,  and  often  unjust  administration  of  their
ministers  and  subordinates,  and  the  oppressions
under  which  the  poor  groaned  ;  in  short,  it  was
asserted  that  if  the  spiritual  power  was  anti-
christian,  the  temporal  was  no  less  so. Both
were accused of heathenism and tyranny.
"  Things  cannot  go  on  as  they  have  done,"
concludes  one  of  these  writings  ;  "  the  game
has  been carried  on  long enough,  and both
citizens  and  peasants  are  tired  of  it ; everj'
thing  will  alter — omnium  rerum  vicissitude."^
The  first  disturbances  broke  out  in  the  same
district  in  which  most  of  the  former  commotions
had  begun, — in  that  part  of  the  Schwarzwald
which  divides  the  sources  of  the  Danube  from
the  upper  valley  of  the  Rhine. Several  causes
concurred  to  render  this  the  scene  of  peculiar
discontent : — the  vicinity  of  Switzerland,  with
which  that  part  of  Germany  stood  in  various
and  close  relation ;  the  peculiar  severity  with
which  the  Austrian  government  at  Ensisheim
and  the  commission  at  Engen  pursued  even  the
i  most  blameless  preachers  of  the  new  doctrine;
I  the  personal  share  taken  in  these  measures  by
I  the  Count  of  Sulz,  governor  of  Insbruck,  and
j  hereditary  judge  at  Rothweil,  who,  as  v/ell  as
!  the  Counts  of  Lupfen  and  Fürstenberg,  was
I  distinguished  for  his  hatred  of  Lutherans  and
I  peasants ; the  presence  of Duke Ulrich of
j  Würtenberg at  Hohentweil,  who  beheld  his
;  most  formidable  enemies  in  these  noble  parti-
I  sans  of  Austria,  and  used  every  means  to  irritate
I  the  people  against  them. ;  lastly,  perhaps,  the
I  consequences of  a hail-storm  which,  in  the
■  sunimer  of  1524,  destroyed  all  hopes  of  the
\  harvest  in  the  Kletgau. The  insurrection  broke
j  out  in  the  Stühlinger  district,  the  domain  of
I  Count  Sigismund  of  Lupfen. If  it  be  true,  as
i  the contemporar}^  chronicles affirm,  that  the
I  immediate  cause  of  the  revolt  was  a  strange
i  whim  of  the  Countess  of  Lupfen,  for  winding
i  yarn  upon  snail-shells  which  her  subjects  were
forced  to  collect,  it  is  certain  that  never  did  a

\i  "  Kurz  das  e  zugang  aufF  Erden,  wie  mir  Theutschen

von  Schlaurafteniand,  die  Poeten de  Insulis  fortunatis,

I  umf  die  Juden  von  ihres  Messias  Zeytten  dichten,  also

I  auch  zum  Tayl  die  Junger  Christi  gedachten  vom  Re)-ch

I  Christi.''— "  In  short,  that  it  should  be  on  earth,  as  we:

I  Germans  romance  of  the  Schlaurafferfland  (a  sort  of  pays

j  de  Cocaigne),  poets,  de  Insulis  fortunatis,  and  the  Jews

of  the  times  of  their  Messiah;  so  some  of  the  disciples

of  Christ  thought  about  the  kingdom  of  Christ." — Eberlin

von  Günzberg,  Ein  Getrewc  Warnung  an  die  Christen  in

der  Burgau.

IF  Ein  ungewonlicher  und  der  ander  Sendtbrieff  dess
Bauernfeyndts  zu  Karsthannsen."— "An  uncommon  and
another  missive  of  the  peasants'  enemj'-  to  Karsthann-
sen," towards  the  end  : printed  by  Johann  Locher  of
I  Munich. Panzer (ii.  No.  2777.) mentions a  previous
i  letter  of  Karsthannsen,  dated  1525. In  the  second,  I  find
!  no  mention  of  the  peasants'  war,  and  it  must  have  been
1  %vritten,  at  latest,  during  the  latter  half  of  the  year  1524.

210

PEASANTS'  WAR.

Book  III.

more  trifling  and  faiitastic  cause  produce  more
serious  and  violent  effects.*

On  the  24th  of  August,  1524,  Hans  Müller
of  Bülgenbach,  a  Stiihlinger  peasant  and
soldier,  went  to  the  anniversary  of  the  conse-
cration of  the  church  at  Waldshut,  followed  by
a  considerable  troop  of  insurgent  peasants,
bearing  a  black,  red,  and  white  flag:  but  re-
sistance to  a  single  count  was,  far  too  mean
and  trifling  an  object  for  him ;  he  announced
his  intention  of  founding  an  evangelical  brother-
hood for  the  purpose  of  emancipating  the
peasantry  throughout  the  German  empire. j-  A
small  contribution  paid  by  the  members  was
destined  to  pay  emissaries  who  were  to  extend
the  confederation  over  all  parts  of  Germany.
This  project  did  not  originate  with  himself.  It
was  suggested  by  Thomas  IMünzer,  who  had
long  kept  up  a  correspondence  with  this  district,
and  now  arrived  there  in  person.  ?Ie  stayed  a
few  wrecks  in  Griesheim,  and  then  traversed
the  Hegau  and  the  Kletgau, — for  he  could  find
no  permanent  resting-place, —  :|:  preaching
wherever  he  went  the  deliverance  of  Israel,
and  the  establishment  of  a  heavenly  kingdom
upon  earth.  The  subjects  of  the  Counts  of
Werdenberg,  Montfort,  Lupfen,  and  Sulz,  of
the  Abbot  of  Reichenau  and  the  Bishop  of
Constance,  gradually  joined  the  Stühlingers.
Those  of  Sulz  previously  consulted  the  inha-
bitants of  Zürich,  in  which  town  their  lord
possessed  the  rights  of  citizenship;  and  al-
though the  latter  did  not,  as  they  assured  the
count,  approve  the  insurrection,  they  did  not
hesitate  to  make  the  toleration  of  evangelical
preachers  one  of  the  conditions  of  their  obe-
dience.§  It  would  be  Vv'ell  worth  while  to  ex-
amine the  course  of  these  movem.ents  more
narrowly  than  has  yet  been  done.  The  various
motives  which  concurred  to  produce  the  pea-
sants' war  were  more  distinguishable  at  this,
than  at  any  other  period ;  for  this  was  the
moment  at  which  they  assumed  the  form  of
those  general  ideas,  which  from  that  time  to
this  have  possessed  such  ä  singular  power  of
inflaming  and  attaching  the  minds  of  men.

The  lords  vainly  called  upon  the  Swabian
League  for  aid  in  their  peril.  Here  and  there
a  band  of  insurgents  was  induced  by  its  per-
suasions and  promises  to  return  home ;  but
wherever  a  serious  engagement  took  place,  the
peasants  maintained  their  ground.

*  Extract  from  the  Villinger  Clironik;  VValchner,  Ra-
tolphzell,  p.  89.  According  to  Anshelni,  vi.  p.  298,  the
subjects  of  the  Counts  von  Lupfen  and  Fürstenberg  com-
plained, "  Dass  sie  am  Fyrtag  müpsten  Schneggenhüssli
suchen,  garn  winden,  Erdbeer,  Kriesen,  Schlehen  ge-
winnen, und  ander  dergleichen  thun,  den  Herren  und
Frouwen  werken  bei  gutem  Wettei-,  ihnen  selbs  im  Un-
gewetter:  das  gejägd  und  d'hund  lüftent  ohne  Achtung
einigs  Schadens."— "That  on  hölydays  they  were  obliged
to  hunt  for  snails,  wind  yarn, gather  strawberries,  cherries,
and  sloes,  and  do  other  such  like  things  ;  they  had  to
work  for  their  lords  and  ladies  in  fine  weather,  and  for
themselves  in  the  rain.  Their  huntsmen  and  hounds  ran
about  without  resrarding  the  damage  they  did."  The
matter  v.-aslaid  before  the  Kammergericht,  but  the  people
did  not  wait  for  the  decision.

t  Schreiber,  Taschenbuch  für  Süddeutschland,  i.  p.  72.

J  "  Certis  de  causis."  Bullinger  adversus  Anabaptistas,
and  his  Reformations-geschichte,  p.  224.

§  Füesslins  Beiträge  zur  Historie  der  Kirchenreforma-
tion, vol.  ij.  p.  68.

Hearing  that  a  body  of  the  infantry  and
cavalry  of  the  League  was  advancing  against
them  under  Jacob  von  Landau,  they  took  up  a
strong  position,  from  which  it  was  impossible
to  dislodge  them,|J  Nor  could  the  most  zealous
efforts  of  well-intentioned  mediators  bring
about  any  reconciliation.  The  peasants  drew
up  a  statement  of  their  grievances  in  twelve
articles,  which  they  did  not  hesitate  to  lay
before  the  Council  of  Regency  at  Esslingen.
If,  however,  the  lords  refused  to  enter  on°the
discussion  of  the  whole  of  these  collectively,
the  peasants  were  equally  determined  not  to
concede  any  point :  they  had  indeed  far  more
extensive  schemes  in  reserve.  At  the  end  of
the  year  1524,  and  the  beginning  of  1525,  the
peasants  were  masters  of  the  whole  land.*^
The  lords  and  their  ministers  were  at  length
compelled  to  seek  safety  behind  the  massive
walls  of  Ratolphzell,  defended  by  its  devoted
townsmen.

Meanwhile,  however,  similar  disturbances
had  broken  out  in  larger  districts.

Nowhere  were  the  complaints  of  the  people
better  grounded  than  in  the  dominions  of  the
Abbots  of  Kempten.  These  ecclesiastical
rulers  continually  vexed  their  subjects  with,
fresh  taxes,  which  they  spent  in  building  or
travelling.  A's  long  ago  as  the  year  1492,
riots  had  broken  out  in  consequence,  but  had
led  to  no  redress  of  the  peoj)le's  wrongs.  The
free  peasants,  who  were  very  numerous  in  the
Abbacy,  were  continually  ground  down  to  the
station  of  Zinsers,**  and  those  again  to  that
of  villeins; II  while  the  latter  were  compelled
to  perform  services  that  rendered  their  condi-
tion more  intolerable.  Free  lands  were  taken
possession  of;  tithe-free  estates  subjected  to
tithe^;  the  money  paid  by  the  peasants  for
protection  and  defence  v/as  raised  twenty-fold  ;
the  popular  courts  of  justice  held  at  markets
or  fairs  were  suppressed ;  the  revenues  of  the
communes  or  villages  were  seized ;  occasionally,
even,  the  spiritual  power  was  applied  to  carry
through  these  oppressions.  It  was  not  sur-
prising, therefore,  that,  in  th&year  1523.  when
a  new  Abbot,  Sebastian  von  Breitenstein,
entered  on  the  government,  the  peasants  re-
fused to  do  homage,  except  on  condition  that
he  would  redress  their  grievances.  At  first  he
held  out  the  hope  that  he  would  comply  with
their  demands;  thirteen  sittings  were  held  to
consider  of  them,  but  all  in  vain ;  the  Abbot  at
length  exclaimed  that  he  would  leave  things  as
he  found  them;  if  his  subjects  would  not  obey

11  VValchner,  Geschichte  von  Ratolphzell,  p.  92.

IT  The  instruction  given  by  Archduke  Ferdinand  to
Veit  Suiter  (Walchner  and  Bensen,  p.  558,)  shows  the
state  of  lawless  violence  produced  under  these  circum-
stances.

**  The  Zinser,  or  Zinsmann,  occupied,  as  the  context
shows,  an  intermediate  station  between  the  free  peasant
and  the  villein.  As  the  idea  is  a  very  complex  one,  and
involves  a  number  of  conditions  to  which  we  have  no-
thing analogous,  any  attempt  to  translate  the  word  could
only  mislead.  Grimm  (D.  R.  A.  p.  358)  says,  ''Zins  is
the  Latin  census."  The  word  which  seems  most  nearly
to  express  its  meaning,  in  the  cases  he  cites,  is  dues. —
Transl.

tt  Haggenmüller,  Geschichte  der  Stadt  und  Grafschaft
Kempten,  p.  505,  says  that  four  hundred  cases  of  this  kind
are  recorded  in  the  Rotula  of  the  Provincial  Acts.

Chap.  VI.

PEASANTS'  WAR.

211

him,  George  von  Frundsberg'  should  come  and
teach  them.  This  was  assuredly  a  most  ill-
timed  stretch  of  the  spiritual  rights  of  supre-
macy, just  when  all  men  were  refusing  their
belief  in  the  basis  on  which  those  rights  were
founded — the  divine  authority  of  the  clergy.
As  the  Abbot  made  this  appeal  to  force,  his
subjects  thought  it  time  to  prepare  for  defence.
On  the  23d  of  January,  1525,  the  seceders,
{Gotteshauskuie — God's  house  people)  held  a
meeting  at  their  old  place  on  the  Luibas.  They
determined  to  pursue  the  matter  legally  before
the  judges  and  councillors  of  the  League,  and
if  they  could  get  no  redress,  to  sound  the  tocsin,
and  repel  force  by  force.

Already  they  beheld  allies  rising  around  them
on  every  side.  Similar,  if  not  equal  wrongs  ;
the  force  of  example,  and  the  hope  of  success,
set  the  peasantry  all  over  Swabia  in  motion.

In  February,  the  people  of  the  Allgau,  led
by  Dietrich  Hurlewagen  of  Lindau,  rose  against
the  Bishop  of  Augsburg,  and  formied  a  strict
alliance  with  the  villages  of  Kempten.  On
the  27th  of  February,  the  two  districts  held  a
meeting  on  the  Luibas.  If  any  inhabitant  of
them  refused  to  join  the  association,  a  stake
was  driven  into  the  ground  before  his  door,  as
a  token  that  he  was  a  public  enemy.  At  their
call,  the  peasants  all  along  the  Lake  of  Con-
stance, and  across  the  Alps  to  Pfullendorf,
joined  them,  led  by  Eitelhans  of  Theuringen,
whom  his  followers  celebrate  as  "a  good  cap-
tain' of  the  Lord,  who  kept  a  faithful  hand
over  them."  No  bells  could  be  tolled  for
divine  service ;  the  sound  of  them  instantly
gave  the  alarm,  and  all  the  people  rushed  to
the  place  of  meeting  at  Bermatingen.*  A
third  party,  consisting  of  the  subjects  of  the
Abbot  of  Ochsenhausen,  the  Baron  of  Wald-
burg,  and  many  other  lords  and  cities,  rose  on
the  Ried.  The  villages  that  refused  to  join
them  were  threatened  with  fire  and  sword  ;f
the  people  on  the  Iller  hastened  to  unite  with
them.  Their  centre  of  operations  was  at  Bald-
ringen.

Thus united,  and grown to  a  formidable
force,  the  peasantry  now  again  laid  their  griev-
ances  before  the  Swabian  League. In  the  j
course  of  March,  negotiations  were  again  set  '
on  foot  in  Ulm  with  the  three  insurgent  bands.  :
But  it  may  be  doubted  u-hether  it  was  not  the  !
character  of  the  League  itself  which  caused  !
these  discontents;  —  the  incessant  wars,  the  j
expenses  of  which  were  either  thrown  directly
on  the  subjects,  or  raised  by  an  increase  of  all  I
the  established  burthens ;  the  support  it  gave  \
to  the  several  lords  individually;  being  itself

*  Saliiiansweiler's  description  in  Oeclisle,  Beiträge  zur
Geschichte  des  Bauernkriegs,  p.  485.

t  See  the  account  of  the  treaty  of  Heaöwisch,  Walchner,
p.  238:  "  Wie  wol  es  den  Frommen  und  Eibaren  nil  Jieb,
sonder  ein  gros  beschwärd  was. Nütt  dester  minder  so  j
was  der  Jungen  und  auch  deren  die  nienien  nutz.;  so  vil  j
das  die  Allten  und  auch  die  Frommen  mit  innen  müsten  [
ziichen,  oder  sy  im  der  nit  ziechen  wollt  ein  Pfal  für  sin  |
hus  schlugen!,  unnd  im  darby  tröwtend." — "Although,  |
indeed,  to^the  honest  and  godly  it  was  not  welcome,  but  I
rather  a  grievous burthen  ; nevertheless,  not only  the
young,  and  those  who  were  of  no  use  to  any  man,  but  j
also  the  old  and  godly  men  even  were  forced  to  go  along  \
with  them. And  if  any  man  would  not,  they  thrust  a  i
stake  into  the  earth  before  his  door,  and  threatened  him  I
thereat."  1

I  composed  of  the  very  sovereigns  against  whom
I  the complaints  were made. It now  clearly
!  appeared  how  great  a  calamity  it  was  for  the
'  country  that  the  Council  of  Regency  had  re-
cently lost  so  immensely  in  power  and  con-
I  sideration. It  sent,  indeed,  two  of  its  mem-
j  bers  to  comxmand  peace,  and  to  try  to  bring
I  about  a  reconciliation ;  and  they  proposed  to
erect  a court  of  arbitration,  —  each  party  to
'  nominate one prince and three cities, who
I  should hear  the  complaints  and  adjudge  the
I  remedy. But  the  Council  of  Regency  v°as  far
too  weak  to  obtain  a  hearing  for  even  these
moderate  proposals. For  a  mxoment  (in  Feb-
ruary and iMarch) the  invasion  of  his own
land  by  the  Duke  of  ^Yürtenbe^g  had  occupied
the  attention  of  the  League. It  is  difficult  to
^ay  what  would  have  happened  if  the  Con-
:  federation,  on  vrhom  this  prince  again  relied,
had  adhered  firmly  to  his  cause,  as  it  appeared
its  interest  to  do. For  it  seemed  consistent
enough  that  the  Swiss,  in  opposition  to  whom
the  Swabian  League  was originally  formed,
should  support  the  duke  who  attacked,  and  the
I  peasants  who  revolted  against  it ;  and  it  was
this  danger  which  had  induced  the  councillors
;  of  the  League  to  enter  into  negotiations. But
on  this  occasion,  as  on  formier  ones,  other  con-
siderations preponderated  with  the  Swiss  diet ;
and  when  the  duke  had  already  forced  his  way
into  the  outskirts of  Stuttgart,  they  recalled
their  troops  from  him  with  the  greatest  urgency, +
and  he  was  compelled  to  retreat  without  gain-
ing any  solid  advantage.

The  League  was  thus  at  liberty"  to  act  against
the  peasantry.  Without  further  hesitation,  it
required  them  first  to  lay  down  their  arms,
after  which  it  would  treat  with  them.§  As
the  peasants  had  gone  much  too  far  to  agree  to
these  conditions,  the  League,  well  prepared  for
war,  determined  on  an  immediate  resort  to
force.  But  it  was  destined  again  to  find  a
Vv'holly  unexpected  resistance.  Detached  bands
Vv^ere  easily  routed  and  dispersed,  and  a  fev/
small  places  quickly  reduced  ;  but  this  had  no
effect  on  the  main  body.  The  duke's  enter-
prise had  so  far  been  o-^  use  to  the  peasants,'
that  it  had  given  them  time  to  assemble  in
masses  which  kept  even  such  a  commander  as
George  Truchsess  in  check.  Many  of  these
men  had  borne  arms  in  the  field.  While  the
League  had  excited  the  insurrection  by  grinding

J  Hans  Stockar's  Heimfahrt  und  Tagebuch,  p.  ].3i:
"und  dye  Botten,  die  miantend  uns  ab,  das  wier  hiam
zugend  mit  Mund  und  mit  Brieffen,  by  Lib  und  by  Leben,
aiü  Eren  und  Gutt,  by  Verlürn  unser  Vatters-land,  und
ckemend  wier,  so  wettind  sy  uns  aller  Straff  ledyg  Ion,
und  erzalttend  uns  von  dem" Schaden,  den  wier  zu  Mia-
land  und  der  Frantzoss  Küng  hatt  aimpfangen.  Und
also  warend  v,-ir  unseren  Heren  und  Oberen  gehorsam,
und  brachen  in  der  Nacht  uff."— "And  the  messengers
warned  us  to  depart  to  our  homes  by  word  of  mouth  and
by  letter,  as  we  loved  our  lives  and  limbs,  our  honour
and  goods,  and  feared  to  lose  our  country;  and  if  we
went  there  they  v\-ouId  forgive  us  all  punishment.  And
they  told  us  of"the  losses  we  had  suffered  in  Milan,  and
those  of  the  French  king.  And  accordingly  we  obeyed
our  lords  and  masters,  and  set  out  that  same  night."
~  §  Haggenmüller,  Kempten,  p.  522.  A  book  which  I
have  constantly  found  very  useful.  I  am  surprised  to
find  the  movement  at  Kempten  so  falsely  represented,
even  in  contemporary  works,  and  hence,  of  course,  in  all
subsequent  ones.  Cochläus  seems  to  be  the  originator
of  the  errors.

212

PEASANTS'  WAR.

Book  III.

taxes  and  religious  persecutions,  it  had  also
made  the  insurgents  capable  of  self-defence,
by  its  continual  wars.  The  feeling  of  their
own  power  of  defending  themselves  was,  in-
deed, one  chief  motive  to  the  revolt.  The  foot-
soldiers  of  the  League,  who  had  not  unfre-
(juently  served  under  the  same  banners  with
these  peasants,  had  a  natural  fellow-feeling
with  them.  And  now,  from  the  time  that  the
last  negotiations  had  proved  abortive,  the  dis-
order began  to  assume'  a  really  serious  cha-
racter.

The  twelve  articles  had  appeared,  and  every
one  knew  what  he  had  to  expect,  and  why  he
had  taken  arms.  These  articles  contained  three
diflWent  kinds  of  demands  :  first  of  all,  the
liberty  of  the  chase,  of  fishing,  and  of  hevi^ing
wood,  and  the  prevention  of  or  compensation
for  the  damage  done  by  the  game  : — demands
and  complaints  reiterated  by  the  peasantry  of
all  countries  ever  since  the  rise  of  feudal  so-
cieties :  as  early  as  the  year  997,  we  find  them
urged  in  Normandy.*  Secondly,  the  peasants
pressed  for  relief  from  some  newly-imposed
burthens,  new  laws  and  penalties,  and  for  re-
storation of  the  property  of  the  parishes  which
had  been  abstracted,  as  we  remarked  in  speak-
ing of  the  usurpations  of  the  lords.  Lastly,
the  desire  for  religious  reform  was  mingled
with _  these  secular  motives.  The  peasants
were  determined  no  longer  to  be  serfs,  for
Christ  had  redeemed  them  also  with  his  pre-
cious blood  ;  they  would  no  longer  pay  the
small  tithe,  but  only  the  great  one,j-  for  God
had  ordained  that  alone  in  the  Old  Testament.
Above  all,  they  demanded  the  right  to  choose
their  own  preachers,  in  order  to  be  instructed
by  them  in  the  true  faith,  "  without  which
they  were  mere  flesh  and  blood,  and  good  for
nothing."  The  characteristic  feature  of  these
articles  is  a  mixture  of  spiritual  and  temporal
demands,  a  derivation  of  the  latter  from  the
former,  v,^hich  is  certainly  at  variance  with  the
sentiments  of  Luther,  and  with  the  pure  and
unmingled  tendencies  of  the  reformation;  but
which  is  also  far  removed  from  all  schemes  of
general  convulsion,  and  not  at  variance  with
common  sense  and  humanity.  As  to  the  po-
litical demands,  the  local  and  particular  inte-
rests are  far  less  prominent  than  those  of  a
general  or  a  universal  character, — as  was  in-
dispensable where  various  bands  of  men  were
to  combine  :  the  author  of  them,  be  he  who  he

*GulielmijsGemeticensis,  Hist.  Norm.,  lib.  v.  2:  "  Juxta
8i]os  libitus  vivere  decernebant,  quatenus  tain  in  sylvarum
compendiis  quam  in  aquarnra  coninierciis  nullo  obsistente
ante  statuti  juris  obice  legibus  uterentur  suis,"

t  This  is  shown  in  the  following  passage  from  Müllner's
Annals.  The  council  at  Nürnberg  caused  it  to  he  pro-
claimed from  all  pulpits,  "  dass  aller  lebendige  Zehent,
ails  Füllen  Kälber  Lämmer,  &c.,  desgleichen  der  kleine
Zehent,  den  man  nennt  dan  todten  Zehent,  als  Heidel
Erbeiss  Heu  Hopfen,  &c.,  ganz  todtund  abseyn  solle,  aber
den  grossen  harten  Zehenten  von  hernach  benanntem
Getreide,  so  man  die  fünf  Brand  nennt,  nemlich  von
Korn  Dünkel  Waitzen  Gerste  Jiabern,  sollte  man  zu
geben  schuldig  seyn."— "That  all  tithes  on  living  things,
such  as.  foals,  calves,  lambs,  &c.,  likewise  the  small
tithes  called  the  dead  tithes,  such  as  buck-wheat,  pasture,
liay,  hops,  &c.,  should  he  entirely  abolished;  but  the
people  should  be  bound  to  pay  the  great  hard  tithes  on  the
following  sorts  of  grain,  viz.  rye,  spelt,  wheat,  barley  and
oats."  (According  to  custorfi,  the  fifteenth,  twentieth,  or
tJjirtietli  sheaf,)

may,  gave  evidence  of  sagacity  and  address.
For  thus  alone  could  the  articles  obtain  general
approbation,  and  be  regarded  as  the  manifesto
of  the  whole  body  of  the  peasantry. ij:  But
further  demands  were  by  no  means  withdrawn
in  consequence.  \

All  the  people  of  the  Black  Forest,  from
Wutachthai  to  Dreisamthal,  now  flocked  to-
gether under  Hans  Müller  of  Bulgenbach.
This  leader  journeyed  from  place  to  place,
brilliantly  attired  in  a  red  cloak  and  cap,  at
the  head  of  his  adherents ;  the  great  standard
and  the  battle-flag  followed  him  in  a  cart  deco-
rated with  leaves  and  ribbons—a  sort  of  car-
roccio.§  A  herald,  or  mess&nger,  summoned
all  the  parishes,  and  read  the  twelve  articles
aloud.  Nor  did  their  commander  stop  here  ;
he  declared  them  the  symbol  of  the  evangelical
brotherhood,  which  he  intended  to  found;
whoever  refused  to  accept  them  should  be  put
under  temporal  ban  by  the  union.  Already
had  this  been  declared  against  the  lords  of
castles,  the  monks  and  priests  in  convents  and
.chapters  :  though  even  these  men  might  be
admitted  into  the  association,  if  they  chose  to
enter  it,  and  to  live  for  the  future  in  common
houses  like  other  people ;  every  thing  should
then  be  granted  them  which  was  their  due  ac-
cording to  the  laws  of  God.  MüUer's  first
vague  idea  of  an  evangelical  brotherhood  thus
assumed  a  very  distinct  form.  A  radical
change  in  political  and  even  in  social  relations
was  the  object  now  clearly  aimed  at.

In  the  course  of  April,  1525,  it  really  ap-
peared likely  to  come  to  this.

It  is  a  very  remarkable .  circumstance  that
while  Münzer  was  fomenting  the  disorders  in
Upper  Swabia,  Dr.  Carlstadt,  a  Franconian  by
birth,  was  equally  active  in  Franconia.  Com-
pelled to  quit  Strasburg  and  to  return  home,
but  there  subject  to  incessant  persecution,  and
regarded  with  double  horror  in  consequence  of
the  notoriety  of  his  doubts  as  to  the  sacrament,
he  at' length  found  an  asylum  at  Rothenburg
on  the  Tauber,  where  his  opinions  were  re-
garded with  sympathy.  The  citizens  of  the
guilds  demanded  that  the  church  reform  which
had  just  been  begun  should  be  carried  through,
which  the  patrician  families  {die  GeschlecJder^)
whose  domination  was,  moreover,  not  wholly

X  "Dye  grünlichen  und  rechten  Hauptartikel  allei
Bauerschafft  und  Uyndersessen :"  printed  among  others
in  Ptrüt)ers  Beiträge,  ii.  p.  9.  Among  the  editions,  one
in  Panzer,  No.  2705,  has  this  addition;  "des  monadts
Martii."  According  to  Haggenmüller,  p.  513,  their  first
appearance  in  the  form  of  a  document  was  during  the
negotiation  between  the  three  united  bodies  of  peasants
and  the  Swabian  l^eague,  in  February  and  March,  1525.
in  which  case  theymust  have  been  drawn  up  by  a  preacher
who  had  joinc^d  the  peasants.  According  to  the  unani-
mous opinion  of  contemporaries,  among  whom  was  Me-
lanchthon,  Christopher  Schappeler  was  the  author.  Even
in  the  Florentine  History  of  Nardii  (viii.p.  187,)  he  is  called
"  uno  scelierato  rinnovatore  della  setta  degli  anabattisti
chiamato  Scaflere."  Schappeler,  hov.'ever,  always  denied
this  (Bullinger,  p.  245);  and,  indeed,  it  seems  to  have
been  an  error.  It  was  afterwards  supposed,  and  from  his
own  confession  (see  Strobel,  ib.  p.  76),  that  Joh,  Heughlin
of  Lindau  was  the  real  author,  yet  his  confession  relates
only  to  the  articles  which  were  granted  to  the  peasants
of  Sernatingen,  to  prevent  their  joining  the  other  pea-
sants: the  famous  twelve  articles  would  have  been  men-
tioned in  another  manner.

§  Schreiber  der  Breisgau  im  Bauernkriege,  Taschenb.
für  Süddeulschland,  i.  p.  235.

Chap.  VI.

PEASANTS'  WAR.

213

legal,  opposed.  The  guilds  had  a  most  power-
ful ally  on  their  side,  in  the  sturdy  warlike  pea-
sants of  the  Landwehr,  who  were  also  vexed
with  exorbitant  and  illegal  charges,  and  who
claimed  the  liberty  of  the  Gospel.  We  are  too
well  acquainted  with  the  character  of  Carl-
stadt,  not  to  know  that  he  would  approve  all
the  objects  of  the  people.  Already  banished
by  the  council,  but  secretly  protected  by  cer-
tain powerful  members  of  it,  he  suddenly  ap-
peared near  the  crucifix  in  the  great  burial-
ground,  in  his  peasant's  coat  and  hat  of  rough
white  felt,  and  exhorted  the  country  people
not  to  desist  from  their  endeavours.*  It  may
easily  be  imagined,  however,  that  the  move-
ment was  not  confined  to  religious  innovations.
In  the  last  week  of  March,  disturbances  broke
out,  first  in  the  country,  and  then  in  the  town,
in  which  a  committee  of  the  guilds  seized  on
all  the  power;  while  the  rural  communes
formed  themselves  into  a  great  association,  set
forth  their  grievances  —  which  had  indeed  spi-
ritual grounds,  but  were  by  no  means  of  an
exclusively  spiritual  nature — and  took  up  arms
to  compel  redress.

In  Franconia  the  slumbering  fires  of  discon-
tent burst  forth  with  still  greater  rapidity  than
in  Swabia;  either  in  consequence  of  the  com-
binations formed  by  the  emissaries  sent  by
Hans  Müller,  or  by  the  excitement  produced
in  the  minds  of  the  disaffected  ringleaders  by
the  example  of  their  neighbours.  A  few  thou-
sand peasants,  excited  by  the  twelve  articles,
which  had  fallen  into  their  hands,  assembled
in  a  valley  of  the  Odenwald,  called  the  Schüp-
fergrund,  and  chose  for  their  leader  George
Metzler,  the  inn-keeper  at  Ballenburg,  in
whose  house  the  first  arrangements  had  been
made,  —  a  bold  man,  whose  life  had  been
passed  in  the  noisy  revels  of  a  frequented
tavern. f  Similar  meetings  were  held  at  Böck-
ingen, Mergentheim,  and  many  other  places.
The  first  thing  usually  was  to  break  the  fasts  ;
a  banquet  was  held,  at  which  the  most  eloquent
and  the  most  disaffected  spoke ;  the  twelve
articles  were  brought  out,  read,  and  approved  ;
a  leader  was  chosen,  and  the  alarm  bell
sounded.  Such  was  the  beginning  of  the  riot,
the  first  act  of  which,  in  almost  every  case,
was  to  seize  upon  a  flour-store  or  a  wine-
cellar,  or  to  drag  a  seigneurial  fish-pond.
The  newly  chosen  commanders  might  be  seen
riding  about  with  an  air  of  authority,  mounted
upon  the  priest's  pony.  But  though  these
tumults  seemed  contemptible  enough  in  their
beginnings,  they  became  more  and  more  formi-
dable as  they  advanced.  On  an  appointed
day  the  several  bands  repaired  together  from
every  side,  not  exactly  at  the  customary  meet-
ing-place, but  at  some  convent  the)^  had  doomed
to  destruction,  as,  for  example,  at  Schefler-
sheim,  where  they  swore  to  pay  neither  tax,

*  Bensen  der  Bauernkrieg  in  Ostfranken,  p.  79.  Ac-
cording to  the  sentence  passed  on  Stephan  von  Menzin-
gen,  this  leader  of  the  town  movements,  an  adherent  of
Duke  Ulrich  of  VViirtenberg,  associated  frequently  with
Carlstadt.  See  Aufang  und  Ende  des  Bauernkriegs  zu
Rothenburg,  Walch,  L.  W.  xvi.  ItO.

t  According  to  Hubert  Thomas  Leodius,  this  occurred
about  the  middle  of  Lent,  at  Lätare,  26lh  March.

rent,  nor  tithe,  to  any  lord,  temporal  or  spi-
ritual, till  they  would  come  to  some  terms ;
and  in  future,  as  they  had  only  one  God,  to
acknowledge  only  one  master.  It  was  as  if
the  insurgents  were  led  by  some  secret  guid-
ance to  one  predetermined  end.  Their  object
was  in  the  first  place  to  emancipate  themselves
from  their  lords,  but  then  to  unite  with  thnm
and  take  measures  in  concert  against  the  clergy,
and,  above  all,  against  the  spiritual  princes.

To  accomplish  this  work  by  forcible  m.eans,
two  troops  marched  into  the  field,  one  called
the  Black,  from  Rothenburg,  under  Hans  Kol-
benschlag, the  other,  the  White,  from  the
Odenwald,  under  George  Metzler.  The  lords
were  compelled  to  accept  the  twelve  articles,
of  which  the  Odenwald  band  published  a  dis-
tinct declaration,  wherein  the  abolition  of  the
punishment  of  death,  of  the  lesser  tithes,  and
of  villeinage  were  especially  insisted  on,  v/ith-
out  omitting  such  local  modifications  as  should
seem  necessary,  and  holding  cut  the  prospect
of  further  reforms.:|:  This  band  had  not,  like
the  Swabian,  the  forces  of  the  League  to  deal
with ;  there  was  nobody  capable  of  resisting
them.  The  Counts  of  Hchenlohe  and  Löwen-
stein, the  commander  of  the  Teutonic  Order  at
Mergentheim,  and  the  Junker  of  Rosenberg,
were  forced  in  succession  to  subscribe  to  the
conditions  laid  before  them  by  the  peasants,
and  to  submit  beforehand  to  the  reforms  they
purposed  to  introduce.  The  Counts  George
and  Albert,  of  Hohenlohe,  consented  to  appear
before  the  peasants'  army  at  Grünbühl.  *"  Bro-
ther George  and  brother  Albert,"  said  a  tinker
of  Öhringen  to  them,  "come  hither  and  swear
to  the  peasants  to  be  as  brothers  to  them,  for
ye  are  now  no  longer  lords,  but  peasants. "§
Terrible,  indeed,  was  the  fate  of  those  who
ventured  to  resist,  like  Count  Helfenstein  at
Weinsberg.  The  natural  rudeness  of  peasants
was  inflamed  by  the  first  opposition  into  the
wildest  and  most  wanton  blood-thirstiness :
they  swore  that  they  would  kill  every  man
that  wore  spurs ;  and  when  Helfenstein  had
fallen  into  their  power,  it  was  in  vain  that  his
wife,  a  natural  daughter  of  Emperor  Llaximi-
lian,  threw  herself  at  the  feet  of  the  leaders
with  her  little  son  in  her  arms :  a  lane  was
formed,  and  the  victim  brought  out,  preceded
by  a  peasant  playing  on  a  pipe ;  Helfenstein
was  then  driven  on  the  spears  of  his  peasants,
amidst  the  sound  of  trumpets  and  horns.
Hereupon,  every  one  gave  way :  all  the  no-
bility, from  the  Odenwald  to  the  Swabian
frontier,  submitted  to  the  laws  of  the  peasants,
— those  of  Winterstetten,  Stettenfels,  Zobel,
Gemmingen,  Frauenberg,  and  the  Counts  of
Wertheim  and  Rheineck;  these  of  Hohenlohe
now  even  gave  up  th.eir  artillery  to  the  pea-
sants. ||  In  order  to  bring  the  matter  to  a  con-
clusion, both  bodies  now  marched  against  the
most  powerful  lord  in  Franconia,  who  bore  the
title  of  Duke  there,  —  the  Bishop  of Würz-

X  Explanation  of  the  12  articles.  Oechsle,  p.  572,  and
Bensen,  p.  526.

§  Letter  from  Count  George  to  the  city  of  Hall.  Tues-
day  after  Palm  Sunday. Oechsle,  p.  27L

II  Chronik  der  Truchsessen,  ii.  p.  195,

214

PEASANTS'  AVAR.

Book  III.

barg.  On  their  way,  they  had  not  alone  en-
riched and  strengthened  themselves,  but  had
also  secured  distinguished  commanders  of  the
knightly  class.  Götz  von  Berlichingen  had
undertaken  the  command  of  the  Odenwald
troop  ;  partly  because  it  would  have  been  dan-
gerous to  refuse;  partly  attracted  by  the  pros-
pect of  active  war,  which  was  the  sole  object
and  passion  of  his  life,  and  in  which  he  was
the  more  ready  to  engage,  as  it  was  directed
against  his  old  enemies  of  the  Swabian
League.*  Florian  Geier  led  the  Rothenbur-
gers. On  the  6th  and  7th  of  May  these  bands
approached  Würzburg  in  opposite  directions,
and  were  joyfully  received  by  the  inhabitants
of  the  town,  who  hoped  to  gain  the  privileges
of  a  free  imperial  city  ;f  the  citizens  and  the
peasants  swore  not  to  forsake  each  other  till
they  had  conquered  the  Frauenberg,  in  which
the  last  remaining  forces  of  the  princes  and
knights  of  Franconia,^  who  were  now  united,
had  assembled.

At  the  same  moment  (the  end  of  April  and
beginning  of  May,  1525)  a  similar  state  of
things  began  throughout  Upper  German5^
Disturbances  broke  out  in  all  directions,  and
eveirywhere  they  were  in  effect  successful.

The  Bishop  of  Spire  had  been  forced  to
submit  to  the  conditions  imposed  by  the  pea-
sants;:!: the  Elector  Palatine  had  met  them  in
an  open  field  near  the  village  of  Horst,  and
promised  to  redress  their  grievances  on  the
conditions  laid  down  in  the  twelve  articles. §
In  Alsatia,  Zabern,  the  residence  of  the  bishop
himself,  had  fallen  into  the  hands  of  the  insur-
gents ;  the  inhabitants  of  the  small  towns  de-
clared that  they  had  no  spears  wherewith  to
pierce  the  peasants ;  for  a  time  their  leaders,
Schlemmerhans  and  Deckerhans, [)  were  all-
powerful.  On  Markgrave  Ernest  of  Baden
refusing  to  accept  the  terms  offered  by  the
peasants,  his  castle  was  taken  and  he  was
forced  to  fly.  The  knights  of  the  Hegau  were
surrounded  and  besieged  by  them  in  the  town
of  Zell  on  the  Untersee.  Even  the  powerful
Truchsess,  at  the  head  of  the  forces  of  the
Swabian  League,  was  compelled  to  come  to
terms  with  the  peasants  of  the  Allgau,  See
and  Ried,  and,  with  the  mediation  of  the  cities,
to  promise  them  relief  from  their  oppressions,
before  they  would  submit.  It  was  unusual
good  fortune  when  they  would  thus  consent  to
wait  for  future  arrangements. In  Würtemberg

*  Lebensbeschreibung  des  Götz,  p.  201.  See  his  Apology
in  the  Materialien^  p.  156.

t  Johann  Reinhards  Würzburgische  Chronik  in  Lud-
^vig,  Würzb.  Geschichtschr.,  p.  886.

t  Gnodaiius,  ii.  p.  142.

§  Letter  from  the  Elector  to  Melanchthon  ;  "Haben  uns
mit  ihnen  den  12  Artikel  wegen  eines  Landtags  vereinigt,
dergestalt  wes  wir  uns  derselben  mit  ihnen  vergleichen
möchten,  das  hat  seine  wege,  wes  wir  uns  aber  nicht  ver-
tragen können,  das  seit  stehen  zu  Thürfursten  Fürsten
und  Ständen  des  Reichs."— "We  have  agreed  with  them
about  a  diet  to  consider  the  12  articles;  in  such  wise  that
whatever  we  could  arrange  with  them  was  to  stand,  but
what  we  cannot  settle  was  to  be  referred  to  the  electors,
princes,  and  states  of  the  empire."  This  was  the  prin-
ciple of  most  of  the  arrangements  that  were  made.
(Mel.  Epp.  i.  p.  743.)

II  Two  names,  equivalent  to  Jack  the  Guttler  and  Jack
the  Tiler.— Transl.

they  would  not  hear  of  any  more  diets  of  the
duchy  (Landtage)^  but  insisted  on  instantly
placing  everything  in  the  hands-of  their  Chris-
tian brotherhood,  which  had  already  spread
over  the  chief  part  of  the  country.  Each  place
sent  a  certain  number  of  people  into  the  field.

The  Bishop  of  Bamberg,  the  Abbot  of  Hers-
feld,  and  the  coadjutor  of  Fulda,  had  already
made  concessions  of  a  spiritual,  as  well  as
temporal  kind.  The  last-named  of  the  three
agreed  to  these  changes  with  peculiar  readi-
ness, and  immediately  allowed  himself  to  be
saluted  Prince  von  der  Buchen  ;  his  brother,
the  old  Count  William  of  Henneberg,  also
entered  into  the  peasants'  league,  and  promised
to  leave  in  freedom  "  all  whom  God  Almighty
had  made  free  in  Christ  his  Son."^  The
boldest  attempt  at  a  complete  change  in  all  the
relations  of  life  was  perhaps  that  made  by  the
inhabitants  of  the  Rlieingau.  They  once  more
assembled  on  the  old  traditional  meeting-place,
the  Lützelau,  at  Bartholcmewtide,**  and
agreed  to  demand,  above  all,  the  restoration
of  their  ancient  constitution,  the  Haingericht
(Bush  Court)[f  subsisting  under  their  old
law,  and  the  Gebick,  which  converted  the
country  into  a  sort  of  fortress  :  besides  this
they  insisted  on  the  participation  of  the  lords,
both  spiritual  and  temporal,  in  the.  burthens
borne  by  the  community  at  large,  and  the  ap-
plication of  conventual  property  to  the  use  of
the  country.  They  encamped  on  the  Wach-
holder  at  Erbach,  and  actually  in  open  rebel-
lion, compelled  the  governor,  dean  and  chapter
to  grant  their  demands. :|::|:  At  Aschaffenburg
too,  the  governor  for  the  Archbishop  of  Mainz
was  forced  to  submit  to  the  conditions  of  the
peasants.

The  whole  Swabian  and  Franconian  branch
of  the  German  nation  was  thus  in  a  state  of
agitation  which  seemed  likely  to  end  in  a  com-
plete overthrow  of  all  the  existing  relations  of
society  ;  a  great  number  of  towns  were  already
infected  with  the  prevailing  spirit.

The  small  towns  were  the  first  to  join  the
cause  of  the  peasantry, — Kempten,  Leipheim,
and  Günzburg  on  the  Danube  (which,  indeed,
soon  received  severe  chastisement) ;  the  nine
Odenwald  towns  in  the  see  of  Mainz,  and  the
towns  in  the  Breisgau,  in  some  of  which  the
town  clerk  himself  opened the gates  to  the

IF  The  formula  of  the  League. Ludwig,  p.  879.

**  According  to  Bodmann's  Rheingauischen  Alterthü-
mern,  p.  461,  Vogt's  assertion,  that  the  juniper-tree  was
the  ancient  place  of  meeting,  is  erroneous.

tt  Grimm,  in  his  Deutsche  Rechtsalthümer,  p.  793,  says,
"The  ancient  OerichUw^s  invariably  held  iti  the  open
air,  in  a  wood,  under  shady  trees,  on  a  hillock,  or  near  a
spring;  the  assembled  multitude  could  not  have  been
contained  in  any  moderate  building,  and  pagan  ideas  re-
quired that  the  Gericht  should  be  holden  in  a  holy  spot,
on  which  sacrifices  were  offered,  and  the  judgment  of
heaven  appealed  to.  Christianity  abolished  the  sacri-
fices, but  left  the  old  Oerichtstatten  undisturbed."  I  have
sought  in  vain  for  any  explanation  of  the  word  Gebick.
It  has  been  suggested  to  me  that  it  is  something  like  a
Mark  (district),  or  rather  the  lines  by  which  each  Mark
was  enclosed.  These  were  chiefly  formed  by  forest,  and
also  by  rivers,  ditches,  and  other  natural  boundaries.  See
Grimm's  account  of  the  primitive  territorial  divisions  of
Germany  (book  iii.  p.  491). — Transl.

XX  Artikel  gemeiner  Landschaft;  Schunk,  Beiträge  zur
Mainze  Gesch.  i.  p.  191.  '

Chap.  VI.

PEASANTS'  WAR.

215

peasants;  none  of  these,  indeed,  were  in  a
condition  to  resist,  and  most  of  them  groaned
under  the  same  oppressions  as  the  peasantry.
The  people  of  Bamberg  conceived  the  bold
project  of  compelling  the  surrounding  nobles
to  come  and  live  within  the  walls  of  their
town  and  become  burghers;  nearly  fifty  castles
w"ere  stormed  in  this  neighbourhood.*  The
Abbot  of  Kempten  being  forced'  to  surrender
his  castle  of  Liebenthann  to  the  peasants,  and
to  seek  refuge  in  the  town,  the  burghers  took
advantage  of  the  favourable  moment  to  bring
him  to  an  agreement  the}"  had  long  desired,
for  the  release  of  all  his  rights  of  sovereignty.
Some  of  the  free  imperial  towns  of  the  second
and  third  classes  were  next  drawn  into  the
league  by  persuasion  or  by  force  :  these  were
Heilbronn,  Memmingen,  Dünkelspiel,  and
Wimpfen ;  Rothenburg  entered  into  an  alli-
ance with  the  peasantry  for  a  hundred  and
one  years,  which  was  ratified  at  a  solemn  as-
sembly held  in  the  parish  church  :  \Yindsheim
was  only  restrained  from  the  same  course  by
the  dissuasions  of  Nürnberg.  Even  in  the
great  cities  a  similar  spirit  manifested  itself,
Mainz  claimed  the  restitution  of  its  rights  as
an  imperial  city,  of  which  it  had  been  deprived
since  the  last  disturbances.  The  council  of
Treves  not  only  demanded  that  the  clergy
should  be  called  upon  to  bear  their  share  in
the  burthens  of  the  citizens,  but  even  laid
claim  to  a  part  of  the  spiritual  revenues  accru-
ing from  the  relics  in  the  cathedral. j-  The
council  of  Frankfurt  was  forced  to  agree  to
the  articles  laid  before  it  by  the  commonalty,
word  by  word  ;-\:  alleging  as  an  excuse  that
the  same  thing  had  happened  in  several  other
imperial  cities.  "■  It  was  remarked  that  Strasburg
received  the  insurgents  as  citizens,  and  that
Ulm  supplied  them  with  arms,  and  NiJrnberg
with  provisions.  A  learned  writer  of  this  pe-
riod states  it  as  his  opinion,  that  the  move-
ment had  originated  even  more  with  the  towns
than  with  the  peasantry,  and  that  the  former
had  been  originally  stirred  up  by  Jewish
emissaries  :  he  believes  that  the  intention  of
the  towns  was  to  shake  off  the  authority  of
the  princes  altogether,  and  to  live  like  Veajce,
or  the  republics  of  antiquity. §

Unfounded  as  was  this  opinion  —  for  we
know  hovv'  zealously  many  of  the  imperial
towns,  Nürnberg  for  example,  strove  to  sup-
press the  rising  disorders  in  their  own  domi-
nions, and  we  have  seen  that  the  disturbances
in  the  towns  which  corresponded  to  those  of
the  peasants  Were  only  called  forth  by  circum-
stances,—  yet  w^e  cannot  but  perceive  what
force  and  extension  must  have ,  been  given  to
the  rebellion  by  the  addition  of  this  second
element,  and  how  wide  and  threatening  the
danger  was  become.

*  Lang's  Geschichte  von Baireuth,  i.  p.  187. Heller,
p.  88.

t  Scheckmann:  Aflditamentiim  ad  Gesta  Trevirorurn  in
Wyttenbach's  edition  of  the  Gesta,  ii.  Animadv.  p.  51.

T  Lersner's  Frankfurter  Chronik.

5  Conrad! Mutiani Literse  ad  Fridericuin  Electorem,
57th  April.  1525,  in  Köhler's  Beiträge,  i.  270.

The  ideas  to  which  this  crisis  gave  birth
w'ere  most  remarkable.

The  Franconian  peasants  formed  projects
for  the  reform  of  the  whole  empire.

So  deeply  rooted  w^as  this  purpose  in  the
very  heart  of  the  nation.  That  which  the
princes  had  vamly  endeavoured  to  accomplish
at  so  many  diets, —  which  Sickingen  and  his
knights  had  attempted  three  years  before  to
execute  aiter  their  fashion, — the  peasants  now
believed  they  could  effect ;  —  of  course  in  the
manner  most  calculated  to  raise  their  own
condition.

The  first  object  was  to  give  a  general  direc-
tion and  guidance  to  the  present  tumultuous
movement.  A  common  olhce  for  the  business
of  all  the  separate  bands,  in  fact  a  sort  of
central  government,  was  to  be  established  at
Heilbronn.  The  masses  were  to  be  ordered
to  return  home  to  their  daily  work,  leaving
only  a  certain  levy  in  the  field,  whose  duty  it
w'ould  be  to  compel  all  who  still  remained  un-
subdued to  accept  the  twelve  articles.

In  the  further  attempts  to  create  some  posi-
tive institutions,  the  predominant  idea  was  that
of  freeing  the  peasantry  from  the  burthen  of  all
the  oppressive  privileges  of  the  lords,  both
spiritual  and  temporal.  To  accomplish  this,
it  was  determined  to  proceed  at  once  to  a  gene-
ral secularisation  of  the  ecclesiastical  property.
As  this  w^ould  involve  the  abolition  of  the  spi-
ritual principalities,  means  would  thus  be  ob-
tained for  giving  compensation  to  the  .temporal
sovereigns  for  the  loss  of  their  rights,  for
which  some  indemnity  was  thought  due.  The
amount  of  church  property  was  so  enormous,
that  the  people  hoped  still  to  have  enough  left
to  satisfy  all  the  public  exigencies  of  the  em-
pire. All  duties  and  tolls  were  to  be  taken
off,  and  all  charges  for  safe  conduct ;  and  only
every  tenth  year  a  tax  was  to  be  levied  for  the
Roman  emperor,||  who  was  in  future  to  be  the
sole  protector  and  ruler  of  the  country,  and  to
whom  alone  the  people  were  to  owe  duty  and
allegiance.  The  courts  of  law  were  to  be  re-
modelled and  popularised  on  one  comprehen-
sive principle.  There  w^ere  to  be  sixty-four
free  courts  {Freigerichte^)  in  the  empire,  with
assessors  of  all  classes,  even  the  lowest ;  be-
sides these,  sixteen  district  courts  {Landge-
richte)^ four  courts  of  appeal  {Hnfgerichte),  and
one  suprem^e  court  (Kammer gerichf) ;  all  or-
ganised in  the  same  manner.  The  members
of  the  Kam me'rgeripht  were  to  be  as  follows : —

II  They  refused  to  acknowledge  Margrave  Ernest  of
Baden  as  their  sovereign,  and  were  determined  to  be  go-
verned in  future  by  the  Emperor  and  his  deputy  alone.
They  also  meant  something  similar  by  the  divine  right
which  they  conceded  to  the  Duke  of  Wiirtenberg.  The
chief  ground  of  their  recognition  of  the  Emperor  (Kaiser
—Cmsar)  was  that  he  was  named  in  the  New  Testament.

IT  Grimm  says,  in  his  Deutsche  Rechts  Aitertliümer
(p.  829),  "Originally  almost  every  Gau  or  Merkgericht
might  be  called  a  Freigericht.  Later,  however,  when  the
sovereignty  of  the  princes  gained  force  and  consistency-,
this  term  acquired  a  peculiar  meaning.  Particular  dis-
tricts which  maintained  their  independence,  and  re-
mained immediately  subject  to  the  empire,  bore  the  name
of  Freigerichte,  just  as  immediate  cities  were  called
Freistädiey  (öee  further,  note  at  p.  225.)  Courts  called
Freigerichte,  of  which  the  lord  of  the  soil  appoints  the
president,  and  the  peasants  the  assessors,  exist,  lam  told,
in  the  Germ.an  provinces  of  Russia.— Transl.

216

PEASANTS'  WAR.

Book  III.

two  princes,  two  reigning  counts,  two  knights,
three  burghers  of  the  imperial  towns,  three
^rom  the  princely  residencies,  and  four  from
all  the  communes  of  the  empire.  These  were
plans  which  had  often  been  suggested,  and
are,  for  instance,  to  be  found  in  a  work  which
appeared  as  early  as  1523,  calFed  "Need  of  the
German  nation"  {^'-Nothdurft  deutscher  Nation'''')
—  they  were  now  adopted  and  developed  by
two  clever  and  daring  peasant  leaders.  Fried-
rich  Weigant  of  Miltenberg,  and  Wendel  Hip-
ler,  formerly  chancellor  of  Hohenlohe.*  The
doctors  of  the  Roman  law  were  especially
hated  by  the  peasantry  ;  they  were  not  to  be
admitted  into  any  court  of  law,  and  only  to  be
tolerated  at  the  universities,  in  order  that  their
advice  might  be  taken  in  urgent  cases.  All
classes,  too,  were  to  be  made  to  return  to  their
original  vocation ;  the  clergy  were  to  be  only
the  shepherds  of  their  flocks  ;  the  princes  and
knights  were  to  occupy  themselves  in  defend-
ing the  weak,  and  to  live  in  brotherly  lovg
one  with  another.  All  the  commons  were  to
undergo  a  reformation  consonant  to  the  laws
of  God  and  of  nature  ;  only  one  sort  of  coin
was  to  be  current,  and  uniform  weights  and
measures  were  to  be  introduced.

Ideas  more  radically  subversive  than  were
ever  again  proclaimed  till  the  time  of  the
French  Revolution.

But  bold  and  anarchical  as  they  were,  they
were  not  without  a  considerable  prospect  of
being  realised. ,  The  contagion  spread  every
instant :  it  had  already  seized  on  Hessen,
whence  it  threatened  to  extend  its  conquests
over  the  Saxon  race ;  as  from  upper  Swabia
over  the  Bavarian,  and  from  Alsatia  over  that
of  Lorraine.  Corresponding  disturbances  took
place  in  Westphalia;  for  example,  at  Mün-
ster, where  the  town  demanded  the  same  con-
cessions from  its  chapter  as  at  Treves,  and  the
bishop  already  feared  that  he  should  see  the
Vv^hole  country  hurried  away  by  the storm. f

*See  the  plans  of  the  peasants  in  Ochsle,  p.  ]G3,  and
in  the  Appendix.  It  has  already  been  remarked  by  Eich-
horn (Deutsche  Staats  und  ßechtsgesch.  iii.  p.  ]]9,  4th  ed.)
that  these  designs  throw  a  new  liglit  on  the  so-called  Re-
formation of  Frederick  III.  Goidast  does  not  indeed  de-
serve the  blame  which  Eichhorn  attributes  to  him  :  he
has  not  given  this  little  work  as  a  reforniHlion  of  the
Emperor's.  The  old  work  lie  quotes  bears  the  title
"  Teutscher  Nation  Notturft :  die  Ordnung  und  Reforma-
tion aller  Stend  in  Rom.  Reych,  durch  Kayser  Friedrich
III.  Gott  zu  Lob,  der  ganzen  Christenheit  zu  Nutz  und
Seligkait  fürgenommen."  {Panier,  ii.  p.  2-26.)  — "The
Needs  of  the  German  N^ation:  the  ordering  and  reforma-
tion of  all  tlie  classes  of  the  Roman  empire  by  the  Em-
peror  Frederick  III.,  undertaken  for  the  glory  of  God,
and  for  the  benefit  and  salvation  of  all  Christendom."
But  this,  no  doubt,  is  a  mere  author's  fiction.  The  paper
breathes  throughout  the  spirit  of  the  first  years  of  the  re-
formation. The  calamity  at  Erfurt,  which  is  there  men-
tioned  among  those  communes  which  owed  their  ruin  to
self-interest,  refers,  n5  doubt,  to  the  destructive  riots  of
1510,  and  not  to  any  previous  and  less  remarkable
events.

t  "Alle  und  semptliche  Artikel  durch  die  van  Munster
by  sick  sol  vest  upgericht."— "  All  and  every  article  drav.?n
up  for  themselves  by  those  of  Munster,"  and  especially
the  letter  of  the  Bishop  Frederic,  dated  8lh  of  May,  in
Niesert,  Beiträge  zu  einem  Münsterschen  Urkundenbuch,
i.  p.  113.  "So  juvv  vorgekommen,  was  grotes  uprores
jtzont  im  hylligen  Ryke  und  daitscher  nation  weder  alle
Christliche  Ordenunge  Obericheit  geistlich  und  weltlich
vorhanden  is  — werden  wy  berichtet —  das  sulchs  allhier
in  unserm  Gestichte  unser  Obericheit  und  insonderheit
dem  geistlichen  Stande  zu  gyner  geringen  Verhonynge

It  also  broke  out  on  the  Austrian  frontiers,
where  all  that  offered  resistance  were  put
under  ban  by  the  peasantry ;  all  the  Alpine
districts  were  in  the  same  state :  in  Tyrol,
Archduke  Ferdinand  found  himself  compelled,
in  manifest  contravention  of  the  decrees  of
Regensburg,  to  concede  to  the  committees  of
the  states  of  Inn  and  W^ippthal  that  the  Gospel
should  in  future  be  preached  "  pm-e  and  plain,
according  to  the  sense  borne  by  the  text;"^:
in  the  see  of  Brixen,  the  bishop's  secretary,
Michael  Geissmayr,  headed  the  insurgents;  at
Salzburg,  the  miners  flocked  to  the  churches
at  the  sound  of  the  alarm-bell ;  even  between
Vienna  and  Neustadt  the  labourers  in  the  vine-
yards talked  of  a  combination  which  would
enable  them  to  send  abont  ten  thousand  n!en
into  the  field  v/ithin  a  few  hours.§

Meanwhile,  the  rebellion  had  broken  out
in  Thuringia,  and  had  there  assumed  another
character.

It  appears  probable  that  in  ThuAngia  and
the  Harz,  traditions  of  the  fanaticism  of  the
flagellants,  the  eflects  of  which  may  be  traced
down  even  to  the  end  of  the  15lh  century,!)
had  prepared  the  ground  for  the  insurrection
of  the  peasantry.  At  all  events,  motives  arising
out  of  religious  enthusiasm  were  much  more
powerful  there  than  political  causes.  The
opinions  which  Luther  had  overcome  at  Wit-
tenberg, and  which  he  had  warned  his  prince
not  to  suffer  to  take  root  in  Thuringia,  were
now  eagerly  listened  to  by  a  numerous  and
excited  population.  Münzer  had  returned  to
Thuringia;  he  had  been  received  at  Mühl-
hausen, Vv^here,  as  at  Rothenburg,  a  change  of
the  constitution  and  of  the  council  had  been
I  brought  about  by  the  co-operation  of  the  lower
class  of  burghers  with  the  country  people  ;
and  from  hence  lie  soon  spread  the  ferment
far  and  wide  around  him.  He  scorned,  as
we  are  already  aware,  the  "  fabulous  gospel''
preached  by  Luther,  his  "honey-sweet  Christ,"
and  his  doctrine  that  antichrist  must  be  de-
stroyed by  the  Word  alone,  without  violence  :
he  maintained  that  the  tares  must  be  rooted
out,  at  the  time  of  harvest;  that  the  example
of  Joshua,  who  smote  the  people  of  the  pro-
mised land  with  the  edge  of  the  sword,  must

Inbrock  und  Besweriuire  im  Deile  och  vorgenommen  und
beteiiget."  —  "And  it  h;'.s  come  to  our  knowledge  what
great  uproar  there  now  is  throughout  tlie  holy  empire  and
German  nation,  against  all  Christian  order  and  all  rulers,'
both  spiritual  and  temporal ;  and  we  are  informed  that,
in  our  diocese,  this  has  been  tlie  cause  of  no  little  con-
tempt, resistance,  and  complaining  against  our  magis-
trates, and  especially  against  those  of  the  ecclesiastical
order."

X  Excerpts  in  Bucholtz,  viii.  p.  330.  Bucholtz  shows  a
want  of  knowledge  of  the  language  of  this  period  in  as-
suming that  by  these  concessions  the  difficulties  were
avoided.

§  Schreiben  von  Hofrath  und  Rennlkarnme'r,  Bucholtz,
viii.  p.  88.

KAccordingto  Johann  Lindner's  Onomasticon  (Mencken,
ii.  p.  1521,)  this  sect  prevailed  chiefly  in  Aschersleben  and
Sangerhausen.  In  a  document  which  is  quoted  by  Forste-
mann in  his  Provincialblättern  für  Sachsen  (18.38,  No.
I  232),  we  find  an  inquisition  at  Castle  Hoym  against  one
of  these  flagellants,  in  the  year  1481.  It  was  perhaps  a
point  of  union  that  they  too  looked  upon  their  preacher
as  a  prophet,  and  thought  that  in  him  they  beheld  the
judge  at  the  day  of  judgment.  But,  indeed  the  whole  i3
dressed  up  with  metaphor.

Chap.  VI.

PEASANTS'  WAR— MÜNZER.

217

he  followed  *  '  He  was  moreover  dissatisfied
with  the  compacts  made  b}'-  the  peasants  of
Swabia  and  Franconia.  His  views  went  much
farther;  he  deemed  it  impossible  to  speak  the
truth  to  the  people  so  long  as  they  were  go-
verned by  princes.  He  declared  it  intolerable
that  all  creatures  had  been  converted  into  pro-
perty,—  the  fish  in  the  water,  the  birds  in  the
air,  and  the  plants  on  the  earth;  these  crea-
tures must  be  free  to  all  before  the  pure  Word
of  God  could  be  revealed.  He  utterly  rejected
all  the  principles  on  which  the  idea  of  the
State  rests,  and  acknowledged  nothing  but
revelation;  "but  this,"  he  said,  "must  be  ex-
pounded by  a  second  Daniel,  who  will  lead
the  people  like  Moses."  At  Mühlhausen  he
was  regarded  as  a  master  and  a  prophet ;  he
had  a  seat  in  the  council,  and  gave  judgment
in  the  court  of  law  according  to  revelation ;
under  his  direction  convents  were  suppressed,
and  their  property  confiscated  ;  cannon  of  pro-
digious calibre  founded,  and  warlike  enter-
prises executed.  The  priests'  houses  in  the
territory  of  Duke  George  were  first  attacked,
and  then  the  convents  stormed,  with  tha assist-
ance of  the  enraged  populace;  in  the  Harz  and
throughout  the  great  plain  of  Thuringia,  up  to
the  edge  of  the  forest.  The  monuments  of  the
old  Landgraves  at  Reinhardsbrunn  were  de-
faced, and  the  library  destroyed. f  The  next
step  was  to  attack  the  castles  and  farms  of  the
lords,  both  in  Eichsfeld  and  in  Thuringia.
We  no  longer  find  any  mention  of  conditions
and  treaties,  or  of  a  future  reformation ;  the
object  of  these  fanatics  was  a  general  and  piti-
less destruction.  "  Beloved  brethren,"  writes
Münzer  to  the  miners  at  ?.Iansfeld,  "do  not
relent  if  Esau  gives  you  fair  words ;  give  no
heed  to  the  wailings  of  the  ungodly.  Let  not
the  blood  cool  on  your  swords ;  lay  Nimrod
on  the  anvil,  and  let  it  ring  lustily  vv'ith  your
blows;  cast  his  strong  tower  to  the  earth  while
it  is  yet  day."  "Know  then,"  he  writes  to
Count  Ernest  of  Heldrungen,  "  that  God  has
commanded  us  to  cast  thee  from  thy  seat  with

*  Ausleguns;  des  andern  unterscliyds  Danielis  dess  prn-
'  pheten  gepredigt  aufm  Schloss  zii  Alstedt  vor  den  tetisen
thewren  Herzogen  und  Vorstehern  zu  Sachsen  durch
Thomas  Münzer,  1524."—'-  Explanation  of  the  other  dis-
tinction of  the  Prophet  Daniel,  preached  at  the  Castle  of
Alsted,  before  the  active  and  beloved  dukes  and  governors
of  Saxony,  bj'  Thomas  Miintzer."  Certainly  one  of  his
most  remarkable  productions.  He  takes  great  pains  to
prove  the  diöerence  between  genuine  revelations  and
false  visions,  e.  ff.  that  the  former  descends  on  a  man  in
a  joyful  amazement  ("  in  eyner  frohen  Verwunderung").
A  man  must  be  free  from  all  temporal  comforts  of\he
flesh  ("abgeschieden  sein  von  allem  zeitlichen  Trost
seines  Fleisches").  The  work  of  visions  should  flow  not
from  human  endeavours,  but  simply  from  the  unchange-
able will  of  God  ^"nit  rausser  quellen  durch  menschliche
anschlege,  sondern  einfaltiar  herfliessen  nach  Gottes- un-
vorrucklichen  Willen").  It  is  clear  that  he  does  not  go
nearly  so  far  as  Ignatius  Loyola ;  at  the  same  time  he
combats  Luther's  more  moderate  theory,  which  he  as-
pcribes  to  "  imaginary  goodness"  ("  einer  getichten  Güte")
He  sa\-s  quite  openly,  that  the  ungodly  should  not  be  suf-"
fered  to  live.  "  I  say  with  Christ  that  ungodly  rulers,
more  e.«pecially  priests  and  monks,  should  be  put  to
death"  ("  Ich  sage  mit  Christo.  &c.  das  man  die  gotlosen
regenten,  sunderlich  pfaffen  und  mönche  tödten  sol").
Princes  are  to  exterminate  the  ungodly,  «r  God  will  take
the  sword  from  them.  "  Oh,  my  dear  masters,  how  finely
will  the  Lord  smite  the  old  pots  with  an  iron  rod  !"
("  Ah,  lieben  Herren,  wie  hübsch  wirt  der  Herr  unter  die
alten  Topf  schmeissen  mit  einer  eysern  Stangen.")
f  Thuringia  Sacra,  i.  p.  173.
28  T

the  might  that  is  given  to  us.":|:  When  the
country  people  of  Schwarzburg,  also  in  league
with  the  small  towns,  rose  against  the  count,
and  assembled  in  considerable  force  at  Frank-
enhausen, jMünzer  feared  nothing  but  the  con-
clusion of  a  treaty;  "a  fraud,"  he  calls  it,
"under  colour  of  justice  :"  he  left  his  strong-
hold of  Mühlhausen  in  order  to  prevent  this
and  to  attack  "the  eagle's  nest"  in  person.
He  proved  from  the  Apocalypse  that  the  power
was  to  be  given  to  the  common  people.
"  Come  and  join  in  our  measure,"  he  writes  to
his  friends  at  Erfurt,  "it  shall  be  right  fairly
trod  ;  we  will  pay  the  blasphemers  back  all
that  they  have  done  to  poor  Christendom."
He  signed  himself  "  Thomas  Münzer,  with
the  sw"ord  of  Gideon."

Fanatic  as  he  was.  Münzer  still  occupied  a
most  formidable  position.  In  him  the  mystical
notions  of  former  ages  were  blended  with  the
tendencies  toward  ecclesiastical  and  temporal
reform  which  had  just  arisen.  Out  of  this
combination  he  formed  a  set  of  opinions  which
addressed  themselves  immediately  to  the  com-
mon people ;  incited  them  to  rise  an^  annihi- '
late  the  whole  existing  order  of  things,  and
prepared  the  way  to  the  absolute  sway  of  a
prophet.  The  people  assembled  in  troops  all
around  on  the  hills  of  Meissen  and  Thuringia,§
awaiting  the  first  decisive  result  of  his  enter-
prize,  in  order  to  join  him  imim.ediately  after  it.
The  popular  current  would  then  have  flowed
in  this  direction  from  all  parts  of  Geri:nany.

At  length,  therefore,  the  results  which  might
long  have  been  anticipated,  appeared.  No
sooner  were  the  authorities  which  constituted
the  State  in  Germany  at  variance  with  them-

I  selves  and  each  other,  than  the  elem.entary
forces  on  which  it  rested  arose. The  lightnings

I  flashed  from  the  ground,  and  the  streams  of
public  life  left  their  accustomed  channels  :  the
storm  which  had  so  long  been  muttering  under-
ground nov\^  poured  out  all  its  fury  on  the  upper
regions,  and  everything  seemed  to  threaten  a

I  complete  convulsion.

I  If  we  examine  more  closely  this  great  ele-
mental strife  of  the  German  State  in  all  its

I  bearings,  we. shall  be  able  to  distinguish  seve-

iral  different  steps  in  its  progress.

I  Its  origin  was,  no  doubt,  to  be  found  in  the
oppression  of  the  peasantry,  which  hac^  been
gradually  increasing  during  the  preceding  years,
in  the  imposition  of  fresh  taxes,  and,  at  the  same
time,  the  persecution  of  the  evangelical  doc-

!  trines  which  had  seized  on  the  minds  of  the
common  people  more  strongly  than  any  intel-
lectual influence  before  oi  since,  and  had  more
effectually  stimulated  them  to  individual  exer-
tion. Had  the  peasants  been  content  with
resisting  all  arbitrary  claims,  and  securing  the
liberty  of  hearing  their  own  doctrine  preached,
they  would  have  avoided  calling  up  against
them  the  whole  strength  of  the  existing  order
of  things,  and  might  have  secured  to  them-

t  Letter  in  Strobel  :  Leben,  Scliriften  und  Lehren
Thomse  Münzer,  p.  95.

§  Pauli  Langii  Chronica  Nurnburgensia,  in  Mencken,
ii.  p.  67.

21S

PEASANTS'  WAR— LUTHER.

Book  IIL

selves  a  long  course  of  peaceful  and  lawful
improvement.

Nay,  even  more  might  have  been  obtained  ;
in  many  places,  treaties  were  concluded  by
which  the  lords  gave  up  the  most  oppressive
of  the  rights  they  had  formerly  acquired  ;  it
was  probable  that  these  would  be  observed  on
both  sides,  and  that  a  lawful  and  w-ell-defined
relation  would  thus  be  established  between  the
classes.

But  it  is  not  in  human  nature  to  rest  content
with  moderate  success ;  it  is  vain  to  expect
reason  or  forbearance  from  a  conquering  mul-
titude. Here  and  there  a  confused  tradition  of
some  ancient  rights  of  the  commons  was  re-
vived, or  the  people  found  themselves  a  match
for  the  knights  in  the  field  ; — indeed  the  rebel-
lion must  be  considered  partly  as  a  symptom
of  the  revived  importance  of  infantry; — but
for  the  most  part,  they  were  goaded  by  long-
cherished  hatred  and  lust  of  revenge,  which
now  found  vent.  While  some  of  their  chiefs
boasted  that  they  would  introduce  a  better  order
of  government  into  the  empire,  the  wildest  de-
struction was  carried  from  castle  to  castle,  from
convent  to  convent,  and  even  threatened  the
towns  which  had  refused  to  join  the  rebellion.
The  peasants  thought  they  ought  not  to  rest
while  a  dwelling  was  left  standing  in  Germany
superior  to  a  peasant's  cottage.*  Their  fury
was  inflamed  by  the  ravings  of  fanatical  preach-
ers, who  justified  the  work  of  destruction,  and
thought  it  a  duty  to  shed  blood  ;  and,  following
the  inspiration  of  the  moment,  which  they  called
divine,  to  erect  a  new  kingdom  of  heaven.  Had
this  movement  been  successful,  there  must  of
course  have  been  an  end  of  all  peaceful  pro-
gress, according  to  the  laws  which  have  ever
governed  the  human  race.  Happily,  it  could
not  succeed  ;  Münzer  was  far  indeed  from  be-
ing the  prophet  and  hero  required  to  execute
so  gigantic  an  enterprise ;  besides  which,  the
existintr  order  of  things- was  too  firm  to  be  so
completely  overthrown.  Moreover,  the  strong-
est and  most  genuine  element  of  the  reforming
party  was  opposed  to  it.

Luther  had  not  allowed  himself  to  be  hurried
into  any  political  enterprise  by  Sickingen  and
the  knights ;  nor  had  the  insurrection  of  the
peasantry  any  attractions  for  him. At  the  be-

*  According  to  Milliner's  Annalen,  the  peasants,  in
an^er  at  receiving  some  refusal,  declared  to  the  council
of  Nürnberg,  that  the  council  mieht  stand  in  greater  need
of  the  peasants  than  the  peasants  of  the  council :  "dar-
auf sind  sie  mit  einem  solchen  Trutz  und  Hochmuth  ab-
ffescheiden,  als  wann  die  Welt  ihr  eigen  wäre;  haben
sich  auch  ingeheim  gegen  etliche  vernehmen  lassen,  sie
gedenken  kein  Hauss  in  ganzen  land  zu  gedulden,  das
besser  sey  denn  ein  Bauernhaus  ;"—"  thereupon  they  de-
parted with  such  insolence  and  pride,  as  though  the  world
were  their  own  ;  they  also  in  private  crave  many  to  under-
stand that  they  were  resolved  to  sufier  no  house  to  stand
which  was  better  than  a  peasant's  hut."  In  the  ordinance
made  by  Michel  Geismair  in  152b  ("  Lanndsordnung,  so
Michel  Geismair  gemacht  hat,  im  1526  Jar,"  Buchoiz,  ix.
C51.),  the  fifth  article  is,  "  alle  Rinkmauern  an  den  Stel-
len, dergl.  alle  Geschlösser  und  Bevestigung  im  I>annd
riiedergeprochen  werden  und  hinfur  nimmer  Statt  sounder
Dörfer  sein,  damit  Unterschied  der  Menschen  (aufhöre),
und  ain  gannze  gleichaitim  Lannd  sei"—"  That  all  walls
round  towns,  likewise  all  castles  and  fortified  houses  in
the  country,  should  he  thrown  down,  and  thenceforth  there
were  to  be  villages  but  no  towns,  so  that  all  distinction
among  men  should  cease,  and  a  complete  equality  shoultl
prevail  in  the  land."

ginning,  ere  it  assumed  its  more  frightful  form,
he  exhorted  them  to  peace  :  while  he  rebuked
the  lords  and  princes  for  their  acts  of  violence
and  oppression,  he  condemned  the  rebellion  as
contrary  to  divineand  evangelical  law,  and  as
threatening  destruction  to  both  spiritual  and
temporal  authorities,  and  hence  to  the  German
nation. -f-  But  when  the  danger  so  rapidly  in-
creased, when  his  old  enemies,  the  "  murder
prophets  and  mob  spirits,"  took  so  prominent
a  part  in  the  tumult,  and  when  he  really  began
to  fear  lest  the  peasants  should  prove  victorious
(a  state  of  things  which  he  thought  could  only
be  the  precursor  of  the  day  of  judgment),  the
wdiole  storm  of  his  indignation  burst  forth.
W^ith  the  boundless  influence  which  he  pos-
sessed, what  must  have  been  the  consequences
had  he  taken  part  with  the  insurgents  !  But
he  remained  a  staunch  advocate  for  the  sepa-
ration between  the  spiritual  and  the  temporal,
which  was  one  of  the  fundamental  principles
of  his  whole  system ;  and  to  the  doctrine  that
the  gospel  gives  freedom  to  the  soul,  but  does
not  emancipate  the  body  from  restraint,  or  pro-
perty from  the  control  of  the  laws.  The  origin
of  the  rebellion  has  been  often  ascribed  to
preaching,  but  this  is  not  confirmed  by  the
facts.  Luther  now,  as  three  years  before-,  did
not  for  one  instant  hesitate  to  brave  the  storm,
and  to  do  every  thing  in  his  power  to  prevent
the  general  destruction  which  he  clearly  fore-
saw. A  pious  Christian,  said  he,  should  rather
die  a  hundred  deaths  than  give  way  one  hair's
breadth  to  the  peasants'  demands.  The  gov-
ernment should  have  no  mercy;  the  day  of
wrath  and  of  the  sword  was  comiC,  and  their
duty  to  God  obliged  them  to  strike  hard  as  long
as  they  could  move  a  limb  :  whosoever  perished
in  this  service  was  a  martyr  of  Christ.  Thus
he  supported  the  temporal  order  of  things  with
the  same  intrepidity  that  he  had  displayed  in
attacking  the  spiritual. tj:

The  secular  authorities,  too,  aroused  them-
selves, and  took  courage  in  this,  the  greatest
peril  that  had  ever  threatened  them.

The  first  who  rose  was  the  same  man  who
had  done  the  best  service  against  Sickingen,—
the  young  Philip  of  Hessen  :  towards  the  end
of  April  he  assembled  his  knights  and  his  most
trusty  subjects  of  the  tow^ns  in  Alsfeld  ;  he
promised  them  that  no  new  burthens  should  be
laid  on  the  peasants  ;§  while  on  their  part,  in

t  "  Ermanung  zum  Friede  auf  die  12  Artikel  der  Baur-
schaft  in  Schwaben." — Altenh.  iii.  p.  114.

J  Wider  die  räubischen  und  mordischen  Bauern.—
Against  the  robbing  and  murderous  peasants. —  Hid.  p.
124.  See  the  letter  to  Rühi-l,  ii.  p.  886.  Melanchthou
came  to  his  aid  on  this  occasion  with  his  convincing,  dog-
matical, and  clear  Conclusions;  e.  g.  to  Spalatin,  lOtli
April,  1525,  chiefly  to  be  understood  as  directed  against
the  introduction  of  the  Mosaic  laws,  but  also  to  be  under-
stood generally  :  "  Rationi  humaiiJE  commisit  Christus
ordinationes  politicas: debemus  uti  presentibus  legi-
bus." {Corp.  Ref.  i.  7.33.)  It  is  necessary  to  have  a  front
of  brass  to  persist  in  afiirming,  as  Surius  and  CocIiIbeus
have  done,  that  Luther  abandoned  the  peasants  when  he
saw  tiiat  they  were  beaten.  I  don't  know  whether  the
partial  successes  of  George  Truchsess,  gained  at  a  great
distance,  were  really  known  to  Luther;  it  is,  however,
certain  that  they  decided  nothing:  (lie  revolt  of  the  pea-
sants had  just  taken  full  possession  of  Thuringia  and  Sax-
ony, when  Luther,  at  his  own  personal  risk,  opposed  it.

§This  information  is  afforded  by  a  declaration  of  Land-

Chap.  VI.

DEATH  OF  FREDERIC.  THE  WISE.

219

answer  to  his  inquiry,  they  swore  with  out-
stretched hands  to  live  and  die  with  hini.  His
first  care  was  to  defend  his  own  frontiers ;  he
tranquiilised  Hersfeld  and  Fulda,  not,  indeed,
without  violence,  though  his  cruelties  have
been  fabulously  exaggerated  ;  and  then  crossed
the  mountains  and  marched  into  Thuringia  to
the  assistance  of  his  Saxon  cousins,  with  whom
he  stood  in  hereditary  alliance.*

Just  at  the  moment  that  these  disorders  reach-
ed their  height  in  that  district,  the  Elector
Frederic  died.  How  striking  was  the  contrast
between  the  fierce  intestine  discord  which  raged
throughout  Germany,  and  the  quiet  chamber  at
Lochau  in  which  Frederic,  calm  and  collected
in  the  ijiidst  of  agonizing  pain,  was  awaiting
the  approach  of  death  !  "  You  do  well,"  said
he  to  his  preacher  and  secretary  Spalatin,  who
after  long  hesitation  had  taken  courage  to  de-
mand an  audience  of  him,  "you  do  well  to
come  to  me,  for  it  is  right  to  visit  the  sick :"
he  then  caused  the  low  chair  in  which  he  re-
clined to  be  rolled  to  the  table,  and  laying  his
hand  in  that  of  the  intimate  friend  and  adviser
of  his  latter  years,  he  once  more  talked  of  the
things  of  this  world,  of  the  peasant's  rebellion,
of  Dr.  Luther,  and  of  his  own  approaching
death.  He  had  ever  been  a  gentle  master  to
his  poor  people,  and  he  now  exhorted  his  bro-
ther to  act  prudently  and  leniently  ;-j-  he  was
not  frightened  at  the  danger  of  the  peasants
becoming  masters,  serious  as  he  believed  it  to
be ;  for  if  it  were  not  the  will  of  God,  it  could
not  happen.  This  conviction,  which  had  guided
and  supported  him  through  the  whole  course
of  the  Lutheran  movement,  was  doubly  strong
in  his  last  moments.  None  of  his  relations
were  with  him ;  he  was  surrounded  only  by
servants.  The  spirit  of  opposition  which  every
where  else  divided  rulers  and  their  subjects,
had  not  yet  reached  them.  "  Dear  children,"
said  the  prince,  "if  I  have  ever  offended  any
of  you,  I  pray  you  to  forgive  me  for  the  love
of  God  ;  we  princes  do  many  things  to  the
poor  people  that  we  ought  not  to  do."  He
then  spoke  only  of  the  merciful  God  who  com-
forts the  dying.  For  the  last  time  Frederic
strained  his  failing  eyes  to  read  one  of  his
friend  Spalatin's  consolations  ;  he  then  received
the  sacrament  in  both  kinds  from  the  hands  of
a  clergyman  to  who,m  he  was  attached.  The
new  doctrine,  which  had  flourished  under  his
prudent  and  sheltering  care,  now  no'  longer  ap-
peared to  him  in  the  light  of  a  power  of  this
world  which  had  to  fight  for  its  existence,  and
the  herald  of  a  new  order  of  things ; — he  only
saw  in  it  the  true  Gospel,  the  true  christian
faith,  piety,  and  comfort  to  the  soul.  The  dy-
ing man  leaves  the  world  to  itself,  and  with-
draws entirely  within  the  circle  of  his  own
relations  to  the  Infinite, — to  God,  and  eternity.
Thus  he  died  on  the  5th  of  May,  1525. "  He

grave  William  at  the  Diet  of  1576. Rommel,  Neuere
Geschichte  von  Hessen,  p.  255,  848.  •

*  Haarer,  Warhaffiige  Beschreibung  des  Bav^ernkriegs,
c.  49,  in  GöbePs  Beiträgen,  p.  139. Rorajnel,  i.  108.

t  His  letters  of  the  i4th  of  April,  and  4th  of  May,  in
VValch,  L.  W.  xvL  p.  140.

was  a  child  of  peace,"  said  his  physician,  "  and
in  peace  he  hath  departed. ":J:

His  successor,  now  the  Elector  John,  ascend-
ed the  throne  in  the  midst  of  the  wildest  and
most  formidable  confusion.  Concessions  were
no  longer  to  be  thought  of;  there  existed  the
same  diflference  between  Frederic  and  John  as
between  Luther's  first  and  second  book ;  be-
tween doubt  and  cautious  counsel  and  down-
right hostility.  Philip  of  Hessen  came  to  his
assistance  at  the  right  moment ;  Duke  George
and  Duke  Henry  took  the  field  about  the  same
time,  and  four  princes  thus  marched  with  their
forces  to  meet  the  peasants.

Münzer  had  taken  up  a  position  upon  the
rising  ground  above  Frankenhausen,  which
commands  the  ■\\'hole  length  of  the  valley  ;  the
spot  was  well  chosen  for  preaching  to  assem-
bled multitudes,  but  offered  no  advantages  what-
ever for  defence.  He  showed  utter  incapacity  :
he  had  not  even  provided  powder  for  his  labo-
riously cast  guns ;  his  followers  were  miserably
armed,  and  had  only  entrenched  themselves
behind  a  feeble  barricade  of  waggons.  The
prophet  who  had  said  so  much  about  the  force
of  arms,  and  who  had  threatened  to  destroy  all
the  ungodly  with  the  edge  of  the  sword,  w^as
now  reduced  to  reckon  on  a  miracle,  which  ho
saw  announced  in  the  portent  of  a  coloured
circle  round  the  sun  at  noon.  At  the  first  dis
charge  of  the  enemy's  artillery,  the  peasants
sang  a  hymn ;  they  were  totally  routed,  and
the  greater  number  killed.  Hereupon  the  panic
which  accompanies  a  half-accomplished  crime
seized  the  whole  country.  All  the  troops  of
peasants  dispersed,  and  all  the  towns  surren-
dered ;  even  Mühlhausen  attempted  hardly  any
resistance. §  Münzer  v/as  executed  in  the  camp
before  Mühlhausen,  where  for  a  time  he  had
reigned.  He  seemed  possessed  by  a  savage
demon  up  to  his  last  hour.  When,  under  the
pangs  of  torture,  he  was  reminded  of  the  count-
less number  he  had  led  into  destruction,  he
burst  into  a  loud  laugh,  and  said  it  was  their
own  desire.  When  he  was  led  out  to  death,
he  could  not  remember  the  articles  of  faith.

At  this  conjuncture,  movements  w^ere  made
in  all  directions  for  attacking  the  forces  of  the
peasants.

Duke  Antony  of  Lorraine  came  with  the  va-
rious garrisons  from  Champagne  and  Burgundy,
and  a  few  companies  of  German  landsknechts
and  reiters,  to  the  assistance  of  the  Landvogt
of  Mörsperg  in  Alsatia.  He  cut  off  some  scat-
tered troops  in  the  open  field,  after  which,  those
who  had  assembled  in  Zabern  capitulated;
they  were,  however,  accused  of  having  made
a  subsequent  attem.pt  to  gain  over  the  lands-
knechts, and  were  attacked  and  slaughtered  to
the  number  of  seventeen  thousand,  as  they
were  leaving  the  fortress  on  the  morning  of  the
17th  of  May. II

X  Spalalin,  Leben  Friedrichs  des  Weisen,  p.  60.

§  Die  Histori  Thomä  Mnntzers  des  Aufengers  der  Dö-
ringischen Urfur."  Hagenaw. — This  book  contains  the
vv^ell-known  narrative  of  Melanchthon,  also  to  be  found,
in  Luther's  works. (Altenb.  iii.  12G.)

KBellay,  No.  TIL  Account  by  Kappolstein  in  Vogt's
Rheinisch.  Gesch.  voi.  iv.  p.  49.

220

PEASANTS'  WAR.

Book  III

Thus  Wiirtemberg  once  more  fell  into  the
hands  of  the  Swabian  League,  whose  general,
Truchsess,  having  in  a  great  degree  secured'
his  rear  by  a  treaty  with  the  peasantry  around
the  lakes,  marched  upon  the  Würtemberg  in-
surgents, whom  he  encountered  at  Sindelfingen,
and  having  first  thrown  them  into  disorder  with
his  field  artillery,  he  charged  and  cut  them
down  with  his  numerous  and  well-armed  ca-
valry. Having  then  taken  and  garrisoned  a
succession  of  towns  and  cities,  he  marched  on
Franconia.  There  he  was  joined  by  the  other
two  princes  who  had  fought  against  fSickengen,
— the  Electors  of  Treves  and  the  Palatinate,
who  marched  to  meet  him  from  Bruchsal,  which
had  just  fallen  irtto  their  hands.  The  two
armies  united  on  the  29th  of  May,  in  the  open
field  between  Helspachand  Neckarsulm.  They
made  up  together  a  force  of  two  thousand  five
hundred  horse,  and  eight  thousand  foot,  and
marched  on  into  Franconia.*

It  was  a  most  important  advantage  to  them
that  the  castle  of  Würzburg  still  held  out
against  two  powerful  bodies  of  Franconian  pea-
sants. At  first,  indeed,  the  garrison  would  have
consented  to  accept  the  twelve  articles,  and  had
already  received  authority  from  the  bishop  to
do  so ;  a  part  of  the  peasants  were  anxious  to
come  to  terms,  which  would  enable  them  to  go
to  the  assistance  of  their  allies,  hard  pressed
on  all  sides.  But  the  citizens  of  Würzburg,
determined  to  get  rid  of  the  castle,  which  had
always  been  a  bridle  in  their  jaws,  contrived
that  the  conditions  offered  to  the  garrison  should
be  such  as  it  was  impossible  it  should  accept.
Hereupon  the  latter  resolved  to  resist  to  the
utmost.  »Sebastian  von  Rotenhan,  who  had  so
greatly  promoted  the  interests  of  the  Lutheran
doctrines  in  the  Council  of  Regency,  had  sup-
plied the  fortress  with  every  requisite,  even
with  powder-mills ;  erected  chevaux-de-frise
within  the  ditches,  and  palisades  all  round  the
castle,  and  had  induced  the  garrison  to  swear
with  uplifted  hands  that  they  would  stand  the
storming  bravely  and  faithfully.  On  the  15th
of  May,  the  day  of  the  battle  of  Frankenhau-
sen, the  peasants  began  the  storm  at  nine  o'clock
at  night,  to  the  sound  of  trumpets  and  fifes,
with  loud  shouts  and  flying  colours.  Pitch,
brimstone,  and  other  combustibles  were  thrown
down  on  them  from  the  castle;  and  incessant
firing  kept  up  from  every  loop-hole  in  the  walls
and  tower.  The  lonely  castle  reared  its  head
in  haughty  grandeur  amid  the  many-coloured
glare  of  the  fire  with  which  it  kept  off"  the  wild
hordes  that  had  overrun  Franconia,  and  now
threatened  all  Germany.-  The  artillery  decided
the  victory  here,  as  at  Sindelfingen  and  Frank-
enhausen ;  at  two  in  the  morning  the  peasants
retreated.!

A  second  assault  was  entirely  out  of  the
question ;  they  received  news  of  the  defeat  of
their  friends  on  all  sides,  and  the  storm  im-
pending over  themselves  became  every  moment
more  near  and  threatening.

*  The  autogrraph  diary  of  the  Count  Palatine  Otto
Heinrich,  in  Freiberg's  Urkunden  und  Schriften,  iv.  p.
367,  gives  these  numbers.

t  Johann  Reinhard,  in  Ludwig,  889.

They  made  one  more  effort  to  save  themselves
by  negotiating;  they  again  offered  the  twelve
articles  to  the  acceptance  of  the  garrison  of
Würzburg,  and  invited  Truchsess,  the  general
of  the  League,  who  was  marching  upon  them,
to  appoint  time  and  place  for  an  interview  for
the  purpose  of  negotiation.  In  a  general  ad-
dress to  the  States  of  the  empire,  they  endea-
voured to  set  their  views  and  objects  in  a  favour-
able light;  and  called  upon  the  Franconian
states  especially,  to  send  delegates  to  Schwein-
furt, that  they  might  take  counsel  together  with
them,  "  for  the  establishment  of  the  word  of
God,  of  peace  and  of  justice."^  But  all  this
was  now  too  late.  They  had  never  had  confi-
dence in  their  own  strength,  and  now  fortune
had  deserted  them  :  they  must  either  remain
masters  of  the  field  or  perish.

The  united  army  advanced  against  them
without  delay;  all  the  places  it  passed  in  its
march  surrendered  unconditionally.  On  the  2d
of  June  it  fell  in  with  the  first  troop  of  peasants
at  Königshofen :  it  was  the  band  from  the
Odenwald  which  had  had  the  courage  to  ad-
vance against  the  victorious  enemy.  But  it
consisted  of  not  more  than  four  thousand  men,§
and  all  their  measures  were  thoroughly  ill-con-
certed. The  peasants  had  neglected  to  guard
the  fords  of  the  Tauber,  and  had  encamped
round  their  baggage,  within  a  barricade  of
waggons,  on  the  Mühlberg  ;  and  it  would  have
been  well  for  them  if  they  had  awaited  the
attack  of  the  enemy  even  there;  but,  terrified
by  the  superior  force  which  gradually  present-
ed itself,  they  endeavoured  to  reach  a  neigh-
bouring forest,  and  thus  invited  an  immediate
assault.  The  cavalry  fell  upon  their  exposed
flank,  the  princes  themselves  helping  to  cut
them  down  ;  in  the  twinkling.of  an  eye,  before
even  the  landsknechts  could  come  up,  the  whole
body  of  peasants  w^as  entirely  broken  and  rout-
ed. ||  A  false  rumour  of  victory  induced  the
1  Rothenberg  troop  to  quit  its  position  near  Würz-
burg, and  on  the  4th  of  June  that  also  fell  into
the  hands  of  the  cavalry  in  an  open  field,  be-
tween Sulzdorf  and  Ingolstadt,  and  was  com-
pletely dispersed.  Both  victories  were  accom-
panied by  the  most  barbarous  massacres.  Df
six  hundred  peasants  who  attempted  to  defend
themselves  in  a  fortified  house  near  Ingolstadt,
all  but  seventeen  were  put  to  the  sword.

A  third  band  which  was  connected  with  the
Thuringian  insurgents  was  overthrown  and
routed,  after  a  short  conflict,  on  the  Bildberg
near  Meinengen,  where  they  had  entrenched
themselves  behind  waggons,  by  Elector  John
of  Saxony. ^f  The  mild  and  placable  prince
promised  safety  to  all  who  would  surrender
themselves  to  his  protection.

Thus  the  great  Franconian  bands,  which  had

X  Proclamation  in  Ochsle,  of  the  27th  of  May,  p.  302.
The  meeting  was  fixed  for  the  31st  day  of  May.

§  I  hold  these  to  be  the  true  number,  as  the  report  of
Secretary  Spiess,  who  accompanied  the  army  (Ochsle,  p.
W7),  and  the  Journal  of  the  Elector,  p.  363,  agree  on  this
point. Others  mention  far  greater  numbers.

II  Brower.  Annales  Trevirenses,  lib.  xx.  p.  333.

IT  Spalatin,  see  Menken,  ii.  1114.  The  peasants  had  one
carronade,  sixteen  cannons  and  mortars,  four  arquebusses,
and  matchlocks.  Their  waggons  were  buried  in  the  earth.

Chap.  VI.

PEASANTS'  WAR.

221

thougiit  to  reform  the  whole  of  Germany,  were
destroyed  like  those  of  Alsatia,  Thuririgia,  and
Würtemburg;  and,  like  those  provinces,  Fran-
conia  was  now  garrisoned  and  chastised  by  its
former  masters.

On  the  Tth  of  June,  "VYür-zburg  was  forced
to  surrender  at  discretion.  The  aged  members
of  the  town  council  assembled  in  the  market-
place, and  bared  their  grey  heads  to  salute  the
-leaders  of  the  array  of  the  League;  but  they
found  no  mercy  from  Truchsess,  who  declared
that  they  were  all  perjured  and  dishonoured,
and  had  forfeited  their  lives.  In  Würzburg
alone,  sixty  rebels  from,  the  town  and  country
were  hanged  :  the  executions  were  equally  fre-
quent and  terrible  throughout  the  whole  bishop-
ric ;  tv/o  hundred  and  eleven  were  put  to  death
in  different  ways  ;  all  arms  delivered  up,  new
serviees  imposed,  and  heavy  contributions  ex-
torted :  the  ancient  ceremonies  of  the  church
were  restored.  IMeanwhile  IMarkgrave  Casimir
of  Brandenburg,  having  taken  possession  of
all  the  rest  of  Franconia,  of  Bamberg,  Schwein-
furt, and  Rothenburg,  without  encountering  any
serious  resistance,  proceeded  to  take  vengeance
on  the  insurgents  in  his  own  territories.

All  that  now  remained  was»  to  subdue  the
remnant  of  the  insurgents  who  still  kept  their
ground  on  the  Upper  and  Middle  Rhine.

The  army  of  Treves  and  the  Palatinate,  on
their  homeward  march,  fell  in  with  the  insur-
gents of  the  Middle  Rhine  at  Pfeddersheim,*
and,  as  on  all  former  occasions,  the  peasants
vrere  dispersed  and  cut  dov/n ;  the  warlike
archbishop  is  said  to  have  slain  several  with
Ins  ov.-n  hand.  These  districts  hereupon  sub-
mitted ;  and  even  the  people  of  the  Rheingau
had  to  give  up  their  arm.s,  and  to  pay  contribu-
tione.  Mainz  v/as  forced  to  resign  the  liberties
it  had  but  just  regained ;  while  the  people  of
Treves,  happy  that  they  had  not  made  any  se-
rious demonstration,  readily  dropped  all  the
projects  they  had  entertained.

The  great  army  of  the  League  on  the  Upper
Rhine  found  a  far  more  arduous  task  ;  it  was
there  that  the  rebellion  had  originated  and  taken
the  deepest  root,  and  nothing  decisive  had  yet
been  accomplished  toward  its'suppression.  The
men  of  the  Allgau  reappeared  in  the  field;
they  had  occupied  a  very  strong  post  on  a  steep
hill,_at  the  foot  of  which  is  the  river  Luid^s,
and  on  either  side,  large  ponds  :  a  considerable
number  of  experienced  landsknechts  fought  in
their  ranks.  They  vrere  able  to  keep  their
/  ground  against  even  the  artillery  of  Truchsess,
and  indeed  had  some  intention  of  beginning
the  attack.  Fortunately  for  Truchsess,  the
veteran  and  successful  leader,  George  Frunds-
berg,  came  to  his  assistance  in  time.  It  is
highly  probablef  that  he  exercised  a  personal
influence  on  many  of  the  peasant  chiefs,  his  old
comrades  and  followers.  Contemporary  writers
positively  affirm  that  he  bought  over  Walter
Bach,  who  treacherously  persuaded  the  pea-

*  Haarer,  c.  84-89.  I  intenci  in  give  in  the  Appendix
whatever  is  necessary  to  illustrate  the  relation  in  which
the  Latin  stands  to  the  German  text,  as  well  as  that  sub-
sisting between  Gnodalius  and  Leontius  and  Haarer.

t  Keisner,  Kriegsthaten  der  Frundsberge.

sants  to  abandon  their  strong  position.  Per-
haps, however,  their  stores  failed  ;  at  all  events
they  separated,  and  retreated  towards  the  moun-
tains. Truchsess  hastened  in  pursuit  of  them,
and  began  to  burn  their  farms  and  villages.
This  was  in  direct  violation  of  the  orders  of  the
League,  at  which  he  only  laughed ;  he,  he
said,  a  peasant  himself,  understood  his  business
better ;  he  knew^  that  this  was  the  way  to  make
every  man  think  of  his  own  home.  He  kept
his  troops  together,  and  thus  easily  beat  the
separate  bands  of  peasants  whenever  he  met
with  them.  He  was  not,  however,  so  abso-
lutely master  as  at  Würzburg.  George  Truch-
sess was  at  last  obliged  to  enter  into  a  compact
with  the  large  body  of  rebels  who  held  together
on  the  Kolenberg,  by  which  redress  of  the  local
grievances  of  their  several  villages  was  pro-
mised them.  Not  till  then  did  they  lay  down
their  arras  and  give  up  their  ringleaders. :|:

At  the  same  moment,  Count  Felix  of  Wer-
denberg put  to  the  rout  the  peasants  of  the
Hegau,  Kletgau,  and  all  that  remained  in  the
Schwarzwald  —  for  many  were  gone  home  to
their  harvest — and  compelled  them  to  lay  down
their  armiS.§

Thus  was  arrested  the  great  raovem-ent  which
threatened  the  total'  subversion  of  the  whole
existing  order  of  things  in  Germany  :  all  the
schemes  for  reconstituting  the  empire  from  the
groundwork  of  society  upw^ards,  or  still  m-ore,
for  visionary  changes  in  the  order  of  the  world
i  under  the  guidance  of  a  fanatical  prophet,  were
I  now  for. ever  at  an  end.

I  Wherever  the  matter  had  been  decided  by
arms,  the  laws  of  war  were  enforced.  The
most  barbarous  executions  took  place;  the  se-
verest contributions  w-ere  exacted  ;  and  in  some
places,  laws  m.cre  oppressive  than  ever  were
imposed.

It  was  only  in  districts  where  the  peasants
had  not  sustained  a  total  defeat,  that,  after  all
their  former  vague  and  ambitious  projects  had
spontaneously  died  away,  some  alleviation  of
their  burthens  and  sufferings  w^as  granted  them.

The  Count  of  Sulz  and  his  subjects  agreed
to  refer  their  differences  to  arbitrators  chosen
in  comm.on,  and  Archduke  Ferdinand  consented
to  appoint  a  chief  umpire. I|

To  the  people  of  the  Breisgau,  Ferdinand
promised  in  his  own  name  that  due  regard
should  be  psid  b}-  magistrates  and  government
officers  to  the  complaints  of  the  subjects.^  The
states  of  Upper  Austria  would  not  allow  con=
tributions  to  be  levied  upon  the  people."**

In  Tyrol,  steps  were  taken  under  the  influ-
ence of  the  disturbances,  towards  drawing  up
a  code  of  law^s,  whereby  the  subjects  were
relieved  from  all  taxes  that  could  not  be  proved
by  authentic  documents,  to  have  existed  for
more  than  fifty  years;  likewise  from  the  lesser

tHaggenmüller  Kempten,  p.  540.

§  Walchner  Eatclphzell,  p.  109.

|:  The  treaty  which  the  people  of  Zurich  helped  to  ne-
gotiate  is  to  be  found  in  Bullinger's  Refornaations-gesch-
ichte,  i.p.  249.

UThe  treaty  of  Offenburg:  extract  in  Schreiber's  Tas-
chenbuch, p.  302.

**  Declaration  of  the  Stände,  Bucholtz,  viii.  p.  104.

222

FORMATION  OF

Book  Hi

titbxGS  in  kind,  and  a  variety  of  other  dues  and
services  ;  and  the  right  of  fishing,  and  even  of
shooting  and  hunting,  granted  them.  Archduke
Ferdinand  also  made  concessions  as  to  religion.
Towns  and  councils  were  empov^^ered  to  appoint
their  own  clergy,  and  the  Gospel  was  to  be
preached  according  to  the  letter,*

Salzburg  was  the  only  country  in  which  the
peasants  kept  the  field  against  the  advance  of  a
regular  army ;  and  even  when  they  were  forced
to  bend  before  the  might  of  the  Swabian  League,
they  began  by  making  singularly  advantageous
terms,  f

These  events  belong,  however,  to  another
state  of  things,  which  immediately  followed
the  disturbances,  and  to  which  vve  will  now
turn  our  attention.

CHAPTER  VII.

PORxMATION  OF  THE  ADVERSE  RELIGIOUS  LEAGUES.
DIET  OF  AUGSBURG,  DECEMBER, 1525.

The  conflict  between  the  elements  of  German
society  was  now  at  an  end  ;  the  rebellious  pea-
santry, and  that  portion  of  the  population  of  the
towns  which  took  pare  with  them,  were  sub-
dued, as  the  knights  had  been  before  them.
The  local  powers  which  had  arisen  during  the
course  of  ages  had  again  withstood  all  the
storms  by  which  they  were  assailed  :  aided  by
the  emperor  or  the  Council  of  Regency,  they
had  stood  fast  amidst  the  ruin  of  all  central
authority.

Nevertheless,  peace  was  by  no  means  re-
stored, nor  was  one  of  those  great  questions
which  had  so  long  occupied  public  attention
decided.

The  rebellion  had  been  put  down  without
any  reference  to  religious  creed ;  friends  and
foes  of  the  new  doctrines  had  taken  up  arras
with  equal  eagerness  against  the  common  ene-
my ;  but  as  soon  as  that  enemy  was  subdued,
the  old  antipathies  broke  out  with  fresh  vio-
lence.

The  Regensburg  members  of  the  Swabian
League,  who  at  this  time  exercised  the  chief
influence  in  that  body,  seized  upon  this  oppor-
tunity of  carrying  into  execution  by  main  force
the  measures  which  had  been  concerted  at
that  city.  The  victories  of  the  League  were
everywhere  followed  by  religious  persecutions.
Among  those  who  were  beheaded  at  Würz-
burg, many  were  condemned,  not  for  the  rebel-
lion, in  which  they  had  taken  no  part,  but  for
the  crime  of  professing  the  evangelical  faith.
Nine  of  the  most  wealthy  burghers  were  exe-
cuted at  Bamberg,  and  it  is  asserted  that  some
of  them  were  remarkable  for  their  peaceable
conduct,  and  had  rather  tried  to  prevent  than  to
encourage  the  attack  of  the  country  people  on
the  bishop's  palace; they  were  punished,  as

*  Excerpts  from  the  proceedings  of  the  diet,  Bucholtz,
Tiii.  p.  337.
t  Zauner,  Chronik  von  Salzburg,  iv.  p.  429.

was  openly  proclaimed,  for  their  adherence  to
the  evangelical  party.ij:  Their  possessions  were,
by  an  unexampled  exercise  of  arbitrary  power,
given  to  certain  individuals,  among  whom  was
a  secretary  of  Truchsess.  All  w^ho  professed
the  evangelical  doctrines  immediately  fled  out
of  both  bishoprics.  But  even  in  all  other  ter-
ritories, spiritual  as  well  as  temporal  obedience
was  enforced  on  the  peasantry;  the  Lutherans
stood — under  that  title — first  on  the  list  of  those
excluded  from  pardon.  The  bitterest  persecu-
tion was  directed  against  the  preachers.  A
provost-martial  of  the  name  of  Aichili  traversed
Swabia  and  Franconia  in  all  directions  at  the
head  of  a  band  of  reiters,  in  order  to  carry  into
effect  the  executions  that  had  been  decreed ;  it
is  calculated  that  within  a  small  district,  he
hung  forty  evangelical  preachers  on  trees  by
the  roadside. §  This  was  the  first  restoration
of  Catholicism  by  violence  in  Upper  Germany.

Similar  attempts  were  now  made  also  in  the
north.

After  the  taking  of  Mühlhausen,  the  allied
princes  had  agreed  on  common  measures  against
the  peasants.  Duke  George  relates,  that  one
morning,  as  his  son-in-law  Philip  was  just
setting  off  on  a  journey,  he  (Duke  George)
went  to  him  once  more,  and  entreated  him  not
to  attach  himself  to  Luther's  cause,  "  in  consi-
deration of  the  evil  which  had  flowed  there-
from ;"  that  he  repeated  this  warning  to  the
Elector  of  Saxony  within  the  same  hour,  and
that  it  was.  kindly  received  by  both  of  them.
Duke  George  hoped  to  exercise  great  authority
over  his  cousin  John  after  Frederic's  death,  as
well  as  over  Landgrave  Philip,  to  vi'hom  he
stood  in  the  relation  of  an  affectionate  father-
in-law.

These  three  princes  had  agreed  at  Mühl-
hausen to  communicate  their  resolutions  to
their  neighbours ;  and  Duke  George  had  an
interview  as  early  as  in  July  with  the  electors
of  Mainz  and  Brandenburg  and  the  Duke  of
Brunswick,  at  Dessau.  These  princes  still
adhered  to  the  Catholic  faith,  andrthey  allowed
their  belief,  that  the  insurrection  owed  its  ex-
istence to  the  new  doctrines  that  had  been
preached,  to  influence  their  resolutions.  Though
we  have  no  authentic  document  as  to  the  na-
ture of  these  resolutions,  there  is  sufficient
evidence  that  they  were  in  the  highest  degree
unfavourable  to  the  religious  changes.  Duke
George  communicated  them  to  his  cousin  and
his  son-in-law,  expressing  at  the  same  time  his
persuasion  that  they  had  ceased  to  entertain
any  Lutheran  ideas. || At  all  events,  he  did  not

t  Detailed  account  in  Milliner's  Annalen.

§  Bullinger's  140th  cap.  treats  of  Provost  Aichili  ("von
Profossen  Aichili.")  Anshelm  also  mentions  him  (vi.  p.
291,)  as  beinij  peculiarly  active  against  the  Lutheran  par-
sons; he  seized,  plundered,  mulcted,  and  hanged  them.
"  Er  war  sunderlich  gflissen,  uf  die  lutherischen  Pfaffen,
fiengs'  beroupts'  schatzts'  und  henkts'."

II  The  only  authentic  notice  of  these  meetings  is  to  be
found  in  a  letter  from  Duke  George  in  the  Dresden  Ar-
chives. According  to  that,  the  determination  was  "  to
stand  by  each  other  in  case  the  Lutherans  attacked  any
one  of  them,  in  order  to  remain  at  peace  from  such  rebel-
lion."— "  Sich  bei  einander  finden  zu  lassen,  wenn  die
Lutherischen  einen  von  ihnen  augreifen  würden,  um
solches  Aufruhrs  vertragen  zu  bleiben."  It  is  not,  how-
ever, easy  to  perceive  from  whom  they  expected  an  attack,

Chap.  VII.

RELIGIOUS  LEAGUES.

223

suffer  himself  to  be  deterred  by  any  considera-
tion for  them,  from  condemning  his  own  subjects
to  the  severest  punishments.  At  Leipzig  two
citizens  were  beheaded  for  no  other  reason  than
that  some  Lutheran  books  had  been  found  in
their  possession.*

It  appeared  probable  that  the  Lutheran  move-
ment, from  the  time  it  was  associated  with  an  i
insurrection  of  the  peasantry,  would,  like  that  !
of  Wicklyffe, be encountered by  a  reaction  \
which  would  end  in  its  entire  suppression. !

But  the  reform  set  on  foot  by  Luther  stood  |
on  a  far  wider  and  firmer  basis  than  that  of
Wicklyffe,  and  had  already  found  resolute  and
powerful  supporters  both  in  North  and  South
Germany.

^  Landgrave  Philip  even  brought  an  evan-
gelical preacher  with  him  to  jMühlhausen;  and
Duke  George,  while  in  the  act  of  expressing
his  conviction  of  his  son-in-law's  altered  -sen-
timents, was  struck  Math  surprise  at  the  ap-
pearance of  this  man.  From  that  time  Philip
had  become  more  and  more  deeply  imbued
with  Lutheran  opinions.  We  have  only  to
read  the  letters  he  v.'rote  to  Duke  George
during  this  year, — in  which  he  controverts  the
doctrine  of  the  canon  and  the  mass,  the  re-
ceived idea  of  the  church,  and  the  obligation
of  vows, —  in  order  to  see  with  Vv^hat  lively  and
yet  earnest  zeal  he  adopted  the  new  doctrines,
and  what  accurate  and  extensive  knowledge
he  had  acquired  of  the  Scriptural  grounds  on
which  they  rested. |

The  same  state  of  things  existed  in  Saxon}^.
Far  from  forsaking  the  path  trodden  by  his
predecessor,  the  new  elector  advanced  in  it
v/ith  far  more  decided  steps  than  Frederic  had
done.  On  leaving  Vveimar  in  At>gast,  1525,
he  once  more  assembled  the  priesthood  of  that
district — on  the  IGth  ofthat  month — and,  after
causing  their 'minds  to  be  prepared  by  two
sermons,,  he  announced  to  them  that  in  future
they  were  to  preach  the  pure  word  of  God,
without  any  human  additions.:|:  Some  old
priests  who  were  present  having  expressed  the
opinion  that  this  would  not  be  inconsistent
with  their  saying  masses  for  the  dead  and
consecrating  salt  and  water,  they  were  told
that  the  same  rule  applied  to  ceremonies  as  to
doctrines.

if  tliey  really  believed  Philip  and  the  Elector  John  to  have
been  re-coiiverted  ;  and,  indeed,  Duke  George  says,  "other-
wise he  would  not  have  made  them  a  party  to  the  treaty,
for  he  -vvoll  knew  that  one  could  not  beat  Swiss  with
Swiss." — "denn  sonst  würde  er  ihnen  den  Vertra<j  nicht
initgetliei't  haben,  er  wisse  wohl,  dass  man  Schweizer
mit  Sciiweizern  nich  schlage."  The  explanation  is,  that
in  those  times  a  defensive  form  was  given  to  all  alliances,
eve«  v,-hen  there  was  no  intention^  of  abiding  by  mere
defence.  Duke  Henry  said  to  the  emperor,  tli^at  he  had
signed  a  treaty  with  his  friends,  "  against  the  Lutherans,
in  case  they  should  attempt  by  force  or  cunning  to  gain
them  over  to  their  unbelief,"— "  wider  die  Lutherischen,
ob  sie  sich  unterstünden,  sie  mit  List  oder  Gewalt  in
ihren  Unglauben  zu  bringen."
*  Gretschel :  Leipzigs  kirchliche  Zustände,  p.  218.
t  Roiiimers  Ürkundenbuch,  p.  2.  n

J  "  Das  man  das  lauter  rayn  cvangelion  on  mensch-
liche Zusatzung  predigen  soll,  fürstlicher  Befelch  zu
Weymar  beschehen."— "That  the  pure  Gospel  should  be
preached  without  any  human  additions.  Sovereign  com-
mand issued  at  Weimar.'"  —  Circular  from  the  minister
Kisswetter  at  Erfurt  to  Master  Hainrich  at  Elxleben,  a.  d.
Gera,  1525.

In  consequence  of  the  recess  of  Mühlhausen,
the  elector  had  an  interview  v/ith  Markgrave
Casimir  of  Brandenburg  at  Saalfeld,  at  which
the  evangelical  tendencies  predominated  as
much  as  the  catholic  had  done  at  Dessau.
These  princes  did  not  indeed  form  a  regular
alliance,  but  Markgrave  Casimir  declared  that
he  would  hold  fast  by  the  word  of  God.§

At  the  very  time  when  the  military  force  of
the  Swabian  League  v/as  employed  in  check-
ing the  progress  of  the  reformation,  some  of
its  most  powerful  members,  the  very  towns  in
v/hich  it  had  originated,  —  Augsburg,  and
above  all,  Nürnberg, — organized  their  churches
according  to  evangelical  principles.  Vv'e  shall
return  to  this  subject  in  another  place.

The  territory  of  Wiirternberg,  which  had
been  conquered  by  the  League,  and  could
hardly  have  been  imagined  capable  of  taking
any  resolutions  of  its  own,  now  declared  itself
on  the  same  side ;  the  Estates  expressed  their
conviction  that  the  tranquillity  of  the  country
could  only  be  maintained  by  preaching  to  the
people  the  pure  word  of  God,  unalloyed  by
the  selfishness  and  vain  conceits  of  men.

Already  the  evangelical  preachers  began
formally  to  emancipate  themselves  from  the
authority  of  the  bishops.  At  Wittenberg,  in
May,  L525,  they  determined  to  give  ordination
j  themselves.  Melanchthon  justifies  this,  on
I  the  ground  that  the  bishops  neglected  their
'  duties. |]  The  preachers  nov/  asserted  their
underived  vocation  as  against  the  bishops,  in
the  same  m.anner  as  those  had  done  against
the  pope.  Melanchthon  says  that  the  princes
could  not  be  called  upon  to  support  a  jurisdic-
tion of  whose  abusive  and  corrupt  nature  they
were  convinced.  In  Hessen  and  Brandenburg,
too,  even  in  the  towns,  the  clergy  began  to
emaiKiipate  themselves  from  the  episcopal
jurisdiction.

We  perceive  that  the  two  opposite  tendencies
came  out  of  the  conflict  with  the  peasants,  ex-
actly in  the  same  state  in  which  they  entered
it;  only  with  increased  activity  on  either  side.

The  papal  party  had  the  advantage,  in  so
far  as  in  a  great  part  of  the  empire,  the  penal
power,  of  which  it  made  such  fearful  use,  was
in  its  hands  ;  but  on  the  whole,  the  evangelical
party  had  gained  still  more  in  the  struggle.

Never  had  the  aversion  to  the  spiritual  part
of  the  constitution  of  Germany  been  so  general
and  so  avowed.  The  clergy  were  accused  of
those  acts  of  grinding  oppression  which  had.
mainly  caused  the  revolt.  The  hostility  of  the
people  was  specially  directed  against  them ;
the  peasants  of  the  Allgau,  for  example,  who
were  besieging  Füssen,  raised  the  siege  as
soon  as  that  town  threw  off  its  allegiance  to
its  lord,  the  Bishop  of  Augsburg,  and  hoisted
the  banner  of  Austria.  On  the  other  hand,
though  the  ecclesiastical  princes  had  contri-
buted very  little  to  extinguish  the  flame  of  re-
bellion, they  now  made  the  most  tyrannical
and  merciless  use  of  the  victory  won  by  others.

§  According  to  a  description  by  Casimir  himself  in  a
letter  from  Schrauttenbach  to  the  Landgrave  Philip,
dated  27th  Dec.  1525,  in  Neudeckers  Urkunden,  p.  16.

[I  De  Jure  Reformandi. Corp.  Reform,  i.  p.  7C5.

224

nmT  ATTEMPTS

Book  III.

Hence  it  happened  that  the  evansjelical  party
found  it  so  easy  to  shake  off  the  episcopal  au-
thority; it  is,  however,  more  remarkable  that
an  analogous  effect  was  produced  in  the  catholic
party.  If  the  one  side  questioned  the  spiritual,
the  other  no  less  vigorously  attacked  the  tem-
poral jurisdiction.

We  must  here  again  recur  to  the  events  of
Tyrol  and  Salzburg.  Archduke  Ferdinand
had  taken  up  the  most  remarkable  position  in
the  world.

At  the  diet  of  Tyrol,  which  we  have  already
mentioned,  there  were  assembled  only  the
nobles,  the  cities,  and  rural  districts  {Ge-
richte*) ;  the  ecclesiastical  body  did  not  ap-
pear. The  anti-ecclesiastical  temper  which
this  produced  was  very  strongly  expressed  in
the  resolutions  that  were  passed.  In  the  re-
cess of  this  diet  it  was  proclaimed,  that  the
appointment  to  the  inferior  situations  in  the
church  should  be  rendered  totally  independent
of  the  bishops ;  in  future,  cities  and  rural  dis-
tricts {Gerichte)  should  have  the  right  of  pre-
sentation, which  the  sovereign  of  the  country
should  confirm,  and  all  complaints  of  the
clergy  should  be  addressed  by  the  former  to  the
latter. f  The  petition  of  the  bishop  of  Trent
for  leave  to  call  in  foreign  troops  to  punish  the
insurgents  within  his  see,  was  refused  ;  for
the  common  people  were  of  opinion,  says  Fer-
dinand, that  the  clergy  ought  to  have  no  juris-
diction whatever  in  temporal  affairs ;  were
such  a  permission  granted  to  the  bishop,  the
nobles  would  complain  that  he  was  goading
the  people  to  a  fresh  revolt,  which  would
bring  trouble  and  ruin  upon  them  also.ij:  This
was  even  carried  much  further.  The  Bishop
of'  Brixen  proving  himself  incapable  of  re-
storing order  in  his  see,  where  one  of  his
secretaries  and  toll  collectors  was  the  leader
of  the  revolt,  the  Tyrol ese  determined  not  to
afford  him  the  least  assistance,  but  at  once  to
seculariza  the.  see.  Archduke  Ferdinand  took
possession  of  it,  and  committed  the  govern-
ment to  one  of  his  council,  "  till  some  future
council,  or  the  retbrmation  of  the  empire;"  he
received  the  homage  from  all  tlie  vassals  and
the  official  persons  of  the  see.§  The  captain
of  Ehrenberg,  which  Was  garrisoned  by  Tyro-
iese,  would  not  g;o  to  the  succour  of  the  town

*  GcricM  here  means  a  certain  cominnriity.  Grimm
(Deutsclie  Rechts  Alterthünier,  p.  755)  says,  "  By  Gericht
we  now  understand  atribanal  for  the  decision  of  litigated
matters,  or  the  punislnnent  of  offences.  Originally,  how-
ever, the  predominant  idea  was  that  of  a  popular  assem-
bly (concilium),  in  which  all  the  public  business  of  the
Mark,  the  commune,  or  the  district  was  discussed,  dis-
putes settled,  and  fines  adjudo^ed.  The  main  element  of
the  Gericht  is  now  the  judges  ;  but  then,  it  was  the  con-
grei2;ated  free  men All  judicial  power  was  exer-
cised by  the  comuiiniity  of  freeineu  under  the  presidency
of  an  elected  or  h,?reditary  head."— Traksl.

t  Bucholtz,  viii.  p.  338.

X  Ferdinand  to  Bishop  Bernhard  of  Trent,  Inspruck,  9th
July,  1525,  Bucholtz,  ix.  p.  640.

§  Patent  of  occupation,  2]st  July.  "  Auf  Beger  und  mit
Eat  ainer  ersamen  Landschaft  dieser  iinsrer  f.  G.  Tirol,
—  zu  furkumung  nachtail  Schadens  und  geferiichait,  so
dieselben  unsur;  Grafschaft  und  dem  Stift  zu  Brichsen,
des  Vogt  Schirm  und  Schutzlierr  wir  dann  sein,  enstehen
mechten."  — "  At  the  request  and  with  the  advice  of  the
honourable  province  of  this  our  free  county  of  Tyrol  —
for  the  prevention  of  loss,  damage,  and  danger,  which
might  accrue  to  our  country  and  the  see  of  Brichsen,
whereof  we  are  bailiff,  lord,  and  protector."

of  Füssen  till  it  surrendered  itself  as  an  here-
ditary fief  to  the  house  of  Austria,  and  did
homage  to  the  Archduke. ||  The  Zillerthalers
were  thus  enabled  to  throw  off  their  allegiance
to  Salzburg,  to  attach  themselves  to  Tyrol,  and
to  accept  the  Archduke,  who  had  already  high
authority  over  them,  as  their  l^rd  and  sove-
reign.^ Nay,  even  in  Bavaria,  similar  no-
tions prevailed.  When  Matthew,  Archbishop
of  Salzburg,  was  besieged  in  his  citadel  by  the
peasants,  and  reduced  to  the  greatest  extremit}''.
Doctor  Lesch,  a  Bavarian  chancellor,  presented
himself  before  the  archduke,  and  proposed  to
him  to  sequester  the  archbishopric  in  common;
so  that  the  part  lying  on  the  confines  of  Bavaria
should  be  taken  possession  of  by  the  dukes,
and  that  bordering  on  Austria  by  the  archduke.
Ferdinand  joyfully  acceded  to  the  proposal ;
he  authorized  the  commissioners  he  had  sent
to  the  peasants  to  use  all  their  endeavours
(but  v;ith  the  knowledge  of  the  archbishop)
that  the  see  might  be  given  up  to  Austria  and
Bavaria.**  In  Bavaria,  however,  this  was  only
a  transient  thought ;  the  plan  here  pursued
was  that  of  an  unconditional  restoration,  from
the  accomplishment  of  which  the  dukes  might
justly  expect  a  still  greater  degree  of  authority
than  they  had  already  acquired,  over  the  neigh-
bouring bishoprics.  They  therefore  furnished
aid  in  every  direction.  In  Tyrol,  on  the  other
hand,  the  province  had  agreed  with  the  prince
on  the  concessions  to  be  made  to  the  rebels ;
by  a  resolute  postponement  of  spiritual  inte-
rests, they  thought  they  should  at  once  allay
the  tumults  and  enhance  their  own  liberty  and
power.  The  Bavarians,  consequently,  soon
abandoned  the  plans  above-mentioned,  and  re-
solved to  come  to  the  assistance  of  the  arch-
bishop in  this  exigency  with  the, forces  of  the
Swabian  League.  The  motives  which  deter-
mined the  dukes  were  not,  hovv'-ever,  of  a  very
disinterested  nature;  they  calculated  on  this
opportunity  of  securing  the  succession  to  the
archbishopric  for  their  brother,  Ernest  of  Pas-
sau;  Vv^hich  they  preferred  to  contributing  to
place  the  greater  part  of  it  in  the  hands  of
Austria,  and  thence  in  a  hostile  relation  to
themselves.  In  vain  the  states  of  Tyrol  made
an  attempt  to  restrain  the  Swabian  League
from  its  intended  campaign,  by  representations
of  the  ancient  privileges  and  alliances  of  Salz-
burg.f  f At  Insbruck  a  strong  desire  prevailed

II  Martin  Furtenbach,  the  town  notary  at  Füssen  :  re-
port on  the  insurrection  of-the  pensar.t-,,  in  Oechsle's
Beitrage,  p.  478.  "  Das  Volk  schrie  Hei  Oeslreich  damit
v/ir  nicht  gar  verderbt  werden,  der  IJauptmann  nahm  die
Erbhuldigung  auf  ein  Hintersichbringen  an."  —  "The
people  cried,  'Hey  Austria,'  so  that  we  might  not  be  en-
tirely ruined:  the  g(!vprnor  received  our  hereditary  ho-
mage on  a  hint  given  him."  I'he  delegates  of  the  town
went  to  Inspruck,  and  were  there  well  greeted  (wohl  be-
grüsst).  Ferdinand  declared  that  he  would  soon  go  there
himself  and  receive  the  homage  in  person.

IT  Instruction  to  Liechtenstein  and  Stöckel,  "  was  s^
mit  dem  Pfleger  zu  Kropfsberg,  mit  der  Nachp;irschaft  im
Zillerthal  reden  sollen,"  — "  what  they  should  say  to  the
parish  priest  at  Kropfsberg,  and  to  the  neighbourhood  i.'i
Z\\\en\\a.V— Bucholtz,  ix.  p.  C30.

**  Instruction  of  Ferdinand  to  the  mediating  commis-
sioners, Bucholtz,  p.  621.

tt  "  Die  vom  Ausschuss  der  dreier  Stände  — an  Hanpt-
leute  und  Räthedes  Pundts  zu  Schwaben,  31  Juli."— /i.  i^f.
p.  624.—"  The  committee  of  the  three  estates  to  the  gover-
nors and  councillors  of  the  Swabian  League."

Chap.  VH.

AT  SECULARIZATION.

225

to  secure  the  succession  to  Don  George  of
Austria,  natural  son  of  Emperor  Maximilian,
and  a  disposition  to  afford  protection  to  the
peasantry.*  But  the  dukes  had  already  the
advantage.  Duke  Louis  of  Bavaria,  the  gene-
ral-in-chief  of  the  Swabian  League,  led  its
armies  against  Salzburg  at  the  end  of  August.
He,  too,  deemed  it  expedient,  and  strongly
urged  George  Frundsberg,  who  was  general
of  the  county  of  Tyrol,  at  first  to  grant  the
peasants'!,  favourable  treaty  —  afterwards,  in-
deed, they  were  as  severely  dealt  with  here  as
dsewhere  —  as  a  means  of  attaining  all  their
other  objects.  The  chapter  of  the  cathedral
promised  the  succession  to  the  bishopric  of
Salzburg  to  the  Bavarian  prince  Ernest,,  to
whom  the  archbishop  also  made  some  conces-
sions ;  the  lordships  of  Laufen,  Geisfelden,
Titmanning,  and  Mattsee  were  mortgaged  to
the  dukes  for  the  expenses  of  the  war.  In
short,  they  obtained  a  general  ascendency  in
Salzburg;  nor  was  it  till  some  time  afterwards
that  the  archbishop  took  courage  timidly  to
admonish  them  to  demand  nothing  of  him  at
variance  with  the  rig-hts  and  dignities  of  his

CO

see. I

Thus,  as  we  see,  the  plans  of  the  League
triumphed  over  the  inclinations  of  the  people
of  Tyrol.  The  archduke  was  also  forced  to
cede  Füssen  again  to  Augsburg,  and  the  Zil-
lerthal  to  Salzburg.

Notwithstanding  this,  Ferdinand  did  not  re-
linquish the  ideas  he  had  once  conceived.
When  the  Wiirtemberg  territory  made  the  de-
mands vre  have  mentioned,  and  pointed  very
unequivocally  to  a  secularization  of  the  church
lands,  as  a  means  of  meeting  the  exigencies
of  the  country,  Ferdinand  showed  not  the
smallest  displeasure  :  he  permitted  that  coun-
try to  send  deputies  to  the  approaching  diet  at
Augsburg,  and  promised  that  whatever  should
there  be  determined  in  regard  to  a  reformation
of  the  clergy,  should  be  carried  into  effect,  as
•wellin  Wiirtemburg  as  in  his  otlier  dominions. ij:
The  views  entertained  on  these  points  by  Arch-
duke Ferdinand  entirely  coincided  with  those
of  the  evangelical  party,  who,  with  perfect
justice,  regarded  the  revocation  of  the  sum-
mons for  the  meeting  at  Spire  as  theim.mediate
cause  of  the  recent  tumults.  In  the  autumn
of  1525  the  project  of  settling  the  religious
diflerences  at  an  assembly  of  the  empire,  and
of  there  proceeding  to  a  thorough  reformation,
was  once  more  universally  stirred.

In  addition  to  the  meetings  at  Dessau  and
Saalfald,  there  was  a  third  and  corresponding
one  between  the  Landgrave  Philip  and  the
Elector  Palatine,  at  Alzey.  They  agreed  "  that
things  must  be  put  on  an  equitable  footing:"
every  means  must  be  employed  to  bring  about
union  among  the  States.§

*  Excerpts  from  a  receipt  of  Ferdinand,  ib.  viii.  p.  109.

t  Zauner,  Salzburger  Chronik,  v.  p.  225,  133.

t  Extractus  landschaftlicher  Schlusserklärung  bei  Sat-
tler, Herzoge,  Beilagen  zum  zweiten  Theil  nr.  124,  and
Landtagsabschied,  30th  Oct.  1525,  nr.  125  (iii.  i.  4).

§  Letter  from  the  Elector  Louis  of  the  Palatinate,  in
Neudeckers  Actenstiicken,  i.  p.  16.  From  the  words,  "von
E.  L.  und  unserm  Freund,  von  ir  und  uns,"— "from  E.  L.
29

Markgrave  Casimir  proceeded  from  Saalfeld
to  Auerbach,  to  a  conference  with  the  Count
Palatine  Frederic,  who  governed  the  Upper
Palatinate  in  the  name  of  his  nephew.  They
determined,  in  the  first  place,  to  lighten  the
burthens  of  the  common  people  as  much  as
possible  ;  and  in  the  next,  again  to  petition  the
emperor  to  hold  an  ecclesiastical  council  in  the
German  nation,  "  in  order  to  come  to  some
common  understanding  as  to  the  exposition  of
the  divine  word."

In  September  the  cities  held  a  meeting,  and
Ferdinand  thought  he  had  reason  to  fear  very
hostile  and  objectionable  resolutions  on  their
part ;  but  their  decision  only  amounted  to  this  :
to  urge  anew  upon  himself  and  the  emperor
the  necessity  of  introducing  a  clear  and  uniform
order  into  the  whole  empire,  with  respect  to  the
ceremonies  of  the  church.

In  the  universal  discussion  of  these  subjects,
every  possible  change  was  suggested,  and  thus
ideas  and  plans  of  the  most  extraordinary  na-
ture became  current.

In  a  project  dravrn  up  towards  the  end  of  the
year  1 5*35,  and  discussed  at  one  or  two  meetings'
of  the  empire,  it  is  assumed  in  the  outset,  that
the  property  of  the  church  is  no  longer  of  any
use  or  benefit  either  to  religion  or  to  the  em-
pire :  that  som.e  change  in  the  disposition  of  it
is  therefore  indispensable  ;  that  this  must  not,
however,  be  left  to  the  common  people,  but
must  be  undertaken  by  the  supreme  authorities ;
i.  e.  by  the  emperor  and  the  temporal  Estates.

People  no  longer  scrupled  to  propose  the
secularization  of  all  ecclesiastical  property.

So  much  might,  they  said,  be  assigned  to
the  spiritual  princes  and  prelates  as  was  neces-
sary for  the  m.aintenance  of  a  suitable  mode
of  living ;  nor  should  any  thing,  for  the  present,
be  taken  from  the  canons,  but  both  they  and
their  superiors  should  be  allowed  gradually  to
die  cut.  Of  the  convents,  a  few  might  be  re-
tained for  3"oung  women  of  noble  birth,  but
with  full  right  and  liberty  to  quit  them.

With  the  funds  thus  obtained,  the  first  care
must  be  to  supply  the  new  spiritual  wants ;  to
appoint  pastors  and  preachers  ;  to  nominate  in
every  circle  a  pious  and  learned  man  as  bishop,
with  a  fixed  salary,  but  wholly  without  tem-
poral functions,  and  solely  a  superintendent  of
the  other  ministers  of  the  church;  and,  lastly,
to  establish  a  high  school  in  every  circle,  in
which  the  languages  and  the  exposition  of  the
Holy  Scriptures  according  to  their  true  sense,
should  be  taught.

But  the  party  which  suggested  these  reforms
also  entertained  the  hope  that  they  should  thus
acquire  strength  to  give  a  new  form  to  the  whole
secular  constitution  of  the  country.

The  proposal  to  that  effect  contained  in  this
project  is,  to  establish  a  particular  Council  of
Regency,  or  administrative  body,  in  each  circle ;
consisting  of  twelve  councillors,  three  from
each  of  the  four  estates,  sovereigns,  princes, —
counts  and  lords  (nobles), — and  imperial  cities;
and  a  chief  or  president,  chosen  from  the  states

and  our  friend,  from  him  and  from  us,"  we  may  conclude
that  the  Elector  of  Treves  was  also  there  prese"nt.

226

FORMATION  OF  RELIGIOUS  LEAGUES.

Book  IIL

of  the  circle,  but  approved  by  the  emperor,
with  nearly  the  same  powers  as  the  governors
and  the  councillors  of  the  Swabian  League.
This  body  was  to  put  in  execution  all  the  plans
determined  on  by  the  States  ;  to  form  a  supreme
court  of  judicature,  and,  above  all,  to  maintain
the  public  peace,  and  for  that  purpose  to  keep
a  standing  force  of  horse  and  foot  always  in
the  field.  The  young  nobility  were  to  serve
in  the  army,  instead  of  occupying  the  posts  in
the  chapters.  With  these  troops  any  succours
granted  by  the  emperor  and  the  empire  could
then  be  rendered  effective,  without  imposing
burdens  on  any  body.  They  v/ould  constitute
so  great  a  permanent  force  as  no  emperor  had
had  at  his  command  since  the  birth  of  Christ.*
The  particular  provisions  of  this  project  are
far  less  important  and  interesting  than  the  gen-
eral ideas  upon  which  it  is  founded  : — -the  secu-
larization of  ecclesiastical  property ;  the  empire
represented  exclusively  by  temporal  estates  (the
constitution  of  v.diich  was  mainly  based  upon
the  extension  of  the  functions  of  the  circles)  ;
a  standing  array  specially  for  the  advantage  of

course  taken  by  the  Swabian  League  was  nearly
the  same.  At  a  meeting  held  by  that  body  in
November,  it  received  a  letter  from  Pope  Cle-
ment, exhorting  it  to  show  the  same  zeal  in  the
completion  of  the  work,  that  had  inspired  the
first  undertaking  of  it,  and  to  finish  the  most
glorious  deed  that  had  been  done  for  centuries. §
The  sovereigns  of  eastern  Germany  felt  in  the
same  manner;  the  instruction  given  by  Duke
George  to  his  delegate  at  the  diet  is  still  extant.
After  vehement  complaints  of  the  enormous
mischief  done  by  the  Lutheran  Gospel,  he  de-
mands that  no  change  shall  be  made  in  the
traditional  ordinances  without  the  sanction  of
a  general  council ;  adding,  that  even  if  an  angel
should  come  down  from  heaven,  he  was  not  to
be  obeyed,  unless  in  a  full  Christian  assembly.!]
jMoreover  a  papal  nuncio  was  sent  to  attend  the
diet.

The  idea  of  a  change  was,  it  is  true,  as
widely  diffused  as  it  was  com.prehensive  ;  but
the  opposite  tendency,  towards  the  maintenance
of  the  existing  ecclesiastical  institutions,  or
rather  tov;ards  their  restoration  in  their  com-

the  young  nobles: — all  things  which,  in  their  j  plete  integrity,  was  still  exceedingly  powerful,
mature  and  finished  form,  gave  their  character  '  Even  while  the  partisans  of  the  new  faith  cher-
to  the  succeeding  centuries,  and  constituted  |  ished  the  most  sweeping  schemes,  they  could
modern  Germany.  The  most  distant  results  !  not  disguise  from  themselves  that  the  diet  might
were  boldly  contemplated,  but  the  vvay  that  led ver}?-  possibly  take  a  turn  highly  unfavourable

te  them  was  long  and  arduous.

The  ecclesiastical  princes  were  yet  far  too

to  their  wishes. Some  believed  that  the  good
and  the  bad  would  be  destroyed  together;  that

strong ;  and  it  may  easily  be  imagined  that truth  would  be  suppressed  together  with  false

plans  of  the  kind  above  mentioned,  which  could
not  remain  concealed  from  them,  would  make
them  feel  the  necessity  of  collecting  all  their
strength.  The  clergy  already  complained  that
they  were  kept  out  of  possession  of  many  things

hood ;  that  a  rule  of  faith  and  life  would  be
established  in  accordance  Avith  the  old  law,  and
that  those  who  did  not  receive  it  willingly  would
be  compelled  by  violence  to  conform  to  it.
As  Elector  John  and  Landgrave  Philip  had

of  which  they  had  been  robbed  during  the  late  ;  declared  themselves  m.ost  openly  for  the  new
com.motions;  and  even  that  their  enemies  pro-  !  doctrines,  they  had  the  greatest  reason  for  fear,
c^eded  in  depriving  them  of  their  accustomed  jThe  landgrave,  because  his  territory  was  sur-
jurisdiction ;  they  showed  a  determination  not  |  rounded  on  all  sides  by  puissant  ecclesiastical
to  await  the  attack  at  the  next  diet,  but  to  press  ■  princes  ;  the  elector,  because  already  there  was
for  a  complete  restitution  of  their  rights  and  an  idea  of  depriving  him  of  his  electorate  as  a
possessions.  To  this  course  they  were  em- !  seceder  from  the  Church  of  Rome;  he  was  ad-
boldened  by  a  rescript  of  the  emperor,  in  which vised  to  place  himself  on  a  better  footinsf  with

mention  v/as  made  cf  the  suppression  of  all
things  that  threatened  the  destruction  of  our
holy  faith,  and  in  such  severe  terms  as  seemed
to  imply  that  an  entire  restoration  of  the  old
order  of  things  was  contemplated.!  The  Coun-
cil of  Regenc}^  Vv'hich  was  sitting  in  Esslingen,
and  of  which  we  now  hear  once  more,  prepared
to  propose  riieasures.in  the  same  spirit.t The

*  "  Rathschlas;  was  man  mit  gelstliclien  Gütern  zu  j^e-
meineminid  des  Reichs  Nutzfurnemen  und  handeln  soll."
"Opinion  as  to  what  should  be  done  with  ecclesitistical

^V^Z'ZS:2.'7?>ni,£i'nlX:^;X ^olf  of  WaibUnge,,,  to-Torga«,  ^vhere  Elector

amnn^the  acts  of  15-20,  but  as  the  diet  of  Aujrsburg  is

his  neighbours,  —  doubtless  especially  with
Duke  George,  —  for  that  many  intrigues  were
on  foot  against  him  in  that  direction.

It  was  less  the  view  of  effecting  any  change,
than  tlie  dread  of  danger  to  themselves,  and
the  necessity  of  maintaining  the  position  which
they  had  taken  up,  that  determined  these  two
princes  to  enter  into  a  closer  alliance  with  each
other.

Landgrave  Philip  made  the  first  advances  in
this  matter,  by  sending  his  chamberlain,  Ru-

mentioned  in  it,  it  was  doubtless  originally  intended  far
thaL
tTolleten  in  Castnien,  24th  May,  1523.  (W.  A.)
J  Feilitsch,  Esslingen,  Monday  after  St.  Martin"'s  day:
"  Er  hält  genzlichen  dafür,  dass  von  denen  die  sich  der
Aufruhr  theilhaftig  gemacht,  auch  denen  die  Kirchen  und
Klöster  irewaltig  ze'rstört,  denselhigen  Güter  eingenom-
men und  davon  wieder  geben  was  ihnen  gefällig,  dass
wider  diese  auf  dem  Tleichstag  gehandelt  werden  soll." —
"  He  was  entirely  of  opinion'that  the  property  should  be
taken  from  those  who  had  been  parties  to  tlie  seditious
movements,  and  who  had  violently  destroyed  churches
and  convents,  and  that  such  of  it  should  be  restored  as
they  thought  fit.  Proceedings  against  these  persons  should
be  "taken  at  the  diet."

John  was  holding  his  court,  charged  with  the
proposal  to  com.bine  with  him  in  making  a
common  resistance,  at  the  next  diet,  to  any
measures  that  might  be  attempted  in  support
of  abuses,  or  for  the  suppression  of  truth ;  to
accede  to  no  ordinance  at  variance  with  the
word  of  God,  and  to  unite  steadfastly  to  that

§  Papal  Brief,  delivered  in  November. Oehsle,  p.  305.

I  Instruction  to  Otto  v.  Pack  in  the  Dresden  Archives.
It  also  contains  some  censure  of  Luther's  marriage; —
"that  he  and  his  Kate  wanted  as  much  for  themselveä
alone  as  the  whole  Augustine  convent  had  formerly  re-
quired.

Chap.  VIT.

DIET  OF  AUGSBURG,  1525.

£27

end  with  all  who  held  the  same  opinions.  This
commission  was  received  with  great  joy  bj^  the
elector,  with  whose  sentiments  and  convictions
it  so  fully  harmonised.  At  the  beginning  of
November,  his  son  John-Frederic  set  out  to
hold  a  conference  with  the  landgrave,  and  to
concert  the  course  they  were  to  pursue.*

The  interview  took  place  at  the  strongly
defended  hunting-seat  of  Friedewalt,  in  the
Sullinger  forest.  The  two  young  princes  per-
fectly understood  each  other.  There  is  in  the
Weimar  archives  a  note  of  an  opinion  "  of  our
dear  cousin  and  brother  the  landgrave,"  in  the
hand-writing  of  John-Frederic  himself,  which
is,  without  doubt,  the  result  of  this  conversa-
tion. Its  contents  do  not  show  that  any  actual
treaty  as  yet  existed  ;  the  resolutions  were  such
as  the  circumstances  of  the  moment  called
forth :  such  as,  that  the  contracting  parties
should  come  to  a  fuller  understanding  as  to  the
evangelical  cause,  and  should  induce  as  many
princes,  counts,  and  cities  of  similar  views  as
possible  to  join  them  (they  had  even  the  hope
of  gaining  over  the  Elector  of  Treves)  ;  and
should  then  eriter  a  common  protest  against
the  expressions  contained  in  the  rescript,  v.hich
were  favourable  to  old  usages,  but  pernicious
to  the  word  of  God ;  and  that  they  s|;iould
stand  as  one  man  for  the  evangelical  cause.
The  electoral  court  did  not  only  approve  these
conditions,  but  thought  it  good  to  extend  the
agreement  to  other  thingrs,  "  in  which  one  might
be  worse  treated  than  the  other."|

In  the  beginning  of  December  the  hostile
parties  thus  met  at  Augsburg,  furnished  with
directly  contrary  instructions.

The  same  disagreement  which  prevailed
among  the  deputies,  manifested  itself  in  the
imperial  commission.  This  consisted  (inde-
]>endently  of  Archduke  Ferdinand,  whose  be-
haviour was  necessarily  ambiguous)  of  "Duke
"William  of  Bavaria,  the  -leader  and  champion
of  the  papists,  and  ^Markgrave  Casimir  of  Bran-
denburg-, who  had  so  long  been  attached  to  the
evangelical  party.  Casimir  declined  indeed  to
enter  into  the  compact  proposed  to  him  by  the
envoys  of  Hessen  and  Saxony ;  but  he  declared
that  he  would  advocate  his  own  convictions  in
the  commission,  and  thus,  he  urged,  do  more
service  to  the  cause  than  he  could  by  joining  a
formal  alliance.

Had  the  prince?  been  present  in  person,  the
struggle  must  now  have become  vehement,

♦Instruction  in  Komrael's  Urknndenbacli,  p.  10.  Cre-
dentials of  the  same  date  (5tli  Oct.)  in  tlie  Weimar  Re-
cords. There  is  also  a  note  of  the  answer  that  VVaiblino-en
was  to  deliver  to  Torgau,  13th  Oct.

t  "  Verzaichniss  des  Bedenkens  unsres  lieben  Vetters
tind  Bruders  auf  die  vertreuliche  Unterrede,  so  wir  mit
S.  L.  jetzo  allhie  sehabt,  so  vil  das  h.  göttl.  Wort  belangen
thiit.  Friedewalt  Mitw.  nach  Beniardi  (8th  Nov.)."—
"  Note  of  the  opinion  of  our  dear  cousin  and  brother,  ex-
pressed at  our  confidential  mpetin?  held  here,  so  far  as
they  coTicern  the  holy  word  of  God.  friedewalt,  Wednes-
day after  St.  Bernard's  day,  i.  e.  8th  Nov."  The  copv
which  was  made  in  Torsjau  ditfers  from  the  paper  written
in  the  prince's  own  hand  in  this  respect :— the  prince  had
only  written  that  they  would  make  an  alliance  together
for  the  sake  of  the  Gospel :  but  in  the  copy  the  words
above  quoted  are  added :  —  "  Auch  sunsten  in  andern
Sachen,  do  eyner  vor  dem  andern  Recht  leyden  kunt,  aus-
geschlossen gesren  den,  so  in  der  Erbeynung  sind."  I  in-
tend to  make  ample  extracts  in  the  Appendix.

earnest,  and  decisive  ;  it  would  soon  hase  öeen
clearly  seen  to  which  side  the  majority  in-
clined.

But  neither  party  was  at  bottom  sincerely
resolved  on  bringing  matters  to  an  issue.  Each
saw  too  clearly  what  might  be  the  consequences
of  such  a  decision  :  they  wished  to  assemble
all  their  forces,  and  to  secure  to  themselves
ev-ery  kind  of  support.  The  princes  at  Friede-
walt thought  it  expedient  to  remove  the  diet  of
the  empire  immediately  to  Spire  or  to  Worms.
On  the  other  side,  the  arrival  of  the  >Iainz
deputy,  without  whom  no  step  could  be  taken,
inasmuch  as  he  brought  with  him  the  imperial
chancery,  was  unduly  delayed.  No  prince  as
yet  appeared  in  person«;  even  the  commission
was  not  complete,  and  a  great  number  of  the
deputies  were  still  missing.

The  first  preliminary  meeting  v/as  held  on
the  eleventh  of  December.  Archduke  Ferdi-
nand besought  those  who  were  assembled  to
have  patience  awhile,  till  a  larger  number  ar-
rived, and  promised  to  report  to  the  emperor
the  good  dispositions  of  those  present.:|;

But  some  weeks  elapsed,  and  their  num-bers
were  little  augmented  :  on  the  renewed  appli-
cation of  the  States,  the  commissioners  at
length  held  a  definitive  meeting  on  the  SOth
December.§

It  was  evident  to  every  body  that,  consider-
ing the  incompleteness  of  the  assem.bly  of  the
States,  and  the  importance  of  the  questions  at
issue,  no  permanent  result  could  be  obtained.
Duke  William  suggested  whether  it  would  not
be  better  to  adjourn  the  diet.  The  three  col-
leo-es  separated,  and  were  unanimously  of  t^at
opinion.  They  adjourned  the  diet  to  Spire,  on
the  first  of  May;  there,  however,  they  said,
every  prince  must  appear  in  person ;  "  there
they  would  with  greater  dignity  treat  of  the
holy  faith,  of  peace  and  justice."

In  order,  however,  to  have  done  at  least
something,  and  in  consideration  of  the  conti-
nued ferment  among  the  people,  a  committee
was  appointed  to  draw  up  a  Recess.

The  only  remarkable  circumstance  as  to  this
is,  that  the  ordinances  of  the  foregoing  diets
of  15-23  and  1524 — that  the  Gospel  should  be
preached  pure  and  intelligible,  according  to
the  interpretations  of  the  received  expositors —
was  repeated,  without  any  mention  of  the
Fathers  of  the  Latin  Church,  or  of  the  edict
of  Worms.  The  States  mutually  agreed  to
hold  themselves  prepared  to  put  down  instantb/
e%*ery  attempt  at  insurrection  ;  and  so  far  re-
stored to  their  rights  and  station  those  who
had  been  declared  infamous  on  account  of  their
participation  in  the  disturbances,  that  the  latter
were  allowed  to  take  part  in  the  sittings  of  the
courts  of  justice.il They  were so  numerous

i  Letter  from  Feilitsch  to  the  Elector  John,  24th  De-
cember. W^eimar  Records.

§  Feilitsch  und  Minkwitz  to  the  Elector  John,  2d  Jan,
1526.

I;  Recess  (Neue  Samml.),  ii.  271,  §5  1,4.  This  was  then
looked  upon  as  a  victory  obtained  by  the  Protestants
Letters  from  the  Nürnbergers,  quoted  by  Hortleder,  i
viii.  1.  ^palatin  Annales  in  Mencken,  ii.  652:  "  Concidit
spes  sperantiuni,  ec  conventu  totura  Baalem  restitutuni
iri."

223

RELIGIOUS  LEAGUES,

Book  III,

that  the  village  tribunals  would  otherwise  have
been  entirely  at  a  stand.

The  whole  attention  of  the  public,  as  well  as
its  active  measures  of  preparaticfn,  were  now
directed  towards  the  approaching  meeting,
which,  indeed,  proved  to  be  decisive.

Saxony  and  Hessen  had  not  as  yet  found
the  sympathy  they  expected  in  their  scheme
of  an  evangelical  league ;  in  fact,  the  Nürn-
berg deputies  alone  had  really  shown  an  ear-
nest inclination  towards  it:  but  this  discou-
ragement did  not  induce  those  princes  to  aban-
don the  idea :  the  two  ambassadors  were  of
opinion  that  the  affair  must  be  undertaken
with  redoubled  vigour,  in  a  personal  interview
between  their  respective  masters.

Meanwhile,  the  other  party  also  concentrated
its  forces.  The  chapter  of  the  cathedral  of
Mainz  brought  forward  its  long-forgotten  me-
tropolitan powers,  and  summoned  the  chapters
of  its  suffragans  to  an  assembly  at  the  mother-
church.  The  attention  of  this  meeting  was
called  to  the  danger  which  threatened  the
clergy  generally;  and  the  resolution  was
passed,  to  send  a  deputation  who  should  lay
before  the  emperor  and  the  pope  a  complaint
that  the  spiritual  jurisdiction  was  invaded  by
the  temporal  authorities;  to  remind  tiiem  of
the  services  which  the  spiritual  princes  had,
from  the  earliest  times,  rendered  to  the  empire
and  the  church ;  and  to  declare  that  they  were
ready  to  perform  similar  and  yet  greater  ser-
vices in  future,  but  that,  in  return,  they  should
expect  their  ancient  privileges  to  be  protected.
They  thought  it  most  expedient  to  entrust  this
protection  to  certain  princes  who  had  not  fallen
off  from  the  faith,  whom  they  specified.*

The  w'ishes  of  these  princes  seemed  to  tend
to  the  same  point.  Duke  George  of  Saxony
and  Duke  Henry  of  Brunswick  met  at  the  resi-
dence of  the  Elector  of  Mainz  at  Halle.  A
few  days  after,  we  find  them  again  at  Leipzig,
together  with  the  Bishop  of  Strasburg ;  they,
too,  determined  to  address  themselves  to  the

*  Letter  from  Count  Albert  of  Mansfeld,  sent  with  a
copy  of  the  treaty,  to  the  Elector  of  Saxony,  in  the  Wei-
mar Records.  Letter  from  Waldenfels  to  Vogler  in  v.  d.
Lith,  p.  160.

emperor.  They  represented  to  him  that,  see
ing  the  uninterrupted  progress  of  the  "  damn
able  Lutheran  doctrine,"  nothing  could  be  ex-
pected but  a  repetition  of  the  rebellion ;  nay,
even  an  open  war,  between  the  princes  and
lords  themselves ;  that  attempts  were  daily
made  to  draw  them,  too,  over  to  the  Lutheran
party ;  and,  since  these  were  not  likely  to  suc-
ceed by  amicable  means,  it  seemed  as  if  it
were  the  design  of  the  Lutherans  to  force  them
into  it,  by  instigating  their  subjects  to  revolt.
Against  these  attempts  they  now  called  upon
the  emperor  for  support. j-  Immediately  after
the  meeting,  Duke  Henry  of  Brunswick  went
to  Spain,  thus  throwing  the  weight  of  his  per-
sonal solicitations  into  the  balance.

Everything  was  thus  prepared  for  the  deci-
sive battle.  If  the  adherents  of  innovation
found  their  strongest  support  in  the  sympathy
of  the  nation,  and  in  the  mighty  movement  of
the  public  mind  generally;  on  the  other  hand,
the  champions  of  the  papacy  v/ere  sustained
by  the  natural  strength  of  established  institu-
tions, and  the  resolute  aversion  of  some  power-
ful princes  to  all  change.

But  they  now  likewise  sought  to  engage  in
their  behalf  the  active  interference  of  the  two
supreme  authorities  whose  dignity  was  so  in-
timately bound  up  with  the  spiritual  constitu-
tion of  the  empire.  They  did  not  doubt  that
these  potentates  would  bring  all  their  influence
to  their  aid.

But  they  thus  came  into  contact  with  two
great  political  powers  which  stood  in  very  dif-
ferent relations  to  each  other,  frojn  that  which
subsisted  between  them  in  Germany ; — 3,  rela-
tion subject  at  every  moment  to  be  changed  by
the  great  events  of  Italy,  and  the  course  of
European  policy.

We  shall  be  unable  to  understand  the  affairs
of  Germany,  if  we  do  not  first  devote  our  atten-
tion to  these  events  :  -they  are  also  important,
as  exhibiting  another  phase  of  the  character
and  condition  of  the  German  people.

t  Excerpt  fronn  a  judgment  given  at  Leipzig,  quoted
by  Schmidt  in  his  Deutsche  Geschichte,  viii.  p.  202.  Yet
I  know  not  whether  this  meeting  took  place  at  liCipzig
or  at  Halle.

BOOK  lY.

FOREIGN  RELATIONS.— FOUNDATION  OF  THE  NATIONAL
CHURCHES  OF  GERMANY.

1521—1528.

CHAPTER  I.

FRENCH AND ITALIAN WARS, DOWN TO THE
LIGUE OF COGNAC, 1521 — 1526.

In  the  tenth  century,  when  the  peoples  of  the
"West,  just  struggling  into  intellectual  life  and
culture,  were  exposed  on  every  side  to  attacks
from  mighty  and  hostile  forces,  the  first  great
victory  was  won  by  the  Germans.  In  defend-
ing themselves,  they  rendered  inestimable  ser-
vice to  all  others.  They  restored  security  and
independence  to  the  West ;  their  successes  in
arms  revived  the  idea  of  a  western  empire;
two-thirds  of  the  great  Carolingian  heritage
devolved  upon  them.

In  the  eleventh  and  twelfth  centuries  the
majesty  and  supremacy  of  the  empire  were  re-
cognised by  all  the  surrounding  nations,  north
and  south,  east  and  west.

Aries  and  Lyons,  Milan  and  Pisa,  M^ere  in-
cluded within  its  dominions.  At  the  end  of
the  twelfth,  and  the  former  half  of  the  thirteenth
century,  we  find  the  emperors  of  Germany
founding  a  strong  domestic  power  in  Italy ;
more  than  once  the  idea  of  annexing  the  east-
ern empire  to  that  of  the  west  suggested  itself
to  them.  Meanwhile,  wide  tracts  of  country
in  the  north  and  east  were  covered  with  settle-
ments ;  and  as  outposts  in  the  far  distance,
those  great  colonies  of  military  orders  were
established,  which  were  unquestionably  the
best  constituted  and  strongest  power  in  the
ngrth.

For  a  while  the  conquests  of  the  empire  con-
tinued to  advance,  although  the  imperial  go-
vernment no  longer  retained  its  pristine  energy ;
but  at  length  the  dissolution  of  internal  order,
and  the  annihilation  of  the  real  independence
of  the  imperial  throne,  was  felt  on  its  fron-
tiers :  the  empire  was  no  longer  able  to  main-
tain its  lofty  station.

The  spoliation  began  with  the  pope,  who
wrested  Rome,  the  States  of  the  Church,  and
Avignon  from  the  empire.  In  alliance  with
him,  the  French  crown  got  possession,  noise-
lessly and  bit  by  bit,  of  the  kingdom  of  Aries;
shortly  after,  the  rising  power  of  Poland  and
Lithuania  gained  a  decisive  victory  over  the
Teutonic  order,  no  longer  adequately  sup-
ported. In  the  fifteenth  century,  Bohemia
made  herself  independent;  the  states  of  Italy
scarcely  preserved  their  allegiance  to  the  em-
pire even  in  name;  and,  lastly,  the  principle
u

of  separation  reacted  even  on  the  races  of  Ger-
man blood  and  language  who  inhabited  the
Alps  and  the  Netherlands.  The  contempla-
tion of  so  many  disasters  awoke  that  sorrowful
indignation  in  the  hearts  of  true  patriots  to
which  we  have  already  alluded.

As  yet,  however,  no  definitive  act  of  cession
had  been  made  on  the  side  of  the  empire ;  ex-
cepting on  some  points,  in  favour  of  the  pope,
with  whom,  however,  the  boundary  line  of
their  respective  powers  had  not  yet  been  very
firmly  settled  :  it  was  still  open  to  every  kind
of  suggestion  or  discussion.

Never,  above  all,  had  the  project  of  giving
up  the  north  of  Italy  been  entertained.  As
early  as  the  beginning  of  the  fifteenth  century,
Rupert,  King  of  the  Romans,  made  a  resolute
attack  on  Milan :  in  the  middle  of  it,  after  the
Visconti  became  extinct,  a  party  arose  in  Milan
disposed  to  place  the  city  under  the  power  of
the  emperor ;  and  we  have  traced  the  life-long
attempts  of  Maximilian  to  conquer  Lombardy.
He  did  not,  it  is  true,  succeed  :  after  many
fluctuations  in  the  fortunes  of  war,  the  French
at  length  kept  possession  of  Milan  and  Genoa ;
but  the  ancient  claims  were  held  in  the  live-
liest remembrance;  and  Francis  L,  who,  more-
over, had  never  received  investiture  of  the  fief,
was  by  no  means  regarded  in  the  empire  in  the
light  of  a  legitimate  possessor.

On  Charles  V.'s  accession  to  the  throne,  the
magnificent  prospect  of  a  recover}''  of  all  its
rights  once  more  opened  on  the  empire.

We  must  remember,  that  this  was  the  point
of  view  which  immediately  presented  itself  to
men's  minds,  on  the  first  approximation  of
Burgundy  and  Austria.  W^hen  Charles  the
Bold  sent  to  offer  his  alliance  to  Frederic  III.,
he  told  him  that  he  would  make  him  more  for-
midable than  any  emperor  had  been  for  three
hundred  years  :  he  represented  to  him  what  an
irresistible  power  must  result  from  the  union
of  their  possessions  and  privileges.*  The
youthful  prince  who  now  ascended  the  throne
was  the  great-grandson  and  heir  of  both  those
sovereigns,  and  his  principalities  and  king-
doms extended  beyond  the  farthest  limit  that
any  imagination  could  at  that  time  have
reached.  How,  then,  was  it  possible  that
ideas  of  this  kind  should  fail  to  arise  within
him !

*  The  only  account  which  may,  however,  be  considered
authentic,  is  given  by  Schmidt  from  the  Imperial  Ar-
chives, book  vii.  cap.  24.

(229)

230

BREAKING  OUT  OF  WAR

Book  IV.

Of  all  the  nations  of  Western  Europe,  the
German  was,  without  doubt,  the  best  prepared
for  war.  The  nobles  of  that  country  were  the
first  to  throw  oft'  the  use  of  the  lance  —  that
chivalrous  weapon  which  the  new  art  of  war
had  rendered  nearly  useless :  lords  and  vassals
fought  in  the  same  ranks.*  The  foot-soldiers,
or  landsknechts,  who  were  peasants,  had  iio
equals  except  among;  the  Swiss, — also  of  Ger-
man race.  The  citizens  were  masters  in  the
■use  of  fire-arms ;  nor  could  any  other  nation
in  the  world  have  measured  its  naval  forces
at^ainst  those  of  the  Hanse  towns  and  the
Netherlands  combined.

All  these  elements  of  strength  had  been
paralysed  by  the  want  of  an  emperor  endued
with  energy  enough  to  put  them  in  motion.
vSuch  an  one  had  never  yet  arisen ;  but  a  new
era  now  appeared  at  hand.  The  landsknechts
hailed  its  advent  in  a  song,  the  burden  of
which  is,  that  they  had  now  a  prince  who
would  be  able  to  pay  them,  and  to  keep  them
in  the  field.  At  the  diet  of  Worms,  the  recon-
quest  of  the  lost  or  ceded  dominions  of  the
empire  was  discussed  with  great  earnestness.
But  here  again  we  must  not  for  a  moment  lose
sight  of  the  fact,  that  the  augmentation  of  the
imperial  power  was  not  the  ofFspri/i^  of  any
essential  change  in  the  sentiments  of  the  na-
tion. The  nation  was  not  disposed  to  grant  to
Charles  V.  greater  rights  than  it  had  granted
to  his  predecessors ;  nor  to  rally  round  him
with  greater  unanimity.  The  difference  con-
sisted in  the  union  of  power,  such  as  had
never  before  centred  in  one  house,  with  the
rights  and  powers  of  the  empire.  But  the  for-
mer included  elements  so  heterogeneous  that
it  could  never  be  amalgamated  with  the  power
conferred  by  the  imperial  throne.  The  posi-
tion of  Charles  Y.  w^as  twofold  ;  hence  it  must
of  necessity  in  time  give  birth  to  difficulties  as
peculiar  as  its  own  nature,  and  might  become
perilous  to  the  rights  of  the  German  empire
in  so  far  as  they  were  distinct  from  those  of
the  individual  then  wearing  the  imperial
crown,  j"

Even  the  origin  of  his  wars  is  to  be  traced
far  more  to  the  aggregate  of  his  various  rela^
tions  than  to  the  peculiar  interests  of  the  em-
pire.

We  have  already  alluded  to  the  revival  of  the
old  hostility  between  France  and  Burgundy.

In  the  beginnirig  of  the  year  1521,  the  de-
clared enemies  of  the  emperor  were  favourably
received  and  advanced  at  the  French  court.
Francis  I.  formed  a  connection  vi-'ith  the  revolt-
ed communes  in  Castile ;  in  Germany,  also,
the  emperor  thought  he  continually  detected
traces  of  his  enemy's  machinations  :  letters  and
schemes  of  the  most  hostile  nature  reached
him  from  Italy  :^  in  May,  Francis  I.  made  an

*  A  passage  from  Pasqualigo's  narrative  will  explain
this  further.

t>See  translator's  note,  p.  5-2.

j  Tractat  de  subtrahendis  omnibus  Ctesaris  amicis, —
solicitat  licet  frustra  sacri  imperii  electores,— concitat  et
Uteris  et  nunciis  turbatos  Hispanise  populos.  From  these
and  similar  complaints  in  the  Refutatio  Apologise  Dis-
suasoria;  in  Goldest  Polit.  Imp.  p.  870,  is  seen  what  espe-
cially irritated  the  emperor,  in  addition  to  the  direct
attacks.

attempt  to  restore  Navarre  by  forqe  to  Albert.
When  the  English  expressed  their  pacific  views
and  wishes,  he  replied  that  he  could  not  allow
himself  to  be  stopped  in  his  victorious  career. §
He  openly  took  under  his  protection  Robert  de
la  Mark,  who,  in  order  to  avenge  a  violation
of  his  jurisdiction  on  the  part  of  the  Chancellor
of  Brabant,  was  proceeding  to  acts  of  violence
against  Luxemburg.

On  the  other  hand,  the  emperor  now^  con-
cluded his  treaty  with  Pope  Leo  X.,  to  whom
the  ascendency  of  the  French  in  Italy  was  ex-
tremely oppressive,  and  any  augmentation  oL
it,  intolerable. II  The  alliance  was  destined  to
revive  and  restore  the  rights  of  the  papacy  and
the  empire  conjointly,  and  even  remote  contin-
gencies were  not  forgotten.  The  emperor  pro-
mised to  assist  in  establishing  the  pope's  claims
on  Ferrara ;  the  pope,  those  of  the  empire  on
Venice.^  But  they  first  determined  jointly  to
conquer  Lombardy.  Parma  and  Piacenza  were
to  fall  to  the  share  of  the  pope ;  Milan  and
Genoa,  to  be  governed  by  native  rulers,  who
were  to  acknowledge  the  emperor  as  their  sove-
reign lord.  There  is  frequent  reference  in  the
treaty  to  the  legitimate  subjection  of  all  princes
to  the  pope  and  the  emperor,  from  whom  God
would  hereafter  demand  an  account  of  the  state
of  the  Christian  republic.

In  Germany,  well-meaning  people  were  anx-
ious to  bring  about  a  reconciliation  between
the  king  and  the  emperor.  The  electors  drew
up  a  sort  of  memorial,  exhorting  the  King  of
France  to  a  peaceful  demeanour,  and  a  recog-
nition of  the  rights  of  the  empire.  But  the
emperor  was  not  pleased  at  their  interference  ;
he  forbade  the  Elector  of  Mainz  to  send  this
paper;  his  chancellor  declared  to  the  Elector
of  Treves  that  no  negotiation  would  have  any
effect  with  the  king,  who  would  keep  the  peace
only  when  restrained  by  force.**

The  purposes,  moreover,  which  had  dictated
the  treaty  with  the  pope  were  wholly  irrecon-
cilable with  an  acconmnodation  of  the  differ-
ences with  the  King  of  France.

In  August,  1521,  it  is  true,  delegates  from
the  emperor  and  the  king,  together  with  pleni-
potentiaries from  Rome  and  England,  met  again
in  Calais ;  but  from  the  first,  little  was  to  be
anticipated  from  this  conference.  Of  the  me-
diators, one  was  already  in  alliance  with  the
emperor,  while  the  other  had  long  been  nego-
tiating with  him,  with  a  view  to  a  stricter
alliance.  They  went  over  the  old  treaties,
article  by  article ;  each  party  maintaining  that
it  was  the  other  who  was  chargeable  with  the
breach  of  it. The greatest  impression  was

§  Extracts  from  the  despatches  of  Fitzwilliam,  the  Eng-
lish minister  in  Paris,  dated  18th  Feb.  and  29th  of  May;
Raumer,  Letters  from  Paris,  vol.  i.  p.  237.

|(  This  motive,  which  the  Italians  seemed  afterwards  to
have  forsotten,  is  very  apparent  in  a  conference  held  by
Henry  VIII.  with  the  French  minister:  "  fere  ofFextreiue
subjection."— 5tafe  Papers,  Henry  VIIL,  i.  p.  13.

IT  "  Omnibus  viribus  suis  spiritualibus  et  temporaübus."
Art.  19.—Dumont,  iv.  iii.  p.  99.

**  "  Wurde  keine  Handlung  leiden,  er  sey  denn  der-
maassen  zugericht,  dass  er  das  Friedens  begere." — "  He
would  hear  of  no  negotiations  unless  he  w-ere  in  a  condi-
tion to  ask  for  peace."  From  the  mouth  of  the  Elector
of  Treves:  Planitz  to  Frederic  of  Saxony. Nov.  1,  1521.

Chap.  I.

WITH  FRANCE— CAMPAIGN  OF  1521,  1522.

231

produced  by  a  letter  of  Francis  to  the  Count
of  Carpi,  wiiich  had  fallen  into  the  hands  of
the  imperialists,  and  in  which  the  king  spoke
very  plainly  of  the  assistance  he  gave  to  Robert
de  la  ^lark,  and  of  his  views  on  Naples  and
Sicil}".  When  at  length  a  renewal  of  these
treaties  was  proposed,  the  emperor's  grand
chancellor,  without  the  slightest  hesitation,  re-
fused; alleging  that  th^  basis  upon  which  they
■  were  constructed  was  unsound;  the  emperor
having  ancient  claims  on  France,  of  which  they
contained  no  mention.  He  not  only  denied,  as
might  be  expected,  the  suzerainty  of  France
\  over  Flanders  and  Artois,  which  he  pronounced
a  mere  momentary  concession  ;  but  demanded
that  the  inheritance  of  Charles  the  Bold  should
be  given  back  entire  and  undiminished;  he
reminded  the  mediators  what  the  throne  of
Aragon,  and  what  the  empire  w-as  entitled  to

in  the  south  of  France  :*

•pretensions

which,  in  faot,  expressed  nothing  less  than  a
resolute  determination  to  try  the  fortune  of  w"ar;
and  which  it  was  impossible  for  Francis  to  ad-
mit unless  he  had  suffered  a  defeat.

From  this  congress  at  Calais,  Charles  V.
reaped  one  advantage — he  won  over  the  King
of  England.  Henry  VIII.  had  before  solemnly
engaged  to^  declare  himself  against  the  one  of
liis  neighbours  who  should  first  break  the
peace.  The  intercepted  letter  in  question  con-
vinced him  that  the  blame  rested  with  Francis
l.j  He  had,  therefore,  no  hesitation  in  espous-
ing the  side  of  the  emperor,  from  whom  he
carefully  obtained  security  for  compensation
for  whatever  pecuniary  injury  might  arise  to
him  from  his  rupture  with  France.  His  pleni-
potentiary, Cardinal  Wolsey,  proceeded  from
Calais  to  Bruges,  where  the  stricter  alliance,
which  had  formerly  been  discussed,  was  con-
cluded.

The  emperor  really  wished  not  to  engage  in
the  war  without  full  justification.  As,  in  con-
sequence of  the  ambiguously  worded  article  in
the  treaty  of  peace,  there  was  a  doubt  which
part}^  was  in  the  right  in  the  affair  of  Navarre,
he  was  rather  glad  than  otherwise  when  he
heard  the  news  of  the  serious  demonstrations
of  the  French  in  favour  of  Robert  de  la  Mark.
'•God  be  praised  !"  exclaimed  he;  "it  is  not
I  who  begin  the  w^ar;  God  affords  me  an  oc-
casion for  defending  myself."  He  was  the
more  determined  to  pursue  the  enterprise  to  the
end. ''I  must  be  a  miserable  emperor,"  said

*  Garnier,  Histoire  de  France,  xxiii.  p.  359,  from  the
MSS.  of  Bethune,  which,  however,  he  does  not  mention,
pives  a  very  m>satistactory  account  of  the  matter.  At  the
tiine  of  the  first  edition,  I  remarked  that  in  time  some-
th'ius  material  should  be  done  (which  would  be  easy
enoush)  in  France  for  the  aiUlientic  elucidations  of  this
history.  Since  then  a  beginning  has  been  made  by  the
yiiblication  of  th*  papers  of  Cardinal  Gravella.  In  the
f.rst  volume,  p.  125-241,  we  find  a  Precis  des  Conferences
dft  Calais,  a  report  written  by  the  Grand  Chancellor  of
the  empire  in  Latin,  and  put  into  the  '^  langue  Valonne
ou  Prancoise"  (so  he  calls  it)  by  Claude  de  Chassey.

t  "  Letters  sent  unto  Rome  by  the  Frenshe  King;  to  the
Counte  de  Carpve  siirned  with  his  hande  and  subscribed
by  Robt.  Tett  (Robsrtet),  which  I  have  seen,  conteyning
the  hoole  discourse  of  his  intended  enterprise,  as  well  by
Eobt.  de  la  Marche  in  those  parties,  as  the  commotion  of
Italie  and  disturbance  of  Naples,  wherby  the  invasion
of  his  partie  evidently  apperithe."  Wolsey  to  King  Hen-
ry.—Sfaie  Papers,  i.  27.  From  the  answer  of  Pace,  p.  35,
it  appears  that  the  king  thought  this  testimony  decisive.

he,  "or  he  shall  become  a  pitiable  king  of
France.":^

Such  Avas  the  beginning  of  the  war  betvv'een
Charles  V.  and  Francis  I.

It  w^as,  in  fact,  a  direct  continuation  of  the
ancient  hostilities  between  Burgundy  and
France.  At  the  same  time,  it  was' immensely
important  to  the  Germanic  empire,  to  which,
for, the  first  time,  a  well-grounded  prospect  of
re-establishing  its  rights  and  authority  w"as  re-
opened. The  war,  with  the  political  changes
consequent  upon  it,  would  then  incessantly
react  on  its  internal  condition;  as  we  have
already  remarked,  and  sli^l  soon  more  distinct-
ly perceive.

CA3IPAIGN  OF  1521,  1522.

It  seemed  at  first  as  if  the  struggle  would  be
decided  on  the  ancient  theatre  of  the  Burgun-
dian  wars — the  border  country  of  France  and
the  Netherlands.

From  the  territory  of  Robert  de  la  IMark,
which  had  been  subdued  without  much  diffi-
culty, a  stately  imperial  arm}",  under  the  com-
mand of  the  Count  of  Nassau,  Sickingen,  and
Frundsberg,  marched  upon  the  French  frontiers,
conquered  Llouzon,  besieged  Mezieres,  and
threatened  the  whole  of  Champagne.  In  the
mean  time,  however,  Francis  assembled  his
best  forces,  and  had  soon  so  confident  a  feeling
of  his  own  superiority,  that  he  declared  that
God  himself  was  evidently  on  the  side  of
France.  The  imperialists  were  compelled  to
raise  the  siege  of  Mezieres,  and  when  they  met
the  French  near  Valenciennes,  esteemed  them-
selves happy  to  escape  without  a  beating.
George  Frundsberg  regarded  this  retreat  as
one  of  his  most  glorious  achievements ;  and  it
did,  in  fact,  in  some  degree  restore  the  balance
of  affairs  :  the  French  took  some  strong  places
in  Artois  ;  the  imperialists,  Tournay  ;  but  these
momentary  successes  led  to  no  great  efforts  or
important  results. §

In  Italy,  on  the  other  hand,  events  unexpect-
edly advanced  to  a  crisis.

This  was  mainly  brought  about  by  the  Swiss
Confederation,  which,  though  still  retaining
the  form  of  subjection  to  the  empire,  and  re-
ceiving its  pay,  enjoyed,  in  fact,  political  inde-
pendence, and  had  for  many  years  been  prin-
cipally instrumental  in  deciding  all  the  great
struggles  in  the  north  of  Italy.  Recently  (A.
D.  1512)  the  Swiss  had  reconquered  Milan  for
the  Sforzas,  and  its  loss,  determined  in  a  most
bloody  battle,  was  entirely  the  result  of  their
divisions.  In  the  5"ear  1516,  I\Iaximilian  had
undertaken,  with  their  aid,  a  second  expedition
into  Lombardy,  the  failure  of  which  was  attri-
buted solely  to  his  defective  conduct  of  it.
Now,  too,  both  the  pope  and  the  emperor,  in
all  their  plans,  reckoned  on  the  assistance  of
these  neighbouring,  brave  and  warlike  troops,
as  indispensable  to  the  success  of  their  arms.

t  Aluigi  Aleandro  de'  Galeazzi,  Brusselles  3.  Luglio,
15-2L  Lettere  di  principi,  i.  93.  That  is  doubtless  the
meaning  of  this  speech.

§  The  Memoirs  of  Bellay  and  of  Fleuranges  on  one  side,
and  of  Pontus  Heuterus  and  Sandoval  on  the  other,  de-
scribe this  war.  I  shall  insert  a  very  unpoetical,  but  in-
structive historical  song,  in  the  Appendix.

232

CAMPAIGN  OF  1521.

Book  IV.

Their  intention  was  to  march  16,000  Swiss
across  the  Alps,  and  to  advance  upon  Milan,
at  the  same  time  that  an  imperial  fleet  appeared
before  Genoa,  and  a  combined  papal  and  Nea-
politan force  on  the  Po.*

It  seemed  hardly  possible  to  entertain  a  doubt
of  the  success  of  their  efforts.  The  Confede-
ration had  espoused  the  part  of  the  House  of
Austria  at  the  election,  and  was  closely  allied
with  the  See  of  Rome.  In  the  beginning  of
the  year,  some  thousand  Swiss  had  entered
Leo's  service,  and  their  captains  had  been  de-
corated by  that  pontiff  with  chains  of  gold.

But  there  was  another  party  in  Switzerland
attached  to  France.  This  party  had  been  the
cause  of  the  division  in  the  army  in  1515  ;  had
afterwards  concluded  the  permanent  peace  with
France  ;  and  though  it  did  not  actually  support
the  pretensions  of  the  king  to  the  imperial
crown  (which  would  have  given  him  legitimate
claims  to  their  services),  being  now  free  from
any  anxiety  on  that  score,  manifested  the  live-
liest desire  to  enter  into  a  strict  alliance  with
him.  The  French  left  nothing  undone  that
could  secure  or  strengthen  the  attachment  of
this  party.  Their  means  were  simple  and  in-
fallible. They  openly  promised  pensions,  and
secretly  administered  bribes.  Anshelm  de-
clares that  not  only  the  members  of  councils
and  the  burgesses  were  bfibed,  but  all  the
loudest  village  orators;  that  many  were  bought
with  ten  gulden,  while  not  less  than  three
thousand  found  their  w'ay,  by  different  chan-
nels, into  some  houses. f  Opposition  was,'  in-
deed, not  wanting.  It  was  remarked  that  the
contracting  parties  bound  themselves  to  a  most
unequal  obligation  in  engaging  mutually  to
defend  each  other's  territory  ;  the  Confedera-
tion, the  extensive  dominions  of  the  king  on
either  side  the  Alps  ;  the  king,  the  narrow  ter-
ritory of  Switzerland  :  itw^as  said  that  Francis,
by  means  of  pensions,  bribes,  and  promises,
would  become  almost  absolute  master  of  the
Confederation  ;:t^  but  as  majorities  are  generally
swayed  rather  by  interests  than  by  arguments,
these  representations  had  no  effect.

The  reply  was,  that  the  Confederation  wanted
something  to  fall  back  upon  in  unexpected
emergencies ;  and  where  could  a  better  con-
nection be  found  ]  that  w-hile  the  only  sacri-
fice demanded  of  them  was  to  let  their  hot-
blooded  youth,  whom  they  could  not  keep  in
order,  flock  to  the  king's  standard,  they  would
derive  great  advantages  from  him  in  return.
In  Zurich  alone  a  firm  resistance  was  offered —
the  result  in  part  of  more  profound  religious
convictions;  but  all  other  parts — even  at  last
Schwyz  and  Glarus,  which  held  out  the  longest
— gave  way.  On  the  5th  of  May,  1521,  just
as  these  plans  were  maturing,  the  alliance  was
ratified  at  Lucern,  according  to  the  terms  of
which,  the  king  raised  the  pensions already

*  This  plan  is  adopted  in  the  treaty  of  alliance.  Art.  9.

t  Anshelm,  Berner  Chronik,  vi.  p.  25.

X  Arguments  on  the  other  side  are  to  be  found,  espe-
cially in  the  address  of  the  city  of  Zurich  to  the  canton
quoted  by  BuUinger,  i.  p.  42.

granted  to  the  Confederation  by  one  half;§
while  the  Swiss,  on  their  side,  promised  to
come  to  his  aid  whenever  any  part  of  his  do-
minions was  attacked,  with  a  force  of  from  six
to  sixteen  thousand  men.  This  is  the  basis
of  every  subsequent  treaty  between  France
and  Switzerland.  How .  great  a  weight  in
Europe  would  the  renewal  of  that  relation  to
Milan  which  had  subsisted  from  1512  to  1515
have  given  to  Switzerland  !  But  this  she  dis-
regarded ;  she  sold  her  arm  and  her  strength —
the  whole  of  that  warlike  power  by  which  she
had  w^on  herself  a  name  among  the  nations —
to  the  crown  of  France,  and  became  the  hired
instrument  of  its  designs.  She  advanced  an-
other step  in  the  career  of  separation  from  the
empire,  to  which  she  was  bound  by  the  ties  of
nationality  and  of  history,  and  sustained  by
which,  she  might  have  assumed  a  lofty  station
among  the  powers  of  Europe;  In  July,  1521,
a  solemn  deputation  repaired  to  Dijon,  to  de-
liver to  Francis  I.  the  sealed  copy  of  the
treaty ;  and  the  king's  mother  w^as  delighted
at  the  marks  of  reverential  homage  addressed
to  her  son  at  this  ceremony  ;  immediately  after
which,  bands  of  Swiss  joined  the  king's  troops
both  in  Picardy  and  in  Italy.

It  is  evident  how  completely  this  must  have
thwarted  all  the  plans  of  the  pope  and  the  em.-
peror.  ■

In  Italy,  the  breaking  out  of  hostilities  was
hastened  by  a  very  ill-concerted  attack  of  the
French  on  the  town  of  Reggio,  where  they  in-
tended to  carry  off  some  Milanese  emigrants.
In  .Tuly,  1521,  Prospero  Colonna,  to  whom  the
supreme  command  over  the  combined  papal
and  imperial  forces  was  given,  left  Bologna  to
attack  Parma  ;  a  fleet  was  sent  to  sea  against
Genoa;  in  Trent,  German  foot-soldiers  flocked
to  the  standard  of  Francesco  Sforza,  son  of
Luigi  il  More;  while  the  exiled  Ghibellines
appeared  with  a  few  boats  on  the  Lake  of
Como,  where  they  had  always  carried  on  a
sort  of  banditti  w^arfare.||

But  to  what  could  all  these  detached  efforts
lead,  when  the  force  from  which  the  grand
attack  on  the  Milanese  was  expected  hadnow
made  common  cause  with  the  enemy,  whose
confidence  was  thus  raised  at  all  points  1  The
enterprises  against  Genoa  and  Como  com-
pletely failed.  It  was  fortunate,  that  at  least
the  Germans  from  Trent  found  means  to  elTect
a  junction  with  the  army  before  Parma,  where
the  troops  whi.ch  had  been  destined  for  the
attack  upon  Genoa  now  likewise  collected ;
but,  even  with  this  addition,  they  did  not  feel
themselves  strong  enough  for  a  serious  and
decisive  attack  :  on  the"  12th  of  September  the
siege  was  raised. *![

§  "  Ut  cngnoscaiit  iiilimuni  amnrem,  liberalitatem,  be-
nevolentiam,  et  affectionem  dicti  Christianissimi  regis
in  eos. "—Z)MW!oni,  iv.  i.  p.  334.  ^

|(  Benedictus  Jovius  Historia  Novncomensis  in  Graevii
Thes.  Ital.iv.  p.  71, names,  as  leader,  Johannes  a  Brinzia,
cogiiomento  stultus;  that  is,  Matto  da  Brinzi,  as  he  is
otherwise  called.

IT  The  somewhat  contradictory  details  of  the  raising  of
this  siege  are  to  be  found  in  Guicciardini,  Capella, 'Jovius
(Vita  Pesc.  ii.  300.  Leonis  Xmi,  iii.  100.)  See  also  NarUi,
Storie  fiorentine,  vi.  p.  170.

Chap.  I.

CAMPAIGN  OF  1521.

233

The  French  at  this  time  possessed  an  un-
questioned superiority  over  their  enemies.
The  Venetians  had  sent  into  the  field  five  hun-
dred men-at-arms,  and  six  thousand  foot-sol-
diers; the  Duke  of  Ferrara,  who  was  not  blind
to  the  danger  impending  over  him,  fell  upon
the  papal  territory ;  the  Swiss  came  down
from  their  mountains  in  detachments,  at  their
head  the  Bernese,  led  by  the  most  ardent  par-
tisans of  the  French.  The  historian  Guicciar-
dini,  who  was  with  the  allied  armies  as  papal
commissioner,  declares,  that  if  the  French  had
attacked  them  at  that  moment,  when  also  dis-
cords and  disorders  had  broken  out  among
them,  they  would  have  obtained  an  easy  vic-
tory.*

But  just  at  this  moment,  hope  of  succour
and  of  safety  dawned  in  the  very  point  whence
the  danger  had  arisen.

Imperial  and  papal  envoys  had  arrived  in
Switzerland,  richly  provided  with  money  and
all  the  means  of  corruption,  and  had  again
found  a  soil  very  favourable  to  the  fulfilment
of  their  commission.  By  pressing  on  the
Swiss  their  old  obligations  towards  the  em-
peror and  Austria,  and  especially  towards  the
pope,  they  brought  into  full  and  distinct  light
the  extent  of  the  danger  into  which  the  Con-
federation had  rushed.  They  were  bound  by
ancient  treaties  to  defend  part  of  the  territories
of  Austria  (i.  e.  Franche  Comte),  and  all  those
of  the  Church  ;  yet,  in  the  teeth  of  these,  they
had  entered  into  a  new  treaty,  a  special  clause
of  which  declared  that  they  were  to  take  the
field  against  all  parties  specified,  and  espe-
cially against  Austria  an'd  the  pope,  if  they
should^  attack  the  king's  dominions.  There
were  still  some  Swiss  in  the  papal  armies,
who  had  taken  part  in  the  attack  on  Parma,
while  others  of  their  countr37men  co-operated,
under  Lautrec,  in  the  relief  of  that  place ;  and
it  was  not  easy  to  see  w^hat  v/ould  be  the  re-
sult of  their  coming  in  contact.  The  French
alliance  was  the  work  of  a  party,  and  nothing
was  more  natural  than  that  another  party
should  be  formed  in  every  place  to  oppose  it.
The  disorderly  and  ill-timed  departure  was
also  a  ground  of  complaint  and  reproach ;  in
some  places  the  whole  labour  of  getting  in  the
harvest  had  been  left  to  women.  Zürich,
which  had  rejected  the  French  alliance  by  an
unanimous  resolution  of  the  council  in  the
city  and  the  communes  in  the  country,  was
determined  at  all  events  to  maintain  that  with
the  pope.  All  these  various  inclinations  and
passions  were  now  laid  hold  of,  and  turned  to
account  by  the  old  master  of  Swiss  intrigues,
Cardinal  von  Sitten.  }n  Zürich  he  was  allowed
to  levy  2700  men,  though  under  the  condition
that  they  were  to  be  employed  solely  for  the
defence  of  the  papal  possessions,  and"  on  no
account  for  the  attack  on  Milan :  these  troops,
however,  formed  a  mere  rallying  point  around
which  partisans  of  the  pope  and  emperor
gathered  from  all  parts ;  the  cardinal  granted
still  higher  pay  than  the  French  plenipoten-

tiaries :  we  find  that  a  banner  or  company,
which  had  been  recruited  for  the  service  of
France,  went  over  in  a  body,  with  the  single
exception  of  its  captain,  to  that  of  the  pope :
above  6000  men  mustered  in  Coire,  towards
the  end  of  September,  and  were  quickly  joined
by  troops  from  the  Orisons  and  the  Pavs  de
Vaud.j

The  pope  was  already  in  great  dismay  and
perplexity  at  the  ill  results  of  his  undertakings,
when  he  received  these  tidings.  His  nuncio
Ennio  assured  him  that  the  clause  in  the  agree-
ment with  Zürich  would  not  restrain  the  troops
of  that  canton  from  attacking  Parma,  Piacenza,
and  even  Ferrara,  though  they  belonged  to  the
Church ;  nay,  that  he  was  confident  that  if  he
did  but  distribute  money  among  some  of  the
leaders,  he  could  induce  them  to  undertake  any
thing  he  wished.:];:

This  revived  the  almost  extinguished  hopes
of  the  allies.  It  was  evident  that  the  mere,  ap-
pearance of  so  strong  a  Swiss  force  in  the
combined  army  must  cripple  the  strength  of  the
enemy,  which  mainly  consisted  of  the  Swiss
in  his  service.  The  only  question  w^as,  how
to  effect  a  junction,  and  to  accomplish  this  the
army  set  itself  in  motion.  Cardinal  Giulio  de'
Medici  had  just  arrived  from  Florence,  and  had
appeased  all  the  quarrels  of  the  leaders  and
secured  the  good  wdll  of  the  troops  by  the  Flo-
rentine gold  of  which  he  was  the  bearer;  he
had  thirteen  sumpter  mules  in  his  train,  all  said
to  be  laden  with  money.  On  the  first  of  Octo-
ber, Prospero  Colonna  crossed  the  Po  at  Casal
Maggiore,  and  marched  up  the  river  Oglio.
iMeanWhile  the  Swiss  who  had  come  down
from  the  Alps  across  the  Morbegno  arrived  from
Chiavenna.  Neither  mountain  nor  flood,  nei-
ther the  warnings  of  their  countrymen  nor  the
hostilities  of  the  French,  had  power  to  deter
them.  At  the  end  of  October  they  too  appeared
on  the  other  side  of  the  Oglio.

It  was  evident  that  the  safety  of  the  French
depended  on  preventing  the  junction  of  these
two  bodies  of  troops.  Prospero  Colonna  had
taken  up  a  position  near  Rebecca,  so  little  ad-
vantageous, that  even  the  cautious  Venetians
were  tempted  to  attack  him ;  the  Swiss  w^ere
urgent  to  do  so :  they  wanted  to  fight  before
their  countrymen  reached  the  scene  of  warfare;
and  in  a  council  of  war  which  was  held,  the
voices  were  nearly  unanimous  lor  the  attack.
The  commander-in-chief,  Lautrec,  alone  was
not  to  be  induced  to  comply  with  their  wishes.§.

*  Guicciavdini,  xiv.  p.  408. Se  fosse  sopravenuto  Lau-
trecli,  gU  raetteva  facilissimamente  in  fuga.

30  ij*

■f  The  offers  made  by  the  imperial  and  papal  party  are
to  be  seen  in  Anshelra.  Dullinger  is  more  explicit  as  to
the  aöairs  of  Zürich,  cap.  24-26.  See  Hottinger,  Ge-
schichte der  Eidgenossen  (Müller's  continuation),  i.  p.
55,  63.

JGaleacius  Capeila  gives,  p.  ISO,  an  extract  from  the
letter;  "  Demuni  pecnnia  facile  esse  duces  corrunipere,
qui  milites  quo  res  postularet  technis  suasiombusque  im-
pe'lerent.

§  The  version  which  Leferron  (v.  p.  330,)  quotes  from
the  mouth  of  an  eye-witness  —  that  Lautrec  had  really
intended  to  make  the  attack  on  the  following  day,  but
was  prevented  by  the  Venetians— is  a  mere  pretext.  Eel-
lay  says,  "  La  tardivite  de  nos  chefs  fut  cause  de  les  nous
faire  perdre."— CoZZ.  Univ.,  torn.  xvii.  p.  180.  The  parti-
culars are  mentioned  by  the  most  trustworthy  Italians,
such  as  Galeazzo.  We  may  judge  of  the  effect  of  this
event  from  the  Chronicles  of  Rabbi  Josef;  he  saj'S  of  too
French,  "  They  are  a  nation  voyd  of  counsel."

234

CAMPAIGN  OF  1521.

Book  IV.

Many  motives  for  his  refusal  were  assigned ;
the  most  generally  received  v^^as  his  want  of
resolution :  he  was  not  a  general  fitted  for  enter-
prising vi'arfare.  He  chose  rather  to  strengthen
the  garrisons  in  the  nearest  fortified  towns,  and
to  take  up  a  strong  position  behind  the  Adda.
Prospero  Colonna  soon  after  joined  the  Swiss
at  Gambara  without  any  impediment.  A  part
of  them,  as  the  nuncio  had  predicted,  were  not
reluctant  to  advance  with  him  upon  Milan.
The  more  conscientious,  who  could  not  be  in-
duced by  any  promises  to  do  so,  marched  upon
Reggio,  whence  they  were  to  make  an  attack
on  the  papal  cities  of  Parma  and  Piacenza.

The  allied  arary  thus  acquired  an  incontest-
able superiority.  The  Swiss  in  the  French
service,  discontented  at  not  having  earned  the
bounty  distributed  after  a  battle ;  dissatisfied
with  Lautrec,  who  preferred  his  German  guard
to  them ;  and  exhorted  by  messengers  from
Switzerland,  for  God's  sake  not  to  fight  their
brother  confederates,  deserted  the  ranks,  and
returned  home  in  troops.  If,  therefore,  in  1515,
the  dissensions  of  the  Swiss  had  essentially
facilitated  the  conquest  of  Ölilan  to  the  French,
the  consequences  of  those  dissensions  now
mainly  occasioned  their  disasters.  The  allies,
at'this  moment,  reinforced  by  fresh  troops  from
the  Grisons,  effected  their  passage  across  the
Adda  with  equal  skill  and  success.  Lautrec
found  himself  entirely  confined  to  the  fortified
towns.

But  these  had  long  been  the  scene  of  hostile
ferment.  The  Ghibellines  hated  the  French
government;  nor  were  the  Guelphs  treated  by
it  with  all  the  consideration  they  expected;
their  most  eminent  leader,  the  aged  Trivulzi,
whose  authority  had  for  a  time  been  superior
to  that  of  the  French  governor,  had,  on  that
account,  fallen  into  the  disfavour  of  the  king,
which  had  terminated  only  with  his  life.  To
these  causes  of  discontent  were  added  the  acts
of  extortion  and  violence  which  generally  ren-
der the  domination  of  the  French  hateful  to
•every  country  subject  to  their  swa)^  On  Lau-
trec's  arrival  in  Milan,  he  found  so  great  an
agitation,  that  he  thought  it  necessary  to  put  it
down  by  severe  military  executions  ;  he  caused
the  aged  Christofero  Pallavicini,  a  near  relation
of  the  House  of  Medici,  and  one  of  the  chiefs
of  the  Ghibelline  faction,  to  be  beheaded  in  the
castle.*  It  is  easy  to  imagine  what  was  the
impression  produced  by  this  cruelty,  combined
w^ith  the  spectacle  of  a  defeated' army  and  the
report  of  the  approach  of  an  enemy  of  over-
Vfhelming  force.  Upon  the  state  of  the  public
mind  resulting  from  such  causes,  Prospero  and
Cardinal  Giulio  had  all  along  placed  their
hopes. j-  Francesco  Sforza  had  fostered  this  by
proclamations,  breathing  nothing  but  clemency
and  mildness,  and  promising  the  paternal  rule

*  Cronaca  Gruinello,  in  Verri,  iii.  p.  221.

tSepulveda,  Praefatio  in  Aristotelem  de  parvis  Natu-
ralihus  (Cf.  Sepulvedte  Vita  et  Scripta,  p.  cvii.),  says,  of
Giulio:  "  Non  ijrnarus,  in  uno  Mediolaiio  cetera  oppida
expugnari."  Vettori  admirably  describes  the  change  of
circumstances.  "  In  Milano  in  facto  la  parte  Ghibellina
e  snperiore' assai,  i  popoli  sono  sempre  desiderosi  di  mu-
tazioni :  chi  lascia  la  campagaa  e  si  retira  dentro  alle
mura,  perde  di  riputazione."

of  a  native  prince,  which  were  read  with  avidity.
As  the  allies  approached  Milan,  they  were
urged  to  advance  without  delay,  and  to  venture
on  an  attack  ;  the  whole  city,  it  was  said,  would
rise  in  their  favour.  It  was  in  November,  the-
weather  and  the  roads  as  bad  as  possible;  but
under  these  adverse  circumstances  they  marched
forwards.  On  the  evening  of  the  19th  they
reached  Milan,  and  immediately  pitched  their
camp  before  it.  Meanwhile,  a  small  party  of
light-horsemen  having  reported  the  bad  state
of  the  entrenchments  which  Lautrec  had  has-
tily thrown  up  round  the  city,  the  Marquess
Pescara,  commander  of  the  Spanish  infantry,
said,  "  We  must  find  quarters  in  the  suburbs ;"
and  instantly  placing  himself  at  the  head  of
sixty  Spanish  riflemen,  advanced  on  the  Porta
Romana,  followed  by  an  irregular  troop  of
Landsknechts.  The  event  which  was  to  de-
cide the  fate  of  Italy  for  centuries,  began  like
an  adventure  undertaken  in  wantonness  and
sport.  Prospero  Colonna,  unwilling  to  be  out-
done, collected  another  party  of  Germans  and
Spaniards,  and  marched  on  the  Porta  Ticinese.
The  entrenchments  were  easily  forced  ;  but,  as
nearly  the  whole  of  the  enemy's  army  Jay  in
the  city,  and  rallied  in  haste  to  make  resist-
ance, the  affair  was  still  doubtful,  and  a  part
at  least  of  the  assailants  held  it  expedient  to
retire.  At  tliis  crisis  the  population  rose ;  the
streets  resounded  with  the  cry  "  the  Duke  !  the
Empire  for  ever!  down  with  the  French!"  a
universal  insurrnction  appeared  imminent,  and
as  the  main  body  of  the  allied  army  at  this
moment  apprcacfed,  and  the  Landsknechts,
wading  up  to  their  belts  in  water  through  the
ditches,  mounted  the  entrenchments,  Lautrec
thought  the  defence  cf  the  city  desperate,  and
retreated  through  the  Porta  Comasina  on  the
opposite  side.  The  Vonetia^ns  were  easily  dis-
armed. The  Swiss  officers  would  not  abandon
the  French,  and  hurried  sfter  them.  In  less
than  two  hours  the  city  was  taken. ij:  On  .en-
tering it,  the  imperialists  found  all  the  streets
brilliantly  illuminated.  The  name  evening  it
was  publicly  proclaimed  that  the  emperor  and
pope  had  determined  to  restore  to  the  Milanese
their  hereditary  sovereign,  Duke  Francesco
Sforza.  Geronimo  Morone',  the  confidential
councillor  of  that  prince,  who  hal  kept  alive
the  connection  with  the  Ghibellire  families,
and  had  contributed  more  than  any  other  indi-
vidual to  the  «access  of  the  enterprise,  took  the
reins  of  government.

Pavia  and  i>odi,  on  the  one  side  tho  Po,
Parma  and  Piac<3nza  on  the  other,  followed  the
example  of  Milai>.  The  latter  cities  received
very  vv^elcome  assi!.^t:\nce  from  the  Swiss  of  Zug
and  Zürich,  who  haL\  net  accompanied  the  army
to  Milan.

The  matter  was,  however,  by  no  means  at
an  end.  The  French  array  had  not  dispersed,
as  was  expected ;  it  took  up  a  strong  position

JA  letter  of  the  Marquis  o!  Mantua  to  his^  mother,
dated  '21st  Nov.,  152],  and  printed  in  the  thirly-siy;ond
volume  of  Sauuto's  Chronicle,  co.ifains  the  best  and  the
most  trustworthy  account  of  this  ev.spt.  I  shall  give  it  iu
the  Appendix,  as  well  as  a  letter  rsf  the  J-,egate,  Giulio
Medici,  written  between  the  eventn^  of  ctit-  I9th  and  tho
morning  of  the  20th.

Chap.  I.

CAMPAIGN  OF  1522.

235

in  Cremona,  whence  it  menaced  Milan  on  the
one  side  and  Parma  and  Piacenza  on  the  other;
it  was  still  in  possession  of  a  number  of  cas-
tles; Novarra,  Trezzo,  Pizzighetone,  in  the
Milanese;  the  strongholds  in  the  passes  of  the
Alps ;  Domo  d'Ossola  and  Arena,  with  all  the
others  on  the  Lago  Maggiore.  The  sudden
death  of  Leo  X.,  whom  fate  summoned  away-
just  as  he  received  the  first  favourable  tidings,
compelled  the  allied  commanders  to  be  frugal,
and  to  discharge  as  many  of  their  troops  as
they  could  possibly  spare.  For  the  moment,
at  least,  they  could  not  reckon  on  any  further
support  from  the  Tuscan  or  Papal  dominions,
which  were  distracted  by  troubles  of  their  own ;
■  while  the  French  had  at  their  disposal  the  re-
sources of  Venice  and  Genoa.  The  most  im-
portant thing,  however,  was  that,  after  this
disaster,  of  which  they  w^ere  themselves  the
sole  cause,  the  Sv/iss  acted  with  greater  con-
cert. The  emperor  invited  them  to  enter  into
alliance  with  him  ;  the  Council  of  Regency
reminded  them  of  their  duties  as  members  of
the  empire ;  an  embassy  from  Milan  offered
them  a  subsidy  ;  but  all  was  in  vain :  the
French  party,  reinforced  by  the  povi-erful  cap-
tains who  w^ere  returned  from  Italy,  asserted
its  superiority;*  its  adversaries  themselves  were
/  struck  by  the  danger  which  threatened  the  Con-
federation from  opposition  to  the  will  of  the
majority.  Zürich  now  recalled  her  citizens
from  Italy,  and  the  twelve  cantons  granted  the
king  a  levy  of  10,000  men:  they  gave  leave
to  the  French  plenipotentiary  to  inspect  them
himself,  which  had  never  been  granted  before;
and  at  the  end  of  January,  1523,  whilst  falling
snow  still  covered  the  roads  with  fresh  drifts,
they  marched  across  the  Alps.

By  this  event,  the  whole  political  face  of
things  assumed  a  new  and  most  complicated
aspect.

The  Swiss  being  thus  opposed  to  the  claims
of  the  emperor  and  the  empire,  they  were  only
to  be  maintained  (if  indeed  it  was  possible  to
maintain  them  at  all)  by  purely  German  re-
sources :  no  union  of  hereditary  possessions,
no  negotiation,  availed  the  emperor  further;
he  had  nothing  to  look  to  but  the  strong  arm
and  the  tried  faith  of  his  Landsknechts.

A  considerable  body  of  these  troops  were
already  collected  in  the  Milanese.  They  had
been  levied  the  preceding  year  in  Tyrol  and
Swabia,  chiefly  with  the  pope's  money  :  it  ap-
pears from  extant  documents,  that  the  Würten-
berg  government  ordered  its  servants  to  let
every  man  go  who  would  be  better  out  of  the
country  than  in  it.f'  Francis  of  Castelalt  had
raised  live  companies.:^  The  most  renowned
of  German  captains,  George  of  Frundsberg,
now  set  himself  in  motion.  He  was  personally
acquainted  with  Francesco  Sforza,  who  had
once  paid  him  a  visit  at  his  castle  of  Mindel-

*  On  the  29th  November,  we  find  the  French  agent,
Galeazzo  Visconti,  in  Lncern  :  "  Qtieste  lige,"  he  says,
"  sono  in  grosso  dixordine, — ma  a  tuto  spero  troverase
bono  recapito,  etiam  che  cum  faticha  et  spexa." — Molini,
Doc.  i.  p.  132.

t  Avvisi  da  Trento,  dated  9tli  July,  1521;  Molini,  i.  p.
99.  On  the  15th  the  order  was  published  in  Wiirtenberg.
—Sattler,  p.  77.

X  Jovius,  Vita  Alfonsi,  p.  185,  names  him.

heim :  another  Italian  pretender,  Geronimo
Adorno,  who  aspired  at  regaining  his  power  i..
Genoa,  and  had  rendered  important  service  at
the  conclusion  of  the  treaty,  appeared  in  Ger-
many well  provided  with  money ;  the  drum
was  beat  in  the  streets  of  Augsburg,  and  in  a
very  short  time  twelve  companies  of  Lands-
knechts flocked  to  the  standard  of  George
Frundsberg,  and  marched  under  his  orders  from
Glurns  on  the  12th  of  February.  He  had  to
contend  with  all  the  difficulties  of  the  season,
and  under  their  severest  form ;  the  Grisoners
would  not  allow  him  to  pass  over  the  Valtel-
line,  so  that  he  was  obliged  to  take  a  much
worse  road,  which  the  labour  of  two  hundred
peasants  was  required  to  clear  and  level,  over
the  Wormser  .loch  to  Lovere  and  the  Lago
d'Iseo ;  notwithstanding  which  he  arrived  at
the  right  moment,  just  as  the  Swiss  and  French
were  about  to  attack  Milan  from  Monza.§

A  third  German  army,  6000  strong,  had  also
assembled  at  Trent,  under  the  command  of
Francesco  Sforza;  Adorno,  whose  personal
hopes  and  interests  all  hung  on  the  issue  of  this
campaign,  hurried  back  to  lead  on  these  troops
to  the  scene  of  action.

The  French  made  an  attempt  on  Milan;  but
Prospero  had  put  himself  in  an  excellent  state
of  defence,  both  against  the  castle  within,  and
the  enemy  without.  He  belonged  to  the  clas-
sical school  of  Italy  of  that  time ;  and  it  was
affirmed  that  Ceesar's  defence  of  Alesia  had
served  as  a  model  for  his  operations. |1

The  French  and  Swiss  took  Novara,  Vige-
vene,  and  some  other  places ;  but — what  was
much  more  important — they  were  unable  to
prevent  the  junction  of  Francesco  Sforza  with
Prospero  :  on  the  4th  of  April,  after  an  absence
of  twenty-two  years,  the  new  duke  entered
Milan,  amidst  the  ringing  of  bells,  the  inces-
sant firing  of  guns,  and  the  joyous  shouts  of
the  whole  population  :  a  foreign  yoke  had  now
taught  them  the  value  of  a  prince  of  their  own
race  and  country ;  and  they  deemed  that  such
an  one  would  be  more  solicitous  for  their  wel-
fare, and  more  attached  to  their  persons  and
interests  than  a  stranger.  Francesco  Sforza
lay  under  the  unfortunate  necessity  of  begin-
ning his  reign  with  demands  ;  nevertheless,  his
people  vied  with  each  other  in  the  zeal  with
which  they  complied  with  them.  High  and
low  brought  money  and  money's  worth-;- every
body  strove  to  show  him  aflfection,  and  to  ob-
tain his  favour.^  An  Augustine  friar,  Andrea
da  Ferrara,  fostered  this  spirit  in  the  people,
by  the  fervid  eloquence  of  discourses  in  which
he  represented  the  French  as  enemies  of  God.

The  imperialists  were  thus  once  more  in  a
condition  to  appear  in  the  field.  After  relieving
Pavia,  they  took  up  a  strong  position  at  Bi-
cocca,  before  Milan,  in  the  hope  that  their
impetuous  enemy  would  attack  them  here.

^Reissner,  Historia  Hern  Georgen  und  Hern  Casparen
von  Frundsberg.

II  Jovius  :  Pescara,  p.  316.  If  he  must  have  an  example,
that  of  the  Thebans  when  they  besieged  the  Cadmeia,
and  endeavoured  at  the  same  time  to  defend  themselves
against  Alexander  (Arrian,  i.  7),  would  be  more  appro-
priate.

TT  ^rumello,  quoted  by  Verri,  p.  223.

236

BATTLE  OF  BICOCCA.

Book  IV.

Nor  did  they  long  expect  in  vain.  As  usual,  i
the  error  last  committed  was  that  most  anx-
iously avoided.  It  was  the  unanimous  opinion
in  the  French  array,  that  nothing  had  been
wanting  the  preceding  autumn  at  Rebecca  but
a  resolute  attack,  to  have  ensured  the  victory  :
the  Swiss,  in  particular,  were  convinced  of  this ;
they  determined  not  to  let  the  opportunity  slip
by  again,  and  loudly  urged  their  leaders  to  lead
them  on  to  the  enemy.  Lautrec  had  lost  his
judgment  and  presence  of  mind.  Though  he
did  not  entirely  approve  of  the  proposition  of
the  Swiss,  he  did  not  dare  resolutely  to  oppose
them  ;  he  suffered  himself  to  be  overruled.  On
the  morning  of  the  27th  of  April,  the  Swiss
and  the  French  moved  upon  Eicocca.

The  imperialists  had  encamped  in  a  spot
enclosed  by  morass,  hollow  ways,  hedges,  and
ditches;  had  entrenched  themselves  here  ac-
cording to  the  rules,  of  art,  as  in  a  fortification,
and  placed  their  guns  on  lofty  breastworks.
The  army  consisted  of  the  German  companies,
which  occupied  the  front  under  George  Frunds-
berg,  and  Rudolf  Hal;  of  Spanish  infantry,
especially  arquebusiers,  who  had  remained  in
Italy  ever  since  the  former  wars,  and  had
fought,  under  Gonsalvo  di  Cordova,  by  the
side  of  the  Germans;  and,  lastly,  of  Italian
Ghibellines,  who  wished  to  see  the  power  of
the  empire  restored,  in  order  that  they  might
avail  themselves  of  its  protection  to  obtain  the
mastery  over  their  adversaries.  It  was  an  army
which  fully  represented  the  substantial  powers
of  Spain  and  Germany,  as  united  under  the
wearer  of  the  imperial  crown.  Francesco  Sfor-
za, whose  interests  were  most  immediately  at
stake,  the  very  next  morning  occupied  a  bridge
which  would  have  afforded  access  to  the  camp,
with  Milanese  troops,  horse  and  foot.  He  was
accompanied  by  a  monk  of  San  Marco,  who
proclaimed  that  heaven  had  decreed  the  victory
to  the  new  duke.  This  patriotic  excitement
was  another  ally  of  the  imperial  cause.

On  the  other  hand,  the  troops  of  the  Con-
federation stood  now  undivided  on  the  side  of
the  French.  As  often  as  this  had  been  the  case
before,  they  had  turned  the  scale  of  victory,  and
they  were  inflamed  with  confidence  in  their
present  success.

Their  tactic  had  hitherto  always  consisted  in
a  headlong,  furious,  straightforward  oriset  on
the  camp  or  the  artillery  of  the  enemy ;  and
this  was  the  mode  of  attack  they  now  adopted.
They  formed  into  two  large  bodies  ;  the  one
out  of  the  country  parts,  under  Arnold  von
Winkelried  of  Unterwaiden;  the  other  from
the  cities,  under  Albrecht  von  Stein.  They
would  submit  to  no  intermixture  with  the  for-
eigner, and  responded  to  the  exhortations  of
their  leaders,  who  sought  to  moderate  their
'impetuosity,  with  shouts  and  curses  ;  according
to  the  plan  of  attack,  the  body  from  the  villages
was  to  have  made  the  first  onset,  and  that  from
the  cities  the  second  ;  but  they  advanced  nearly
in  line,  so  as  to  form  a  right  and  left  wing ;
the  Junkers,  pensioners  and  camp  followers
were  forced  by  the  cries  of  the  multitude  to  ad-
vance into  the  foremost  ranks.  Inspired  by  the
ferocity  of  savages,  rather  than  by  the  noble

enthusiasm  of  heroes,  they  trusted  only  to
themselves  and  despised  all  discipline  and
guidance.  They  knew  that  they  were  merce-
naries, but  every  one  of  them  was  bent  on  do-
ing his  duty :  their  only  thought  was  to  fight
out  the  matter  hand  to  hand  ;  to  earn  the  storm-
ing money  {Sturmgeld),  and  to  conquer  their
old  foes,  the  Swabians — the  Landsknechts.

But  the  camp  upon  which  they  were  now
advancing  was  in  a  better  state  of  defence  .than
any  they  had  before  attacked.  As  they  moved
forward,  their  left  flank  experienced  a  fearful
reception  from  the  enemy's  well-posted  infan-
try, and  the  order  of  battle  was  disturbed  from
that  moment;  the  country  troops  pressed  upon
those  of  the  towns.  As  these,  however,  did
not  give  way,  the  former  recovered  their  ranks,
and,  in  spite  of  the  incessant  fire  of  the  arque-
busiers, both  bodies  Vit  once  charged  the  lines
of  the  imperial  entrenchments.

Seeing  the  enemy  approach,  George  Frunds-
berg  alighted  from  his  horse,  took  a  halberd,
and  placed  himself  in  the  ranks  of  the  lands-
knechts.  They  fell  on  their  knees  and  prayed.
Meanwhile,  the  Swiss  came  on.  "Be  it  so,"
cried  Frundsberg,  "  in  a  good  hour,  and  in
God's  name."  The  landsknechts  sprang  to
their  feet ;  the  Swiss  advanced  in  deep  columns
through  the  ditches  and  hollow  ways  against
the  landsknechts,  and  began  the  fight.  "  Ha  !
do  I  meet  thee  there,  old  comrade  V  exclaimed
Arnold  of  Winkelried,  as  he  caught  sight  of
George  of  Frundsberg,  with  whom  he  had
formerly  served  ;  "  then  by  my  hand  must  thou
die."  "God  willing,"  replied  Frundsberg,
"  thou  by  mine."  Frundsberg  received  a  stab
in  the  thigh  ;  Winkelried  was  struck  to  the
earth  by  a  shot.  The  combatants  rushed  for-
ward into  each  other's  lines,  and  were  mingled
in  one  common  struggle.  The  valour  of  Ru-
dolf Hal  and  of  Castelalt;  of  the  standard-
bearer  Brandesser  and  of  Stralin's  troop,  were
celebrated  in  song  and  story.  But  the  Swiss,
too,  kept  their  ground,  which  was  the  more
remarkable,  as  they  were  not  yet  out  of  the
range  of  the  artillery  ;  they  still  hoped  to  over-
come the  enemy,  spite  of  his  present  advan-
tages.

Meanwhile,  the  French  cavalry  had  made
an  attack  on  the  bridge,  and  had  been  repulsed  ;
their  retreat  had  borne  along  the  troops  in  the
rear.  The  cry  arose,  "  The  rear  is  running  !"
To  the  effect  of  the  artillery,  the  impossibility
of  carrying  the  entrenchments,  and  the  obsti-
nate resistance  of  the  enemy,  was  now  added
the  danger  of  being  abandoned.  The  retreat
of  the  Swiss  was  characterized  by  the  same
impetuosity  as  their  onslaught.  They  left  two
or  three  thousand  men  dead  on  the  field,  but
they  retreated  in  tolerably  good  order.

The  Italian  cavalry  and  the  Spanish  infan-
try now  rushed  out  upon  them  from  behind  the
entrenchments,  but  without  doing  them  much
injury.

Frundsberg,  too,  was  urged  to  pursue  them ;
but  he  was  satisfied  "with  the  repulse  of  so
powerful  an  enemy :  he  said  that  he  had
earned  honour  enough  for, one  day :  he  felt  too

Chap.  I.

CONQUEST  OF  GENOA.

237

sensibly  the  importance  of  the  victory,  to  en-
danger it  by  a  tumultuous  pursuit.*

As  the  military  chest  of  the  French  was  ex-
hausted, the  Swiss  were  no  longer  to  be  kept
in  the  field;  they  betook  themselves  to  their
homes.  The  French,  too,  now  gave  up  the
campaign  as  lost.  At  different  points,  they
found  their  way  back  across  the  Alps.  The
whole  Milanese  territory  fell  once  more  into
the  hands  of  the  Sforzas,  and  acknowledged
the  emperor  as  its  feudal  lord.

This  rendered  it  impossible  for  the  French
party  to  retain  its  footing  in  Genoa.  Unfor-
tunately, hov/ever,  though  powerless  for  any
effectual  resistance,  it  was  powerful  enough  to
prevent  the  conclusion  of  a  treaty,  while  it  v/as
yet  time.  The  city  was  taken  and  given  over
to  pillage.  The  Adorni  now  attained  the  end
w^hich  they  had  aimed  at  from  the  first,  and  got
possession  of  the  government.

In  the  Italian  historians  the  share  taken  in
this  event  by  the  Germans  appears  less  promi-
nent than  it  really  was.  The  historical  ballad, f
however,  circumstantially  relates,  "  hovv'  the
eagle  was  once  more  let  loose,  and  many  a  one
who  had  borne  his  head  high  must  now  cower
'  before  it ;  how  George  Frundsberg  led  an  army
at  the  emperor's  command  towards  the  sea-
coast  to  attack  Genoa :  v/illingly  do  the  lands-
knechts  follow  him;  the  Genoese  feel  that  they
cannot  withstand  the  imperial  crov/n,  but  the
arrival  of  French  succours  under  Peter  Navarra
leads  them  to  attempt  it:  then  the  cannons  are
brought  into  the  field,  and  are  cheerily  served
by  the  landsknechts  ;  there  is  a  skirmish  under
the  walls ;  the  "storming  party  aiTd  the  battle
are  a  sport  to  the  Germans;  it  is  they  who
conquer  the  city."  There  is  no  allusion  what-
ever to  any  foreign  co-operation,  to  a.ny  foreign
leader.  It  is  certain  that  they  had  the  largest
share  both  in  the  victory  and  the  plunder.
"  They  measured  the  broad  cloth  with  their
spears;  they  clothed  themselves  in  silk  and  in
velvet."  A  number  of  the  wealthier  families
of  Genoa  bought  an  exemption  from  pillage.
Frundsberg  was  much  displeased  that  treasure
which  Avould  have  sufficed  to  maintain  the
army  in  the  field  for  months,  fell  into  their
hands  in  so  disorderly  a  manner.  He  selected
out  of  the  booty  a  beautiful  mariner's  compass

*  In  the  account  of  this  battle,  I  have  adhered  to  the
oldest  and  simplest  sources  :  Ansiielm  amon;^  the  Swiss,
Galeazzo  Capra  among  the  Italians  ;  the  Jiistorical  son?
which  I  shall  publish  in  the  Appendi.T,  and  Reissiiers
Historia  der  Frundsberge,  ainongtiie  Germans.  I  am  not
ignorant  of  the  objections  made,  especially  by  Bullinger,
against  certain  passages  of  the  latter.  The  Suiss  wo'uld
not  allow  that  they  had  been  beaten  by  the  landsknechts,
but  replied  to  the  songs  in  which  the  Germans  celebrated
their  deeds,  others  in  which  they  defended  their  own.  One
song  (reprinted  by  Grüneisen,  p.  400,)  by  Nicholas  Manu-
el, which  is  grossly  false,  is  very  well  known.  But  even
there  it  is  not  positively  denied," as  Bullinger  will  have  it,
that  the  combatants  fought  hand  to  hand.  According  to
the  information  brought  the  next  day  by  a  Venetian  spy,
about  lOOa  men  fell  on  the  side  of  the  imperialists.  The
statement  of  Ugo  Foscolo,  in  Sanuto's  Chronicle,  vol.
xxxiii.,  is  by  no  means  clear.  "  Non  si  sa,"  he  finishes
by  saying,  "  chel  causasse,  nostri  si  misseno  a  ritirare  in
gran  disordine."  His  description  certainly  leaves  the
matter  in  complete  obscurity.

t  "  Ein  Hiipsch  neu  lied  von  der  Stat  Genna  und  wie
sy  die  Lantzknecht  erobert  haben."—"  A  pretty  new  song
of  the  city  of  Genoa,  and  how  it  was  conquered  by  the
Landsknechts."— See  Varese,  Storia  di  Geneva,  iv.  p.  315.

for  himself,  as  a  memorial  of  the  day.  Great
as  was  the  loss  of  the  Genoese,  it  did  not  seem
to  affect  them  much  ;  they  had  feared  the  far
more  serious  evil  of  a  shock  to  their  credit.^

Thus  were  these  dependencies  of  the  Impe-
rial Chamber,  Genoa  and  Milan,  after  long
separation,  reannexed :  a  victorious  imperial
army,  m.ore  powerful  than  any  that  had  existed
since  the  time  of  Henry  VI.,  placed  over  them
rulers  recommended  by  their  hereditary  claims,
and  by  their  attachment  to  the  empire.  The
result  was  in  fact  greater  than  the  emperor
expected  —  greater  than  he  would  even  have
ventured  to  aim  at.  At  the  beginning  of  the
year,  he  had  aspired  only  to  gain  over  the
Swiss,  or  even  to  buy  their  services  with  a
yearly  pension;  now,  they  were  defeated  and
repulsed.  The  forces  of  Central  Germany,
which  were  far  more  at  the  emperor's  com-
mand, had  fought  the  battle  and  completed  the
conquest.

And  at  this  moment  the  prospect  and  the  in-
ducement to  enterprises  of  far  wider  reach  pre-
sented themselves  to  his  view.

CAMPAIGN  OF  1523,  1524. ATTACK  ON  FRANCE.

The  claims  of  the  empire  extended  not  alone
to  Italy ;  they  also  embraced  a  large  part  of  the
south  of  France,  nor  had  this  portion  of  them
by  any  means  fallen  into  oblivion.  The  Elec-
tor of  Treves  still  bore  the  title  of  arch-chan-
cellor of  Aries  ;  in  the  year  1401,  Rupert  had
destined  his  son  to  fill  the  post  of  vicar  of  that
kingdom;  in  1444,  Frederic  had  summoned  the
dauphin  to  his  assistance  "  as  the  kinsman  and
vicar  of  the  Holy  Roman  Empire."  At  a  later
period,  it  had  often  been  rehfiarked  that  France
had  neglected  to  renew  its  fief  as  feudatory  of
the  empire.

It  was  likewise  to  be  considered  that  Charles
v.  was  not  merely  emperor;  as  prince  of  Bur-
gundy, he  possessed  other  rights  which  he  had
never  renounced ;  he  never  ceased  to  demand
the  restitution  of  the  French  possessions  which
had  been  wrested  from  his  house ;  the  blood
and  the  spirit  of  one  of  the  ancient  vassals  of
France  still  lived  in  him.

For  his  schemes  on  this  side  the  Alps,
Charles  nov/  found  as  powerful  an  ally  in
Henry  VIII.  of  England  as,  for  those  on  the
other,  in  the  pope.  Henry,  too,  had  not  for-
gotten the  ancient  claims  of  his  predecessors
on  France;  he  still  retained  the  title  which  ex-
pressed them,  and  Calais  was  still  in  the  hands
of  the  English.  Immediately  after  the  con-
clusion of  the  treaty  at  Bruges,  in  which  the
emperor  and  the  king  mutually  promised  to
maintain  their  claims  by  force  of  arms,  with
combined  efforts  by  sea  and  land,  V^olsey  laid
before  his  master  a  long  list  of  provinces,
towns,  and  castles  which  he  meditated  wrest-
ing from  the  French. §  In  the  correspondence
of  the  king  with  the  cardinal,  it  is  seriously
proposed  that  he  should  invade  France  in  per-
son ;||  and  this  project  is  given  as  a  reason  for

I  Polydorus  Virgilius,  Hist.  Angl.  27,  64.

§  Pace  to  Wolsey,  10th  Sept,  1521. See  State  Papers,
p.  52.

II  Wolsey  to  Henry,  Sept.  1522. Ibid.  p.  107.

238

DESIGNS  OF  ENGLAND.  — BOURBON.

Book  IV.

endeavouring'  to  keep  the  Scottish  border  at
peace.  At  one  time,  the  English  were  inclined
to  confine  themselves  within  the  part  of  France
nearest  to  them,  from  Calais  to  the  Somme,  as
being  easier  to  maintain  than  the  more  distant
Guyenne  ;  but  occasionally  the  idea  of  placing
the  crown  of  France  on  his  own  head  floated
before  Henry's  imagination.  On  hearing  a
report  of  the  bad  state  of  things  in  that  coun-
try, he  exclaimed  that  "  they  were  making  a
way  for  him  there,  as  King  Richard  III.  had
done  for  his  father  in  England  :*  he  trusted
he  should  govern  France  himself."  These
thoughts  w-ere  sedulously  fostered  by  Leo,
who  caused  a  draft  of  a  bull  to  be  prepared,  in
which  he  formally  released  the  subjects  of
Francis  I.  from  their  oath  of  fidelity. "j-  On  the
other'hand,  the  king,  as  well  as  the  emperor,
promised  him  aid  against  the  heretics. :[:  It
forms  a  link  in  this  chain  of  circumstances,
that  Henry  VIIL— like  his  cardinal,  a  zealous
adherent  of  Thomas  Aquinas  — broke  a  lance
with  Luther,  in  behalf  of  that  great  teacher  of
the  church  :  he  was  delighted  with  the  favour-
able reception  his  book  experienced  in  Rome,§
and  with  the  title'  of  Defender  of  the  Faith
which  it  procured  him.

In  March,  1522,  Henry  VIIL  caused  war  to
be  proclaimed  against  the  King  of  France,  by
his  herald.  Already  the  English  merchants
had  left  the  ports,  and  the  English  students
the  universities,  of  France  ;  very  little  English
property  fell  into  Francis's  hands.  In  .Tune,
Lord  Surrey,  admiral  of  both  the  imperial  and
the  English  fleets,  made  an  attack  on  the
coast  near  Cherbourg;  in  September,  an  army
from  England  and  the  Netherlands  joined  and
invaded  Picardy  ;  but  no  considerable  results
ensued  either  there  or  elsewhere  :  a  fev/  towns
were  plundered,  and  some  small  districts  laid
waste  ;  then  came  the  unfavourable  time  of
year,  and  the  troops  retreated.

Much  more  brilliant  were  the  prospects  which
opened  on  the  campaign  of  the  following  year
(1523).  As  in  the  earlier  times  of  the  monar-
chy, a  powerful  vassal  of  the  French  crown
took  part  with  its  foes.  The  constable  Bour-
bon, the  second  man  in  the  realm,  proffered
his  assistance  to  the  emperor  and  the  king.
This  fact  is  of  so  general  an  interest,  that  we
may  be  excused  for  dwelling  upon  it  somewhat
at  length,  even  in  a  German  history.

Louis  XL,  who  had  already  found  means  to
reduce  to  subjection  so  many  of  the  territories
of  the  great  vassals,  had  also  meditated  a
scheme  for  bringing  about  the  escheat  of  the
possessions  of  the  house  of  Bourbon  to  the
crown. On  the  marriage  of  his  daughter  with

*  MoretoWolsey,  p.  111.  "Tlie  kinges  grace  saied  that
he  trusted  in  God  "to  be  theyre  governour  liym  selfe,  and
that  tliey  shold  bv  tliys  meanvs  make  a  way  for  hyui,  as?
King  Richard  did  for  his  father."  21st  Sept.  1522.  No
one  will  believe  that  this  was  the  first  time  such  an  idea
crossed  his  mind.

t  "  Excommunicatio  lata  per  Iseonem.  Papara  X.  contra
Franciscum  I.  .  .  .  qua  etiam  subditos  ejos  plcnissime
ahsolvit  ab  omni  fide  itatis  nexu  et  juramento.  4th  Sept.
3521."— Z)m  Mont,  Supplement,  iii.  p.  70.

~J  Herbert,  Life  of  Henry  VIIL,  p.  118.

§  Pace  to  Wolsey,  27th  Oct.  1521.  "  Itt  is  to  Hys  Graces
grete  contentacion  and  comforte."

Pierre  de  Bourbon-Beaujeu,  he  extorted  from
that  prince  a  promise  that,  in  default  of  male
issue,  he  would  leave  to  the  crown  all  the  pos-
sessions of  his  house  which  were  alienable. H
A  younger  branch  of  the  house  still  flourished
in  the  person  of  the  Count  de  Montpensier,
whom  it  was  the  king's  intention  to  exclude
from  the  succession.

After  some  time,  the  event  which  had  been
foreseen  actually  occurred;  Duke  Peter  died'
and  left  only  one  daughter.  Countess  Susanna.

Meanwhile,  however,  Louis  XII.  had  as-
cended the  throne,  and  was  not  inclined  rigidly
to  enforce  the  claims  of  the  crown,  acquired
by  such  questionable  means.  '  He  recognised
the  feudal  rights  of  the  house  of  Montpensier,
nor  did  he  contest  certain  of  the  hereditary
claims  of  the  surviving  princess  ;  in  order  to
prevent  all  dispute,  he  brought  about  a  mar-
riage between  the  young  Count  Charles  de
Montpensier  and  the  Countess  Susanna,  and
their  rights  were  completely  blended  by  a  mu-
tual donation  founded  on  a  prudent  and  equi-
table basis. ^

Such  was  the  origin  of  the  vast  power  of
Charles,  Duke  of  Bourbon.  He  united  in  his
person  two  principalities,  two  duchies,  four
counties,  two  vis-counties,  and  seven  consider-
able lordships;  his  inpome  was  reckoned  at
120,000  crowns;  far  more  than  the  richest  of
German  princes  then  possessed.  He  had
strong  places  garrisoned  by  his  troops ;  he
convoked  his  states,  and  levied  taxes ;  to
crown  all,  King  Francis  revived  the  dig-
nity of  constable  in  his  person.  Lie  was
brave,  bountiful,  and  affable;  and  since  he  had
succeeded  in  repulsing  Maximilian's  attack  on
Milan  in  the  year  1516,  he  enjoyed  the  univer-
sal respect  both  of  the  army  and  the  nation.
Even  then  his  thoughts  took  the  highest  flights ;
the  lineal  succession  to  the  throne  was  by  no
means  secure;  he  hoped  in  time  to  ascend  it
himself.  The  family  of  Alencon^  indeed,  pos-
sessed nearer  claims  ;  but  he  flattered  himself
that  these  had  been  forfeited  by  the  former  re-
bellion of  that  line.  He  even  went  so  far  as
to  solicit  the  support  of  the  republic  of  Venice,
in  case  of  the  king's  death.'^

Events  however  took  a  totally  different
course.  The  succession  to  the  throne  becam.e
more  secure ;  the  government  w^as  entirely  in
the  hands  of  the  confidential  servants  of  the
king  and  his  mother.  Bourbon  was  recalled
from  Milan,  and  excluded  from  any  share  in
affairs  of  state  at  home  ;  in  the  very  next  cam-
paign, that  of  the  Netherlands,  the  privileges
of  constable  were  no  longer  granted  him.  He
m/ight  already  be  regarded  as  leader  of  the  nu-
merous malcontents  created  by  the  disorders  in

II  "  En  tant  qu'il  le  touchoit  on  pourroit  toucher,  que
tous  les  duchez,  contez  et  vicomtez  de  la  Maison  de  Bour-
bon, advenant  qu'il  n'eust  enfans  inasles  de  son  mar-
riage, appartinssent  au  Roi." — Extract  from  the  original
document  in  Pasquier,  Recherclies  de  la  France,  vi.  c.  xi.

TT  Notestaken  especially  from  Badoer,  Relatione  di  M.-
lano,  in  Sanuto's  Chronicle.  Bourbon  explained  these
claims  to  the  envoy,  adding, —  "  perho  in  quel  caso  la
serma  Signoria  volesse  ajutarlo."  Badoer  describes  him
thus:  "Prosperoso,  traze  i;n  pallo  di  ferro  molto  gaiarda-
mente,  teme  dio,  e  devoto,  piatoso,  humano  e  liberalis-
simo."

Chap.  I.

ATTACK  ON  FRANCE,  1523.

239

the  government  of  Francis  I.,  when,  in  the  year
1522,  his  proud  and  splendid  station  was  threat-
ened by  overwhelming'  danger.

His  v/ife,  Susanna,  died  without  issue  ;  and
although  she  had  confirmed  by  fresh  acts  the
donations  made  to  him  at  her  marriage,  the
most  formidable  pretensions  to  her  inheritance
were  immediately  put  forward.

The  king's  mother,  Louisa  of  Savoy,  niece
of  Duke  Peter,  and  hence  a  member  of  the  elder
line,  made  a  general  demand  to  enter  upon  all
the  rights  enjoyed  by  Susanna;  but  scarcely
was  her  suit  commenced,  when  the  Crown  itself
came  forward  with  still  more  sweeping  claims ;
allegin^g  not  only  the  promise  made  by  Count
Peter,  but  a  multitude  of  other  very  plausible
titles.  The  more  clear  and  incontestable  of
these  were  soon  declared  valid  ;  and  even  with
regard  to  the  others,  the  parliament  could  give
no  other  advice  to  the  duke  than  that  he  should
endeavour  to  come  to  some  arrangement  with
the  adverse  party.*  The  constable  saw  him-
self in  imminent  danger  of  sinking  to  the  rank
of  an  insignificant  Count  of  IViontpensier.  But
to  this  he  Vv'as  determined  not  tamely  to  submit.
He  addressed  himself  to  that  house  which  was
then  preparing  to  avenge  on  the  crown  of
France  the  violated  and  oppressed  rights  of  the
great  vassals.  It  was  not  the  emperor  who
sought  him ;  the  first  advances  were  made  by
Bourbon;  and  at  the  same  moment  in  which
his  suit  began,  in  the  month  of  August,  1522,
he  sent  Adrian  de  Beaurain  to  the  court  of  the
Netherlands,  where  the  only  surprise  expressed
by  Margaret  was,  that  he  had  so  much  confi-
dence in  so  young  a  man.]"  The  more  perilous
and  uncertain  the  aspect  of  his  legal  affairs,  the
more  earnestly  did  he  prosecute  this  negotia-
tion. To  the  emperor  and  king  nothing  could
be  more  welcome.  Beaurain  went  backwards
and  forwards  several  times,  and,  at  a  later  pe-
riod, Sir  John  Russell  visited  the  constable  in
disguise,  on  the  part  of  Henry  VÜL^:  It  was
agreed  that  a  German  army  should  invade  Bur-
gundy, a  Spanish,  Languedoc,  and  an  English,
Picardy,  at  the  same  moment,  and  that  Bour-
bon should  declare  himself  independent.  He
flattered  himself  that  he  should  be  able  to  bring
into  the  field  500  men  at  arms  and  10,000  foot
soldiers. The  emperor  promised  to  give  him

*  Gaillanl  (Histoire  de  Frfincois  I.)  has  piven  a  fuller
description  of  the  passion  said  to  bo  entertained  by  Louisa
for  the  Constable  Bourbon.  liis  remarks  on  the  suit  it-
self in  the  Appendix  have  somewhat  more  valne;  yet
even  on  this  snl)ject  he  is  far  surjiassed  by  Gamier,  vol.
xxiv.  p.  17.  Neither  does  Sismoudi  make  the  real  mo-
tives sülTiciently  clear.

t  Notices  from  the  Austrian  Archives  in  Hormayr's
Archiv,  for  the  year  1810. No.  6.

f  Herbert,  Records,  p.  119.  According  to  the  extracts
in  Hormayr  (p.  27.\  the  matter  was  not  ofiicially  an-
nounced to  the  English  court  before  the  1st  June,  1523;
and,  if  I  am  not  mistaken,  it  was  to  this  that  Wolsey's
undated  letter  among  the  State  Papers  refers  (No.  78.  p.
143 ).  For  what  else  can  the  "  mervailous  fordell"  mean,
tlie  like  of  wliich  was  not  to  be  expected,  "for  the  at-
teynino-  of  FrauFice  ?"  The  leajriie  was  siffned  the  begin-
ninir,  of  Ansust  (letter  of  De  Praet,  dated  9th  Auglist.
Ibid.)  It  were  much  to  bo  wished  that  the  authentic  in-
strument itself  could  be  produced.  The  letters  of  Wolsey
to  the  Enjriish  envoys  in  Spain,  Sampson  and  Jerning-
liam.  in  Fiddes'  Collection,  appended  to  his  Life  of  Wol-
sey, No.  69.  and  70.,  give  in  greater  detail,  the  plans  of
that  period.  The  precise  terms  of  the  treaty  I  have,  how-
ever, sought  there  in  vain.

his  sister  in  -marriage,  and  to  raise  him  to  the
kingly  rank ;  while  he,  on  his  side,  promised
to  acknowledge  the  king  of  England  as  his
suzerain,  if  the  emperor  should  desire  it.

Francis  I.  had  just  formed  the  determination,
since  his  general  had  been  so  unforfinate,  to
make  another  attempt  in  person  on  Milan.  A
magnificent  army  was  assembled,  and  Admiral
Bonnivet,  who  commanded  the  vanguard,  had
already  advanced  to  occupy  the  passes  of  the
Alps  :  the  king  set  out  to  follow  him.  The
allies  intended  to  put  their  plan  in  execution  as
soon  as  he  should  have  left  France.

But  the  affair  was  already  known  to  too  many
not  to  transpire.  The  court  of  the  Netherlands
feared  it  might  get  wind  from  England  ;  the
English  court,  from  the  Netherlands :  even  in
France  itself,  the  conspirators  had  been  com-
pelled to  communicate  it  to  some  not  perfectly
trustworthy  persons.  In  short,  the  king's  sus-
picions v/ere  excited,  and  Bourbon  had  to  es-
teem himself  fortunate  that  he  was  able  to
escape.  The  king  was  induced  by  these  cir-
cumstances to  commit  the  army  of  Italy  to  the
sole  command  of  the  admiral,  and  to  remain  at
his  post,  to  take  measures  of  defence  against
the  various  dangers  with  which  his  kingdom
was  threatened,  from  within  as  well  as  from
Vv-ithout.

Bourbon  fled  through  Besancon  to  the  coun-
try of  Pßrt,  whence  he  projected  making  an
immediate  descent  upon  France.  A  few  thou-
sand landsknechts  under  the  Count  of  Fürst-
enberg entered  Champagne,  and  occupied  some
fortified  towns  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Chau-
mont  and  Langres  ;§  Bourbon's  idea  had  al-
v.-ays  been  that  the  English  should,  at  the  same
time,  advance  as  far  as  possible  into  the  heart
of  the  kingdom,  carefully  abstaining  from  plun-
der, and  appearing  only  in  the  character  of
liberators  from  the  tyranny  of  Francis  I.  Then
he  thought,  every  town  would  open  its  gates
to  them.jl  But  the  landsknechts  were  soon  com-
pelled to  retreat,  by  want  of  money  and  pro-
visions ;  the  combined  array  of  English  and
Netherlanders  continued  its  march  through  Pi-
cardy, and,  for  a  moment,  struck  terror  into
Paris :  but  its  leaders  followed  the  traditional
mode  of  warfare,  and  it  could  no  where  obtain
a  Arm  footing.  The  v^-arlike  ardour  of  the
Spaniards  expended  itself  before  Fuenterrabia,
which  the  French  had  taken.  Bourbon  per-
ceived that  he  could  accomplish  nothing  for  the
present  on  this  side  the  Alps,  and  repaired  to
Italy.

Italy  was  destined  to  he  again  the  field  where
the  fortune  of  war  was  to  he  decided.

When  Bonnivet  appeared  in  Lombardy  with
the  fine  army  which  the  king  had  raised  to
revive  his  fame  and  regain  his  conquests  (it
was  estimated  at  30,000"foot  and  4000  horse),
the  imperialists  were  unable  to  contest  the  pas-

5  Bellay,  Memoires,  i.  p.  294.  Petri  Martyris  Epp.  No.
790.,  who  thinks  that  attempts  were  made  to  bribe  the
German  commanders.

II  More  to  Wolsey,  20th  Sept.  St.  P.  p.  139.  "  The  duke
adviseth  that  the  Kinges  army  shall  in  the  marching  pro-
clayme  libertie,  sparing  the  cuntre  frohurning  and  spoile.
The  king  thought  tliat  they  would  soon  exclaim,  'Home  !
home!'  if  they  should  also  forbere  t^eprofite  of  the  spoile,"

240

CAMPAIGN  IN  ITALY,  1524.

Book  IV.

sage  of  the  Tessino,  or  to  meet  it  in  the  open
country.  Prospero  Colonna  was  compelled  to
confine  himself  to  the  defence  of  the  four  most
important  fortified  towns— Como,  Cremona,
Milan  and  Pavia.

Fortuna^ly  he  had  now  nothing  to  fear  from
the  Italian  states  usually  in  alliance  with
France.  Immediately  before  the  arrival  of  the
French  army,  the  emperor  had  concluded  an
anti-Frsnch  alliance  with  the  Italian  powers.
It  was  of  great  advantage  to  him  that  his  old
preceptor,  Adrian,  now  filled  the  papal  chair:
and  as  he  entirely  disclaimed  all  the  plans  of
conquest  of  his  predecessors — for  example,  the
designs  upon  Ferrara — the  emperor  on  his  side
renounced  all  views  on  Venice  :  the  Venetians
entered  into  alliance  with  the  emperor,  the  pope
and  the  king  of  England,*  and  promised  to
protect  Sforza  in  his  duchy.

Every  thing  now  depended  on  th-e  Milanese,
and  it  was  deemed  expedient,  as  the  French
were  advancing,  to  learn  their  dispositions.
They  again  declared  their  entire  devotion  to
the  duke  and  the  empire.  At  the  first  sound
of  the  bells  on  the  22d  of  September,  they
flocked  in  as  great  numbers  as  ever  to  the  ap-
pointed place  of  meeting ;  most  of  them  in  fall
armour,  many  who  had  come  in  haste,  unarm-
ed.f  The  duke  rode  among  the  assembled
crowd.  He  told  them  he  would  govern  them
with  the  mildness  and  magnanimity  of  his  fore-
\  fathers;  and  they,  on  their  side,  declared  their
willingness  to  defend  his  cause.  The  aged
Prospero  Colonna  was  a  man  exactly  formed
to  keep  alive  these  sentiments.  He  enjoyed
the  reputation  of  being  equally  zealous  for  the
happiness  of  his  country,  and  for  the  power
and  glory  of  the  empire.  Am^idst  the  horrors
.  and  calamities  of  war,  he  had  ever  appeared  in
the  character  of  protector  of  the  citizen  and  the
peasant.  Now,  too,  he  was  intent  upon  the
common  good.  There  had  been  time  to  lay  in
abundant  stores  for  the  winter;  handmills  and
windmills  had  been  erected  within  the  walls,
and  there  was  wine  in  profusion.  The  fortifi-
cations, spite  of  the  great  circumference  of  the
city,  were  in  admirable  order.  Sorties  v/ere
daily  made,  and  rarely  without  the  capture  of
prisoners :  the  people  were  grown  so  daring
that  they  often  begged  for  leave  to  go  out  in  a
mass  to  attack  the  French.^:

Even  independently  of  these  adverse  circum-
stances, Bonnivet  saw  himself  compelled  by
frost  and  snow  to  raise  the  siege,  and  already
other  and  far  more  formidable  forces  were  ga-
thering around  him.

By. degrees  the  newly  recruited  Italian  infan-
try arrived ;  Lannoy,  the  Viceroy  of  Naples,
brought  up  light  and  heavy  cavalry ;  the  Ve-

*  We  see  in  Partita,  p.  217.,  that  refrard  tn  England  on
commsrcial  grounds  had  considerable  eiTect  here.  Wolsey
said  "plainly  to  liis  master  that  the  treaty  had  come  to
jiass,  "  by  "your  mediacion  and  moost  for  your  sake."—
Ä>fe  Papers^  No.  66.

t,Lettera  di  Milano,  narra  quelli  successi  de  dl  16  Stt.
a  dl  22. Sanuto's  Chronicle,  vol.  XXXV.

J  Lettera  di  Grotiani,  21  Ott.  in  Sanuto.  "  Tanto  sti-
mano  Francesi  e  Sgnizari  come  se  fussero  tante  pultane."
As  to  the  mention  of  scarcity  in  Milan  alluded  to,  this
could  only  refer  to  the  first  days,  before  every  thing  was
fully  arranged.  See  Gal.  Capella  and  Carpesanus,  p.  1356.

netians  appeared  in  the  field  :  but  the  most  im-
portant reinforcement  consisted  of  7000  lands-
knechts,  whom  the  Archduke  Ferdinand§  had
taken  infinite  pains  to  get  together  under  Lud-
wig von  Lodron  and  Eitelfritz  von  Zollern.
George  Frundsberg  had  remained  at  home,  but
had  sent  his  son  Caspar  in  his  place.  Some
enterprising  chiefs  like  Schärtlin  von  Burten-
bach,  came  at  their  own  charges.  The, Mar-
quis of  Pescara,  too,  who  commanded  the
Spanish  infantry  with  the  sam.e  singular  and
instinctive  talent  as  Frundsberg  the  German,
came  again.  Fortunately,  he  arrived  just  at
the  moment  of  Prospero's  death,  in  consequence
of  which  the  conduct  of  things  devolved  mainly
upon  him. f

If,  however,  the  imperial  army  was  once
more  in  a  condition  to  meet  the  enemy  in  the
field,  it  had  not  a  moment  to  lose  ;  since  he  too
expected  reinforcements  which  would  restore
to  him  his  former  superiority.  The  king  had
concluded  a  new  treaty  with  the  Grisons ;  the
Bernese  aided  him  with  money,  and  considera-
ble bodies  of  men  were  on  their  way  from  both
countries.

Nevertheless,  the  imperialists  and  their  allies
did  not  yet  deem  it  expedient  to  venture  on  a
battle;  the  Venetian  Provveditore  was  espe-
cially opposed  to  it.  "I  do  not  believe,  how-
ever," said  the  general-in-chief  of  the  Vene-
tians, the  Duke  of  Urbino,  to  the  Provveditore,
Pier  de  cha  Pesaro,  "  I  do  not  believe  that  the
republic  maintains  so  many  caparisoned  horses,
so  large  a  body  of  infantry,  and  all  these  arms
which  glitter  around  us,  for  any  other  reason
than  to  do  battle  when  it  is  needful."  "  My
lord,"  replied  the  Provveditore,  "  wh^t  advan-
tage v/ould  it  be  to  the  republic  if  we  fought  1
A  defeat  would  endanger  all  her  possessions:
victory  cannot  escape  us  if  we  do  not  fight.
Were  the  emperor  here  in  person,  he  would  not
give  battle."  This  opinion,  which  convinced
the  general,  prevailed  in  every  council  of  war
from  that  time.  It  was  agreed  not  to  attempt
to  overcome  the  enemy  by  open  attack,  but  by
strategy.

While  one  division  of  the  army  posted  itself
in  the  territory  of  Como  and  Bergamo  to  keep
off  the  Grison  troops,  the  main  force,  accom-
panied by  Bourbon,  who  was  now  invested
with  the  rank  of  Lieutenant  of  the  empire,
crossed  the  Tessino  near  Pavia,  and,  by  an
unexpected  attack,  took  the  fortress  of  Garlasco
which  comm,anded  all  the  surrounding  country.
This  compelled  Bonnivet  to  retreat  across  the
Tessino,  and  to  abandon  his  strong  encamp-
ment of  Abbiate-Grasso,  that  he  might  at  least
defend  Vigevene,  and  the  fertile  plains  of  the
Lomellino,  whence  he  drew  his provisions, !|

§  For  this  the  emperor  afterwards  thanked  him.  Let-
ter in  Bucholtz,  ii.  p.  264.

li'Galeazzo  Capella,  lib.  iii.  p.  191,  from  whom  most
other  writers  have  drawn  their  information.  Even  Du
Bellay's  is  only  a  version  of  Capelia's  text,  with  some
French  additions.  Anshelm  introduces  some  particulara
about  the  Swiss,  and  Sandoval  some,  but  very  few,  ;ibout
the  Spaniards.  In  other  respects  they  both  merely  trans-
late him.  It  is  a  great  pity  that  no  one  who  knew  the
deeds  of  the  Landsknechts  took  the  trouble  of  supplying
the  deficiencies  in  bis  narrative. Hence  we  know  no-

Chap.  I.

ATTACK  ON  FRANCE,  1524.

241

The  imperialists  immediately  crossed  the
Gogna  and  took  Sartirana.  Whilst  Bonnivet,
menaced  in  his  new  position,  as  he  had  been
in  his  former  one,  prepared  to  drive  them
thence,  they  got  possession  of  Yercelli,  by  the
favour  of  the  Ghibelline  faction  of  the  town,
'  and  by  that  means  obtained  a  footing  on  the
other  side  the  Sesia,  so  as  to  cut  off  the  admi-
ral from  the  base  of  his  operations.  He  had
now  nothing  left  but  to  retreat  to  the  Upper
Sesia,  towards  Gattinara,  where  a  new  body
of  Swiss  were  just  arrived  from  Ivrea.  He
still  did  not  relinquish  the  hope,  with  this  rein-
forcement, of  turning  round  upon  the  enemy
and  once  more  offering  him  battle.  But  even
on  his  road  he  found  the  smaller  places  occu-
"  pied  by  the  imperialists.  When  he  reached
the  banks  of  the  Sesia,  the  Swiss  refused  to
cross  to  him,  and  he  ws.^  obliged  to  take  mea-
sures for  transporting  his  troops  over  the  river.
While  thus  engaged,  he  was  attacked  by
Pescara  ;  universal  confusion  ensued  ;  the
bridge  broke  down ;  Gattinara  was  in  flames  ;
'  and,  insignificant  as  was  the  number  of  the
imperialists  on  the  other  side  the  river  (about
a  thousand  light  horse  and  the  same  number
of  foot),  the  loss  of  the  French  w'as  immense;
nothing  remained  for  them  but  once  more  to
abandon  Italy.  It  w"as  evident  that  the  mode
of  warfare  by  which  they  had,  within  the  last
thirty  years,  obtained  such  brilliant  triumphs
in  Italy,  was  no  longer  available.  Single  deeds
of  arms,  momentary  advantages,  chivalrous
bravery,  no  longer  decided  the  fortune  of  a
war.  The  awakened  national  antipathy  ren-
dered a  more  o'bslinate  and  regular  sj'^stem  of
defence  possible  :  in  the  field,  the  calculations
of  strategy  and  the  skilful  use  of  the  arquebuss
carried  all  before  them.  In  this  retreat  fell,
among  other  distinguished  men,  the  good
knight — the  knight  without  fear  and  without
reproach — Bayard,  who  united  i«  his  own  per-
son all  the  fair  and  glorious  qualities  of  knight-
hood, and  presented  them,  for  the  last  time,
to  the  admiration  of  friend  and  foe.  He  had
alwa)^  hated  the  arquebusiers  with  all  his
heart,  and  reluctantly  granted  quarter  to  one
who  fell  into  his  hands :  he  was  doomed  to
receive  his  death  from  a  bullet*  There  is
something  at  once  symbolical,  and  ominous  of
universal  change  in  this  death,  which  has  been
dwelt  on  emphatically  by  so  many  historians  ;
and,  indeed,  in  the  defeat  of  this  chivalrous
army  altogether.  Like  the  fall  of  Sickingen,
they  were  expressions  of  a  great  revolution  in

thin»  more  of  them  in  this  campaign  than  what  we
gather  from  the  life  of  Sebastian  Schürtlin.

*  I  will  not  dwell  long  on  the  circumstances  attending
his  death;  the  rather,  because  they  appear  to  me  doubt-
ful. The  French  (Bellay,  342.)  rela'te  that  Bourbon  spoke
to  Iiim  during  his  last  moments,  and  that  Bayard  re-
proached him  with  his  treason.  It  is  remarkable  that  v/e
lind  nothing  of  this  in  the  Ufa  of  Bayard,  Coll.  Univ.  xv.
p.  412.  But  in  Italy  exactly  the  reverse  was  related, —
that  he  died  lamenting  the  injustice  of  the  king  and  the
disorders  prevailing  in  the  French  government.  Carpe-
sanus,  p.  1375:  "  (iuestus  de  injusta  in  Borboaium  ira,'de
fortuna  et  male  animatorum  hominum  factiorie  cuncta
in  Gallia  permiscente."  Kis  feelings  may  have  vibrated
between  the  two  sentiments  here  expressed,  and  both
may  be  true.  Lastly,  the  Spaniards  make  him  praise  God
that  he  died,  "  en  servicio  de  su  rey  y  a  manos  de  la  mejor
Bacion  del  mmido."—Batalla  de  Pahia.  MS.  Mh,

31  V

human  affairs.  The  coat  of  mail  was  con-
quered by  the  musket,  and  the  massive  wall
of  the  castle  fell  prostrate  before  the  cannon.

The  landsknechts  took  a  very  active  part  in
the  pursuit.  Sebastian  Schärtlin  relates  that
for  three  days  and  three  nights  they  followed
the  enemy  to  the  foot  of  St.  Bernard  ;  they
dragged  the  cannon  they  had  taken,  crowned
with  garlands,  from  the  valley  of  Aosta  to  the
camp.  All  the  places  which  the  French  still
possessed  in  Italy  immediately  surrendered  ;
their  defeat  was  as  complete  as  it  was  possible
to  imagine.

As  a  sort  of  necessary  consequence,  the
thought  immediately  arose  in  the  minds  of  the
conquerors,  that  the  attack  on  France,  which
had  failed  a  year  ago,  might  now  be  attempted
with  greater  prudence  and  success.  Bourbon
found  the  imperial  army  in  admirable  order,
while  his  bravery  excited  their  respect  and
confidence.

The^  state  of  Italy,  too,  seemed  to  render
aggressive  measures  necessar}^  Either  peace
must  be  obtained  (of  which  there  seemed  little
prospect), f  or  employment  must  be  found  for.
the  King  of  France.  Lannoy  wrote  to  the  em-
peror, that  the  Duke  of  IMilan  would  be  a  costly
bargain  to  him,  if  he  could  not  succeed  in  clip-
ping the  wings  of  his  restless  neighbour.  The
emperor  reflected  that  it  would  be  better  tc
seek  the  enemy  in  his  own  country  than  to
await  him  in  Ital}^  where  the  army  must  be
kept  together  at  great  expense,  and  gave  his
consent.

On  this  occasion,  as  formerly,  the  idea  of
attacking  France  at  various  points  was  enter-
tained, but  after  the  experience  of  theVormer
year,  v,'as  quickly  abandoned.  None  of  the
parties  concerned  had  money  enough.  They
esteemed  themselves  fortunate  if  they  could
raise  sufficient  funds  to  keep  the  army  of  Italy
quiet  for  a  few  months.  Bourbon  hoped  to  ac-
complish the  most  brilliant  achievements  with
this  alone.

"  Your  affairs,  sire,"  says  he,  in  a  letter  to
the  emperor,  "  will  prosper.  If  we  are  able  to
give  battle  to  the  King  of  France,  and  win  it?,
as  I  hope,  you  v/ill  be  the  greatest  man  that
ever  lived,  and  will  give  laws  to  the  world."!:

In  July,  1524,  Bourborf  therefore  led  the  im.-
perial  army,  5000  Germans  under  Zollern  and
Lodron,  3000  Spaniards  under  Pescara,  and  a
number  of  Italians,  from  Italy  into  France.
Francis  had  no  inclination  to  meet  these  war-
like and  victorious  bands  in  the  open  field.
Bourbon  met  with  no  resistance,  invested  An-
tibes,  Frejus,  Hieres,  and  Toulon,  and  caused
them  to  do  homage  to  him.  He  bore  the  title
of  Count  of  Provence,  but  had  taken  the  oath
of  vassalage  to  the  King  of  England.§ On

t  The  Instruction  secrete,  <&:c.,  in  Bucholtz,  ii.  p.  503.
cannot  deceive  us  on  this  point.  The  multitude  of  sug-
gestions—and there  are  no  less  than  nine— shows  how
impracticable  each  was.  Peter  Martyr  observes  this  very
justly  in  his  Epp.  798,  p.  472,  July,  1524 ; "Temperate

hujus  tam  incompcsiti  psalterii  chordas Dira  ferri

acies  et  humane  cruore  fiuentes  rivi  has  diriment  que-
relas."

X  Extract  in  Bucholtz,  ii.  p.  263.

§Guicciardini  says  indeed  (xiv.  p.  448),  "  Borbone  con-
stantemente  ricuso  di  riconoscere  il  re  d'Inghilterra." P.

242

ATTACK  ON  FRANCE,  1524.

Book  IV,

the  9th  of  August,  he  took  Aix,  the  chief  town
of  the  province,  and  on  the  19th  arrived  before
Marseilles,  well  knowinor  that  all  his  other
successes  were  useless  if  he  did  not  obtain
possession  of  that  fortified  city.  He  felt  of
what  incalculable  value  it  would  be  to  the  em-
peror to  command  a  harbour  of  such  import-
ance between  Barcelona  and  Genoa.  Marseilles
would  form  the  true  defence  of  Italy,  and  an
incomparable  basis  for  all  future  operations
against  France.  Beaurain  had  entertained  the
design  of  putting  Toulon  in  a  state  of  defence
for  the  emperor,  but  he  was  utterly  without  the
means.*  These  things  increased  the  ardour
with  which  the  army  engaged  in  the  siege  of
jMarseilles.

Now,  however,  it  became  evident  how  greatly
times  had  altered  in  France.  Italians  who  knew
the  country,  such  as  Ludovico  Canossa,  Bishop
of  Bayeux,  had  always  predicted  this  change. f
Spite  of  the  many  causes  of  discontent  afforded
by  the  king,  it  yet  appeared  that  he  was  the
object  of  genera]  adoration.  On  the  other  hand,
Bourbon  had  lost  all  credit  by  his  treason.  It
must  be  considered  that  Bourbon's  influence,
powerful  as  he  was,  had  not  been  of  sufficient
duration  to  acquire  much  strength :  in  most
of  his  possessions  he  was  a  new  master ;  nor
was  there  any  man  of  importance  so  indepen-
dent of  the  crown  as  to  venture  to  embrace  his
cause.  This  conjuncture  suffices  to  prove  to
what  an  extent  the  consolidation  of  France  had
Ifeeen  silently  advancing  to  its  completion.  Not
alone  did  no  one  rise  in  Bourbon's  favour,  but
the  attack  secured  to  the  king  more  implicit
obedience  and  more  cordial  loyalty  than  had
been  yielded  him  before.  He  was  able  to  levy
three  extremely  heavy  taxes,  amounting  in  all
to  five  millions,  one  after  the  other.  Tlie  clergy
consented  to  raise  contributions;  the  good  cities
granted  voluntary  aids  ;  even  the  nobility  was
fain  to  submit  to  forced  loans.  What  could
the  tardy  and  doubtful  payments,  laboriousl}^
obtained  from  Spain  or  from  England,  effect
against  such  abundant  pecuniary  resources  1^
Francis  brought  an  army  into  the  field  which
:might  vie  with  any  former  one  in  magnificence ;

33  nevertheless  not  the  less  certain  that  he  did  take  the
oaths,  as  is  stated  by  Herbert  (p.  133),  and  as  we  learn
■beyond  a  doubt  from  a  l^ter  of  De  Praet  in  Hormayr  (p.
27).  The  King  of  Enfrlandvvas  besides  fully  in  the  secret
of  the  undertaking.  Richard  Pace  told  the  Venetian  Su-
riano,  that  his  monarch  had  empowered  him,  by  a  letter
of  the  28th  June,  to  strengthen  Bourbon  in  his  intentions  ;
indeed,  that  Cardinal  Wolsey  had  offered  on  the  28th
Sept.  to  cause  a  landing  tobe  attempted,  if  that  might  be
of  any  assistance.  Pace  excuses  himself  for  not  accu-
rately staling  the  amount  of  the  succours,  on  the  ground
that  the  emperor  had  not  always  done  so.  In  the  mean
while  we  know  that  John  Russell  brought  20,000^.  into
the  camp  before  Marseilles,  That  Pace  went  very  honest-
ly to  work,  is  evident  from  this;  that,  spite  of  all  appear-
ances, he  expressed  a  certain  suspicion  of  the  good  inten-
tions of  the  Cardinal,  who,  he  said,  was  a  bad  man:—
"  attenta  la  pessima  natura  del  ditto  Cardenal."  What-
ever may  be  the  case,  it  is  certain  that  the  result  of  the
expedition  was  anxiously  expected  in  England.  Bourbon
acknowledged  no  other  king  than  Henry  VIII.

*The  letter  in  Hormayr.  He  imagines  that  he  could
accomplish  this,  with  10,000  ducats.

t  E.  g.  Lettere  di  Principi,  i.  132.  "  E  siate  certo  che
Francesi  adorano  il  loro  re,  e  non  vi  fondate  nelle  ribel-
iioni  altre  volte  seguite  in  Francia,  perche  non  vi  sono
piü  di  quel  tali  principi  che  le  causavano."

I  Garnier,  p.  102, Sismondi,  xvi.

two  thousand  men-at-arms,  seven  thousand
French  infantry,  principally  composed  of  the
warlike  peasantry  of  Dauphine,  and  six  thou-
sand Swiss.  In  the  present  low  state  of  the
German  government,  he  had  even  found  no
difficulty  in  tempting  a  body  of  landsknechts
to  enter  his  service,  by  the  offer  of  high  pay.

While  these  troops  assembled  in  the  country
round  Avignon,  the  imperialists  carried  on  the
siege  of  IMarscilles  with  great  pertinacity  ;  they
brought  up  the  cannon  fit  for  service,  which
they  had  found  in  the  places  they  had  taken
from  the  French ;  the}''  excavated  mines  with
immense  difficulty,  and  erected  a  battery  from
which  they  made  breaches  in  the  walls.  Pes-
cara  was  conspicuous  above  all  in  the  skir-
mishes, in  his  singular  dress.  He  wore  a  red
vest  and  hose,  over  which  was  a  short  black
coat  without  sleeves,  and  a  hat  like  those  of  the
landsknechts,  but  with  large  waving  plumes.
The  eyes  of  the  men  followed  him  like  a  ban-
ner. His  nephew  Guasto  vied  with  him  in
enterprising  valour.  The  army  was  in  the
highest  spirits  up  to  the  middle  of  September  ;
on  the  21st  they  intended  to  storm  the  city.
Pescara  drank  to  his  Spaniards,  and  put  them
in  good  humour;  Bourbon  promised  royal  gra-
titude; the  soldiers  prepared  themselves  for  the
last  extremities  by  confession.  On  the  other
hand,  the  garrison,  commanded  by  Renzo  da
Ceri,  an  Italian  of  the  Orsini  faction,  was  un-
daunted, and  had  put  the  city  in  an  excellent
state  of  defence.  At  the  first  preliminary
attempts,  the  imperialists  saw  with  whom  they
had  to  deal.  They  learned  from  their  prisoners  -
that  mines  filled  with  powder  were  dug  behind
the  breaches,  cannon  planted  at  the  corners  of
streets,  and  the  troops  posted  at  all  the  most
exposed  points,  armed  and  ready  for  action. §
Suddenly  Pescara  changed  his  mind.  "  He
who  has  a  mind  to  eat  his  supper  in  hell,"
Said  he,  "  may  storm  the  city."  A  council  of
war  was  called,  in  which  not  only  the  proba-
bility of  a  defeat  before  Marseilles,  but  even
the  danger  to  Italy  of  a  longer  delay,  were
weighed  and  discussed.  .  The  suspicion  began
to  be  entertained  that  the  king  might,  without
troubling  himself  about  Marseilles,  march  di-
rectly upon  Italy.  "  Sirs,"  exclaimed  Pescara,
"  let  him  who  would  preserve  Italy  to  the  em-
peror follow  me."  Bourbon  reluctantly  aban-
doned the  hope  of  once  more  gaining  a  footing
in  his  own  country  ;  but  the  German  leaders,
Zollern  and  Lodron,  sided  with  Pescara.  On
the  28th  of  September  the  siege  was  raisejd.

We  shall  not  attempt  to  decide  whether  the
king  really  entertained  the  design  attributed  to
him:  thus  much  at  least  is  certain,  —  that  as
soon  as  he  he^rd  of  Bourbon's  retreat,  he
seized  on  this  idea  with  the  greatest  eagerness,
and,  in  -defiance  of  any  representations,  deter-
mined to  lead  the  noble  army  he  again  beheld
around  him,  across  the  Alps  without  delay.
He  was  determined  to  strain  every  nerve  for
the  reconquest  of  Milan. On  the  sleeves  of

§  Sandoval,  lib.  xi.  p.  i.  p.  598.  In  this  place  a  mere
literal  repetition  of  an  old  narrative  entitled  La  Batalla
de  Pabia,  by  which  Sandoval  must  be  here  and  there  cor-
rected ;  as,  for  example,  for  Pisarmo,  read  Pisaiio.

Chap.  I.

SIEGE  OF  PA  VIA.

243

his  body-guard  were  embroidered  the  words,
"Once  more,  and  no  more."*

The  two  armies  rivalled  each  other  in  the
rapidity  with  which  they  crossed  the  Alps.
The  imperialists  marched  as  light  as  possible.
They  took  only  a  part  of  their  cannon,  which
they  dismounted  and  placed  on  mules ;  the
rest  were  buried  or  sent  to  Toulon.  They  ad-
vanced in  two  columns,  but  along  the  same
road,  so  that  the  first  always  left  their  quarters
before  the  other  arrived.  One  day  a  few  of
the  Germans  got  drunk  and  could  not  march.
Pescara  set  fire  to  the  house  in  which  they  lay,
without  pity,  and  burned  them  in  it ;  he  would
not  leave  one  man  in  the  hands  of  the  peasants,
whose  vengeance  he  feared  to  irritate.  Thus
they  passed  Nice,  Ventimiglia,  and  the  Mari-
time Alps,  considerably  reduced  in  external
appearance,  but  not  dispirited  :  they  had  suf-
fered no  defeat :  they  were  followed  by  a  long
baggage-train,  consisting  of  all  the  spoils  of
the  v/ars  of  preceding  years.

Meanwhile,  Francis  I.  marched  at  the  head
of  his  fresh  and.  brilliant  army  across  the
Upper  Alps,  Briancon,  Pignerol,  &c. ;  and  so,
without  halting,  to  the  plains  of  Lombardy.
He  hoped  still  to  be  beforehand  with  the  im-
perial army.

A  IMilanese  chronicle  afiirms  that  the  two
armies  crossed  the  Tessino  on  tlie  same  day ;
the"  French  at  Abbiate  Grasso,  the  imperialists
in  the  neighbourhood  of  Pavia.f

Be  that  as  it  may,  the  imperialists  were  at  a
great  disadvantage.  They  could  not  take  pos-
session of  Milan,  where  the  plague  had  broken
out.  Francesco  Sforza  said  he  was  not  a  bird
to  let  himself  be  shut  up  in  that  cage.  They
left  a  garrison  in  the  castle  only;  the  other
troops  were  divided  between  Pavia,  Lodi,  and
Cremona.  The  powerful  body  of  troops  which
a  few  months  before  appeared  about  to  make
the  emperor  lord  of  the  world,  had  suddenly
vanished  from  the  field.  Maestro  Pasquino
published  an  advertisement  at  Rome,  setting
forth  that  an  imperial  army  vras  lost  in  the
Alps ;  the  honest  finder  was  requested  to  bring
it  to  the  owner,  and  a  handsome  reward
offered.  The  French  were  undisputed  masters
of  the""  country.  They  prepared  to  conquer  the
fortified  towns,  and  in  the  first  place,  Pavia.
The  attack  on  France,  which  was  to  banish
Francis  to  the  other  side  of  the  Alps,  had  only-
served  to  knit  together  all  the  energies  of  his
kinfjdom,  and  to  secure  to  him  the  ascendancy
in  Upper  Italy.

BATTLE OF PAVIA.

The  affairs  of  the  emperor  were  not,  how-
ever, in  so  desperate  a  condition  as  they  ap-
peared to  be.  He  had  now,  as  before,  Ger-
mans in  his  service,  and  could  without  diffi-
culty procure  more.

In  forming  the  design  of  laying  immediate
siege  to  Pavia,  Francis  I.  was  actuated  by  the
hope  that  he  should  be  able  to  seduce  the. Ger-
mans who  formed  the  garrison  to  desert  to  his

*  Carpesaiuis,  lib.  x.  in  Martene,  v.  p.  1379.
t  Martino  "Verri,  in  P.  Verri,  iii.  p.  241.

side.  But  he  was  destined  to  become  better
acquainted  with  their  character.  The  two
colonels,  Zollern  and  Lodron,  were  under  mani-
fold obligations  to  the  House  of  Austria,  and
even  the  captains  had  passed  a  considerable
time  under  the  imperial  banner.  I  shall  not
attempt  to  say  what  course  they  would  have
pursued  had  they  now  had  to  take  service  for
the  first  time  ;  but  it  is  certain  that  not  one  of
them  w^as  disposed  to  abandon  the  cause  which
he  had  espoused.^  Nor  was  the  Ghibelline
city  of  Pavia  at  all  the  place  to  suggest
thoughts  of  such  a  kind.  There,  women  of
high  rank  might  be  seen  taking  a  part  in  the
labours  on  the  fortifications  ;  the  wealthiest
citizen,  Matteo  Beccaria,  had  raised  a  company
at  his  own  cost,  and  of  his  own  retainers;
when  scarcity  began  already  to  be  felt  else-
where, he  gave  the  officers  a  splendid  feast,
and  even  the  common  soldiers  never  wanted
"  white  bread  and  cool  wdne."  Antonio  Leiva,
the  imperial  commander,  in  praising  the  young
Caspar  Frundsberg,  who  had  now  risen  to  the
rank  of  captain,  says  that  he  had  kept  him
himself  in  good  spirits.  Antonia  Leiva,  too,
was  exactly  fitted  for  emergencies  of  this  kind ;
equally  prudent  and  resolute,  devoted  to  the
emperor's  cause,  and  capable  of  any  sacrifice ;
he  took  the  gold  chain  from  his  own  neck  and
gave  it  to  be  coined  into  ducats.  The  Ger-
mans derived  great  advantage  from  their  skill
as  miners  ;§  while  the  river  opposed  an  insu-
perable obstacle  to  the  king,  the  attempt  to
turn  the  course  of  the  Tessino  having  totall)''
failed,  as  might  indeed  have  been  expected.
In  short,  in  January,  1525,  he  found  that  he
could  do  no  more  than  surround  the  town,  with
a  view  to  starve  it  into  submission. ||  He  des-
patched some  thousand  men  under  the  Duke
of  Albania  M'ith  orders  to  attempt  a  diversion
in  central  or  lower  Italy.

Meanwhile  fresh  troops  descended  the  Alps
from  Germany.  Bourbon  had  sold  the  jewels
M^hich  he  had  saved  in  his  flight,  and  had  then
gone  to  Insbruck  and  to  Augsburg.  Supported
by  Archduke  Ferdinand,  he  nov/  brought  eigh-
teen companies  of  landsknechts  under  Marx
Sittich  of  Ems  over  the  mountains.  Count
Nicholas  of  Salm  accompanied  them  with  two
hundred  horses  of  the  retainers  of  the  court.
At  the  same  time  the  viceroy  of  Naples  sold
every  thing  for  which  he  could  find  a  purchaser,

X  Sandoval,  indeed,  mentions  that  Znllern  had  medi-
tated treason,  and  had  been  therefore  poisoned  at  a  feast.
This  is  also  alluded  to  by  G.  Capella,  yet  with  the  addi-
tion, "  multi  existimavere,"  which  has  also  been  repeated
by  others,  with  more  or  less  qualification.  According  to
the  account  of  Tcegius,  physician  and  knight,  who  re-
mained in  Pavia  during  the  siege  (De  Obsidione  Urbis
Ticinensis,  ed.  Pez,  p.  9),  Zollern  died  "  post  longas  vigi-
lias  et  assidüos  labores  ex  tabida  febre  xvi.  Cal.  Febr."
It  was  said  in  Pavia  that  he  was  related  to  the  imperial
family:  "  aliquali  atlinitate  cum  Csesare  conjunctus."
He  is  celebrated  in  the  songs  of  the  time  as  the  person
who  took  the  most  active  part  in  the  defence  of  the  town.

§  Carpesanus  ascribes  the  destruction  of  a  bridge,
"Germanis,  ingeniosis  viris."  TfPgius  gives  high  praise
on  this  account  to  Gliirns,  who  "instrumentis  ferreis  mi-
rabili  arte  in  medio  rescindit"  this  same  bridge.

|(  Lettera  di  Pavia,  ]0  Genn.  Chr.  Ven.  MS.  It  was  un-
derstood, "che  il  re  X™»  avea  deliberato  di  non  voler  piu
dar  battaglia  a  Pavia  per  non  far  morir  gente,  ma  volea
tener  quella  assediata  et  in  simil  modo  averla."

244

SIEGE  OF  PA  VIA.

Book  IV.

and  sent  a  messenger  with  the  money  directly
to  George  Frundsberg,  who  regarded  the  em-
peror's Italian  power  (which  he  himself  had
helped  to  establish)  with  the  most  intense  in-
terest ;  and  who  had  a  yet  stronger  motive  in
the  thought  that  it  was  his  own  son  whom  he
was  going  to  relieve.  The  day  after  Christmas
he  mustered  eleven  companies  at  Meran  :  he
was  surrounded  by  twenty-five  distinguished
captains  and  brother-soldiers  of  good  family  ; —
younger  sons,  or  gentlemen  without  inherit-
ance, followed  by  a  retinue  of  peasants'  sons,
who,  like  themselves,  could  find  no  employ-
ment at  home.  On  the  21st  of  January,  the
two  divisions  joined  the  Italian  army  at  Lodi.*

They  saw  the  necessity  of  taking  the  field
immediately.  In  spite  of  all  the  exertions  that
had  been  made,  there  was  not  money  enough
forthcoming  to  keep  the  troops  quiet  for  any
considerable  time.  Most  of  them  had  received
nothing  but  their  marching  mone}^  and  had
only  engaged  to  serve  for  a  certain  fixed  period
without  pay.  Pavia,  too,  must  be  relieved.
On  the  4th  of  February,  the  army  arrived  in
the  neighbourhood  of  that  cit)^,  threw  into  it  a
fej7  troops  with  munitions  of  war,  and  did
every  thing  they  could  to  provoke  the  king  to
quit  his  strong  encampment.

These  efforts  were,  however,  vain.  The  king
would  not  abandon  the  strong  position  he  had
taken  up  in  the  park  near  Pavia :  it  was  well
fortified, f  the  army  was  in  comfortable  quar-
ters, and  abundantly  supplied  with  provisions.
He  thought  it  more  advantageous  to  wait  for
2in  attack,  as  at  Marignano,  than  to  make  it,
\vhich  had  proved  so  disastrous  to  his  army  at
Eicocca.

On  the  other  hand  the  imperialists  were
forced  by  want,  both  of  mone}'^  and  provisions,
to  resolve  on  attacking.:}:  They  thought  it  as
disgraceful  to  disperse  in  sight  of  the  enem)^,
as  to  suffer  a  defeat.  "  God  grant  me  a  hun-
dred years'  war,  and  not  one  battle,"  said  Pes-
cara ;  "  but  now  there  is  no  escape."  He
went  into  the  midst  of  his  Spaniards,  and  re-
presented to  them  that  they  had  not  a  foot  of
land  they  could  call  their  own,  nor  a  bit  of
bread  for  the  morrow ;  "  but  there,  before  you,"
added  he,  "  is  the  camp,  where  there  is  bread
in  plenty,  and  meat  and  wine  and  carp  from
the  Lago  di  Garda.  We  must  have  it;  we
must  drive  out  the  enemy;  we  will  make  St.
Matthew's  day  memorable."  Already  had
George  Frunsdberg  addressed  his  Germans  in
a  similar  strain.  With  uplifted  hands  they  had
promised  him  to  do  their  best  against  their
splendid  foe,  and  to  succour  their  brethren  in
Pavia.

*  Reissner,  Historia  Herrn  Georg-en  und  Herrn  Ccisparn
von  Frundsberg,  p.  38. See  G.  Earthold's  Frundsbjrg,

t  Extrait  des  lettres  6crites  en  Allemand  ä  Monseig-
reiir  rArchiduc  Ferdinand  par  Messire  George  de  Frons-
berg, ürkundenbnch  zu  Buckholtz,  Ferdinand,  i.  p.  1.

I  In  an  anonymous  account  of  that  tfrne,  Lettere  di
Frincipi,  i.  p.  ]53.,  and  from  tiience  transferred  by  Sis-
inondi  to  his  Hist.de  France,  xvi.p.  2:^2.,  it  is  said  indeed,
that,  two  days  before  the  battle,  150,000  scudi  reached  the
camp  from  Spain  :  this,  liowever,  must  bo  a  false  state-
ment. In  Pescara's  despatch  it  is  expressly  said,  "  De
jfiinguno  canto  nostra  necessiiad  tenia  rimedio."  He  had
foreseen  '-que  deshazer  el  exercito  a  lavio  del  enemigo
«ra  lan  mal  como  perdillo  con  batalia,"

This  was  not  likely  to  be  one  of  those  bril-
liant battles  in  which  two  chivalrous  armies
Vv'ere  wont  to  contend  for  the  prize  of  honour;
a  needy  band  of  mercenaries,  urged  by  hunger
and  privation,  and  counting  the  days  of  the
service  they  had  contracted  for,  must  be  led  on
to  the  assault,  or  they  would  disperse.  Their
objects  were,  to  plunder  the  rich  camp  of  the
enemy,  to  relieve  their  brothers  in  arms,  and
once  for  all  to  secure  the  possession  of  the  often
conquered  land.  Circumstances  were  most  un-
favourable to  them.  "  Either,"  writes  Pescara
to  the  emperor,  "your  majesty  must  gain  the
desired  victory,  or  vre  shall  fdfil  by  our  death
the  duty  of  serving  you."

Pescara's  plan  was  to  surprise  the  enemy  by
night.  In  the  middle  of  the  park  w^as  the  farm
of  Mirabella,  where  the  iTiarket  of  the  camp
was  commonly  held  ;  and  a  part  of  the  cavalry
was  posted  at  this  point.  He  wished,  if  pos-
sible, to  effect  a  junction  with  the  garrison  of
Pavia.  About  midnight  they  began  to  pull
down  the  walls  of  the  park.  Two  thousand
Germans  of  the  regiments  of  Frundsberg  and
of  Ems,  and  a  thousand  Spaniards,  with  linen
shirts  over  their  coats  of  mail,  were  to  fall  on
the  camp.  But  the  walls  were  stronger  than
they  thought;  it  was  daylight  before  they  had
made  breaches  sufficiently  large  to  pass  through.
When,  at  length — on  the  morning  of  the  24th
of  February — the  troops  pressed  through,  the
French  were  fully  prepared,  and  in  motion.  §
One  point  was  gained, — namely,  that  they  left
their  strong  position  and  came  out  into  the  open
ground  on  the  heath;  but  the  imperial  army
itself  incurred  the  greatest  danger.  The  divi-
sion of  the  landsknechts,  as  they  were  march-
ing up,  were  within  range  of  the  very  superior
artillery  of  the  French,  and  suffered  great  loss  ;
the  light  cavalry,  too,  were  in  disorder.  King
Francis,  who  rushed  into  the  thick  of  the  fight
at  this  point  and  killed  a  brave  knight  with  his
own  hand,  was  delighted  when  he  saw  some
companies  broken  and  fleeing  before  him."
"To-day,"  sard  he  to  his  companion,  reining
up  his  horse  to  let  him  recover  breath,  "  I  call
myself  Lord  of  Milan. "||  His  army  advanced
in  the  best  order,  the  artillery  keeping  up  an
uninterrupted  fire.

But  the  moment  which  seemed  that  of  vic-
tory, was,  in  fact,  but  the  beginning  of  the  bat-
tle. Pescara  had  rallied  round  him  the  three
thousand  men,  wdio  were  now  unable  to  effect
any  thing,  in  consequence  of  the  non-appear-
ance of  their  friends  from  Pavia ;  and  they
were  graduall^'^  joined  by  the  tvro  large  bodies
under  the  command  of  George  Frundsberg,  and
Marx  Sittich  of  Ems.  Frundsberg,  with  his
companions,  the  Counts  of  Ortenburg,  Hag,
Virneburg,  and  the  Lords  of  Losenstein  and
Fleckenstein,  and  by  his  side  Marx  Sittich,
now  formed  the  left  wing';^  Pescara,  with  his

§  "  Epitre  du  Roy  traitant  de  son  partement  de  France
et  de  sa  prise  devant  Pavie,"  in  Lenglet  and  Gobel,  p.  30:

"Au  matin  jls  feirent  Icur  entree

Et  nous  aussi  estions  ja  en  bataille."
i(  Lettera  di  Paulo  Luzasco  al  Sr  Marchese  di  Mantua,
according  to  a  statement  of  the  king  himself,  in  the  Ap-
pendix.
IT  "  This  appears  from  the  despatch  of  Fruodsberg,—

Chap.  L

BATTLE  OF  PAVIA.

245

Spaniards  and  two  thousand  Germans,  the  right.
^The  cavalry  near  him  had  also  recovered  its
order.  As  it  was  manifestly  no  match  for  the
French,  Pescara  and  Frundsberg  ordered  fifteen
hundred  arqnebusiers  to  support  it.  The  vice-
roy, who  had  always  been  of  opinion  that  they
might  entrench  themselves  opposite  to  the  ene-
my in  the  park,  now  clearly  perceived  that  this
was  impossible.  "  There  is  no  help  but  in
God's  mercy,"  said  he  :  "  Sirs,  do  as  I  do  ;"
so  saying-,  and  crossing  himself,  he  put  spurs
to  his  horse  and  charged  the  enemy.

The  melee  thus  began  on  the  right  wins,
where  a  part  of  the  French  men-at-arms,  the
king  at  their  head,  fought  with  the  Spanish-
Italian  horse,  aijd  Salm's  reiters  ;  in  the  centre,
but  some\Vhat  further  off,  other  French  horse-
men under  Alen^on  advanced  with  twentj^-
eight  companies  of  Swiss  :  against  Pescara
and  Guasto  with  their  Spaniards  and  Germans,
the  black  companies  (as  the  Germans  from
Gueldres  and  Lorraine  in  the  king's  service
were  called),  admirably  supported  by  artillery,
moved  upon  the  left  wing  of  the  imperialists,
consisting  of  the  tv/o  great  bodies  of  lands-
knechts.

On  this  point  the  first  decisive  stroke  was
struck.  The  Germans  in  the  service  of  France,
and  the  imperialists,  were  those  between  whom
the  bitterest  and  most  determined  hatred  pre-
vailed. An  Augsburger,  named  Hans  Langen-
mantel,  stepped  from  the  ranks  of  the  former,
and  challenged  the  two  German  colonels  to
single  combat.  But  he  was  held  unworthy  to
do  battle  with  them,  in  consequence  of  his
having  taken  service  under  the  French,  and
was  instantly  felled  to  the  ground  and  killed.
A  landsknecht  held  up  his  hand,  severed  from
the  body  and  covered  with  rings  of  gold,  as  a
trophy.  Upon  this  the  combat  became  furious.
Marx  Sittich,  by  a  rapid  evolution,  threw  him-
self on  the  flank  of  the  black  companies.*  They
made  a  most  gallant  defence,  and  were  killed
almost  to  a  man.  Their  cannon  fell  into  the
hands  of  the  imperialists.

Meanwhile  the  centre  had  advanced.  Already
the  arqnebusiers  had  made  a  fearful  impression
on  the  men-at-arms,  for  no  armour  was  stout
enough  to  resist  the  fire  of  their  matchlocks,
when  Pestara,  at  the  head  of  his  Spanish  ve-

"Moyetma  bände  tirasmes  ä  la  main  senestre  vers  le
•  dite  Marchsith  contre  les  dits  Francois."  There  is  alsn
to  be  found  the  number  of  arquchusi'ers,  v. iio  wem  gene-
rally supposed  to  amount  to  500._  Teptriiis  mentions  as
many,  but  it  may  have  been  only  the  Spaniards.  That
the  landsknechts  U'ere  armed  with  arquebusses  is  proved,
among  other  things,  by  tlie  line  of  the  sons— "  Fire  into
them,  you  good  landsknechts"  ("  Schiesst  Drein,  schiesst
Drein,  ihr  trurame  Landsknecht.")— ^/j-aw,  p.  25a

*  "Ein  scliöns  neüwes  Lied  von  der  Schlacht  newlich
vor  Pavia  geschechen."— "  A  beautiful  new  sons  of  the
battle  lately  fought  before  Pavia,"  bv  no  means  poetical,
but  very  accurate,  which  is  proved  bv  its  accordance  with
Frundsberg's  despatch:  "Da  das  ersachen  die  Lanntz-
knecht,  bey  dem  Frantzosen,  mer  kendt  rechtt,  zuL'endt
vnns  vnnder  augen,  Herr  Jörsen  Haufi' ervffen  sie  an,
vnnd  thätten  in  iiitt  fraeenn.  Da  dz  ersach  Herr  Marxen
hauffan  disem  orth,  gryffen  sie  drauffuartapfierjich  diirch-
trungen."— "When  the  landsknechts  perceived  this  amonir
the  French,  taking  good  note  and  marching  past  us,  the
Lord  Georjre's  troop  attacked  them  without  asking  their
leave.  When  the  Lord  Marx's  troop  saw  this  at  this
place,  they  attacked  right  bravely,  and  forced  their  way
through."

terans,  attacked  the  Swiss. |  The  fight  now
became  general ;  the  fury  of  the  attack,  the
effect  of  the  fire-arms  on  the  cavalry,  the  sight
of  the  defeat  of  4,he  black  companies,  and  the
rush  of  the  victorious  squadron  of  the  imperial
Germans,  threw  the  French  centre  into  confu-
sion. AlenQon  was  the  first  of  the  men-at-arms
who  took  to  flight ;  a  part  of  the  Swiss  were
hurried  along  with  him  ;  a  part  had  their  ranks
broken  :  at  this  moment  the  garrison  of  Pavia
appeared  in  the  rear  of  the  disordered  French
troops,' and  a  universal  flight  followed.

The  gallant  king  was  spurring  his  cliarger
along  the  right  wing,  under  a  heavy  fire  from
the  arquebusiers,  when  he  looked  round  and_
s^w  his  people  in  full  retreat.  "  My  God,  what
is  this]"  exclaimed  he.  He  thought,  at  least,
to  rally  the  Swiss,  and  hastened  after  them.
But  the  decided  superiority  of  the  enemy  ren-
dered this  impossible.  Even  he  himself  was
borne  along  with  the  retreating  torrent.  He
wore  on  his  arm  an  embroidered  scarf,  given  to
him  in  happier  days  in  France  by  the  lady  of
his  love,  to  whom,  in  return,  he  had  vowed
never,  und^r  any  circumstances,  to  give  way
before  the  enemy. :|:  True  knight  as  he  was,  he
retreated  as  slowly  as  possible,  and  not  with-
out continually  facing  round  in  an  attitijde  of
defence;  he  v/as  now  overtaken  by  the  pursu-
ing Germans.  Nicholas  von  Salm  stabbed  his
horse  under  him  ;  the  king  fell,  and  was  com-
pelled to  surrender.  At  this  moment  the  vice-
roy came  up,  reached  out  his  hand  to  him
respectfully,  and  took  him  prisoner.

Within  an  hour  and  a  half,  the  most  magni-
ficent army  that  the  world  could  then  behold
was  annihilated.  It  was  calculated  that  ten
thousand  men  were  left  dead  on  the  field,  or
drowned  in  the  waters  of  the  Tessino  :  among
them  many  Swiss,  the  ancient  fame  of  whose
arms,  established  in  the  Burgundian  wars,  was
now  obscured  for  ever.  The  leaders  of  the
French,  with  few  exceptions,  were  killed  or
taken  prisoners  :  above  all,  their  puissant  mon-
arch had  fallen  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy.
Never  was  a  victory  more  complete  and  tri-
umphant.§

The  victors  seized  on  the  plunder  of  the
camp,  to  satisfy  their  most  pressing  wants.
The}''  were  at  length  lords  and  masters  in  the

t  His  own  despatch,  agreeing  with  the  statement  of  the
king  in  Luzazio.  When  he  says  that  he  sent  Guasto  with
the  Gei;mans  against  the  king's  landsknecJits,  it  is  only
to  be  understood  that  Guasto  had  a  siuue  in  Sittich's  on-
slaught. The  Gern)an  accounts  prove  that  lie  and  Frunds-
berg  contributed  greatly  to  the  success  of  this  attack.

X  "[L'heureux  present,  par  lequel  te  promys
point  ne  fuir  devant  rnes  ennemys. —

Epitre  du  Roi."'

§  In  this  account  of  the  battle,  I  have  not  thought  my-
self bound  to  adhere  exclusively  to  the  earlier  historians,
such  as  Capella,  Guicciardini,  Jovius,  and  Bellay.  I  have
also  avoided  all  that  Reissner  has  borrowed  from  Jovius,
as  we  are  now  enabled  to  draw  more  authentic  inforir.a-
tion  from  the  despatches  of  the  conmianders  themselves;
1.  those  of  Frundsberir  in  Bucholtz,  identical  with  an  old
German  edition.  "  Wahrlicher  Bericiit,  &:c.  ("  True  Ac-
count," &;c.)  which,  however,  I  never  saw:  2,  those  of
Pescara  in  the  Appendix:  3.  those  of  Francis  Lin  the
letters  of  Luzasco  in  the  Apjiendix  and  in  the  Epitre.
Besides  these,  there  exists  a  detailed  Spanish  account,
which  has  been  used  b}'  Sandoval,  and  which  contains
some  remarkable  passages.  The  song  before  quoted,  which
I  intend  to  print  in  the  Appendix,  is  a  bulletin  in  verse,
and  therefore  worthy  of  credit.

24G

CONSEQUENCES  OF  THE  BATTLE  OF  PAVIA.

Book  IV.

state  of  Milan,  and  had  no  fresh  attack  to  fear.
The  Italian  powers  who,  so  long  as  things  were
in  suspense,  maintained  a  very  doubtful  atti-
tude, now  called  to  mind  their  old  engagements,
and  consented  to  pay  up  the  arrears  of  subsi-
dies they  had  promised,  so  that  the  army  at
last  gradually  received  its  well-earned  pay.

But  the  fears  of  some,  the  hopes  of  others,
and  the  attention  of  all,  were  now  turned  upon
the  young  emperor,  lor  whom  this  victory  had
been  won;  while  he,  in  tranquil  retirement  in
Castile,  had  been  slovv'ly  recovering  from  the
quartan  ague  which  had  long  tormented  him.

Charles  V.  was  standing  in  a  room  of  the
palace  in  Madrid,  talking  of  the  state  of  things
in  Italy,  and  of  the  situation  of  his  army,  vv  hich
he  still  felt  to  be  very  dangerous,  when  a, courier
from  that  army  arrived.  Without  announcing
to  any  one  the  tidings  with  which  he  was
charged,  he  walked  in  :  he  chose  to  deliver
them  first  to  the  emperor  in  person.  "Sire,"
said  he,  "  there  has  been  a  battle  before  Pavia.
Your  Majesty's  troops  have  gained  the  victory:
the  French  arrny  is  destro3^ed ;  the  king  him-
self is  a  prisoner,  and  in  your  majesty's  power."
Great  and  unexpected  good  fortune  has  at  the
moment  the  same  effect  as  a  sudden  calamity.
While  Charles  listened  to  these  words,  the
blood  seemed  congealed  in  his  veins,  and  for  a
few  moments  he  did  not  speak.  When  at  length
he  found  utterance,  he  only  repeated,  "The
King  of  France  is  in  my  power — the  victory  is
mine  !"  Hereupon  he  retired  into  the  adjoining
chamber,  where  his  bed  stood,  and  kneeling
down  before  an  image  of  the  Holy  Virgin,  tried
to  raise  his  thoughts  to  God  and  to  the  great-
ness of  his  vocation.  He  caused  processions
to  be  made  and  prayers  to  be  offered  up,  that
God  would  be  pleased  to  grant  him  still  higher
favour  in  the  war  he  meditated  with  the  infidels.
He  spoke  of  an  expedition  against  Constanti-
nople and  Jerusalem.*

Projects  of  this  kind,  however,  were  yet  at
a  vast  distance.  The  immediate  concern  was
to  improve  the  present  moment.

The  first  idea  w4iich  presented  itself  was,
that  the  great  victory  could  in  no  way  be  turned
to  so  much  advantage  as  by  a  renewal  of  the
so-often-attempted  invasion  of  France.

The  Duke  of  Bourbon  began  immediately
to  make  preparations  for  carrying  this  into  ex-
ecution.

The  King  of  England  was  urgent  in  his  per-
suasions to  the  same  effect.  The  instructions
drawn  up  by  Henry  VIII.,  for  an  embassy  which
he  sent  to  the  emperor  in  consequence  of  the
battle  of  Pavia,  are  extremely  curious,  and  show
how  far  that  monarch's  views  extended.  He
expresses  his  opinion  that  the  King  of  France
should,  under  no  conditions,  be  reinstated  on
the  throne ; — there  are  none,  he  says,  that  Fran-
cis will  observe  :  he  requires  that  he  should  be
absolutely  deprived  of  the  crown.  With  regard
to  a  successor,  there  can,  he  says,  be  no  ques-
tion as  to  Bourbon,  who  could  neither  plead
any  defensible  claim,  nor  afford  the  emperor
any  satisfactory  guarantee;  on  the  other  hand,

*  Letter  of  the  Mantuan  envoy  Suardin  to  the  Mar-
grave of  Mantua,  I5th  March,  1526. Sanuto,  vol.  xxxviii.

the  King  of  England  had  the  best  and  most
incontestable  right  to  the  French  crown, — a
right,  indeed,  already  recognised  by  the  em-
peror. In  the  course  of  the  next  summer,
Charles  might  attack  France  in  person  from
the  side  of  Spain,  while 'he  would  do  the  same
from  that  of  England :  he  would  assist  him
with  large  subsidies;  no  formidable  resistance
was  now  to  be  feared,  and  he  hoped  to  meet
his  imperial  majesty  in  Paris.  If  he  were  once
crowned  in  that  city,  he  would  accompany  the
emperor  to  Rome  to  be  present  at  his  corona-
tion. All  that  had  been  wrested  from  the  House
of  Burgundy  or  th?  empire  should  be  restored
to  him  ;  nay,  even  eventually  France  and  Eng-
land itself,  if,  in  conformity  with  the  existing
treaties,  he  married  the  youthful  Princess  Mary.
At  first  he  had  affected  to  raise  difficulties  on
this  head,  but  in  the  end  he  consented  to  give
his  daughter,  who  was  yet  a  child,  into  the
guardianship  of  the  emperor  till  she  should  be
of  age  to  marry.f

From  time  to  time,  projects  like  this  are  re-
vived in  Europe, — either  of  the  universal  do-
minion of  a  single  nation,  or  of  a  partition  of
power  between  two  preponderant  states;  but
though  at  a  distance  they  seem  to  threaten  uni-
versal convulsion,  they  are  invariably  wrecked
against  the  massive  strength  of  existing  insti-
tutions.

Young  as  the  emperor  was,  he  was  of  far
too  sedate  a  character  to  be  carried  away  by
such  extravagant  propositions.  Nor  had  Eng-
land by  any  means  afforded  him  such  a  degree
of  assistance  in  the  war,  as  would  have  war-
ranted her  claiming  so  large  a  share  of  the
fruits  of  victory.  The  secret  negotiations
which  the  cardinal  had  carried  on  with  France
were  well  known  in  Spain.

Chancellor  Gattinara  advised  the  emperor  to
answer,  that  it  would  be  unseemly  to  make
war  upon  an  enemy  who  could  not  defend  him-
self; and  that  neither  did  the  interests  of  peace
require  any  such  proceeding.  He  thought  that
if  the  King  of  England  resolved  to  try  his  for-
tune, the  best  way  to  thwart  his  schemes  was
to  send  him  no  assistance.  He  esteemed  a
union  of  France  and  England  in  the  highest
degree  dangerous  to  the  empire  and  to  Europe:
his  idea  was  to  maintain  the  independence  of
the  throne  of  France,  but  at  the  same  time  to
establish  for  ever  the  supremacy  of  Austria.  A
project  drawn  up  by  his  hand,  which  is  to  be
found  in  the  Austrian  Archives,:|:  goes  directly

t  Fiddes,  in  his  Life  of  Wolsey,  346—352,  quotes  at
length  the  instruction  to  Tunstall  and  Wingfield?*  Her-
bert,  p.  ]ö8,  gives  a  very  imperfect  notice  of  it.  Robertson,
vol.  iv.,  who  had  only  read  Herbert  and  not  Fiddes,  treats
it  all  as  a  sort  of  pretext.  But  it  is  only  necessary  to
read  Wolsey's  letter  to  the  king,  dated  ]2th  Feb.,  1525
(State  Papers,  p.  158,)  where  he  already  reckons  on  vic-
tory, to  be  convinced  that  people  promised  themselves  '
honour  and  advantage  from  this  course.  "The  matters
succeedingto  the  advantage  of  the  imperiallis,the  thanke,
l^iUde,  and  praise  shal  comnie  unto  Your  Grace."  It  is
impossible,  however,  to  ajiree  with  Fiddes,  who  denies
that  any  arrangement  with  France  had  been  already  en-
tered into.  The  same  letter  throws  light  upon  this.  If
France  were  victorious,  Wolsey  says  he  had-  provided
against  that  event  "  by  such  communications  as  be  set
furth  with  France  aparte."

t  In  Bucholtz,  ii.  p.  280.  To  the  same  intent  are  the
demands  which  occur  in  a  letter  of  the  emperor  to  the
king's  mother. Papiers  d'6tat  de  Granvelle,  i.  p.  264.

Chap.  I.  MISUNDERSTANDINGS  BETWEEN  THE  POPE  AND  EMPEROfT.  247

to  the  same  decisive  object  which  he  already
contemplated  in  the  year  1521.  The  king  was
to  renounce  all  his  claims  on  Italy,  both  on
Milan  and  Naples ;  further,  to  restore  Bur-
gundy to  the  house  to  which  it  appertained;
and,  lastly,  to  acknowledge  the  rights  of  the
empire  over  the  south  of  France.  To  Provence
he  made  a  direct  claim,  as  "  an  appurtenance
of  the  empire :"  the  emperor's  intention  was
to  grant  this  in  fee  to  the  Duke  of  Bourbon.
Dauphine,  too,  might  be  demanded  back,  be-
cause the  renewal  of  the  investiture  had  so
long  been  neglected  ;  but  the  emperor  was  dis-
posed to  leave  this  to  the  successor  to  the
throne  of  France,  provided  always  that  he
married  a  princess  of  the  house  of  Austria.  If
Francis  I.  accepted  these  conditions,  he  would
certainly  be  too  much  sunk  and  enfeebled  to  be
an  object  of  dread.  The  emperor's  supremacy
would  then  be  established  on  an  immutable
basis:  he  would  have  no  rival  remaining  Vv-ho
could  attempt  to  measure  himself  against  him.
A  feeling  pervaded  the  whole  West,  that  the
emperor  was  the  predestined  ruler  of  Europe.
A  Neapolitan  description  of  the  battle  of  Pavia
concludes  with  the  words,  "Thou  hast  placed
the  world  under  his  feet."  "  Now,"  said
Wolsey,  to  one  of  Charles's  ambassadors,
"  your  master  will  be  emperor  no  longer  in
title,  but  in  fact  also."  "The  counsels  of
God,"  exclaims  a  minister  of  the  pope,  "are
a  deep  abyss."

Such  a  prospect  was  not,  however,  v/elcome
to  all.  No  man  had  ever  yet  assumed  a  sta-
tion of  this  kind  in  Europe  without  exciting
the  animosity  and  the  resistance  of  all  that  had
a  feeling  of  independence.  The  King  of  Eng-
land was,  of  course,  offended  by  the  emperor's
refusal  to  accede  to  his  proposals,  and  ever)'^
moment  increased  the  coolness  between  them.
But  this  was  not  all.  In  another  of  the  em-
peror's allies — the  Papal  States — opposition  to
his  scJiemes  arose.  Indeed,  the  exclamation
of  a  papal  minister  which  we  have  just  quoted
savours  more  of  the  terror  of  one  vrho  feels
himself  menaced,  than  of  the  sympathy  of  an
ally.  For  some  time  past  misunderstandings
of  a  very  serious  nature  had  arisen  between
the  pope  and  the  emperor.  They  originated,
indeed,  raerely  in  a  question  of  territory,  but
soon  assumed  the  character  of  one  of  the  most
important  features  in  the  affairs  of  the  times.

MISUNDERSTANDINGS BETWEEN THE POPE AND
THE EMPEROR.

When  Leo  X.  concluded  his  alliance  with
the  emperor,  it  was,  as  we  have  seen,  with  a
view  of  getting  possession  of  all  the  countries
which  were  still  claimed  by  the  see  of  Rome,
especially  Ferrara :  in  this  the  emperor  pro-
mised him  his  assistance.

On  the  sudden  death  of  Leo,  the  Duke  of
Ferrara  caused  a  medal  to  be  struck,  with  the
inscription,  "The  lamb  rescued  from,  the  jaws
of  the  lion."  But  he  was  not  only  rescued  ;
he  found  occasion,  during  the  vacancy  of  the
Holy  See,  to  get  possession  of  Reggio  and  Ru-
biera. Over  Adrian  VI.  he  gained  such  an

influence,  that  that  pontiff  renewed  his  fief,  in
spite  of  these  encroachments.

Adrian's  successor,  however,  Clement  VII.,
was  of  a  totally  different  way  of  thinking:  no
sooner  were  the  French  driven  out  of  Italy  in
1524,  than  he  asked  the  imperialists  to  assist
him  against  the  duke,  and,  in  the  first  place,  to
expel  the  latter  from  Reggio.

This,  however,  they  did  not  consider  them-
selves bound  to  do.  Their  thoughts  were  ex-
clusively bent  on  the  invasion  of  France,  and
they  wished  to  excite  no  troubles  in  their  rear.
The  viceroy  answered,  that  if  the  pope  loved
the  emperor,  he  ought  rather  to  complete  his
satisfaction  by  giving  him  back  IModena.*

This  suggestion  was  deeply  offensive  to  the
pope.  If  he  had  not  latterly  contributed  much
to' the  success  of  the  common  cause,  the  share
which  he  had  personally  taken  in  the  conquest
of  ]\lilan  v/as  still  fresh  in  his  memory.  Was
this  now  to  turn  exclusively  to  the  profit  of  the
empire]  was  the  papacy  not  only  not  to  obtain
the  extension  of  territory  it  desired,  but  to  give
up  cities  it  had  formerl}^  possessed  ]

So  long  as  the  imperial  arms  were  successful
in  Provence,  Clement  was  silent;  but  scarcely
could  he  have  received  the  news  of  the  retreat
of  Bourbon  from  Marseilles,  than  he  sent  an
envoy  (the  same  Geronimo  Aleander  who  is
already  vrell  known  to  us)  to  the  King  of
France  ;f  and  as  soon  as  Francis  touched  the
soil  of  Italy,  Giberti,  the  pope's  most  confi-
dential minister,  who  had  always  been  regarded
as  in  the  French  interest,  went  to  meet  him ;
in  order,  as  his  credentials  set  forth,  "  to  ne-
gotiate concerning  things  and  plans  which
touch  the  honour  and  advantage  both  of  the
pope  and  the  king.":|:  The  course  and  the
result  of  their  negotiations  are  not  accuratel};-
known;  but  thus  much  is  certain,  that  a  treaty
was  agreed  on,  the  basis  of  which  was,  that
the  king  should  retain  possession  of  Milan.  In
this  case  the  king  promised  not  to  demand  the
restitution  of  Parma  or  Piacenza ;  to  import
the  salt  for  the  consumption  of  Milan  from  the
papal  salt-works  (a  source  of  considerable  re-
venue to  the  apostolic  chamber),  and  to  support
the  pope  against  his  rebellious  vassals;  —
meaning,  no  doubt,  Ferrara. §  On  Giberti's
return,  people  remarked  that  he  never  went  to
the  pope  without  the  head-dress  which  then
distinguished  the  French ;  the  pages  of  the
palace  were  dressed  in  the  French  fashion,  and
French  officers  were  allowed  to  recruit  in  Rome
in  aid  of  the  Duke  of  Albania,  who  had  under-

*  Giberti  agli  oratori  in  Spagna  22  Ott.  1524.  Tlie
duke's  retreat^  after  having  made  a  short  advance,  was
ascribed  entirely  to  the  imperialists:  "Che  tal  mutatione
del  duca  e  determinatione  di  non  rendere  e  processa  del
vicere."— 5a?/^a,  21  Mov.  Latere  di  principi  21  JVov.

t  His  credentials,  dated  14th  Oct.  1524,  are  to  be  found
in  Molini,  i.  177.  "  Magnis  de  rebus  christianasque  rei-
publicse  hoc  tempore  non  solum  salutaribus  sed  etiam
necessariis."

I  For  Montmorency,  dated  30th  Oct.  Ibid.  p.  178.
"  Mittentes  Gibertnm  ad  regem  pro  rebus  ac  consiliis
utriusque  nostrum  honorem  et  commodum  spectantibus."

§  The  articles  of  this  treaty  have  never  been  published
in  an  authentic  form  ;  nevertheless  the  pope  communi-
cated them  to  the  Archduke  Ferdinand,  and  in  this  form
Spalatin  has  preserved  them.  Annales  in  Mencken
Scriptt.,  ii,  p.  641.

248 MISUNDERSTANDINGS  BETWEEN  THE  POPE  AND  EMPEROR. Book.  IY.

taken  an  expedition  against  Naples  :  the  Ger-
mans at  the  papal  court  were  persuaded  that
the  pope  had  even  made  a  grant  of  Sicily  and
Naples  to  the  king.*

This  was  an  error :  it  was  impossible  that
the  sovereignty  of  the  French  in  Naples  could
be  agreeable  to  the  pope.  His  view,  doubtless,
■was  only  to  favour  a  diversion  which  promised
to  restore  the  balance  of  power  in  Italy  ;j-  but
even  this  design,  his  whole  demeanour,  his
undeniable  defection  in  the  moment  of  danger,
awakened  the  hostility  of  the  imperial  com-
manders. They  rejected  his  offers  of  mediation
with  disdain.  "  He  who  is  not  for  me,"  writes
the  viceroy  to  him,  "  is  against  me."  Frunds-
berg  drove  a  papal  agent  out  of  his  presence  at
the  point  of  the  sword,  and  anxiety  as  to  the
effect  of  the  papal  intrigues  certainly  hastened
on  the  battle  :  the  imperialists  threw  on  the
pope  the  whole  blame  of  the  dilatoriness  of  the
Venitians  in  fulfilling  their  engagements.^

This  state  of  things  sufficiently  explains  the
painful  impression  made  at  Rome  by  the  news
of  the  king's  defeat ;  and  indeed  Frundsberg
actually  recommended  making  an  immediate
attack  on  the  pope  in  person.  Letters  were
received  in  the  ecclesiastical  States  from  the
other  generals,  full  of  threats,  and  imperial
troops  instantly  invested  the  territory  of  Pia-
cenza.  Clement  VIT.  avowed  that  he  had  been
influenced  solely  by  this  sort  of  coercion  to
pay  the  imperialists  100,000  ducats,  and  to
conclude  a  fresh  treaty  with  them.§

Unfortunately,  too,  we  have  no  authentic
copy  of  this  treaty  ;  but  from  the  state  papers
which  were  afterwards  exchanged,  it  appears
that  in  some  articles  the  pope  stipulated  for  the
same  conditions  as  had  been  granted  to  him  by
the  king.  He  demanded  the  monopoly  of  salt
in  the  Milanese,  the  recognition  of  his  claims
on  Reggio,  and  assistance  in  the  prosecution
of  them.  He  did  not  doubt  that  the  emperor
would  accede  to  these  demands.

But  one  of  them  was  no  longer  possible.
Archduke  Ferdinand,  who  had  conducted  him-
self so  meritoriously  in  the  last  expedition,  had
taken  advantage  of  the  favourable  moment  to
conclude  a  treaty  with  Fra.ncesco  Sforza,  in
virtue  of  which  Milan  was  to  purchase  its  salt
from  Austria.il  This  was  the  first  solid  advan-
tage Austria  derived  from  her  sovereignty  in
Lombardy.

Nor  would  the  emperor  accede  to  the  other
condition. He  had  no  mind  to  make  a  forcible

*  Ziegler  Historia  dementis  Vlf.  in  Scliellliorn  Aniceni-
tates,  ii.  p.  372. Ziegler  was  then  present  at  the  court.

t  Fr.  Vettori  says  that  the  treaty  made  by  the  medi-
ator of  Alb.  Carpi  had  reference  only  to  the  free  passage
of  the  troops.  "  Solo  a  questo  che  11  papa  la  (gente)
lasciasse  passare,  pagatido  quello  aveva  bisogno;  et  i)
papa  stimo  certo,  che  chome  questa  gente  del  I'e  si  met-
teva  in  camino,  cli,e  gli  iinperiali  si  povessino  ritirare
verscLNapoli,  onde  seguirebbe  che  Francesco  diventerebbe
Signore  di  Milano  ....  et  ciascuno  di  loro  avrebbe  cura
che  I'oltro  non  diventassi  maggiore  in  Italia.

I  Contarini  Relatione  di  Spagna,  1525.  Al  papa  da-
vano  principalmente  la  colpa,  che  V.  Celsitudine  fosse
andata  cosi  ritenuta  con  S.  M».

§  Instruttione  al  C\  Farnese.  Fürsten  end  Völker,
iv.  App.  15,  (Ranke's  History  of  the  Popes,  vol.  iii.  App.
p.  32.)

[I  Rescripfum  ad  criminationes.

attack  on  the  Duke  of  Ferrara.  Moreover,  the
feudal  rights  of  the  empire  came  into  collision,
on  this  ground,  with  those  of  the  See  of  Rome.
These  the  emperor  would  on  no  account  sur-
render. He  accepted  the  treaty  in  the  main,
but  these  particular  articles  he  refused  to  ratify.

"As  our  sovereign  lord  now  saw,"  says  a
subsequent  papal  instruction,  "  that  he  was  be-
trayed ;  that,  contrary  to  all  expectation,  his
footing  with  the  emperor  was  worse  and  worse,
he  lent  an  ear  to  the  old  assertion,  that  the  em-
peror's design  was  entirely  to  subjugate  Italy;
he  therefore,  determined  to  ally  himself  with
those  who  had  a  common  cause  with  him,  in
order  to  avert  the  danger  which  threatened
him."^

It  is  evident,  therefore,  that  the  real  ques-
tions at  issue  related  to  the  north  of  Italy.
The  pope  put  forward  financial  claims  on
Milan,  and  territorial  ones  on  Ferrara;  and
these  the  emperor  refused  to  admit.

Let  us  examine  the  conduct  of  Charles  V.
Ey  his  treaties  of  15-21,  he  was  bound  to  make
an  attack  both  on  France  and  on  Ferrara.  His
allies,  on  their  side,  thought  themselves  wa^r-
ranted  in  claiming  a  share  of  the  advantages
of  the  victory.  But  their  co-operation  had
been  trifling,  their  behaviour,  latterly,  equivo-
cal ;  and  hence  the  emperor  thought  himself
exonerated  from  all  these  obligations.  The
victory  was  due  to  his  arms  alone,  and  alone
he  would  reap  the  fruits  of  it:  what  induce-
ment could  he  have  to-expose  himself  to  new
dangers  in  order  to  aggrandize  allies  of  so
doubtful  a  kind  1

'  The  situation  of  the  pope  was  in  eOect  the
same  as  that  of-  England  ;  it  marks  the  spirit
of  the  age,  that  the  pope  was  the  first  who  had
the  courage  to  oppose  the  rising  pov/ers  which
threatened  to  become  universal..  He  was  afraid
the  empire  might  once  more  become  too  power-
ful for  the  church;  and  the  idea  of  the  inde-
pendence of  Italy  haunted  him  as  it  had  done
Julius  n.  The  popes  had  hitherto  always
given  the  impulse  which  led  to  great  political  j
changes,  and  their  views  had  generally  been
carried  out.  Clement  VIL  ventured  to  present
himself  as  the  centre  of  the  opposition  to
Charles  V.

His  first  object  necessarily  was  to  bring  about
a  reconciliation  between  England  and  France.  -
As  early  as  the  8th  of  March,  Ludovico  Ca-
nossa,  in  concert  with  Giberti,**  began  to  move
in  this  affair  in  France.  On  the  16th  of  March,
the  latter  exhorted  the  papal  nuncios  in  Eng-
land to  use  all  their  influence  with  Henry  VIII.
and  Wolsey,  to  effect  an  amicable  arrangement
with  France. "I"!  In  April,  the  negotiations  were
already  known  in  the  Netherlands.  They
were  attended  with  little  difficulty  ;  especially
since  the  emperor's  reluctance  to  fulfil  his  en-
gagement to  marry  the  king's  daughter,  became
more  and  more  obvious;  whereas  Francis  I.
declared  that  he  would  enter  into  no  agreement
without  the  good  counsel  of  the  king  of  Eng-

!r  The fore-mentioned Instruttione,  (Ranke's  History
of  the  Popes,  App.  p.  32.)
**  See  a  later  letter  of  Giberti,  Lett,  di  pr.  i.  171.
It  Lettere  di  Principi,  157.

Chap.  I.

PESCARA.

249

land.*  On  the  Hth  of  July,  Wolsey,  accord-
ing to  Giberti's  report,  appeared  not  only  in-
flined  to  a  reconciliation  with  France,  but
inflamed  with  ardour  for  it.f  On  the  30th  of
June,  the  nuncios  declared  that  all  hesitation
was  at  an:  end.

Another  important  circumstance  was,  that  the
Italian  powers  once -more  assumed  an  attitude
calculated  to  inspire  respect.  To  this  end,  the
pope  had  sought  to  renew  the  ancient  alliance
with  Switzerland^  that  he  might  be  able  to
command  the  prompt  succour  of  eight  or  ten
thousand  men,  in  case  of  need.  He  had
already  established  a  good  understanding  with
the  Duke  of  Milan  and  the  Venetians.  The
fortified  places  belonging  to  the  former,  the  fine
army  maintained  by  the  latter,  (1000  lances,
500  light  horse,  and  16,000  foot,)  formed  an
admirable  basis  for  the  schemes  in  agitation,:]:
An  alliance  with  France  was  necessary,  and
was  desired  ;  but  the  first  condition  of  the
treaty  was  to  be,  a  renunciation  on  the  part  of
that  power  of  all  its  Italian  claims ;  of  those
on  Milan  in  favour  of  Sforza,  and  of  those  on
Naples  in  favour  of  the  pope.  Then  would
Italy — for  that  name  appears  once  more — bring
a  magnificent  army  into  the  field  for  the  deliver-
ance of  Francis  I.

The  persons  by  whom  the  pope  was  sur-
rounded really  indulged  the  hope  that  it  would
be  possible  to  keep  the  French  for  ever  at  a
distance ;  to  drive  out  the  Spaniards,  and  to
raise  Italy  to  the  state  in  which  she  was  before
the  year  1494.  The  feeling  of  nationality,
which  had  often  given  signs  of  its  existence,
and  especially  in  the  unrivalled  culture  of
letters  and  art,  which  was  the  pride  and  the
distinction  of  Italy,  now  took  possession  of  all
minds.  The  pope  was  strongly  inclined  to
place  himself  at  the  head  of  the  enterprise.

Meanwhile,  a  prospect  of  reaching  the  goal
of  their  wishes  with  unhoped-for  rapidity  now
opened  upon  the  papal  party.

Immediately  after  the  battle  of  Pavia,  mis-
understandings had  broken  out  between  the
imperial  commanders.  Lannoy,  who,  on  that
eventful  day,  had  done  the  least,  received  the
greatest  proofs  of  personal  favour,  and  at  length
presumed,  in  direct  opposition  to  the  decision
of  all  the  others,  to  take  the  royal  captive  on
his  own  authority  to  Spain. §  This  gave  gene-
ral disgust.  Pescara,  who  felt  that  his  ser-
vices were  not  duly  acknowledged  or  requited,
begged  for  his  dismissal;  in  order,  as  he  said,
to  close  his  life  in  some  obscure  corner  of  the
earth,  "  far  from  suspicion  and  from  war."||

*  Instructions  to  Tonstall  and  VVyngfield  :  Herbert, 168.

t  In  Wolsey's  own  handwriting  to  the  king  (St.  P.  No.
g8),  the  demands  of  the  emperor  in  reference  to  France  as
well  as  to  Milan  are  declared  to  be  exorbitant ;  his  offers
to  England,  to  be  "  lytel  or  nothing  to  your  commodite,
proufit,  or  benefit."

I  Paruta  Storia  Venetiana,  v.  p.  243.

§  Letter  of  Bourbon,  10th  June,  in  Ranmer's  Briefen,
i.  p.  '244.  It  is,  however,  officially  asserted  in  the  Refut.
ApologiiE,  that  the  journey  was  undertaken  by  the  king's
own  proposal,  "inscio  atque  inconsulto  Ceesare."

II  Sepulveda,  Hist.  vi.  1.  According  to  Jiv;  ias,  he  wished
to  retain  Carpi  orSora,  but  vi^as  put  otf  with  empty
words.  According  to  Sandoval,  i.  p.  671,  the  right  which
he  claimed  of  exacting  ransom  from  the  King  of  Navarre
whom  he  had  taken  prisoner,  was  contested.

33

This  was  known  to  the  Italians,  and  it  was,
indeed,  no  very  far-fetched  idea  to  ground  a
scheme  upon  the  discontent  of  such  a  leader.
Had  not  the  first  knight  and  captain  of  France
lately  set  an  example  of  defection  1  Was  it
impossible  to  lead  Pescara  to  a  similar  course?
He,  too,  was  born  in  Italy,  and  was,  in  the
exactest  sense  of  the  word,  an  Italian.

The  consequences  which  would  result  from
gaining  over  such  a  man  were  incalculable.
He  was  the  most  experienced  and  the  ablest
of  all  the  emperor's  generals ;  in  every  cam-
paign the  most  signal  and  successful  actions
had  been  his;  the  Spanish  infantry  were  abso-
lutely devoted  to  him.  If  they  could  succeed
in  gaining  over  the  general,  the  best  part  of  the
army  was  sure  to  follow  him,  and  the  rest
would  easily  be  destroyed.

And  magnificent  was  the  prize  they  had  to
offer  him.  The  Spaniards  were  to  be  driven
out  of  Naples  and  Sicily.  Now  it  was  im-
possible for  the  pope  to  administer  and  to  de-
fend these  countries  himself,  and  the  thought
suggested  itself,  to  reward  the  defection  of
Pescara  with  this  crown.  The  very  act  v/ould
have  bound  him  closely  to  the  Italian  powers.
The  unity  and  the  freedom  of  Italy  would  have
been  obtained  at  one  stroke.

Geromino  Morone,  the  confidential  minister
of  Sforza,  Vv^ho  had  evinced  so  much  prudence
in  preparing,  and  so  much  energy  in  effecting,
the  restoration  of  his  master — who  also  held
all  the  threads  of  the  intrigues  now  going  on
in  his  hand,  one  day  took  courage  to  open  the
matter  to  the  marquis  ;  first  extorting  from  him
a  solemn  promise,  not  to  disclose  to  any  human
being  what  he  was  about  to  say  to  him..  Hav-
ing fully  discussed  the  political  state  of  Eu-
rope, he  touched  on  the  possibility  of  freeing
themselves  from  a  foreign  yoke  which  now
offered  itself  to  the  Italians  (among  whom  he
included  Pescara)  :  he  spoke  of  the  confidence!
he  inspired ;  of  the  great  deed  expected  from
him,  and,  lastly,  he  mentioned  the  prize  by
which  that. deed  was  to  be  rew^arded.^

Such  a  proposal  was  calculated  to  excite  a
storm  of  contending  emotions  in  the  breast  of
Pescara.  The  prospect  opened  to  him  was
brilliant  and  boundless,  and  he  had  just  causes
of  displeasure  with  the  court :  on  the  other
hand,  he  was  incensed  at  the  treachery  of  the
Italians,  and  his  old  Spanish  blood  rose  in  his
veins.  He  instantly  saw  the  necessity,  and
felt  the  desire,  to  come  to  the  bottom  of  the
affair.  The  crafty  warrior  who  had  so  often
surprised  the  enemy  at  the  right  moment,  and
had  never  in  his  life  laid  him^self  open  to  at-
tack, showed  all  his  wonted  caution  and  self-
command  on  this  occasion.  "  It  is  a  great
thing  which  you  say  to  me,"  replied  he  to
Morone  ;  "  and  it  is  not  less  great  that  you  say
it  to  me." He  admitted  that  he  had  cause  to

IT  How  far  matters  went  is  shown  by  the  often-quoted
answer  of  the  emperor :  "Cum  audivisset  rnarchio  nun-
cium  ad  id  per  Vestram  Sanctitatem  transmissum,  eidem
sui  parte,  nt  ait,  offerentem  sub  cujusdam  apostolici
brevis  credentia  regni  nostri  Neapolitani  investituram

et  possessionem ut  inde  Sanctitas  Vestra  nos  etiam

ab  omni  imperiali  dienitate  depoiieret."  —  Ooldast  Pol.
Imp.  997.

250

PESCARA.

Book  IV.

be  dissatisfied;  "  but  no  dissatisfaction  in  the
world,"  continued  he,  "  could  induce  me  to  act
contrary  to  the  laws  of  honour.  If  I  quit  the
emperor's  service,  it  must  be  done  in  such  a
manner  that  the  best  knight  in  the  world  could
not  have  behaved  otherwise.  I  should  do  it
only  to  show  the  emperor  that  I  am  of  more
importance  than  certain  people  whom  he  pre-
fers before  m^e."*" '  Expressions  in  which  Mo-
rone  thought  he  perceived  a  leaning  but  slight-
ly veiled,  and  by  no  means  dubious.  This
opinion,  coinbiding  with  the  favourable  intelli-
gence from  France  and  England,  gave  wings
to  all  these  projects.  "  I  see  the  world  utterly
changed,"  exclaimed  Giberti ;  "  Italy  will
arise  out  of  the  deepest  misery  to  the  highest
felicity. "f  Writers  were  employed  completely
to  remove  Pescara's  scruples ;  couriers  were
despatched  to  make  communications  to  the
allied  courts: — the  commencement  of  the
work  was  impatiently  expected.

But,  we  may  ask,  were  the  means  contem-
plated really  of  a  nature  to  lead  to  the  desired
end  ]  The  independence  of  a  people  is  so  vast
a  good,  that,  when  once  lost,  it  can  only  be
regained  by  straining  every  physical  power
and  every  moral  faculty.  In  the  present  case,
the  need  of  it  was  first  felt  by  the  literary  class
alone;  the  mass  of  the  nation  were  unconscious
of  it :  they  had  no  military  point  of  honour  to
wound,  nor  had  they  to  complain  of  violated
legal  or  political  rights ;  the  right  of  the  em-
peror was  of  the  highest  antiquity,  and  was
incontestable.  Hence,  therefore,  the  leaders
did  not  rely  on  the  nation,  in  the  proper  sense
of  the  word.  They  thought  chiefly  of  the
favourable  conjuncture  of  circumstances,  of
foreign  aid,  and  of  this  unlooked-for  defection
of  Pescara  :  a  lucky  political  ccimbination  was
to  effect  the  whole.

But  this  soon  appeared  doubtful.  As  early
as  the  September  of  15-25,  Giberti  remarked^
that  the  intention  of  the  French  was  only  to
take  advantage  of  the  connexion  with  Italy,  in
order  to  obtain  favourable  terms  from  the  em-
peror.

Whilst  the  French  party  continued  to  reckon
on  the  defection  of  the  imperial  general,  they
learned  that  the  fortified  towns  in  the  Milanese
were  repairing.  A  courier  who  had  been  des-
patched to  France  had  disappeared  in  that  ter-
ritory; nay,  declarations  reached  them  from
the  Spanish  court,  which  seemed  to  contain
some  allusions  to  the  matter.  People  knew
not  what  to  think.  Was  Morone  a  traitor]
But  what  advantage  could  he  propose  to  him-
self, that  would  outweigh  the  detestation  he
bad  to  expect  from  Italy?  Or  was  Pescara
playing  a  double  game  1  "I  cannot  believe
it,"  says  Giberti.  "  What  he  had  done  for  the
emperor,  a  kingdom  could  not  requite;  can  he
mean  to  use  this  occasion  to  crouch  before  him

*  Personal  narrative  of  Pescara  in  a  document,  dated
30th  of  July,  1523,  in  Hormayr's  Archiv,  for  1810,  pp.
29,  30,

t  Lettera  a  Ghinucci.  Lettere  di  Principi,  i.  170.  How
then  could  Giovio  (Vita  Piscar.,  p.  408),  maintain  that
Giberti  warned  the  pope  against  these  things?

X  Al  vescovo  di  Bajusa  4.  Sett.  Ibid.

again,  and  beg  for  bis  favour  anew  1  It  were
a  sin  to  imagine  that  so  base  a  thought  could
find  place  in  so  noble  a  soul."§

And  yet  this  was  the  fact.  Pescara  was
born  in  Italy,  but  he  had  the  soul  of  a  Span-
iard. All  his  forefathers  had  devoted  their
lives  to  the  one  object  of  establishing  the  Ara-
gonese  sovereignty  in  Italy.  His  great-grand-
father, Ruy  Lopez  di  Avalos,  had  attached
himself  to  the  person  and  fortunes  of  Alfonzo
V. ;  his  son,  Inigo,  had  been  that  king's  confi-
dential adviser;  and  his  son,  Alonzo,  had  per-
ished by  the  hand  of  a  Moor,  in  the  attack  of
the  French  ;||  the  existence  of  our  hero  was
bound  up  with  the  prosperity  of  the  same  cause.
His  whole  soul  was  devoted  to  the  command
of  the  Spanish  infantry,  which  was  entrusted
to  him :  he  knew  every  one  of  his  men  by
name;  was  indulgent  to  all  their  offences,  even
their  forbidden  pillage,  and  spared  them  when-
ever it  was  possible.  It  was  enough  for  him
if  they  fought  bravely  at  the  critical  moment;
and  in  this  they  never  failed  him.  W^hen  he
marched  at  their  head,  with  his  broad  shoes  of
German  make,  his  waving  plumes  on  his  hat,
and  holding  his  drawn  sword  straight  before
him  in  both  hands,  he  was  at  the  height  of  his
felicity  and  glory.  The  Italians,  on  the  con-
trary, he  hated  ;  he  held  them  for  cowardly  and
untrustworthy  ;  there  had  even  been  examples
at  the  conquest  of  a  city,  of  his  ordering  all
the  Italian  soldiers  to  be  massacred.  People
asked  him,  "  Why, — since  they  are  your  coun-
trymen ?"  "  For  that  very  reason,"  replied
he  ;  "  they  are  my  countrymen,  and  yet  serve
the  enemy."  As,  in  his' capacity  of  general,
he  curbed  his  natural  intrepidity  by  prudence
and  caution,  so  was  he  ambitious,  high-spirited
and  arrogant,  but  always  within  the  bounds  of
loyalty  and  honour.  The  character  of  the  soul
is  determined,  more  than  is  commonly  imagined,
by  the  contemplation  of  some  Ideal.  To  ideas
like  those  which  were  prevalent  in  Italy  from
the  study  of  classical  antiquity,  Pescara  was  an
utter  stranger ;  but  the  notions  and  feelings  of
personal  devotedness  and  fidelity  which  form
the  basis  of  a  feudal  state,  and  from  which
Italy  was  the  first  to  emancipate  herself,  go-
verned all  his  thoughts  and  feelings.  He  had
grown  up  in  intercourse  with  the  heroes  of
Spanish  romance ;  perhaps  he  compared  him-
self to  the  Cid,  who,  though  offended  ^nd  re-
pulsed by  his  king,  remained  inflexibly  true  to
him,  without  bating,  for  a  single  moment,  one
jot  of  his  haughty  bearing.  Chivalrous  feeling
and  feudal  honour  were  thus  opposed  to  the
spirit  of  Italy,  whose  national  feeling  was  the
offspring  of  classical  culture,  and  who  had
thrown  off  the  political  morality  of  the  middle
ages.  That  morality  did  indeed  make  one  more
struggle  for  existence ;  but  in  doing  so,  it  be-
trayed how  much  it  had  already  been  affected
by  contact  with  the  world  of  which  Machiavelli
was  the  organ  and  the  representative.  Pescara
had  not  the  refined  moral  culture  which  would
have  led  lum  to  reject  the  proposals  made  to

§  To  Domenico  Sauli. Ibid,,  p.  174.
II  Zurita  Anales  de  Aragon,  v.  58.  b.

Chap.  I.

CONDUCT  OF  THE  EMPEROR.

251

him  with  the  disgust  and  scorn  they  merited.
He  thought,  indeed,  while  listening  to  them,
that  Morone  deserved  to  be  thrown  out  of  the-
window;  but  he  reflected  that  it  was  necessary
to  learn  the  whole  plan  in  order  to  counteract
it  effectually.  While,  therefore,  he  kept  up  a
good  understanding  with  Morone,  he  commu-
nicated the  affair,  from  the  very  first  day,  to
the  imperial  commissioners,  and  to  his  brother
commanders,  Bourbon  and  Leiva :  he  wrote
instantly  to  Insbruck  for  succours,  and  sent  a
courier  with  the  intelligence  to  Spain.  While
Giberti  was  amused  with  dreams  of  the  dawn
of  a  new  freedom  for  Italy,  he  was  already  be-
trayed.

In  September  the  emperor  gave  the  marquis
full  powers  to  act  in  the  matter  before  him  as
he  should  think  necessary.*

Nothing  was,  however,  more  necessary  than
to  get  a  firm  footing  in  Milan,  and  to  annul  all
the  claims  of  the  Sforzcis.  The  imperial  gen-
erals thought  that  without  the  concurrence  of
the  marquis  thej'^  should  all  have  been  lost.:|'

The  first  step  was  to  secure  the  person  of
Morone.  On  the  14th  Oct.  1525,  when  he  paid
a  confidential  visit  to  Pescara,  Leiva  was  con-
cealed behind  the  tapestry,  for  the  purpose  of
overhearing  the  conversation ;  and  on  Morone
rising  to  take  his  leave,  he  was  arrested.  Pes-
cara, however,  requested  the  emperor  to  grant
him  the  liberty  of  this  man,  who  might  still
be  of  great  use  if  an  occasion  offered  for  em-
ploying him.

Pescara  now  required  the  duke  to  deliver  up
the  strong  places  of  the  duchy  to  the  imperial
troops — ^^a  measure  demanded,  as  he  said,  by
the  interests  of  the  emperor's  service.  The
duke,  robbed  of  his  minister,  and  conscious  of
his  own  treacherous  conduct,  did  not  venture
to  refuse ;  especially  since  the  two  strongest,
Milan  and  Cremona,  were  left  him.

But  these  were  passed  over  in  silence  only
so  long  as  the  others  were  not  taken  possession
of:  as  soon  as  that  was  the  case,  Pescara  de-
manded the  surrender  of  the  citadels  of  Cre-
mona and  Milan.  The  duke  made  representa-
tions. Pescara  replied,  that  he  knew  from  the
letters  of  Domenico  Sauli,  the  duke's  plenipo-
tentiary in  Rome,  that  his  excellency  had
offered  the  aid  of  his  person  and  his  state  in
the  liberation  of  Italy  from  the  imperial  troops ;
and  insisted  that  at  least  the  commanders  of  the
castles  should  take  an  oath  of  fidelity  to  the
emperor.:|:  As  Sforza  refused  to  yield  to  these
demands,  Pescara  had  no  hesitation  in  employ-
ing force.  He  took  possession  of  Cremona,
and  advanced  to  besiege  the  citadel  of  Milan,
which  employed  three  thousand  Germans. §  He
immediately  impeached  the  duke  of  felony.
He  announced  to  the  emperor,  that  God  and
the  world,  and  the  dictates  of  common  sense,
required  him  to  keep  Milan  in  his  own  hands.
The  emperor  declared  his  resolution  of  letting

*  Pescara  to  Archduke  Ferdinand,  4th  Oct.  Bucholtz,
iii.  ii.

t  Letter  of  Leiva  in  Hormayr,  29,  30.

t  Pescara  to  Ferdinand,  4th  Nov. Bucholtz,  iii.  14.

§  Custode.  Continuation  of  Varri  from  the  national
chroniclers,  p.  29.

the  prosecution  take  its  course,  and  abiding  by
the  sentence  of  the  judges;  though  indeed  of
the  nature  of  this  there  could  be  no  doubt. [j

Such  was  the  result  of  this  first  attempt  of
the  Italians  to  shake  oif  the  yoke  of  foreign
armies.  As  the  principal  element  of  their  cal-
culation was  the  treason  of  Pescara,  their  en-
terprise was  rendered  abortive  by  the  fidelity
with  which  he  adhered  to  the  emperor.  Charles
could  now  reasonably  entertain  the  project  of
keeping  Milan  in  his  own  hands.

But  the  matter  was  not  yet  decided.  The
universal  hatred  entertained  for  the  imperial
troops  (who  lived  at  the  charge  of  the  inhabit-
ants) all  over  Lombardy,  and  the  obstinacy
with  which  the  citadel  of  Milan  defended
itself,  aff'orded  a  hope  that  what  had  not  been
accomplished  by  cunning  might  still  be  eff'ected
by  force.  Another  favourable  circumstance
was,  that  at  this  juncture  the  general,  who  had
always  inspired  the  most  fear,  and  now  with
I  good  reason  the  bitterest  hate — Pescara — died.
i  Above  all,  the  great  questions  at  issue  between
the  emperor  and  the  King  of  France  were
treated  in  a  manner  that  justified  the  most
confident  anticipations  of  fresh  commotions
throughout  Europe.

It  was  clear  that  the  emperor,  though  he  did
not  enter  into  the  English  plans,  overrated  the
advantages  which,  might  accrue  to  him  from
the  king's  captivity.  I  shall  not  enlarge  on
his  want  of  magnanimity ; — though  I  hold  it  to
be  perfectly  true,  that  the  power  of  freely  and
cordially  forgiving  his  enemies  was  not  in  his
nature ;  but  it  may  also  be  said  that  his  con-
duct arose  from  a  defect  of  judgment.  He  had
conquered  Milan  and  Genoa,  and  he,  probably,
thought  that  he  might  take  advantage  of  the
king's  captivity  to  induce  him  to  renounce  his
Italian  claims.  He  had  gained  nothing  what-
ever from  France  itself;  his  attack  on  that
kingdom  having  been  completely  repulsed.
He  nevertheless  dem.anded,  obstinately  and
peremptorily,  the  cession  of  Burgundy.  Nei-
ther the  illness  into  which  Francis  fell  from
vexation  and  anxiety,  nor  the  negotiations  of
his  sister,  who  had  travelled  to  Spain  on  pur-
pose to  obtain  her  brother's  liberation,  nor  the
arguments  of  his  own  councillors,  made  the
slightest  impression  on  Charles.^  He  would
hear  of  no  indemnity;  he  would  have  back  the
heritage  of  his  fathers,  whence  he  derived  the
name  and  the  arms  he  bore.  But  his  victory
was  far  from  being  complete  enough  for  this.
The  principle  of  unity  and  nationality,  which
daily  iDecame  more  and  more  powerful  in  France,
had  remained  unshaken  and  unharmed,  even
by  the  defection  of  the  constable;  it  was  but
slightly  affected  by  the  disasters  in  Italy.  Ar-
dently as  the  king's  m.other  desired  her  son's
return,  she  declared  that  it  were  better  that  he

II  Sandoval,  i.  668,  asserts  that  he  saw  the  instruments
of  infeudation  which  were  already  drawn  up  for  Bourbon ;
nay,  that  he  had  actually  been  invested  with  the  fief  with
all  due  forms.

tr  We  see  from  the  Refutatio  Apologise,  p.  877,  that
the  emperor  was  angry  because  the  Duchess  of  Alencon,
with  a  view  to  the  machinations  going  on  in  Italy,  would
not  agree  to  all  chat  the  king  had  before  pledged  himself
to ;  chiefly  because  she  wished  to  assist  him  in  making
his  escape.

252

CONDUCT  OF  FRANCIS  I.

Book  IV.

should  remain  in  prison  for  ever,  than  that  the
kingdom  should  be  dismembered.

On  the  other  hand,  purer  conceptions  of  mo-
rality and  dignity  would  have  taught  the  king
rather  to  endure  his  imprisonment  than  to  as-
sent to  conditions  which  he  was  predetermined
not  to  adhere  to.  But  this  would  have  been
asking  too  much  of  him  :  he  felt  his  situation
insupportable,  and  was  ready  to  purchase  free-
dom at  any  price.

At  length,  on  the  14th  of  January,  he  signed
the  conditions  submitted  to  him  by  the  emperor.
He  promised  to  renounce  all  his  claims  on  Italy,
on  the  suzerainty  of  Flanders  and  Artois,  and
his  alliances  with  the  enemies  of  the  emperor
in  .Germany,  Wiirtemberg,  ar^d  Gueldres ;  he
consented  to  give  up  Burgundy.  He  did  not
reject  the  supposition  that  these  concessions
were  to  put  an  end  for  ever  to  all  disputes,  and
contracted  himself  in  marriage  with  the  em-
peror's sister,  the  widowed  Queen  of  Portugal :
but  in  the  same  day — the  same  hour — nay,  one
moment  before  —  he  had  secretly  signed  a  pro-
test, in  which  he  declared  that  he  accepted  the
treaty  only  under  the  pressure  of  com})ulsion  ;
that  all  the  stipulations  contained  in  it  wore,
and  would  remain,  null  and  void  ;  and  that  he
intended  nevertheless  to  maintain  all  the  rights
appertaining  to  his  crown.*

His  ideas  of  religion  did  not  prevent  him
from  taking  an  oath  at  the  solemn  celebration
of  the  mass,  and  with  his  hand  on  the  Gospels,
never  to  break  the  treaty  all  the  days  of  his
life.

He  now  let  the  papal  legate  know  that  he  did
not  mean  to  observe  the  treaty,  [  while  he  him-
self made  overtures  towards  an  alliance  with
the  Italian  powers  :  at  the  same  time,  he  vv-ent
to  Illescas  to  celebrate  his  betrothal  with  the
emperor's  sister,  which  rested  on  the  presump-
tion that  the  treaty  would  be  executed.

The  emperor  and  the  king  now  saw  each
other  more  frequently,  rode  out  together,  were
carried  in  the  same  litter,  and  called  each  other
brother.  They  took  leave  near  Illescas,  be-
neath a  crucifix  which  stands  at  the  point
v/here  the  roads  to  Madrid  and  Toledo  divide.
•'Brother,"  said  the  emperor,  "think  on  what
we  have  promised  each  other."  The  king  re-
plied, "  I  could  repeat  the  articles,  without
missing  a  word."  "Tell  me  the  truth,"  said
Charles,  "are  you  minded  to  keep  them?"
"  Nothing  in  my  kingdom  shall  hinder  me
from  doing  so,"  replied  Francis.  The  emperor
then  said,  "  One  thing,  I  pray  you ;  if  you
mean  to  deceive  me  in  any  thing,  let  it  not
concern  my  sister,  your  bride;  for  she,"  added
he,  "  would  not  be  able  to  revenge  herself.":}:

We  see  the  lowering  tempest  which  slum-
bered behind  this  appearance  of  confidence.

Immediately  after,  in  a  bark  on  the  Bidas-
soa,  Francis  was  exchanged  for  his  two  sons,
the  dauphin  and  the  future  king  Henry  IL,  who
were  to  be  left  as  hostages  for  the  performance

*  Treaty  and  protest  in  Du  Mont,  iv.  1.  399,  412.
t  ^iherti  to  the  Bishop  of  Bajusa,  Lettere  di  Principi,
ij.  If.  31,  b,

I  Narrative  in  Sandeval,  i.  717.

of  his  engagements.  '  "  Sire,"  said  Lannoy,
"  your  highness  is  now  free  ;  fulfil  now  what
you  have  promised."  "All  will  be  fulfilled,"
said  the  king,  and  sprang  into  the  French  boat.
He  was  now  once  more  among  his  own  people,  '
and  saw  himself  received  with  all  the  marks
of  respect  of  which  he  had  so  long  been  de-
prived :  he  felt  completely  himself  again.
Mounting,  as  soon  as  he  touched  land,  a  Turk-
ish horse  that  stood  ready  caparisoned,  he
exclaimed,  "I  am  the  king,  the  king!"  and
galloped  off.§  '

This  was  the  moment  for  which  the  Italians
had  been  waiting.

When  the  terms  of  the  peace  of  Madrid  were
reported  to  the  pope,  he  declared  that  he  ap-
proved them,  provided  the  king  did  not  observe
them:  the  only  difference  would  then  be,  that
the  emperor  would  have  the  king's  sons  in  his
custody,  instead  of  the  king,  which  would  avail
him  little. II  He  now  absolved  the  king  from
his  oath;*^  he  caused  it  to  be  represented  to
him  in  common  with  the  Venitians,  what  an
excellent  army  was  already  in  the  field ;  that
it  would  not  be  very  difficult  to  extort  better
terms ;  that  if  he  was  but  resolute,  and  would
take  up  arms  for  the  relief  of  his  sons  and  the
deliverance  of  Italy,  the  Italians  too  would
show  themselves  men,  and  would  not  yield
themselves  up  to  the  will  of  the  emperor.

For  a  moment  the  king  paused  :  he  hesifated
to  enter  into  this  alliance.  He  convoked  the
notables  of  Burgundy ;  and  resting  on  their
declaration,  that  the  King  of  France,  in  virtue
of  the  ancient  compacts  of  the  province  with
the  crown,  had  no  right  whatever  to  cede  it,**
he  repeated  to  the  emperor  his  former  proposal
of  giving  an  indemnity  for  it  in  money.  He
probably  thought  the  ferment  in  Italy  would
induce  Charles  to  accept  this  offer. j-f

Let  us  pause  to  examine  the  situation  of  the
emperor.  At  his  court  and  among  his  most
faithful  servants  the  treaty  had  experienced
great  opposition,  not  on  account  of  the  exor-
bitance of  its  demands,  but  of  the  slender  secu-
rity afforded  for  its  observance  ;,  they  said  the
conditions  were  very  good  as  child's  play,  but
nothing  more  :  nevertheless,  suppressing  a  se-
cret anxiety  which  he  too  felt,  he  had  concluded
it: — he  had  already  appointed  a  governor  of
Burgundy  who  was  on  the  way  thither ;  his
sister  waited  in  Vittoria  for  the  execution  of
the  treaty  in  order  to  enter  France  as  queen ; —
and  now  he  received  this  proposal, — the  same
he  had  before  rejected. He  saw  that  Francis

§  Report  in  Sandoval,  i.  738.

II  The  BisJiop  of  Worcester  to  Wolsey,  12th  Jan.  7th
Feb.  Raumer,  i.  247.

IT  Sandoval,  i.  746.  "  Embio  el  papa  al  rey  de  Francia
relaxacion  del  juramento  que  avia  hecho  :"— There  is  in
Rainaldus  a  similar  release  from  an  oath,  dated  3d  July,
1526.  XX.  4C0.

**  The  emperor  did  not  much  regard  this  declaration  ;
Apologise  dissuasorite  Refutatio,  p.  884.  "Satis  plane
constat,  eos  duntaxat  vocatos  quos  rex  ipse  aniea  stipen-
diarjos  et  juratos  habebat."

tt  Official  information  in  the  Oratio  ad  Proceres  Ger-
mania; in  fonventu  Ratisbon  1527,  in  Goldast.  Polit.  i.  p.
902.  "Conditionem  ultro  sibi  delatam  tantisper  acci-
pere  sustinuit,  dum  legatis  rursus  missis  ultimum  expe-
riretur.

Chap.  I.

LEAGUE  OF  COGNAC.

253

thought  he  should  compel  him  by  the  fear  of
hostilities  in  Italy  :  the  consciousness  that  he
had  not  condacted  the  affair  well,  the  vexation
at  being  deceived,  the  wounded  feeling  of
knightly  honour,  the  pride  of  power — all  arose
at  once  within  him.  He  answered  the  king,
that  if  he  was  prevented  from  fulfilling  the
conditions  of  his  freedom,  he  had  better  return
to  his  captivity,  where  a  fresh  agreement  might
then  be  made.*

•  In  earlier  ages  this  would  have  been  done  ;
those  times  were  past.  The  king  did  not  hesi-
tate to  conclude  his  treaty  with  the  Italian
states  on  the  22d  May,  1526,  at  Cognac.  The
terms  proposed  were,  that  the  emperor  should
be  required  to  give  up  the  French  princes  forli
ransom,,  cede  Milan  to  Francesco  Sforza,  and
restore  the  States  of  Italy  in  general  to  the
condition  in  which  they  were  before  the  break-
ing out  of  hostilities  ;  further,  on  his  progress
to  his  coronation  he  was  to  be  escorted  by  no
more  troops  than  the  pope  and  Venice  thought
fit  to  permit :  the)''  thought  to  treat  him  as  they
had  formerly  treated  IMaximilian.  They  deter-
mined to  lay  these  conditions  before  him  as
soon  as  they  had  equipped  a  powerful  army,
and  if  he  refused  to  accept  them,  which  did  not
admit  of  a  doubt,  to  drive  him  out  of  Naples,
the  subsequent  disposal  of  which  the  pope  re-
served to  himself.f

It  was  a  combination  of  the  whole  of  West-
ern Europe  to  counteract  the  consequences  of
the  battle  of  Pavia ;  to  check  the  preponder-
ance, the  vievv's  and  the  fortune  of  the  house
of  Burgundy.  These  objects  had  the  concur-
rence of  England.  The  king  and  the  cardinal
exhorted  Francis  not  to  fulfil  engagements
which  would  make  him  the  servant  of  Spain. +:
They  did  every  thing  in  their  power  to  promote
the  Ligue,§  though  Henry  VIII.  did  not  deem
it  expedient  to  become  a  member  of  it.

At  the  court  of  Rome,  the  ideas  which  had
been  cherished  a  year  before,  now  revived  with
redoubled  strength.  There  was  no  longer  a
question  of  a  struggle  for  the  sovereignty  of
Italy  between  the  two  princes.  Francis  de-
manded no  more  than  Asti  and  the  feudal  su-
periority of  Genoa ;  and  hopes  were  really
entertained  that  Italy  would  be  restored  to  the
state  in  which  she  was  in  1494.  The  Vene-
tians showed  an  enthusiasm  not  inferior  to  that
displayed  at  Rome :  their  ambassador,  Fran-
cesco Foscari,  boasts  that  it  was  he  who  had
held  the  pope  fast  to  his  resolutions  ;  the  Re-
public promised  to  do  wonders.  The  Floren-
tines were  completely  at  the  pope's  disposal,
and  it  v/as  reported  from  Piedmont  that  the
duke  wished  to  emancipate  himself  from  the
imperial  domination.  The  papal  party  thought
themselves secure of the assistance  of  the

*  Charles  relates  this  himself  in  the  before  quoted  Re-
futation.

t  Traite  de  confederation,  appelle  la  Sainte  Ligue,  in
Damont,  iv.  i.  451.

J  Extract  from  Cheney's  Instructions,  in  Fiddes,  380.

§  "That  the  leegge  shold  be,  by  all  meanys  possibyll,
sett  forwardys."  Clerk  to  Wolsey,  31st  May,  St.  P.,  p.
134.  In  a  paper  of  the  9th  Oct.  (p.  130.)  Wolsey  ascril)es
the  league  especially  to  the  king.  "Your  Highness,  by
wliois  counsaile  this  liege  had  been  begon."
W

French,  as  the  king  had  so  strong  a  personal
interest  in  the  war;  and  they  reckoned  with
greater  certainty  than  ever  on  the  Swiss,  v,'hose
diets  would  be  subject  to  the  combined  in-
fluence of  the  courts  of  France  and  of  Rome ;
the  King  of  England,  it  was  hoped,  would
accept  the  protectorate  of  the  alliance,  which
was  offered  him,  or  at  least  consent  to  advance
money.  Could  the  imperial  army  possibly
withstand  so  many  united  forces  1  Francesco
Sforza  still  held  out  in  the  castle  of  Milan ;
the  people  were  ripe  for  insurrection  ;  they
thought  they  could  destroy  the  flower  of  the
imperial  troops  on  tiie  spot.||  The  letters  of
the  Datarius  Giberti,  who  at  length  saw  him-
self in  the  position  he,  had  always  desired,
breathe  all  the  d^etermination  whicii  a  grand
and  noble  enterprise  inspires.  In  June,  1526,
the  emperor  proposed  the  mildest  and  most
moderate  conditions  to  the  pope.  Clement
VIL,  having  already  joined  the  Ligue,  rejected
them  without  hesitation. *ir

Open  war  once  more  broke  out  betwee^n  the
two  greatest  povvers  of  Europe.  But,  in  the
situation  of  things  and  the  stage  of  civilization
which  now  prevailed,  it  became  evident  that
the  emperor  had  other  weapons  within  his
grasp  than  had  ever  been  wielded  by  his  pre-
decessors. These  he  determined  to  employ.

CHAPTER  II.

DIET OF SPIRE, A.  D. 1526.

'  The  events  of  Italy  necessarily  reacted  vi'ith
no  inconsiderable  force  on  Germany.

The  attack  on  the  emperor  was  an  attack  on
the  rights  of  tlie  empire ;  and  Charles,  v/ith
great  dexterity  and  tact,  pointed  the  public  at-
tention to  the  fact  that  no  mention  was  made
of  the'  empire  in  the  treaty  of  Cognac ;  it
seemed  to  be  regarded  indeed  as  already  dis-
possessed of  all  its  rights.  In  all  former
years,  it  v/as  its  German  forces  which  had
decided  its  conquests  in  Italy.  In  the  present
war,  more  perilous  than  any  preceding,  it  was
to  them  it  must  look  for  efficient  support.  It
could  not  be  a  matter  of  indifference  to  the
nation  whether  the  empire  should  have  any
significance  in  Italy,  or  none.

Weighty,  however,  as  this  consideration
was,  it  was  in  truth  the  less  important  side  of
the  matter.

yhe  mind  and  heart  of  the  nation  was  in-

|(  Giberti  to  Don  Michele  de  Silva,  1st  July.  Lett,  di
Princ,  i.  230.  See  Provisinni  per  la  guerra  che  disegnö
Pp.  demente  Vil.  contra  I'iniperatnre.  Inform  Politt.
torn.  xii.  no.  46.  [t  appears  from  this  that  there  was  an
intention  of  acting  at  the  same  time  against  IVlilan,
Genoa,  Naples,  and  Sienna,  where  the  imperialist  party
prevailed  ;— in  Sienna  with  the  aid  of  the  exiled  party;
in  Naples  with  the  aid  of  the  Orsini ;  they  were  deter-
mined to  suffer  no  assemblage  of  Spaniards  in  the  towns,
and  no  correspondence  withSpain.  Tiiey  were  to  accept
the  offer  of  the  Duke  of  Savoy,  so  that  the  cause  might
appear  to  be  that  of  the  whole  of  Italy.

TT  Sanga  to  Sambara,  19th  June. Ibid.,  210.

254

IMPERIAL  ADMONITION.

Book  IV.

comparably  more  actively  engaged  in  the  spi-
ritual interests, — -in  the  great  questions  which
embraced  the  whole  moral  and  intellectual  fu-
turity of  the  world.  We  know  how  mighty
an  influence  political  affairs  had  from  the  first
exercised  on  the  emperor's  conduct  with  regard
to  these  questions :  the  edict  of  Worms,  the
revocation  of  the  summons  for  the  assembly  at
Spire,  had  been  the  fruits  of  his  alliance  with
the  pope  :  to  please  him,  he  had  assumed  an
air  of  strict  adherence  to  the  ancient  church  ;
it  remained  to  be  seen  w^iether  he  would  main-
tain it.

In  the  spring  of  152G,  there  was  still  every
appearance  that  he  would  not  depart  from  it  a
hair's  breadth.  Henry  of  Brunswick,  who
had  just  then  arrived  in  Spain,  obtained  .from
the  emperor  declarations  v/iiich  sounded  as
decided  as  ever.

In  fact  he  had  arrived  in  a  moment  the  most
favourable  that  could  be  conceived  for  the  pro-
posal he  had  to  make  in  his  own  name  and  the
names  of  his  friends.

The  peace  of  Madrid  vv^as  concluded;  and
the  court  was  persuaded  that  t^e  great  dispute
with  France  was  thus  settled  forever.*  Hence
the  views  of  the  government  w^ere  rather  di-
rected towards  Germany.  If  we  examine  this
peace  more  nearly,  we  shall  find  that  it  in-
volved not  only  the  adjustment  of  personal^
and  political  disputes,  but  also  an  agreement
upon  a  common  enterprise  against  the  Turks,
and  "against  heretics  who  have  severed  them-
selves from  the  hosom  of  the  holy  church;"
the  two  contracting  princes  already  entreat  the
pope  to  co-operate  with  them  b}^  ecclesiastical
concessions."!"  It  was  left  to  the  good  pleasure
of  the  emperor  with  which  of  these  under-
takings to  begin,  and  when  to  set  about  them.
It  was  Francis's  own  voluntary  offer,  that  if
the  emperor  would  make  war  either  upon  the
infidels  or  the  Luiherans,  he  would  bear  half
the  cost  and  accompany  the  array  in  person. ±

In  the  days  in  which  people  still  believed
in  the  execution  of  this  treaty, — when  the  king
returned  to  his  kingdom,  Leonora  prepared  to
follow  him,  and  Orange  to  take  possession  of
Burgundy, — that,  in  th^  midst  of  all  the  mag-
nificent solemnities  of  the  church  with  which
the  marriage  of  the  emperor  with  a  princess
of  Portugal  was  celebrated  at  Seville,  the  pro-
posals of  Duke  Henry  were  brought  under  dis-

*  "  Nach  dem  langen  Trübsal  und  Krie?,"  writes  Hein-
rich von  Nassau  from  the  Spanish  court  to  iiis  brother  in
Dillenburg,  "  hat  uns  Gott  den  heiligen  Frieden  wieder-
gegeben."— "  After  the  long  misery  and  war,  God  has
again  given  us  blessed  peace."  Toledo,  22d  Jan.:  Ar-
iioldi,  p.  20:?.

t  Pour  dresser  tons  les  moyens  convenables  pour  ies
dites  emprises  et  expeditions  tant  contre  les  dits  Turcs  et
infideies  que  contre  les  dits  her6tiques  alien6s  du  greme
de  la  sainte  6glise. Art.  26.

J  Apolngiffi  DissuasoriiE  Refiitatio,  in  Goldast.  Pol.  Imp.
884.  "  Q,uod  inquit  (autor  apoiogiie),  quocumque  profi-
cisceretur  Caesar,  illuc  etiam  maxima  cum  milituin  manu
regi  eundum  erat,"—"  on  the  part  of  the  French  this  was
one  motive  for  refusing  to  carry  out  the  treaty,"— "  hie
profecto  se  proprio  gladio  percutit,  quum  potissime  rex
ipse  id  obtulerit,  ut  si  Caesari  adversus  hostes  fidei  eundum
esset  aut  in  Lutheranos  moxendum,isdimidinm  impensje
custineret,  et  si  Cajsari  gratum  esset,  cum  eo  personaliter
adesset,  quam  oblationemCassar  pro  Christiante  religionis
augmento  respuendam  non  censuit."

cussion  in  that  splendid  and  stately  court.
They  were  extremely  welcome,  and  he  received
the  most  encouraging  answer.  On  the  23d  of
March,  1526,§  the  emperor  issued  an  admoni-
tion to  certain  princes  and  lords  of  the  empire,
to  remain  steadfast  in  the  old  faith,  arid  to  use
their  influence  with  their  neighbours,  that  the
heretical  doctrines  which  were  the  cause  of  all
the  disturbances  might  be  wholly  eradicated.
In  this  document  he  commends  the  anti-Lu-
theran alliance  which  had  been  concluded  be-
tween Duke  Henry,  Duke  George,  Elector
Albert,  and  some  other  princes.  He  announces
his  intention  of  shortly  going  to  Rome ;  after
which  he  would  resort  to  every  measure  for
the  radical  extirpation  of  heresy.  Admonitions
of  this  sort  were  addressed  to  the  Counts  of
Nassau  and  Königstein,  to  the  Bishop  of  Stras-
burg, and  Duke  Erich  of  Calenberg.  The  two
former  were  to  communicate  with  the  counts
on  the  Rhine,  in  the  Westerwald,  and  the  Ne-
therlands ;  the  bishop  with  the  princes  of  Upper,
and  the  duke  with  those  of  Lower  Germany. j)
The  emperx)r,  as  we  perceive,  entirely  shared
the  ideas  of  the  orthodox  party  in  Germany,
which  indeed  was  observed  to  display  unwont-
ed spirit  and  boldness  from  the  time  of  Duke
Henry's  arrival.  Duke  George  was  reported
to  say  that  if  he  liked  he  could  be  elector  of
Saxony.^  His  chancellor  one  day  in  Torgau
expressed  himself  to  the  effect,  that  the  Lu-
theran affair  would  not  last  long;  people  had
better  take  care  what  they  were  about.

This,  however,  necessarily  obliged  the  op-
posite party  to  rally  all  their  forces,  towards
which,  indeed,  they  had  already  taken  some
steps.  The  alliance  which  had  been  talked
(?f  at  the  end  of  the  former  year  was  now  really
brought  to  bear.

It  is  commonly  called  the  league  of  Torgau,
but  it  was  only  ratified  on  the  side  of  Saxony
in  Torgau  ;  it  was  concluded  about  the  end  of
February,  1526,  at  Gotha.

Here,  in  pursuance  of  the  arrangement  made
by  their  several  envoys  at  Augsburg,  the  Elec-
tor of  Saxony  and  the  Landgrave  of  Hessen
met,  and  agreed  to  stand  by  each  other  with
all  their  might,  in  case  they  were  attacked  on
account  of  the  w^ord  of  God,  or  the  removal
of  abuses.  According  to  the  first  draft,  the
union  was  to  subsist  only  "until  a  christian
and  equitable  adjustment  should  be  effected  at
the  next  diet  of  the  empire."  It  seems,  how-
ever, that  this  clause  was  afterwards  thought
too  restrictive,  and  it  was  omitted.  It  was  also
specified  that  they  would  afford  each  other  the
needful  help  "  at  their  own  cost  and  damage."
As  the  reigning  princes  treated  in  person,  no

§  The  exchange  of  Francis  I.  took  place  on  the  IGth
March.  The  first  letters  must  have  arrived  about  the  23d  :
in  tiiese  Francis  still  promised  to  hold  to  the  treaty.  Even
in  Cognac,  Francis  I.  said  to  the  viceroy,  Lannoy,  that
the  protest  of  the  Burgundians  was  of  no  importance. —
ßefutatio  Apologiee.

II  In  the  Weim.  Arch.  See  Rommell,  Urkundenbuch,
p.  13.

TT  See  Rommel,  Ind.  p.  22.  From  Duke  George's  answer,
it  appears  that  he  had  only  said  that  the  councillors  could
be  electors  of  Saxony  if  they  willed  it,  i.  e.  they  couiri
administer  the  aflairs  of  the  electorate.  It  appears  as  if
he  merely  sought  to  explain  away  what  he  had  said.

Chap.  IL

MEETING  AT  MAGDEBURG.— DIET  QF  SPIRE,  1526.

255

protocol  was  taken  of  their  conferences ;  but
thus  much  is  clear, — that  in  the  course  of  their
deliberations  the  ties  between  them  were  gradu-
ally drawn  closer.*

But  the  alliance  of  two  princes,  although
among  the  most  powerful  in  the  empire,  could
effect  little:  they  immediately  determined,  ac-,
cording  to  their  former  intentions,  to  try  to
induce  other  states  of  the  empire  to  join 'them.
Each  of  them  accordingly  began  with  his  near
friends  and  old  allies ;  Philip,  with  those  of
the  Oberland ;  Elector  John,  with  the  Low
Germans.

Their  success  was  very  unequal.  In  the
Oberland,  public  opinion  was  not  yet  favour-
able to  a  positive  league.  The  Nürnbergers
had  shown  themselves  well  disposed  at  the
last  diet,  but  in  Gotha  they  declared,  *' they
would  respectfully  await  the  time  of  his  Impe-
rial Majesty  and  the  next  diet."  They  feared
the  emperor  might  conceive  displeasure  against
them  and  abandon  them  to  their  enemies.  The
Landgrave  then  applied  to  Frankfurt,  but  the
council  declined  the  proposal ;  and  an  alliance
with  the  people,  who,  the  Landgrave  was  as-
sured, would  find  means  to  force  the  council
to  do  as  they  would  have  it,  would  have  been
a  dangerous  precedent.-  The  Elector  of  Treves
v/as  out  of  the  question;  he  abandoned,  at  this
very  moment,  the  place  in  the  opposition  which
he  had  hitherto  held,  and  accepted  a  pension
of  6000  gulden  from  the  emperor  and  his  bro-
ther.f  It  was  impossible  to  bring  the  Elector
Palatine  to  a  resolution :  at  a  fresh  interview
with  the  Landgrave,  he  declared,  indeed,  that
he  would  venture  person  and  property  in  the
cause,  but  he  did  not  accept  the  proffered  alli-
ance ;  he  only  held  out  the  hope  that  he  would
join  it  at  the  diet ;  he  also  raised  sopae  objec-
tions to  the  draft  of  the  treaty .±

On  the  other  hand,  the  negotiations  of  the
Elector  of  Saxony  in  Lower  Germany  were
eminently  successful.  There  Vv-ere  a  number
of  princes  who  had  always  been  attached  to
the  house  of  Saxony,  some  of  whom  were  nearly
akin  to  it.  After  some  preliminary  negotiations,
Duke  Ernest  of  Lüneburg,  Philip  of  Gruben-
hagen,  Henry  of  Mecklenburg,  Prince  Wolf
of  Anhalt,  and  Count  Albert  of  Mansfeld,  re-
paired, on  the  invitation  of  the  elector,  to  Mag-
deburg. §  On  the  appointed  day,  9th  June,
Elector  John  with  his  son  and  his  cousin  also
arrived  at  Lüneburg,  AU  were  alarmed  at  the
admonition  issued  by  the  emperor  from  Seville,
which  had  only  now  come  to  their  knowledge.
On  the 10th  of  June,  the proceedings  were

*  The  documents  in  the  Weim.  Arch.  The  ratirication
at  Torpau  took  place  on  the  4th  March.  See  Hortleder,
i.  viii.  1.

t  Excerpt  of  the  treaty  in  BuchoUz,  ix.  5.

J  "  Da  wolle  man,  saste  er,  die  N'otel  weiter  stellen," —
"  It  was  intended,  he  said,  to  extend  the  terms."  Letter
of  tlie  Landgrave  to  the  Elector,  Wednesday  after  Palm
Sunday,  28th  March. W.  A.

§  It  rnns  thus  :  "  In  Meinung  und  in  Sachen  des  gött-
lichen Wortes,  damit,  so  der  Reichstag  Fortgang  gewönne,
die  Sache  in  christlichen  Bedenken  zuvor  berathschlagt
wäre."  "  In  the  opinion  and  cause  of  the  Word  of  God,
so  that  as  the  diet  proceeded,  the  affair  should  first  be
subjected  to  Christian  deliberation. "  Instruction  for
Caspar  V.  Minkwitz,  which  was  sent  to  George  of  Bran-
denburg, who,  however,  did  not  appear. W.  A.

opened ;  Electoral  Saxony  spoke  first :  he  re-
minded the  assembled  princes  of  the  danger
which  threatened  them  from  the  alliance  formed
at  Mainz,  and  from  the  document  in  question;
and  of  the  necessity  of  giving  in  an  unanimous
declaration  at  the  next  diet.  The  compact
entered  into  by  Saxony  and  Hessen  was  then
laid  before  them,  together  with  the  proposal  to
join  it.  They  were  all  willing  :  on  ihe  12th
of  June  they  signed  the  treaty,  as  it  had  been
drawn  up  at  Gotha  and  ratified  at  Torgau,  and
appended  their  several  seals  to  it.||

It  is  especially  remarkable  that  the  princes
did  not  disdain  to  receive  into  their  alliance  a
city,  which,  it  is  true,  enjoyed  great  franchises,
but  had  by  no  means  the  rank  or  charactfer  of
an  immediate  imperial  city — Magdeburg,  where
their  meeting  was  held.'if  It  was  important  to
them  as  a  central  point  for  all  the  States  of
Lower  Germany ;  and  moreover  it  was  desir-
able for  them  that  it  should  be  able  to  maintain
itself  against  the  archbishop  without  their  aid.

Such  was  the  first  formation  of  a  compact
evangelical  part}-;  in  presence  of  the  imminent
danger  which  threatened  them  from  the  union
of  the  emperor  with  their  antagonists,  they
united  to  defend  the  truth  they  acknowledged,
and  above  all,  to  prevent  the  passing  of  any
hostile  resolution  at  the  ensuing  diet.  It  v.as
an  extension  of  the  old  Saxon  alliance  from
religious  motives.

Such  were  the  preparations  made  on  either
side  for  a  decisive  struggle,  when,  in  the  sum-
mer of  1526,  the  diet  was  convoked  at  Spire.
The  Proposition  was  laid  before  the  diet  on
the  25th  of  June,  and  brought  the  affairs  of
the  church  immediately  under  discussion.**  It
was  couched  in  terms  which  might  be  satisfac-
tory to  both  parties.  The  States  were  herein
exhorted  to  consult  as  to  ways  and  means,
"  whereby  Christian  faith  and  well-established
good  Christian  practice  and  order  might  be
maintained  until  the  meeting  of  a  free  council."
Measures  were  proposed  for  insuring  obedience
to  the  im.perial  edicts  and  the  decrees  which
were  now  about  to  be  passed.  It  is  remark-
able how  gently  the  edict  of  Worms  is  alluded
to  in  this  last  passage. |f

i!  Haiuilung  uf  den  Tas  zu  Magdeburg.  The  Proceedings
at  the  Diet  at  Magdeburg,— properly,  instructions  for  the
proceedings  at  this  meeting.  "  Ferner  ist  bedacht,  das
Bundniss  so  uns.  gn.  Herr  mit  dem  Landgrafen  zu  Gotha
aufgericht,  den  Fürsten  freundlich  und  vertraulich  zu
zeigen,  und  wo  I.  F.  Gn.  auch  darein  willigen  und  schleis-
sen  wollten,  als  u.  gn.  Hr.  sich  genzlichen  versehen  auch
frundlich  bitten  thäte,  sollt  alsdann  solch  Bundniss  durch
eine  Beschreibung  immaassen  mit  u.  gns'<^°  Herrn  vorge-
lueldt  (dem  Landgrafen)  auch  aufgericht  und  vollzogen
v/erden."  "  Further  it  is  intended  to  show  in  friendship
and  confidence  to  the  princes,  the  treaty  which  our  gra-
cious  lord  has  made  with  the  landgrave  at  Gotha :  and
should  the  princes  a^ree  and  be  willing  to  enter  into  it,
as  our  gracious  lord  fully  expected  and  cordially  request-
ed, then  should  this  treaty  be  concluded  and  ratified,  by  a
written  contract  to  that  intent  with  our  gracious  lord
aforementioned  (the  landgrave)."

IT  "At  your  humble  seeking,  praj'er,  and  request,"  says
the  elector,  "  we  have  included  the  burgheripaster,  coun-
cillers, and  guildmasters  of  the  old  city  of  Magdeburg  in
this  Christian  agreement,  because  we  know  that  by  God's
grace  they  are  well  inclined  to  the  godly  word."

**  According  to  the  report  of  Esslingen  of  the  1st  of
April,  signed,  "  Ferdinandus  Archi.  Aust.  C.  in  Imp.  Lo
cut,"  F.  A.  vol.  xli.

tt  Extract  in  Neudecker's  Actenstiicken,  p.  21.

256

BIET  OF  SPIRE,  1526.

Book  IV.

The  deliberations  began  in  the  Colleges  of
the  Princes,  and  in  them,  too,  the  first  resolu-
tions were  indifferent.  It  was  laid  down  as  a
principle  that,  in  affairs  of  faith,  no  decision
should  be  come  to,  and  that  the  old  established
good  customs  should  be  observed  ; — a  principle
which  each  party  might  interpret  in  its  own
sense.  But  it  was  different  when  they  came
to  speak  of  the  abuses  which  must  be  reformed.
The  clergy  required  that  this  matter  should  be
referred  to  a  council  ;  it  could  not,  they  said,
be  within  the  competence  of  a  diet  to  separate
the  good  from  the  evil.  On  the  other  hand,
the  laity  did  not  choose  to  be  again  put  off:
they  declared  that  the  common  people  were  so
far  instructed  that  they  would  no  longer  suffer
themselves  to  be  led  with  the  same  simple  cre-
dulity as  heretofore.  They  had  on  their  side
the  cogency  of  circumstances,  the  reasonable-
ness of  their  purpose,  and  even  the  words  of
the  Proposition — that  good  customs  should  be
maintained  and  evil  ones  severed  from  them
and  rejected.  In  spite  of  the  vehement  resist-
ance made  by  the  clergy,  who  appeared  in
great  numbers,  it  was  at  length  resolved  to  dis-
cuss the  reformation  of  abuses,  and  to  enforce
universal  obedience  to  whatever  might  be
agreed  on.  The  clergy  had  the  consolation  of
thinking  that  they  would  have  their  share  of
influence  in  determining  what  the  abuses  were
which  it  was  desirable  to  remove.*

But  it  instantly  became  evident  that  they
were  at  a  great  disadvantage  even  here.

The  cities  to  which  the  resolution  of  the
princes  was  communicated  on  the  30th  of  June,
received  it  with  joy;  but  the  interpretation
which  they  instantly  affixed  to  it  was  quite
nnequivccal.  In  their  answer  they  declared
that,  by  good  customs  no  other  could  be  under-
stood but  such  as  were  not  contrary  to  faith  in
Christ.  But  it  w^as  notorious  to  all  how  many
directly  opposed  to  this,  had,  to  the  universal
corruption,  crept  into  the  church.  It  was  a
great  joy  to  them  to  learn  that  these  were  to
be  abolished."]-

On  the  4th  of  Julj^,  when  the  bishops  took
their  seats  in  the  council  of  princes,  they  op-
posed the  reception  of  this  declaration  :  they
maintained  that  the  disturbed  state  of  the  people
arose  not  from  the  alleged  abuses,  but  from  se-
ditious writings  and  discourses;  in  the  heat  of
debate,  one  of  them  let  fall  the  expression,  that
it  would  be  better  if  all  the  books  that  v/ere
printed  were  burned  every  eighth  year.  Such
exaggeration  and  violence  could  of  course  in-
jure only  themselves ;  they  were  reproached
wath  v.'ishing  to  stifle  all  science,  art,  and
reason,'  The  answer  of  the  cities  w'as  accepted
as  it  stood.

*  The  judgment  in  the  Frankf.  Acten,  vol.  xlii.  Otto  von
Pack  gives  to  Dtike  Georfre  of  Saxony  an  account  of  the
'proceedings.  Vis.  Mar.  2:1  July.  (Dresrien  Arch.)  "1st
daruf  gestanden,  class  der  einig  Artikel  den  Reichstag  solt
zutrennt  haben,  wenn  dy  Geystlichen  nicht  bewilligt  das
»y  von  den  IVIissbrauclien  wollten  handeln  lassen."  "It
is  agreed,  that  the  only  circumstance  which  should  have
power  to  dissolve  the  diet  should  be,  the  clergy  not  con-
senting to  any  arrangement  concerning  the  abuses  of  the
church."

t  The  answer  of  the  cities,  printed  by  Kapp  and  Walch,
xvi.  24ti.

Upon  this  the  whole  diet  of  the  empire  was
now  broken  up  into  various  commissions,  for
the  reform  of  spiritual  abuses  ; — one  of  electors,
one  of  princes,  and  one  of  cities — in  the  same
manner  as  had  been  formerly  adopted  at  Worms,
for  the  discussion  of  the  charges  against  the
papal  see.

The  sentiment  of  dislike  and  distrust  of  the
clergy  which  reigned  in  the  nation  became
also  the  prevailing  one  in  the  diet.  "  The
clergy,"  says  the  Frankfurt  envoy,  "  seek  no-
thing but  their  ovfn  advantage,  and  neglect  the
public  good."q;:  We  find  the  same  complaints
in  the  letters  of  the  envoy  of  Ducal  Saxony,
notwithstanding  the  strict  Catholicism  of  his
master.  "The  greater  part  of  the  clergy,"  he
says,  "have  only  their  own  aggrandizement
in  their  eye;  they  cannot  deny  the  mischief
created  by  the  abuses  tha^  have  crept  into  the
church,  yet  they  Vvdll  eradicate  none.  There
is  more  solicitude  for  the  true  interests  of
Christianity  to  be  discerned  among  the  laity
than  among  the  clergy. "§

It  may  be  easily  imagined  how  greatly  this
disposition  of  the  public  mind  was  heightened,
by  the  arrival  of  the  allied  princes  of  the  evan-
gelical party.

The  Elector  of  Saxony  appeared  with  the
state  befitting  the  most  puissant  prince  of  the
empire.  He  rode  in  at  the  head  of  a  numerous
retinue  of  horsemen :  seven  hundred  persons
lived  daily  at  his  charge,  and  his  followers
boast  how  well  they  fared  in  his  service.  He
was  good-humoured  and  magnificent.  One  diy
he  gave  a  banquet,  at  which  twent5r-six  princes
dined  with  him ;  they  were  seated  at  four  tables,
their  nobles  and  councillors  at  separate  ones  ;
some  went  awa)''  early,  others  stayed  till  ten
o'clock,  and  played  high.  The  Landgrave,  on
the  other  hand,  with  his  earnest  and  learned
zeal,  made  a  great  impression :  he  showed  him-
self more  deeply  versed  in  the  Scriptures  than
any  of  the  bishops. [j  Both  these  princes  had
admonished  their  people,  that  since  they  had
taken  a  name  after  the  Gospel,  they  should  ab-
stain from  all  levities.  They  had  preaching  in
their  houses  every  other  day,  which,  on  Sun-
days and  holydays,  thousands  resorted  to  hear.
The  armorial  bearings  over  their  doors  were
encircled  with  the  words,  "  Yerdum  Dei  manet
in  sternum."

J  Hammann  von  Holzhusen,  1st  ed. :  "Die  Geistlichen
hearheiten  sich  heftiglich  urn  iren  eignen  und  vergessen
den  gemeinen  Nutzen."  — "  The  clergy  exert  themselves
vehemently  for  their  own,  and  forget  the  common  inte-
rests."

§  Otto  von  Pack.  "  Ist  am  Tage,  wenn  die  Geystlichen
genieyna  Christenheit  also  meinten  wy  dy  Laien,  so  biib
Gottes  Ehr,  alle  gute  christliche  Ordnung,  und  bliben
darzu  sye  selbst  mit  aller  irer  Kab  Ehr  und  Gut,  denn  ich
liab  bisher  keyn  Leyen  vermerkt  der  da  wolt  ein  Buch-
staben von  den  guten  Kirchenordnungen  abthiin  adder
dpr  Gevstlichen  Güter  um  einen  Pfennig  schmälern.
Nicht  v/eiss  ich  was  der  Churfürst  von  Sachsen  und  Hes-
sen bringen  werden."  "It  is  evident  that  if  the  clergy
meant  the  same  common  Christianity  as  the  laity,  the
honour  of  God  and  good  Christian  order,  as  well  as  they
themselves  with  all' their  wealth,  honour,  and  property,
would  remain  unhurt ;  for  I  have  as  yet  seen  no  layman-
who  wished  to  take  away  an  iota  from  the  good  discipline
of  the  Church,  or  to  diminish  its  possessions  by  one
penny.  I  knov/  not  what  the  Elector  of  Saxony  and
Hessen  will  bring  about."

II  Annales  Spalalini  in  Mencken,. 659.

Chap.  IL

DIET  OF  SPIRE,  1526.

S57

Such  were  the  influences  under  vrhich  the
reports  of  the  committees  of  the  diet  were
made.  All  the  old  complaints  and  charges
ag-ainst  the  encroachments  of  Rome  were  re-
vivedt;  among-  others,  that  it  exacted  far  too
much  subservience  from  the  bishops,  since  they
were  also 'councillors  of  the  empire;  against
commendams  and  annates,  the  monstrosity  of
the  mendicant  orders,  &c.  It  was  thought  that
never  had  language  so  free  been  directed  against
the  pope  and  the  bishops.  The  cities  pressed
especially  for  a  better  provision  for  the  parishes
out  of  the  funds  of  the  church,  and  the  right
of  every  civil  government  to  appoint  priests  to
officiate  in  them;  they  demanded  that  the
clergy  should  be  subject  to  the  civil  burdens
and  tribunals.*

But  by  far  the  most  remarkable  thing  was
the  report  which  issued  from  the  committee  of
the  princes,  consisting  of  the  bishops  of  Würz-
burg, Strasburg,  Freisingen,  and  of  George
Truchsess  for  the  spiritual;  and  of  Hessen,  the
Palatinate,  Baden,  and  the  Count  of  Solms  for
the  temporal  bench. |  I  have  not  been  able  to
discover  which  of  them  had  the  predominant
influence,  whether  the  well-known  moderation
of  the  Bishop  of  Freisingen,  or  the  ardent
earnestness  of  the  young  landgrave,  turned  the
scale  :  be  that  as  it  may,  in  the  discussions  of
this  committee,  the  original  idea  of  erecting
one  norm  or  standard  equally  binding  on  both
parties  was  kept  steadily  in  view  ;  and  vras,  in
fact,  realised  in  a  resolution  passed  to  that
effect.  There  was  as  yet,  spite  of  all  the  strug-
gles between  the  ruling  powers,  no  actual  divi-
sion in  the  nation  itself.  The  different  races
of  Germany  stood  on  nearly  the  same  stage  of
civilisation  :  all  without  exception — as  we  had
latel}^  occasion  to  observe  of  Tyrol — whether
in  the  north  or  the  south,  had  the  same  ten-
dency to  reform,  though  their  ideas  respecting
the  means  b)''  which  it  was  to  be  effected  might
differ.  But  since  these  were  not  yet  fixed,  they
might  still  be  moulded  into  more  than  one  form.
It  might  be  imagined  that  a  well-conceived
endeavour  to  establish  a  good  understanding
throughout  the  nation  might  yet  perhaps  de-
stroy those  elements  of  discord,  and  reconcile
those  wide  divergencies  of  opinions,  which  lay
in  the  league  of  Regensberg  and  its  conse-
quences. In  such  a  spirit  of  conciliation  were
these  propositions  conceived.  They  particu-
larly insisted  on  the  expediency  of  permitting
the  marriage  of  the  clergy,  and  granting  the
cup  to  the  laity.  It  was  proposed  to  leave
every  man  free  to  receive  the  Holj^  Sacrament
in  one  kind  or  in  both  ;  and  it  was  represented
to  the  emperor  that  it  were  better  for  the  priest-
^lood  to  contract  matrimony  than  to  live  with
women  of  ill  fame.ij: The  committee  proposed

*  Pi-Iemorial  of  the  free  and  imperial  cities  against  the
clergy,  iu  Holzhusen's  handwriting  in  the  Frank.  A.,  vol.
xlii.

t  Report  of  the  Hessian  delcgrate,  Schrauttenbach,
Thursday  after  St.  Udalric  (5th  July),  in  the  acts  of  the
diet.  Weimar  Archives.  They  are  in  other  respects  very
confused,  and  aflurd  but  little  information  for  this  year.

I  "  Zuzulassen,  dass  die  Empfahung  des  hochvvürc^igen

Sacraments  unter  einer  oder beiderlei  Gestalten  eines

Jeden  Gewissen  und  Freiem.  Willen  heimgesetzl  wurde, —

dass  niitlerzeit  gegen  den  ehelichen  Priesterti  von  keyner

33  w2

that  the  severity  of  fasts  and  confession  should
be  mitigated,  private  masses  abolished,  and  at  the
ceremonies  of  baptism  and  the  Lord's  Supper,
the  Latin  and  German  languages  be  used  joini-
l)'' ;  that  the  other  sacraments  should  not,  in-
deed, be  discontinued,  but  be  administered
i  gratuitously.  In  regard  to  preaching,  the  for-
mula of  1523  was  repeated  ; — that  God's  word
should  be  preached  according  to  right  and
sound  uiiderstandincr,  and  according  to  the  in-
terpretation of  the  expositors  acknowledged  by
the  Christian  church  ;  but  with  an  addition
which  evinced  a  still  stronger  inclination  to
reform  and  to  the  sentiments  of  Luther ;  viz.
that  Scripture  must  always  be  explained  by
Scripture. §

Such  were  the  propositions  which  issued
from  a  commission  composed  of  an  equal  num-
ber of  spiritual  and  temporal  members.  We
clearl}''  perceive  that  if  the  Council  of  Regency
formerly  showed  itself  favourably  inclined  to
reform,  this  was  not  the  effect  of  caprice,  nor
even  of  choice  :  the  necessity  of  this  step  arose
out  of  the  situation  of  things,  and  the  strength
of  that  universal  conviction  from  whose  influ-
ence no  man  can  withdraw  himself.

After  so  many  abortive  attempts  and  danger-
ous agitations,  the  nation  once  more  showed
the  possibility  of  preserving  its  unity  on  the
most  important  concern  that  can  occupy  the
mind  of  man.

On  the  1st  of  August,  a  committee  chosen
from  all  the  States  was  appointed  to  submit
this  project  to  final  discussion  —  a  discussion
that  promised  to  be  of  the  greatest  interest.
There  is  no  doubt  that  the  project  would  have
experienced  much  opposition,  since  the  evan-
gelical party  protested  against  retaining  the  four
sacraments,  about  which  nothing  is  to  be  found
in  Scripture;'!  nor  were  the  catholics  satisfied.
Duke  George  remarked  that  the  worst  abuses
were  yet  untouched ;  the  origin  of  all  the  evil
lay  in  the  bad  manner  in  which  the  prelates
found  entrance  to  the  church — by  the  right  door
or  the  wrong — by  the  help  of  powerful  kindred  :
in  short,  the  most  vehement  debates  would  have
taken  place  ;^  but  there  is  no  ground  for  doubt-
ing that  there  would  have  been  a  decided  ma-
jority, and  that  it  would  have  passed  definitive
resolutions,  binding  on  the  whole  empire.

It  was  a  crisis  like  that  which  had  occurred
two  years  before,  when  universal  preparation
was  made  for  a  national  assembly.  The  diffi-
culties were  now  greater,  because  on  both  sides
independent  fonns  of  thought  and  culture  had
begun  to  take  root;  but  it  was  the  more  im-^
portant  to  oppose  some  check  to  their  growth,
and  it  vras  yet  possible  to  do  so.

Uberkeyt  geistlichs  oder  weltlichs  Standes  etwas  streflichs
werd  fiirgenomen."— "  To  concede,  that  the  reception  of
the  most  venerable  Sacrament  under  one  or  both  kinds
should  be  allowed  to  every  one  according  to  his  conscience
and  free  will.— that  meanwhile  no  punishment  ^should  be
inflicted  on  married  priests,  either  by  the  ecclesiastical  or
temporal  authorities."

§  Judgment  of  the  eight  commissioners  in  the  Dresden
Archives.

II  Treatise  in  Walch,  xvi.  258.  A  reply  to  the  principles
laid  (down  by  the  eight  commissioners,  partly  agreeing
with,  and  partly  comliating  them.

•C"  Letter  of  Duke  George  in  the  acts  of  the  imperial
jiiet,  Dresden  Archives.

258

DIET  OF  SPIRE,  1526.

Book  IV.

Again,  however,  did  that  power  intervene
which  had  forbidden  the  national  assembly,
and  had  so  often  thwarted  the  resolutions  of  the
collective  empire.  The  emperor  seemed  deter-
mined to  adhere  infiexibl}'-  to  his  old  policy.

At  the  same  time  that  he  published  the  ca-
tholic admonition,  which  we  have  already  men-
tioned, at  Seville,  he  issued  instructions  to  his
commissioners,  commanding  them  to  assent  to
no  resolution  of  the  diet  that  might  run  counter
to  the  established  doctrine  or  practice  of  the
church,  and  again  urged  the  execution  of  the
edict  of  Worms,*  This  affair  is  involved  in
some  obscurit}^  The  instructions  must  have
arrived  long  before,  for  a  considerable  time  had
elapsed  since  Duke  Henry's  return;  and  it  is
not  easy  to  see  how  the  commissioners  could,,
nevertheless,  feel  themselves  authorised  at  first
to  produce  others; — unless  we  suppose  that
they  did  so  in  pursuance  of  a  hint  subsequently
given  to  the  archduke.  Be  this  as  it  may,  it
was  not  till  this  advanced  stage  of  the  business
that  the  instructions  in  question  were  produced,
at  the  instigation,  as  it  was  asserted  in  Spire,
of  certain  powerful  ecclesiastics,  and  not  with-
out corruption  and  intrigue  {'■''Finanz  und  Hin-
terlist^) :  they  created  an  extraordinary  sensa-
tion. The  great  committee  preserved  its  firm-
ness and  composure:  it  declared  that  it  would
adopt  sach  a  course  as  it  could  answer  to  the
world  ;  but  it  seemed  impossible  to  effect  any
thing,  since  every  new  ordinance  they  might
frame  would  be  met  by  the  clear,  express  words
of  the  emperor.

'  There  was  a  general  persuasion  that  nothing
more  whatever  was  to  be  accomplished.  Many
dedared  they  v/ould  not  stay  a  moment  longer :
■the  evangelical  party  feared  that  recourse  would
be  had  to  force.  For  this  cause  mainly,  the
cities  now  inclined  to  the  union  with  Saxony
and  Hessen,  in  order  to  have  a  support  and  de-
fence in  case  violence  should  be  resorted  to
against  them.f  Nürnberg,  Strasburg,  Augs-
burg, and  Ulm,  now  gave  their  assent  to  the
proposal  of  the  princes.

The  complication  was  most  singular.  Whilst
in  Italy  the  pope  Avas  employing  every  means
of  attack  on  the  emperor,  and  stirring  up- an
European  war  against  him,  the  imperial  power
was  once  more  rendered  subservient  to  the
maintenance  of  the  authority  of  the  papal  see
in  Germany.

But  such  a  relation  was  too  wide  a  departure
from  the  ordinary  nature  and  course  of  human
affairs  to  endure  long.

In  Germany  people  had  already  ceased  to
believe  in  the  sincerity  of  the  opinions  expressed
in  the  instructions.  Though  their  attention  was
chiefly  engrossed  by  internal  affairs,  they  knew
of  tlie  treaty  of  Cognac,  and  of  the  misunder-
standings between  the  pope  and  the  emperor.
Thö  cities  first  remarked  how  very  remote  was

*  Commission  of  the  23d  March,  in  the  Fr.  A.  vol.  xlii.
p.  32.

t  Then  would  "  solch  Ansuchen  und  Fulgung  zu  gross-
em Nutz  gereichen" — "such  applications  and  following
he  of  great  use."  Letter  of  Holzhusen,  21st  August.  The
other  cities  had  their  answer  by  the  25th  August.  They
waited  to  see  what  the  deputies  would  accomplish  before
tliey  came  to  a  final  decision.

the  date  of  the  instructions.  At  that  time,
indeed,  the  emperor  and  pope  were  on  a  good
understanding,  but  now  the  pope's  troops  were
in  the  field  against  the  emperor.  They  were
told  that  every  improvem.ent  must  be  reserved
for  the  decision  of  a  general  council  ;  but  how,
under  the  present  circumstances,  was  it  possi-
ble to  expect  one]  Were' the  emperor  present,
he  vv'ould  see  that  they  could  not  observe  his
edict,  if  they  would.

It  was  rumoured  that  a  caution  had  been  sent
to  the  Lady  Margaret  in  the-  Netherlands,  to
handle  all  matters  connected  \vith  the  evan-
gelical religion  gently.  In  the  persuasion  that
they  were  acting  in  accordance  with  the  empe-
ror's real  sentiments,  the  cities  therefore  pro-
posed to  send  a  deputation  which  should  repre-
sent to  him  the  state"~of  afFairs,  and  pray  him,
either  to  grant  a  national  council,  or  at  least  to
recall  the  order  that  the  edict  of  Worms  should
be  executed.  This  proposal  found  a  ready-
hearing  in  the  great-  committee,  in  which  an
anti-ecclesiastical  majority  had  instantly  de-
clared itself.  During  the  discussion  of  the
grievances  of  the  common  people,  the  abuses
of  the  clergy  had,  in  spite  of  their  opposition,
been  expressly  designated  as  the  chief  cause
of  the  late  insurrection.  People  now  called
to  mind  that  the  imperial  edict  had  been  oc-
cepted,  only  in  so  far  as  it  should  be  found
possible  to  execute  it ; — but  it  was  found  utterly
1  impossible.  Nobody  was  forthcoming  who  had
executed  it,  nay,  whose  conscience  would  allov/
{  him  to  execute  it,  according  to  the  letter.ij:  And
\  how  were  they  to  furnish  succours  against  the
Turks,  if  they  saw  danger  im.pending  over  them
at  home  1  The  great  committee  assented  to
the  proposition  of  sending  a  deputation  to  Spain,
and  immediately  drev/  up  instructions  for  it,
wherein  it  ascribed  the  religious  divisions  of
the  country  more  especially  to  the  prohibition
of  the  national  assembly,  and  prayed  the  em-
peror as  soon  as  possible  to  call  a  council  of
the  nation  at  least;  and,  until  then,  graciously
to  suspend  the  execution  of  the  edict,  w^hich,

t  A  rough  draft  of  the  instruction  in  the  Dresden  Ar.
chives  proves  that  these  were  the  motives  alleged;  the
petition  runs  thus  :  "  Der  Kaiser  wolle  die  Execution  der
Peen  und  Straf  desseihigen  Edictes  bis  uf  ein  künftig
Concilium  in  Ruw  stehn  lassen,  Ursach  es  haben  die
Stennd  das  Edict  nicht  anders  angenommen  dan  so  vi!
In  iriÜ!,dich,  wie  die  kaisserliche  Instruction  selbs  mit  ir
bringt^  und  nachdem  Etlichen  unmüglich  gewesen  das
Edici  zu  halten,  so  seyen  sie  auch  nicht  in  die  Peen  ge-
fallen, zum  andern  so  man  die  Buchstaben  besieht,  so  ist
kain  Fürst  oder  Bisehof  der  das  Edict  geballten  oder  der
nicht  ein  Entsetzen  hat  dasselbise  ad  literam  zu  halten."
— "  The  emperor  wished  to  let  the  execution  of  the  pains
and  penalties  imposed  by  this  edict  rest  until  a  future
council ;  therefore  the  estates  did  accept  the  edict  only  so
far  as  it  was  possible  to  carry  it  out,  as  was  set  forth  in
the  imperial  instruction;  and  as  some  had  found  it  im-
possible to  enforce  the  edict,  they  were  not  subjected  to
the  penalties:— on  the  other  hand,  if  the  letter  of  the
edict  be  looked  to,  it  were  impossible  that  any  prince  or
bishop  could  enforce  it,  or  not  have  a  horror  of  enforcing
it  ad  literam."  Then  follows  the  instruction  itself.  The
Frankfurt  deputies  say,  in  a  letter  written  from  this  diet,
"So  wollen  wir  auch_E.  F.  W.  nicht  bergen,  dasa  auch
das  kais.  Edict  so  ao  21  zu  Worms  ausgangen,  allhie
auf  diesem  Reichstag  von  Fürsten  Grafen  Herrn  una
Stedten  hochlich  und  fast  als  unmöglich  in  allen  Puncter
zu  hallen  angefochten  wird."  "We  will  not  concea
from  your  princely  worships  that  tlie  imperial  edict  pub-
lished at  Worms,  anno  21,  will  be  opposed  at  this  diet  by
princes,  counts,  lords,  and  cities,  as  being  almost  impos-
sible to  be  enforced  in  all  points."

Chap.  IL

DIET  OF  SPIRE,  1526.

259

to  some,  was  impossible  on  conscientious
grounds;  to  others,  because  they  had  reason
to  fear  it  would  cause  a  rebellion  among  their
subjects ;  and  to  a  third  party,  for  these  rea-
sons combined.

It  is  very  remarkable  that  while  such  were
the  resolutions  come  to  in  Germany,  they  were
met  by  corresponding  ideas  from  Spain.

We  know  the  point  of  view'  from  which  the
imperial  court  from  the  first  regarded  the  Lu-
theran opinions.  It  had  opposed  them  so  long
as  it  w' as  in  alliance  with  the  papacy ;  but  its
devotion  to  the  church  did  not  go  the  length  of
requiting  the  war  wdiich  Clement  VII.  made
upon  it  in  Italy,  with  friendly  offices  in  Ger-
many. Immediately  after  the  battle  of  Pavia,
when  it  first  became  apparent  how^  little  reli-
ance could  be  placed  on  the  pope's  good  inten-
tions, the  Grand  Chancellor,  Gattinara,  pro-
posed to  demand  a  council ;  not,  as  he  said,
really  to  convoke  it,  but  only  to  force  the  pope
to  show  a  more  compliant  spirit  in  his  negoti-
ations.* England  at  the  same  time,  begn;ed
Clement  to  consider  how  easily  any  partiality
shown  to  France  might  cost  him  the  obedience
of  that  portion  of  the  States  of  the  empire  which
3'et  adhered  to  the  church. j  But  the  hostility
to  him  had  now  become  far  more  decided.
From  Germany  itself  he  had  been  apprised  that
the  diet  would  be  more  unfavourable  than  ever
to  his  cause :  he  himself  indeed  expected  no-
thing else.:}:  Long-^-almost  too  long — did  the
emperor  hesitate  to  declare  himself.  At  length,
however,  after  tlie  latest  negotiations  had  failed,
ho  assumed  a  more  resolute  bearing.  After
many  consultations  in  the  council  of  state
which  he  had  just  then  constituted  for  affairs
of  Spain  and  German}'-,  he  wrote  to  his  brother
on  the  27th  July,  that  a  proposal  which  he  nov/
subjoined  had  been  submitted  to  that  body,  for
abolishing  the  penal  clauses  of  the  edict  of
Worms,  and  for  submitting  the  truth  of  the
evangelical  doctrines  to  the  decision  of  a  coun-
cil. The  pope  would  not  have  cause  to  com-
plain, since  it  was  only  the  secular,  and  not
the  spiritual  punisliments  that  it  w^as  proposed
to  abolish.  It  was  to  be  hoped  that  the  em-
peror might  then  obtain  efficient  succours,  in
liorse  and  foot,  against  the  Turks  or  against
Jtaly,  for  the  good  of  Christendom. §

*  The  decree  in  Bucholtz,  ii.  p.  281.

t  Extract  of  a  letter  from  Wolsey  to  the  Bishop  of  Bath
immediately  hefore  the  battle  of  Pavia  (before  Parma,  is
flnabtless  a  clerical  error).  Fiddes,  Life  of  Wolsey,  32.
VVols-?y  thought  that  the  course  adopted  by  Campeggi
promised  to  kad  to  the  desired  end,  but  "  that  Germany
being  now  so  nuich  infected  with  the  Lutheran  heresy,
such  members  of  it  as  still  continue  in  the  communion
of  the  churcli,  may  be  provoked  to  withdraw  their  obedi-
ence, should  his  holiness  appear  to  act  in  favour  of  the
French  king  against  tlie  emp'eror."

t  Albert  da  Carpi  au  Rni  de  France,  2-Uh  June,  ]?26,  in
Molini  Docum.  stor.  i.  p.  20?. :  "  que  d  cette  heure  se  feroit
le  tout  le  pis  que  se  pourroit  contre  luv  et  la  ste.  siege."
From  a  declaration  of  the  Elector  of  Treves  of  the  9th
June.

§  Extract  in  Buchoftz,  iii.  .37L  "  In  his  council  a  draft
of  a  well-constructed  and  well-grounded  edict  was  made,
the  fruit  of  which  was  to  be,  that  those  who  adhered  to
the  errors  of  Luther  were  to  be  drawn  away  from  them
by  mildness  and  leniency ;  and  a  way  be  atforded  them  by
which  the  truth  of  the  evangelical  doctrine  might  be  decided
ly  a  good  council,  which  the  -pove  iioio  feared;  at  the  same
lime  they  would  support  Ferdinand  against  the  Turks  or
against  Italy,  for  the  common  good  of  Christendom."

Under  these  circumstances  —  the  emperor
himself  having  made  the  concession  wliich
Germany  urgently  demanded — who  v/ould  not
have  expected  that  it  would  be  definitely  granted
and  proclaimed  ]  It  appears  from  the  original
documents  that  Markgrave  Casimir  of  Bran-
denburg, one  of  the  imperial  commissioners,
zealousy  advocated  this  abolition  of  penalties.  ||
It  unquestionably  depended  on  Ferdinand
alone  ;  but  he  was  not  favourable  to  it.

His  chief  ground  of  opposition  was  doubtless
the  fear  of  displeasing  those  states  of  Germany
w^hich  were  inclined  to  the  ancient  faith.
Charles,  indeed,  had  remarked  in,  the  letter
above  mentioned,  that  a  part  of  his  council
thought  it  expedient  to  put  off  the  repeal  of  the
edict,  which  might  otherwise  convert  the  adver-
saries of  Lutheranism  into  enemies  of  his  go-
vernment.^ Ferdinand  doubtless  knew  even
better  than  his  brother  how  necessary  it  was  to
conciliate  them.  The  idea  had  at  this  moment
been  suggested  at  Rome  of  offering  the  Roman
crow'n  to  soine  antagonist  of  the  emperor  :**  and
Duke  William  of  Bavaria  had  already  begun
to  canvass  the  most  influential  electors  with  a.
view  to  obtaining  that  dignity.  To  wrest  from
the  catholic  princes  the  edict  upon  which  they
principally  based  their  persecution  of  the  Lu-
therans, might  have  converted  them  into  the
most  resolute  and  dangerous  enemies.  He  too
thought  it  prudent  to  suspend  the  repeal  of  the
edict  of  Worms.  He  thought  that  when  the
emperor  w^as  once  more  within  the  limits  of  tha
empire,  and  had  established  his  powder  there  on
a  solid  basis,  this  measure  might  be  cafried
into  effect  with  advantage,  and  w-ithout  any
shock  to  the  established  religion  :  then  too  he
might  obtain  a  good  sum  of  money  from  the
Lutherans  in  return  for  this  act  of  grace  and
lenity. j-f  But  if  he  w^as  not  disposed  to  hasten
the  revocation  of  the  edict  of  Worms,  he  had
just  as  little  inclination  or  power  to  urge  its
general  execution.  A  complete  triumph  of  the
pope's  adherents  v/ould  have, been  extremely
injurious  to  the  house  of  Austria.

As,  therefore,  it  seemed  neither  expedient  to
execute  tbe  edict  nor  to  repeal  it;  as  no  pro-
posals of  a  middle  course  had  an)»-  chance  of
acceptance  ;  a  principle  came  into  action  which
had  already  influenced  the  course  of  events,
though  rather  beneath  the  surface,  and  without
as  yet  exciting  general  attention.  The  princi-
ple of  the  development  of  the  several  territorial
powers  now  prevailed  even  in  the  affairs  of  ^
religion.  I  find  that  the  cities  were  the  first  to
bring  this  into  public  notice  and  discussion.
They  alleged  that  it  was  no  longer  possible  to  %
re-establish  entire  the  ceremonies  of  the  church  :
that  in  m.anj''  places  these  had  been  altered,  in
others,  had  been  left  wholly  untouched;  that
each  party  thought  that  his  way  was  the  right ;

II  See  the  Lith.  Erlänterung,  p.  172.

IT  Cause,  "  d'estre  jnauvais  avec  les  autres."  Bucholtz.
372. Pity  the  whole  letter  is  not  printed.

**  In  the  Provvisioni  per  la  guerra  di  demente  VII.
Inform,  polit.)  this  is  described  as  a  desirable  measure.

tt  Excerpt  of  a  letter  from  Ferdinand,  22d  Sept.  There
is  no  question  that  the  letter  of  27th  July  arrived  in  the
middle  of  August.  Letters  from  Spain  were  generally  a
fortnight  on  the  joad.

260

DIET  OF  SPIRE,  1526.

Book  IV.

that  it  was  impossible  in  this  case  to  resort  to
force  ;  and  that  nothing  remained  but  to  leave
every  man  to  the  form  of  religion  he  had  adopt-
ed, till  such  time  as  a  free  council  should  be
able,  by  the  help  of  the  divine  word,  to  decide
the  matter:* — A  proposal  fundamentally  at
variance  with  the  nature  of  a  diet  of  the  empire,
which  represented  unity,  and  with  the  former
decrees  of  the  empire,  which  had  always  been
of  universal  application  and  validity ;  but  v/hich
was  imperiously  commanded  by  the  state  of
things.  It  was  equally  impracticable  to  with-
draw the  edict  of  Worms  from  the  catholic
states,  or  to  impose  it  on  the  evangelical :  the
thought  of  granting  to  every  district  and  every
state  j;he  independence  in  regard  to  religion
Vv'hich  it  had,  in  fact,  begun  to  enjoy,  speedily
gained  ground.  It  was  the  most  easy  and  na-
tural solution  of  the  difficulty  :  nobody  had  any
thing  better  to  advise.  The  impulse  towards
religious  separation  which  had  grown  up  since
152-1,  triumphed  over  all  attempts  to  preserve
and  to  cement  unity  by  means  of  reform.  The
committee  decreed  that  "  each  state  should  act
in  such  wise  as  it  could  ansvv^er  it  to  God  and
the  emperor; — that  is  to  say,  it  should  do  as  it
thought  expedient.  The  committee  immedi-
ately inserted  this  resolution  in  the  instructions
for  the  deputation  to  the  emperor.

There  is  a  moment  at  which  all  the  interests
of  Europe  at  large,  and  Germany  in  particular,
converge  and  become  implicated  with  each
other;  a  moment  which,  though  it  appears  un-
important, was  in  fact  the  point  at  which  the
early  history  of  Germany  ends  and  the  modern
begins  : — the  moment  when  the  Archduke  Fer-
dinand accepted  the  report  of  the  committee,
sanctioned  the  sending  of  the  deputation,  and
approved  the  instructions  drawn  up  for  it.  It
was  ordered  in  the  Recess,  that  until  the  gene-
ral or  national  assembly  of  the  church,  which
v/as  prayed  for,  should  be  convoked,  each  state
should,  in  all  matters  appertaining  to  the  edict
of  Worms,  "  so  live,  rule,  and  bear  itself  as  it
thought  it  could  answer  it  to  God  and  the  em-
peror."j-

The  reader  must  pardon  the  repltilion  of
these  words,  in  consideration  of  the  infinite
importance  they  afterwards  acquired.  They
contain  the  legal  foundation  of  the  constitution
of  the  national  churches  of  Germany,  and  at

*  P.Iemorial  of  the  cities. Frankf.  A.  A.  vol.  xlij.

t  "  Demnach  haben  wir  (die  Commissarien)  auch  Chur-
fiirsten  Fürsten  und  Stände  des  Reichs  und  derselben
Boitschafter  uns  jetzo  allhie  auf  diesem  Reichstag  ein-
Hiüthialich  verglichen  und  vereiniget,  mittler  Zeit  des
*  Concilii  oder  aber  Nationalversammlung  nichts  desto
)ainder  (d.  i.  ohne  die  Rückkunft  der  Gesandtschaft  zu
erwarten)  mit  unsern  Unterthanen  ein  jeglicher  in
Saclien,  so  das  Edict,  durch  Kais.  Mt.  auf  dem  Reichstag
7.:\  Worms  gehalten  ausgangen,  belangen  möchten,  für
sich  also  zu  leben,  zu  reineren  und  zu  halten,  wie  ein
jeder  seiches  gegen  Gott  un  Kais.  Mt.  hoffet  und  vertrauet
ziuverantworteii."  "  Thereupon  have  we  (the  commission-
f-.rs),  aiso  the  electors,  princes,  and  estates  Qf  the  empire,
and  the  ambassadors  of  the  same,  now  here  at  this  pre-
sent diet,  unanimously  agreed  and  resolved,  in  the  midst
of  the  sitting  of  the  council  or  national  assembly  (j.  c.
without  waiting  for  the  return  of  the  deputation)  with
our  subjects,  on  the  matters  which  the  edict  published  by
liis  imperial  majesty  at  the  diet  holden  at  Worms  may
^  concer9,  each  one  so  to  live,  govern,  and  carry  himself  as
lie  hopes  and  trusts  to  a'nswer  it  to  God  and  his  imperial
majesty."-- -JVew  Qollection  of  Recesses,  ii.  274.

the  samxc  time  they  involve  (although  leaving
open  the  possibility  of  a  future  reunion)  the
separation  of  the  nation  into  two  great  religious
parties.  They  are  the  words  which  decided
the  fate  of  German}^  Catholicism  v/ould  not
have  been  able  to  maintain  itself  if  the  edict
of  Worms  had  been  formally  repealed.  The
evangelical  party  would  not  have  been  able  to
constitute  itself  legally,  if  the  emperor  and  the
States  had  insisted  on  the  execution  of  that
edict.  The  future  existence  and  development
of  both  hung  on  this  point.  ■

Generally  considered,  it  was  the  immediate
and  necessary  consequence  of  the  division  be-
tween the  emperor  and  the  pope.  Their  al-
liance had  produced  the  edict  of  Worms :  that
alliance  being  broken,  the  emperor  and  his
brother  revoked  the  edict  in  so  far  as  its  revo-
cation was  consistent  with  their  own  interests.

CHAPTER  III.

CONQUEST OF ROME, A.  D. 1527.

While  these  deliberations  were  going  on
in  Germany,  in  Italy  war  had  already  broken
out.

The  allies  had  taken  the  field  in  June;  un-
questionably not  with  the  necessary  prompti-
tude and  decision ;  since  the  imperialists  had
gained  time  sufficient  to  put  down  the  insurrec-
tion of  the  Milanese,  and  had  at  length  suc-
ceeded in  taking  the  citadel.  On  the  ether
hand,  however,  the  allies  took  Lodi  and  Cre-
mona ;  the  Swiss,  so  long  expected  in  vain,  at
length  arrived  in  considerable  numbers,  and  a
brilliant  corps  of  French  men-at-arms  joined
the  army.  In  September  the  Ligue  were  evi-
dentl)'-  masters  of  the  country,  while  the  im-
perialists, cooped  up  in  a  city  inclined  to  re-
hellion,  ill  paid,  and  almost  cut  off  from  the
surrounding  country,  found  themselves  in  a
very  critical  situation.:}:

But  the  emperor  had  means  of  resistance
and  of  retaliation  at  his  command,  even  in
Italy  itself.

In  June  he  once  more  made  overtures  of
peace  to  the  pope  ;  at  the  same  time  charging
his  plenipotentiary,  ügo  Moncado,  in  case  he
received  a  refusal,  to  find  means  of  diverting
the  forces,  of  the  enemy  from  Mil  an. §  This
was  not  difficult  to  accomplish  v  the  state,  the
city,  nay,  the  Vatican  itself,  was  filled  witli
partisans^  of  the  empire.  When  the  imperial
envoy,  the  Duke  of  Sessa,  rode  home  from  the
last  fruitless  audience,  he  took  a  fool  behind
him  on  his  horse,  who  by  a  thousand  antic
tricks  and  buffooneries  gave  the  people  to  un-
derstand that  there  was  nothing  to  be  done.jl

X  From  a  letter  of  Guicciardini  to  the  Datarius,  24th
Sept.,  15-2G,  it  appears  that  there  was  an  idea  of  making
a  new  attempt  to  drive  the  imperialists  oat  of  Milan.

§  Letterfrom  Charles:  Bucholtz,  iii.  52.

il  Albert  da  Garni  to  Francis  I.  Molini,  Documente
1.  205.

Chap.  III.

WARLIKE  PREPARATIONS  IN  GERMANY,

261

The  pope's  open  enemies  held  meetings  under
his  own  eyes  in  the  houses  of  the  Colonnas.
In  order  to  fulfil  the  intention  of  the  emperor,
the)'  resorted  to  what  we  may  be  permitted  to
call  the  lowest  cunning-.  They  began  to  make
"warlike  preparations  on  the  frontiers  of  Naples,
in  the  dominions  of  the  Colonnas  ;  upon  which
the  pope  too  took  up  arms.  They  then  ofiered
to  enter  into  a  treaty  with  him.  Clement  con-
sented, and  was  now  so  devoid  of  all  solici-
tude, that  he  discharged  a  great  number  of  his
troops  in  Rome.  This  was  exactly  the  mo-
ment they  waited  for.  Having  lulled  him  into
security,  they  determined  to  attack  him. —
Pompeo  Colonna  —  the  warlike  cardinal  who
had  once  rent  his  stole  and  gone  forth  to  decide
a  quarrel  by  single  combat — who  had  always
displayed  a  bitter  personal  hatred  to  Clement,
now  made  common  cause  with  Don  Ugo,  as
Sciarra  Colonna  had  done  with  Nogaret.  On
the  19th  of  September,  the  troops  of  Colonna
appeared  before  the  walls  of  Rome,  and  en-
tered without  resistance.  The  city  was  utterly
defenceless :  the  people  did  not  stir ;  they
•were  curious  to  see  whether  Colonna  would
really  do  what  he  said — take  possession  of  the
Vatican  in  the  name  of  the  Roman  emperor.*
There  was  no  one  to  prevent  his  fulfilling  this
threat ;  and  the  pope,  who  had  fled  to  the  cas-
tle of  St.  Angelo,  was  compelled,  in  order  to
have  his  palace  restored  to  him,  to  consent  to
a  truce,  not  only  with  Ntiples  and  the  Colon-
nas, but  with  -\lilan  and  Genoa ;  in  short,  in
respect  of  all  his  own  troops  by  land  or  sea."|"
It  was  only  on  these  terms  that  Colonna's
army  left  the  city,  from  which  it  carried  off  a
booty  of  300,000  ducats.

Clement  must  sorely  now  have  perceived  the
feebleness  of  his  resources  and  the  magnitude
of  the  danger ;  he  must  have  heard  the  voice
that  foretells  the  fall  of  the  avalanche;  but
again  he  was  under  the  dominion  of  exaspera-
tion and  vengeance.  The  obligations  which
he  had  so  solemnly  and  publicly  taken  upon
himself  were,  as  his  plenipotentiary,  Guicciar-
dini,  wrote  to  him,  far  more  sacred  than  these
conditions,  extorted  from  him  by  force  ;4:  nor
was  he  disposed  to  observe  the  truce  an  hour
longer  than  expediency  required  ;§  no  sooner
was  he  in  some  degree  prepared,  than  he
attacked  the  Colonnas  and  the  Neapolitan  ter-
ritory ;  in  a  short  time  he  received  French  and
English  subsidies  in  money,  and  the  celebrated
defender  of  Marseilles,  Re'nzo  da  Ceri,  under-
took to  lead  the  papal  army  into  the  Abruzzi.
Meanwhile,  his  other  troops served against

*  Contemporary  account,  in  Euder,  Sammlunff,  unee-
druckter  Schriften,  p.  503.  Ne;;ri  'o  Micheli,  iith  Sept.
Lettere  di  Piincipi,  i.  234.  (The  ilaie  in  the  printed  copy
is  wrong.)

t  Conventione  di  demente  VII.  con  Ugo  di  Moncada  in
Molini,  i.  229.

tGuicciardini  to  Datarius,  2Tth  Sept.  Lett,  di  Prin.
ii.  14.  He  expressed  himself  very  ctiaracteristically  :
''Neil  os^ervare  la  triegua  veggo  vergogna.  iion  si  fiigge
spesa  et  si  auirumenta  il  pericoio:  perciie  quanto  all'  ho-
nore.  piu  e  obligato  N.  S-^  ad  una  lega  faHa  volontaria-
mente  et  con  tante  solennith  per  salute  publica,  che  ad
un'  accordo  fatto  per  forza  et  con  ruina  del  mondo."

§  Excerpt  of  a  letter  wherein  Clement  declares  that  the
Treaty  is  not  b.nding  on  him.

!  Milan  and  Genoa,  just  as  they  had  done  before
I  the  truce.

j  At  this  moment,  however,  a  new  and  far
j  greater  danger  arose  in  another  quarter :  the
I  emperor  had  forces  at  his  disposal  of  a  ver}'-
:  different  character  from  any  that  Italy  could
I  produce.

I  In  that  letter  of  the  2Tth  July,  1526,  which
;  was  so  decisive  for  the  issue  of  the  diet,
i  Charles  had  invited  his  brother  either  to  go  to
'  Italy  in  person,  (in  which  case  he  meant  to  give
,  him  no  instructions,  but  merely  full  powers,  as
his  alier  ego,)  or  at  least  to  fit  out  and  send  a
strong  army.;|

Ferdinand  was  prevented  from  going  in  per-
son by  the  affairs  of  Hungary,  which  urgently
demanded  his  presence  ;  but  he  addressed  him-
;  self  to  the  man  who  had  always  led  the  Lands-
i  knechts  in  Italy  to  victory  —  George  Frunds-
'  berg  of  Mindelsheim, who was ready  once
j  more  to  devote  all  the  vigour  that  age  had  left
{  him  to  the  service  of  the  emperor. The  great
:  difficulty  was to raise money.«;" Ferdinand
;  gave  his  plenipotentiaries  full  powers  to  mort-
'  gage  land  and  people,  castles  and  cities  ;  he
declared  himself  ready  to  send  his  jewels  to
pawn  in  Augsburg. Frundsberg,  too,  pawned
his  wife's  jewels,  and  offered  his  own  lands
!  to  mortgage,** The  Italian  commanders,  who
declared  that  they  could  only  hold  out  for  a
'  short  time  unless  they  received  succours,  sent
!  some  ready  money ;  at  length  enough  v.as  got
I  together  to  give  the  men  at  least  their  march-
j  ing  money  and  half  a  month's  pay. Hereupon
I  the  drum  was  beat  in  all  the  imperial  cities  of
the  Oberland,  and  troops  flocked  to  the  standard
;  from  all  quarters.

j We  run  no  risk  of  error  in  affirming  that  it
was  not  mere  martial  ardour  that  now  drew
them  togetlier ;  they  knew  that  they  were  to
march  against  the  pope.
j This  had  been  foreseen  in  Rome. Giberti
'  remarked,  in  the  preceding  July,  that  nume-
rous bodies  of  men  might  easily  be  collected
in  Germany,  "  on  account  of  the  natural  hatred
I  which  they  cherish  against  us,  and  of  the  hope
i  of  plunder.-'

I  The  emperor's  exhortations  were  conceived
I  in  the  most  insidious  terms.  His  brother,  he
!  said,  had  only  to  give  out  that  the  army  he  was
;  levying  was  to  march  against  the  Turks :  every
\  body  would  know  what  Turks  were  meant.
j  In  a  manifesto  published  by  the  emperor  in
September,  1556,  he  expressed  himself  in  a

\,  Excerpt  in  Bucholtz,  iii.  42.

^  From  the  report  of  Otto  von  Pack,  who  was  sent  to
Insbruck  to  collect  money  for  Duke  George,  we  see  what
dilEculties  he  encountered :  the  Weisers  were  not  in
funds;  the  Fuggers  wanted  the  cash  that  was  in  their
hands  in  order  ta  dissolve  their  partnersiiip  after  the
death  of  Jacob  Fugger  (Dr.  A.).  According  to  a  letter  of
Ferdinand's  to  Charles,  2Sth  October,  löiG.^^Gevay,  Docu-
ments and  Acts,  part  i.  p.  22,)  it  appears  as  if  nothing
whatever  was  to  be  obtained  from  the  money-changers. ~

**  "Voire  que  luv  mesraes  a  voulsu  engaiger  et  mectre
ez  mains  des  fouckres  les  terres  et  biens  qail  a  a  lentour
daugspurg,  ne  luy  a  este  possible  sauoir  deulx  ny  autre-

ment  recouurer argent Neantmoins  affiii  que  Je

tout  ne  se  perde  .  .  .  non  obstant  mes  grans  atfaires  iay
enuoye  audict  messire  george  ce  dargent  quay  peu  tintr,
tplleiiient  que  de  ceste  heure  il  passe  audict'ytalie  auec
X"^  bons  pietons  et  vne  bonne  bände  dartülerie."

262

FRUNDSBERG'S  MARCH.

Book  IV.

manner  which  no  follower  of  Luther  would
have  needed  to  disown  :  he  testified  his  sur-
prise that  the  pope  should  be  willing  to'  cause
hloodshed  for  any  possession  whatsoever ;  a
thing-  wholly  at  variance  Vvith  the  doctrine  of
the  Gospel.*  In  October,  he  begged  the  car-
dinals to  remind  the  pope  that  he  was  not
raised  to  the  pontifical  throne  "in  order  to  bear
arms,  nor  for  the  injury  of  the  people  of  Chris-
tendom :"  he  again  proposed  a  council,  and
urged  the  cardinals,  if  the  pope  continued  to
refuse  it,  to  call  one  in  his  stead  :  he  declared
that  he  at  least  v/ould  be  guiltless,  "if  injury
should  accrue  to  the  Christian  republic  from
its  denial. "f  As  to  Frundsberg,  there  is  no
doubt  that  he  had  for  some  time  cherished
evangelical  opinions,  and  had,  moreover,  con-
ceived the  bitterest  hatred  against  the  pope
during  the  late  war4  Immediately  after.,the
battle  of  Pavia,  he  had  proposed  to  march  into
the  States  of  the  Church,  and  attack  him  on
his  ovm  ground.  He  was  encouraged  in  this
way  of  thinking  by  his  secretary  and  compa-
nion, Jacob  Ziegler,  who  had  long  been  resi-
dent at  the  court  of  Rome,  and  whose  biogra-
phy of  Clement  VII.  is  still  extant.  From
this  we  learn  what  the  Germans  there  thought
and  said  among  themselves  of  the  pope;  —  of
his  illegitimate  birth,  which  ought  from  the
lirst  to  have  excluded  him  from  the  priesthood  ;
his  cunning  and  craftiness,  and  his  insatiable
and  scandalous  rapacity.  They  accused  him
of  a  connection  with  poisoners,  and  of  the  most
shameful  vices.  They  caught  up  and  repeated
all  the  rumours  of  the  court,  true  or  false,  to
feed  the  national  antipathy  of  which  they  were
themselves  full.  These  stories,  combined  v/ith
the  hostility  shown  by  Rome  to  the  emperor,
which  was  esteemed  most  unjust,  awakened  in
the  Germans,  both  leaders  and  common  men,
the  same  politico-religious  zeal  against  the
pope,  which  had  been  fatal  to  so  many  bishops
in  the  Peasants'  V^'ar.  George  of  Frundsberg
was  thoroughly  imbued  with  it  ;§  added  to
which,  he  was  sorry,  he  said,  for  "the  good
honest  fellows"  who  were  besieged  in  Milan
and  Cremona. II  He  declared  that  he  was  re-
solved "to  make  an  end  of  the  affair,  and  to  do
the  pope  a  mischief,  if  he  could  get  him  into
his  hands."

If  the  emperor's  policy  seconded  the  reli-
gious  efforts  of  the Germans, the religious

*  Rescriptum  ad  Papas  Criininationes.  "  duod  tamen
gti  v^a'^  non  placuit,  it  is  said  (Goldast,  Constit.,  i.  489,
nr.  l^i),  licet  credere  non  possemus,  eura  qui  Christi  vices
in  terris  serit,  vel  unius  guttce  humani  sanguinis  jactnra
quamcunque  secularem  ditionena  sibi  vendicare  velle,
cum  id  ab  avangelica  doctrina  prorsus  alienum  videretur."

t  Epistola  Caroli  ad  Collegium  Cardinalium  Vl'a  Octo-
bris. Goldast,  Pol.  Imp.,  p.  1013.

t  See  the  passage  quoted  at  p.  Ö6.

§Sc!ielhorn,  de  Vita  et  Scriptis  Jacobi  Ziegleri,  §  21.
He  reters  to  an  unprinted  work  of  Ziegler's  "magnanimo
heroi,  G.  F-i  in  expeditione  Italica  versanti  euni  fuisse  vel
a  consiliis  vel  ab  epistolis."

II  Letter  from  Frundsberg  to  Marrgaret,  19th  Sept.,  1526,
"  .  .  ^  u'here  the  want  of  money  was  such  a  hinderance
to  such  help  and  succour,  that  it  was  to  be  feared  the
good  honest  fellows  would  be  abandoned,  and  not  only
the  duchy  of  Milan  Tost,  but  Naples,  Calabria,  and  Sicily
also ;  and  likewise  that  the  hereditary  and  other  domi-
nions of  his  imperial  Majesty  must  be  reduced  to  great
extremity."

spirit  by  which  those  efforts  were  prompted
was  favourable,  on  the  other  hand,  to  the
policy  of  the  emperor.  No  sooner  did  he  show
the  smallest  leaning  to  the  inclinations  of  the
people,  than  they  tendered  their  whole  powers
to  his  assistance.

In  November,  nearly  11,000  men  assembled
on  the  mustering  g-round  at  Meran  and  Botzen :«?[
they  were  joined  in  Trent  by  the  garrison  which
had  just  evacuated  Cremona,  under  Conradin
of  Glürns  :  they  were  all  willing,  spite  of  the
poor  pay  they  received :  about  4000  more
joined  them  on  their  march  without  any  pay
whatever;  "  a  choice  army,  such  as  had  not
been  beheld  in  Italy  in  the  memory  of  man."
The  great  and  immediate  difficulty  was  to
get  there ;  to  cross  the  Alps,  and  then  to  effect
a  junction  with  the  troops  in  Milan.

Frundsberg  had  no  mind  to  waste  his  time
and  strength  on  the  w^ell-garrisoned  fortress  of
Verona :  he  took  the  far  more  difficult  road
over  the  Sarka  mountain,  towards  the  domains
of  his  brother-in-law,  the  Count  of  Lodron.
Here,  again,  two  roads  lay  before  him  :  the
one  on  the  right  practicable  for  an  army,  but
commanded  by  the  fortress  of  Anfo  ;  the  other
on  the  left,  a  mere  footpath  between  precipices
and  chasms,  which  a  single  peasant  could  have
rendered  completely  impassable,  but  which  the
enemy  had  n^t  observed.  Along  this  path
Frundsberg  began  his  march  on  the  17th  of
Novemiber.  His  brother-in-law,  who  knew
every  pass  and  defile  of  the  neighbourhood  of
his  hereditary  castle,  gave  him  escort  for  three
j  miles,  up  to  the  summit  of  the  mountain.  They
could  take  but  few  horses,  and  even  of  these
some  fell  over  the  precipices  :  of  the  men,
some  perished  in  the  same  manner;  and  the
j  boldest  did  not  venture  to  cast  his  eyes  into
I  the  abyss  below.  A  few  sure-footed  lands-
I  knechts,  forming  a  sort  of  railing  with  their
long  spears,  guarded  the  steps  of  their  veteran
leader;  and  thus,  holding  on  one  before  him
and  pushed  on  by  another,  he  traversed  the
terrific  pass.  They  reached  Aa  in  the  evening,
and  on  the  I8th  arrived  atSabbio,  without  en-
countering any  resistance.  On  the  19th  they
appeared  at  the  foot  of  the  Alps,  at  the  village,
of  Gavardo,  in  the  territory  of  Brescia.  Their
provisions  were  just  exhausted,  but  here  they
found  good  Farnazio  wine  ;  and  having  driven
together  8000  head  of  cattle,  they  made  m.erry
after  their  long  privations.**

TT  From  the  diary  in  Hormayr's  Archiv.,  1812,  p.  424,
we  see  that  the  army  consisted  of  10,050  men,  and  re-
quired for  its  maintenance,  and  that  of  the  various  offi-
cers and  followers  attached  to  it,  25,900  gulden  (with  the
exchange,  34,842  gulden).  The  commissaries  lent  Frunds-
berg 2000  gulden,  "  that  he  might  have  something  in
hand." He  accepted  it  "  with  overflowing  eyes."

**  Reissjier  Frundsberge,  86.  Thun,  in  Hormayr,  428.
Very  minute  details  of  this  whole  enterprise  are  to  be
found  in  Jacob  Ziegler'n  unprinted  work.  Acta  Paparura
Urbis  RomaB,  of  which  I  intend  to  give  a  fuller  account
in  the  Appendix.  I  shall  only  remark  here,  that  it  is  the
main  source  whence  Reissner  has  taken  his  book,  which
it  surpasses  in  brevity  and  distinctness.  It  says  of  the
march  upon  Mantua,  "  Vnd  dieweil  gfiirlich  vnd  schwär
fur  die  grosse  stett  press  vnd  Bergom  vber  die  grossen
wasser,  die  allenthalb  verlegt  durch  die  gwaltigen  hauffen
der  feind,  den  nechsten  auf  Mailand  zuziehen,  hat  ersieh
auf  Mantua  gewendt."— "  And  then  with  danger  and
difficulty,  past  the  great  cities  Brescia  and  Bergamo,

Chap.  III.

JUNCTION  OF  THE  IMPERIAL  ARMIES.

263

Their  intention  had  been  to  effect  an  imme-
diate junction  with  the  army  at  ^lilan.  But
the  enemy  was  far  too  strong  ia  the  field  to
allow  this.  The  Duke  of  Urbino,  commander-
in-chief  of  the  Ligue,  appeared  on  their  right
flank,  and  kept  them  oif  from  Oglio.  They
saw  the  impossibility  of  attacking  any  of  the
neigiibouring  cities,  which  were  all  in  a  good
state  of  del'ence,  while  they  themselves  were
without  artillery  :  nothing  remained  but  to  en-
deavour to  cross  the  Po,  where  the  enemy  was
not  so  strong,  and  where  Bourbon  might  in
time  be  able  to  join  them.*  Thither  Frunds-
berg  took  his  way,  in  three  close  columns.  The
allies  had  not  yet  courage  to  make  a  serious
attack  on  him  ;  they  merely  annoyed  him  with
their  light  cavalry,  or  with  their  musketeers,
who  lay  in  ambush  behind  hedges  or  in  ditches. f
Once  only  he  was  in  serious  danger.  As  he
entered  the  fortifications  round  Mantua,  over  a
long  and  narrov/  dam,  the  enemy  attacked  him
in  the  rear,  and  at  the  same  time  moved  for-
ward to"  occupy  the  bridge  over  the  Mincio,
which  he  had  to  pass  at  Governolo.  He  would
have  been  lost  if  he  had  suffered  himself  to  be
hemmed  in  in  this  most  unfavourable  place.
Frundsberg,  however,  though  chiefly  conspicu-
ous for  his  rough  soldier-like  bravery,  was  by
no  means  without  a  simple  and  efficient  S3^stem
of  tactics.  He  had  secured  this  bridge  exactly
at  the  right  moment:  the  attack  in  his  rear  was
repulsed  by  the  musketeers;  and,  just  as  a
considerable  body  of  the  enemy's  troops  ap-
peared on  the  other  side  of  the  river  and  seemed
about  to  contest  the  passage  with  him,  fortune
favoured  him  so  far  that  one  of  his  first  shots
inflicted  a  mortal  wound  on  their  captain,  Gio-
vanni de  Medici, t  in  whom  the  Italian  soldiery
put  implicit  trust.  He  was  a  man  completely
after  the  tastes  and  opinions  of  Italy  at  that
period— accomplished,  prudent,  addicted  to  all
the  vices  and  debaucheries  of  the  south,  but  at
the  same  time  energetic  and  daring,  and  gifted
%vith  every  other  quality  of  a  good  leader.
Hereupon  Frundsberg  crossed  the  Po  at  Ostig-
lia,  and  marched  up  the  right  bank  as  far  as
the  Trebbia.  On  the  2Sth  of  December,  he
arrived  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Piacenza.
"  Here  we  are,"'  he  writes  to  Bourbon ;  "  over
the  high  mountains,  and  tfie  deep  waters,
through  the  midst  of  the  enemy,  in  hunger  and

across  the  great  water,  which  was  obstructed  on  all  sides
l)y  the  strong  bands  of  the  enemy;  in  order  to  take  the
nearest  way  to  Milan,  he  turned  upon  Mantua."

*  Bourbon  wrote  to  Frundsberor  that  lie  could  not  fix  a
route  for  him.  Frundsberg  was  determined,  if  necessary,
to  fisht,  but  otherwise  "to  put  himself  in  no  peril." —
Letter  in  if,  p.  424.

t  Leoni  ;  Vita  di  Francesco  Maria  d'Urbino,  p.  364.

X  The  incident  that  this  was  exactly  the  first  shot  out
nf  tli;^  falconet  just  arrived  from  Ferrara,  is  first  found  in
Ziegler.  Reissner  also  used  Jovius  (Vita  Alfonsi,  p.  189)
and  Gnicciardini  (b.  27,  p.  34),  who  expresses  more  clearly
what  Zie'j:ler  tells  somewhat  obscurely:  "he  (Giov.  de
Medici)  had  one  le?  shot  off  at  the  knee,  by  a  shot  from
a  falconet."  "  Roppe  una  gamba  alquanto  sopra  al  g\-
nöcchio."  AccordinjT  to  the  diary  in  Hormayr,  two  fal-
conets and  two  culverins  arrived  from  the  duke,  together
with  1000  gulden.  "  Had  I,"  says  Frundsberg,  "  had  400
or  500  horse,  I  would,  with  God's  help,  have  won  no  slight
honour  for  his  imperial  majesty  and  his  princely  highness.
You  may,  in  short,  believe  that  I  never  in  my  life  saw  a
more  hurried  retreat."  The  enemy  lost  five  hundred
horse.

want  and  misery,  we  have  arrived  safe  and
sound. What  shall  we  dol"

Bourbon  required  the  whole  of  January  to
reduce  Tslilan  to  such  a  state  of  tranquillity  as
that  he  could  entrust  it  to  a  part  of  his  troops,
and  march  with  the  remainder  to  join  the  Ger-
man forces.  On  the  12th  January  the  junction
was  effected  near  Firenzuola.§  There  could  be
no  doubt  as  to  the  course  which  it  was  expe-
dient for  them  to  pursue.  We  are  already  ac-
quainted with  the  dispositions  of  Frundsberg;
nor  can  it  be  matter  of  wonder  that  Bourbon
now  hated  the  pope  more  than  any  man  living;
since  the  emperor's  demand  that  he  should  be
created  Duke  of  Milan,  to  which  Clement
Vvould  never  accede,  was  the  condition  which
had  hitherto  rendered. all  negotiations  abortive.
Their  sole  ally  in  Italy  was  the  Duke  of  Fer-
rara, who  cherished  a  bitter  hatred  to  the  pope,
having  been  incessantly  menaced,  even  in  his
hereditary  domains,  both  by  Leo  and  by  Cle-
ment :  he  supplied  the  troops  with  provisions
on  their  march,  and  urged  their  leaders  not  to
lose  a  mioment,  and  to  seek  their  common  ene-
my in  Rome  itself. ||  On  the  22d  February,
the  combined  army,  20,000  strong,  in  six  divi-
sions, Vv'ith  some  cannon  and  a  small  body  of
light  horse,  broke  up  their  camp  at  Firenzuola
and  took  the  high  road  to  Rome.  Leaders  and
men  were  equally  persuaded  of  the  fact  that
the  pope  had  begun  the  war  afresh  :  they  knew
very  well  that  if  the  emperor  allowed  them  to
be  without  pay  it  was  only  from  vrant  of  means,
and  they  determined  to  go  and  seek  it  for  them-
selves in  Rome.  Religious  antipathy,  and  the
desire  to  avenge  the  emperor — perhaps  to  re-
establish the  ancient  power  of  the  empire  in
Ital}^  ;1 — the  just  notion  that  a  war  is  only  to
be  concluded  in  the  enemy's  capital ;  the  eager-
ness to  get  possession  of  their  well-earned  pay,
and  the  rumour  of  treasures  brought  from  all
parts  of  the  globe  and  accumulated  in  Rome
for  centuries, — all  these  various  feelings  and
motives  were  blended  into  one  mass  of  pas-
sionate determination  to  conquer  and  to  plunder
Rome.

At  the  very  first  obstacle  that  placed  itself
in  their  way,  this  temper — now  become  inde-
pendent and  untameable^burst  out  v/ith  the
most  violent  explosfon.

At  the  end  of  February  and  the  beginning  of

§  Frundsberg  was  very  discontented  at  the  long  delay.
He  began  to  suspect  treachery :  what  is  told  him,  he  be-
lieves "  like  St.  Thomas." Letter  passim,  430.

II  As  early  as  November,  the  Duke  of  Ferrara  had  ad-
vised him  to  establish  the  Bentivogli  in  Bologna  ;  if  tliat
was  impossible,  "  to  undertake  the  campaign  against  the
pope  ;  if  Bourbon  could  raise  no  money,  then  to  levy  con-
tributions on  the  towns  and  villages  for  the  support  of  the
landsknechts."

ITZiegler: "  Desshalben  aus  inanigfaltiger  getrungner
not  alle^einhellig  beschlossen,  das  sie  eilends  den  papa,
den  anfaher  dess  kriegs  vnd  dieser  bundtnus,  vberfalleu,
daselbs  bezalung  suchen  weiten: wann  das  haubt  be-
zwungen, so  wurden  sich  die  stott  vnd  das  land selbs
ergeben,  wo  es ihnen  dand gluckhen  vnd dem kaiser
geliebt  sein  wurd,  so  wolten  sie  gantz  Jtalia  wieder  zum
reich  bringen."—"  Therefore  from  manifold  urgent  need,
all  unanimously  determined,  that  they  would  suddenly
\  fall  upon  the  pope,  the  beginner  cf  tlie  war,  and  upon
'  this  league,  and  would  there  seek  pay  :  wlien  the  head  was
subduecf,  the  city  and  the  country would  surrender  of
themselves:  if  they  had  luck,  and  the  emperor  pleased,
1  they  would  bring  back  the  whole  of  Italy  to  the  empire."

264

MUTINY  IN  THE  CAMP.

Book  IV.

March  the  papal  troops  had  gained  some  ad-
vantages in  the  Neapolitan  territory,  and  the
viceroy  had  actually  determined  to  conclude  a
truce  with  the  pope ;  in  which,  however,  the
sum  of  money  that  was  to  be  contributed  to
the  support  of  the  army  was  either  not  men-
tioned at  all,  or  very  vaguely ;  though  its  re-
treat into  Lombardy  was  distinctly  stipulated.*
It  was  not  very  likely  that  this  treaty  would  be
latified  by  the  emperor,  or  accepted  by  the
leaders  of  the  army  ;  nor,  indeed,  that  it  would
be  executed  by  the  papal  general  ;  since  the
army  of  the  Ligue  threatened  in  that  case  to
separate  itself  entirely  from  the  papal  troops. |
But  the  mere  rumour  of  such  a  thing,  the  sight
of  an  envoy  coming  from  Rome  and  returning
thither  directly,  threw  the  Avhole  army  into
agitation.:}:  The  Spaniards  murmured  first.
They  threatened  that  they  would  go  over  to
another  master  who  would  satisfy  their  claims
better;  —  an  empty  threat  —  for  vvhom  could
they  find  1  Since  the  emperor  owed  them  eight
months'  pay,  nothing  remained  but  to  stand  by
their  leader.  It  was  fortunate  for  Bourbon  that
he  was  able  to  make  his  escape;  his  tent  was
plundered,  and  his  best  garment  found  the  fol-
lowing day  in  a  ditch.  The  Spaniards  instant-
ly communicated  their  own  mutinous  spirit  to
the  Germans  :  their  incessant  cry  v;as,  Lanz  !
Lanz  !  Geld  !  Geld  !  (Lance  !  Lance  !  Money !
Money  !)  this  was  all  the  German  they  knew ;
it  was  like  the  inarticulate  cry  of  passion.
Frundsberg,  however,  did  not  as  yet  see  any
ground  for  fear;  he  still  trusted  to  his  well-
tried  personal  influence  over  the  landsknechts.
He  ordered  the  drums  to  beat,  a  ring  to  be
formed,  and  had  the  courage  to  go  into  the
middle  of  it,  accompanied  by  the  Prince  of
Orange  (who  had  followed  the  army  from  Ger-
many) and  the  chief  commanders  :  he  thought
he  should  still  be  able  to  effect  something  by
means  of  a  few  words  of  reason.  He  called
upon  them  to  remember  how  he  had  always
been  their  friend ,§  and  had  never  left  them  in
good  times  or  in  evil  :  he  promised  that  he
would  always  be  true  to  his  good  landsknechts;
he  reminded  them  that  they  had  sworn  to
stand  by  one  another  in  life  and  in  death,  till
they  should  all  be  paid  and  satisfied ;  then  he
meant  to  stop  :  the  emperor's  foe,  the  beginner

*  Treaty  in  Bucholtz,  iii.  fi05.  The  contents  of  this
treaty  as  jjiven  by  Guicciardini  ^xviii.  5),  do  not  exactly
correspond  wiüi  this  ;  e.  g.  there  is  no  mention  in  Biicholz
of  the  60,000  dncats  which,  according  to  Guicciardini,
were  to  be  paid.  Ziegler  says,  too,  "  Er  welt  si'clitzig
tausent  ducaten,  iedeni  knocht,  das  sie  ans  dem  land
ziehen,  ainen  monatsold  geben  ;'" — "  he  would  give  sixty
thousand  ducats— the  amount  of  a  month's  pay  for  all
the  landsknecht  whom  they  brought  out  of  the  country,"
which  is  adopted  word  for  word  by  Reissner,  p.  103.  I
am  inclined  to  think,  however,  that  there  were  some
secret  articles,  as  in  the  Ligue  of  Cognac.  Vettori  speaks
of  65,000  ducats.

t  These  uncertainties  reduced  the  papal  agents  to
despair.  "Si  e  sempre  consigliato  lo  accordo,  ma  s'in-
tende.va  un  accordo  che  fiisse  fermo  e  non  dubio  e  intriga-
to,  come  questoche  si  e  fatto  in  Roma  e  non  osservato  in
Lombardia."

X  Sepulvedo,  vi.  1.

§  In  a  former  letter  from  the  army  it  is  said,  "  Die
Knecht  sind  vast  wohl  mit  im  zufrieden:  er  ritt  auch
unter  ihnen  um  wie  ein  Held,  und  ist  allvveg  der  fördriste
beim  Haufen."  Wittenbach,  4th  Feb.  27,  in  Hormayr's
Oestreichischer  Plutarch,  xiii.  112,

of  the  war,  he  would  carry  off  with  them.||
But  reason  has  little  power  over  congregated
masses  of  men,  nor  is  their  violence  to  be  con-
trolled by  any  arguments.  The  rational  ad-
dress of  their  leader,  whom  every  man  of  them
individually  loved  and  honoured,  they  answered
with  the  cry.  Money  !  Money  !  which  ran  like
the  muttering  of  a  storm  through  their  ranks :
they  levelled  their  lances  against  the  command-
ers in  their  centre  as  if  they  meant  to  transfix
them.  Never  could  such  a  moment  have  pre-
sented itself  to  the  imagination  or  the  fears  of
Frundsberg.  It  was  with  him  that  the  organ-
ization and  tactics  of  the  landsknechts  had
mainly  originated  ;  they  called  him,  and  with
justice,  their  teacher  and  father.  He  had  fought
at  their  head  in  almost  all  the  wars  of  the  house
of  Austria  during  that  century;  he  had  con-
quered the  most  powerful  enemies,  spite  of
every  inferiority  of  numbers  or  disadvantage  of
position.  His  reputation  did  not  rest  on  the
mere  animal  courage  of  a  soldier ;  he  com-
manded respect  by  his  coolness  and  presence
of  mind  in  the  midst  of  danger ;  by  the  prompt-
itude v»-ith  which  he  took  a  salutary  resolution,
and  the  dauntless  valour  with  which  he  exe-
cuted it.  His  homely  sayings  are  very  charac-
teristic :  "  Kriegsrath  mit  der  That"  (Counsel
in  v.-ar,  with  action)  ;  "  Viel  Feinde,  viel  Ehre"
(Many enemies,  nmch  honour);  they  inspired
both  the  officers  and  men  who  served  under
him  with  boundless  confidence.  His  command
fully  justified  their  obedience.  He  still  hoped
by  their  aid  to  effect  every  thing;  he  did  not
even  despair  of  beating  the  Turks,  and  of  driving
them  to  the  frontiers  of  Europe.  Like  a  true
partisan  and  servant  of  the  empire,  he  embraced
with  a  glance  Rome  and  Constantinople.  His
loyalty  never  v/avered,  although,  spite  of  all
his  services,  he, was  sometimes  ill  at  court;  he
gave  vent  to  his  dissatisfaction  in  a  few  rhymes,
and  at  the  next  trouble  or  disaster  that  befel
his  master,  he  took  down  his  armour  from  the
wall :  he  held  to  the  great  Idea  of  the  empire
with  unshaken  constancy.  He  had  now  to
encounter  this  unlooked-for  resistance.  He  was
a  man  of  extraordinary  personal  strength ;  on
one  occasion  he  had  pushed  aside  a  very  pow-'
erful  adversary  \^ith  one  finger,  as  if  in  sport;
fear  he  knew  not,  nor  had  any  sudden  mishap
ever  had  power  to  throw  him  off  his  gliard ; —
but  that  those  should  (rebel  against  him  whom
he  had  made  what  they  vvere, — that  they  should
turn  against  him  the  spears  which  he  had
taught  them  to  wield — this  was  too  m.uch  for
him.  Its  effect  was  such  as  no  one  could  have
anticipated ;  in  the  same  moment — ^"at  one  stroke
— he  lost  utterance  and  consciousness,  and
sank  down  upon  a  drum  ;  he  bald  reached  the
goal  of  bis  heroic  career.  Singular  catastro-
phe! He  died  on  the  field,  but  not  by  the
hands  of  the  enemy;  not  in  the  heat  of  the
battle  which  he  had  come  forth  to  wage  :  his
simple  heroic  spirit,  which  had  striven,  with
all  its  honour  and  all  its  earnestness,  to  stem

II  Reissner  Frundsberge,  104.  (Barthold's  Frundsberg,
I  presume.)  True  and  short  account  in  Buder,  p.  526.;
and  in  Goldast,  Polit.  Reichshändel,  p.  443. :  there  are
some  small  differences  which  can  hardly  be  reconciled.

Chap.  III.

MARCH  ON  ROME.

the  rising-  torrent  of  rebellion  in  the  troops  by
whom  he  had  so  long  been  implicitly  obeyed,
sank  when  he  saw  that  the  tempest  was  un-
governable— the  passion  of  revolt  triumphant ;
— it  was  a  sight  that  struck  him  with  instant
death.  It  has  been  affirmed,  that  the  crafty
enemy  who  was  now  advancing  against  him
had  stirred  up  the  fire  of  mutiny  by  secret  prac-
tices and  emissaries.  And  as  against  himself,
no  other  weapon  was  needed.  If,  however,
the  pope  thought  to  gain  any  thing  by  these
means,  he  was  greatly  in  error.  The  re-action
produced  in  the  army  by  this  sudden  calamity
was  violent  as  had  been  the  conduct  that  caused
it.  It  effected  what  no  persuasion,  no  reason
could  have  (Jone.  The  lances  were  taken  up
again,  the  wild  tumult  was  stilled ;  the  words
of  the  chiefs  once  more  found  a  hearing;  the
whole  disorderly  mass  dispersed.  Four  days
after,  Frundsberg  recovered  His  speech,  but  he
could  no  longer  lead  the  army.  He  could  only
beg  the  Duke  of  Bourbon  not  to  draw  back;
hitherto,  he  said,  God  had  guided  them  ;  he
would  not  abandon  their  cause  to  the  end.
Some  money  arrived  from  Ferrara  for  the  Span-
iards;,the  landsknechts  had  ceased  to  clamour
for  it;  they  themselves  entreated  Bourbon  to
lose  no  more  time  : — all  they  asked  was  to  be
allowed  to  march.

Had  Bourbon  intended  to  retreat,  he  could
no  longer  have  induced  the  army  to  do  so.*

The  violence  of  the  hatred  entertained  against
the  pope  by  his  enemies,  was  equalled  by  the
cool  indifference  manifested  by  his  friends.
The  army  of  the  Ligue  followed  the  imperial-
ists at  a  distance,  and  seemed  rather  intended
to  obstruct  their  retreat  than  their  progress.
All  the  great  towns  of  the  Ecclesiastical  States
were  in  as  good  a  state  of  defence  a-s  those  of
Lombardy,  while  the  army  possessed  nothing
but  the  road  along  which  it  marched ;  yet  it
found  nq  obstacles  save  those  presented  by  in-
clement weather  and  alpiue  passes  :  it  encoun-
tered no  enemy.  Bourbon  advanced  slowly :
on  the  5th  of  April  we  find  him  at  Imola,  after
taking  and  plundering  smaller  towns.  He  then
turned  to  the  right  towards  the  Alps,  and  took
the  road  of  Val  di  Bagno.j  The  larger  guns
he  sent  to  the  Duke  of  Ferrara,  the  smaller  were
dragged  up  the  mountains ;  there  was  some-
times a  scarcity  of  bread,  but  never  of  meat  and
wine ;  the  heights  were  ascended  without  much
toil  in  the  neighbourhood  where  the  Sapio,
Folia,  Metora,  and  several  other  tributaries  of
the  Arno  rise,  and  where  numerous  springs
meet  and  form  the  sources  of  the  Tiber.:^ On

*  According  to  Macchiavelli,  Speditione  a  Francesco
Guicciardini  lettera  XIV.  29  Marzo,  Bourbon  expressed  to
the  legate,  "  quanto  egli  ha  desiderato  la  pace,  e  la  fatica
ch'  egli  ha  durata  per  far  contenti  quelli  soldati  a  questa
tregua,  e  che  in  effetto  non  ha  potuto  fargli  contenti,
mostrando  che  bisogna  piu  danari,  ne  dice  il  numero."

t  Foi>cari,  Relatione  di  Fiorenza,  1527,  says  that  Bour-
bon could  pass  either  the  Val  di  Latnone,  or  the  Via  della
Maria,  from  Riinini  or  the  Val  di  Bagno.  Only  the  mid-
dle and  easiest  road  was  fortified.  The  others  might  also
have  been  fortified  with  very  little  trouble,  "si  fatadeum,
si  mens  non  IfEva  fuisset."  From  Macchiavelli's  letters
it  appears  that  when  the  army  broke  up  its  quarters  at
San  Giovanni  it  was  thought  that  it  might  still  return,
and  take  the  road  to  Lucca,  or  attack  Ravenna.

X  Plinius,  Hist.  Nat,,  iii,  175,  ed.  Lugd,  Flavius  Blon-
dus,  Italia  illustr,,  p.  344. ^

34  X

the  18th  of  April  the  imperialists  appeared  at
Pieve  di  San  Stefano,  whence  they  threatened
at  the  same  time  the  valleys  of  the  Arno  and
the  Tiber, — Florence  arid  Romej  and  left  it
impossible  for  the  enemy  to  decide  on  which
side  they  would  first  direct  their  attacks.  The
whole  of  this  region  was  panic-stricken.

The  pope  now  perceived  that  the  treaty  lie
had  concluded  with  Lannoy  was  too  favourable
to  be  executed.  He  could  no  longer  refuse
what  the  imperialists  had  always  demanded  of
him — money  to  satisfy  the  troops.  He  saw
that  his  own  safety  depended  on  their  disposi-
tions. He  commissioned  Lannoy  to  repair  to
Florence  to  see  what  could  be  raised  there.
Lannoy  obtained  the  assurance  of  150,000
scudi,  to  be  paid  at  stated  terms,  and  hastened
towards  the  Alps,  in  order  if  possible  to  induce
the  army  by  this  promise  to  retrace  its  steps.§

On  the  21st  of  April  he  arrived  at  the  camp,
where  he  staid  three  days.  He  was  seen  to
eat  and  drink  with  Bourbon;  all  their  misun-
derstandings were  at  an  end  ;  but  it  was  clear
that  the  offer  of  the  Florentines  was  not  suffi-
cient for  their  wants  ;  they  declared  that  they
must  have  at  least  240,000  scudi  to  induce  the
army  to  return.

Whether  even  then  they  would  have  found
this  possible — whether  they  would  have  seri-
ously attempted  it, — is,  I  think,  extremely  ques-
tionable. The  tumults  of  that  camp  were  too
fresh  in  men's  minds.  Nor  do  I  find  that  they
received  any  encouragement  from  the  emperor.

The  situation  of  the  emperor,  we  must  re-
mark, is  once  more  extremely  singular.

The  expressions  of  paternal  kindness  and
filial  obedience  which  are  traditional  in  the
Catholic  world,  had  been  frequently  and  osten-
tatiously exchanged  between  him  and  the  pope  ;
the  emperor  still  occasionally  spoke  of  the  ex-
tirpation of  the  Lutherans  ;  in  respect  of  Italy,
he  gave  assurances  of  which  the  pope  said,  he
would  have  given  the  vv'hole  world  and  his  own
soul  into  the  hands  of  the  emperor  upon  the
faith  of  them,!|  But  Charles's  directions  to
his  generals  have  a  totally  different  tendency.
Lannoy  was  admonished  in  February,  by  no
means  to  allow  himself  to  be  the  dupe  of  any
treaty  whatever;  if  he  supported  Colonna's
party  on  the  one  side,  and  if,  on  the  other,
Bourbon  came  up  with  his  German  troops,
many  great  and  good  things  might  be  accom-
plished. "  We  see  clearly,"  says  he  in  a  let-
ter, "that  they  (in  Rome)  will  do  no  good
unless  they  are  well  thrashed.  It  will  be  ne-
cessary to  cut  thongs  out  of  foreign  leather
{i.e.  to  raise  money  to  pay  our  troops)  wherever
we  can  lay  our  hands  on  it;  and  we  must  not
forget  Florence,  which  has  also  deserved  a  good
castigation."l[  These  are  nearly  the  opinions
which  prevailed  in  the  army.  The  letters  to
Bourbon  are  in  the  same  tone.  The  emperor
tells  him  to  do  every  thing  he  can  to  make  up

§  Instruction  of  Lannoy  in  Hormayr's  Archiv*.  1812,  p
377.  The  Excerpts  in  Bucholtz,  p.  71,  are  taken  from  the
same  papers.

11  Instruttione  a  Farnese,  Ranke's  Histoi  y  of  the  Popes,
vol,  iii.  Appendix,  p.  .19.

TT  Excerpts  in  Bucholtz,  iii.  57.

266

MARCH  ON  ROM|].

Book  IV.

the  accounts  of  the  war.  "  You  see,  the  game
lasts  long ;  you  will  neglect  no  means  of
bringing  it  to  a  close."*  He  did  not,  it  is  true,
break  off  the  negotiations ;  he  even  caused  a
ratification  of  the  truce,  and  full  powers  for
concluding  a  peace,  to  be  drawn  up ;  but  he  at
the  same  time  commanded  the  viceroy  to  de-
liver up  the  ratification  only  in  case  no  change
in  the  state  of  affairs  had  been  brought  about
in  the  mean  time  by  the  army,  which  might
render  it  possible  to  make  better  terms.  At  the
distance  at  which  he  was,  his  instructions  could
only  arrive  very  late  and  produce  a  general
effect.  But  it  is  most  remarkable  that  on  the
very  same  day  when  Lannoy  and  Bourbon
were  together  — on  the  23d  of  April  —  after
Charles  must  have  knov/n  of  the  truce  —  he
did  not  say  a  single  word  to  his  commander-
in-chief  about  observing  it.  "  I  see,  cousin,
that  you  are  advancing  on  Rome,"  said  he,
carefully  avoiding  any  expression  of  disappro-
bation; on  the  contrary,  he  insinuated  that  a
truce  or  a  peace  might  best  be  negotiated  there ;
that  he  would  not  send  him  the  full  powers,
although  his  was  the  first  name  that  occurred
in  them,  in  order  that  it  might  not  appear  as
if  he  came  to  sue  for  peace,  so  that  people
might  know  he  would  compel  it  by  force. f  In
one  word,  the  emperor  was  well  content  that
his  army  marched  on  Rome  to  extort  its  pay
there  as  it  could,  and  to  dictate  a  peace  to  the
enemy.

Let  us  observe,  too,  that  at  this  moment,  the
pope  was  no  longer  inclined  to  observe  the
truce  which  separated  him  from  his  allies.  At
the  very  same  time — 25th  April — whether  it  be
that  he  had  already  learned  the  new  demands
of  the  army,  and  had  thought  them  such  as  it
was  impossible  to  comply  with,  or  that  he  was
determined  by  the  general  aspect  of  politics —
he  concluded  a  xi^w  alliance  with  the  Ligue,
the  terms  of  which  were  kept  secret,  but  which,
we  learn  from  his  own  declaration,  contained
much  that  was  unfavourable  to  the  emperor-ij:

In  short,  both  the  emperor  and  the  pope  were
determined  to  try  their  fortune  in  war.

The  imperialists,  who  had  felt  their  hands
tied  by  the  former  truce,  were  now  set  at  liberty.
Bourbon  delayed  not  a  moment  to  take  advan-
tage of  this  change.  After  some  demonstra-
tions against  Florence  and  Arezzo,  in  which  he
was  supported  by  Siena,  on  the  28th  of  April
he  took  that  high  road  to  Rome  which  for  cen-
turies had  been  trodden  alternately  by  hostile
armies  and  pious  troops  of  pilgrims  from  the
north.  The  cavalry  of  the  Ligue  was  close  at
his  heels,  but  before  him  he  found  no  obstacle.
On  the  2d  of  May  he  was  in  Viterbo,  where
he  was  welcomed  by  the  German  leaders;  on
Ihe  4th  he  drove  the  first  papal  troops  that  en-
countered him,  under  Ranuccio  Farnese,  out
pf  Romiglione ;  on  the  5th  he  traversed  the
Campagna, and appeared tov/ards evening,

*  14th  Feb.  and  31st  March. Bucholtz,  p.  67.

t  Extract  in  BuchoUz,  p.  67.

J  Instruttione  al  C  Farnese,  App.  p.  31:  "  consentendo
a  molte  conditioni  che  erano  in  pregiudicio  della  M^
Cesarea."

from  the  side  of  Monte  Mario,  before  the  walls
of  the  Vatican.§

The  German  army  thus  reached  Rome  in  the
same  state  as  it  had  quitted  Tyrol  and  Swabia,
without  having  encountered  the  slightest  re-
sistance, and  having  seen  all  its  enemies  dis-
perse before  it ;  its  hatred  exasperated  by  the
Spaniards  and  Italians  who  had  joined  it,  and
who  sought  in  Rome  pay  and  vengeance ;  led
by  a  general  who  had  already  quitted  the  usual
path  of  the  morality  and  policy  of  his  age  and
country,  and  who  hated  in  the  pope  the  most
formidable  opponent  of  all  his  claims  and  pro-
jects.

It  would  be  utterly  inexplicable  how  it  hap-
pened that  the  prudent  Clement  did  not  seek
by  every  possible  means  to  avert  this  storm,
werfe  it  not  clear  that  he  always  believed  him-
self to  be  the  stronger.  In  Naples  he  had
gained  ground,  in  Lombardy  he  had  lost  none ;
the  enemy's  unresisted  advance  he  imputed  to
his  own  imprudence  in  concluding  a  truce
which  had  perplexed  his  allies :  now,  as  he
had  recalled  this  measure  and  renewed  the
Ligue,  he  did  not  doubt  that  its  army,  which
was  already  in  Tuscany,  would  still  come  to
his  assistance  in  time :  till  then,  he  thought,
Rome  would  be  in  no  danger;  the  walls  were
well  furnished  v/ith  cannon,  and  five  thousand
arquebusiers  were  taken  into  pay  :  the  defence
of  the  city  vv^as  entrusted  to  the  very  captain
who  had  so  successfully  repulsed  the  same
leader  with  a  similar  army  from  Marseille.

It  remained  to  be  seen  how  the  event  would
justify  his  security.  Bourbon  summoned  the
pope  to  open  the  city,  over  whichj  he  said,  the
bishop  had  no  right,  to  the  emperor,  to  whom,
as  head  of  the  Roman  empire,  it  had  of  all
time  belonged.  The  pope  sent  for  answer  to
the  trumpet,  that  if  he  did  not  instantly  be-
gone, he  should  be  shot.

Hereupon  a  council  of  war  was  called,  the
issue  of  which  could  not  he  doubtful.  The
leaders  saw  very  clearly,  that  they  must  not
allow  themselves  to  be  overtaken  before  these
walls  by  the  well-commanded  enemy  who  was
marching  on  their  rear.  They  resolved  to  com-
mend themselves  to  God,  and  at  once  without
delay  to  storm  Rome  ;  even  though  the  victory
should  be  dearly  bought.

During  the  night  they  did  not  neglect  to
keep  the  enemy  in  breath  by  incessant  alarms.
Meanwhile,  every  thing  was  prepared  for
storming.

Bourbon  gave  his  confessor  a  commission
which  affords  a  tolerable  insight  into  the  sphere
of  ideas  in  which  his  mind  moved.  He  de-
sired him  to  tell  the  emperor,  in  the  first  place,
for  the  future  to  keep  his  troops  in  good  humour
— especially  the  Germans,  without  whom  he
could  not  hold  Italy 4n  check:  in  the  second,
to  cause  himself  to  be  crowned  in  Rome,  which
would  be  yery  advantageous  to  him  for  securing
peace  with  the  pope,  and  obedience  from  the

§  In  the  21st  hour  (between  4  and  5  o'clock).  The  Com-
mentarius  captce  urbis  says,  that  the  army  arrived  before
Rome  on  the  4th.  A  part  of  it  must  indeed  have  appeared
there  at  that  time,  if  it  is  true  that  it  was  exposed  for  a
day  and  two  nights  to  the  fire  of  the  Roman  artillery.

Chap.  III.

CONQUEST  AND  SACK  OF  ROME.

267

princes  of  the  empire.  As  to  himself,  he  de-
clared that  his  intention  was  only  to  force  the
pope  to  grant  him  a  loan  for  the  payment  of  his
troops,  and  to  prepare  the  coronation  of  the
emperor.  It  is  evident  that  he  felt  himself  en-
tirely a  soldier  of  the  emperor ;  he  thought  to
hold  Rome  garrisoned  by  his  victorious  and
contented  army,  and  to  procure  for  his  master
the  rank  and  dignity  of  an  emperor  of  anti-
quity.

It  is  a  remarkable  fact,  that  the  sentiments
of  a  portion  of  the  population  within  the  walls
were  of  the  same  kind.  Rome  possessed  no
compact  body  of  citizens,  held  together  by  he-
reditary rights,  such  as  was  at  that  time  to  be
found  in  almost  every  other  city  in  Europe ;
the  mass  of  the  inhabitants  were  recent  settlers
from  other  parts,  who  lived  upon  the  business
of  the  court.  As  there  had  been  a  great  and
continual  falling  off  in  its  consideration  and
revenues,  they  would  not  have  been  sorry  to
see  the  government  of  the  priests  superseded
by  the  court  of  a  puissant  emperor,  which
would  have  afforded  them  the  same  or  greater
advantages.*

On  the  morning  of  the  6th  of  May — on  a
Monday — the  imperialists  advanced  to  the  as-
sault of  the  walls  surrounding  the  Vatican.
They  had  got  a  quantity  of  trellises  from  the
gardens,  which  they  had  converted  into  scaling-
ladders,  by  binding  them  together  with  willow
rods.  The  right  side,  towards  the  Porta  Santo
Spirito,  was  to  be  stormed  by  tlie  Germans;
the  left,  towards  the  Porta  Pertusa,  immediately
behind  St.  Peter's  church,  by  the  Spaniards.
A  thick  fog  rendered  it  impossible  for  the  ene-
my to  direct  his  fire  from  the  distant  castle  of
St.  Angelo  against  them,  or  even  to  see  their
approach.  At  the  point  of  their  attack,  the
walls  were  low  and  the  entrenchments  thrown
up  in  haste.  Meanwhile  the  fire  of  the  carron-
ades,  culverines,  and  falconets,  which  were
planted  on  the  fortifications,  was  so  effective,
that  the  first  assault  of  both  troops  was  re-
pulsed. They,  however,  instantly  prepared  for
a  second.  The  Germans  were  animated  by  the
exhortations  of  Philip  Stumpf,  who  led  them
to  a  more  favourable  spot.  Bourbon  himself
was  seen  to  lead  on  the  Spaniards,  upon  whom
the  first  repulse  had  made  some  impression,
and  to  seize  a  ladder  with  his  own  hand.  The
forlorn  hope  of  the  Germans,  though  under  a
heavy  fire  of  musketry,  now  succeeded  in  car-
rying the  mound  and  the  entrenchments.  From
this  time  they  encountered  no  resistance.  Glaus
Seidensticker,  a  veteran  captain,  was  one  of  the
first  to  mount  the  walls  with  his  huge  battle
sword  in  his  hand  ;  Michael  Hartmann,  with  a
few  comrades,  leaped  down ;  at  last  they  found
so  little  steady  resistance  that  they  themselves
hardly  knew  hov/  they  had  got  over;  in  their
fanatical  ardour,  they  thought  that  God  had
crone,  before  them  in  the  mist.

Their  leader,  Bourbon,  was  struck  at  the  mo-
ment in  which  he  was  mounting  the  ladder,  by
a  bullet,  whether  from  the  hand  of  an  enemy,
or  an  accidental  shot  of  one  of  his  own  troops,
is  uncertain. I  He  was  destined  only  to  eon-
duct  events  to  the  point  at  which  they  mig4it
be  left  to  their  own  spontaneous  movement;
they  now  passed  over  him,  following  their  own
unaided  and  ungoverned  courses.  But  the  fury
of  the  Spaniards  was  roused,  by  the  loss  of
their  leader,  to  a  pitch  which  nothing  could
withstand  ;  shouting  Espaila,  they  too  scaled
the  walls.  The  papal  guns  were  easily  taken,
and  the  gates  and  sally-ports  opened  to  the
crowd  that  pressed  on  behind ;  a  few  hundred
Swiss,  who  here  too  were  opposed  to  the  lands-
knechts,  were  routed  without  difficulty ;  the
Bbrgo-was  conquered  before  the  pope  actually
knew  that  the  attack  had  begun :  he  had  only
just  time  enough  left  to  seek  refuge  in  the
Castle  of  St.  Angelo. ij:  The  original,  text  of
one  of  the  oldest  accounts  states  that  Bourbon
was  carried,  still  living,  in  front  of  St.  Peter's
Church  ;  here  he  must  have  felt  the  full  sense
of  victory — and  here  he  breathed  his  last.  The
body  was  carried  into  the  Sixtine  Chapel.

The  army  was  sufficiently  well  disciplined"
to  preserve  its  order  after  his  death  ;  to  abstain
at  first, from  plunder,  and  to  propose  further
terms  to  the  pope.§  A  few  months  before,  Lan-
noy  had  demanded  200,000  scudi ;  and  Bourbon,
a  few  days  before,  240,000.  The  generals  now,
under  the  eyes  of  the  pope,  demanded  300,000;
and,  as  security  for  payment,  the  Transteverine
city.  The  pope,  who  lived  in  the  hope  that
every  moment  would  bring  the  arm}''  of  the
Ligue — some  pretended  that  they  already  de-
scried its  advanced  guard — and  that  the  city,
properly  so  called,  would  be  able  to  hold  out
till  its  arrival,  even  at  this  mom.ent  rejected  all
proposals.

After  four  hours'  delay,  the  troops  once  more
set  themselves  in  motion  to  bring  their  Vv'ork  to
a  conclusion.  They  took  the  Trastevere  with-
out drawing  a  sword ;  the  fire  of  the  match-
locks sufficed  to  clear  the  battlements,  and  some
blocks  that  served  as  battering-rams,  to  force
the  gates  off  their  hinges  ;  the  bridges  that  led
to  the  interior  of  the  city  were  feebly  defended  :
the  conquerors  advanced  unopposed  through
the  deserted  streets ;  vthe  inhabitants  had  all
taken  refuge  in  their  houses.  At  an  hour  after
sunset  the  whole  city  was  in  their  hands.  Until

The  task  of  the  Spaniards  was  not  so

easy.

*  Vettori :  Sacco  di  Roma,  scritto  in  dialogo.  "Gli
Roniani  si  persuadevano  che  I'imperatore  avessi  a  pigliare
Roma  e  farvi  la  sua  residenza,  e  dovere  avere  quelle
medesime  comoditä  e  utile  che  avevano  dal  domino  de'
preti."

t  According;  to  the  Ferrarese  account  in  Hormayr,'437,
Bourbon  fell\^ither  the  first  or  tlie  third;  a  musket-ball
broke  his  ribs,  and  penetrated  the  intestines  ;  in  half  an
hour  he  was  dead.

J  Vettori,  Storia  d'  Italia,  relates  what  he  witnessed  as
follows.  "  La  mattina  delli  sei  appresentö  (Borbone)  la
battaglia  tra  il  portone  del  borge,  che  e  drieto  alia  casa
del  C'Cesis,  e'quelto  di  S.  Spirito,  dove  ne'  piü  di  luoghi
non  e  muro,  ma  bene  vi  era  facto  qualche  poco  di  riparo.
Era  la  mattina  nebbia  grande,  che  causava  che  I'artigliria
non  si  poteva  in  modo  indirizzare  che  necesse  alii  inimici
i  quali  dettono  la  battaglia,  e  quelli  di  drento  si  difende-
vano  ^gliardamente,  ma  furono  tanti  quelli  di  fuori  che
con  le  mani  guastavano  i  ripari,  che  erano  di  terra  e  de-
boli,  e  si  ridussono  a  combattere  a  piano."  See  Sepulveda,
who  was  also  present,  and  fled  into  the  castle  with  Al-
berto Carpi,  vii.  7.

§  The  Ferrarese 'account  relates  that  only  the  camp
followers  plundered  at  this  moment.  The  attack  had  cost
20Üraen.  .

268

CONQUEST  AND  SACK  OF  ROME.

Book  IV.

midnight  they  remained  in  the  order  in  which
they  had  been  posted ;  the  mass  of  the  Span-
iards remained  on  the  Piazza  Navona ;  that
of  the  Germans,  on  the  Campofiore, — at  that
time  the  most  frequented  part :  at  length,  as
no  enemy  appeared  either  in  the  city  or  near  it,
they  rushed  forth  to  plunder  the  houses.

For  the  last  seventy  or  eighty  years,  uncount-
ed treasures  had  flowed  in  a  continual  stream
into  Rome :  ecclesiastical  revenues  from  every
country'  on  earth ;  gifts  of  pilgrims ;  proceeds
of  jubilees;  incomes  of  benefices  held  by  the
prelates :  the  money  for  which  every  spiritual
favour  had  been  bartered  :*  and  all  these  riches
now  fell  into  the  hands  of  naked,  hungry,  ra-
pacious soldiers,  who  had  so  long  been  only
kept  in  heart  by  the  hope  of  this  hour.

Within  the  first  day  or  two,  twenty  thousand
persons  paid  contributions  :  those  of  the  impe-
rial party,  Ghibellines,  were  as  little  spared  as
the  Guelfs;  the  churches  as  little  respected  as
private  houses.  The  great  basilics  before  the
gates  of  San  Lorenzo  and  San  Paolo  were
plundered ;  the  tomb  of  Saint  Peter  was  ran-
sacked, the  ring  torn  from  the  body  of  Julius
II. :  it  was  calculated  that  the  value  of  ten
millions  of  gold  had  fallen  into  the  hands  of  the
army.f

The  Spaniards  made  the  richest  booty  ;  they
might  be  said  to  scent  gold ;  they  showed  equal
skill  in  discovering  the  most  hidden  treasures,
and  in  extorting  them  by  torture.

']'he  Neapolitans  were  personally  yet  mme
ferocious  and  malignant.ij:  Fortunately,  after
some  days  Pompeo  Colonna  arrived  ;  he  strove
to  protect  the  Roman  nobles,  at  least  from  the
most  revolting  outrages,  and  opened  a  sort  of
asylum  in  his  house.

The  Germans  were  satisfied  with  having
once  more  enough  to  eat  and  drink  ;  where
they  found  no  resistahce,  they  were  rather  good-
natured  than  otherwise. §  They  allowed  the
Jews  to  make  their  profit  without  grudging.
There  was  much  gambling  in  Campofiore;
men  had  grown  so  suddenly  rich,  that  they
staked  hundreds  of  gulden  on  a  throw\  Many
came  laden  with  vases  of  gold,  which  they  lost
to  more  successful  players. Or  they  feasted

*  Francesco  Vettori,  Storia  d' Ttalia,  MS.,  adds:  "  Ro-
mani  vendevano  tutte  le  loro  entrate  caro  et  affittavano
le  loro  case  a  gran  pregj  ne  pagavano  alcana  tassa  o  ga-
bella."  He  also  mentions  the  profit  of  each  calling  :  "  li
artiiriani,  il  popolo  ininuto,  le  ineretrici,"  Never  was  a
richer  city  plundered.

t  Nova  quomodo  Roma  capta  sit  relatio  in  Schardi-
us,  ii.  611.  "  Per  decern  integros  dies  ecclesias  gynecia
monachos  moniales  et  cardinales  episcopos  prelates  ban-
carios  spoliarunt,  dcditos  ceperunt,  libros  et  registra  lace-
rarunt,"  &c.  Vettori :  "La  uccisione  fu  poca,  perclie
rari  si  uccidono  (luelli  che  non  si  vogliono  defendere,  ma
lapreda  fu  inestimabile  di  danari  contanti,  di  gioie,  d'oro
e  d'  argento  lavorato,  di  vestiti,  d'  arazzi,  paramenti  di
case,  mercantie  d'  ogni  sorte  e  di  taglie."

X  An  Italian,  Jovius,  Vita  Pompeji  Columnae,  pp.  191,
192,  draws  this  distinction.

§  In  the  Sacco  di  Roma,  ascribed  to  Francesco  Guicci-
ardini,  or  to  one  Jacopo  Buonaparte,  these  details  are
given  at  length.  At  first  I  did  not  venture  to  make  use
of  them,  as  I  was  not  quite  sure  as  to  the  origin  of  the
work;  but  after  further  investigation,  I  think  «the  facts
may  be  as  related.  I  shall  give,  in  the  Appendix,  my
views  as  to  the  author  of  this  writing,  as  well  as  of  the
book  called  "  Memorie  storiche  dei  principali  avvenimenti
politici  d' Italia  seguiti  durante  il  pontificato  di  demente
VII.  opera  di  Patrizio  de'  Rossi,  Roma,  1837."

Simon  Battista,  who  had  been  imprisoned  by
the  papal  government  for  prophesying  the  pil-
lage of  the  city.  But  though  they  had  set  him
at  liberty,  he  predicted  no  good  to  them  ;  he
told  them  that  soldiers'  riches  and  priests'  lands
went  the  same  way.  "  Take  all  you  can,  plun-
der and  spoil,"  exclaimed  he,  "  you  will  soon
lose  it  all  again  !"  Their  anti-catholic  feelings
vented  themselves  in  unseemly  jests.  Soldiers
dressed  as  cardinals,  with  one  in  the  midst
bearing  the  triple  crown  on  his  head  and  per-
sonating the  pope,  rode  in  solemn  procession
through  the  city,  surrounded  by  guards  and
heralds  :  they  halted  before  the  Castle  of  St.
Angelo,  where  the  mock  pope,  flourishing  a
huge  drinking  glass,  gave  the  cardinals  his
benediction ;  they  then  held  a  consistory,  and
promised  in  future  to  be  more  faithful  servants
of  the  Roman  empire :  the  papal  throne  they
meant  to  bestow  on  Luther.||

Occasionally  discords  broke  out  between  the
several  nations.  A  committee  was  then  chosen,
consisting  of  three  Spanish  and  three  German
officers,  who  patroled  the  streets  all  night  on
horseback,  to  keep  order.^

The  leaders  lay  in  the  Vatican ;  the  Prince
of  Orange  occupied  the  pope's  chamber.  Every
man  kept  his  horse  as  near  him  as  possible,
that  it  might  not  be  stolen.

Meanwhile,  the  viceroy  had  arrived  in  Rome
and  renowned  the  former  negotiations.  For  a
time,  the  pope  hoped  for  succour ;  the  Duke
of  Urbino  appeared  in  the  neighbourhood,  and
three  times  every  night  signals  were  made  from
the  castle  that  the  garrison  still  held  out.  But
he  appeared  to  fear  that  tlie  Germans  would
defend  themselves  with  more  vigour  than  would
be  shown  in  attacking  them.*"^

Nor  was  it  likely  that  he  would  be  inclined
to  incur  any  great  danger  for  the  sake  of  the
pope,  since,  but  a  few  years  before,  he  had  been
involved  in  a  struggle  for  life  and  death  with
the  house  of  Medici,  and  driven  by  them  out
of  his  own  dominions.  He  retreated  again,
without  making  the  slightest  attempt  at  a  res-
cue. The  pope  was  at  length  com.pelled  to
accept,  in  a  greatly  aggravated  form,  the  terms
he  had  so  often  rejected.  He  now  promised  to
pay  400,000  scudi  by  instalments  :  as  a  pledge,
he  allowed  the  allies  to  garrison  some  of  the
strongest  places  which  still  held  out ;  in  Lom-
bardy,  Modena,  Parma,  and  Piacenza ;  and  in
his  own  states,  Ostia  and  Civita  Vecchia.  On
the  15th  June  this  treaty  was  concluded,  and
the  following  day  Spanish  and  German  soldiers
mounted  guard  in  the  Castle  of  St.  Angelo.
Two  hundred  of  the  handsomest  and  stoutest

K  Reissner.  Wahrhaftiger  Bericht.  Much  more  violent
effusions  of  Grüiiewald's  against  the  pope,  "  who  acts
contrary  to  the  word  of  God,"  are  related  by  Cochlseus,
and  repeated  by  Rainaldus.

If  "AXwfftf  Romse,  in  Hofmann,  Nova  Collectio,  p.  535.
The  Germans  would  not  alloyv  the  Spaniards  to  commit
their  abominable  outrages,— for  example,  on  the  persons
of  female  children  ;  the  Spaniards,  on  the  other  hand,
forbade  the  Germans  to  mock  at  the  priests,  which  they
declared  one  of  the  most  ungodly  of  sins.

**The  Germans,  at  least,  were  much  inclined  to  march
against  him.  Schwegler  writes  (Hormayr,  passim,  p.  446),
in  the  camp  of  the  enemy  there  is  hunger  and  discontent;
if  they  come  nearer,  we  will  seek  them  in  the  field.

Chap.  IV.

FALL  OF  HUNGARY.

269

landsknechts  were  picked  out  to  do  duty  about
the  person  of  the  pope.

The  emperor  now  thought  his  designs  on
Italy  accomplished.  He  doubted  not  that  his
army  would  be  able  to  make  an  advantageous
convention  w^th  the  Florentines,  who,  in  the
general  confusion,  had  driven  out  the  house  of
Medici,  and  deserted  the  cause  of  the  pope  :  it
was  then  to  march  against  Venice  and  encamp
in  the  territory  of  the  republic,  in  order  to  com-
pel that  state  also  to  make  peace.  In  this
enterprise,  the  assistance  of  Ferrara  would  be
valuable."^

The  title  of  apostolic,  was  already  exchanged
in  Rome  for  that  of  imperial,  chamber.

The  Germans  had  here  an  opportunity  of
seeing  distinctly  how  the  empire  had  been  the
prey  and  the  dupe  of  the  popes;  people  showed
them  the  ruins  of  the  emperor's  palace,  and
explained  to  them  all  the  stratagems  by  which
he  had  been  stripped  of  the  country  and  the
city,  and  eyen  of  his  own  imperial  residence
within  its  walls.  But  they  consoled  them-
selves with  the  thought,  that  the  man  who  had
exalted  himself  to  the  station  of  a  god  on  earth
would  now  be  brought  low  by  the  might  of  the
jealous  and  offended  God  of  heaven.  They
were  persuaded  that  He  had  opened  to  them  a
way  across  the  Alps,  over  the  steep  rocks
which  they  had  climbed  like  the  wild  goat ;
He  had  preserved  them  unhurt  at  Mantua,
where  their  enemies  had  thought  to  catch  them
as  in  a  net;  He  had  commissioned  the  first  shot
to  lay  prostrate  the  pope's  ablest  captain ;  and,
lastly,  having  led  them  by  all  the  large  cities,
in  face  of  the  enem}^  and  once  more  over  the
trackless  mountains,  safe  and  sound,  to  Rome,
He  had  gone  before  them  in  the  mist  across
the  strong  walls.  Thus  did  the  mighty  God
strike  Antichrist  with  the  lightnings  of  his
judgment. I  They  indulged  the  hope  that  now
times  were  changed,  and  the  beloved  young
emperor  Charles  would  rule  by  his  mild  virtues
according  to  the  word  of  our  Redeemer  alone. :[:

CHAPTER  r

OCCUPATION  OF  BOHExMIA  AND  HUNGARY.

■  At  the  moment  of  this  signal  success,  the
warlike  power  of  Germany,  taking  another
channel,  poured  itself  over  Hungary;  and  here
also,  for  the  aggrandizement  of  the  house  of
A.U  stria.  *

*  Letter  of  Charles's  of  t'.m  3()th  of  June,  in  Hormayr,'
181'2,  :iSl.  His  intention  was  to  appoint  the  Duke  of  Fer-
rara captain  jjeiieral :  Milan,  Charles  could  not  promise
to  any  body,  but  must  wait  till  Sforza's  process  was  de-
cided. In  a  letter  of  Angerer's  of  the  1st  of  July,  it  is
said,  if  6000  men  were  but  now  sent  to  the  assistance  of.
leiva,  "all  Italy  would  be  won  and  conquered."

t  Ziegler's  Acta  Pp.  contain  these  reflections.

i  Words  of  the  Wahrhaftiger  Bericht.  (True  Report.)
't  concludes,  "  In  order  that  our  souls,  over  which  God  is
j_,ord,  at  our  temporal  departure  may  be  taken  to  eternal
joy,  therefore  did  the  Lord  Jesus  come  down  into  this
world,  and  died  on  the  cross  for  tlie  love  of  all  men.  This
may  the  Lord  God  grant  us!"

If  we  would  form  a  clear  conception  of  the
origin  and  import  of  this  event,  we  must  bear
in  mind,  above  all,  that  the  three  eastern  mo-
narchies of  western  Christendom, — Hungary,
Bohemia,  and  Poland,  had  only  attained  to  a
somewhat  stable  government,  and  to  a  share  in
the  benefits  of  Christianity  and  civilisation,  by
German  influence  under  various  forms.  At  the
end  of  the  fourteenth  century,  it  once  more
seemed  as  if  this  connexion  were  indissolubly
restored.  The  most  powerful  house  of  Germany,
that  of  Luxemburg,  possessed  Bohemia  and
Hungary;  while  the  heiress  of  Poland  Was
educated  as  the  affianced  bride  of  an  Austrian
prince.

But  in  all  these  countries  there  also  existed
tendencies  opposed  to  German  interference.
The  most  formidable  enem)'^  of  the  Germans,
the  Grand  Prince  Jagjel  of  Lithuania,  succeed-
ed in  driving  the  Duke  of  Austria  from  the
throne  of  Poland ;  he  afterwards  sent  his  ne-
phew, Koribut,  to  Bohemia,  and  his  son  ob-
tained the  crown  of  Hungary.  The  race  of
Jageilon  thus  consolidated  its  power  throughout
the  east  of  Europe  ;  on  the  one  side  it  presented
a  bulwark  against  the  incursions  of  the  Otto-
mans, and  on  the  other,  excluded  all  German
influence :  in  spite  of  many  turns  of  fortune,
it  still  maintained  itself  in  the  beginning  of  the
16th  century.  Sigismund  I.  ruled  over  Poland
and  Lithuania ;  Vv'ladislas  II.  over  Bohemia
and  Hungary.

But  it  no  longer  possessed  any  internal
strength.  VVladislas  II.  was  by  no  means  the
man  to  curb  the  stormy  nobles  of  Hungary. §
He  was  fitted  only  for  the  simplest  private  life.
Those  about  him  remarked  that  he  spoke  of
the  affairs  of  daily  life  with  a  certain  degree
of  good  sense,  but  that  this  deserted  him  as
soon  as  the  discourse  fell  on  matters  of  state.
He  would  not  believe  any  thing  bad  that  vras
told  him  of  any  m.an,  and  could  vrith  difficulty
be  brought  to  sign  a  sentence  of  death  ;||  every
body,  therefore,  did  what  he  liked.  Under  King
Matthias,  tlie  public  revenues  had  exceeded
800,000  ducats  ;  under  Vvladislas,  they  gradu-
ally fell  off  to  200,000 ;  soon  after  his  death,
there  was  not  money  enough  to  pay  the  ex-
penses of  the  royal  kitchen.  Every  thing  fell
into  ruin  and  decay.  "  Two  things,"  it  is  said
in  the  Maxims  of  Tolna  of  the  year  1518,  "are
required  for  the  maintenance  of  every  kingdom
— arms  and  lav>-s  ;  in  our  kingdom  of  Hungary
we  have  neither  the  one  nor  the  other."ir

Under  these  circumstances,  the  Jagellons
gradually  saw  the  expediency  of  attaching
them^seives  again  to  the  nearest  and  most  pow-
erful German  famil}'- — to  the  house  of  Austria.

§  They  would  fein  have  driven  away  Matthias  too.  TJje
Relatio  Nuncii  apostolici  of  IS-iO,  in  Engel,  ii.  14,  t^ays
expressly,  "  Li  Baroni  cercano  di  cacciarlo  del  reame."

\i  Relatione  di  Sebastian  Zustigiian  venuto  orator  di
Hongaria  in  Sanuto,  iv.,  1503,  "II  re  e  homo  granrie  di
persona  e  di  degnissima  genealogia  :  devoto  e  religiose,
e  si  dice,  nunquam  habuit  concubitura  cumrauliere,  emai
si  adira,  mai  dice  mal  di  niun,  e  se  niun  dice  mal  di  nnal-
cuno,  dicit  rex  ;  forsan  non  est  verum. ..  .Dice  assa  ora-
tion, aide  tre  messe  al  zorno,  ma:  in  reliquis  e  come  una
statu  a Est  piü  presto  homo  rectus  quam  rex."

TT  Ex  Ludovici  XL  decretis  Tolnensis  conventus  in  Ka-
tona  Hist.  cric.  Ungarice,  xix,  p.  £9.

27:

JOHN  ZAPOLYA.

Book  IV.

The  Emperor  Maximilian,  who,  as  he  said,  had
never  lor  a  momeni  lost  sight  of  "  his  own
rights  and  those  of  the  German  nation"  on
Hungary  and  Bohemia,  had  at  length,  in  the
yearlsiS,  the  singular  satisfaction  of  receiving
both  kings — Sigismund  and  Wladislas — at  his
court,  and  of  concluding  the  strictest  alliance
with  them,  Wladislas  betrothed  his  son  and
daughter  to  a  grand-daughter  and  grandson  of
the  emperor ;  Sigismund  promised  to  marry
Bona  Sforza,  who  was  also  related  to  the  house
of  Austria.  The  year  after,  "Wladislas  died,
and  Louis  II.  ascended  the  throne,  under  the
joint  guardianship  of  Maximilian  and  Sigis-
mund, By  degrees,  a  German  party  took  firm
root  at  the  court;  especially  after  the  marriage
between  Louis  and  the  grand-daughter  of  Maxi-
milian, Mary  of  Austria,  had  actually  been  con-
cluded (a.  d.  1521).  All  was,  however,  still  in
the  greatest  confusion.  Heberstein  cannot  find
words  to  describe  how  the  great  nobles,  spi-
ritual as  well  as  temporal,  vied  with  each  other
in  insolence;*  how  the  frontiers  were  without
defence,  while  their  armed  bands  obstructed
the  streets  of  the  capital ;  how  the  loud  trum-
pets called  the  magnates  to  dinner,  while  the
king  sat  almost  alone  ;— all  places  were  distri-
buted by  favour,  and  the  currency  was  deterio-
.fated.  At  length  the  intelligent  queen,  at  least,
formed  plans  for  reviving  the  authority  of  the
state ;  but  already  had  a  power  arisen  capable
of  opposing  a  formidable  resistance  to  the
court. '

Under  King  Matthias  the  house  of  Zapolya,
so  called  from  a  Slavonic  village  near  Pos-
chegfa,  whence  it  originated,  rose  to  peculiar
eminence.  To  this  house,  in  particular.  King
Wladislas  had  owed  his  accession  to  the  throne;
whence,  however,  it  thought  itself  entitled  to
claim  a  share  in  the  sovereign  power,  and  even
a  sort  of  prospective  right  to  the  throne.  Its
members  were  the  wealthiest  of  all  the  mag-
nates ;  they  possessed  seventy-two  castles  ;f
the  chief  seat  of  the  family  being  Trentsin,  a
fortress  perched  on  a  steep  rock  overhanging
the  Waag,  adorned  with  the  most  beautiful
gardens,  watered  from  wells  dug  a  hundred
fathoms  deep  by  Turkish  prisoners,  and  de-
fended by  strong  fortifications.  It  is  said  that
a  prophecy  early  promised  the  crown  to  the
young  John  Zapolya.  Possessed  of  all  the
power  conferred  by  his  rich  inheritance.  Count
of  Zips,  and  Woiwode  of  Transylvania,  he
soon  collected  a  strong  party  around  him.  It
was  he  who  mainly  persuaded  the  Hungarians,
in  the  5^ear  1505,  to  exclude  all  foreigners  from,
the  throne  by  a  formal  decree ;  which,  though
they  were  not  always  able  to  maintain  in  force,
they  could  never  be  induced  absolutely  to  re-
voke. In  the  j^ear  1514,  the  Woiwode  suc-
ceeded in  putting  down  an  exceedingly  formi-
dable insurrection  of  the  peasants  with  his  own
forces ;  a  service  which  the  lesser  nobility
prized the more  highly,  because it enabled

*  Rerum  Moscoviticarura  Commentarii,  Basil,  1571,  p.
146.

t  According  to  Turnschwamb  (Engel,  i.  p.  193),  many
of  them  were  confided  only  to  trusty  hands,  such  as
Father  John  and  Stephen  Zapolya.

them  tß  reduce  the  peasantry  to  a  still  harder
state  of  servitude.:!:  His  wish  was,  on  the
death  of  Wladislas,  to  become  Gubernator  of
the  kingdom,  to  marry  the  deceased  king's
daughter  Anne,  and  then  to  await  the  course
of  events.  But  he  was  here  encountered  by
the  policy  of  Maximilian.  Anne  was  married
to  the  Archduke  Ferdinand ;  Zapolya  was  ex-
cluded from  the  administration  of  the  kingdom ;
even  the  vacant  Palatinate  was  refused  him
anil  given  to  his  old  rival  Stephen  Bathory.
He  was  highly  incensed  :  indeed,  at  the  meet-
ing of  the  Rakosch,  in  1518,  the  emperor  kep.t
a  few  thousand  men  ready  to  come  to  the  aid
of  the  Hungarian  government  in  ease  of  any
violence  on  the  part  of  Zapolya. §  But  it  Avas
not  till  the  year  1525  that  Zapolya  "got  the
upper  hand  at  the  Rakosch.  The  king  having
nevertheless  rejected  his  proposals,  his  fol-
lowers summoned  an  extraordinary  diet  at
Hatwan,  at  which  they  made  an  attempt  to
exclude  all  strangers,  to  alter  the  whole  go-
vernment, and  take  it  into  their  ovv'n  hands.
Tiiey  deposed  the  palatine,  Bather}'',  and
elected  in  his  stead  the  VVoiwode's  most  inti-
mate friend,  Stephen  Yerböcz.  As  to  Zapolya,
no  one  entertained  a  doubt  that  he  aimed  at  the
throne.  "  The  Woiwode,"  says  a  Venetian
report  of  1523,  "  has  a  good  head,  he  is  very
clever,  and  universally  beloved :  he  would  be
glad  if  the  kingdom  suffered  some  disaster ;  he
would  then  reconquer  it  with  his  own  forces
and  make  himself  king."i|  '•  He  strives,"  says
another,  of  the  year  1525,  "\\^th  all  the  powers
of  his  mind  after  the  crovrrf,  and  prepares  every
thing  so  that  he  may  be  able  to  seize  it."
.  In  order  to  arrest  these  hasty  and  undis-
guised strides  of  a  vassal  towards  the  final
goal  of  his  ambition,  his  opponents,  who  had
every  thing  to  fear  from  his  success,  rallied
more  closely  round  the  court;  declared,  at  a
national  assembly,  the  decrees  of  Hatwan  null
and  void,  reinstated  Bathory,  and  requested  the
king  at  length  to  exert  his  authority.  This
the  queen  was  fully  prepared  to  do.  She  de-
manded complete  liberty  in  the  administration
of  the  finances,  and  the  direct  dependence  of
the  frontier  troops  on  the  government.  She
warned  the  papal  nuncio  not  to  put  too  much
fuel  on  the  fire.

But  before  any  thing  was  accomplished — on
the  contrary,  just  as  these  party  conflicts  had
thrown  the  country  into  the  utmost  confusion,
the  mighty  enem}^,  Soliman,  appeared  on  the
frontiers  of  Hungar}'',  determined  to  put  an  end
to  the  anarchy.  Ottomans  and  Jagellons  had
long  stood  opposed  to  each  other  on  the  eastern
verge  of  Europe :  the  propitious  moment  had
at  length  arrived,  in  which  the  Sultan  might
hope,  at  least  as  far  as  Hungary  was  concerned,
to  fight  out  this  long  pending  duel. Five  years

t  Tile  revolt  was  directed  precisely  against  the  nobility.
Zeckel  called  himself,  in  one  of  his  proclamations,  "  Regis
HiingariiB  tantummodo  subditus  et  non  dominorum."-—
Katona,  xviii,  720.

§  Maximilian's  Instructions  to  Hebersteiu  in  Senken-
berg's  Sammlung  ungedructer  Schriften,  iv.  p.  20.

l  Relatione  del  S"-  d'Orio,  12th  Dec.  1523.  "  Saria  con-
tento  che  quel  regno  si  perdesse  e  poi  lui  con  il  favor  de
Transilvani  ricuperarlo  e  farsi  re."

Chap.  IV.

BATTLE  OF  MOHACZ.

271

before,  he  had  conquered  Belgrade ;  which,  it
was  said,  had  fallen,  partly  because  the  Hun-
o-arian  government  could  not  raise  the  fifty
rrulden  necessary  for  the  transport  of  the  am-
munition lying  ready  at  Ofen.  Since  then,  the
strong  places  on  the  frontier  of  Croatia  had
fallen  into  the  hands  of  the  pachas,  and  the
plain  country  was  laid  open  to  a  great  blow.
Such  an  one  the  sultan  now  felt  himself  en-
couraged to  strike,  both  by  the  internal  state
of , Hungary  and  the  general  distraction  of  Eu-
rope. In  his  prison  at  Madrid,  Francis  I.-  had
found  means  to  entreat  the  assistance  of  Soli-
man  ;  urging  that  it  well  beseemed  a  great
emperor  to  succour  the  oppressed.  Plans  were
laid  at  Constantinople,  according  to  which  t!ie
two  sovereigns  were  to  attack  Spain  witli  a
combined  fleet,  and  to  send  armies  to  invade
Hungary  and  the  north  of  Italy.*  Solinian,
without  any  formal  treaty,  v/as  by  his  position
an  ally  of  the  Ligue,  as  the  king  of  Hungary
was,  of  the  emperor.  On  the  23d  of  April,
1526,  Soliman,  after  visiting  the  graves  of  his
forefathers  and  of  the  old  IMoslem  m.artyrs,
marched  out  of  Constantinople  v/ith  a  mighty
host,  consisting  of  about  a  hundred  thousand
men,  and  incessantly  strengthened  by  fresh
recruits  on  its  road.  He  understood  the  art  of
keeping  lüs  troops  under  the  severest  discipline.
His  diar}''  shows  that  he  ordered  men  to  be  be-
headed for  having  driven  the  horses  of  the  pea-
santry, or  destroyed  the  standing  corn  in  a  Vil-
lage.j  Still  in  the  bloom  of  youth,  he  dis-
played those  brilliant  qualities  of  energy  and
love  of  conquest  Vv'hich  had  raised  his  ances-
tors to  greatness.

"What  power  had  Rungar}',  in  the  condition
v/e  have  just  described,  of  resisting  such  am
attack  ]

Ibrahim  Pacha  had  already  laid  siege  to
Peterwardein  before  the  Hungarians  had  taken
any  measures  for  defence.  The  troops  had  not
long  before  been  called  out,  but  none  had  ap-
peared :  contributions  had  been  dem.anded,  but
scarcely  any^  thing  had  been  raised.  With
great  difficulty,  Anton  Fugger  had  been  in-
duced to  advance  fifty  thousand  gulden  on  the
Neusohler  mines.  The  young  king  took  the
field  v/ith  a  following  of  not  more  than  three
thousand  nrien.:|:

Ibrahim  had  conquered  Peterwardein,  and
had  welccmed  his  sovereign  on  the  Hungarian
soil  with  an  olTering  of  five  hundred  heads.
The  Ottoman  array  was  now  nearly  three  hun-
dred thousand  strong,  and  had  begun  to  ascend
the  Danube  :  Soliman  caused  it  to  be  proclaim-
rd  through  his  camp  that  his  object  was  Ofen.
Meanwhile  the  troops  of  some  Gespannschafts
(counties)  and  a  few  magnates  collected  around
the  king;  a  fev/  companies  hired  by  the  pope,
Bud  a  few  by  Poland,  also  joined  him.^ On

*  Narratjv,"  of  Ibraim  (the  fniberi-Wascha)  in  the  Re-
port liy  Larr.bers-  and  Jiiri^^chitr?  iii  Gfvay's  Urkunden
mid  i-A(t.:'ii^iackeii  zur  Gescbicbte  der  VorJiriltnisse  zwi-
schen Ot's-terreich  Ungern  und  der  Pforte,  1530,  p.  42.
t  Hammer's  Geschichte  der  Gämauen,  v.  iii.  p.  6^9,
X  Broderitlius:  Descriptio  cladis  Mohaczian<B  in  appen-
dice  .Bonfinii  ed  Sambucus,  p.  558.  See  Türnschwand,
p.  204. I

his  arrival  in  Tolna,  he  might  have  from  ten
to  tv/elve  thousand  men.§

The  most  pressing  necessity  was  to  defend
the  passage  of  the  Drave^  whither  the  palatine,
who  Vv'as  certainly  not  deficient  in  zeal,  now
hastened.  But  a  number  of  magnates  refused
to  advance  vrithout  the  king.  Soliman  thus
gained  time  to  build  a  convenient  bridge,  over
which  his  army  marched  without  interruption
for  five  days.  King  Louis  said,  "  I  see  my
head  must  be  stuck  up  instead  of  yours  ;  well
then,  I  will  carry  it  thither  myself!"  He  pro-
ceeded to  the  fatal  plain  of  IMchacz,  fully  re-
solved with  his  small  band  to  await  in  the
open  field  the  overwhelming  force  of  the
enemy.

The  troops  of  the  kingdom  were  as  yet  far
from  being  assembded  ;  the  two  miG:htipst  vas-
sals, the  Ban  of  Croatia  and  the  V.  (iiv.  ooe  of
Transylvania,  were  still  missing;  the  Bohe-
mian and  rJoravian  allies  had  not  yet  arrived  ;
—  with  all  its  recent  additions,  the  array  in
luohacz  amounted  to  from  twenty  to  twenty-
four  thousand  men.  Few  of  them  had  ever
seen  a  pitched  battle.  The  command  was  in-
trusted to  a  Muscovite  friar,  Paul  Tomoiy,
Archbishop  of  Colccza,  vvho  had  formerly  dis-
tino-uished  himself  in  a  few  marauding  expe-
ditions. Spite  of  all  these  disadvantages,  the
Hungarians  still  indulged  the  m.ost  extravagant
self-confidence.  It  would  have  been  impossi-
ble to  induce  them  to  retreat;!]  the};^  would  not
even  form  a  barricade  of  their  v/agons.  As
soon  as  the  enemy  descended  the  hills  in  front
of  them,  into  the  plain  where  they  lay  en-
camped, wi:'r:nut  a  moment's  pause  they  rushed
upon  him.  Lut  Soliman  was  as  prudent  as  he
Vvus  daring.  The  Hungarians  thought  to  de-
cide the  battle  by  an  impetuous  charge;  "they
trusted  in  their  harness  of  the  blue  steel."  Ill
provided  with  infantry  or  artillei^?-,  they  made
war  in  the  spirit  and  manner  of  the  past  cen-
tui}^  On  the  other  hand,  Soliman,  barbarian
as  he  might  otherwise  be,  knew  how  to  avail
himself  of  the  most  recent  improvements  in
the  advancing  art  of  war;  he  had  planted  three
hundred  cannon  behind  the  heights  Vv^e  have
m.entioned,  and  his  janizaries  were  as  well
skilled  in  the  use  of  the  matchlock  as  any  sol-
diery in  the  world.  The  Hungarians  found  no
difficulty  in  dispersing  the  advanced  Turkish
squadrons  and  occupying  the  hill.  Already
they  thought  they  had  conquered,  but  here  they
first  beheld  the  boundless  camp  of  the  Osmans.
They  rushed  forward  headlong,  as  if  the  im-
possible were  possible  to  their  valour,  and
were  received  by  a  tremendous  fire;  the  right
wing,  from  the  artillery,  the  centre  from  the
musketry  of  the  janizaries,  while  the  Sipahi
horse  attacked  them  on  both  flanks.  Here  per-
sonal valour  could  avail  nothing.  The  Hun-
garians were  immediately  thrown  into  disor-
der,f  their  best  men  fell,  the  others  took  to

§  Among  them,  4000  foot,  Brod.  559.  Ke  does  not  state
the  exact  number  of  the  cavalry.  ^

II  Ongari  si  havea  potuti  ritrar  salvo  verso  Buda.  Copia
di  nil  aviso  avutodaConstantinopoli  in  Hammar's  Wiens
erste  aufgehobene  türkische  Belagerung  App.,  No.  viii.  ■;
a  simple  but  good  statement.

fr  Extract  from  the Heiduck -Nagy's History  of  the

272

PLANS  OF  THte  DUKES  OF  BAVARIA.

Book  IV.

flight.  The  young  king  was  compelled  to  flee.
It  was  not  even  granted  him  to  die  in  the  field
of  hattle ;  a  far  more  miserable  end  awaited
him.  Mounted  behind  a  Silesian  soldier,  who
served  him  as  a  guide,  he  had  already  been
carried  across  the  dark  waters  that  divide  the
plain ;  his  horse  was  already  climbing  the
bank,  when  he  slipped,  fell  back,  and  buried
himself  and  his  rider  in  the  morass.*  This
rendered  the  defeat  decisive.  The  leader  of
the  nation — the  king — and  a  great  part  of  the
magnates  had  fallen,  j"  For  the  present,  no  fur-
ther resistance  could  be  thought  of  The  land
was  ravaged  far  and  wide;  the  keys  of  Ofen
were  carried  to  the  sultan,  who  celebrated  the
Beiram  there.

Soliman  had  gained  one  of  those  victories
which  decide  the  fate  of  nations  during  long-
epochs.  The  great  power  at  the  head  of  which
he  stood,  the  power  which  had  carried  the  prin-
ciples of  Islam,  such  as  they  had  been  estab-
lished in  Asia,  under  Tartar  influence,  into  the
other  quarters  of  the  globe,  had  been  raised  by
him  to  complete  ascendency  in  eastern  Europe.
Who  was  strong  enough  to  overturn  it  ]  Trou-
bling himself  little  about  the  defence  of  the
places  he  had  taken,  he  turned  back  and  placed
the  trophies  of  Ofen  on  the  Hippodrome  and
"the  mosque  of  Aja  Sofia.

That  two  thrones,  the  succession  to  which
was  not  entirely  free  from  doubt,  had  thus  been
left  vacant,  was  an  event  that  necessarily  caused
a  great  agitation  throughout  Christendom.  It
was  still  a  question  whether  such  a  European
pov.-er  as  Austria  v/ould  continue  to  exist ; — a
question  which  it  is  only  necessary  to  slate,  in
order  to  be  aware  of  its  vast  importance  to  the
fate  of  mankind  at  large,  and  of' Germany  in
particular.  Before  the  nature  of  the  relations
which  might  subsist  between  Europe  and  the
Ottoman  empire  could  even  be  discussed,  this
great  question  had  to  be  decided.

The  claims  of  Ferdinand  to  both  crowns,
unquestionable  as  they  might  be  in  reference
to  the  treaties  with  the  reigning  houses,  were
opposed  in  the  nations  themselves,  by  the  right
of  election  and  the  authority  of  considerable
rivals.

In  Hungary,  as  soon  as  the  Turks  had  re-
tired, .lohn  Zapolya  appeared  with  the  fine
army  which  h'e  had  kept  back  from  the  con-
flict: the  fall  of  the  king  vras  at  the  same  time
the  fall  of  his  adversaries.  The  faction  which
had  framed  the  resolutions  of  Hatvvan  was
now  omnipotent;  and,  at  an  assembly  at  To-
kay, they  determined  that,  as  nothing  could  be
undertaken  without  a  king  and  ruler,  thej^
would  immediately  proceed  to  elect  one,  and

Campaijrii  of  Moliacz,  presarved  in  Petschewi's  Ottoman'
HiPtory  (the  lingular  pxampie  of  a  really  useful  Oriental
narrative  froiii  an  Oriental  work):  communicated  by
Hainsner,  in  Hnra:iayr's  Archiv,  for  IS27,  No.  15.

*  This  account  (in  ,]Vac:y  and  otliers)  is  confirmed  by
the  letter  in  Katona,  xix.  p.  GüT.,  concerning  the  discovery
of  the  body.

fKatona,  p.  703.  "  ?.Ta,7na  dohinc  revTim  conversio
sectita  fuit,  pluribus  et  prtesulibus  et  proceribus  una  Iiac
dimicatione  exstinctis.-"

to  that  end  convoke  a  diet  at  Stuhlweissen-
burg.:|:  Even  in  Tokay,  however,  John  Zapo-
lya was  saluted  as  king.

Meanvv^hile,  the  Dukes  of  Bavaria  conceived
the  design  of  getting  possession  of  the  throne
of  Bohemia  :  in  this  they  were  encouraged  by
several  obsequious  nobles  of  that  country  ;  and
in  September  they  despatched  their  councillor
Weissenfelder  to  Prague,  who  found  their
prospects  so  promising  that  they  determined  to
send  a  solemn  embassy  to  Bohemia.

Nor  was  it  in  the  two  kingdoms  alone  that
these  pretenders  had  a  considerable  party.
The  state  of  politics  in  Europe  was  such  as  to
insure  them  powerful  supporters  abroad.

In  the  first  place,  Francis  I.  was  intimately
connected  with  Zapolya:  in  a  short  time  a
delegate  from  the  pope  was  at  his  side,  and
the  Germans  in  Rome  maintained  that  Clement
assisted  the  faction  of  the  Woiwode  with
money. §  Zapolya  sent  an  agent  to  Venice
with  a  direct  request  to  be  admitted  a  member
of  the  Ligue  of  Cognac.

In  Bohemia,  too,  the  French  had  long  had
devoted  partisans. We  find  that,  in  the  year
1523,  they  had  the  project  of  attacking  Austria
from  the  side  of  Bohemia,  and  had  carried  on
a  correspondence  with  an  ancestor  of  Wallen-
stein, with  that  object.|| As  the  King  of  Po-
land, who  had  for  some  time  withdrawn  him-
self from  the  Austrian  alliance,  and  likewise
':  set  up  pretensions  to  the  throne  of  Bohemia,
j  found  he  had  no  chance  of  success,  the  Polish
I  as  well  as  the  French  envoys  promised  their
support  to  the  agents  of  Bavaria.
j By  this  political  combination,  Duke  William
of  Bavaria  was  encouraged  to  form  still  more
ambitious  plans.

We  have  already  observed,  that  Rome  felt
the  necessity  of,  placing  a  kin^  of  the  Romans
by  the  side  of,  or  rather  in  opposition  to,  the
emperor  Charles.  Meanwhile, -Duke  William,
one  of  the  most  devoted  adherents  of  the  Curia,
had  already  conceived  the  thought  of  raising
himself  to  this  high  station,  and  had  actually
taken  steps  in  consequence.

At  the  same  diet  of  1524,  in  which  the  Coun-
cil of  Regency  was  overthrown,  the  houses  of
Bavaria  and  the  Palatinate,- engaged  in  a  com-
mon struggle  against  the  nobles,  laid  aside
their  old  hostilities  and  concluded  a-new  here-
ditary alliance.  Leonhard  Eck  addressed  ami-
cable reproaches  to  the  elector,  that  at  the  last
vacancy  of  the  imperial  crown  he  had  forgotten
his own pretensions,  and had subsequently

X  Among  the  contradictory  accounts  of  tlie  chroniclers,
the  only  trustworthy  docinnont  is  the  al!^=uer  of  the  King
of  Poland  to  the  invitation  sent  to  liim  from  Toivay.
Dogiel  and  Katona,  xix.  p.  7-18.

§  Ziegler,  Vita  Ciem.  Vit.,  in  Sclielhorn's  Amoenitateel
ii."308:  "  Ea  pecunia  (he  is-?i)eaking  of  exactions)  Trents-
chinii  factionein  contra  Ferdinandum  regem  aliquamdiu
juvit."

II  Lettera  di  Franc.  Massario  in  Sanuto,  torn,  xxxv.,
calls  him  "  Waldestein,  barone  e  gran  capitano  di  Bohe-
mia, volentier.  vcniria  a  servir  la  S^ia  nra  cum  10,  20,  3C«>
persone.  Questo  c  quel  capitano  che  '1  re  X™"' TOleva
condurre."

CöAP.  IV.

ELECTION  TO  THE  THRONE  OF  BOHEMIA.

273

ceded  his  right  to  the  Vicariate  to  the  Council
of  Regency.*

Shortly  afterwards,  when  the  princes  met  at
the  cross-bow  match  at  Heidelberg,  which  we
have  already  mentioned,  Dake  William  no
longer  concealed  that  he  aspired  to  the  Roman
crown  for  himself.

At  an  interview  at  Ellwangen,  soon  after,
they  again  discussed  the  matter.  Duke  Wil-
liam appeared  willing  to  give  the  precedency
to  the  elector;  but  as  that  prince  had  taken  no
measures  towards  the  accomplishment  of  such
an  object,  he  commenced  negotiations  without
scruple  on  his  own  account.  In  the  autumn
of  1526,  overtures  were  also  made  to  the  Elec-
tor of  Saxony,  though  without  success,  since
that  prince  belonged  to  a  party  professing
opinions  radically  different.-j-

The  consequences  that  must  have  resulted,
had  this  scheme  succeeded,  are  so  incalculable,
that  it  is  not  too  much  to  sny  ihej  would  have
completely  changed  the  political  history  of
Europe.  The  power  of  Bavaria  would  have
outweighed  that  of  Austria  in  both  German
and  Slavonian  countries,  and  Zapolya,  thus
supported,  would  have  been  able  to  maintain
his  station;  the  Ligue,  and  with  it  high  ultra-
montane opinions,  would  have  held  the  ascen-
dency in  eastern  Europe.  Never  was  there  a
project  more  pregnant  with  danger  to  the  grow-
ing power  of  the  house  of  Austria.

Ferdinand  behaved  with  all  the  prudence
and  energy  which  that  house  has  so  often  dis-
played in  difficult  emergencies.

For  the  present,  the  all-important  object  v/as
the  crown  of  Bohemia.

His  situation  as  husband  of  a  Princess  of
Hungary  and  Bohemia,  and  as  brother  of  the
widowed  queen,  brought  him  into  frequent  per-
sonal contact  with  the  most  puissant  nobles.
He  perfectly  understood  the  art  of  turning  to
his  own  advantage  every  favourable  disposftion
arising  out  of  these  circumstances,  and  of  ex-
tinguishing every  germ  of  antipathy  by  favours.
The  influential  High  Burggrave,  Low  von
Rozmital,  received  the  assurance  that  the  ac-
count which  he  was  bound  to  render  of  his
administration  would  either  be  altogether  dis-
pensed with,  or  very  slightl}^  inspected.  Im-
portant concessions  were  also  made  to  Schwan-
berg, Schlich,  Pflug,  and  the  Duke  of  Mün-
sterberg. The  Chancellor  Adam  von  Neuhaus
had  hastened  in  the  retinue  of  the  Austrian  en-
voy, to  use  his  influence  in  favour  of  Ferdinand.
While  a  certain  number  of  Bohemian  nobles
were  quickh/  induced  b}''  these  measures  to
declare  that  they  would  acknowledge  no  other
master  than  the  archduke,:j:  no  means  were  ne-
glected of  conciliating  the  mass  of  the  popula-
tion. Though  thoroughly  convinced  that  his
wife  (and  therefore  he  himself)  had  an  unques-
tionable hereditary  right  to  the  throne,  he  care-

*  Meraoires  de  la  Vie  et  dos  Faicts  de  Frederic  I.  (Comte
Palatin),  in  Hoffman's  Sammlung  ungedructer  Nachrich-
ten, ch.  xlii.  ,

t"  There  are  traces,"  says  the  Bavarian  Staatsarchivar
Stumpf,  "that  Pope  Clement  VII.  and  the  King  of  France
tried  to  forward  the  duke's  designs."

t  Extract  from  a  letter  of  Weissenfelder in Stumpf
Baierns  Polit.  Gesch.  i.  p.  39.
35

fully  avoided  offending  the  pride  which  the
nation  felt  in  the  belief  that,  in  a  case  like  the
present,  it  had  absolute  freedom  of  election.
He  let  it  appear  that  his  claim  was  by  no
means  the  chief  motive  for  his  ofi^ering  himself
to  their  choice.

At  first  he  thought  of  at  once  assuming  the
title  of  king,  but  this  project  he  dropped  at  the
advice  of  his  envoys.  He  acceded  to  the  de-
mand of  the  Bohemians,  that  he  would  take
upon  himself  a  part  of  the  public  debt,  incon-
venient as  that  was  in  the  straitened  state  of
his  finances.  Nor  did  he  disdain  to  give  the
most  careful  answers  to  all  the  objections  which
his  envoys  said  were  urged  against  him.§

In  a  word,  all  his  measures  were  taken  with
such  skill  and  prudence,  that  on  the  day  of
election,  though  the  Bavarian  agent  had,  up  to
the  last  moment,  not  the  slightest  doubt  of  the
success  of  his  negotiations,  an  overwhelming
majority  in  the  three  estates  elected  Ferdinand
to  the  throne  of  Bohemia.

This  took  place  on  the  23d  October,  1526.
A  solem.n  embassy  proceeded  to  Vienna  to  in-
vite him  to  take  possession  of  his  new  king-
dom ;  one  of  the  fairest  in  the  v/orld,  including,
as  it  did,  Silesia  and  Lusatia.

A  very  important  question,  deserving  a  more
accurate  inquiry,  here  suggests  itself; — what
influence  religious  considerations  had  in  this
election.

All  the  countries  subject  to  the  Bohemian
crown  were  filled  with  anti-papal  elements.  In
Silesia  and  the  Lusatias,  the  evangelical  doc-
trines were  widely  diffused ;  in  Bohemia  and
Moravia,  the  Utraquists  formed  a  most  power-
ful community.  It  is  hardly  probable  that,  in
the  choice  of  a  king,  the  interests  of  these  dif-
ferent confessions  were  disregarded.

In  this  point  of  view,  Ferdinand  was  infi-
nitely to  be  preferred  to  a  duke  of  Bavaria.
The  dukes  were  unqualified  adherents  of  the
papacy,  and  fierce  persecutors.  The  archduke,
on  the  contrar}^  however  strict  a  catholic  him-
self, however  careful  to  appear  so  (for  in  all
the  countries  in  question  there  was  still  a  ver}'-
considerable  catholic  party),  had  for  some  time
showed  great  moderation  in  his  hereditary  do-
minions. We  have  seen  how  little  he  was
inclined  to  favour  the  secular  claims  of  the
clergy,  and  what  equivocal  decrees  the  German
diet  had  passed  under  his  influence.  More-
over, he  was  at  this  moment  at  open  war  with
the  pope;  the  Bohemian  election  took  place
Vv'hile  the  recruiting  for  Frundsberg's  army  was
going  on.

We  find  no  traces  of  the  negotiations  which
were  probably  carried  on  with  relation  to  re-
ligious affairs ;  but  from  the  Recesses  it  appears
that  Ferdinand  acceded  to  very  remarkable  con-
cessions.

It  is  well  known  that  the  court  of  Rome
never  fully  recognised  the  Compactata  of  the
Council  of  Basle  (a  line  of  policy  it  afterwards
pursued  with  many  treaties  unfavourable  to
itself),  and,  since  the  time  of  Pius  IL,  had  ex-
pressly refused  to  confirm  them.

§  Extract  from  the  Instructions  and  the  Ambassador's
Correspondence,  Bucholtz,  ii.  p.  407.

274

ELECTION  TO  THE  THRONE  OF  BOHEMIA.

Book  IV.

Ferdinand  now  promised  to  give  their  full
efficacy  to  the  Compactata,*  and  to  assume,
in  treating  with,  the  pope,  that  they  were  con-
firmed, f

One  of  the  greatest  grievances  of  the  Utra-
quists  was,  that  they  had  long  been  without
bishops  to  ordain  their  priests,  and  that  they
had  been  reduced  to  many  strange  and  even
hurtful  expedients  to  supply  this  want.  Fer-
dinand promised  to  procure  for  them  an  arch-
bishop who  should  put  in  force  the  Compactata
in  relation  to  both  spiritual  and  temporal  affairs.
In  short,  he  solemnly  undertook  not  only  to
protect  the  Utraquists,  but  to  obtain  for  them  a
fresh  recognition  of  their  privileges.

Tins  was,  perhaps,  rendered  less  difficult  by
the  fact,  that  a  party  hostile  to  Luther  was  now
formed  among  the  utraquists  themselves;  not-
withstanding which,  however,  they  were  still
treated  as  heretics.

J^or  were  the  general  abuses  and  errors  of
the  church  entirely  forgotten.  Ferdinand  pro-
raised  the  Bohemians  to  take  measures  to  pro-
mote a  Christian  union  and  reformation — a
promise  which,  indeed,  either  side  might  inter-
pret in  its  own  favour, — but  which,  as  it  related
only  to  the  conduct  of  the  emperor,  not  to  that
of  the  pope, — to  some  assembly,  of  whatever
nature,  not  to  a  general  council  in  which  all  the
nations  of  Christendom  were  to  take  part,:}: —
could,  in  fact,  hardly  be  understood  in  any
other  sense  than  that  intended  by  the  German
diets.

The  Silesians  expressed  themselves  still  more
plainly  and  unequivocally.

At  a  meeting  of  the  States  at  Leobschütz,  on
the  4th  December,  1526,  after  they  had  recog-
nised Ferdinand's  hereditary  right — though  not
without  keeping  up  the  appearance  of  a  certain
freedom — they  commissioned  the  delegates  who
were  to  be  the  bearers  of  this  recognition  to
Vienna,  (among  whom  Vv'ere  princes  greatly
inclined  to  evangelical  opinions, — for  example,
Frederic  of  Liegnitz  and  George  of  Branden-
burg,) to  call  the  attention  of  the  new  king
and  archduke  to  the  putting  an  end  to  religious
dissension,  "according  to  the  gospel  and  word
of  God."§ In  conformity  with  these  instruc-

*  "Q,uod  rursum  ad  suum  vigorem  pervenirent."  Fer-
dinanrii  Liters,  L5th  Dec.  1526,  ap.  Dumont,  iv.  pp.  1.  469.

t,"  Promisimus, cum  siimßio  Pontifice  illud  tractare,  ac
si  Bohemis  ac  Moravis  ilia  (compactata)  cum  effectu  es-
sent  confirmata."

J  Excerpt  of  the  article  inserted  in  the  Landtafel,  Buc-
holtz,  ii.  p.  42U.

§  The  words  of  the  instruction  in  Biickisch,  Religion-
sacten,  MS.,  torn.  i.  p.  206,  are  as  follows  : — "  Und  nach-
dem der  allm.  Gott  aus  seiner  iröttlichcn  Verordnunjr
geschickt  und  verleiten,  dass  wir  S.  Kön.  Mt.  zu  unserm
Erbkönige  einträchtijrlich  angenommen,  welcher  einmüt-
tigenund  tröstlichen  Meinung  wir  s.  Allmächtigkeit  billig
Lob  und  Dank  sagen,  so  befinden  wir  nun  in  Notturft
unser  Seel  and  Leibs  glückseliger  Wolfahrt,  die  jetzige
vorfallende  L-rung  und  Rweispalt,  so  sich  in  dem  h.  rhristi.
Glauben  zugetragen,  bei  S.  K.  M.  anzuregen,  damit  die-
selb  aus  solchem  Irrthum  und  Zertrennung  erhaben,  und
nach  Verordnung  der  h.  christl.  Kirchen  dem  Evangelio
und  Worte  Gottes  gemäsg  nach  S.  K.  Mt.  Ausssatz  und
durch  unser  aller  einmüthig  und  freundliches  Vergleichen
in  recht  christl.  Bestand  und  gleichförmigen  Gebrauch
g-ebracht  würde,  welches  E.  L.  ihn  und  E.  F.  Gn.  bei  S.
K.  Mt.  alles  in  UnterthUnigkeit  bitten  werden,  auf  dass
S.  K.  Mt.  dasselbe  als  ein  christl.  König  zu  Trost  und  Heil
unrer  Seelen  Seligkeit,  auch  zu  Dempfung  erfolgenden
Unraths  nach  dem  h.  Evangelio  gnädiglich  zu  verordnen

tions,  the  delegates  entreated  the  king  to  take
into  consideration  the  establishment  of  a  Chris-
tian ordinance  according  to  the  standard  of  the
gospel ;  that  so  all  might  live  together  in  peace
and  unity.  Ferdinand  replied,  he  v/ould  do  all
that  could  conduce  to  christian  unity  and  the
praise  of  Almighty  God.||

As  opposed  to  the  traditional  opinion,  it  may
sound  like  a  paradox  to  affirm — what  however
the  general  combination  of  events  warrants  us
in  concluding, — that  the  bearing  which  the
house  of  Austria  had  at  this  crisis  assumed, —
opposed  to  Rome  in  its  political,  and  moderate
in  its  religious  views,  contributed  to  secure  to
it  the  obedience  of  these  countries,  which  were
filled  with  such  various  elements  of  opposition
to  Rome.

By  a  singular  concatenation  of  circumstances,
the  high  Romanist  opinions,  of  which  Bavaria
v/as  the  champion,  contributed,  from  the  very
first,  to  the  defeat  of  their  plans.

On  his  brother's  birth-day,  the  24th  of  Feb-
ruary, 1527,  Ferdinand  v/as  crowned  at  Prague ;
on  the  11th  of  May  he  received  the  act  of  ho-
mage and  allegiance  in  the  market-place  in
Breslau,  and  the  German  princes  hastened  to
accept  from  the  new  suzerain  a  renewal  of  the
fiefs  which  they  held  of  the  Bohemian  crown.
A  Muscovite  ambassador,  who  happened  to  be
then  at  the  court,  expressed  his  surprise  that  so
magnificent  a  kingdom  should  have  passed  into
the  hands  of  a  new  lord  without  a  sword  being
drawn. T[

The  affairs  of  Hungary  were  not  so  easily  or
so  peacefully  settled.

That  country  offered  a  certain  analogy  to
Bohemia  in  a  religious  point  of  view.  Qf.een
Mary,  around  whom  the  Austrian  party  gather-
ed, was  esteemed  a  friend  of  the  new  opinions :
she  did  not  keep  the  fasts,  read  Lutheran  writ-
ings, and  had  followers  of  Luther  at  her  court.
In  November,  1526,  Luther  dedicated  a  psalm
to  her,  for  consolation  under  her  misfortune.
On  the  other  hand,  Zapolya's  partisans  affected
strict  orthodoxy :  their  chief  organ,  Verbocz,
passed  among  the  Lutherans  for  a  great  hypo-
crite ;  he  had  caused  a  covered  way  to  be  con-
structed from  his  own  house  to  the  neighbour-
ing Capuchin  convent,  that  he  might  enjoy
uninterrupted  communication  with  it.**

und  zu  verschaffen  geruhe."— "And  since  Almighty  God,
in  his  divine  providence,  has  ordained  and  granted  that
we  have  unanimously  accepted  H.  R.  M>'.  to  be  our  liere-
ditavv  king,  for  which  unanimous  and  comfortable  opin-
ion we  civ^e  due  praise  and  thanks  to  the  Almighty,  we
now  find  it  needful  for  the  welfare  of  our  souls  and  bodies
to  bring  the  errors  and  divisions  which  now  prevail  in
the  holy  Christian  faith  .before  H.  R.  My.,  whereby  the
same  may  be  raised  out  of  such  error  and  division,  and
accordina  to  the  ordinances  of  the  holy  Christian  church,
and  aure^eably  to  the  gospel  and  the  word  of  God  may,
conformably  with  H.  R.  M^.'s  pleasure,  and  by  our  una-
nimous and  amicable  agreement,  be  brought  to  a  true
Christian  understanding,  and  a  uniform  practice.  Your
princely  graces  will,  in  all  submission,  pray  H.  R.  My.,  in
order  thnt  H.  R.  Mr.,  as  a  Christian  king,  may  be  pleased
graciously  to  order  and  procure  the  same  to  be  done  ac-
cording to  the  Holy  Gospel,  for  the  comfort  and  benefit
of  our  souls,  and  for  the  prevention  of  future  troubles."

|!  Petition  and  Resolution,  in  Schickfuss,  Schlesische
Chronik,  iii.  171.  Also  in  the  Appendix  to  Bucholtz,  ii
523.

TT  Herberstein  E.  M.  C,  p.  154.

**  Turnschwamb,  in  Engel,  i.  197.  "  Stephen  Verbocz
amicus  S"^" Relatio  Actorum  ;  Engel,  ii.  p.  55.

Chap.  IV.

OCCUPATION  OF  HUNGARY.

2f75

The  political  consequences  of  these  conflict-
in2:  opinions  were,  however,  not  very  obvious
in  Hungary.  The  inclinations  in  favour  of  a
church  differing  in  form  from  that  established,
were  as  yet  too  scattered,  too  insignificant,  to
produce  any  sensible  effect.  Ferdinand,  who
had  been  reproached  with  surrounding  his  wife
with  Germans,  who,  it  was  said,  were  all  Lu-
therans,* carefully  endeavoured  to  maintain  his
reputation  as  a  good  catholic.  On  the  Good
Friday  of  15-27,  he  took  occasion  to  admonish
his  sister  concerning  her  religious  leanings.j
On  Corpus  Chrisii  day  of  the  same  year,  he
was  seen  following  the  procession  through  the
streets  of  Vienna,  in  regal  ornaments,  with  a
sword  girt  at  his  side  and  a  missal  in  his  hand,
looking  around  to  see  that  every  body  paid  due
reference  to  the  holy  elements.  From  time  to
time  he  issued  mandates  for  the  maintenance
of  the  ancient  practices  of  the  church.

But  in  Hungary,  superiority  of  force  was
at  that  time  more  important  than  questions  of
religion.

It  could  not  be  said  that  the  vrhole  nation
was  split  into  two  hostile  parties ;  rather,  that
two  political  tendencies  existed  in  its  bosom ;
the  one  inclining  to  the  court  and  the  palatine,
the  other,  to  the  opposition  and  Zapolya.  After
the  disaster  of  Mohacz,  they  stood  in  the  same
relation  to  each  other  as  before ;  the  prepon-
derancy  of  either  was  dependent  on  the  mo-
mentary assent  of  the  majority,  who  had  at-
tached themselves  decidedly  neither  to  the  one
party  nor  the  other.

At  first,  when  Zapolya  came  forward,  full
armed  and  powerful  out  of  the  general  deso-
lation, he  had  the  uncontested  superiority.  The
capital  of  the  kingdom  sought  his  protection,
after  which  he  marched  to  Stuhlweissenburg,
where  his  partisans  bore  down  all  attempts  at
opposition  :t  he  was  elected  and  crowned  (11th
of  November,  152G) ;  in  Croatia,  too,  he  was
acknowledged  king  at  a  diet;  he  filled  all  the
numerous  places,  temporal  and  spiritual,  left
vacant  by  the  disaster  of  Slohacz,  with  his
friends.  We  have  mentioned  the  negotiations
he  set  on  foot  in  all  directions.  In  Venice  and
Rome,  in  Munich  and  Constantinople,  we  find
his  agents.  When  some  one  showed  him  an
address  of  Ferdinand's,  exhorting  the  Hunga-
rians to  abandon  him,  he  smiled,  and  said,
"kingdoms  were  not  conquered  in  that  man-
ner."

But  Ferdinand  soon  had  recourse  to  other
expedients.

The  party  of  the  former  court  had  still  suffi-
cient strength  and  im.portance  to  convoke  a  diet
on  behalf  of  Ferdinand,  the  husband  of  a  Ja-
gellon,  who  had  so  many  ancient  treaties  in  his

*  Diarium  in  Coinitiis  Pestlianis,  in  Ensel,  ii.  51.  "  De-
dit  ei  GermanoS  qui  omnes  fuerunt  LuTherani."  In  Ka
tona,  xix.  515,  Art.  v.  "  Fiikkarii  abiegentur  :  oratores
Cesareus  et  Venetus  (the  latter  only  for  the  sake  of  the
former,  as  the  Venetian  Kelation  expresses)  esmittaiitur  ;
Lutherani  etiam  omnes  de  regno  extirpentur, — ubicuni-
que  reperti  fuerint,  lihere  comburantur."

t  Correspondence  in  Bucholtz,  ix.

t  So  at  least  the  Bishop  of  Nitra,  Hodmanizky,  excused
himself  for  placing  the  crown  on  Zapolya's  head.  He  says
lie  should  havG  been  in  danger  of  his  life  if  he  had  re-
fused—Diploma Ferdinaudi ;  Katona,  xix.  p.  752.

favour.  It  was  held  at  Presburg — also  in  No-
vember, 1526 — and  elected  him  king.  Stephen
Bathory  and  Alexis  Thurzo,  the  Bishop  of
Wesprim,  were  extremely  active  in  his'  service.
There  is  a  diploma  of  Ferdinand's,  in  which
he  names  his  adherents,  expresses  his  gratitude
to  them,  and  promises  his  supporters  the  best
posts  and  offices  hereafter.§  Nor  did  he  ne-
glect to  try  the  efficacy  of  gold  ;  mindful  of  the
hint  of  his  sister  Mary,  that  he  could  accom-
plish more  with  a  gulden  now,  than  in  future
perhaps  with  a  large  sum.  Heavily  as  they
pressed  upon  him,  his  gifts  were  still  insuffi-
cient to  put  an  end  to  the  waverings  of  the
magnates.  Ferdinand  saw  indeed — for  he  had
too  much  good  sense  to  indulge  in  any  illusions
— that  the  grand  thing  was  superiority  in  arms.
The  acquisition  of  the  crown  of  Bohemia  gra-
dually enabled  him  to  obtain  the  necessary
force,  and  he  received  some  pecuniary  aid  from
his  brother.  If  he  hesitated  to  reject  the  nego-
tiations which  the  King  of  Poland  set  on  foot  at
Olmütz,  it  was,  as  he  expressly  says  in  an  ex-
tant letter,  merely  in  order  to  gain  tim^e  for  his
preparations.  At  length  he  had  proceeded  far
enough. II

On  the  31st  July,  1527,  Ferdinand,  reached
the  half-ruined  tower  on  the  high  road  between
Vienna  and  Ofen,  which  m.arks  the  boundary
between  Austria  and  Hungary:  he  was  re-
ceived by  the  palatine  and  a  few  Hungarian
horsemen.  As  soon  as  he  touched  the  soil  of
Hungary,  he  alighted  from  his  horse  and  swore
to  m.aintain  the  privileges  of  the  kingdom.  He
had  brought  a  noble  army  into  the  field.  The
grants  of  his  new  kingdom  had  enabled  him  to
raise  an  excellent  body  of  infantry:  he  was
preceded  by  Katzianer;  and  he  now  distin-
guished himself  by  the  most  rigorous  discipline,
which  he  enforced  even  on  the  Bohemians.
Rogendorf,  vrho  had  just  returned  from  Spain,
and  the  veteran  captains,  x^Iarx  Sittich  and  Eck
von  Reischach,  had  brought  up  the  most  expe-
rienced landsknechts.  Besides  these,  the  king's
new  vassals,  Casimir  of  Brandenburg,  George
of  Saxony,  and  the  aged  warrior,  Erich  of
Brunswick,  had  been  induced  to  send  some
squadrons  of  German  reiters  to  his  aid.  Ca-
simir, notwithstanding  that  he  had  adopted  de-
cided, though  moderate,  evangelical  opinions,
was  invested  with  the  chief  command.  Nicho-
las von  Salm,  whose  name  we  met  with  at  the
battle  of  Pavia,  and  Johann  Hilchen,  the  com-
panion of  Sickingen,  were  with  this  army.  It
amounted  to  8000  foot  and  3000  horse.  The
king  was  advised  not  to  expose  his  person  to
danger,  lest  he  should  share  the  fate  of  his
predecessor ;  but  as  at  this  moment  he  received

§  Katona,  xx.  19.  "  Prylaturas  et  dignitates  et  beneficia
ecclesiastica  ac  bona  et  jura  hereditaria  et  ofiicia  qus  ad
collationem  nostrara  regiam— devolventur,  prsefatis,  con-
siliariis  et  his  qui  nostras  partes  sequentur,  pro  suis  cui-
que  meritis  ante  alios  donabimus." — Ferdinand  describes
the  circumstances  of  both  elections  in  a  letter  to  his  bro-
ther of  3Ist  Dec.  15-26.  (Gevay,  .p.  30.)  He  asserts  thar
he  was  elected  by  a  vast  majority.

Ii  Ferdinand  to  Mary,  7th  April.  "  Combein  que  nay
nullement  en  voulente— riens  traicter  ny  conclure,  neant-
moings— pour  entretenir  les  affaires  jusques  a  ce  que  sole
de  tout  prest  pour  me  mectre  aux  champs,  .  .  ,  ie  luy  (au
Roi  de  Pologne)  ay  bien  voulu  accorder  icelle  joura6e."—
Gevay,  p.  60.

276

OCCUPATION  OF  HUNGARY.

Book  IV.

the  intelligence  that  a  son  was  born  to  him,  and
the  succession  thus  secured,  he  insisted  on  ac-
companying the  expedition.*

Nor  did  this  assume  a  very  formidable  as-
pect. The  first  fortified  places,  Comorn,  Tata,
and  Gran,  fell  without  much  resistance :  the
excellent  artillery,  the  red-hot  cannon-balls,
quickly  reduced  the  garrison  to  despair.  The
Germans  advanced  without  interruption ;  and
as  soon  as  it  appeared  possible  that  Ferdinand
might  be  successful,  Zapolya's  followers  began
to  desert  him.  The  fleet  in  the  Danube  went
over  first,  —  the  military  importance  of  which
■was  equal  to  its  moral  effect ;  next  the  Ban
Bathyany,  who  had  already  changed  sides
more  than  once,  returned  to  that  of  Ferdinand.
Peter  Pereny,  who  is  regarded  as  the  first
evangelical  magnate  in  Hungary,  and  Valen-
tine Török,  suspected  of  being  actuated  by  the
desire  to  retain  possession  of  some  seques-
trated church  lands,  appeared  with  splendid
retinues.j"  The  example  of  these  great  men
was  followed  by  innumerable  obscurer  ones.
Zapolya  saw  that  his  antagonist  was  the
stronger,  and  neither  ventured  to  meet  him  in
the  field,  nor  even  to  hold  the  capital  against
him,  but  retreated  to  his  own  dominions.  On
the  20th  August,  St.  Stephen's  day,  Ferdinand
made  his  entry  into  Ofen.

■  V/hilst  the  States  of  the  kingdom  assembled
about  him  in  that  city,  the  German  reiters
under  Nicholas  von  Salrn — Markgrave  Casimir
having  died  at  Ofen  —  pursued  the  Woiwode
across  the  Theis.  Never  did  the  German
troops  display  more  bravery  and  constancy. :|:
They  had  often  neither  meat  nor  bread,  and
were  obliged  to  live  on  such  fruits  as  they
found  in  the  gardens :  the  inhabitants  were
wavering  and  uncertain  —  they  submitted,  and
then  revolted  again  to  the  enemy  ;  Zapol3'a's
troops,  aided  by  their  knowledge  of  the  ground,
made  several  very  formidable  attacks  by  night;
but  the  Germans  evinced,  in  the  moment  of
danger,  the  skill  and  determination  of  a  Roman
legion :  they  showed,  too,  a  noble  constancy
under  difficulties  and  privations.  At  Tokay,
they  defeated  Zapolya  and  compelled  him  to
quit  Hungary ;  after  which  they  had  the  honour
to  escort  their  royal  leader  and  countryman  to
Stuhlweissenburg  in  silken  and  embroidered
sureoats  over  their  glittering  armour.  On  the
3d  November,  1527,  Ferdinand  was  crowned
in  Stuhlweissenburg : only  five  of  the  mag-

*  Ursiniis  Velins  de  Bello  Pannonico,  ed.  Kollar.  From
the  collations  in  Katona,  who  has  inserted  this  work  en-
tire, it  is  evident  how  inferior  is  Isthuausi  and  even  Zer-
megh  to  these  contemporaneous  and  circumstantial  ac-
cou"nts.

t  Gebhardi  Gesch.  v.  Ungarn,  ii.  287.  In  Bucholtz,  iy.
323,  there  is  a  document  concerning  the  submission  of
Pereny,  which  probably  relates  to  this  matter,  and  is  ex-
tremely remarkable.  Pereny  represents  the  following  as
his  first  demand  :— "  Inprimis  cupit  D.  Petrus  der  S.  W'^'^
assecurari,  ne  a  religione  sua  unquam  prohibeatur,  quan-
doquidem  verum  et  honum  Christianum  se  profiteatur  et
pcientem  fidem  Chanam  ^gr  Christum  juxta  evangelium.''
Ferdinand  answers  :  "  Concedit  M.  S.  uti  se  gerat  verum
et  bonum  Ch=^i"m  ut  cujusque  erga  deum  pietas  fidesque
nostra  vera  et  catolica  dictare  et  postulare  videtur."  A
concession  which,  though  very  equivocal,  seems  to  have
satisfied  Pereny.  Witliout  doubt,  he  thought  himself  also
in  possession  of  the  fides  vera  et  catholica.

I  Velius  :  "  Hand  unquam  alias  Germani  militis  virtus
et  patientia  in  bello  magis  euituit." »

nates  of  the  kingdom  adhered  to  Zapolya.
The  victory  appeared  complete.

Ferdinand,  however,  distinctly  felt  that  this
appearance  was  delusive.  "  Monseigneur,"  he
writes  in  the  same  November  to  his  brother,
"  I  do  not  doubt  that  the  nature  of  the  Hunga-
rians,—  the  fickleness  of  their  will,  is  known
to  you.§  They  must  be  held  in  with  a  short
rein  if  you  would  be  sure  of  them."  It  was
not  without  great  hesitation  that  he  could  re-
solve to  leave  Hungary  again  at  this  moment.

In  Bohemia,  too,  his  power  was  far  from
secure.  His  Bavarian  neighbours  had  not  re-
linquished the  hope  of  driving  him  from  the
throne  at  the  first  general  turn  of  affairs.

The  Ottomans,  meanwhile,  acting  upon  the
persuasion  that  every  land  in  which  the  head
of  their  chief  had  rested  belonged  of  right  J;o
them,  were  preparing  to  return  to  Hungary;
either  to  take  possession  of  it  themselves,  or
at  first,  as  was  their  custom,  to  bestow  it  on
a  native  ruler  —  Zapolya,  who  now  eagerly
sought  an  alliance  with  them — as  their  vassal.

This  was  a  state  of  things  in  which  the
most  important  events  often  hang  on  the  fate
of  a  battle.  The  house  of  Austria  had  no  other
means  of  maintaining  the  position  it  had
reached,  than  the  assistance  of  the  empire,  to
which  it  was  compelled  incessantly  to  appeal.

On  the  Germans  now  devolved  the  defence
of  Christendom  against  the  Ottoman  power.

CHAPTER  V.

FOUNDATION  OF  EVANGELICAL  STATES.

So  important,  in  respect  of  the  foreign  rela-
tions of  Germany,  were  the  consequences  of
the  events  which  coincided  with  the  meeting
of  the  diet  at  Spire.

But  that  assembly  at  the  same  time  gave
rise  to  qther  consequences,  affecting  the  inter-
nal affairs  of  the  empire  and  the  church,  which,
comparatively  insignificant  as  they  at  first  ap-
peared, were  intrinsically,  and  with  relation  to
the  whole  future  condition  of  Germany,  of  far
higher  and  more  unequivocal  importance  than
any  external  acquisitions.  Those  of  the  States
inclined  to  evangelical  opinions  undertook  to
form  new  ecclesiastical  establishments  in  their
territories,  on  the  basis  laid  down  by  the  Re-
cess of  the  empire :  they  proceeded  to  sever
themselves  definitively  from  the  world-embrac-
ing hierarchy  of  the  Latin  church.

But  as  it  usually  happens  that,  at  the  begin-
ning of  radical  changes,  the  principles  most
strongly  opposed  to  the  existing  order  of  things
are  the  most  prominent  and  influential,  so,  in
the  present  case,  the  extremest  objects  were
those  most  anxiously  aimed  at ;  and  the  ideas
most  in  favour  were  those  most  at  variance
with  the  absolute  dominion  of  the  papacy.

Luther,  at  an  earlier  period,  had  contributed

§"Leur  muable  et  fragille  vouloir." Gevay,  p.  120.
Bucholtz,  iii.  114.

Chap.  V.

NEW  IDEA  OF  THE  CONSTITUTION  OF  A  CHURCH.

277

to  this  result.  In*  the  year  1523,  the  Bohe-
mians, having  fallen  into  intolerable  confusion
and  perplexity,  in  consequence  of  their  adhe-
rence to  the  necessity  of  episcopal  ordination,
he  advised  them  to  choose  their  pastors  and
bishops  themselves  without  scruple.  "First
prepare  yourselves  by  prayer,"  said  he,  "  and
then  assemble  together  in  God's  name  and
proceed  to  the  election.  Let  the  most  eminent
and  respected  among  you  lay  their  hands  with
good  courage  on  the  chosen  candidate,  and,
when  this  has  taken  place  in  several  parishes,
let  the  pastors  have  a  right  to  elect  a  head  or
superintendent  to  visit  them,  as  Peter  visitfed
the  first  Christian  communities."*  Ideas  of
this  kind  were  at  that  time  very  popular  and
widely  diffused,  both  in  Switzerland  and  Ger-
many. We  find  even  an  obscure  congregation
declaring  to  its  new  pastor,  that  he  is  not  their
master  but  their  servant  and  minister ;  peremp-
torily forbidding  him  to  apply  to  the  bishop
concerning  any  one  of  his  congregation,  and
threatening  him  with  dismissal,  if  he  does  not
adhere  to  the  single  and  eternal  word  of  God.f
The  congregations  began  to  regard  themselves
as  the  sources  of  spiritual  power.  Had  these
principles  become  universal,  the  edifice  of  a
new  church  must  have  been  raised  on  a  purely
democratical  basis.

And,  in  fact,  the  experiment  was  tried  in
one  large  principality  of  Germany.

There  is  nothing  in  the  history  of  these
times  more  remarkable  than  the  decree  of  the
synod  which  Landgrave  Philip  of  Hessen  held
with  the  spiritual  and  temporal  estates  of  his
dominions  at  Homberg.  The  objection  raised
by  the  guardian  of  the  Franciscans  of  Marburg
—  that  at  so  small  an  assembly  no  decision
could  be  taken  on  affairs  which  properly  be-
longed to  a  general  council — was  easily  over-
ruled ;  since  even  at  the  diet  the  impossibility
of  waiting  for  such  a  council  had  been  admit-
ted. On  the  other  hand,  Francis  Lambert
succeeded  in  establishing  the  contrary  princi-
ple— that  every  Christian  is  participant  in  the
priesthood  ;  that  the  true  church  consists  only
in  their  fellowship,  and  that  it  is  for  this  church
to  decide,  according  to  God's  word,  upon  arti-

*  L.  de  instituendis  Ministris  Ecclesire  ad  clarissimum
Senatum  Pragensem.  Opp.  Jen.  ii.  p.  554.  "  Coiix'ocatis
et  convenientibus  lihere  quorum  corda  Deus  tetigerit,  ut
vnbiscum  unum  sentiant  et  sapiant,  procedatis  in  nomine
Domini  et  eligite  quem  et  quos  volueritis,  qui  digni  et
idonei  visi  fuerint,  turn  impositis  super  eos  manibus  illo-
rum  qui  potiores  inter  vos  fuerint,  confirmetis  et  commen-
detis  eos  populo  et  eccIesioB  seu  universitati  sintque  hoc
ipso  vestri  episcopi  ministri  seu  pastores. Amen."

I  Dorfmaister  und  Gemaind  zu  Wendelstains  Fürhalten
den  Amptleuten  zu  Schwobach  iren  newangeenden  Pfarr-
lierrn  gethan  Mittw.  nach  Galli,  15-24.  Abgedruckt  in
Riederer's  Nachrichten  zur  Büchergeschichte,  Slc.  ii.  .■?34.
"  Nachdem  ainer  christlichen  Gemain  gebürt,  einhellig  in
sich  in  die  Gemaind  zu  greifen  nach  einem  erbarn  unver-
leumpten  Mann, . .  welchen  auch  dieselbe  Gemaind  JMacht
hat  wieder  abzuschaffen.  Der  Widerchrist,  der  sie  in  der
babylonischen  Gefangenschaft  halte,  habe  ihnen  auch
diese  Freiheit  entzogen,"  &c.  —  The  master  (magistrate)
and  parish  of  Wendelstain's  charge  to  the  functionaries
at  Schwobach,  as  to  their  new  priest,  Wednesday  after
Galli,  1524.  Printed  in  Riederer's  Nachrichten,  &c.,  334.
"  Afterwards  it  is  incumbent  on  a  Christian  cnngreeation
to  look  out  unanimously  for  an  honest  and  blameless
man,  .  .  .  whom  the  same  congregation  has  power  to  dis-
miss again.  The  antichrist  who  holds  you  in  Babylonish
captivity  has  robbed  you  of  this  liberty  among  others,"  &;c.

cles  of  faith.ij:  The  idea  was  formed  of  con-
stituting a  church  consisting  solely  of  true  be-
lievers. The  following  was  the  scheme  drawn
up  to  that  effect.§

It  was  proposed  that,  after  a  sermon,  a  meet-
ing should  be  held,  and  every  one  should  be
asked  whether  he  was  determined  to  submit
himself  to  the  laws,  or  not.  Those  who  re-
fused should  be  put  out  and  regarded  as  hea-
thens. But  the  names  of  those  v/ho  chose  to
be  in  the  number  of  the  saints,  should  be  writ-
ten down;  they  must  not  be  troubled  if,  at
first,  they  should  be  few,  for  God  would  soon
increase  their  number  :  these  would  constitute
the  congregation.  The  most  important  busi-
ness of  their  meetings  would  be  the  choice
of  their  spiritual  leaders  (here  simply  called
bishops).  For  this  station  any  citizen  of  irre-
proachable life  and  competent  instruction  should
be  eligible,  whatever  were  his  profession ;  but
he  should  be  allowed  to  retain  it  only  so  long
as  he  preached  the  genuine  word  of  God.  Each,
parish  or  congregation  should  have  some  mem-
bers who  should  perform  military  service,  and
a  common  chest  or  treasury,  to  which  all  should
contribute,  and  out  of  which  the  poor,  and  those
who  had  been  driven  from  their  homes  for  the
Gospel's  sake,  should  receive  assistance.  The
right  of  excommunicating,  it  was  affirmed,  is
inherent  in  every  man:  the  crimes  which  draw
down  this  punishment  are  specified  :  absolu-
tion can  only  be  granted  after  sin  has  been
confessed  and  repented  of.  [We  see  that  the
most  rigid  church  discipline  is  united  with  the
fullest  independence  of  the  several  religious
communities.  The  pretensions  set  up  are
sanctified  by  the  profound  earnestness  of  spirit
which  dictates  them.]  Every  year  the  church-
es, represented  by  bishops  and  deputies,  should
assemble  in  general  synod,  where  all  com-
plaints should  be  heard  and  doubts  resolved.
A  committee  of  thirteen  should  be  appointed
to  prepare  the  business  and  lay  it  before  the
meeting,  to  be  decided  according  to  God's
word.  At  the  general  synod,  the  meeting  of
which  was  permanently  fixed  for  the  third
Sunday  after  Easter,  three  visitors  were  to  be
chosen,  v.^io  were  to  examine  the  state  of  each
individual  church.

It  is  very  remarkable  that  the  man  who
worked  out  these  ideas  into  so  complete  a
scheme  of  church  government,  was  a  foreigner
— a  Frenchman  of  Avignon — who,  converted
by  Zwingli,  had  become  deepl)^  imbued  with
evangelical  doctrines  in  the  school  of  Luther.
The  ideas  are  the  same  on  which  the  French,
Scotch,  and  American  churches  were  after-
wards founded,  and  indeed  on  which  the  exist-
ence and  the  development  of  North  America
may  truly  be  said  to  rest.  Their  historical  im-
portance is  beyond  all  calculation.  We  trace
them  in  the  very  first  attempt  at  the  constitu-

J  Paradoxa  Francisci  Lamberti  in  Scultetus,  Annales
Evang.  p.  Cb. Tit.  vi.  §  6. Tit.  iii.  §  1.

§  Reformatio  ecclesiarum  Hassice  juxta  certissiman
sermonuni  Dei  regulam  ordinata  in  venerabili  synodo  per
clemmum  Hassorum  principem  Fhilippuui  ao  1.526,  d.  2üt£i
Oct.  Hombergi  celebrata  cui  ipse  princeps  interfuit.
Schmincke  Monumenta  Hassorum,  ii.  p.  588.  Bickell
Zeltschrift  des  Vereins  für  hessische  Geschichte  i.  C3— 69.

278

PRINCIPLE  OF  THE

Book  IV.

tion  of  a  church ;  they  were  adopted  by  a  small
German  synod.

It  was  another  question,  however,  whether
they  could  be  carried  into  execution  in  Ger-
many generally.

Luther  at  least  had  already  renounced  them.

In  the  first  place,  he  found  them  attended
with  almost  insurmountable  difficulties.  —
Throughout  the  whole  of  his  labours,  he  had
fouud  a  powerful  ally  in  the  desire  of  the
higher  secular  ranks  to  emancipate  themselves
from  the  immediate  supervision  of  the  clergy.
People  would  not  now  consent  to  have  an
equally  galling  yoke  laid  upon  them  in  another
form.  Moreover,  Luther  found  that  he  had  no
men  fitted  for  an  institution  of  this  kind.  He
v/as  often  highly  incensed  at  the  stubborn  in-
docility  of  the  peasants,  who  could»  not  even
be  prevailed  on  to  maintain  their  clergy.  He
said  "the  ordinances  of  the  church  fared  as
they  might  do  if  they  had  to  be  practised  in
the  market-place,  among  Turks  and  heathen  :
the  greater-  part  stood  and  gaped,  as  if  they
were  only  looking  at  something  new."*  In
short,  the  whole  state  of  things  was  not  adapt-
ed to  such  institutions.  If  these  ideas,  which
^we  may  describe  as  ecclesiastically  democratic,
afterwards  triumphed  in  other  countries,  it  was
because  the  new  church  rose  in  opposition  to
the  civil  power ;  its  real  root  and  strength
Vy^ere  in  the  lower  classes  of  the  people.  But
it  was  far  otherwise  in  Germany.  The  new
churches  were  founded  under  the  protection,
the  immediate  influence,  of  the  reigning  au-
thorities, and  its  form  was  naturally  deter-
mined by  that  circumstance.

For  the  ideas  which  find  their  way  into  the
world  are  modified  by  external  circumstances.
The  moment  of  their  production  has  an  inevita-
ble and  permanent  effect  on  their  w^hole  exist-
ence ;  they  live  on  under  the  same  conditions
which  attended  their  birth.

It  is  worth  while,  at  the  point  at  which  we
are  arrived,  where  we  have  to  examine  into  the
foundation  of  the  evangelical  church,  to  en-
deavour to  acquire  a  precise  and  comprehensive
notion  of  the  circumstances  under  which  it
took  place.  We  shall  thus  be  able  to  form  a
more  exact  estimate  of  the  lawfulness  of  the
measures  adopted.  The  principle  of  the  eccle-
siastical law  of  the  evangelical  church,  on
v.'hich  the  whole  structure  is  founded,  may,  if
I  mistake  not,  be  arrived  at  by  an  historical
deduction.

The  first  and  most  important  consideration
which  presents  itself  is,  that  the  real  origin  of
the  movement  is  to  be  found  in  the  internal  di-
visions of  the  church  ;  that  the  secession  took
place  within  her  own  proper  domain.  A  uni-
versity, with  those  nurtured  in  its  bosom,  set
the  example;  the  lower  clergy  through  a  great
part  of  Germany  followed  ;  they  were  the  men
who  changed  the  opinions  of  all  classes,  the
lowest  as  well  as  the  highest — who  carried  all
along  with  them.  In  innumerable  places  the
established  form  of  worship  fell  of  itself.

*  Preface  to  the  Book  on  the  German  Mass. Altemb.
iii.  468.

It  was  the  immediate  business  of  the  spi-
ritual power  to  repress  this  movement ; — but  it
was  unable  to  do  so.  The  pope's  bulls  were
not  executed.  In  one  portion  of  the  empire
the  secular  power  no  longer  lent  its  arm  to
enforce  the  ordinances  of  the  bishops.  The
new  opinions  were  become  so  strong  in  a  num-
ber of  the  princes  of  the  empire,  that  they  no
longer  regarded  this  as  their  duty.

Hence  the  ecclesiastical  power  had  address-
ed itself  to  the  emperor,  and  an  edict  had  been
published  in  its  favour;  but  as  this  did  not
spring  from  any  intrinsic  necessity,  but  from
partial  political  considerations,  it  had  been
found  impossible  to  carry  it  into  execution.
After  all  the  ebbs  and  flow's  of  the  religious
agitation,  the  diet  had  at  length  determined  not
to  revoke  it,  but  to  leave  to  the  discretion  of
every  member  of  the  empire,  whether  he  would
execute  it  or  not.

What  under  these  circumstances  could  be
the  result  in  the  territories  infected  with  the
ideas  of  the  reformation  ]  Should  their  princes
seek  to  restore  an  authority  with  which  they
had  incessantly  been  at  bitter  strife,  which  had
drawn  upon  itself  the  hatred  of  the  whole
nation,  and  whose  ministry  they  deemed  un-
christian] The  Recess  of  the  diet  did  not
enjoin  this  upon  them.  It  said,  that  no  man
must  be  robbed  of  his  goods  or  his  revenues;
the  re-establishment  of  the  spiritual  jurisdiction
was  purposely  passed  over  in  silence.  Or
were  they  to  wait  till  a  council  should  be  con-
vened, and  should  restore  order?  It  was  im-
possible to  foresee  when  that  might  take  place;
— the  diet  itself  had  found  it  impossible.  Nor
could  things  be  left  to  their  own  undirected
course,  or  to  chance.  If  the  nation  were  not
to  be  given  up  to  a  wild  anarchy,  the  existing-
lawful  authorities  must  take  measures  for  the
restoration  of  order.

If  it  be  asked,  how  the  princes  of  Germany
were  empowered  to  act  thus,  their  warrant
must  not  be  traced  to  a  sort  of  episcopal  autho-
rity ;  at  least  not  at  the  beginning.  It  was  on
this  occasion  that  Luther  expressly  declared,
"  that  the  temporal  power  was  not  commanded
to  govern  spiritually."  Another  opinion  then
put  forward  is  more  plausible;  namely,  that
the  church  actually  existing  committed  to  the
sovereign  of  the  country  the  office  of  supervi-
sion. Luther,  however,  w'ho  maturely  weighed
all  these  things,  and  would  do  nothing  without
full  certainty,  only  said,  "  that  people  prayed
the  princes,  out  of  love  and  for  God's  sake,  to
take  upon  themselves  this  "affair."  The  new
church  was  not  yet  itself  constituted ;  it  is
quite  certain  that  it  did  not  esteem  itself  com-
petent to  confer  a  right  on  others.

The  right,  properly  so  called,  is  derived,  if  I
mistake  not,  from  another  source.

It  were  hardly  possible  to  question  the  com-
petency of  the  empire,  in  the  prevailing  state
of  confusion,  to  frame  ordinances  respecting
ecclesiastical,  as  well  as  civil  affairs,  at  a
regular  assembly  like  that  intended  to  be  held
at  Spire.  It  is  true  that  scruples  were  urged
from  more  than  one  quarter,  but  these  scruples
were  at  a  subsequent  period  removed. Other-

Chap.  V.

EVANGELICAL  ECCLESIASTICAL  LAW.

279

wise  we  must  call  in  question  the  legality  of
the  Religious  Peace,  as  well  as  of  the  peace
of  Westphalia,  neither  of  which  was  ever  ac-
knowledged by  the  papal  power.

Nor  was  the  validity  of  the  Recesses  of
1523  and  1524,  which  were  so  important  to
the  cause  of  religion,  ever  doubted  in  Ger-
many.

Had  the  assembly  of  the  empire,  proceeding
in  this  course,  used  its  unquestioned  right,  and
organized  a  reform  for  all  classes,  a  total  revo-
lution must  have  been  the  result.

The  meeting  of  the  empire  could  not,  it  is
true,  come  to  any  such  unanimous  decision;
but  it  did  not  on  that  account  relinquish  its
powers,  as  is  proved  by  the  way  in  which  it
subsequently  used  them.  At  the  time  we  are
speaking  of,  the  diet  deemed  it  expedient — for
that  is  the  point  on  which  the  whole  depends —
to  entrust  the  exercise  of  its  rights  to  the  terri-
torial rulers.

For  what  other  interpretation  can  be  put
upon  the  liberty  granted  by  the  diet  to  the
princes,  to  agree  with  their  respective  subjects
whether  or  not  they  would  obey  the  edict  of
Worms?  —  a  matter  necessitating  the  most  de-
cisive and  sweeping  measures.*  What  the
assembly  of  the  empire  was  not  unanimous  or
determined  enough  to  execute,  it  left  to  be  exe-
cuted by  the  several  States,

Thus  4he  matter  was  understood  by  Land-
grave Philip,  when  he  invited  his  "  subjects
cf  spiritual  and  temporal  estate"  to  repair  to
Romberg,  "  in  order  to  come  to  an  agreement
with  them  in  affairs  relating  to  the  holy  faith."
IMarkgrave  Casimir  of  Brandenberg  takes  the
same  ground,  when,  as  a  god-loving  prince  (as
he  calls  himself)  and  a  dutiful  subject  of  his
imperial  majesty,  he  makes  an  arrangement
with  the  deputies  of  his  dominions,  the  spirit
of  which,  notwithstanding  a  certain  discreet
reserve,  is  unquestionably  evangelical.  We
possess  a  little  treatise  of  that  time,  in  which
not  only  the  competency,  but  the  duty  of
princes  to  make  regulations  conformable  with
the  standard  of  the  Divine  Word,  concerning
the  whole  Christian  life  and  conversation  (since
the  edict  was  intended  to  extend  to  them  also),
is  deduced  from  the  words  of  the  Recess.f To

*  "  Das  ist  Jp  die  Wahrheit,  dass  das  kais.  Edict  anders
nichts  innen  hült.deiin  die  Sachen  unsern  h.  Glauben  und
Eeligion,  auch  die  Irsallehren  und  Missbräuch  so  daraus
entsprungen  se.vn,  belancjend.  So  denn  an  denselben,
neniüch  wie  und  was  man  glauben,  was  man  lehren  pre-
digen und  halten,  was  man  auch  in  solchem  fliehen  und
vermeiden  soll,  ein  ^anz  christlich  Leben  und  unser  einige

Seligkeit  ohne  Mittel  gelegen  ist, so  folset  gewisslich,

dass  der  angezeigte  Artikel  auf  ein  ordentlich  christlich
Leben  Regiment  und  Wesen  muss  gezogen  werden.  Die
hineingebrachten  Wort  des  Edicts  machen  auch  den  Ar-
tikel viel  läuterer."  (Worte  der  gleich  anzuführenden
Schrift.)— "That  is  the  truth,  that  the  imperial  edict  con-
tains nothing  but  what  concerns  the  affairs  of  our  holy
faith  and  religion,  and  the  false  doctrines  and  abuses  that
have  sprung  out  of  it.  So  then,  as  upon  this,  —  namely,
how  and  what  we  must  believe,  what  should  be  taught
and  preached  and  held,  also  what  should  he  eschewed  and
avoided, — a  wholly  Christian  life  and  our  own  salvation
immediately  depend,  so  it  of  a  certainty  follows  that  the
above-mentioned  article  must  extend  to  the  rule  and  na-
ture of  a  proper  Christian  life.  The  words  of  the  edict
make  the  article  much  clearer."  (Words  of  the  writing
in  which  the  above  edict  is  quoted.)

f'Ein  christlicher  Rathschlag welcher  gestalt  sich

alle  christliche  Personum  von  Obern  und  Unterthanen

this  Luther  alludes  when  he  mentions  that  the
Emperor  Constantino  found  himself  constrained,
during  the  prevalence  of  the  Arian  troubles,  to
interfere,  at  least  so  far  as  to  summon  a  council
in  order  to  put  a  stop  to  further  disorders.

In  a  word,  it  was  the  incontestable  right  of
the  highest  power  in  the  state,  on  the  breaking
out  of  these  dissensions  in  the  church,  to  take
measures  for  putting  an  end  to  them — the  right
of  the  whole  collective  body  of  the  empire,
transferred  to  the  several  States, — in  virtue  of
which  the  evangelical  princes  proceeded  to
carry  through  the  reform  in  their  own  domi-
nions.

Plence  the  democratical  ideas  we  have  men-
tioned could  not  gain  ascendency ;  the  exist-
ing facts  did  not  tend  that  way ;  the  church
did  not  constitute  itself  from  below.  Nor  had
that  community  of  true  believers,  answering  to
the  idea  of  the  invisible  Church,  to  which  the
right  of  giving  laws  to  itself  might  have  been
committed,  any  actual  existence.  Luther  con-
tinued to  regard  the  Church  as  a  divine  insti-
tution to  be  supported  by  all  temporal  autho-
rities (as  heretofore)  ;  instituted  not  for  the
purpose  of  representing  the  great  Mystery,  but
above  all,  for  the  instruction  of  the  people;
"as  a  public  incitement,"  as  he  expresses  it,
"  to  faith  and  Christianity."  Whilst  he  de-
nounced the  bishops  who  had  suffered  the
people  to  remain  in  such  a  state  of  barbarous
ignorance,  that  they  had  not  even  learned  the
Lord's  Prayer  or  the  Ten  Commandments,  and
knew  nothing  of  the  Christian  faith,  he,  at  the
same  time,  combated  the  notions  of  some  re-
formers, who  thought  that  education  being
rendered  more  accessible  and  general,  the
priesthood  might  be  entirely  dispensed  with  :
in  his  view,  the  Church  is  a  living,  divine  in-
stitution, for  the  maintenance  and  the  diffusion
of  the  Gospel  by  the  ministering  of  the  sacra-
ments, and  by  preaching:  his  idea  is,  as
he  says,  "  to  drive  the  doctrine  of  the  Scrip-
tures into  the  hearts  of  men ;  that  so  present
and  future  generations  may  be  replenished
with  it."

These  were  the  ideas  which  presided  over
the  ecclesiastical  institutions  of  the  Saxon  do-
minions.

The  elector  had  nominated  certain  Visitors
who  should  examine  the  state  of  each  parish,
as  to  doctrine  and  life.  Instructions  drawn  up
by  Melanchthon,  and  approved,  nay  edited,  by
Luther,  were  sent  in  their  name  to  the  respect-
ive clergymen.

These  are  well  worthy  of  attention.

The  opposition  to  the  papacy,  vehement  as
was  the  struggle  still  pending,  had  already
fallen  very  much  into  the  back-ground  ;  it  was
admitted  that  this  was  not  a  fit  topic  to  be  de-
bated in  the  pulpit  and  before  tKe  people.  The
preachers  were  admonished  not  to  use  reproach-
ful language  concerning  the  pope  or  the  bish-

halten  sollen,  dass  sie  das  nach  Anzeigung  eines  sondern
Artikels  im  Abschied  des  jüngstgehalferien  Reichstaet^zu

Speier mögen  verantworten." — "  A  Christian  counsel

.  ..what  conduct  all  Christian  persons,  rulers,  or  subjects
should  observe,  that  they  may  answer  it,  according  to  Mie
admonition  of  a  particular  article  in  the  recess  of  tha
last  held  diet  at  S^iie."—JforUeder,  b.  i,  c.  2.

280

SAXON  VISITATION.

Book  IV.

ops,  but  to  keep  solely  in  view  the  wants  of  *he
-many — the  implanting  of  the  evang-elical  doc-
trine in  the  minds  of  the  common  people.  The
greatest  respect  for  all  that  was  traditional  and
established  was  shown.  It  was  not  thought
necessary  positively  to  forbid  the  use  of  Latin
for  the  mass :  the  administration  of  the  sacra-
ment in  one  kind  was  even  deemed  allowable,
where  any  one  from  scruples  of  conscience  was
unwilling  entirely  to  throw  oil  the  ancient
ritual;  though  the  compulsion  to  auricular  con-
fession was  rejected  as  unauthorised  by  the
Holy  Scriptures,  it  was  declared  salutary  for
every  one  to  confess  the  sins  by  which  he  felt
his  conscience  burdened,  and  about  which  he
needed  counsel  '/nor  were  even  all  the  festivals
of  the  saints  abolished ;  it  was  enough  if  they
were  not  invoked  or  their  intercession  prayed
for.

The  idea  which  we  have  already  frequently
expressed — that  the  reformers  rejected  only  the
pretensions  to  infallibility  and  to  exclusive
saving  power,  which  were  the  grovv-th  of  later
centuries,  but  by  no  means  abandoned  the
ground  on  which  the  Latin  church  stands, —
here  presents  itself  again  in  great  distinctness.
They  sought  only  to  get  rid  of  the  load  of  per-
plexing traditions,  to  free  themselves  from
hierarchical  usurpations,  and  to  recover  the
pure  meaning  of  the  Lloly  Scripture — the  re-
vealed Word.  ■*  Whatever  could  be  retained
consistently  with  this,  they  retained.  They
took  care  not  to  perplex  the  minds  of  the  com-
mon people  with  difficult  controversial  doc-
trines, especially  those  concerning  good  works
and  free  will.  Not  that  they  had  in  the  least
degree  fallen  off  from  the  convictions  they  had
come  to; — from  the  fundamental  doctrine  of
justification  by  faith ;  from  the  conflict  with
the  error  of  seeking  salvation  in  the  observance
of  human  ordinances  :  on  the  contrary,  they
repeatedly  proclaimed  these  principles  with  all
possible  clearness,  but  they  required  at  the
same  time  penitence,  contrition  and  sorrow,
shunning  of  sin  and  piety  of  life.  For  it  is
unquestionably  in  the  power  of  man  to  flee
from  evil  and  to  do  that  which  is  right;  the
impotence  of  the  will  means  only  that  it  cannot
purify  the  heart  or  bring  forth  divine  gifts ;
these  must  be  sought  from  God  alone. f  The
end  they  proposed  to  themselves  was,  to  lead
men  to  inward  religion,  to  faith  and  love,  to
blameless  conversation,  honesty  and  good  order.
Far  from  departing  on  any  point  whatsoever
from  genuine  Christianity,  they  made  it  their
chief  merit  to  imbue  the  minds  of  their  hearers
more  and  more  deeply  with  its  principles. Lu-

*  See  Luther's  Vorrede  auf  da?  Büchlin  des  Herrn  Li-
centiaten  Klingenbeil,  1528,  Altenb.  iv.458.  "  Wir  haben
die  Schrift  für  uns,  dazu  der  alten  Väter  Spruche  und  der
vorigsn  Kirchen  Gesetze,  dazu  des  Papsts  selbst  eigenen
Brauch  da  bleiben  wir  bei :  sie  aber  haben  etlicher  Väter
Gegensprüche,  newe  Canones  und  ihren  eignen  Muthwil-
len  olin  alle  Schrifft  und  Wort  Gottes."—"  We  have  the
Scripture  for  us,  and  also  the  maxims  of  the  old  father's
and  the  laws  of  the  early  church,  and  likewise  the  usage
of  the  pope  himself— by  that  we  abide  :  but  they  have  the
contrary  maxims  of  some  fathers,  new  canons,  and  their
own  wantonness,  without  any  Scripture  and  word  of
God."

f  Instructions  of  the  Visitatores  to  the  parish  priests
of  the  Elector  of  Saxony. Altenb.  iv.  389.

ther  deems  it  his  highest  praise  that  he  applies
the  maxims  of  the  gospel  to  common  life.  He
made  it  his  especial  business  to  instruct  the
several  classes  of  society  in  their  duties,  on
religious  grounds  :  the  secular  authorities  and
their  subjects,  the  heads  of  families  and  their
several  members.  He  displayed  a  matchless
talent  for  popular  teaching.  Lie  tells  the  clergy
how  to  preach  with  benefit  to  the  common  peo-
ple ;  schoolmasters  how  to  instruct  the  young
in  the  several  stages  of  learning, — how  to  con-
nect science  with  religion,  and  to  avoid  exag-
geration ;  masters  of  families  how  to  keep  their
servants  in  the  fear  of  God  :  he  prescribes  to
each  and  all  texts  for  the  good  ordering  of  their
lives  ;  the  pastor  and  his  flock,  men  and  women,
aged  people  and  children,  men-servants  and
maid-servants,  young  and  old ;  he  gives  them
the  formula  of  the  Benedicite  and  the  Gratias  at
table  ;  of  the  morning  and  evening  benediction.
He  is  the  patriarch  of  the  austere  and  devout
discipline  and  manners  which  characterise  the
domestic  life  of  Northern  Germany.  What
countless  millions  of  times  has  his  "  Das  wait
Gott,":[:  reminded  the  tradesman  and  the  pea-
sant, immersed  in  the  dull  routine  of  the  v/ork-
ing  day,  of  his  relation  to  the  Eternal !  The
Catechism,  which  he  published  in  the  year
1529, — of  which  he  said,  that  he  repeated  it
himself  with  devotion,  old  doctor  as  he  was, —
is  as  childlike  as  it  is  profound,  as  intelligible
as  simple  and  sublime.  Happy  the  man  wnose
soul  has  been  nourished  with  it,  and  who  holds
fast  to  it!  It  contains  enduring  comfort  in
every  affliction,  and  under  a  slight  husk,  the
kernel  of  truths  able  to  satisfy  the  wisest  of  the
wise.

But,  in  order  to  insure  stability  to  this  tend-
ency tov/ards  popular  instruction, — this  substi-
tution of  preachers  for  priests, — a  new  external
establishment  of  the  churches  was  immediately
necessary.

We  must  here  bear  in  mind  that  the  property
of  the  church  was  menaced  from  every  side.
We  have  already  remarked  how  the  first  disso-
lution of  convents  originated  in  the  high  ca-
tholic party,  and  what  claims  were  made  by
the  Austrian  government  on  the  secular  admin-
istration of  the  episcopal  domains  :  these  arbi-
trary acts  daily  acquired  a  more  open  and  violent
character.  Luther  said,  the  papist  Junkers  were
in  this  respect  more  Lutheran  than  the  Luther-
ans themselves  ;  he  thought  it  his  duty  to  com-
plain of  the  measures  of  the  Elector  of  Mainz
against  his  convent  in  Halle. §  Landgrave
Philip,  too,  remarked  that  people  began  to
scramble  among  themselves  for  the  conventual
lands  :  every  man  stretched  out  his  hand  after
them,  though  in  other  respects  they  would  not

J  Literally,  that  God  rules  or  disposes  ;— or,  as  we  should
say.  As  it  please  God.— Transl.

§  Bericht  an  einen  guten  Freund  aufs  Bischofs  von  Meis-
sen Mandat.  Altenb.  iii.  895.  "  Man  nehme  den  Klöstern
und  Stiftern  ihre  Barschaft  und  Kleinodien,  greife  den
Geistlichen  in  ihre  Freiheit,  beschv\'ere  sie  mit  Schätzun-
gen, laure  auf  ihre  liegenden  Grihide."— Report  to  a  good
Friend  on  the  Mandate  of  the  Bishop  of  Meissen.  (Alt.
iii.  895.  "They  strip  the  convents  and  abbeys  of  their
money  and  jewels,  assail  the  freedom  of  tjie  clergy,  op-
press them  with  contributions,  and  lie  in  watch  for  their
lands,"

Chap.  V.

REFORMATION  IN  HESSEN.

281

be  called  evangelical.*  This  disposition,  how-
ever, was  not  confined  to  Germany  ;  it  showed
itself  all  over  Europe.  In  the  two  years  1524
and  1525,  Cardinal  VVolsey  dissolved  more
than  twenty  convents  and  abbeys  in  England,
in  order  to  endow  with  their  funds  the  New
College  in  Oxford,  by  which  he  looped  to  im-
mortalize his  name.f  We  must  fully  under-
stand the  general  temper  of  the  times,  which
was  connected  with  the  attempts  at  reform,  be-
fore we  can  be  competent  to  judge  the  steps
taken  in  the  evangelical  territories.  In  Saxony
a  great  number  of  convents  had  dissolved  of
themselves  ;  the  monks  had  dispersed,  and  the
neighbouring  nobles  already  stretched  out  their
hands  towards  the  vacant  lands  and  houses.

Luther's  opinion  was,  that  this  ought  not  to
be  permitted.  He  said  that  as  the  lands  were
originally  designed  fcr  the  support  of  God's
service,  they  ought  in  future  to  be  applied  to
that  destination.  He  required,  above  all,  that
the  rural  parishes,  which  were  very  poorly  en-
dowed, and,  in  consequence  of  the  great  falling
off  in  the  fe^s,  could  not  maintain  a  priest,
should  be  enriched  from  the  funds  of  the  vacant
benefices.  Whatever  remained  might  be  given
to  the  poor,  or  used  for  the  exigencies  of  the
state.  It  was  only  to  the  highest  power,  "  the
supreme  head,"  as  he  expresses  it,  that  he  as-
cribed "  the  right,  and  at  the  same  time  the
duty,  of  ordering  these  things  after  the  papal
yoke  had  been  removed  from  the  land."  He
once  forced  him.self  into  the  apartments  of  his
elector,  to  impress  upon  him  the  duty  of  pro-
tecting the  church  property  from  the  rapacity
of  the  nobles. :|:

The  Visitors  were  now  commissioned  to  order
the  new  establishments  conformably  with  these
views.  It  must  be  acknowledged  that  they
proceeded  with  great  moderation.  The  abbeys
and  chapters  w^hich  had  become  evangelical,  as
for  example,  those  of  Eisenach  and  Gotha,  re-
mained untouched.  In  Hensdorf  and  Weimar,
nuns  were  tolerated  and  allowed  to  adhere
strictly  to  the  old  ceremonies.  The  Franciscan
convents  in  Altenburg  and  Saalfield,  which  had
made  a  violent  resistance  to  the  new  doctrines,
were  yet  suffered  to  remain ;  they  were  only
admonished,  and,  as  the  original  report  ex-
presses it,  "commended  to  God"  {Goit  he-
fohlen).§  I  havejQOt  found  any  trace  of  the
actual  abolition  of  subsisting  institutions.  The
commission  only  disposed  of  the  estates  of
benefices  already  fallen  vacant;  these  were
applied  to  increasing  the  endowments  of  parish
churches  and  schools ;  the  existing  chapters
were  compelled  to  contribute  to  the  same  ob-
jects. Some  of  the  prelates,  for  example,  the
Abbot  of  Bosan,  were  very  well  inclined  to
this ;  with  others,  it  was  necessary  to  use  se-  j

*  Letter  from  Philip  to  Luther,  1526. Rommel  Hess.  I
Gesch.  V.  p.  8Ul;  essey  "  viel  Rappens  um  die  geistlichen  j
Güter."— there  was  "much  snatching  at  the  church  pro-
pert.v."

t  Catalogue  in  Fiddes's  Collection,  No.  76.  There  are
especially  many  Augustin  convents.

X  Letter  of  Luther  to  the  Elector,  22d  Nov.  1526,  in  De
Wette,  iii.  p.  137;  and  Spalatin,  1st  Jan.  1527,  ibid.  147.
See  p.  153.

§  Extracts  from  the  Visitation  Acts  ;  Seckendorf,  ii.  p.
102.  I

36  Y*

vere  compulsion.  Instead  of  censuring  this
employment  of  power,  we  have  only  to  wish
it  had  been  from  the  first  more  decisive — more
large  and  sweeping  in  its  plans  and  operations.
In  the  first  freshness  and  vigour  of  the  religious
impulse,  much  more  extensive  and  beneficial
changes  might  have  been  effected  than  could
be  attempted  at  a  later  period.  What,  then,
might  not  have  been  achieved  for  the  cause  of
religion  and  of  civilisation,  had  the  empire
itself  undertaken  the  guidance  of  this  mighty
revolution  !  As  things  nov/  stood,  the  reform-
ers were  forced  to  content  themselves  with
bringing  matters  to  a  tolerable  condition,  not
inconsistent  with  the  simple  existence  of  the
hew  church.

Nevertheless,  even  these  institutions  con-
tained the  germ  of  a  vast  development.

In  the  centre  of  Latin  Christendom — so  es-
sentially hierarchical— a  new  form  of  Church
and  State,  emancipated  from  every  kind  of  hi-
erarchy, arose.  If,  on  the  one  hand,  an  alliance
had  been  formed  in  Bavaria  between  the  civil
sovereignty,  the  university  and  the  papacy,
which  exercised  supervision  and  control  over
the  regular  hierarchical  authorities,  on  the  other,
a  union  was  here  effected  between  the  prince,
the  university  and  the  inferior  clergy,  which
completely  excluded  the  episcopal  jurisdiction.
The  lower  clergy  acquired  great  independence.
They  might  be  said  to  govern  themselves,  by
means  of  the  superintendents  whom  the  sove-
reign chose  out  of  their  ranks,  and  to  Miiom
some  of  the  functions  of  bishops  were  com-
mitted. By  rejecting  celibacy,  they  secured  a
new  influence  over  the  mind  of  the  nation.
The  body  of  married  clergy  became  a  nursery
for  the  learned  professions  and  civil  offices ;
the  centre  of  a  cultivated  middle  class.  It  is
to  the  greater  care  which  the  tranquillity  of  a
country  life  enables  parents  to  bestow  on  the
education  of  their  children,  and  which  the  dig-
nity of  their  calling  in  some  measure  imposed
upon  the  country  clergy,  that  Germany  owes
some  of  its  most  distinguished  men.  The  sup-
pression of  monasteries  and  the  restoration  of
their  inhabitants  to  social  life,  gradually  led  to
a  very  sensible  increase  of  the  population.  In
the  year  1750,  Justus  IMöser  reckoned  that  from
ten  to  fifteen  millions  of  human  beings,  in  all
countries  and  regions  of  the  globe,  owed  their
existence  to  Luther  and  to  his  example,  and
adds,  "A  statue  ought  to  be  erected  to  him  as
the  preserver  of  the  species. "||

Institutions  of  the  kind  we  have  been  de-
scribing were  far  more  consonant  with  the  situ-
ation of  Germany  and  the  natural  course  of
events,  than  the  rash  and  subversive  ideas,  ill
suited  to  the  state  of  things,  which  had  been
put  forth  at  Homberg.  As  the  instructions  to
the  Saxon  Visitatores  were  adopted  in  Hessen,
as  early  as  the  year  1528,  the  Saxon  ordinances
very  soon  followed  ;  in  1531,  Landgrave  Philip
nominated  six  superintendents  ;*|[  It  was  only
in  relation  to  church  property,  that  the  measures
employed  in  Hessen  were  more  sweeping  and

[j  Lettre  ä  Mr.  de  Voltaire  Osn.  6th  Sept.  1750,  in  Abe.
ken's  Reliquien  von  Justus  Moser,  p.  88.
TT  Rommel  Land.  Philipp,  ii.  pp.  123, 124.

282

BRANDENBURG.

Book  IV.

uniform  than  in  Saxony.  Landgrave  Philip
was  still  inflamed  by  the  first  ardour  of  religious
and  patriotic  ideas  :  "  I  will  help  Hessen,"
exclaimed  he  once  with  enthusiasm;  yet  he
did  not  disguise  from  himself  the  danger  that
"  he  might  be  overcome  by  the  flesh,  and  led
away  from  the  right  path."  He  conceived  the
design  of  placing  the  »monasteries  under  an
administration  dependent  on  the  prince  and
states  conjointly, — providing  both  for  those  in-
mates who  chose  to  remain,  and  for  those  who
quitted  them ;  and  of  applying  the  surplus  to
the  public  wants,  especially  of  a  spiritual' na-
ture :  he  himself  would  not  have  the  right  to
touch  this  fund,  without  the  consent  of  the
states.*  The  interests  of  the  country  were  here
peculiarly  powerful.

As  a  motive  for  the  confiscation  of  conventual
property,  it  was  alleged,  that  perhaps  only  a
fourth  part  of  the  monks  and  nuns  were  natives;
the  rest  were  foreigners,  and  therefore  such  pro-
perty was  of  no  advantage  to  the  country.  Some
monasteries  which  had  embraced  the  evange-
lical faith  were  suffered  to  remain,  but  by  far
the  greater  number  were  suppressed  ;  some,
because  they  drew  their  funds  from  alms,  which
nobody  v/ould  now  contribute;  others,  because
the  members  dispersed,  either  from  Christian
motives,  as  they  express  it, — from  conscientious
scruples, — or  because  some  favourable  oppor-
tunity presented  itself.  They  accepted  com-
pensation in  money  or  in  kind;  the  surplus
was,  according  to  the  regulations  of  a  diet  held
in  October,  1527,  to  be  given  in  part  to  the
nobility, f  in  part  to  an  university  which  it  was
determined  to  found  at  Marburg,  and  the  re-
mainder to  form  a  fund  for  the  use  of  the  prince,
the  nobles,  and  the  cities ;  but  only  to  be  re-
sorted to  with  their  joint  consent.  Many  of
these  dispositions  were  altered  in  the  course
of  the  slow  and  gradual  execution  of  them.
Yet  some  great  institutions  were  really  found-
ed :  two  endowments  for  young  ladies  of  noble
birth,  four  large  public  hospitals,  and,  above
all,  the  university  of  Marburg,  with*its  Semi-
narium  theologicura.  For  this  newly  founded
evangelical  university  was  more  especially  a
theological  school;  the  other  faculties  were
only  slight  and  incom.plete  beginnings.  The
synod  of  Homberg  had  decreed  that  nothing

*  "  Das  eine  Oberkeit  zu  dem  Kasten  nit  kommen  kont
one  VtTwüli^ung  der  Landschaft,  sonst  so  verkompt  das
Gut,  und  der  OkeVkeit  oder  Landt  wurd  es  nit  gepessert."
— "  That  no  one  of  the  authorities  should  be  able  to  touch
the  fund  without  the  cousent  of  the  country;  otherwise
the  property  would  he  spent,  and  the  government  or  the
country  not  be  the  better  for  it." — Letter  to  Luther  in  Rom-
mel, V.  p.  862.

t"S.  F.  Gn.  wollen  30  Mannspersonnen  (vom  Adel),
15  im  Odern,  15  im  nidern  Furstenthumben,  mit  etlicher
Steuwer  an  Frucht  Korn  und  Habern  Fiirsehunp:  thun,
damit  sie  sich  in  Rüstung  erhalten  und  auf  Erforderung
desto  stattlicher  dienen  mögen."— "His  princely  grace
■will  provide  liO  men  (nobles),  15  in  the  upper,  and  15  in
the  lower  principality,  with  certain  dues  in  wheat,  rye,
and  oats,  that  so  they  may  hold  themselves  in  readiness
and  serve  in  more  n<>b!e  wise  when  called  out." — "Was
derdurchleuchtiire  Fürst  .  .  .  Hr  Philips  .  .  .  mit  den  Glos-
terpersonen  Pfarrhorren  und  abgöttischen  Bildnussen  vor-
genommen hat. "— "  vVhat  the  most  illustrious  prince —
-the  Lord  Philip  —  has  done  and  provided  as  to  monks,
parish  priests,  and  idolatrous  figures."  Hortleder,  i.  v.  ii.
§  11.—"  It  recalls  the  ideas  which  dictated  the  Augsburg
scheme  of  secularisation,  1-525."

should  be  studied  there  which  might  be  "  con-
trary to  the  kingdom  of  God ;"  and  every
member  w^as  obliged  to  take  an  oath  on  his
admission,  that  he  v^^ould  attempt  no  innovation
contrary  to  God's  word.  It  was  of  great  im-
portance that  another  centre  of  evangelical  the-
ology thus  ar^se  by  the  side  of  the  school  of
Wittenberg;  at  first,  infleed,  without  the  impe-
rial privilege,  but  this  was  afterwards  granted.
The  influence  of  these  events  was  felt  in
the  Franconian  principalities  of  Brandenburg,
though  affairs  w^ere  here  more  complicated.  Of
the  two  princes  who  governed  conjointly,  the
one,  Markgrave  Casimir,  married  to  a  Bavarian
princess  and  allied  to  the  house  of  Austria,  ad-
hered as  closely  as  he  could  to  the  established
party ;  while  the  other,  Markgrave  George,
who  resided  in  Silesia,  cherished  and  avowed
decidedly  evangelical  opinions.  In  October,
1526,  Markgrave  Casimir  held  a  diet  of  his
estates  at  Anspach,  on  occasion  of  the  Recess
of  Spire,  in  which  resolutions  of  a  still  more
ambiguous  nature  were  passed  than  those  em-
bodied in  the  Recess  itself.  It  is  impossible  to
doubt  of  their  evangelical  tendency  :  in  the
very  first  article  it  is  ordained,  that  the  preach-
ers throughout  the  country  shall  preach  the
pure  Gospel  and  w^ord  of  God,  and  nothing
contrary  to  it ;  nor  are  the  concessions  as  to  the
ritual  to  be  judged  with  rigour,  when  it  is  re-
membered how^  tolerant  even  Luther  was  on
that  point.  To  many,  doubtless,  it  must  have
appeared  shocking,  that  Markgrave  Casimir
ordered  the  mass  to  be  said  in  Latin ;  that  he
prayed,  though  he  did  not  command,  his  sub-
jects to  keep  the  fasts,  and  even  thought  it  ex-
pedient to  maintain  the  endowed  masses  for  the
dead,  and  the  vigils. :[:  Markgrave  George  was
extremely  dissatisfied  :  the  letter  which  he  sent
his  brother,  together  with  the  copy  of  these
resolutions,  is  full  of  bitter  remarks.  The
whole  country  remained  in  a  stale  of  doubt.
And  as  the  neighbouring  bishops  refused  their
approbation — refused  to  consent  to  the  loss  of
their  jurisdiction,  and  still  m.ade  attempts  to
present  to  livings,  which  were  not  repressed
with  sufficient  energ}", — every  thing  fell  into
confusion.  Under  these  circumstances  it  was
an  event  of  great  importance  that  Casimir  died
in  the  Hungarian  campaign,  and  Markgrave
George  took  upon  himself  the  sole  government
of  the  principalities.  With  his  accession,  the
zealous evangelical councillors, Hans von

X  Recess  and  Opinion,  Onolzbach,  Wednesday  after  St.
Francis  (in  1d'26,  St.  Francis's  day  fell  on  a  Wednesday,
4th  Oct.V  Hortleder,  i.  i.  3.  The  extract  in  Lang  entirely
effaces  the  evangelical  character,  e.g.  According  to  Lang,
it  was  said  that  the  holy  sacrament  should  in  no  case  be
given  in  both  kinds,  and  that  nothf'ng  should  be  taught
contrary  to  the  doctrine  of  transubstantiation.  In  fact,
however,  we  find  there  (No.  5,  Hortleder,  p.  :W),  "Wollen
uns  versehen,  dass  sich  ein  jeder  mit  Empfahung  des
Sacraments  also  halte,  wie  er  das  gegen  Gott  und  Kais.
Mt.  verhoff  zu  verantworten."—"  We  will  take  care  that
every  one  carry  himself  so  as  to  the  receiving  of  the
Sacrament,  as  he  may  hope  to  answer  it  to  God  and  his
imperial  majesty."  which,  however,  involves  complete
freedom.  "Es  soll  auch  wider  das  hochw".  Sacra, i.ent, —
als  ob  in  dem  h.  Sacrament  der  Leih  und  das  Blut  nicht
gegenwertis  wäre,  nit  gepredigt  werden." — "There  shall
also  be  nothing  preached  against  the  holy  Sacrament, —
as  if  the  body  and  the  blood  were  not  present  in  the  holy
Sacrament."  Between  the  presence  and  transubstantia-
tion, however,  what  a  differenoel

Chap.  V.

NÜRNBERG.

283

Schwarzenberg  and  George  Vogler,  acquired
unobstructed  influence.  At  another  diet  at
Anspach,  1st  of  March,  15-28,  an  explanation
of  the  former  Recess,  dictated  by  purely  evan-
gelical opinions,  was  given ;  and  now,  too,
nothing  contrary  to  God's  word  was  to  be  tole-
rated in  the  ceremonial  of  the  church.  A  visi-
tation, on  the  model  of  that  of  Saxony,  was
immediately  appointed  in  connexion  with  the
city  of  Nürnberg ;  and  by  its  agency  an  evan-
gelical church  constitution  was  established  in
both  territories.

For  the  reform  had  meanwhile  been  carried
through  in  Nürnberg.  We  have  already  men-
tioned the  great  leaning  which  the  burghers  of
that  city  had  shown  from  the  first  to  the  new
doctrines,  and  the  support  they  experienced
from  their  two  provosts — patricians  of  Nürn-
berg— in  the  appointment  of  evangelical  preach-
ers. Here,  too,  no  changes  were  at  first  made,
except  those  strictly  necessary.  In  the  year
1524,  for  example,  the  baptismal  service  was
first  read  in  the  German  tongue.  Although  an
admonition  to  that  effect  had  been  published  a
year  before  by  Luther,  the  Nürnbergers  chose
rather  merely  to  translate  the  entire  formula  of
the  Bamberg  Agenda  into  German:  the  custom
of  putting  salt  into  the  mouth  of  the  child,  of
breathing  thrice  on  its  eyes,  and  anointing  its
breast  with  oil,  was  still  adhered  to;  nor  was
one  of  the  traditionary  formulae  of  exorcism
discontinued.*  It  deserves  to  be  noticed,  as  an
illustration  of  the  transition  going  on,  that  the
rector  of  St.  Sebaldus  altered  the  ancient  form,
"Ave  Regina,  mater  misericordise  !"  into,  "Ave
Jesu  Christe,  rex  misericordi83  '."f  The  most
important  changes  were,  the  administration  of
the  Lord's  Supper  in  both  kinds,  and  the  omis-
sion of  the  canon  ;  the  abolition  of  vigils,
masses  and  anniversaries  for  the  dead,  and
particular  hours  of  the  day  for  prayer.  But  it
will  be  readily  concluded  that  this  was  far  too
much  for  their  ordinary,  the  Bishop  of  Bam-
berg. He  at  length  excluded  the  two  provosts
from  the  community  of  the  church,  declared
their  offices  vacant,  and  required  those  Vv'ith
whom  it  rested,  to  proceed  to  a  new  election.
But  things  were  totally  altered  since  the  year
1520.  Then,  it  was  still  necessary  to  come  to
a  compromise  with  the  papal  commissioners,
distant  as  they  were ;  now,  the  excommunica-
tion of  a  neighbouring  and  powerful  bishop
made  no  impression.  The  provosts  appealed
from  him  to  "  a  free,  sure.  Christian,  and  godly
council.''^  The  most  active  members  of  the
council  gradually  adopted  their  way  of  think-
ing. Jerome  Ebner,  a  man  distinguished  alike
for  the  rigour  of  his  conscience  and  the  mild-
ness of  his  temper,  Caspar  Nützel,  Christo-
pher Scheurl,  Jerome  Bauragärtner,  and  Laza-
rus  Spengler, secretary  to  the  council,  v.'ho

*  History  of  Exorcism  in  the  Church  of  A'iirnberg  ;
Strobel  Miscell.,  iv.  p.  173.

t  Instead -of  '•  advocata  nostra,"  it  is,  "mediator
noster:"  instead  of  "  Jesum  benedictum  fructum  ventris
tui  nobis  post  hoc  exilium  ostende,"  it  is,  "  O  Jesu  bene-
dicte  faciem  patris  tui  nobis  post  hoc  exilium  ostende."

X  Appeal  and  Petition  of  tlie  Provosts  and  the  Prior
of  the  Augustines  at  Nürnberg:  Strobel  Miscell.,  iii.
p.  62.

united  the  liveliest  interest  in  questions  of  re-
ligion and  church  government  generally,  with
extraordinary  talents  for  business.  At  all  the
meetings  of  the  ciües,  from  the  August  of
1524,  the  council  of  Nürnberg  boldly  asserteü
its  evangelical  opinions,'  whether  against  mem-
bers of  the  Swabian  League,  the  States  of  the
empire,  or  the  emperor  and  his  representatives.
Nürnberg  was  one  of  those  cities  which  caused
Charles  to  declare,  that  he  could  not  act  other-
wise than  he  did,  on  account  of  the  temper  of
the  citizens.  But  let  us  not  forget  that  it  also
gained  great  political  advantages  by  this  con-
duct. Church  reform  was  the  only  means  of
putting  an  end  to  the  disorders  and  insubordi-
nation of  the  clergy,  with  which  the  civil
power  had  so  long  had  to  contend.  The
■  Nürnbergers  turned  the  insurrection  of  the
peasants  to  account  for  this  purpose.  They
urged  the  clerg}^  to  remember  their  own  critical
position  ;  the  danger  that  threatened  them  from
the  mob,  and  their  pressing  need  of  protection;
and  at  length  actually  succeeded  in  persuading
the  whole  body  to  yield  duty  and  obedience  to
the  civil  authorities.  Even  the  Commander
and  Spital-master  of  the  Teutonic  Order  sub-
mitted, with  the  consent  of  the  Franconian
House-commander,  to  the  obligation  of  paying
,  taxes. §  The  council  was  thus,  for  the  first
:  time,  master  within  its  own  walls.  The  mo-
i  nasteries  were  compelled  to  appoint  evangelical
preachers,  and  to  promise  to  admit  no  new
mem.bers  :  they  soon  dissolved,  or  were  closed.
The  jurisdiction  of  the  bishop  had  no  longer
,  an  object.  To  all  his  complaints  the  council
answered,  that  it  only  performed  the  duties  of
a  Christian  government  and  executed  the
orders  of  the  Recess  of  the  empire.  It  did
:  not  scruple  to  unite  with  the  markgrave  in  the
visitation  of  the  churches  ;  "  since  the  bishop
had  never  been  in  the  habit  of  visiting  the
i  churches."

i  It  is  obvious  how  vastly  this  course  of  affairs
must  have  tended  to  increase  the  independence
of  the  secular  povv-er,  as  well  of  the  cities  as
of  the  princes.

:  Let  us  here  call  to  mind  the  primitive  cr-
,  ganization  of  the  church  of  Germany  under
,  Charlemagne,  founded  on  the  combined  power
'  and  agency  of  the  bishops  and  counts.
I  While,  in  those  remote  ages,  the  bishops  had
!  succeeded  in  getting  into  their  own  hands  the
I  secular  authority,  at  least  in  a  part  of  the  ter-

! §  Extract  from an  apologetic  Address  of  the  Council
of' Nürnberg  in  Müilner's  MS.  Annals. "  Es  sind  aber,"
adds  the  author,  "die  Hausscomuienthurm  mit  nachfol-
genden Conditionen  zu  Bürgern  aufgenommen  worden,
],)  dass  sie  Bürgerpflicht  thun  und  hinter  die  Viertels-
meister schworen  sollten,  2,)  dass  sie  den  deutschen  Hof
mit  seinen zügehörigen Gütern diesseit des  Wassers
gelegen Verlosungen sollten,  3.)  sollen sie  von allem
i  Getränk  so  im  Hof  und  Spital  eingleght  wird,  das  Umgeld
'  zahlen,  4,)  sollen  sie  mit  dem  Holze  auf  des  Reichs  Boden
i  sich  bescheidentlich  halten." — "  The  House  Commanders
were, however,  admitted  citizens under  the following
'  conditions:  1st,  that  they  should  perform  all  civic  ser-
I  vices  and  duties,  and  swear  behind  the  Viertel  meister
I  (literally,  quarter-master,  i.  e.  magistrate  of  a  quarter  of
,  the  city);  üd,  that  they  should  sell the  Deutscher  Hof
!  (German  House),  with  the  lands  appertaining  on  this  side
!  of  the  water;  3d,  that  they  should  pay  the  duty  on  all
'  drink  brought  into  the  Hof  or  tlie  Spital  ;  4th,  that  they
]  should  beaf  themselves  modestly  as  to  the  wood  on  the
1  imperial  lands."

284

CITIES  OF  THE  OBERLAND— LÜNEBURG.

Book  IV.

litories  subject  to  their  spiritual  sway,  and  in
constituting-  themselves  sovereign  lords;  at  the
time  we  are  treating  of,  on  the  other  hand,  the
temporal  authorities  who  exercised,  though
under  another  form,  the  rights  and  privileges
formerly  held  by  the  counts,  excluded  the
bishops  from  all  participation  in  the  temporal
government  of  their  sees.

We  should  be  misled  by  appearances,  were
•we  to  regard  this  simply  as  an  extinction  of
the  ecclesiastical  principle.  For  it  cannot  be
denied  that  the  episcopal  authority  had  been
chiefly  exerted  for  the  maintenance  of  all  sorts
of  exemptions,  dues,  and  claims,  which  had
little  in  common  with  religion.  It  was,  for
example,  one  of  the  chief  causes  of  quarrel  be-
tween Bamberg  and  Nürnberg,  that  the  city,
during  the  revolt  of  the  peasants,  had  omitted
to  pay  the  small  tithes,  which  the  bishop  abso-
lutely refused  to  give  up.  The  temporal  power
could  never  have  accomplished  its  purpose,
had  it  not  taken  upon  itself  to  represent  the
truly  ecclesiastical,  i.  e.  the  religious  principle;
for  example,  to  make  better  provision  for  the
religious  instruction  of  the  parishes.  A  deputy
of  the  congregation  was  summoned  out  of  each
parish  in  Brandenburg  and  Nürnberg,  to  give
true  information  as  to  the  life  and  teaching  of
the  clergyman.  The  governments  were  deter-
mined to  put  an  end  to  the  disgraceful  state  of
the  inferior  clergy,  to  whom  no  bishop  seriously
paid  any  attention.  It  was  impossible  to  deny
that  the  higher  clergy  had  left  the  formation
and  interpretation  of  doctrine  to  the  univer-
sities ;  and  the  ofnce  of  preaching  the  Word
to  ill-paid  and  ill-governed  hirelings.  It  can
excite  no  wonder  that,  after  the  high  schools
had  so  long  acted  the  part  of  champions  of  the
clerical  claims,  one  of  them  at  length  adopted
doctrines  of  a  contrary  tendency  ;  or  that,  in
those  who  had  devoted  themselves  to  the  pro-
per service  of  the  church,  there  arose  a  disgust
at  so  contemptible  and  already  contemned  a
state  of  things,  a  feeling  of  the  peculiar  im-
portance of  their  calling,  and  a  fervent  zeal  for
reform,  springing  from  a  conviction  of  the  ex-
clusive authority  of  the  Gospel.  The  temporal
power  did  nothing  more  than  avail  itself  of  the
authority  given  to  it  by  the  Recess,  to  secure
freedom  for  the  development  of  these  endea-
vours which  w^ere  manifestly  of  a  spiritual  na-
ture. It  is  absurd  to  say  that  the  church  was
thus  become  the  slave  of  the  state.  If  by  the
church  is  understood  the  influence  of  religious
principles,  it  would  be  more  just  to  say  that  it
only  now  arose  into  power ;  for  never  were
those  principles  more  powerful  and  eflacacious,
than  in  the  times  which  immediately  followed
those  of  which  we  are  speaking.  What  was
begun  by  the  evangelical  governments,  was
carried  on  in  an  analogous  manner  by  the
catholic.  But  it  is  at  the  same  time  clear,
that  the  efficacy  of  the  evangelical  church  did
not  rest  on  wealthy  endowments,  high  rank,  or
the  pomp  of  hierarchical  ordinances ;  but  on
inward  energy,  pious  zeal,  and  the  free  culture
and  growth  of  the  intellect.  On  no  other  foun-
dation can  the  church  ever  be  established  in
Germany ;  and  this  is  the  source  of  her  strength.

The  same  events  which  had  taken  place  in
Nürnberg,  occurred  also  in  many  of  the  cities
of  the  Oberland ;  first  in  Augsburg  and  in
Ulm,  —  indeed,  meetings  of  these  three  cities
were  frequently  held  and  measures  agreed  on :
in  the  year  1528,  there  was  again  a  talk  of  a
new  alliance  between  all  the  imperial  cities ;
then  followed  Strasburg,  and  above  all,  the
towns  of  Sv/itzerland  ;  in  the  year  1528,  Berne
adopted  the  religious  changes.  But  we  must
leave  the  events  in  these  countries  for  a  subse-
quent part  of  our  work,  where  we  have  devoted
closer  attention  to  the  modifications  which  the
doctrine  underwent  in  Switzerland.

The  whole  of  Lower  Germany,  on  the  other
hand,  adhered  to  the  forms  established  under
Luther's  influence  in  Saxony.  The  slight
variations  which  they  underwent,  depended
only  on  the  difference  of  the  civil  constitution
or  the  form  of  sovereignty  in  each  country.

In  Lüneburg,  the  change  took  place  in  con-
sequence of  a  union  of  the  prince  and  the
nobles  at  the  diet  at  Scharnebeck  in  the  year
1527.  The  prelates  had  refused  to  appear  at
previous  meetings,  and  at  their  instigation  the
aged  prince,  who  had  abdicated  and  gone  to
France,  where  he  remained  true  to  the  catholic
faith,  came  back  to  oppose  the  innovations.
But  it  was  now  too  late.  At  that  diet  the
reigning  duke  and  his  subjects  promised  each
other  to  cause  the  Gospel  to  be  preached,  pure,
clear,  and  plain;  they  resolved  that  the  pre-
lates should  be  compelled  to  do  the  like  in
their  churches  and  convents,  although  they
were  permitted,  in  regard  to  ceremonies,  to  act
as  they  thought  they  could  answer  it  to  God.*
From  this  time  the  reform  gradually  spread
over  the  whole  country.  The  Chancellor
Klammer  rendered  the  same  services  here  as
Brück  had  done  in  Saxony,  Feige  in  Hessen,
Vogler  in  Anspach,  and  Spengler  in  Nürnberg.

In  East  Friesland,  the  power  of  the  count
was  still  too  new  to  enable  him  to  decide  in
affairs  so  delicate  and  so  dependent  on  the  most
intimate  convictions.  When  Count  Etzard,
who  at  first  had  been  much  impressed  by  the
Lutheran  opinions,  had  afterwards  come  to  the
determination  to  hold  fast  to  the  existing  form
of  the  church,  a  chieftain.  Junker  Ulrich  of
Dornum,  took  upon  himself  the  conduct  of  the
cause.  At  his  suggestion,  a  solemn  disputa-
tion was  held  at  Oldersum.  It  began  in  a
very  characteristic  manner.  "  Say  the  Lord's
Prayer,"  exclaimed  Henry  Arnoldi,  the  cham-
pion of  the  Lutherans;  "and  an  Ave  Maria,"
added  Prior  Laurence,  the  Dominican  who  de-
fended the  catholic  side  ;  and  the  controversy
turned  chiefly  on  the  w^orship  of  the  Virgin
Mary.  But  as  the  Lutherans  persisted  in  car-
rying on  the  argument  solely  with  passages
from  Scripture,  tl^e  Dominicans  were  left  with-
out an  answer.  Nor  was  this  all ;  desertion
soon  crept  into  their  own  ranks.  On  the  New
Year's  day  of  1527,  Resius,  a  Dominican,  as-
cended the  pulpit  in  the  church  at  Norden,  to
defend  certain  Lutheran  propositions  which  ho

*  Extract  from  tlie  ducal  edict  in  Pfeffinger,  Historie
des  Braunschweig  Lünebiirgischen  Hauses,  ii.  347  Seo
Schlegel'is  Kircliengeschichte,  ii.  50.

Chap.  V.

SILESIA.

285

had  already  advanced ;  a  single  antagonist
arose,  who,  however,  was  soon  reduced  to
silence ;  whereupon  the  Dominican,  in  sign  of
his  conversion,  laid  aside  his  cowl  in  the  very
pulpit.*  In  the  year  1527,  Lutheranism  was
the  prevailing  religion  in  almost  all  the  pa-
rishes. In  the  year  1528,  the  East  Friesland
churches  published  a  full  confession  of  faith.

Fortunately  for  Schleswig  and  Holstein,  the
bishops  of  the  dioceses  of  Schleswig  and  Lü-
bek  offered  no  strenuous  opposition  to  the  Re-
formation, while  on  the  other  hand  the  govern-
ment afforded  it  protection,  and  left  the  reve-
nues of  its  clerical  adherents  untouched.  The
transition  from  the  one  confession  to  the  other
was  here  peculiarly  easy.  As  one  of  the  four-
and-twenty  papal  vicars,  Hermann  Tast  had
been  the  first  to  preach  evangelical  doctrines  :
his  colleagues  easily  accommodated  themselves
to  the  change  ;  —  premising  always  that  their
incomes  were  to  be  secured  to  them  for  their
lives.  Many  of  the  country  priests  adopted  the
reformed  faith  without  a  struggle;  they  readily
accepted  the  articles  laid  before  them.  In  the
towns  there  was  almost  as  much  resistance
opposed  by  the  anabaptists  as  by  the  adherents
of  the  papacy.  The  immediate  disciples  of
Luther,  for  example,  Marquard  Schuldorf  of
Kiel,  lent  efficient  help  against  both  antago-
nists.f  Here,  too,  the  ecclesiastical  institu-
tions were  gradually  placed  on  the  footing  of
those  of  Saxony.

In  Silesia,  too,  as  we  have  alread}^  mention-
ed, the  evangelical  doctrine  had  made  early
and  mighty  progress.  This  country,  indeed,
differed  from  other  parts  of  Germany,  inasmuch
as  it  was  not  an  immediate  dependenc)''  of  the
empire,  and  could  therefore  ground  no  preten-
sions on  the  Recess  of  Spire.  But  the  circum-
stances were  nearly  akin  ;  its  chief  city  and  its
princes  assumed  a  scarcely  less  independent
posture  with  regard  to  the  crown  of  Bohemia,
to  which  they  belonged,  than  the  States  of  the
empire  had  done  towards  the  emperor :  every
fluctuation  of  opinion  in  central  Germany  was
here  immediately  answered  by  an  analogous
movement.  Breslau,  which  no  long  time  be-
fore, in  the  affairs  of  Podiebrad,  had  held  with
unshaken  firmness  to  the  side  of  the  pope,  now
took  the  lead  in  the  struggle  against  him.
Here,  too,  the  inclinations  of  the  council  and
citizens  had  received  an  anti-clerical  bias  from
a  great  number  of  circumstances.  They  would
no  longer  have  a  Bernardine  convent,  because
they  thought  themselves  injured  by  its  connec-
tion with  the  king's  court.  They  were  discon-
tented at  the  disgraceful  scenes  carried  on  in
the  parish  of  St.  Mary  Magdalen,  where  one
pretender  to  the  benefice  was  continually  driven
out  by  another.:]:  There  were  a  thousand
causes  of  bickering  with  the  canons  in  the  city.
The  Lutheran  tendencies,  therefore,  found  the

*  Ubbo  Emmius  Herum  Frisciarum  Hist.,  lib.  liv.  p.
839.

t  Munter's  Kirchengescliichte  von  Dänemark,  iii.  p.
584,  contains  a  laborious  collection  of  these  very  scattered
notices.

J  Schutzred  des  erbarn  Raths  und  ganzen  Gemeind  der
K.  Stadt  Breslau  bei  Schickfuss,  Neuvermehrte  Schlesische
Ch?on.,  iii.  p.  58.

ground  well  prepared.  In  the  year  1523,  the
citizens  of  Breslau  ventured  to  appoint  to  the
parish  in  question,  of  their  own  authority,  Dr.
Johann  Hess,  one  of  the  most  intimate  friends
of  Luther  and  Melanchthon,  who  had  just  come
from  Wittenberg;  upon  which  matters  took
the  same  course  here  as  elsewhere.  The  new
principles  were  triumphantly  maintained  in  a
solemn  disputation ;  the  people  were  gained
over;  the  reformers  began  by  altering  the  cere-
monies, keeping  as  close  as  possible  on  various
incidental  points  to  the  traditionary  ritual  of  the
see  of  Breslau.  The  Bernardines  had  quitted
the  city  rather  than  submit  to  be  united  with
the  Jacobites,  as  was  proposed  to  them:  the
monasteries  now  dissolved  themselves;  the
council  offered  no  impediment  to  the  monks  and
nuns  who  quitted  them  and  married.  But  it
must  not  be  imagined  that  the  Lutheran  clergy,
who  unquestionably  ow^ed  their  ascendency  to
the  council,  were  absolutely  at  its  disposal.  In
April,  1525,  Dr.  Hess  suddenly  left  off  preach-
ing, upon  which  the  council  sent  to  ask  him
the  cause.  He  answered,  that  he  saw  the
blessed  Lord  Christ  lying  before  the  church
doors,  and  that  he  could  not  walk  over  him.
What  he  meant  was  this ;— he  had  often  ex-
horted the  council  to  provide  for  the  beggars
who  filled  the  city,  and  lay  during  the  time  of
service  before  the  church  doors;  but  always
in  vain.  This  earnest  demonstration,  however,
made  an  impression.  The  really  indigent  were
separated  from  the  idle,  and  placed  in  six  dif-
ferent hospitals.  In  the  year  1526  the  first
stone  of  the  great  spital  was  laid  by  Hess  him-
self; the  opulent  citizens  gave  the  materials,
and  the  various  artisans  their  labour;  so  that
the  building  was  finished  in  a  year — a  genuine
work  of  the  new-born  evangelical  zeal.  Hess
was  strongly  and  actively  supported  by  the  town
clerk,  John  Corvinus,  who  had  taken  part  in
the  earlier  literary  movement,  and  had  taught
in  some  of  the  first  schools  of  poetry.  There
was  a  general  consent  and  co-operation :  the
councillor  declared  to  the  court  that  he  had
never  seen  a  more  obedient  comraunity.§  If
this  was  the  case  with  regard  to  those  who
had  opposed  Podiebrad,  what  was  to  be  ex-
pected from  his  adherents'?  The  son  of  hi^'-
son,  Duke  Charles,  ruled  over  Münsterberg,
01s  and  Frankenstein ;  the  son  of  his  daughter,
Duke  Frederic  II.  of  Liegnitz,  had  united  Brieg
and  Wolau  with  that  domain.  It  may  easily
be  imagined  what  opinions  they  held.  Duke
Charles  wished  to  see  the  memory  of  his  grand-
father restored  to  honour  by  Luther.  Duke
Frederic  not  only  gave  a  ready  ear  to  the  prayers
of  his  nobles  and  cities,  that  he  would  grant
them  a  freer  exercise  of  their  religion,  but  gra-
dually became  inspired  by  the  most  ardent  zeal
in  the  same  cause  ;I|  he  conceived  the  design
of  founding  another  evangelical  university,  and
had  not  the  doctrines  and  followers  of  Scwenk-

§  Die  Jahrbücher  der  Stadt  Breslau  von  Nicolaus  Pol.
Bd.  iii.  die  Jahre,  1521—1527.  Compared  to  the  veracious
account  of  this  simple  chronicler,  the  stories  of  Bukisch,
who  borrowed  from  him,  are  often  like  bad  caricatures.

|(  Des  Erlauchten,  &c.  Herzog  Friedrichs  II.  Grunder.
sach  und  Entschuldigung  auf  etlicher  Verunglimpfen  in
Schickfuss  S.  65.

286

PRUSSIA.

Book  IV.

feld  caused  troubles  in  his  dominions,  would
have  organised  one  on  a  noble  and  comprehen-
sive plan.*  Just  then  Markgrave  George  of
Brandenburg  had  acquired  Jägerndorf,  and  of
course  allowed  the  Lutheran  doctrines  free
course  there.  The  young  duke  Wenceslas
Adam  of  Teschen,  was  soon  deeply  impressed
with  the  new  opinions.  All  these  things  passed
without  any  serious'opposition,  either  from  the
spiritual  or  the  temporal  authorities.  Jacob
of  Salza,  bishop  of  Breslau,  saw  very  clearly
that  Christianity  did  not  consist  in  the  presence
or  absence  of  a  few  ceremonies  more  or  less.
The  evangelical  doctrine  found  powerful  pro-
tectors at  the  court  of  King  Louis.  King  Fer-
dinand, as  we  have  seen,  at  least  did  not  ven-
ture to  reject  the  demands  regarding  religion
which  were  laid  before  him  at  his  election  ;  and
if  he  occasionally  published  mandates  w^hich
sounded  zealously  orthodox,  he  was  not  in  a
condition  to  give  them  effect.  The  Breslauers
once  represented  to  him  in  so  lively  a  manner
the  impossibility  of  returning  to  the  ancient
practices,  that  he  no  longer  ventured  to  press
it:  "Well,  then,"  said  he,  at  length,  "only
keep  the  peace,  and  believe  as  you  think  you
can  answer  it  to  God  and  the  emperor."  j"  He
at  the  same  time  extended  to  his  own  province
the  concessions  made  to  the  empire.  Thus
was  formed  in  Silesia  the  constitution  which
for  a  century  prevailed  there,  as  well  in  the
Austrian,  as  in  all  other  dominions :  evange-
lical states  strenuously  maintained  their  poli-
tical and  religious  privileges,  and  the  govern-
ment was  compelled  to  use  leniency  aifd  tole-
ration.

By  far  the  most  remarkable  and  sweeping
change  took  place,  however,  in  Prussia.

Various  causes  had  contributed  to  prepare
this  event.

The  political  importance,  nay  in  effect  also
the  position  of  the  Teutonic  Order  relatively
to  the  Prussian  government,  had  been  annihi-
lated for  more  than  half  a  century.  At  the
peace  of  Thorn,  in  the  year  1466,  the  Order
had  been  compelled  to  cede  the  larger  half  of
its  territory,  with  all  its  richest  and  most  pow-
erful cities,  to  Poland ;  and  for  the  smaller,
which  wa§  left  in  its  possession,  to  recognise
the  king  of  that  country  as  its  feudal  lord.

If  we  inquire  how  this  came  to  pass,  we
shall  fmd  that  it  w^as  not  so  much  the  conse-
quence of  the  military  superiority  of  Poland,
which,  though  indisputable,  would  never  have
sufficed  to  produce  such  results ;  but  of  the  in-
ternal situation  of  the  country, — the  misunder-
standings between  the  order  and  the  territory
over  which  it  ruled.

Prussia  was  a  colony  which  had  gradually
risen  to  independence.  The  order,  which  was
no  longer  inspired  by  the  ancient  impulses  of
religion,  honour,  or  love  of  war,  and  came  into
the  country  only  to  govern  and  to  enjoy,  was
most  oppressive  to  the  inhabitants.  They
complained  that  they  were  allowed  no  share
in  the  administration ;  that  they  were  treated

*  Thebesii  Liegnitzische  Jahrbücher,  iii,  p.  29.
t  Nie.  Pol.  iii.  p.  52.

like  serfs,  subjected  to  acts  of  violence,  and
denied  all  right  and  justice.  The  relation
v/hich  arose  between  them  was  like  that  be-
tween the  Creoles  and  Chapetons  in  South
America;  between  the  Pullains  and  the  Fils
Arnaud  in  Jerusalem ;  in  short,  such  as  must
arise  in  every  colony  as  its  civilisation  ad-
vances. At  first  the  country  sought  to  protect
itself  by  its  great  union  of  1440;  but  as  this
was  opposed  by  the  emperor,  it  turned  to  Po-
land. It  was  the  nativö  population  of  Prussia
that  put  those  arms  into  the  hands,  of  the  King
of  Poland  against  the  grand  master,  by  means
of  which  the  former  gained  the  victory,  and
extorted  so  advantageous  a  peace  as  that  of
Thorn.  The  city  of  Danzig  had  expended
700,000  marks  in  this  cause.  In  return,  the
King  of  Poland  granted  to  the  allies,  for  the
first  time,  the  blessing  of  self-government,
which  the  knights  had  steadily  refused  them.:^

In  the  smaller  division  of  the  country  which
had  remained  in  the  possession  of  the  order,
but  which  had  also  taken  part  in  the  league
and  in  the  war,  similar  tendencies  continued,
as  may  easily  be  imagined,  to  show  them-
selves. We  find  that  the  states,  whose  busi-
ness it  was  to  grant  the  taxes,  more  than  once
refused  them.  They  demanded  the  right  of
appointing,  jointly  with  the  grand  master,  a
lieutenant  to  aci  for  him  during  his  absence ;  a
post  we  sometimes  find  occupied  by  a  burgher-
master.  In  a  scheme  for  the  defence  of  the
country  drawn  up  in  the  year  1507,  fifteen
governors,  or  chiefs  of  districts,  were  nomi-
nated ;  and  of  these  fourteen  belonged  to  the
order.§

Not  only  was  the  order  thus  checked  and
controlled  in  its  functions,  but  its  peculiar  re-
publican character  was  gradually  superseded
by  one  more  monarchical.  It  was  found  ex-
pedient to  choose  native  princes  as  grand  mas-
ters ;  for  example,  in  1498,  Frederic  of  Saxony,
and  in  1511,  Albert  of  Brandenburg;  and  in
order  to  secure  to  them  a  state  and  maintenance
suited  to  their  rank,  whole  commanderies  were
confiscated.  These  princes  entrusted  the  pub-
lic affairs  to  chancellors  who  did  not  even  be-
long to  the  order,  and  to  their  own  particular
councillors,  after  the  manner  of  the  German
courts.  Their  position  became  more  and  more
like  that  of  hereditary  rulers,  in  consequence
of  the  necessity  they  lay  under  of  granting  a
great  degree  of  independence  to  their  subordi-
nates out  of  the  country — both  the  Master  in
Livonia,  and  the  Teutonic  Master  {Deutsch-
meister) ;  in  fact,  of  emancipating  the  former
from  all  important  obligations  and  services.  ||
In  the  place  of  the  wide  general  relations  of
the  order,  arose  narrow  territorial  interests.

J  His  very  first  promise  is,  "  ut  in  mutatione  principum
commutatam  etiam  aut  sublatam  deprehenderent  oppres-
sionem."  Litteree  Casiniiri  Regis,  in  Dlugoss  Historia
Pol.,  ii.  p.  138. See  Voigt  Preuss.  Gesch.,  viii.  p.  378.

§  Baczko  Preussische  Gesch  iv.  p.  142.

|(  Albert  mentions  (Schütz  Hist.  Rer.  Pruss.,  p.  331),
"  was  er  sich  gegen  den  beiden  Meistern  verschreiben  und
obligiren  müssen  :  damit  sie  sich  denn  ganz  und  gar  auS'
dem  Gehorsam  gezogen," — "  to  what  he  must  subscribe
and  bind  himself  towards  both  Masters ;  wherewith
they  then  withdrew  themselves  entirely  from  their  obe-
dience."

Chap.  V.

PRUSSIA.

287

The  only  question  now  was,  —  one  which
involved  a  remote  and  permanent  change  —
whether  they  should  submit  to  the  peace  of
Thorn,  or  not.  The  last  grand  masters  refused
to  do  homage  as  their  immediate  predecessors
had  done ;  they  demanded  a  revision  of  the
terms  of  the  peace,  "  according  to  natiiral  and
Christian  laws ;"  they  made  incessant  claims
on  the  assistance  of  the  empire  (especially  of
the  knightly  body),  which  was  afforded  to  this
possession  of  Prussia.  At  length,  in  the  year
1519,  the  grand  master  (Slarkgrave  Albert  of
Brandenburg)  had  once-  more  recourse  to  arms.
But  what  had  been  injurious  to  his  predeces-
sors, proved  disadvantageous  to  him.  The
cities  and  districts  which  had  fallen  off  from
the  order,  no  longer  lent  their  aid  to  the  sup-
port of  its  power;  it  was  indeed  to  the  cities
of  Danzig  and  Elbingen,  and  to  the  families
of  the  lords  of  the  league,  that  the  public
opinion  of  that  time  attributed  the  breach  of
the  peace ;  their  intention  was  to  strip  the
order  altogether  of  its  territory  and  subjects;*
it  was  they  who  urged  on  the  war  with  the
greatest  energy  and  success.  From  Germany,
on  the  other  hand,  the  order  received  no  effi-
cient help.  The  grand  master  was  again  com-
pelled to  cede  eleven  towns  with  their  territo-
ries, and  to  consent  to  a  truce  for  four  years,
during  which  affairs  were  to  be  definitely  ar-
ranged, under  the  mediation  of  the  Emperor
and  the  King  of  Hungary.

Albert  went  to  Germany,  in  order  once  m.ore
to  try  in  person  what  he  could  obtain  from  the
states  and  nobles  of  the  empire.  Had  victory
declared  on  the  side  of  Sickingen,  with  whom
he  had  long  been  connected,  Prussia  might
have  reckoned  on  assistance.  But  Sickingen
fell ;  the  knights  of  the  empire  suffered  great
losses ;  they  were  unable  to  maintain  their  in-
dependence at  home,  much  less  to  attempt  en-
terprises abroad.  The  Council  of  .Regenc}^
too,  on  which  some  of  its  hopes  were  placed,
was  overthrown.  The  emperor  was  so  far  from
holding  out  any  expectation  of  assistance,  that
he  rather  favoured  the  claims  of  the  Jagellons.
The  promised  mediation  was  not  even  attempt-
ed. The  grand  master  had  nothing  left  but
either  to  do  homage  agreeably  to  the  treaty
of  Thorn,  or  to  abdicate.  And  indeed  the  ab-
dication was  seriously  discussed.  It  might
either  take  place  according  to  the  views  of  the
order,  in  which  case  Duke  Erich  of  Brunswick
was  suggested  as  successor ;  or  to  those  of  the
country  and  of  Poland,  in  which  case  it  would
have  been  in  favour  of  Sigismund :  the  king
sent  an  ambassador  to  Nürnberg  in  1524,  in
the  hope  of  inducing  the  grand  master  to  con-
sent to  this  latter  scheme. |

The  Order  and  its  government  in  Prussia,
were  doubtless  the  most  singular  product  of
the  hierarchical  and  chivalrous  spirit  of  the
preceding  centuries  in  the  German  nation ;  but
to  what  had  it  sunk  ! The  greater  part  of  its

*  "  Eyn  newes  Geticht  von  dem  negstvorgangenen
Krieg  zu  Proiissen."  Beitrüge  zur  Kunde  Preussens  ßd,,
ii.  p.  287.

t  Memorial  of  the  Grand  Master  Albert,  given  by  Fa-
ber, Beitr.  zur  Kund  Preussens,  iv.  83.

territory  gone ;  in  what  remained,  powerful  and
growing  states  ;  the  internal  unity  in  which  its
strength  lay,  broken  ;  its  tie  to  the  mother
country  relaxed  and  feeble  ; — submission  was
become  inevitable — its  time  was  over.  It  was
however  not  easy  at  present  to  see  what  could
or  ought  to  be  done  ;  there  existed  no  clue  by
which  to  escape  from  the  labyrinth  of  such
difficult  contingencies.  Such  were  the  circum-
stances under  which  the  nev/  religious  doctrine
appeared  in  the  country.  In  no  part  of  the
world  was  it  more  wanted— -in  none  more  wel-
come. People  saw  that  the  institution,  so  long
revered  as  intrinsically  religious,  by  no  means
stood  in  that  profound  and  inward  relation  to
the  idea,  or  the  original  spirit  of  Christianity,
which  had  been  presumed.  The  states  seized
with  joy  a  doctrine  which  justified  their  old
opposition,  on  higher  grounds.  The  bishops,
Vvho  were  elsewhere  alm^ost  universally  its  op-
ponents, lent  a  glad  ear  to  it:  under  the  direc-
tion of  the  bishop  of  Samland,  fasts  were
abolished,  mass  said  in  German,  the  ceremonies
altered,  and  the  monasteries  cleared. :[:  Even
the  members  of  the  Order  could  not  withstand
the  universal  current  of  opinion.  They  were
seen  attending  the  sermons  of  the  Lutheran
preachers  ;  many  laid  aside  their  cro'^s  ;  some
determined  to  marry.  Their  numxber  was  indeed
no  longer  great,  and  at  last  only  five  remained
faithful  to  the  institution.  At  length  the  sermons
of  Oslander,  the  society  of  men  like  Planitz,
and  the  private  conversation  he  held  with  Lu-
ther, imbued  the  mind  of  the  grand  master
himself(jwith  the  evangelical  opinions  prevalent
in  Saxony  and  in  Nürnberg.  On  the  one
hand,  he  was  convinced  that  his  profession  had
not  the  merit  which  had  been  imputed  to  it,
nor  even  conformity  with  the  word  of  God.  On
the  other,  people  represented  to  him  that  he
could  not  abdicate,  since  he  had  duties  to  per-
form to  the  country  from  which  he  could  not
so  lightly  v;ithdraw  himself.  The  country  re-
quired him  to  la}'  to  heart  its  desolation  and  its
weakness,  and  to  procure  for  it  a  lasting  peace;
to  grant  it  preachers  of  the  pure  word  of  God,
and  to  abolish  v/hatever  was  repugnant  to  that;
most  probably  including,  in  that  expression,  the
vow  of  the  Order.§  Albert,  though  he  still
adhered  to  it,  had  doubtless  in  his  heart  deter-
mined on  the  course  he  meant  to  pursue,  when
he  set  on  foot  new  negotiations  with  Poland,

In  Poland  the  diet  of  Petricau  had  just  then
come  to  the  resolution  that  the  grand  master
should  either  do  homage  or  be  driven  out  of
Prussia,  together  with  his  order.  1|

I  How  Rome  stirred  n^aiiist  and  thought  to  overthrow
it.  Voigt  Preusäische  Geschicte,  ix.  pp.  7.33,  737.  That
he  subscribed  himself  only,  by  the  grace  of  God,  without
mentioning  the  apostolic  see,  was  there  regarded  as  apos-
tacy.  This  had,  too,  an  influence  on  the  safety  of  the
grand  master,  who  was  moreover  attacked  by  the  Teu-
tonic master.

§  "  Sind  darum  aus  geistlichem  Suchen  undBegern  der-
selben Landschaft  zw  diefer  Verenderung  und  Vertrag
mit  der  Krön  Polen  kommen." — "  Are  thereupon  come  to
this  alteration  and  agreement  with  the  crown  of  Poland,
in  consequence  of  the  siiiritual  request  and  desire  of  that
country."  Albert's  answer  to  the  proposals  of  Griifendorf,
the  Saxon  ambassador. W.  A.

II  Literte  regisB  ad  sedem  apostolicam:  "  alioquin  haec
tragoedia  nullum  unquaai  finera  habere  potuisset,  praeser-

288

PRUSSIA.

BöoE  IV.

It  was  therefore  very  fortunate  for  Markgrave
Albert  that  in  Silesia,  which  in  all  the  previous
troubles  had  adhered  to  the  king,  he  had  two
of  his  nearest  relations  ;  his  brother,  Mark-
grave  George,  and  his  brother-in-law,  Frederic
of  Liegnitz — both  like  himself,  nephews  of  the
king — who  undertook  once  more  to  conciliate
Sigismund,  and  to  procure  for  Albert  favourable
conditions.

The  king  had  gone  to  Cracow  with  a  com-
mittee of  the  diet.  Here  the  tvv^o  princes,  both,
as  we  are  aware,  zealous  partisans  of  the  evan-
gelical faith,  went  to  meet  him-:  they  adopted
the  principles  laid  down  by  the  diet ;  but  at
the  same  time  remarked  that  no  arrangement
with  the  Order  would  be  of  any  avail,  since  the
government  was  in  the  hands  of  so  many  that
no  reliance  could  be  placed  on  its  actions.
They  proposed  to  the  king  that  the  grand
master  should  be  declared  hereditary  duke  of
Prussia.*

The  king  said,  he  would  take  into  considera-
tion what  was  to  be  done,  and  what  Albert's
kinsmen  required  of  him."!"  He  acquiesced
with  joy.

When  the  affair  was  brought  before  the  royal
council  erf"  Poland,  some  voices  indeed  were
raised  against  it  on  religious  grounds;  but  to
these,  others  replied,  that  no  injury  was  in-
flicted on  Catholicism,  since  the  Order  had
already  gone  over  to  Lutheranism,  and  held
nothing  in  greater  abhorrence  than  the  name
of  the  pope;:]:  they  ought  rather  to  thank  God
that  it  had  fallen  of  itself.  The  diet  decided
in  favour  of  the  king's  project.

Meanwhile,  negotiations  were  carried  on  in
Beuthen,  whither  plenipotentiaries  of  the  Order
and  of  the  States  had  repaired  to  meet  the
Markgrave.  The  envoys  of  the  Order,  who
were  unquestionably  the  most  important,  spoke
first.  They  entirely  approved  the  proposition,
and  only  urged  their  claim  to  certain  advan-
tages due  to  them  from  Poland.  The  dele-
gates of  the  States  were  chiefly  solicitous  lest
they  should  be  attacked  by  the  remnant  of  the
order  in  Germany,  and  by  the  empire,  and  not
sufficiently  defended  by  Poland.  They  de-
manded of  their  new  sovereign  a  promise  that
he  v/ould  rather  increase  than  diminish  their
privileges,  and  appoint  no  foreigner  to  a  public
office:  though  he  did  not  accede  to  the  latter
stipulation,  they  were  on  the  whole  satisfied

tim  curn  subditi  tiiei  omnes  a  me  exigerent  mofiis  oinni-
bus  neque  ab  hoc  institnto  dimoveri  poTuerint  in  con-
ventu  generali  regni  niei  novissimo,  vel  cn^rendum  tandem
magistrnm  Prust^ise  ad  prrestandam  oh^dientiani  et  oma-
?rium  mihi  et  regno  nieo  debitum  vel  ilium  ac  ordinem  ex
terris  illis  exturbandum."

•  *"LiterER  Andres  Critii  Episcopii  Presmiliensis  ad
Joannen!  Antonium  Piileonein  (he  should  be  called  Bur-
gonem,  for  J.  A.  v.  Bariro  was  then  niancio  in  Hungary),
lib.  Bar.  et  nunciuin  apnstolicum.  Principes  ingenue  e
vestigio  et  citra  ullns  ambajres  id  quod  attulerant  propo-
suerant."  —  Samuelis  JVakielski  Miechovia  sive  Promtua-
rium,  ^'c,  p.  609.

t  Litsrcs  regis:  "condictis  conditionibns  quffi  pro  tem-
pore fieri  pituerant,  et  quales  mutua  nostra  necessitudo
postulavit."

J  "Lnteranismum  apud  ordinem  ipsum  sacrnsanctum,
Romanam  vero  ecclesiam  et  ejus  ritus  execrabiles  esse
(nihil  apud  eum  nomine  pontificis  contemptibilius  esse),
plerosque  comraendatores  et  sacrificos  nubere,"  &;c.  &;c.

with  his  declarations. §  [The  envoys  of  the
Order,  too,  were  content,  on  the  king  consent-
ing to  restore  the  fortified  places  taken  from  it
in  the  last  war,  and  granting  a  small  revenue
for  the  new  princes.

All  parties  thus  easily  and  gladly  combined
to  bring  about  this  great  change.  The  King
of  Poland  saw  his  suzerainty  at  length  will-
ingly acknowledged,  and  the  descendants  of
his  sister  established  within  his  extended  fron-
tiers. The  country  acquired  the  independence
of  foreign  influence  it  had  so  long  aspired  after.
The  order,  which  had  secularised  itself,  thus
secured  protection;  it  associated  itself  with  the
natives  of  the  country  whom  it  had  hitherto  op-
posed. Markgrave  Albert's  aim,  in  short,  was
not  alone  to  found  a  hereditary  sovereignty,  he
thought  he  sefved  his  country  by  securing  for
it  peace,  and  the  free  difl"usion  of  evangelical
opinions.

On  the  10th  of  April,  1525,  the  solemn  in-
feudarion  took  place  at  the  Ring  at  Cracow.
The  king,  in  his  sacerdotal  ornaments,  sur-
rounded by  his  bishoj)S,  delivered  to  the  new
duke,  by  the  symbol  of  the  banner  (v*'hich
Markgrave  George  also  grasped,  in  sign  that
the  investiture  extended  to  the  whole  line  of
Brandenbursr),  '•  the  whole  land  in  Prussia
which  had  been  held  by  the  Order."  Albert
took  the  oath  of  homage  and  allegiance  in  a
formula  in  which  no  mention  was  made  of  the
saints.

At  his  entrance  into  Königsberg,  he  was
greeted  by  an  evangelical  preacher  with  a  reli-
gious discourse.  He  was  received  with  all  the
festivities  and  honours  which  could  be  offered
to  an  hereditary  prince ;  the  bells  were  rung,
the  houses  hung  with  tapestry,  and  the  roads
strewed  with  flowers.

The  States,  of  course,  did  not  hesitate  to  ap-
prove the  negotiations  of  their  delegates  ;  they
confirmedthe  treaty  of  Cracow,  and  took  the
oath  of  allegiance.  The  original  document,  by
which  Albert  had  confirmed  "  the  privileges,
franchises,  and  praiseworthy  customs"  of  the
country,  was  delivered  into  the  keeping  of  the
magistrate  of  the  Altstadt  of  Königsberg.  In
the  place  of  the  great  officers  of  the  Order  now
appeared  Marshal,  Landhofmeister,  Oberburg-
graf,||  and.  Chancellor;  all  which  officers  were
in  future  to  be  filled  by  natives.  The  courts
of  justice  were  newly  constituted  with  the  ad-
vjcü  and  assistance  of  the  nobles.

Only  one  of  the  knights  of  the  order  oflered
any  persevering  resistance ;  Erich  of  Bruns-
wick, in  whose  favour  Albert  had  thought  of
resigning,  held  out  in  Memel ;  he  Vv^as  after-
wards provided  for  by  means  of  a  small  pen-
sion.

The  religious establishments  were  formed

§  The  negotiations  are  to  be  found  in  the  last  pages  of
Schütz.  The  duke  declared  to  the  deputies  of  the  states,
who  were  in  fact  not  b-pecially  commissioned  for  that]iur-
pose,  "er werde  ihnen  dennaassen  beweisliche  Urkunden
mitgeben,  dass  sie  den  Ihren  entsehuldigt  seyn  sollten,"—
"  that  he  would  give  them  such  authentic  documents  tbat
they  should  stand  excused  to  their  constituents."  This
was  shown  immediately  on  the  duke's  return.

II  Titles  of  offices  to  which  we  have  none  correspond
ing.— Transl.

Chap.  V.

PRUSSIA.

2ö9

without  difficulty :  the  bishops  themselves,  as
we  have  said,  were  in  their  favour.  At  the
very  first  assembly.  Bishop  Polenz  of  Samland
abdicated  the  temporal  part  of  his  authority,
alleging  that  the  service  of  the  Gospel  alone
belonged  to  a  bishop,  not  the  enjoyment  of
worldly  honours  ;  he  gave  his  power  into  the
hands  of  the  duke,  who  took  the  states  to  wit-
ness this  voluntary  tradition.  This  example
was  soon  followed  by  Bishop  Erhard  Quels  of
Pomesania.  Their  spiritual  authority  Avas  left
entire — the  more  so,  since  now,  as  before,  they
administered  it  by  officials.*  They  introduced
a  liturgy  in  which  they  still  kept  as  close  as
possible  to  traditional  forms :  the  convents
were  turned  into  hospitals :  the  efforts  to  spread
Christianity  in  the  lowest  regions  of  society
and  those  hitherto  the  least  touched  by  its  in-
fluence, here  found  a  wide  sphere  of  action
among  the  Slavonian  population,  which  still
occupied  a  great  portion  of  the  land  ;  func-
tionaries called  Tolken,  i.  e.  interpreters,  were
attached  to  the  parish  priests,  and  repeated
every  sentence  of  the  sermon  in  the  ancient
language  of  Prussia. f  In  order  to  keep  the
clergy  themselves  in  the  right  v/ay,  the  Mark-
grave  caused  the  Postilies^  to  be  brought
twice  a  year  from  Wittenberg,  two  hundred
of  each  at  a  time.  Lucas  Cranach  had  a
general  commission  to  send  him  all  the  good
-^ and  valuable  books  that  appeared. §

Duke  Albert's  marriage  with  Dorothea,
Princess  of  Denmark,  which  took  place  in  the
year  1526,  appears  like  the  consummation  and
bond  of  all  these  things.  Alliances  cemented
by  this  kind  of  uniformity  of  opinion  are  now
almost  universal  among  the  crowned  heads  of
Europe.  The  duchess  graduallj'  gave  evidence
of  as  strong  evangelical  convictions,  "as  firm
a  faith  and  trust  in  our  Saviour,"  as  her  hus-
band. Nor  was  she  less  fitted  to  render  do-
mestic life  happy.  He  dwells  with  untired
delight  on  her  noble  and  amiable  qualities ;
and  adds  that,  had  she  been  a  poor  serving
girl,  she  could  not  have  borne  herself  with
more  lowliness  and  truth,  vrith  more  unchang-
ing love,  to  him  unworthy, !|  Her  brother
Christian,  afterwards  King  of  Denmark,  hav-
ing married  a  princess  of  Lauenburg,  out  of
which  house  Gustavus  Vasa  of  Sweden  after-
wards took  his  wife,  all  these  new  evangelical
powers  of  the  North  were  united  by  the  closest
bonds.

Let  us  observe  the  general  direction  of  the
policy  of  the  North,  of  which  these  events
formed  the  consummation.  In  the  year  1515,
Maximilian  had  thought  to  connect  all  the
northern  territories  of  Slavonic  and  Germanic
tongue,  in  one  great  alliance,  of  which  he  was
to  be  the  head.  Poland  severed  itself  first ;
then  Christiern  II.  was  driven  out  of  Denmark
and  Sweden;  and  now  Albert,  who  had  hith-

*  Bock  Leben  Albrechts,  i.  p.  187.  '

t  Hartknoch  Preussische  Kirchengeschichtert*.  277.

X  A  hook  containing  expository  sermons  on  the  Gospels
and  Epistles.— Transl.

§  Letter  to  Cranach,  and  his  account,  inserted  by  Voigt
iu  the  Beiträgen  zur  Kunde  Preussens,  iii.  p.  246.

II  Faber  Ciniges  lider  die  Herzogin  Dorothea.  Beitr.  z.
IC  Preus.«ens,  iii,  p.  126.

3'  '  z

erto  remained  attached  to  Christiern,  formed
an  alliance  of  amity  and  marriage  with  the
new  king.  Erich  of  Brunswick  was  removed
from  Memel,  because  he  persisted  in  keeping
up  an  intercourse  with  Severin  Norby,  the
admiral  of  Christiern.^  The  position  which
Albert  acquired  at  his  first  reception  among  the
northern  powers,  was  extremely  strong  and
advantageous.

The  evangelical  princes  of  Germany  also
afforded  him  support  from  another  side.

Even  at  the  time  when  Elector  John  of
Saxony,  and  his  neighbouring  co-religionists
were  negotiating  about  the  meeting  at  Magde-
burg, he  sent  to  Prussia  to  propose  to  the  new
duke,  that  if  he  were  aggrieved  in  any  thing
relating  to  the  evangelical  faith,  he  would  stand
by  him  steadfastly.  This  message  was  most
welcome  to  the  duke.  He  sent  the  Bishop  of
Pomesania,  who  had  the  general  conduct  of  his
foreign  affairs,  and  had  arranged  the  relations
with  Poland  and  Denmark,  to  Breslau,  in  1526,
where  he  was  met 'by  Hans  von  Minkwitz  on
the  part  of  Saxony.  Here  a  formal  agreement
was  concluded.**  The  duke  had  observed  that
Prussia  was  so  exhausted  in  the  last  war,  that
he  could  not  engage  to  furnish  more  than  a
hundred  armed  horsemen.  Elector  John  was
satisfied  and  promised  the  duke  an  equal  num-
ber in  case  he  was  attacked.  The  party  send-
ing assistance  was  to  pay  the  troops  and  bear
the  losses;  the  party  receiving  it,  to  provide
them  with  necessaries.  In  December,  1526,
the  ratification  arrived  at  Weimar.  The  duke
and  his  bishop  had  a  design  of  extending  this
alliance  to  the  states  of  Silesia,  the  Markgrave
George  of  Jägerndorf,  the  Duke  of  Liegnitz,
and  the  city  of  Breslau  :|-[-  some  deliberations
had  already  taken  place  about  a  common  and
more  intimate  concert  with  Denmark,  for  which
the  elector  evinced  perfect  readiness.

It  has  often  been  said,  and  with  perfect
truth,  that  the  empire  sustained  a  great  loss  by
the  act  of  homage  to  Poland.  But  this  was
inevitable.  The  Polish  diet  had  taken  the  de-
termination to  proceed  no  further  on  a  middle
course,  and,  if  necessary,  to  decide  the  matter
by  force;  the  country  was  wholly  incapable
of  resistance,  and  no  help  was  to  be  expected
from  the  empire.  Had  the  Order  not  yielded,
it  would  have  been  driven  out  of  Königsberg,
as  it  had  been  out  of  Danzig ;  the  territory
would  have  become  a  Polish  province,  like  the
kingdom  of  Prussia.  Under  these  circum-
stances, it  is  unquestionably  to  be  regarded  as
one  of  the  most  fortunate  events  for  the  main-
tenance of  the  Germanic  principle  in  those
countries,  that  a  duchy — an  hereditary  German
sovereignty  —  was  erected.  If  we  compare
this  province  v/ith  Livonia,  w^e  see  that  though
there,  too,  the  Reformation  had  penetrated,
though  the  powerful  Grand Master  Pletten-

ir  See  Albert's  Instruction,  18th  April  J525,  Beitr.  z.  K.
Pr.,  iv.  p.  395,  and  an  essay  by  Faber,  vi.  p.  539.

**  PiCcess  of  Königsberg,  5th  July  1526. W.  A.

•ft  Letter  from  Minkwitz,  Leipzig,  Sunday  after  St.
Francis's  day;  "Trost,  es  soll  kein  Mangel  haben." —
"Take  comfort,  there  shall  be  no  want."  I  do  not  find,
hov/ever,  that  any  resolution  was  come  to.  The  Land-
grave of  Hessen,  too,  thought  the  mutual  obligations  too
insignificaut.

290

CONCLUDING  REMARKS.

Book  IV.

berg,  who  was  now  absolutely  independent,
protected  it,  and  found  means  siill  to  keep  the
Order  in  existence  for  a  time, — it  was  but  for
a  time  ;  the  country  was  afterwards  secularised
like  the  rest,  but  fell  under  a  foreign  yoke,  and
aoon  lost  its  sympathy  with  the  German  nation.
.Nor  did  royal  Prussia  reap  any  advantage  from
having  no  prince  at  its  head  ;  the  influence  of
Poland  became  overwhelming,  and  the  countrj"
had  to  endure  indescribable  oppressions,  both
of  a  political  and  religious  kind.  The  progress
of  German  civilisation  was  not  only  arrested,
but  forced  back.  On  the  other  hand,  ducal
Prussia  gradually  became  completely  German;
by  its  family  alliances  with  a  powerful  German
house,  it  remained  in  strict  and  indissoluble
political  connection  with  the  great  fatherland.
Amidst  all  the  distraction  of  the  theological
and  literary  controversies  which  followed  in
the  train  of  the  Reformation,  here  was  an  in-
dependent centre  of  German  culture,  from
which  the  grandest  developments  of  German
nationality  have  sprung.

We  cannot  contemplate  Germany  at  this
moment,  without  a  deep  sense  of  the  grandeur
of  her  character  and  position.

Belgium  and  the  Netherlands,  Bohemia  and
the  neighbouring  countries,  might  once  more
be  reckoned  as  parts  of  the  German  empire.
German  arms  had  wrested  Italy  from  the  influ-
ence of  France,  as  well  as  from  that  of  Swit-
zerland, Avhich  had  now  severed  itself  from  the
empire :  they  had  restored  the  name  of  the
empire  in  Italy,  and  in  its  ancient  metropolis:
more  than  once  they  had  m.ade  threatening  ad-
vances from  the  south  and  east  into  France ;
and  in  the  west,  they  had  aided  the  Spaniards
to  reconquer  the  lost  border  fortresses,  and  to
vanquish  the  iMoors  of  Valencia.  They  had
just  gained  possession  of  Hungary.  \Vith  the
assistance  of  the  German  maritime  cities,  they
had  put  the  two  northern  monarchs  in  posses-
sion of  their  crowns.  If  Poland  had  reaped
the  advantage,  she  was  indebted  for  it  solely
to  the  instigation  and  the  assistance  of  the
German  provinces,  which  sufficiently  showed
that  this  was  a  state  of  things  that  could  not
last.  In  Livonia,  the  attacks  of  the  Russians
were  repulsed  in  successive  engagements,  and
in  the  year  1522,  peace  was  obtained  on  very
advantageous  terms.

And  all  this  had  been  accomplished  in  the
absence  of  any  vigorous  central  government, —
amid  the  storms  of  the  most  violent  internal
dissension.  But  these  very  storms  were  the
symptoms  of  a  far  wider  tendency — one  w^hich
was  destined  to  embrace  the  world.  It  was
reserved  for  the  mind  of  Germany  to  sever  the
intrinsic  truth  of  Christianity  from  the  acci-
dental forms  which,  in  later  ages,  had  grown
around  it  under  the  influences  of  papacy,  and
with  equal  moderation  and  firmness  to  secure
to  it  a  legal  adoption  in  its  extensive  territories.
In  one  electorate,  tw'o  or  three  duchies,  the
largest  landgravate,  the  largest  county  of  the
empire,  one  or  two  markgravates,  and  a  great
number  of  cities,  the  ne\y  doctrine  had  become
predominant,  and  had  pervaded  the  populations
with  whose  character  and  turn  of  mind  it  had

a  natural  affinity.  In  order  to  bring  vividly
before  our  minds  the  original  views  of  a  posi-
tive and  negative  kind,  we  should  compare  the
written  confessions' of  faith  which  h-id  now
been  published  at  so  many  places;  the  articles
of  the  Visitation  of  Saxony  and  Hessen,  and
still  more  those  of  Brandenburg  and  Niirnberg;
the  Confession  of  East  Friesland  ;  the  Instruc-
tions to  the  preachers  of  Schleswig-Holstein;
the  Apologies  of  the  States  of  Silesia ;  the
Synodal  Constitutions  of  Prussia.  In  all  these
documents  we  perceive  the  same  feeling  of  an
obligatory  return  from  the  accidental  to  the
essential,;  a  resistless  conviction,  not  3'et  indeed
defined  in  articles  of  faith,  but  assured  of  its
truth.  It  is  manifest  that  since  the  development
of  these  opinions  took  place  in  narrow  territo-
ries, the  infant  church  could  not  enter  into  the
most  distant  rivalry  as  to  external  grandeur  and
splendour  with  the  established  hierarchy,  in
which  was  expressed  the  unity  of  an  aggregate
of  great  kingdoms :  its  essence  and  its  w  orth
consisted  in  its  intellectual  depth  and  strength.
The  office  it  had  taken  on  itself  was  that  of
bi-inging  the  principles  of  Christianity  home
to  the  minds  of  the  common  people;  of  ex-
pounding its  meaning  and  spirit,  freed  from  all
disguises  of  foreign  forms  and  rites;  that  so  it
might  at  length  be  brought  home  to  the  con-
sciousness of  all  the  nations  of  the  earth.  Al-
ready was  the  new  doctrine  proclaimed  in  almost
every  tongue.  We  mentioned  the  interpreters
of  the  Prussian  clergy  :  in  Breslau  Doctor  Hess
caused  the  Gospel  to  be  read  in  Slavonic ;  Lu-
ther's disciples  preached  it  in  Denmark  and
Sweden ;  one  of  the  first  names  inscribed  at
the  university  of  Marburg,  was  the  founder  of
the  Scottish  church  ;  in  1527,  a  society  of  men
inclined  to  Lutheran  opinions  was  founded  in
Corpus  Christi  College,  Oxford,  which  may
be  regarded  as  the  seminary  of  the  new  opin-
ions.* IMeanwhJle,  from  the  year  1528,  an
immediate  effect  had  been  produced  on  Geneva
and  the  Roman  world.  In  Italy,  the  doctrine
pervaded  the  old  literary  associations;  in  Spain,
it  soon  laid  hold  of  the  Franciscans  ;  in  France,
it  found  a  powerful  patroness  in  the  Queen  of
Navarre.  Luther,  who  was  a  stranger  to  am-
bition— who  had  not  even  a  genuine  zeal  for
proselyting,!  and  expected  every  thing  from
the  silent  inborn  force  of  conviction — yet  re-
marked that  his  efforts  to  restore  the  preaching
of  the  Gospel  would  some  time  or  other  form
the  subject  of  a  church  history.  But  at  present
he  was  occupied  with  higher  hopes.  "It  will
draw^  the  cedars  of  Lebanon  to  itself,"  said  he.
He  applied  to  it  the  words  of  Isaiah,:t:  "I  will
say  to  the  North  give  up,  and  to  the  South
keep  not  back ;  bring  my  ^ons  from  far,  and
my  daughters  from  the  end  of  the  earth."

*  Fiddes,  Wolsey,  p.  416.

t  See  liis  letter  to  the  people  of  Erfurt,  in  de  W.,  iii.  p.
227.  "  Wer  uns  nicht  hören  will,  von  dem  sind  wir  leicht
und  bald  geschieden."—"  He  who  will  not  hear  us,  from
him  are  we  easily  and  quickly  departed."

i  "  Eine  schone  herrliche  und  tröstliche  Vorrede  D.  31.
L.  auf  das  Büchlin  der  gottseligen  Fürstin  F.  ürsulen
Herzogin  zu  Miinsterberg."— "Afair,  noble,  and  comfort-
able preface  of  Dr.  Martin  Luther  to  the  little  book  of  the
godly  princess  the  Lady  Ursula,  Duchess  of  Münsterberg."
Allenb.,  iv.  p.  416.

BOOK  V.

FORMATION  OF  A  CATHOLIC  MAJORITY.
1527—1530.

RETROSPECT.

In  the  introduction  to  this  history,  vre  en-
deavoured to  lay  before  our  readers  a  view  of
the  earher  fortunes  of  the  German  nation,  espe-
cially in  reference  to  the  struggle  between  the
spiritual  and  temporal  powers. We  observed
how  the  papacy  not  only  was  victorious  in  this
struggle,  but  raised  itself  to  the  condition  of  a  !
substantial  power  in  the  Germanic  empire. —  |
a  power  indeed  of  the  first  order. We  saw.  I
however,  that,  just  as  it  had  placed  itself  on  a  '
footing  of  amity,  and  concluded  an  alliance  \
with  the  vanquished  imperial  power,  the  em-  j
pi  re  l)ecame  ungovernable,  fell  into  confusion  j
and  anarchy  at  home,  and  from  year  to  year  j
lost  its  consideration  abroad  :  till  at  length  the  !
spirit  of  the  nation,  condemned  to  inactivity,  j
expressed  itself  only  in  a  general  conviction
that  such  a  state  of  things  was  untenable  and
fatal.

In  our  first  book  we  traced  the  earnest  efforts
made  by  the  nation  in  the  latter  part  of  the
15th  and  the  beginning  of  the  16th  century,  j
to  remedy  the  evils  under  which  it  suffered.  ;
Its  first endeavours  were directed towards  !
temporal  abuses. The  project  was  conceived  I
of  creating  a  power  in  the  empire,  resting  at  I
once  on  the  privileges  of  the emperor  and  I
those  of  the  States,  but  more  especially  founded  [
on  the  co-operation  of  the  latter  in  the.  govern-  !
ment ;  not  with  a  view  of  eff'ecting  a  centrali-  j
§ütion  in  the  sense  of  modern  times,  but  only  !
as  a  means  of  satisfying  the  most  pressing
wantS; — the  establishment  of  peace  and  law,
and the defence  of  the country  against  its
neighbours. But  the  end  was  not  attained.
Certain  constitutional  forms,  which  were  of
more  value  and  importance  to  later  times  than
to  those  which  gave  them  birth,  vrere  indeed
established  ;  but  we  have  seen  how  small  was
their  practical efficacy. The consequence
rather  was,  that  the  abortive  attempt  to  intro-
duce such  radical  changes  threw  the  nation
into  universal  confusion. As  men  felt  only
the  restraints  which  pressed  upon  themselves,
but  were  ignorant  of  the  benefits  of  pubhc
order,  the  old  spirit  of  insubordination  and  pri-
vate vengeance  revived ;  with  the  diff"erence,
however, that it  was  now  mingled  with  a
lively  feeling  for  the  common  weal,  and  ani-
mated by  a  disgust  at  the  reigning  abuses,
bordering  on  rage.

Such  was  the  temper  of  the  nation,  when
(as  we  observed  in  our  second  book),  after  the
failure  of  its  attempts  to  reform  its  secular

affairs,  it  seized  on  the  affairs  of  the  Church,
and  on  the  functions  of  the  papacy,  which
possessed  so  large  a  portion  of  political  power
in  the  empire.  Here,  however,  this  disposi-
tion of  the  national  mind  became  blended
with  still  more  extensive  movements  of  public
opinion.  Though  the  papacy  was  still  intent
upon  a  more  rigorous  and  minute  development
of  its  dogmas  and  its  rites,  and  a  more  strerm-
ous  assertion  of  them,  tendencies  of  a  scien-
tific kind  which  were  opposed  to  the  reigning
system  of  the  schools,  and  longings  of  the  re-
ligious spirit  which  found  no  satisfaction  in
the  ritual  observance  of  the  prescribed  ordi-
nances, were  at  work  within  its  own  bosom.
The  wonderful  coincidence  was,  that  just  as
abuses  had  risen  to  the  most  intolerable  height,
the  study  of  the  sacred  books 'in  their  original
tongues  once  more  revealed  to  the  world,  in
all  its  radiance,  that  pure  idea  of  Christianity
which  had  so  long  been  darkened  or  disguised.
A  man  appeared  who,  in  that  secret  travail
and  contention  of  mind  to  which  the  remedies
usually  applied  by  the  Church  afforded  no  re-
lief, seized  with  his  whole  soul  on  an  aspect  of
Christianity  hitherto  the  most  profoundly  ob-
scured ;  and  such  was  his  own  experience  of
its  truth,  fulness,  and  saving  power,  that  he
would  never  more  suffer  it  to  be  wrested  from
him,  but  maintained  it  unshaken  through  life
and  death.  In  the  contest  to  which  it  gave
rise,  he  drew  around  him  all  the  other  ele-
ments of  innovation,  with  a  consistency  and
sagacity  which  at  length  gained  over  the
whole  nation,  and  secured  to  himself  a  degree
of  sympathy  such  as  no  other  man  ever  en-
joyed. At  "the  same  time  that  he  gave  a  new
direction  to  religious  thoughts  and  feelings,  he
opened  a  new  prospect  of  national  regenera-
tion. Men  already  felt  that  the  papacy  was
not  to  be  held  in  check  by  constitutional
forms  ;  and  that  if  they  would  free  them-
selves from  its  usurpations,  they  must  contest
the  spiritual  grounds  on  which  those  usurpa-
tions rested.

The  voung  emperor,  who  was  elected  in
the  midst  of  these  troubles,  remained  faithful
to  the  old  system  :  but  as  he  left  Germany
after  a  short  residence,  and  the  representative
government  which  had  formerly  been  pro-
jected, was  now  in  actual  operation,  his  con-
duct was  of  far  less  importance  than  that  of
the  States.  In  the  third  book  we  saw  how
the  Council  of  Regency,  after  brief  hesitation,
declared  itself  decidedly  for  Luther.  Even
the  proposal  made  in  the  assemblv  of  the

(291)

292

KETROSPECT.

Book  V.

States,  to  compel  the  preachers  at  least  to  ad-
here to  the  four  oldest  canonical  teachers  of
the  Latin  Church,  was  overruled  by  the  re-
gency ;  so  far  were  people  from  considering  a
strict  adherence  to  doctrines  which  had  been
added  in  later  ages  as  indispensable.  The
views  of  this  government  were  indeed  on  all
points  of  the  most  enlarged  kind.  Its  plan  for
the  imposition  of  a  general  tax  of  the  empire,
instead  of  those  taxes  on  the  several  states
which  it  was  often  impossible  to  collect,  would
doubtless  have  given  it  a  firmness  and  vigour
hitherto  unknown.  Had  this  succeeded,  it
would  have  taken  the  administration  of  all  the
affairs  of  the  country,  ecclesiastical  as  well  as
temporal,  vigorously  in  hand.  It  is  hardly
possible  to  estimate  the  consequences  which
raitst  have  resulted  from  a  national  council
(such  as  was  already  appointed)  acting  under
its  guidance.  But  Germany  had  been  too  long
a  stranger  to  order.  Neither  the  knights,  nor
the  princes,  nor  even  the  States,  would  suffer
a  regularly  constituted  power,  which  they
would  have  been  forced  to  obey,  to  rise  into
existence.  In  defiance  of  the  decrees  of  the
diets  of  the  empire,  some  princes  formed  the
strictest  alliance  with  the  pope  ;  the  emperor
sent  from  Spain  to  forbid  the  assembling  of
the  national  council ;  the  whole  government
was  broken  up.  The  peasants'  war  was  a
symptom  of  the  universal  dissolution  which
followed.  Nor  was  this  subdued  by  the  con-
stituted authorities  of  the  empire,  but  by  the
several  associations  of  princes  and  states  ex-
posed to  the  attack.  Measures  for  the  consti-
tution of  a  national  church,  such  as  had  been
contemplated  by  the  council  of  regency,  were
no  longer  to  be  thought  of.  The  several
states  were  compelled  to  provide  for  their
own  v^-ants.

This  the  emperor  was  in  no  present  condi-
tion to  oppose  :  on  the  contrary,  he  himself
needed  the  support  of  the  new  tendencies  of
the  public  mind.

The  attempt  to  re-establish  the  rights  of  the
empire  in  Italy,  which  he  had  at  first  under-
taken in  concuirence  with  the  papacy,  gradu-
ally entangled  him,  as  we  have  shown  in  our
fourth  book,  in  the  m.ost  violent  disputes  with
that  power.  With  the  insignificant  means  at
his  disposal,  he  would  never  have  been  able
to  make  any  successful  resistance  to  Rome,
had  not  the  popular  exasperation  against  the
papacy,  which  increased  from  year  to  year,
come  to  his  aid.  But  in  order  to  turn  this
feeling  to  account,  he  w-as  obliged  to  make
concessions  to  it.  A  solemn  decree  of  the
diet  was  passed,  whereby  an  almost  absolute
religious  independence  was  granted  to  the
princes  and  states  within  their  several  domi-
nions. This  insured  perfect  concord  and  union
throughout  the  empire.  While  a  German  aiiny
marched  into  Italy,  conquered  Rome,  and  made
the  Pope  himself  a  prisoner,  a  great  number  of
the  territories  of  princes  and  cities  on  this  side
the  Alps  adopted  and  put  in  practice  the  prin-
ciples of  Luther:  they  emancipated  themselves
for  evbrfrom  the  yoke  of  Rome,  and  established
an  ecclesiastical  organisation  of  their  own.

The  fence  of  those  hierarchies  which  had
surrounded  the  world  being  thus  broken  down,
the  more  vigorous  and  highly  civilised  among
them  sought  to  reconstitute  themselves  on  a
new-  system ;  the  leading  principle  of  which
w^as,  to  draw  religious  convictions  from  the
purest  and  most  primitive  sources,  and  to  free
civil  hfe  from  the  contracting,  oppressive  influ-
ence of  a  spiritual  institution,  w^hich  assumed
the  monopoly  of  piety — an  undertaking  of  the
greatest  importance  and  the  highest  promise
to  the  progress  of  the  human  race.

Tlie  empire,  which  from  the  earliest  ages
had  developed  itself  under  the  influence  of  the
See  of  Rome,  was  thus  invaded  by  a  new  ele-
ment, hostile  to  the  ancient  hierarchical  order
of  things:  this,  if  sufliciently  pow^erful  to  sus-
tain itself,  promised  to  change  the  whole  face
and  destinies  of  the  German  nation.

Changes  so  radical  and  extensive  are  not,
however,  to  be  carried  into  effect  without  the
most  violent  struggles;  nor  is  this  the  result
of  human  will  or  caprice,  but  inherent  in  the
nature  of  human  affairs.

If,  in  the  case  before  us,  we  consider  the
characters  of  the  men  who  attached  them-
selves to  the  great  religious  innovation,  we
shall  see  how  impossible  it  was  for  them  to
avoid  varieties  of  opinion,  and  divergencies
of  view^s.  Nor  was  it  to  be  expected  that
the  energetic  princes  who  carried  that  innova-
tion into  effect,  should  remain  perfectly  ex-
empt from  the  excesses  and  acts  of  violence
which,  in  their  age,  had  become  a  second
nature.

But  far  greater  dangers  presented  them-
selves on  the  side  from  which  they  had  se-
ceded.

It  would  have  been  absurd  to  expect  that
the  spirit  of  absolute  domination  which  had
inspired  the  Church  of  Rome  from  her  very
infancy,  and  had  gradually  led  her  to  claim  a
supreme  authority  over  the  world,  would  allow
her  to  submit  to  losses  so  dangerous  to  her
power  and  interests,  without  straining  every
nerve  to  bring  back  the  seceders.  ^

The  German  people  would  doubtless  have
desired  that  the  emperor  should  retain  the
power  he  had  acquired  in  Italy,  and,  in  return,
should  allow  them  to  carry  into  effect  those
ideas  of  a  Church  which  they  confidently  be-
lieved to  be  in  conformity  with  the  will  and
the  commands  of  God.  But  to  this  end  it
would  have  been  necessary  that  the  emperor
should  himself  feel  a  lively  sympathy  in  those
ideas — a  sympathy  elevated  far  above  the  cal-
culations of  policy.  W^ere  this  not  the  case
(and  at  that  time  there  seemed  no  trace  of
any  probability  of  it),  his  own  power  stood  in
far  too  close  and  manifold  relations  to  the
papacy,  for  him  long  to  continue  at  war  with
Rome.

As,  m.oreover,  the  attempt  to  establish  a
government  which  might  carry  through  the
opposition  to  Rome  and  then  afford  protection  ■
to  the  spiritual  Estates,  had  not  succeeded,  it
followed  that  the  latter,  who  had  reaped  no-
thing from  the  reformation  but  loss  of  revenue
and consideration, and  who had reason  to

Chap.  I.

THE  EMPEROR  CHARLES  V.

293

put

dread  still  greater, — if  not  total  ruin,
themselves  In  an  attitude  of  defence.

Thus  therefore  it  inevitably  followed,  that
the  emperor  and  the  empire  once  more  erii-
braced  the  cause  of  the  hierarchy  ]  and  that
the  commencement  of  the  fiercest  and  most
perilous  struggles  dated  from  this  moment.

As  yet  there  was  no  question  of  a  wider
dissemination  of  the  new  opinions;  it  was  first
to  be  seen  whether  the  newly  organised  evan-
gelical church  would  not  share  the  fate  of  all
the  other  religious  institutions  which  had  at-
tempted to  sustain  themselves  apart  from
Rome,  but  had  either  utteily  disappeared,  or
sunk  into  insignificance.

We  have  watched  the  founding  of  the  edi-
fice ]  it  now  remains  for  us  to  see  whether  it
will  have  sufficient  strength  and  solidity  to
stand  erect  and  unsupported.

We  shall  begin  with  a  view  of  the  foreign
relations  of  the  empire,  by  which  the  general
position  of  the  emperor  was  determined,  and
which  consequently  exercised  a  powerful  re-
action on  the  afi'airs  of  Germany.

CHAPTER  I.

CHANGES IN THE GENERAL POLITICAL RELA-
TIONS IN EUROPE.

1527,  1528.

The  Hispano-German  army  had  conquered
Rome ;  and  whatever  might  be  the  external
deportment  of  the  emperor,  there  is  no  doubt
that  he  at  first  founded  the  most  extensive
political  projects  upon  this  event.

The  instructions  with  which  he  sent  one  of
his  courtiers,  Pierre  de  Verey,  to  the  Viceroy
of  Naples,  have  only  lately  come  to  light.  In
these  he  confesses  that  his  wish  was,  either
to  go  himself  without  delay  to  Italy,  or  to
cause  the  Pope  to  come  to  Spain,  in  order  that  j
they  might  settle  all  difi'erences  in  person  and
orally:  and  that  he  should  prefer  the  latter
plan,  if  the  viceroy  could  find  means  to  bring
the  pope  safely  to  Spain  ;  but  that  he  was
alarmed  by  the  danger  of  the  pontiff  falling
into  the  hands  of  hostile  troops  by  the  w^ay.
Under  these  circumstances  he  thought  it  best
to  reinstate  the  pope  in  the  papal  chair  in  full
freedom.  But  the  conditions  are  worthy  of
note.  This  freedom,  said  the  emperor  ex-
pressly, was  only  to  be  understood  as  relating
to  the  pope's  spiritual  functions;  and  even
with  regard  to  these,  it  would  be  necessary,
before  setting  him  at  liberty,  to  obtain  full
security  against  treachery  and  deceit  on  his
part.* The  emperor  stated  what  were  the

*  Instructions  to  Pierre  de  Verey,  Baron  de  St.  Vincent.
Excerpts  in  Bucholtz,  Ferdinand,  ill.  97 — 104,  especially
p.  ]01.  "We  have  considered  that  in  case  there  be  no
means  for  his  Holiness  to  come  hither  in  safety,  notwith-
standing what  has  passed,  to  use  so  great  liberality  to-
wards H.  H.  as  to  give  him  back  his  freredoni,  and  that  by
tue  hand  of  my  viceroy,  as  representative  of  our  person,

securities  which  he  should  deem  satisfactory;
viz.,  the  cession  of  the  cities  of  Ostia  and
Civita  Vecchia,  Parma  and  Piacenza,  Bologna
and  Ravenna;  and  lastly,  of  Civita  Castellana.
He  demands,  as  w^e  see,  ail  the  important
places  of  the  ecclesiastical  states,  as  then
constituted.  The  principle  upon  which  he
proceeded  was,  that  even  if  the  pope  should
ever  again  entertain  the  w^ish  to  injure  him,
he  must  not  have  the  power  to  do  so.  These
strong  places  he  proposed  to  keep  in  his  own
hands,  till  the  pope  should  call  a  council  for
the  reformation  of  the  Church.

These  views  were  to  a  certain  degree  in
accordance  with  the  ideas  of  the  German  na-
tion. The  church  reform  which  the  emperor
required  was  certainly  not  that  proposed  by
Luther  and  his  followers ;  nor  indeed  was  it
at  all  of  a  doctrinal  nature  :  his  only  object
was,  to  have  the  administrative  abuses  re-
moved, as  preceding  kings  and  emperors  had
so  often  demanded,  and  Glapio  had  lately  re-
commended in  Worms.  It  is  however  ob-
vious that  the  two  projects  reciprocally  sup-
port each  other.  How  vast,  moreover,  was
the  prospect  of  increased  temporal  power
which  opened  to  the  emperor,  if  he  could  suc-
ceed in  keeping  possession  of  the  States  of  the
Church  till  the  accomplishment  of  so  remote
and  uncertain  an  event.  Thus  Ferdinand  had
recently  seized  on  the  bishopric  of  Brixen  till
some  accommodation  should  be  come  to,  and
had  excited  the  suspicion  that  he  intended  to
keep  it.  Thus  too,  in  this  very  year,  the
Bishop  of  Utrecht,  driven  out  by  his  warlike
neighbour  of  Guelders,  had  ceded  to  the  go-
vernment of  the  Netherlands  all  his  rights
over  the  temporal  administration  of  his  bishop-
ric for  an  annual  sum  of  money. t  The  same
fate  seemed  to  await  the  greatest  of  all  spi-
ritual benefices  —  the  States  of  the  Church.
It  was  thought  that  the  emperor  would  estab-
lish his  seat  of  government  in  Rome,  take  the
temporalities  of  the  ecclesiastical  states  into
his  own  hands,  and  depose,  or  carry  off,  the
pope.  What  indeed  could  men  think,  when
Charles  was  known  to  have  instigated  the
Duke  of  Ferrara  to  undertake  without  delay
the  restoration  of  the  exiled  dynasts  of  the
ecclesiastical  states — the  Sassatelli  in  Imola,
the  Bentivogii  in  Bologna,  hc.l  The  Viceroy
of  Naples  actually  proposed  to  the  Spanisii
colonel  Alarcon,  to  whom  the  safe  keeping  of
the  pope  in  the  Castel  St.  Angelo  w^as  en-
trusted, to  bring  his  captive  to  Gaeta.  Alar-
con however  refused;  ^-not  out  of  ill  will,"
observes  the  reporter,  "but  because  he  had
scruples  of  conscience." '-'God  forbid,"  said

he  be  reinstated  in  his  chair  at  Rome.  But  before  he  can
be  restored  to  this  freedom,  which  is  to  be  understood  of
spiritual  functions,  our  viceroy  must  be  so  well  assured  by
him  as  to  all  things  which  can  happen  by  human  means
and  by  secular  power,  that  we  be  not  deceived  therein,
and  that  if  H.  H.  should  have  the  will,  he  may  not  have
the  power  to  do  us  ill ;  that  thereby  we  may  not,  in  return
for  the  kindness  we  have  shown  him,  continually  receive
injury  and  damage,  as  the  experience  of  the  past  has
shown."  Bucholtz  places  these  instructions  three  weeks
after  the  30th  June,  i.  e.  21st  July,  1527.

t  The  negotiations  of  Schoonhoven  (Oct.  1527)  appear
from  the  speech  in  the  assembly  of  the  Dutch  States,
Wageaaar,  ii.  349.

294

HENKY  VIII.

Book  V.

the  brave  soldier,  ^'that  I  should  lead  the  body
of  the  Lord  captive."*

It  is  not  always  necessary  that  the  schemes
of  a  power  should  be  accurately  known  in
order  to  excite  resistance  ;  the  same  possibility
which,  on  the  one  side,  sugg'ests  the  thought
of  an  enterprise,  awakens,  on  the  other,  the
dread  of  it  and  the  endeavour  to  counter-
act it.

Charles  V.  had,  as  we  may  recollectj  still
most  powerful  enemies  to  contend  with.  The
Ligue  lay  still  encamped  against  him  in  un-
broken force  ;  and  just  at  this  moment  the  King
of  England,  who  had  for  some  time  shown  an
inclination  that  way.  made  marked  advances
towards  its  chiefs.  Charles's  refusal  to  allow
him  any  share  in  the  advantages  resulting
from  the  victory  of  Pavia,  or  to  conclude  the
promised  marriage  between  himself  and  the
Princess  Mary  (a  refusal  which  touched  Henry
in  a  very  sensible  part,  inasmuch  as  it  involved
a  pecuniary  damage — an  old  debt  of  the  em-
peror's being  reckoned  as  part  of  the  dowry),
seemed  to  the  king  a  sufficient  ground  for
separating  himself  from  his  ancient  ally.  As
early  as  the  30th  April,  a  treaty  was  concluded
between  Henry  VIII.  and  Francis  I.,  the  mo-
tive for  which  they  declare  to  be  the  mutual
inclination  which  nature,  who  had  fashioned
them  alike  in  mind  and  body,  had  implanted
in  their  hearts,  and  which  had  been  only
heightened  by  the  late  interruption  of  the  good
understanding  between  them.  They  agree
therein  to  demand  of  the  emperor,  through
their  common  ambassadors,  the  liberation  of
the  French  princes  on  fair  and  honourable
terms,  and  the  satisfaction  of  the  pecuniary
claims  of  England  :  and,  in  case  of  his  refusal
to  listen  to  these  demands,  to  declare  war
against  him  without  delay.!  It  may  easily  be
imagined  that  their  eagerness  for  war  was
greatly  inflamed  by  the  conquest  of  Rome.
Henry  VIII.  says,  in  the  full  powers  for  con-
cluding fresh  treaties  which  he  gave  to  Cardi-
nal Wolsey,  that  the  cause  of  the  Holy  See
was  the  common  cause  of  all  princes;  that
never  had  a  greater  insult  been  offered  to  it
than  now ;  and  that,  as  this  had  been  caused
by  no  offence  or  provocation,  but  solely  by  un-
bridled lust  of  power,  such  ungovernable  am-
bition must  be  opposed  betimes  by  combined
forces.!  His  first  idea  \vas,  that  the  cardinals
still  at  liberty  should  assemble  in  Avignon,
where  Wolsey  should  also  be  present;  and
that  a  new  central  point  for  the  church  should
thus  be  created.  But  as  the  cardinals  did  not
agree  to  this,  the  two  monarchs  mutually  pro-
mised on  no  account  to  consent  to  any  procla-
mation of  a  council,  so  long  as  the  pope  was
not  free  :  and  jointly  to  oppose  every  attempt
on  the  part  of  the  emperor  to  administer  the
powers  of  the  church. § Lastly,  they  settled

*  Letter  of  Verey. Bucholtz,  pp.  110,  118.

t  Traite  de  Westminster,  30  Avril,  1527.  Du  Mont,  iv.
1.  476.

X  Ad  tractandum  super  quocumque  fcedere  pro  resar-
cienda  Ronianee  sedis  dignitate  commissio  regis.  Eymer,
vi.  ii.  p.  80.

§  " prsesertim  cum  juris  naturalis  fequitate  pensata

non  proprie  ä  summo  pontifice  factum  dici  possit,  quod  ad

the  old  differences  between  the  two  kingdoms.
Wolsey,  who  had  repaired  to  Amiens,  re-
nounced, in  the  king's  name,  all  claim  to  the
throne  of  France.  A  sum  of  money  was
agreed  on,  as  compensation,  which'was  to  be
paid  to  King  Henry  and  all  his  successors,
''without  ceasing,  till  all  the  years  M'hich
divine  Providence  has  appointed  to  the  human
race  shall  have  passed  away."  At  first  they
intended  to  direct  their  principal  attack  against
the  Netherlands;  they  now  agreed  to  turn
their  arms  against  Italy.  Henry  showed  a
readiness  to  advance  subsidiesj  he  hoped  to
obtain  ample  compensation  by  means  of  a  per-
petual tribute  which  he  intended  to  exact  from
the  duchy  of  Milan.  The  proposals  made  by
the  emperor  at  this  moment,  reasonable  as
they  appeared,  were  rejected.  In  August
1527,  a  new  French  army  appeared  in  Italy
under  Lautrec,  took  Bosco,  Alexandria  and  the
strong  city  of  Pavia,  on  which  cruel  vengeance
was  taken  for  the  resistance  it  had  made  two
years  and  a  half  before.  In  October  1527,
Lautrec  crossed  the  Po,  intending  to  wait  only
for  reinforcements,  and  then  immediately  to
enter  the  States  of  the  Church.il

It  would  have  been  extremely  disagreeable
to  the  emperor,  if  the  pope,  still  unreconciled
to  him,  had  been  liberated  from  the  castle  by
this  army  ;  an  event  which  appeared  by  no
means  impossible,  since  the  German  troops,
in  consequence  of  their  disorder,  and  of  the
diseases  caused  by  an  Italian  summer,  had
sustained  great  losses,  and  were  constantly
discontented.  But  this  would  have  been  ren-
dered peculiarly  vexatious  and  inconvenient
to  him  by  a  project  which  King  Henry  had
conceived,  and  now  followed  up  with  the  rupst
impetuous  ardour.

King  Henry  VIII.  was  married  to  Catharine
of.  Aragon,  the  widow  of  his  brother  Arthur,
and  aunt  of  the  emperor.  This  marriage  could
not  have  been  'contracted  without  a  dispensa-
tion from  the  pope,  which  Julius  II.  had  granted,
"in  virtue  of  his  apostolical  authority;  that
supreme  delegated  power  which  he  used  as
time  and  circumstances  might  require."!  But
in  the  nation,  nay,  even  in  the  persons  imme-
diately surrounding  the  king,  the  scruples  on
this  head  had  never  entirely  disappeared.  The
death  of  every  son  that  Catharine  brought  him,
one  after  another,  produced  a  deep  impression
on  people's  minds,  and  seemed  a  fulfilment  of
the  words  in  the  3d  Book  of  Moses,**  denounc-
ing childlessness  against  the  man  who  shall
take  his  brother's  wife.  Even  Thomas  Aqui-
nas had  doubted  whether  the  pope  could  re-

aliorum  arbitrium  facit  captivus,  etiamsi  verbi?  diversi.s-
simum  profiteatur."  Traite  d'Amiens,  18  Aout,  Dumont,
iv.  1.  494.

II  Letter  from  Angerer  (5th  Nov.),  in  Hormayr's  Archiv.
1812,  p.  45Ö:  "We  allow  ourselves  to  be  restrained  by
words,  and  the  Ligue  follows  up  its  victory.  I  have  really
no  hope  or  heart  left."  A  letter  of  LeiVa's  of  the  23d
Oct.  shows,  however,  that  he  had  not  lost  heart.

IT  Brief  in  Burnet's  Collection,  p.  9.  It  is  said  there,
"Cum  nifttrimonium  contraxissetis  illudque  carnali  co-
pula forsan  consunmiavissetis."  It  is  clear  that  the  dis-
pensation assumed  this  to  be  the  case.

**  Leviticus,  xx.  2],  quoted  by  John  the  Baptist  to
Herod;  St.  Mark,  vi.  18.

Ghap.  I.

PROJECT  OF  DIVORCE.

295

lease  men  from  the  obligatory  force  of  a  law
of  the  holy  Scripture;  and  we  may  imagine
how  greatly  the  ideas  of  the  reformers,  origi-
nating in  similar  questions  as  to  the  authority
of  Scripture,  and  now  become  current  even  in
England,  must  have  tended  to  strengthen  this
doubt.  The  king's  confessor  had  for  a  long
time  declared  to  his  friends  that  his  highness's
marriage  would  not  last.^^

In  this  state  of  things  it  happened  that  Car-
dinal Wolsey,  the  king's  confidant,  quarrelled
with  the  emperor.  The  emperor,  when  at
Windsor,  had  promised  to  raise  him  to  the
papal  dignity;  but  when  the  occasion  offered,
he  did  httle  or  nothing  in  his  behalf.  It  was
constantly  affirmed  in  Spain  that  Wolsey  s\vore
eternal  vengeance  against  the  emperor  for  this
breach  of  "faith;  that  he  boasted  he  would
bring  about  suVih  a  revolution  in  affairs  as  had
not  taken  place  for  a  century  ; — even  though
the  kingdom  of  England  should  perish  in  the
convulsion. t  Various  other  causes  now  con-
tributed, as  we  have  seen,  to  create  enmity
between  his  royal  master  and  the  emperor.
In  order,  however,  to  render  this  permanent.
it  was  absolutely  necessary  that  the  marriage
by  which  Ferdinand  the  Catholic  and  Henry
VII.  had  thought  lo  render  the  union  of  then-
families  eternal,  should  be  dissolved.  We  may
believe  Wolsey's  assertion  on  his  trial, — that
it  was  not  he  who  first  suggested  the  divorce ;
but  it  is  no  less  certain  that  he  first  seriously
proposed  it,  and  with  the  view  above  men-
tioned :  he  himself  affirmed  this  most  dis-
tinctly to  the  French  ambassador,  Jean  du
Bellay.^

Meanwhile,  the  passion  which  the  king  con-
ceived for  Anna  Boleyn.  one  of  the  ladies  of
the  queen's  ^court,  though  it  subserved  Wol-
sey's views,  did  not  form  part  of  his  plans.
He  wished  to  substitute  the  French  alliance
for  the  Spanish.  When  he  was  in  Amiens  he
said  to  the  queen-mother,  that  if  she  lived
only  another  year,  she  would  witness  the  eter-
,  nal  union  of  England  with  the  one  side  (the
French),  and  a  no  less  'complete  separation
from  the  other.  He  let  fall  other  mysterious
expressions,  begging  her  to  remember  his
words,  and  adding,  that  he  would  remind  her
of  them  at  the  proper  time.

Such  being  the  state  of  his  mind,  the  differ-
ences of  the  pope  with  the emperor  w^ere

*  Polydorus  Virgilius,  Historia  Auslica,  Heniicus  VIII.,
p.  82.  Jam  pridom  conjugium  re^ium  velut  infirmum
labefactatum  iri  censebal  idque  clam  suis  ssps  intimis
amicis  insusurrabat.

t  Respuesta  del  emperador  al  cartel  presentado  por  Cla-
rencao. Sandoval,  lib.  xvi.  torn.  i.  p.  358.

J  Depeclie  de  Teveque  de  Bayonne,  J.  du  Bellay,  28th
October,  15-28.  Wolsey  complains  of  certain  measijres  of
the  French,  from  which  had  ensued  "  totale  alienation  de
Nr«  dit  St.  Tere  avec  ronipturedudit  mariage(the  negotia-
tions concerning  the  aftair  of  the  marriage).  La  quelle
ronipture,  encore  que  la  perte  de  N"-  dit  St.  Pere  ne  soit
pour  rien  coniptee,  est  rie  telle  importance,  ce  dit  mon  dit
Seigneur  Legat  (Wolsey),  que  tout  homme  en  pourra
juffer  qui  saura  que  les  premiers  termes  du  divorce  ont  ete
mis  par  luy  en  avant,  afin  de  mettre  perpetuelle  separa-
tion entre  les  maisons  d'Angleterre  et  de  Bourgogne."
Already  printed  in  Le  Grand's  Histoire  du  Divorce,  iii.  p,
1S5.  I  have  recently  looked  through  the  manuscript  (De-
pesches  de  Messire  J.  du  Bellay.  Colbert,  v.  468,  King's
Library,  at  Paris),  which  Le  Grand  used,  and  have  found
many  new  and  important  circumstances  in  it.

entirely  in  accordance  with  his  wishes;  and
he  therefore  urged  on  the  new  alliance,  and
the  enterprise  against  Italy.

We  may  imagine,  however,  the  effect  that
schemes  and  proceedings  of  this  kind  natu-
rally produced  on  the  emperor.  And  here  aa
observation  suggests  itself,  which  sounds  pa-
radoxical, but,  if  w^e  mistake  not.  contains  a
striking  truth.

It  is  a  well-knowm  fact,  and  one  to  which
we  shall  often  have  occasion  to  recur,  that
[his  divorce  proved  fatal  to  the  influence  of
the  papacy  in  England.  But  if  we  ascend  to
that  higher  point  of  view  which  commands  the
general  relations  of  Europe,  w-e  shall  see  that
the  schemes  of  Henry  VIII.  were,  at  this  cri-
tical moment,  productive  of  advantage  to  the
papal  power.  The  emperor,  Avhose  conduct
had  been  not  only  imperious  but  violent  to-
wards the  pope,  now  perceived  that  the  head
of  the  church,  even  in  a  prison,  was  a  person
of  importance,  and  was  still  able  to  make  him
painfully  sensible  of  his  power.

The  emperor  first  heard  of  the  project  of
divorce  at  the  end  of  July,  1527.  In  the  in-
structions of  the  21st  of  that  month,  drawn
up  for  Verey,  no  trace  of  it  is  (if  we  may  trust
our  extracts)  to  be  found;  but  on  the  31st  of
the  same  month  we  have  a  letter  of  the  em-
peror's in  which  it  is  expressly  mentioned.
In  this  he  commissions  the  viceroy  to  speak
of  the  matter  to  the  pope,  but  with  discretion,
lest  he  should  avail  himself  of  it  ''as  means  to
a  mischievous  understanding  with  the  king."
Charles  wished  that  the  pope  had  instantly
crushed  the  scheme  by  tw^o  or  three  briefs  to
the  king  and  the  cardinal,  containing  a  pe-
remptory refusal. §

It  is  obvious  that  a  vast  weight  was  thrown
into  the  pope's  scale  by  the  need  the  emperor
had  of  his  aid  in  a  domestic  affair  of  such
importance.

To  this  was  added  the  unfavourat|le  im-
pression produced  in  Spain  by  the  captivity
of  the  sovereign  pontiff.  The  grandees  of
that  kingdom,  both  temporal  and  spiritual,
who  w^ere  aj;  the  court,  took  an  occasion  to
speak  to  the  emperor  about  it,  and  to  remind
him  of  the  devoted  attachment  of  the  Spanish
nation  to  the  see  of  Rome.  The  nuncio  was
even  emboldened  to  entertain  the  project
of  suspending  the  ecclesiastical  functions
throughout  Spain;  the  prelates  were  to  ap-
pear befoie  the  emperor  in  mourning  gar-
ments, and  to  demand  from  him  the  liberty
of  Christ's  vicegerent  on  earth.  Nothing  less
than  the  direct  interference  of  the  court  was
required  to  prevent  his  issuing  a  proclama-
tion of  this  violent  character.il

Under  these  circumstances  the  imperial
council  of  state  found  it  impossible  to  adhere
absolutely  to  its  first  instructions,  Gattinava
declared  that  they  could  not  keep  the  pope  a
prisoner,  so  long  as  they  continued  to  recognise
him  as  the  true  pope.  De  Praet  remarked,
that  the  troops  now  quartered  in  Rome  were

§  Excerpt  from  this  letter. Bu'Sfcltz,  iii.  94,  note.
I!  Castiglione,  lOth  Dec,  1527;  Pallavicini,  lib.  ii.  c.  14.

296

LIBERATION  OF  THE  POPE.

Book  V.

wanted  for  the  defence  of  the  kingdom  of
Naples,  and  that  they  could  not  march  till  the
pope  was  set  at  liberty:  he  advised  that  the
orders  issued  for  the  execution  of  the  instruc-
tions should  be  qualified  by  the  very  pregnant
words,  '-'as  far  as  practicable."  The  council
of  state  hereupon  came  to  the  decision  that  the
pope  must,  at  all  events,  be  set  at  liberty.*

Negotiations  were  then  set  on  foot  with
Clement  VII.,  through  Degli  Angeli,  general
of  the  Franciscans.  We  unfortunately  pos-
sess no  details  of  their  progress.  On  the
twenty-sixth  of  November,  1527,  a  treaty  was
concluded,  in  virtue  of  which  the  pope  was
restored,  not  only  to  his  spiritual  functions  but
to  his  temporal  power.  The  emperor  con-
tented himself  with  the  cession  of  a  few
strong  places,  such  as  Ostia,  Civita  Vecchia
and  Civita  Castellana.  The  pope  promised  to
convoke  a  council  for  the  union  and  reforma-
tion of  the  church,  and  to  contribute,  as  far
as  lay  in  his  power,  to  satisfy  the  soldiery.!
Their  pay  was  to  be  raised  chiefly  by  a  large
sale  of  church  lands  in  the  Neapolitan  ter-
ritory.

Another  point,  which  is  not  mentioned  in
the  treaty,  was,  as  it  appears,  also  a  subject
of  negotiation.  The  pope  is  said  to  have  pro-
mised the  emperor  that  he  would  not  consent
to  the  divorce  of  the  king  of  England.

Clement  VII.  was  once  more  free.  He  gar-
risoned the  castle  of  St.  Angelo  with  his  own
troops,  caused  all  the  bells  in  the  city  to  be
rung,  and  nominated  anew  all  the  officers  of
the  camera  and  of  the  city.  The  vast  schemes
of  limiting  the  pope  to  his  spiritual  functions,
of  carrying  him  off  to  a  distant  fortress,  and
the  like,  were  so  far  from  being  realised,  that
the  emperor's  own  power  in  Italy  was  now
once  more  in  danger.

At  first  the  pope  was  far  from  trusting  the
emperor  or  his  ministers,  or  from  believing
that  the  peace  between  them  would  be  of
long  endurance.  It  was  agreed  that  he  should
go  to  Orvieto.  But  he  was  still  fearful  that
Hugo  Moncada,  who  had  succeeded  Lautrec
as  viceroy  of  Naples,  would  seize  upon  his
person  on  the  way,  and  carry  him  off  to  some
fortress  in  the  imperial  territory.!:  He  deter-
mined to  escape  in  disguise  through  the  gates
of  the  garden  of  the  Vatican,  on  the  night
before  the  day  appointed  for  his  journey.  In
this  way  he  reached  Orvieto,  on  the  10th  of
December,  1527.

For  a  moment  he  felt  as  if  he  were  once
more  master  of  his  own  destiny:  but  he  no
sooner  raised  his  eyes,  than  he  found  himself
surrounded  by  dangers  on  every  hand.

On  the  one  side,  he  saw  his  country  in
great  measure  in  the  hands  of  the  conqueror
by  whom  he  had  been  so  injuriously  treated.

*  Notice  in  Bucholtz,  iii.  p.  1]9.

t  Contract  between  Pope  Clement  and  Charles  V. ;
Reissner,  p.  ]5.5.  The  words  of  the  preamble  are,  how-
ever, rather  a  form  of^pression  than  an  historical  truth.

I  Jovius,  Vita  PomiTCji  Columnse,  197,  f.  Guicciardini,
lib.  jxiii.  p.  469.

In  the  course  of  the  winter  his  capital  had
been  reduced  to  utter  ruin  by  the  imperial
troops,  to  which  arrears  of  pay  were  still  due.

On  the  other  side,  the  friends  who  had
affected  to  protect  him  inspired  him  only  with
hatred,  distrust  and  alarm.  Florence,  which
had  again  expelled  the  house  of  Medici,  and
attempted  to  found  a  republic  on  the  plan  of
Savonarola,  found  support  from  France.  The
Venetians  had  taken  possession  of  the  cities  of
Ravenna  and  Cervia,  which  Julius  II.  deemed
it  so  great  a  glory  to  have  reconquered.

Clement  feared  both  parties.  That  the  em-
peror should  possess  at  once  Milan  and  Na-
ples, seemed  to  him  extrernely  dangerous  ^§
in  that  case  Charles  w^ould  indeed  be  '-lord
of  all  things;*'  the  favour  which  he  himself
had  shown  to  the  emperor's  foes  would  bring
his  head  upon  the  block.  But  the  measures
of  the  Ligue  caused  him,  if  possible,  more
anxiety  and  distress.  When  the  French  in-
vited him  to  sanction  and  to  join  the  Ligue,
as  it  was  then  constituted,  he  rephed,  that  it
was  a  strange  proposal  to  make  to  him,  to
sanction  and  concur  in  the  measures  taken
against  himself: — in  Florence  his  family  had
been  ruined  ;  Ferrara  was  constantly  engaged
in  hostilities  against  him ;  yet  with  these
powers  he  was  asked  to  ally  himself.

The  French  told  him  they  were  determined
to  wn-est  not  only  Milan  but  Naples  also  from
the  emperor;  and  they  wished  to  know  whe-
ther the  pope  would  at  least  openly  declare
himself  for  them,  when  they  had  made  their
way  to  Naples,  and  driven  out  the  Spaniard.
Clement  evaded  giving  a  positive  answer;  he
found  it  difficult  "to  believe  that  they  would,
as  they  asserted,  allow"  him  to  dispose  of  Na-
ples at  his  pleasure;  judging  from  his  coun-
tenance, people  concluded  that  his  intention
was  to  gain  time  to  consider,  and  then  to
make  such  terms  as  circumstances  would
allow.ll

Every  thing, however, depended on the
issue  of  the  enterprise  of  France,  and  on  the  \
fortune  of  arms.

In  January  1528,  Lautrec  entered  the  king-
dom of  Naples.  The  German  army,  which
had  at  length  with  infinite  difficulty'been  led
out  of  Rome  by  the  Prince  of  Orange,  threw
itself  in  his  way  at  Troja,  and  offered  to  give
him  battle.  But  Lautrec  expected  succours
from  Venice,  and  was  satisfied  to  let  the  im-
perialists feel  the  superiority  of  his  artillery.
This  conduct  had  such  an  effect,  that  an  in-
clination in  favour  of  France  manifested  itself
throughout  the  empire.  When  the  expected
reinforcements  arrived,  the imperial  troops,

§  Literee  Grenrorii  de  Cas?ellis,  in  Fiddes's  Life  of  Wol-
sey,  p.  4G7.  "  Et  cum  ei  persuasissem,  ut  nihil  dubitaret,
et'quod  totum  se  rejiceret  in  manns  regias  majestatis  et
rev.  D.  Legati,  dixit  se  ita  velle  facere  et  quod  in  eoruni
brachia  se  et  omnia  sua  remittat.  Et  caput  jam  ponit
sub  supplicio,  nisi  a  regia  Majestate  adjuvetur.  Si  Coesar
permittatur  aliquid  possidere  in  Italia  pra;terquam  in
regno  Neapolitano,  omnium  rerum  semper  erit  dominus,
nisi  mature  confundatur."  It  is  evident  he  was  still  of
opinion  that  it  was  necessary  to  the  security  of  the  see
of  Rome  that  Milan  should  be  wrested  from  the  emperor.

II  Nie.  Raince  au  Gr.  Maitre,  2Stfa  Jan.  1523.  MS.  Ee-
thune,  8534.

Chap.  I.

ITALIAN  WARS,  1528.

297

which  had  no  artillery,  found  it  necessary  to
abandon  the  field  and  retreat  upon  Naples,  the
defence  of  which  was  of  the  highest  import-
ance;* the  head,  they  said,  did  not  follow  the
members,  bnt  the  members  the  head.  Lau-
trec  hastened  to  pursue  them  :  towards  the
end  of  April  he  encamped  on  either  side  of
the  higii  road  from  Capua,  and  opened  the
siege  of  Naples.  It  appeared  almost  impossi-
ble that  this  populous  city,  less  able  than  any
other  to  endure  scarcity  of  food,  could  long
hold  out  against  a  conquering  army.  In  Eng-
land the  fall  of  Naples  was  already  reckoned
upon  as  the  termination  of  the  whole  affair;
for  the  provinces  of  the  kingdom  were  already
in  ofreat  measure  in  the  hands  of  the  allie:

offences,  as  well  as  of  the  treatment  experi-
enced by  his  native  city,  whose  ancient  rights
over  Savona  were  now  disputed.  In  England,
where  many  Genoese  then  lived,  and  all  these
circumstances  were  known  with  the  greatest
accuracy,  they  created  the  most  violent  irrita-
tion. Wolsey  said  the  French  ought  to  give
Doria  all  the  money  and  all  the  honours  he
might  choose  to  demand  ;  and  rather  cede  Sa-
vona seven  times  over  than  estrange  this  man
at  the  moment  when  they  most  needed  him.
But  France  did  not  keep  one  line  of  policy  so
rigorously  and  steadily  in  view,  as  to  weigh  all
the  consequences  of  his  loss.  On  the  other
hand,  the  emperor  subscribed  to  all  the  terms
proposed  by  Doria;  he  rendered  the  destiny

The  Venetians  took  possession  of  the  ports  of of  Genoa,  as  well  as  the  person  and  fortunes

Apulia,  while  Filippino  Doria  defeated  the  im-
perialists in  the  harbour  of  Amalfi.  Some
people  began  to  conceive  a  hope  of  a  universal

of  Doria,  perfectly  secure,  and  he  voluntarily
added  certain  marks  of  favour;  for  example,
considerable  grant  of*  land  in  the  Neapolitan

overthrow  of  the  imperial  power.  Wolsey  was  ■  territory.  He  knew  well  what  he  was  doin«.
beard  to  declare  that  the  pope  must  be  enabled  i  In  a  very  short  time  Andrea  Doria  hoisted  on
at  once  to  depose  the  emperor,  on  account  of  the  emperor's  shipsthe  very  flags  which  Fil ip-
the  grievous  outrages  he  had  experienced  from  '  pino  had  taken  from  the  imperialists  in  the
him;  he  had  only  to  proclaim  that  the  elec- :  battle  of  Amalti.il  His  desertion  alone  suf-
toral  princes  possessed  the  right  of  proceeding  i  ficed  to  establish  the  emperor's  superiority  in
to  a  new  election,  and  to  admonish  them  to the  jMediterranean. But  besides  this,  it  was

choose  one  of  their  own  body.  This  would
not  only  have  the  effect  of  conciliating  them,
but  would  create  such  a  breach  between  the
emperor  and  the  pope  that  any  future  recon-
ciliation would  be  impossible. t  A  communi-
cation to  this  effect  was  in  fact  made  to  the
pope.  He  deemed  it  necessary  that  both  kings
should  agree  upon  the  candidate  for  the  impe-
rial crowir,  lest  a  similar  confusion  to  that  at
tbe  last  election  (of  Charles  V.)  should  occur.
He.  thought  he  could  reckon  upon  four  elec-
toral princes.  I

But  here,  too,  the  emperor's  luck}'  star  did
not  forsake  him.

In  the  first  place,  he  succeeded  in  gaining
over  one  of  the  most  powerful  chiefs  of  Italy,
Andrea  Doria.  of  Genoa.  He  bad  long  been
negotiating  with  him:  first  before  Doria  en-
tered into  the  service  of  the  Ligue.  and  after-
wards durmg  the  visit  of  the  arch-chancellor
Gattinara  to  Upper  Italy,  in  May  1527  :  an
Augustinian  hermit,  in  concert  with  a  servant
of  Doria' s  named  Erasmo,  were,  on  both  occa-
sions, the  secret  mediators. §  It  is  not  sur-
prising if,  under  these  circumstances,  the  king
of  France  missed  in  Doria  the  cordiality  and
zeal  wliich  he  expected  from  him.  Doria,  on
his  side,  made  many  complaints  of  personal

*  Ziegler,  Acta  Paparum.  book  xii.  "As  the  imperial-
ists had  neither  ammunition  nor  provisions,  ana  nothing
could  be  conveyed  to  them  in  safety,— for  all  places  were
better  inclined  to  the  French  than  to  the  imperialists .  .  .  ."

t  Bellay  au  Grandmaitre,  2d  Jan.  15-28. (MS.  Colberl,

i  Gardiner  and  Cassalis  to  C.  Wolsev.  April  28.  Strype,
Eccles.  Mem.  v.  427.  "It  were,"  says  the  pope,  "to  be
foreseen  before  sentence  of  privation,  who  were  most
meet  to  be  chosen."

§  The  details  which  we  find  concernins  this  in  Hor-
mayr's  Archiv.  ISIO,  p.  61,  and  in  Bucholtz,  are  doubtless
taken  from  the  same  documents  in  the  Vienna  archives.
Doria's  engagements  to  Francis  were  to  cease  Isl  July.
1528,  and  then  those  to  the  emperor  to  begin.  See  also
Folieta,  Historia  Genuensis,  p.  309.  Sieonius  de  rebus
gestis  Andrece  Aursse,  0pp.  Sigonii,  i.  241.
38

an  important  advantage,  that  a  city  which,
formed  the  link  of  direct  communication  be-
tween Spain  and  Milan,  once  more  declared
for  the  emperor.

At  this  moment,  too,  the  fate  of  Naples  was
decided.

Contagious  diseases,  such  as  always  follow
in  the  train  of  devastating  war,  broke  out  in
the  French  armies  before  Naples,  and  spread
with  dreadful  rapidity.  '-God  sent  amongst
them,"  says  a  German  report,  -such  a  pesti-
lence that  out  of  25.000  not  above  4000  sur-
vived."IT  Lautrec  himself  was  one  of  its  vic-
tims; Vaudemont,  to  whom  the  crown  had
been  destined,  died  before  the  g-ates  which  he
had  hoped  to  enter  in  triumph  as  king.  To
these  disasters  were  added  the  fortunate  turn
of  things  among  the  besieged.  The  German
imperialists,  as  at  Pavia,  directed  their  attacks
in  the  first  place  against  their  countrymen  in
the  service  of  France,  under  the  Count  of  Lup-
fen, and  brought  back  their  colours  as  a  trophy
into  the  city :  at  length  the  rest  of  the  French
^rmy  found  itself  compelled  to  prepare  for  a
retreat,  when  at  that  moment  it  was  attacked

;  Letter  to  Salviati,  L.  d.  Principi,  ii.  129.  la  a  MSS.
biography  of  Guasto.  in  the  Chigi  library  at  Rome,  there
is  a  chapter  on  the  Cambiamento  di  A.  IDoria,  which  cer-
tainly sounds  rather  romantic.  Doria's  prisoners  hear
him  complaining  of  king  Francis  in  his  sleep;  "non  basta
aJ  re  Francesco,  avermi  tolti  i  ricatti  guadasnati  col
rischio  del  mio  saneue,  ma  vuol  Genova  sottoporre  a  Sa-
vona— ma  io  cainbiaro  !a  bandiera.  saro  signore  del  mare,
faro  libera  non  che  soggetta  la  patria  mia."  The  mo-
tives, however,  are  clear  enough.  According  to  this  story.
Guasto  urged  them  in  his  conversation  with  Doria.  ad-
ducing the  examples  of  La  Palice  and  Giangiacopo  Tri-
vulzio,  who  had  also  been  very  ungratefully  treated  by
Francis. These  arguments  brought  him  over.

TT  Ziegler:  "es  starb  ser  under  ihnen,  Gott  schiket  under
des  Frantzosen  häuften  ain  solche  pestilenz,  das  si  inner-
halb 30  Tagen  schir  all  starben  und  von  25.000  über  4,000
nit  beliben."  "There  died  many  among  them.  God  sent
among  the  trooj)S  such  a  pestiience;:?hat  within  thirty
days  they  sheer  all  di-?d,  and  out  of  25.000  not  4,000  re-
mained ;"  a  statement  which  Reissner  has  alteied,  after
iiis  manner,  p.  173.

298

ITALIAN  WARS,  1528.

Book  V.

and  totally  cut  off. This  occurred  on  the  29th
August  1528.=^

The  imperialists,  whose  condition  had  so
lately  appeared  hopeless,  remained  completely
victors,  and  once  more  took  possession  of  the
kingdom.

Fortunate  was  it  for  the  pope  that  he  had
remained  neutral.  ''But  for  this,"  writes  his
secretary  of  state,  Sanga,  now  his  prime  mi-
iiister,"f  "we  should  now  be  in  the  lowest
abyss  of  ruin."  It  was  in  a  conference  be-
tween Clement  and  Sanga  on  the  6th  of  Sep-
tember, that  some  advances  to  the  emperor
were  seriously  resolved  on.

The  imperial  party  had  already  frequently
requested  the  pope  to  return  to  Rome,  wehere
they  promised  to  defend  him  from  every  dan-
ger.! He  now  determined  upon  this  step.  On
the  6th  of  October  we  i^ud  him  again  in  Rome.

He  was  not,  however,  on  that  account  to  be
regarded  as  in  any  degree  an  ally  of  the  em-
peror. Even  in  November  1528,  he  encouraged
Francis  I.  to  keep  alive  the  agitation  in  Ger-
many, by  which  Charles's  dignity  as  emperor
was  endangered,  and  to  support  the  Woiwode
of  Transylvania. §  In  December  1528,  the
French  ambassador  declares  that,  "Vvhatever
may  appear  to  the  contrary,  the  pope  is  as
much  inclined  to  the  French  as  ever ;  that  at
the  bottom  of  his  heart  he  was  much  dis-
pleased that  their  attack  on  Naples  had  suc-
ceeded so  ill ;  had  they  followed  his  advice,
he  said,  matters  would  not  have  ended  so.  "I
venture  to  affirm,"  adds  the  ambassador,  "  that
here  is  no  feint. "II  It  is  at  least  certain  that
one  of  his  intimates.  Cardinal  Campeggi,  who
was  gone  to  England  to  conduct  the  proceed-
ings on  the  king's  divorce,  said  publicly,  in
the  plainest  terms,  that  the  emperor  was  full
of  ill-will,  and  would  do  them  as  much  mis-
chief as  he  possibly  could ;  that  to  attack  him
in  good  earnest  was  the  true  way  to  bring  him
to  his  senses;  the  desirable  thing  would  be  to
do  him  some  damage  in  Spain,  but  as  that  was
not  practicable,  an  expedition  against  him  in
Germany  was  by  all  means  to  be  undertaken,
let  it  be  conducted  as  it  might. If

No  one,  therefore,  could  have  ventured  to
predict  a  speedy  peace.  In  the  year  1528-  a
formal  challenge  was  sent  by  the  emperor  to
the  king,  and  it  was  from  no  backwardness  oij
the  part  of  the  former  that  a  single  combat
did  not  take  place.**

*  Sepulvecia,  who  was  then  in  Gaeta,  viii.  34,  f.

t  Al  CI.  Campenrgin,  Lettere  di  principi,  ii.  127.  "  Se  sua
Santitä  non  faceva  cosi,  hora  si  sarebbe  nel  profondo  della
total  ruina."

X  Lettera  di  Roma  a  B.  Castiglione. L.  d.  pr.  ii.  10.

§Gio  Joachim  a  Montmorency  Roma,  7th  Nov.  1528.
Molini,  ii.  122.  "  Mi  disse  S.  Santitä,  che  Timperatore
fosse  quasi  costretto,  in  persona  trovarsi  ben  tosto  in
Alamagna,  per  dar  ordine  a  molte  cose,  — le  qiiali  non
ordinate— producevano  gran  pregiudizio  e  non  minor  mo-
vimento,  minacciavano  a  Timperatore  sua  stato,  titulo  e
diiinitä  (lie  i)()itits,  no  doubt,  at  the  designs  of  the  House
of  Bavaria,  to  ohtniii  tlie  dignity  of  king  of  Rome).  Se
RIO  le  cose  in  Gennania  fnssero  nel  stato  che  si  dice,  a
S.  Sä  parrehbe  che!  chr^o  re  per  ben  degli  suoi  afiari  le
mantevesse,  augumentasse  ef omen  lasse."

\l  Raince,  14th  Dec.  1528,  "qu'il  n  y  a  fiction  aucune."

irBeliay,  1  Jan.  1529,  "  lonant  fort  I'enterprise  d'Alle-
iTiagne,  par  quel  moyen  qu'elle  se  puisse  conduire."

**  ßelacion  da  Borgoiia,  Sandoval,  888. He  Lad  a  ,

f

In  Upper  Italy  the  fortune  of  war  was  still
vacillating,  inclining  rather  to  the  side  of  the
king  than  to  that  of  the  emperor.  The  same
diseases  which  had  destroyed  the  French
army  before  Naples,  attacked  the  German
troops  which,  in  the  summer  of  1528,  had
crossed  the  Alps  under  Henry  of  Brunswick
and  Marx  Sittich  of  Eras,  in  aid  of  the  em-
peror, and  were  now  encamped  in  Lombardy.
Independently  of  this,  Duke  Henry  was  not
the  man  to  carry  through  an  undertaking  in
which  he  had  to  contend  at  once  with  the
jealousy  of  his  allies,  the  aversion  of  the
country  people,  the  fatal  effects  of  the  cli-
mate, and  the  attacks  of  the  enemy.  He
soon  retreated  in  disgust  across  the  Alps;  his
troops  dispersed,  and  part  of  them  entered
the  service  of  Venice.

Theieupon  a  fresh  French  army  made  its
appearance  in  Ivrea  under  St.  Pol;  the  Vene-
tians sent  money  and  troops  to  meet  it,  and
the  allies  not  only  reconquered  Pavia,  which
they  had  a  second  time  lost,  but  immediately
began  to  indulge  the  highest  hopes.  St.  Pol
was  of  opinion  that  they  ought  instantly  to
press  on  to  the  Neapolitan  territory,  where  a
number  of  strong  places  were  still  in  posses-
sion of  the  French ;  he  doubted  not  that  the
whole  kingdom  would  then  fall  into  his  hands.
The  French  government,  on  the  other  hand,
thought  it  more  urgent  first  to  make  an  attack
on  Genoa  and  Andrea  Doria.  Although  this
did  not  succeed,  the  army  became  master  of
the  greater  part  of  Lombardy,  and  in  England
hopes  were  still  entertained  that  it  would  soon
take  Milan,  and  even,  by  investing  Parma
and  Piacenza,  regain  its  influence  over  the
pope.

Nor  was  eastern  Europe  in  a  state  of  less
confusion.  So  long  as  Ferdinand  himself  was
present  in  Hungary,  order  was  in  some  mea-

Even  his  own  adherents  could  not  agree.
The  Bishop  of  Erlau  complained  of  Andrew
Bathory,  who  had  insulted  and  wounded  him ;
"no  Socrates,"  he  declared,  "had  had  need
of  more  patience  than  he."  Francis  Batthy-
any  could  not  make  his  way  to  the  castles
of  which  Louis  Pekry  had  taken  possession,
in  his  name.  A  universal  cry  was  raised
against  the  violences  of  the  German  army
under  Katzianer,  which  levied  its  supplies
directly  upon  the  country,  and  advanced  at  a
very  slovt^  rate  against  the  Joannists.  Katzia-
ner sent  an  energetic  and  rough  answer. ft
The assertion, even if untrue, that bread

solemn  audience  of  the  king,  who  said  to  him,  "  Dost
thou  bring  me  the  place  of  battle?"  The  herald  answer-
ed, "Sire,  the  Emperor's  sacred  majesty " The  king

broke  in  upon  him,  "  I  bid  thee  that  thou  speak  to  me  oif
nothing,  till  thou  hast  brought  me  assurance  of  the  place
of  battle."  The  herald  could  not  fully  deliver  his  mes-
sage ;  but  at  last  it  came  to  pass  as  Wolsey  thought.  "  I
trust  to  God  these  young  courageous  passions  shall  be
finally  converted  into  fume." 21st  July,  St.  P.  p.  320.

ft  Correspondence  in  Bucholtz,  iii.  269—279.  In  Ursinus
Veiius  de  Bello  Pannonico,  p.  91,  we  see  that  the  grandees
of  Hungary  quarrelled,  "de  bonis  hostis  Joannis  jamolim
inter  se  partitis."

Chap.  IL

TROUBLES  IN  HUNGARY,  1528.

299

mixed  with  chalk  was  given  to  the  Germans
to  poison  them,  proves  the  strong  national
antipathy  that  had  arisen.  This  rendered  it
doubly  difficult  to  keep  in  check  the  adhe-
rents of  Zapolya.  At  the  diet  of  Ofen,  in
January  1528,  they  formed  three  distinct
classes ;  those  who,  spite  of  the  oath  they
had  sworn  to  King  Ferdinand,  endeavoured
to  seduce  his  subjects  to  revolt;  the  vacil-
lating, who  had  demanded  safe  conduct  in
order  that  they  might  go  and  do  homage  to
the  king,  and  then  had  never  appeared ;  and
lastly.  Zapolya"s  open  followers,  who  carried
on  a  system  of  plunder,  and  rendered  the
country  insecure.  It  does  not  appear  that
any  effectual  measures  were  taken  ag-ainst
any  of  them.  On  the  other  hand,  Zapolya
neglected  no  means  by  which  he  could,  from
his  exile  at  Tarnow,  keep  Hungary  in  a  state
of  agitation.  George  Martinuzzi,  a  monk  of
the  Pauline  order,  who  had  formerly  been  in
the  service  of  Zapolya's  mother,  was  so  de-
voted to  him  that  he  three  times  ventured
into  Hungary  on  foot.  He  boasts  of  the  good
reception  he  had  experienced  from  Jacob  von
Thornaly,  Stephen  Bathory  of  Somlyo,  and
Paul  Arthandy.  He  wandered  from  castle  to
castle,  revived  old  connexions,  and  prepared
every  thing  for  his  lord's  reception.*  The
main  thing  was,  that  he  was  the  bearer  of
promises  of  Turkish  succours.  In  the  be-
ginning of  the  year  1528  a  treaty  had  been
concluded  between  Zapolya  and  Suleiman.
This  was  not  the  result  of  presents,  for  the  am-
bassador, Jerome  Lasko,  had  brought  none  ;
nor  of  any  promise  of  tribute,  but  solely  of
political  motives.  Zapolya  had  declared  ,that
he  would,  now  and  always,  serve  the  mighty
sultan  with  all  the  powers  of  his  kingdom,  of
his  hereditary  possessions,  and  even  of  his
own  person.  "I,  on  the  other  hand,"  said
Suleiman,  in  the  solemn  audience  of  leave,
'•  will  be  a  true  friend  and  ally  to  your  mas-
ter, and  support  him  against  his  enemies  with
all  my  power.  I  swear  it  by  the  prophet,  by
the  great  prophet  beloved  of  God,  Mohammed,
and  by  my  sword. ""t  Unquestionably  nothino-
could  be  more  conducive  to  the  progress  of
the  Turkish  power  than  a  strict  alliance  with
so  influential  a  chief.  Suleiman  considered
himself  as  the  most  formidable  rival  of  the
House  of  Austria,  ■— the  natural  head  of  the
opposition  to  it,  in  which  he  included  France,
Venice,  Poland,  and  the  pope  himself;  "that
poor  priest  from  whom  the  faith  of  the  Chris-
tians emanates,  and  whom  they  nevertheless
so  remorselessly  maltreat."  He  was  con-
vinced that  he  ought  immediately  to  oppose
resistance  to  the  power  of  the  emperor
Charles  v.;  "for,"  gaid  he,  "it  is  hke  a
stream  formed  of  small  brooks  and  melting
snows,  which  at  length  undermines  the  strong
castle  in  the  mountain  gorge."!" The  Aus-

*  His  letter  to  Verantius  in  Pray,  and  thence  in  Kato-
ua,  XX.  1.  409. See  Isthuansi,p.  126.

t  Lasky's  Statement  in  Katona,  xx.  1.  Lasky  declared
in  Zapolya's  name,  "  non  solum  Ungariae  regnum,  non
solum  dominia  patrimonii  sui,sed  et  personam  suam  pro-
priam  non  suam  esse  vult  sed  vestrana,"  p.  319.

J  Habordancz,  Reportj  in  Bucholtz,  iii.  596.

trian  ambassadors  assert  that  the  Kittg  of
Poland  sent  a  special  messenger  in  October
1528,  inviting  the  sultan  to  declare  war  upon
the  emperor  in  the  following  year;  in  which
case  he  would  come  to  his  assistance.  Sulei-
man was,  however,  already  resolved  upon  it.
When  Habordancz,  the  envoy  sent  by  Ferdi-
nand to  Constantinople,  to  demand  the  resti-
tution of  twenty-four  fortresses  formerly  be-
longing to  Hungary,  offered  only  a  pecuniary
compensation  in  return,  the  sultan  replied,
that  he  would  come  in  person,  with  all  his
troops,  to  defend  these  fortresses.  It  may
easily  be  imagined  what  a  ferment  this  pros-
pect of  war  excited  in  Hungary.  As  early  as
September  1528,  Andrew  Bathory  wrote  to
King  Ferdinand  that  he  lived  surrounded  by
rebels,  and  with  death  before  his  eyes.  The
same  year,  Peter  Raresch,  Hospodar  of  LIol-
davia,  who  had  long  been  a  fisherman,  but
was  now  recognised  as  a  true  Dragoschide  of
the  house  of  the  great  Stephen,  invaded  and
laid  w^aste  the  diocese  of  Szekler.§  Every
thing  seemed  to  tend  to  a  great  catastrophe.

While  such  an  universal  ferment  prevailed
in  the  East  and  in  the  West,  it  was  hardly  pos-
sible that  stormy  Germany  should  escape  the
contagion.

CHAPTER  II.

GERMANY DURING THE AFFAIR AND TIMES OF
PACK.

We  invariably  find  the  Dukes  of  Bavaria  in
more  or  less  intimate  connexion  with  the
foreign  princes  hostile  to  the  empire  —  the
King  of  France,  II  the  woiwode,  and  above  all,
the  pope.

They  had  still  not  relinquished  their  hopes
of  the  im^perial  crown.  They  carried  on  in-
cessant intrigues  with  the  leading  electoral
princes,  and  made  them  magnificent  promises.
They  also  tried  to  set  the  King  of  France  again
in  motion.

We  are  in  possession  of  a  project  which
they  communicated  to  the  French  court  with
a  view  to  the  attainment  of  their  end.ll  It  was
proposed  that  French  ambassadors,  supported
by  those  of  Lorraine  and  of  England,  should
appear  at  the  next  diet  of  the  empire,  and
should  remind  the  States  what  numerous  and
severe  losses  the  church  and  the  empire  had
sustained,  since  the  House  of  Austria  had  oc-
cupied the  imperial  throne.  Constantinople,
Rhodes,  and  now  Hungary,  were  lost  to  Chris-
tendom ;  Basle  and  Constance  to  the  empire ',
the  sole  object  of  the  princes  of  Austria  was

§  Engel,  Geschichte  der  Wallachei,  p,  170.

II  Lettre  de  Breton  au  Gr.  Maitre,  17th  May,  1528  (MS,
Bethune).  "  Le  secretaire  du  due  de  Baviere,  que  vous
savez,  est  depuis  deux  (jours  ?)  ici  et  a  eu  fort  bonne  au-
dience du  roi."

IT  Forme  et  maniere  de  conduire  et  mener  l'affaire  d'elec-
tion  au  nom  du  roi  de  France.  MS.  Bethune,  6593,  f.  9?.
See  the  agreement  with  Mainz ;  Stumpf,  p.  50.

PACK'S  PLOT,  1528.

Book  V.

to  make  the  empire  hereditary,  and  to  aggran-
dise themselves  in  every  possible  way^  (as  an
example  of  which,  Don  Ferdinand^ s  recent
attempt  to  get  possession  of  Salzburg  was  to
be  cited  :)  hereupon  they  should  call  upon  the
States  to  proceed  to  the  election  of  another
emperor ;  to  elevate  to  the  throne  a  man  who
would  rule  uprightly,  and  restore  Germany  to
its  former  prosperity;  who  should  be  a  true
and  good  catholic,  able  to  eradicate  all  here-
sies. With  such  an  emperor,  the  King  of
France  should  engage  to  form  the  strictest
alhance.*

It  is  very  probable  that  these  negotiations
v/ere  carried  further.  It  is  at  least  certain
that  the  Bavarians  hoped  to  gain  over  the
Palatinate  and  Treves ;  the  Elector  of  Bran-
denburg, through  the  influence  of  France,  and
the  Elector  of  Saxony  by  corrupting  his  coun-
cillors.t  This  we  gather  from  the  expressions
of  the  pope  and  his  legate,  as  well  as  from
those  of  Cardinal  Wolsey.

It  is,  however,  remarkable  enough  that  the
opposite  (i.  e.  the  evangelical)  party  had  also
made  advances  to  the  powers  hostile  to  Aus-
tria.

We  find  an  emissary  of  the  Landgrave  of
Hessen,  Dr.  Walter,  at  the  court  of  France.
Another  we  see  setting  out  on  his  way  to  John
Zapolya,  and  trace  his  progress  through  the
whole  of  his  journey.  This  was  the  cele-
brated Dr.  Pack.  In  the  Passion-week  of
1528,  we  find  him  in  Senftenberg,  where  he
gave  himself  out  to  be  a  canon  of  Meissen  ]
at  Easter,  in  Breslau,  where  he  hired  a  ser-
vant who  could  speak  Polish;  on  the  18th  of
April,  at  Cracow.  Here,  in  the  church  of  St.
Barbara,  he  had  his  first  interview  with  a  fol-
lower of  the  woiwode.  at  which  they  deter-
mined that  he  should  visit  that  prince  in  per-
son., When  Pack  reached  the  neighbourhood
of  Tarnow.  where  the  woiwode  then  resided,
he  alighted  from  his  carriage  and  proceeded
on  foot  into  the  city,  in  order  not  to  attract
attention.  On  the  26th  and  27th  April  we  find
him  negotiating  with  the  woiwode ;  a  formal
treaty  was  drawn  up,  and  nothing  was  want-
ing but  the  ratification  of  the  landgrave. J
The  landgrave  had  demanded  money  to  en-
able him  to  attack  Ferdinand  in  Germany.
The  woiwode  promised  to  procure  100,000
gulden  from  his  brother-in-law,  the  king  of
Poland.  The  report  that  Poland  had  promised
the  sultan  to  attack  Ferdinand  with  German
troops,  may  very  probably  be  traced  to  this
treaty.

It  is  impossible  to  calculate  the  conse-
quences that  must  have  resulted  from  a  pro-

*  The  conclusion  runs  thus:  "Au  surplus  nos  princes
sont  deliböres  de  n'nbmettre  rien  de  leur  labeur  et  vigi-
lance, et  d'essayer  tous  les  inoyens  qu'ils  verront  etre  ne-
cessaires  pour  la  fin  de  cette  affaire,  et  qu'ils  ont  esperance,
Dieu  aidant  et  la  bont6  du  roi  tres  chrötien,  achever
I'affaire  ainsi  qu'ils  le  desiren*  "

t '  Möchten  etliche  seiner  Räthe  durch  Geld  abzurichten
seyn  :"  "  some  of  his  councillors  might  be  to  be  bi'ought
round  with  money."  Extracts  from  a  memoir,  probably
of  Duke  William,  in  Sugenheim,  Baierus  Zustände,  &;c.,
p.  9.

X  We  have  taken  all  the  details  from  the  confession  of
Hans  Schuoch  of  Breslau,  the  same  whom  Pack  hired  as
his  servant.

secution  of  these  schemes,  which  were  aimed
by  the  one  party  at  Charles's  imperial  dignity,
while  the  other  intended  to  attack  Ferdinand
in  his  hereditary  domains  ;§  especially  at  a
time  when  all  other  social  and  political  rela-
tions were  shaken.

But  such  projects  were  not  destined  to  be
realised.  The  Dukes  of  Bavaria  and  the
Landgrave  of  Hessen  were  wholly  ignorant
that  they  were  allies.  Indeed,  such  violent  an-
tipathies, chiefly  from  religious  causes,  arose
among  the  sovereigns  of  Germany,  that  they
gave  birth  to  one  of  the  most  singular  compli-
cations that  ever  occurred  in  history.

In  consequence  of  so  many  evangelical
princes  having  thrown  off  the  jurisdiction  of
the  ecclesiastical  courts,  numerous  complaints
were  laid  before  the  imperial  court;  and,  in
the  existing  state  and  spirit  of  the  imperial
chanceries,  these  complaints  could  not  fail  to
meet  with  a  hearing  :  it  is  perfectly  true  that
the  expediency  of  resorting  to  punishments,
and  even  to  the  ban,  was  there  suggested.
Nassau,  which  had  old  territorial  dissensions
with  the  Landgrave  of  Hessen,  sought  to  se-
cure itself  against  this  contingency  by  man-
dates.II

A  vague  rumour  of  these  designs  found  its
way  to  Germany.  The  landgrave  was  warned
by  a  man  of  great  consideration,  as  he  says,
"whom  he  would  not  name,  but  who  knew
from  good  authority  that  there  was  something
in  hand  —  extraordinary  practices  [merkliche
practica) — against  the  Lutherans.-'

The  landgrave,  however,  did  not  look  so  far
for  the  origin  of  the  danger.  He  saw  only  the
hostilities  of  which  the  adherents  of  the  new
doctrine  were  the  objects,  in  Bavaria  and  the
whole  of  Upper  Germany;  the  violent  menaces
uttered  by  Duke  George  of  Saxony  against  his
cousin  the  elector ;  his  declarations  that  no-
thing should  induce  him  to  be  reconciled  to
that  prince  so  long  as  he  adhered  to  the  Lu-
theran sect,  and  that  he  only  waited  for  the
emperor's  commands  to  proceed  against  him.
It  appeared  to  the  landgrave  a  suspicious  cir-
cumstance that  zealous  catholic  princes  had
visited  King  Ferdinand  at  Breslau,  in  May
1527,  and  had  afterwards  afforded  him  assist-
ance in  Hungary;  in  short,  he  was  fully  per-
suaded that  a  plot  against  him  was  in  agita-
tion among  his  neighbours.

Just  at  this  time  it  happened  that  the  stew-
ard of  the  chancery  of  Duke  George  —  Otto
von  Pack — the  same  who  undertook  the  jour-
ney to  Tarnow  —  in  the  course  of  the  year

§  It  was  the  general  opinion  that  the  troubles  in  the
Mark,  and  the  attacks  made  by  Minkwitz  upon  Lebus,
were  connected  with  this.  Duke  George  writes  to  Hoyer
von  Mansfeld  (March,  1529),  "  It  is  credibly  reported  to  us
that  a  very  great  business  was  in  hand,  and  although  it
is  set  on  foot  in  the  name  of  some  of  the  nobles,  we  can-
not  give  much  heed  to  it,  since  a  great  deal  of  money  is
aiven  to  the  persons  employed.  It  is  said  that  this  busi-
ness is  undertaken  for  the  advantage  of  the  Wayda,  and
against  the  country  of  Laussnitz  and  the  elector  of  Bran-
denburg." The  duke  was  just  then  intending  to  have  an
interview  with  the  elector.  It  v^as  he  who  arrested
Minkwitz.

11  Heinrich  v.  Nassau  to  Joh.  v.  TVassau  ;  Arnoldi,  Me-
moirs, p.  200.  The  letter  is  of  the  13th  April,  before
Pack's  affair,  of  which  nothing  was  then  known,  espe-
cially in  Spain.

Chap.  IL

PACK'S  PLOT,  1528.

301

1527  came  to  the  landgrave,  who  was  then  at
-Cassel,  to  give  him  information  and  legal  ad-
vice as  to  the  affair  with  Nassau.  The  land-
grave disclosed  to  him  his  apprehensions,  and
pressed  him  to  say  whether  he  knew  any-
thing about  the  m-atter.  Pack  sighed,  and
was  silent.  This  only  increased  the  land-
grave's urgency.  Pack  at  length  declared,
that  a  league  against  the  Lutherans  was  in-
deed not  only  in  hand,  but  actually  concluded.
He  engaged  to  procure  the  original  documents
for  the  landgrave,  who,  in  return,  promised
him  his  protection  and  a  reward  of  10,000
gulden.  Landgrave  Philip  was  now  inflamed
with  indignation.  In  February  1528,  we  find
him  in  Dresden  :  whither  Pack  brought,  not,
indeed,  the  original  of  the  treaty,  Vv'hich,  he
said,  the  chancellor  had  laid  aside,  but  a  copy
of  it,  bearing  all  the  outward  marks  of  authen-
ticity. The  seal  of  the  Saxon  chancery  was
afhxed  on  both  sides  to  the  black  silk  cord
which  tied  the  sheets  of  paper  together,  and
beneath  it  hung  the  seal  of  the  signet  ring  I
w-hich  Duke  George  wore  (and  which  the
landgrave  knew  perfectly  well),  with  his  three
escutcheons:  in  the  upper  one  the  rue  gar-
land ;  in  the  lowest,  two  lions.  Pack  allowed
the  landgrave's  secretary  to  take  a  copy  of  it,
and  received  four  thousand  gulden.*

This  document  contained  the  most  alarming
and  hostile  matter  that  it  was  possible  to  con-
ceive. It  appeared  therein  that  the  Electors
of  i\Iainz  and  Brandenburg,  the  Dukes  of  Sax-
ony and  Bavaria,  the  Bishops  of  Saltzburg,
Wurzburg,  and  Bamberg,  in  conjunction  with
King  Ferdinand,  had  bound  themselves  in  the
first  place  to  fall  upon  the  Elector  of  Saxony,
if  he  refused  to  deliver  up  Luther  and  his  fol-
lowers, and  to  partition  his  territory  :  and  next
to  attack  the  landgrave,  and  if  he  would  not
recant,  to  drive  him  out  of  his  country,  which
was  then  to  be  given  to  Duke  George.  The
city  of  Llagdeburg  was  also  to  be  reduced  to
subjection  to  its  bishop.  The. mode,  as  well
as  the  means  of  attack  were  accurately  deter-
mined.

The  landgrave,  long  filled  with  suspicions  of
this  kind,  did  not  for  a  moment  doubt  the  au-
thenticity of  the  document  laid  before  him :
he  hurried,  with  his  habitual  vehemence,  to
Weimar,  in  order  to  communicate  it  to  the
jelector.  Even  he  was  stunned  and  hurried
away  by  the  amazing,  yet  precise  and  urgent
nature  of  the  danger  ;  and  on  the  9th  of  March
a  treaty  between  the  two  princes  was  con-
cluded, in  which  they  promised  to  raise  six
thousand  foot  and  two  thousand  horse  for  their
mutual  defence.  They  concluded  that  it  would
be  better  not  long  to  await  the  attack,  but  to
anticipate  it.  The  landgrave  himself  went  to
Nürnberg,  and  thence  to  Ansbach.  It  was
under  these  circumstances  that  he  sent  Otto
Pack,  whom  he  had  now  attached  more  closely
to  his  service,  to  the  woiwode.  Warlike  pre-
parations began  without  delay. The  Hessian

*  Statement  of  the  Landgrave,  in a  letter  to Duke
Georjre,  of  the  28th  June,  which  Rommel  (iii.  21)  speaks
of  as'losl,  but  which  is  in  the  Dresden  archives. I  shall
give  it  in  the  Appendix.
2  A

troops  assembled  near  Herrenbreitungen;  the
Saxon,  in  the  Thuringian  forest.  The  whole
of  Germany  was  in  motion.

The  situation  of  things  in  the  evangehcal
part  of  Germany  was  not,  however,  such  as  to
depend  solely  on  the  hasty  spirit  of  this  or
that  prince.  The  theologians  too,  especially
Lulher,  had  a  voice  to  give ;  and  the  first
question  was,  what  opinion  this  voice  would
pronounce.

Luther  had  as  little  doubt  as  the  two  princes
of  the  genuineness  of  the  treaty  laid  before
him  ;  but  he  thought  it  did  not  justify  an  im-
mediate resort  to  arms.  Such  violent  measures
were  opposed  to  all  his  ideas  of  law  and  mo-
rality. He  therefore  thought  it  his  duty  to
remonstrate  with  the  princes  on  their  designs,
and  beg  them  to  desist  from  them :  an  accu-
sation, he  said,  must  first  be  laid  against  their
enemies,  and  the  answer  heard ;  othervv'ise,
violence  and  confusion  would  break  out  among
the  princes  of  Germany,  which,  to  the  joy  of
Satan,  would  lay  waste  the  country.  Of  all
the  men  who  ever  placed  themselves  at  the
head  of  a  great  movement,  Luther  was  per-
haps the  most  averse  to  violence  and  war.  He
held  that  self-defence  was  lawful,  especially
against  princes  like  those  above  named,  who,
as  the  equals  of  his  master,  had  no  sovereignty
over  him  :  but  to  be  the  first  to  take  up  arms
and  proceed  to  acts  of  offence,  —  that  was
beyond  his  comprehension. t  He  applied  the
words,  ''  Blessed  are  the  meek  and  the  peace-
makers,'' to  political  affairs.  "He  that  taketh
the  sword  shall  perish  by  the  sword."  "  War,"
said  he.  '-ventures  all,  wins  little,  and  is  cer-
tain to  lose ;  but  meekness  loses  nothing,  risks
little,  and  wins  all."

It  was  easy  to  persuade  Elector  John,  who
understood  the  gospel  as  Luther  did,  and  loved
it  with  all  his  heart;  he  had  merely  been  hur-
ried awa}'  by  the  vehemence  of  his  impetuous
ally.  He  now  represented  to  Philip  that  an
attack  might  bring  dishonour  on  the  gospel,
and  that  they  must  therefore  refrain  from  it.
The  landgrave  replied,  that  the  treaty  of  their
enemies,  sealed  and  sworn  to  by  them,  was
equivalent  to  an  attack;  he  represented  the
advantage  of  taking  immediate  and  active
measures  for  their  defence  ;  it  would  awaken
many  who  now  slumbered,  and  would  enable
them  to  obtain  safer  terms.  But  the  elector
could  no  longer  be  prevailed  on  to  advance  a
step.  He  sent  his  son.  accompanied  by  a
trusty  councillor,  named  Wildenfels,  to  Cassei,
with  so  decided  a  refusal,  that  the  landgrave
was  forced  at  length  to  follow  Luther's  advice,
and  in  the  first  place  to  make  the  treaty
known,  and  demand  an  explanation  from  the
princes  therein  named.  He  instantly  sent  it
to  his  father-in-law. J

t  Remarks  in  De  Witte,  iii.  316.  Nos.  986, 9S7,  but  doubt-
less to  be  dated  March,  and  not  May.  For  they  are  men-
tioned already  in  a  copy  of  instructions  in  JVeudecker's
Documents,  p.  33,  which,  though  undated,  certainly  falls
in  March,  since  the  elector  says  therein  that  he  has  sura-
moned  some  of  his  friends  on  the  Friday  after  Judica  (3d
April),  "right  presently"  (schirstkiinftig).

X  Letter  in  the  Weimar  archives,  undated,  but  of  the
earlier  half  of  April,  in  answer  to  the  above-named  in-
structions. "  I  will  certainly  see  that  I  shortly  obtain  the

PACK'S  PLOT,  1528.

Book  V.

It  is  impossible  to  describe  the  astonishment
that  seized  the  German  courts  at  the  appear-
ance of  the  accusation  founded  on  this  docu-
ment.

Duke  George  answered  immediately,  and
denounced  the  man  who  affirmed  that  he  had
seen  the  original-  of  such  a  treaty,  as  a  false
and  perjured  villain.  Elector  Joachim  de-
manded, as  did  Duke  George,  that  the  name
of  the  liar  who  had  forged  this  treaty  should
be  published,  lest  people  should  think  the
landgrave  himself  had  invented  it.  All  the
others  answered  in  the  same  manner.  The
landgrave  saw  himself  compelled  to  arrest
his  informer,  and  to  allow  him  to  be  brought
to  trial.*

We  too  must  here  discuss  the  question,
which  does  not  seem  even  yet  to  be  at  rest, —
what  was  the  real  truth  concerning  this  alleged
treaty  ?

In  the  first  place,  it  is  full  of  the  gTOssest
improbabilities.  Elector  Joachim,  for  example,
was  to  abandon  Hessen  to  the  Duke  of  Saxony
(to  which,  in  virtue  of  the  hereditary  union  of
the  houses,  he  Wd  quite  an  equal  claim),
stipulating  to  receive  Beeskow  and  Storkow
as  a  compensation  ;  though  these  had  for  some
years  become  the  property  of  the  bishopric  of
Lebus.t  The  Dukes  of  Bavaria  were  repre-
sented as  uniting  with  Ferdinand  to  give  him
possession  of  Hungary  —  the  very  country
which  they  were  striving  to  wrest  from  him.
The  plan  of  the  campaign,  too,  was  most
strange ;  and  there  is  a  certain  ironical  truth
in  what  Pack  afterwards  said,  when,  in  order
to  excuse  himself,  he  described  the  whole
scheme  as  "foolishly  laid"  {närrisJi  geslellt).t

We  have  also  to  consider  the  character  of
Pack.  In  the  Dresden  archives  there  are
docom.ents  concerning  him,  from  which  it  is
evident  that  hfe  was  untrustv.-arthy,  treacher-
ous,—  in  short,  a  thoroughly  bad  man.  He
made  use  of  his  position  at  court  to  extort
money.  For  example,  he  borrowed  from  the
council  of  Tennslädt  some  hundreds  of  gulden,
under  specious  pretexts,  and  postponed  pay-
ment from  term  to  term.  In  the  list  of  his
creditors  are  also  four  other  Saxon  towns.  Pirna.
Meissen,  Oschatz  and  Chemnitz. §

But  the  following  story  is  still  more  discredit-
able to  him.  On  one  occasion,  when  he  went
to  Nürnberg  on  his  lord's  business  (we  find
him  more  than  once  in  the  character  of  envo}'-
to  the  diet),  the  Bishop  of  Merseburg  entrusted

same  (the  original).  But  had  F.  L.  followed  my  advice,  and
that  of  others,  at  Weimar,  and  not  grudged  a  little  cost,
I  should  have  it  already  at  this  time."  It  is  clear  that
Pack  from  the  very  first  demanded  money.  Philip  de-
clared in  a  letter  to  Duke  George  (Rommel,  iii.  17),  that
it  was  only  within  the  last  three  or  four  weeks  that  he
had  allowed  money  to  be  offered  to  Pack.

*  The  answers,  as  well  as  the  pretended  treaty  itself,
are  to  be  found  in  Hortleder  and  Walch.  In  the  Dresden
archives  there  is  also  a  copy  of  instructions  of  Ferdinand's,
in  which  he  requests  Duke  George  to  come  to  the  bottom
of  the  affair,  and  to  make  out  how  and  where  it  arose.

t  Wohl  brück,  Geschichte  von  Lebus,  ii.  414.

I  Printed  in  the  Acta  concerning  Doctor  Otto  v.  Pack's
examination  in  Cassel,  in  Hoflfman's  collection  of  un-
printed  Reports,  p.  98.

§  Missives  found  in  Dr.  Pack's  house  when  he  was  ar-
rested. Dresden  Archives,  No.  7398.

him  w^ith  his  contingent  for  the  Council  of  Re-
gency and  the  imperial  chamber,  amounting
to  103 5  gulden.  The  diet  was  over,  and  Pack
long  returned,  when  the  bishop"  received  a  ci-
tation to  pay  his  contingent.  Pack,  being
questioned  about  it,  declared,  without  any
embarrassment,  that  he  had  given  the  money
to  a  Nürnberg  citizen  of  the  name  of  Friede-
mann, who  had  delivered  it  to  the  Council  of
Regency,  but  had  got  no  receipt,  because  some
former  arrears  were  still  due.  As  a  proof,  he
subjoined  Friedemann's  letter  and  seal.  Friede-
mann was  of  course  immediately  called  to  ac-
count. What  was  the  surprise  of  the  council,
when  the  honest  citizen  declared  he  hardly
knew  Dr..  Pack, — never  had  any  dealings  with
him,  nor  received  money  from  him ;  he  like-
wise observed  that  the  Council  of  Regency
would  certainly  have  given  him  a  receipt  for
the  sum  which  he  had  actually  paid  in,  though
not  for  the  whole  debt ;  that  the  handwriting
and  seal  which  the  doctor  had  produced  could
not  possibly  be  his.  Both  these  documents
are  in  the  archives;  and,  in  fact,  the  hand-
writing which  Pack  had  sent  in,  is  totally  dif-
ferent from  that  of  Friederaann.  In  fact,
Pack  was  already  practised  in  forgery,  when
this  opportunity  of  making  money,  on  a  larger
scale  than  heretofore,  presented  itself.  He
used  his  skill  to  such  a  purpose,  that,  as  we
have  seen,  Germany  was  very  nearly  involved
in  civil  war.  He  himself  afterwards  did  not
persist  in  asserting  the  genuineness  of  the
forged  documents.  He  abandoned  the  asser-
tion that  he  had  had  in  his  hands  the  original,
authenticated  by  the  seals  of  all  the  princes,
and  only  affirmed  that  a  Bohemian  secretary,
named  Wurisyn,  had  brought  him  a  copy  out
of  Silesia.  But  even  this  turned  out  to  be
false.  The  secretary  proved  that,  at  the  time
mentioned  by  Pack,  he  was  not  in  Dresden:
he  was  then  a  fugitive  from  his  creditors.il

A  document  so  filled  with  contradictions,
and  proceeding  from  so  fraudulent  and  men-
dacious a  man,  must  be  entirely  rejected.  I
find,  too,  that  the  opinion  that  Pack  had  prac-
tised a  cheat,  was,  even  at  the  time,  very  ge-
nerally difl^used.  Melancthon  was  persuaded
of  it  the  instant  he  read  the  first  examinations.1
Chancellor  Brück  instituted  a  more  searching
inquiry,  and  came  to  the  same  conclusion.**
Landgrave  Philip  more  than  once  frankly  ac-
knowledged it.  He  was  afterwards  reproached
w^ith  having,  on  that  occasion,  undertaken
much  and  accomplished  little,  ''That  hap-
pened," said  he,  "because  we  felt  that  we

II  Examination  of  Wurisyn,  in  a  convolute  in  the  Dres-
den Archives,  entitled.  Proceedings  concerning  the  Affair
between  Dr.  Otto  Pack  and  Caspar  Wurisyn.  I  must  ex-
pressly remark  that,  in  the  whole  account  of  this  affair,  I
do  not  use  any  thing  that  Pack  confessed  on  the  rack,  as
evidence.

U  To  Camerarius,  Corp.  Repert.  i.  988.  Alter  sane
odiose  extorsit  pecuniam  nobis  valde  dissuadentibus :
alSihs  6'  ovK  ayaeii  Ktxpriixivo^j  avSpi.  Camerarius  had  very
much  moderated  these  expressions.  Dr.  Bretschneider  has
restored  them.

**  Oratio  de  Gregorio  Pontano  habita  aVitoWinshe-
mio.  Declam.  Melanchthonis,  torn.  V.  p.  205.  "  Pnncipes
commenticio  foedere  moti,  arma  ceperunt.— Re  inquisita
Pontani  diligentia  exercitus  dimissi  sunt."

Chap.  IL

PERSECUTIONS  OP  THE  REFORMERS.

303

were  deceived. We  found  that  we  had  been
falsely  informed."*

Fortunate  would  it  have  been,  had  he  yielded
to  this  conviction  sooner  than  he  actually  did.

But  before  the  falsehood  of  the  supposed
project  was  become  perfectly  obvious,  he  had
already  fallen  upon  the  Würzburg  territory,
and  threatened  Bamberg  on  the  one  side  and
Mainz  on  the  other.  He  now  demanded  that
those  who  had  caused  his  armament  should
pay  the  cost  of  it.  As  no  one  was  prepared
to  resist  him,  the  bishops  were  compelled,  in
spite  of  the  mediation  of  the  Palatinate  and
Treves,  actually  to  pay  him  an  indemnity,  and
to  accede  to  unfavourable  terms.

Happy  as  the  Elector  of  Saxony  was  that  an
unjust  war  would  be  avoided,  he  was  fully
sensible  of  the  unpardonable  nature  of  such
violence,  and  of  the  precipitancy  which  had
characterised  the  whole  affair.  "It  almost
consumes  me,"  said  Melancthon,  "when  I  re-
flect with  what  stains  our  good  cause  is  co-
vered by  it.  I  can  only  sustain  myself  by
prayer. '-"t

Even  the  landgrave  was  afterwards  ashamed.
"If  it  had  not  happened,"  said  he,  "it  would
not  happen  now.  We  know  no  act  of  our  life
that  is  more  displeasing  to  us."!'

But  this  did  not  remedy  the  evil,  which,  in-
deed, was  followed  by  the  gravest  and  the
most  dangerous  consequences.

The  Protestant  chiefs  had  laid  bold  plans  for
availing  themselves  of  the  complication  of
events  m  Europe,  or  had  endeavoured  to  bring
the  religious  dissensions  of  Germany  to  an
open  conflict.  The  only  result,  however,  had
been  an  outrageous  breach  of  the  public  peace,
which  threw  an  ill  light  on  all  the  proceedings
and  designs  of  the  religious  party.

For  the  common  sense  of  what  was  due  to
justice  and  to  the  empire,  now  naturally  re-
volted against  them.

The  members  of  the  Swabian  league,  to
which  both  the  landgrave  and  the  bishops  be-
longed, were  particularly  discontented.  The
landgrave  sent  apologetic  letters,  and  offered
to  abide  the  legal  decision  of  Elector  Louis.
The  League  answered  (November  1528)  that
no  appeal  to  law  was  necessary  ;  they  would
adhere  to  the  letter  of  their  act  of  union.  "I
would  that  the  day  of  judgment  burst  upon
us,"  exclaims  an  envoy  in  his  zeal,  "that  so
we  might  be  delivered  out  of  this  and  other
dangers."

Though  there  existed  in  the  leaders  of  both
parties  a  certain  inclination  to  oppose  the
House  of  Austria,  and  to  join  the  European
confederation  against  it,  we  find  that  affairs

*  Tliird  reply  in  Hortleder,  iv.  19,  No.  26,  p.  567.

t  13tli  September,  passim,  p.  998.

I  Acts  of  the  proceedings,  legation  and  writings  which
took  place  under  the  most'serene  Lord  Philip,  in  the  affairs
of  Miinster,  Cassel,  May,  1535.  "As  to  the  bishops,  a
plot  came  before  us  which  we  and  many  others  held  to  be
true,  and  accordingly  willed  to  save  our  subjects  from  it;
but  as  u'^dsaw  that  we  had  been  too  lightly  informed,  we
paused  in  our  designs.  The  money  that  we  have  given,
the  electors  have  settled  with  us  with  a  good  will,  nor  are
you  to  resard  this  our  proceeding  as  an  example,  for  we
know  no  matter  that  more  displeases  us,  that  we  have
done  in  all  our  life,  than  even  this;  had  it  not  happened,
it  would  now  never  happen."

took  a  totally  different  direction;  and  that  it
was  in  fact  a  mistake,  a  fraud,  and  an  act  of
rashness  which  brought  all  the  conflicting
passions  into  play.

This  could  not;  indeed,  have  been  the  case,
had  not  the  internal  dissonances  become
every  hour  stronger  and  deeper.

As,  on  the  evangelical  side,  institutions  in
harmony  with  the  new  opinions  began  to  be
organised;  so  on  the  other,  measures  were
proposed  to  strengthen  the  tottering  edifice
of  Catholicism.

In  some  places,  similar  means  to  those  used
by  the  Lutherans  were  resorted  to.  In  the
years  1527,  1528,  we  find  visitations  of  the
churches  in  Austria,  by  commissions  com-
posed of  ecclesiastical  and  lay  members,  like
those  in  Saxony,  only  in  a  contrary  sense.
These  were  appointed  in  the  hope  of  bring-
ing about  the  observance  of  the  edict  of
Regensbuig,  and  the  archducal  mandates
founded  thereupon,  by  gentle  means  ;§  but  it
was  soon  perceived  that  the  new  opinions
were  already  widely  diffused.  Recourse  was
then  had  to  punishments.  On  the  20th  of
July  1528,  it  was  ordered  that  heretics  should
be  punished,  not  as  ordinary  criminals,  but  as
malefactors  of  the  highest  order. II  On  the
24ih  of  July  not  only  all  printers,  but  all  vend-
ers of  sectarian  books,  v/ere  threatened  with
death  by  drowning,  as  poisoners  of  the  coun-
try. Edicts'  were  published  to  restore  the
spiritual  authority  which  had  so  greatly  de-
cline d.T

In  Tyrol  the  decree  of  the  empire  of  1526
was  interpreted  in  favour  of  Catholicism;  and
the  government  declared  it  would  no  longer
be  bound  by  the  concessions  made  the  pre-
ceding year.

In  Bavaria  the  main  point  was  already
gained  ;  and  the  only  solicitude  of  the  govern-
ment was,  not  to  permit  the  abhorred  doc-
trines to  creep  in  anew.  The  streets  were
watched,  and  those  who  attended  the  preach-
ings in  the  neighbourhood,  were  immediately
seized  and  punished.  At  first  they  were
fined;  but  as  this  was  ascribed  to  the  duke's
avarice,  he  would  receive  no  more  fines.  He
next  caused  nine  men  to  be  put  to  death  by
fire  in  Landsberg,  and  twenty-nine  by  water
in  JMiinich.  The  name  of  the  unfortunate
Leon  hard  Kasar  is  well  known.  He  had  come
from  Wittenberg  to  his  birth-place  at  Schärd-
ing, to  visit  his  dying  father ;  here  he  was  be-
trayed, seized,  and  carried  to  Passau,  where
he  was  condemned,  and  soon  after  burned.**

The  Swabian  league  also  proceeded  with
its  executions.  In  1528  the  captains  of  the
League  received  orders  to  remove  all  who
were  suspected  of  holding  anabaptist  opinions
from  the  jurisdiction  of  the  ordinary  tribunals,
and  to  put  them  to  death  without  the  forms
of  trial.  The  council  of  Nürnberg  protested
against  this  ;  not  indeed  out  of  any  inchnation
for  the  anabaptists,  but  because  they  thought

§  Bucholtz,  viii.  139.
t  Raupach,  ii.  49.

IT  E.  g.  in  Raupach,  ii. Appendix,  N.  viii.
**  Schelhorn,  in  Winter,  i.  258.

304

PERSECUTIONS  OF  THE  REFORMERS.

Book  V.

thatj  under  the  pretext  of  hunting  the  wolf,
the  League  meant  to  seize  the  sheep; — that
this  was  in  fact  but  a  cover  for  the  persecu-
tion of  the  followers  and  preachers  of  the  Word.

The  Bishop  of  Constance  obtained  an  im-
perial mandate,  m  virtue  of  which  all  who
were  settled  within  the  boundaries  of  his
diocese  were  warned  to  submit  themselves  to
'•'his  spiritual  jurisdictions,  bannaha,  presen-
tations, first-fruits,  and  other  ancient  usages
and  good  customs."  The  bishop  proceeded
with  great  severity  against  heretics.  John
Hiighn,  of  Lindau,  was  delivered  over  to  the
secular  tribunal  in  Morsburg,  "  as  an  enemy
of  the  holy  mother  church,"  and  committed
to  the  flames.

The  same  thing  took  place  on  the  Rhine.
A  preacher  of  Halle  who  was  cited  to  appear
at  A^chafTenburg,  was  murdered  on  the  way
back:  a  crime  v.hich  was  openly  attributed
to  the  chapter  of  Mainz.

Li  Cologne,  Adolf  Clarenbach  was  con-
demned to  death;  because  he  would  not
believe  that  the  pope  was  the  head  of  the
holy  church ;  because  he  seemed  to  doubt
wdiether  some  things  had  not  occasionally
been  established  by  councils,  or  might  be
established  therein,  contrary  to  the  divine
word  f^  and  the  like.  The  superiority  of
mind,  the  knowledge,  and  the  calm  courage
which  the  accused  displayed  at  his  trial,  were
truly  admirable ;  and  the  town  council  of
Cologne  accordingly  hesitated  a  long  time  to
consent  to  his  execution.  It  is  afhrmed  that
they  were  only  induced  to  do  so  at  length,  by
the  declaration  of  the  priests  that  the  havoc
made  by  the  s\veating  sickness  in  Cologne
was  a  vengeance  of  God  upon  the  city  for  not
punishing  heretics.  '-Oh  Cologne,  Cologne  !'*
exclaimed  Clarenbach,  as  he  was  led  to  the
stake,  '•'  why  persecutest  thou  God's  v\'ord  1
There  is  a  mist  yet  in  the  heavens,  but  by
and  by  it  vrill  disperse.''!

North  Germany  was  no  longer,  indeed,  the
scene  of  these  barbarous  excesses  of  priestly
tyranny,:  but  Dul^e  George  still  caused  the
poor  people  who  would  not  take  the  Lord's
supper  because  they  were  not  allowed  to
receive  in  both  kinds,  to  be  whipped  out  of
the  country  by  the  beadle  and  the  hangman,
in  the  most  ignominous  processions.  In  Bran-
denbarg, at  a  diet  held  on  the  day  of  the
Visitation  of  the  blessed  Virgin,  in  the  year
1527,  the  elector  and  estates  once  more
agreed  to  uphold  the  observance  of  the  an-
cient ceremonies  with  all  their  might;  to
admit  no  parish  priest  without  the  permission
of  his  ordinary;  to  protect  the  clergy  in  their
possessions:  and  to  proceed  against  offenders
according  to  the  mandates  of  his  holiness  the
pope  and  his  imperial  majesty.:|: The  coun-

*  The  first  question  asked  him  on  the  Monday  after
Palm  Sunday,  1528.

jRabi  Rlartyrerbach,  Part  ii.  pp.  243,  249.  Here,  as
usual,  we  find  in  Rabusan  old, contemporaneous,  and  very
circumstantial  statement,  bearing  every  mark  of  authen-
ticity.

X  Mandate  Thursday  after  Annunciation,  4th  July,  re-
cently given  in  Müller,  Gesch.  der  Eeform.  in  der  Mark,
p.  138.

try  at  large,  however,  was  not  of  the  same
way  of  thinking  as  the  sovereign  and  the
states.  The  first  memorable  opposition  which
Joachim  I.  experienced,  was  from  his  own
wife,  Elizabeth.  She  sided  rather  with  the
Ernestine  house  of  Saxony,  from  which  she
sprang,  and  with  her  uncle  John,  than  with
her  husband,  against  whom  she  had  many
other  causes  of  complaint;  and  her  physi-
cian, Ratzenberger  of  Brandenburg,  one  of  the
most  zealous  adherents  of  the  new^  doctrine,
brought  her  acquainted  with  Dr.  Luther,
whose  books  she  had  long  admired  and  re-
vered. At  last  she  ventured  to  take  the
Lord's  Supper  in  both  kinds,  in  the  secrecy
of  her  own  apartments  in  the  palace  ;  but  the
affair  did  not  remain  concealed;  the  whole
violence  of  her  husband's  temper  was  ex-
cited, and  he  seemed  disposed  to  execute  the
just-published  mandate  on  his  wife;  he  locked
her  up  in  her  chamber,  and,  it  is  said,  threat-
ened to  have  her  walled  up  within  it.  She
succeeded,  however,  in  making  her  escape.
Disguised  as  a  peasant,  and  attended  by  one
male  and  one  female  servant,  she  arrived  at
Torgau,  wdiere  the  Elector  of  Saxony  then
was,  in  the  night  of  the  20th  March,  1528. §
She  declared  to  him  that  if  she  was  burthen-
some  to  him,  or  likely  to  bring  him  into  any
danger,  she  would  rather  go  on  as  far  as  her
eyes  could  guide  her.  Elector  John,  how-
ever, invited  her  to  stay  with  him,  and  gave
her  Lichtenburg,  where  she  was  free  to  live
in  entire  accordance  with  her  own  pious  incli-
nations.

Such  was  the  state  of  things  in  Germany.
What  was  regarded  in  one  part  as  the  most
peifect  piety,  was  punished  in  the  other  as
the  most  horrible  crime.  What  the  one  party
sought  to  establish,  the  other  endeavoured,
under  every  condition  and  by  every  means,
to  extirpate.

The  troubles  caused  by  Pack  are  extremely
characteristic  of  the  political  reactions  arising
from  the  spiritual  struggle.

Nor  were  these  by  any  means  the  only  hos-
tilities existing  in  Germany.

In  consequence  of  the  rise  of  the  Swiss
church,  discords  which  gradually  acquired
political  importance,  had  broken  out  among
the  Protestants  themselves.  W^e  cannot  ad-
vance a  step  further,  without  some  examina-
tion of  the  religious  movement  of  Switzer-
land :  one  of  the  most  important  incidents  in
the  general  progress  of  the  reformation.

§  Spalatin's  Report  in  Mencken,  ii.  1116.  The  extracts
from  Seckendorff  are  not  quite  .'iccurate.  I  also  take  leave
to  doubt  the  truth  of  the  story  which  is  found  in  tliis  book,
and  has  been  disseminated  in  so  many  histories  of  the
Mark,  and  its  reformation  ;  namely,  that  it  was  a  daugh-
ter of  the  electress,  named  Elizabeth,  who  betrayed  her.
It  is  at  least  certain,  that  this  princess  was  not  a  girl  of
fourteen,  as  is  said.  She  was  born  in  1510,  and  was  mar-
ried to  Erich,  Duke  ofCalenberg,  in  July,  15Q7.  (Bunting,
Braunschvv.  Chronik,  ii.  68.)  Is  it  likely  she  was  in  Ber-
lin in  March,  1528?  In  the  August  of  that  year  she  gave
birth  to  her  first-born  son  at  Münden.  Her  husband,  who
was  forty  years  older  than  herself,  delighted  that  she  had
brought  him  a  son,  promised  to  grant  her  a  request.  She
begged  for  the  liberation  of  a  parish  priest  who  had  been
imprisoned  for  administering  the  Lord's  Supper  in  both
kinds.  (See  Havemann,  Duchess  Elizabeth,  p.  13.)  And
this  was  the  princess  who  a  few  months  later  accused  her
own  mother ! The  whole  story  is  equally  improbable.

Chap.  III.

ZWINGLI.

3a5

CHAPTER  III.

REFORMATION  IN  SWITZERLAND.

Although  Switzerland  formed  a  distinct
community,  and  pursued  a  policy  independent
of  the  empire,  it  was  imbued  with  the  same
moral  and  intellectual  spirit  which  prevailed
in  Germany;  and  more  especially  in  the  North.

The  efforts  to  throw  off  the  domination  of
the  priesthood  which  characterized  the  cen-
tury, had  also,  at  an  early  period,  shown  them-
selves here.  The  exemption  of  the  clergy
from  the  secular  tribunals,  and  from  extraor-
dinary taxes, — the  former  claimed  by  the
Bishop  of  CoiVe,  the  latter  by  the  prelates  and
chapter  of  Thurgau,  were  disputed.

The  literary  tendencies  of  the  German
schools  of  poetry  had  also  found  acceptance
here.  In  Lucerne,  St.  Gall,  Freiburg,  Bern,
Coire  and  Zürich,  we  find  similar  institutions
for  the  promotion  of  learning.  Here,  too,
arose  an  extensive  literary  public,  of  which
Erasmus  formed  the  active  centre  from  the
time  he  settled  in  Basle.

Hence  it  happened  that  Luther's  earliest
writings  excited  so  much  interest  in  Switzer-
land. They  were  first  printed  in  a  collected
form  in  Basle.  As  early  as  1520,  we  find  "A
short  Poem  in  Praise  of  Luther  and  in  Derision
of  his  Gainsayers,"'  by  a  peasant  of  Thurgau.
This  spirit  was  fostered  by  the  students  who
returned  from  Wittenberg.  The  names  of
those  who  were  present  when  Luther  burned
the  pope's  bull  are  still  preserved.  The  doc-
trine spread  from  the  plain  country  and  the
cities  into  the  mountains  •  to  the  Grisons,  Ap-
penzell and  Schwytz.  The  Administrator  of
Einsiedeln,  one  Geroldseck,  was  described  by
Zwingli  as  the  father  of  all  them  that  love
God.*  That,  notwithstanding  these  sympa-
thies, the  movement  which  arose  in  Switzer-
land assumed  a  different  character  —  even  as
to  religious  questions — from  that  of  Germany,
was  mainly  the  result  of  the  intellectual  cha-
racter and  training  of  the  man  who  com-
mienced  and  carried  through  the  conflict —
Ulrich  Zwingii.

EARLY  LIFE  OF  ZWINGLI.

Zwingli  was  born  in  the  parish  of  Wilden-
haus in  Toggenburg,  within  whose  boundary
the  Thnr  rises,  at  a  height  where  neither
corn-fields  nor  fruit-trees  are  to  be  seen,  amidst
green  alpine  meadows,  crowned  by  bare  and
sturdy  pines.

He  was  born  on  New  Year's  Day,  1484,  a
few  weeks  after  Luther.  His  childhood  fell
about  the  time  when,  the  communes  began
g.-adually  to  emancipate  themselves  from  the
most  oppressive  of  the  feudal  services  due
from  them  to  the  Abbot  of  St.  Gall.  This  was
effected  chiefly  under  the  conduct  of  his  father,
who  was  the  most  considerable  man  in  those
parts;  Amman  of  his  village,  and  proprietor

*  Letter  to  Myconius.  Aug.  25, 152-2.  Zwinglii  Opera,
curantibiis  Melch.  Schulero  et  Jo.  Schulthessio,  torn.  vii.
Epp.  voL  i.  p.  218.

39  2a*

of  a  large  tract  of  meadows  and  upland  pas-
tures. Surrounded  by  numerous  children,
eight  of  whom  were  sons,  he  lived  in  patri-
archal dignity.  It  was  at  that  time  the  con-
stant practice  for  one  of  a  large  family  to  de-
vote himself  to  the  priesthood  : — this  was  the
destination  of  Ulrich;!  his  uncle,  who  was  the
first  priest  chosen  by  the  people  of  Wilden-
haus themselves,  and  who  still  held  that  office-
undertook  to  qualify  him  for  holy  orders.

The  most  remarkable  trait  recorded  of
Zwingli's  youth  is,  his  natural,  quick  and  clear
sense  of  truth.  He  once  mentioned  that  when
he  first  began  to  reflect  on  pubhc  affairs,  the
doubt  occurred  to  him  whether  a  lie  ought
not  to  be  more  severely  punished  than  steal-
ing. •'' For  veracity,"  added  he,  •'•  is  the  mo-
ther and  source  of  every  virtue."

With  this  unperverted  sense  of  right,  which
he  seemed  to  have  imbibed  from  the  pure  air
of  his  native  mountains,  he  now  entered  the
field  of  literature,  public  life  and  ecclesiastical
affairs.

He'  studied  at  the  schools  of  Basle  and
Bern ;  thence  he  went  to  the  university  of
Vienna,  and  back  again  to  Basle. ±  It  was
just  the  dawn  of  the  revival  of  classical  lite-
rature and  its  substitution  for  the  scholastic
learning  of  the  middle  ages.  Zwingli,  like
his  teachers  and  friends,  espoused  this  cause,
to  whith  he  steadily  adhered  when  he  be-
came, at  a  very  early  age.  priest  in  Glärus.
(1506.)  He  devoted  all  the  leisure  his  duties
left  him  to  study.  He  made  som.e  attempts
at  composition  in  the  style  of  the  Latinists  of
that  time ;  but  he  never  succeeded  in  throw-
ing his  thoughts  with  full  freedom  into  an-
tique forms, §  He  rather  contented  himself
with  reading  and  studying  the  ancients.  He
was  more  captivated  by  their  matter,  by  their
lofty  feeling  for  the  simple  and  the  true,  than
excited  to  imitation  by  their  beauty  of  form.
He  thought  that  the  influences  of  the  divine
Spirit  had  not  been  confined  to  Palestine ;
that  Plato,  too,  had  drunk  from  the  sacred
fount;  he  calls  Seneca  a  holy  man:  above  all,
he  reveres  Pindar,  who  speaks  of  his  gods  in
language  so  divine,  that  some  sense  of  the
presence  and  power  of  the  Deity  must  have
inspired  him. II  He  is  grateful  to  them  all;
for  he  has  learned  from  all,  and  has  been  led
by  them  to  the  tmth.  While  occupied  with
such  pursuits,  he  took  up  Erasmus's  edition
of  the  New  Testament  in  Greek,  and  applied
himself  to  it  with  the  greatest  industry.  In
order  to  make  himself  thoroughly  acquainted
with St.  Paul's epistles,  he  did  not  shrink

,1  Properly,  Huldreich— full  of  grace.— Trans.

+  His  principal  teacher  in  Basle  was  Thomas  VVitten-
bach,  himself  a  disciple  of  Paul  Scriptor  of  Tübingen.
Gualtherus  Praefatio  ad  priorem  partem  homiliarum  iii
Ev.  Älatthaei  ad  Josuam  VVittenbachium.  Misc.  Tigur.
iii.  p.  103.

§  De  gestis  inter  Helvetios  el  Gallos  ad  Ravennam,  Pa-
piam  aiiisque  locis  relatio. By  Freher-Struve,  iii.  171.

II  Nihil  est  in  omni  opere,  quod  non  sit  doctum,  amae-
num,  sanctum. — G,uum  aliquando  Dei  munere  oculos  re-
cipimus  eosque  ad  vetustissimos  scriptores  attollimus,  jam
videntur  uix  et  virtus  in  cotispectum  veuisse.  See  the
preface  and  the  conclusion  which  Zwingli,  under  the  name
Huldrvchus  Geminius,  wrote  for  Ceporin's  edition  of  Pin-
dar, 1526. Misc.  Tig.  iii.  207.

806

ZWINGLL

Book  V.

from  the  laLour  of  transcribing  them,  in  a  fair
hand.*  and  writing  on  the  margin  tlie  exposi-
tions of  the  fathers  of  the  Church.  Occasion-
ally, he  was  bewildered  by  the  theological
notions  he  had  brought  with  him  from  the
university;  but  he  soon  formed  the  determi-
nation to  throw  aside  all  other  considerations,
and  to  learn  God's  will  from  his  pure  and
simple  word.  From  the  time  he  thus  devoted
himself  exclusively  to  the  text  of  Scripture,
his  intelJectual  sight  became  clearer.  But,
at  the  same  time,  convictions  extremely  at
variance  w^ith  the  established  order  of  things
in  the  Church,  took  possession  of  his  mind.
At  Einsiedeln,  whither  he  had  removed  in
1516,  he  said  pjainly  to  Cardinal  Schiner,  that
popery  had  no  foundation  in  Scripture.

But  it  was  another  circumstance  which  gave
to  his  labours  their  characteristic  direction.
Zwingii  was  a  republican ;  reared  in  the  per-
petual stir  of  a  small  commonwealth,  a  lively
interest  in  the  political  business  of  his  country
w^as  become  a  second  nature  to  him.  At  that
time  the  war  with  Italy  set  all  the  energies  of
the  Confederation  in  motion,  and  raised  it  to
the  rank  of  a  great  pov.'er  in  Europe.  Zwingii
more  than  once  took  the  field  with  his  warlike
flock.  He  was  present  at  the  battle  of  Marig-
nano.  But  war  had  brought  in  the  evils  of
foreign  enlistment  and  of  pensions.  Public
opinion  was  against  them,  as  the  disturbances
which  broke  out  at  short  intervals  in  Lucerne,
Solothurn,  Bern,  and  Zürich  prove;  the  com-
mon people  wo(dd  hear  nothing  of  treaties,
according  to  which  their  sons  and  brothers
were  led  to  slaughter  in  strange  lands;  they
demanded  the  punishment  of  the  "German-
French,"  the  "crown-eaters;"  in  some  cases
the  Grand  Councils  were  actually  forced  to
forswear  "wages  and  gifts,"  and  not  unfre-
quently  the  diets  published  edicts  against
them ;  but  the  interests  of  those  in  power
were  too  strongly  connected  with  these  abuses
for  them  to  be  given  up;  a  warlike  youth  was
always  ready  to  enlist  in  foreign  service,  and
the  evil  increased  from  day  to  day.  Zwingii,
together  with  his  admiration  for  the  Latin
writers,  combined  that  for  the  German  popular
literature,  (which,  as  we  may  recollect,  was
full  of  attacks  upon  prevailing  abuses,)  and  as
early  as  1510  he  w^rote  a  somewhat  diffuse
fable,  in  which  he  set  before  the  Confederation
the  corrupt  practices  of  which  they  were  the
victims :  he  told  them  how  they  were  vainly
warned  by  faithful  dogs  against  the  seductions
of  cunning  cats;  how  they  must  inevitably
lose  their  freedom  —  freedom,  that  blessing
which,  after  the  example  of  their  ancestors,
they  were  bound  to  defend  with  spear  and
battle-axe,  and  never  to  endanger  by  a  connec-
tion with  foreigners;  those,  he  said,  w^ho  took
pensions  and  gifts  would  bring  about  the  de-
struction of  their  bond  of  brotherhood. t  In
spite  of  this  we  find  that  Zwingh  himself  lg,y,

for  a  time,  under  the  obligation  of  a  pension
from  the  pope.  It  doubtless  appeared  to  him
a  totally  different  thing  to  accept  a  small  salary
from  the  pope,  the  spiritual  head  of  the  Con-
federation, and  to  take  money  from  a  sovereign
with  whom  they  had  no  connection,  like  the
King  of  France ;  and  accordingly  it  was  against
the  partisans  of  that  monarch  that  his  zeal
was  first  directed.  In  the  year  1516,  we  find
him  engaged  in  a  M-arm  conflict  with  the
French  faction  in  Glarus,  v^'here,  as  in  most
parts  of  Switzerland,  it  was  then  in  the  as-
cendant. He  failed  indeed,  for  the  king  had
gained  over  the  most  powerful  of  the  inhabit-
ants ;  and  he  makes  the  bitterest  complaints
of  all  he  had  to  endure  in  consequence.  At
length  he  found  himself  compelled  to  (juit  his
parish,  and  to  take  the  subordinate  place  of
vicar  at  Einsiedeln. t  This,  however,  led  him
to  a  more  complete  and  coTisistent  develop-
ment of  his  opinions.  As  the  French  party
gradually  became  the  dominant  one,  so  his
resistance  to  it  gradually  grew  into  a  struggle
against  the  system  of  pensions  in  general.
The  rise,  throughout  the  Confederation,  of  al-
liances between  families  and  leaders,  founded
chiefly  upon  personal  interests,  he  justly  re-
garded as  an  event  dangerous  to  the  general
liberty.  Public  morals  and  public  opinion,
offended  by  this  abuse,  found  in  him  their
most  eloquent  advocate.  The  precepts  and
examples  of  the  ancients  and  of  the  scriptures,
contrasted  w^ith  the  prevailing  moral  and  reli-
gious dissolution  ;  and  the  consciousness  of  an
honest  patriotism  struggling  against  mercenary
obsequiousness  to  foreign  courts,  raised  in  him
a  spirit  which  already  gave  earnest  of  his
future  endeavours  to  reform  the  whole  condi-
tion, ecclesiastical  and  political,  of  his  coun-
try ;  it  ordy  remained  to  be  seen  whether  he
could  succeed  in  obtaining  the  wide  field  and
the  commanding  position  which  such  an  en-
terprise demanded.

These  he  obtained  at  Zürich  in  the  year
1519.

Zürich  was,  if  not  the  sole,  yet  the  princi-
pal, town  in  the  Confederation,  which  had
never  allowed  itself  to  be  persuaded  to  accept
the  French  pensions.  Conrad  Hoffmann,  a
canon  of  the  cathedral,  who  enjoyed  extraor-
dinary respect,  maintained  the  patriotic  cause
against  foreign  service  and  foreign  pensions  ;
he  was  eloquent,  and  he  did  not  shrink  from
uttering  severe  truths  to  his  audience.  It  was
chiefly  through  his  influence  that  Zwingii,  in
spite  of  much  opposition,  was  elected  secular
priestat  the  cathedral. §

Ulrich  Zwingii  here  at  once  took  up  the  po-
sition with  regard  to  these  two  parties,  which
from  that  time  he  steadily  maintained. _

His  first  attacks  were  directed  against  all
party  alliance  with  foreign  powers,  even  with

*  Schiller,  Huldreich  Zwingii,  Gesch.  seiner  Bildung  zum
reformator. Notes,  p.  7.

t  Huldrych  Zwingii,  the  Priest's  fabulous  Poem  of  an
Ox  and  certain  Beasts,  to  be  understood  of  the  present
Course  of  Things.

t  Epistola  ad  Joachijnum  Vadianum  ;  ex  Eremo  13  Jun.
1517,  Epp.  i.  p.  24.  Locum  mutavimus  Galloriim  technis.
Fuimus  pars  rerum  gestarum:  calamitates  raultas  vel
tulimus  vel  ferre  didicimus.

§  Bullinger,  Reformationsgeschichte,  p.  11 ;  "Especially
because  he  heard,  how  that  he  preaches  violently  against
pensions  and  pensioners  — against  the  leagues  and  wars
of  the  princes."

Chap.  III.

ZWINGLI.

307

the  pope.  He  is  said  to  have  declared  that
Cardinal  von  Sitten,  who  recruited  for  the
pope,  did  not  wear  a  red  hat  and  mantle  with-
out reason;  ''if  it  were  wrung,"  said  he,
"you  would  see  the  blood  of  your  nearest
kindred  drip  from  its  folds.''  He  laughed  at
the  eagerness  with  which  a  wolf  that  only  de-
voured beasts  was  hunted,  while  the  wolves
that  destroyed  men  were  suffered  to  go  unmo-
lested.

The  effects  of  the  Lutheran  movement  just
then  began  to  be  felt  in  Switzerland.  No  man
was  belter  prepared,  or  more  eager,  to  take
part  in  it  than  Zwingli.  He  too  had  had  a
battle  on  his  own  ground  with  a  vender  of  in-
dulgences, and  had  succeeded  m  keeping  him
at  a  distance.  He  wrote  against  the  conduct
of  the  court  of  Rome  to  Luther,  and  published
an  apology  for  him,  in  answer  to  the  bull.

His  preaching,  for  which  he  had  a  singular
natural  gift,  produced  a  great  effect.  He  at-
tacked tlie  prevalent  abuses  with  uncompro-
mising earnestness.  On  one  occasion  he
painted  the  responsibility  of  the  clergy  in
such  lively  colours,  that  several  young  men
among  his  hearers  instantly  abandoned  their
intention  of  taking  orders.  '-'I  felt  myself,"
said  Thomas  Plater,  '■'  as  it  were  lifted  up  by
the  hair  of  the  head.'"*  Occasionally  some
individual  thought  the  preacher  aimed  his
remarks  at  him  personally,  which  Zwingli
thought  it  necessary  to  guard  against :  '-Wor-
thy man,"  he  exclaimed,  -take  it  not  to  thy-
self;" and  then  proceeded  in  his  discourse
with%  zeal  which  rendered  him  regardless  of
the  dangers  which  sometimes  even  threatened
his  life.

But  his  efforts  were  mainly  directed  to  ren-
dering the  meaning  of  Scripture  plainer  to  his
hearei's.  With  the  permission  of  the  chapter,
he  expounded  not  only  the  Perikopes,t  but
the  entire  books  of  the  scriptures  as  he  had
studied  them  ;i  for  he  strove  to  catch  and  to
communicate  the  whole  current  and  connexion
of  the  divine  thought.  His  doctrine  was,  that
rehgion  consisted  in  trust  in  God,  love  of  God,
and"  innocence  of  life.§  He  avoided  every
thing  far-fatched  or  over-learned  in  his  style  ;
and  his  efforts  to  render  his  discourses  intelli-
gible to  all,  were  crowned  with  success.  In
a  wide  circle  of  hearers  he  laid  the  founda-
tions of  that  faith  which  stood  fast  in  the  day
of  the  tempest,  and  afforded  him  firm  support
in  all  his  undertakings.

In  daily  life  he  vras  of  an  easy,  cheerful
disposition.  He  had  learned  how  to  live  with
men,  and  how  to  deal  with  them,  in  the  re-
public of  a  village,  in  the  camp,  in  the  resort
of  stransrers  at  Einsiedeln. He  was  not  free

*  Autobiographie  Platers  Misc.  Tig.  iii.253.

t  -spiKÖTiai.  The  passages  from  the  Old  and  New  Testa-
ment, selected  to  be  read  in  churches.  They  were  first
published  in  a  distinct  Lectionarium,  by  Pope  Gregory  the
Great,  in  the  sixth  century,  and  were  adopted  by  Charle-
magne as  the  basis  of  the  Homiliariuni  for  his  whole  em-
pire. This  selection  was  retained  by  Luther. — Trans.

I  In  the  second  Zürich  disputations  he  mentions  it:  he
began  with  Matthew.

§  De  vera  et  falsa  Religione :  Veram  pietatem,  quae
nihil  aliud  .-t  quam  ex  amore  timoreque  Dei  servata  in-
nocentia. Ld.  Gualth.  p.  202.

from  youthful  vices,  sometimes  of  an  offensive
kind;  but  his  correspondence  shows  how  ear-
nest were  his  self-reproaches  and  his  endea-
vours to  amend.  After  a  time  his  ^conduct
became  irreproachable.il  He  laboured  to  sub-
due ebullitions  of  anger,  as  well  as  those  of
other  passions;  he  drove  away  fantastic  hu-
mours by  music,  for  he  too  was  a  great  lover
of  music,  and  a  master  of  several  instruments
— an  accomplishment  no  less  common  in  Tog-
genburg  than  in  Thuringia.lf  He  Joved  a  re-
tired domestic  life,  and  his  favourite  food  was
that  of  his  country  —  various  preparations  of
milk ;  but  he  never  refused  an  invitation  ;  he
frequented  the  guild  meetings  of  the  citizens,
the  holiday  feasts  of  the  peasants,  and  en-
livened every  company  by  his  cheerful  spirit
and  pleasant  discourse. *=*  Laborious  as  he  was,
much  as  he  undertook  and  accomplished,  he
repulsed  no  one ;  he  had  the  art  of  saying
something  agreeable  and  satisfactory  to  every-
body. He  was  well  made  and  robust,  charita-
ble and  good-humoured  ;  cheerful,  accessible,
contented,  and  at  the  same  time  full  of  the
greatest  and  noblest  thoughts.

If  we  compare  him  with  Luther,  we  find
that  he  had  no  such  tremendous  tempests  to
withstand,  as  those  which  shook  the  most  se-
cret depths  of  Luther's  soul.  As  he  had  never
devoted  himself  with  equal  ardour  to  the  esta-
bhshed  Church,  he  had  not  now  to  break  loose
from  it  with  such  violent  and  painful  struggles.
It  was  not  the  profound  sense  of  the  power  of
faith  and  of  its  connexion  with  redemption  in
which  Luther's  efforts  originated,  that  made
Zwingli  a  reformer ;  he  became  so.  chiefly
because,  in  the  course  of  his  study  of  Scrip-
ture in  search  of  truth,  he  found  the  Church
and  the  received  morality  at  variance  with  its
spirit.  Nor  was  Zwingli  trained  at  a  univer-
sity, or  deeply  imbued  with  the  prevalent
doctrinal  opinions.  To  found  a  high  school,
firmly  attached  to  all  that  was  worthy  of
attachment,  and  dissenting  only  on  certain
most  important  points,  was  not  his  vocation.
He  regarded  it  much  more  as  the  business
and  duty  of  his  life,  to  bring  about  the  reli-
gious and  moral  reformation  of  the  republic
that  had  adopted  him,  and  to  recall  the  Swiss
Confederation  to  the  principles  upon  which  it
was  originally  founded.  While  Luther's  main
object  was  a  reform  of  doctrine,  which,  he
thought,  would  be  necessarily  followed  by
that  of  life  and  morals,  Zwingli  aimed  directly
at  the  improvement  of  life  ;  he  kept  mainly  in
view  the  practical  significancy  of  Scripture  as
a  whole ;  his  original  views  were  of  a  moral
and  political  nature ;  hence  his  labours  were
tinged  with  a  wholly  peculiar  colour.

We  must  here  devote  a  few  words  to  the
question  of  the  priority  of  his  attempts  at
reform.  It  is  not  to  be  denied  that,  even
before  the  year  1517,  he,  in  common  with
many  others,  had  evinced  dispositions,  and

If  To  Heinrich  Utinger,  4th  Dec.  3518. 0pp.  vii.  Epp.  i.
p.  55.

TTBullinger,  Reformationsgeschichte,  p.  31.
•**  Myconius,  in  Ständlins  and  Tzschirner's  Archiv,  i.  ii.
Ingeuio  amoBnus,  ore  jocundus.

308

SECESSION  OF  ZURICH.

Book.  V

expressed  opinions,  which  tended  that  way.
But  the  essential  point  was  the  struggle  with
the  spiritual  power,  and  the  separation  from
it.  This  struggle  Luther  undertook  first,  and
sustained  alone  :  he  first  obtained  freedom  of
discussion  for  the  new  doctrines  in  a  consider-
.nble  German  state:  he  began  the  work  of
liberation.  At  the  time  Luther  was  con-
demned by  Rome,  Zwingli  was  still  receiving
a  pension" from  Rome.  Luther  had  already
stood  impeached  before  the  emperor  and  the
empire,  ere  Zwingli  had  experienced  the  least
attack.  The  whole  field  of  his  activity  was
different.  While,  in  the  one  case,  we  see  the
highest  and  most  august  powers  of  the  world
in  agitation,  in  the  other,  it  is  a  question  of
the  emancipation  of  a  city  from  an  episcopal
power.

But  this  incident  of  the  great  revolution
which  was  now  going  on,  has  its  interest;
this  enterprise  also  demanded  intelligence
and  energy,  and  it  is  well  worth  while  to
devote  some  attention  to  it.

E^IA^'CIPATION OF  THE  TOWN  OF ZURICH FROM
THE  EPISCOPAL  G0VERN3IEXT  OF  CONSTANCE.

The  city  of  Zürich,  like  the  other  cities  of
Switzerland,  had  long  maintained  a  certain
independence  of  the  bishopric  of  Constance,
to  which  it  belonged,  mamly  supported  by
the  collegiate  chapter  of  the  cathedral.  For
some  years  peculiar  circumstances  had  given
a  remarkable  extension  to  the  exercise  of  this
independence.

The  bishop  of  that  time,  Hugo  of  Hohen-
landenberg,  regarded  with  great  displeasure
the  tratfic  in  indulgences  which  was  carried
on  in  his  diocese  by  the  commissaries  of
Rome  :  he  had  fully  consented  that  the  coun-
cil of  Zürich  should  refuse  permission  to  a
vender  of  indulgences  named  Samson,  who
had  already  come  as  far  as  an  inn  belonging
to  Zürich  on  the  banks  of  the  Sil.  to  enter
iheir  territory.  Zwingli  carefully  preserved
the  letter  in 'which  he  was  requested  by  the
ecclesiastical  authorities  to  oppose  resistance
to  men  bearing  full  powers  from  the  Roman
Curia.*  JMeanwhile  two  political  considera-
tions induced  the  Curia  to  treat  the  city  with
great  moderation  and  respect.

In  the  year  1520  Zwingli  had  already
secured  a  considerable  number  of  decided
adherents.  The  town  council  had  actually
given  the  secular  priests  and  preachers  in  the
city,  permission  to  preach  according  to  the
divine  Scriptures  of  the  Old  and  New  Testa-
ment, and  to  take  no  notice  of  any  novelties
in  doctrine  or  discipline  that  might  have  been
introduced  ;t  an  order  which,  in  fact,  involved

*  Antwurt  Zwingli  an  Va!.  Compar.  Werke  ii.  1.  p.  7;
fjrtber  on,  tlie  answer  to  Faber,  April  30,  1526.

t  "That  they  all  and  cenerally  preach  in  freedom  (as  is
also  granted  by  the  papal  laws)  the  holy  Gospels  and
Epistles  of  the'  Apostles,  conformably  with  the  word  of
God,  and  the  true  divine  Scriptures  of  the  Old  and  Xew
Testament,  and  that  they  teach  that  which  they  receive
and  hold  from  the  said  'Scriptures,  and  say  nothing  of
other  accidental  innovations  and  rules."  Answers  which
a  BiJrsermeister.  council  and  the  grand  council  of  the  city
of  Zürich  save  to  their  confederates,  Fiissli  Beiträge,  ii.
p.  237. See  BuUinger,  i.  p.  20.

a  defection  from  the  Cliurch  of  Rome.  It
could  not  be  said  that  the  affair  remained
unknown  to  the  Roman  court,  since  two  or
three  papal  nuncios  and  a  cardinal  were  pre-
sent;  but  they  did  not  venture  on  any  oppo-
sition. Their  conduct  on  this  occasion  is  very
instructive,  as  elucidating  the  general  policy
of  the  Church.  They  promised  Zwingli  to
raise  his  pension  from  fifty  to  a  hundred
gulden,  on  condition  that  he  desisted  from
preaching  against  the  pope.  Zwingli,  thouah
in  want  of  this  addition  to  his  income,  rejected
the  ofier.  They  then  made  him  the  same
offer  without  annexing  any  condition;  but
even  this  Zwingli  would  not  accept.?  The
nuncios,  however,  were  more  interested  in
recruiting  the  array,  with  which  they  hoped
to  conquer  JNlilan,  than  in  any  theological
question  whatsoever.  Although  the  city  was
already  thoroughly  infected  with  the  spirit  of
defection  from  the  Church,  they  entered  into
an  alliance  whh  it.  '-We  are  not  reproached
as  heretics  and  apostates,^'  says  Zwingli,
'"'but  lauded  with  high  titles. ''§

The  ordinary  of  the  diocese  favoured  the
new  mode  of  preaching  as  a  means  of  resist-
hig  the  usurpations  of  Rome  :  the  Roman  See
tolerated  it,  in  order  to  attain  the  object  of  its
political  negotiations;  and  thus  the  new  doc-
trines were  freely  promulgated  for  years,  and
took  fast  root  in  the  public  mind.

At  length,  however,  serious  attention  was
excited  by  a  violation  of  the  discipline  of  the
Church.  In  jNIarch  1522,  the  people  of  Zürich
broke  the  fast,  and  ate  eggs  and  meat.  Upon
this  the  bishop,  who  found  himself  menaced
with  similar  acts  of  insubordination,  and  saw
his  dispensations  slighted,  bestirred  himself:
he  sent  a  special  mission  to  the  council  of
Zürich,  requiring  it  to  maintain  the  established
usages  and  ceremonies  of  the  Church.

But  it  remained  to  be  seen  whether  this
was  still  possible ;  whether,  at  this  epoch  of
fervent  religious  zeal,  opinions  which  had
undergone  so  radical  a  change,  could  be
brought  under  subjection  to  the  mere  dictum
of  a  spiritual  head.

In  the  conference  which  followed  the  com-
munication made  to  the  Grand  Council  by
these  envoys,  Zwingli  maintained  that  many
of  the  ceremonies  of  the  Church  were  just
those  which  St.  Peter  had  declared  to  be  in-
tolerable. This  assertion  received  no  satis-
factory answer,  even  from  the  envoys;  in-
deed one  of  them,  Wanner,  preacher  of  the
cathedral  of  Constance,  was  of  the  same  opi-
nion in  his  heart. ;i  The  Grand  Council  came
to  a  resolution,  evasive  in  form,  but  very  in-
telligible m  fact,  that  no  one  should  break  the
fast  •'•  without  notable  cause;'"  and  requested
the  bishop  to  obtain  from  the  spiritual  author-
ities, or  from  the  learned,  an  explanation  as
to  the  conduct  to  be  observed  \Aith  regard  to
the  ceremonies,  in  order  not  to  offend  ag-ainst

J  Uslegung  und  Gründe  der  Schlussreden,  p.  3ö9.

§  Zwinjli's  opinion,  in  answer  to  tiie  pope's  brief.
Werke,  Bd.  ii.  Abth.  ii.  p.  393.

I  Ep.  Zwinelii  ad  Fabricium  de  actis  legationis.  Opp.
i.  p.  12.

CflAP.  III.

FROM  THE  CHURCH  OF  ROME.

309

the  precepts  of  Christ.*  The  bishop  an-
swered by  impressing  again  upon  the  Grand
Council  the  necessity  of  observing  the  ordi-
nances and  good  customs  of  the  holy  Church,
which  he  beheved  to  be  conformable  with  the
Scriptures.  In  a  letter  written  with  greater
freedom  and  animation  to  the  chapter,  he  in-
deed admitted  that  some  things  might  have
crept  in  w^hich  were  not  warranted  by  the
Holy  Scriptures,  but  added  that  an  error  shared
with  the  whole  of  Christendom  acquired  a
right  to  respect;  on  no  account  ought  doc-
trines to  be  accepted  which  were  condemned
by  the  emperor  and  the  pope;  those  who
would  not  submit  to  the  bishops,  must  be
entirely  separated  from  them.t

There  were  still  some  monasteries  in  the
city  which  were  not  affected  by  the  first  reso-
lution of  the  Grand  Council ;  a  great  many
persons,  high  and  low,  still  held  to  the  an-
cient usages,  and  consequently  this  admoni-
tion was  not  wholly  without  effect.  The  moat
violent  opponents  of  the  monks  were  recom-
mended to  moderate  their  language  in  the
pulpit  or  in  disputations.

But  a  circumstance  purely  accidental  suf-
ficed, in  a  short  time,  to  produce  a  contrary
result.

About  this  time  a  Franciscan  monk  from
Avignon  (the  same  Francois  Lambert  whom
we  had  occasion  to  mention  in  treating  of  the
synod  of  Homberg)  appeared  in  Switzerland.
At  an  early  age  he  had  entered  a  convent
of  very  strict  observance  in  search  of  peace
and  piety,  but  had  found  nothing  but  secret
vices  and  hateful  passions. i  In  this  state  of
things,  some  of  Luther's  works  had  fallen  into
his  hands,  and  he  determined  to  quit  his  clois-
ter and  repair  to  Luther  himself  in  Witten-
berg. This  monk,  still  habited  in  the  garb
of  his  order,  and  riding  upon  an  ass,  now
made  his  appearance  in  Zürich.  His  Catholic
orthodoxy  was  shaken,  but  not  as  yet  de-
stroyed. He  could  not  bring  himself  to  dis-
continue the  ceremonies  of  the  Church,  nor  to
give  up  the  intercessions  of  the  saints.  Seated
at  the  high  altar  of  Our  Lady's  minster,  he
held  discourses  to  that  effect  in  Latin.  Dur-
ing one  of  these.  Zwing] i  called  out  aloud,
'•Brother,  thou  errest !"'  The  orthodox  party
hoped  therefore  to  find  an  ally  in  Lambert;
and  as  they  perceived  that  he  w^as  learned
and  of  ready  speech,  they  got  up  a  disputa-
tion between  him  and  Zvvingli.  This  was
held  on  the  17th  of  July,  in  the  refectory  of
the  canons.  But  the  result  was  very  different
from  what  was  expected.  The  Franciscan
was  a  man  who  loved  truth  and  sincerely
sought  it.  He  soon  perceived  the  superior
weight  of  his  antagonist's  arguments;  and
was  at  length  entirely  convinced  by  the  pas-
sages of  Scripture  which  Zwingli  placed  be-

*  Fiisäli,  Beiträge,  ii.  15.

t  His  principle  was,  Communis  error  facit  jus.  Htec
dogmata  non  prsdicentur,  nihil  innovetur  contra  ecclesice
ritum.

X  Francisci  Lamberti  rationes  propter  qua?  Minoritarum
conversationem  traditumque  rejecit.  Schelhorn,  Com-
iiientatio  de  vita  Lamberti.  Amoenitat.  literariie,  iii.
p.  312.

fore  him.  He  raised  his  hands,  thanked  God,
and  vowed  to  lay  aside  all  litanies,  and  to  call
on  his  name  alone. §  He  left  Zürich  in  the
same  humble  way  as,  he  had  entered  it,  and
in  progress  of  time  we  find  him  in  Eisenach,
in  Wittenberg,  at  a  later  period,  as  we  said,
in  Homberg,  and  lastly,  in  Marburg.  His
attempt  to  give  to  the  German  church  a  con-
stitution different  from  that  established  by
Luther,  is  sufficient  to  perpetuate  his  memory
to  all  succeeding  time.

This  disputation  produced  the  greatest  effect
in  Zürich.  It  was  h^ld  on  a  Thursday.  On
the  Monday  following  (the  21st  of  July),  the
council  once  more  called  the  readers  of  the
Orders,  the  canons,  and  the  secular  priests,
into  the  provostry.  Zwingli  now  felt  himself
strong  enough  to  open  the  discussion  by  se-
verely censuring  the  sermons  preached  in  the
convents  without  any  warranty  from  Scripture.
The  bürgermeister  renewed  the  proposal  to
.both  parties,  to  refer  their  differences  to  the
decision  of  the  dean  and  chapter.  But  Zwingli
declared  that  he  was  the  preacher,  the  bishop,
of  the  city;  he  had  taken  upon  himself  the
cure  of  souls  in  it  wnth  his  vow ;  he  would
not  suffer  that  men  who  had  in  no  respect  any
true  vocation,  should  preach  in  the  convents
against  God's  word;  rather  than  that,  he
would  mount  the  pulpit  and  publicly  contra-
dict them.  Already  he  had  the  whole  audi-
ence on  his  side;  and  at  length  the  bürger-
meister declared  in  the  name  of  the  council,
that  it  was  its  will,  that  the  pure  word  of  God
should  be  preached  in  the  city,  and  that
alone.

Before  this  conference,  preaching  according
to  Scripture  was  only  permitted  or  recom-
mended to  the  secular  priests;  now,  it  was
rendered  imperative  even  on  the  monks.

If  we  inquire  on  what  authority  Zwingli
grounded  his  refusal  to  conform  to  the  bishop's
ordniances,  we  shall  find  that  it  was  mainly
derived  from  the  idea  of  the  commnne.il  He
was  of  opinion  that  all  that  the  Scripture  says
with  regard  to  the  Church,  was  especially  ap-
plicable to  each  separate  commune  (congre-
gation). He  seems  even  to  have  assumed,
that  such  a  body,  so  long  as  it  did  not  attempt
to  introduce  any  new  doctrines  or  practices,
and  contented  itself  with  hearing  God's  word,
and  deciding  all  controversies  according ,  to
that,  could  not  fall  into  error. If  He  regarded
the  Grand  Council  as  no  less  the  ecclesiastical
than  the  political  representative  of  the  rights
of  the  commune.  His  plan  of  proceeding
w^as,  as  he  once  expressly  declared,  to  con-
tinue to  discuss  each  question  in  his  sermons
till  everybody  was  convinced ;  and  not  till
then to bring  it  before  the  Grand  Council  ;

§  Bernhard  Weiss  in  Fiissli  Beiträgen,  ii.  42.

11  Gemeinde.  —  We  have  no  word  that  eApresses  the
double  sense,  ecclesiastical  and  civil,  of  tJiis.  [  hnve
therefore  been  obliged  to  resort  to  the  French  word  L'o.ii-
mune,  which  will  be  generally  understood.— Trans.

V  Second  Disputation.  Liv.  W.  i.  p.  470.  "  Hence  a
follows  also  that  this  our  convocation,  which  hath  ujat
together,  not  for  the  injury  of  certain  Christians,  but  to
hear  the  word  of  God,  cannot  err;  for  it  undertaketh  not
to  settle  or  to  unsettle,  but  will  only  hear  what  can  be
found  out  from  certain  portions  of  tlie  word  of  God."

310

SECESSION  OF  ZURICH

Book  V.

after  which  the  forms  necessary  to  be  estab-
lished should  be  determined  on,  in  concert
with  the  ministers  of  the  church.  The  council,
says  he,  holds  the  supreme  power  as  represen-
tative of  the  commune.*

It  is  manifest  that  this  theory  furnished  a
totally  different  basis  for  an  infant  ecclesias-
tical society,  from  that  on  which  the  reformers
of  Germany  were  building.  In  fact  and  prac-
tice, the  difference  was  not,  however,  so  great  ]
in  Germany,  the  preachers  united  with  the
sovereign  of  the  country;  in  Switzerland,  with
the  civic  authorities  of  tl^e  city  :  but  the  cir-
cumstance, that  the  former  were  referred  to  a
Recess,  while  the  latter  already  possessed  the
sovereignty  de  facto,  and  now  exercised  it  in
spiritual  as  well  as  in  temporal  affairs,  forms
a  very  marked  distinction  in  theory,  and  one
very  important  to  the  future  development  of
the  institution.

The  bishop  issued  a  new  decretal,  anathe-
matizing the  doctrine,  that  a  Christian  was  not
bound  to  live  according  to  the  rules  laid  down
by  the  Church ;  but  wit^hout  the  sligiitest  avail ;
since  the  very  opinion  which  the  commune
held  to  with  the  greatest  tenacity,  was  that
which  emancipated  it  from  his  authority.

The  only  real  difficulty  in  their  way,  arose
from  the  obstinancy  of  certain  dissentients  in
their  own  body.  There  were  still  among  them
men  who  denounced  Zwingli  as  a  heretic.

In  order  to  put  an  end  to  this  state  of  things-,
and  on  the  ground  that  the  explanation  which
it  had  demanded  had  never  been  given,  the
council  ordained  a  conference  of  its  secular
priests,  curates  of  souls,  parish  priests,  and
preachers.  This  was  in  all  respects  agreea-
ble to  Zwingli's  notions.  He  said  that  God
would  not  ask  wdiat  the  pope  and  his  bishops,
or  what  councils  and  universities,  had  decreed,
but  what  was  contained  in  his  word.  The
bishop,  w^ho  does  not  yet  appear  to  have  given
up  all  hope,  also  sent  some  delegates,  under
his  vicar-general  Faber ;  not  indeed  exactly  to
take  part  in  the  disputation,  but  to  be  present
at  it,  and  to  endeavour  to  reconcile  the  con-
tending parties. t  The  conference,  however,
ended  completely  in  Zw^ingli's  favour.  What,
indeed,  could  his  opponents  say,  after  the  prin-
ciple had  once  been  conceded,  that  the  Scrip-
ture, which  neither  lieth  nor  deceiveth,  was
the  sole  rule  of  faith?  It  is  matter  of  surprise
that  so  prudent  a  man  as  Faber  should  venture
upon  such  slippery  ground.  He  boasted  that
he  had  proved  from  Scripture  the  doctrine  of
the  invocation  of  saints,  to  a  priest  infected
with  the  heresy ;  upon  which  Zwingli  chal-
lenged him  to  adduce  the  same  proof,  now,  on
the  spot.  He  failed,  as  might  be  expected,
thereby  affording  Zwingli  one  of  his  most  sig-

*  Ante  omnia  multitudinem  de  quaestione  probe  docere:
jta  factum  est  ut  quicquid  diacosii  (the  grand  council)  cum
verbi  ministris  ordinarent,  jam  dudum  in  animis  fidelium
orriinatum  esset.  Denique  senatum  diacosion  adivimus,
nt  ecclesiffi  totius  nomine,  quod  usus  postularet,  fieri  jube-
rent.  Diacosion  senatussummaest  potestasecclesiffi  vice.
Subsidium  de  Eucharisiia. 0pp.  iii.  339.

t  "  Nit  zu  disputiren,  sondern  allein  uffhören,  rath  ge-
hen und  schidiiit  zu  seyn :"  "not  to  dispute,  but  only  to
listen,  to  give  counsel,  and  to  be  peace-makers."  Faber
Warlich  Unterrichtung  bei  Hettinger,  i.  437.

nal  triumphs.  In  short,  even  zealous  adver-
saries then  confessed  —  what  it  is  impossible
to  read  the  report  of  the  proceedings  without
seeing — that  Zwingli  obtained  a  complete  vic-
tory. Hence  it  followed,  that  the  council  ex-
pressly authorised  him  to  continue  in  the
course  he  had  adopted,  and  repeated  its  admo-
nitions to  the  clergy,  neither  to  practise  nor  to
teach,  any  thing  which  they  could  not  prove
from  the  word  of  God.

We  must  observe  w^ell  the  words,  '  practise
or  teach;'  they  involve  an  alteration  of  the
ceremonies  as  well  as  of  the  preaching.

Already  the  change  in  the  externals  of  the
church  was  in  full  progress.  The  clergy  mar-
ried ;  nuns  were  at  liberty  to  quit  their  con-
vents, or  to  remain  in  them: "Know,  dear

Master  Ulrich,

rote  the  steward  of  the  con-

vent of  Cappel,  to  Zw^ingh,  "we  are  all  of  one
mind  with  our  abbot,  —  to  accept  the  holy
gospel  and  divine  w^ord,  and  to  abide  by  it  till
death."§  Although  there  were  still  some
zealous  adherents  of  the  old  opinions  in  the
monastery  attached  1o  the  cathedral,  yet  the
resolution  to  reform  their  body  was  adopted
by  the  canons  themselves,  and  executed  in
concert  with  some  delegates  of  the  council.
By  far  the  greater  part  of  the  stole  fees  were
abohshed ;  and  such  arrangements  made  vfith
regard  to  tithes  and  other  sources  of  revenue,
that  a  large  and  excellent  school  was  estab-
hshed  out  of  the  funds.  But  the  doubts  which
agitated  the  public  mind  more  than  any  others,
were  those  concerning  the  veneration  of  im-
ages and  the  mass, — two  questions  which
were  now  daily  more  and  more  debated.
Writings  against  the  canon  of  the  mass  al-
ready appeared,  and  acts  of  violence  had  been
committed  upon  the  sacred  images.  The
council  deemed  it  necessary  to  lay  these  ques-
tions before  a  special  ecclesiastical  assembly,
which  w^as  convoked  in  October  1523.

It  w^as  impossible  for  the  independent  cha-
racter of  an  association  detaching  itself  from
the  great  hierarchical  body,  and  assuming  a
constitution  of  its  own,  to  exhibit  itself  in  a
more  striking  light,  than  at  this  meeting.  The
Bishop  of  Constance  took  good  care  to  send
no  more  delegates.  The  aged  Conrad  Hof-
mann,  formerly  Zwingli's  great  abettor,  in  vain
repeated  that  a  commune  was  pot  qualified  to
dispute  concerning  things  of  this  kind. II  Zwin-
gli's great  principle  was,  that  the  church  con-
sisted not  of  pope,  cardinals,  bishops,  and
their  convocations;  but  of  the  commune,  the
Kilchhori  (church-hearers) :  that  was  the
church,  like  the  first  church  at  Jerusalem.
(Acts,  xv.)ir And  the  present  meeting  did,  in

X  Proceedings  of  the  assembly  in  the  worshipful  city  of
Zürich,  by  Hegenwaldt,  with  extracts  from  Faber's  War-
licher Unterrichtung  (true  account)  in  Zwingli's  Works,
i.  p.  105.

§  Jacob  Leu,  the  steward,  to  Zwingli. Epp.  i.  367.

11  "  I  was  ten  or  thirteen  years  at  Heidelberg,  and  1  wen\
to  the  house  of  a  learned  man,  the  same  was  called  Dr.
Joss,  a  good  and  godly  man,  and  with  him  I  ate  and  drank
oft  ...  .  there  I  continually  heard  that  it  was  not  seemly
to  dispute  concerning  these  matters."  Chunrad  Hoffmanns
Schriftlicher  Fürtrag  wider  Zwinglis  Reformation  :  Füssli
Beiträge,  iii.  93.

IT  " '  Ja  Hong  und  Küssnacht  ist  eine  gewissere  Kirche  ,

•.  III.

FROM  THE  CHURCH  OF  ROME.

311

fact,  consist  only  of  the  clergy  of  the  town
and  country  of  Zürich,  with  a  few  strangers
(as,  in  the  example  above  quoted,  it  was  re-
marked, there  were  messengers  from  Antioch),
who  under  the  presidency  of  the  bürgerraeis-
ter,  Marx  Roust,  met  at  the  town-lions'^,  to
take  counsel  together  concerning  two  of  the
weightiest  questions  that  could  occupy  Chris-
tendom. Master  Leu  (Leo  Judee),  secular
priest  of  St.  Peter's  church,  and  Zwingli  laid
before  the  meeting  the  propositions,  which
they  were  prepared  to  defend  ;  the  one,  that
it  was  unlawful  to  use  any  image  in  the  wor-
ship of  God  ;  the  other,  that  the  mass  was  not
a  sacrifice :  they  invited  every  man  who  ob-
jected to  these  propositions  to  confute  them
out  of  Scripture.  One  after  another  rose  for
this  purpose,  but  their  arguments  were  easily
answered.  Those  who  had  the  most  zealously
opposed  the  new  doctrines  as  heretical,  were
then  called  upon  severally,  by  name,  to  prove
their  words.  Some  did  not  appear;  others
were  silent ;  others  declared  themselves  at
length  convinced,  and  merely  apologised  for
having  shared  the  general  error.  At  the  close
of  the  proceedings,  the  Abbot  of  Cappel,  whom
we  have  already  mentioned,  exhorted  the  men
of  Zürich  now  undauntedly  to  espouse  the
cause  of  the  Gospel.*  Hereupon  the  priests
were  commanded  not  to  preach  against  the
two  articles  which  had  been  triumphantly  es-
tablished at  the  conference.  Zwingli  drew  up
instructions  for  them,  which  were  published
by  authority,  and  may  be  regarded  as  the  ear-
liest of  all  the  symbolical  books  of  the  evan-
gelical churches.

Thus  did  Zürich  sever  itself  from  the  bish-
opric (and  hence  from  the  whole  system  of
the  Latin  hierarchy),  and  undertook  to  found  a
new  form  of  church  government  on  the  basis
of  the  commune  or  congregation.

Though  the  political  constitution  of  the  city
rendered  it  impossible  to  complete  the  struc-
ture in  exact  conformity  with  the  plan  thus
laid  down,  it  is  undeniable  that  the  inhabit-
ants of  the  town  and  country  took  a  voluntary
share  in^all  the  changes.  No  innovation  was
attempted  to  be  put  in  practice  till  the  result
was  rendered  certain  by  the  express  approba-
tion of  the  city  communes ;  the  Grand  Council
did  not  originate  opinions,  it  only  adopted
them.  Already  had  the  clergy  of  the  chapter  i
of  Zürich  repeated  the  resolutions  of  the  city;
afterwards  the  several  communes  (congrega-
tions) announced  their  approbation  of  the  pro-
ceedings of  the  civic  body,  in  separate  acts  of
adhesion.  The  whole  population  was  filled
with  that  positive  spirit  of  Protestantism  which

denn  alle  zusamniengerottete  Bischöfe  und  Päpste.'  Die
Versammhiiür  seihst  ist  freilich  auch  keine  Kirche,  aber
sie  vindicirt  der  Gemeinde  das  Recht  der  Autonomie.  Sie
ist  der  erste  Ansatz  zur  Presbyterialverfassung."  "  '  Yes,
Höng  and  Küssnacht  (names  of  two  towns  or  villages)  is
a  more  certain  (truer)  church  than  all  the  bishops  and
popes  banded  together.'  The  roimretration  is,  indeed,  not
proi)erly  speakinor  a  church,  but  it  is  an  assertion  of  the
independence  of  the  commune.  It  is  the  foundation-stone
of  the  presbyterian  form  of  church  government."

*  Records  of  the  second  disputation  {^C\  27,  28.  Wyn-
monats),  Zwinglis  Werke,  i.  539.  There  exists  also  a  re-
port of  it  by  Johann  Salat,  clerk  of  the  Court  at  Lucerne.
It  is  noticed  in  FüssÜ,  Beiträgen,  iii.  1.

has  ever  since  distinguished  it:  and  which
has,  from  time  to  time,  displayed  its  ancient
spontaneity  of  action  m  the  most  remarkable
manner.

RELATIONS  OF  THE  SWISS  REFORMERS  TO  LU-
THER. CONTROVERSY  CONCERNING  THE  LORD^S
SUPPER.

It  is  clear  that  there  was  nothing  in  these
proceedings  that  can  justify  us  in  regarding
them  as  a  mere  repetition  of  what  had  been
passing  at  Wittenberg.  As  the  growth  and
development  of  the  characters  of  the  two  re-
formers, so  were  also  the  nature  of  the  civil
authority  to  which  they  adhered,  and  of  the
oppositions  they  had  to  combat,  widely  differ-
ent. Essential  divei;gencles  in  the  direction
of  their  ideas,  and  in  the  character  of  their
doctrines,  also  manifested  themselves,  in  spite
of  the  various  analogies  between  them.

The  principal  difference  is,  that,  whereas
Luther  wished  to  retain  every  thing  in  the
existing  ecclesiastical  institutions  that  was  not
at  variance  with  the  express  words  of  Scrip-
ture, Zwingli  was  resolved  to  get  rid  of  every
thing  that  could  not  be  maintained  by  a  direct
appeal  to  Scripture.  Luther  took  up  his  sta-
tion on  the  ground  already  occupied  by  the
Latin  Church  :  bis  desire  was  only  to  purify  ;
to  put  an  end  to  the  contradistinctions  between
the  doctrines  of  the  Church  and  the  Gospel.
Zwingli,  on  the  other  hand,  thought  it  neces-
sary to  restore,  as  far  as  possible,  the  primitive
and  siinplest  condition  of  the  Christian  Church;
he  aimed  at  a  complete  revolution.

We  know  how  far  Luther  was  from  incul-
cating thß  destruction  of  images ;  he  merely
combated  the  superstitions  which  had  ga-
thered around  them.  Zv\-ingli,  on  the  cor>-
trary,  regarded  the  veneration  addressed  to
images  as  sheer  idolatry,  and  condemned
their  very  existence.  In  the  Whitsuntide  of
1524,  the  council  of  Zürich,  in  concert  with
him,  declared  its  determination  of  removing
all  images ;  which  it  held  to  be  a  godly  work.
Fortunately,  the  disorders  which  this  measure
excited  in  so  many  other  places,  were  here
avoided.  The  three  secular  priests,  wdth
twelve  members  of  the  council,  one  from
each  guild,  repaired  to  the  churches,  and
caused  the  order  to  be  executed  under  their
own  supervision.  The  crosses  disappeared
from  the  high  altars,  the  pictures  were  taken
down  from  the  altars,  the  frescoes  scraped
off  the  walls,  and  whitewash  substituted  in
their  stead. — In  the  country  churches  the
most  precious  pictures  were  burnt,  '•  to  the
praise  and  glory  of  God."  Nor  did  the  organs
fare  better;  they^  too  were  connected  with
the abhorred superstition.! The reformers

t  Bernhard  Weiss,  p.  49.  Bullinger  Reform.  Gesch.  i,  p.
102.  Leben  Leonis  Judae  Misc.  Tigur.  iii.  33.  "Anno  24
stalt  man  ab  die  processionen  der  Mönchen  und  Pfaffen, —
ordnet  Leut,  die  über  die  Sürch  (Reiiquienkästen)  gingend
und  vergrubind  die  Gebein  oder  Heilthnm.  Man  täht  die
Orgien  aussden  kilchen,das  todteniäuten  ward  abgestellt,
das  wychen  des  Saltses  Wassers  Palmen  :  das  verrichten
der  Krankeen  ;— hernach  thät  man  in  der  Stadt  die  Bilder
US  den  Küchen  und  uf  dem  Land  wo  es  das  Mehr  werden
möcht." "Anno  24  the  processions  of  monks  and  priests

312

CONTROVERSY  CONCERNING

Book  V.

would  have  nothing  but  the  simple  Word.  The
same  end  was  proposed  in  all  the  practices  of
the  church.  A  new  foi^m  of  baptism  was
drawn  up,  in  which  all  the  additions  "v\hich
have  no  ground  in  God's  word"  were  omitted.*
The  next  step  was,  the  alteration  of  the  mass.
Luther  had  contented  himself  with  the  omis-
sion of  the  words  relating  to  the  doctrine  of
sacrifice,  and  with  the  introduction  of  the
sacrament  in  both  kinds.  Zwingli  estabhshed
a  regular  love  feast  (Easter  1525).  The  com-
municants sat  in  a  particular  division  of  the
benches  between  the  choir  and  the  transept,
the  men  on  the  right,  the  women  on  the  left ;
the  bread  was  carried  about  on  large  wooden
platters,  and  each  broke  off  a  bit,  after  which
the  wine  was  carried  aboutln  wooden  cups.t
This  was  thought  to  be  the  nearest  approach
to  the  original  institution.

We  come  now  to  a  difference,  the  ground
of  which  lies  deeper ;  and  which  related  not
only  to  the  application,  but  also  to  the  inter-
pretation, of  Scripture,  in  reference  to  the
most  important  of  all  spiritual  acts.

It  is  well  known  how^  various  were  the
views  taken,  even  in  the  earliest  times,  of
this  mystery;  especially  from  the  ninth  to
the  eleventh  century,  before  the  doctrine  of
transubstantiation  became  universally  pre-
dominant. It  is  therefore  no  wonder  if,  now
that  its  authority  was  shaken,  new  differences
of  opinion  manifested  themselves.

At  the  former  period,  they  were  rather  of  a
speculative  nature  5  at  the  latter,  in  conformity
with  the  altered  direction  of  learning,  they
turned  more  on  interpretation  of  Scripture.

Luther  had  no  sooner  rejected  the  miracle
of  transubstantiation,  than  others  began  to
inquire  whether,  even  independently  of  this,
the  words  by  which  the  sacrament  was  insti-
tuted were  not  subject  to  another  interpre-
tation.

Luther  himself  confesses  that  he  had  been
assailed  by  doubts  of  this  kind  ;  but  as,  in  all
his  outward  and  inward  combats,  his  victo-
rious weapon  had  ever  been  the  pure  text  of
Scripture  taken  in  its  literal  sense,  he  now
humbly  surrendered  his  doubts  to  the  sound
of  the  words,  and  continued  to  maintain  the
real  presence,  without  attempting  further  to
define  its  mode.

But  all  had  not  the  same  reverent  submis-
sion to  the  literal  meaning  as  Luther.

Carlstadt  was  the  first  who,  in  the  year
1524,  when  he  was  compelled  to  flee  from
Saxony,  offered  a  new  explanation.  This  was
indeed  exegetically  untenable  and  even  ab-
surd, and  he  himself  at  last  gave  it  up:  in
the  attempt  to  establish  it,  however,  he  put
forth  some  more  coherent  arguments,!-  which

were  abolished.  People  were  ordered  to  go  in  search  of
reliquaries  and  dig  up  the  bones  or  shrines.  The  organs
were  taken  out  of  the  churches,  the  death-bell  abolished,
the  consecration  of  the  salt  and  water  and  palms;  the
preparation  of  the  sick  ;  afterwards  the  pictures  were
taken  out  of  the  churches  in  the  city  and  in  the  country,
wherever  there  were  the  most  of  them."

*  Zwinglis  Werke,  II.  ii.  p.  230.

t  Preface  ;  Werke,  II.  ii.  p.  234.

I  Dialogue  of  the  ungodly  Misuse  of  the  Sacrament.

gave  a  great  impulse  to  the  public  mind  in
the  direction  it  had  already  taken  upon  this
point.

The  modest  (Ecolampadius  of  Basle,  among
whose  friends  similar  notions  were  current,
began  to  be  ashamed  that  he  had  so  long  sup-
pressed his  doubts  and  preached  doctrines  of
the  truth  of  which  he  was  not  thoroughly  con-
vinced ;  he  took  courage  no  longer  to  conceal
his  view  of  the  sense  of  the  mysterious  insti-
tutional words. §

The  young  BuUinger  approached  the  ques-
tion from  another  side.  He  studied  Berenga-
rius's  controversy,  and  came  to  the  conclusion
that  on  this  important  point. — the  very  point
afterwards  established  by  the  reformation, —
injustice  had  been  done  to  that  early  reformer.
He  thought  Berengarius's  interpretation  might
even  be  found  in  St.  Augustine.il

The  main  thing,  however,  was,  that  Zwingli
declared  his  opinion.  In  studying  the  Scrip-
ture after  his  manner,  rather  as  a  whole  than
in  detached  passages,  and  not  without  a  con-
tinual reference  to  classical  antiquity,  he  had
come  to  the  conviction  that  the  is  of  the  insti-
tutional words  signifies  nothing  more  than
'' denotes.''  Already,  in  a  letter  dated  June
1523,  he  declares  that  the  true  sense  of  the
Eucharist  cannot  be  understood,  until  the
bread  and  wine  in  the  Lord's  Supper  are
regarded  in  exactly  the  same  manner  as
the  water  in  baptism. IF  While  attacking  the
mass,  he  had  already  conceived  the  inten-
tion of  restoring  the  Eucharist  to  itself,  as
he  expressed  it.**  As  Carlstadt  now  brought
forward  a  very  similar  interpretation,  which
he  was  unable  to  maintain.  Zwingli  thought
he  could  no  longer  remain  silent.  He  pub-
lished his  exposition  :  first  in  a  printed  address
to  a  parish  priest  in  Reutlingen  (November
1524),  then  more  at  length  in  his  essay,  On
true  and  false  Religion.  Although  he  was
little  satisfied  with  Carlstadt's  explanation,  he
nevertheless  availed  hinrself  of  some  of  the
same  arguments  which  that  theologian  had
employed ;  e.  g.  that  the  body  of  Christ  was
in  heaven,  and  could  not  possibly  be  divided
realiter  among  his  disciples  on  e^rth.  He
rested  his  reasoning  chiefly  on  the  sixth  chap-
ter of  the  Gospel  of  St.  John,  w^hich  was  thus,
as  he  thought,  rendered  perfectly  clear.

No  longer  ago  than  the  autumn  of  1524,  the
great  division  of  the  Church,  into  Catholic  and
Evangelical,  had  been  formally  accomplished ;
and  already  an  opinion  was  broached  w^hich.
was  destined  to  work  a  violent  schism  in  the
Evangelical  Church.

Walch.  XX.  2878.  Of  the  unchristian  Misuse  of  the  Lord's
Bread  and  Cup. Ibid.  138.

§  Collection  jof  the  various  declarations  of  CTIcolanipa-
dius  in  his  life,  by  Hess,  p.  102.

II  Lavater  von  Laben  und  Tod  Heinrychen  Bullingers,
1578,  p.  H.

"il  To  Hans  Wyttenbach,  15th  June,  1523.  Panem  et
vinum  vere  esse  puto\ac  edi  etiara,  sed  frustra,  nisi  edens
firmiter  credat  hunc  solum  esse  animse  cibum.  Omnia
sunt  planiora  si  rri  auKa  cvku,  i.  e.  ficus  ficus  appellaveri-
mus,  panem  dixerimus  panem,  vinum  vinum.  (Epp.  i.
258.)

**  Deliberavimus  usui  esse  futurum  si  missa  evertere-
tur,  qua  eversa  speravimus  etiam  Eucharistiam  sibi  re-
slitui  posse. De  vera  et  falsa  Religione,  p.  269.

Chap.  III.

THE  LORD'S  SUPPER.

313

Luther  did  not  hesitate  to  denounce  Zwingli
as  a  wild  enthusiast,  with  whom  he  had  fre-
quently had  to  contend;  he  disregarded  the
fact  that  the  removal  of  images  in  Zürich  had
been  effected  under  the  sanction  of  the  civil
authority,  and  that  the  Swiss  reformers  had
found  a  point  at  which  civil  order  might  se-
curely subsist,  only  a  few  steps  further  re-
moved from  traditional  usage  than  that  to
which  he  had  himself  advanced.  Indeed  his
notions  of  the  affairs  of  Switzerland  were  alto-
gether very  vague  and  imperfect.  He  began
the  contest  with  great  vehemence.

This  is  not  the  place  to  enumerate  the  po-
lemical writings  exchanged,  or  the  arguments
employed,  on  either  side.  The  historian  may,
however,  be  permitted  to  make  one  remark.

It  appears  to  me  undeniable  that  the  contro-
versy was  not  to  be  terminated  by  a  purely
exegetic  process.

That  the  is  in  the  text  might  have  a  figura-
tive sense,  cannot  be  denied,  nor  in  fact  does
Luther  attempt  to  deny  it.  He  grants  it  in
expressions  such  as,  Christ  is  a  rock,  a  vine,
&c.,  '-because  Christ  cannot  be  a  natural  rock."
He  only  denies  that  the  word  had,  or  must
have,  a  figurative  meaning  in  the  case  under
discussion. =* ,

Hence  it  clearly  appears,  that  the  ground  of
the  controversy  lay  m  their  general  view  of
the  subject.

Zwingh's  chief  objection  to  the  hteral  inter-
pretation is,  that  Christ  himself  says,  "I  shall
not  be  with  you  always ;"  thus  implying  that
he  would  not  be  present  in  the  Eucharist;
and  that,  according  to  this  interpretation,  he
must  be  omnipresent;  whereas  a  local  omni-
presence is  a  contradiction  in  terms.  The
reply -of  Luther,  who  had  an  instinctive  aver-
sion to  any  departure  from  the  simple,  clear
and  Hteral  meaning  of  words,  is  a  general  one  :
— that  he  holds  fast  to  the  infallible  Word,  and
that  to  God  nothing  is  impossible.  But  it  is
abundantly  clear  that  he  would  never  have
been  satisfied  with  this  defence,  had  he  not
felt  himself  elevated  above  the  objections  of
his  antagonists,  by  the  higher  region  from
which  he  contemplated  the  whole  subject.
Being  harder  pressed,  he  at  length  enounced
the  doctrine  of  the  union  of  the  divine  and
human  natures  in  Christ,  which  he  regards  as
far  more  intimate  than  that  between  body  and
soul.  Not  even  death,  he  says,  had  power  to
loose  it:  the  human  nature  of  Christ  was
raised  above  all  natural  existences,  above  and
beyond  all  created  beings,  by  its  union  with
the  Godhead.  We  have  here  a  case,  and  by
no  means  the  only  one,  in  which  Luther,  with-
out being  even  conscious  of  it  himself,  reverts
to  opinions  which  were  current  before  the  de-
velopment of  the  hierarchical  supremacy,  and
the  organisation  of  the  system  to  which  it
gave  birth.  In  the  ninth  century,  Johannes
Scotus  Erigena  reconciled  the  doctrines  of  the
Eucharist  and  the  two  natures,  if  not  in  ex-
actly the  same,  yet  in  a  very  similar  manner.!

*  Greater  Confession,  in  Walch's  Collection  of  Luther's
Works,  Part  xx.  p.  1138.
t  De  divisione  naturae:  Neander  Kirchengeschichte,  iv.
40  '2b

Luther  goes  on  to  teach  that  the  identity  of
the  divine  and  human  nature  is  showed  forth
in  the  mystery  of  the  sacrament.  The  body
of  Christ  is  the  entire  Christ,  of  a  divine  na-
ture, exalted  above  all  the  conditions  of  the
creature,  and  hence  also  easily  communicable
in  the  bread.  The  objection,  that  Christ  says
he  would  not  be  present  always,  he  conclu-
sively answers  by  the  remark,  that  Christ  was
there  speaking  of  his  earthly  existence.

It  is  evident  why  the  sort  of  proof  adduced
by  Zwingli  had  no  longer  any  cogency  for  Lu-
ther. His  own  hypothesis  enabled  him  to
abide  by  the  strict  meaning  of  the  words,  as
he  was  fond  of  doing;  since  they  no  longer
presented  any  co-ntradiction.  And  this  hypo-
thesis, which  touches  the  highest  mysteries
of  religion  (though,  with  a  reverent  awe  of
dragging  the  mysterious  into  the  conflict  of
the  day,  he  rarely  brought  it  forward),  was,
therefore,  perfectly  satisfactory  to  his  mind.

Luther  indeed  here  appears  to  ns  in  the
most  characteristic  light.

We  have  often  remarked  that  he  deviated
from  tradition,  only  so  far  as  he  felt  himself
absolutely  constrained  to  do  so  by"  the  words
of  Christ.  To  go  in  search  of  novelties,  or  to
overthrow  any  thing  established  that  was  not
utterly  irreconcilable  with  Scripture,  were
thoughts  which  his  soul  knew  not.  He  would
have  maintained  the  whole  structure  of  the
Latin  Church,  had  it  not  been  disfigured  by
modern  additions,  foreign  to  its  original  de-
sign, and  contrary  to  the  genuine  sense  of  the
Gospel :  he  would  have  acknowledged  the
hierarchy  itself,  if  it  had  only  left  him  free-
dom of  speech ;  but,  as  that  could  not  be,  he
was  compelled  to  take  upon  himself  the  work
of  purification.  He  was  so  profoundly  attached
to  the  traditions  of  the  Church,  that  it  v/as  not
without  the  most  violent  inward  storms  that
he  emancipated  himself"  from  accidental  and
groundless  additions.  But  he  held  with  the
more  unshaken  tenacity  to  the  great  mystery,
in  so  far  as  it  was  in  accordance  with,  and  sup-
ported by,  the  literal  meaning  of  Scripture.;
His  mind  embraced  it  with  all  its  native  depth  ;
he  was  not  only  susceptible  of^the  sublimest
mysticism,  but  his  whole  soul  was  steeped
in  it.

It  is  true,  Luther  fell  off  from  the  Church
of  Rome  (or  rather  he  was  expelled  from  it),
and  wrought  it  more  damage  than  any  other
man  W'hatever.  But  he  never  denied  its  origin.
If  we  take  a  comprehensive  view  of  the  great
historical  movement  of  opinion  and  doctrine
throughout  the  w^orld,  we  shall  see  that  Luther
was  the  organ  through  which  the  Latin  Church
resumed  a  freer,  less  hierarchical  form,  and
one  more  in  harmony  with  the  original  ten-
dency of  Christianity.

We  must,  however,  admit  that  his  view^s.

47-2.  The  difference  mainly  consists  in  this  ;  that  Scotus
assumes  more  decidedly  the  glorification  of  the  human
nature  by  the  divine.  Caro  in  virtutem  transformata
nullo  loco  continetur.

X  E.  g.  Carlstadt  asked,  Where  has  Christ  commanded
that  the  elements  should  be  lifted  up  and  shown  to  the
people?  (Walch,  2876.)  Luther  answered,  Where  does
Christ  forbid  it?  (p.  252.)

314

REFORMATION  IN  SWITZERLAND.

E(

especially  of  this  subject,  were  always  some-
what individual, — not  fitted  to  produce  con-
viction in  all  men,  any  more  than  the  point
from  which  he  took  tnose  views  could  be
shared  by  all.  Nor  were  the  more  profound
and  eminent  spirits  who  took  an  active  part  in
the  general  movement  of  the  century,  by  any
means  so  well  inclined  towards  the  Church  as
Luther.  And  as  the  evidence  adduced,  by
Zwingli  failed  to  convince  Luther,  so  Luther's
hypothesis  produced  no  impression  upon
Zwingli.

Zwingli  had,  as  we  have  said,  none  of  Lu-
ther's deep  and  lively  conception  of  the  u-ni-
versal  Church,  or  of  an  unbroken  connexion
M'ith  the  doctrines  of  past  ages.  We  have
seen  that  his  mind,  formed  in  the  midst  of  re-
publican institutions,  was  far  more  occupied
with  the  idea  of  the  commune ;  and  he  was
now  intent  on  keeping  together  the  communes
of  Zürich  by  a  stricter  church  discipline.  He
tried  to  get  rid  of  all  public  criminals  j  put  an
end  to  the  right  of  asylum,  and  causecl  loose
women  and  adulterers  to  be  turned  out  of  the
city.  With  these  views  of  politics  and  morals,
he  united  an  unprejudiced  study  of  the  Scrip-
tures, freed  from  the  whole  dogm.atic  structure
that  had  been  raised  upon  them.  If  I  do  not
mistake,  he  did,  in  fact,  evince  an  acute  and
apt  sense  for  their  original  meaning  and  spirit.
He  regarded  the  Lord's  Supper  (as  the  ritual
he  introduced  proves)  in  the  hght  of  a  feast
of  commemoration  and  affection.  He  held  to
the  words  of  Paul ;  that  we  are  one  body,  be-
cause we  eat  of  one  bread;  for,  says  he,
every  one  confesses  by  that  act  that  he  be-
longs to  the  society  which  acknowledges  Christ
to  be  its  Saviour,  and  in  which  all  Christians
are  one  body;  this  is  community  in  the  blood
of  Christ.  He  would  not  admit  that  he  re-
garded the  Eucharist  as  mere  bread.  "If,"
said  he,  "bread  and  wine,  sanctified  by  the
grace  of  God,  are  distributed,  is  not  the  whole
body  of  Christ,  as  it  were,  sensibly  given  to
his  followers?"  It  was  a  peculiar  satisfaction
to  him,  that  by  this  view  he  arrived  directly
at  a  practical  result.  For,  he  asked,  how  can
the  knowledge  that  we  belong  to  one  body  fail
to  lead  to  Christian  life  and  Christian  love  ?
The  unv/orthy  sinned  against  the  body  and
blood  o^  Christ.  He  had  the  joy  of  seeing
that  his  ritual  and  the  views  he  had  put  forth,
contributed  to  put  an  end  to  old  and  obdurate
hostilities.^

Although  Zwingli  insists  much  on  what
there  still  was  of  supernatural  in  his  scheme
of  the  Eucharist,  it  is  clear  that  this  was  not
the  mystery  which  had  hitherto  formed  the
central  point  of  the  worship  of  the  Catholic
Church.  We  can  easily  understand  the  effect
produced  on  the  common  people,  by  the  at-
tempt to  rob  them  of  the  sensible  presence
of  Christ.  Some  courage  was  required  to  re-
solve on  such  an  experiment ;  but  when  this
was  actually  made,  the  public  mind  was,  as
OEcolampadius  says,  found  to  be  far  better
disposed for  its  reception  than could  have

*  Ei-positio  fidei,  Works  II.  ii.  241.

been  suspected.  This  is,  however,  very  ex-
plicable. People  saw  that  they  had  gone  too
far  to  retract,  in  their  defection  from  the
Church  of  Rome ;  and  they  found  a  certain
gratification  of  the  feeling  of  independence
which  that  defection  had  generated,  in  ren-
dering it  as  complete  as  possible.

Luther  had,  from  the  first  moment,  been
treated  with  the  greatest  harshness;  Zwingli,
on  the  contrary,  with  the  utmost  gentleness :
even  in  the  year  1523  he  received  an  ex-
tremely gracious  letter  from  Adrian  VI.,  in
which  no  allusion  was  made  to  his  innova-
tions. Yet,  it  is  obvious  that  Zwingll's  oppo-
sition to  the  existing  forms  and  institutions  of
the  Church,  was  far  more  violent  and  irrecon-
cilable than  that  of  Luther.  Neither  ritual
nor  dogma,  in  the  forms  which  they  had  ac-
quired in  the  course  of  centuries,  any  longer
made  the  smallest  impression  upon  him :
alterations,  in  themselves  innocuous,  but  to
which  abuses  had  clung,  he  rejected  with  the
same  decision  and  promptitude  as  the  abuses
themselves ;  he  sought  to  restore  the  earliest
forms  in  which  the  principle  of  Christianity
had  found  an  expression : — forms,  it  is  true,
no  less  than  those  he  abolished,  and  not  sub-
stance ;  but  purer  and  more  congenial.

Luther,  notwithstanding  his  zeal  against  the
pope,  notwithstanding  his  aversion  to  the  se-
cular dominion  of  the  hierarchy,  was  yet,  both
in  doctrine  and  discipline,  as  far  as  it  was  pos-
sible,  conservative,  and  attached  to  the  his-
torical traditions  of  the  Church;  his  thoughts
and  feelings  were  profound,  and  profoundly
impressed  with  the  mysteries  of  religion.
Zwingli  was  much  more  unsparing  in  rejec-
tion and  in  alteration ;  attentive  to  the  practi-
cal business  of  life;  remarkable  for  sobriety
of  mind  and  good  sense.

Had  Luther  and  his  disciples  stood  alone,
the  principle  of  the  reformation  would  proba-
bly have  rapidly  acquired  stability.;  but  it
would  perhaps  as  rapidly  have  lost  its  living,
progressing  power.  It  is  difficult  to  imagine
Zwingli  as  standing  alone;  but  had  views
like  his  arisen  without  those  of  Luther,  the
chain  of  the  historical  development  of  the
Church  would  have  been  violently  broken.

Thus  it  was  decreed  by  divine  Providence,
if  we  may  presume  to  say  so,  that  these  two
systems  should  make  their  way  together.
They  co-existed,  each  in  its  place ;  each  the
offspring  of  a  sort  of  internal  necessity ;  they
belonged  to  each  other,  they  completed  each
other.

But,  from  the  time  of  the  establishment  of
the  inquisition — of  the  intolerant  domination
of  a  dogmatical  system — so  rigid  an  idea  of
orthodoxy  had  obtained  in  the  world,  that
these  two  sections  of  the  great  party  of  re-
form, regardless  of  their  common  antagonist,
attacked  each  other  with  furious  zeal.

We  shall  frequently  have  occasion  to  recur
to  the  various  movements  excited  by  this  hos-
tility. We  must  now  trace  the  progress  of
Zwingli  on  his  own  ground  —  Zürich  and
Switzerland.

Chap.  III.

ANABAPTISTS  IN  ZUKICH.

315

DEFENCir.- PKOPAGATION.

Although  Zwingli  had  gone  much  farther
than  Luther,  he  was  soon  opposed  by  a  still
more  extreme-  party :  he  had  to  contend  with
the  anabaptists.

He  was  called  upon  to  form  a  separate  con-
gregation of  true  believers,  since  they  alone
were  the  subjects  of  the  promises.  He  re-
plied, that  it  was  impossible  to  bring  heaven
upon  the  earth;  Christ  had  taught  that  we
were  to  let  the  tares  grow  together  with  the
wheat.*

It  was  then  demanded  that  he  should  at
least  invite  the  whole  commune  of  Zurich  to
take  part  in  the  deliberations,  and  not  content
himself  with  the  Grand  Council,  which  con-
sisted only  of  two  hundred  members.  But
Zwingli  feared  the  influence  of  fanatical  de-
magogues and  pretenders  to  inspiration,  on
a  larger  assembly.  He  maintained  that  the
commune  was  adequately  represented,  not
only  politically  but  ecclesiastically,  in  the
Grand  Council.  The  tacit  assent  of  the  com-
mune he  held  to  be  a  perfectly  sufficient
sanction  of  the  decrees  of  the  Grand  Council.
This,  it  was  true,  exercised  the  spiritual
^ower,  but  under  the  condition  that  it  did  not
offend  against  the  rules  laid  down  in  the  Holy
Scriptures  in  the  smallest  particular  ]  for  that
had  been  promised  to  the  commune  by  its
preachers.  Zwingli  adhered  steadily  to  the
idea  of  the  commune,  though  he  could  not
perfectly  realize  it  ]  just  as,  in  modern  times,
even  in  countries  where  the  principle  of  the*
sovereignty  of  the  people  is  fully  admitted,
the  body  of  the  people  do  not,  in  fact,  take
an  active  part  in  the  government.

Zwingli  was  determined  not  to  suffer  the
newly  established  order  of  things  to  be  dis-
turbed. In  order  to  obtain  some  advantage
from  it,  the  oppositionists  demanded  the  abo-
lition of  tithes,  which,  they  said,  rested  on  no
divine  authority  whatever.  Zwingli  replied,
that  the  tithes  had  either  already  passed  into
the  handfe  of  third  parties  by  civil  contract,  or
had  been  applied  to  the  foundation  of  churches
and  schools. t  He  did  not,  like  Luther,  take
his  stand  intrepidly  on  the  principle  of  the
supremacy  of  the  civil  power;  but  he  was
equally  resolved  not  to  allow  the  political
edifice  which  had  just  been  constructed,  to
be  shaken.  He  saw  that  the  agitation  must
stop  somewhere,  unless  every  thing  was  to
be  called  in  question.  He  had  reached  a  cer-
tain point,  but  he  would  not  be  drawn  on  one
step  further ;  and  he  had  the  general  will,  on
which  in  a  republic  every  thing  depends,  on
his  side.

At  this  juncture  anabaptism  also  made  its
appearance  in  Zürich.  The  rite  of  the  second
baptism  is  the  only  symbol  of  that  doctrine
which  requires  perfect  uniformity  of  opinion
and  genuine  Christianity  as  the  basis  of
the  commune  (congregation).  A  community
founded  on  sucn.  ideas,  however.  Mdll  always

*  Elenchus  contra  Catabaptistas. 0pp.  iii.  363.
t  Fiissli's  Beiträge,  i.  235.

apply  to  temporal  the  principle  which  governs
spiritual  affairs;  and  accordingly,  we  very
soon  find  the  anabaptists  at  variance  with  the
constituted  authorities.  When  summoned  be-
fore the  tribunals,  they  declared  that  they
were  not  subject  to  any  earthly  power;  that
God  was  their  only  sovereign.  They  did  not
perhaps  maintaiu  in  so  many  words,  that  no
temporal  authority  ought  to  be  endured ;  but
they  taught  that  a  Christian  could  not  fulfil
any  temporal  office,  or  draw  the  sword  ;  so
that,  according  to  them,  Christianity  did  not
recognise  the  temporal  power.  They  repre-
sented a  community  of  goods  as  that  ideal  of
our  condition  on  earth  after  which  we  ought
to  strive. i  As,  however,  notions  of  this  kind
had  produced  such  fearful  effects  during  the
revolt  of  the  peasants,  and  as  the  Zürich  ana-
baptists (as  Zwingli  affirmed  he  positively
knew)  preached  the  doctrine,  that  it  was  law-
ful to  kill,  and  necessary  to  kill  priests ;  the
whole  force  of  the  existing  order  of  things,  in
concert  with  the  preachers,  rose  up  in  arms  to
rid  the  territory  of  them.  Some  were  ban-
ished, others  fled ;  a  few  of  the  ringleaders
were  drowned  without  mercy.§  The  new
constitution  of  the  Church  was  firmly  estab-
lished, without  peril  or  injury  to  the  institu-
tions of  the  city  or  the  state.

Meanwhile,  in  another  quarter,  a  still  more
dangerous  opposition  had  arisen  out  of  politi-
cal motives  affecting  the  whole  Confederation.

Zwingli  had  propagated  his  political,  as  well
as  his  religious  opinions  in  Zürich;  he  had
combated  the  abuses  of  foreign  enlistment
and  foreign  pensions  with  complete  success :
the  priests  were  compelled  solemnly  to  for-
swear all  pensions;  and  in  the  year  1521,
Zürich  alone,  of  all  the  cantons,  refused  to
accept  the  French  alliance.  The  disasters
which  this  alliance  brought  in  its  train,  were
used  by  Zwingli,  as  means  of  gaining  others
over  to  his  system.  It  is  necessary  to  read
"The  Divine  Warning,"  which  he  addressed
after  the  battle  of  Bicocca,  "To  the  oldest  and
right  honest  Confederates  at  Schwyz,"  in  order
to  perceive  the  connexion  which  subsisted  be-
tween his  religious  and  his  political  labours.
His.  persuasion  was,  that  reason  and  piety
were  blinded  by  secret  gifts  from  foreigners,
and  nothing  but  discord  engendered.  He
urges  his  countrymen  to  lay  aside  selfish  con-
siderations. And  if  any  one  asked  how  this
was  possible,  seeing  that  selfishness  has  its
root  in  every  human  heart,  he  answered,  that
care  must  be  taken  that  the  word  of  God  be
taught  clearly  and  intelligibly,  and  without
any  of  the  encumbrances  of  human  wisdom.
For  so  would  God  gain  possession  of  the  heart.
"  But  where  God  is  not  in  the  heart  of  man,
there  is  nothing  but  the  man  himself,  and  he
thinks  of  nothing  but  what  ministers  to  his  in-

X  Confessions  and  documents  in  Fiissli's  Beiträgen,  i.
2-29,  2-19,  258,  ii.  263.

§  In  Rodolplii  Gualtherj  Epistola  ad  Lectorem,  prefixed
to  the  second  part  of  the  Works,  1544,  it  is  protested  that
Zwingli  did  not  desire  this.  "  Q,uod  homines  veesani,  non
jam  infideles  raodo,  verum  etiam  seditiosi,  reipublicpe  tur-
batores,  magistratuum  hostes,  justa  senatus  sententia
damnati  suat,  num  id  Zwinglio  fraudi  esse  poterit  V

316

TRIUMPH  OF  THE

Book  V.

terests  or  his  lusts."  His  political  views,  and
indeed  all  his  ideas,  are  pervaded  by  that
higher  morality,  which  is  at  the  same  time
mysticism  and  rehgion.  In  Schwyz,  where
he  had  a  number  of  personal  friends,  his
addresses  made  such  an  impression,  that  on
the  18th  May,  1522,  the  rural  communes  de-
clined the  French  alliance,  and  admonished
others  to  renounce  it;  "all  those  whom  it  had
a  right  to  admonish."  It  was  quite  to  be  ex-
pected that  Schwyz,  where  Geroldseck  and
Zwingli  and  Leo  Juda  had  so  long  had  influ-
,ence,  would  now  follow  the  example  of  Zü-
rich in  religious  affairs.

By  this  course,  however,  Zwingli  necessarily
created  the  most  formidable  enemies.  The
leading  men  in  the  communes,  who  received
foreign  pensions,  and  the  hired  captains  who
led  the  warlike  youth  into  foreign  service,
constituted  factions  which  were  not  disposed
to  let  slip  their  advantages  so  easily ; — oligar-
chies which,  united,  governed  the  popular
assemblies.  Zwingli  himself  discovered  that
ii  new  nobility  was  as  dangerous  as  the  old
one.  And  in  fact  these  governing  parties  were
powerful  enough  to  induce  the  Schwyzers  to
revoke  their  resolution  against  foreign  service.
The  influence  of  Hans  Hug,  Schultheiss  of
Lucerne,  chiefly  contributed  to  maintain  the
existing  policy  in  the  VVald  cantons.*  At  the
diet  of  1523  a  complaint  was  formally  laid
against  Zwingli,  and  it  inevitably  followed
that  the  hostility  to  his  political  opinions  was
reflected  back  on  his  religious  exertions.  In-
deed it  is  impossible  to  deny  that  they  were
most  intimately  connected.  His  views  on
both  subjects  were  simultaneous  in  their  ori-
gin, and  had  thus  far  been  prosecuted  toge-
ther. In  the  year  1524,  the  diet  required  the
Zürichers  to  desist  from  their  innovations.
As  they  gave  an  evasive  answer,  the  other
cantons  threatened  that  they  would  no  longer
sit  with  them  in  diet,  and  would  send  them
back  the  briefs  of  confederation.  Some  dis-
sentient opinions  were  indeed  expressed  at
the  diet,  and  occasionally  prevailed.  In  the
year  1525  a  very  remarkable  resolutiou  was
passed;  the  purpose  of  which  was  to  limit  the
spiritual  jurisdiction, t  after  the  manner  of  the
German  diets.  But  those  who  were  strongly
attached  to  Rome  would  hear  of  no  limitation
of  the  ecclesiastical  jurisdiction;  and,  in  the
main,  this  more  orthodox  opinion  predomi-
nated. The  prelates  who,  shortly  before,  had
been  in  no  little  jeopardy,  felt  the  ground
once  more  firm  under  their  feet :  they  formed
the  closest  alliancQ  with  the  oligarchs.  At
this  point  of  our  researches,  we  come  upon
the  remarkable  actions  of  John  Faber,  the
Vicar-general  of  Constance,  who  at  an  earlier
period  had  shared  the  literary  tendencies
of  his  High  German  contemporaries,  and  en-

*  Zwingli's  Complaint,  Feb.  19,  1523,  to  Steiner.  Epp.
i.  p.  275.

t  E.  g:  the  clergy  shall  rntain  what  relates  to  affairs  of
marriage,  or  places  of  worship  and  sacraments,  or  errors
of  faith  ;  but  these  too  shall  first  be  laid  before  the  secular
authorities,  which  shall  refer  them,  only  when  they  deem
it  necessary,  to  the  epiritual  judges.  Articles  in  Bullinger,
J.  203.

cou raged  Zwingli  to  resist  the  sale  of  indul-
gences. In  1521,  however,  he  returned  from
Rome  totally  changed,  and  now  devoted  his
life  to  the  maintenance  of  the  ancient  faith.
He  laboured  by  every  means  to  promote  the  ^
alliance  we  have  mentioned,  and  to  render  it
effective.  The  conference  at  Baden  in  May,
1526,  at  which  Eck  was  also  present,  was  the
expression  of  the  new  understanding  between
the  oligarchs  and  the  spiritual  power. :|:  With
greater  confidence,  and  with  greater  proba-
bility, than  ever,  the  orthodox  party  main-
tained that  the  victory  was  on  their  side.

Yet  this  very  conference  turned  out  highly
injurious  to  them.

Zwingli  did  not  attend  it,  probably  alarmed
at  the  executions  which  had  just  taken  place
in  the  see  of  Constance  ;  for  example,  that  of
Hans  Hüglin :  on  the  other  hand,  Bern  and
Basel  sent  two  representatives  of  the  new
doctrines.  Berthold  Hallerand  (Ecolampadius,
who  were  not  only  far  from  conceding  the
victory  to  their  opponents,  but,  on  their  re-
turn home,  excited  a  patriotic  interest  in  their
cause  in  the  minds  of  their  fellow-citizens. §
Bern  and  Basel  also,  on  their  side,  denoanded
their  share  in  the  publication  of  the  acts  of
the  conference,  ancl  would  not  quietly  allow
them  to  remain  in  the  hands  of  the  Catholic
majority.  A  misunderstanding  had  already
arisen  between  those  cities  and  the  others,
on  the  question  of  jurisdictions,  and  an  entire
division  now  seemed  inevitable.

'But  a  further  political  crisis  was  necessary
•to  bring  this  to  an  open  breach.

If  the  new  doctrine,  however,  had  made
enemies  by  its  connexion  with  politics,  it  had
also  secured  friends.  In  all  these  cities  a.
powerful  democratic  party  in  the  Grand  Coun-
cils, together  with  the  body  of  the  citizens,
stood  opposed  to  the  oligarchies.  As  the
latter  adhered  to  the  spiritual  power,  so  the
former  inclined  to  reform.  Two  parties,  op-
posed in  pohtics  and  religion,  were  formed,
and  long  was  the  victory  doubtful.  There  is
no  question  that  the  spirit  of  ecclesiastical  re-
form, established  so  firmly  and  so  continually
gaining  strength  among  the  people,  mainly
contributed  in  the  powerful  canton  of  Bern  to
give  the  final  ascendancy  to  the  more  demo-
cralical  party.  The  troubles  concerning  the
conference  of  Baden  had  the  same  result.  At
the  new  elections  in  the  year  1527,  a  con-
siderable number  of  adherents  of  reform  and
adversaries  of  the  oligarchs,  entered  the  Grand
Council.  The  first  consequence  of  this  was,
that  the  Grand  Council  demanded  the  restitu-
tion of  all  its  ancient  rights.  Twenty  years
long  it  had  acquiesced  in  the  lesser  council

t  Zwingli  to  Vadian,.  i.  485.  "  Istiid  unum  raveo,  ne
optima  plebs  Helvetica  horum  nebulonum,  Fabri  videlicet
et  Ecciorum,  strophis  committatur,  id  autem  Oligarcha-
rum  perfidia." 3  Kal.  Apr.  1526.

§  As  the  song  by  Nicolas  Manuel  shows:  "ain  Lid  in
schilers  Hofthon.''  Grüneisen,  p.  409.  "  Egg  zahlet  mit
füssen  und  henden,  fing  an  schelken  und  sehenden,— er
sprach  ich  hlib  by  dem  verstand,  den  Bäbst  Cardinal  Bis-
chof hand."  "  Egg  strove  with  hand  and  foot,  and  began
to  scold  and  to  abuse:— he  said,  I  hold  to  the  understand-
ing (opinion)  that  the  pope,  cardinals  and  bishops  have."
—He  appears  just  the  same  ia  Baden  as  in  Leipzig.

Chap.  III.

REFORAUTION  IN  SWITZERLAND.

817

being  composed  of  Vennern  and  Sechzeh-
nern  :*  and  it  now  resumed  its  inherent  right
to  elect  the  members  of  the  latter  body.t
After  it  had  thus,  agreeably  to  the  constitu-
tion, united  in  itself  the  entn-e  civic  power,  it
proceeded  to  the  discussion  of  religious  affairs.
The  mandates  commanding  the  people  to  hold
fast  to  the  ancient  faith  were  revoked ;  a  dis-
putation was  held,  at  which  Zwingii  was  pre-
sent, and  which  ended  entirely  in  his  favour.
All  his  plans  for  Zurich  were  adopted  in  Bern.
In  the  year  1528,  the  adherents  of  the  old
faith  were  turned  out  of  both  the  councils.  The
commune  was  assembled  in  the  church ;  man
by  man, — gentlemen,  masters  of  trades,  and
workmen,  all  swore  allegiance  to  the  two
councils. t  The  next  question,  as  might  be
expected  from  the  twofold  character  of  the
reform,  was  the  system  of  foreign  pensions,
which  had  many  advocates  in  Bern,  even
among  the  evangelical  party.  Not  without  a
hot  contest,  and  a  second  appeal  to  the  opinion
of  the  people  in  city  and  country,  were  the
pensions  refused  (24th  August),  and  notice  of
the  same  sent  to  the  King  of  France,§

The  existing  government  of  Basel  stood  its
ground  a  httle  longer;  it  flattered  itself  that
it  would  still  be  able  to  maintain  the  balance
between  the  two  confessions.  Gradually.
however,  the  evangelical  communes  became
aware  of  their  superiority;  and  at  length,  at
a  meeting  of  the  people  in  January  1529,
only  eight  hundred  Catholics  were  present,  to
three  thousand  reformers.  In  the  following
February,  a  violent  commotion  broke  out.
The  first  thing  was  to  alter  the  constitution.
The  guilds  resumed  their  ancient  independ-
ence, and  acquired  the  perpetual  right  of
sending  sixty  of  their  members  to  the  Grand
Council.  No  one  was  to  sit  in  the  lesser
council,  who  was  not  nominated  by  the
greater ;  all  the  Catholics  left  the  lesser  coun-
cil. II  Psalms  and  hymns  in  the  German  lan-
guage were  immediately  sung  in  the  churches;
and  on  the  1st  of  April  a  form  of  divine  ser-
vice on  the  pattern  of  that  of  Zurich  was  pub-
lished, breathing  the  religious  earnestness  and
austere  morality  which  were  among  the  chief
internal  causes  of  this  revolution,  and  con-
taining allusions  to  the  suppression  of  wanton
wars. ,

A  code  determining  their  relations  was
now  agreed  on  by  the  three  cities. This  was

*  Local  titles  of  magistrates.  The  sixteen  (Sechzelinern)
still  exist  at  Bern,  thougli  their  functions  are  reduced  to  a
shadow.— TR.4.NS.

t  "Ad  viginti  annos  4  Pandareti  cum  16  e  civibus  sena-
tum minorem  elegerunt,  ea  conditione  ut  per  eos  delectos
civium  turma  non  haberet  abjicere:  nunc  ablata  est  illis
potestas  et  concio  universa  civium  senatum  deligit."
Letter  from  B.  Haller  to  Vadian  in  Kirchhofer's  Berthold
Vadian,  p.  89.

I  Stettler,  ii.  6.

§  Bnllinger,  ii.  13.  Haller  calls  it  pecunia  sanguinaria;
Hofmeister  speaks  of  execrabile  foadus  Galücum.  Manuel
too  v>?as  one  of  those  who  attacked  the  pensions.  Grünei-
sen, 109. Kirchhofer,  133.

IJ  See  Ochs,  Geschichte  von  Basel,  v.  p.  626,  f.  The  dioe-
cesium  suftragio,  cumdioecesiis  disponenda  in  CEcolampa-
dius'  Report  with  which  Ochs  (v.  653)  torments  himself
so  much,  is  doubtless  diacosion  suffragio,  cum  diacosiis,  by
which  word  Zwingii,  and  also  fficolampadius  (e.  g.  in  his
letter  to  Hess,  p.  506),  usually  denotes  the  Grand  Council.
2b*

in  fact  a  treaty  of  alliance  for  the  defence  of
the  new  order  of  things  which  they  had
estabhshed,  and  into  which  they  contem-
plated the  admission  of  all  the  confederate
cantons,  "when,"  as  they  express  it,  ''they
shall  be  so  far  instructed  in  the  word  of
God."

Of  this  event,  indeed,  ther»-  seemed  to  be
a  considerable  probability.  In  Glarus,  Ap-
penzell, and  the  Grisons,  the  reforming  party
was  very  active;  in  Schaffhausen  the  council
incessantly  vacillated  between  the  opposite
tendencies  ;1[  in  St.  Gall  the  victory  was  al-
ready decided.  In  the  year  1528,  after  a
cliange  of  the  council  of  that  city,  the  Catho-
lic ceremonies  were  discontinued,  and  articles
of  a  radical  reformation  promulgated.**  The
same  took  place  in  ]\Iühlhausen,  where  the
secretary  of  the  city,  Gamshorst,  one  of  the
statesmen  who  had  taken  an  active  part  in
the  internal  affairs  of  the  Confederation  and
in  its  relations  to  the  pope  and  the  emperor,
encouraged  the  movement  by  his  well-founded
authority.  In  the  years  1528  and  1529,  St.  Gall,
Biel,  and  Mühlhausen  (the  latter  not  without
some  difficulty,  and  only  in  consequence  of
the  especial  interposition  of  Bern)  were  re-
ceived into  the  Christian  civic  alliance. ft

These  changes,  great  and  important  as  they
were,  originated  in  a  single  profound  thought,
embracing  political  and  religious  objects.
Zvvingli  had  resolved  to  purify  at  once  the
church  and  his  country  from  the  most  per-
nicious abuses  of  both  kinds.  He  could  not
have  accomplished  the  ecclesiastical  reform
without  the  political,  nor  the  political  without
the  ecclesiastical.  Nothing  short  of  the  con-
current progress  of  both  would  have  realized
his  original  conception.  We  shall  see  here-
after how  far  he  was  successful.

Germany  was  chiefly  affected  by  his  viev/
of  the  sacrament  of  the  Lord's  Supper*  But-
zer  and  Capito,  the  reformers  of  Strasburg,
had  taken  part  in  the  conference  at  Bern,  and
had  long  been  zealous  advocates  for  Zwingli's
system.  Lindau  and  Memmingen  soon  fol-
lowed Strasburg.  The  same  doctrine  was
preached  by  Somius  in  Ulm,  Cellarius  in
•Augsburg,  Blaurer  in  Constance,  Hermann  in
Reutlingen,  and  by  many  others  in  the  towns
of  that  part  of  Germany.  In  some  indeed,
the  project  of  attaching  themselves  by  close
and  indissoluble  ties  to  the  evangelical  towns
of  the  Swiss  Confederation  was  talked  of.
And  this  took  place  at  the  very  moment  when
an  evangelical  church,  organized  accordiiig
to  Luther's  views,  arose  in  so  many  parts  of
eastern  Germany.

The  antagonism  which  thus  arose  between
the  opinions  and  the  new-born  institutions  of
eastern  and  western  Germany  was  undoubt-
edly a  great  misfortune. The  polemical  writ-

TT  This  undecided  state  of  opinion  appears  clearly  in
the  individual  case  of  Hans  Stockar,  wliose  journal  was
published  in  1839.

**  Arx,  Geschichte  von  St.  Gallen,  ii.  529,  cursory  as  to
the  main  point,  circumstantial  in  the  collateral  and  spite-
ful details.

ft  Bullinger,  Reformationsgeschichte,  ii,  p.  46.

318

POSITION  OF  THE  EMPEROE.

Book  V.

ings  of  that  period  filled  all  minds  with  mutual
antipathy.

But  this  reflection  is  by  no  means  the  only
one  which  the  course  of  events  is  calculated
to  excite.  The  antagonism  in  question  arose
not  merely  from,  a  different  apprehension  of  a
dogma;  it  lay  in  the  very  origin  of  the  move-
ment on  either  si^e;  in  the  political  and  eccle-
siastical condition  from  which  each  party  had
to  emancipate  itself.  Whether,  as  to  dogma,
an  explanation  satisfactory  to  both  parties
might  not  still  be  discovered,  was  as  yet  un-
certain. But  that  reform  in  Switzerland  origi-
nated in  causes  and  in  sentiments  native  and
peculiar  to  the  Country,  that  it  struck  root  in
its  own  soil,  and  assumed  a  form  and  growth
of  its  own,  was  unquestionably  fortunate  for
the  world  at  large  ;  since  it  gave  to  the  gene-
ral principle  of  the  reformation  fresh  vigour
and  stability.

CHAPTER  IV.

POLITICAL CHARACTER OF THE YEAR 1529.

The  situation  of  the  world  was  at  that  time
as  follows  :^

The  great  political  relations  betw^een  East
and  West,  upon  which,  during  the  middle  ages,
every  thing  had  depended,  were  unsettled.
The  puissant  prince  in  whom  the  warlike
power  of  the  East  centred,  was  once  more
meditating  an  attack  upon  Christendom,  from
which  he  was  justified  in  anticipating  success
as  complete  as  that  which  had  attended  his
former  enterprises:  it  was  not  likely  that  the
very  feeble  preparations  for  resistance  which
had  since  then  been  made  by  the  German
powers  in  Hungary,  would  have  the  effect  of
arresting  his  course.  A  conflict  of  the  Ger-
man forces  by  land  and  the  Roman  by  sea,
with  those  of  tKe  Ottoman,  seemed  imminent.

But  Christendom  itself  was  torn  with  divi-
sions.

Peace  was  not  yet  restored  between  its  tw^o
highest  potentates.  The  emperor  had  even
entertained  the  thought  of  stripping  the  pope
of  all  his  temporal  authority;  while,  on  the
other  hand,  the  emperor's  adversaries  had
conceived  a  plan  for  deposing  him,  with  the
aid  of  the  pope.  These  projects  were  not
yöt  entirely  abandoned.

Nor  was  the  military  superiority  of  the  two
great  powers  which  had  so  long  stood  con-
fronted in  arms,  more  decided.  From  year  to
year  the  fortunes  of  the  house  of  Austria  had
been  in  the  ascendant ;  yet  France  scorned  to
acquiesce  in  the  loss  of  the  predominant  con-
sideration she  had  long  enjoyed,  or  to  renounce
her  possessions  in  Italy.

To  this  conflict  of  political  interests  was
now  added  that  of  religious  opinions;  at  this
moment  less  noisy,  but  pregnant  with  far  more
•weighty  consequences.  The  authority  of  the
Roman  Church,  which  had  ruled  the  West  for

so  many  centuries,  now  encountered  an  oppo-
sition, to  w'hich  it  appeared  likely  to  succumb.
Enemies  had  frequently  arisen;  but  never  be-
fore did  they  manifest  a  religious  sentiment  at
once  so  energetic  and  so  firm  ;  never  had  their
efforts  been  so  intimately  connected  with  the
general  intellectual  life,  and  the  progress  of
civilisation  throughout  Europe ;  and,  accord-
ingly, never  had  their  opinions  been  propa-
gated with  such  rapidity  and  vigour.

It  had  happened,  moreover,  that  the  schemes
of  reform  had  taken  two  perfectly  diflerent,
and  even  opposite  directions.  The  one  sys-
tem attached  itself  as  closely  as  possible  to
the  existing  doctrine  of  the  church,  and  to  the
established  forms  of  the  state.  The  other
was,  from  the  first,  blended  with  projects  of
radical  political  changes,  and  assumed  as  its
end  the  restoration  of  the  primitive  state  of
Christendom.  And  they  were  directly  op-
posed in  their  views  of  the  most  important
dogma.

These  were  not  disputes  about  this  or  that
measure  to  be  taken  for  the  future,  or  about
this  or  that  interest  already  vested ;  they  were
contests  concerning  the  interests  and  aflairs  of
the  deepest  importance  to  mankind  at  large  ;
the  relations  of  the  East  and  the  West;  of  the
empire  and  the  papacy ;  of  the  two  preponde-
rant powers  of  Europe  to  each  other :  a  con-
test on  the  one  side  for  the  permanency  of
the  hierarchical  powers,  and  on  the  other  for
the  introduction  of  new  ecclesiastical  forms;
and,  even  with  regard  to  ihe  latter,  a  contest
between  those  who  advocated  the  preserva-
tion of  all  that  it  was  possible  to  preserve,
and  those  who  desired  radical  and  sweeping-
changes.

As  it  is  clear,  however,  that  all  these  an-
tagonisms, however  they  might  affect  the
world  at  large,  chiefly  concerned  the  German
nation,  and  came  into  collision  on  the  German
soil  (for  Germany  had  immediately  to  fight
out  the  battle  with  the  Ottomans  on  the  con-
tinent, to  maintain  its  supremacy  in  Italy,  and
to  bring  the  religious  quarrels  to  a  decision  or
to  a  compromise),  the  whole  course  of  affairs
depended  on  the  attitude  which  the  emperor
might  assume  in  the  general  shock  and  con-
flict of  these  various  movements.

Hitherto  the  fluctuating  nature  of  events
had  forced  him  upon  political  measures  not
always  consistent  with  one  another ;  but  now
that  the  time  for  decision  was  at  hand,  it  was
absolutely  necessary  to  adopt  a  system,  and
to  carry  it  through.

The  w^ish  of  the  German  people  was,  as
we  have  already  remarked,  that  the  emperor
would  place  himself  at  the  head  of  the  resist-
ance to  the  hierarchy,  and,  supported  by  all
the  energy  of  the  nation,  assert  the  rights  of
the  empire,  of  whatever  kind,  and  drive  back
the  barbarians  beyond  the  Danube.  It  seems
hardly  possible  that  the  emperor's  inclinations
should  not  have  gone  with  this  policy.  Had
he  not.  from  the  moment  of  his  accession,
spoken  of  a  reformation  of  the  church,  and
had  he  not  of  late  frequently  repeated  the
same  word '? Was  not  the  most  violent  and

CaA?.  IV.

SPANISH  CATHOLICISM.

319

dangerous  jealousy  of  his  house  to  be  found
in  those  German  princes  who  had  espoused'
the  cause  of  the  hierarchy?  It  would  seem
that  he  must  necessarily  have  regarded  an
alhance  with  the  popular  tendencies  (on  whose
irresistible  progress  all  his  letters  from  Ger-
many dwelt)  as  a  means  of  mcreasing  his
power.

But  a  man  placed  in  the  midst  of  the  con-
flict of  opposing  powers  and  influences  of  such
magnitude,  is  seldo/n  able  to  come  to  a  per-
fectly free,  deliberate  and  unbiassed  decision.
I  do  not  believe  that  Charles  V.  ever  so  much
as  asked  himself  the  question,  which  side  he
ought  to  espouse.  The  German  nation  was
not  destined  to  attain  to  its  further  develop-
ment under  the  guidance  of  a  common  head.
Charles  Y.  found  himself  compelled  by  his
personal  situation,  and  by  the  previous  course
of  events,  to  adopt  a  policy  contrary  to  its
wishes.

Recent  experience  had  proved  that  an  at-
tempt to  carry  on  a  further  contest  with  the
pope  would  involve  him  in  perplexities  of
which  it  was  impossible  to  foresee  the  end.
In  the  presence  of  this  urgent  necessity,  there-
fore, he  had  resolved  not  only  upon  a  more
conciliatory  demeanour,  but  on  an  alliance
with  Rome.

It  is  remarkable  how  all  his  foreign  rela-
tions conspired  to  confirm  him  in  this  resolu-
tion.

We  have  already  observed  that  the  honour
of  his  house  utterly  forbade  him  to  listen  to
the  doubt,  whether  the  Court  of  Rome  was
warranted  in  granting  Henry  YIII.  the  dispen-
sation for  his  marriage,  which  that  monarch
now  declared  to  be  null.

In  the  northern  states,  the  enemies  who  had
driven  his  brother-in-lav\'  Christiern  into  exile,
manifested  a  strong  leaning  to  the  German
notions  of  reform,  which  indeed  had  nearly
become  predominant  in  Sweden.  The  empe-
ror could  only  restore  his  brother-in-law  to  the
throne,  and  re-establish  the  influence  of  the
house  of  Austria  in  the  north,  by  a  union
with  the  various  parties  still  attached  to  Ca-
tholicism.

Yet  further:  the  alliances  v>diich  the  re-
formed towns  of  Switzerland  contracted  with
their  co-religionists  and  neighbours  of  North
Germany,  caused  the  Catholic  cantons  to  seek.
a  support  in  the  house  of  Austria  :  they  forgot
their  hereditary  enmity  to  it,  and  in  the  early
part  of  the  year  1529  concluded  a  formal
treaty  with  King  Ferdinand.

In  the  quarrel  with  the  AYoiwode  and  his
adherents  in  Hungary  also,  it  vras  very  im-
portant to  the  success  of  Charles's  cause  that
the  church  should  acknowledge  his  rights.

And  if  the  emperor  cast  his  eyes  over  thef
German  empire,  he  could  not  fail  to  see  that
his  authority  had  most  to  gain  from  a  union
with  the  spiritual  princes.  We  may  remem-
oer  how  anxious  Maximilian  was  to  fill  the
episcopal  sees  with  men  devoted  to  his  in-
terests, and  to  gain  over  the  body  of  the  clergy.
This  became  a  far  easier  task,  as  soon  as  the
bishops,  whose  spiritual  privileges  were  me-

naced by  the  current  ideas  of  the  age,  looked
for  protection  to  the  imperial  power.  Consi-
dering the  weight  which  the  hierarchical  in-
gredient in  the  constitution  of  the  Germanic
empire  still  possessed,  it  was,  indeed,  no  slight
advantage  to  have  it  as  an  ally.  I  have  no
documentary  evidence  to  prove  that  these
considerations  presented  themselves  to  Charles
Y.  ]  but  they  are  certainly  too  obvious  to  have
escaped  him.  We  all  know  that,  at  a  later
epoch,  the  dissolution  of  the  spiritual  piinci-
palities  was  the  signal  for  the  overthrow  of
the  imperial  throne.  Something  similar  might
have  taken  place  then,  however  little  it  might
be  contem.plated.  The  imperial  authority  had
not  firm  root  enough  to  sustain  itself  among
merely  temporal  powers,  even  had  they  not
been  all  hereditary  ;  or  if  it  did  sustain  itself,
it  could  only  be  by  vast  and  continued  efibrts;
it  was  infiriilely  easier  to  turn  the  long-estab-
lished institutions  to  account.  Zwingli  once
said  truly  enough,  that  the  empire  and  the
papacy  were  so  closely  interwoven,  that  it  was
impossible  to  make  war  upon  the  one  without
attacking  the  other.

The  result  of  all  these  circumstances  v.'as,
that  the  emperor's  policy  was  totally  difierent
from  that  vrhich  vrould  have  been  agreeable
to  the  German  nation .  He  meditated  a  recon-
ciliation with  the  pope  ;  the  e-xaltation  of  the
imperial  power,  but  solely  on  the  established
hierarchical  basis ;  resistance  to  the  Ottoma.ns,
but  entirely  in  the  usual  spirit  of  Latin  Chris-
tendom :  he  had  no  sympathy  with  the  Ger-
man ideas  of  church  reform, — on  the  contrary,
they  were  utterly  distasteful  to  him,  and  Vv-e
shall  see  that  he  detemiined  to  extinguish
them.

This  is  mainly  to  be  ascribed  to  the  fact,
that  he  vras  not  only  Emperor  of  Germany,
but  King  of  Spain.  He- had  passed  the  im-
portant years  of  adolescence,  in  which  a  man
enters  definitively  upon  the  path  which  he
pursues  through  life,  in  Spain,  and  had  im-
bibed the  opinions  prevalent  in  that  country
on  some  essential  points.

Catholicism — which,  had  it  really  become  a
lifeless,  unmeaning  foi-ra,  m.ust  unquestiona-
bly have  perished  in  the  storms  of  this  cen-
tury— had  deep  and  living  roots  in  the  Roman
part  of  Europe,  and  especially  in  Spain.

In  Spain,  the  State,  such  as  it  existed  in  the
middle  ages,  —  the  State,  in  which  the  attri-
butes of  the  monarchy  and  the  priesthood
were  combined,  —  was  still  in  full  vigour  and
activity.

The  conflict  with  Islam,  which  had  so  ma-
terially contributed  to  the  development  of  this
form  of  Church  and  State,  was  here  still  going
on  ;  the  government  was  constantly  employed
in  christianizing  the  country,  and  no  acts  of
violence  tending  to  that  end  excited  either
reprobation  or  remorse.  In  the  year  1524,
Charles  got  a  dispensation  from  the  oath  v.-hich
bound  him  to  tolerate  the  Moriscos  of  the
crown  of  Aragon.*  The  victory  of  Pavia  had
insphed  him  wdth  redoubled  fervour ;  he  once

*  Pope's  Brief  of  the  J2th  March,  1524.  Llorente,  i.  427

320

SPANISH  CATHOLICISM.

Book  V.

used  the  remar]iable  expression,  that  since
God  had  dehvered  his  enemies  into  his  hands,
he  was  bound  lo  convert  God's  enemies  :*  and
he  immediately  set  about  this  work  in  Valen-
cia, where  the  Christian  population  was  as  yet
in  a  minority ;  the  Christian  families  being
estimated  at  22,000,  and  the  Moorish  at  26,000".
A  sort  of  crusade  was  set  on  foot  against  the
latter :  and  at  last  the  Germans,  who  had  fol-
lowed the  emperor  into  Spain,  were  forced  lo
march  against  the  Moors  of  the  Sierra  Espa-
dan.  Hereupon  the  mosques  were  transformed
into  churches,  and  tithes  were  collected  for
the  benefit  of  the  twofold  hierarc^iy.  Of  all
the  thousands  who  were  baptized,  says  San-
doval, there  were  not  six  whose  inclinations
were  changed ;  but  woe  to  him  who  did  not
prostrate  himself  at  the  sight  of  the  host  I
The  most  rigorous  inquisition  watched  over
every  outward  demonstration.

This  might  indeed  be  necessary.  Even  in
1528,  a  man  was  discovered  among  the  Moors
of  Valencia  v^^hom  they  secretly  regarded  as
their  king.t  His  design  seems  to  have  been
to  make  a  rising  on  the  first  absence  of  the
emperor.  He  was  put  to  death  together  with
his  whole  tribe.

The  colonisation  of  America  was  carried  on
in  the  same  spirit.  The  great  discoverer,  on
his  return  to  Seville,  was  seen  to  take  part  in
a  procession,  habited  in  the  dress  of  a  Fran-
ciscan. Columbus  thought  himself  destined
lo  propagate  the  Christian  faith  in  the  country
of  the  Great  Khan,  which  he  believed  he  had
discovered.  He  continually  expressed  his
hope  of  being  the  instrument  of  procuring  to
the  crown  the  means  of  re-conquering  the
Holy  Sepulchre. t  And  we  may  remark  in
all  his  successors,  curiously  mingled  with  the
desire  to  be  rich,  powerful,  and  glorious,  the
most  ardent  zeal  for  the  extension  of  the  reli-
gion of  Rorae,§  For  the  crown,  this  was  a
sort  of  necessity,  since  it  deduced  all  its  rights
from  the  Fvoman  Seej  such  was  the  official
doctrine  which  it  proclaimed  to  the  Indians.
It  transferred  the  entire  form  and  character  of
the  Latin  Church,  only  if  possible  yet  more
gorgeous  and  magnificent,  to  the  nevr  world.

It  must  not,  however,  be  understood  that  all
men  were  imbued  with  these  seQtiments.  It
is  a  remarkable  fact,  for  example,  that  Cortez
did  not  approve  the  importation  of  the  com-
plete hierarchy  into  America;  he  would  have
no  bishops,  only  an  active  lower  clergy  and
zealous  monks ;  and  occupied  himself  in  de-
vising means  for  dispensing  v^^ith  episcopal

*  Sandoval,  i.  673,  who  is  here  generally  our  authority.

t  "Uno  que  se  dize  rey  encuhierto,  que  es  nombre  de
baxa  suerto,— publican,  que  eran  muchos  con  el  que  esta-
ban  deternfjinadosdepassando  el  einperador  de  malar  a  la
reyna  Germana  y  el  duque  de  Calavria  su  marido  e  levan-
tarse  por  rey  esto  dicho  rey  encubierto. — Han  fecho  morir
ata  50  hombres  que  se  dezia  ser  de  su  lignage  y  tienen
presos  mas  de  ata  ciento."  Advertimiento  de  la  Corte  del
Emperador.  Bib.  du  Roi,  Paris.  Bethune's  Collection,
8531,  f.  110.

+  Humboldt,  iii.  250.

§  Prescott,  History  of  Ferdinand  and  Isabella,  iii.  418,
quotes,  a  very  remarkable  passage  from  Gonzalo  di  Ovie-
do:  "Who  can  doubt  that  powder  against  the  infidels  is
incense  to  the  Lord  ?"

ordination. li  But  so  strong  was  the  attach-
ment to  the  whole  mass  of  established  usages,
that  even  he,  the  conqueror  and  lavi'giver,
could  make  no  effectual  resistance  to  it,

Spain  was,  indeed,  not  so  secluded  from  the
rest  of  Europe,  that  the  innovating  spirit  and
tendencies  of  the  current  literature  had  not
penetrated  there.  Antonio  de  Lebrixa,  for
example,  deserves  to  be  placed  in  the  same
class  with  Erasmus  and  Reuchlin.  He,  too,
devoted  his  labours  to  the  ^cred  writings,  and
pubhshed  a  work  under  the  title,  "A  Hundred
and  Fifty  Passages  of  the  Holy  Scriptures,
translated  in  an  improved  manner. ''T  But  the
Dominican  Inquisition,  which  Germany  would
not  endure  within  its  bosom,  ruled  in  Spain
with  absolute  sway.  The  grand  inquisitor,
Diego  Deza,  Bishop  of  Palencia,  robbed  the
learned  author  of  the  greater  part  of  his  book,
and  did  not  attempt  to  conceal  that  his  inten-
tion in  doing  so  was  to  restrain  him  from  pub-
lishing any  thing  in  future  on  that  subject.  In-
deed it  is  asserted  that  this  bishop  would,  if
he  could,  have  extirpated  the  original  language
of  the  sacred  books. *^  Deza's  successor,  Xime-
nes,  was,  as  is  well  known,  far  from  sharing
these  narrow  views ;  he  felt  that  depth  and
force  of  the  original  which  no  translation  can
adequately  convey,  and  ordered  the  text  to  be
published  in  his  polyglot.  But  he  estimated
the  received  version  of  the  Latin  church,  the
vulgate,  far  beyond  its  value.  He  compared
the  Greek  an^  Hebrew  texts,  between  which
the  Latin  was  printed,  to  the  thieves  on  the
right  hand  and  the  left  of  the  Saviour.tt  It  is
an  indisputable  fact,  that  he  altered  the  words
of  the  Septuagint.  and  even  the  Greek  text  of
the  New  Testament,  in  accordance  with  the
vulgate ;  and  adopted  a  passage  of  great  im-
portance as  dogmatic  evidence,  which  is  found
in  none  of  the  manuscripts,  merely  in  defer-
ence to  that  translation. li  In  short,  the  slight-
est deviation  from  the  established  system  of
the  Latin  church  would  not  have  been  tole-
rated. It  is  a  very  remarkable  fact,  that  at
the  epoch  we  are  treating  of,  the  school  philo-
sophy rose  into  consideration  in  Spain  just  as
it  declined  throughout  the  rest  of  Europe.  In
the  university  of  Salamanca,  Alfonso  of  Cor-

li  Report  of  Cortez,  15th  October,  1524,  by  Koppe,  p.  487.

TT  Qiiinqnagenre  tres  locorum  sacrce  scripturte  noa  vul-
gariter  enarratorum.

**  "  Bonus  ille  prtBsul  in  tota  quKstione  sua  nihil  magis
laborabat,  quam  utduarum  linguaiiim,  ex  qiiibus  religio
nostra  pendet,  ueque  ullum  vestigium  relinqueretur,  per
quod  ad  dignoscendam  in  rebus  dubiis  certitudinem  per-
venire  possemus."  (Apologia  pro  se  ipso.  Nie.  Antonii
Bibl.  Hisp.  Nova,  i.  p.  13S.)

ft  Proloffns  ad  lectorera.  Medium  autem  inter  has  (the
Hebrew  arid  Greek  texts)  Latinam  beati  Hieronymi  trans-
lationem  velut  inter  synagogam  et  orientalem  ecclesiam"
posuimus:  duos  hinc  et  inde  latrones,  medium  autem
Jesum,  h.  e.  Romauam  sive  Latinam  ecclesiam,  coUo-
cantes.

XX  Semler's  Accurate  Examination  of  the  bad  Execution
of  the  Greek  New  Testament,  printed  at  Alcala,  1766.
They  omitted  the  Doxology  in  the  6th  Chapter  of  St.  Mat-
thew, which,  though  Chrysostom  had  adopted  that  reading,
they  maintained  had,  even  in  his  time,  been  interpolated
ex  corruptis  originalibus  (p.  117).  The  passage  in  ques-
tion is,  as  is  well  known,  St.  John  i.  5—7.  In  this  they
adopted  the  criticism  of  St.  Thomas.  Salmeron  too  says,
videtur  plus  fidei  tribuendum  Latinis  codicibus  quam
Gri3ecis.

Chap.  IV.

SPANISH  CATHOLICISM.

32]

dova  proclaimed  the  nominalist,  and,  at  the
same  moment,  Francisco  of  Vittoria,  the  realist,
doctrines,  as  something  new  and  for  the  first
time  to  be  disseminated  in  the  country;  they
wished  to  render  it  unnecessary  for  Spaniards
to  resort  to  the  schools  of  Paris.  Francisco
of  Vittoria  had  the  greatest  following  ]  he  gave
a  new  development  to  the  moral  philosophy
of  the  schools.  Bellarmine  called  him  the
happy  father  of  excellent  masters;  and,  in-
deed, the  most  eminent  Spanish  theologians
issued  from  his  school.*  As  another  proof  of
the  unaltered  state  of  the  public  mind  in  Spain,
we  may  mention,  that  a  great  part  of  the
''Romancero  general"  owed  its  origin  to  the
sixteenth  century.  The  spirit  of  the  ages  of
priestly  dominion  still  bore  exclusive  sway  in
the  polity  and  hterature  of  the  country.

^The  natural  consequence  of  this  state  of
public  opinion  was.  an  intense  hostility  to  the
aberrations,  as  they  were  deemed,  of  the  rest
of  the  world.  Not  only  were  the  ordinances
against  Luther's  heresy  executed  with  the  ut-
most rigour,  but  even  Erasmus,  spite  of  the
favour  he  enjoyed  at  court,  found  no  mercy
from  monkish  pedantry.  Diego  Lopez  Zuniga,
a  man  familiar  with  both  languages,  made  it
the  main  object  of  his  life  to  oppose  the  inno-
vations of  the  witty  and  learned  Dutchman.t
During  the  Lent  of  1527,  certain  Dominicans
formally  accused  Erasmus  —  or  rather  his
writings,  for  luckily  he  was  out  of  their  reach
—  of  heresy  to  the  inquisition.  A  tribunal
was  appointed;  and  although  its  members
could  not  immediately  come  to  any  unanimous
decision,  the  inquisition  thought  itself  justified
in  prohibiting  the  '-Colloquies,"  the  '-Praise
of  Folly,"  and  the  "  Paraphrase  of  the  New
Testament,  "t

In  every  country  there  prevails  a  moral
atmosphere,  from  which  there  is  no  escape ;
and  we  perceive  that  it  was  impossible  for
the  young  emperor,  surrounded  by  such  in-
fluences as  these,  to  acquire  energy  and  inde-
pendence of  mind.

The  archives  at  Brussels  contain  a  Spanish
criticism  of  Luther  and  fficolampadius,  writ-
ten in  the  spirit  of  the  church,  and  presented
to  the  emperor,  to  fortify  him  against  the  in-
fluences of  the  new  opinions. §  In  this,  the
full  right  of  the  church  to  impose  the  punish-
ment due  to  a  mortal  sin  is  insisted  upon ;
otherwise,  it  is  urged,  every  man  would  fol-
low only  his  own  inclination.  The  disputed
articles  of  faith  are  then  defended  in  all  their
rigour ;  marriage,  confirmation,  consecration,
extreme  unction,  are  maintained  to  be  sacra-

*  Nie.  Antonii  Bibliotheca  Hisp.  N.  I.  s.  v.  Franciscus.

t  He  too  maintained  the  superiority  of  tlie  vulgate.
"  Sciendum  est,"  says  he  of  John  i.  5—7.  "  Graecorum  codi-
ces  aprertissime  esse  corruptos,  noEtros  vero  veritatem  ipsam
continere."  Nevertheless  in  this  very  passage  the  vuIgate
is  interpolated. See  Griesbach,  App.  12.

X  Llorente,  i.  459.  Erasmi  Epistola?,  989,  1032.  He  men-
tions Pedro  di  Vittoria  especially  as  his  antagonist.

§  Siguense  los  errores  de  Luther  y  Colampadio  su  dis-
cipulo  con  la  determinacion  de  I'iglesia.  The  several
articles  were  discussed  in  succession:  e.  g.  Art.  3,  as
above  ;  Art.  6.  Santo  es  y  justo  commendarnos  a  los  San-
tos y  adorar  sus  imagines.  7.  La  iglesia  puede  licita-
mente  tener  patrimonio  y  poseer  bie'nes  temporales.  8.
Justa  pena  es  por  los  hereges,  que  seen  quemados.
41

ments,  instituted  by  Christ  himself.  In  con-
clusion, it  is  proved  that  the  proper  punish-
ment for  heretics  is  burning.

These  opinions  did  not  obtain  such  a  com-
plete ascendancy  over  the  emperor's  mind  as
to  lead  him  to  an  abject  submission  to  the
papacy;  or  to  stifle  his  projects  of  purifying
the  church  from  its  abuses,  and  of  undertaking
the  work  of  its  reformation  himself;  but  it  is
unquestionable  that  his  residence  in  Spain
contributed  to  confirm  him  in  views  of  policy
with  which  the  exclusive  domination  of  the
Latin  church  is  intimately  connected.  It
strengthened  his  antipathy  to  the  unauthor-
ised innovations  of  individual  teachers  or
bodies.  We  shall  soon  witness  the  eff"ects  of
these  sentiments.

The  very  first  instructions  he  gave  the  im-
perial ambassadors  who  were  sent  to  the  cap-
tive pope,  contain  expressions  concerning  the
necessity  of  extirpating  the  erring  sect  of  the
Lutherans. li  In  consequence  of  this  the  pope,
in  the  treaty  of  the  26th  of  November,  1527,
promises  a  council,  "  whereby  the  church
may  once  more  be  set  right,  and  the  Lutheran
sect  be  rooted  out."  In  the  spring  of  1528,
the  imperial  vice-chancellor,  provost  Wald-
kirchen,  repaired  to  Germany,  with  a  view  to
revive  the  Catholic  spirit.  As  he  travelled
from  town  to  town,  and  from  one  prince's
court  to  another,  it  was  universally  believed
that  his  intention  was  to  form  a  league  against
the  evangelical  party .*iF  The  exhortations  of
the  pope  to  that  effect  grev/  more  and  more
earnest  and  vehement.  We  possess  a  letter
of  Sanga's,  dated  October,  1528,  in  which  he
tells  the  nuncio  at  the  imperial  court,  to  press
the  emperor  in,  the  most  urgent  manner  to
devote  himself  more  than  heretofore  to  the
affairs  of  religion :  already,  he  said,  there
were  people  who  went  further  than  Luther:
already  they  denied  the  sacrament  of  the
Lord's  Supper  and  infant  baptism  :  —  what
would  posterity  say,  when  it  read  that,  under
the  greatest  emperor  who  had  governed  it  for
centuries,  Germany  swarmed  with  heresies  !**

Of  the  emperor's  antipathy  to  them  there
could  be  no  doubt.  The  executions  which
took  place  in  thq  Netherlands,  where  he  was
absolute  master,  afforded  sufficient  proof  of
it.  Erasmus,  who  knew  him  well,  was  per-
suaded that  he  would  not  think  himself  em-
peror, if  he  did  not  succeed  in  suppressing
Lutheranism.tt

And  at  this  juncture  events  occurred  which
rendered  it  probable  that  he  would  acquire
the  power  of  doing  so.

We  saw  how  warlike  and  menacing  was
the  aspect  of  things,  even  so  late  as  the  be-
ginning of  the  year  1529 ;  but  the  emperor's
good  fortune  frustrated  the  schemes,  and
broke  the  spirit,  of  his  enemies.

II  Bucholtz,  iii.  99.

TT  Stetten,  p.  303. Von  der  Li th,  p.  217.
**  Lettere  di  divevsi,  56.

tt  Erasmi  Epp.  p.  963.  In  Hollandia  mire  fervet  carni-
ficina.  This  sounds  very  differently  from  the  remark  of
Le  Clay,  Correspondance  de  Maximilien  et  Blarguerite,  ii
p.  449,  in  justification  of  Margaret.

3'22

ITALIAN  WARS,  1529.

Book  V.

The  Venetians  and  the  French  still  cherish-
ed the  idea  of  conquering  Milan;  in  the  spring
of  1529  they  marched  again  from  both  sides
on  that  capital ;  they  reckoned  on  the  exhaus-
tion and  the  discontent  of  the  citizens,  and
the  small  number  of  the  troops,  and  were
resolved  on  an  immediate  attack.

It  soon  became  evident  what  Milan  had  lost
in  losing  Genoa.  By  the  possession  of  that
city,  the  emperor  gained  the  advantage  of
being  less  exclusively  dependent  on  German
auxiliaries  than  heretofore.  He  was  now  en-
abled to  send  a  few  thousand  men  from  Spain
to  Genoa,  whence  they  afterwards  pushed  on
to  Milan,  which  the  enemy  were  not  sufR-
ciently  masters  of  the  field  to  prevent.  They
were  troops  of  the  very  worst  appearance, —
barefoot,  half-naked,  squalid^  and  starved.
But  to  the  emperor  they  were  invaluable.
Such  as  they  were,  they  were  most  cordially
received  by  his  commander-in-chief,  Antonio
Leiva.  Leiva  had  hitherto  carried  on  his  de-
^  fence  chiefly  by  the  aid  of  Germans ;  in  Sep-
tember, 1528,  he  numbered  5000  of  that  na-
tion, and  only  800  Spaniards  ]^  it  may  easily
be  imagined  how  welcome  was  this  reinforce-
ment of  his  own  countrymen,  whose  bravery
would,  he  knew,  be  sharpened  by  their
necessities.

The  allies  immediately  perceived  that  they
were  not  strong  enough  to  make  a  seiious  at-
tack on  the  city.  They  therefore  determined
to  surround  it  at  some  distance,  and  to  cut  off
its  supplies.  St.  Pol  even  indulged  a  hope  of
.making  some  successful  attempt  upon  Genoa,
and  quitted  rjilan  with  that  view.

But  he  thus  gave  his  foes  an  opportunity  of
striking  a  great  blow,  such  as  the  Spaniards
had  often  struck  with  success.  Leiva's  troops
moved  forward  in  the  night,  without  drums  or
trumpets,  and  with  shirts  over  their  armour  :
he  himself,  though  suffering  from  the  gout,
would  not  stay  behind;  fully  armed  and  ac-
coutred, even  to  the  waving  plume  upon  his
■helmet,  he  caused  himself  to  be  carried  on  a
litter  to  the  field.  Just  as  the  French  were
breaking  up  their  camp  near  Landriano,  — at
the  moment  when  St.  Pol  was  giving  orders  to
pull  down  a  house,  the  beams  of  which  he
wanted  to  force  a  piece  of  artillery  out  of  the
mud,t  they  were  surprised  by  Leiva,  who
gained  a  complete  victory,  and  led  back  St.
Pol  and  the  chief  officers  of  his  army,  prison-
ers to  Milan.

This  victory  rendered  the  emperor  as  com-
pletely master  in  Lombardy  as  he  already  was
in  Naples.  A  fresh  attack  upon  his  forces
would  have  required  new  and  mighty  efforts,
which  no  one  felt  able  or  disposed  to  make.

Indeed,  such  a  course  was  the  less  to  be
tbought  of,  since  the  long-pending  negotia-
tions with  the  pope  were  brought  to  a  conclu-

*  Letter  from  Leiva  to  the  emperor. Sandoval,  ii.  19.

t  The  morning  of  the  27th  of  June:  in  sul  passar  dell'
Ambra.  Barchi,  214.  According  to  Leoni  the  loss  was
caused  by  St.  Pol  disregarding  the  advice  of  the  Duke  of
Urbino,  1o  send  on  the  artillery  in  front  and  to  divide  his
other  troops  into  two  columns,  the  one  of  which  was  to
support  the  other. Vita  di  Francesco  Maria,  414.

sion,  exactly  at  the  moment  of  this  decisive
affair  in  the  Milanese  territory.

The  proposals  made  to  the  pope  were,  as
we  have  remarked,  of  the  most  advantageous
nature,  both  as  regarded  German  and  Italian
affairs,  the  supreme  direction  of  which  was
to  be  in  his  hands  :  the  emperor  promised  to
follow  his  advice  in  every  respect;  to  restore
to  him  the  lands  belonging  to  the  church;  to
conclude  a  general  peace  with  his  mediation  ;
and  made  many  other  flattering  concessions'.
But  we  are  not  to  imagine  that  Clement  was
influenced  by  these  alone.  The  proximate
and  determining  motive  was  fear.  In  April,
1529,  he  complained  to  Cardinal  Triülzio  of
the  eagerness  with  which  he  was  urged  to
conclude  the  treaty  by  the  imperial  agents:
he  declared  that  he  would  never  accede  to  it,
were  he  but  strong  enough  to  resist ;  but,  he
added,  he  was  surrounded  on  all  sides  by  ad-
herents of  the  emperor,  and  might  at  any
moment  be  exposed  to  some  fresh'disaster,—
he  was  still,  in  fact,  no  better  than  a  prisoner;
he  saw  no  difference,  except  perhaps,  that  be-
fore, he  could  not  run  away,  and  that  now  he
could  certainly  do  that :  in  fact,  he  must  either
escape  and  abandon  the  states  of  the  church
to  the  enemy,  or  make  the  least  disadvan-
tageous temis  v.-ith  them  he  could.  He  ex-
pressed all  this  with  so  much  energy,  that  he
completely  convinced  the  cardinal.  '••!  know
not,"  says  Triulzio,  '-what  the  holy  father
will  determine  upon.  But  if  he  consents  to
sign  the  treaty,  I  see  that  it  will  be  only  be-
cause he  is  forced,  and  dragged  into  it  by  the
hair  of  the  head. "I

I  will  not  take  upon  myself  to  maintain
that  this  feeling  exclusively  possessed  the  pope
during  the  whole  of  these  negotiations; — he
well  knew  that  Cardinal  Triulzio,  to  whom  he
said  all  this,  was  a  partisan  of  France  :  — but
he  was  not  so  thorough  a  dissembler  as  to
feign  it  altogether,  and  it  is  probable  that,
though  generally  suppressed,  it  was  occasion-
ally beyond  his  control.

He  was  likewise  influenced  by  considera-
tions of  his  own  personal  interest.  His  con-
nexion with  the  emperor  afforded  him  the
only  prospect  of  becoming  master  of  his  ene-
mies in  his  native  city  of  Florence.

For  a  time  he  had  entertained  the  hope  of
attaining  to  this  most  cherished  wish  of  his
heart  by  peaceful  means,  and  with  that  view
he  kept  up  a  certain  degree  of  intercourse,
not  direct  indeed,  but  through  friends,  with
the  Gonfaloniere  Caponi.  It  seemed  not  im-
probable that  the  Medicean  and  the  repubh-
can  parties  would  severally  moderate  their
claims,  and  come  to  a  peaceable  compromise.

But  at  this  very  juncture,  a  contrary  move-
ment took  place  in  Florence.  A  violent  re-
publican party,  which,  in  spite  of  the  entire
change  of  circumstances,  would  not  give  up
the  persuasion  that  it  could  maintain  itself  as
firmly  as  formerly,  accused  the  Gonfaloniere
of  these  connexions  and  designs  as  crimes,

J  Lettera  del  Cardinale  Triulzio  a  M.  Hieronymo,  Roma,
9  Apr.  1529. Bibliotheque  du  roi,  3IS.  Bethune.

Chap.  IV.

PEACE  OF  BARCELONA.

J23

and  effected  his  deposition  (April,  1529);
though  he  was  afterwards  acquitted  of  all  real
delinquency.  From  that  time  all  posts  were
exclusively  filled  by  the  most  violent  enemies
of  the  Medici;  the  pope  was  spoken  of  with
hatred  and  contempt,  and  a  reconciliation  with
him  was  out  of  the  question.  Clement  VII.
fell  into  a  rage  whenever  he  thought  of  the
affairs  of  Florence.  Among  other  Fhings,  the
story  of  his  illegitimate  birih  was  brought  up
again;  he  was  declared  to  have  been. disqua-
lified from  ascending  the  papal  throne,  and
even  the  title  of  pope  was  denied  him..*  The
English  ambassador  found  him  one  day  in  a
state  of  great  exasperation.  Clement  said  he
would  rather  be  chaplain,  nay,  groom,  to  the
emperor,  than  allow  himself  to  be  insulted  by
his  own  disobedient  subjects.!  To  the  feeling
of  the  impossibility  of  throwing  off  the  yoke
imposed  upon  him,  were  united  revenge  and
ambition,  v.diich  he  could  satisfy  in  no  other
way  than  by  submitting  to  it.

On  the  29th  of  June,  a  treaty  of  peace  was
concluded  at  Barcelona,  between  the  emperor
and  the  pope;  which  was  chiefly  remarkable
for  the  pope's  acquiescence  in  the  emperor's
domination  in  Italy,  against  which  he  had  so
vehemently  struggled.  He  renewed  the  in-
feudation  for  the  crown  of  Naples,  and  re-
mitted the  tribute  which  had  always  been
paid  for  it,  retaining  only  the  gift  of  the  sump-
ter  horse.  He  no  longer  positively  insisted  on
the  maintenance  of  the  Sforzas  in  Milan,  but
consented  that  their  guilt  or  innocence  should
be  decided  by  a  regular  tribunal:  he  was
satisfied  with  the  emperor's  declaration  that
he  would  take  no  steps  as  to  the  new  investi-
ture of  the  duchy  without  the  pope's  consent.
He  granted  the  imperial  troops  free  passage
through  his  territory,  from  Naples  to  Tuscany
or  Lombardy.  On  the  other  hand,  the  em-
peror promised  to  restore  to  the  see  of  Rome
possession  of  the  countries  wrested  from  it  by
Venice  and  Ferrara  (but  with  express  reserva-
tion of  the  rights  of  the  empire),  and  to  rein-
state theMedicean  family  on  the  ducal  throne
of  Florence.:!:  The  emperor  formed  the  most
intimate  alliance  with  that  house.  He  pro-
mised the  hand  of  his  natural  daughter  to  the
young  Alessandro  de'  JMedici,  on  whom  the
lordship  of  Florence  was  to  devolve.  For  so
greatly  had  things  altered,  that  it  was  now  the
emperor's  turn  to  protect  the  pope  against  the
immediate  influence  of  the  Ligue.  Now,  as
in  the  year  1521,  the  emperor  formed  an  alli-
ance w'ith  a  pope  of  the  house  of  Medici.
But  how  vast  was  the  difference  !  Leo  X.
might  have  reasonably  entertained  a  hope  of
becoming  master  of  ^vlilan  and  Genoa,  and  of
conquering  Ferrara.  Clement  VH.  was  fain
to  content  himself  with  receiving  back  the
States  of  the  Church  from  foreign  hands,  and
reconquering  his  native  city  by  foreign  aid.

*  Vaixhi,  Storia  Fioreutina  208.  Jovius,  HistoriE,
27,  45.

t  Casalis  in  Herbert,  233.

I  Tractatus  Confoederationis  inter  Carolum  V. Impe-

ratorem  Roinanoruiu et  Ciementuin,  VII.  Roinaniim

Poüliücem  conclusus. Du  Moat,  iv.  ii.  1.

To  this  arrangement  af  Italian  affairs  other
stipulations  were  appended,  though  they  were
not  all  included  in  the  treaty.

John  Zapolya,  who  had  hitherto  enjoyed  the
favour  of  the  apostolic  see,  w^as  now  aban-
doned by  it,  and  shortly  afterwards  visited
with  the  most  rigorous  ecclesiastical  censures. §
In  respect  of  English  affairs.  Ferdinand's  am-
bassador united  his  entreaties  to  those  of  the
imperial  envoys. The  trial  had  already  begun
there,  in  virtue  of  the  commission  already  is-
sued ;  but  the  pope  pledged  his  word  to  both
brothers that no sentence should be pro-
nounced. They,  in  return,  promised  him,  in
the  most  solemn  manner,  their  assistance  in
matters  of  religion. In  the  treaty  of  Barce-
lona the  emperor  declares,  that  he  has  it  at
heart  to  find  an  antidote  to  the  poisonous  in-
i  fection  of  the  new  opinions.',! If,  hov.-ever,  it
should  be  found  im^possible  to  bring  back  the
,  minds  of  the  erring  by  mild  measures ;  if  they
j  should  refuse  to  hear  the  voice  of  the  shep-
j  herd,  and  remain  stiff-necked  in  their  errors;
I  '-'then,"  continues  this  document,  '-both  the
I  emperor  and  the  King  of  Hungary  and  Bohe-
mia would  set  all  their  forces  m  motion,  and
avenge  the  wrong  offered  to  Christ  with  their
utmost  power."

Such  was  the  unexpected  turn  which  events
took.  The  emperor  was  chiefly  indebted  for
his  victory  to  the  sympathy  in  his  cause,  pro-
duced in  the  German  nation  by  Lutheran
opinions :  it  was  only  by  means  of  the  power
which  this  gave  him  that  he  forced  the  pope
to  make  peace.  Yet  in  the  very  treaty  which
he  concluded  with  the  pope,  he  promised  him
the  extirpation  of  these  very  Lutheran  opi-
nions.

These  events,  as  the  pope  had  foreseen,
rendered  it  impossible  for  Francis  I.  to  avoid
entertaining  serious  thoughts  of  peace,  how-
ever unpalatable  they  were  to  him.

In  the  negotiations  of  the  year  1527,  the
emperor  had  no  longer  demanded  the  restitu-
tion of  his  hereditary  dominions  so  ab.solutely
as  before ;  he  had  shown  a  disposition  to  ac-
cept two  millions  of  scudi  as  an  equivalent.
But  the  whole  negotiation  had  been  rendered
abortive  by  the  king's  refusal  to  give  up  Milan
and  Genoa,  or  to  withdraw  his  troops  out  of
Italy .^  It  appeared  as  if  the  French  regarded
the  re-conquest  of  Älilan  as  a  point  of  duty
and  of  honour.  Chancellor  du  Prat  declared
that  he  should  never  cease  to  feel  the  shame
and  dishonour  that  had  fallen  upon  him  by
the  less  of  that  country  to  the  crown  of  France,
during  his  administration  ;  could  he  but  re-
cover it  for  his  sovereign,  he  would  be  content
to  die  the  next  hour.**

§  Katona,  xx.  i.  551.  Zapolya's  Complaint  respecting
the  Bull,  from  which  he  saw,  "  S.  Sanctitatem— me  et  in-
colas  regni  per  censuras  ecclesiasticas  devovisse  et  a
capite  iiostro  Jesu  Christo,  quod  in  ea  erat,  resectos  de-
clarasse."

]!  Cum  Csesarese  Majestati  cordi  sit,  ut  huic  pestifera
morbo  congruum  antidotum  praeparari  posslt.

IT  Ce  qui  a  ete  dit  en  la  communication  tenue  ä  Pa-
lencia,  in  du  Mont,  iv.  i.  502.

**  Bellay,  13  Juill.  1Ö29,  MS. Maitre  de  Barre  tells  him

that  the  expressions  which  had  come  to  the  knowledge

1  of  Margaret,  and  also  of  the emperor,  prevented  the

324

NEGOTIATIONS  WITH  FRANCE.

Book  V.

Nevertheless,  the  necessity  of  acquiescing
in  this  loss  had  arrived.

In  the  first  place,  a  continuance  of  the  war
no  longer  offered  any  prospect  of  success.
Even  the  king's  partisans  in  Italy  reminded
him  that  it  would  be  impossible  to  put  an
army  into  the  field  before  the  emperor  ap-
peared in  Italy:  that  Charles's  aUiance  with
the  pope  would  make  him  master  in  Upper  as
Avell  as  in  Lower  Italy ;  Florence  would  not
be  able  to  resist  him  ;  Venice  was  herself  in
danger  from  the  defection  of  Mantua,  and
could  think  of  nothing  but  her  own  safety :  he
would  have  to  contend  single-handed  against
the  emperor,  who  had  the  bravest  troops  in
the  world,  and  the  favour  of  fortune.*

The  kingdom  and  the  court,  it  was  also
urged,  could  no  longer  suffer  the  French
princes  to  remain  captives  iii  Spain,  whence
occasionally  unsatisfactory  reports  of  their
health  arrived.

Thus,  therefore,  while  preparations  for  war
were  going  on,  while  hopes  of  the  king's
ariival  in  person  were  held  forth  to  the  Ita-
lians, and  an  invasion  of  Germany  was  pro-
jected ;  the  negotiations  for  peace,  which  had
never  been  definitively  broken  off,  were  re-
sumed with  fresh  earnestness.

It  was  long  reported  in  Rome  that  the  pope
was  to  undertake  the  task  of  mediation,!  and
that  he  was  to  conduct  affairs  in  person  at
some  place  on  the  frontiers  of  France  and
Spain"  for  example,  Perpignan.  To  this  he
seemed  well  inclined;  even  in  March,  1529,
the  galleys  that  were  to  transport  him  were
still  pointed  out.  In  the  end,  however,  all
this  was  given  up,  and  the  matter  fell  into
totally  different  hands.

At  a  considerably  earlier  period  M'e  find  a
secret  emissary  of  Francis  I.  in  Spain,  through
whom,  addressing  himself  immediately  to  his
betrothed  bride,  Queen  Leonora,  he  expressed
his  wishes  that  all  obstacles  to  their  union
might  be  removed  as  quickly  as  possible,  and
placed  all  his  affairs  with  the  emperor  in  her
hands.  The  queen  was,  as  maybe  imagined,
delighted  at  this  message ;  she  declared  that
she  had  alwa)-«  relied  on  the  king's  good  in-
tentions, and  had  therefore  overlooked  all  that
had  passed.  As  the  envoy  refused  to  treat
with  the  Grand  Chancellor  on  the  ground  that
he  was  a  lover  of  war,  —  perhaps  because  his
consideration  at  court  was  increased  by  keep-
ing those  eminent  men  whom  war  would  have
rendered  necessary,  at  a  distance  from  it, —
Queen  Leonora  declaied  that  the  negofeation

peace.  They  were  these:  "pui-qne  le  roi  avoit  perdu
Milan  estaiit  luv  en  adminisiration  des  affaires,  il  aime-
roit  inieux  la  morl  que  de  faillir  d  le  luy  faire  recouvrer:
cela  fait  il  6toit  content  de  mourir  une  heure  apres."

*  Ottaviano  Sforza  al  vescovo  di  Lorii :  Molini,  ii.2l0.
Bgl.  histruzione  di  Teodoro  Triulzio,  Guido  Rangoni  et
Joachim  a  Mess.  Mauro  da  Nova,  Venezia,  15  Luglio,  in
Moliiii,  ii.  219.  "In  effecto  quest' inipresa  de  tanta  ex-
trema  importantia  si  deve  extiniare,  quanta  possa  essere
cial'onore  al  disonore  o  per  megiio  dirlo  dal  vivere  al
niorire  de  la  prima  corona,  re  et  re^io  di  Christianita."

t  Hieronymus  Niger  to  Sadolet,  v.  Gal.  April,  1529.
*'Q,'iotidie  in  ore  habet  (pontifex)  divinum  consilium
suum  de  profectione  ad  CsEsarem  et  de  pace  publica,  quo
quidcm  consilio  si  integris  rebus  usus  fuisset,  non  labora-
remus." Sadoleti  Epp.  lib.  via.  p.  323.

was  now  her  business,  and  that  she  would
bring  it  to  a  conclusion  alone. ^

I  cannot  ascertain  precisely  the  date  of  this
mission.  Suffice  it  to  observe,  that  it  was  an
attempt  to  withdraw  the  negotiations  from  the
usual  channel,  and  the  regular  mode  of  pro-
ceeding.

Duchess  Louisa  next  addressed  herself  to
the  emperor's  aunt,  the  Governess  of  the  Neth-
erlands. Her  motives  were  doubtless  chiefly
personal ;  for  while  her  grandsons  were  pri-
soners, she  could  not  endure  the  thought  of
the  fresh  campaign  which  she  saw  that  her  son
must  almost  inevitably  undertake.  She  repre-
sented to  Margaret  that  it  more  especially  de-
volved on  them,  the  two  oldest  female  rela-
tives of  the  contending  princes,  to  endeavour
to  effect  a  reconcihation  between  them.§
Margaret,  too,  was  of  opinion,  that  the  ani-
mosity between  the  two  monarchs  had  been
raised' to  such  a  pitch  by  long-protracted  hos-
tilities, by  the  letters  and  documents  that  had
beeuxinterchanged,  and  by  the  challenges  that
had  been  sent,  that  women  alone  could  suc-
ceed in  bringing  about  an  accomxmodation.il
The  emperor  still  thought  himself  bound  in
honour  to  insist  on  the  execution  of  the  treaty
of  Madrid:  he  wondered  not  a  little  that  Mar-
garet, entirely  contrary  to  her  former  character
and  habits,  listened  to  the  flattering  language
of  the  duchess.lF  It  was  no  easy  task  for  her
to  change  his  dispositions,  and  indeed  she  after-
wards took  credit  for  its  accomplishment.  At
last,  on  the  8th  of  April,  she  received  the
fullest  authority  to  negotiate  that  it  was  pos-
sible to  imagine.**  Charles  V.  promised,  on
the  word  of  an  emperor,  on  his  honour,  and
under  pain  of  forfeiting  his  private  domains,
to  ratify  any  terms  which  she  might  con-
clude. It  was  easier  for  Francis  I.  to  grant
full  powers.  Among  the  reasons  why  it  was
expedient  that  not  the  king,  but  his  mother,
should  conduct  the  negotiations,  one  of  the
principal  was,  that  she  had  not,  like  him,  per-
sonally contracted  engagements  with  the  Ita-
lian powers,  Milan,  Florence,  or  Venice.

On  the  5th  July  the  two  ladies  entered  Cam-
bray  from  opposite  sides,  and  took  up  their
abode  in  two  houses  connected  by  a  covered
way,  so  that  they  could  see  and  speak  to  one
another  without  being  observed.

X  D6chiffrenient  d'une  depesche  6crite  d'Espagne,  Bibi.
du  R.  MS.  Bethune,  854^3,  f.  182,  without  date,  place  or
signature.  Perhaps  of  the  year  1527,  at  all  events,  of  the
time  during  which  the  French  princes  were  in  prison.
"Elle  me  demanda,  si  vous  vouliez  mettre  en  sa  main
I'affaire  d'entre  vous  et  I'empereur ;  je  luy  ai  dit  que  pour
cet  effet  m'aviez  depesche  vers  eile.— Elle  m'a  dit,  que  la
fiance  qu'elle  avoit  toujours  eu  en  votre  bonne  voulonte
envers  eile,  I'avoit  tenue  en  bonne  esperance  et  lui  avoit
fait  porter  patiemment  tout  ce  qui  avoit  passö.  Qu'elle
vouloit  niener  cette  affaire  et  que  autre  ne  se  meslat
qu'elle,  et  c'estoit  son  propre  fait."

§  Teneur  du  pouvoir,  donnö  ä  rarchiduchesse.  DM.  iv.
2,  15.

11  Her  own  expressions— Hormayr,  Archiv.  1810,  p.  108.

TI  Charles  V.  to  the  Sieur  de  Montfort,  16  JWars.  Pap.
d'etat  de  Granvelle,  i.  450.  Search  ought  to  be  made  for
Margaret's  letter  which  brought  the  matter  to  a  conclu-
sion, and  which  must  have  been  written  about  this  time.

**  As  "Procuratrix  gönöralle  et  especialle  avec  plain
pouvoir  auctoritö  et  ma'ndcment  especiall  pour  et  en  nora
de  nous  pour  parier  — et  finallement  traiter  et  conclure
bonne  ferme  secure  paix  amitie  ligue  et  coufederatioia."

CffiP.  IV.

PEACE  OF  CAMBRAY.

525

The  negotiations  could  not  be  very  difficult,
since  the  preliminaries  must  have  been  agreed
on  before  they  were  opejied.  France  now
actually  engaged  to  pay  the  two  millions  de-
manded ;  to  abandon  all  her  claims  and  con-
nexions in  Italy ;  and  lastly,  to  renounce  her
suzerainty  over  Flanders  and  Artois.  On  the
other  hand,  Charles  V.  gave  up  some  compa-
ratively imimportant  claims;  e.  g.  to  Peronne
and  Boulogne ;  and,  for  the  present,  relin-
quished his  scheme  of  conquering  Burgundy.*
The  principJe  which  then  prevailed  through-
out Europe — that  of  severing  states,  and  mak-
ing them  independent  of  each  other  —  was
observable  in  this  treaty  of  peace.  Whilst
France  gave  up  its  foreign  enterprises,  its  in-
ternal affairs  remained  untouched.  Burgundy
and  Valois  at  length,  after  so  many  bloody
wars,  separated.  Burgundy  had  not  indeed
reaUsed  all  its  pretensions,  but  it  had  gained
immense  advantages.  It  had  succeeded  in
cn-cumscribing  the  house  of  its  rival  within
the  limits  of  France.

But  it  w^as  not  to  be  imagined  that  every
thing  was  thus  concluded.  Francis  I.  pro-
tested against  the  treaty  of  Cambray,  as  he
had  done  against  that  of  Madrid.  He  per-
sisted in  affirming  that  Asti  and  Milan  were
his  inalienable  inheritance,  and  that  of  his
children;  that  Genoa  belonged  to  him;  that
it  was  impossible  for  a  treaty  wrung  from  him
first  by  his  own  captivity,  and  then  by  that
of  his  children,  to  be  binding  upon  him.t
When  the  verification  of  it  was  laid  before
-the  parliament,  the  procureur-general,  Maitre
Fran9ois  Rogier,  solemnly  protested  against
it,  on  the  ground  that  it  had  been  brought
about  by  the  violence  done  to  a  feudal  lord
by  his  vassal,  and  was  therefore  contrary  to
the  fundamental  laws  of  the  empire. t  But
these  protests  were  only  the  utterance  of  the
feeling  that  France  yielded  to  force,  —  and
very  reluctantly;  they  were  an  act  of  reser-
vation for  the  future,  wholly  insignificant  for
the  present;  and  therefore  attracting  no  at-
tention.

At  first  every  one  rejoiced  that  peace  was
actually  concluded.  On  all  the  points  but
those  in  which  an  express  alteration  had
been  agreed  on  —  and  these  were  but  four  —
the  treaty  of  Madrid  was  confirmed;  they
were  now  both  proclaimed  together,  and  en-
tered in  the  state  register.  The  letter  in
which  Duchess  Louisa  announces  the  conclu-
sion of  the  treaty  to  her  son  is  very  charac-
teristic ;  the  safety  of  his  person,  she  tells
him,  resulting  from  the  peace  which  God  had

*  The  Emperor,  however,  remarks  in  his  counter  report
of  1536,  that  he  "  ursach  und  gevvalt  gehabt  hätte,  noch
grössers  und  mehrers  von  ihm  (dem  Konig)  zu  begeren
und  abzunehmen,  dieweil  ich  damals  zu  Avasser  uiid  zu
land  sighaft  von  Gott  und  mit  treffenlicher  rüstung  gefasst
und— vil  sterker  denn  er  gewesen  bin."  "  .  .  .  .  had  at
that  time  cause  and  power  to  demand  and  to  take  greater
and  more  things  from  him  (the  king),  since  I  was  then  by
God's  grace  victorious  by  land  and  water,  and  prepared
v/ith  excellent  armaments,  and  much  stronger  than  he."

t  Protestation  du  Roy  Francois  contre  les  Traitös  de
Madrid  et  de  Cambray.  Tlie  title  of  the  document  printed
ia  Du  Mont,  in  Dupuy's  collection,  179.

I  Protestation  du  Procureur-General.  Du  M.  iv.  ii.  52,
nr.  39.

2c

granted  them,  is  dearer  to  her  than  her  own
life  ;§  the  personal  danger  into  which  he  was
a^out  to  rush,  was  the  chief  motive  for  her
efforts.  The  Netherlanders  were  very  proud
that  such  an  act  had  emanated  from  their
regent ;  the  French  delegate  was  asked  at  a
dinner,  whether  people  had  imagined  that
lady  capable  of  such  a  v/ork,  and  whether  the
French  were  satisfied  with  it  1  The  French-
man replied,  '4hat  a  part  of  the  merit  w^as
due  to  his  king ;  that  on  the  mere  worjd  of  the
archduchess  he  had  discharged  15,000  lands-
knechts,  with  whom  he  could  have  struck
some  decisive  blow.''i|  The  pope  was  more
delighted  than  anybody;  he  found  no  words
strong  enough  to  express  his  sense  of  the  ser-
vice which  Duchess  Louisa  had  rendered  to
Europe.  It  was  a  peculiar  satisfaction  to  him
that  the  treaty  contained  no  stipulations  in
favour  of  the  members  of  the  Ligue,  of  whom
he  had  to  complain.  In  spite  of  all  its  pro-
visions, he  had  no  belief  in  any  long  con-
tinuance of  the  emperor's  ascendancy.  The
protests  of  the  French  are  quite  in  accordance
with  Clement's  intimations,  that  as  soon  as  the
king  had  his  sons  back  again,  and  not  till  then,  ^
remedies  would  be  found  for  all  the  other
evils. IF

Nor  was  this  the  only  cause  of  the  pope's
satisfaction.  In  the  course  of  the  negotia-
tions, as  well  as  in  the  treaty  itself,  the  king
showed  himself  no  less  an  enemy  of  the  re-
ligious innovations  than  the  emperor.  In  the
full  powers  granted  by  Francis,  he  alleges  as
one  of  the  grounds  of  his  desire  for  peace,  his
earnest  wish  to  suppress  the  heresies  which
had  arisen  in  Christendom  ;  '•  that  the  Church
might  be  honoured  as  the  salvation  of  souls
required."**  In  the  43d  article  of  the  treaty
of  peace,  it  was  said,  that  the  emperor  and
the  king  were  determined  to  manitain  the
holy  see  in  all  its  dignity  and  consideration,
as  beseemed  their  imperial  and  royal  station
and  power.  Among  the  articles  of  the  treaty
of  Madrid  that  were  confirmed,  was  the  one
in  which  the  king  promised  the  emperor  his
aid  against  the  heretics,  no  less  than  against
the  Turks.  So  entire  a  change  being  thus
effected  in  the  relations  of  the  great  powers,
the  most  important  question  now  was,  What
would  be  the  course  pursued  by  the  King  of
England,  whose  projects  of  divorce  had,  by  a
sort  of  reaction,  so  largely  contributed  to  the
chancre  ?

§  Lettre  de  Madame  au  Roi  apres  le  Iraite  de  Cambray.
Bethune,  8471.  Copie.  "  La  seurete,  Monseigneur,  en  la
quelle  je  cognois  votre  personne  par  la  paix,  que  j'estinie
plus  que  ma  propre  vie."

II  De  la  Pommeraye  au  connetable,  17  Sept.  1529  Beth.
8610.

TT  Lettre  de  Raince,  12  Aout,  1539.  "  Surtout  ne  pour-
roit  etre  plus  content  qu'il  est  de  ce  qu'il  entend  qu'on  a
eu  memoire  de  luv,  et  semble  qu'il  ayt  quelque  advis  que
aucunsdes  confederes  soient  aucunenient  (in  some  degree)
demeures  en  derriere  ;  que  luy  conörme  la  satisfaction  en
quoi  il  est  autant  ou  plus  que  nulle  autre  cliose  et  fait
bien  compte,  s'ils  vouloient  aller  le  chemin  qui  sera  re-
quis,  que  delivres  et  retournes  en  France  Messieurs  que  ä
tout  se  aura  bon  remede."

**  "Pour  extirper  les  heresies  qui  pullulent  en  la
Chrestiente  et  que  l'eglise  soit  reveree  et  honoree  ain.si
qu'il  appartient  pour  le  salut  de  nos  ames."  Du  M.  ii.
iv.  p.  16.

326

DIVORCE  OF  HENRY  VIII.

Book  V.

Wolsej^'s  hope  of  carrying  through  these
projects  had  been  founded  on  political  combi-
nalions  which  now  no  longer  existed.  He
thought  himself  justified  in  the  largest  antici-
pations from  the  influence  of  the  French  court
on  the  see  of  Rome,  and  on  the  gratitude  of
the  latter  towards  England.

As  to  the  pope,  his  real  opinion  was,  that
the  king  would  do  better  to  take  another  wife,
without  any  further  agitation  of  the  question,
and  then  to  call  in  the  Apostohc  See  as  judge.*
This,  however,  the  respect  for  the  letter  of
the  laws,  which,  even  in  that  age,  distin-
guished England,  did  not  permit.  The  king
wished  to  have  the  legitimacy  of  the  possible
issue  of  a  second  marriage  fully  established :
he  chose  that  the  power  which  had  bound,
should  also  loose  him  from  his  ties.  Wolsey
hoped  that  the  successes  of  the  Ligue  would
lead  the  pope  to  consent  to  this.  He  repeat-
edly urged  Francis  to  do  as  much  for  the
dissolution  of  the  marriage,  as  the  King  of
England  had  done  for  the  restitution  of  the
children  of  France ;  adding,  that  he  had  only
to  declare  to  the  pope  that  he  thought  the
cause  of  the  King  of  England  just,  and  that
if  Rome  refused  Henry's  petition,  he  should
regard  it  as  an  offence  done  to  himself,  and
should  never  forget  it.  Francis  well  knew
the  importance  to  himself  of  Wolsey's  con-
tinuance in  power ;  and  Wolsey  reminded  him
that  he  should  be  ruined  if  "this  afl^air  were
not  brought  to  a  successful  issue,  after  the
positive  assurances  he  had  given  the  king.t
And;  in  fact,  the  pope  himself  wished  that
the  joint  importunities  of  England  and  France
had  been  such  as  would  have  enabled  him  to
excuse  himself  to  the  emperor,  on  the  ground
of  a  sort  of  moral  compulsion. t  But  it  does
not  appear  that  the  French  thought  it  expe-
dient to  go  so  far.  They  had  not  yet  aban-
doned the  idea  of  a  marriage  betw^een  the
Princess  Mary,  the  presumptive  heiress  to  the
throne  of  England,  and  one  of  their  princes. §

As  Henry  would  not  proceed  in  the  affair
Vvüthout  the  pope,  and  as  no  measures  seemed
likely  to  be  taken  for  extorting  Clement's  con-
sent, he  was  obhged  to  resort  to  diplomatic
negotiations,  the  progress  and  result  of  which
vrere,  from  their  very  nature,  dependent  on
contingencies.

The  English  delegates  who,  in  March  and

*  Casalis,  13  Jan.  Fiddes,  p.  461.  "Quia  nullus  doctor
in  mundo  est,  qui  de  hac  re  melius  decernere  possit  quam
ipse  rex  ;  itaque  si  in  hoc  se  resolverint,  ut  pontifex  credit,
statini  committat  causam  (in  England),  aliam  uxorem
ducat,  litem  sequatur,  mittat  pro  legato."

tBellay  ä  Montmorency,  22  Mai,  1528:  "en  la  quelle
(raffaire  du  divorce)  s'il  ne  s'employoit  tant  et  si  avant,
qu'il  voudroit  faire  pour  le  recouvrement  des  Messrs.  les
enfans,  il  pourroit  etre  seur  d'avoir  cause  ä  mon  d.  Sr  le
legat  une  totale  ruine,  pour  les  grandes  asseurances  qu'il
en  a  toujours  baillö  ä  son  dit  maistre."

+  D.  Knight.  Herbert,  218.  The  pope  thinketh  he  might
by  good  colour  say  to  the  emperor,  that  he  was  required
by  the  English  ainbassadeurs  et  Mr.  de  Lautrech  to  pro-
ceed in  the  business.

§  Bellay  mentions  this  motive  in  a  despatch  of  the  8th
2iov.  He,  for  hia  own  part,  scruples  to  concede  the  point
of  the  nullity  of  Catharine's  marriage,  because  of  the  use
that  might  be  made  of  that  concession,  "  ou  le  mariage  de
M.  d'Orleans  tireroit.  Aucuns  de  deca  disent,  que,  quoique
on  fasse,  qui  espousera  la  princesse  sera  apres  roi  d'An-
gleterre."

April,  1528,  remained  with  the  pope,  did  not
deceive  themselves.  "  The  difficulties  and
delays  which  we  encounter  in  this  affair,
arise,"  say  they,  "mainly  from  fear;  we  find
every  one  as  well  disposed  as  possible  to  for-
ward the  matter,  but  people  are  afraid  that
any  unusual  favour  granted  to  the  king  may
lead  to  a  new  captivity,  provided  the  emperor
retains  his  power." il  The  ambassadors  again
made  an  attempt  to  combat  fear  by  fear.  They
one  day  represented  to  the  pope  that  he  would
lose  the  only  prince  who  was  really  attached
to  him ;  '■'  not  only  the  King  of  England,  but
the  Defender  of  the  Faith,"  as  Wolsey  once
expressed  himself.  Then  would  the  papacy,
already  nodding  to  its  fall,  be  completely  over-
thrown, to  the  joy  of  all  men.  The  pope  was
not  insensible  to  this  danger;  he  walked  up
and  down  the  room  in  their  presence,  making
violent  gesticulations,  and  it  was  some  time
before  his  excitement  was  calmed.!  He  did,
in  fact,  make  some  advances  to  the  English
in  consequence;  naming  Cardinal  Campeggi
(who  was  on  the  best  footing  with  Henry  VIII.,
and  whose  appointment  was  proposed  by  the
ambassadors)  legate  to  England,  and  granting
him  authority  to  declare  the  papal  dispensa-
tion on  which  Henry  VIII. 's  marriage  was
founded,  operative  or  the  contrary,  and  the
marriage  itself  valid  or  invalid,  according  to
his  own  judgment.  This  he  did  in  the  begin-
ning of  June,  1528,  while  the  affairs  of  the
French  before  Naples  were  in  the  most  pro-
mising state.**  The  ambassadors  had  also
promised  him  to  induce  the  Venetians  to  re-
store his  cities. ft

Shortly  after  followed  the  defeat  of  Lautrec
before  Naples;  we  have  seen  what  a  com-
plete revolution  the  papal  policy  instantly  un-
derwent in  favour  of  the  emperor,  and  this
now  necessarily' extended  to  the  English  affair,
in  which  Charles  took  so  deep  an  interest.

On  the  2d  of  September,  Campeggi  was  re-
minded that,  however  strongly  his  Holiness
might  feel  himself  bound  to  the  King  of  Eng-^
land,  he  must  also  show  all  possible  considera-
tion for  the  victorious  emperor,  and  not  furnish
him  with  fresh  occasion  for  a  rupture,  which
would  not  only  be  an  obstacle  to  peace,  but
would  bring  utter  ruin  on  the  States  of  the
Church.lt

In  October,  1528,  Campeggi  came  to  Eng-
land, However  strong  were  the  expressions'
which  he  used  with  regard  to  the  emperor,  it

II  Gardiner  and  Fox  Orviet,  the  last  day  of  March,  in
Strype's  Ecclesiastical  Memorials,  vol.  v.  p.  402,  that  if
there  were  any  thing  doon  novum  et  gratiosum  agaynst
the  emperors  purpose,  it  should  be  materia  novae  captivi-
tatis.

ir  The  same  Monday  in  Easter  week,  ibid.  423.  The
pope  also  gave  the  French  ambassador  hopes  "qu'entre
cy  et  demain  prendra  quelque  bonne  forme  de  conclusion,
qui  pourra  satisfaire  au  roy  d'Angleterre."  Raince;  Le
Grand,  iii.  p.  190.

**  Commission  Viterbii,  VL  Jun.  (8th  June),  printed  in
Herbert,  p.  233.

tt  This  is  evident  from  Casalis's  letter  in  Burnet's  His-
tory of  the  Reformation,  Records  ii.  nr.  17.  The  pope
says  to  the  ambassador,  Vos  scire  volo,  promissum  mihi
fuisse,  si  legatus  hie  in  Angliam  mitteretur,  futurum  ut
mihi  civitates  a  Venetis  restituerentur.

tl  Sanga  to  Campeggi.  Viterbo,  2d  Sept.  1528.  His-
tory of  the  Popes,  i.  126.

Chap.  IV.

FALL  OF  V/OLSEY.

327

was  very  soon  evident  that  lie  had  no  inten-
tion of  offering  any  serious  resistance  to  him.
He  admonished  both  the  king  and  Wolsey  to
desist  from  their  project.  He  utterly  refused
to  produce  the  bull  by  which  Wolsey  hoped
to  prove  to  the  Privy  Council  the  pope's  fa-
vourable intentions  towards  the  king:  proba-
bly he  burned  it.*  He  affected  at  every  step
to  have  recourse  to  Rome  for  instructions.  He
rejected  with  the  utmost  vehemence  the  pre-
valent notion  thatj  as  a  marriage  w^ith  a  bro-
ther's widow  was  forbidden  in  the  Old  Testa-
ment, this  was  a  case  in  which  the  pope  had
no  dispensing  power.  It  only  remained,  there-
fore, to  prove  that  the  dispensation  in  question
was  not  based  on  tenable  grounds.  Here  too,
however,  insurmountable  difficulties  presented
themselves,  as  the  queen,  on  whose  testimony
the  whole  matter  depended,  constantly  af-
firmed that  the  marriage  whh  Prince  Arthur
had  not  been  consummated.  She  was  a  wo-
man of  so  noble  and  dignified  a  character,
that  she  was  universally  believed.  She  also
availed  herself  of  her  legal  right  of  protesting
agamst  her  two  judges,  on  the  ground  of  par-
tiality.!

During  these  delays,  however,  the  pope  be-
came (especially  after  the  affair  of  Florence)
more  and  more  intimately  allied  with  the  em-
peror, who  declared  that  he  regarded  the  in-
terests of  his  aunt  as  his  own.  In  May.  1529,
the  English  envoy  expressed  his  fears  that  the
commission  of  the  two  cardinals  would  be
formally  recalled. j

This  was  probably  the  motive  which  led  the
king  to  open  the  proceedings  without  further
delay.

On  the  31st  of  March,  1529,  they  com-
menced ;  but  on  the  29th,  instructions  had
already  been  sent  to  Campeggi  from  Rome,  to
protract  them  as  much  as  possible,  and  by  no
means  to  suffer  judgment  to  be  pronounced. §
These  orders  he  punctually  obeyed.  The
affair  had  not  got  beyond  prehminaries  and
matters  of  form,  when,  on  the  28th  July,  Cam-
peggi adjourned  the  sittings  to  the  1st  of  Oc-
tober. He  also  claimed  the  holidays  of  the
Roman  rota  for  himself.

After  concluding  his  treaty  of  peace  with
the  emperor,  Clement  was  still  in  time  to
evoke  the  suit  from  England  to  the  tribunals
of  the  curia.

On  the  9th  of  July  the  pope  declared  to  the
English  envoys,  tnat  he  shared  the  opinion
common  to  all  the  Roman  lawyers,  that  this
evocation  could  no  longer  be  refused. The

*  Pallaviciui  denies  (lib.  ii.  c.  xv.)  the  existence  of  this
bull  which  Guicciardini  affirmed.  But  it  is  only  neces-
.sary  to  read  the  above-mentioned  report  by  Casalis  on
his  negotiations  with  the  pope  in  Dec.  1528,  in  order  to
dispel  all  doubt.  S.  D.  N.  injecta  in  meum  brachium
manu— dixit — bullam  decretalem  dedisse,  ut  tantum  regi
ostenderetur  coiicremareturque.  Burnet,  Records,  ii,  17,
p.  42.  What  this  bull  contained  we  cannot  of  course
make  out,  as  nobody  saw  it  but  the  king  and  Campeggi.
I  am  not  disjiosed  to  believe  Guicciardini's  assertion.

t  Bellay,  17th  Nov.  1528.

t  Gardiner,  4th  May,  which  was  confirmed  by  divers
other  letters  from  our  agents. Herbert,  p.  232.

§  Sanga  al  01.  Campeggio,  29  Maggio,  1529.  Sua  Beati-
tudine  ricorda,  che  il  procedere  sia  lento  et  in  modo  alcu-
no  non  si  venghi  al  giudicio. Lettere  de'  principi,  ii.

ambassadors  used  every  possible  means  of
dissuading  him  from  it;  but  he  replied  that
he  was  hemmed  round  by  the  power  of  the
emperor,  who  could  not  only  force  him  to  do
justice,  but  in  whose  hands  he  himself  was.
"  I  see,"  said  lie,  "  the  consequences  as  clearly
as  you  do  ]  but  I  am  between  the  hammer  and
the  aavil.  U  I  oblige  the  king,  I  draw  down
the  most  destructive  storm  on  myself  and  on
the  church. "II

On  the  18th  of  July  peace  was  proclaimed
in  Rome  between  the  pope  and  the  emperor.
On  the  19th,  the  pope  sent  word  to  Cardinal
Wolsey  that,  to  his  great  regret,  he  found  him-
self compelled  to  evoke  the  cause  from  Eng-
land to  the  curia.

Wolsey  had  always  assured  his  sovereign
that  he  should  be  able  to  carry  through  the
affair  to  which,  as  affecting  him  personally,
Henry  attached  the  greatest  importance.  The
king  now  saw  himself  cited  to  appear  in  person
in  Rome,  and  w^hat  particularly  irritated  him,
under  an  express  pecuniary  penalty. IT  He
thought  this  so  offensive  to  his  dignity,  that  he
did  not  choose  to  let  his  subjects  know  it.

Wolsey  had  also  assured  him  that  France
would  never  desert  him.  Even  in  May,  1529,
he  would  not  believe  this  possible  ;  he  caught
with  eagerness  at  every  rumour  of  a  new  rup-
ture between  that  country  and  the  empire,
and  founded  fresh  plans  upon  it.  But  what
he  refused  to  believe  came  to  pass.

Nothing  remained  for  King  Henry  but  to  ac-
cede to  the  peace.  His  participation  in  the
war  had  of  late  been  so  slight,  that  the  peace
which  he  concluded  seemed  but  a  supplement
to  that  of  France;  it  has  hardly  a  place  in
English  history.  It  was  enough  for  the  king
that  France  undertook  to  pay  the  money
which  he  claimed  from  the  emperor,  out  of  the
above-mentioned  two  milhons.**

But  no  one  acquainted  with  the  character
of  Henry,  could  for  a  moment  expect  that  he
would  desist  from  his  great  project,  the  di-
vorce. The  desire  of  having  a  legitimate  heir
and  successor  by  Anne  Boleyn,  was  become
his  ruling  passion.  Indeed  the  affair  now  as-
sumed a  far  more  important  character  than
heretofore.

Above  all,  the  downfall  of  Wolsey  was  be-
come inevitable.  Already  had  his  anti- Aus-
trian measures  experienced  opposition,  not
only  in  the  Privy  Council,  but  in  the  nation.
Any  war  with  the  Netherlands  \vas  unpopular
in  England;  the  Enghsh  merchants,  discon-
tented at  the  breach  of  the  peace,  had  been
at  one  time  brought  only  by  a  sort  of  compul-
sion to  resort  to  the  markets  as  theretofore.
The  king  had  been  mainly  persuaded  into  this
policy  by  Wolsey's  assurances  that  the  alli-
ance would  be  productive  of  immediate  pecu-

II  Burnet,  from  the  ambassadors'  despatches,  p.  76.

"^  "  The  K.  Highness  supposeth  —  that  it  should  not  be
nedeful  any  such  letters  citatorial,conteyning  matier  pre-
judicial to  his  persone  and  royal  estate  to  be  showed  to
his  subjects." — Gardiner  to  Wolsey,  4  Aug.  State  Papers,
i.  p.  336.

**  See  Commissio  ad  tractandum  de  jocalibus  recipien-
dis.  Rymer,  vi.  ii.  19.  "  Cum  oratoribus,"  says  Francis
I.,  "Anglice  regis,  pro  omnibus  obligationibus  absque  pig-
nore  coiiiractis  convenimus."

828

PROJECTS  OF  THE  EMPEROR.

Book  V.

niary  advantage  to  himself.  The  cardinal
often  represented  to  the  French  ambassadors
what  arts,  ''what  terrible  alchemy,"  as  he
expressed  it,  were  necessary  to  enable  him  to
withstand  his  enemies.*  But  all  his  resources
were  now  exhausted.  His  foreign  policy,
which  had  been  calculated  on  a  union  between
England,  France,  and  Rome,  had  completely
failed.  Despairing  of  being  able  to  carry
through  the  projects  which  he  had  so  zea-
lously encouraged,  it  is  unquestionable  that
he  at  length  advised  the  king  to  desist  from
them.  But  he  thus  lost,  as  might  be  expected,
the  king's  grace  and  favour;  he  irritated  a
considerable  party,  which  Anne  Boleyn  had
won  over,  and  particularly  her  father,  who  had
been  created  Marquis  of  Rochfort :  old  ene-
mies and  new  rose  up  against  him;  and  just
then  Suffolk,  who  during  his  stay  in  France
had  shown  himself  little  disposed  to  favour
the  cardinal's  schemes,  returned,  and  now
openly  quarrelled  with  him.t  Norfolk  had
never  been  his  friend.

Thus  fell  Wolsey.  In  November,  1529,  he
was  deprived  of  the  Great  Seal ;  in  December
he  was  found  guilty  of  having  infringed  the
privileges  of  the  kingdom,  by  an  undue  exer-
cise of  his  power  as  legate.  Neither  the  re-
turning support  of  the  French,  nor  (to  use
Norfolk's  words)  "the  counsels  of  his  star-
gazers,"  could  save  him.

A  still  more  important  point,  however,  was,
that  these  affairs  became  the  subject  of  an
angry  controversy  between  the  king  and  the
pope.  The  declaration  of  the  foraier,  —  that
he  would  marry  Anne  Boleyn.  if  the  pope
allowed  it,  and  if  the  pope  did  not  allow  it,
he  would  still  marry  her.  —  sounds  like  a
jest;|  but  it  was  the  prelude  to  an  event
which  changed  the  history  of  England.  Wol-
sey is  reported  to  have  urged  the  pope  to  ex-
communicate the  King  of  England,  because,
in  that  case,  the  people  would  revolt  against
him.§  Whether  this  be  well-founded  or  not,
the  bare  rumour  was  sufficient  to  determine
the  king  to  put  an  end  at  once  to  the  possi-
bility of  such  an  interference  with  the  internal
affairs  of  his  kingdom.

To  return  to  the  emperor.  It  was  doubtless
advantageous  to  him  that  he  w^as  for  the  pre-
sent delivered  from  the  hostility  of  England,
and  had  his  hands  free  in  that  direction ;  yet
he  soon  expressed  a  doubt  whether  he  should
not  be  compelled,  by  the  honour  of  his  house,
to  draw  his  sword  again  in  the  cause  of  his
aunt,  Henry's  repudiated  wife.

His  letters  show  that  he  by  no  means  calcu-
lated on  the  stability  of  peace,  when,  in  the

*  Bellay,  16th  Feb.  1528,  in  Le  Grand,  Hist,  du  Divorce,
iii.  p.  84.

t  According  to  a  letter  of  Bellay's  of  the  29th  May,  the
king  was  persuaded  by  the  cardinal  "  qu'il  n'a  tant  avancö
le  mariage  qu'il  eust  fait,  s'il  eust  voulu."  Le  Grand,
p.  313.

X  From  a  letter  of  the  emperor  to  Ferdinand,  10th  Jan.
1530.

§See  the  extracts  from  a  letter  from  Chapuis  to  Charles
in  Hormayr's  Archiv.  1810,  p.  131.  The  Joncquim  there
alluded  to  is  no  other  than  the  Genoese,  John  Joachim,
who  is  elsewhere  so  frequently  mentioned.

summer  of  1529,  he  made  serious  preparations
for  going  to  Italy,

This  design  he  had  long  seriously  enter-
tained. He  seemed  suddenly  conscious  that
the  years  of  youth  were  past  for  him ;  he  felt
himself  a  man.  and  wished  to  take  a  personal
share  in  the  great  concerns  which  had  hitherto
been  carried  on  in  his  name;  ''to  show  the
world,"  as  one  of  his  confidential  friends  said,
"his  true  self,  his  mind  and  heart,  which
hitherto  had  been  known  to  them  alone. "II
He  w^as  animated  by  a  completely  personal
and  chivalrous  ambition.  He  hoped  either
immediately  to  bring  about  a  peace  in  Italy,
or  to  give  such  an  impulse  to  the  war  as  w^ould
lead  to  its  successful  termination ;  then  to  re-
ceive the«  imperial  crown,  and  to  repair  to
Germany,  whither,  as  he  said,  he  was  called
by  his  anxiety  lest  the  greater  part  of  the
country  should  secede  from  the  church  of
Rome,  or  be  overrun  and  conquered  by  the
Turks-IT  In  reply  to  a  message  from  his  bro-
ther, respecting  an  impending  invasion  of  the
Turks,  he  sent  him  word  that  he  would  not
only  assist  him,  but,  if  possible,  take  the  field
himself.

Had-  not  this  desire  been  so  strong  within
him,  he  would  not  so  easily  have  entered  upon
a  negotiation,  in  which  he  ceded  to  Portugal
the  claims  of  the  crown  of  Castile  to  the  Mo-
luccas, for  the  sum  of  350.000  florins.  The
Spaniards  were  not  very  well  satisfied  at  this,
but  the  emperor  wanted  to  be  rid  of  these  dis-
puted questions,  which  had  already  led  to  san-
guinary quarrels  in  the  East  ■**  and,  above  all^
he  was  in  want  of  money.  He  was  well  con-
tent that  the  Portuguese  found  means  to  pay
him  by  rapid  instalments.

He  now  turned  a  deaf  ear  to  all  opposition.
He  said  he  could  not  be  satisfied  with  him-
self till  he  had  taken  this  journey.

On  the  27ih  of  July,  1529,  the  emperor  took
ship  at  Barcelona,  and  on  the  12th  of  August,
landed  at  Genoa. ft

In  all  the  plenitude  of  a  power,  not  (like
that  of  the  emperors  of  old)  composed  of  Ger-
man elements  alone,  but  formed  of  a  wonder-
ful combination  of  the  south  and  the  north,
Charles  now  appeared  on  the  Italian  frontiers
of  the  ancient  empire.  In  his  retinue  we  find
all  the  glorious  names  of  Castilian  history ;
Mendoza,  Guzman,  Pacheco,  Manrique,  Zu-
niga,  Toledo,  Cueva,  Rojas,  Ponce  de  Leon;
every  great  house  had  sent  a  representative,
and  the  most  brilliant  among  them  all  was
Alvarez  Ossorio,  Marquis  of  Astorga.  They
were  joined  by  Navarrese,  Catalans,  and  Ara-
gonese. He  also  brought  fresh  troops  from

II  Philibert  of  Orange's  Instructions  to  Balanca,  Pap.
d'etat,  de  Granv.  i.  434:  Apres  avoir  veu  le  taiit  grand
desir  quy  (I'empereur)  montre,  de  se  trouver  en  quelque
lieu  pourdonner  a  cognoistre  a  tout  le  monde  ce  que
preca  nous  aultres  ses  serviteurs  avons  cogneu,  qu'est
d'avoir  le  cceur  tel  quil  a.

IT  Sandoval,  ii.  p.  25.

**  Herrera  Historia  de  las  Indias,  Dec.  iv.  lib.  v.  p.  117.

ft  L'enipereur  au  Sieur  de  Montfort.  Pap.  d'etat,  i.  p.
415.  When  difficulties  occurred,  he  said,  "  que  je  n'estois
en  fasson  du  monde  delibere  de  lasser  de  faire  ce  voyage,
et  que  je  ne  me  pouvois  satisfayre  de  moi-raesme  si  je  ne
le  faisois."

Chap.  V.

PROCEEDINGS  OF  THE  EMPIRE,  1528,  1529.

329

Malaga  to  reinforce  those  in  Milan  and  Na-
ples. The  imperial  power,  personified  in  the
emperor,  acquired  a  romantic  and  highly  Ca-
tholic character,  from  the  new  elements  com-
bined with  it.  It  was  only  necessary  to  look
at  this  court,  in  order  confidently  to  predict  its
intentions.

Let  us  next  observe  how,  meanwhile,  mat-
ters had  gone  on  in  Germany.

CHAPTER  V.

DIET OF SPIRES, A.  D. 1529.

We  have  seen  how  great  was  the  influence
of  political  affairs  on  the  rise  and  progress  of
religious  reform.  Had  it  not  been  for  the
divisions  existing  between  ^  the  two  highest
powers  of  Europe,  the  decisive  resolutions  of
the  diet  of  1526  would  never  have  passed.

Since  that  time,  however,  no  further  pro-
ceedings of  practical  importance  had  taken
place  in  the  empire.

The  mission  to  the  emperor,  which  was  then
resolved  on,  was  withheld  under  frivolous  pre-
tences. The  Saxon  party  confidently  main-
tained that  this  was  solely  the  efl^'ect  of  the
secret  intrigues  of  the  spiritual  estates,  who
seemed  to  fear  that  the  growing  differences
between  the  emperor  and  the  pope  might  lead
the  former  to  decide  in  a  manner  disadvan-
tageous to  them.

A  congress  of  the  princes  of  the  empire  held
at  Esslingen,  in  December,  1526,  had  no  other
object  than  the  defence  of  the  country  against
the  Ottomans;  the  resolutions  which  it  passed
were  neither  important  in  themselves,  nor
productive  of  the  slightest  results.

In  May,  1527,  a  diet  was  convoked  at  Re-
gensburg; but  it  was  so  ill  attended  that  those
present  did  not  even  consider  themselves
authorised  to  deliberate  upon  matters  which
had  been  expressly  referred  to  them;  e.  g.  the
affair  of  the  deputation  to  the  emperor  above-
mentioned.  They  passed  a  resolution  ''to  un-
dertake no  business  w^hatever."*

In  March,  1528,  a  new  diet  was  appointed
to  be  held  at  Regensburg ;  but  the  pope's  ad-
herents were  still  not  without  apprehensions
as  to  the  probable  decisions  of  the  assembled
states;  affairs  in  general  were  indeed  still  too
uncertain  to  enable  them  to  form  any  settled
opinions  themselves.  In  the  first  place.  King
Ferdinand  postponed  the  opening  of  the  meet-
ing from  March  till  May  ;t  then,  an  edict  of
the  emperor's  appeared,  which  peremptorily
forbade  it,  without  assigning  any  satisfactory
reasons;  only,  to  quote  the  words  of  the  edict,
from  "notable grounds  and causes. "J We

*  I  remark  that  the  extract  from  this  recess  in  Häberlin
(xi.  46)  does  not  precisely  correspond  with  the  original
(Reichsabschiede,  ii.  185).

t  Neudecker  Actenstiicke,  i.  26.

%  Proclamation  in  the  Frankfurt  Acts  of  the  10th  April,
which,  however,  reached  Germany  in  time.

42  2c*

find  from  records  of  the  papal  court,  that  "no
good  conclusion"  was  anticipated  there. §

But  the  more  weighty  matters  of  foreign
policy  were  now  decided,  and  a  complete
change  in  the  internal  affairs  of  Germany  was
inevitable.

The  emperor's  sentiments  were  learned,
from  a  distance  indeed,  but  quite  unequivo-
cally. We  have  already  alluded  to  the  pro-
ceedings of  his  vice-chancellor,  Waldkirch.
He  declared  to  the  people  of  Augsburg,  in  the
plainest  manner,  that  the  emperor  was  dis-
pleased with  them  because  they  had  introduced
changes  in  religion.  In  Strasburg  he  threat-
ened the  nobles  who  sat  in  the  council  with.
loss  of  life,  if  they  did  not  oppose  the  abolition
of  the  mass. II  The  impression  he  made,  and
the  hopes  excited  by  the  renewed  connexion
with  the  imperial  court,  may  be  inferred  from
this,  among  other  circumstances  ; — the  chap-
ter of  Constance,  which  shortly  before  had
been  compelled,  to  yield  to  the  force  of  the
new  opinions,  and  to  emigrate  to  Ueberlingen,
now  chose  him,  the  vice-chancellor,  as  coad-
jutor.

The  peace  concluded  by  the  emperor  with
the  pope  was  of  immense  advantage  to  the
bishops,  as  it  not  only  reconciled,  but  united,
the  two  supreme  powers.  The  clergy  could
now  once  more  reckon  on  strenuous  and  effi-
cient support.

This  w^as  the  more  welcome  at  a  moment
when  they  all  felt  the  dangers  by  which  they
were  threatened  by  the  progress  of  refonn  in
Switzerland.  We  discover  from  numerous
publications  expressive  of  their  opinions,  what
anxiety  Zwingli's  departure  from  the  estab-
lished doctrine  concerning  the  Lord's  Supper
excited  in  all  quarters;  it  was  feared  that  the
Oberland  cities,  infected  with  the  new  heresy,
would  separate  themselves  from  the  empire. 1

Nor  can  w^e  deny  that  the  violent  courses
into  which  the  landgrave  had  suffered  him-
self to  be  led  by  Pack's  forgeries,  had  exer-
cised a  very  unfavourable  influence  on  the
cause  of  the  reformation.  They  had  con-
firmed the  Swabian  league  in  its  anti-evan-
gelical system;  and  it  now  excluded  the
Memmingen  delegates  from  its  council,  be---
cause  Memmingen  had  abolished  the  service
of  the  mass,  and  embraced  Zwingli's  opinions.

In  his  brief  of  October,  1528,  to  M-hich  we
have  alluded,  the  pope  had  solemnly  called
upon  the  emperor  to  take  up  the  cause  of  re-
ligion at  the  approaching  diet  with  greater
earnestness  than  heretofore  :  immediate  care
must,  he  said,  be  taken  that  at  least  the  evil
be  not  suffered  to  spread.  One  effect  of  this
was  that,  on  the  last  day  of  November,  the
convocation  of  a  new  diet,  to  be  holden  at
Spires  on  the  21st  of  February,  1529,  was
issued. The  States  were apprised  that no

§  Sanga  a  Castiglione,  Lettre  di  diversi  autori,  p.  56.
Prudentemente  penso,  poter  facilmente  essere  che  ne  suc-
cedesse  qualche  non  buona  de.terminatione.

II  Röhrich  Gesch.  der  Reform  im  Elsass,  I.  360.

tr  Es  weisst  der  gmein  Man  nitt  glich,  ob  er  sy  Schwytz
oder  ghör  zum  Rych,  iPhe  common  people  do  not  rightly
know  whether  they  are  Swiss,  or  belong  to  the  empire.
(Lied  gegen  Constauz,  bei  Vierordt,  p.  34.)

830

PROCEEDINGS  OF  THE  EMPIRE,  1528,  1529.

Book  V.

those  who  were  present  would  proceed  to
busmess  in  the  same  manner  as  if  the  assem-
bly were  complete.*  The  subjects  specially
announced  for  deliberation  were,  the  arma-
ment against  the  Turks,  the  violations  of  the
public  peace,  and,  above  all,  the  rehgious
innovations.

This  time  the  announcement  of  a  diet  was
serious  and  sincere;  the  imperial  commission-
ers made  their  appearance  at  the  time  ap-
pointed ;  the  ecclesiastical  princes  came  in
greater  number  than  usual,  and  those  w^ho
did  not  come,  sent  the  most  zealous  of  their
•mmisters  in  their  stead. t  The  Bishop  of  Con-
stance, for  example,  was  represented  by  the
same  Faber,  who.  as  we  saw,  took  an  active
part  in  the  political  and  religious  troubles  of
Switzerland.  He  had  seen  Erasmus  on  his
way,  and  expressed  himself  in  such  terms,
that  the  latter  expected  nothing  but  war  and
violence.!  The  Catholic  principle  had  also
gained  new  adherents  among  the  secular
princes.  D'oke  Henry  of  Mecklenburg,  who
had  hitherto  been  reckoned  among  the  evan-
gelical party,  now  entirely  concurred  with  his
son  Magnus,  Bishop  of  Schwerin, — one  of  the
most  violent  opponents  of  change.  The  Elec-
tor Palatine,  who  had  almost  formally  joined
the  reformers,  forbade  his  people to  attend

»  the  preachings.  It  was  thought  that  he  had
been  persuaded  to  take  this  course  by  his
brother,  the  Count  Palatine  Frederic,  who  had
once  more  conceived  hopes  of  obtaining  the
hand  of  an  Austrian  princess.  ^'The  Palati-
nate,'' says  a  letter  from  Spires,  "will  have
nothing  more  to  do  with  Saxony."

Under  these  circumstances,  surrounded  by
opinions  favourable  to  their  wishes,  the  impe-
rial commissioners  were  enabled  to  bring  tor-
ward  measures  of  a  decisive  nature,  in  the
Proposition§  which  they  delivered  on  the
15th  of  March.

While,  in  consequence  of  the  pope's  con-
sent, they  announced  a  council  with  greater
certainty  than  before,  and  at  the  same  time
touched  upon  the  old  question — how  affairs
were  to  be  carried  on  in  the  interval — they

^proposed  formally  to  revoke  the  article  of  the
recessll  of  1526,  in  virtue  of  which  all  existing
innovations  were  recognised  and  admitted  ;  on
the  ground,  that  it  gave  occasion  to  ''  much  ill
council  and  misunderstanding  ;"1  and  to  sub-

*  The  printed  copy  of  the  extract  names  the  first,  the
MS.  copy,  the  twenty-first.  "And  if  you  do  not  appear
within  ten  days  after  the  day  appointed,  our  envoys  and
coniinissaries  will,  notwithstanding,  discuss  and  deter-
mine affairs  with  the  States  then  and  there  present,  in  all
respects  as  if  you  and  others  who  absented  yourselves  on
slight  and  frivolous  grounds,  liad  been  present.  All  which
we  shall  attend  to  and  execute  with  firmness  and  vigour,
in  the  same  manner  as  if  all  the  States,  whether  present
or  absent,  had  agreed  to  them."

t  "  I.  am  afraid,"  writes  Jacob  Sturm  to  Peter  Bütz  in
the  middle  of  March,  "  from  what  I  see  of  the  persons
here,  there  will  not  be  much  to  be  obtained."—"  In  sum-
ma, Christus  est  denuo  in  manibus  Caiaphae  et  Pilati."
Jung,  Gesch.  des  Reichstags  zu  Speier,  Beil.  nr.  4.

I  Erasml  Epistolce,  ü.  1220.

§  See  p.  152,  Translator's  note.

)|  Abschied. See  Preface,  Translator's  note.

IT "  Your  Imperial  Majesty,"  says  the  Proposition, "  here-

stitute  for  it  another  ordinance  of  a  directly
opposite  tendency,  in  favour  of  the  spiritual
authorities.

This  was  the  notion  entertained  by  most  of
the  orthodox.  In  the  instructions  given  by
Duke  George  of  Saxony  to  his  ambassador  to
the  diet,  we  find  that  he  too  regarded  this  arti-
cle as  the  cause  of  all  the  existing  troubles.**
He  demanded  that  a  uniform  standard  of  faith
should  be  established,  and  that  the  represent-
ative and  government  of  his  imperial  majesty
should  not  surrender  their  power.

The  first  thing  was  to  appoint  a  committee
to  deliberate  and  report  upon  the  Proposition.

In  this,  as  was  fully  to  be  expected,  the
orthodox  party  were  greatly  superior.  Amojig
the  electoral  votes,  only  that  of  Saxony  was
on  the  evangelical  side.  Of  the  nine  princes'
votes,  five  were  ecclesiastical,  and  three  of  the
secular  decidedly  Catholic ;  while  not  only  Fa-
ber, but  Leonard  von  Eck,  the  leader  of  the
reaction  in  Bavaria,  was  a  member  of  the
committee.  There  could  be  little  doubt  of
the  result.  On  the  24th  of  March  the  com-
mittee declared  its  assent  to  the  proposed  arti-
cle, and  only  added  the  following  provisions.
•'  Those  who  had  held  to  the  edict  of  VVormSj
should  continue  to  do  so :  in  the  districts
which  had  departed  from  it,  no  further  innova-
tion should  be  introduced,  and  no  one  should
be  prevented  from  saying  mass.  No  ecclesi-
astical body  should  be  deprived  of  its  author-
ity or  revenues,  on  pain  of  ban  and  reban.
Lastly,  the  sects  w^hich  deny  the  sacrament
of  the  true  body  and  blood  of  Christ,  should
in  no  wise  be  tolerated  any  more  than  the
anabaptists."  With  these  additions  the  report
was  laid  before  the  Slates.

All  the  measures  of  the  States  in  favour  of
the  evangehcal  doctrines  had  been  the  conse-
quence of  the  leaning  of  the  majority  towards
them.  The  majority  was  now^  reversed.  What
the  former  had  enacted,  the  present  sought  to
repeal.  In  the  sittings  of  the  6th  and  7th  of
April  they  adopted  the  report  of  the  commis-
sion without  the  smallest  alteration.

Nor  were  the  friends  of  reform  to  be  de-
luded by  the  mere  sound  of  the  words,  into
the  idea  that  the  only  thing  intended  was  to
check  the  progress  of  the  movement.  This
was  undoubtedly  the  immediate  purpose  ;  but,
on  a  careful  examination,  it  was  evident  that
these  ordinances  were  incompatible  with  the
maintenance  of  the  changes  already  effected
in  the  several  countries,  on  the  strength  of
former  recesses.

One  leading  motive  to  the  previous  recess
had  been,  the  necessity  of  appeasing  the  in-
ternal troubles  in  the  several  countries;  hence

by  repeals,  revokes,  and  annuls  the  above  mentioned  arti-
cle contained  in  the  above-mentioned  recess,  now  as  then,
and  then  as  now,  all  out  of  your  own  imperial  absolute
power  (Machtvollkommenheit).",  Müller,  Historie  von
der  evangelischen  Stände,  Protestation  und  Appellation,
p.  22.

**  "Denn  dieweil  es  ein  Jeder  sol  machen  wie  er  wil
und  gegen  Gott  und  kais.  Maj.  vornimmt  zu  verantwor-
ten, so  kann  kein  Einigkeit  seyn." — "  For  since  every  man
is  to  do  as  he  will,  and  as  he  thinks  he  can  answer  it  to
God  and  his  imperial  majesty,  there  can  be  no  unity."
Instrument  in  the  Dresden  Archives.

'.  V.

RESISTANCE  OF  THE  MINORITY.

331

it  had  been  left  to  princes  and  subjects  to
come  to  an  understanding  with  one  another
on  religions  questions,  as  they  could.  Now,
those  who  had  prohibited  the  Latin  mass
were  compelled  to  tolerate  it,  and  nothing
could  be  expected  but  an  entire  dissolution
of  all  that  had  been  settled.

Further :  the  very  existence  of  the  changes
that  had  been  adopted,  rested  on  a  tacit  denial
of  the  episcopal  jurisdictions ;  the  authority  of
the  bishops  (that  is,  their  spiritual  authority)
was  now  established  anew^  The  right  of  ap-
pointing or  removing  preachers  was,  among
others,  unquestionably  restored  to  them.*'
How  could  this  be  endured  for  a  moment  ?

The  reforms  were  still  going  on  most  pros-
perously in  many  cities.  Some  had  delayed
to  take  the  final  step,  because  they  were  still
in  expectation  of  some  new  express  conces-
sion from  the  diet  of  the  empire  ;  e.  g.  the  ad-
mission of  both  elements  in  the  sacrament.
They  were  now  condemned  to  abide  im-
plicitly, and  for  ever,  by  the  established
forms.

Lastly,  Zwingli'S  followers  w^ere  absolutely
excluded  from  the  peace  of  the  empire.

In  short,  though  the  dissidents  were  not
expressly  admonished  in  the  recese,  to  return
to  the  bosom  of  the  church  they  had  aban-
doned, it  was  unquestionable  that  by  assent-
ing to  it  they  would  bring  about  the  total  and
speedy  ruin  of  the  evangelical  church,  which
was  just  rising  into  importance.

It  appeared^as  if  the  religious  reforms  which
nad  begun  to  acquire  consistency  from  the
situation  of  the  political  affairs  of  Europe,
were  now  about  to  be  overthrown  by  the
changes  which  those  affairs  had  undergone.
The  great  community  of  the  empire,  which
for  a  while  had  Vv^avered,  now  resumed  its
station  on  the  side  of  the  two  great  combined
powers.

There  remained  also  the  most  important  of
all  considerations  for  the  evangehcal  party;
viz.,  whether,  supposing  they  were  inclined
to  venture  to  resist  those  powers,  they  had
lawful  grounds  for  doing  so.

The  question  arose,  whether,  in  the  present
case,  a  resolution  of  the  majority  of  the  states
of  the  empire  was  binding  upon  the  minority.

This  question  was  of  a  general  nature :
When  an  institution  has  been  established  by
lawful  means,  and  has  actually  attained  to
full  life  and  vigour,  can  the  supreme  power
morally  assume  the  right  to  overthrow  and
annihilate  the  new  structure? Has  not  the

*  Fürstenberg,  Wednesday  after  Cluasimodogeniti  (7th
April):  "Es  werden  in  dem  allerlei  VVörtlia  ingesch-
lichen, die  den  Städten,  als  den  man  ufsetzig  und  gefer  ist,
iiit  treglichnoch  leidlich  seyn;  mit  Namen  dass  man  nie-
mand an  seiner  Oberkeyt  und  Herkommen  vergweltigen
soll,  damit  wird  den  Geistlichen,  so  solcher  Artikel  ange-,
nommen  und  verwilligt  wird,  erfolgen,  die  Prädicanten
zu  setzen  und  zu  entsetzen,  alle  Missbrauch  wieder  zu
erheben  und  andere  wieder  anzurichten." — "  Tliere  were
all  sorts  of  little  words  slipped  in,  which  are  not  tolerable
or  endurable  to  the  cities,  against  which,  they  (the  ortho-
dox majority)  are  violent  and  dangerous  ;  and  especially
that  their  authority  and  traditional  jurisdiction  should  be
forcibly  set  aside,  in  order  that  the  clergy  (in  case  the
said  article  is  accepted  and  granted)  may  continue  to  ap-
point and  to  displace  the  preachers,  to  restore  all  the  old
abuses,  and  to  estabUsti  new  ones," Frankf.  Acten.

body  which  has  thus  legally  and  efficiently
constituted  itself,  the  right  to  exist,  and  to
defend  its  existence  ?

The  imperial  power  had,  on  a  former  occa-
sion, found  itself  unable  to  heal  the  general
divisions,  and  had  voluntarily  abandoned  its
functions  to  the  several  territorial  sovereigns;
was  it  justified,  now  that  it  had  acquued
greater  strength,  in  destroying  what  was  in
fact  the  result  of  its  own  act  of  delegation'?
This  nobody  could  admit ;  otherwise  institu-
tions of  the  greatest  antiquity  might,  during
some  of  the  vacillations  to  which  power  vest-
ed in  a  fluctuating  majority  is  exposed,  be
brought  into  question.  Nothing  would  be
secure  or  permanent :  for  when  once  institu-
tions had  received  the  sanction  of  law,  how
were  they  to  be  distinguished  in  principle
from  those  which  had  subsisted  for  ages  ?

In  the  present  case,  too,  it  w^as  to  be  ob-
served, that  with  regard  to  one  of  the  most
important  of  those  ordinances,  —  that  enjoin-
ing the  toleration  of  the  mass, — nothing  was
said  either  in  the  proposition,  the  report  of  the
commission,  or  the  transcript.!  Landgrave
Philip  would  not  admit  that  the  majority  of
the  states  had  the  right  to  pass  decrees  so
deeply  affecting  the  internal  affairs  of  the
territories  of  the  minority,  without  their  as-
sent.

In  this  declaration,  Hessen,  electoral  Sax-
ony, Lüneburg,  and  Anhalt,  toaether  with
Mai"
red.

The  cities  viewed  the  matter  under  another
aspect.  Their  delegates  in  the  committee
remarked,  that  Faber  had  worked  upon  the
princes  mainly  by  insisting  upon  and  exag-
gerating the  dangerous  consequences  of  the
former  concessions. t  To  this  they  replied,
that  Germany  was  indebted  for  the  tranquil-
lity she  enjoyed,  to  that  Very  recess  which
they  were  now  called  upon  to  revoke.  If,  in
these  hasty  times,  they  were  to  pass  resolu-
tions of  such  gravity,  directly  opposed  to  the
former,  nothing  could  be  expected  to  result
but  division,  and  indescribable  perplexities
and  evils. §  As  yet  the  cities  were  unani-
mous; those  which  had  remained  Catholic,  as
well  as  those  which  had  become  Protestant.
The  reply  above  mentioned  is  their  common
work.  Vainly  did  Count  Palatine  Frederic
represent  to  the  reformers  that  they  were  dis-
obedient to  the  imperial  edict ;  that  their  in-
novations led  rather  to  discontent  and  trouble
than  to  the  honour  of  God ;  they  replied,  that
w^hat  they  had  done  was  not  an  act  of  hos-

t  Extract  from  the  Protest  (Beschwerungsschrift),  MÜI.
ler,  p.  33.

I  Matthias  Pfarrer  bei  Jung,  nr.  vii.:  "Der  Doctor  Fa-
ber bildt  mit  solcher  Unworheit  und  Lügen  indie  Fürsten,
— was  uss  der  Ler  gefolg  hab  und  noch  folgen  werd,  das
do  frilich  in  keines  menschen  gedanken  ich  geswige  thun
file,  und  verbittert  die  Fürsten  mit  solchen  Reden." — "  Dr.
Faber  represents  with  such  falsehood  and  lies  to  the
princes  what  has  followed  and  will  follow  from  the  doc-
trine, such  as  truly  never  could  come  into  any  man's
thoughts,  much  less  to  act  upon,  and  embitters  the  princes
against  us  with  such  discourse."

§  "  Der  erbern  Frei  und  Reichsstäte  Gesandten  Beden-
ken." "  The  scruples  of  the  worshipful  the  envoys  of  the
free  and  imperial  cities,"  (Sth  April,)  Jung.  nr.  26,

332

DIET  OF  SPIRES,  1529.

Book  V.

tility  or  insubordination  to  the  emperor,  but
a  measure  intended  to  maintain  peace  among
their  people,  and  for  the  rehef  of  consciences  ]
that  none  could  have  a  greater  dread  of  any
kind  of  disturbance  than  they.  King  Ferdi-
nand entreated  them  two  or  three  times  to
assent  to  the  report  laid  before  them,  and
added,  that  the  emperor  would  hold  this  in
most  gracious  remembrance.  They  replied,
that  they  would  obey  the  emperor  in  all  that
could  further  the  maintenance  of  peace  and
the  honour  of  God.*

Overpowering  as  the  majority  was,  it  did
not  think  it  expedient  to  show  an  utter  dis-
regard of  so  determined  a  resistance.  The
cities  especially,  had  strongly  objected  to  the
use  of  the  word  supremacy,  in  the  article  con-
cerning the  spiritual  power  —  a  word  which
had  been  carefully  avoided  in  the  recess  of
1526.  The  majority  at  last  thought  it  better
to  omit  this  word,  and,  as  before,  only  to  forbid
the  subtraction  of  revenues  and  lands  from
the  church.  It  added,  that  no  one  should  pro-
tect the  lieges  and  subjects  of  another  state

against  their  lawful  lords

But  this,  too,  was

strongly  objected  to  by  the  evangelical  minor-
ity. They  feared  that,  if  the  words  were
taken  literally,  a  bishop  would  think  himself
entitled  to  regard  the  preachers  as  his  sub-
jects and  lieges,  and  that,  in  conformity  with
the  article  of  the  recess,  they  must  be  deli-
vered up  to  him — an  obligation  which  had
been  disclaimed  long  before  the  introduction
of  the  new  doctrines.  Forty  years  ago,  Frank-
furt had  refused  to  comply  with  such  a  de-
mand made  by  Archbishop  Berthold.  More-
over, this  was  only  a  single  point,  and  their
causes  of  complaint  were  numerous.

But  the  majority  w-as  inflexible  ;  and  it  now
remained  for  the  evangelical  party  to  consider
whether  they  should  allow  a  resolution  which
threatened  them  with  destruction,  to  acquire
the  validity  of  ]aw^

On  the  12th  of  April,  the  Saxon  envoy,  Mink-
witz,  declared  in  the  full  assembly  of  the  em-
pire, that  they  were  resolved  not  to  allow  this.
He  insisted  chiefly  on  the  religious  grounds.
In  affairs  of  conscience,  he  said,  a  majority
had  no  force ;  but  besides,  by  what  right  did
the  diet  venture  to  denounce  as  unchristian,
doctrines  which  a  part  of  the  States  held  to  be
Christian,  before  the  council,  so  often  de-
manded, had  been  holden  ?  The  minority
would  never  consent  to  this;  they  would  not
consent  that  those  who  had  hitherto  conformed
to  the  edict  of  Worms,  should  now  be  forbid-
den to  abide  by  it ;  for  this  would  be  to  pass
condemnation  on  their  own  doctrines.  The
other  reformers  were  greatly  rejoiced  at  see-

*  Piirstenberg,  Monday  after  Qüasimodogeniti  (7th
April) ;  "  Keyserlich  Maj.  begeren  halber  wiren  sie  ur-
bittig,  wess  sie  zu  der  ere  Gottes  auch  frieden  und  ruhe
dienlich  gehelfen  mochten,  sollt  man  sie  allerunterthänig
gehorsam  spüren."  — "In  consequence  of  his  Imperial
Majesty's  desire,  they  respectfully  promise  that  wherein-
soever they  can  be  helpful  to  the  honour  of  God,  and  the
peace  and  tranquillity  of  the  realm,  you  shall  find  them
most  dutifully  obedient."

t  So  it  was  inserted  in  the  Recess,  5  10.  Unterthanen
und  Verwandte.

ing  their  cause  pleaded  wäth  such  zeal.f
Minkw-itz  urged  the  States  of  the  empire  to
adhere  to  their  former  decree;  if  this  had
been  perverted  to  any  bad  purpose  (which,  he
affirmed,  on  the  evangelical  side  was  not  the
case),  the  evil  might  be  remedied  by  a  decla-
ration. Under  these  conditions,  he  promised
that  the  party  to  which  he  belonged  would
assent  to  the  other  resolutions.

But  all  his  arguments  w^ere  vain.

On  the  19th  of  April,  King  Ferdinand,
Waldkirch,  and  the  other  commissioners  ap-
peared in  the  assembly  of  the  States,  thanked
them  for  their  "  Christian,  faithful  and  assidu-
ous services,"  and  declared  their  resolutions
accepted ;  so  that  there  only  remained  to  re-
duce them  into  the  form  of  a  recess.  They
rejected  the  proposals  and  objections  of  the
Elector  of  Saxony  and  his  adherents,  solely  on
the  ground  that  the  resolutions  were  "  adopted
according  to  ancient  praiseworthy  usage,  by
the  greater  part  of  the  electors  and  princes,''
so  that  the  rest  must  also  submit  to  them.§
The  evangelical  princes,  startled  at  so  direct
a  refusal,  which  had  the  air  of  a  reproof,  ||  and,
as  it  was  read  aloud  before  all  the  States,  must
be  entered  on  the  records  of  the  empire,  re-
tired for  a%ioment  into  an  adjoining  room,  in
order  instantly  to  agree  upon  some  answer.
But  the  king  and  the  imperial  commissioners
were  not  disposed  to  wait  for  this.  In  reply
to  a  request  of  the  princes,  that  they  would
not  refuse  a  short  delay.  King  Ferdinand  said
that  he  had  received  the  positive  commands
of  his  imperial  majesty ;  the^e  he  had  exe-
cuted, and  so  the  matter  must  remain:  the
articles  were  determined  on.l"  So  saying,  he
and  the  commissioners  left  the  house.  Still
more  irritated  by  the  contempt  for  their  dig-
nity and  their  rights  which  this  conduct  im-
plied, the  evangelical  States  now  determined
to  execute  a  project  which  they  had  conceived
some  w^eeks  before,  as  soon  as  they  saw  the
turn  afl"airs  were  taking  at  the  diet.  They  re-
solved to  resort  to  the  only  legal  means  of  re-
sistance left  them.  It  was  evidently  impossi-
ble to  make  the  assembly  recede  from  its
resolutions;  to  submit  to  them,  would  be  to
renounce  their  own  existence.  They  re-
appeared in  the  same  sitting, — not  indeed
before  the  king  and  the  imperial  commission-
ers, but  before  the  States  still  assembled,  —
and  caused  that  protest  to  be  read  aloud,  from
which  they  took  the  name  their  descendants
still  bear — Protestants.

They  especially  insisted  on  the  fundamental
principles  of  the  laws  of  the  empire.**  They

X  Fürstenberg.  He  conducted  their  affairs  "with  the
greatest  earnestness,  bravely,  and  for  the  best."

§  Intended  message  which  his  royal  highness  (Königl.
Durchlauchtigkeit)  caused  to  be  read  aloud.  In  the  In-
strumentum  Appellationis  of  Müller,  p.  72.

II  They  call  it  "  an  almost  insolent  rebuke."

•^  Narrative  in  the  Appellations  Instrument,  p.  75,  and
in  the  letter  of  the  Strasburg  envoy,  21st  April,  Jung,
nr.  44.

**  A  legal  argument  of  a  general  nature  which  they
adduce  is,  that  "auch  in  menschen  Handlungen  und  Sa-
chen das  mirer  wider  das  minder  nicht  fürdrücken  mÖcht
da  die  Sachen  nit  ir  vil  in  ein  gemein,  sundern  jeden  sun-
derlich  belangt."  — "In  human  dealings  and  affairs,  the

Chap.  V.

PROTEST.

333

declared  that  they  could  not  be  obliged,  with-
out their  consent,  to  give  up  the  privileges
secured  to  them  by  the  recess  lately  drawn
up  at  Spires,  which  had  been  confirmed  by
such  strong  mutual  promises,  and  attested  by
their  common  seals ,  that  the  attempt  of  the
other  States  to  repeal  this  by  their  separate
act,  was  null  and  void,  and  had  no  authority
over  them;  that  they  should  go  on  to  conduct
themselves  towards  their  subjects  in  matters
of  religio'-^  according  to  the  terms  of  the  for-
mer recess,  and  as  they  thought  they  could
answer  it  to  God  and  the  emperor.  If  the
other  States  were  not  to  be  restrained  from
framing  the  present  recess  with  the  offensive
resolutions,  they  begged  that  their  protest
might  at  least  be  incorporated  with  it.

This  declaration,  the  mere  form  of  which  is
most  remarkable,  was  expressed  with  all  pos-
sible external  deference  and  courtesy.  The
States  were  all  spoken  of  as  '•  our  dear  lords,
cousins,  uncles,  and  friends;"  they  were  en-
titled, with  the  most  careful  attention  to  their
several  distinctions,  ''You,  well  beloved,  and
you,  others."*  To  the  former  were  addressed
"friendly  requests,"  to  the  latter,  "gracious
consideration"  {gnädiges  Gesinnen)\  and  while
they  do  not  for  an  instant  lose  sight  of  their
princely  dignity,  they  beg  their  opponents  not
to  misunderstand  the  course  which  they  feel
themselves  compelled  to  adopt:  in  return,
they  promise  the  former  to  deserve  this  by
their  friendship,  and  the  latter,  to  requite  it
by  their  good  will.  The  style  of  the  docu-
ments of  this  century  certainly  have  no  claim
to  be  called  beautiful  or  classical ;  but  they
are  suited  to  the  circumstances,  and  have  a
marked  character, — like  the  men  of  that  age
and  all  that  they  do.

The  king,  to  whom  this  protest  was  deli-
vered, together  with  some  additions  made  the
following  day,  did  not  think  it  expedient  to
accept  it;  nevertheless  it  made  an  immense
impression.  That  a  diet  could  thus  end  in
open  disunion,  seemed  to  promise  nothing  less
than  immediate  violence.  On  the  20th,  Henry
of  Brunswick  and  Phihp  of  Baden  were  com-
missioned by  the  majority  to  endeavour  to
mediate  between  the  parties.

The  points  on  which  the  mediators  agreed
with  the  evangelical  party  are  very  remark-
able.

They  conceded  that  the  article  concerning
the  jurisdiction  of  the  clergy  over  their  sub-
jects, and  others  Connected  with  them  by
secular  relations,  should  receive  certain  limita-
tions.

The  evangelical  party,  on  the  other  hand,
promised  that  no  further  innovation  should  be
attempted  before  the  convocation  of  a  coun-
cil;  and  especially  that  no sect should  be

more  ought  not  to  oppress  the  less ;  since  the  affair  does
not  belong  to  many  of  them  in  common,  but  to  each  in
particular." Müller,  p.  114.

*  Eure  Liebden  und  Ihr  Andern.  It  is  impossible  to  find
in  another  language  terms  which  represent  the  precise
distinctions  implied  in  these  and  the  follo%ving  words.
The  reader  will  understand  that  they  are  among  the
various  graduated  forms  of  respectful  address.— Trans.

tolerated  which  denied  the  sacrament  of  the
true  'body  and  blood  of  Christ.

The  two  parties  agreed  mutually  to  tolerate
their  differences  as  to  the  service  of  the  mass;
no  sovereign  was  to  have  any  thing  to  say  on
this  head,  out  of  his  own  secular  dominions. t

These  terms  were  actually  accepted  by  the
evangelical  princes ;  the  cities  inclining  to
Zwnngli's  views  were  also  inclined  to  consent
to  them.

It  is  evident,  that,  had  the  only  question
been,  to  acquiesce  in  some  check  being  put
to  the  progress  of  innovation  (in  so  far  as  that
could  be  effected  by  legal  means),  they  would
have  'given  way ;  their  position  was  entirely
a  defensive  one :  it  was  only  against  the  in-
fluence of  the  spiritual  jurisdiction,  recog-
nised anew  by  the  diet,  that  they  determined
to  make  a  stand.

But  the  composition  of  the  majority  left
httle  hope  that  these  proposals  would  be  ac-
cepted. They  might  obtain  the  assent  of  a
few  temporal  princes,  but  the  spiritual,  to
whom  the  revolution  in  public  affairs  appear-
ed to  open  a,  brilliant  prospect  of  the  restora-
tion of  their  power,  disdained  to  listen  to
them.  Nor  were  all  the  temporal  princes
satisfied  with  the  first  resolutions  of  the  com-
mittee. Duke  George  of  Saxony  demanded
more  precise  regulations  concerning  the  de-
serted convents  and  the  married  priests ;  he
wanted  that  all  references  to  the  Holy  Scrip-
tures at  variance  with  tradition,  should  be  for-
bidden.:|:  But  above  all  it  was  impossible  to
gain  over  King  Ferdinand.  He  was  irritated
that  the  evangelical  princes  had  framed  and
published  a  protest,  without  first  attempting
to  negotiate  with  him ;  that  they  had  sent  ir
to  him  with  so  little  ceremony,  and  had  even
rejected  negotiations  which  he  had  empower-
ed Planitz  to  open.  He  w^as  also  greatly  dis-
pleased with  the  evangelical  cities,  especially
Strasburg,  which,  shortly  before  the  diet,  had
abolished  the  mass ;  nor  could  he  be  prevail-
ed on  to  allows  Daniel  Mieg,  the  delegate  of
that  city,  to  take  his  seat  in  the  Council  of
Regency.  He  therefore  now  declined  any
further  attempt  at  a  better  understanding,  and
rejected  the  proposals  of  the  two  mediators.
He  refused  to  allow  the  protest  to  be  incor-
porated in  the  recess,  or  even  any  mention  to
be  made  of  it.

In consequence of this, the evangelical

I  "Also  dass  kein  Churfürst  noch  andre  Stände  ussert-
halb  ihrer  weltlichen  Oberkeiten  (Gebiete)  den  andern  zu
oder  von  sinem  alten  oder  neuen  Fürnemen  oder  Haltung
der  Messen  in  eynichem  Wege  vergweltigen,  darzu  oder
davon  dringen  sol."  —  "So  that  no  elector  nor  other  es-
tate, out  of  his  own  temporal  jurisdiction  (territory),
should  compel  another  to  or  from  his  old  or  new  opinions,
or,  in  any  way  whatsoever,  should  urge  bim  to  or  from
the  maintenance  of  the  mass."  Article  of  Composition.
Müller,  p.  42.  Walch,  xvi,  422,  where,  however,  great
errors  occur  (e.  g.,  bessern,  instead  of  besten).  Jung.  nr.  45.

J  Letter  to  his  ambassador,  17th  April.  He  requires  the
addition,  "dass  sich  niemands  unterstehe,  die  h.  Schrifl
weiter  zu  deuten  oder  Disputation  einzuführen,  denn  wie
dieselbigen  angenommenen  Lerer  oder  der  Jiierer  Tail
unter  irTen  thut  anzeigen  und  beschliessen." — "  That  no-
body should  venture  to  comment  on  the  Holy  Scriptures,
or  to  introduce  disputations  further  than  the  said  ac-
cepted teachers,  or  the  greater  part  of  them,  do  actually
teach  and  decide."

334

DIET  OF  SPIRES,  1529.

Book  V.

princes  utlerly  disregarded  Ferdinand's  re-
quest that  they  would  give  no  further  exten-
sion or  pubhcity  to  the  protest.

A  formal  instrument,  with  all  the  docu-
ments annexed,  was  drawn  up,  in  which  the
united  princes.  Elector  John  of  Saxony,  Mark-
grave  George  of  Brandenburg,  Dukes  Ernest
and  Francis  of  Brunswick-Lünebnrg,  Land-
grave Philip  of  Hessen,  and  Prince  Wolfgang
of  Anhalt,  appealed  from  the  wrongs  and
offences  done  to  them  at  the  diet,  to  the
emperor,  the  next  general  free  assembly  of
holy  Christendom,  or  to  a  Congress  of  the
German  nation.

On  the  following  Sunday,  April  25th,  the
necessary  legal  form  was  given  to  this  mani-
festo. This  Took  place  (for  the  spot  is  pointed
out  v.dth  an  accuracy  worthy  of  notice)  -'in
the  lodging  of  Chaplahi  Peter  Mutterstadt.
near  St.  John's  Church  at  Spires,  in  St.  John's
lane  of  the  same,  in  the  little  room  on  the
ground  floor."  It  was  immediately  made
public,  in  order  that  every  one  might  know
that  the  princes  had  in  no  wise  been  consent-
ing to  the  new  recess,  but  were  determined
to  hold  fast  by  the  former.
>  This  declaration  acquired  great  additional
•weight  from  the  signatures  of  a  great  number
of  the  imperial  cities.

At  first  they  appeared  resolved  once  more
to  act  together  as  one  man.  For  their  old
rule  was,  that,  if  one  of  them  had  a  grievance
to  complain  of,  all  the  rest  were  to  adopt  it,
and  on  no  account  to  separate  their  interests
or  their  plan  of  action.  We  observed,  in-
deed, that  the  first  remonstrance  of  the  cities,
though  containing  matter  of  a  highly  anti-
clerical tendency,  was  signed  by  all.  But  the
hearts  of  men  were  too  deeply  and  intensely
,  moved  by  the  interests  of  religion  for  them
to  attend  to  old  rules.  The  imperial  com-
missioners sent  for  the  delegates  of  the
Catholic  cities,  commended  their  steady  ad-
herence to  the  faith,  and  encouraged  them  to
persevere  in  it.  John  Faber  had  a  great  per-
sonal influence  over  some  of  the  smaller,  such
as  Rottweil  and  Ravensburg.  Others,  it  was
affirmed,  were  rendered  more  docile  by  the
hope  of  being  rated  lighter  to  the  taxation  for
the  empire.  Be  this  as  it  may ;  in  the  de-
cisive moment  when  the  Chancellor  of  Mainz
asked  which  were  the  cities  that  felt  them-
selves aggrieved,  the  recollection  of  their  old
principles  made  them  hesitate  for  a  moment,
— but  it  was  only  for  a  moment.  The  dele-
gate from  Rottweil  was  the  first  to  declare
that  there  were  many  among  the  cities  that
agreed  to  the  resolutions  of  the  recess.  To
this  others  assented.^  A  list  was  drawn  up
in  which  those  who  thought  themselves  ag-
grieved wrote  their  names.  At  first  Cologne
inscribed  itself;  not  so  much  because  it  par-
took of  the  new  opinions,  as  because  it  was
engaged  in  disputes  wdth  its  clergy;  but  it

*  Fürstenberg's  Report  in  the  Frankf.  Acts,  and  the
priest  Matthis,  in  those  of  Strasburg.  "The  separation
between  the  cities  began  on  that  very  day,"  exclaims
Matthis;  "that  is  what  the  clergy  have  been  hitherto
Beeliing."

afterwards  revoked  its  signature.  Frankfurt,
too,  was  at  first  among  the  number,  and  here
the  new  opinions  had  taken  firm  root :  it  sub-
sequently withdrew,  because  it  did  not  choose
to  break  with  the  emperor.  But  the  others
remained  inflexible.  In  the  instrument  above
mentioned,  fourteen  were  named  as  joining
in  the  protest.  Strasburg,  Nürnberg,  Ulm,
Constance,  Lindau,  Memmingen,  Kempten,
Nördlingen,  Heilbronn,  Reutlingen,  Isny,  St.
Gall  (which  here  once  more  appears  among
the  imperial  cities),  Wissenburg,  and  Winds-
heim.  This  includes,  as  we  perceive,  all
those  attached  to  Zwingli's  opinions.  In  the
mom.ent  of  need  the  Lutheran  princes  had
not  hesitated  to  unite  with  them.

Sovereigns  so  considerable,  especially  in
the  north  of  Germany,  —  cities  so  populous
and  wealthy  in  the  south  and  west,  —  all
united  in  opinion  and  in  will,  formed  a  body
which  commanded  respect.  They  were  de-
termined to  defend  themselves  with  their
combined  strength  against  every  attempt  at
compulsion  on  the  part  of  the  majority.

CHAPTER  VI.

DISSENSIONS AMONG THE PROTESTANTS.

The  discussions  of  the  diet  of  1529  turned
rather  on  a  question  of  public  law  than  on
any  points  of  doctrine.

All  hope  of  a  general  agreement  of  the  em-
pire on  matters  of  religion  had  long  been  at
an  end ;  the  division  between  the  two  great
parties  became  more  and  more  marked  and
hostile.  This  division  had  indeed  been  re-
cognised and  sanctioned  by  the  supreme  au-
thority, whose  language  and  attitude  in  1526
might  be  regarded  as  neutral.  Now,  how-
ever, w-hen  the  first  storm  was  over, — when
the  ecclesiastical  body,  after  its  own  violent
dissensions,  had  re-united  for  the  maintenance
of  its  common  interests, — when  the  emperor
had  once  more  established  amicable  relations
with  the  pope, — the  Cathohc  party  succeeded
in  getting  possession  of  the  supreme  power;
the  government  of  the  em.pire,  in  the  hands
of  the  majority,  assumed  a  thoroughly  Catholic
complexion  and  attitude.

The  evangelical  party,  while  emboldened
by  the  consciousness  of  a  recognised  legality,
and  cherishing  the  hope  of  further  progress
in  the  same  direction,  suddenly  saw  itself  not
only  excluded  from  all  share  in  the  govern-
ment of  the  empire  (which  it  had  for  some
years  mainly  conducted),  but  threatened  in
its  very  existence.

Nothing  remained  but  for  these  princes  to
organise  themselves  as  a  minority,  determined
to  endure  no  oppression,  and  to  resist  every
attempt  of  the  kind  with  all  their  might.

It  must  never  be  forgotten,  that  the  noble
and  courageous  idea  of  taking  up  this  defen-
sive position; — of  entrenching  themselves  be-

Chap.  VI.

THEOLOGICAL  SCRUPLES.

3a5

hind  the  laws  of  the  empire,  —  an  idea  from
which  the  whole  subsequent  development  of
Protestantism  resulted,  —  was  founded  on  the
union  of  the  confessions  of  Saxony  and  of
Switzerland.

On  the  21st  of  April,  King  Ferdinand  re-
fused the  offered  mediation  of  Brunswick  and
Baden ;  on  the  22d,  Saxony  and  Hessen  con-
cluded ■'  a  particular  secret  agreement,''  as  it
is  called  in  the  document  itself,  with  the  cities
of  Nürnberg,  Ulm,  and  Strasbui-g.  They  were
perfectly  agreed  that  they  would  defend  them-
selves, if  they  were  aftacked  on  account  of
God's  word;  whether  the  attack  came  from  the
Swabian  league,  or  from  the  imperial  chamber,
or  even  from  the  imperial  government.  Dele-
gates who  were  to  meet  in  June,  at  Rotach  in
the  Franconian  mountains,  were  to  determine
in  what  manner  they  were  to  assist  eacli  other. ^

No  difference  \Yas,  as  we  see,  made  be-
tween Nürnberg,  which  adhered  to  Lutheran
opinions,  and  Strasburg,  which  had  espoused
those  of  Zwingli.

Immediately  after  the  diet,  they  proceeded
to  reconsider  the  terms  of  this  compact.  Two
drafts  of  it  have  come  down  to  us;  the  one
framed  by  the  cities,  the  other  by  the  princes.
The  former  proceeds  on  the  prmciple,  that  a
council  should  be  formed  of  the  delegates  of
the  several  states,  who,  being  released  from
their  special  duties  towards  their  own  particu-
lar constituents,  should  act  only  with  a  view
to  the  common  interests.  The  member  of
the  alliance  against  whom  the  attack  might
be  directed,  should  always  appoint  the  leader
of  the  combined  forces.  This  project  con-
tains an  ordinance  ni  conformity  with  the
constitution  of  the  empire;  viz.,  that  the  gene-
ralissimo should  always  be  a  sovereign  prince,
to  whom  should  be  attached  a  military  council
consisting  of  six  menibers,  three  from  the  body
of  the  princes,  one  from  that  of  the  counts,  and
two  from  the  cities.  In  the  draft  sent  in  by
the  cities,  great  stress  is  laid  on  the  point,  that
no  resort  should  be  had  to  arms  on  any  but
religious  grounds;  ••only,"'  to  use  their  words,
"if  they  were  attacked  on  account  of  their
faith,  or  obstructed  in  the  visitations  of  the
churches,  under  pretext  of  a  spiritual  jurisdic-
tion." In  that  of  the  princes,  which  is  in  the
handwriting  of  the  electoral  prince,  the  right
of  self-defence  is  especially  insisted  on;  no
mention  is  made  of  the  emperor;  the  recent
edicts  are  treated  as  mere  assumptions  of
arbitrary  power  on  the  part  of  states  with
which  they  (of  the  Protestant  party)  were  in
every  respect  equal  in  rank  and  dignity,  and
which;  therefore.'  it  was  not  only  their  right,
but  their  duty,  to  oppose.!

Whichever  of  these  projects  had  been  pre-
ferred, it  is  certain  that  the  force  which  the
two  allies  could  have  called  out  would  have
been  considerable. The  electoral  prince  reck-

*  Article  of  tiie  Reflections  on  the  confidential  Conver-
sation :  in  tile  W^irft.  Aicli.

t  Bedenken  der  Eynung  des  Evanireliunis  halber  (Re-
flections on  the  Union  on  account  of  the  Gospel)  in  the
W.  A.,  und  Erstgestellte  N'otel  des  Berstendniiss,  von  den
von  Nürnberg  übergeben.  (.First  note  (sketch)  of  the
agreement,  submitted  by  them  of  Nürnberg.) Müller.

oned  that  it  would  bs  necessary  to  raise  10.000
foot  and  2,000  horse;  he  advised  that  their
friends,  whether  near  or  at  a  distance,  should
be  invited  to  join  them.  The  fact,  that  they
would  have  had  Switzerland  on  their  side,  vi^as
of  immense  importance;  the  imperial  city  of
Constance  had  a  year  ago  allied  itself  with
Zürich  and  Bern  ;  and  St.  Gall,  a  Swiss  town,
had  signed  the  protest.  But  this  union  would
not  long  have  remained  so  entirely  inoffensive,
and  so  devoid  of  any  application  to  the  em-
peror, as  John  Frederic  intended  it  to  be.
Landgrave  Philip  and  the  council  of  Zürich,
who  were  most  intimately  connected,  hacl
already  serious  schemes  for  the  restoration  of
Dnke  Ulrich  of  Würtenberg.  'In  the  negotia-
tions on  this  matter  between  Fiance  *and
Zürich,  which  were  opened  by  the  latter,
Zwingli  expressly  stipulated  that  the  land-
grave, whom  he  characterised  as  magnani-
mous, steadfast  and  wise,  should  be  invited
to  join  them. J  Venice,  too,  had  been  applied
to.  Whilst  the  emperor  maintained  his  as-
cendanc}'  in  the  south  of  Europe,  it  appeared
as  if  a  party,  bound  together  by  religious  and
political  interests,  would  rise  up  against  him
in  Switzerland  and  Germany,  and  would  form
the  centre  of  a  new  European  opposition.  At
all  events,  it  might  be  confidently  expected
that  this  union  would  off'er  an  insuperable  re-
sistance to  the  emperor  and  the  majority  of
the  states  of  the  empire.

But  how  short  a  tim.e  elapsed  ere  the  new
party  was  compelled,  by  the  very  nature  of  its
own  composition,  to  abandon  all  these  expec-
tations !

At  the  time  that  party  was  organised,  the
diff"erence3  existing  between  the  two  confes-
sions had  been  left  wholly  out  of  sight.  This
was  indeed  possible  in  Spires,  under  the  pres-
sure of  a  sudden,  unexpected,  and  increasing
danger;  in  presence  of  the  common  enemy,
they  felt  the  interests  that  united  them,  and
the  necessity  for  political  combination.  But
as  soon  as  they  were  dispersed,  this  impres-
sion w^as  effaced,  and  the  old  antipathies  re-
sumed their  power.

This  was  characteristic  of  the  century ;  the
efforts  to  throw  off  the  yoke  of  the  clergy
had  been  prompted  by  the  theological  spirit ;
and  this  was  too  earnest  and  energetic  to
allow  itself  to  be  controlled  by  any  political
considerations.

The  parties  to  the  new  league  had  at  first
kept  it  secret  from  the  theologians  in  Spires;
and  when  at  length  it  was  communicated  to
them,  they  were  obliged  to  acquiesce  in  it.

But  they  were  the  first  in  whose  minds
scruples  concerning  it  arose.  JMelanchthon,  a
man  who,  with  patient  and  unwearied  labour,
worked  out  in  his  own  mind  every  difhcult
problem  that  came  before  him,  returned  home
robbed  of  his  accustomed  cheerfulness. §  He
fancied  that  if  Zwinoli's  adherents  had  been

I  Hottinger,  ii.  282,  313.

§  Letter  from  Melanchthon  to  Camerarius,  (17th  May  :)
"  Redii  neutiquam  afferens  domum  illara  quam  solebam
hilaritatem."  To  Spengler  and  Justus  Jonas,  1069^1075
1Ü7Ö.

336

THEOLOGICAL  SCRUPLES.

Book  V.

abandoned,  the  Lutherans  would  have  found
the  majority  more  willing  to  make  conces-
sions ]  he  reproached  himself  with  not  having
insisted  upon  this,  as  was  his  duty.  He  was
alarmed  at  the  idea  that  a  subversion  of  the
empire  and  of  religion  might  be  the  conse-
quence of  this  compliance.  On  reaching  Wit-
tenberg, he  spoke  to  Luther  about  it,  and  we
may  easily  imagine  what  were  his  sentiments.
Melanchthon  fell  into  the  most  painful  state
of  inward  strife. "My  conscience,"  says  he.

in  a  letter  of  the  17th  May,

disquieted

because  of  this  thing;  I  am  half  dead  with
pondering  upon  it,"  On  the  11th  June:  "My
soul  is  possessed  by  such  bitter  grief,  that  I
neglect  all  the  duties  of  friendship,  and  all
my  studies."  On  the  14th :  "  I  feel  myself
'in  such  disquiet,  that  I  had  rather  die  than
endure  it  longer."  As  if  with  a  desire  to
remedy  the  wrong  that  had  been  committed,
he  at  length  endeavoured,  on  his  own  author-
ity, to  put  his  friends  in  Nürnberg  on  their
guard  against  concluding  the  projected  treaty.
'•  For  the  godless  opinions  of  Zwingii  must  on
no  account  be  defended."

His  sovereign  master,  the  elector,  he  could
safely  leave  to  Luther's  influence.

Luther,  as  we  have  said,  had  not  hesitated  a
moment  to  condemn  the  alliance  with  the  fol-
lowers of  Zwingii.  Instantly  and  spontaneous-
ly, on  hearing  Melanchthon's  statement  of  the
facts,  he  applied  to  Elector  John  even  now  to
set  aside  the  agreement  concluded  at  Spires.
He  represented  to  him  that  all  such  compacts
were  dangerous,  and  reminded  him  how  the
former  one  had  been  misused  by  the  impetu-
osity of  the  young  landgrave.  ''How  then,"
said  he,  '•  shall  we  dare  to  connect  ourselves
Vv'ith  people  who  strive  against  God  and  the
holy  sacrament  %  We  shall  thus  go  to  perdi-
tion, body  and  soul."

It  can  hardly  be  affirmed  that  these  theo-
logical scruples  ought  to  have  been  utterly
disregarded,  or  that  Luther  w^as  to  be  blamed
for  entertaining  them.

We  must  consider  that  the  whole  reforma-
tion originated  in  religious  convictions,  v;hich
admit  of  no  compromise,  no  condition,  no  ex-
tenuation. The  spirit  of  an  exclusive  ortho-
doxy, expressed  in  rigid  formulse,  and  deny-
ing salvation  to  its  antagonists,  now  ruled  the
world.  Hence  the  violent  hostility  betv^-een
.  two  confessions,  which  in  some  respects  ap-
proximated so  nearly.

A  union  of  their  respective  followers  could
only  be  rendered  possible,  either  by  disregard-
ing their  differences,  or  by  putting  an  end  to
them.

In  Spires,  in  the  tumult  of  the  diet,  under
the  pressure  of  the  common  peril,  the  former
had  been  deemed  possible.  But  how  could  it
be  realised  while  the  most  violent  polemical
writings  were  interchanged  between  the  lead-
ers ?  Considering  the  convictions  v/hich  both
parties  had  embraced  with  fervour,  and  held
to  with  the  utmost  tenacity,  such  a  union
would  have  seemed  to  prove  that  the  original
religipus  motives  had  not  been  entirely  free
from  alloy.

Luther  was  wholly  opposed  to  it,  and  there
needed  only  an  admonition  from  him,  to  deter
the  elector  from  any  such  attempt.

Elector  John  sent  indeed  his  delegates  at
the  ^appointed  time  to  Rotach,  but  with  strict
charge  merely  to  listen,  and  report  to  him  ]
he  would  then  consult  with  the  learned  men
about  him  whether  the  thing  could  be  exe-
cuted without  grieving  the  conscience.  He
thought  that  perhaps  similar  scruples  would
occur  to  the  people  of  Nürnberg.*

And  in  fact  the  opinions  of  the  Nürnberg
theologians  were  precisely  those  of  the  Saxon.
They  too  exhorted  the  gouncil  to  have  nothing
to  do  with  the  "Sacramenters."t

Hence  the  meeting  in  Rotach  ended  in  no-
thing beyond  general  assurances  of  mutual
assistance,  and  preliminary  promises;  further
dehberations  were  postponed  till  a  meeting,
to  be  held  at  Schwabach  in  the  following
August.  This,  however,  never  took  pla-ce.
It  was  already  countermanded  when  the  dele-
gales  from  the  Oberland  arrived;  they  had
made  their  long  journey  in  vain. J

Thus  the  same  influential  body — the  theo-
logians—  ^^'lio  had  put  a  sudden  and  entire
check  to  the  warlike  preparations  caused  by
Pack's  intrigues,  three  years  before,  now  of-
fered a  no  less  strenuous  and  successful  resist-
ance to  an  alliance  which  appeared  the  only
safeguard  from  arbitrary  power.  The  same
influence  which  in  the  one  case  had  prevented
attack,  now  proved  an  equally  insuperable
obstacle  to  all  measures  of  defence.

It  is  no  wonder  that  Landgrave  Philip,  who
had  embraced  the  former  schemes  with  all
the  ardour  of  his  haughty  and  ambitious  tem-
per, vv'as  offended  and  grieved  at  the  present
turn  of  affairs.  He  did  every  thing  in  his
power  to  keep  his  Saxon  allies  to  their  former
resolution;  but  in  vain. §

We  are  ix)t  to  imagine  from  this  that  Land-
grave Philip  had  emancipated  himself  from
the  spirit  of  his  age. His  disposition  to  con-

*  Instruction  auf  Herr  Hansen  Minkwitz  Ritter  gen
Rotach.  (Instructions  sent  to  Master  John  Minliwitz,
Imight,  at  Rotach.)  He  was  to  observe  whether  possibly
the  Nürnberg  delegates  might  not  of  their  own  accord  say
to  him,  "  that  they  found  ic  would  be  difficult  for  them  to
come  into  any  compact  with  those  who  held  Zwingli's
opinion  concerning  the  sacrament,  inasmuch  as  they
would  be  biirthened  on  account  of  the  divine  word  of  the
faith,  as  if  this  article  were  also  founded  on  the  divine
word  and  the  faith,  which  must  then  be  received  in  silence
against  their  consciences;"  and  then  he  was  to  say  to
them,  "that  a  like  ditficulty  and  scruple  had  also  fallen
upon  us  since  the  last  diet  at  Spires."  The  recess  is  dated
Tuesday  after  St.  Boniface,  (8th  June.)

t  Chancellor  Bruch  said  at  Schnialkalden,  that  it  all
came  from  the  counsels  of  Nürnberg.  Strobel  Miscella-
neen,  iv.  130.

X  Letter  to  Nürnberg,  23d  August.  They  would  pri-
vately inform  their  friends  of  the  affair,  although  it  "is
quite  burthensome  to  us,  the  delegates,  not  only  »m  ac-
count of  our  body's  weakness,  but  of  the  length  of  the
way,  and  the  alarming  gangs  wandering  about  the  coun-
try." (W.  A''  ^  meeting  at  Zerbst  also  did  not  take
place;  it  w  ^  o  off  because  the  elector  "had  seen  good
not  to  cone  ,  that  which  he  had  conferred  about  with
certain  princt^s  and  states,  concerning  a  friendly  under-
standing, with  whom  those  of  the  Magdeburg  union  will
not  enter."  I  find  that  Erich,  Bishop  of  Paderborn  and
Osnabrück,  who  had  already  joined  in  the  first  protest  at
Spires,  was  also  invited.

§  Reasons  and  counter  reasons  in  the  letters  of  the
elector  and  the  landgrave.  Müller,  Gesch.  der  Protest,  p.
236,  261.

Chap.  VI.

CONFERENCE  AT  MARBURG.

337

cede  arose  from  his  being  less  firmly  con-
vinced of  the  truth  of  Luther's  doctrines  than
his  allies  were.

As,  however,  it  was  no  longer»  possible  to
disregard  the  dissensions  between  the  two
sections  of  reformers,  it  was  doubly  neces-
sary to  make  one  effort  more  to  reconcile  the
contending  theologians.

Landgrave  Philip  had  already  seen  the
urgency  of  this  in  Spires,  and  had  written  to
Zwingli  about  it.  He  now  sent  a  definitive
invitation  to  both  parties  to  m.eet  at  his  castle
of  Marburg,  on  the  Feast  of  St.  Michael.
(a.D.  1529.)

It  is  remarkable  how  differently  his  two  in-
vitations were  received.  Zwingli  feared  that
he  should  be  withheld  from  going  by  the
Grand  Council  of  his  city;  if  he  announced
his  intentions,  he  thought  they  would  hardly
allow  him  to  take  so  long  a  journey  through
so  many  doubtful  or  hostile  territories.  With-
out communicating  his  intentions  even  to  his
wife,  or  waiting  for  the  expected  safe-conduct
from  Hessen,  he  therefore  set  out.  with  the
connivance  of  a  few  members  of  the  privy
council.  On  the  other  hand,  Melanchthon
would  rather  that  his  sovereign  had  forbid-
den him  the  journey  altogether.  Luther  con-
stantly declared  that  the  conference  would
lead  to  nothing.  When  he  had  reached  the
Werra,  it  was  impossible  to  induce  him  to
proceed  any  further  till  he  had  received  a
safe-conduct  in  all  its  formes  from  the  land-
grave.=^'

On  the  other  hand,  the  Swiss  were  filled
with  the  most  sanguine  hopes;  they  knew
that  the  prince  at  whose  court  they  vv^ere  to
meet  their  antagonists,  was  entirely  on  their
side  in  politics,  and  nearly  so  in  religion.
The  Wittenberg  party  were  sensible  that  they
would  have  to  contend,  against  Philip's  wishes;
they  were  determined  however  not  to  give
wav,  but  to  maintain  their  ground  at  all  risks.
The  two  parties  met  therefore  in  a  totally
opposite  temper  of  mind;  and,  according  to
the  usual  weakness  of  human  nature,  pro-
ceeded to  act  under  the  influence  of  the  mo-
ment.

Yet,  regarded  from  a  higher  point  of  view,
this  meeting  had  a  sublime  and  most  import-
ant character.

The  eminent  spirits  who,  on  either  side,
had  led  the  movement  with  such  power,  but
between  whom  misunderstandings  had  now
broken  out,  met  together  in  order  to  endea-
vour to  elicit,  by  personal  discussion,  some
means  of  putting  an  end  to  the  quarrels
which  were  so  great  an  obstacle  to  the  pro-
gress of  the  common  cause.

In  this  light  did  Euricius  Cordus  regard  it,
when  he  addresses  them  all,  ''t^-'e  princes  of
the  Word,"  '-the  acute  Luthe  •  'le  gentle
CEcolampadius,  the  magnanimo.  Zwingli,
the  honest  Melanchthon,"  and  the  others
who  were  come,  —  Schnepf,  Brenz,  Hedio,
Oslander, Jonas, Crato, Menius, Myconius,

*  According  to  Bullinger,  whose  accouni  of  this  con-
ference is,  generally,  vei'y  remarkable,  the  landgrave  him-
eelf  observed  this  difierence,  p.  214.
43  2  a

each  of  whom  he  designates  by  some  eulo-
gistic epithet,  and  admonishes  them  to  put  an
end  to  the  new  schism.  ''The  church  falls  at
your  feet  weeping,  and  conjures  you  by  the
bowels  of  Christ  to  take  this  matter  in  hand
with  genuine  earnestness,  for  the  salvation  of
the  faithful,  and  to  bring  about  a  decision
which  the  world  may  confess  to  have  ema-
nated from  the  Holy  Ghost. "t  It  was  an
ecclesiastical  council  of  the  dissidents  from
Catholicism.  Had  it  succeeded,  means  would
have  been  devised  to  maintain  the  unity  of
the  new  church.

Certain  preliminary  doubts  were  first  satis-
fied. Zwingli  had  been  accused  of  errors
concerning  the  divinity  of  Christ.  He  now
professed  opinions  in  entire  conformity  with
the  Nicene  creed.  He  also  declared  his  com-
plete agreement  with  the  Wittenberg  divines,
on  the  doctrine  of  original  sin,  on  which  the
whole  scheme  of  redemption  rests ;  on  the
efficacy  of  the  external  word  ;  on  baptism,  as
being  not  a  mere  symbol.  It  is  certain  that
Zwingli,  in  his  endeavours  to  make  out  the
meaning  of  Scripture  for  himself,  had  de-
parted widely  from  the  received  opinions  of
the  church  on  all  these  points.  In  this  re-
spect he,  like  Luther,  reverted  to  the  funda-
mental basis  upon  which  the  Latin  church
rested.:^  On  one  point  alone,  the  most  im-
portant of  all — the  point  which  occupied  uni-
versal attention  —  on  the  question  of  the  Eu-
charist, he  was  inflexible.  Here  he  hoped
for  victory,  and  pleaded  his  cause  with  great
vivacity  and  earnestness.  His  chief  argu-
ments were,  the  figurative  meaning  of  the
word  is,  in  other  passages;  the  explanation
given  by  Christ  himself,  in  the  sixth  chapter
of  John  (concerning  which,  he  said  that  '^  it
broke  Luther's  neck" — an  expression  the  lat-
ter rather  misunderstood) ;  the  consent  of  se-
veral fathers  of  the  church ;  lastly,  the  impos-
sibility that  a  body  should  be  in  more  than
one  place  at  one  time.  But  Luther  saw  writ-
ten on  the  page  before  him,  ^'This  is  my
body."  He  persisted  that  these  were  the
words  of  God,  about  which  there  must  be  no
quibbling,  and  which  Satan  himself  could  not
get  over ;  he  would  not  now  enter  upon  the
more  profound  explanations  with  which  he
had  previously  combated  the  argument  of  lo-
cality, without  which  it  is  impossible  to  con-
ceive a  body ;  he  would  not  endure  the  word
'•signifies,"  for  that  made  complete  abstrac-
tion of  the  body.  The  difference  is  this :
Zwingli  regards  the  presence  of  Christ  as  con-
nected with  the  bread ;  whereas  Luther  re-
gards the  bread  itself  as  the  very  presence  —
the  present  body ; — the  visible  containing  the
invisible,  as  the  scabbard  contains  the  sword. §

t  The  poem  is  inserted  by  Melanchthon  in  the  Paralipo-
menon  to  the  Chronikon  Urspergense,  p.  495.

I  Löscher,  Historia  Motuum,  p.  103,  examines  how  far
the  present  resolutions  were  contradicted  by  former  ex-
pressions of  the  Oberländers.  Even  Planck,  otherwise  a
great  champion  of  the  Oberländers,  admits  that  in  this
matter  Löscher  is  right.

§  The  following  passage  in  the  abstract  from  the  re-
cords in  Scultetus,  p.  143,  seems  to  me  to  contain  one  of
the  main  points  of  difference  :  Lutherus  affirmat  (the  sub-
ject is,  the  Cth  chapter  of  John)  non  ipsam  manducatiocera

338

CONFERENCE  AT  MARBURG.

Book  V.

He  too  understood  the  word  eat  in  a  spiritual
sense,  but  he  would  not  part  with  the  mys-
tery which  is  involved  in  the  symbol.  He
thought  that  his  antagonists  had  probably
never  had  occasion  to  prove  the  value  and  effi-
cacy of  their  exposition  in  the  conflicts  of  the
spirit ;  whereas  he  was  conscious  that,  by  the
aid  of  his,  he  had  fought  against  Satan  and
hell,  and  had  found  there  the  consolation
which  is  able  to  sustain  the  soul  in  the  most
desperate  tempests  that  can  assail  it.*

With  a  view  to  the  progressive  development
of  religious  ideas,  it  was  not,  I  think,  to  be
wished  that  Zwingli  should  have  given  up  his
theory,  which,  by  continually  referring  to  the
original  and  historical  character  of  the  insti-
tution of  the  great  mystery,  was  of  such  im-
mense importance  to  the  whole  conception  of
Christianity,  independent  of  the  church  as
actually  constituted.  On  t^e  points  on  which
he  yielded  he  was  not  so  sure  or  so  steadfast,
but  this  he  had  thought  out  in  all  its  bearings ;
here  he  was  master  of  his  subject ;  it  con-
tained the  principle  upon  which  his  system
was  founded,  and  to  this  he  clung  with  the
utmost  tenacity.

Just  as  httle  was  it  to  be  expected,  or  even
desired,  of  Luther,  that  he  should  assent  to
^wingli'S  exposition.  His  opinions  on  the  in-
dwelling of  the  divine  element,  generally,  in
the  Christian  church,  are  the  same  as  those  of
the  Catholics;  only  he  does  not  recognise  it
in  the  numerous  incidents  handed  down  from
fantastical  or  sophistical  ages.  As  these  fail
to  aflbrd  him  the  assurance  he  requires,  he
reverts  to  the  original  sources,  to  which  the
Catholics  also  refer,  and  receives  nothing  but
what  he  finds  there.  Of  the  seven  sacraments,
he  retains  only  the  two  of  which  unquestiona-
ble mention  is  made  in  the  New-  Testament.
But  to  these  he  adheres  in  spite  of  every  at-
tempt to  wrest  them  from  him,  or  to  detract
from  their  mysterious  import.

These  are,  as  we  have  remarked,  two  views
of  the  subject  taken  from  different  points,  but
equally  inevitable.

It  was  enough  that  the  two  parties  began  to
desist  from  their  mutual  outcries  of  heresy.
Luther  discQvered  that  his  antagonists  did  not
mean  so  ill  as  he  had  imagined,  while  the
Swiss  abandoned  that  coarse  conception  of
Luther's  scheme  which  they  had  hitherto  en-
tertained. Luther  thought  the  violence  of  the
polemical  writings  w^ould  now  subside.'!"

oralem,  sed  manducalionis  moduni  crassum  ilium,  qualis
est  carnis  suillfe  aiit  bovinaj,  rejici.  CEcolnmpadius,
arrepta  inde  occasione,  de  duplici  verboruin  Cliristi  iiitel-
ligentia  disserit,  humili  sive  carnali,  et  subiiini  sive
spiritiiali:  humilem  sive  carnalem  verbortim  Christi  in-
tellectum  eum  esse  quern  Luthenis  asserat  a  Christo  re-
pwdiatum:  spiritualem  sive  sublimem  esse  ilium  quern
Christus  jusserit  amplecti.  Contra  Lutherus  fieri  non
posse  riec  debere,  ut  ad  spiritualem  tantum  intellectum
verba  ccsnce  referantur,  siquidein  remissio  peccatorum,
vita  setenia  ac  regnum  ccElorum  carnalibus  istis  ac  hu-
milibus  ut  appereant  rebus  per  verbum  dei  aiinexa  sint.

*  Luther's  Explanation,  addressed  to  Landgrave  Philip
in  de  W.  iii.  p.  510-.

t  Melanchthon  says  in  the  Appendix  to  the  Chron.  Urs-
perg:— Triduo  duravit  colloquium,  et  durasset  diutius  spe
uberioris  turn  concordise  futuree,  nisi  borrendus  ille  mor-
bus sudatorius vocatos  dispersisset.  This  was  in-
serted in  BuUinger.  It  shovv's  at  least  what  an  impression
I'lad  been  made  on  Melaachthoii.

In  the  first  place^  all  the  more  important
articles  of  faith  on  which  they  agreed,  were
drawn  up  and  signed  by  the  theologians  of
both  parties ;  the  deviations  from  the  Roman
confession  are  carefully  stated  in  it,  as  well  as
those  from  the  anabaptist  sects;  this  was  a
desirable  basis  of  their  common  progress,  and
the  Marburg  conference  will  be  for  ever  me-
morable and  important  for  its  establishment.
The  fifteenth  and  last  of  these  articles  relates
to  the  Lord's  Supper.  They  agree  on  the  na-
ture and  mode  of  the  solemn  rite,  and  on  its
purpose,  in  so  far  that  both  believe  that  the
true  body  and  true  blood  of  Christ  are  here
spiritually  eaten ;  the  only  point  in  dispute  is,
whether  this  true  body  is  bodily  in  the  bread.
Here  a  freer  interpretation  of  Scripture  leads
to  a  different  view  of  the  mystery  from  that
adopted  by  the  community  of  the  church.
They  mutually  promised  that  each  party
would  treat  the  other  with  Christian  charity.

One  point,  however,  Luther  would  not  con-
cede; viz.,  he  would  not  extend  brotherly-
love  to  the  dissidents  (that  is,  he  would  not
acknowledge  that  the  two  parties  formed  one
brotherhood). t  He  thought  the  difference  of
opinion  far  too  fundamental ,"  the  mystery,  the
central  point  of  the  Christian's  faith  and  ser-
vice, far  too  essential,  to  admit  of  such  a  con-
cession.

We  perceive  therefore  that,  as  far  as  the
future  was  concerned,  and  the  recognition
that,  in  spite  of  their  difterences,  they  be-
longed essentially  to  the  same  confession,  this
conference  was  productive  of  important  re-
sults; but  for  the  pohtical  purposes  of  the
moment,  which  Landgrave  Philip  had  had  in
his  eye,  it  effected  nothing.

Indeed,  the  very  contrary  of  what  he  had
aimed  at  came  to  pass.

From  Marburg  Luther  hastened  to  Schleiz,
where  Elector  John  of  Saxony  and  Älarkgrave
George  of  Brandenburg  were  at  this  moment
together,  in  order  to  consult  with  them  as  to
the  expediency  of  the  Oberland  alhance.  Not
only  did  Dr.  Luther  convince  the  princes  that
a  perfect  unity  of  faith  was  necessary  to  a
treaty  of  mutual  defence,  but  they  determined
mutually  to  confess  the  articles  whereon  this
unity  was  founded,  and  to  admit  no  one  into
their  alliance  who  dissented  from  any  one  of
them.§  No  sooner  had  the  Oberland  dele-
gates arrived  at  Schwabach,  where  a  fresh
conference  was  appointed  to  be  held  in  Octo-
ber, than  such  a  confession  of  faith  was  laid
before  them  for  their  signature,  before  any
further  business  was  entered  upon.  These
are  the  so-called  Schwabach  articles,  and  are
seventeen  in  number.  Little  acuteness  is  ne-
cessary to  discover  that  they  bear  the  strongest
resemblance  to  the  Marburg  agreement.  The
sequence  is  the  same  in  the  first  nine  arti-

t  Luther  to  Gerbellius,  (4th  Oct.):  —  Denuntiatum  est
eis,  nisi  et  hoc  articulo  resipiscant,  charitate  quidem
nostra  posse  eos  uti,  sed  in  fratrum  et  Christi  membrorum
numero  a  nobis  censeri  non  posse.

§  The  recess  of  Schleiz  was  only  oral.  We  see  what  its
contents  were  from  the  instructions  to  the  councillors  of
the  elector,  and  the  Markgrave  of  Brandenburg  at  the
Schwabach  conference.  Müller,  p.  281,  and  Walch,  xvii.
p.  669, First  article.

GttAP.  VI.

DISSENSIONS  AMONG  THE  PROTESTANTS.

cles;*  the  forms  of  expression  are  for  the
most  part  identical  also;  there  are  but  few
alterations^  the  most  important  among  which
is  in  the  tenth  article,  wherein  it  is  taught,
that  ''the  true  body  and  blood  of  Christ  is
verily  present  in  the  bread  and  wine ;"  to
which  is  annexed  the  polemical  remark,  that
the  opposite  party  assert  them  to  be  mere
bread  and  wine.  The  Schwabach  articles  are
a  somewhat  more  elaborate  edition  of  the
Marburg  agreement :  Luther's  scheme  being
exclusively  adopted  in  both.t  It  was,  of
course,  impossible  for  the  delegates  from  Ulm
and  Strasburg  to  sign  this  confession.  They
remarked  that  it  was  not  in  conformity  with
the  doctrines  preached  among  them;  that
they  were  not  apprised  of  the  alteration,  and
must  bring  a  declaration  of  the  opinions  of
their  constituents  on  the  subject,  to  the  next
meeting.

It  was  easy  to  foresee  that  this  declaration
would  be  in  the  negative,  and  that,  under
these  circumstances,  the  alliance  must  be
abandoned.

This  division  took  place  just  at  the  moment
when  the  emperor  manifested' the  most  hos-
tile disposition  towards  reform.

The  emperor  having  issued  a  manifesto
from  Spain,  expressive  of  his  disapprobation
of  the  protest,  the  states  which  had  joined  in
it  had  sent  a  deputation  to  Italy,  charged  to
justify  their  measures  to  him .  Nothing,  how-
ever, could  be  more  directly  hostile  to  their
views  than  the  Spanish  Catholicism  which  the
delegates  encountered  in  the  emperor's  court.
The  emperor  only  repeated  his  former  decla-
rations. He  refused  to  receive  the  protest,
and  was  greatly  displeased  when  the  envoys
laid  it  on  the  table  of  the  secretary  who  was
transacting  business  with  them.  The  whole
court  was  incensed  at  the  audacity  of  Michael
Kaden,  one  of  the  envoys,  who  put  into  the
hands  of  the  orthodox  emperor,  the  temporal
head  of  Catholic  Christendom,  a  writing  of  a
Protestant  tendenc}',  given  to  him  by  the  land-
grave. The  delegates  were  compelled  to  fol-
low the  court  for  a  while  as  prisoners,  and
escaped  from  it  only  by  a  sort  of  flight.

But  if  any  hoped  that  the  adverse  and
menacing, circumstances  without,  would  have
the  effect  of  re-unitin«-  the  two  sections  of  the

*  What  the  Schwabach  Art.  viii.  appears  to  contain
over  and  above,  is  to  be  found  in  those  of  Marburg,  under
the  title,  De  iisn  sacramenti.  See  the  primed  copy  of  the
17  Articles  in  Walch,  xvi.  773,  and  given  with  diplomatic
accuracy  in  Weber's  Kritische  Gesch.  der  Augsb.  Con.  V.
i.  A  p.  2.

t  Riederer  found  the  following  words  in  Veit  Diedrich's
handwriting  on  Luther's  autograph  preface  to  the  17  Ar-
ticles, of  the  year  1530.  Pr?efatio  ad  xvii  Articulos  Mar-
burgi  scriptos;  and  upon  them  founded  liis  assertion  that
the  17  Articles  themselves  were  drawn  ut)  at  Marburg.
Had  that  been  the  case,  Luther  would  have  brought  them
ready  with  him  to  S^clileiz.  In  fact,  Luther  must  have
been  very  much  occupied.  On  the  3Uth  of  September  the
theologians  arrived;  on  the  1st,  2d,  ar.d  3d  of  October
they  debated;  on  the  4th  the  Marburg  agreement  was
signed  ;  and  on  the  5ih  he  went  away.  The  scheme  there
concocted  does  however  agree  pretty  well  with  the  cha-
racter of  the  17  Articles,  only  they  must  afterwards  have
been  revised,  and  rendered  more  distinct  in  some  places,
if  what  was  said  in  Schmalkalden  to  the  cities  is  true:
"The  articles  are  very  well  considered,  and  drawn  up
with  brave  counsel  of  learned  and  unlearned  councillors."

Protestants, this hope proved utterly  illu-
sory.

At  the  very  meeting  at  Schmalkalden,  be-
fore which  they  laid  the  report  of  these  cir-
cumstances (Dec,  1529),  the  separation  be-
tween them  was  first  rendered  absolute  and
complete.

The  seventeen  articles  were  once  mor.e  laid
before  the  Oberländers  (who  were  here  far
more  numerous  than  at  Schwabach).  Ulm
and  Strasburg,  whose  example  was  usually
followed  by  the  others,  definitively  declared
that  they  would  not  sign  them.  The  Luther-
ans, in  an  equally  decided  manner,  declared
that,  in  that  case,  they  could  not  enter  into
an  alliance  with  them.  Their  own  earnest
entreaties,  and  the  zeal  with  which  the  land-
grave exerted  himself  in  their  behalf, — urg-
mg  that  there  was  nothing  to  be  expected
from  the  emperor  but  disfavour  and  violence,
— were  equally  vain.  The  other  party  re-
fused even  to  communicate  to  them  the  re-
port of  the  delegates,  unless  they  would  first
declare  their  assent  to  the  profession  of
faith.i

In  the  course  of  these  transactions,  another
question,  rather  of  a  political  nature,  had
come  under  discussion.

When  Luther  warned  his  master  not  to
enter  into  a  league  with  the  Oberländers,  he
still  cherished  the  hope  that  a  reconcihation
with  the  emperor  was  possible.  This  hope
was  inspired  by  the  view  he  took  of  the  cha-
racter of  the  reformation.  He  contemplated
only  its  widest  objects  and  effects  —  the  de-
liverance of  the  secular  powder  from  the  pre-
tensions to  supremacy  and  precedency  hitherto
asserted  by  the  clergy.  He  represented  what
innumerable  abuses,  universally  admitted  and
complained  of,  he  had  removed ;  while  on  the
other  hand,  he  had  combated  with  chival-
rous valour  against  anabaptists  and  image
breakers ;  the  chief  merit  which  he  claimed,
however,  and  most  justly,  w^as,  that  he  had
revived  the  idea  of  civil  supremacy  and
secular  majesty,  and  had  procured  for  it  uni-
versal acceptance.  He  had  so  high  an  opinion
of  the  emperor,  that  he  was  persuaded,  if  it
were  represented  to  him  that  the  doctrines  of
Christianity  were  preached  in  greater  purity
in  the  evangelical  countries  than  they  had-
been  for  a  thousand  years,  he  must  instantly
see  the  truth.  Luther  was  little  less  imbued
with  the  idea  of  the  empire  than  with  that  of
the  church.  I  do  not  mean  its  momentary
condition  or  aspect,  but  its  import  and  es^-
sence;  and  he  felt  almost  an  equal  pain  at
having  to  sever  himself  from  it.

Negotiations  w^ere  in  fact  set  on  foot  be-
tween the  elector  and  King  Ferdinand.  Fer-
dinand was  moved  to  them,  as  he  writes  to
his  brother  more  than  once,  by  his  anxiety
lest  a  movement  of  the  Protestants  should  en-
sue before  his  (the  emperor's)  arrival,  which
might  have  ruinous  results;  the  elector,  by
his  natural  reluctance to separate himself

t  Protocol  of  the  meeting,  Sunday  after  St.  Catherine
1539. Strobel,  iv.  113.

340

RIGHT  OF  RESISTANCE.

Book  V.

from  the  head  of  the  empire, — a  reluctance
which  had  been  greatly  enhanced  by  Luther's
arguments,  and  which  sometimes  almost
shook  the  confidence  of  the  landgrave  in  his
intentions.  Philip  once  bluntly  asked  the
elector,  what  he  had  to  look  to  from  him  if  he
were  attacked. =*

But  it  gradually  became  evident  how  little
was  to  be  expected  from  these  negotiations.
It  was  clear  that  the  Protestants  would  not,
as  the  electoral  prince  had  assumed  in  his
project  of  a  league,  have  to  deal  with  the
States  alone.  Even  in  the  instructions  given
by  the  elector  to  his  envoys  to  Schwabach,  it
was  said,  "  the  great  danger  will  now  be  in
the  highest  places."!

The  further  question  now  presented  itself,
how  far  it  was  generally  lawful  to  resist  the
authority  of  the  emperor.  Till  this  was  an-
swered, all  union  and  combination  was  vain,
whatever  might  be  the  conformity  of  opinion
in  other  respects.

Saxony  remarked  with  justice  that,  until
they  were  agreed  on  this  indispensable  point,
any  alliance  must  be  merely  apparent,  would
inspire  no  confidence,  and  afford  no  security.

Did  not  the  supreme  power  reside  in  the
emperor?  Were  they  not  bound  by  the
words  of  Scripture,  to  which  they  were  con-
stantly appealing,  to  pay  him  unqualified  obe-
dience ?

These  questions  were  examined  in  Saxony
itself  with  scrupulous  earnestness.  The  jurists
rested  their  arguments  on  the  principle  of  law,
that  self-defence  is  permitted  •  they  justified
resistance.  The  question  was  then  submitted
to  the  theologians;  and,  in  the  absence  of
Luther  and  Melanchthon,  who  were  then  at
ISlarburg.  Bugenhagen,  upon  whom  the  deci-
sion devolved,  brought  a  theological  argument
to  support  those  of  the  jurists.  He  declared
that  if  a  power,  however  unquestionably  de-
rived from  God,  set  itself  in  opposition  to
God,  it  could  no  longer  be  regarded  as  the
sovereign  authority.

Luther,  on  his  return,  gave  a  totally  different
opinion.  He  thought  that  the  maxims  of  law
which  countenanced  resistance  were  contra-
dicted by  others  which  forbade  it,  while  the
latter  were  supported  by  Scripture.  If  re-
sistance to  every  prince  who  disobeys  God's
word  were  to  be  permitted,  people  would  at
last  reject  all  authority  whatever  at  their  own
discretion.

This  opinion  was  shared  by  the  theologians
of  Nürnberg.  Johann  Brenz  gave  in  a  report
to  the  markgrave  to  that  effect.

The  conflict  was  in  fact  between  the  doc-
trines of  passive  obedience,  and  of  the  right
of  resistance.

^  We  knovc  how  greatly  these  doctrines,  espe-
cially in  their  connexion  with  religion,  con-
tributed to  the  development  of  political  theo-
1  ies  in  Europe ;  it  is  worthy  of  remark  that
they  were  first  brought  into  discussion  in  Ger-
many, and  at  so  early  a  period.

But  the  time  was  not  yet  come  for  the  vast

*  Rommel  Urkundenbuch,  No.  9.

t  Instructions  for  Schwabach. Müller,  282.

consequences  with  which  they  were  pregnant
to  be  felt.  In  another  age  and  country  they
touched  the  vital  point  upon  which  the  de-
velopment of  such  theories  entirely  turns,  viz. :
the  relation  between  sovereign  and  subject:
in  Germany  this  was  not  even  agitated  ]  the
doubt  referred  only  to  the  relation  of  a  subor-
dinate to  a  supreme  government :  of  a  prince
of  the  empire  to  the  emperor.

In  Germany  the  question  turned  upon  the
principles  of  public  law  peculiar  to  the  em-
pire, rather  than  upon  those  which  are  com-
mon to  all  states.  Its  real  bearing  was,  whether
the  supreme  power  of  the  empire  was  of  a
monarchical  or  an  aristocratical  nature.

Luther,  who  saw  in  the  imperial  power  the
continuation  of  that  of  ancient  Rome,  as  re-
presented in  Scripture,  adhered  firmly  to  the
idea  of  monarchy  there  exhibited.  He  com-
pared the  relation  between  the  elector  his
master  and  the  emperor,  with  that  between
a  bürgermeister  of  Torgau  and  the  elector.
Brenz  was  of  opinion  that  the  princes  were
as  little  justified  in  taking  arms  against  the
emperor,  as  the  peasants  against  the  nobles
and  prelates.

These  comparisons,  however,  clearly  show
how  little  the  essential  question  was  defined.
On  the  other  side  it  was  contended,  that  there
was  no  resemblance  between  the  princes  of
Germany  and  the  Roman  prefects  of  the  Scrip-
ture ;  not  to  speak  of  bürgermeisters  and
peasants.  They  were  subject  to  the  emperor
under  certain  conditions  insuring  their  freedom,
and  rights;  with  certain  limitations,  and  ac-
cording to  the  privileges  originally  granted
them.  Moreover,  they  were  themselves  sove-
reigns, and  it  was  their  duty  as  such  to  defend
the  Gospel. rj:

At  the  Congress  of  Nürnberg,  the  Chancel-
lor of  Saxony  declared  (but  under  the  express
proviso  that  it  was  only  his  personal  opinion),
that  he  was  convinced  of  the  legality  of  re-
sistance to  the  emperor.  He  adduced  the  two
arguments  we  have  just  mentioned;  in  the
first  place,  that  the  power  of  the  princes  was
no  less  derived  from  God  than  that- of  the  em-
peror ;  and  secondly,  that  if  the  emperor  de-
sired to  compel  them  to  return  to  Popery,  he
was  to  be  regarded  in  the  light  of  an  enemy,
and  no  such  compulsion  w^as  to  be  endured.

These  arguments,  however,  found  little  ap-
probation. As  he  was  one  day  going  to  his
chancery,  Spengler,'  the  secretary  of  the  city
of  Nürnberg,  whom  we  have  had  occasion  to
mention  as  a  man  of  great  experience  in  legal
affairs,  went  up  to  him  and  accused  him  of
error.  They  fell  into  a  vehement  altercation,
which,  however,  they  had  the  discretion  to
carry  on  in  Latin,  that  it  might  not  be  under-
stood by  the  bystanders.

Brandenburg  was  of  the  same  mind  as  Niirn-
berg.  Chancellor  Vogler  affirmed  that  his
master  had  determined,  if  the  emperor  in-

X  Answer  to  the  scruple  put  forth  ;  that  no  resistance
mav  be  otFered  to  his  imperial  majesty.  Hortleder  (ii.  ii.
12) "places  this  at  "about  1531:"  but  as  it  relates  to  the
opposition  experienced  by  the  last  of  the  protesting  dele-
gations, I  incline  to  think  it  must  be  dated  at  the  end  of
1329,  or  the  beginning  of  1530.

Chap.  VI.

THE  OTTOMANS  BEFORE  VIENNA.

341

vaded  his  dominions,  not  to  defend  himself,
but  to  bear  whatever  it  might  please  God  to
lay  upon  him.

This  opinion  obtained  permanent  ascen-
dancy, even  in  Saxony.  Luther  declared,  that
even  if  the  emperor  violated  his  oath,  he  was
still  emperor  —  the  sovereign  authority,  set
over  them  by  God :  if  they  were  determined
no  longer  to  obey,  they  must  dethrone  him.
But  to  what  could  it  lead  if  they  took  up  arms
against  him  ?  Whoever  conquered,  must  expel
him  and  become  emperor  in  his  stead,  which
could  be  endured  by  no  one.

The  only  counsel  Luther  could  give  was,
that  if  the  emperor  had  recourse  to  violence,
the  princes  must  not  indeed  assist  him,  for
that  would  be  to  sin  against  the  true  faith;
but  they  must  not  refuse  to  allow  him  to  enter
their  territory,  and  to  act  there  according  to
his  will.  He  repeated,  that  if  the  emperor
summoned  him  and  the  other  reformers,  they
M'ould  be  forthcoming  :  the  emperor  need  have
no  anxiety  on  that  account.  For  every  man
must  hold  his  belief  at  his  own  risk  and  peril.

Thus  a  few  months  sufficed  to  put  an  end
to  a  league  which  seemed  destined  to  con-
vulse Europe.  It  was  entirely  dissolved.  Even
the  territorial  alliance  did  not  seem  able  to
afford  protection  against  the  emperor.  We
perceive  that  the  several  sovereigns  and  states
thought  themselves  again  bound  to  act  and  to
suffer  single-handed.

It  is  very  easy  to  repeat  the  censure  that
has  so  often  been  thrown  upon  this  decision.
It  was  certainly  not  the  part  of  political  pru-
dence.

But  never  was  a  course  of  action  more
purely  conscientious,  more  regardless  of  per-
sonal consequences,  more  grand  and  magnani-
mous.

These  noble  men  saw  the  enemy  approach ;
they  heard  his  threats ;  they  were  under  no
illusion  as  to  his  views;  they  were  almost
persuaded  that  he  would  attempt  the  worst
against  them.

"They  had  an  opportunity  of  forming  a  league
against  him  which  would  shake  Europe,  at
the  head  of  which  they  might  oppose  a  for-
midable resistance  to  his  projects  of  universal
domination,  and  make  an  appeal  to  fortune ;
but  they  would  not  —  they  disdained  the  at-
tempt.

Not  out  of  fear  or  mistrust  of  their  own
strength  and  valour; — these  are  considera-
tions unknown  to  souls  like  theirs.  They
were  withheld  by  the  power  of  religion  alone.

First,  because  they  v\-ould  not  mix  up  the
defence  of  the  faith  with  interests  foreign  to
it,  nor  allow  themselves  to  be  hurried  into
things  whiöh  they  could  not  foresee.

Secondl}-,  they  would  defend  no  faith  but
that  which  they  themselves  held  ;  they  would
have  feared  to  commit  a  sin  if  they  connected
themselves  with,those  who  differed  from  them :
— on  one  point  only,  it  is  true,  but  that  one  of
the  highest  importance.

Lastly,  they  doubted  their  right to  resist
their  sovereign  and  head,  and  to  trouble  the
long-established  order  of  the  empire.
2d*

Thus,  in  the  midst  of  the  jarring  interests
of  the  world,  they  took  up  a  position  coun-
selled only  by  God  and  their  own  consciences,
and  there  they  calmly  awaited  the  danger.
"For  God  is  faithful  and  true/'"  says  Luther,
•'and  will  not  forsake  us.'^  He  quotes  the
words  of  Isaiah,  '-'Be  ye  still,  and  ye  shall  be
holpen."'

Unquestionably  this  is  not  prudent,  but  it  is
o-reat.

CHAPTER  VII.

THE OTTOMANS BEFORE VIENNA.

The  results  of  the  two  diets  of  1526  and
1529  were  not  less  diametrically  opposed  than
were  their  decrees.

The  former  led  the  evangelical  party,  pro-
tected and  sanctioned  by  the  empire,  to  lay
the  great  foundations  of  their  future  exist-
ence; the  latter  not  only  withdrew  this  pro-
tection, but  at  the  same  time  divided  their
body.

The  discord  which  had  arisen  since  the
publication  of  the  regulations  of  Nürnberg,
had  now  become  an  open  breach.

I  think  we  shall  be  justified  in  affirming
that  the  contrast  in  the  consequences  of  the
two  diets,  with  relation  to  foreign  affairs,  was
not  less  complete.

At  the  diet  of  1526,  the  house  of  Austria
having  sanctioned  the  progress  of  the  evan-
gelical party,  was  requited  by  that  cordial
I  assistance  of  the  German  nation,  which  se-
!  cured  to  it  the  supreme  power  over  Italy  and
'.  Hungary.  It  was  not  to  be  expected  that
'  after  this  house  had  taken  so  entirely  different
;  a  direction,  it  would  receive  the  same  support
I  from  the  affections  of  the  nation.

"I  have  heard,'"  says  Daniel  Mieg  (who
had  been  excluded  from  the  Council  of  Re-
I  gency) to the Altammeister  of Strasburg,
I  '•'  that  his  majesty  has  applied  for  powder  :
!  my  advice  is,  not  to  grant  it,  since  such  an
j  affront  has  been  offered  us. It  were  good
j  that  we  kept  our  money  and  our  powder  too  ;
I  we  shall  want  them  ourselves.'"*
j The  conduct  of  the  house  of  Austria — its
I  schemes  of  conquest  and  aggrandisement  —
had  already  excited  universal  anxiety;  people
had  no  desire  to  lend  it  any  serious  assist-
ance. An  assessor  of  the  Council  of  Regency,
Haramann von Holzhusen, delegate from
Frankfurt — a  city  so  conspicuous  for  its  loyalty
to  the  imperial  house  —  remarks,  '-'that  many
of  the  states,  whether  they  be  Lutheran or
not,  do  not  know  what  they  have  to  expect
from  Austria;  they  are  afraid  the  assistance
they  afford  may  in  the  end  be  turned  to  the
detriment  of  the  empire  and  the  nation,"!

*  Saturday  before  Jubilate,  1529. Jung,  Biel.  No.  37-
t  Spires,  Oct.  9.  "  E.  W.  werden  auch  fleissik  bedenken
und ermessen die  schwinnen  (geschwinden)  liiuf  und
brattig  (Practiken)  so  in  etlich  Jaren  vorhanden  gewest

342

SULEIMAN  IN  HUNGARY.

Book  V.

A  little  later  we  find  letters  circulating  in
Hungaryj  in  which  the  impossibility  of  Ferdi-
nand's defending  Hungary  is  inferred  from  the
religious  quarrels  in  which  he  was  involved
with  the  magnates  of  Germany.^'

Such  was  the  state  of  the  public  mind  when
the  most  powerful  enemy  the  empire  had  en-
countered for  centuries," the  representative  of
another  woildj  the  rival  and  the  implacable
foe  of  Christendom,  appeared  on  its  frontiers.

It  was  just  about  this  time  that  one  Katib,
learned  in  the  law,  asserted  in  Constantinople,
that  the  prophet  Jesus  was  to  be  preferred  be-
fore the  prophet  Mohammed.  The  divan  be-
fore whom  this  innovator  was  accused,  sought
in  vain  to  confute  him,  nor  was  the  mufti,  to
whom  the  matter  was  then  referred,  more
successful ;  he,  however,  tried  and  sentenced
him  to  death.  This  sentence  was  entirely
agreeable  to  the  opinions  of  the  sultan.

Katib  refused  to  recant,  and  suffered  death
for  the  name  of  Jesus,  in  the  middle  of  the
mosque.

Suleiman's  highest  ambition  was  to  be  re-
garded as  the  prophet's  vicegerent  on  earth.
He  was  the  first  of  the  Ottoman  sultans  who
raised  Mecca  into  consideration  ;  it  was  he
who  built  the  sacred  house  of  the  Kaaba,  re-
stored the  mosque  of  Chadidscha,  constructed
aqueducts,  and  established  colleges.  "I,
whose  power  is  sustained  by  the  grace  of  the
Almighty,  by  the  blessing  of  the  greatest  of
his  prophets,  by  the  protection  of  the  first  four
of  his  favoured  disciples;  I,  the  shadow  of
God  over  both  worlds" — such  was  his  manner
of  describing  himself  in  a  letter  to  the  King
of  France.  His  pretensions  were  in  harmony
with  these  titles.  ^'Dost  thou  not  know,"
said  his  son-in-law,  Mustapha  (a.  d.  1528),  to
Lasky,  "that  our  lord  is  next  to  Allah?  That
as  there  is  only  one  sun  in  the  heavens,  so
also  there  is  only  one  lord  upon  earth?"

At  a  time  when  peace  was  yet  unconcluded
in  Europe,  when  he  might  expect  to  find  the
whole  combined  opposition  to  Charles  V.  in
full  activity,  on  the  4th  of  May,  1529,  Sulei-
man set  out  with  an  army  which  has  been
reckoned  at  250,000  men,  to  wage  a  holy  war.
Before  him,  the  Hospodar  of  Moldavia  in-
vaded Transylvania,  and  put  to  rout  the  fol-

uiid  noch  sint,  also,  das  alle  Chur  und  Fürsten,  geistlich
und  weltlich,  auch  ander  Prälaten,  Herrn,  und  Stadt,  sie
seyen  letters  (lutherisch)  wie  man  denn  die  nennen  will
oder  nit,  nit  wol  wissen  mö^en,  wes  siesich  versehen  sol-
len, und  also  das  dieselhig  Hilf,  so  gemelt  mein  gnst.  und
gf\.  Herrn,  Chur  und  Fürsten,  auch  andre  Stende  und  Stet
thun  werden,  dem  hilligen  Keich  und  Teutzer  Nation  und
inen  selber  zu  grossen  unüberwindlichen  Schaden  und
nachtail  reichen  und  kommen  möge." — "  Your  worships
■will  also  carefully  consider  and  ponder  the  rapid  course
and  practice  [of  what,  is  not  said]  that  for  some  years
have  taken  place  and  still  exist ;  also,  that  all  electors  and
I)rinces,  be  they  Lutheran,  as  people  are  pleased  to  call
them,  or  not,  know  not  what  to  provide,  and  also  that  the
pame  succours  which  are  demanded  of  my  most  gracious
Jords,  electors  and  princes,  will  be  granted  by  other  es-
tates and  cities,  to  the  great  and  irreparable  prejudice  and
damage  of  the  holy  empire,  German  nation,  and  them-
selves." He  proposes  a  meeting  of  the  cities,  "in  order
to  have  discourse  and  counsel  concerning  this  and  other
things,  to  .agree  upon  an  opinion  and  what  is  to  be  done
herein,  and  what  answer  to  be  given."

*  Katona,  xx.  i.  p.  634.  Rex  Ferdinandus  propter  dis-
sensionem  suam  cum  imperio  et  aliis  magnatibus  Ale-
raanniee  propter  fidem,  nullum  habere  potest  populum.

lowers  of  Ferdinand.  Next  John  Zapolya  de-
scended the  Karpathians  with  the  small  troop
that  had  collected  around  him;  he  had  the
good  fortune  to  meet  with  Ferdinand's  party
in  Hungary,  before  they  were  joined  by  the
Germans,  and  to  defeat  them  ;  he  met  and
joined  the  sultan  on  the  battle-field  of  Mo-
hacz.  Suleiman  asked  him  what  had  induced
him  to  come  to  him,  notwithstanding  the  dif-
ference of  their  faith.  "The  Padischah,"  an-
sw^ered  John,  "is  the  refuge  of  the  world,  and
his  servants  are  innumerable,  both  moslems
and  unbelievers."  Zapolya,  repulsed  by  the
pope  and  by  Christendom,  fled  to  the  protec-
tion of  the  sultan.  This  need  of  others  for
momentary  protection  had  made  the  Ottoman
empire  what  it  was.

In  Hungary,  Suleiman  experienced  little  or
no  resistance.  The  Austrian  government  did
not  dare  to  call  out  the  light  cavalry:  it  feared,
in  the  unfavourable  state  of  the  public  m,ind,
that  this  might  lead  to  disturbances.  But  it
was  wholly  incapable  of  defending  the  coun-
try by  its  own  resources.  The  commander
of  the  fleet,  who  owed  his  men  40,000  guld.,
had  the  greatest  difficulty  in  getting  together
800.  Means  were  not  forthcoming  even  to
garrison  the  fortresses.

Suleiman's  wezir  laughed  at  the  princes  of
the  West,  who  were  forced  to  extort  money
from  the  wretched  peasants  before  they  could
make  war;  he  pointed  to  the  seven  towers,  in
w^hich  his  master  had  gold  and  silver  lying  in
vast  heaps,  while  his  word  was  sufficient  to
place  a  countless  army  in  the  field.

It  is  little  wonder  that,  under  these  circum-
stances, the  strong  party  that  adhered  to  Za-
polya was  completely  triumphant.  The  mag-
nates— the  Hungarian  Beys,  as  they  are  called
in  Suleiman's  journal — rivalled  each  other  in
the  alacrity  with  which  they  repaired  to  his
camp  to  kiss  his  hand.  Peter  Pereny  endea-
voured at  least  to  rescue  the  holy  crown  for
Austria ;  but  he  was  attacked  on  the  road  by
the  Bishop  of  Fünfkirchen,  a  kinsman  of
Zapolya's,  who  took  him  prisoner  Avith  all  the
regalia,  and  carried '  them  to  the  Ottoman
camp.t  The  extraordinary  veneration  with
which  the  Hungarians  regard  their  crown  is
well  known.  They  believe  it  to  have  been
sent  down  from  heaven,  and  affirm  that,  at
the  sight  of  it,  drawn  swords  have  leaped
back  into  their  scabbards.  "  The  loadstone
does  not  more  strongly  attract  the  iron,"  says
Rewa,  "  than  the  crown  does  the  reverence
of  the  Hungarians,  and  they  hold  it  to  be  their
duty  to  escort  it  whithersoever  it  may  be
borne,  without  heeding  cost  or  danger, :|:  The
Turkish  notion  was,  that  it  had  been  handed
down  from  Nuschirwan  the  Just;  and  this
palladium,  in  which  the  Hungarians  beheld  a
divine  symbol  of  their  nationality  and  their
kingdom,  was  now  in  Suleiman's  camp,  and
accompanied  his  army.  .

In  this  universal  defection,  it  could  hardly

t  Zermegh,  Historia  rerum  inter  Johannem  et  Ferdi-
nandum  gestarum. Schwandtner.  ii.  lib.  i.§  12.

J  Rewa,  De  sacra  corona  regni  Hungariae  ;  Schwandtner
ii.  456. See  Tuberonis  Commentarii. Ibid.  113, 114.

'.  VII.

SULEIMAN  IN  GERMANY,

343

be  expected  that  the  German  garrisons  would
be  able  to  defend  the  few  strong  places  they
still  occupied.  There  were  about  700  newly
raised  landsknechts  under  Colonel  Besserer,
in  Ofen,  who  held  out  against  several  assaults;
J3ut  when  the  city  was  taken,  and  the  castle
of  St.  Gerhardsberg,  which  cornnnanded  it.  was
nearly  in  ruins,  they  despaired  of  being  able
to  resist  the  enemy's  lire  with  their  long-
lances,  and  held  themselves  justified  in  con-
sulting their  own  safety;  they  forced  their
leader  to  capitulate.  But  they  knew  not  the
enemy  with  whom  they  had  to  deal :  Ibrahim
Pacha  promised,  in  the  most  solemn  manner,
that  they  should  march  out  free;  they  had  not
reached"^  the  gates  of  Ofen,  when  they  vrere
all  cat  to  pieces.*

From  this  moment  the  barbarian  torrent
rolled  unresisted  towards  the  German  frontier:
'■towards  a  land."  says  the  Ottoman  historian,
"  which  had  never  yet  been  trodden  by  the
hoof  of  a  Moslem  steed."

The  mighty  power  of  the  East,  erected  on
kingdoms  the  civilization  of  which  was  either
in  the  state  of  undeveloped  infancy  or  of
semi-barbarised  decay,  here  first  came  in  con-
tact w^ith  the  very  heart  of  western  life,  where
the  unceasing  progression  of  the  human  mind
had  taken  root,  and  was  in  full  activity.

No  sooner  had  they  set  foot  in  Germany,
than  the  Ottomans  found  they  had  a  different
foe  before  them  from  any  they  had  yet  en-
countered.

They  describe  it  as  a  country  of  Giaours
(they  make  no  distinctions  between  infidels).
a  woody  land,  difficult  to  traverse ;  but  they
remark  that  it  is  peculiarly  illumined  by  the
torches  of  unbelief;  inhabited  by  a  warlike
people,  marching  under  fierce  banners,  and
defended  on  all  sides  by  castles,  cities,  and
walled  churches;  they  are  struck  with  the
fact  that  as  soon  as  they  had  passed  the  fron-
tier, they  found  every  necessary  of  daily  life
in  the  greatest  abundance. t  They  felt  the
presence  of  a  people  thoroughly  imbued  with
civilisation,  surrounded  with  the  comforts  of
a  long-settled  population,  brave  and  religious.

Ibrahim  toJd  the  Austrian  ambassadors  the
following  year,  that  the  warning  they  had  sent

*  The  groundlessness  of  the  somewhat  dramatic  and
dressed-out  lamentations  of  Ursinus  Velius  (lib.  vi.)— that
the  Landsknechts  had,  on  this  occasion,  forgotten  the  old
German  valour— which  have  found  their  way  into  modern
histories,  appears,  the  monieiit  we  recur  to  some  simpler
statement ;  as,  for  example,  that  of  the  tutor  of  the  pages
(Pagenhofaieister)  in  Schardius  iii.  22$: — "  Arx  ad  volup-
tatem  magis  quam  vim  instructa  erat,"  etc. :  or  that  of
Sebast  Frank  (which  is,  by  the  by,  identical  with  a
pamphlet  of  that  time),  p.  256,  where  he  says,  the  castle
was  garrisoned  by  four  companies  (Fähnlein),  "  die  nitt
so  vil  man  oder  einzelich  personen  vermochten,  als  der
Turk  tausend;  noch  hat  er  eilf  gewaltiger  stürm  davon
verloren,  dass  er  meynetes  wereu  eitel  Teufel  im  Schloss."
— "Who  were  not  so  many  men  or  single  persons  strong.
as  the  Turks  were  thousands  ;  yet  were  these  repulsed  in
eleven  violent  assaults,  so  that  they  thought  there  were
nothing  but  devils  in  the  castle."  "  Wo  die  nit  gewest,"
adds  Pessel,  "  wer  vielleicht  die  Stat  Wien  übereilet  wor-
den."—"Had  they  not  been  there,  the  city  of  Vienna
would  perhaps  have  been  taken."  "Achthundert  frummer
deutscher  knecht,  Die  hielten  sich  redlich  und  recht ;"  says
the  song  of  Soltau,  p.  337.

t  Ssoloksade  in  Hammer,  Wiens  erste  türkische  Bela-
gerung, p.  lOl.  See  Suleiman's  Journal,  S!-2d  Sept.,  Osman.
Gesch.  iii.  650.

the  sultan,  not  to  advance  further,  for  that  Fer-
dinand their  lord  stood  ready,  sword  in  hand,
to  receive  him,  had  served  only  to  inflame
Saleiman  with  fresh  ardour  to  seek  him  out.
He  had  expected  to  find  him  in  Ofen,  where
he  thought  a  king  of  Hungary  ought  lo  hold
his  seat ;  but  in  this  he  had  been  disappointed.
He  had  then  advanced  to  the  Austrian  fron-
tier, where  he  thought  Ferdinand  would  wait
for  him;  on  the  contrar)-,  the  keys  of  Brück
were  carried  out  to  meet  him  on  his  approach.
Thus  he  reached  Vienna,  but  there,  too,  he
found  neither  Ferdinand  nor  his  army;  he
only  learned  that  the  king  had  fled  to  Linz  or
Prague.  At  the  sight  of  Vienna,  so  beautifully
surrounded  by  vineyards  and  mountains,  and
yet  lying  in  the  midst  of  a  fertile  plain,  he
said  that  here  he  would  rest ;  this  was  a  place
worthy  of  an  emperor ;  he  had  spread  out  his
skirts  (i.  e.  he  had  allowed  his  light  troops  to
disperse  on  all  sides),  to  show  that  the  real
emperor  was  come  in  his  might. J

Such  is  the  description  of  the  event,  given
by  Suleiman  himself  in  a  letter  to  Venice.
He  relates  hov/  he  had  taken  Ofen,  and  made
himself  master  of  Hungary,  and  given  it  to
King  John  ;  and  how  the  ancient  crown  of
that  kingdom  had  fallen  into  his  hands.  "My
purpose,  however,"  he  says,  "'was  not  to
seek  these  things,  but  to  encounter  King  Fer-
dinand."§  He  told  the  first  German  prisoners
that  were  brought  him,  that  he  would  seek
out  Ferdinand,  even  if  he  were  in  the  centre
of  Germany.

On  the  20th  September,  he  arrived  befare
Vienna,  and  pitched  his  camp  there.  From
the  lofty  tower  of  St.  Stephen's  church  nothing
was  to  be  descried  for  miles,  over  hill  and
dale,  but  tents,  and  the  Danube  covered  with
Turkish  sails.  The  place  is  still  pointed  out
near  Sommering,  where  Suleiman's  own  tent
stood,  the  internal  magnificence  of  which  may
be  inferred  from  the  golden  balls  and  tassels
with  which  its  exterior  was  decorated.  He
encamped  in  the  same  order  as  he  had  march-
ed. The  troops  from  the  Porte  immediately
surrounded  him;  behind  him  lay  the  Ana-
tolian army  under  its  Beglerbeg,  extending  as
far  as  Schwechat;  before  him,  the  Seraskier
Ibrahim,  with  the  European  Sipahis,  the
Rumeliotes  and  Bosniaks,  and  the  Sandschaks
of  Mostar  and  Belgrade.  For,  in  a  country
where  the  state  is  nothing  else  but  the  army,
the  distribution  of  the  camp  represents  that
of  the  empire.  The  Hungarians,  who  rivalled
the  other  subjects  of  Suleiman  in  their  zeal
"  to  adorn  themselves  with  the  collar  of
obedience,"  already  found  their  place  in  this
great  assemblage.  It  consisted  of  western
Asia  and  eastern  Europe,  in  the  form  they
had  assumed,  and  were  still  assuming,  under
the  influence  of  conquering  Islam ;  they  now
made  their  first  attempt  on  the  heart  of  Chris-
tian Europe. The  light  troops  ascended  the

j  Lamberg  und  Juriscliitsch  in  Gevay,  1530,  p.  36.  In
Latin,  agreeing  in  the  main,  but  with  some  peculiarities,
p.  80.

§  Copia  della  lettera  del  Sultan  Solimano.  Belgr.  9th
Nov. Hammer,  Belagerung,  p.  77.

344

LUTHER'S  OPINION.

Book  V.

Danube  in  search  of  the  fabulons  bridge  of
the  horned  Alexander  —  the  boundary  of  the
fantastic  world  of  oriental  mythology.  The
beast  of  burthen  of  the  Arabian  desert  vras
driven  up  to  the  walls  of  a  German  city,  laden
with  provisions  and  munitions  of  war ;  there
were  22^000  camels  in  the  camp.  The  me-
mory of  those  who  fell  before  Vienna  is  still
celebrated  with  oriental  pomp.  Potschewi
says  in  his  history,  speaking  of  Iskendert-
schausch  Farfara,  that  ''  immediately  on  his
arrival  here,  he  drank  of  the  cup  of  Islamite
martyrdom,  and  forgot  the  world."  For  the
Turkish  army  believed  itself  to  be  waging  a
holy  war  against  ^4he  infidels,  who  were  like
dust  before  it."  In  full  view  of  the  grandest
castle  of  the  latest  German  emperors,  the  doc-
trine of  the  sublime  Porte  was  proclaimed ;
that,  as  there  was  only  one  God  in  heaven,
there  must  be  only  one  lord  on  earth ;  and
Suleiman  gave  it  to  be  understood  that  he
was  this  lord;  he  declared  that  he  would  not
lay  his  head  to  rest  till  he  had  reduced  Chris-
tendom to  subjection  with  his  sword.  It  was
rum.oured  that  he  reckoned  on  a  three  years'
absence  from  Constantinople  for  the  execution
of  this  design.

Europe  was  not  so  dull  of  apprehension  as
not  to  feel  the  magnitude  of  the  danger.

It  was  a  crisis  like  that  when  the  Arabians
had  got  possession  of  the  Mediterranean,  con-
quered Spain,  and  pressed  on  towards  France  ;
or  like  that  when  the  Mongolian  power,  after
overwhelming  the  north-east  and  south-east
of  Europe,  attacked  Christian  Germany  on  the
Danube  and  the  Oder.  Europe  was  evidently
now  stronger:  it  was  conscious  that  it  possess-
ed the  power  "  to  drive  these  devils  (so  they
were  called)  out  of  Greece;"  but  the  neces-
sary union  seemed  impossible.

There  is  a  letter  of  Francis  I.,  of  this  period,
in  which  he  declares,  that  he  would  now  put
in  execution  the  purpose  he  had  always  che-
rished, of  devoting  all  the  powers  of  his  king-
dom and  his  person  to  the  war  against  the
Turks ;  he  hoped  to  move  his  brother  of  Eng-
land to  do  the  same ;  he  thought  that  he  could
then  bring  60,000  m.en  into  the  field — a  force
that  certainly  was  not  to  be  despised.  He  ex-
presses himself  with  such  warmth  that  h^  ap-
pears to  be  really  in  earnest;  but  he  adds  a
condition  which  nullifies  the  whole.  He  pro-
poses that  the  emperor  should  remit  one  of  the
two  millions  which  he  was  bound  by  treaty  to
pay  him — a,  proposition  to  which  nobody  could
expect  the  emperor  to  accede. =*

The  imperial  court,  too,  w-here  the  danger
was  still  more  urgent,  and  where  the  Ottoman
maxim,  that  every  country  through  which  the
sultan  marched  belonged  to  him,  became  of
terrible  practical  importance,  was  employed
in  devising  means  for  rousing  the  whole  of
Christendom  to  arms.  The  expedient  sug-
gested is  very  remarkable. Hoogstraten,  the

*  Lettres  de  Gilles  de  Pommeraye,  MS.  Bethune,  8619.
En  cas  que  led.  empereur,  pour  m'ayder  ä  souldoyer  les
gens  que  je  raenerois  en  ma  compaignie,  me  voulust  sur
lesd.  2  millions  d'escus  en  rabattre  ung  million,  je  me
faisois  fort,  etc.

leading  minister  in  the  Netherlands,  once
opened  himself  on  the  subject  to  the  French
ambassador.  He  said,  the  true  way  of  resist-
ing the  Turks  was  to  bring  the  pope  to  con-
sent to  a  universal  scheme  of  secularisation.
A  third  of  the  church  property,  sold  to  the
highest  bidders,  would  suffice  to  bring  an
army  into  the  field,  capable  of  driving  out  the
Turks  and  reconquering  Greece. |

It  is  only  necessary  to  look  at  these  propo-
shions,  in  order  to  see  their  impracticability  ;
to  see  how  impossible  it  was  to  carry  through
an  undertaking  burthened  with  conditions  so
remote  and  visionary.

If  Germany  meant  to  defend  itself,  it  was
evident  that  it  must  look  to  its  own  resources
alone.

But  even  here  things  wore  a  very  doubtful
aspect.  It  was  a  question  whether  there  were
not  people  so  dissatisfied  with  the  existing
order  of  things,  as  to  wish  even  for  Turkish
rule.  Luther  himself  had  once  said  that  it
was  not  the  duty  of  a  Christian  to  resist  the
Turks,  whom  he  ought  rather  to  regard  as  the
scourge  of  God  :  this  indeed  was  one  of  the
sentences  condemned  in  the  papal  bull.  And
now  the  results  of  the  diet  of  Spires  were  cal-
culated to  excite  the  alarm  of  all  the  adhe-
rents of  a  reform  in  the  church,  and,  as  we
have  seen,  to  incline  them  to  question  whe-
ther they  ought  to  afford  assistance  to  Ferdi-
nand— the  head  of  the  very  majority  by  vrhich
their  own  just  demands  had  been  rejected.

As  to  Luther,  it  is  true  that  he  used  the  ex-
pression just  quoted  ;  but  in  this  passage  he
speaks  only  of  Christians,  as  such  : — of  the  re-
ligious principle  abstracted  from  all  other  con-
siderations, such  as  it  is  exhibited  in  somiC
passages  of  the  gospel.  His  indignation  and
disgust  had  been  excited  by  the  hypocritical
outcry  for  war  against  the  Turks,  for  the  sake
of  the  Christian  religion,  and  the  appeals  to
the  faithful  lor  contiibutions  which  were  ap-
plied to  very  different  purposes. J  In  short,
he  utterly  abjured  warhke  Christianity;  he
would  not  bring  religion  into  so  close  a  con-
nection with  the  sword.  But  when  it  came  to
be  a  question  of  real  danger,  and  of  aiding  the
efforts  of  the  civil  power  to  resist  that  danger,
he  declared  in  the  most  emphatic  manner,
that  it  was  a  positive  duty  to  oppose  the  pro-
gress of  the  Turks.  For  that  cause  was  the
empire  entrusted  to  the  emperor;  he  and  the
princes  would  otherwise  be  guilty  of  the
blood  of  their  subjects,  which  God  would  re-
quire at  their  hands. He  thinks  it  strange,

t  Q,ue  ces  deux  princes  conduisisscnt  le  pape  jusques  ä
ce  point  que  1°  il  se  coistente  de  ce  qu'il  a,  2^  qu'il  per-
niette  qu'a  realise  des  six  mille  due.  de  rente  on  preigne
les  deux  universellement  par  tonte  la  Ciiretiente :  les
quelles  seront  vendus  au  plus  oflrant,  et  avec  I'argent  que
les  princes  fourniront  (for  they  were  to  do  something)
sera  süffisant  pour  deloger  ce  diabie  rie  la  Grece,  qui  seroit
grandement  accroistre  Feglise  d'y  adjoindre  un  tel  pays
que  celui  la. Lettre  de  Pommeraye',  17  Sept.

I  "  Therefore  they  should  desist  from  urging  and  goad-
ing,  as  the  emperor  and  princes  have  been  hitherto  urged,
to  the  conflict  with  the  Turks,  on  the  plea  that,  being  the
head  of  Christendom,  the  protector  of  the  church,  and  de-
fender of  the  faith,  he  ought  to  extirpate  the  religion  of
the  Turks.  Vom  Kriege  wider  die  Türken.  Published
about  Easter,  1529. Altenb.  iv.  525.

Chap.  VII.

SIEGE  OF  VIENNA.

345

that  the  assembly  at  Spires  was  so  much
troubled  whether  people  ate  meat  in  Lent,  or
whether  a  uun  got  married,  while  it  let  the
Turk  advance,  and  conquer  cities  and  coun-
tries at  his  pleasure.  He  calls  on  the  princes
no  longer  to  regard  the  banner  of  the  emperor
merely  as  a  piece  of  silk,  but  to  follow  it,  as
was  their  duty,  to  the  field.  With  a  view  to
convert  those  who  wished  for  the  government
of  the  Turks,  he  takes  the  trouble  to  set  forth
all  the  abommations  of  the  Koran.  He  ex-
horts the  people  to  march  forth  boldly  in  the
name  of  the  emperor:  ''he  who  dies  in  the
performance  of  this  duty,"  says  he,  •'  will  be
well  pleasing  to  God."

In  treatnig  of  this  great  peril  of  the  German
nation,  we  rnay  be  permitted  to  record  the  opi-
nion of  the  man  whose  voice  was  at  the  time
more  potential  than  any  other.  The  address
on  the  Turkish  war  exhibits,  in  all  its  pene-
trating acuteness,  the  spirit  whose  grand  task
it  was  to  separate  the  ecclesiastical  and  tem-
poral elements.

So  much  at  least  he  effected,  that  the  pro-
testers, though  in  actual  dread  of  war  and
violence  on  the  part  of  the  majority,  and
though  they  had"  not  assented  to  the  resolu-
tions of  the  diet,  made  the  same  preparations
for  the  defence  of  the  country  as  the  others.
Even  Elector  John  sent  several  thousand  men
mto  the  field  under  the  command  of  his  son.*

From  every  side  succours  hurried  to -join  the
general-in-chief  of  the  empire,  Count  Palatine
Frederic,  who  meanwhile  had  come  up  with
King  Ferdinand  at  Linz.t

These  troops  were,  however,  far  from  being
strong  enough  to  attack  the  Ottoman  camp,
especially  during  the  first  panic.  The  em-
peror, who  heard  in  Genoa  that  Suleiman  was
not  coming  thither,  did  not  find  himself  in  a
condition  to  hasten  with  his  Spaniards  to  the
assistance  of  Vienna,  as  he  had  promised.

For  the  present,  therefore,  all  depended  on
the  ability  of  the  garrison  of  Vienna  to  resist
the  barbarians.

It  is  worth  our  while  to  pause  a  moment
over  the  particulars  of  this  siege,  which  at
the  time  engrossed  the  attention  of  the  world,
and  was  indeed  pregnant  with  the  most  im-
portant consequences.  Had  Suleiman  con-
quered Vienna,  he  would  have  found  means
to  fortify  it  in  such  a  manner  that  it  would  not
have  been  easy  to  recover  it  from  his  grasp.
From  this  admirable  post,  he  would  have
commanded  the  whole  territory  of  the  Middle
Danube.

Nor  are  we  to  imagine  that  Vienna  was  a
very  strong  place.  It  was  surrounded- by  a
ruinous  wall,  without  any  of  the  defences
contrived  by  the  modern  art  of  fortification ;
without  even  bastions  upon  which  artillery,
commanding  the  enemy's  camp,  could  have
been  planted.  The  ditches  were  without
water.  The  commanders  of  the  army  of
Lower  Austria  had  at  first  doubted  whether

*  Spalatin  Vita  Johannis  Electoris  in  Mencken, ii.  1117.

t  Hubert  Thomas  Leodius  de  vita  Friderici,  p.  119,  lite-
rally transcribed in Melchior Soiter  de  Vinda  Bellum
Pannonicum,  lib.  i. Schardius,  iii.  p.  250.
44

they  could  defend  the  ''wide-spread,  unculti-
vated spots-"  for  a  moment  they  thought  they
would  rather  await  the  enemy  in  the  open
field,  so  that,  in  case  of  need,  they  could  fall
back  upon  the  fresh  troops  which  the  count
palatine  and  the  king  were  busied  in  collect-
ing; at  last,  however,  they  had  come  to  the
conclusion  that  they  must  not  surrender  their
ancient  capital,  and  had  resolved  to  burn  the
suburbs,  in  order  to  preserve  the  city  within
the  walls.

But  though  the  fortifications  were  feeble,
Maximilian's  passion  for  gunnery  now,  so  long
after  his  death,  stood  his  capital  in  good  stead.
Not  only  in  the  citadel,  and  behind  the  loop-
holes which  had  been  pierced  in  the  walls,
but  on  all  the  towers  of  the  city  gates,  on  the
houses,  on  the  walls  (which  were  first  un-
roofed), under  the  roofs,  nay,  in  the  very  dor-
mitories of  the  convents,  falconets,  culverins,
mortars,  nightingales,  and  other  kinds  of  artil-
lery stood  ready  to  receive  the  enemy's  as-
sault.

The  garrison  consisted  of  five  regiments;
four  German  (two  of  which  were  raised  at  the
cost  of  the  empire,  and  two  by  Ferdinand
himself)  and  one  Bohemian,  The  troops  of
the  empire,  under  Count  Palatine  Philip,  Fre-
deric's lieutenant,  occupied  the  wall  from  the
Red  Tower  to  the  Carinthian  gate;  from  hence
the  king's  troops,  under  Eck  von  Reischach
and  Leon  hard  von  Fels,  extended  to  the  Scots'
gate.  They  were  people  of  every  variety  of
German  race;  among  them  many  eminent
Austrians,  besides  Brabanters,  Rhinelanders,
men  of  Meissen  and  of  Hamburg,  and  espe-
cially Franconians  and  Swabians;  we  find  cap-
tains from  Memmingen,  Nürnberg,  Ansbach,
and  Bamberg;  a  master  of  the  watch  from
Gelnhausen;  the  schultheiss  (m^agistrate)  of
the  whole  army  was  from  Frundsberg,  terri-
tory of  Mindelheim,  and  the  chief  provost
from  Ingoldstadt.  The  Bohemians  occupied
the  ground  from  the  Scots'  gate  to  the  Red
Tovver,  A  few"  parties  of  horsemen  were
posted  about  on  the  open  places  within  the
city,  under  the  excellent  captains  Nicolas  von
Salm,  William  von  Rogendorf,  and  Hans  Kat-
zianer.  There  might  be  sixteen  or  seventeen
thousand  men  in  all.

Whether  these  troops  would  be  able  to  re-
sist an  enemy  so  enoiTnoushr  superior  in  num-
bers, was,  however,  very  doubtful.

Suleiman  sent  a  miessage  to  the  garrison,
promising  that  if  they  would  surrender  the
city  to  him,  he  would  neither  enter  it  himself,
nor  allow  any  of  his  troops  to  do  so,  but  would
continue  his  march  in  search  of  the  king.
But  if  they  refused,  he  was  well  assured  that
on  the  third  day  from  the  present  (jMichael-
mas  day),  there  would  be  no  dnmer  eaten  in
Vienna ;  on  that  day,  he  would  not  spare  the
babe  in  its  mother's  v\'omb.

According  to  the  ballads  and  tales  of  the
time,  the  answer  of  the  garrison  was.  that  he
might  come  to  dinner  when  he  would,  they
would  dress  it  for  him  with  culverines  and
halberts.  But  this  is  not  true.  Their  minds
were  not  sufficiently  at  ease  to  send  so  bold

846

SIEGE  OF  VIENNA.

Book  V..

and  haughty  a  reply.  '-'The  answer,"  says
an  authentic  report  of  the  general,  '-stuck
m  our  pen."  They  made  the  most  earnest
preparations  for  defence,  but  by  no  means
with  the  persuasion  that  they  should  conquer.
They  saw  tlie  extent  of  the  danger,  but  were
determined  to  brave  it.*

Suleiman  had  therefore  no  other  alternative
than  to  take  the  city  by  force.

First,  the  Janissaries  posted  themselves,
with  their  battle-axes  and  firelocks,  behind
the  walls  of  the  ruined  suburbs;  they  were
excellent  marksmen,  and  had  v.äth  them  a
company  of  expert  archers:  no  one  could  ven-
ture to  appear  on  the  walls  or  battlements,  for
the  assailants  commanded  the  whole  circuit
of  the  town,  and  the  gables  of  the  nearest
houses  bristled  with  arrows.

Amidst  the  dust  and  noise  caused  by  this
discharge  of  weapons,  the  Ottomans  now  pre-
pared a  very  different  attack.  Whoever  was
their  master, — whether,  as  it  was  said,  an  Ar-
menian, or  of  what  other  nation, — it  is  certain
that  one  of  the  most  formidable  of  their  arts
of  besieging  was  the  undermining  of  the
walls. t  The  men  of  the  West  were  asto-
nished when  they  afterwards  beheld  these
mines,  whh  entrances  as  narrow  as  a  door,
and  gradually  widening;  not  like  the  mines
they  were  accustomed  to  work  for  metals,  but
smooth,  regular,  spacious  caverns,  so  con-
structed that  the  walls  must  fall  inwards.
The  Turks  had  but  little  artillery,  and  this
was  the  art  which  they  now  brought  to  bear
upon  Vienna.  But  they  had  here  to  do  with
a  people  well  skilled  in  subterranean  works.
The  garrison  soon  perceived  the  enemy's  de-
signs ;  vessels  of  water  and  drums  were  placed
so  as  to  betray  the  slightest  motion  of  the
earth ;  romantic  stories  are  still  told  how  peo-
ple watched  and  listened  in  every  cellar  and
underground  room,  and  countermined  accord-
ingly. It  was  a  sort  of  subterraneous  war.
On  the  second  of  October  a  half-finished  mine
of  the  enemy's  was  found  and  destroyed.
Another  was  soon  after  discovered,  at  the  very
moment  when  they  were  beginning  to  fill  it
with  powder.  The  miners  sometimes  came
so  near  that  they  could  hear  each  other  work ;
the  Turks  then  turned  in  another  direction.
In  order  at  all  events  to  secure  the  Carinthian
gate,  the  Germans  thought  it  necessary  to
surround  it  with  a  ditch  of  sufficient  depth;
but  this,  of  course,  was  not  possible  in  all
places.

On  the  9th  of  October,  the  Turks  succeeded
in  blowing  up  a  considerable  portion  of  the
M-all  between  the  Carinthian  gate  and  the
citadel,  and  at  the  same  moment  they  rushed
to  the  storm  amidst  tha  wildest  battle-cries.

But  the  besieged  were  already  prepared.
Eck  von  Reischach,  who  had  learned  at  Pavia

*  Journal  of  the  s)e?e  :  Hammer,  p.  66.  Cleaiij'  an  offi-
cial repoii,  as  the  postscript  and  the  whole  form  show;
drawn  up  on  the  19th  October.

t  At  a  Inter  period  Marsicrii  took  great  pains  to  ascer-
tain th^proceedinffs  of  the  Turks  on  tliis  occasion.  See
Stato  militare  degli  Ottonianni,  ii.  c.  xi.  p.  37.  The  corps
of  the  Lagumdschi— miners— received  fiefs,  not  pay,  and
were  therefore  held  in  greater  honour.  Hammer,  Staats-
verfassung der  Osm,  ii.  233.

how  to  receive  an  assault,  had  described  to
his  people  the  rush  and  shouts  of  a  storming
party,  and  how  it  was  to  be  met.  We  are
told  by  a  contemporary,  that  Reischach's  in-
structions gave  his  young  landsknechts  "a
brave  and  manly  heart ;"  it  is  certain  that  they
stood  admirably.  They  answered  the  Otto-
man war-cry  with  a  tremendous,  "  Come  on  !"
{Her!)  Halberts,  firelocks,  and  cannon  sup-
ported each  other  with  the  best  results.  '-The
balls  of  the  carronades  and  muskets,"  says
Dschelalsade,  "  flew  like  flocks  of  small  birds
through  the  air;  it  was  a  banquet  at  which
the  genii  of  Death  filled  the  glasses."  The
German  accounts  dwell  particularly  on  the
valour  displayed  by  the  aged  Salm,  the  com-
mander of  the  army  of  Lower  Austria,  at  this
moment. +  The  Ottomans  sustained  such  a
murderous  loss,  that  they  were  compelled  to
retreat.  The  ruined  walls  were  instantly  re-
stored as  far  as  possible.

But  the  enemy  sought  to  repair  this  check
by  an  attack  on  the  other  side  of  the  Carinthian
gate.  After  many  false  alarms,  he  blew  up  a
considerable  portion  of  the  wall  leading  to  the
Stubenthor,  and  immediately  made  another
attempt  at  storming.  His  columns  were  now
more  closely  formed.  The  Asafs  and  Janis-
saries had  been  reinforced  by  Sipahis  of  Al-
banian origin,  from  Janina  and  Awlona ;
armed  with  their  crooked  sabres  and  amall
shields,  they  rushed  forward  in  the  van  of  the
other  troops,  over  the  prostrate  walls.  But
here  Eck  von  Reischach,  with  four  small  com-
panies of  intrepid  landsknechts,  threw  him-
self in  their  way.  He  was  supported,  as  at
Pavia,  by  Spanish  soldiers,  skilled  in  the  use
of  fire-arms  ;§  and  by  field-marshal  William
von  Rogendorf.  -  They  fought  hand  to  hand,
and  the  long  battle-swords  which  theGermans
wielded  with  both  hands,  mingled  clashing
with  the  Tuikish  scimeters,  A  Turkish  his-
torian describes  the  fires  which  flashed  from
the  encounter.  Thrice  did  the  Ottomans  re-
new the  assault.  Jovius,  who  described  so
many  battles,  remarks  that  hardly  had  this
century  witnessed  a  sterner  encounter. 11  But
all  the  efforts  of  the  Ottomans  were  vain ;
they  sustained  far  heavier  losses  now  than
before.

This  reverse  entirely  damped  their  courage.

On  the  12th  October  they  again  overthrew
a  part  of  the  city  wall ;  but  when  they  saw
the  Germans  and  Spaniards  with  their  banners
displayed  on  the  other  side,  they  did  not  ven-
ture to  advance.

Already  had  the  notion  gained  ground  in
the  Ottoman  camp  that,  in  the  decrees  of  the
IMost  High,  the  conquest  of  Vienna  was  not
for  the  present  destined  to  Islam.  The  nights
were  unusually  cold  for  the  season,  and  the
mountains  were  covered  in  a  morning  with

t  Especially  in  the  Jnnrnal  in  Anton,  p.  34;  concerning
Reischach,  see  p.  32,  4th  October.

§  See  especially  the  first  Venetian  Report  in  Hammer,
p.  ]5S;  he  mentions  Roeendorf,  Erich  de  Rays,  et  alcuni
nobili  con  4  bandiere  de  fanti  insieme  cum  Ii  Spagnoli.

\l  Jovius,  28, 69,  generally  follows  private  accounts.  The
mention  of  the  Count  of  Oettingen  shows  that  he  speakä
of  the  nth  of  October.

Chap.  VIL

DISCONTENTS  AMONG  THE  IMPERIALISTS,

"347

hoar-frost  ;*  they  thought  with  anxiety  on  the
length  and  danger  of  the  way  back,  and  re-
membered that  no  preparation  was  made  for
the  three  years'  absence  of  which  Suleiman
had  spoken.  Added  to  this,  there  were  ru-
mours of  approaching  rehef.  An  army  of  the
hereditary  subjects  of  Austria  was  assembhng
in  Moravia,  while  armaments  were  actively
making  in  the  circles  of  the  Swabian  league.
Schartlin  boasts  what  admirable  soldiers  he
recruited  in  Wiirtenberg.  Count  Palatine  Fre-
deric, who  had  remained  in  the  neighbour-
hood of  Vienna,  assumed  a  more  menacing-
attitude.  The  peasants  had  already  begun
successfully  to  resist  the  bands  of  skirmishers.
Suleiman  perceived  what  would  be  his  posi-
tion if  he  were  attacked  here,  in  a  hostile
country,  without  any  fortified  places,  and  in
the  bad  season,  by  an  enemy  whose  valour  he
had  now  learned  to  appreciate.  He  deter-
mined to  make  one  last  attempt  on  Vienna,
and  if  that  failed,  immediately  to  raise  the
siege  and  retreat.  He  chose  a  day  which  he
reg-arded  as  lucky,  the  14th  of  October,  — the
day  on  which  the  sun  enters  the  Scorpion.
Exactly  at  noon  he  assembled  a  large  part  of
his  army  within  sight  of  the  walls.  Tschausche
proclaimed  rewards,  mines  were  sprung,
breaches  opened,  and  the  signal  for  storming
was  given. But  the  soldiers  had  lost  all  con-

forces  besides  himself,  and  beyond  his  power
to  subdue.

For  the  moment,  however,  he  had  reason  to
console  himself;  he  had  wrested  Hungary
from  the  Germans.  John  Zapolya  received
the  sacred  crown  from  the  hands  of  the  Otto-
man authorities ;  though  called  king,  he  was
in  fact  only  a  lieutenant  of  the  sultan.

It  might  have  been  thought  that  Ferdinand
would  take  advantage  of  the  disorder  of  this
retreat,  and  of  the  army  collected  for  the  re-
lief of  Vienna,  to  reconquer  the  kingdom  ;  and
in  fact  the  frontier  towns,  Altenburg,  Trent-
schin,  &c.  fell  into  his  hands;  but  the  castle
of  Gran  held  out,  and  the  troops  which  came
up  were  far  too  weak  to  recover  Ofen.§  The
cause  of  this  failure  is  evident  enough ; — the
king  had  no  money.  It  v\'Ould  have  required
at  least  20,000  gulden  to  set  the  troops  in
motion ;  he  could  raise  only  1400  gulden  (and
even  that  sum  in  base  coin),  and  a  few  thou-
sand gulden  worth  of  cloth.  The  discontent
was  universal.  The  Tyrolese,  who  were
urgently  entreated  to  take  part  in  this  enter-
prise, had  unanimously  refused ;  the  people
flatly  declared  they  had  no  mind  to  serve  any
longer. II  Suleiman,  on  retiring  from  before
Vienna,  had  rewarded  the  Janissaries  for  their
efforts,  however  unsuccessful,  with  rich  gifts  ;
while  the  landsknechts,  who  had  so  gallantly

fidence;  they  were  driven  forward  almost  by  and  so  successfully  defended  the  city,  were
force,  and  then  came  within  range  of  the  guns  not  paid  even  the  storming-money  [Sturmsold)
on  the  walls,  so  that  whole  ranks  fell  without  to  which  they  had  a  sort  of  right.  The  con-
even  seeing  the  enemy.  Towards  evening  a  i  sequence  was,  a  violent  mutiny  broke  out
band  was  seen  to  advance  from  the  vineyards,  i  among  them.  Such  being  the  state  of  things
and  instantly  to  retire  again. t  |  in the imperial  army, their  adversaries  in

Hereupon  a  general  retreat  began :  the  Ana-  j  Hungary  were  soon  predominant.  In  the  upper
tolians  now  formed  the  main  guard ;  in  the  districts  we  find  several  German  captains  of
night  the  sultan  himself  struck  his  tent ;  the  note  (especially  that  Nickel  I\Iinkwitz,  who
Janissaries  set  fire  to  their  encampments  in  j  gave  the  Elector  of  Brandenburg  so  much
the  suburbs,  and  hastened  to  accompany  their  j  frouble)  in  the  service  of  Zapolya;  from  Kes-
lord.  A  few  days  afterwards  Ibrahim  followed  mark  he  traversed  the  country  and  set  fire  to
with  the  rest  of  the  European  troops.  j  Leutschau.l JMean while  the  Turks  made  an

irruption  over  the  Bosnian  frontier,  and  Croatia
was  in  danger  of  falling  into  their  hands ;  a
disaster,  the  consequences  of  which  extended
even  to  the  remoter  parts  of  the  country.  In
Bohemia,  Zapolya  had  so  many  warm  sup-
porters, even  among  the  most  considerable
men  of  the  kingdom,  that  when  Ferdinand
went  to  Prague,  at  the  end  of  January,  1530,
he  cameto  the  conviction  that  he  must  get  rid
of  all  those  who  had  any  share  in  the  govern-
ment, if  he  meant  to  be  master  of  the  country.**
This  disastrous  state  of  things,  however,  only
proves  more  strongly  the  immeasurable  im-
portance of  the  defence  of  Vienna.

The  emperor  advised  his  brother  to  con-

It  was  the  first  time  that  an  enterprise  of
the  victorious  sultan  had  so  totally  failed.  He
now  perceived  that  he  was  not,  so  absolutely
as  his  poets  boasted,  '^  the  gold  in  the  mine  of
the  world — the  soul  in  the  body  of  the  world  ;"'|
that  there  were  other  vioorous  and  invincible

*  Poniis  uvisque  immaturis  ve?cebantur:  equi  strictis
arboriiiii  frondibus  el  Vitium  pampiiiis  tolerabautur.  Ur-
sinus  Velius.

t  "  Sie  haben  kurz  den  Fuxen  nicht  wollen  beissen"  (in
sbort  they  would  not  bite  the  fox),  says  the  official  report
(Hammer,  p.  GS),  which  is  written  with  the  joyous  humour
of  a  victorious  soldier.  Hans  Sachs  says  inhis  Historia
der  türkischen  Belagerung  der  Statt  Wien,  und  handluiig
beyder  tail,  auf  das  kürzest  ordenlich  begriiien  (Thl.  i.  206),

"Da  sach  man  naus  auf  manchem  tburn.
Das  die  Türken  getrieben  wurn,
Von  iren  waschen  mit  gewalt,
IMit  saybeln  prügeln  jung  und  alt,
Aus  iren  hütten  und  gezelten,
Aus  den  Weinbergen  und  den  weiden.
Das  sie  anlaufen  stürmen  solten,
Das  sie  sich  ärsten  und  nit  wollen."

"Then  the  people  saw  from  many  a  tower  that  the
Turks  were  driven  *-ith  force  from  their  watches,  youns
and  old,  with  blows  of  sabres,  out  of  their  huts  and  their
tents,  out  of  the  vineyards  and  woods  ;  that  they  should
[were  ordered  to]  rush  to  the  assault,  and  that  they  halted
and  would  not."

X  Baki's  Kasside,  translated  by  Hammer,  p.  7.

§  Ursinus  Velius,  lib.  viii.

Ij  Instructions  of  the  military  commissaries  in  Presburj
for  Count  Nicholas  zu  Salm  the  younger,  imperial  coun-
cillor and  chamberlain  to  King  Ferdinand:  Hormayr,
Taschenbuch  auf  1840,  p.  506.

IT  Sperfogel,  and  the  journal  of  Pastor  Moller  of  Leuts-
chau,  whose  own  full  barns  were  set  on  fire,  Katona.  sx.
1,  p.  540,  546.  Minkwitz  is  here  called  Xicholaus  iWynko-
witz;  he  went  soon  after  from  Kesmark  to  Ofen.

**  Letter  from'  Ferdinand  to  Charles,  21st  January,
1530,  in  Gevay,  p.  68.  Entre  tant  que  ils  ont  le  governe-
ment,  je  ne  saroie  avoir  obeisance  ne  poroie  raeintenirla
justice.

348

NEGOTIATIONS  IN  ITALY.

Book  V.

elude  a  truce  with  the  sultan ;  sincej  at  this
moment,  their  combined  forces  were  not  suf-
ficient to  confront  him,  and  no  other  prince
would  afford  them  assistance.

Nay,  even  in  Italy,  he  had  felt  the  reaction
consequent  on  the  triumphs  of  the  Ottoman
arms.

/  CHAPTER  VIII.

CHARLES  V. IN ITALY.

Notwithstanding  the  numerous  victories
obtained  by  Charles  V.,  notwithstanding  their
sudden  abandonment  (contrary  to  all  promise)
by  Francis  I.,  the  Italian  states  were  still  in  a
condition  to  oppose  a  formidable  resistance  to
the  imperial  arms.

Venice  was  in  possession  of  her  entire
Terra  firma,  some  towns  in  the  States  of  the
Church,  and  several  strong  places  in  the  Nea-
politan territory,  which  she  successfully  de-
fended :  she  kept  a  noble  army  in  the  field,
which,  if  it  had  won  no  celebrated  victory,
had  never  been  beaten  :  under  the  conduct
of  a  leader  who  knew  how  to  satisfy  the  cau-
tious and  jealous  senate,  and,  at  the  same
time,  to  maintain  his  ovt'n  reputation.  Her
naval  power  too  was  in  a  flourishing  condi-
tion :  an  expedition  was  preparing  in  Corfu
which  was  to  make  a  descent  on  the  Neapoli-
tan coast  at  Brindisi.

The  Duke  of  Milan,  in  spite  of  long  and
ruinous  wars,  still  held  possession  of  the
greater  part  of  his  country,  and  (besides  some
less  considerable)  was  master  of  the  strongest
places  at  that  time  in  Italy — Cremona,  Lodi
and  Alessandria.

It  was  hardly  to  be  supposed  that  the  Duke
of  Ferrara,  who  had  defended  a  territory  for-
tified by  nature  and  art,  against  innumerable
attacks,  would  not  now  be  able  to  repel  his
enemies.

Florence  was  governed  by  a  party  resolved
to  maintain  their  liberties  even  by  a  struggle
for  life  and  death;  Michel  Angelo  Buonarotti,
himself  a  member  of  it,  fortified  the  city  with
a  fertility  of  invention  and  a  skill  in  the  exe-
cution, which,  a  century  and  a  half  later,
excited  the  admiration  of  a  Vauban  ;*  a  sort
of  levy  en  masse  was  organised  throughout  the
territory.  The  Florentines  were  already  in
alliance  with  Perugia,  which  they  hoped  to
get  completely  into  their  hands.  They  were
also  on  tolerably  good  terms  with  Siena,  which
was,  like  Florence,!  oppressed  by  the  pope.

The  States  of  the  Church  and  Naples  were
4  Still  in  a  state  of  universal  disquiet  and
ferment.

How  often  had  Italy  offered  successful  re-
sistance to  warlike  emperors,  who  crossed  the

*  Vasari  Vita  di  Buonarotti. (Vite  d.  Pitt.  X.,  110.)
■j  Relatio  n.v.  Antonii  Surianide  legTltione  Florentina,
•I5'i9. Et  perö  cum  questo  fondamento  de  inimicitia  con
il  papa,  queste  republiche  hanno  trattato  insierae  qualche
intelligentia.

Alps  with  far  more  powerful  armies  than  that
at  the  disposal  of  Charles,  even  though  they
were  supported  by  a  party  in  the  country!
Even  when  an  emperor  had  gained  a  firm
footing  there,  this  had  only  served  to  unite
all  parties  in  Italy  in  a  common  effort  to  drive
him  back.  Neither  valour  nor  talent,  neither
Frederick  I.  nor  Frederick  TL,  had  been  able
to  give  stability  and  permanence  to  their
domination.

And  now  came  this  youthful  emperor,  whose
pale  face  and  feeble  voice  —  whose  frame,
graceful  and  healthy,  but  far  from  robust',
gave  him  rather  the  air  of  a  courtier  than  a
warrior — who  had  never  seen  a  serious  bat-
tle— and  were  they  to  submit  to  him  1

The  chief  circumstance  in  his  favour  was,
that  he  was  closely  united  with  the  pope,  in
consequence  of  the  affairs  of  Florence.  On
his  arrival  at  Venice,  the  Florentines  sent  an
embassy  to  him,  but  of  course  with  limited
powers:  since  they  were  determined  at  all
events  to  maintain  their  actual  constitution.
The  emperor  answered,  that  they  must,  in
the  first  place,  recall  the  Medici,  and  restore
them  to  the  rank  they  held  before  their  last
expulsion.!  The  young  Alessandro,  whom  he
destined  to  be  his  son-in-law  and  ruler  of
Florence,  was  already  in  his  train. §  More-
over, he  could  not  endure  a  government  which
had  always  leaned  to  the  Guelph  and  French
party.  Until,  however,  this  affair  was  settled,
the  emperor  was  completely  sure  of  the  pope,
who  entei-tained  a  passionate  hatred  of  the
enemies  of  his  house  in  Florence.

It  might  possibly  occur  to  Charles  V.  that
he  might  take  arms  again,  and  compel  his
divided  antagonists  to  accept  his  conditions.
This  the  intimate  friends  whom  he  had  con-
sulted at  his  departure  from  Germany,  proba-
bly expected ;  for  his  presence,  they  averred,
would  be  equivalent  to  an  army  of  ten  thou-
sand men ;  the  world  must  be  shown  that
nobody  could  resist  where  the  emperor  ap-
peared in  person.  Some  old  captains  of  the
Italian  wars  were  also  in  favour  of  this  course.
Charles  afterwards  regretted  that  he  did  not
pursue  it,  and  especially  that  he  did  not  im-
mediately enter  the  Venetian  territory;  the
issue  of  the  attempt  of  the  Turks  on  Vienna
being  what  it  was,  he  might  then  have  dic-
tated a  peace. II

This  issue,  however,  it  had  been  impossible
to  foresee ;  and  the  first  effect  of  the  advance
of  the  grand  sultan  was  rather  to  awaken  in

J  According  to  Jacopo  Pitti,  Apologia  de  capucci,  a  MS.
full  of  excellent  information,  the  ambassadors  had  the
"  segreta  commissione,  di  non  pregiudicare  ne  alia  liberta
ne  al  dominio:  il  che  notificato  con  piu  segretezza  a
Cesare,  hebbono  per  ultima  risposta,  che  se  volevano  le-
varsi  da  dosso  la  guerra,  rimettessero  i  Medici  nello  stato
che  erano  avanti  si  partissero  dalla  citta:  onde  li  oratori
se  ne  partirono  subito." See  Varchi,  ix.  234.

§  Carlo  V.  a  Clemente  VII.  29  d'Agosto.  Similmente
dico,  ch'io  sto  molto  contento  della  persona  del  Duca  Ales-
sandro. Leltere  di  principi  ii.,  f.  185.

II  Charles  to  Ferdinand,  ]0  January,  1530.  Me  trouvois
plus  loing  de  vous  que  n'eusse  fait  si  dez  le  commence-
ment je  me  fusse  party  au  pays  des  Veniciens,  et  eusse
et6  plus  pres  pour  mieux  vous  pouvoir  succourir  et  eulx
plus  voluntaires  pour  venir  a  ung  meilleur  appointemeni
faillant  votre  uecessitö  comme  eile  a  fait.  Brussels  Ar-
chives,

Chap.  VIII.

NEGOTIATIONS  IN  ITALY.

349

the  Italian  powers  a  hope  that  they  might  find
that  support  in  the  Turks,  which  France  no
longer  afforded  them.  Milan  and  Venice,
therefore,  drew  closer  the  bonds  of  their  alli-
ance ]  they  determined  on  mutual  succours,
and  each  promised  not  to  conclude  a  separate
peace.  War  broke  out  again  in  Lombardy;
Leiva  took  Pavia,  and  a  few  thousand  lands-
knechts  under  Count  Felix  von  Werdenberg,
invaded  the  Venetian  territory  along  the  Lago
di  Garda,  and  plundered  the  Brescian  coun-
try.* These  slight  successes,  however,  de-
cided nothing;  and  the  two  states  presented
a  front  fully  armed  and  prepared  for  self-
defence.

Suleiman's  retreat  altered  the  face  of  things :
the  Italians,  abandoned  on  all  sides,  lost  cour-
age :t  but  the  emperor  had  in  the  interval  con-
stantly evinced  such  pacific  dispositions,  that
he  could  not  revert  to  any  warlike  schemes,
without  breaking  his  word  and  losing  for  ever
the  public  confidence. -t

It  was  not  agreeable  to  him  indeed  to  re-
store jlhe^  Milanese,  which  he  would  gladly
have  disposed  of  otherwise,  to  Francesco
Sforza;  nor  to  leave  the  towns  of  the  Terra
firma,  which  he  claimed  as  emperor,  in  the
hands  of  the  Venetians;  but,  all  circumstances
considered,  it  was  not  to  be  avoided. §

It  was  most  important  lo  him  to  make  peace
with  the  Venetians,  who  still  possessed  some
strong  places  and  good  harbours  in  the  Nea-
politan territory.  By  the  acquisition  of  these,
Naples  would  be  tranquiUized;  it  would  then
be  able  to  conduct  its  own  administration,  and
to  contribute' to  the  general  expenses  of  the
empire.

In  order  to  retain  possession  of  the  Milanese,
he  must  first  wrest  from  Francesco  Sforza  the
fortresses,  which  were  in  an  excellent  state
of  defence ;  this  could  not  be  done  without  a
serious  w^ar.  and  would  unsettle  the  treaty  of
peace  concluded  with  France,  and  even  with
the  pope.

Pope  Clement  earnestly  wished  for  peace.
His  former  schemes  of  restoring  the  indepen-
dence of  Italy,  had  been  merged  in  his  desire
to  reduce  Florence  to  obedience.  Now  it  was
manifest  that  a  renewal  of  the  war,  let  it
terminate  how  it  might,  would  open  to  that
city  a  possibility  of  resistance,  while  it  w^ould
greatly  diminish  his  means  of  attack,  by  fur-
nishing other  occupation  to  the  imperial  army.
He  thought,  therefore,  he  did  enough  for  Milan
and  for  Italy  if  he  procured  them  a  tolerable
peace.il

Every  thing  that  had  happened  had  served
to  confirm  the  emperor  in  the  opinion,  that  he

*  Leoni,  Vita  di  Francesco  Maria,  413.

t  Jacopo  Pitti :  Tutti  calarono  le  Itracche  per  la  fuga
Tmchoscha,  altrimente  riniperatore  haberebbe  liavuto
che  fare  raolto  piu  che  non  si  pensasse.

t'Pour  ceste  occasion  du  Turcq  j'avois  tant  parl6  de
ceste  paix  qu'il  ne  m'eust  semble  honneste  Ja  laisser  de
faire. (Lettre  ä  Ferdinand,  10  Janv.)

§  Si  j'eusse  veu  moyen  d'en  faire  autrement,  n'en  eusse
use  ainsi. Tb.

I!  Recollections  in  a  Iptter  from  Rome,  doubtless  from
Sanara  to  the  Bishop  of  Vasona,  papal  nuncio  at  the  em-
peror's court. Lettere  di  principi,  ii.  181—185.
2b

could  not  maintain  his  power  in  Italy  without
the  friendship  of  the  pope.

Towards  the  end  of  the  year  1529,  they
held  a  conference  in  Bologna,  the  object  of
w^hich  was,  from  the  beginning,  the  complete
pacification  of  Italy ;  negotiations  to  that  efi'ect
having  already  made  some  progress  under  the
mediation  of  the  pope.  On  the  5th  of  Novem-
ber the  emperor  arrived,  and  found  Clement
awaiting  him.

The  pope  and  the  emperor,  like  the  two
royal  ladies  in  Cambra'y,  inhabited  adjoining
houses,  connected  by  a  door  of  which  each
had  a  key. IF

The  emperor  took  care  to  prepare  himself
beforehand  for  every  conversation  with  the
veteran  politician.  He  had  a  paper  in  his
hand,  on  which  he  had  noted  all  the  topics  to
be  discussed  at  that  interview.

The  first  point  on  which  he  hstened  to  the
pope's  advice  was,  to  cite  his  rebelUous  vas-
sal, Francesco  Sforza,  against  w^hom  he  had
proclaimed  sentence  of  forfeiture  of  his  duchy,
to  appear  before  him.

Sforza  was  seriously  ill.  He  was  obliged
to  support  himself  on  a  staff  when  he  spoke
with  the  emperor,  and  the  pope  would  not
allow  him  to  kiss  his  foot.  But  his  cause  did
not  suffer;  he  showed  prudence,  ability,  and
good  dispositions ;  he  spoke  extremely  Vv-ell,
and  understood  how  to  conciliate  his  own  in-
terest v.^ith  entire  devotion  to  his  suzerain.**
With  the  great  men  about  the  court  he  em-
ployed other  means  of  persuasion.  Gradu-
ally, the  old  resentment  against  him  was
allowed  to  subside.

The  Venetian  ambassador  also  endeavoured
to  remove  the  displeasure  which  the  emperor
might  have  conceived  against  the  republic.
He  obtained  an  audience  of  two  hours,  and
had  the  satisfaction  of  finding  that  the  em-
peror understood  the  situation  of  the  republic,
and  admitted  the  justification  he  had  to  ofi'er.

The  bases  of  a  treaty  were  therefore  soon
agreed  upon ;  the  Venetians  were  to  give  up
whatever  they  possessed  belonging  to  the
states  of  the  church  or  to  Naples,  and  on  that
condition,  were  not  to  be  attacked.  Fran-
cesco Sforza  w^as  to  receive  the  fief  of  the
duchy  of  Milan.

The  only  difficulty  lay  in  the  demands  for
money  both  on  Venice  and  Milan.  In  order
to  make  sure  of  payment  from  the  latter,  the
emperor  w^ished  to  garrison  the  citadels  of
Milan  and  Como  with  his  troops.  On  the  12ch
of  December,  a  courier  arrived,  bringing  the
assent  of  the  Venetian  senate  to  the  pecuniary.

U  Romischer  keyserlicher  Majestät  eynreyten  gen  Bo-
Ionia,  auch  Avie  sich  bebstliche  Heyligkeit  gegen  seyne
keyserliche  Majestät  gehalten  habe,  1529.  His  Roman
imperial  majesty's  journey  to  Bologna,  alsohoAV  his  papal
holiness  demeaned  himself  towards  his  imperial  majesty,
1.529.  At  the  conclusion:  "Und  liegen  der  Keyser  und
der  Babst  also  nah  bei  einander,  das  nit  mer  dan  ein  kleyn
wand  zwyschen  inen  ist,  und  haben  ein  Thür  zusam-
mengehn  und  jeder  ein  Schlüssel  darzu." — "And  tlie  em-
peror and  the  i)ope  lie  near  each  other,  so  that  not  more
than  a  little  wall  is  between  them,  and  they  have  a  door
through  which  to  meet,  and  each  has  a  key  thereof"

**  Confidarsi  in  lei  (S.  M.),  ponersi  in  man  sua,  Conta-
rini  Relatione  di  Bologna,  1530.

350

CORONATION  OF  CHARLES  V.

Book  V.

terms  imposed  on  the  republicj  as  well  as  to
those  regarding  Milan.*

Hereupon,  on  the  23d  of  December,  a  treaty
of  peace  was  concluded,  which  was  at  the
same  time  one  of  alliance.  The  Venetians
engaged  to  pay  off  the  arrears  of  subsidies
which  they  owed  in  virtue  of  the  treaty  of
1523,  by  instalments,  during  the  next  eight
years;  paid,  besides,  100.000  sc.  in  the  next
year.t  Francesco  Sforza  was  much  more
severely  dealt  with;  a  sum  of  900,000  scudi,
to  be  discharged  at  fixed  periods,  was  de-
manded of  him,  400,000  of  which  he  was  to
pay  wiihin  the  next  year.  This  was,  as  we
perceive,  the  emperor's  system  ]  he  treated
Milan  and  Venice  in  the  same  manner  as  he
had  treated  Portugal  and  France;  he  waived
claims  which  he  might  have  asserted,  in  con-
sideration of  money.  The  emperor  promised
to  defend  Milan  and  V^enice ;  and  the  Vene-
tians, on  their  part,  Naples  and  Milan,  in  case
of  an  attack.

The  Duke  of  Ferrara  was  still  not  included
in  the  peace.  As  he  was  also  at  enmity  with
the  pope,  he  had  neglected  no  means  of  ob-
taining access  to  Charles  himself.  It  is  said
that  Andrea  Doria  wrote  to  him,  that  his  only
way  of  gaining  the  favour  of  the  emperor,  was
to  show  confidence  in  him. J  When,  there-
fore, Charles  entered  Modena,  the  duke  went
out  to  meet  him,  carrying  the  keys  of  the
city;  and  from  that  moment  it  is  certain  that
the  emperor  showed  himself  favourably  dis-
posed towards  him.  The  pope  was  far  less
placable.  It  was  with  the  utmost  difficulty
that  he  was  induced  to  submit  his  disputes
with  Ferrara  to  a  fresh  investigation  by  the
emperor  himself,  in  whose  hands  the  duke
had  consented  to  place  Modena  as  a  deposit.

In  the  Florentine' affairs,  Clement  was  per-
fectly immovable.  Envoys  from  that  republic
presented  themselves  before  him  again  at  Bo-
logna; but  they  were  only  met  by  violent  ex-
plosions of  temper  on  the  part  of  the  pope,
and  bitter  reproaches  for  all  the  personal  af-
fronts that  had  been  offered  to  himself,  and
to  the  friends  by  whom  he  was  surrounded  in
Rome.  The  emperor  repeated  what  he  had
always  said,  that  he  was  not  come  to  Italy  to
injure  anybod}-^,  but  to  make  peace ;  but  that
he  had  now  pledged  his  word  to  the  pope,
and  must  abide  by  it.§  The  affair  had  often
been  discussed  in  his  privy-council.  It  had
been  decided  that,  in  the  first  place,  Florence
had  forfeited  her  privileges  by  rebellion,  and
that  the  emperor  had  an  indisputable  right  to
punish  her ;  and  secondly,  that  the  pope  was,
independently  of  this,  fully  justified  in  his  de-

*  Gre^rorio  Casale,  13th  Dec. Molini,  ii.  p.  2G3.

t  Tractatus  pacis  ligte  et  perpetuee  confoederationis,  Du
Mont,  iv.,  ii.  p.  53.

X  Galeacius  Capella,  lib.  viii.  p.  238.

§  Jacopo  Pitti :  Rispose  loro  Cesare  gratamente,  dolerli
del  male  pativa  la  Cittä,  perclie  egli  non  era  venuto  in
Italia  per  nuocere  ad  alcuno,  ma  per  metterci  pace,  non
poter  gia  in  questo  caso  niancare  al  papa— ne  credere  che
voglia  il  papa  cose  inconvenienti :  replicaronli  Ii  oratori,
che  la  cittä  desiderava  solamente  mantenere  il  suo  go-

verrio: Cesare  disse,  che  forse  il  governo  parerebbe

loro  ragionevole,  nondimeno  haberebbe  bisogno  di  qualche
correctione.

mands ;  since  the  viear  of  Christ  would  cer-
tainly commit  no  injustice.il  Perugia,  Arezzo,
and  Cortona  were  already  in  the  hands^of  the
imperiahsts;  the  Prince  of  Orange,  though  not
as  fully  persuaded  of  the  justice  of  the  pope's
claims  as  his  master,  obeyed  orders,  and  in
the  month  of  February  encamped  with  his
army  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Florence.  Dur-
ing the  carnival,  there  were  daily  skirmishes
at  the  gates.

The  emperor  wished  to  settle  all  the  affairs
of  Italy  now  definitively,  that  he  might  be  at
liberty  to  go  for  a  few  months  to  Naples,
where  his  presence  was  very  desirable.  He
would  then  have  taken  Rome  in  his  way;
and,  as  ancient  usage  demanded,  have  re-
ceived the  crown  there  with  all  the  customary
solemnities;  There  were  persons  about  him
who  told  him  that  he  had  accomplished  no-
thing, if  he  had  not  been  crowned  in  Rome
itself.  Others,  however,  doubted  whether  the
place  was  of  so  much  importance;  and  Charles
thought  it  expedient  first  to  ask  his  brother,
whether  the  affairs  of  Germany  would  allow
of  his  absenting  himself  for  the  time  required
for  this  journey. IT  Ferdinand  replied,  the
sooner  he  returned  the  better;  if  he  went  to
Naples,  his  enemies  would  imagine  he  would
never  con-je  back.  It  was  therefore  decided
that  the  coronation  should  take  place  at  Bo-
logna; the  emperor  determined  to  commemo-
rate his  birthday  and  the  anniversary  of  the
battle  of  Pavia,  by  this  solemn  act.

Solemnities  of  this  kind  have  a  twofold  sig-
nificancy ;  they  connect  the  present  imme-
diately with  the  remote  past ;  while,  at  the
same  time,  they  have  a  character  determined
by  the  circumstances  of  the  moment.

The  coronation  of  Charles  was  distinguished
by  many  peculiarities.  It  did  not  take  place
at  Rome,  as  had  been  the  invariable  custom,
but  at  Bologna;  the  church  of  San  Petronio
was  the  substitute  for  St.  Peter's ;  the  chapels
which  were  used  for  the  various  functions
were  named  after  the  chapels  of  St.  Peter's,
and  there  was  a  place  marked  in  the  church
which  represented  the  confessional  of  St.
Peter's.**

Nor  did  the  emperor  appear  with  the  same
state  as  his  predecessors.  He  had  neglected
to  summon  the  electors ;  a  single  German
prince  was  present  —  Philip  of  the  Palatinate,
who  had  arrived  by  chance  the  day  before
the  coronation  —  the  same  who  had  just  ac-
quired a  certain  celebrity  at  the  siege  of
Vienna;  but  he  held  no  official  rank  or  charge
at  the  ceremony.  An  escort  of  German  knights,
such  as  had  heretofore  accompanied  their  em-
peror to  the  bridge  of  the  Tiber,  was  out  of  the
question;  instead  of  them,  three  thousand  Ger-

|(  Declaration  of  the  emperor's  confessor.  Varchi,p.  333.

IT  The  immediate  purpose  of  the  letter  of  the  JOth  of
January,  so  often  referred  to,  which  I  discovered  during
my  second  visit  to  Brussels,  and  will  insert  in  the  Appen-
dix, was  this  inquiry.  Ferdinand  received  it  on  the  ISth,
and  answered  on  the  SSth  from  Budweis.  The  answer  is
printed  in  Gevay,  1530. App.  No.  1.

**  Consurgens  electus  venit  ad  confessionem  B.  Petri

et  in  loco  humili  et  depresso  ad  instar  loci  ante  in-

gressum  capellee  S.  Petri  de  urbe  procubuit.  Rainaldus,
XX.  568.

Chap.  VIII.

CORONATION  OF  CHARLES  V.

351

man  landsknechts  were  drawn  out  on  the
piazza,  gallant  and  warlike  soldiers,  but'under
the  command  of  a  Spaniard,  Antonio  de  Leiva,
who  had  made  his  entrance  into  the  city  at
their  head,  carried  on  a  litter  of  dark  brown
velvet.  VVhatever  brilliancy  surrounded  the
emperor,  had  attended  him  from  Spain,  or
had  come  to  meet  him  in  Italy.  The  proces-
sion, with  which  he  repaired  to  the  church,  to
be  invested  with  the  imperial  crown,  on  the
24th  of  February,  1530  (having  two  days  pre-
viously received  the  iron  crown  with  some-
what modified  solemnities),  w^as  opened  by
Spanish  pages  of  noble  birth;  then  followed
the  Spanish  lords  we  have  already  enume-
rated, vying  with  each  other  in  pomp  and
splendour;  after  them,  the  heralds — not  Ger-
man, but  principally  those  of  the  several  Spa-
nish provinces :  the  sceptre  was  borne  by  the
Marquis  of  Monferrat;  the  sword,  by  the  Dake
of  Urbino;  the  globe,  by  Count  Palatine  Philip;
and,  lastly,  the  crown,  by  the  Duke  of  Savoy.
The  electors  learned  with  wonder  that  their
hereditary  charges  had  been  committed  to
others,  without  even  asking  their  consent.
After  these  undelegated  performers  of  their
functions,  walked  the  emperor,  between  two
cardinals,  and  followed  by  the  members  of
his  privy-council.  A  wooden  gallery  had  been
erected  to  connect  the  palace  with  the  church
of  St.  Petronio;  hardly  had  the  emperor  passed
through  it.  when  it  broke  down.  jMany  re-
garded this  as  an  omen  that  he  would  be  the
last  emperor  who  would  be  crowned  in  Itaiy
— a  prediction  which  the  event  fallilled.  He
himself  saw  in  the  incideiU  only  a  fresh  proof
of  his  good  fortune,  which  prutected  him  in
the  moment  of  danger.*

He  was  now  invested  with  the  sandals,  and
the  mantle,  ponderous  and  stiff  with  jewels,
which  had  been  brought  from  the  court  of  By-
zantium. He  was  anointed  with  the  exorcised
oil,  according  to  a  formula  almost  exactly  the
same  as  that  used  by  Hinkmar  of  Eheims;t
the  crown  of  Charlemagne  was  placed  upon
his  head;  he  was  adorned  with  all  the  insig-
nia of  the,most  ancient  and  sacred  dignity  of
Chief  of  Christendom.  But  while  receiving  j
its  honours,  he  also  accepted  its  obligations ;  j
he  took  the  oath  which,  m  the  triumphant  days  j
of  the  hierarchy,  the  popes  had  imposed  upon
the  emperors — to  defend  the  pope,  the  PiOman
church,  and  all  their  possessions,  dignities,
and  rights;  and  as-  he  Vas  a  conscientious
man.  we  cannot  doubt  that  he  pronounced
this  oath  with  the  most  earnest  sincerity.
The  union  of  the  spiritual  and  temporal  hie-
rarchy required  to  complete  the  idea  of  Latin
Christendom,  was  once  more  consummated.

During  the  ceremony,  the  French  ambas-

*  Jovius,  2Tth  Book.  De  duplici  coioiiatione  Caroli  V.
Ctesarisap.  Bononiain  Ijistoiiola,  autore  H.  C.  Agrippa.
Sciiari'.iuä,  iii.  266.

t  The  words  of  the  unction  in  the  ritual,  "Ipse  — super
caput  tuuni  infundat  benedictionem,  eandem  usque  ad  in-
teriora  cordis  tui  penetrarefaciat"  (Rainaldus,  p.  .569,  No.
23),  strongly  remind  us  of  Hiukmars  formula  of  877;
'•Cujus  sacratissima  unctio  super  caput  ejus  defluat  atque
ad  interiora  ejus  descendat  et  intima  cordis  illius  pene-
tret."  But  the  earlier  form  is  in  all  respects  more  beau-
tiful.

sador,  the  Bishop  of  Tarbes,  stood  between
the  throne  of  the  emperor  and  that  of  the
pope,  with  the  Count  o{  Nassau.  They  spoke
much  of  the  friendship  now  existing  between
their  sovereigns,  which  left  nothing  to  desire,
excfpt  that  it  should  be  permanent.  But  it  is
only  necessary  to  read  the  report  of  the  cere-
mony sent  by  the  bishop  ro  his  owm  court,  to
see  that  he.  at  least,  meant  the  very  reverse
of  W'hat  he  said.  He  pretends  to  have  per-
ceived that  the  pope  sighed  whenever  he
thought  himself  unobserved.  He  declares  in
the  same  letter  that  the  protracted  meeting
of  the  two  sovereigns  had  rather  tended  to
generate  aversion  than  friendship;  that  the
pope  had  said  to  him,  that  he  saw  he  was
cheated,  but  that  he  must  act  as  if  he  did  not
see  it.  In  short,  he  declared  it  certain  that
time  would  bring  about  proceedings  on  the
pope's  part,  with  which  the  King  of  France
might  be  well  satisfied.?

From  the  correspondence  of  the  emperor
w^ith  his  brother,  w-e  also  see  that  he  felt  by
no  means  secure  of  the  pope.

It  were  a  mistake  to  imagine  that  it  would
then  have  been  safe  or  possible  for  him  to
act  as  if  he  were  sovereign  lord  of  Italy  ;  but
he  knew  how  to  profit  by  the  moment  when
his  enemies  were  exhausted  and  deprived  of
political  support,  in  order  to  strengthen  that
ascendency  which  he  had  acquired  by  arms,
and  thus  to  lay  the  basis  of  future  domina-
tion.

The  pope  might  vent  his  anger  as  he
pleased  m  moments  of  irritation,  but  he  could
no  longer  emancipate  himself  from  the  em-
peror. Florence  being  reduced  to  subjection
after  a  brave  resistance,  the  emperor  conferred
upon  the  house  of  Medici  a  more  firmly  based
legitimate  power  than  it  had  ever  possessed  ;
a  family  alliance  was  concluded,  which  ren-
dered impossible  in  future  any  of  those  vio-
lent divisions  wdiich  had hitherto rent the

City-  ,

The  emperor  was  also  secure  of  Milan.
Sfoiza  well  knew  that  Francis  I.  had  not
wholly  renounced  his  pretensions  to  Lom-
bardy;  as  was  evident  from  the  eagerness
with  which  some  Milanese  of  rank  sought  to
renew  their  connexion  with  France.  Sforza
was  therefore  compelled  to  attach  himself
unconditionally  to  the  emperor,  to  whom  alone
he  could  look  for  protection.  Shortly  after,
he  too  became  allied  by  marriage  with  the
house  of  Austria.  An  imperial  general  con-
tinued to  command  the  army  in  Lombardy.

Venice  retained  a  far  greater  share  of  inde-
pendence. But  here,  too,  the  peace  had  been
brought  about  by  a  party  in  opposition  to  the
doge,  and  relying  on  its  friendly  relations  with
Austria  and  Spain  for  its  own  support.  More-
over, the  republic,  menaced  by  the  Ottomans,
was  compelled  to  seek  assistance  in  Europe,
which  no  other  power  but  Spain  was  in  a
condition  to  afford.  It  had  gradually  come  to
a  conviction  that  the  time  for  conquest  and

X  Lettre  de  M.  de  Gramont,  Ev.  de  Tarbes  ä  M.  I'Ad-
miral,  Boulogne,  25  Fevrier,  in  La  Grande  Histoire  du
Divorce,  tom.  iii.  p.  386.

352

RELATION  OF  CHARLES  V.  TO  GERMANY.

Book  V.

extension  of  territory  was  for  ever  past  for
Venice;  that  she  was  entering  on  a  new  era,
the  character  of  which  would  be  determined
by  her  relations  with  Spain.

Nor  had  the  emperor  been  less  anxious  to
attach  to  himself  the  lesser  princes  and  re-
publics.

The  Markgrave  of  Mantua  was  raised  to
ihe  dignity  of  duke ;  Carpi  was  granted  to  the
Duke  of  Ferrara,  by  the  emperor;  to  his
brother-in-law,  the  Duke  of  Savoy,  he  gave
Asti,  which  Francis  L  had  surrendered,  —  to
his  no  small  disgust^,  to  the  Duke  of  Urbino —
at  that  time  the  most  renowned  warrior  of
Italy — Charles  had  offered  service,  and  dis-
tinguished him  with  many  personal  favours  in
Bologna.

The  old  Ghibelhne  spirit  revived  in  Siena
and  Lucca,  and  was  fostered  in  every  possible
way  by  the  emperor.  Whatever  might  be
said  of  the  restored  liberties  of  Genoa,  the
real  effect  of  the  changes  that  had  taken  place
there  was  to  render  Andrea  Doria  absolute.*
The  name  given  to  him  —  II  Figone  (the  fig-
gardener) —  from  his  birth-place,  the  Riviera,
soon  gave  way  to  another  —  the  Monarch.
And  this  monarch  of  Genoa  was  admiral  to
the  emperor.

Charles  bound  the  great  capitalists  to  his
interests  by  a  different,  but  not  less  powerful
tie  ;  he  borrowed  money  of  them.

There  is  no  doubt  that  all  these  powers
might  imagine  themselves  independent ;  they
might  certainly  have  embraced  a  different
line  of  polic)^,  and,  indeed,  they  occasionally
meditated  doing  so.  But  either  their  internal
or  external  affairs  afforded  motives  which
bound  them  to  the  emperor,  and  these  motives
were  now  partly  enhanced  by  design,  partly
developed  by  the  nature  of  things ;  while
Charles's  power  was  so  vast  and  dazzling,
that  a  connexion  with  him  was  no  less  flatter-
ing to  the  ambition,  than  profitable  to  the  in-
terests, of  lesser  sovereigns.

The  world  thus  once  more  beheld  an  em-
peror in  the  plenitude  of  power;  but  the
bases  on  which  this  power  rested  were  new ;
,the  old  imperial  office  and  dignity  were  gone.

Least  of  all  could  the  German  nation  boast
that  the  Germanic  empire  had  recovered  its
ancient  character  and  powers.

The  electors  complained  that  they  were
neither  summoned  to  the  coronation,  nor  in-
vited to  take  a  share  in  the  treaties  which
the  emperor  had  concluded  with  the  Italian
pov/ers.  They  entered  a  formal  protest,  that
if  any  thing  should  have  been  agreed  to  in
these  treaties  which  might  now  or  hereafter
prove  detrimental  to  the  holy  Roman  empire,
they  had  in  no  wise  assented  or  consented  to  it.t

The  emperor  had  already  been  reminded
that  the  conquered  provinces  of  Italy  did  not
belong  to  him,  but  to  the  empire ;  and  had
been required  to restore  to  the  empire  its

*  Basadonna  Relatione  di  Milano,  1.533.  Esso  Doria  fa
il  privato  e  guberna  absolulamenle  Genoa.  Del  die  si
doleno  Genoesi.

t  Protest  of  the  30th  July,  1530,  in  the  Coblentz  Archives.

finance  chambers  (Kammern),  especially  those
of  Milan  and  Genoa ;  upon  M^hich  the  impe-
rial government  would  appoint  a  gubernator,
and  would  appropriate  the  surplus  revenues
to  the  maintenance  of  tranquillity  and  law.
Such,  however,  w^ere  not  the  notions  of  the
emperor,  or  of  his  Spanish  captains.  The
Duke  of  Brunswick  affirmed  that  obstacles
had  been  intentionally  thrown  in  his  v/ay,
during  his  Italian  campaign  in  the  year  1528,
by  Antonio  Leiva;  the  Spaniard,  he  said,
would  endure  no  German  prince  in  the  Milan-
ese. And  this  same  Leiva  had  now  received
Pavia  in  fief,  and  held  the  supreme  command
over  an  army  in  the  field.  German  influence
was  destroyed.

Under  these  circumstances  the  emperor,
no  longer  the  perfect  representative  of  the
national  power,  took  his  way  over  the  Triden-
tine  Alps  to  Germany  (May,  1530).$

If  we  inquire  what  were  his  own  views  as
to  Germany,  we  shall  discover  that  none  but
the  most  proximate  presented  themselves  with
any  'distinctness  to  his  mind.

He  had  promised  his  brother,  whose  fidelity
to  him  through  all  the  complications  of  his
Italian  affairs  had  been  unshaken,  —  who,
feeble  as  were  his  resources,  was  ever  ready
to  come  to  his  aid,  and  who  had  been  his
most  useful  ally, — to  confer  upon  him  the  dig-
nity of  King  of  the  Romans.  The  attejupts
to  transfer  this  dignity  to  another  house  —
attempts  continually  renewed  and  not  without
danger — must,  he  said,  be  put  an  end  to.  The
fitting  moment  vras  now  arrived ;  they  must
take  advantage  of  this  full  tide  of  power  and
victory.

It  had  likewise  become  absolutely  necessary
to  take  effectual  measures  against  the  Turks.
Recent  events  had  shown  the  Germans  that
not  Hungary  alone,  but  their  own  fatherland
was  at  stake ;  the  imminence  of  the  danger
would  render  them  more  complying.  This
was  an  indispensable  condition  to  the  stability
of  the  house  of  Austria.

Yet  he  distinctly  felt  that  this  state  of  things
would  not  be  permanent.

During  his  stay  in  Italy,  a  pacific  demeanour
— not  indeed  at  variance  with  his  disposition,
which  rather  inclined  that  way,  but  contrary
to  his  original  intentions  —  had  been  imposed
upon  him  by  the  state  of  things.  But  the
warlike  schemes  of  his  youth,  though  sus-
pended, were  not  abandoned.  When  he
turned  his  eyes  on  Germany  (as  he  tells  his
brother  in  a  letter),  he  wished  to  confer  with
him  about  many  things,  and  especially -about
their  future  conduct  towards  that  nation; —
whether  they  should  remain  at  peace,  or  en-
gage in  any  warlike  expedition ;  whether  they
should  immediately  join  in  a  common  effort
against  the  Turks,  or  wait  for  some  great  occa-
sion which  might  justify  their  enterprise.

Every  thing  depended  on  the  course  of  reh-
gious  affairs,  and  these  had  already  occupied
his  deliberate  attention.

J  Bucholtz,  iii.  92. Note,

Chap.  IX.

-  DIET  OF  AUGSBURG.

353

CHAPTER  IX.

DIET OF AUGSBURGj 1530.

Bt  the  treaty  of  Barcelona  the  emperor
had  bound  himself  to  endeavour,  in  the  first
place,  to  bring  back  the  dissidents  to  the
faith;  and  if  that  attempt  should  fail,  then  to
apply  all  his  power  '-'to  avenge  the  insult
offered  to  Christ."*

I  do  not  doubt  that  this  engagement  was
entirely  in  accordance  with  his  intentions.

Revolting  and  arbitrary  as  the  opinion  deli-
vered to  him  by  his  .companion,  the  papal
legate  Campeggi,  appears  to  us,  it  is  in  fact
founded  on  the  same  ideas.  Campeggi  begins
by  suggesting  the  means  by  which  the  Protest-
ants inight  be  reclaimed: — ^^promises,  threats,
alliances  with  the  stales  which  remained  true
to  Catholicism;  in  case,  however,  all  these
shoald  be  unavailing,  he  insists  most  strongly
on  the  necessity  of  resorting  to  force, — to  fire
and  sword,  as  he  expresses  it;  he  declares
that  their  property  should  be  confiscated,  and
Germany  be  subjected  to  the  vigilance  of  an
inquisition  similar  to  that  established  in  Spain. t

All  that  has  come  down  to  us  of  the  corre-
spondence of  the  emperor  with  his  brother,
breathes  the  same  spirit  and  the  same  pur-
poses.

Ferdinand  bad,  as  we  know,  entered  hito
negotiations  with  Elector  John  of  Saxony;  but
he  assures  the  emperor  that  he  does  this  only
to  gain  time.  "You  may  think,"  adds  he,
•■that  I  concede  too  much;  and  you  may  thus
be  hindered  from  proceeding  to  the  work  of
punishment.  Monseigneur,  I  wäll  negotiate
as  long  as  possible,  and  will  conclude  nothing ;
but,  even  should  I  have  concluded,  there  will
be  many  other  pretexts  for  chastising  them, —
reasons  of  state,  without  your  needing  to  men-
tion religion ;  they  have  played  so  many  bad
tricks  besides,  that  you  will  find  people  who
will  willingly  help  you  in  this  matter.''!

This,  therefore,  was  the  design ;  to  try  first
whether  the  Protestants  could  not  be  brought
back  by  fair  means  to  the  unity  of  Latin
Christendom,  which  was  now  restored  to
peace,  and  lo  the  imposing  aspect  of  a  great
system ;  but  in  case  this  did  not  succeed,  the
application  of  force  was  distinctly  contem-
plated, and  the  right  to  apply  it  carefully  re-
served.

It  would  not  have  been  prudent,  however,
to  irritate  the  antipathies  of  offended  self-love
by  threats.  Clemency  ceases  to  be  clem.ency,
if  future  severity  is  seen  lurking  in  the  back-
ground. It  was  therefore  determined  at  pre-
sent to  turn  only  the  fair  side  to  view.

The emperor's convocation of the diet

^*  Vim  potestatis  distringent  (Charles  and  Ferdinand).

t  Instructio  data  Cssari  dal  revmo.  Campeggio :  "con
Offerte  prima,  poi  con  minaccie  ridurli  nella  vi~asua,  cioe
del  Dio  omnipotente."  The  opinion  is  attached  to  the
deliberation  at  Bologna,  with  which  Eck  was  acquainted.
See  Luther's  Warnung  an  seine  lieben  Deutschen  (Warn-
ing to  his  dear  Germans). Altenb.  v.  534.

t  Letter  from  Ferdinand  to  the  emperor;  Budweis,  28th
Jan.,  in  Gevay's  original  documents  of  1530,  p.  67.  See
the  Excerpt  from  the  Chancellor's  letter  in  Bucholtz,  iii.
427-

45  2e*

breathed  nothing  but  peace.  He  announced
his  desire  "to  allay  divisions;  to  leave  all  past
errors  to  the  judgment  of  our  Saviour,  and,
further,  to  give  a  charitable  hearing  to  every
man's  opinions,  thoughts,  and  notions;  to
weigh  them  carefully ;  to  bring  men  to  Chris-
tian truth;  and  to  dispose  of  every  thing  that-
has  not  been  rightly  explained  on  both  sides."'
This  proclamation  was  dated  from  the  palace
in  which  the  emperor  was  living  with  the
pope.  The  pope  left  the  emperor's  hands
free ;  and,  indeed,  he  too  would  have  been
rejoiced  if  these  lenient  measures  had  been
successful.

But  whatever  moderation  might  appear  in
the  emperor's  language,  the  orthodox  princes
were  sufficiently  well  informed  of  the  temper
of  the  imperial  court,  and  of  its  connexion
with  that  of  Rome,  not  to  conceive  the  live-
liest hopes  on  its  arrival.  They  hastened  to
draw  up  a  statement  of  all  their  grievances,
and  to  revise  all  the  old  judgments  and  orders
in  council  for  the  suppression  of  the  Lutheran
agitation.  "It  pleases  us  much,"  says  the
Administrator  of  Regensburg,  in  the  instruc-
tions to  his  envoys  to  the  diet,  "'that  the  in-
novations against  the  excellent  and  long-estab-
lished usages  of  the  church  should  be  rooted
out  and  abolished. "§  The  emperor  at  first
held  his  court  at  Innsbruck,  in  order,  by  the
aid  of  his  brother's  advice,  to  secure  a  favour-
able result  of  the  proceedings  of  the  diet.
Of  what  nature  these  were,  may  be  mferrecl
from  one  fact; — that  the  A'enetian  ambassador
saw  an  account  from  which  it  appeared  that,
between  the  time  of  its  departure  from  Bo-
logna, to  the  12th  of  July,  1530,  the  imperial
court  had  expended  270,000  gulden  in  pre-
sents. Prosperity  and  power,  in  themselves
sufficiently  imposing  and  attractive,  were  now,
as  for  centuries  in  Germany,  aided  by  all  the
influence  of  largesses  and  favours.  All  who
had  any  thing  to  expect  from  the  court  now
flocked  thither,  and  it  was  almost  forgotten
that  the  diet  ought  long  ago  to  have  been
opened  ;  every  man  was  intent  on  getting  his
own  business  settled  without  delay. II

It  soon  appeared  from  one  example,  how
great  an  influence  the  emperor's  presence
would  exercise  on  religious  affairs.  His  bro-
ther-in-law, the  exiled  King  Christiern  of  Den-
mark, who  had  hitherto  adhered  to  Luther,
constantly  corresponded  with  him,  and  openly
declared  himself  a  convert  to  his  doctrines,
was  induced  in  Innsbruck  to  return  to  the  old
faith.  The  pope  was  overjoyed  when  he
heard  it.  "I  cannot  express,"  he  whites  to
the  emperor,  "'  with  what  emotion  this  news
has  filled  me.  The  splendour  of  your  ma-
jesty's virtues  begins  to  scare  away  the  night;
this  example  will  work  upon  numberless
others. "IF  He  granted  Christiern  absolution,
and  imposed  upon  him  a  penance  which  he
was  to perform  after  his  restoration  to  his

§  Förstemann  Urkundenbuch  zur  Geschichte  des  Reich-
stags von  Augsburg,  bd.  i.  p.  209.

II  Relatio  viri  nobilis  Nie.  Theupulo  doctoris,  1533:  ne
in  esso  vi  erano  spese  se  non  di  doni  fatti  a  diversi  sig-
nori  (among  whom  were  Italians).

•tT  Koma,  3  Giugno,  1530. Lettere  de'  Principi,  it.  194.

854

DIET  OF  AUGSBURG.

Book  V.

kingxlom.  The  emperor  himself  hoped  that,
as  he  had  succeeded,  contrary  to  his  expecta-
tions, in  purifying  Italy  from  heresy,  he  should
not  fail  in  Germany.  In  Rome  every  thing
was  expected  from  the  lucky  star  which
seemed  to  preside  over  all  his  proceedings.

Circumstances  did  indeed  appear  extremely
propitious  to  his  designs.

The  emperor's  convocation  had  been  favour-
ably received  by  the  Protestants.  The  prince
whose  dispositions  and  conduct  were  the  most
important  —  the  Elector  of  Saxony  —  was  the
first  who  arrived  at  Augsburg.  He  went  with-
out delay  to  offer  his  congratulations  to  the
emperor  (who  had  crossed  the  Alps  just  at
the  same  time)  on  his  arrival  in  the  empire,
which  he  had  learned  ''with  loyal  joy:"  he
would  wait  the  pleasure  of  his  majesty,  his
own  chief  and  lord,  in  Augsburg.*  He  had
invited  his  allies  to  follow  him )  for  the  diet
of  Augsburg  seemed  to  be  the  national  coun-
cil which  had  been  so  long  expected,  so  often
and  so  vainly  demanded,  and  which  now
afforded  a  hope  of  the  reconciliation  of  reli-
gious differences. t

The  negotiations  of  the  elector  with  King
Ferdinand  had,  as  may  be  presumed  from
what  we  have  just  stated,  led  to  no  conclu-
sion; but  they  were  by  no  means  broken  off.
Elector  John  had  also  various  other  affairs  to
discuss  with  the  imperial  court,  to  arrange
Avhich  he  had  sent  an  ambassador  to  Inns-
bruck. The  question,  whether  it  might  not
be  possible  to  win  him  over,  presented  itself,
and  an  attempt  was  made  to  prevail  on  him
to  come  himself  to  Innsbruck.  The  emperor
sent  him  word  that  he  might  rely  on  all  pos-
sible friendship  from  him,  and  invited  him  to
come  to  his  court,  as  many  other  princes  had
done.  "He  intended  to  unite  with  him  in  the
settlement  of  affairs,  which  might  be  arranged
by  themselves  in  person."

But  here,  too,  Charles  had  a  proof  of  the
kind  of  resistance  which  he  would  have  to
encounter  in  Germany.  The  elector  was  of-
fended that  the  emperor  had  urged  him,
through  the  ambassador  of  another  power,
"to  impose  silence  on  the  preachers  he  had
brought  with  him.  This  demaud  appeared  to
him  an  unauthorised  attempt  to  prejudge  the
very  question  to  be  inquired  into  :  and  he  was
persuaded  that  the  compliance  which  he  re-
fusecf  in  Augsburg  would  be  extorted  from
hira  in  Innsbruck,  in  case  he  appeared  there.
He  saw,  too,  that  the  court  was  already  filled
with  his  personal  adversaries. Nor  did  he

*  To  Xassau  and  Waldkirch,  14Mav;  Förstemann,  i.
162,  164.

t  13th  March,  ibid.  p.  24.  See  the  opinion  in  Brück,  p.
11.  In  einer  Ermanung  re.vmenweiss  von  Hans  Mars-
chalk,  1530,  wird  Gott  gebeten  offenbar  zu  machen  sein
Wort,  "damit  es  komme  an  ein  Ort  in  diesem  Reichstag
undConciüo."  In  "an  admonition  rh.vme-wise,"  by  John
Marschalk,  1,530.  God  is  prayed  to  proclaim  his  work,
•'whereby  a  place  may  be  appointed  for  this  diet  and
council."  Here  the  hopes  of  former  years  re-appear.  The
emperor  is  admonished  to  embrace  tiie  divine  word,  "  da-
mit nicht  weyter  werd  geplent  das  arm  volk  der  Christen-
heit, welches  lang  auf  sclnnaler  weyd  des  Glaubens  halb
irr  gangen  ist,"  —  "that  so  the  poor  people  be  no  longer
deprived  of  Christianity,  who,  on  account  of  their  scanty
nourishment  of  faith,  have  long  gone  half  astray."

think  it  expedient  to  enter  upon  the  business
of  the  diet  at  any  other  place  than  the  one
appointed.  In  short,  he  adhered  to  his  de-
claration, tliat  he  would  wait  the  emperor's
coming  in  Augsburg.

. The  imperial court  was generally  unpre-
pared for  the  bearing  exhibhed  by  die  Pro-
testants assembled  in  Augsburg;  for  the  ap-
probation the  preachers  olDtained  in  that  city,
and  the  popularity  they  enjoyed  throughout
Germany. In  Italy  it  had  been  thought  that
at the  first  mutterings  of  the  tempest,  the
Protestants  would  disperse,  like  a flock of
doves  when  the  hawk  pounces  down  in  the
midst of  them. i Chancellor  Gattinara  first
remarked  that  the  court  would  find  more  dif-
ficulties  than he had himself anticipated. §
Gattinara. an old antagonist of the papal
policy,  and  without  question  the  most  adroit
politician  the  emperor  possessed,  would  per-
haps have  been  the  man  to  modify  the  views
of  the  court  so  as  to  render  them  attainable;
even  the  Protestants  rehed upon  him. But
exactly  at  this  moment  he  died  at  Innsbruck.
The  stale  of  things  excited  no  such  serious
misgivings  in  the  others:  what  did  not  succeed
I  in  Innsbruck,  they  hoped  to  accomplish,  by
I  some  means  or  other,  in  Augsburg.
I On  the  6th  of  June,  the  emperor  set  out  for
I  that  city. He  took  IMunich  in  his  w^ay,  where
he  was  magnificently  received. Accompanied
by  the  temporal  and  spiritual  princes  of  Aus-
tria and  Bavaria — the  same  who  formerly  con-
cluded the  Regensburg  league  —  he  reached
the  bridge  over  the  Lech,  before  Augsburg,
on  the  evening  of  the  15th.
I The  most  brilliant  assemblage  of  princes  of
the  empire  that  had  been  witnessed  for  a  long;
I  time,  had  already  been  waiting  for  some  hours
I  to  receive  him;  sovereigns,  spiritual  and  tem-
poral, from  Upper  and  Lower  Germany,  and
a  very  numerous  body  of  young  princes,  who
had  not  yet  attained  to  sovereignty. As  soon
as the emperor approached, they  alighted
from  their  horses  and  advanced  to  meet  him.
I  The  emperor  too  alighted,  and  put  out  his  hand
i  to  each  of  them  in  a  courteous  and  friendly
I  manner. The  Elector  of  Mainz  greeted  him
!  in  the  name  of  all  these  '-assembled  members
of  the  holy  Roman  empire." Hereupon  they
all  prepared  to  make  their  solemn  entry  into
the  imperial  city. As  we  have  just  contem-
plated the  imperial  coronation,  in  which  Ger-
many had  hardly  any  share,  we  must  pause  a
monient over this still essentially German
ceremony  of  the  solemn  entry. II

J  Leodius,  lib.  vii.  p.  130.  See  how  Erasmus  speaks  of
Sadolet :  —  Duffi  res  nonnullam  prajbent  spem  :  una  est
genius  Ctesaris  mire  felix,  altera  quod  isti  in  dogmatibus
mire  inter  se  dissentiunt.  End  of  1529,  or  beginning  of
1530. Epp.  ii.  1258.

0  Raince,  Rome  1  Join.  Le  s.  pere  est  adverti,  que  le
chancelier  se  tronvoit  aucunement  (in  some  degree  — the
sense  in  which  Raince  often  uses  it)  decu  de  Toppinion
facille,  en  ouoy  il  en  avoit  et6,  et  qu'il  commencoj^t  ä
confesser  qu'il  s'appercevoit  les  clioses  en  tout  cas  y  etre
plus  laides  qu'ils  ne  pensoient. MS.  Bethune,  8534.

!|  We  have  several  accounts  of  this  ceremony.  1st.  In
the  Altenburg  collection  of  Luther's  works.  2d.  In  Cy-
prian's Historv  of  the  Aujsburs  Confession,  and  two
pamphletscalle'd,  3d.  Kaiserl.  Maj.  Einreitunofzu  München,
and,  4th,  Kais.  Maj.  Einreiten  zum  Reichstag  gen  Augs-

Chap.  IX.

ENTRY"  OF  CHARLES  V.

355

Foremost  marched  two  companies  of  lands-
knechts,  to  whom  the  emperor  entrusted  the
guard  of  the  imperial  city,  as  whose  newly-
arrived  lord  he  wished  to  be  regarded.  They
were  just  recruited,  and  had  not  that  military
air  which  is  required  in  Germany:  but  there
were  many  among  ihem  who  had  served  in
the  Italian  wars,  and  some  who  had  become
rich  there.  The  most  prominent  figure  was
Simon  Seitz,  an  Augsburg  citizen,  who  served
the  emperor  as  m.iiilary  secretary,  and  who
now,  magnificently  clad  in  gold,  and  mounted
on  a  brown  jennet  with  embroidered  housings,
returned  to  his  native  town  with  an  air  of
splendid  arrogance.

Next  followed  the  mounted  guard  of  the  six
electors.  The  Saxons,  accordmg  to  ancient
usage,  headed  the  procession;  about  a  hun-
dred and  sixty  horsemen,  all  habited  in  liver
colour,  with  matchlocks  in  their  hands.  They  j
consisted  partly  of  the  people  about  the  court;  j
princes  and  counts  having  one,  two,  or  four  i
horses,  according  to  their  dignity;  partly  of
the  councillors  and  nobles  summoned  Irom
the  country.  People  remarked  the  electoral
prince,  who  had  negotiated  the  first  alliance
with  Hessen.  Then  followed  the  horsemen  of
the  Palatinate,  Brandenburg,  Cologne,  Mainz,
and  Treves,  all  in  their  proper  colours  and
arras.  According  to  the  hierarchy  of  the  em-
pire, the  Bavarians  had  no  place  here  ;  but  be-
fore they  could  be  prevented,  they  had  taken
their  place,  and  they  at  least  filled  it  magnifi-
cently. They  were  all  in  light  armour,  with
red  surcoats ;  they  rode  by  fives,  and  were
distinguishable,  even  from  a  distance,  by  their
waving  plumes.  There  might  be  four  hun-
dred and  fifty  horses  in  all.

People  were  struck  with  the  difference,
when,  after  this 'most  warlike  pomp,  the  courts
of  the  emperor  and  the  king  made  their  ap-
pearance:  foremost,  the  pages,  dressed  in  red
or  yellow  velvet;  then  the  Spanish,  Bohemian,
and  German  lords,  in  garments  of  silk  and
velvet,  with  large  gold  chains,  but  almost  all
unarmed.  They  were  mounted  on  the  most
beautiful  horses,  Turkish,  Spanish,  and  Polish,
and  the  Bohemians  did  not  forget  to  display
their  gallant  horsemanship.

This  escort  was  followed  by  the  two  sove-
reigns in  person.

Their  coming  was  announced  by  two  rows
of  trumpeters,  partly  in  the  king's  colours,
partly  in  the  emperor's,  accompanied  by  their
drums,  pursuivants,  and  heralds.

Here,  then,  were  all  the  high  and  mighty
lords  who  ruled  almost  without  control  in  their
wide  domains;  whose  border  quarrels  were
wont  to  fill  Germcvny  with  tumult  and  war.
Ernest  of  Lüneburg  and  Henry  of  Brunswick,
who  were  still  in  a  state  of  unappeased  strife
concerning  the  Hildesheim  quarrel ;  George
of  Saxony,  and  his  son-in-law.  Philip  of  Hes-
sen, who  had  lately  come  into  such  rude  colli-
sion, in  consequence  of  Pack's  plot ;  the  Dukes
of  Bavaria,  and  their  cousins,  the  counts  pala-
tine, whose  short  reconciliation  now  began  to

burir.  The  two  former  are  reprinted  in  Walch ;  the  two
latter  in  Förstemann.  Some  particulars  I  extracted  from
Fürstenberj?'s  letters.

give  M-ay  to  fresh  misunderstandings ;  near
the  princes  of  the  house  of  Brandenburg,  the
Dukes  of  Pomerania,  who,  in  despite  of  Them,
hoped  to  receive,  at  the  coming  diet,  infeuda-
tion  as  immediate  lords.  All  these  now  ac-
knowledged the  presence  of  one  above  them
all,  to  whom  they  paid  common  homage  and
deference.  The  princes  fvere  followed  by  the
electors,  temporal  and  spiritual.  Side  by  side
rode  John  of  Saxony  and  Joachim  of  Branden-
burg, between  whom  there  was  no  slight
grudge,  sufficiently  accounted  for  by  the  trou-
bles caused  by  the  flight  of  the  wife  of  the
markgrave.  Elector  John  once  more  bore  the
drawn  sword  before  his  emperor.  Imme-
diately after  the  electors,  came  their  chosen
and  now  crowned  chief,  mounted  on  a  white
Polish  charger,  under  a  magnificent  three-
coloured  baldachin,  borne  by  six  councillors
of  Augsburg.  It  was  remarked  that  he  who
formed  the  centre  of  this  imposing  group,  was
the  only  one  who  looked  a  stranger  to  it ;  he
was  dressed  from  head  .to  foot  in  the  Spanish
fashion.  He  had  expressed  a  wish  to  have
his  brother  on  the  one  side  of  him,  and  on  the
other,  the  legate,  to  whom  he  wished  to  pay
the  highest  honour;  he  even  wanted  the  eccle-
siastical electors  to  yield  precedence  to  him,
but  on  this  point  they  were  inflexible.  They
thought  they  did  Campeggi  honour  enough
when  the  most  learned  of  their  college,  Elector
Joachim,  who  spoke  Latin  with  considerable
fluency  (better  at  least  than  any  of  its  spiritual
members),  offered  him  their  congratulations.
King  Ferdinand  and  the  legate  accordingly
rode  together,  outside  the  baldachin;  they
were  followed  by  the  German  cardinals  and
bishops,  the  foreign  ambassadors  and  prelates.
Conspicuous  among  them  was  the  emperor's
haughty  confessor,  the  Bishop  of  Osma.^

The  procession  of  princes  and  lords  was
again  succeeded  by  mounted  guards;  those
of  the  emperor  clad  in  yellow,  those  of  the
king  in  red ;  Vv-ith  them,  vying  in  gallant  equip-
ments, the  horsemen  of  the  lords,  spiritual
and  temporal,  each  troop  in  its  proper  colours ;
all  armed  either  with  breast-plate  and  lance,
or  with  fire-arms.

The  militia  of  Augsburg,  which  had  marched
out  in  the  morning  to  receive  the  emperor,  foot
and  horse,  paid  troops  and  citizens,  closed  the
procession.

This  was  in  accordance  with  the  whole  im-
port of  the  ceremony,  viz.,  that  the  empire
fetched  home  its  emperor.  Near  St.  Leonard's
church  he  was  met  by  the  clergy  of  the  city,
singing  ''Advenisti  desiderabilis;"  the  princes
accompanied  him  to  the  cathedral,  where  "  Te
Deum"  was  sung,  and  the  benediction  pro-
nounced over  him ;  nor  did  they  leave  him
till  they  reached  the  door  of  his  apartment  in
the  palace.

But  even 'here,  at  their  very  first  meeting —
in  the  church  too  —  the  great  and  all-dividing
question  which  was  to  occupy  this  august  as-
sembly, presented  itself  in  all  its  abrupt-
ness.

The  Protestants  had  joined  in  the  religious,

*  Contarini ;  "  di  spirito  molto  alto."

356

DIET  OF  AUGSBURG.

Book  V.

as  well  as  the  civil  ceremonies ;  and  the  em-
peror was  perhaps  encouraged  by  this  to  take
advantage  of  the  first  moment  of  his  presence,
the  first  impression  made  by  his  arrival,  to
prevail  upon  them  to  make  some  material
concessions.

Allowing  the  remaining  princes  to  depart,
the  emperor  invited  the  Elector  of  Saxony,
the  Markgrave  George  of  Brandenburg,  Duke
Francis  of  Lüneburg,  and  Landgrave  Philip,
to  attend  him  in  a  private  room,  and  there,
through  the  mouth  of  his  brother,  requested
them  to  put  an  end  to  the  preachings.  The
elder  princes,  startled  and  alarmed,  said  no-
thing; the  impetuous  landgrave  broke  silence,
and  sought  to  justify  his  refusal  on  the  ground
that  nothing  was  preached  but  the  pure  Word
of  God,  just  as  St.  Augustine  had  enjoined; —
arguments  consummately  distasteful  to  the
emperor.  The  blood  rushed  into  his  pallid
cheeks,  and  he  repeated  his  demand  in  a
more  imperious  tone.  But  he  had  here  to  en-
counter a  resistance  of  a  very  diff'erent  nature
from  that  he  had  experienced  from  the  Italian
powers,  who  contended  only  for  the  interests
of  a  disputed  possession.  "Sire,"  said  the  old
Markgrave  George,  now  breaking  silence,
"rather  than  renounce  God's  word,  I  will
kneel  down  on  this  spot  to  have  my  head  cut
off".''  The  emperor,  who  wished  to  utter  none
but  words  of  mildness,  and  was  naturally  be-
nevolent, was  himself  alarmed  at  the  possi-
bility thus  presented  to  his  mind  by  the  lips
of  another.  "'  Dear  prince,"  replied  he  to  the
markgrave,  in  his  broken  low  German,  "  not
heads  off"  (nicht  Köpfe  ab).*

The  next  difficulty  was  that  the  Protestants
declined  taking  part  in  the  procession  of  Cor-
pus Christi,  on  the  following  day.  Had  the
emperor  required  their  attendance  as  a  court
.«ervice,  they  would  probably  have  given  it,
"fike  Naaman,  in  the  Scripture,  to  his  king,"
as  they  said ;  but  he  demanded  it  "'  in  honour
of  Almighty  God."  To  attend  on  such  a
ground  appeared  to  them  a  violation  of  con-
science. Theyrephed  that  God  had  not  in-
vstituted  the  sacrament  that  man  should  wor-
ship it.  The  procession,  which  had  no  longer
in  any  respect  its  ancient  splendour,  took  place
without  them.

In  regard  to  the  preaching,  they  did  indeed
at  length  yield ;  but  not  till  the  emperor  had
promised  to  silence  the  other  party  also.  _He
himself  appointed  certain  preachers,  but  they
were  only  to  read  the  text  of  Scripture,  with-
out any  exposition.  Nor  would  it  have  been
possible  to  bring  the  Protestants  to  yield  even
this  point,  had  they  not  been  reminded  that
the  recess  of  1528,  to  which  they  had  always
appealed,  and  which  they  would  not  sufl'er  to
be  revoked,  authorised  it.  The  emperor,  at
least  so  long  as  he  was  there  in  person,  was
always  regarded  as  the  legitimate  supreme
authority  of  every  imperial  city.t

It  is  evident,  therefore,  that  the  Protestants
did  not  allow  themselves  to  be  driven  back
one  step  from  their  convictions  or  from  their
rights.  The  requests  of  the  emperor  when
present  made  no  more  impression  upon  them
than  his  demands  when  absent  had  done.  If
the  emperor  had  calculated  on  compliance,
these  were  no  flattering  omens  of  future
success.

At  length,  on  the  20th  of  June,  the  business
of  the  diet  was  opened.  In  the  proposition,
which  was  read  on  that  day,  the  emperor  in-
sisted, as  was  reasonable,  most  urgently  on  an
adequate  armament  against  the  Turks :  at  the
same  time  he  declared  his  intention  of  putting
an  end  to  the  religious  dissensions  by  gentle
and  fair  means,t  and  reiterated  the  request
contained  in  the  convocation,  that  every  one
would  give  him,  to  that  end,  his  "'thoughts,
judgment,  and  opinion,"  in  writing.

As  the  council  of  the  empire  resolved  to
proceed  first  to  the  consideration  of  religious
affairs,  the  grand  struggle  immediately  com-
menced.

CONFESSION or AUGSBURG.

The  Protestants  hastened  immediately  to
draw  up  a  written  statement  of  their  religious
opinions,  to  be  laid  before  the  States  of  the
empire.

This  statement  is  the  Augsburg  Confession,
and  its  origin  is  as  follows  :

Immediately  after  the  receipt  of  the  empe-
ror's proclamation,  the  Saxon  reformers  had
deemed  it  expedient  to  set  forth  in  writing,
and  in  a  regular  form,  the  belief  "in  which
they  had  hitherto  stood,  and  in  which  they
persisted. "§

Similar  preparations  had  been  made  in  va-
rious parts,  in  anticipation  of  the  national  as-
sembly which  was  to  be  held  in  the  year  1524 ;
and  something  of  the  same  kind  was,  at  this
moment,  taking  place  on  the  other  side;  e.  g.
in  Ingolstadt.il

The  Wittenberg  reformers  took,  as  basis  of
their  creed,  the  Schwabach  articles,  in  which,
as  we  may  remember,  the  points  of  difTerence
between  the  Lutheran  theologians  and  those
of  the  Oberland  were  defined.  It  is  very  re-
markable that,  in  framing  this  confession,  the

*  There  is  a  very  authentic  account  of  this  in  the  let-
ters of  the  Nürnberg  delegate,  who  that  same  night  caused
the  landgrave  to  be  Vv^aked,  and  told  him  what  was  groins;
forward.  16th  June;  Bretschneider  C.  Ref.  iii.  106.  With
slight  variations,  Heller,  in  Förstemann.

t  Letter  from  Augsburg.  Altenb.  v.  Walch,  16,  873. (In

Walch  under  Spalatin's  name  but  not  complete.)  Brenz
to  Isenmann,  19  Juni,  Corp.  Ref.  ii.  117.

J  I.  Mt  hat  "  aus  angeporner  Güte  und  MiUigkeit  diesen
Weg  (der  Güte)  nach  vermöge  des  Ausschreibens  furge-
nommen,  der  entlichen  Hofnung,  der  soll  bei  allen  ver-
stendigen  ein  billiges  ansehii  haben  und  menniglich  dahin
bewegen  und  leitten,  dass  alle  Sachen  wieder  zum  Besten
gekehrt  und  gev.'endet  werden,  damit  I.  Mt  inn  ireni
gnedigen  Fürhaben  verharren  und  pleiben."  "Your
niajesty  has,  from  your  natural  goodness  and  mildness,
chosen  this  way  (of  gentleness)  according  to  tJie  tenor
of  the  convocation,  with  the  hope  it  might  obtain  just
consideration  with  all  reasonable  men,  and  move  and  lead
many  in  such  wise,  that  all  things  may  be  again  turned
and  converted  for  the  best,  so  that  your  majesty  may  per-
sist and  remain  in  your  gracious  purpose."  From  Förste-
mann, i.  308,  we  see  how  many  variations  the  copies  ex-
Iiibit.  That  of  Frankfurt  has  still  more :  e.  g.  "  aus  ein-
geborner  Gunstigkeit,  der  möglichen  Hofnung,"  u.  s.  vv.
But  the  meaning  is  the  same.

§  It  was  thus  that  Chancellor  Brück  first  conceived  the
thought,  as  his  "  Zeddel"  shows ;  Förstemann,  i.  39.

11 19th  Feb.  1530. Extract  in  Winter,  i.  270.

Ch4p.  IX.

CONFESSION  OF  AUGSBURG.

357

feeling  of  the  differences  which  separated
them  from  a  party  so  nearly  akin,  was,  to  say
the  least,  not  less  strong  than  that  of  the  ori-
ginal dissent  which  had  caused  the  first  great
movement.  The  separation  now  appeared  the
wider,  since  Zwingli  and  his  followers  had,  in
the  meanwhile,  recanted  some  admissions
which  they  had  made  in  Marburg,  and  which
had  found  their  way  from  the  Marburg  con-
vention into  the  Schwabach  articles.
%|^These  articles  were  now  revised  and  drawn
up  afresh  by  Melanchthon,  in  that  sound  and
methodical  spirit  peculiar  to  him,  and  in  the
undeniable  intention  of  approximating  as
closely  as  possible  to  the  Catholic  doctrines.
The  expositions  of  the  doctrine  of  free  will
and  of  justification  by  faith  which  he  added,
were  extremely  moderated ;  he  defined  at
greater  length  what  were  the  heretical  errors
(errors  rejected  also  by  the  Church  of  Rome)
condemned  by  the  articles ;  he  sought  to
establish  these  articles,  not  only  on  the  author-
ity of  Scripture,  but  on  that  of  the  fathers,
and  especially  of  St.  Augustine ;  he  did  not
entirely,  forbid  the  honours  paid  to  the  me-
mory of  the  saints,  but  only  endeavoured  to
define  their  extent  more  accurately;  he  in-
sisted strongly  on  the  dignity  of  the  temporal
power,  and  concluded  with  the  assertion,  that
these  doctrines  were  not  only  clearly  estab-
lished in  Scripture,  but  also  that  they  were  not
in  contradiction  with  the  church  of  Rome,  as
understood  from  the  writings  of  the*  fathers,
from  whom  it  was  impossible  to  dissent,  and
who  could  hardly  be  accused  of  heresy^

And  indeed  it  cannot,  I  think,  be  denied
that  the  system  of  faith  here  set  forth  is  a
product  of  the  vital  spirit  of  the  Latin  church  :
that  it  keeps  within  the  boundaries  prescribed
by  that  church,  and  is,  perhaps,  of  all  its  off-
spring, the  most  remarkable,  the  most  pro-
foundly significant.  It  bears,  as  was  inevita-
ble, the  traces  of  its  origin  ;  that  is.  the  fun-
damental idea  from  which  Luther  had  pro-
ceeded in  the  article  on  justification,  gives  it
somewhat  of  an  individual  stamp  :  this,  how-
ever, is  inherent  in  all  human  things.  The
same  fundamental  idea  had  more  than  once
arisen  in  the  bosom  of  the  Latin  church,  and
had  produced  the  most  important  effects ;  the
only  difference  was,  that  Luther  had  seized
upon  it  with  all  the  energy  of  religious  aspi-
ration; and  in  his  struggle  with  opposite
opinions,  as  well  as  in  his  expositions  to  the
people,  had  estabhshed  it  as  an  article  of  faith
of  universal  application;  no  human  being
could  say  that,  so  explained  and  understood,
this  idea  had  any  thing  sectarian  in  it.  Hence
the  Lutherans  steadily  opposed  the  more  acci-
dental dogmas  which  have  sprung  up  in  later
ages;  though  not  disposed  to  ascribe  to  the
expressions  of  a  father  of  the  church,  absolute
and  demonstrative  authority,  the  reformers
were  conscious  that  they  had  not  departed
widely  from  his  conception  of  Christianity.
There  is  a  tacit  tradition,  not  expressed  in  for-
mula, but  contained  in  the  original  nature  of
the  conception,  which  exercises  an  immense
influence  over  all  the  operations  of  the  mind.

The  reformers  distinctly  felt  that  they  stood
on  the  old  ground  which  Augustine  had
marked  out.  They  had  endeavoured  to  break
through  the  minute  observances  by  which  the
Latin  church  had  allowed  itself  to  be  fettered
in  the  preceding  centuries,  and  to  cast  away
those  bonds  altogether;  they  had  recurred  to
the  Scripture,  to  the  letter  of  which  they  ad-
hered. But  they  did  not  forget  th*at  it  was
this  same  Scripture  which  had  been  so  long
and  so  earnestly  studied  in  the  Latin  church,
and  had  been  regarded  as  the  standard  of  her
faith;  nor  that  much  of  what  that  church  re-
ceived was  really  founded  on  Scripture.  To
that  they  adhered ;  the  rest  they  disregarded.

I  do  not  venture  to  assert  that  the  Augsburg
Confession  dogmatically  determines  the  con-
tents and  import  of  Scripture ;  it  does  no  more
than  bring  back  the  system  which  had  grown
up  in  the  Latin  church  to  a  unison  with  Scrip-
ture ;  or  interpret  Scripture  in  the  original
spirit  of  the  Latin  church.  That  spirit  had,
however,  wrought  too  imperceptibly  to  pro-
duce any  open  manifestation  which  could  have
served  as  a  bond  of  faith.  The  confession  of
the  German  Lutheran  church  is  itself  its
purest  manifestation,  and  the  one  the  most
immediately  derived  from  its  source.

It  is  hardly  necessary  to  add  that  its  authors
had  no  intention  of  imposing  this  as  a  perma-
nent and  immutable  standard  of  faith.  It  is
simply  the  assertion  of  the  fact.  '-Our  churches
teaclv' — ''it  is  taught'' — "it  is  unanimously
taught" — "such  and  such  opinions  are  falsely
imputed  to  us."  Such  are  the  expressions
Melanchthon  uses ;  his  intention  is  simply  to
state  the  behef  which  already  exists.

And  in  the  same  spirit  he  wrote  the  second
part,  in  which  he  enumerates  and  explains  the
abuses  that  had  been  removed.

How  wide  a  field  was  here  opened  for  viru-
lent polemical  attack  !  What  might  not  have
been  said  concerning  the  encroachments  of  the
papal  power — especially  during  the  sitting  of
the  diet,  whose  antipathies  might  thus  have
been  appealed  to  ;  —  or  concerning  the  dege-
neracies of  a  corrupt  form  of  worship  ! — and,
indeed,  we  find  a  long  register  of  them  among
the  rough  drafts  of  the  work;  but  it  was
thought  better  to  omit  them.  Melanchthon
confined  himself  strictly  to  a  justification  of
the  ecclesiastical  organisation  to  whicji  the  re-
formers had  gradually  attained.  He  explained
the  grounds  on  which  the  sacrament  in  both
kinds  and  the  marriage  of  the  clergy  had  been
permitted,  vows  and  private  masses  rejected,
and  fasts  and  confession  left  to  the  will  and
conscience  of  each  individual ;  he  sought  to
show  generally,  how  new  and  dangerous  were
the  contrary  practices,  how  at  variance  even
with  the  old  canonical  rules.  With  wise  dis-
cretion he  was  silent  concerning  the  divine
right  of  the  pope,  the  character  indelibilis,  or
even  the  number  of  the  sacraments:  his  ob-
ject was  not  to  convert,  but  simply  to  defend.
It  was  suflicient  that  he  insisted  on  the  dis-
tinction between  the  spiritual  calling  of  the
bishops  and  their  temporal  power ;  while  de-
fining the  former  in  accordance  with  the  tenor

358

CONFESSION  OF  AUGSBURG.

Boo»  V.

of  Scripture,  he  wholly  abstained  from  attack-
ing the  latter.  He  maintained  that,  on  this
pomt  also,  the  evangelical  party  had  not  de-
viated from  the  genuine  principles  of  the
Catholic  church,  and  that  consequently  the
emperor  might  well  consent  to  tolerate  the
new  organisation-of  the  church.*

It  may  be  questioned  whether  the  Protest-
ants vvouia  not  have  done  better  if,  instead  of
restricting  themselves  so  entirely  to  defence,
they  had  once  more  acted  on  the  oflensive,
and  appealed  to  all  the  strong  reforming  sym-
pathies then  afloat.

We  must,  however,  acknowledge  that  from
the  moment  they  had  decided  to  refuse  to
admit  the  adherents  of  Zvvingh  into  their  com-
munity, this  was  impossible.  They  found
themselves  almost  eclipsed  by  the  popularity
of  the  doctrines  taught  byZwingh;  the  ma-
jority of  the  inhabitants  of  Augsburg  espoused
£he  latter  :  and  nothing  less  was  talked  of  than
;i  union  of  Upper  Germany  and  Switzerland,
in  order  to  overthrow  the  entire  hierarchy  of
the  empire.  Even  one  of  the  most  eminent
of  the  reforming  princes.  Landgrave  Philip
of  Hessen,  seemed  from  his  conversation  to
lean  to  the  side  of  Zwingli.t  A  special  ad-
monition from  Luther  was  required,  to  induce
him  to  subscribe  the  confession.

Nor  could  the  Lutherans  entertain  the  least
hope  of  gaining  over  the  majority  of  the  States
of  the  empire,  who  had  already  taken  too  de-
cided a  part  with  their  adversaries.

They  wished  for  nothing  but  peace  and
toleration;  they  thought  they  had  proved  that
their  doctrines  had  been  unjustly  condemned,
and  denounced  as  heretical.  Luther  brought
himself  to  entreat  his  old  antagonist,  the  Arch-

*  It  is  well  known  that  neither  of  the  originals  of  the
Augsburg  Confession,  signed  by  the  princes,  has  ever  con)e
to  light.  It  was  for  a  long  time  thought  that  the  German
copy  had  been  discovered  in  Mainz;  but  Weber  in  his
"Kritische  Geschichte  der  Augsburger  Confession"  has
shown  with  scrupulous  industry,  that  this,  like  many
others,  is  a  transcript  without  any  authentic  value.
These  transcripts  present  a  number  of  deviations  both
from  each  other  and  from  the  first  edition,  which  Melanch-
thon  superintended  in  the  year  2530.  Fortunately  the  de-
viations, though  numerous,  are  not  important.  The
scribes  of  that  time  allowed  themselves  slight  freedoms,
especially  in  the  law  language,  which  was  so  little  fixed;
but,  for  the  meaning  and  tenor,  these  seldom  are  of  any
moment.  Försteniann's  second  volume  contains  a  very
careful  collation  of  some  manuscripts.  We  meet  with
the  original,  from  the  Mainz  Chancery,  again  at  the
Conference  of  Worms,  1540.  "Dr.  Eck,"  says  the  Bran-
denburg Protocol  of  the  4th  Dec,  "hat  die  newe  confes-
sion und  apologia  angefochten,  des  syn  seint  dem  augs-
burgischen Reichstag  etlich  blettergemehret,  viel  verän-
dert und  das  har  in  die  wolle,  vie  er  sagt,  geschlagen  und

ein  new  schmalz  darein  gethon  wer,  derhalben  er

das  Original  Keys.  Mt  zu  Augsburg  übergeben  aus  der
maintzischen  canzlei  begerete,  welches  denn  unversaget
und  ihme  zu  übergeben  bewilliget."  —  "  Dr.  Eck  has  at-
tacked the  new  Confession  and  Apology,  to  which  since
the  diet  of  Augsburg  some  leaves  have  been  added,  much
altered,  and  the  hair  beaten  into  the  wool  (felted),  as  he
says,  and  a  new  glaze  given  to  it,  wherefore  he  desired  to
have  the  original,  which  had  been  presented  to  his  impe-
rial majesty  at  Augsburg,  out  of  the  Mainz  Chancery,
which,  accordingly,  did  not  refuse,  and  permitted  the  same
to  be  given  to  him."  I  do  not  find,  however,  that  Eck
produced  the  collation  he  promised.

t  Letter  from  Urbanus  Rhegius  to  Luther,  21st  May,
1530:  Landgrave  Philip  adduces  "innumera  Sacramenta-
riorum  argumenta, ""sentit  cum  Zwinglio,  «it  ipsi  mihi
est  fassus."  But  it  was  neither  this,  nor  a  letter  of  Me-
lanchthon  that  moved  Luther  to  apply  to  the  landgrave.
This  he  did  as  early  as  the  20th  May. (De  W.  iv.  p.  23.)

bishop  of  Mainz,  who  now  seemed  more
peaceably  disposed,  to  lay  this  to  heart.  Me-
lanchthon  addressed  himself  in  the  name  of
the  princes  to  the  legate  Campeggi,  and  con-
jured him  not  to  depart  from  the  moderation
which  he  thought  he  perceived  in  him,  for
that  every  fresh  agitation  rnight  occasion  an
immeasurable  confusion  in  the  church. t

In  this  spirit  of  conciliation,  in  the  feeling
of  still  unbroken  ties,  in  the  wish  to  give  force
to  that  similarity  which  not  only  lay  at  the
bottom  of  both  religions,  but  was  obvious  in
many  particulars,  was  this  confession  con-
ceived and  drawn  up.

On  the  afternoon  of  the  25th  June,  1530,  it
was  read  aloud  in  the  assembly  of  the  empire.
The  princes  prayed  the  emperor  to  allow  this
to  be  done  in  the  larger  hall,  to  which  stran-
gers were  admitted, — in  short,  in  a  public
sitting:  the  emperor,  however,  chose  the
smaller,  the  chapter-room  of  the  bishop's  pa-
lace, which  he  inhabited ;  to  this  only  the
members  of  the  assembly  of  the  empire  had
access.  For  a  similar  reason  he  wished  the
Latin  version  of  the  document  to  be  read,  but
the  princes  reminded  him  that  on  German
ground  his  majesty  would  be  pleased  to  per-
mit the  use  of  the  German  language.  There-
upon the  young  Chancellor  of  Saxony,  Dr.
Christian  Baier,  read  the  confession  in  Ger-
man, with  a  distinctness  of  voice  and  utter-
ance which  well  accorded  with  the  clearness
and  firmness  of  the  belief  it  expressed. §  The
number  of  the  spiritual  princes  present  was
not  great :  they  thought  they  should  be  com-
pelled to  listen  to  many  inconvenient  re-
proaches. Those  in  favour  of  it  rejoiced  at  ''
having  made  this  progress,  and  were  de-
lighted both  with  the  matter  of  the  confes-
sion and  the  manner  in  which  it  was  recited.
Some  took  advantage  of  the  opportunity  to
note  down  the  main  points.  As  soon  as  it
was  finished,  the  two  copies  were  handed  to
the  emperor;  the  German  he  gave  to  the
chancellor  of  the  empire,  the  Latin  he  kept
in  his  own  hands.  Both  of  them  were  signed
by  the  Elector  and  the  Electoral  Prince  of
Saxony,  Markgrave  George  of  Brandenburg,
the  Dukes  Francis  and  Ernest  of  Lüneburg,

X  Philip  Fürstenberg  reports  to  the  city  of  Frankfurt,
27th  June,  that  there  were  formal  negotiations  concern-
ing this.  The  elector  and  his  kinsmen  prayed  :  "  Ih  :  Mt
wolt  morgen  wieder  an  dem  Ort  (im  Pallast)  erscheinen
und  den  Umbstand  (die  Umstehenden)  ire  Berantwortung
vernehmen  zu  lassen  gestalten,  denn  sie  weren  von  irea
Widderwertigen  nit  aleyn  bei  L  Mt  sondern  auch  bei
menniglich  verunglimpft;  aber  endlich  ist  es  bei  dem
Besehend  blieben."—"  That  your  majesty  would  again  ap-
pear at  the  same  place  (the  palace),  and  be  pleased  to  let
those  present  hear  your  answer,  for  they  have  been  re-
proached not  only  by  your  majesty,  but  by  many  others,
with  their  untractableness.  Nevertheless,  the  message
remained  unanswered."

§  Fürstenberg  :  "Hell  und  klar,  dass  menniglich,  so
dabei  was,  der  anders  deutsch  verstünde,  alle  Wort  eigent-
lich, was  doch  in  solcher  Versammlung  selten  geschieht,
verstehen  mocht."— "  Distinct  and  clear,  that  as  many  as
were  there  present  that  understood  German,  could  hear
every  word,  which  in  such  assemblies  seldom  happens."
The  Catholics  thought  the  permission  to  read  the  Confes-
sion aloud,  a  great  and  unmerited  honour.  Even  two
years  afterwards,  Eck  grumbles  at  it.  "  Lutheranismu.s
in  arcem  dignitatum  evectus  ita  invaluit,  ut  assenores
erroris  non  vererentiir  in  publicis  comitiis  Augustre  ofTerre
Csesari  novi  dogmatis  confessionem."  Preefatio  in  homi-
lia's  V.  contra  Turcam. A.  iii.

Chap.  IX.

CONFUTATION.

359

Landgrave  Philip',  Prince  Wolfgang  of  Anhalt,
and  the  delegates  of  the  cities  of  Nürnberg
and  Reutlingen.

CONFUTATION. — THREATS.

The  evangelical  princes  expected  that  their
adversaries  vvoulil  come  forward  with  a  simi-
lar declaration  of  faith,  and  that  the  emperor
would  then  endeavour  to  mediate  between
them.  This  expectation  w^as  held  out  by  the
Proposition,  and,  in  still  more  distinct  terms,
by  the  convocation  in  virtue  of  which  they
were  now  assembled.

It  is  highly  probable  that  this  was  actually
the  emperor's  intention  :  he  had  indeed  wished
that  the  Catholic  party  had  brought  forward  a
distinct  charge  against  the  reformers,  in  which
case  he  would  have  undertaken  the  part  of  an
umpire  between  them.  At  the  meeting  of  the
States,  Ferdinand  had  once  made  a  proposal
to  that  effect.

But  the  two  brothers  w^ere  not  sufficiently
masters  of  the  assembly  to  accomplish  this.

The  majority  which  had  been  formed  in
Spires,  and  acquired  greater  compactness  in
Augsburg,  regarded  itself  as  the  legitimate
possessor  of  the  authority  of  the  empire.
Though  the  Catholic  zeal  of  the  two  brothers
w^as  most  agreeable  to  its  wishes,  it  found
many  things  to  object  to  them.  Ferdinand
had  obtained  papal  concessions  of  ecclesiasti-
cal revenues.  —  a  thing  which,  though  per-
mitted in  Spain,  was  unheard  of  m  Germany.
This  excited  universal  disgust  and  resistance
among  the  clergy.  The  majority  declined
constituting  themselves  as  a  party,  and  ac-
knowledging the  emperor  as  judge  between
them  and  the  Protestants.  They  declared
that  they  had  nothing  new  to  propose;  they
had  simply  adhered  to  the  imperial  edict;  if
the  emperor  was  in  want  of  a  charge  to  bring
against  the  reformers,  let  him  resort  to  that
of  contravention  of  his  edict.  Nay,  more;  as
it  was  the  immemorial  custom  that  the  em-
peror should  accede  to  the  sentiments  of  the
assembly  of  the  empire,  they  were  of  opinion
that  he  should  now  adopt  their  cause  as  his
ow^n.  This  was,  in  fact,  requesting  him  to
use  his  imperial  power  in  this  affair,  wnth  the
advice  of  the  electors,  princes,  and  estates  of
the  empire.  It  was  a  matter  of  perfect  indif-
ference to  them,  that  this  was  at  variance
with  the  express  words  of  the  convocation,
since  they  were  not  the  authors  of  it.  The
emperor  w^as,  in  fact,  compelled  to  relinquish
his  idea  of  a  judicial  mediation.

It  has  been  usually  asserted  that  traces  are
to  be  found  of  personal  and  independent  nego-
tiations between  the  emperor  and  the  Protest-
ants at  this  diet.  The  fact  however  is,  that
from  this  moment,  the  whole  business  was
conducted  by  the  majority  of  the  States.  Con-
cerning the  minutest  point — e.  g.,  the  commu-
nication of  a  document  —  the  emperor  was
compelled  to  hold  a  consultation"  with  them  ;
he  acted  at  last  only  as  they  deemed  ex-
pedient.

It  is  much  to  be  regretted  that  we  have  no

protocols  of  the  sittings  of  the  Catholic  ma-
jority; we  do  not  even  know  whether  any
were  drawn  up.  Neither  have  any  full  and
accurate  reports  come  to  light;  and  they  are
hardly  to  be  expected,  since  the  most  con-
siderable princes  were  present,  and  the  dele-
gates from  the  cities  did  nof  take  part  in  the
sittings.

All  that  we  know  is,  that  there  was  a  divi-
sion of  opinion  in  the  majority  itself.  The  one
party  thought  that  the  emperor  ought  at  once
to  take  up  arms,  and  enforce  the  execution
of  his  former  edict.  The  Archbishop  of  Salz-
burg said,  '•  Either  we  inust  put  an  end  to
them,  or  they  wdll  put  an  end  to  us;  which
of  the  two  suits  us  best?"  An' equally  vio-
lent member  of  the  assembly  was  heard  to
remark,  jesting,  that,  the  confession  was  writ-
ten with  black  ink.  '-Were  we  emperor,"
said  he,  '■'•  we  would  put  red  rubrics  to  it."
■'Sir."  rejoined  another,  '-only  take  care  that
the  red  does  not  spirt  up  in  your  faces."  All,
as  this  answer  shows,  were  not  equally  hos-
tile. The  Archbishop  of  I\Iainz,  in  particular^
pointed  out  the  danger  which  would  arise
from  an  invasion  of  the  Turks,  in  case  of  an
open  breach  with  the  Protestants.  It  was  at
length  determined  to  advise  the  emperor
above  all  things  to  authorise  a  confutation  of
the  confession  :  meanwhile,  an  attempt  might
be  made  to  arrange  the  differences  between
the  temporal  and  spiritual  estates.  The  em-
peror acted  on  this  advice.  He  gavediimself
up  to  the  hope  that  the  settlement  of  these
differences  and  the  confutation  of  the  confes-
sion would,  united,  produce  such  an  effect  on
the  Protestants  as  to  induce  them  to  yield.*

The  situation  of  the  Protestants  was  thus
changed  greatly  for  the  worse.

Till  now  they  had  expected  from  the  em-
peror's exalted  position  a  fair  appreciation  of
their  conduct,  and  mediation  between  them
and  their  adversaries  ;  but  they  very  soon  per-
ceived that  he  did  not  give,  but  received  the
impulse;  the  old  and  bitter  enemies  with
whom  they  had  so  long  striven,  constituting  a
majority,  now  directed  all  the  measures  of  the
imperial  authority.

The  confutation  was  set  about  with  the  ut-
most zeal.  There  was  no  want  of  labourers.
Not  only  the  reforming  theologians,  but  their
opponents,  had  repaired  to  the  diet  wdth  their
respective  princes;  Faber,  from  Vienna;  w-ho
was  now  become  prebendary  of  Ofen;  Eck,
from  Ingolstadt ;  Cochläus,  from  Dresden ;
Wimpina,  from  Frankfurt  on  the  Oder.  With
the  prince  bishops  came  their  vicars,  or  learned
officiating  bishops ;  there  were  some  eminent
monks — Capuchins,  Carmelites,  and  especially
Dominicans ;  Paul  Haug,  the  provincial ;  John

*  Tlie  extracts  in  Bucholtz,  iii.  throw  peculiar  light  on.
tliese  negotiations.  A  remarkable  document  belonging
to  them  is  to  be  found  entire  in  Förstemann,  vol.  ii.  p.  9.
It  is  without  a  date,  but  it  must  be  of  the  9th  or  lOth  of
July,  since  the  emperor  mentions  a  question  he  had  asked
the  Protestants  on  the  9th,  —  i.  e.,  whether  they  intended
to  bring  forward  more  articles;  to  which  he  had  as  yet
received  no  answer.  The  answer  was  given  on  tlie  10th;
but,  perhaps,  was  not  delivered  till  the  day  following.
See  the  reports  in  Schmidt,  viii,  244.  Melanchthon  to
Luther,  8th  July. C.  R.  ii.  175.

360

CONFUTATION.

Book  V.

Barkhardj  the  vicar; and  the  prior,  Conrad
Colli,  who  had  written  against  Luther's  mar-

riage.

It

not  surprising  that  a  man  like

Erasmus  (who  was  also  invited)  felt  no  incli-
nation to  have  his  name  associated  with  such
as  these.  The  nien  who  were  here  to  conduct
the  discussion  were  the  representatives  of  the
Aristotehc  Dominican  system,  which  so  long
ruled  the  schools  of  Europe,  and  which  he  had
himself  combated.  With  the  literary  weapons
which  they  had  hitherto  wielded,  they  had
accomplished  little.  Their  whole  strength  lay
in  their  cormexion  with  power.  They  were
now  no  longer  private  men  :  they  were  to
speak  and  to  write  in  the  name  of  the  empire.

They  were  not,  it  is  true,  left  at  absolute
liberty.  People  dreaded  their  violence  and
their  difFuseness,  for  each  of  them  brought  his
old  animosities  and  his  old  refutations  of  Lu-
theran opinions,  which  were  not  now  in  dis-
pute.! Their  first  draft  was  peremptorily  re-
turned to  them  by  the  assembly  of  the  empire,
admonishing  them  to  confine  themselves  en-
tirely to  the  article  of  the  confession.  A
second,  shorter,  which  was  next  presented,
was  submitted,  article  by  article,  to  minute
discussion  by  the  assembly.  It  was  the  third
of  August  before  the  confutation  was  prepared
and  could  be  read  aloud  in  the  fore-mentioned
hall  of  the  bishop's  palace.

It  consists,  like  the  confession,  of  two  parts;
the  one  treating  of  belief,  the  other  of  prac-
tice.

In  the  former,  the  contested  question  already
approached  the  point  at  which  it  has  since  re-
mained stationary.  It  was  no  longer  main-
tained that  the  sacrament,  the  mere  perform-
ance of  the  act,  the  opus  operalum,  merited,
grace.  It  was  no  longer  taught  that  a  good
work  done  without  grace  was  of  the  same
nature  as  one  done  with  grace ;  that  the  differ-
ence between  them  was  only  one  of  degree.
Those  were  the  doctrines  against  which  Luther
had  contended. A  nearer  approach  was  made

*  Eck  brought,  among  other  things,  a  book  already
printed  at  Ingolstadt  under  the  following  title :  Sub  do-
mini  Jhesu  et  Marim  patrocinio  Articulos  404  partim  ad
disputationes  Lipsicam  Baden,  et  Bernen.  attinentes  par-
tim vero  ex  scriptis  pacem  ecclesiK  perturbantium  ex-
tractos  coram  divo  Cajsare  Carolo  V.  Ro.  Imp.  semper
Augu.  ac  proceribus  Imperii  Joan.  Eckius  minimus  eccle-
site "minister  offert  se  disputaturum  ut  in  scheda  latius  ex-
plicatur  Augustas  Vindelicorum  die  et  hora  consensu
Cffisaris  posterius  publicandis.  He  mentions  first  the  41
articles  condemned  by  the  pope;  "Assero,  qui  bulla;  con-
tradixerint,  schismaticos  esse  ac  fidei  hostes,  quos  catho-
licus  habet  proethnicis  et  publicanis."  He  then  cites  the
articles  which  he  had  defended  at  Leipzig  and  Baden,  as
well  as  those  which  he  had  opposed  to  the  resolutions  of
Berne;  lastly,  "  errores  novi  et  veteres  jam  ventilati,"
under  certain  rubrics.  He  collects  404,  "  ex  i  nfinitis  eorum
crroribus  hos  paucos  subitarie  excerpsi."  In  his  hurry,  he
has  also  mixed  up  with  them  some  of  Erasmus's  maxims.
The  other  side  threw  the  Propositiones  de  vino,  venere,
et  balneo,  in  his  teeth,  which  we  still  see  circulate  among
the  Catholic  societies,  and  which  made  him  an  object  of
public  ridicule.

t  CoChlüus  printed  some  articles  of  this  confutation  in
his  book,  Philippiceequatuorinapologiam  Melanchthonis,
Lipsiffi,  1534.  At  the  third  article,  sheet  D,  it  is  said
therein;  damnent  diras  blasphemias — Lutheri  errorem—
Fuum  Pugenhagium  — Melanchthonem  suum— Antonium
Zimerman,  hominem  insigniter  Lutheranum — studiosum
Lutheri  discipulum  Burguerum.  The  passages  worthy  of
condemnation  from  each  are  quoted.  Hence  it  happened,
as  Cochlaus  said,  "quorundam  consilium  qui  judicabant
ejusmodi  responsionem  fore  nimis  acrem  et  prolixam."

to  the  more  profound  conception  of  justifica-
tion through  Christ  which  has  since  been
almost  universally  adopted.  If  the  Catholics
strove  to  retain  the  doctrine  of  the  necessity
of  good  works,  it  was  in  a  different  sense  from
that  heretofore  affixed  to  it.t

This  was,  however,  the  only  modification  to
which  they  consented.

On  the  other  points  they  remained  steadfast
to  the  established  system.  They  demanded
the  admission  of  the  doctrine  of  transubstan-
tiation,  of  the  seven  sacraments,  and  the  invo-
cation of  saints;  they  persisted  in  the  denial
of  the  cup,  and  the  injunction  of  celibacy;
they  even  made  an  attempt  (which,  indeed,
was  certain  to  fail)  to  deduce  these  doctrines
from  passages  of  Scripture,  or  from  the  usage
of  the  earliest  ages  of  the  church,  and  in  this
attempt  they  stumbled  again  on  the  false  de-
cretals; they  would  not  give  up  the  sacrifice
of  the  mass:  and  above  all,  they  firmly  ad-
hered to  the  idea  of  the  Latin,  as  the  universal
church.  They  defended  the  use  of  the  Latin
ritual  in  the  mass,  on  the  ground  that  the  offi-
ciating priest  belonged  far  more  to  the  whole
church,  than  to  the  particular  congregation  by
which  he  happened  to  be  surrounded.

In  short,  if,  on  the  one  side,  the  Protestants
were  driven  by  the  misinterpretation  of  doc-
trines, and  by  abusive  practices,  to  recur
directly  to  Scripture  (understanding  it  in  a
sense  corresponding  with  the  fundamental
notions  of  the  primitive  Latin  church,  but  irre-
concilable with  the  ideas  and  fictions  of  recent
hierarchical  times),  on  the  other,  their  antago-
nists now  consented  to  relinquish  some  of  the
most  flagrant  excrescences  in  doctrine,  and  to
take  into  consideration  the  removal  of  the
abuses  which  had  already  caused  so  many
disputes  between  spiritual  and  temporal
princes ;  they  still,  however,  persisted  in  af-
firming that  the  whole  hierarchical  system
was  of  immediate  divine  origin.  We  see
them  in  search  of  a  method — for  they  had  as
yet  found  none  —  by  which  to  prove  the  con-
formity of  their  system  with  Scripture.

This  would  not  have  been  of  so  much  im-
portance, had  they  aimed  only  at  self-defence.
But  that  was  by  no  means  the  case.  The
majority  not  only  declared  that  they  deemed
this  opinion  just  and  Catholic,  conformable
with  the  Gospel,  but  they  also  demanded  that
the  Protestant  minority  should  erase  the  re-
futed articles  from  their  confession,  and  return
to  a  unity  of  faith  with  the  universal  orthodox
church.  No  attention  was  paid  to  their  agree-
ment in  what  was  essential,  ancient,  and  ori-
ginal, so  long  as  the  slightest  difference,
though  only  in  accidental  and  unessential  par-
ticulars, was  discernible.  Whatever  had  been
altered,  M'hether  by  the  inevitable  pressure  of
circumstances,  or  in  consequence  of  the  legal

t  See,  besides  the  confutation,  De  principum  protestan-
tium  confessione  Joannis  Eccii  censura  archiepiscopo
Moguntino  et  Georgio  D.  S.  Augusts  exhibita,  in  Ceeles-
tin,  iii.  3'5.  As  this  work,  addressed  to  certain  Catholic
princes,  contains  the  essentials  of  the  concessions  made
by  some  modern  Catholics,  it  puts  an  end  to  the  imputa-
tion of  hypocrisy  which  has  been  brought  forward  against
them.

Chap.  IX.

ELECTOR  JOHN  OF  SAXONY.

361

enactments  of  a  former  diet,  was  to  be  re-
stored to  its  original  state.  The  emperor  de-
clared himself  entirely  of  this  rriind.  At  the
end  of  the  confutation,  which  was  pubhshed
in  his  name,  he  admonished  the  evangelical
party  immediately  to  return  to  their  obedience
to  the  Roman  and  Catholic  chnrch.  If  not,
he  must  proceed  against  them  as  became  a
Roman  emperor,  the  protector  and  steward  of
the  church.

The  time  for  mildness  w^as  over ;  the  time
for  severity  seemed  to  have  arrived.

Already  had  the  pope  spoken.

At  the  very  commencement  of  the  meeting,
the  emperor  had  demanded  a  short  statement
of  the  most  important  demands  of  the  Pro-
testants, drawn  up  by  Melanchthon,  M'hich  he
communicated  to  the  legate,  who  forwarded
it  to  Rome.  As  far  as  we  are  able  to  ascer-
tain, the  following  points  were  mentioned  as
indispensable  :  —  Sacrament  in  both  kinds  ;
marriage  of  priests;  omission  of  the  canon  in
the  mass ;  concession  of  the  secularised  church
lands :  and,  lastly,  discussion  of  the  other  con-
tested questions  at  a  council.  The  document
was  laid  before  a  consistory  of  cardinals  on
the  6th  of  July.  What  a  moment  would  this
have  been,,  if  they  had  but  entered  on  the
consideration  of  it  in  a  conciliatory  spirit!
But  they  at  once  declared  these  articles  at  va-
riance with  the  faith  and  discipline,  no  less
than  wuth  the  interests,  of  the  church  :*  they
decided  to  reject  the  petition,  and  simply  to
thank  the  emperor  for  his  zeal.

The  assembly  of  the  empire  had  itself  ex-
horted the  emperor  to  act  as  became  the
steward  of  the  church.

Urged  on  either  side,  bound  by  his  treaties,
and  exclusively  surrounded  by  persons  who
either  had  no  idea  of  the  real  character  and
views  of  the  Protestants,  or  had  long  been
their  enemies, — Charles  assumed  the  sternest
deportment.  Not  content  with  his  general
declarations,  he  showed  his  sentiments  by  his

ungracious  behaviour  to  individuc

to  the

Elector  John,  especially,  he  expressed  his  dis-
pleasure that  he  had  separated  himself  from
the  emperor,  the  defender  of  the  faith,  intro-
duced innovations,  and  sought  to  form  confe-
derations. "His  majesty  also  had  a  soul  and
a  conscience,  and  would  do  nothing  contrary
to  God's  word."  If  the  elector  would  not  re-
turn to  the  faith  which  had  been  held  by  their
forefathers  for  centuries,'"  his  majesty,  on  his
part,  would  not  be  disposed  to  grant  him  in-
feudation,  nor  any  of  the  other  favours  which
he  craved.

RESISTANCE.

The  might  and  energy  of  Latin  Christendom
was  once  more  exhibited  to  the  world  in  the
person  of  the  emperor.  By  his  brilliant  vic-
tories he  had  secured  universal  peace;  even

*  Pallavicini,  from  a  contemporaneous  Diario,  iii.  iv.
280.  ArticoU  opposti  —  alia  ragion  della  chiesa.  A  sort
of  ecclesiastical  reason  of  state.

t  In  the  reprint  in  Müller,  p.  672,  it  is  said,  for  twenty
or  thirty  years,  which  is  doubtless  an  error  of  the  pen.
"46 ♦  2f

from  the  Ottoman  power  he  had  nothing  to
dread  during  the  present,  or  probably  the
coming  year.  The  papal  authority,  as  well
as  the  collective  power  of  the  States  of  the
empire,  was  on  his  side.  On  the  other  hand,
the  Protestants  had  no  religious  or  political
support  in  any  quarter;  nor  had  they  even  the
internal  strength  which  a  firm  bond  of  union
would  have  given  them.

It  might  indeed  be  doubted  whether  Ger-
man princes  and  lords,  trained  in  the  chival-
rous life  of  courts,  and  converted  to  the  new
doctrines  in  mature  age,  by  the  arguments  and
instructions  of  strangers;  —  to  whom  a  good
understanding  with  their  neighbours,  and,  in
their  more  important  affairs,  the  favour  of  the
emperor,  were  indispensable,  would  have  suf-
ficient constancy  to  maintain  their  opinions  in
defiance  of  his  express  displeasure,  and  of  the
power  concentrated  in  his  person.

The  immediate  decision  of  this  question  de-
pended on  the  most  eminent  and  powerful
among  them,  to  whom  the  others  looked  up,
and  against  whom  the  emperor  chiefly  directed
his  attacks — the  Elector  John  of  Saxony.

Elector  John  of  Saxony,  the  last  of  the  four
excellent  sons  of  Elector  Ernest, — educated
with  the  greatest  care,  at  Grimma,  to  qualify
him  for  either  the  spiritual  or  the  temporal
dignities  of  the  empire — the  progenitor  of  the
Ernestine  house,  which  has  now  such  numerous
and  flourishing  branchesij: — did  not  possess  the
political  genius,  nor  the  acute  and  penetrating
mind  of  his  brother  Frederic.  On  the  other
hand,  he  w^as  remarkable  from  his  childhood
for  good  nature  and  frankness,  — "  without
guile  and  without  bile,"  as  Luther  said, — yet
full  of  that  moral  earnestness  w^hich  gives
weight  and  dignity  to  simplicity  of  character.
He  is  believed  to  have  lived  to  his''thirty-
second  5'ear,  when  he  marriad,  in  pe/f^ct
chastity  ;§  there  is  at  least  no  trace  of  the  con-
trary. The  brilhant  and  tumultuous  knightly
festivals  in  which  he  sometimes  took  part  at
the  court  of  Maximihan.  afforded  him  no  satis-
faction, although  he  always  made  a  distin-
guished figure  at  them  ;  he  once  said,  at  a  later
period  of  his  life,  that  not  one  of  these  days
had  passed  without  a  sorrow. |i  He  was  not
born  for  the  amusements  and  dissipations  of
the  world;  the  disgust  w^hich  inevitably  at-
tends them  made  too  deep  an  impression  on
him,  and  gave  him  more  pain  than  their  frivo-
lous enjoyments  gave  him  pleasure.  With
his  brother,  who  was  his  co-regent,  he  never
had  a  difference  ;  never  did  the  one  engage  a
person  in  his  service  without  the  full  consent
of  the  other.  From  the  first  appearance  of
Luther  in  the  world.  John  embraced  his  doc-
trines with  the  most  joyful  sympathy ;  his
serious  and  profoundly religious  mind was

t  These  are,  the  house  of  Weimar,  and  that  of  Gotha,
in'its  three  subordinate  lines,  S.  Meiningen  Hildburg-
hausen, S.  Altenburg,  and  S.  Coburg-Gotha. — Transl.

§  SpaIatin,Von  Herzog  Hansen  zu  Sachsen  Churfiirsten,
in  Struve's  newly  published  Archives,  iii.  16;  unfortu-
nately much  less  fertile  in  information  than  the  same
autho'r's  Nachricht  über  Friedrich  d.  W.

|(  An  expression  of  his  in  Beckmann's  Anhaltischer
Geschichte,  ii.  v.  p.  140.

302

ELECTOR  JOHN  OF  SAXONY.

Be

his  nobles;  mild  and  sweet  tempered  as  he
was,  he  was  not  to  be  induced  to  grant  any-
unjust  favour,  and  he  censured  his  son  for
hstening  more  than  was  prudent  to  those
about  him.  In  all  these  respects  Luther  had
the  greatest  influence  over  him  ]  Luther  knew
how  to  set  the  secret  springs  of  this  pure  and
noble  soul  in  motion  at  the  fitting  time,  and  to
keep  this  upright  conscience  constantly  awake.
Thus,  therefore,  it  was  John  of  Saxony  \^ho
took  the  lead  in  that  protest  which  gave  its
name  and  position  to  the  whole  party.  For
when  justice  and  religion  were  on  his  side,  he
knew  not  hesitation  ;  he  sometimes  quoted  the
proverb,  "Strait  forward  makes  a  good  runner."

He

gradually  but  completely  embued  with  them.
His  greatest  enjoyment  was,  to  have  the  Scrip-
tures, which  he  now  heard  for  the  first  time,
read  aloud  to  him  in  an  evening;  sometimes
he  fell  asleep, — for  he  was  already  far  ad-
vanced in  years, — but  he  awoke  repeating  the
last  verse  that  had  dwelt  upon  his  memory.
He  occasionally  w^rote  down  Luiher's  sermons,
and  there  is  extant  a  copy  of  the  lesser  cate-
chism in  his  handwrituig.*  Examples  are
not  wanting,  both  before  and  since  his  time,
of  princes  whose  powers  of  action  have  been
paralysed  by  absorption  in  religious  contem-
plation ;  but  with  him  this  was  not  the  case;
notwithstanding  the  extreme  simplicity  of  his
character,  he  was  not  less  conspicuous  for  ele-
vation and  force  of  will.  When,  during  the
peasants'  war,  the  cause  of  the  princes  was  in
so  tottering  a  state,  he  did  not  disguise  from
himself  that  a  terrible  convulsion  might  ensue  ;
he  was  prepared  for  reverses,  and  was  heard
to  say  that  he  could  content  himself  with  a
horse  or  two,  and  be  a  man  like  other  men  ;
but  4his  sentiment  did  not  prevent  his  de-
fending his  good  right  as  bravely  as  any  of  his
brother  princes;  only  he  used  his  victory  with
greater  clemency. It  would  be difficult to

point  out  a  moment  in  the  subsequent  years  |  no  doubt  of  being  easily  able  to  reconcile  that
of  his  reign,  in  which  he  could  have  indulged  j  sentiment  with  his  religious  convictions.  But
in  a  merely  contemplative  piety.  We  know  it  very  soon  became  obvious  that  this  would
of  no  prince  to  whom  a  larger  portion  of  the  i  be  impossible ;  and  in  order  to  avert  the
merit  of  the  establishment  of  the  Protestant danger  from  the  head  of  their  prince,  some

("Gradaus  giebt  einen  guten  Eennei

was  by  nature  retiring,  peaceful,  unpretending;
but  he  was  raised  to  such  a  pitch  of  resolution
and  energy  by  the  greatness  of  his  purposes,
that  he  showed  himself  fully  equal  to  their
accomplishment.

Here,  in  Augsburg,  had  Elector  John  to
stand  the  test,  whether  his  intentions  were
unadulterated  gold,  or  whether  they  were
mixed  with  any  baser  matter.

He  felt  the  reverence  for  the  emperor  natural
to  a  prince  of  the  empire,  and  at  first  he  had

church  can  justly  be  ascribed.  His  brother
and  predecessor  had  merely  not  suffered  the
new  doctrines  to  be  crushed:  he  had  taken
ihem  under  his  protection  in  his  own  domi-
nions, and,  so  far  as  it  was  possible,  in  the
empire.  But  when  John  assumed  the  govern-
ment, there  were  rocks  on  either  side,  on  which
the  whole  cause  might  have  gone  to  wreck,
afid  which  could  only  have  been  avoided  by  a
policy  founded  on  those  lofty  convictions  that
never  for  a  moment  failed  or  wavered.  The
peasants'  war  was  followed  by  violent  tenden-
cies to  a  re-action;  and  urgently  as  the  adop-
tion of  these  was  pressed  upon  him  by  his
worldly-wise  and  experienced  cousin,  John
did  not  allow  himself  to  be  mastered  by  them.
On  the  contrary,  the  course  which  he  took  at
the  ensuing  diet  contributed  to  the  passing  of
that  recess  on  which  the  whole  subsequent
legal  structure  of  Protestantism  was  reared.
It  soon,  indeed,  appeared  as  if  the  impetuosity
of  his  Hessian  ally  would  hurry  the  elector
into  a  series  of  political  perplexities  of  which
nobody  could  foresee  the  end;  but  his  calmer
and  better  judgment  saved  him  in  time,  and
he  returned  to  that  defensive  position  which
was  natural  to  him,  and  which  he  was  able  to
maintain.  His  sole  object  and  endeavour  was
to  give  to  the  new  doctrines  an  utterance  and
a  recognised  existence  in  his  dominions.  He
introduced  into  Germany  the  first  evangelical
formof  church  government,  which,  in  a  greater
or  less  degree,  served  as  model  for  all  others.
He  speedily  put  a  stop  to  the  arbitrary  acts  of

*  Cyprian,  Geschiclite  der  Augsburgischen  Confession,
p.  1S4.

of  his  learned  men  reverted  to  the  old  idea,
that  he  should  not  espouse  their  cause,  but
leave  it  to  stand  or  fall  by  itself.  They  were
prepared  to  deliver  in  the  confession  solely  in
their  own  names.  The  elector  replied,  "I  too
will  confess  my  Christ."  (-^ch  will  meinen
Christus  auch  mit  bekennen.")

From  that  time  the  emperor  evinced  more
and  more  alienation  from  him."  '-'We  have
prayed  his  imperial  majesty,"  says  the  elec-
tor, in  one  of  his  letters,!  "to  invest  us  with
the  electoral  dignity  according  to  the  feudal
forms;  this  has  been  refused  to  us.  We  stand
at  a  great  cost  here,  having  just  now  been
obliged  to  borrow  12,000  gulden;  his  imperial
majesty  has,  as  yet,  given  us  no  word  of
promise.  We  cannot  think  otherwise  than
that  we  have  been  sorely  slandered  to  his
imperial  majesty,  and  that  this  has  befallen
us  through  our  own  kinsfolk."

We  see  the  state  of  mind  to  which  he  had
already  been  brought;  and  now  followed  the
confutation  and  the  threatening  declaration
annexed  to  it.

That  he,  v.-ith  his  narrow  strip  of  land  on
the  Elbe  and  his  little  Thuringia, — without
any  allies  on  whom  he  could  rely  —  could
off'er  resistance  to  the  emperor,  who  had  just
achieved  so  exalted  and  commanding  a  sta-
tion, and  was  enabled  to  enforce  the  ancient
ordinances  of  Latni  Christendom,  was  too
wild  a  thought  to  be  seriously  entertained  for
a  moment.  He  was,  moreover,  paralysed  by
the  doubt,  -whether  he  had  a  right  to  resist.

t  To  Nicolas  v.  Ende,  Amtmann  in  Georgenthal,  28
July.

Chap.  IX.

ELECTOR  JOHN  OF  SAXONY.

and  rather  inclined  to  tlie  opinion  that  it  could
in  no  case  be  justifiable.

Care  was  taken  to  let  him  know  clearly
what  awaited  him.  A  prince  greatly  in  the
confidence  of  the  court,  told  him  one  day  that,
if  he  would  not  submit,  the  emperor  would
attack  him  with  an  armed  force,  drive  him
from  his  country  and  his  people,  and  execute
the  extremest  rigours  of  the  law  on  his  per-
son.*

The  elector  doubted  not  that  it  might  come
even  to  this.  He  came  home  greatly  moved,
and  expressed  his  consternation  that  he  was
required  either  to  deny  what  he  had  acknow-
ledged to  be  the  truth,  or  to  plunge,  with  all
belonging  to  him,  into  irretrievable  ruin.

Luther  affirms  that,  had  John  wavered,  not
one  of  his  council  would  have  stood  firm.

But  his  simple  and  straight-forward  mind
viewed  the  (juestion  laid  before  him  in  so
clear  and  direct  a  light,  that  his  decision  was
inevitable.  "  Either  deny  God  or  the  world,"
said  he, — '•'  who  can  doubt  which  is  better  ?
God  has  made  me  an  elector  of  the  empire,  a
dignity  of  which  I  never  was  warthy ;  let  him
do  with  me  further  according  to  his  good
pleasure."

A  dream  which  he  had  about  this  time
affords  a  curious  proof  of  what  was  passing  in
his  mind.  He  was  seized  with  that  sort  of
stifling  oppression  in  which  the  sleeper  feels  as
if  he  were  expiring  under  a  crushing  weight.
He  dreamed  that  he  lay  under  a  mountain,  on
the  summit  of  which  stood  his  cousin  George ;
towards  morning  the  mountain  crumbled  away,
and  his  hostile  kinsman  fell  down  by  his  side.

Ill  short,  the  aged  prince  neither  quailed
nor  wavered.  Great  events  rarely  come  to
pass  without  those  great  moral  efforts  which
are  the  necessary,  though  hidden  germs  of
new  social  and  pohtical  institutions.  Elector
John  continued  to  declare  that  the  emperor
should  find  him  a  loyal  and  peaceful  prince
in  every  respect;  but  that  he  would  never  be
able  to  induce  him  to  regard  the  eternal  truth
as  not  the  truth,  or  the  ünperishable  word  of
God  as  not  God's  word.

The  man  who  had  the  greatest  influence  in
keeping  him  steady  to  this  determination,  was
unquestionably  Luther,  though  he  was  not
with  him.

Luther's  sentence  of  ban  w^aj  not  yet  re-
voked, and  though  he  had  remained  secure  in
spite  of  it,  the  elector  could  not  bring  him  to
the  diet.  He  left  him  at  Coburg,  on  the  fron-
tier of  his  territory.

It  was  a  great  advantage  to  Luther  that  he

'was  not  involved  in  the  turmoil  of  affairs,  and

of  the  incidents  of  the  day ;  he  could  take  a

more  comprehensive  view^  of  what  was  passing.

He  was  struck  with  surprise  that  the  em-
peror appeared  so  intimately  connected  with

*  Müller,  Geschichte  der  Protestation,  p.  715.  One
proof  how  widely  diffused  were  anxieties  of  this  kind,  is
a  report  which  Zwingii  received  from  Venice  in  the  iDe-
ginnin?  of  the  year  1530,  in  which  the  emperor's  schemes
are  thus  described;  "the  emperor  would  bring  Duke
George  of  Saxony  to  Duke  John,  from  whom  he  would
take  away  iiis  status  (Stand),  so  that  he  be  no  longer  an
electing  prince,  and  would  take  upon  him  to  give  it  to
Duke  George." Archiv  für  Schweiz.  Geschichte,  i.  p.  278.

the  pope,  and  so  secure  of  the  French ;  and
that  the  States  of  the  empire  had  again
espoused  the  pope's  party.  He  treated  these
things  with  a  sort  of  irony.  "Monsieur  Par-
ma-ibi,"  as  he  called  the  King  of  France,
would,  he  thought,  never  forget  the  disgrace
of  the  battle  of  Pavia :  Master  In  nomine
Domini  (the  pope)  would  not  be  much  de-
lighted with  the  devastation  of  Rome ;  Jheir
amity  with  the  emperor  belonged  to  the  chap-
ter, Non  credimus.f  He  could  not  understand
how  the  princes  took  it  so  easily  that  the  pope
had  crowned  the  emperor  without  their  pre-
sence.! He  compared  their  assembly  with
the  conclave  of  jackdaws  before  his  window;
there  he  witnessed  the  same  journeying  to
and  fro;  the  clamours  and  pratings  of  the
whole  flock;  the  monotonous  preaching  of  the
sophists.  "A  right  useful  folk  to  consume
all  that  the  earth  brings  forth,  and  to  while
away  the  heavy  time  with  chattering."§  It
struck  him  particularly  that  the  state  of  things
when  he  first  rose  into  notice,  seemed  to  be
entirely  forgotten;  he  reminded  his  friends
that,  at  that  time,  the  sale  of  indulgences,
and  the  doctrine,  that  God  might  be  satisfied
by  pious  works,  w^ere  universally  prevalent ;
that  new  services,  pilgrimages,  relics,  and,  to
crown  all,  the  fable  of  the  garment  of  Christ,
were  daily  brought  forward  ;  that  masses  were
bargained  for  and  sold  for  a  few  pence,  more
or  less,  and  held  to  be  a  sacrifice  well  pleasing
to  God.  He  called  to  remembrance  that  the
most  effectual  weapons  for  putting  down  the
peasants'  war  (at  least  those  of  a  literary
kind),  had  been  used  by  the  Protestants ;  as  a
requital  for  w^hich  their  enemies  were  now
labouring  for  their  destruction.  For  he  had
never  for  a  moment  doubted  how  this  matter
would  end :  from  the  time  the  emperor  had
prohibited  the  preaching,  he  had  ceased  -to
have  the  slightest  hope  of  reconciliation;  he
saw  that  Charles  would  urge  all  the  subordi-
nate princes  to  renounce  their  opinions.  Not
that  he  thought  the  emperor  himself  disposed
to  violence ;  on  the  contrary,  he  never  speaks
of  "the  noble  blood  of  Emperor  Charles"
without  reverence ;  but  he  knows  in  what
hands  their  good  lord  is;  he  beholds  in  him
only  the  mask  behind  which  their  old  ene-
mies are  concealed;  and  these,  he  is  per-
suaded, meditate  nothing  but  force,  and  trust
to  their  superior  numbers.  He  thinks  that  the
Florentine  who  now^  occupies  the  papal  chair,
will  find  some  opportunity  to  cause  streams  of
German  blood  to  flow.

But  these  prospects  did  not  affright  him.
"Let  them  do  as  they  list,"  said  he,  "they
are  not  at  the  end  yet."

He  could  not  think  of  receding  one  step  fur-
ther. "Day  and  night,"  said  he,  "I  live  in
these  things,  I  search  the  Scriptures,  I  re-
flect, I  discuss;  I  daily  feel  increasing  cer-

t  To  Teucleben,  19th  June.

X  To  the  Elector  of  Mainz,  6th  July.

§  To  his  Table  Companions,28th  April,  and  to  Spalatin,
9tii  May.  (A  translation  of  this  sportive  letter  may  be
found  in  a  little  volume  of  Fragments  from  German  Prose
Writers.— Transl.)

364

LUTHER  IN  COBURG.

V.

tainty;  I  will  not  allow  more  to  be  taken  from
me,  let  what  God  wills  befall  me  in  conse-
quence." He  laughs  at  the  d*emands  of  the
Catholics  for  restitution.  "Let  them  first,"
he  exclaims,  "  restore  the  blood  of  Leonhard
Kaiser  and  of  so  many  other  innocent  men
whom  they  have  murdered  !"

His  intrepidity  is  solely  the  result  of  his
persuasion  that  his  cause  is  the  cause  of  God.
"Some  are  sorrowful,"  he  says^  "as  if  God
had  forgotten  us;  but  he  cannot  forget  us,  he
must  first  forget  himself;  our  cause  must  be
not  his  cause,  our  doctrine  not  his  work.
Were  Christ  not  with  us,  where  then  were  he
in  the  world?  If  we  have  not  God's  word,
who  then  has  if?"  He  consoles  himself  with
the  words,  "Trust  to  me;  I  have  overcome
the  world."

"The  Lord  dwelleth  in  the  mist;  he  hath
his  dwelling-place  in  the  darkness.  Man
seeth  not  what  he  is;  but  he  will  be  the
Lord,  and  we  shall  see  it."

,,"And  if  we  are  not  worthy,  it  will  be
brought  to  pass  by  others.  Have  our  fore-
fathers made  us  to  be  what  we  are?  God
alone,  who  will  be  the  Creator  after  us,  as  he
was  before  us,  causes  it  to  be  with  us  even  as
it  is.  For  he,  the  God  that  ruleth  the  thoughts,
will  not  die  with  us.  If  the  enemy  put  me  to
death,  I  shall  be  better  avenged  than  L could
desire :  there  will  be  one  who  will  say,  Where
is  thy  brother  AbeH"

In  this  temper  of  mind  are  all  his  letters  of
that  time  written.  Never  was  a  man  more
intensely  penetrated  with  the  immediate  pre-
sence of  the  Divine  Being.  He  knew  the
,  eternal,  all-conquering  powers  in  whose  ser-
vice he  was  engaged ;  he  knew  them,  such  as
they  had  revealed  themselves,  and  he  called
upon  them  by  their  names.  He  rested  with
dauntless  courage  on  the  promises  which  they
had  given  to  the  human  race,  in  the  Psalms  or
the  Gospel.

He  spoke  with  God  as  with  a  present  Lord
and  Father.  His  amanuensis  in  Coburg  once
heard  him  praying  to  himself: — "I  know  that
thou  art  our  God,"  exclaimed  he;  "that  thou
will  destroy  them  that  persecute  thy  people;
didst  thou  not  thus,  thou  wouldst  abandon
thine  own  cause;  it  is  not  our  cause, — we
have  been  compelled  to  embrace  it ;  thou
therefore  must  defend  it."  He  prayed  with
the  manly  courage  which  feels  its  right  to  the
protection  of  the  Divine  Power  to  whom  it  has
devoted  itself;  his  prayer  plunges  into  the
depths  of  the  Godhead,  without  losing  the
sense  of  its  personality;  he  does  not  desist
till  he  has  the  feeling  of  being  heard  —  the
greatest  of  which  the  human  heart,  raised
above  all  delusion,  is  in  its  holiest  moments
susceptible.  "  I  have  prayed  for  thee,"  he
J  writes  to  Melanchthon,  "I  have  felt  the  amen
in  my  heart."

A  genuine  expression  of  this  frame  of  mind
was  the  hymn,  "  Eine  feste  Burg  ist  unser
Gott"  ("Our  God  is  a  strong  tower"),  the
composition  of  which  is  justly  attributed  to
this  period.* It  professes  to  be  a  paraphrase

of  the  16th  Psalm,  but  is  in  fact  merely  sug-
gested by  it;  it  is  completely  the  product  of
the  moment  in  which  Luther,  engaged  in  a
conflict  with  a  world  of  foes,  sought  strength
in  the  consciousness  that  he  was  defending  a
divine  cause  that  could  never  perish.  He
seems  to  lay  down  his  arms,  but  it  was  in
fact  the  manliest  renunciation  of  a  momentary
success,  with  the  certainty  of  that  which  is
eternal.  How  triumphant  and  animated  is
the  melody !  how  simple  and  steady,  how
devout  and  elevated  !  It  is  identical  with  the
words;  they  arose  together  in  those  stormy
days.

Such  was  his  temper  of  mind,  when  he  ex-
horted not  only  his  nearest  friends,  but  the
elector  and  his  councils,  to  be  of  good  courage.

He  told  his  prince  to  take  comfort,  that  no
other  crime  was  imputed  to  him  than  the  de-
fence of  the  pure  and  living  word  of  God.
Therein  indeed  consisted  all  his  honour.  In
his  land  he  had  the  best  preachers;  childhood
and  youth  grew  up  in  the  knowledge  of  the
catechism  and  the  word  of  God,  so  that  it  was
a  joy  to  see  them ;  this  was  the  paradise  over
which  God  had  set  him  as  guardian ;  he  did
not  only  protect  the  word,  he  maintained  and
noui'ished  it.  and  therefore  it  came  to  his  aid.
"Oh  !"  exclaims  he,  "the  young  will  be  your
helpers,  who  with  their  innocent  tongues  call
so  heartily  on  Heaven."

"I  have  lately  seen  tAvo  wonders,"  writes
he  to  Chancellor  Brück.  "  The  first, — I  looked
out  of  the  window  at  the  stars  of  heaven,  and
the  whole  beautiful  vauhed  roof  of  God,  and
could  nowhere  see  a  pillar  upon  which  the
Master  had  placed  his  roof;  and  yet  it  stands
fast.  The  other, — I  saw  thick  clouds  hanging
over  us,  and  yet  no  ground  upon  which  they
rested,  no  vessel  in  which  they  were  con-
tained; yet  they  fell  not,  but  greeted  us  with
a  gloomy  countenance  and  passed  on :  for
God's  thoughts  are  far  above  our  thoughts;
if  we  are  only  certain  that  our  cause  is  his
cause,  so  is  our  prayer  already  heard  and  our
help  already  at  hand  : — if  the  emperor  granted
us  peace,  as  we  wish,  the  emperor  would  have
the  honour;  but  God  himself  will  give  us
peace,  that  he  alone  may  have  the  honour. "t

A  determined  will  has  always  the  power  of
carrying  others  along  with  it.  How  resistless
must  it  then^be  in  one  so  filled  with  the  Spirit
of  God  !  Luther  exercised  perhaps  a  greater
influence  over  his  followers  from  a  distance,
than  his  continual  presence  could  have  given
him.

All  the  other  princes  vied  Vvüth  Elector
John  in  firmness.

It  was  on  this  occasion  that  Duke  Ernest  of
Lüneburg  won  the  name  of  the  Confessor.
Instead  of  receding  a  single  step,  he  received
into  his  intimacy  Urbanus  Rhegius,  the  chief

mentions  that  this  hymn  is  to  be  found  in  a  collection  of
1529.  He  means,  however,  only  a  collection  of  Lutheran
hymns,  dated  ]529,  in  the  Jen.  und  Altenb.  Ausg.  luth.
Werke;  but  which,  like  many  other  of  his  assertions,  is
founded  on  error. Nowhere  else  is  there  any  trace  of  a

collection  of  1529,  and  we  may  be  permitted  to  doubt  of
its  existence. The  one  published' under  that  title  also
contains  later  hymns.
*  C£Eleslin  affirms  this. Olearius,  on  the  other  hand,  1 \  4th  Aug.,  in  De  Wette,  iv.

Chap.  IX.

CONDUCT  OF  THE  PROTESTANT  PRINCES.

365

promoter  of  the  reformation  in  his  duchy,  and
took  him  home  from  Augsburg,  as  the  most
precious  treasure  that  he  could  bring  his
people.

The  emperor  and  the  king  had  promised
Markgrave  George  of  Brandenburg  to  favour
his  interests  if  he  would  renounce  the  new
doctrine-  a  consideration  of  the  more  weight,
since  Brandenburg  had  even  then  claims^on
certain  possessions  in  Silesia ;  but  the  mark-
grave  rejected  every  proposal  of  the  kind.*
Nor  was  this  ail;  his  powerful  and  zealoasly
Catholic  cousin.  Elector  Joachim,  was  not  less
urgent  with  him  to  quit  the  evangelical  party,
and  bitter  altercations  took  place  between
them.  The  markgrave  declared  his  convic-
tion that  the  doctrine  could  not  be  called  an
error,  so  long  as  Christ  was  really  Christ :  it
taught  a  man  to  turn  himself  to  Christ  alone:
of  this  he  had  full  experience.  Without  en-
tering seriously  on  the  discussion  of  this  point,
the  elector  mainly  insisted  on  the  emperor's
determination  to  restore  every  thing  to  its  for-
mer state.  The  markgrave  replied,  that  the
emperor  might  abohsh  what  he  chose ;  that
he  himself  must  submit,  but  that  he  would
not  assist  in  the  work.  The  elector  asked
v»'hether  the  markgrave  recollected  what  he
had  at  stake.  He  replied,  "  They  say  I  am  to
be  driven  out  of  my  country.  I  must  commit
the  matter  into  God's  hands. "t

Wolfgang  of  Anhalt  was  by  no  means  a
powerful  prince,  nevertheless  he  said  with  the
greatest  calmness,  ''Many  a  time  have  I  taken
horse  in  the  cause  of  ray  good  masters  and
friends,  and  my  lord  Christ  deserves  that  I
should  venture  something  for  his  sake  also."
"Master  Doctor,"  said  he  to  Eck,  '■'•  if  you  are
thinking  of  war,  you  will  find  people  ready  on
this  side  likewise. "ij:

Such  being  the  disposition  of  the  other  re-
formers, it  was  not  likely  that  the  high-spirited
landgrave  would  be  brought  to  concede  any
thing.  'The  Hessian  chronicler,  Lauze,  relates
that,  after  the  confession  had  been  delivered
in,  certain  men  had  taken  the  landgrave  to  the
top  of  a  high  mountain,  and  shown  him  all  the
good  things  of  the  world;  that  is,  had  held
out  to  him  hopes  of  favour  in  the  affairs  of
Nassau  and  Wiirtenberg ;  but  that  he  had  re-
fused them  all.§  One  day  he  heard  that  the
emperor  intended  to  reprove  him;  instantly,
accoutred  as  he  w^as,  he  hurried  to  court,  and
begged  the  emperor  to  state  the  acts  by  which
he  had  incurred  his  displeasure.  The  em-
peror enumerated  some,  whereupon  the  land-
grave gave  an  explanation  w'hich  Charles
accepted  as  satisfactory.  But  the  grand  diffi-
culty was  yet  to  come ;  the  emperor  required
him  to  show  himself  a  dutiful  subject  in  the
matter  of  the  faith,  and  added,  that  otherwise
.he  would  take  the  course  which  beseemed
him as  Roman  emperor. But  threats  were

*  Letter  to  the  kinsmen  of  the  house  of  Brandenburg
(Stammesvettern),  19th  July;  Förstemann,  ii.  93.

t  Cotemporaneous  notes  commencing  these  negotia-
tions, passim,  630.

I  Beckmann's  Anhaltische  Chronik,  ii.  v.  142.

§  Letter  of  the  Nürnberg  envoy,  C.  R.  ii.  167.

2f*

still  vainer  than  promises.  Philip  was,  more-
over, daily  more  impatient  of  an  assembly
in  which,  conformably  to  the  hierarchical  rules
of  the  empire,  he  held  a  position  by  no  means
corresponding  with  his  power.  He  begged  the
emperor  to  dismiss  him  ;  and  as  the  latter  re-
fused, he  one  evening  rode  away  without  leave. II
He  wrote  from  a  distance  to  ihe  Elector  of
Saxony,  to  assure  him  that  he  would  stake
body  and  goods,  land  and'  people,  with  him
and  with  God's  word.  "Bid  the  cities,"  he
writes  to  his  council,  "that  they  be  not  wo-
men, but  men ;  there  is  no  fear. — God  is  on
our  side."

And  in  fact  the  cities  proved  themselves
not  unworthy  of  the  princes.  "  Our  m.ind  is,"
say  the  Nürnberg  tlelegates,  "  not  to  give  way,
for  by  so  doing  we  should  put  the  emperor's
favour  above  that  of  God  ;  God,  we  doubt  not,
will  grant  us  steadfastness."  The  biirger-
■meister  and  council  were  of  the  same  mind
as  their  delegates.

Others  at  a  distance  took  part  in  these
events  in  a  similar  spirit.  "  Your  grace,"
write  the  councillors  of  Magdeburg  to  the
Elector  of  Saxony,  "  stands  carrying  on  a  peril-
ous struggle  in  the  afiairs  of  all  Christendom,
under  the  banner  of  our  Saviour:  w^e  pray  to
God  daily  to  grant  you  patience  and  strength."

Things  had  thus  already  assumed  a  distinct
shape  in  Germany.  On  the  one  side  was  a
majority,  claiming  all  the  rights  and  privileges
of  the  empire,  united  with  the  emiperor,  and
allied  with  the  powers  of  ancient  Europe;  on
the  other,  a  minority  struggling  for  its  exist-
ence, isolated  and  formless,  but  full  of  religious
fortitude  and  constancy.  The  majority,  with
the  emperor  at  their  head,  meditated  using
force ;!  steps  were  already  taken  for  raising-
troops  in  Italy.**  The  minority  had  as  yet  no
plan ;  they  only  knew  that  they  were  deter-
mined not  to  yield.

But,  it  might  be  asked,  was  not  every  vio-
lent measure  full  of  danger  to  the  majority  of
the  States  also?  They  were  not  sure  of  their
own  subjects;  the  suggestion  of  the  Elector
of  Mainz,  as  to  the  danger  with  which  both
parties  w^ere  threatened  in  case  of  a  w^ell-timed
invasion  by  the  Turks,  made  a  deep  impres-
sion. From  these  considerations  the  original
proposal  of  the  pacific  party,  incorporated  in
the  resolutions  of  the  diet,  was  adopted,  and
an  attempt  at  mediation  resolved  on.

ATTEMPT OF THE STATES TO MEDIATE.

On  the  16th  of  August  a  conference  was
opened,  in  which  two  princes,  two  doctors  of
canon  law,  and  three  theologians  of  each  party

II  6th  August.  On  the  30th  July  he  had  entered  into  an
alliance  vi'ith  Zürich,  which  had  a  great  influence  on  his
conduct.  See  Escher  und  Hottinger,  Archiv  für  Schweiz.
Gesch.  und  Landeskunde,  i.  42Ö.

TT  Butzer  feared  a  "laniena  sanctorum  qualis  vix  Dio-
cletiani  tempore  fuit." 14  Aug.  1530,  Röhrich,  ii.  p.  136.

**  Nice.  Tiepolo  Relatione.  Essendo  in  Augusta  intesi
che  si  ofFersero  (the  two  dukes  of  Bavaria)  all'  iinpera-
tore  volendo  lui  muover  guerra  a  Lutheranis,  e  seppi  che
tentorno  col  duca  di  Mantova  d'haver  il  modo  di  condur
1000  cavalli  leggieri  d'ltalia  in  caso  si  facesse  guerra  in
Germania.

366

DIET  OF  AUGSBURG.

Book  V.

took  part,  and  which  soon  appeared  to  promise
great  results.

The  dogmatical  points  at  issue  presented
no  insuperable  difficulties.  On  the  article  of
original  sin,  Eck  gave  way  as  soon  as  Melanch-
thon  proved  to  him  that  an  expression  objected
to  in  his  definition  was  in  fact  merely  a  popular
explanation  of  an  ancient  scholastic  one.  Re-
specting the  article  on  justification  '■'  through
faith  alone,"  Wirapina  expressly  declared  that
no  work  was  meritorious,  if  performed  without
grace;*  he  required  the  union  of  love  with
faith ;  and  only  in  so  far  he  objected  to  the
word  ''alone."  In  this  sense,  however,  the
Protestants  had  no  desire  to  retain  itj  they
consented  ro  its  erasure;  their  meaning  had
always  been  merely  that  a  reconciliation  with
God  must  be  effected  by  inward  devotion,  not
by  outward  acts.  On  the  other  hand.  Eck  de-
clared, that  the  satisfaction  which  the  Catholic
church  required  to  be  made  by  penitence,  was
nothing  else  than  reformation;  an  explanation
which  certainly  left  nothing  further  to  be  ob-
jected to  the  doctrine  of  the  necessity  of  satis-
faction.!" Even  on  the  difficult  point  of  the
sacrifice  of  the  mass,  there  was  a  great  ap-
proximation. Eck  explained  the  sacrifice  as
merely  a  sacramental  sign,  in  reraem^brance
of  that  which  was  offered  up  on  the  cross. i
The  presence  of  Christ  in  the  eucharist  v;as
not  debated.  The  Protestants  M'ere  easily
persuaded  to  acknowledge  not  oiily.a  true,  but
also  a  real  presence.  This  addition  is  actually
inserted  in  the  Ansbach  copy  of  the  confes-
sion.

It  was  certainly  not  the  difference  in  the
fundamental  conceptions  of  the  Christian  dog-
ma which  perpetuated  the  contest,  Luther
had  done  nothing  more  than  revive  and  re-
establish the  primitive  doctrines  of  the  Latin
church,  which  had  been  buiied  under  the
hierarchical  systems  of  later  times,  and  *an
ever-increasing  load  of  abuses.  Such  diver-
sities as  those  we  have  just  mentioned  might
be  reciprocally  tolerated  ;  and  indeed  different
opinions  had  always  co-existed.  The  real
cause  of  rupture  lay  in  the  constitution  and
practices  of  the  church.

And  with  respect  to  these  the  Protestants
gave  way  as  much  as  possible.  They  were
persuaded  that  the  division  was  an  obstacle  to
good  discipline  in  church  and  school;  and  that
the  govern miCnt  of  the  church  would  be  both
ill-conducted  and  costly  in  the  hands  of  the
temporal  sovereigns.  The  Protestant  princes
and  theologians  declared  themselves  ready  to
restore  to  the  bishops  their  jurisdiction,  right
of  anathema,  and  control  over  benefices;  pro-
vided  only that no attempt was made to

*  Eck  too  says  in  liis  opinion,  "  De  principum  protestan-
tiiim  confessione  Joliannis  Eccii  censura  (Ccelestjn,  iii.
36):  quod  opera  de  sua  natura  et  in  se  noii  essent  meri-
toria,  sed  solum  ex  Deo  et  gratia  Dei  assistente.

f  Spalatin,  who  performed  the  duties  of  a  notary  at  the
first  silting,  in  Forstemann,  ii.  p.  228.  In  like  manner 'is
Eck's  singular  expression  to  be  understood  (CoBlestin,  p.
3G):  Nos  ponimus  satisfactionem  tertiam  partem  poeni-
tentiffi,  ipsi  vero  fatentur,  sequi  debere  fructus  bonorum
operuin,  ubiiternm  lis  est  verbalis,  non  realis.

J  Account  in  Ccelestin,  iii.  45.  Est  ergo  missa  non  re-
vera  victima,  sed  niysterialis  et  repraesentativa.

abridge  the  liberty  of  reading  and  expounding
the  Gospel. §  They  were  even  disposed  to
observe  fasts;  not  as  an  ordinance  of  God,  but
for  the  sake  of  good  order;  and,  in  regard  tQ
confession,  to  admonish  the  people  to  confess
all  matters  whereon  they  felt  a  want  of  advice
and  consolation; — concessions  which,  in  fact,
included  a  restoration  of  the  externals  of  the
chufch  to  an  extent  no  longer  to  be  expected.

Nor  is  there  any  ground  for  the  assertion,
that  the  refusal  of  the  Protestants  to  restore
the  property  of  the  suppressed  convents  was
the  obstacle  to  a  reconciliation.  Thoug'h  the
Protestants  retorted  upon  their  antagonists  the
charge  of  worse  acts  of  spoliation  —  such  as
the  seizure  of  the  bishopric  of  Utrecht  by  the
emperor  —  an  event  of  far  greater  importance
than  the  suppression  of  a  few  convents,  seeing
that  the  constitution  of  the  church  was  founded
on  bishops,  not  on  monks. — yet  the  Elector  of
Saxony  at  last  offered  to  place  all  the  sup-
pressed convents  under  sequestration  :  the  se-
questrees,  honourable  men  chosen  from  among
the  nobility  of  the  land,  were  to  pledge  them-
selves to  the  emperor  to  allow  nothing  to  be
abstracted  from  the  property,  till  a  council
should  decide  on  its  application. ||

Such  were  the  advances  once  more  made  by
the  Protestants  to  the  church  of  Rome,  and  to
the  majority  in  the  empire.  It  is  difficult  to
understand  how  the  latter  did  not  meet  them
with  eagerness.

On  one  point  the  committee  of  the  majority
made  a  great  concession  to  the  Protestants.
It  expressed  the  hope  of  obtaining,  at  the  en-
suing council,  the  general  admission  of  mar-
ried priests,  according  to  the  example  of  the
primitive  church.l  It  also  opposed  no  scruple
to  the  sacrament  in  both  kinds.

After  so  near  an  approximation,  of  what  im-
portance were  a  few  differences  in  practice  ?
Was  it  necessary  to  sacrifice  to  them  the  unity
of  the  empire  and  the  nation,  and  the  bless-
ings of  peace  ?

That  such  was  the  lamentable  result,  may
be  mainly  ascribed  to  the  inability  of  the  Ca-
tholic leaders  to  act  as  perhaps  they  would
have  wished.  We  know  that  the  affair  had
been  already  discussed  and  decided  at  the
papal  court.  The  papal  legate,  Campeggi,  did
not  neglect  to  visit  the  emperor  at  the  critical
moment,  in  order  to  inflame  his  Catholic  zeal,
and  bring  him  back  to  the  views  of  the  Curia.**

§  Unexpected  answer,  Forstemann,  ii.  256.  Compare
with  the  Reflections,  idem,  p.  245,  p.  75.  From  the  latter
it  appears,  that  they  tried  to  derive  all  hierarchical  insti-
tutions expressly  from  human  laws,  including  even  the
Papacy  itself,  which,  on  those  conditions,  might  be  tole-
rated. How  far  Luther  assented  to  this  may  be  seen  in
Reflections  signed  by  him. Walch,  xx.  2178.

11  Sächsische  Apologia.  Müller,  p.  861,  and  the  Archiv,
of  Forstemann,  p.  150.

^"That  the  conjugati  should  be  admitted  to  priests'
estate  and  ordained,  in  like  manner,  as  was  the  usage
for  some  centuries  in  old  times  in  the  first  churches."
Unschlüssige  und  unvergriffliche  christliche  Mittel.  (Un-
decided and  impracticable  Christian  Measures.— Proposals
of  the  Catholic  Committee.) Forstemann,  ii.  p.  250.

**  Thorn.  Leodius,  Vita  Friderici  Palatini,  vii.  151.  Ut
intellexit,  ita  rejecit.  See  Melanchthon  to  Camerarius.
Corp.  Ref.  ii.  590.  To  this  also  tended  Campeggi's  first
observations.  "I  santi  padri,"  says  he,  "con  la  santita
delta  vita,  osservantia  delli  precetti  divini,  con  summa

Chap.  IX.

ATTEMPT  AT  MEDIATION.

367

He  maintained  that  all  the  ordinances  of  the
church  were  immediately  dictated  by  the
Holy  Ghost.  He.  worked  on  the  minds  of  the
Statßs  by  similar  arguments,  and  at  length
they  required  that,  until  the  decision  of  the
council;  the  Protestants  should  appoint  no
more  married  priests  to  benelices:  ihey  per-
sisted in  compulsory  confession ;  they  would
consent  neither  to  the  omission  of  the  canon
in  the  mass,  nor  the  abolition  of  private  masses
in  Protestant  countries;  and,  lastly,  they  re-
quired that  the  participation  in  the  Lord's
Supper,  in  one  kind  should  be  declared  not
less  valid  than  in  both.

These,  however,  were  concessions  which
would  have  as  completely  destroyed  the  in-
fant work  of  Protestant  organisation  as  those
demanded  in  1529.  Half-formed  convictions
would  thus  have  been  shaken  to  their  very
foundations.  The  Protestants  were  prepared
not  to  condemn  the  sacrament  in  one  kind;
but  it  was  impossible  for  them  to  resolve  to
declare  it  equally  conformable  with  Scripture
as  their  own  form,  '-since,"  as  they  affirmed,
"Christ  instituted  the  sacram.ent  in  both
kinds."  Nor  could  they  be  expected  to  rein-
troduce the  private  masses,  v/hich  they  had  so
vehemently  denounced  as  utterly  at  variance
with  the  idea  of  the  sacrament.  This  would
have  been  to  destroy  their  ovv'n  work,  notwith-
standing their  conviction  that  they  had  under-
taken it  on  just  grounds,

4s  the  negotiations  advanced,  too,  every
step  revealed  a  greater  difference  of  funda-
mental principles  than  the  parties  had  avowed
to  themselves.  The  Catholics  regarded  the
ordinances  of  ecclesiastical  authority  as  the
rule  which  admitted,  at  the  utmost,  of  rare
exceptions.  The  Protestants,  on  the  contrary,
saw  the  rule  of  faith  and  life  in  Scripture
alone;  they  would  admit  the  peculiar  institu-
tions of  the  Romish  church  only  conditionally,
and  in  so  far  as  it  was  wholly  unavoidable.*
The  former  derived  all  the  ordinances  of  the
church  from  divine  right;  the  latter  saw  in
them  only  human  and  revocable  institutions.
But  little  was  gained  so  long  as  the  Protest-
ants were  unanimously  inclined  to  regard  the
Papacy  as  an  earthly  and  human  institution,
and  therefore  needing  limitations;  since  the
religious  ideas  of  the  opposite  party  Vy-ere  en-
tirely founded  oii  the  divine  right  of  the  Ca-
tholic church,  and  the  character  of  its  head
as  Vicar  of  Christ.

And  even  had  they  come  to  some  sort  of  un-
derstanding, and  settled  some  terms  of  com-
promise, it  would  have  been  almost  impossible
to  put  them  in  execution.  What  difficulties,
for  example,  would  ihe  re-establishment  of
bishoprics  have  created !  The  character  of
the  new  church  rested  mainly  on  the  inde-
pendence of  the  lower  clergy,  and  its  imme-
diate  connexion  with the territorial  power.

vigilaatia  c  stiuiio  si  sono  sforzati  a  partecipare  del  spirito
santo,  (lal  quale  senza  dubio  spinti  hantip  cosi  santa-
merite  ordinate  tutte  le  cose  della  chiesa."

*  Brenz  spoke  of  a  preceptum  dispensabile  in  casu
necessitatis.  The  necessity  is  to  hiin  the  decree  of  the
Komish  Church,  which,  however,  he  by  no  means  regards
as  justified  thereby.

The  old  antipathy  of  the  cities  was  already
aroused  by  the  suggestion;  the  Nürnbergers
declared  they  would  never  again  submit  to
the  domination  of  a  bishop. t

Another  and  a  less  numerous  meeting,  con-
sisting of  only  three  members  on  eitlier  side,
was  convened  towards  the  end  of  August,
after  the  first  negotiations  were  broken  off;
but  on  following  their  discussions  with  atten-
tion, we  find  that  they  never  approached  the
point  which  the  former  assembly  had  reached.

Some  isolated  attempts  at  conciliation  were
afterwards  made.  Duke  Henry  of  Brunswick
had  a  conference  with  the  son  of  the  Elector
John  Frederick,  in  the  garden  of  a  citizen  of
Augsburg.  In  the  church  of  St.  Maurice,  the
Chancellor  of  Baden  made  certain  proposals
to  the  Chancellor  of  Saxony,  who  was  accom-
panied by  Melanchthon  :  these  were  discussed
for  a  time,  but  could  lead  to  no  results.

The  Protestant  party  had  conceded  as  much
as  possible,  consistently  with  their  religious
convictions;  they  had  reached  the  farthest
limits  of  compliance;  nay,  murmurs  were
already  heard  in  their  own  body  against  the
concessions  that  had  been  made ;  it  was  impos-
sible to  induce  them  to  advance  a  single  step
farther.  During  these  negotiations,  Elector
John  exhorted  the  theologians  to  look  only  at
the  cause,  and  to  take  no  thought  for  him  or
his  land. '

Nor  was  any  farther  concession  to  be  ex-
torted from  the  other  side,  fettered  as  it  was
by  the  pope.

NEGOTIATIONS OF THi EMPEROR.

It  was  impossible  that  the  emperor  should
be  inclined  to  acquiesce  in  such  a  termination
of  the  diet,  or  to  allow  it  to  disperse  thus.
He  was.  on  the  contrary,  deeply  impressed
with  the  conviction,  that  an  interminable  train
of  still  greater  evils  and  troubles  must  then
ensue. :^

At  the  very  beginning  of  the  deliberations,
the  Catholic  majority  had  repeated  the  de-
mand for  a  council,  and  Charles,  who  already
contemplated  an  ecclesiastical  assembly  from
his  own  peculiar  point  of  view,  as  emperor,
had  written  about  it  to  the  pope.  Clement
VII.  laid  the  demand  before  a  congregation
which  he  had  appointed  to  settle  matters  of
faith.  Many  declared  themselves  against  it,
especially  on  the  two  following  grounds:  first,
because  persons  who  had  rejected  the  former
councils  would  not  consent  to  a  new  one;
secondly,  because  any  attack  on  the  part  of
the  Turks  would  be  far  more  dangerous  while
the  public  attention  was  absorbed  by  these
internal  affairs.  But  the  pope  was  bound  by
the  promises  he  had  made  during  his  cap-
tivity in  the  castle  of  St.  Angelo,  as  well  as
by  expressions  he  had  let  fall  in  conversation
at  Bologna: he  therefore  entreated  the  em-

t  Opinion  of  Spengler  in  Hausdorfs  Leben  Spenglers,
p.  65.

I  An  opinion  presented  to  the  diet  (Brüssels  Archives)
says,  "  La  matiere  ne  peut  pas  demeurer  en  ces  termes
sans  en  attendre  pis  et  inconvenient  irreparable."

36S

PROPOSALS  FOR  A  COUNCIL,

Book  V.

peror  once  more  maturely  to  weigh  the  thing;
but  if  his  majesty,  who  was  on  the  spot,  and
whose  zeal  for  the  Catholic  religion  was  un-
doubted, held  it  to  be  absolutely  necessary,
he  also  would  consent  ]  but  only  under  the
condition  laid  down  by  the  emperor  and
States  themselves — that  the  Protestants  must,
till  then,  dutifully  return  to  the  rite  and  the
doctrines  of  the  holy  mother  church.  He
proposed  Rome  as  the  most  suitable  place  for
the  meeting.*

It  was  in  consequence  of  this  correspond-
ence that,  on  the  7th  of  September,  the  em^-
peror  sent  a  message  to  the  Protestants,  in
which  he  announced  the  council;  adding,
however,  "ihaf  they  must  in  the  interval
conform  to  the  faith  and  practice  of  the  em-
peror, the  states,  and  the  universal  Christian
church."

Did  Charles  really  believe,  after  all  that  had
passed,  that  a  command  of  this  nature  would
be  obeyed  1  Such  an  expectation  would  only
prove  that  the  temper  and  modes  of  thinking
of  the  Protestants  were  for  ever  closed  and  un-
intelligible to  him.  They  had  already  heard
of  the  intended  proposal,  and  were  prepared.
They  replied,  that  to  compl}*  with  such  a  de-
mand, would  be  to  run  counter  to  God  and

their  consciences ;  and  that,

moreover.

they

were  not  legally  bound  to  do  so  ;  that  the
council  granted  was  a  consequence  of  pre-
vious decrees  of  the  empire,  but  that  no  con-
dition like  that  now  attached  to  it  had  ever
been  so  much  as  discussed.  No  resolutions
which  the  majority  might  recently  have  passed
in  Spires  to  this  effect  could  possibly  bind
those  who  had  solemnly  protested  against  the
whole  proceedings  there.  In  the  oral  commu-
munication  the  emperor  had  described  them
as  a  sect ;  against  this  they  entered  an  imme-
diate and  solemn  protest.!

"\7e  are  in  possession  of  the  letter  which
the  emperor  hereupon  sent  to  the  pope;  it
proves  that  he  was  no  less  m.ortified  than  in-
censed. '"'They  have  answered  me,"  says
he,  "in  the  stubbornness  of  their  error,  where-
upon I  am  reflecting  what  to  do."

As  the  necessity  of  having  recourse  to  force
already  arose  in  prospect  before  him,  fee
thought  that,  although  the  mediation  of  the
States  had  so  utterly  failed,  he  -might  be  able
to  effect  something  by  his  personal  interfer-
ence. "In  order  that  all  our  measures  may
be  more  completely  justified,"  he  continues,
"it  seems  good  to  me  that  I  should  speak
with  them  myself,  both  jointly  and  severally,
which  I  think  immediately  to  proceed  in."
Not,  therefore,  without  giving  notice  to  the
court  of  Rome,  he  offered  the  Protestants  his
personal  endeavours  to  discover  means  of  re-
storing unity,  previous  to  the  meeting  of  the
council.

*  Air  imperatore  di  man  propria  di  demente  (L.  di
pr.  ii.  197):  Pregatala  prima  clie  esamini  maturamente—
dico  a  V.  M.  che  son  contenlo  che  quella,  in  caso  g:iudiclii
essercosi  necessario,  oiferisca  e  prometta  la  convocatione
del  concilio,  con  conditione  pero,  che  appartandosi  da'
loro  errori  tornino  incontinente  al  viver  Catholicamente.

t  Remarks  on  the  Ansbach  Acts,  in  Forstemann's  Ur-
kundenbuch,  ii.  39-3.  Sächsische  Apologia  in  Förste-
mann's  Arch.  136.

He  deceived  himself  greatly,  however,  if
he  hoped  to  accomphsh  any  thing  with  the
Protestants  by  means  of  such  a  missive  as  he
now  addressed  to  them.  In  this  he  maintained
the  nullity  of  the  protest,  without  going  into
the  grounds  on  which,  it  rested,  and  solely
because  it  was  reasonable  and  expedient  that
so  insignificant  a  number  should  yield  to  the
majority:  he  likewise  expressed  his  astonish-
ment that  the  Catholic  deputies  had  carried
their  concessions  so  far.  As  the  Protestants
had  already  expressed  their  final  decision,
they  could  not  do  otherwise  than  reject  a
negotiation  founded  on  such  assumptions  as
these.  They  entered  into  no  discussion  of
the  religious  questions  in  their  answer;  they
onl)^  sought  to  make  the  legality  of  their  pro-
ceedings clear  to  the  emperor.  They  replied,
that  they  were  determined  to  take  their  stand
on  the  recesses  of  the  diets  of  1524  and  1526
—  a  position  from  which  no  majority  could
remove  them — and  asked  for  nothing  save
external  peace. I

Inevitable  as  such  an  answer  was,  it  deeply
offended  the  emperor.  He  gave  the  Protest-
ants to  understand  that  he  had  received  the
same  "'with  notable  displeasure."  He  says
in  one  of  his  letters  that  he  cannot  describe
what  vexation  this  affair  causes  him.  Cling-
ing tenaciously  to  the  idea  of  the  Latin  church,
and  animated  by  a  chivalrous  sort  of  ambi-
tion, he  had  hoped  to  triumph  over  all  his
enemies.  Instead  of  this  he  saw  himself  in-
volved in  a  dispute,  the  very  grounds  of  which
were  unintelligible  to  him.§

In  fact,  he  now  thought  that  all  peaceful
means  were  exhausted,  and  that  he  must
have  recourse  to  arms.  In  the  letter  to  the
pope,  to  which  we  have  just  alluded,  he  says,
"  Force  is  what  w^ould  now  bring  the  m.ost
fruit;"  and  he  was  only  restrained  by  the
consideration  that  he  was  not  sufficiently  pre-
pared. After  the  second  answer,  of  the  Pro-
testants had  been  sent  in,  he  declared  to  the
majority  of  the  States,  that,  as  he  could  con-
sent to  nothing  prejudicial  to  the  faith,  and  as
all  conciliatory  measures  had  been  of  no  avail,
he  was  ready  to  risk  his  possessions  and  his
person  in  the  cause,  and  w^ith  the  aid  and
counsel  of  the  States,  to  do  whatever  might
be  necessary.  He  would  likewise  seek  assist-
ance from  the  pope  and  other  sovereigns.

This  thought  had  been  entertained  in  his
privy  council  from  the  very  commencement
of  the  diet.  Should  the  Protestants  remain
obstinate,  and,  as  their  enemies  vrished,  re-
fuse to  submit  either  to  the  judgment  of  the
emperor  or  to  the  council,  the  legate  was  to
be  consulted  as  to  the  kind  of  force  to  be
employed. II

The  emperor  appeared  disposed  to  treat  the
Protestants  as  he  had  done  the  Moors  in  Spain.
Had  he  been  fully  prepared  with  munitions  of

t  Answer  of  the  Protestants,  dated  8th  Sept.  Forste-
mann's  Urkunden,  ii.  411.

§  Förstemann's  Urkunden,  ii. Heller's  Report,  422.

II  Si  lesdits  Lutheriens  -  -  demeurent  obstinez,  il  faut
savoir  I'intention  du  Sieur  Legat,  comment  et  par  quels
moyens  on  pourra  proceder  contra  eux  par  righeur.

Chap.  IX.

APOLOGY  FOR  THE  CONFESSION.

369

war,  and  had  he  not  been  bound  by  the  reso-
lutions of  the  majority,  he  would  probably,
spite  of  his  natural  mildness,  have  been  led
by  his  consistent  adherence  to  engagements,
to  proceed  immediately  in  this  work.

It  is,  however,  not  surprising  that  the  ma-
jority of  the  diet  had  some  hesitation  in
assenting  to  such  a  course.  Certain  interests
had  been  agitated  (as  we  have  already  men-
tioned), about  which  the  States  were  not  fully
agreed  with  the  emperor  y^  they  were  not  dis-
posed to  follow  him  implicitly  in  a  crusade.
The  old  sentiments  of  members  of  the  empire
had  not  yet  so  entirely  given  place  to  religious
hatred.  On  the  contrary,  at  this  moment,  the
project  of  electing  a  king  of  the  Romans  (lo
which  we  shall  shortly  recur)  excited  fresh
dissatisfaction  among  them.

The  States  submitted  a  project  of  a  recess,
which  held  out,  indeed,  a  menace  of  war,  but
at  a  distance ;  th-e  Protestants  were  to  be
allowed  tim.e  for  repentance  till  the  next  5th
of  May,  in  order  to  explain  themselves  on  the
articles  on  which  it  had  been  found  impossible
to  come  to  an  agreement.

Unfortunately,  however,  this  project  was
also  conceived  in  terms  which  wounded  the
feelings  of  the  Protestants.  It  was  said,  that
they  must  compel  no  one  to  join  their  sect : —
the  word  and  the  thing  were  equally  odious  to
them:  it  contained  ordinances  to  which  they
did  not  think  themselves  at  liberty  to  submit ;
e.  g.  not  to  allow  any  thing  relating  to  matters
of  faith  to  be  printed  within  the  period  assign-
ed, and  to  allow  monks  to  confess  and  say
mass;  and  lastly,  it  was  expressly  asserted
that  the  confession  had  been  confuted  with
arguments  drawn  from  the  Holy  Scripture.  By
accepting  and  subscribing  this  recess,  they
would  have  signed  the  condemnation  of  their
own  cause.  They  rejected  it  without  a  mo-
ment's hesitation.  They  not  only  explicitly
stated  the  grounds  of  their  refusal,  but  seized
the  opportunity  offered  them  by  the  assertion
that  the  confession  had  been  confuted,  to  lay
before  the  emperor  an  apology  for  it.  On  all
main  points  the  apology  is  like  the  confes-
sion ;  but,  if  I  mistake  not,  the  nature  and
style  of  the  former  recede  still  more  widely
from  Catholicism.

This  brought  down  upon  them  another
storm.  Elector  Joachim  of  Brandenburg  an-
nounced to  them,  that  if  they  refused  to  accept
the  recess,  the  emperor  and  States  were  de-
termined to  veiiture  person  and  property,  land
and  people,  in  order  to  put  an  end  to  this
matter.  The  emperor  declared  that  he  would
consent  to  no  further  alterations ;  if  the  Pro-
testant party  would  accept  the  recess,  there  it
was :  if  not,  he,  the  emperor,  in  concert  with
all  the  other  Estates,  must  take  immediate
measures  for  the  extirpation  of  their  sect.

But  if  former  threats  had  been  unavailing,
these  were  not  likely  to  make  any  impression.
The  religious  spirit  which,  in  the  rigour  of  its

*  Konigklich  wirde  zu  Hungern  sc.  Revocation  der
babstlichen  bulle  so  auf  den  vierten  Tail  d'  geistlichen
gutter  erlangt.  The  revocation  of  the  papal  bull  is  de-
manded for  the  fourth  part  of  the  ecclesiastical  lands,  by
the  king  in  Hungary,  &,c.  Förstemann's  Urk.  ii,  843.  -
47

conscientiousness,  had  scorned  every  alliance
not  founded  on  perfect  uniformity  of  belief,
now  showed  itself  no  less  inflexible  towards
the  system  from  which  it  had  seceded.

Such  was  the  end  of  every  attempt  at  ap-
proximation. The  minority  were  determined
to  maintain  their  position  in  all  its  integrity,
and  calmly  to  await  whatever  their  enemies
might  undertake  against  them.

Thus  the  parties  separated.

It  were  a  complete  mistake  to  imagine
that  the  Elector  of  Saxony  had  any  political
schemes  of  opposition  to  the  emperor.  On
the  contrary,  it  was  a  sincere  affliction  to  him
to  be  forced  to  sever  himself  thus  from  his
emperor  and  lord;  but  he  could  do  no  other-
wise. The  moment  had  arrived,  when,  being
about  to  depart,  he  went  to  take  his  leave.
'•Uncle,' uncle,"  said  the  emperor.  '-I  did  not
look  for  this  from  you  {Eiv.  Liebdsn].'''\  The
elector  made  no  answer ;  his  eyes  tilled  with
tears,  but  he  could  find  no  words ;  so  he  left
the  palace,  and,  immediately  after,  the  city.t

A  complete  separation  had  taken  place
among  the  princes  of  the  empire.  In  Spires
this  had  extended  to  the  princes  alone  ;  now,
the  emperor  was  not  only  present,  but  im-
plicated.

The  rupture  which  had  hitherto  been  con-
cealed beneath  the  hope  of  a  reconciliation,
was  now  laid  bare  to  view.

The  division  had  aheady  extended  to  the
cities.

First,  Reutlingen,  and  then,  one  after  an-
other, Kempten,  Heilbronn.  Windsheim,  and
Weissenburg  in  the  Nordgau.  had  joined
Nürnberg.

Four  other  to\^ns.  Strasburg,  Memmingen,
Constance  and  Lindau,  which  had  hitherto
adhered  to  the  Swiss  views  of  the  Lord's  Sup-
per, had  given  in  their  own  confession  —  the
so-called  Tetrapolitana  —  to  the  contents  of
which,  so  highly  important  to  the  internal  his-
tory of  Protestantism,  we  shall  return  here-
after.§  To  them,  too,  the  emperor  caused  a
Catholic  refutation  to  be  |'ead  aloud ;  of  course,
without  the  smallest  effect. Strasburg  showed

t  Your  well-helovedness,  would  be  someniiat  correspond-
ing to  this  title,  by  which  the  emperor  was  wont  to  ad-
dress his  immediate  vassals. — Traxsl.

t  Erzählung  der  sächsischen  Apologia  in  Förstemann's
Archiv,  p.  206.  Granvella  mentions  this  trait,  as  a  proof
of  the  loyalty  and  afiection  of  the  elector  towards  his
imperial  majesty.

§  Fürstenberg  (5th  July)  relates  the  following:  "  Es  ha-
ben die  von  Strasburg  vergangener  Tag  uns  "und  etlich
mehr  von  Städten  bei  sich  erfordert,  und  die  Bekanntniss
irer  Lere  und  Predig,  so  sie  der  Keys.  Mt.  zu  übergeben
willens,  zuvor  anhören  lassen,  ob  sich  jemand  vilTeicht
mit  inen  unterschreiben  wolt.  Wie  wol  nun  dieseibig
fast  wol  gestellt  und,  etwas  subtiler  und  zugtiger  dan  der
Fürsten  gewest,  so  haben  wir  doch,  diweyl  bis  anher  bei
uns  des  Sacraments  halber  ihre  Opinion  nit  gepredigt,  das
underschreyben  abgeschlagen ;  dergleichen  haben  auch
andere  getiian,  uss  Ursachen  von  jeglichen  insonderheit
furgewant."  —  "Yesterday  they  of  Strasburg  invited  us
and  some  others  of  the  cities  to  come  to  them,  and  to  hear
the  confession  of  their  doctrine  and  preaching,  which  they
intend  to  deliver  in  to  the  emperor;  and  to'see  whether
perchance  any  will  subscribe  it  with  them.  A'ow,  although  •
the  same  be  well  drawn  up,  and  somewhat  more  subtle
and  discreet  than  that  of  the  princes  was,  yet  have  we,
seeing  that  till  now  their  opinion  on  the  sacrament  has
not  b'een  preached  am.ong  us,  refilsed  to  sign  ;  the  like
have  also  others  done,  for  reasons  by  each  severally  as-
signed,"

370

DIVISION  AMONG  THE  CITIES.

Book  V.

as  much  courage  as  Nürnberg  and  other  cities.
Had  the  intended  reconcdiation  taken  place
between  Cathohcs  and  Protestants,  the  four
cities  would  have  fallen  into  little  jeopardy.
But  as  things  turned  out  in  Augsburg,  they
had  less  to  fear  than  at  first,  and  they  there-
fore gave  the  less  ear  to  any  suggestions  from
the  other  side.

It  was  only  to  the  other  cities  that  the  em-
peror caused  it  to  be  announced,  on  the  24th
of  September,  that  Saxony  and  his  kinsmen
and  aJhes  had  causelessly  and  wrongfully  re-
jected a  recess  drawn  up,  in  fact,  in  their
favour. — doubtless  mainly  because  they  were
required  to  restore  the  convents;  but  that  he
was  resolved  to  put  an  end  to  this  thing.  As
the  other  States  had  promised  to  stake  life
and  property  on  the  cause,  he  hoped  to  find
the  same  zeal  in  them.  -  The  cities  requested
to  be  allowed  first  to  consult  their  authorities;
the  emperor  pressed  for -an  immediate  answer.

Hereupon  those  who  had  remained  Catho-
lic, the  smaller  as  well  as  the  larger,  Rottweil,
Ueberlingen.  Cologne,  Hagenau,  even  Regens-
burg, attached  themselves  without  hesitation
to  tlie  emperor.

The  others,  who  had  hitherto  allowed  free
circulation  to  the  confession,  without  setting
themselves  in  open  opposition  to  the  emperor
and  the  majority,  were  now  in  no  small  per-
plexity. They  considered  that,  by  accepting
the  recess,  they  should  admit  the  confession
to  be  confuted,  and  that  they  should  be  com-
pelled to  fight  against  their  co-religionists:
gradually  therefore  Frankfurt,  Ulm,  Schwä-
bisch-Hall — and  lastly  Augsburg,  rejected  it.
In  Augsbuig,  as  may  be  imagined,  this  diffi-
culty was  most  felt,  in  consequence  of  the
emperor's  presence.  It  was  thought  neces-
sary to  resort  to  the  extraordinary  measure  of
convoking  the  great  council,  in  which  mem-
bers of  all  the  guilds  took  part.  But  the  Pro-
testant spirit  had  already  petietrated  the  body
of  the  citizens  too  deeply  for  them  to  find  it
possible  to  renounce  it.  In  the  very  face  of
the  emperor,  Augsburg  refused  to  accept  his
recess.*

*  Kress  and  Volkamerto  Nürnberg,  in  Corp.  Ref.  ji.422.
Tlie  correspondence  between  the  city  of  Frankfurt  and
its  delegates  is  specially  worthy  of  noie.  '■  Sollte  es  aber
mil  sich  bringen,  wie  es  on  Zweyfel  thut,"  wrote  Fürsten-
berg on  the  M  of  October,  "dass  wir  stillschweygend  ge-
liehen, dass  die  Bekenntniss  des  Churfürsten  und  seynes.
Anhanes  mit  den  lieyligen  Evangelien  und  Geschriften
gründlich  abgeleynet  worden,  welche  Ableynung  wir  doch
nie  gesehn  noch  an  Tag  kommen  ist,  das  istunsersErach-
tenswider  unser  Gewissen  und  Verstand  und  deshalb  zu
bewilligen  ganz  beschwerlich  und  nit  thunlich,  und  wan
es  gleich  desfalls  nit  zu  widerfechten  were,  khan  E.  W.
QU  Zwevffel  wol  ermessen,  wo  es  zur  Handlung  kommen
soll,  was  E.  W.  derwegen  mit  Pulver  Buxen  Geld  und
andern  zu  leihen  und  darzustrecken  zugemut  word  wer-
den :  wir  wollen  geschweygen  was  das  uf  im  hab  zuzusa-
gen und  zu  halten  was  weiter  beschlossen  wird."  —
"Should  it,  however,  come  to  pass,  as  it  doubtless  will,
that  we  tacitly  admit  that  the  confession  of  the  elector
and  his  followers  is  fundamentally  confuted  from  the  holy
Gqspels  and  Scriptures,  (which  confutation  we  have,  how-
ever, not  seen,  and  which  has  not  yet  been  made  public,)
that  were,  according  to  our  judgment,  against  our  con-
science and  understanding,  and  to  assent  to  it  were  very
difficult,  and  not  a  thing  to  be  done  ;  and  if,  in  like  man-
ner, it  were  not  to  be  controverted,  your  worships  can
without  doubt  well  estimate,  if  it  should  come  to  action,
what  your  worships  would  be  asked  to  lend  and  contribute
in  powder,  firelocks,  money,  and  other  things;  we  will
eay  nothing  about  what  is  to  be  said  to  this  matter,  and

There  were  now  fourteen  cities,  and  among
them  precisely  the  most  affluent  and  flourish-
ing in  the  empire — Strasburg,  Ulm,  Augsburg,
Frankfurt,  and  Nürnberg,  — that  actively  op-
posed the  recess.  They  were  a  minority,  but
not  so  inconsiderable  a  minority  as  had  at
first  appeared.

Meanwhile,  the  emperor  had  business  to
transact  with  the  majority,  who,  as  we  have
said,  did  not  attach  themselves  with  such  cor-
diahty  to  his  house  as  the  support  they  now
received  from  him  seemed  to  demand.

The  grant  of  the  ecclesiastical  lands  in  Ger-
many and  Austria,  made  by  the  pope  to  King
Ferdinand,  was  obstinately  rejected.  The
clergy  first  declared  their  resolution  not  to
consent  to  it,  and  the  whole  assembly  then
made  the  cause  their  own.  In  a  report  with
marginal  notes,  written  by  Granvilla,  it  ap-
pears that  they  threatened  to  withhold  all
subsidies  for  the  Turkish  war  if  this  project
was  persisted  in.  Such  an  innovation,  they
declared,  such  an  assumption  on  the  part  of
the  pope,  could  be  endured  neither  in  the
empire,  nor  in  the  Austrian  hereditary  d'omi-
nions.t  Granvilla  made  this  known  to  the
king,  and  Ferdinand  was  at  length  compelled
to  let  the  bull  drop.

Not  till  then  were  the  Turkish  succours
granted :  nor  even  then  were  they  such  as
the  emperor  had  wished  them  —  permanent,
which  the  states  declared  would  only  be  pos-
sible in  case  of  the  co-operation  of  the  whole
of  Christendom.  On  the  other  hand,  a  con-
siderable body  of  troops  raised  in  haste  were
immediately  granted ;  twice  as  many  as  for
the  Roman  expedition  of  1521  ;  viz.,  40,000
foot  soldiers,  and  8,000  horse,  for  six  months
only  at  present,  but  for  longer  in  case  of  need.

will  hold  to  what  may  be  further  determined."  The  emi-
nently discreet  council  of  Frankfurt  hereupon  resolves  on
this  answer  to  the  emperor.  (14th  Oct.)—  "  Dieweil  Kais.
Ml.  ein  Concilium  zu  verschaffen  sich  allergnediglichst
erpotten,  und  ein  erparer  l\ath  kainswegs  sich  ye  verse-
hen, dass  i<!ais.  Mt.  dem  ewigen  Gottes  Wort  etwas  zu-
wider werde  aufrichten  oder  handhaben  lielffen,  so  wolle
einerbarer  Rath  in  Bedacht  hochgedachter  Kays.  Mt.  als
eines  allergnedigsten  gütigen  miilen  Kaisers  selbss  erbie-
ten sich  desselbigen  getroisten,  auch  füran,  als  einem
christlichen  Magistrat  wol  geziemt,  und  so  viel  sie  gegen
Gott  der  Seelen^und  Gewissen  halb  und  der  Kays.  Ml.
von  des  Reichs  wegen  Gehorsam  zu  leisten  schuldig,  wie
pillig  allerunterthängist  gehorsamen."  —  "  Since  your
imperial  majesty  has  most  graciously  proposed  to  procure
an  ecclesiasiical  council  to  be  held,  and  since  our  honour-
able council  has  by  no  means  seen  that  your  imperial
majesty  would  ever  help  to  establish  or  maintain  any
thingcontrary  tothe  everlasting  word  of  God,  our  honour-
able council  regarding  your  imperial  majesty  as  a  most
gracious,  kind  and  clement  emperor,  proposes  to  trust  to
your  imperial  majesty  as  it  beseems  a  Christian  magis-
tracy, and  in  as  far  as  they  are  bound  to  tender  obedience
to  God,  on  account  of  their  souls  and  consciences,  and  to
your  imperial  majesty  on  account  of  the  empire,  so  far
most  dutifully  to  obey,  as  is  just  and  reasonable."  In
these  obscure  folds  do  they  wrap  up  their  refusal.  In  the
main,  they  agree  with  their  ambassador.

t  Les  deputes  ont  dit  clerement,  que  la  dite  hastive
ayde  ne  sera  en  maniere  nulle  consentie,  si  premierement
le  roi  (Ferdinand)  n'abolit  entieremeut  la  bulle  du  pape,
et  ce  non  seulement  en  I'empire,  mais  aussi  a  i'encontre
des  subjects  de  tous  les  estats  qui  sont  demourans  el  habi-
tans  en  pays  d'Autriche,  car  ils  donnent  ä  entendre  que
de  la  sorte  ils  ne  veulent  nullemenl  estre  en  subjection
du  pape:  (Brussels  Archives.)  Granvilla  adds  the  re-
mark, au  roi,  que  S.  M.  regarde,  etc.

Chap.  IX.

DIET  OF  AUGSBURG. RECESS.

371

The  succours  were  not  to  be  in  money,  but  in
men,  and  to  be  levied  according  to  the  division
of  the  circles.

Some  other  internal  affairs  vrere  likewise
transacted.

One  main  purpose  of  the  diet,  announced
in  the  proclamation,  was,  to  allay  the  disputes
between  the  spiritual  and  temporal  Estates
which  had  recently  made  so  much  noise.  At
a  former  period  the  spiritual  States  had  been
vehemently  attacked;  now,  they  were  the
complainants.  Formerly,  this  would  have
given  occasion  to  the  most  violent  contests;
now,  as  these  mutual  animosities  had  given
way  to  a  common  antipathy,  a  committee,
composed  of  both,  was  appointed,  and  a  com-
promise actually  effected,  which  the  emperor
consented  to  proclaim  as  a  constitution  of  the
empire.*

The  hundred  Gravamina  were  likewise  once
more  brought  forward.  The  temporal  princes,
accustomed  to  persist  in  their  resolutions,  pre-
sented them  anew.  As  the  papal  legate  was
not  empowered  to  enter  into  negotiations  on
the  matter,  the  emperor  engaged  to  have  them
agitated  by  his  ambassador  in  Rome.t

It  appears  almost  as  if  the  abolition  of  these
grievances  had  subsequently  been  regarded
as  conceded,  and  as  if  the  constitution  just
mentioned  had  obtained  a  certain  authority.!
But  these  interests  now  vanished  before  the
far  weightier  one  of  the  reformation.

The  most  important  question  was,  what
attitude  the  emperor  and  the  majority  Avould
assume  in  their  relations  with  the  States  which
had  rejected  their  recess.

From  all  I  have  been  able  to  discover,  it
appears  that  the  emperor  was  more  for  an
immediate  resort  to  force,  while  the  majority
were  inclined  to  defer  taking  up  arms.

After  being  repeatedly  asked,  they  gave  in
their  opinion,  that  the  emperor  should  issue  a
new  religious  mandate  on  the  basis  of  the
edict  of  Worms.  If  Saxony,  with  his  fol-
lowers, should  refuse  obedience  to  it,  the  em-
peror should  summon  them  to  appear  before
him,  pronounce  the  due  punishment,  and  pro-
ceed to  its  execution.

The  recess  is  conceived  in  the  same  spirit.

The  emperor  therein  proclaims  his  serious
determination  to  enforce  his  edict  of  Worms;
he  specifies  a  number  of  infringements  of  it,
all  of  which  he  condemns,  whether  they  be
Called  Lutheran,  Zwinglian.  or  anabaptist ;  he
insists  on  the  maintenance  of  every  point  of
the  disputed  usages  or  doctrines,  and  estab-
lishes anew  the  jurisdiction  of  the  spiritual
princes.  The  imperial  fiscal  was  immediately
to  proceed  judicially  against  the  recusants,

*  Coiicordata  of  the  spiritual  and  temporal  grievances,
collected  in  the  form  of  a  constitution. Bucholtz,  iii.  636.

t  In  Adrian's  Catalogus  is  quoted  (No.  196,  p.  93),  Con-
sultatio  et  deliberatio  consiliariorum  deputatorum  super
gravaminibus  qus  nation!  GermanicEe  per  sedem  apostoli-
ca.ai  inferuntur,  which  would  belong  here.

J  Spittler,  Geschichte  der  Fundamentalgeselze  der
deutsch-katholischen  Kirche  (Werke,  viii.  501),  affirms  that
the  two  documents,  the  Gravamina,  which  were  regarded
as  actually  settled,  and  the  Concordata,  lay  on  the  table
of  the  Imperial  Council  (Hofrath)  for  daily  use.

even  to  the  punishment  of  the  ban  of  the  em-
pire, which  should  be  executed  according  to
the  ordinances  of  the  public  peace,

A  main  point,  and  one  to  which  we  shall
shortly  have  occasion  to  return,  is  that  the
Imperial  Chamber  was  immediately  reconsti-
tuted and  bound  to  enforce  this  recess.

An  appeal  to  arms  remained,  however,  as
we  see  from  this  document,  always  in  reserve;
it  was  an  idea  to  which  the  emperor  inces-
santly recurred.

In  a  letter  to  the  pope  of  the  4th  October,
he  expressed  himself  with  great  vivacity  on
the  subject;  he  informed  him  that  the  nego-
tiations were  broken  off,  and  their  adversaries
more  obstinate  than  ever,  but  that  he  was  de-
termined to  apply  all  his  force  to  subdue  them.
He  wishes  the  pope  to  exhort  the  other  princes
of  Christendom  to  espouse  this  cause. §

We  have  another  letter,  dated  25th  of  Octo-
ber, from  Charles  to  the  cardinals,  in  which  he
earnestly  entreats  them  to  promote  the  convo-
cation of  a  council.  Meanwhile,  he  wishes  to
consult  them  how  he  is  to  act  in  the  interval
towards  the  Lutherans,  so  as  to  avoid  further
danger ;  and  especially  how  he  ought  to  fulfil
the  functions  of  an  emperor,  which  had  de-
volved upon  him.  "We  declare  to  you,"
adds  he,  "that  for  the  termination  of  this
affair  we  will  spare  neither  kingdoms  nor  do-
minions ;  nay,  that  we  will  devote  to  it  body
and  soul,  which  we  have  wholly  dedicated  to
the  service  of  God  Almighty." II

On  the  30th  October  he  sent  his  major  domo,
Pedro  de  la  Cueva,  to  Rome,  to  inform  the
pope  that  the  Catholic  princes  were  indeed  of
opinion  that  the  year  was  too  far  advanced 'to
undertake  any  immediate  measures  against
the  Lutherans ;  but  to  exhort  him  (the  pope)
by  no  means  to  desist  from  preparations  for
such  an  enterprise.  The  emperor,  on  his
side,  however  desirable  it  might  be  for  him
to  go  to  Spain,  would  postpone  every  thing,  in
order  imjiiediately  to  put  in  execution  what-
ever in  the  pope's  opinion  might  conduce  to
the  service  of  God  and  of  his  holiness.

In  Rome  the  question  had  long  been  de-
cided. Campeggi  had  told  the  emperor  that,
without  some  strong  measure,  he  would  arrive
at  no  result.  He  had  reminded  him  of  Maxi-
mihan,  who  had  never  been  able  to  obtain
obedience  till  he  took  up  arms,  and  used
them  successfully  against  the  house  of  the
Palatinate. IF

§  Raince,  18lh  Oct.  Lui  (au  Pape)  escrivoit  le  dit  em-
pereur  estre  delibere  employer  tous  ses  biens  et  forces  et
sa  propre  personne  ä  leur  faire  la  guerre,  priant  S.  Ste.
vouloir  adnionester  et  requerir  tous  les  princes  Chretiens
vouloir  aider  et  entrer  ä  I'expedition  de  la  dite  emprise,  et
sur  cela  s.  d.  St6.  fait  dimanche  congregation  de  cardinaux.
MS.  Bethune  at  Paris.

II II  vous  plaira,  selon  votre  prudence  et  bonte,  adviser
comment  on  se  peut  gouverner  avec  eux— (les  Lutheriens)

tant  pour  empescher  qu'il  n'advienne  plus  detriment

ä  la  chose  publique,  que  partiellement  pour  la  satisfaction
des  charges  et  offices,  esquels  par  la  divine  clemence  fumes
constitues,  vous  advisansque  n'epargnerons  ni  royaumes
ni  seigneuries  pour  la  consommation  de  chose  tant  neces-
saire,  etc Bethune,  8539.

TT  Molto  piu  a  V.  Mtä.  conviensi  in  questa  impressa
santa  e  Christiana  a  farsi  obedire  con  tutte  le  vie  e  modi
che  si  ponno  trovare,  che  fece  la  felice  memoria  di  Maxi-
miliano  sue  avo  nelle  imprese  che  contra  i  Palatini  si

372

WARLIKE  DISPOSITION  OF  THE  EMPEROR.

Book  V.

In  short;  as  the  Protestants  were  not  to  be
brought  to  conform  by  mild  measures,  western
Christendom  and  the  German  empire,  repre-

gloriosamente  fini.  dipoi  la  quale  sempre  fu  poi  tenuto  e

riverito  e  obedito, ricordando  sempre  che  e  impossi-

bile  senza  qualche  gagliarda  exactione  et  ordine  estirpare
le  heresie.

sented  by  the  pope,  the  emperor,  and  the  as-
sembly of  the  empire,  appeared  resolved  to
put  them  down  either  by  law  or  by  force.

It  remained  to  be  seen  whether  the  re-
cusants would  have  the  physical  and  moral
strength  necessary  to  make  effectual  resist-
ance.

. BOOK  VI.

ORIGIN  AND  PROGRESS  OF  THE  SCHMALKALDIC  LEAGUE.
. 1530—1535.

As  even  in  the  remote  times  described  by
Tacitus,  the  Germans  deemed  it  the  heaviest
of  all  punishm.ents  to  be  forbidden  to  attend
the  public  assemblies  and  sacrifices ;  so.  during
the  middle  ages,  they  acconnted  it  an  intolera-
ble misfortune  to  be  excluded  from  the  com-
munion of  the  church  and  the  peace  of  the
empire.  These  two  communities  appeared  to
embrace  all  the  good  which  man  can  enjoy  on
this  side  the  grave  and  on  the  other.

The  evangelical  States  now  found  them-
selves on  the  point  of  being  excluded  from
both.

From  the  church,  encumbered  as  it  was
Avith  abuses  which  they  had  hoped  to  reform.,
they  had,  since  their  efforts  were  unsuccess-
ful, voluntarily  severed  themselves.  They
clung  with  fervent  and  steadfast  attachment
to  the  idea  of  an  improved  church.  On  the
other  hand;  the  established  church  strenuously
resisted  every  attempt  nt  change,  and  repulsed
every  advance  unaccompanied  by  complete
submission.

Hence  it  happened  that  the  imperial  au-
thority, on  which  the  evangelical  party  at
first  thought  they  might  rely  for  support,
having  concluded  a  close  alliance  with  Rome,
now  threatened  them  with  exclusion  from  the
public  peace, — that  is  to  say,  with  war  and
ruin.

It  seemed  evident  that  the  evangelical  party,
with  their  slender  territorial  power,  still  fur-
ther enfeebled  by  internal  divisions,  if  once
involved  in  a  serious  contest  vrith  a  large  ma-
jority of  the  States,  the  puissant  emperor,  and
the  whole  of  Latin  Christendom  united,  must
be  instantly  and  hopelessly  overwhelmed.

This  it  is  which  constitutes  the  most  striking
feature  of  the  diet  of  Augsburg:  that,  in  full
view  of  this  danger,  they  resolved  never  to
abandon  the  religious  position  they  had  taken
up,  and  the  importance  of  which  filled  their
whole  souls.

When,  indeed,  this  resolution  was  once
taken,  it  appeared,  on  a  calm  survey  of  their
situation,  that,  in  spite  of  the  superiority  of
their  opponents,  the  cause  they  so  intrepidly
r ■'^fended  was  by  no  means  desperate.

And,  in  the  first  place,  the  tendency  to  re-
lorra  was  inherent  in  the  course  of  events  and
the  progress  of  public  opinion,  and  had  innu-
merable allies  hing  without  the  pale  of  its
acknowledged  domain;  all  the  force  of  the
principle  of  which  the  protestors  were  the
avowed  champions,  must,  without  any  effort
of  theirs,  come  to  their  aid.
2g '

At  the  same  time  the  whole  of  the  Germane-
Roman  nations  of  the  west  were  attacked  by
the  most  formidable  enemy  they  had  eve'r
encountered.  In  spite  of  all  differences,  in
spite  of  the  attempt  to  exclude  them  from  the
great  pohtical  body  of  which  they  were  mem-
bers, the  Protestants  belonged  to  this  menaced
and  assailed  community  ;  they,  indeed,  were
the  representatives  of  a  new  stage  of  that  in-
tellectual culture,  of  which  the  barbarian
enemy  meditated  the  extirpation ;  Europe
neither  could  nor  would  dispense  with  their
aid .

But,  lastly,  the  external  unity  of  Cathohc
Christendom  was  only  the  product  of  a  mo-
ment of  good  fortune  and  victory,  or  of
prompt  and  successful  pohcy.  It  was  hardly
to  be  expected  that  such  a  peace  as  this  would

I  lead  to  serious  co-operation,  or  would^even  be

:  of  any  long  continuance.

j  I  do  not  believe  that  any  of  the  men  then
living  arrived  at  a  full  sense  of  the  real  situa-
tion of  things.  Landgrave  Philip  was  the  first
who  had  a  dim  perception  of  it ;  the  others,
without  much  reflection  on  vv'hat  was  passing
around  them,  took  counsel  only  of  their  con-
sciences.

The  important  thing  both  for  them  and  for
the  general  progress  of  society  was,  that  a
centre  of  resistance  should  be  firmly  estab-
lished, so  that  they  might  not  be  overpowered
by  the  first  storm,  and  might  on  some  future
occasion  take' advantage  of  favouring  circum-

I  stances,  by  which  their  enemies  nov*'  so  largely

i  profited.

CHAPTER  I.

FOUNDATION OF THE SCH3IALKALDIC LEAGUE.

The  church  had  of  herself  no  political
power  ]  for  that,  she  was  wholly  dependent  on
the  arm  of  the  empire.  "  The  anathema."
says  the  Sachsenspiegel,  '-'injures  only  the
soul :  the  penalties  of  the  law  of  the  land  or
of  the  feudal  law  are  consequent  on  the  king's
ban."

Hostile  as  was  the  temper  of  the  majority
at  the  diet  to  the  Protestants,  this  ban,  spite
of  their  secession  from  the  church,  was  not
prQclaimed  against  them.  The  'majority,
which  had  not  even  permitted  the  emperor
to  act  as  judge,  hesitated  to  put  arms  into  his
hands.

(373)

374

ELECTION  OF  THE  KING  OF  THE  ROMANS.

Book  VI.

While  war  still  appeared  imminent,  they
conceived  the  design  of  transferring  the  com-
bat to  another  field ;  "they  would  not  fight,
but  right"  {nicht  fechten  sondern  rechten)^  as
they  expressed  it.  Of  all  the  great  institu-
tions of  the  empire  which  had  been  so  labori-
ously founded  for  the  conservation  of  the  na-
tional unity,  the  only  one  that  still  enjoyed
some  consideration  Vv-as  the  Imperial  Chamber
(Reichskammergericht),  which  exercised  the
jadicial  functions  of  the  emperor,  while  its
character  was  eminently  representative.*  This
tribunal  they  resolved  to  employ  for  the  pur-
pose they  meditated.  At  the  diet  of  Augs-
burg, the  Imperial  Chamber  was  extended
and  better  organised  for  the  despatch  of  busi-
ness. The  number  of  assessors  was  increased
from  eighteen  to  twenty-four,  retaining,  of
course,  the  right  of  election  of  the  circles;
but  besides  this,  it  was  thought  necessary,  in
order  to  get  rid  of  long  arrears  of  business,  to
appoint  eight  experienced  doctors.  Further,
the  court  determined  to  subject  itself  to  a  new
visitation.  The  reader  will  remember  the
manner  in  which  it  was  purified,  at  the  time
the  old  Council  of  Regency  fell.t  The  same
spirit  presided  over  the  present  reforms.  Seven
of  the  procurators  and  advocates  were  se-
riously admonished  on  account  of  their  reh-
gious  opinions,  and  an  eighth  was  obliged  to
absent  himself  for  a  time.t  And  this  tribunal,
thus  strengthened,  and  purged  from  all  incli-
nation to  the  new  opinions,  was  now  most
earnestly  exhorted  to  observe  the  Augsburg
recess,  particularly  in  the  article  concerning
faith ;  the  president  of  the  chamber  was  to  be
not  only  empowered,  but  bound,  to  remove
any  who  might  infringe  it,  and  must  do  so
mider  pain  of  the  emperor's  displeasure. §

The  Imperial  Chamber  was  thus  rendered  a
complete  expression  of  the  prevailing  senti-
ments of  the  majority.

The  Protestants  were  well  aware  of  this.
In  a  project  for  the  maintenance  of  peace,
communicated  to  them  at  the  conclusion  of  the
diet,  it  was  said,  that  no  one  should  invade
another's  dominions  unlawfully.  They  in-
ferred from  this  that  such  invasion  might  take
place,  in  pursuance  of  a  sentence  of  the  Im-
perial Chamber,  the  nature  of  which  could  not
be  doubtful.

At  the  same  time,  however,  a  new^  measure
was  introduced  for  the  government  of  the
empire.

Of  late  years  the  house  of  Austria  had
more  than  once  had  occasion  to  fear  that,  in
consequence  of  the  nullity  of  the  Council  of
Regency,  and  the  absence  of  the  emperor,
people  might  either  proceed  to  elect  another
chief,  or  might  revive  and  recognise  the  rights
of  the  vicars  of  the  empire,  of  w^hom  the
Elector  of  Saxony  was  one.

*  Ständisch. See  Translator's  note,  p.  52.

t  See  p.  193.
• 1  Harpprer.ht,  Staatsarchiv,  des  Kammergerichts,  v.  82.

§  Recess  of  the  19th  Nov.  1530,  §§  76,  82,  91.  All  the
persons  of  the  imperial  chamber  should  "  bear  themselves
agreeably  to  the  recess  of  this  diet  now  and  here  holden,
esnecially  in  the  article  of  faith  and  religion."

In  order  to  put  an  end  forever  to  plans  of .
this  sort,  the  emperor  abandoned  all  considera-
tions regarding  his  possible  posterity,  and,  as
we  have  said,  determined  to  raise  his  brother
to  the  rank  of  »King  of  the  Romans.

It  had  been  objected  to  INIaXimilian  on  a
similar  occasion,  that  he  was  himself  not
crowned  emperor,  and  therefore,  in  fact,  only
King  of  the  Romans;  and  this  was  one  of  the
reasons  for  Charles's  coronation  in  Bologna.

To  this  the  five  Catholic  electors  raised  little
objection,  presuming  that  their  compliance
would  be  requited  with  favours.  The  Pala-
tinate was  promised  compensation  for  its
losses  in  the  Landshut  war,  and  moreover  the
sum  of  160.000  gulden.  A  final  settlement
of  the  affair  of  Zossen  and  the  Bohemian  fiefs,
together  with  other  advantages,  was  promised
to  Brandenburg ;  in  his  letters  he  tells  with
great  delight  what  a  gracious  emperor  and
king  he  has.ll  A  number  of  extraordinary,
and  indeed  almost  contradictory  favours  were
to  be  granted  to  the  Elector  of  Mainz;  e.  g.
to  procure  him,  from  the  court  of  Rome,  the
powers  of  a  legate  a  latere  for  his  dioceses,
and  at  the  same  time,  permission  to  leave
these  same  dioceses  to  coadjutors,  and  keep
an  accumulation  of  estates  and  benefices  for
his  own  perpetual  use.T  Treves  had  for  some
years  been  secured  by  a  sum  of  money.  The
longest  hesitation  was  on  the  part  of  Cologne,
the  promises  made  to  whom  eleven  years  ago
at  the  election  of  Charles  V.  were  not  yet  ful-
filled; but  at  length,  having  received  suffi-
cient guarantee,  he  assented.  Saxony  alone
held  out.

It  was  suggested  by  some,  that,  as  Saxony
could  in  no  case  be  won  over  without  conces-
sions which  the  emperor  was  determined  not
to  grant;  it  would  be  most  expedient  to  take
advantage  of  his  defection  from  the  Church  of
I  Rome,  at  once  to  exclude  him.  The  pope  ac-
I  tually  sent  a  brief,  according  to  which  Elector
John  could  be  stripped  of  his  right  of  elect-
ing, in  virtue  of  a  bull  of  Leo  X.,  subjecting
the'  defenders  of  Luther  to  the  pains  and
penalties  of  heresy.**  Deliberations  were  ac-
tually held  upon  the  matter;  but  the  electors
had  not  yet  reached  such  a  point  as  to  con-
sent to  so  formless  a  proceeding,  which  might
afterwards  be  turned  against  any  one  of  them-
selves. The  evidence  we  have  seems  to
prove,  that  the  elector  palatine  most  strenu-
ously'opposed  it,tt  and  that  John  of  Saxony
was'in  fact  invited.  The  pliant  pope  had  fur-
nished a  brief  to  meet  this  case  also,  in  which
he  declared  that  the  participation  of  Saxony,
ahhough,  in  virtue  of  the above-m.entioned

II  Letter  of  the  ]Sth  Äug.  1530. Berlin  Archives.

•JT  The  last,  in  the  letter  of  grace  (Gnadenbrief)  of  the
6th  Sept.  in  Bucholtz.  iii.  662.  The  first,  in  the  Brussels
Archives,  7th  Sept.  Contendemus  obtinere  a  D.  N.  de-
mente VII.  facnltates  ad  instar  lesati  a  latere  pro  electors
antedicto  in  omnibus  suis  dioecesibus,  nerape  Moguntina,
Magdeburgensi,  et  Halberstadensi.

**  Extract  in  Bucholtz,  ix.  17.

ttTaubenheimtoEI.  John.  Förstemann.  ii.  821.  "Wie
ichs  vermerke,  so  szolle  Pfalz  die  vornehmste  Ursach  sein,
damit  E.  Ch.  G.  nicht,  ausgeschlossen  werden."  Accord-
ing to  what  I  observe,  the  palatine  is  the  chief  cause  why
your  E.  G.  is  not  excluded.

Chap.  I.

ORIGIN  OF  THE  SCHMALKALDIC  LEAGUE.

375

bull;  he  might  be  regarded  as  excommuni-
catecl,  should  not  prejudice  the  validity  of  the
election.

The  warning  thus  given,  and  the  threat  im-
plied in  the  new  mstructions  to  the  Imperial
Chamber,  were  the  immediate  causes  of  the
Schmalkaldic  League.

We  have  seen  how  little  the  evangelical
princes  had  hitherto  succeeded  in' forming
any  permanent  union;  and  even  now  they
w^avered  as  long  as  the  emperor  remained  in
Augsburg,  and  there  was  still  a  doubt  what
measures' he  might  take  in  concert  with  the
majority.  A  congress  already  convoked  was
given  up  again  in  consequence  of  some  pacific
expressions  of  the  emperor.*  But  now  that  the
recess  had  appeared,  and  was  of  so  decidedly
hostile  a  character.  —  now,  that  the  above-
mentioned  citation  was  at  the  same  time  sent
to  the  Saxon  court,  they  could  no  longer  defer
their  meeting.

In  a  letter  to  George  of  Brandenburg,  Elec-
tor John  gives  the  following  reasons :  —  First,
that  in  answer  to  a  question  concerning  the
instructions  given  to  the  fiscal  of  the  Imperial
Chamber,  the  emperor  had  replied,  that  he
(the  fiscal)  should  not  be  prohibited  from  pro-
ceeding against  those  who  would  not  submit
to  his  "recess:  it  would,  therefore,  be  neces-
sary to  deliberate  on  a  unanimous  exception
against  such  a  proceeding.  And  likewise,
that  the  summons  to  the  election  rendered  it
necessary  that  they  should  converse  with
each  other  about  it,  and  immediately  agree
on  some  common  measures  of  opposition.!

I  know  not  whether  I  am  wrong  in  sup-
posing that  this  turn  of  affairs  w^as  essentially
favourable  to  the  Protestants.

The  all-important  point  was.  that  they  should
not  be  excluded  from  the  peace  of  the  empire,
on  account  of  their  ecclesiastical  changes.

Had  the  old  modes  of  thinking  still  pre-
vailed, a  crusade  would  have  been  set  on  foot
against  them.

But,  inasmuch  as  the  majority  resolved  to
attack  them  by  means  of  the  great  represent-
ative [ständischen)  tribunal,  and  on  the  field
of  the  ancient  laws  of  the  empire  ;  inasmuch
as  the  emperor  invited  them  to  concur  in  his
brother's  election,  the  legality  of  their  partici-
pation in  the  business  of  the  empire,  in  spite  of
*  their  ecclesiastical  differences,  was  recognised.

The  whole  contest  was  converted  from  an
ecclesiastical  into  a  general; — from  a  political
question,  to  one  of  public  law;  and  on  this
ground  the  Protestants  had  now  to  unite,  and
to  organise  their  resistance.

On  the  22d  of  December,  1530,  John  of
Saxony,  Ernest  of  Lüneburg,  Philip  of  Hessen.
"Wolfg-ang  of  Anhalt,  the  Counts  Gebhard  and
Al  brecht  of  jMansfeld,  the  latter  of  whom  was
bearer  of  the  vote  of  Grubenhagen,  and  also
delegates  from  George of  Brandenburg and

*  It  was  fixed  for  the  Monday  after  the  feast  of  St.
Catharine. (28th  Nov.  1530.)

f  This  is  in  fact  expressed  in  the  paper  which  is  an-
nexed to  the  letter  from  Torgau,  of  St.  Andrew's  Eve
(29th  Nov.)  The  elector  invites  the  markgrave,  "  ir  (S.
Gn.)  seihst  und  der  Sachen  zu  gut,"  ("  for  your  grace's  own
sake,  and  that  of  the  cause.") (W.  A.)

from  several  cities,  assembled  in  Scnmalkal-
den.  The  heights  which  surround  the  town
were  covered  with  snow.  It  was  not  for  their
pleasure  that  they  passed  the  festival  of
Christmas  in  this  small  frontier  town,  in  the
midst  of  a  rude  mountain  district-.

They  resolved,  in  the  fir.st  place,  that,  as
soon  as  any  attempt  should  be  made  by  the
imperial  fiscal  to  enforce  the  law  against  any
one  of  them,  the  whole  body  should  come  to
his  aid.j  They  agreed  on  certain  exceptions
which  they  intended  to  take  hi  common,  and
appointed  two  or  three  procurators  to  conduct
the  business  before  the  Imperial  Chamber.

This  is  the  essential  part  of  the  league ;  and
it  affords  the  cfearest  evidence  that  the  reli-
gious dispute  was  transformed  into  one  of
law.  In  this  all  who  had  originally  subscribed
the  Augsburg  Confession,  or  had  since  given
in  their  adhesion  to  it,  joined.

They  also  agreed  that  they  must  try  to  in-
duce the  emperor  to  mitigate  the  terms  of  the
recess,  or  perhaps,  protest  against  it  altogether.

Had  they  proceeded  to  act  immediately,  it
is  probable  that  a  uniform  external  organiza-
tion of  the  new  churches  would  have  been
effected.  Most  of  them  were  in  favour  of  the
introduction  of  a  general  church  ordinance, —
mainly  in  order  to  render  open  vice  amenable
to  ecclesiastical  chastisement.

On  the  other  hand,  they  could  not  come  to
so  perfect  an  understanding  concerning  the
second  principal  subject  of  deliberation — the
election  of  the  king.

Saxony  declared  his  opinion  that  they  should
not  allow  so  great  a  latitude  to  the  emperor,
as  that  he  should  be  able  to  carry  through  an
affair  of  this  importance  single-handed;  other-
wise, there  would  soon  be  an  end  of  the  privi-
leges and  franchises  of  the  empire.  There
was  a  great  difference,  he  said,  between  an
election  after  a  regular  vacancy,  and  an  at-
tempt to  place  a  king  of  the  Romans  by  the
side  of  a  living  emperor.  In  the  latter  case,
a  consultation  of  all  the  electors,  and  an  una-
nimous resolution,  must  precede  the  summons
to  the  election.  But  nothing  of  the  kind  had
been  thought  of.  Even  the  citation  which
had  been  sent  to  himself  (the  Elector  of
Saxony),  allowed  much  too  short  a  time,  and
was  as  completely  null  a«  all  the  rest  of  the
proceedings.  Lastly,  it  was  impossible  to  suf-
fer Ferdinand,  who  had  distinguished  himself
by  his  enmity  to  the  Gospel,  to  be  imposed
upon  them.  While  lieutenant,  he  had  con-
trived the  strangest  artifices,  and  as  king,  he

J  'Wo  der  kais.  Fiscal,  der  Bund  zu  Schwaben  oder
Jemand  anders  J.  Chf.  und  Fürstlichen  Gnaden  oder  die
eemeldten  Städte,  eine  oder  mehre,  oder  jemand  von  den
Iren  in  Sachen  unfern  heil.  Glauben  oder  v.-as  demselben
anhanget  (belaniren),  auf  den  ausgegangenen  Abschied
fürnehmen  und  im  Schien  des  Rechtens  oder  andere  Wese
beklagen  würde,— das  Ire  allerGn  und  Gunsten  einander
in  solche  beistendig,  räthlich  und  hülflich  seyn  sollen."—
"  If  the  imperial  fiscal,  the  Swabian  league,  or  any  others,
should  undertake,  in  virtue  of  the  recess  just  published,
and  under  the  appearance  of  law,  or  in  any  other  way,  to
accuse  your  E.  and  P.  Graces,  or  the  above-mentioned
cities,  on  account  of  our  holy  faith,  or  what  is  connected
therewith— that  all  your  graces  should  stand  by  one  an-
other with  counsel  and  help."

870

QUESTION  OF  RESISTANCE  TO  THE  EMPEROR.

Book  VI.

elect  Ferdinand  thus,  without  any  stipulation,
would  be  to  put  arms  into  the  hands  of  their
enemies.  They  must  stand  firm  as  one  man,
and  refuse  obedience  with  common  consent.
They  could  negotiate  afterwards.  They  would
then  have  a  good  opportunity  to  oblige  the  king
to  order  the  fiscal  to  stay  proceedhigs,  or  en-
tirely to  repeal  the  recess.*  They  might,
according  to  the  expression  in  the  original,
'•put  a  bit  in  his  mouth."

These  views  were  very  readily  listened  to,
and  especially  coincided  with  those  of  Land-
grave Philip.  They  were  approved  by  a  large
majority  of  the  States.

Markgrave  George  and  his  neighbours  of
Nürnberg  alone  would  not  go  so  far.  The
former  stood  in  too  various  and  peculiar  rela-
tions to  Ferdinand,  to  venture  to  off"end  him
personally.  The  great  desire  of  the  latter
was,  to  show  themselves  the  more  especial
subjects  of  the  emperor.  At  the  first  request
on  his  part,  they  had  delivered  up  the  corona-
tion regalia  which  were  kept  at  Nürnberg,  and
had  sent  an  ambassador  for  that  express  pur-
pose to  the  imperial  court.

Another  question  was  i-ntimately  connected
with  the  former.

Although  the  attacks  more  immediately  to
be  dreaded  were  of  a  judicial  kind,  it  was  im-
possible not  to  see  that,  in  case  of  need,  the
emperpr  meditated  employing  force.  It  was
remarked  that  in  the  recess  he  had  enjoined
peace  on  others,  but  had  not  promised  to  ob-
serve it  liimself.t  It  is  certain  that  a  corre-
spondence concerning  the  necessity  c^  raising
troops,  was  carried  on  between  Ferdinand  and
the  papal  court,  in  the  beginning  of  the  year
1531.1:  People  asserted  that  they  had  heard
Henry  of  Brunswick  say,  that  he  and  Esk  of
Reischach  were  to  take  the  command  of  the
army.

The  first  question,  therefore,  to  be  decided,
was,  whether  it  was  lawful  to  resist  the  em-
peror. ■

The  opinion  of  the  theologians,  who  took
their  ideas  of  the  imperial  authority  from  the
New  Testament,  was,  as  we  are  aware,  against
resistance.

But  in  a  time  of  such  vast  changes,  when
the  secular  element  was  universally  emanci-
pating itself  from  the  hierarchy,  the  notions
of  public  law  necessarily  became  cleared  of
all  theological  admixture.

The  jurists  adduced  certain  arguments
drawn  from  the  civil  law,  concerning  the  re-
sistance which  might  be  ofi'ered  to  a  judge
who  should  take  no  notice  of  a  legal  appeal ;
chiefly, however, they  called in question,

*  Article,  what  is  to  be  treated  of  the  following  day  at
Schmalkalden. (W.  A.)

t  Letter  of  the  Saxon  envoy.  Förstemann,  ii.  711.  The
Nürnbergers  announced  as  early  as  the  21st  October,  that
all  was,  "dahin  gericht,  wie  man  die  thatliche  Handlung
wider  die  Anhenger  des  Evancreliums  zum  tapfersten  an-
fange,"—"so  arranged,  that  forcible  measures  may  be  the
most  vigorously  begun  against  the  adherents  of  the
Gospel."

X  A.  de  Bnrgo  to  Ferdinand,  2d  March,  1531.  Dixi  quod
esset  providendum  de  viribus  etremediis  in  re  Lutherana,
quod  solum  concilium  non  futurum. esset  sufficiens,  sed
paratffi  vires  facerent  bonum  concilium,  et  quod  paratis
viribus  possint  illi  (ae?)  converti,  ubi,  etc.

whether  the  power  which  the  theologians
ascribed  to  the  emperor  was  really  his  by
law.§

The  theologians  hai  even  advised  the
princes  to  allow  the  emperor  to  proceed  in
their  dominions  according  to  his  pleasure  ;  to
allow^  him,  for  example,  to  drive  out  them-
selves (the  preachers).  To  this  it  was  objected,
that  such  a  proceeding  would  be  utterly  un-
precedented m  any  other  matter,  and  that  the
emperor  did,  in  fact,  possess  no  such  power.

New  ideas  on  the  general  nature  of  the
German  constitution  gradually  made  their
way.  It  was  observed,  that  if,  on  the  one
hand,  the  princes  did  homage  to  the  emperor,
he,  on  the  other,  took  an  oath  which  he  was
bound  to  observe  :  the  princes  were  the  here-
ditary sovereigns  of  the  country  ]  the  emperor
was  elected.  A  doctrine  which  was  long  in
obtaining  acceptance,  and  was  not  recognised
as  consonant  with  public  law  until  the  conclu-
sion of  the  i^eace  of  Westphalia,  was  likewise
then  broached  : — the  doctrine,  namely,  that
the  constitution  of  the  German  empire  was
not  of  a  monarchical,  but  an  aristocratical
nature.  According  to  this  theory,  the  relation
of  the  princes  to  their  head  was  not  very
different  from  that  of  the  senators  of  Rome  to
the  consuls,  or  those  of  Venice  to  their  doge,
or  of  a  chapter  to  its  bishop.  Kut  neither
canons  nor  senators  had  ever  been  bound  to
passive  obedience.  '•'  The  States  govern  jointly
with  the  emperor,  and  the  emperor  is  not  a
Qionarch.'"il

To  these  arguments  the  theologians  had  no-
thing more  to  oppose.  They  could  now  ad-
here to  their  text  from  Scripture,  without  being
compelled  by  it  to  condemn  all  resistance  to
the  emperor.  "We  did  not  know,"  say  they,
"  that  the  sovereign  power  itself  was  subject
to  law."1F

The  earnestness  of  their  scruples  was  proved
by  the  difficulty  with  which  they  shook  them
ofi-,  and  by  their  subsequent  recurrence  to
them  from  time  to  time.

Luther  was  peculiarly  impressed  with  the
fact  that,  as  he  had  continually  remarked,  the
emperor  did  not  attempt  to  act  independently  ;
but  always  by  the  advice  of  the  pope,  and  of
the  princes  of  Germany.  He  pronounced  him
to  be  no  '•  Augmenter  of  the  Empire,""**  but  a
captain  and  sworn  vassal  of  the  pope.  And
should  the  Protestants  now  encourage  their
old  enemies  —  their  neighbours  of  Bohemia,
who  would  use  the  authority  of  the  emperor's
name  —  by  declaring  resistance  unlawful^
"  They  hope,"  says  Luther,  "  that  we  shall  not
defend  ourselves.  But  if  they  mean  to  show^
their  knighthood  against  the  blood  of  our
people,  they  shall  do  so  with  peril  and  fear. "ft

§  Etlicher  furtrefflicher  Rechtsselehrten  in  Wittenberg
Sentenz.  (Sentence  of  certain  excellent  lawyers  in  Wit-
tenberg.) Plortleder,  Book  ii.  cap.  vi.

II  Juristical  decision;  Hortleder,  P.  II.  B.  ii.  C.  viii.  at
the  end.

«^  Considerations  of  the  Theologians, Ibid.  c.*9.

**  Mehrer  des  Reichs ;  one  of  the  titles  of  the  Emperor.
— Transl.

tt  See  "Warnung  an  seine  lieben  Deutschen."— Altenb.
v.  538. "Alles  ist  ein  Getrieb  des  obersten  Schalks  in  der

Chap.  I.

ELECTION  OF  KING  FERDINAND.

377

On  these  grounds  Saxony  now  proposed  to
the  assembled  States  a  league  for  their  mutual
defence,  even  aganist  the  emperor.  In  a]l
previous  coalitions  of  the  kind,  he  had  been
excepted ;  but  such  a  course  would  now  be
useless,  since  their  enemies  now  acted  under
cover  of  his  name.*

These  views  were  by  no  means  shared  by
Nürnberg,  or  by  Älarkgrave  George.  Their
theologians  had  remained  unconvinced  or
doubtful.  Nürnberg  declared  that  it  could  not
found  so  important  a  resolution  as  this  on  opi-
nions of  so  revolting  a  kind.  The  reader  will
remember  that  a  similar  difference  existed  the
year  before,  between  the  divines  of  the  two
States."!"

The  others,  however,  accustomed  to  follow
Saxony,  or  perhaps  even  rejoiced  that  she  had
at  length  abandoned  her  scruples,  declared
their  entire  assent.

A  draft  of  an  agreement  was  immediately
drawn  up,  in  which  the  emperor's  name  was,
indeed,  carefully  avoided,  and  the  causes  of
alarm  obscurely  alluded  to,  in  such  expres-
sions as  this.  "  It  appears  as  if  there  existed
an  intention 'of  crushing  the  followers  of  the
pure  word  of  God  ;"  but  it  was  more  exphcit
iiivwhat  related  to  measures  of  defence.  The
allies  bound  themselves  to  hasten  to  the  aid
of  any  one  among  them,  who  might  be  at-
tacked on  account  of  the  word  of  God.  It
was  further  declared  that  this  league  was
directed  neither  against  the  emperor,  nor
against  any  individual  whatsoever ;  which
only  meant  that  it  would  attack  no  one,  and
would  rigorously  confine  itself  to  self-defence.

The  league  included  Saxony,  Hessen,  Lüne-
burg, Wolfgang  of  Anhalt,  the  two  Counts  of
Mansfeld,  the  cities  of  Magdeburg  and  Bre-
men. The  other  assembled  princes  and  States
promised  to  declare  themselves  within  a  short
time.  On  the  3 1st  of  December  they  dis-
persed.J

These  nine  days  may  be  reckoned  among
the  most  important  in  the  history  of  the  world.
The  threatened  and  despised  minority,  under
the  influence  of  a  religious  idea  on  which  de-
pended the  future  development  of  the  human
mind,  assumed  an  energetic  and  even  warlike

Welt."— "All  is  a  manceuvre  of  the  chiefest  rogue  in  the
world."  He  did  not  advise  recourse  to  arms;  but,  as  he
■writes  to  Spengler,  "  Ego  pro  mea  parte  dixi,  ego  consulo
ut  theologus ;  sed  si  juristae  possent  docere  legibus  suis  id
licere,  ego  pertnitierem  eos  suis  legibus  uti.  Ipsi  vide-
rint."

*  "  Dieselbig  Widerpartei  die  Sachen  in  die  kaiserlich
Majestät,  als  ob  sy  diselbig  gar  nicht  zu  thun  hätte,
Echieven  wil." — '-The  same  adverse  party  will  shove  the
thing  on  his  imperial  majesty,  as  if  tliey  themselves  had
nothing  at  all  to  do  with  it."

t  Müller's  Annales  Norici.  One  disputed  question  was,
v.hether  the  imperial  authority  extended  to  matters  of
religion.  The  Landgrave  of  Hessen,  particularly,  denied
this.  The  Brandenburg  opinion,  however,  maintains  it.
Saxony  says,  in  the  above-mentioned  proposals,  "Wo
sich  gleichwol  I.  Mt.  Amt  in  des  Glaubens  Sachen  er-
strecken sollt,  wäre  das  doch  durch  die  Appellation,  so  an
I.  Maj.  un  ein  Concilium  sämtlich  nach  rechtlicher  Ord-
nung erschienen  ist,  suspendirt."  —  "But  even  if  your
majesty's  functions  should  extend  to  matters  of  faith,
-  they  must  be  suspended  by  the  appeal  which  has  been  ad-
dressed, according  to  legal  order,  to  your  imperial  majesty
and  a  council."

t  Eece#s  of  the  diet  held  at  Schmalkalden,  1530.  Last
day  of  December. (W.  A.)

48  2g*

attitude.  They  determined  in  like  manner,
as  they  had  confessed  the  new  doctrine  and
refused  to  abandon  it,  so  they  would  now  de-
fend the  whole  position  into  which  that  con-
fession had  led  them  ; — by  legal  means,  in  the
first  place ;  but  if  necessary,  by  arms.  As  ta
the  former,  all  were  agreed ;  as  to  the  latter,
the  majority  (some  still  entertained  scruples
as  to  their  legal  right);  and  thus,  at  the  very
origin  of  the  innovation,  a  compact  and  deter-
mined union  was  formed  for  its  maintenance,
which  its  antagonists  were  likely  to  find  it
difficult  to  overcome.

The  affair  of  the  election  soon  proved  the
force  and  value  of  this  resistance.

During  the  deliberations  in  Schmalkalden,
John  Frederic  of  Saxony,  the  heir  to  the  elec-
torate, had  gone  to  Cologne,  to  oppose  the
election  in  his  father's  name.

His  opposition  had,  as  may  be  imagined,  no
effect  in  preventing  a  thing  which  was  already
decided.  Ferdinand  was  chosen  at  Cologne
(5th  January,  1531)  by  the  five  other  electors^
and  a  few  days  afterwards  was  crowned  at
Aix  la  Chapelle.^  By  his  election  .capitula-
tions he  was  expressly  bound  to  maintain  the
existing  forms  of  religion,  and  specially  in
virtue  of  the  recess  of  Augsburg. II  This  re-
cess, which  involved  all  the  interests  of  the
Catholic  majority,  and  was  the  principal  wea-
pon in  their  hands,  had  nov/  all  the  value  and
force  of  law.  From  this  time  the  emperor
left  the  administration  of  the  empire  chiefly
to  his  brother.lF  He  reserved  to  himself  only
the  privilege  of  being  consulted  in  some
weighty  cases  ',  c.  g.  the  granting  of  banner
fiefs,  or  of  high  titles  of  nobility  ;  or  the  deci-
sion concerning  monopohes  —  the  most  con-
siderable mercantile  interests  of  those  days :
or  such  proclamations  of  ban,  or  alliances,  as
might  have  the  effTect  of  involving  the  country
in  regular  war.**  But  how  complete  and  valid
soever  the  election  thus  appeared  to  be,  the
opposition  of  Saxony  did  not  fail  to  produce  a
great  effect.  The  public  voice  was,  inde-
pendently of  this,  against  the  act  of  the  elec-

§  Spalatin,  Verzeichniss  der  Handlung  in  Colin,  in
Struve's  Archiv,  i.  62.

li  The  words  in  the  copy  at  Brussels  are,  "  Das  wir  in
Zeit  solcher  königlichen  Würde,  Ambts  und  Regierung
die  Christenheit  und  den  Stuel  zu  Rom,  bebstliche  Heilig-
keit, auch  die  christliche  Kirch  bei  dem  alten  loblicheJi
und  wolhergebrachten  Glauben,  Religion  und  Cerimonien
vermöge  des  jüngsten  zu  Augsburg  aufgerichten  Abschie-
des bis  zu  endlicher  Determination  khünftigen  gemeinen
Cqnoils  in  guten  Bevelch,  Schutz  und  Schirm  haben  sol-
len."— "That  we,  as  holding  such  royal  dignity,  should
have  in  our  good  ordering,  protection  and  defence,  tire
stewardship  and  government  of  Christendom  and  the  See
of  Rome,  the  pope's  holiness,  also  the  Christian  church,
with  its  ancient  praiseworthy  and  well-established  be-
lief, religion  and  ceremonies,  in  virtue  of  the  recess  newly
drawn  up  at  Augsburg,  until  the  final  determination  of  a
future  general  council."

IT  Extract  from  the  original  document,  Bucholtz,  ix.  IG :
—I  am  struck  by  the  distinction,  "imperium  per  Germa-
niam  superiorem  regat."  Was  lower  Germany  excepted,
because  the  Saxon  vicar  of  the  empire  had  not  given  his
assent  ?  or  (more  probably),  because  the  emperor  would
suffer  no  interference  of  the  authorities  of  the  empire
with  his  Netherland  government  ?

**  The  Brussels  Archives  contain  the  Sommaire  me-
moire au  roi  des  Romains  d'aucuns  points  esquels  il
sernble  ä  I'empereur  que  le  dit  S.  roi  doit  avoir  considers,
tion  et  regard  touchant  le  gouvernement  de  rempire,
pour  lequel  Teinpereur  luy  envoye  ample  pouvoir.

378

ORIGIN  OF  THE  SCHMALKALDIC  LEAGUE.

Book  VI.

tors.

Dukes  of  Bavaria,  who  had  never  concealed
that  they  aimed  at  the  crown  (alleging  that
members  of  their  house  had  been  emperors
and  kings  when  the  ancestors  of  the  Habs-
burgers were  still  seated  among  the  counts),
had  now  a  lawful  ground  for  refusing  to  ac-
knowledge the  validity  of  the  king's  election.
They  cared  littlo,  for  the  motives  which  had
prompted  Saxony's  opposition.  It  is  remark-
able that,  on  this  point,  the  ultra  Catholics
united  with  the  leaders  of  the  Protestants.
At  a  second  meeting  held  by  the  alhes  at
Schmalkalden,  shortly  before  Easter,  1531.
Grubenhagen,  Hessen  and  Anhalt  declared
still  more  emphatically  than  before,  that  they
would  persist  with  Saxony  in  refusing  obedi-
ence to  Ferdinand.  The  cities  were  not  all
so  resolute ;  yet  they  also  refrained,  for  the
most  part,  from  giving  him  the  title  of  King
of  the  Romans.

Very  shortly  after,  Ferdinand  complained  to
his  brother,  that  he  bore  the  title  indeed,  but
that  it  commanded  no  respect  or  obedience ;
he  had  no  more  weight  than  any  other  prince
of  Jhe  empire.*

From  day  to  day  the  league  assumed  a
moi'e  important  aspect.

At  the  second  meeting,  the  treaty  for  mu-
tual defence,  the  duration  of  which  was  pro-
visionally fixed  for  six  years,  was  sealed  by
Saxony,  Hessen,  Lüneburg  and  .Grubenhagen.
For  the-  ratification  by  the  cities,  a  certain
process  was  agreed  on,  which  was  afterwards
adopted.  As  they  had  not  yet  determined  on
a  formal  military  organisation,  and  as  the
movements  of  their  adversaries  seemed  to
make  some  measures  necessary,  they  re-
solved, for  the  present,  to  take  a  certain  num-
ber of  horsemen  into  their  pay,  till  they  should
see  '•  whither  these  hasty  and  strange  mea-^
sures  v.'ould  extend."

At  a  third  meeting  at  Frankfurt  on  the
Maine,  on  the  5th  June,  the  principal  subject
of  discussion  was,  the  affairs  of  the  Imperial
Chamber.  The  allies  were  not  perfectly
agreed  to  whom  they  should  entrust  their  pro-
curations; some  objections  were  raised  to  the
persons  proposed,  but  on  the  main  point  there
waä  no  hesitation ;  the  procurators  were  to  be
empowered  "  to  act  in  all  their  names,  and  to
help  to  carry  through  all  things  regarding
their  faith  and  rehgion,  which  the  fiscal  might
bring  against  any  of  the  alhes. "t  They
agreed  upon  a  small  tax  to  pay  the  procura-

*  Yo  no  soy  mas  que  un  principe  de  los  del  ymperio  por
agora,  no  siendo  obedecido  por  rey  de  Romanos. (B.  A.)

t  "Alle  und  jede  Sachen  die  Religion  Cerimonien  und
Avas  dem  anhangt  anlangend,  so  der  ks.  Fiscal  vielleiclit
nsbefel  ks.  Mt.  oder  uf  anhalten  sonderer  Personen  oder
Parteien  wider  die  ernannten  Städte  eine  oder  mehrfür-
gewendt  hette  oder  noch  fiirpringen  würde,  in  irei"  aller
Namen  semptlich  und  sonderlich  zu  vertreten  und  usfiih-
ren  zu  helfen."— "To  act  and  aid  in  all  and  every  matter
relating  to  religion,  its  ceremonies,  and  what  belongs
thereto,  if  the  imperial  fiscal  should,  by  the  command  of
his  imperial  majesty,  or  by  the  suggestion  of  other  per-
sons or  parties  against  the  above-mentioned  cities,  have
alleged  or  should  allege  one  or  more  of  such  matters,  you
are  in  all  their  names,  collectively  and  severally,  to  act
as  their  representatives,  and  to  help  to  carry  the  business
through."  The  draft  was  already  prepared  at  Schmalkal-
den, but  was  adopted  at  Frankfurt.

\

tors.  Strangely  enough,  the  first  permanent
contribution  which  was  agreed  on  in  the
league,  as  in  the  empire,  had  a  jurisdictional
destination.

Such  were  the  fundarhental  characteristicc,
juridical  and  military,  which  the  league  ex-
hibited from  its  very  commencement.  Not  all
its  members,  however,  shared  both  these  ten-
dencies. Brandenburg  and  Nürnberg  would
not  consent  to  armed  resistance.  It  was  there-
for.e  arranged  that  their  delegates  should  not
be  admitted  to  the  meetings  in  which  mea-
sures of  defence  were  discussed.  Two  re-
ports, or  recesses,  were  drawn  up,  of  which
the  one  was  described  as  the  general  ("ge-
meine^^),  the  other  the  particular  {^^ sunder-
liche^^}.  The  former  related  to  the  more  ex-
tensive, and  merely  peaceful ;  the  other,  to
the  narrower — that  is,  the  warlike  coalition.?
The  adherents  of  the  latter,  however,  still
hoped  to  induce  Brandenburg  and  Nürnberg
to  join  them.  Brandenburg  was  immediately
threatened  by  the  Swabian  league,  and  the
markgrave  v/as  told  that  had  he  but  signed
the  treaty  for  mutual  defence,  the  Swabian
league  would  have  left  him  at  peace.  But
every  thing  was  yet  in  a  state  of  mere  prepa-
ration.

Hitherto  we  have  devoted  our  attention
mainly  to  the  relations  of  the  princes ;  but
those  of  the  cities  in  upper  and  lower  Ger-
many were  not  less  remarkable.  Negotia-
tions with  the  upper  German  cities,  leading
to  the  most  fortunate  results,  and  justifying  the
highest  expectations,  may  be  traced  through
all  these  meetings  of  the  allies.

We  should,  however,  be  unable  to  appre-
ciate them,  if  w^e  did  not  first  attend  to  the
course  which  the  reformation  had  in  the
meanwhile  taken  in  Switzerland.

CHAPTER  II.

PROGRESS  OF  THE  REFORMATION  IN  SWITZER-
LAND.

The  restored  unity  of  Latin  Christendom
was,  as  may  be  concluded,  no  less  dangerous
to  the  dissidents  of  Switzerland  than  to  those
of  Germany.

It  happened  that  the  Catholic  movement
was  directed  first  against  Germany,  because
the  head  of  Christendom,  the  emperor,  en-
joyed an  authority  universally  acknowledged
and  respected  in  that  country ;  but  every  step
of  its  progress  was  felt  to  be  of  imminent  dan-
ger to  Switzerland.

The  situation  of  the  latter  country  was.  how-

J  Untertheniger  Bericht  der  Sachen  so  sich  in  der  Hand-
lung zu  Frankfurt  Trinitatis,  1531,  zugetragen  und  im
Abschiede  nit  verzeichnet  sind.  "  Humble  report  of  tlie
affairs  transacted  at  the  meeting  at  Frankfurt,  Trinity,
1531,  and  not  entered  in  the  recess."  (W.  A.)  There
exist,  as  we  see,  three  documents  concerning  this  meet-
ing; the  general  and  the  particular  recesses,  and  this  re-
port.

Chap.  II.

THE  REFORMATION  IN  SWITZERLAND.

379

ever,  very  different  from  thai  of  the  former.
There,  as  iii  Germany,  the  reformation  en-
countered a  majority  armed  with  traditional
privileges;  but  m  Switzerland  this  majority
was  enfeebled  by  a  long  series  of  reverses.

We  have  seen  how  Zwiugli  gained  over  to
his  opinions  the  two" most  powerful  of  the
eight  noblest  cantons  —  Bern  and  Zürich;  of
those  which  had  joined  the  Confederation
later,  Basel;  and  of  those  more  remotely  con-
nected With  it,  St.  Gall,  Biel  and  JVluhlhausen.
In  all  these  he  had  introduced  a  new  organisa-
tion of  the  church.

,  On  the  other  hand,  he  experienced  an  ob-
stinate resistance  from  the  remaining  cantons :
of  these,  five  of  the  older — the  four  Forest
Cantons  and  Zug,  were  decidedly  hostile.
The  reader  will  remember  which  party  had
been  triumphant  there  in  the  year  1522 ;  their
refusal  to  give  up  the  pensions  and  the  right
of  taking  foreign  service,  and  their  determina-
tion to  maintain  the  ancient  faith  with  all  its
external  observances.

Had  the  several  cantons  been  completely
separate  states,  they  might,  no  doubt,  have
remained  peaceful  neighbours.  But  there
"were  districts  wdiere  the  government  was
shared  by  the  two  opposing  parties — the  lord-
ships and  bailiwicks  which  were  subjects  of
the  whole  Confederation:  here  the  adverse
powers  necessarily  came  into  collision.  If  we
reflect  that  the  Confederation  had  attained  to
its  strength  and  compactness  chiefly  by  means
of  its  common  conquests  —  that  the  real  knot
of  the  aUiance  consisted  in  these  — it  will  be
evident  how  important  must  be  a  difference
which  came  to  an  open  breach  on  this  very
ground.  Here  the  majority  had  always  en-
joyed parampunt  consideration ;  it  w^as  now
to  be  seen  whether  it  was  in  a  condition  to
maintain  it.

The  five  older  cantons  refused  to  tolerate
the  new  doctrines  in  the  free  bailiwicks.  The
bailiifs,  Joseph  am  Berg  of  Schwytz  and  Jacob
Stocker  of  Zug,  inflicted  on  the  dissidents  fine,
imprisonment,  stripes  and  banishment.  The
preachers  had  their  tong-ues  slit,  and  v/ere
driven  out  of  the  country,  or  put  to  death
with  the  sword.  Germans  w^ho  had  fled  from
persecution,  and  taken  refuge  in  Switzerland,
were  delivered  up  to  the  Austrian  government
of  the  Vorlande,  which  put  them  to  death
without  trial  or  delay. ^^  Ail  books  of  the  new
doctrine,  as  well  as  Testaments  and  Bibles,
were  seized.  In  Baden,  the  dead  belonging
to  the  evangelical  party  were  refused  decent
burial.

The  Zürichers  had  long  seen  these  things
with  displeasure;  and  as  soon  as  they  felt
themselves  strong  enough  to  resist,  they  de-
termined to  endure  them  no  longer.  One  of
the  main  articles  in  the  treaty  between  Zürich
and  Bern  is,  that  the  two  cantons  w^ould  not
allow  the  people  of  the  common  lordships  and
bailiwicks  (the  due  proportion  of  the  sove-
reignty over  which  belonged  to  them  as  mem-
bers of  the  Confederation),  or  the  congrega-

*  Proclamation  of  Zürich,  3d  March,  1529.  See  Bullin-
ger,  ii.  31.

tions  \vhich  had  determined  by  the  vote  of  a
majority  to  adhere  to  the  evangelical  party,  to
be  prevented  from  so  doing  by  violence. t
,  This  at  once  roused  all  the  oppressed  evan-
gelical spirit  in  Thurgau  and  the  valley  of  the
Rhine.  The  Five  Cantons  despaired  of  keep-
ing them  down  solely  by  the  authority  of  their
bailifts:  on  the  30th  of  November,  1528,  they
assembled  all  the  magistrates  and  deputies  of
the  communes  of  Thurgau  in  Frauenfeld,  and
admonished  them  not  to  separate  themselve«
in  matters  of  faith  from  the  majority  of  the
cantons  to  which  they  owed  obedience;  but
rather  to  aid  the  bailiff  in  punishing  the  re-
bellious. This  meeting,  however,  had  also
been  attended  by  deputies  from  Zürich  and
Bern,  who  had  come  uninvited,  and  did  not
fail  to  offer  exhortations  and  assurances  of  a
contrary  tendency.  The  country  people  asked
to  be  allowed  time  for  reflection  till  the  feast
of  St.  Nicholas,  when  they  assembled  again  in
W^infelden.  At  first  they  showed  some  hesi-
tation ;  gradually,  however,  a  majority  de-
clared itself  determined  to  adhere  to  the  evan-
gelical confession,  and  w^as  openly  supported
by  promises  of  assistance  from  Zürich  and
Bern.  The  former  had  also  been  applied  to
by  the  people  of  the  Rhine  valley,  as  the  prin-
cipal canton  of  the  Confederation,  and  had
replied,  that  '■  it  would  not  allow  them  to  be
driven  from  God's  word."t

This  was  an  act  of  self-government  on  the
part  of  the  people.  As  the  governingvbody
was  divided,  it  depended  on  their  free  deci-
sion which  party  to  espouse.  They  chose  the
cause  of  reform.

In  Thurgau  there  soon  remained  but  nine
nobles  who  had  not  joined  this  party,  and  even
these  begged  only  for  delay.  In  the  Rhine
valley  there  was  only  a  single  parish  in  which
the  majority  did  not  vote  for  the  burning  of
pictures  and  images,  and  the  abolition  of  the
mass.  Finding  that  the  reforming  communes,
with  the  help  of  Zürich,  had  been  victorious
over  the  Catholic  council  which  adhered  to
the  party  of  the  Five  Cantons,  the  free  baili-
wicks and  the  country  round  soon  followed.

However  strong  the  assurances  given,  that
the  secular  obedience  due  to  the  estabhshed
authorities  should  not  suffer,  it  is  obvious  that
the  basis  of  power  —  influence,  to  which  the
subject  willingly  submits — was  thus  of  neces-
sity lost  to  the  Five  Cantons.

And  already  a  dispute  not  less  unfavour-
able to  their  cause  had  taken  place  in  another
district.

Unterwaiden-  had  ventured  to  offer  assist-
ance to  the  Bernese  Oberland,  w^here  the  mea-
sures taken  by  the  city  for  the  introduction
of  reform — and  especially  the  suppression  of
the  convent  of  Interlachen  —  had  excited  irri-
tation and  resistance:  and  without  any  decla-
ration of  hostilities,  to  invade  the  territory  of
one  of  its  co-confederates  with  baiuaers  flying.

t  Original  document  of  tlie  treaty  between  the  cities,
Bullinger,  ii.  11.

X  Recess  at  Frauenfeld  and  Instructions  of  the  Zü-
richers for  Winfelden.  Bullinger,  ii.  27.  Bernh.  Weiss,
p.  93.

380

ALLIANCE  OP  THE  FIVE  CANTONS  WITH  AUSTRIA.

Book  VL

Bern  placed  itself  on  the  defensive^  reduced
its  subjects  to  obedience,  and  compelled  the
invaders  to  retreat;  but  it  is.  obvious  what
must  be  the  effects  of  so  open  a  breach  of  the
ancient  alliance.  Unterwaiden  found  support
from  the  four  cantons  with  which  it  was  more
particularly  connected  ;  but  all  the  City  Can-
tons were  of  opinion  that  Unterwaiden  must  be
chastised.  Solothurn  and  Freiburg  promised
to  assist  Bern,  as  they  were  bound  to  do.

In  this  state  of  political  and  religious  infe-
riority,- and  threatened  with  vengeance,  the
Five  Cantons  conceived  the  idea  of  applying
^  to  the  house  of  Austria  for  succour.  It  was,
indeed,  a  general  principle  with  them  not  to
give  up  alliances  with  foreign  powers.

On  the  frontiers  of  Switzerland  power  was
still  in  the  hands  of  those  who  had  put  down
the  insurrection  of  the  peasants,  and  sup-
pressed the  preaching  in  those  parts : — Count
Sulz  and  Count  Fürstenberg,  and  Marx  Sittich
of  Ems,  baihfF  of  Bregenz.  The  clan  of  Ems,
which  had  recently  been  strengthened  by  an
alliance  with  the  Castelan  of  Musso,  sustained
the  cause  of  Catholicism  in  the  mountains
generally ;  and  the  Five  Cantons  had  no  diffi-
(^ulty  in  obtaining-a  favourable  hearing  from
them.  Meetings  were  held  at  Feldkirch  and
Waldshut;  the  arms  of  Switzerland  and  Aus-
tiia  were  displayed  side  by  side;  and  it  was
even  asserted  that  the  old  antagonists  of  the
peacock's  feather  (the  badge  of  the  house  of
Austria)  were  now  seen  decorated 'with  it.  A
treaty  was  drawn  up,  in  vrhich  Kipg  Ferdi-
nand and  the  Five  Cantons  mutually  engaged
to  jeniain  constant  to  the  ancient  faith ;  to
chastise  any  who  might  assail  it  in  their  re-,
ypective  territories:  and,  in  case  this  brought
down  hostilities  upon  them,  to  afford  each
other  assistance.  Any  conquests  made  within
the  Confederation  were  to  belong  to  the  Five
Cantons ;  any  without  its  boundaries,  to  the
king.

The  chief  stipulation  of  the  treaty  is,  that
Ferdinand  guarantied  to  the  Five  Cantons
'•all  that  may  be^subject  to  or  connected  with
them'*  (and  consequently  the  common  baili-
wicks and  Thurgau),  while  the  Five  Cantons
expressly  declared  that  they  would  not  regard
Constance  as  a  member  of  the  Confederation,
but  would  leave  it  to  the  king.*

The  Five  Cantons  were  right  in  replying  to
the  City  Cantons,  who  reproached  them  with
this  treaty,  that  they  also  had  allied  themselves
Avith  foreigners;  but  the  circumstances  were
widely  different.  Constance  was  closely  con-
nected with  the  Confederation,  inconsequence
of  the  treaty  it  had  concluded  with  Zürich.  It
had  always  been  the  aim  of  Austrian  policy
to  prevent  this;  and  Llaximilian  had  once,
fronl  that  m^otive,  taken  a  large  part  of  the
communes  into  his  service :  the  Five  Cantons
now  abandoned  Constance  to  Austria.

It  is  remarkable  that  this  happened  at  the
very  time  (the  beginning  of  the  year  1529)
vv'hen  the  majority  of  the  States  of  the  empire
once  more  embraced  the  side  of  the  house  of

*  Original  treaty. Hottinger,  ii.  475.

Austria.  All  political  grudges  now  disap-
peared before  a  community  of  religious  in-
terests.

Ferdinand  sought  to  strengthen  the  Swiss
alliance  by  every  means  in  his  power.  In
Innsbruck,  where  it  was  concluded,  he  had
also  summoned  a  part  of  the  Tyrolese  land-
holders to  the  council ;  all  the  Vorlände.  Wür-
tenberg  included,  were  to  be  admitted'  to  it.
He  hoped,  perhaps,  by-  this  means,  to  break
forever  the  power  of  the  Confederation  ;t  but,
at  all  events,  to  oppose  an  insuperable  barrier
to  the  further  progress  of  the  new  opinions.

But  it  was  a  question  whether  a  coalition  of
this  kind  could  really  afford  protection  to  the
Five  Cantons.  Its  measures,  tried  by  the
principles  of  the  Confederation,  were  thorough*
ly  unjustifiable — the  invasion  of  the  Bernese
territoiy.  no  less  than  the  alliance  with  Ferdi-
nand. They  were  utterly  .at  variance  with
the  idea  and  with  the  existence  of  the  Confe-
deration. To  the  success  which,  thanks  to
the  goodness  of  their  cause,  attended  the
measures  of  the  City  Cantons,  was  now  added
all  the  weight  of  the  interests  of  the  country
at  large,  and  of  hidisputable  right.

Peace  was,  at  all  events,  out  of  the  question
for  the  Confederation.  The  deputies  of  the
City  Cantons  who  went  into  the  mountain
country,  in  order  to  warn  their  old  brother
confederates  against  forming  this^  alliance,
found  the  arms  of  their  cities  nailed  to  the
gallows,  and  themselves  treated  as  heretics
and  traitors;  in  spite  of  their  presence  and
efforts,  the  most  terrific  punishments  were  in-
flicted on  seceders.  The  reformation  in  cen-
tral Switzerland  had  also  its  martyrs.  Jacob
Keyser,  a  preacher  from  the  territory  of  Zü-
rich, who  went  from  time  to  time  to  Caster  to
conduct  the  worship  of  an  evangelical  church
in  that  place,  was  arrested  in  the  forest  of
Eschibach,  on  the  high  road,  and  dragged  to
Schwytz.  The  office  of  ^bailiff  of  Gaster  did
not  at  that  time  belong  to  Schwytz ;  and,  even
if  it  had,  the  trial  ought  to  have  been  heard
before  the  tribunal  of  Utznach.  Nevertheless
the  commune  condemned  the  unfortunate  and
guihless  riian  to  the  flames,  which  he  endured
with  great  constancy. t

This  roused  Zürich  to  open  resistance.  In
June,  1529,  when  a  new  bailiff  of  Unterwaiden
was  to  make  his  entrace  into  Baden,  Zürich
openly  declared  that  it  would  not  suffer  it,  nor
indeed  have  any  further  community  with  the
Unterwalders :  from  henceforth  it  would  not
permit  them  to  exercise  the  oÖice  of  bailiff  in
the  domains  over  which  they  had  a  common
jurisdiction. §

Zürich  had  long  since  announced  to  the
Schwytzers  its  determnnation  to  avenge  itself,

t  Invitation  to  the  WiiVtenberg  districts,  ii.  orig.  doc.
No.  144.  "  That  the  power  of  the  same  confederation  is
divided  by  the  above-mentioned  union,  while  his  royal
majesty  and  his  subjects  who  adhere  to  the  ancient  Chris-
tian faith  are  strengthened  with  foreign  aid,  as  well  as
the  above-mentioned  Five  Cantons."

t  BuUinger,  Ref.  Gesch.  ii.  p.  148.  Eidgenössische
schweizerische  Märtyrer,  Misc.  Tig.  ii.  p.  35  (insigiiilJ-
cant).

§  They  are  particularly  reproached  for  this  in  Eck's
"  ilepulsio."

Chap.  II.

MMINENCE  OF  WAR,  1529.

381

if  any  violence  was  used  towards  the  preacher
of  its  feudatories.  Keyser's  execution  was
therefore  the  signal  for  war.

On  the  5th  of  June  the  first  company  of
Zürich  troops  marched  out  to  protect  the  free
bailiwicks  from  a  bloody  re-establishment  of
the  ancient  faith ;  soon  afterwards  another  was
sent  to  Thurgau  and  the  Rhine  valley,  and  a
third  to  invest  the  Schwytz  portion  of  Gaster,
which  had  pat  the  preacher  to  death.  The
enemy  having  instantly  assembled  at  Bar  am
Boden,  the  great  banner  of  the  city  was  un-
furled on  the  9th  of  June,  under  the  Banneret
Hans  Schweizer,  who  had  already  borne  it  in
the  Milanese  w^ars.

For  the  first  time  did  two  Swiss  armies,  not,
.as  before,  of  peasants  and  their  lords,  but
of  adversaries  equal  in  rights  and  fnlly
prepared  for  war,  stand  confronted,  in  conse-
quence of  religious  differences.  "  They  are
so  full  of  hatred  to  each  other,"  said  King-
Ferdinand,  -'that  nothing  but  open  violence  is
to  be  expected.''

The  evangelical  party  had,  however,  at  this
moment  a  decided  superiority.

The  Zürich  army  had  not  its  equal.  It  con-
sisted of  the  brave  men  who  had  embraced
the ,  cause  of  the  reformation  with  all  the
moral  earnestness  with  which  Zwingli  preached
it.  No  common  women  were  suffered  in  the
camp ;  no  curses  or  oaths  were  to  be  heard,
and  even  dice  were  banished^  the  amuse-
ments consisted  of  athletic  exercises,  such  as
leaping,  hurling,  &c. ;  quarrels  hardly  ever
occurred,  and  prayers  before  and  after  meals
were  never  omitted.  Zwingh  himself  was
with  them;  he  had  been  relieved  from  the
obligation  of  going  out  with  the  great  ban-
ner as  preacher,  but  he  had  voluntEirily
mounted  himself,  and  taken  a  halberd  on  his
shoulder.

Zwingli  was  firmly  persuaded  of  the  supe-
riority of  his  party ;  and  as  the  accounts  from
all  sides  tended  to  confirm  him  in  this  opinion,
he  conceived  the  most  sanguine  hopes.  It
was  at  least  certain  that  the  Five  Cantons  had
nothing  to  expect  from  Ferdinand,  who  was
occupied  elsewhere,  and  found  himself  re-
duced to  make  applications  to  his  states,  from
which  but  small  results  were  to  be  expected.
Zwingli  now  thought  himself  about  to  reach
the  goal  upon  which  he  had  from  the  first
fixed  his  eyes.  He  would  listen  to  no  propo-
sitions of  peace,  unless  accompanied  with  the
two  great  concessions,  on  which  he  had  always
insisted,  i.  e.  that  the  whole  system  of  pen-
sions should  be  forever  forsworn,  and  the
preaching  of  the  Gospel  permitted  throughout
all  the  cantons  of  Switzerland.  He  represented
to  the  members  of  the  government,  that  in
this  way  only  was  unity  in  the  state  to  be  ob-
tained, as  well  as  in  the  church.  "  Stand  fast
in  God,"  exclaimed  he;  "they  give  you  good
w^ords  now,  but  do  not  be  deceived ;  yield  no-
thing to  their  entreaties  till  the  right  is  estab-
lished. Then  shall  we  have  made  a  war
more  advantageous  than  any  that  was  ever
made  before; we shall  have  accomplished

things  which  will  redound  to  the  honour  of
God  and  of  the  city,  centuries  hence."*

Had  it  depended  on  Zwingli  and  on  Zürich
alone,  they  would  have  ventured  every  thing,
and  have  followed  up  their  advantages  to  the
utmost.

But  there  is  a  general  and  a  most  just  dread
of  beginning  war  and  of  sheddnig  blood.
Whilst  the  Zürichers  were  preparing  to  take
the  field,  Ebli,  the  Ammanti  of  Glarus,  ap-
peared among  them,  and  represented  how
often  they  had  shared  weal  and  woe  with
those  whom  they  were  now  about  to  cast  off.
His  address  produced  the  greater  effect,  be-
cause he  was  known  to  be  an  honest  man,
who  at  bottom  entertained  the  same  views  as
those  which  prevailed  at  Zürich.  He  obtained
a  truce.  Zwingli  alone,  who  saw  farther  into
futurity  than  the  others,  was  not  satisfied  wit.h
a  compliance  which  appeared  to  him  ill-timed.
'■'Good  gossip  Ammann,"  said  he  to  Ebli,
"thou  wilt  have  to  give  an  account  of  this
matter  to  God,"t

Meanwhile  Bern  also  spoke  out.  The  power-
ful influence  exercised  by  Zürich  was  not
agreeable  to  the  Bernese,  and  they  now  de-
clared that  they  would  lend  assistance  in  case
Zürich  were  attacked,  but  not  otherwise.

The  notion  of  the  independence  of  states,
wdiich  had  become  prevalent  in  Germany,  also
gained  groinid  in  Switzerland.  Bern  deemed
the  conditions  proposed  by  Zwingh  inadmissi-
ble, because  it  would  not  be  right  to  interfere
so  much  with  the  independence  of  the  govern-
ment of  the  several  cantons.

Thus  the  obstacles  which  prevented  the
great  reformer  from  carrying  out  his  views
with  the  armed  hand,  originated  in  the  evan-
gelical party  itself.

Negotiations  were  set  on  foot,  which,  con-
sidering the  power  the  adverse  party  still  pos-
sessed, and  the  opinions  that  still  predominated
among  the  Confederates,  could  not  lead  to  the
decisive  results  contemplated  by  Zwingli.?

The  utmost  that  could  be  expected  was,
that  the  Five  Cantons  should  consent  to  give
up  the  treaty  with  Ferdinand;  should  promise
compensation  for  the  expenses  of  the  war,  and
the  punishment  of  those  who  had  used  inju-
rious language ;  and  should  formally  consent
to  the  rule  laid  down  by  the  City  Cantons,
that,  in  the  common  domains,  the  vote  of  the
majority  should  decide  the  form  of  religion  in
each  parish.  The  prohibition  of  pensions,  and
the  freedom  of  the  evangelical  faiih,  were  also
discussed;  but  they  were  by  no  means  so  de-
cisively agreed  to  as  Zwingli  had  desired.
The  abolition  of  the  pensions  appeared  only
in  the  light  of  a  request  of  the  City  Cantons
to  the  Five  Cantons ;  and  instead  of  proclaim-

*  Opinion  and  letter  in  the  Appendix  to  Hottinger,
Geschichte  der  Eidgenossen,  ii.  483.

t  Bullinger,  ii.  170.

t  Journal  of  Hans  Stockar  of  Schaf  hausen,  199.  "Dye
von  Zürycli  mianttend,uns  hyeoch  jn  zu  zychen,  das  niai
vvyder  unser  Bunttbryef  was  und  uns  nitt  zustund."—
"  Those  of  Zürich  thought  that  to  sign  this  was  contrary
to  our  treaty  of  confederation,  and  not  within  our  com
petence."

382

PROGRESS  OF  THE  REFORMATION  IN  SWITZERLAND.

Book  VI.

ing  liberty  of  preaching,  it  was  only  said,  that
the  one  party  would  not  punish  the  religious
opinions  of  the  other.*

But  even  thus  it  appeared  that  no  slight
advantage  had  been  obtained.

The  Five  Cantons  were  compelled  to  pro-
duce on  the  spot  their  original  treaty  with
Ferdinand:  arid  although  the  mediators  inter-
posed to  prevent  it  being  read  aloud,  from
the  fear  that  it  might  revive  old  animosities,
Ammann  Ebli  no  sooner  saw  it  than  he  stuck
ids  dagger  through  the  document  and  tore  it,
upon  which  those  who  were  standing  near
snatched  off  the  wax  of  the  seal.

In  consequence  of  the  obvious  superiority
of  the  evangelical  party,  reform  advanced
much  more  rapidly  after  the  peace.

Bullinger  mentions  the  number  of  places  in
which  a  majority  formed  itself 'in  favour  of
the  U3W  opinions;  in  his  language,  '-'how  the
word  of  God  was  increased.''  In  the  year
1529  Zwingli  was  already  able  to  hold  a  synod
in  Thurgau,  and  to  establish  the  evangelical
church  there.  Large  abbeys,  like  those  of
Vv^ettingen  and  Hitzkirch,  went  over;  in  the
former,  not  more  than  two  monks  refused
their  consent.  Abbot  George  Müller,  of  Ba-
den, stipulated  only. that  the  pictures  and
images  which  w^ere  removed  from  the  church
should  not  be,  as  in  so  many  other  places,  de-
stroyed.t  Lastly,  a  resolution  was  passed  by
the  greater  and  lesser  councils  of  Schafhau-
sen,  that  the  mass  and  the  images  should  be
abolished.  Hans  Stockar  relates,  not  without
suppressed  sorrow,  how,  on  the  Friday  after
Michaelmas,  "  the  great  God  in  the  Mmster"
was  taken  away.t  The  city  joined  the  union
with  Bern,  Basel  and  Zürich.  In  Sololhurn  the
reformers  demanded  and  obtained  a  church :
and  only  a  reputed  miracle  perpetuated  the
veneration  for  St.  Urs.  The  evangelical  party,
protected  by  Bern,  arose  in  Neuenburg :  the
Catholics  had  already  taken  up  arms,  and  it
seemed  as  if  bloodshed  was  inevitable,  when
they  resolved  to  allow  the  majority  to  decide.^
It  decided  for  reform.  The  majority  was  in
many  cases  small ;  in  Neuenburg,  it  amounted
to  only  eighteen ;  in  Neuenstadt,  to  twenty-
four.  The  same  was  the  case  on  the  other
side,  under  different  influences.  In  Rottweil,
in  the  immediate  neighbourhood,  the  six  Ca-
tholic guilds  committed  acts  of  such  violence
on  the  five  evangelical,  that  several  hundred
citizens  were  obhged  to  leave  the  town. II

But  the  most  important  circumstance  for  the
progress  of  Zwingh's  opinions  was,  that  in  one
of  the  eight  older  cantons,  which  had  hitherto
remained  neutral,  —  in  Glarus,  —  where  the
evangelical  majority  had  been  much  more
free  in  the  declaration  of  its  opinions  than  in
the  others,  it  had  obtained  a  complete  ascend-
ancy. The  reformed  doctrine  had  already  so
far  prevailed,  that  only  two  or  three  churches

*  Landtsfried  zii  Cappel  ufFgericht  (Peace  concluded  at
Cappel),  25th  June,  1529,  Bullinger,  ii.  185.
t  From  N.  Manuel's  Missives  in  Grüneisen,  p.  135.
t  Journal,  201.

§  Chambrier,  Histoire  de  Neuchatel,  p.  296.
i  Stettler,  ii.  36.

had  retained  their  sacred  images.  Although
their  congregations  begged  for  nothing  more
than  a  short  delay,  till  the  emperor  and  the
empire  could  take  some  measures  for  the
remedy  of  abuses,  the  country  communes  de-
termined (April,  1530)  that  these  churches
too  should  be  purified,  and  rendered  uniform
with  the  others  in  the  country. IF  There  might
be  some  recusants ;  but,  politically  speaking,
Glarus  was  now  evangelical.

The  advantage  of  having  gained  over  this
canton,  which  Zwingli,  at  the  beginning  of
his  career,  had  been  obliged  to  abandon,  was
much  heightened  by  the  enlarged  sphere  of
legitimate  influence  over  others  which  was
thus  acquired.

The  .Abbot  of  St.  Gall  had  used  every  en-
deavour to  check  the  progress  of  the  new  doc-
trine in  his  territory  (not  the  city,  which  had
long  espoused  it,  ^  but  the  country),  in  spite
of  which  it  had  made  its  way  there  as  rapidly
as  elsewhere.  This  abbot  was  a  prince  of
the  holy  empire,  but  Glaius,  Lucern.  Schwytz
and  Zürich  exercised  a  protectorate  over  him,
and,  in  consequence,  claimed  no  little  influ-
ence over  the  internal  administration  of  his
domains.  At  this  juncture  the  abbot  died,
which  rendered  the  change  in  opinion  of  two
out  of  the  four  protecting  cantons  very  import-
ant. Contrary  to  their  express  desire,  the  con-
ventual authorities  contrived,  indeed,  to  bring
about  an  election,  whi&h  was  confirmed  by
the  emperor  and  the  pope,  and  approved  by
Schwytz  and  Lucern,  but  wdiich  Zürich  and
Glarus  refused  to  recognise;  alleging  that  they
lay  under  far  more  sacred  obligations  to  the
district  x^here  the  evangelical  movement  was
now  going  on,  than  to  the  conventual  author-
ities. Zürich  proceeded  on  the  principle,  that
it  was  not  the  abbot  who  constituted  the  reli-
gious house,  but  that  all  the  country  people,
villages  and  communes  were  committed  to
the  guardianship  of  the  protecting  cantons.
In  concert  with  ihe  inhabitants,  an  order  was
issued,  according  to  which  a  captain  taken  out
of  the  four  protecting  cantons,  and  a  council
consisting  of  twelve  members,  were  to  con-
duct the  government.  But,  that  they  might
not  have  a  commander  out  of  Schwytz  or
Lucern,  hostile  to  the  new  doctrines,  they
made  it  an  express  condition  that  the  captain
should  be  of  the  evangelical  party,  and  that
he  should  not  receive  homage  till  he  had
sworn  to  allow  the  vassals  of  the  abbey  to
continue  their  attendance  on  the  preaching  of
God's  word.*=*  The  newly  established  free-
dom extended  to  Toggenburg:  even  during^
Zwingli's  youth,  that  town  had  begun  to  pur-
chase its  exemption  from  service  to  the  con-
vent, and  this  redemption  it  now  completed.
Early  in  the  year  1531,  Zwingh  had  the  joy

IT  Tschudi  in  Hottinnrer,  p.  2?7,  note  30.  Bullinger,  p.
289.\  "  Messaltäre  und  Götzen  wurden  abgemeeret :  etliche
Götzen  uf  besser  Glück  entzückt  und  verborgen."—"  Mass-
altars and  idols  (images)  were  removed;  some  idols  with-
drawn and  hidden  till  better  luck."

**  Ordnung  und  Satzung  wie  hinfüro  by  den  Gottshus-
lüten  Rat  und  Gericht  zhalten.— Ordinance  and  rule  how,
in  future,  council  and  judgment  are  to  be  held  among  the
people  (subjects  or  tenants)  of  the  house  of  God  (abbey).

Chap.  III. RECONCILIATION  OF  THE  TWO  PROTESTANT  PARTIES.

383

of  revisiting  his  native  place — now  perfectly
free — and  of  establishing  in  it  a  church  after
his  own  heart.*

Extensive  as  \Yas  this  progress,  it  did  not,
however,  fulfil  the  views  which  he  had  ori-
ginally cherished,  and  on  the  accomplishment
of  which  all  depended.  The  ruling  party  in
the  Five  Cantons  remained  inflexible ;  even
on  the  field  of  Gappel  the  commanders  were
said  to  have  promised  each  other,  in  defiance
of  the  first  article  of  the  treaty  of  peace,t  not
to  allow  the  spread  of  the  new  opinions,  and
even  to  put  to  death  any  who  might  attempt
to  disseminate  them.  It  is  at  all  events  cer-
tain, that  nobody  ventured  to  profess  them  in
their  dominions,  though  many  were  well  in-
clined to  them.  The  suppression  of  injurious
language  was  not  even  attempted.  The  people
of  Zürich  and  Bern  were  represented  as  a  set
of  mean,  traitorous,  heretical  pedlars,  and
their  preachers,  as  stealers  of  the  cup  and
murderers  of  souls:  the  mountaineers  said,
Zwingii  v:as  one  of  the  gods  of  the  Lutherans;
the  undiscriminating  bigotry  of  their  priests
made  no  distinction  between  the  opinions  of
Zwingii  and  those  of  Luther.  Though  the
treaty  with  i^ustria  was  pubhshed,  fresh  ne-
gotiations were  continually  set  on  foot.  De-
puties from  Lucern  and  Zug  were  present  at
the  diet  of  Augsburg.  On  their  journey  thither
they  were  most  honourably  received  by  the
Catholics,  and  were  lodged  in  the  town  near
the  emperor,  by  his  especial  desire ;  they
were  observed  to  give  him  some  written
papers.  They  also  experienced  support  from
their  old  allies,  JMarx  Sittich,  Eck  of  Reischach,
and  Hans  Jacob  of  Landau  :  and  they  discussed
vast  plans,  such  as  an  attack  on  Strasburg;  the
destruction  of  the  Confederates  who  might
come  to  its  aid;  and  a  simultaneous  invasion
of  the  reformed  part  of  Switzerland,  from  Sa-
voy, the  Rhineland  and  the  Alpine  country.:|:
These  projects  found  the  more  easy  credence,
since  tiie  nofcility  of  Savoy  was  actually  pre-
paring for  a  descent  on  Geneva  ;  and,  at  the
same  time,  the  castellan  of  jMusso,  with  his
kinsmen  and  allies  of  Ems,  fell  upon  the  Ori-
sons. The  Five  Cantons  took  good  care  to
aflbrd  no  assistance  to  the  threatened  dis-
tricts; indeed  the  people  of  Wallis  plainly  de-
clared that,  for  the  sake  of  the  faith,  this  ought
not  to  be  done.  Zürich  and  Bern  naturally
combined  all  these  circumstances;  and,  in-
deed, the  same  was  done  on  the  other  side  ;§
— for  example.  King  Ferdinand  feared  that  if
the  City  Cantons  were  masters  of  the  Grisons,
they  would  attack  the  Five  Cantons,  and  when
once  they  had  subdued  them,  would  turn  their
arms  against  the  hereditary  dominions  and  the

*  ßiillinger,  ii.  271,  344.

t  Land  friede.— Vea.ce  of  the  country,  i.  e.  domestic  or
internal  peace.  We  want  a  correlative  word  denoting
the  termination  of  what  we  call  civil  war. — Transl.

1  Christian  Friedhald  of  St.  Gall,  Augsburg,  16th  July,
in  Escher  und  Hottiugers  Schweizeriscliem  Archiv,  i.  p.
433.

§  From  a  letter  from  Bern  to  Zürich,  16th  October,  1530.
Hottinger,  ii.  326.  The  game  was  begun  too  soon  :  a
Savoyard^ let  out  the  secret  that  this  was  the  plan  of  the
ciergy.  See  Landgrave  Philip's  Instructions  in  Eschar's
Archives,  ii.  p.  304.

empire.  It  was  mainly  on  this  ground  that
he  requested  the  emperor  to  afford  succour,
if  necessary,  to  the  Five  Cantons. II

CHAPTER  III.

ATTEMPTS AT A  RECONCILIATION OF THE TWO
PROTESTANT  PARTIES.

At  this  juncture  we  find  the  Confederation
in  circumstances  very  analogous  to  those  of
the  empire.

In  the  Swiss  diet,  as  well  as  in  that  of  the
empire,  an  increasing  minority,  sustained  by
pubhc  opinion,  stood  opposed  to  an  orthodox
majority.

The  chief  difference  consisted  in  this: —
that  the  emperor  and  the  empire  possessed  a
spiritual,  as  well  as  a  temporal  'authority ;
while  the  Swiss  diet,  w^hich  could  not  appeal
for  support  to  the  emperor  (to  whom,  as  such,
it  had  no  legal  relation),  was  wholly  without
the  former.  On  the  other  hand,  however,  the
Swiss  minority  had  not,  like  the  German,
general  decrees  of  former  diets  in  its  favour.
The  conflict  was,  in  Switzerland,  more  one  of
fact;  in  Germany,  of  law.

Both  majorities  looked  to  the  house  of  x\us-
tria  as  their  main  prop.  It  appeared,  there-
fore, the  interest  of  the  minorities  to  use  the
most  earnest  endeavours  to  heal  the  breach
that  had  so  long  existed  between  them.

But  the  misfortune  was.  that  Zwingii  had
expressed  himself,  in  the  year  1530,  in  a  man-
ner rather  calculated  to  excite  resentment  and
increase  division,  than  to  bring  about  any  sort
of  reconciliation.  Whether  he  was  irritated
by  the  unfavourable  reports  which  Vv-ere  spread
by  the  Lutherans  concerning  the  conference
of  Marburg; — or  whether  he  was  influenced
by  Carlstadt,  who  had  just  then  come  to  visit
him,  and  soon  after  obtained  a  post  in  Swit-
zerland, it  is  impossible  to  determine  :^-it  is
enough  to  say,  that  hardly  was  the  Augsburg
Confession  in  his  hands,  when  he  sent  the
emperor,  though  not  at  all  called  upon  to  do
so,  a  statement  of  his  own  belief,  in  which  he
not  only  attacked  the  Catholic  church  with
greater  violence  than  jMelanchthon  had  done
(for  example,  he  utterly  rejected  the  institu-
tion of  bishops),  but  also  retracted  concessions
he  had  already  made,  such  as  that  on  original
sin  :  indeed  he  almost  expressly  reproached
Luther  with  sighing  to  return  to  the  flesh-pots
of  Egypt,  and  gave  the  coarsest  interpretation
to  his  words. IT

It  was  therefore  no  wonder  that  the  Lu-

ll Extracts  from  Ferdinand's  letter  to  Charles  in  Bu-
choltz,  V.  2,53.

TTAdCarolura  Rnmanum  Imperatorem  fidei  Huldrychi
Zwinglii  ratio.  Quod  Christi  corpus  per  essentiam  et
realiter,  h.  e.  corpus  ipsuni  naturale,  in  cubIo  aut  adsit  aut
ore  dentibusque  manduceter,  queniadmodum  Papistje  el
quidani  qui  ad  oUas  Eiivptiacas  respectant  perliibent,  id
vero  neque  tantum  negamus,  sed  ....  Mitratum  genus
atque  pedatum  (says  he,  further  on)  credimus  vödov.

nm

MARTIN  BUTZER.

Book  VI.

therans  expressed  an  increased  aversion  to
the  followers  of  Zwingli.

The  necessity  for  peace  was,  however,  so
urgent,  that  at  this  naoment  the  desire  to
effect  a  reconciliation  arose  in  another  place.

The  Oberland  States,  especially  Strasburg,
belonged,  in  fact,  to  both  parties.

On  the  one  hand,  they  shared  in  the  pecu-
liar circumstances  of  the  German  cities,  and
in  the  desire  which  prevailed  with  singular
strength  among  them  to  render  the  clergy
subject  to  the  civil  law,  and  to  put  an  end  to
the  influence  of  the  great  religious  bodies  on
the  presentation  to  benefices ; — an  influence
which  had  been  as  great  in  Strasburg  as  any-
where. In  all  the  measures  they  had  adopted,
they  had  constantly  referred  to  the  recesses
of  the  imperial  diets.  In  consequence  of  the
recess  of  1523,  the  council  of  Strasburg  had  is-
sued an  admonition  to  the  preachers,  '^hence-
forward to  preach  undaunted  the  Holy  Scrip-
ture, pure  and  unmixed  with  men's  fables ;
for  a  worshipful  council  would  support  them
in  the  same."*  From  the  diet  of  1526,  the
Strasburgers  further  deduced  their  right  to
make  alterations  in  the  ceremonies  of  the
church;  especially,  to  abolish  the  mass;  and
from  this  they  did  not  suffer  themselves  to  be
deterred  by  the  admonitions  of  King  Ferdi-
nand, or  the  Council  of  Regency.!  They  were
consequently  among  the  first  who  were  im-
peached before  the  Imperial  Chamber.  In  all
these  respects,  they  had  now  to  adopt  the
same  means  for  their  defence  as  the  other
German  cities.

On  the  other  hand,  however,  the  dogmatic
opinions  of  Zwingli  vv'ere  very  popular  in  Stras-
burg, and  gradually  became  completely  j^redo-
minant;  statues  and  altars  were  removed;  the
interior  walls  of  the  churches,  ornamented
with  paintings,  w^ere  washed  over  with  stone
colour;  the  preachers  proclaimed  that  no
graven  image  must  be  tolerated  by  the  godly;
no  instrumental  music  was  permitted;  even
the  organs  were  all  silenced. I  Strasburg  had
likewise  the  same  political  interests  as  the
Swiss  cantons,  in  so  far  as  both  were  menaced
by  the  Austrian  power  in  Alsatia.  In  January,
1530,  it  joined  the  union  of  the  Swiss  cities ;
they  promised  each  other  mutual  aid.  and,  in
particular,  Strasburg  engaged  to  furnish  the
Swiss  with  gunpowder.

Such  being  the  religious  and  political  state
and  interests  of  Strasburg,  it  may  be  imagined
that  nowhere  was  the  desire  for  the  reconcilia-
tion of  the  contending  parties  more  earnest.

And  already  had  a  man  appeared  who  de-
voted his  whole  life  to  bring  about  this  recon-
ciliation, as  to  matters  of  doctrine.

This  man  was  Martin  Butzer.  After  the  fall
of  Sickingen,  in  whose  service  he  was,  he  had
been  driven  by  persecution  from  place  to  place,
with  a  pregnant  wife  (he  was  one  of  the  first

*  Rörich,  i.  175,  455.  In  the  first  chapter  of  the  Tetra-
politana,  the  motive  assigned  forthis  change  is,  that  the
great  diet  of  J523  commanded  that  the  sermons  be  taken
out  of  the  Holy  Scripture,  and  the  authority  cited.

t  Statement  of  the  deputies  of  the  council  of  regency.
Jung,  Actenstiicke,  p.  66,

X  Röhrich  Ref.  v.  Strasburg,  ii.  p.  8.

evangelical  preachers  who  had  married),  and
in  the  greatest  poverty,  and  had  at  length
sought  refuge  in  Strasburg,  where  he  found
not  only  an  asylum,  but  a  field  for  his  highest
and  most  strenuous  exertions.  It  is  reported
of  him,  that,  in  his  youth,  when  carrying  on
scholastic  disputations,  he  had  invented  a
method  for  severing  the  essential  and  neces-
sary from  the  accessory  and  accidental. §  By
comparing  the  subject  with  each  of  the  two
contradictory  predications,  he  discovered  a  ii
third  term  which  reconciled  them.  Butzer
has  the  reputatron  of  a  pliancy  not  always  to
be  justified.  He  is  generally  thought  to  have
yielded  too  much  to  circumstances.  It  is  un-
deniable that  his  attempts  at  mediation  were
prompted  by  the  pressing  necessity  for  peace
without,  no  less  than  by  his  own  reflections;
but  they  were,  as  far  as  his  convictions  were
concerned,  most  sincere.  He  possessed  an
acute  and  subtle  apprehension  of  the  ideas  of
others,  and  a  remarkable  talent  for  developing
them;  —  for  what  may  be  called  'secondary  '
production.

At  first,  Butzer  had  seen  in  Luther's  inter-
pretation of  the  Lord's  Supper,  merely  a  new
attempt  to  turn  Christ  into  bread,  as  he  calls  it
[cine  neue  Verhrotung  Christi) ]\\  but  on  a  more
profound  study,  especially  of  the  greater  con-
fession of  the  Lord's  Supper,  it  became  clear
to  him  that  this  was  not  the  case  :  in  a  treatise
he  wrote,  as  early  as  the  year  1528,*!!  he  re-
marks, that  Luther's  real  meaning  was  totally
different  from  that  generally  imputed  to  him.
In  this  opinion  he  was  confirmed  at  the  con-
ference of  Marburg.

But  he  was  not  more  disposed  to  accede  to
the  notion  generally  entertained  by  the  Lu-
therans, that  the  Oberländers  regarded  the
Lord's  Supper  as  merely  bread  and  wine.  We  -
have  observed  that,  at  the  diet  of  Augsburg,
the  four  cities  found  themselves  compelled,  as
they  were  not  allowed  to  subscribe  the  Saxon
confession,  to  deliver  in  a  confession  of  their
own.  Butzer,  who  had  the  principal  share  in
drawing  it  up.  made  choice  of  such  expres-
sions as  might  preclude  the  possibility  of  this
reproach  fo^-  the  future.  In, the  18lh  article
of  the  "Confession  of  the  four  Free  and  Im-
perial Cities,  Strasburg,  Constance,  Memmin-
gen,  and  Lindau,"— the  so-called  Tetrapoli-
tana  —  it  is  said,  "The  Lord  gives,  in  the  Sa-
crament, his  real  body  and  real  blood,  really  to
eat  and  to  drink,  for  the  nutriment  of  souls  to
eternal  life."**  It  is  evident  that  the  word
"real" is  designedly  repeated,  but  without

§  Adami  Vitse  Theologorum,  102.

II  Frairment  of  a  letter  from  Butzer  to  the  brethren  in
Coire,  Kohrich,  ii.  135.  The  Irttor  to  Blaurer  (ibid.  p.  275)
is  likewise  very  instructive.  Dum  ipsi  (Lulherani)  veram

prresentiam  tueri  voluerunt iis  verbis  eam  affir-

inarunt,  quaj  si  ad  vim  exigös,  localem  statuunt.  Contra
nostri,  dum  localem  voluerunt  negare,  sic  locuti  sunt,  ut
visi  sint  Christum  cosna  prorsus  excludere.

IT  Vergleichnng  Doctor  Luthers  und  seines  Gegentheyls
— Dialogus,  ]32d.— (Comparison  of  Dr.  Luther  and  his  ad-
versaries.)

**  First  printed  in  1531,  with  an  apology  of  Butzer,  in
which  Hospinian,  a  zealous  Zvvinglian,  finds  the  "  vera  et
orthodoxa  sententia  de  coena  domini."  Historia  sacra-
mentaria,  ii.  221.

Chap.  III. ATTEMPT  TO  RECONCILE  THE  TWO  PROTESTANT  PARTIES.

335

prejudice  to  the  spiritual  import  of  the  par-
taking.

For  Butzer's  scheme  of  reconcihation  rested
on  the  assumption  that  Luther  did  not,  any-
more than  his  antagonists,  mean  that  the  body
was  locally  contained  iu  the  bread  :  but  only
that  there  existed  a  sacramental  unity  of  the
body  and  blood  of  Christ  with  the  bread  and
the  wine ;  and  that,  on  the  other  hand,  the
spiritual  nature  of  the  partaking  did  not  ex-
clude the  real  presence  of  the  body  of  Christ.
In  so  far  as  Luther  ascribed  a  spiritual  essence
to  the  body  of  Christ,  Butzer  sided  with  him.
He  admitted  that  the  body  might  unquestiona-
bly have  another  than  a  local  presence ;  the
bread  and  wine  did  not  cease  to  be  symbols,
but  they  were  symbols  of  the  present,  not  of
the  absent  body ;  of  the  bodily  presence, — that
is  to  say,  the  real  presence.*

The  question  now  was,  whether  Butzer
would  succeed  in  rendering  this  explanation
acceptable  to  both  parties.

He  first  submitted  it  to  Melanchthon  at
Augsburg;  after  which  he  hastened  to  Co-
burg,  where  he  showed  Luther  those  passages
of  his  writings  which  treated  the  most  plainly
of  the  sacramental  spiritual  partaking;  he  re-
ported that  he  had  received  from  both  assur-
ances which  led  him  to  hope  the  best.

Luther,  however,  was  not  disposed  to  make
the  task  of  mediation  a  light  one.  To  guard
against  mistake,  he  proposed  two  questions
which  left  no  room  for  ambiguity :  the  one,
w^hether  the  body  was  really  in  the  symbols;
the  other,  whether  it  was  really  received  by
sinners.  It  is  remarkable  that  the  latter  and
more  difficult  of  these  questions  had  already
been  raised  in  the  12th  century.  Otto  of  Frei-
singen  alludes  to  it,  but  he  thinks  it  better  to
evade  it,  than  to  command  that  it  be  answered
in  the  affirmative."!"  To  Luther  this  affirma-
tive did  not  appear  to  be  attended  with  any
such  great  difficulty,  since  it  must  at  all  events
be  admitted  that  God's  word  v.-as  heard  by
sinners^ — that  God's  sun  shone  even  upon  the
blind.  And  in  fact,  Butzer  declared  himself
in  a  satisfactory  manner  on  both  points.  He
acknowleciged  that  Christ  was  really  present
in  the  sacrament ;  even  in  the  bread  and  to  the
mouth ;  and  that,  as  all  the  promises  of  Christ
must  be  true,  he  did  not  doubt  that  the  un-
godly, as  well  as  the  pious,  partook  of  the
body  and  blood  of  Christ.  For  himself,  he
accepted  both  articles.  With  regard,  however,
to  his  "Co-servants  of  the  Word,"  he  re-
marked, that  they  were  convinced  of  the  first,
but  were  not  free  from  doubt  as  to  the  second. I

*  Melanchthon  de  Buceri  sententia.  Corp.  Ref.  ii.  316.
See  Litei'fB  Buceri  ad  Pontanum  4th  Aug.  3530,  in  Coles-
tin,  ii.  302.  Letter  of  Butzer's  to  Duke  Ernest  of  Lüne-
burg in  Hess's  "  Leben  CEkolanipads,"  p.  317.

t  Chronicorum  liber,  viii.,  Prologus:  utrum  mali  vera-
citer  sacramentis  communicent,  an  exterius  tantum  ea
accipiant..

t  We  have  not,  indeed,  Butzer's  letter  itself;  but  the
expressions  of  Luther,  to  whom  it  was  addressed,  leave
JIG  doubt  as  to  its  contents.  (To  Wencelaus  Link,  in  De
Wette,  iv,  327.)  Likewise  to  Menius:  Bucerus  etfecit
tantum,  ut  concedant  omnes,vere  adesse  et  porrigi  corpus
Domini,  etiam  corporali  prEesentia  ;  casteri  tantum  fideli
aniraie  ac  piee  ;  Bucerus  vero  consentit  et  impiorum  manu
49  2h

Luther  had  previously  consented  not  to  press
the  second  at  present,  if  the  first  were  but
agreed  on :  th*is  he  now  repeated ;  by  the  ad-
mission that  the  sacrament  was  in  the  sym-
bols, he  invested  it  with  its  proper  quality;
the  question,  what  sinners  received,  he  agreed
to  postpone.

This  was  an  epoch  in  which  ecclesiastical,
nay,  even  dogmatical  questions,  were  inter-
woven in  the  closest  manner  with  political.

In  consequence  of  the  first  advances  made
by  Batzer,  an  invitation  had  been  sent  to  the
delegates  of  the  Oberland  cities  to  take  part  in
the  deliberations  at  Schmalkalden,  in  Dec,
1530.  But  after  an  explanation  hke  that  above,
they  were,  without  further  scruple,  formally
received  into  the  union  at  the  second  meeting.^
John  Frederick,  who  filled  the  place  of  his
father,  made  it  his  first  business  to  speak  with
the  deputies  of  the  four  cities;  he  exhorted
them  openly  to  preach  the  doctrine  thus  agreed
on,  and  to  cause  it  to  be  made  known  to  all
the  world.  They  assured  him  that,  as  Butzer
did  not  treat  for  himself  alone,  but  with  the
authority  of  his  masters,  there  could  be  no
doubt  on  the  subject. II  'Strasburg,  Lindau,
Constance  and  Memmingen  had  been  joined
not  only  by  Biberach.  Ysni  and  Reutlingen,
but  even  by  Ulm.  This  powerful  city  had
protested  against  the  recess  of  Spires ;  and,  in
spite  of  all  the  emperor's  admonitions,  had
refused  to  subscribe  the  recess  of  Augsburg ;
— measures  of  so  decisive  a  nature  as  clearly
to  show  how  strong  the  reforming  spirit  must
already  be.  But  the  opposite  party  in  the
city  long  retained  considerable  strength,  and
num.erous  violent  re-actions  took  place.  At
length  the  citizens  gave  the  council  full
powers  to  restore  order.  In  a  very  short  time
an  evangelical  confession  appeared,  agreeing
with  the  Tetrapolitana  on  the  article  of  the
Lord's  Supper.  The  cities  above-mentioned  all
signed  the  treaty  of  mutual  defence  at  Schmal-
kalden.

Butzer's  efforts  having  thus  been  successful
with  regard  to  Saxony,  he  proceeded  to  incul-
cate his  views  in  Switzerland.

Of  the  two  great  Swiss  reformers,  he  gained
over  one  without  difficulty.  The  peaceful
Qj^kolampadius  thought  that  Butzer  was  as
dihgent  a  promoter  of  truth  as  of  charity,  and

porrigi  et  ore  sumi. In  Plank,  iii.  340,  these  letters  are
obviously  overlooked.

§  Instruction  uf  den  angesetzten  Tag  gegen  Schmal-
kalden, Torgau,  25th  March.  "Uns  ist  itso  wieder  ein
Schreiben  von  Wittenberg  zukommen,  so  der  Butzer  an
Dr.  Martin  und  Phil.  Mel.  gethan,  daraus  die  zween,  wie
uns  angezeigt  ist  worden,  nit  anders  zu  vernehmen  wissen,
denn  das  der  hintersteiligen  Punkt  halber  auch  vollend
verglichen."  (W.  A.)  —  "Another  letter  from  Wittenberg
has  now  come  to  us,  which  Butzer  had  addressed  to  Dr.
Martin  and  Philip  Melanchthon,  from  which,  as  it  is
shown  to  us,  those  twain  can  understand  no  other.wise
than  that  the  article  concerning  the  doubtful  point  had
been  fully  settled."

II  Account  of  the  transactions  at  the  diet  held  at  Schmal-
kalden in  the  week  after  Judica.  "Haben  keinen  Zvvei-
vel,  sie  (ihre  Herrn)  werden  verschaffen,  dass  dergleichen
gepredigt  gelehrt  und  verkündigt  werde,  auch  solches
lautbar  zu  machen."—"  Have  no  doubt  that  they  (our  go-
vernors) will  take  care  that  the  same  shall  be  preached,
taught,  and  proclaimed,  so  as  to  make  it  known."

5S8

ATTEMPT  TO  RECOXCILE  THE  TWO  PROTESTANT  PARTIES. Book  VI.

recommended  his  interpretation  to  his  col-
league, Zwingli.*

It  was  impossible,  however,  that  Zwingii
should  share  his  sentiments.

In  the  first  place,  he  had  far  too  frequently
and  too  decidedly  accused  Luther  of  a»  coarse
and  material  view  of  the  subject,  lightly  to
abandon  the  charge.  It  was  also  not  to  be
denied  that,  although  Butzer  adhered  to  the
idea  of  the  spiritual  partaking,  he  approached
nearer  to  Luther's  exposition  of  the  mystery
than  Zwingii  could  possibly  approve.  He  was
too  conscious  that  his  view  of  the  subject  was
to  be  traced  to  a  totally  different  origin.  He
did  not  directly  reject  Butzer's  formula,  but
the  threefold  repetition  of  the  word  '■'•reaV
was  very  offensive  to  him ;  he  thought  that
people  would  understand  this  in  the  sense  of
natural.  He  had  no  objection  to  Butzer's  pub-
lication of  a  letter  v>-hich  he  had  addressed  to
the  Swiss,  on  the  identity  of  the  two  doctrines  ]
but  he  reserved  to  himself  the  right  of  giving
a  commentary  upon  it,  expressive  of  his  own
peculiar  opinion.  He  consented  indeed  to
adopt  the  formula,  that  the  body  of  Christ  was
present  in  the  sacrament ;  but  not  without  the
addition  of  the  words.  '•'  only  to  the  believing
soul;"  he  utterly  refused  to  assent  to  the
proposition,  that  the  body  of  Christ  was  pre-
sented to  the  mouth. t  The  whole  force  of  his
original  conception  vras  aroused  within  him,
and  he  could  not  be  induced  to  advance  one
step  further  on  the  path  of  conciliation.

This,  however,  did  not  prevent  Basel,  under
the  guidance  of  GEkoIampadius,  from  accept-
ing the  mediation.  There  was  already  a  re-
pon  in  Switzerland  of  a  peculiar  doctrine
taught  by  GEkoIampadius,  which  was  said  to
have  a  considerable  number  of  adherents. :J:

In  short,  the  rumours  of  a  closer  union  be-
tween the  two  parties  of  reformers  were  ge-
neral, earnest,  and  uninterrupted.  In  a  cer-
tain sense  this  had  already  taken  place  :  Stras-
burg, and,  since  July  1530,  Landgrave  Philip
having  joined  the  union  of  the  Swiss  cities,  at
the  same  time  that  they  were  members  of  the
Schmalkaldic  league.  The  following  fact  ap-
pears tome  extremely  striking  : — Bullinger's
History  contains  a  copy  of  a  treaty  of  alliance
which  Zürich  laid  before  Basel  and  Bern,  at  a
congress  held  in  February  1531,  with  the  remark,
that  it  was  already  accepted  by  some  Germans.
On  nearer  inspection  I  find  that,  word  by  word,
from  beginning  to  end,  it  is  merely  and  pre-

*  Utrinsqiie  (veritatis  et  caritatis)  Bucerus  mea  sen-
tentia  observantissimiis  e?t.  Proinde  confido  non  iiipra-
tum  tibi  fore  quicquid  ille  in  medium  attiilit.  19th  Nov.
1530,  in  Hottinger,  ii.  Sau.

t  Letter  in  Hess,  CEkolampadius,  p.  341.

X  From  the  otherwise  very  empt}»^  and  uninstructive
essay  of  Faber,  de  admirabili  cathoiicis  ....  data  vic-
toria, we  see  this  (cap.  vi.  0pp.  iii.  145).  In  a  letter  of
Landgrave  Philip,  dated  the  Friday  after  Palm  Sunday,
(W.A.)  CEkolampadius  is  regarded  as  completely  agree-
ing with  that  party.  "Since  CEkolampadius  and  the
others  are  of  one  mind  with  us  in  the  matter  of  the  sacra-
ment, and  it  is  to  be  hoped  that  the  otliers  also  will  come
to  us"  ....

cisely  the  formula  of  the  Schmalkaldic  treaty.
How  remarkable,  that  Zurich  should  (at  least,
as  it  appears  from  this)  have  earnestly  pro-
posed to  its  most  intimate  allies  to  join  the
Schmalkaldic  league !

There  was  no  point  of  time  at  which  the
Swiss  Confederation  w^as  so  near  to  an  internal
reconstitution,  in  consequence  of  the  progress
of  church  reform,  and  likewise  to  a  re-union
with  Germany,  as  the  one  we  are  now, con-
templating. The  two  factions  into  which  it
was  divided  were  powerfully  attracted  by  the
corresponding  elements  of  the  German  mother
country.  Zwingii  said,  the  matter  must  be
settled  in  Switzerland,  before  the  emperor
would  have  his  hands  free  in  Germany.  Fer-
dinand feared  a  general  union  of  all  the  Pro-
testants. In  the  unusually  energetic  resist-
ance which  he  encountered  on  all  hands,  he
thought  he  detected  traces  of  the  confidence
which  such  a  coalition  was  calculated  to  in-
spire. §

But  religious  differences  once  more  formed
an  insuperable  obstacle  to  their  union.

At  the  meeting  at  Frankfurt  on  the  i\Iain,
in  June,  1531,  the  matter  was  agitated  anew.

Bern  and  Zürich  had  again  declared  that
they  would  not  accept  Butzer's  formula,  not
because  it  appeared  to  them  unchristian,  but
because  it  was  obscure,  and  might  easily  give
occasion  to  dangerous  misconceptions.il

On  the  other  hand,  the  Elector  of  Saxony
had  instructed  his  envoys,  in  case  the  Con-
federation should  not  subscribe  a  confession
in  harmony  w^th  that  of  Augsburg,  to  break
off  all  negotiations  with  them,  and  to  refuse
even  to  be  the  bearers  of  any  thing  they
might  desire  to  send  him.

This  again  necessarily  had  an  influence  on
the  internal  transactions  of  the  Schmalkaldic
league.

A  project  of  a  military  organisation  was  sub-
mitted in  Frankfurt,  which  the  OberJanders
thought  very  ably  conceived  and  expedient ;
but  they  declined  to  subscribe  it,  because  it  did
not  include  the  confederate  cantons.  They
declared  that  the  enemies  by  whom  they
were  surrounded  were  too  strong  j  allies  so
remote  would  not  be  able  to  afford  them  ade-
quate assistance.

Without  doubt  they  wished  to  wait  to  see
how  things  would  turn  out  in  Switzerland.

For  it  was  evident  that  in  that  country  every
thing  would  be  referred  to  the  decision  of
arms,  and  that  this  decision  would  re-act  in
various  ways  on  Upper  Germany.

§  Es  cierto  que  se  haran  todos  unos  y  peoi;es  que  iiunca
por  los  fuercas  y  ventaja  que  de  dia  en  dia  van  cobrando
Jos  que  sigu'en  estas  sectas. Prina,  •27th  March,  1531.

i,  Correspondence  between  Bern,,  Basel,  and  Zürich  in
Escher  and  Hottiiiger's  Archiv,  ii.  p.  290.  Basel  insists
that  Butzer's  explanation  is  "  also  luter,  das  sie  mit  irem
(der  Gegner)  natürlichen  lyblichen  substanzlichen  oder
wesentlichen  Lyb  gar  keine  Gemeinschaft  hat,"  —  "so
clear,  that  it  has  nothing  whatever  in  common  with  their
(the  opposite  party's)  natural,  bodily,  substantial,  or  ma-
terial bodj."

Chap.  IV.

ZWINGLI'S  POLITICAL  REFORMS.

387

CHAPTER  IV.

CATASTROPHE OF THE REFORMATION IN SWIT-
ZERLAND.

The  attack  made  by  Savoy  on  Geneva  was
repulsed  in  1530:  in  the  spring  of  1531,  the
Castellan  of  jMusso  was  also  driven  out  of  the
Grisons.  As,  on  the  one  side)  the  cities  had
not  joined  the  Schraalkaldic  league,  so,  on  the
other,  the  Five  Cantons  had  in  fact  concluded
no  alliance  with  Austria.  The  two  parties
in  the  Confederation  stood  confronted,  each
limited  to  its  own  resources,  but  more  embit-
tered than  ever.

The  Five  Cantons  complained,  and  indeed
not  unjustly,  that  their  rights  as  majority  were
no  longer  respected.  They  refused  to  assent
to  ordinances  like  those  which  had  been  issued
in  St.  Gall.  The  first  captain  who,  according
to  the  new  regulations,  was  to  assume  the
command  there  (he  was  from  Lucern),  dis-
dained to  take  an  oath  to  peasants,  and  rode
away.

On  the  other  hand,  the  evangelical  cities
were,  also  with  apparent  justice,  incensed
that  they  had  not  been  supported  in  matters
regarding  their  interests  as  members  of  the
Colifederation,  and  affirmed  that  the  bond
which  united  them  was  thus  broken :  nor
were  they  disposed  longer  to  endure  the
"coarse,  inhuman-'  vituperation  of  which
they  had  been  the  object.  The  answers  of
the'  Five  Cantons  were,  they  said,  in  them-
selves an  insult. "*

Zwingli's  intention  had  been  to  put  an  end
to  the  thing  at  once  by  force.

The  difference  wliich  existed  between  Lu-
ther and  Zwingli  was  at  least  as  great  on  po-
litical, as  on  religious  points.  Luther's  policy,
if  it  deserves  the  name,  was  entirely  depend-
ent on  his  religious  views,  and  was  limited  to
immediate  defence.  Zwingli,  on  the  con-
trary, pursued,  from  the  very  beginning,  ends
of  a  positively  political  nature ;  a  complete
change  in  the  form  of  the  Confederation  vras
the  central  point  of  all  his  ideas,  and  he  had
laid  the  most  extensive  plans  for  its  accom-
plishment. He  is,  without  doubt,  in  both  re-
spects, the  greatest  reformer  that  Switzerland
has  produced.

It  had  often  been  complained  of  as  unfair,
that  the  forest  cantons,  which  contributed  so
much  less  in  men  and  money  to  the  wars  of
the  Confederation  than  the  populous  city  can-
tons, yet  enjoyed  an  equal  share  of  the  advan-
tages of  victory  and  dominion.  This  was  the
true  cause  of  the  dissensions  which  foUow^ed
the  Burgundian  wars.  Zwingli  found  that
this  state  of  things  had  of  late  become  more
intolerable.  Zug  having  joined  the  four  forest
cantons,  a  majority  had  been  formed  which
decided  all  the  business  of  the  diets,  and
against  which  there  existed  no  lawful  remedy.
Zwingli  was  of  opinion  that  this  advantage,

*  Antwurtten  und  Meinungen  der  Radtsbotten  der
christlichen  Stetten. — Answers  and  opinions  of  the  envoj-s
of  the  councils  of  the  Christian  cities.  24th  April,  1531.
Bullinger,  ii.  362.

which  they  so  recklessly  abused,  was  highly
unjust. The  guidance  of the  Confederation
much more properly belonged to the two
I  cities  of  Zurich  and  Bern,  which  had  always
1  been  its  most  powerful  members,  and  done
;  the  most  for  its  interests. It  would  be  neces-
sary to  send  back  the  act  of  Confederation  to
the  Five  Cantons,  and  make  a  new  one,  either
'  entirely  excluding  them  from the common
bailiwicks  (at  least  on  this  side  of  the  Alps),
I  or  making  a  fresh  division ;  or  at  all  events
:  putting  an end  to  their  influence  as  a  ma-

We  see  that  Zwingli  wanted  to  place  the
■.  constitution  on  a  totally  different  basis,  and  to
'  estabhsh  its  unity  on  the  preponderance  of  ac-
;  tual  force.  The  same  principles  would  then
:  have  prevailed  through  the  whole  territor}-,
both  in  religion  and  politics.

Plans  of  this-  sort  can  never  be  executed

without  an  energetic  co-operation  of  forces  at

the favourable  moment. The  first  question

was,  whether  JMaster  Ulrich  Zwingli,  powerful

;  and  respected  as  he  was,  were  sufficiently  so

I  to  unite  his  own  party  in  an  undertaking  of

'  this  kind.

{ But  even  in  Zürich,  Zwingli  had  still  to  con-
i  tend  with  hostile  opinions  and  obstinate  pri-
I  vate  interests. In  the  Grand  Council,  which
'  managed  the  affairs  of  the  church,  there  were
;  still,  towards  the  end  of  the  year  1528,  men
i  who retained their preference for the old
1  usages. Zwingli  demanded  from  the  pulpit
[  the  purification  of  the  council  from  the'  un-
I  godly,  who  could  not_ endure  the  word  of  God.
Accordingly.  Zwingli's  partisans  proceeded  to
interrogate  the members  of  the  guilds,  one
after  another.  v\-hether  they  would  repair  to
■  the  Lord's  table  like  other  Christians;  and  ex-
cluded those  who  refused,  from  the  counciLj
:  But  this  did  not  put  an  end  to  all  the  diffi-
culties. Among  th©  noble  families  there  were
many  who  had  reluctantly  given  up  the  pen-
,  sions,  and  had  not  broken  off  all  connexion
;  with the leaders'  of  the Five Cantons. If
Zwingli  could  not  break  this  connexion,  he
was  determined  at  least  to  render  it  innocuous.
The  influence  of  the  noble  families  in  Zürich
:  rested  upon  this,  —  that  whereas  only  three
/members  of  each  of  the  other  guilds  sat  in  the
Lesser,  and  twelve  in  the  Grand  Council,  the
i  noble  guild — called  the  Constafel  —  had  the
'  privilege  of  sending six  to  the  former,  and
:  eighteen  to  the  latter. § Zwingli had suffi-
cient influence  to  break  down  this  inequality.
He  carried  the  point  of  putting  the  Constafel
on  the  same  footing  as  the  other  guilds.

t  Was  Zürich  und  Bern  Not  zu  betrachten  sey  in  dem
fiinfortisen  Handel.— What  is  to  be  regarded  as  the  danger
of  Zürich  and  Bern  in  the  quarrel  with  the  Five  Cantons.
Hotiinger,  ii.  467.

i  Bernhard  Weiss,  p.  91,  fortunately  enters  more  into
detail  than  Bullinger.  The  difficulties  of  the  situation
are  moreover  apparent  from  the  following  passage  from
Zwingli's  own  writings: — An  non  optimi  quique  ac  in-
nocerrtissimi,  cum  senatores  tum  pleheji,  sic  me  colunt  ac
tiientur.  ut  nisi  id  constantissime  facerent,  minor  esset
publica  tranquillitas.  Responsio  ad  amici  hand  vulgaris
epistolam. Gualth.  ii.  323.

§  See  Bluntschli  Staats-  und  Eechtsgeschichte  von  Zu-
rich, i.  359.— Unfortunately,  this  book  contains  no  further
account  of  the  above-mentioned  relations.

388

DEMANDS  OF  THE  CITY  CANTONS.

Book  VI.

Nothing  less  than  measures  of  such  severity
m  Zurich  itself,  could  have  brought  about  that
politico-religious  unity  in  the  public  authority
which  was  necessary  to  Zvvingli's  plans.  But
it  was  clear  that  secret;  if  not  open  counter-
action was  inevitable.  In  a  very  short  time
he  was  made  to  feel  this.

Far  greater  difficulties  were  opposed  to  him
by  Bern.  There,  where  the  attachment  to  the
pensions  was  much  more  deeply  rooted ;  where
a  certain  jealousy  of  Zürich  always  showed  it-
self; the  separation  which  had  hitherto  existed
between  the  several  cantons  found  stubborn^
if  not  ardent  defenders.

I  know  not  whether  Zv»'ingli's  plan,  which
seemed  so  advantageous  to  the  Bernese,  was
ever  even  submitted  to  them.  I  find  no  trace
of  it  in  the  transactions  of  their  diets.

The  demands  of  the  city  cantons  were  con-
fined to  the  three  following :  first,  that  blas-
phemers should  be  punished;  secondly,  that
the  poor  people  who  had  been  driven  from
house  and  home  for  conscience"  sake,  should
be  received  again:  lastly,  that  the  religious
doctrines  of  the  city  cantons  should  be  tole-
rated in  the  territories  of  the  other  cantons  ;*
— demands  which  the  nature  of  the  case  ren-
dered inevitable.  For  what  could  be  the  Con-
federation in  which  the  one  member  would
not  receive  the  oath  of  the  other  *?  What  the
community  of  justice  in  the  bailiwicks,  where
the  one  portion  of  the  rulmg  body  persecuted
the  faith  in  which  the  other  beheld  its  salva-
tion'?  How,  above  all,  could  the  evangelical
members  of  the  Confederation  look  on,  while,
at  a  few  miles'  distance,  their  co-religionists
were  thrown  into  prison  'I  These  demands
therefore  were  merely  an  assertion  of  the
Christian  character  of  the  new  state  of  things ;
a  recognition  of  this  was  all  that  they  claimed.

At  this  time,  however,  the  rehgious  creed
Avas  far' too  intimately  couHOcted  with  the  civil
power,  for  concessions,  even  of  this  kind,  to  be
obtained,  except  by  compulsion.  In  the  Five
Cantons,  that  power  was  founded  on  the  ex-
clusive sway  of  Catholicism.  Had  the  author-
ities consented  to  admit  the  contrary  opinion,
a  hostile  party  would  have  formed  itself  in
the  population,  under  their  own  eyes;  and,
supported  by  the  tendencies  of  the  age,  and
encouraged  by  sympathy  from  without,  might
easily  have  became  dangerous  to  themselves.
They  therefore  at  once  decidedly  rejected
these  demands.

Upon  this  Zwingli  did  not  hesitate  to  advise
war,  and  to  urge  an  immediate  attack  while
the  advantage  was  still  in  their  hands:  he  so
far  prevailed  that  Zürich,  where  no  one  now
^''entnred  openly  to  oppose  him,  declared  itself
for  that  course.

In  Bern,  however,  his  authoiity  \v?.s  not  so
great.  That  city  also  regarded  coercive  mea-
sures as  inevitable,  but  did  not  choose  imme-
diately to  come  to  extremities.  It  succeeded
in  prevailing  on  its  allies  for  the  moment  to

*  All  the  iiPijotiations  are  to  be  found  in  Biillinger's
Chronicle,  from  which  nearly  all  authors,  even  the  earlier
ones,  have  drawn  most  of  their  information,  and  which
is  now  printed.  The  want  of  the  continuation  of  Zwingli's
correspondence  is  severely  felt.

resort  to  no  act  of  open  aggression  against  the
Five  Cantons,  but  merely  to  withhold  supphes.

This,  however,  was  little  likely  to  content
Zwingli.  He,  clearly  saw  that  delay  would
ruin  every  thing.  He  felt  that  his  adversaries
at  home  were  once  more  bestirring  themselves,
arid  complained  from  the  pulpit  of  the  support
that  Zürich  itself  afi'orded  to  the  enemy.  At
one  moment  he  was  seriously  determined  to
resign  his  post.  As  he  was  prevented,  though
with  difficulty,  from  putting  this  design  in  exe-
cution, he  made  another  attempt  to  convince
the  Bernese  of  the  necessity  of  adopting  an-
other line  of  conduct.  We  find  him  holding
a  secret  meeting,  by  night,  in  the  house  of  the
preacher  at  Bremgarten,  with  certain  delegates
from  Bern,  while  the  councillors  of  Bremgar-
ten kept  watch  without.  But  he  seems  not  to
have  found  much  encouragement  here.  Before
day  dawned,  Bullinger  conducted  his  master
to  the  ^road,  through  a  gate  near  the  shooting-
house.  Zwingli  was  deeply  depressed.  He
wept  as  he  took  leave  of  Bullinger.  "  God
keep  thee,  Henry,"  said  he,  ''and  only  re-
main thou  faithful  to  the  Lord  Christ  and  his
church. '"t  In  August  a  comet  had  appeared ;
Abbot  George  Müller  of  Wettingen  one  day
asked  Zwingli  in  the  churchyard  of  the  great
minster,  what  that  might  signify.  "  My
George,"  an^vered  Zwingli,  "it  will  cost  me
and  many  an  honest  man  dear:  the  church
will  be  hi  jeopard}^,  but  you  will  not  be  de-
serted by  Christ.'"^

Things  fell  out  as  Zwingli  had  foreseen,  —
indeed,  as  it  was  inevitable  they  should.  Bern
probably  hoped  that  the  common  people  in
the  Five  Cantons  would  not  be  able  to  hold
out  against  the  scarcity,  and  would  rise  against
their  governors;  but  the  very  contrary  came
to  pass.  The  people  were -exasperated  be-
cause, under  the  pretence  of  zeal  for  the  Chris-
tian religion,  their  adversaries  withheld  the
fruits  of  the  earth,  which  God  caused  to  grovv^
freely  for  all.§  The  governing  class  turned
this  disposition  of  the  public  mind  to  the  ad-
vantage of  their  own  authority.  The  Zürich-
ers had  put  forth  a  manifesto  for  their  justifi-
cation, and  had  sent  it  to  Lucern;  the  council
of  Lucern  treated  all  those  who  had  received
and  communicated  it  to  others  as  traitors,  and

t  Bullinger's  P^Tarrative,  iii.  49.  '

I  I  may  be  permitted  here  to  quote  the  charming  narra-
tive of  a  contemporary,  which  has  been  printed  in  the
Schw.  Mus.  ii.  535.  He  tells  how,  when  he  was  at  St.
Gall  in  those  days,  he  one  night  climbed  up  the  Bernegh
v/ith  Zwinirli's  friend  Vadianus,  Dr.  Joachim  von  Watt,'
and  some  others ;— how,  when  they  had  climbed  up  to  the
very  top,  the  doctor  sea  ted  himself  in  the  midst  of  them  upon
the  ^'round  in  the  dew,  and  explained  to  them  the  names
of  the  constellations,  the  opposite  motions  of  the  Zodiac
and  the  rest  of  the  firmament,  and  the  wonders  of  the
Creator,  whom  he  desired  soon  to  behold.  Hereupon  lie
cast  his  eyes  upon  the  country,  and  spoke  of  the  first
spttlement'by  the  Romans,  of  the  founding  and  fortunes
of  the  town,  how  many  times  it  had  been  burnt,  whence
each  gate  thereof  had"  its  name,  how  the  neighbouring
forest' had  been  cleared,  and  who  had  established  the
flourishing  trade  of  linen  weaving  :  this  thought  led  him
back  again  to  the  comet,  which  none  doubted  to  portend
the  wrath  of  God.  Theophrastus  von  Hohenheim,  then
dwelling  at  St.  Gall,  and  others,  interpreted  it  to  foreshow
not  only  bloodshed  and  the  overthrow  of  the  government,
but  especially  the  destruction  of  learned  men.

§  Hallwylin  Kirchhofer's  Malier,  107.

Chap.  IV.

BATTLE  OF  CAPPEL.

389

sentenced  them  to  the  rack.  And,  indeed,  the
feeliftg  of  continual  offence  \Ya3  of  itself  suf-
ficient to  render  the  temper  of  the  two  parties
more  hostile  from  day  to  day.  Thus  all  nego-
tiations were  abortive.  The  Five  Cantons  per-
sisted in  demanding  of  the  cities  to  open  the
common  stores  to  them,  according  to  the  terms
of  the  Confederation,  or  to  grant  them  their
rightful  share.  The  cities  refused  to  enter
into  the  question  of  right,  as,  by  the  terms  of
the  public  peace,  the  withholding  of  the  stores
was  expressly  appointed  as  the  punishment  for
continued  insults  and  offences.  This  punish-
ment they  now  intended  to  inflict.  The  me-
diators, among  whom  we  find  Strasburg  depu-
ties, proposed  that  the  punishment  of  the
insults  complained  of  should  be  left  to  them.
To  this  the  cities  consented,  but  the  country
cantons  were  not  to  be  induced  to  agree  to  it.

No  remedy  could  be  devised;  war  was  in-
evitable ]  war,  under  totally  different  auspices
from  what  Zwingli  had  desired.

In  September  die  Five  Cantons  held  a  diet
at  Lucern.  in  order  to  consult  on  the  means  of
carrying  on  the  war.  At  first,  Uri,  Schwytz,
and  Unterwalden,  oh  dem  Wald,  were  against
an  immediate  attack ;  indeed  Uri  proposed  to
wait  for  the  resolutions  of  the  approaching
diet  of  the  empire.  But  Unterwalden,  nied
dem  Wald,  insisted  on  the  necessity  of  declar-
ing war  without  delay,  and  at  length  all  came
round  to  this  opinion;  "for  they  could  not
perish  of  hunger,  they  must  fetch  means  of
subsistence,  and  for  this  they  must  risk  body
and  soul."*

The  friends  of  the  Five  Cantons  regarded
their  decision  with  some  alarm.  King  Ferdi-
nand feared  they  would  succumb,  and  that  the
confusion  v^-ould  then  become  too  violent  and
general  to  be  repressed.

They  were  undoubtedly  very  inferior  in  num-
bers, but  they  were  united;  their  leaders  were
bound  together  in  the  closest  manner  by  com-
munity of  interest  and  of  danger,  and  were
supported  by  the  popular  exasperation.  They
had  likewise  the  advantage,  that  while  no  ac-
tive steps  had  as  yet  been  taken  in  the  cities,
they  could  rush  down  from  their  mountain
fortresses,  and  make  a  sudden  attack  on  the
most  vulnerable  points.  For  some  days  no-
thing was  heard  of  them ;  the  passes  were
vigilantly  guarded,  and  no  suspicious  person
Avas  allowed  to  go  out  or  in.  There  were,  in
the  high  country,  friends  of  the  Zürichers,
who  had  promised  to  give  them  intelligence
if  any  thing  was  in  preparation ;  but  they  were
so  strictly  watched  as  to  render  this  impossi-
ble. A  few  days  onl}'  were  necessary  to  make
all  ready  for  an  outbreak.  Suddenly,  on  the
9th  of  October,  a  company  from  Lucern  crossed
the  borders,  and  plundered  the  free  bailiwicks.
On  the  10th.  a  boat  laden  with  soldiers  was
seen  crossing  the  lake  of  Zug;  the  sound  of
horns  announced  their  arrival  in  Zug,  and  the
pipes  of  the  men  of  Uri  was  heard  on  the  bor-
der, xlt  the  above-mentioned  meeting  at  Lu-
cern, it  was  immediately  determined  to  com-

*  Bullinger,  iii.  73. The  first  attack  upon  Bern  ema-
nated rather  from  Obwalden.

2h*

bine  forces  at  Zug;  the  council  of  war  had
only  to  fix  the  day,  and  then  to  set  things  in
order  for  the  attack. t

Had  the  cities  been  prepared  for  this  assault,
they  would  easily  have  repulsed  it ;  Zürich  had
only  to  guard  the  pass  over  the  Albis,  and  she
would  have  time  to  make  the  most  efficient
preparations  for  her  defence.  But  the  Zürich-
ers were  up  to  this  moment  continually  occu-
pied- with  the  coercive  measures  they  had
adopted;  they  had  just  been  devising  means
to  prevent  the  approach  of  troops  from  Alsatia
on  either  side  the  Reuss.  Whilst  busied  about
means  of  coercion,  .they  found  themselves
suddenly  attacked.  Their  confusion  was  the
greater,  since  the  attack  coming  from  different
quarters,  left  them  in  doubt  against  what  point
it  was  more  especially  directed.

On  the  morning  of  the  11th  of  October,
1531,  the  militia  of  the  Five  Cantons  took  the
oath,  and  marched,  eight  thousand  men  strong,
under  their  five  banners,  to  invade  the  terri-
tory of  their  chief  foe,  the  Zürichers.

In  front  of  them,  near  Cappel,  a  troop  of
about  twelve  hundred  Zürichers  had  posted
themselves.

The  great  banner  had  indeed  been  unfurled
the  same  morning  in  the  city  of  Zürich,  and
the  militia  belonging  to  it  began  to  assemble ;
but  all  this  was  done  with  disorder  and  precipi-
tation. At  the  sam.e  hour  a  part  of  the  troops
marched  towards  the  free  bailiwicks.  And
now,  at  the  decisive  moment^  it  became  evi-
dent that  all  were  not  of  the  ^ame  mind.  A
secret  counteraction  had  paralysed  every  mea-
sure.? jMessage  after  message^  arrived,  that
the  cogribined  forces  of  the  ene^my  threatened
the  troop  at  Cappel,  and  would  utterly  destroy
it,  if  assistance  were  not  immediately  sent;
so  that  the  militia  attached  to  the  banner,
weak  as  it  was — there  were  only  seven  hun-
dred men — was  compelled  to  take  the  field
without  further  delay.

The  only  means  of  salvation  would  have
been,  to  surrender  Cappel  and  withdraw  the
troop.

The  proposal  was  indeed  made  in  their
ranks  to  retire  before  the  superior  force.  But
it  appeared  to  these  brave  men  an  act  of
cowardice  to  retreat  a  step,  even  when  their
inferiority  was  so  manifest.  Rudy  Gallmami
stamped  his  foot  on  the  ground  when  the  pro-
posal was  made,  and  exclaimed,  "God  giant
that^I  may  not  live  to  see  the  day  when  I  shall
yield  one  foot  of  earth  to  these  people.  Let
this  rather  be  my  grave."

Already  had  the  superior  enemy  advanced
and  the  firing  begun,  as  the  banner  reached
the  summit  of  the  Albis.  The  company  wa^-,
as  we  have  said,  extremely  weak.  William
Toning,  captain  of  sharp-shooters,  looked
around,  and  gave  it  as  his  opinion that it

t  Kurze  Beschreibung  der  fünf  katholischen  Orte  Kriegs
wider  ihre  Eidgenossen  der  fünf  zwinglischen  Orte  (Short
description  of  the  war  of  the  Five  Catholic  Cantons
against  their  confederates  of  the  Five  Zwinglian  Cantons),
which,  since  Haller's  time,  has  been  attributed  to  Gil??
Tschudi,  but  which  appears  in  MS.  under  the  name  of
Cysat  and  others. Balthasar's  Helvetia,  ii.  p.  186.

X  Examination  of  Eudolf  Lavater. Escher,  ii.  311.

390

DEATH  OF  ZWINGLL

Book  VI.

■would  be  better  to  halt  a  while,  and  to  wait
for  reinforcement  from  the  people,  who  were
now  flocking  to  join  them,  before  they  marched
further.  But  Master  Ulrich  Zwingie,  who  had
also  marched  out  with  the  banner,  and,  on  this
occasion,  as  preacher,  in  virtue  of  the  ofhce
which  he  had  not  been  permitted  to  resign,
replied,  that  it  would  ill  become  them  to  look
down  idly  from  the  mountain  on  the  brave
people  fighting  below.  "I  will  to  them  in
God's  name,"  added  he,  -'and  die  with  them,
or  help  to  save  them." — ^-Wait,  Toning,  till
thou  be'st  fresh  again,"  said  the  standard-
bearer.  '^I  am  as  fresh  as  you,"  answered
Toning,  "and  will  be  with  you."

The  company  of  the  Five  Cantons  had
posted  itself  on  a  little  height  surrounded  with
wood,  called  the  Schürenberg:*  here  the
banner  rushed  upon  them.  It  was,  indeed,
the  force  of  Zürich  which  now  stood  con-
fronted with  the  Five  Cantons;  but  careless-
ness at  first,  disunion  and  want  of  discipline
afterwards,  had  caused  it  to  consist  of  little
iTiore  than  two  thousand  men,  whereas  the
city  could  easily  have  put  ten  thousand  men
into  the  field.

This  little  band  was  now  met  by  the  troops
of  the  Five  Cantons,  four-fold  their  numbers,
not  (to  say  the  least)  less  warlike,  and  far
better  commanded.  Little  remains  to  be  said
of  a  battle  which  was  decided  ere  it  began.
The  Zürichers  had  left  the  thicket  at  the  foot
of  the  hill  unoccupied  ]  through  this  the  enemy
rushed,  almost  unobserved,  and  began  the  at-
tack with  the  utmost  confidence  in  his  supe-
riority. The  valour  of  the  Zürichers  was  of
no  avail;  they  were  routed  and  overthro^vn  in
a  moment,  and  a  furious  carnage  began.  Of
the  two  thousand  Zürichers,  five  hundred
perished;  and  what  was  the  most  grievous,
among  them  were  the  most  eminent  and
zealous  evangelical  leaders,  for  they  had  been
the  first  to  take  up  arms.  There  did  Ri^idy
Gallmann  find  the  grave  he  pointed  to.  The
standard-bearers,  Schweizer  and  Wilhelm  To-
ning, fell,  and  the  banner  itself  was  saved
with  great  difiicuity :  the  gTiildmaster  Funk,
the  brave  Bernhard  Weiss,  to  whom  we  are
indebted  for  so  many  excellent  reports;!  the
director  Geroldseck,  several  preachers,  and,  in
the  midst  of  his  flock,  Zwingli  himself.  The
enemy,  drunk  with  victory,  and  already  dis-
persed over  the  battle-field  in  search  of  plunder,
lound  him  lying  under  a  tree,  still  breathing,
'■  with  his  hands  folded  and  his  eyes  raised  to
heaven."  Is  it  too  much  to  conjecture  that  as
he  lay  there  weltering  in  his  blood,  a  thought

*  In  tlie  "  Kurze  Beschreibung,"  Schönenberg;  but  there
too  ii  onsht  rather  to  be  Schiirenberg.  "  1st  ein  ziemlich
hoher  Bühel,  daruff  vor  Zyten  ettliche  hüser  und  schüren
gestanden  sind,  daher  nians  genambt  hat,  wie  es  noch
lieissl,  zu  oder  ufF  Schüren."—  "  This  is  a  somewhat  high
hill,  whereon  in  former  times  stood  several  houses  and
barns,  whence  it  had  the  name  by  which  it  still  is  known,
of  the  barns  (Schüren)." Bulling,  iii.  111.

t  According  to  Accolti  (in  Epistolis  Sadoleti,  vii.  273),
of  the  300  senators  only  se.ven  remained.  The  truth  is
That  seven  members  of  the  Lesser,  and  nineteen  of  the
Great  Council  were  killed  in  battle,  besides  sixty  citizens
and  seven  clergymen  (quam  plurimi  sacerdotes) !  Bullin-
get  enumerates  tiiem  ajl.  The  rest  were  men  from  the
country.  Accolti,  indeed,  reckons  the  Zürichers  at  20,000
men.

which  he  had  lately  expressed  in  gloomy  fore-
bodings was  present  to  his  soul  ?  The  pros-
pects of  the  Confederation,  in  the  sense  in
which  he  understood  and  desired  it,  he  pro-
bably felt  he  must  renounce  forever;  the  pros-
pects of  the  church  and  of  the  religion  of  the
Gospel,  he  could  contemplate  with  unshaken
confidence.  Thus  was  he  found  dying  by  two
common  soldiers,  who  exhorted  him  to  confess
himself  to  a  priest,  or  as  it  already  seemed  too
late  for  that,  at  least  to  receive  the  blessed
Virgin  and  the  saints  into  his  heart.  He  made
no  answer,  and  only  shook  his  head  ;  they  did
not  know  who  he  was;  they  thought  him
some  obscure  "stubborn  heretic,"  and  gave
him  a  death-stroke.  It  was  not  till  the  next
day  that  it  was  remarked  that  Zwingli  was
one  among  the  many  distinguished  men  who
had  fallen.  All  flocked  to  see  him.  One  of
his  acquaintances  from  Zug  declared  that  his
countenance  in  death  had  the  same  expression
as  it  used  to  have  when  inspired  by  the  ardour
of  his  mind  in  preaching.  No  sight  could  be
more  welcome  to  his  enemies,  the  pensioners.
They  instituted  a  sort  of  trial  of  Zvvingli,  quar-
tered his  body,  burned  it,  and  scattered  the
ashes  to  the  winds.

But  the  Five  Cantons  were  not  yet  com-
pletely victors  and  masters  in  the  Confedera-
tion. The  Zürichers  now  determined  to  oc-
cupy the  pass  over  the  Albis,  and  under  the
shelter  thus  aflbrded,  they  collected  their
strength.  They  had  very  shortly  an  army  of
twelve  thousand  men  of  their  own  and  allied
cantons  in  the  field.  Meanwhile  Bern  too
had  taken  the  field,  and  its  army,  together
with  those  of  Basel  and  Biel,  was  supposed  to
amount  to  about  .the  same  number.  When
these  troops  united  at  Bremgarten,  the  Five
Cantons  saw  clearly  that  they  could' do  no-
thing against  such  masses;  they  therefore
evacuated  the  ravaged  territory,  and  retreated
towards  Zug,  where  they  encamped  at  Bar  am
Boden.

It  now  appeared  as  if  an  offensive  war
might  be  carried  on  by  the  cities,  as  Zwingli
had  always  advised;  and  they  did  indeed
march  in  pursuit  of  their  enemy ;  but  circum-
stances were  totally  altered.

Since  their  victory,  the  Five  Cantons  had
become  bolder  than  they  had  ever  been  before ;
on  the  other, hand,  it  ^vas  remarked  that  the
cities  w:anted  an  impulse  such  as  Zwingli
would  perhaps  have  given  them.  Zürich  had
indeed  lost  its  best  citizens  :  people  said,  "they
had  lost  the  rye  out  of  the  wheat."J  The
Bernese  had  never  displayed  much  ardour  for
w^ar,  and  consequently  they  did  not  engage  in
it  with  the  necessary  energy.  They  neglected
to  fall  on  the  enemy  at  the  favourable  mo-
ment, when  he  w^as  changing  his  position.
W^hen  at  length  they  resolved  to  attack  the
very  strong  encampment  in  which  he  now
was,  from  the  Zug  mountains  on  the  one  side

X  To  those  unacquainted  with  the  habits  of  the  German
people,  this  expression  requires  explanation.  They  do
not  willingly  eat  wheaten  bread,  which  they  regard  as
much  less  nutritious  than  that  made  of  rye.  A  j)easant
will  tell  you  that  it  is  impossible  to  work  upon  wheaten
bread,  there  is  no  strength  (kraft)  in  it.— Tkansl.

Chap.  IV.

ATTEMPT  OF  THE  EMPEROR  ON  SWITZERLAND.

391

t)Lr;d  the  valley  on  the  other,  and  for  that  pur-
pose occupied  the  mountain,  they  did  it  with
so  little  skill  and  prudence,  that  they  gave  the
enemy,  whom  they  meant  to  surprise,  an  op-
portunity to  fall  upon  the  division  posted  on
the  mountain,  and  to  cut  off  a  great  number
of  men.*  Notwithstanding  their'superior  num-
bers, the  cities  had  no  longer  courage  to  make
a  strenuous  attack  on  their  brave  and  con-
quering enemy.  They  only  hoped  to  weary
him  out  by  surrounding  him  with  a  winter  en-
campment.

How  totally  were  the  daring  schemes  which
Zvvmgli  had  cherished,  overthrown !  It  is
clear  that  the  pohtico-religious  principle  of
which  he  was  the  representative  and  the
champion,  was,  in  fact,  not  so  strong  in  Zurich
as  he  had  flattered  himself,  and  that  it  was
still  weaker  in  Bern.  It  was  not  suiiiciently
powerful  to  pervade  and  to  animate  the  exist-
ing elements  of  society.  At  the  decisive  mo-
ment, mistaken  measures  were  adopted,  the
ground  of  which  always  was,  want  of  that
union  and  high-minded  energy  which  alone
-couid  have  insured  success.
(  The  fears  which  had  been  entertained  by
the  Cathohc  party  at-  the  beginnifig  of  these
disturbances  were  now  changed,  by  such
unexpected  successes,  into  the  mosi  sanguine
hopes.

With  undisguised  joy  and  exultation  Ferdi-
nand sent  his  brother  an  account  of  the  battle
of  Cappel  and  the  death  of  the  arch-heretic
Zwingli.  ••This."  says  he,  '-'is  the  first  ad-
vantage which  has  been  gained  of  late  by  the
cause  of  the  faith  and  of  the  church."'

On  the  arrival  of  the  news  of  the  second
successful  engagement,  he  began  to  lay  plans.
He  exhorted  his  brother  to  remember  what
favour  God  had  shown  to  the  defenders  of  his
cause.  \Vere  the  emperor  not  so  near  a,t
hand,  he  himself,  feeble  and  poor  as  he  was,
would  hasten  to  assist  in  so  sacred  an  enter-
prise. But  now  he  could  not  refiain  from  ex-
horting him.  the  head  of  Christendom,  to  do
this  ]  never  could  he  have  a  fairer  occasion
for  acquiring  renown.  Without  Switzerland,
the  German  sects  would  be  easily  subdued.
He  advised  him  to  send  succours  openly  or
secretly  to  the  Catholic  cantons.  He  goes  so
far  as  to  tell  the  emperor  that  this  was  the
ti\ie  way  for  him  to  put  an  end  to  religious
discords,  and  to  become  master  of  Germany.f

Nor  was  Charles  V.  in  any  degree  indifferent
to  projects  of- this  kind.  He  answered  that
the  excellence  of  his  brother's  advice  struck
him  the  more,  the  more  he  reflected  upon  it ;
that  the  dignity  with  which  he  was  invested,
solicitude  for  the  orthodox  princes,  the  duty  of

*  "  Das  was  ungfar  urn  die  swei  nach  Mitternacht  Mor-
gens 2:iiistag  den,  '2A  Üctobris."  "  Maria  die  Mutter  Got-
tes war  dero  Nacht  ihr  Krie^szeichen."  —  "This  was  at
about  two  hours  after  niidnieht  on  tjae  morning  of  Tues-
da\-  the  24th  October."  "  Mary,  llie  mother  of  God,  was
their  watchword  on  that  night." Kurzer  Bericht.

t  ]st  Nov.  Vra.  iMagestad  a  la  qiial  su])lico  quiera
mirar  lo  que  yinporta  y  usar  de  la  occasion  y  opportuai-
dad  del  tiempo,  pues  es  el  mas  a  proposito  que  se  pudo
desear  i  cammo  para  remediar  las  quiebras  de  nuestra  fe
y  ser  Vra.  Md.  senor  de  Jllemanna  y  liazer  una  cosa  la  mas
senualada  que  iu  nuestros  tempos  se  ha  hecho.

defending  the  Christian  religion  and  the  com-
mon weal,  and  considerc^tions  for  the  house  of
Austria,  rendered  it  incumbent  uj^on  him  to
do  something.

The  Five  Cantons  had  been  joined  in  their
camp  on  the  Zug  mountains  by  some  compa-
nies of  Italians.  We  discover  from  a  letter
that  this  took  place  with  the  knowledge  of
the  emperor;  he  was  of  opinion  that  all  future
assistance  must  be  given  in  the  name  of  the
pope. I

Nor  did  he  stop  here.  He  immediately  sent
to  ask  the  King  of  France  to  give  his  support
to  the  Five  Cantons,  and  to  declare  war  against
those,  which  had  faUen  off  from  the  faith.

But  he  found  little  cordiality  in  Francis,  who
had  seen  with  great  displeasure  the  close  al-
liance of  the  Five  Cantons  ^^■nth  Austria^  and,
with  a  view  to  luaintain  a  counterpoise,  had
entered  into  negotiations  with  the  other  can-
tons shortly  before  this  catastrophe.  The  king
pleaded  to  the  emperor's  ambassadors  all  the
sums  he  had  had  to  pay  in  consequence  of
the  engagements  he  had  entered  into  at  Cam-
bray.  What  he  had  lately  inherited  from  his
mother,  he  wished  to  apply  to  the  defence  of
his  kingdom.  The  emperor,  he  continued
with  increasing  bitterness  and  irritation,  had
tied  his  hands  for  every  enterprise  where  any
thing  was  to  be  gained  ]  he  v;as  friendly  only
where  nothing  was  to  be  got  but  blows  and
expenses, — against  the  Turks  and  the  Swiss. §

Negotiations  were  likewise  entered  into
\vith  the  Venetian  ambassador  in  Milan.  The
Bishop  of  Yeroli,  papal  nuncio,  prayed  the  re-
public for  permission  to  send  two  thousand
Spaniards  through  the  Bergamese  territory
into  Switzerland.  The  ambassador,  Giovanni
Basadonna,  did  not  immediately  consent  to
this;  he  wished  to  see  the  full  powers  of  the
nuncio,  and  observed  to  him  that  the  Spa-
niards, if  allowed  to  interfere  in  the  intestine
wars  of  the  Confederation,  might  easily  render
themselves  its  masters.  He  induced  Veroli
to  drop  his  request.  The  nuncio  repaired  in
person  to  Switzerland,  where  he  expressed
the  hope  that  it  might  be  possible  to  induce
the  seceders  to  return  to  their  ancient  alle-
giance to  the  see  of  Rome. II

It  is  evident  that,  had  it  depended  on  the
emperor  and  his  brother,  the  victory  of  the
Five  Cantons  would  have  been  immediately
succeeded  by  a  general  attempt  to  establish
Catholicism  in  Switzerland.

Meanwhile,  however,  the  Swiss  themselves
had  begun  to  consider  of  the  means  of  putting
an  end  to  their  dissensions.

The  army  of  the  cities  was- by  no  means  in
a  condition  to  remain  under  arms,  in  the
mountains,  when  the  bad  season  set  in.  As
the Five Cantons  prepared  to  attack  them

X  Bruselles,  2d  Nov.  1531. Archives  of  Brussels.

§  Lettre  du  roi  ä  Mr.  d'Auxerre,  21  Nov.  MS.  Bethune,
8477.  Pour  la  guerre  du  Türe  ou  des  Suisses^oü  il  n'y  a
que  coups  et  despenses  d'argent.

II  Relatio  V.  N.  Joannis  Basadone.  Come  el  mi  disse,
andava  cum  proposito  di  rimover  Lutheran!  dalla  loro  mala
opinione  con  mezzo  di  alcuni  suoi  amici  e  cum  danari.
Aixhives  of  Venice.

392

RESTORATION  OF  CATMCLICISM  IN  SWITZERLAND.

Book  VL

again,  Züricli,  and  afterwards  Bern,  were
obliged  to  accept  the  peace  dictated  to  them.

It  was  exactly  the  reverse  of  the  last  internal
peace.  The  cities  were  now  obliged  to  give
up  the  alliances  they  had  concluded  with
foreign  powers,  and,  in  one  form  or  another,
to  pay  all  the  expenses  of  the  war.

They  were  allowed  the  exercise  of  their
religion.  They  had  not  fallen  so  low  that
their  enemies  could  dare  to  assail  this.  They
had  suffered  some  reverses,  and  their  attack
had  failed,  but  they  were  not  subdued.

They  were  forced,  however,  to  submit  to  a
great  diminution  of  their  political  and  reli-
gious influence.  The  Five  Cantons  intended
to  chastise,  not  only  the  districts  which  im-
mediately belonged  to  them  —  Ilapperschwyl,
Toggenburg,  Gaster  and  Wesen,  —  but  also
those  over  which  the  cities  had  a  joint  con-
trol with  them,  such  as  the  free  bailiwicks  in
Aargau,  Bremgarten,  and  Mellingen.  In  the
other  common  bailiwicks,  those  who  had  ac-
cepted the  new  creed  were  to  be  not  indeed
commanded,  but  permitted,  to  return  to  the
"ancient  and  true  Christian  faith."  Expres-
sions of  this  kind  the  cities  w^ere  obhged  to
endure  throughout  the  treaty.^

No  sooner  had  Bern  accepted  this  peace,
than  the  revival  and  re-establishment  of  Ca-
tholicism began  on  a,ll  sides.

Immediately  after  the  battle  of  Cappel,  me
Catholic  minority  in  Glarus  bestirred  itself,
revoked  the  succours  of  the  canton  already
determined  on,  and  warned  the  subjects  of
the  same  not  to  furnish  them;  they  did  every
thing  in  their  power  to  favour  the  turn  things
had  taken.  Very  shortly  a  certain  number
of  churches  were  restored  to  them ;  and  from
that  time  they  have  exercised  a  far  greater
influence  on  the  public  business  of  the  canton
than  the  evangelical  party,  which  was  dis-
heartened and  enfeebled  by  the  great  losses
sustained  by  their  co-religionists.  Schwytz,
therefore,  experienced  no  resistance  when  it
overran  Gaster  and  V/esen,  abolished  the  old
liberties,  and  restored  the  altars  and  images,
and  the  mass.  Glariis  united  with  Schwytz,
and'Uri  undertook  to  reinstate  the  abbot  of
St.  Gall.  His  abbey  was  restored  to  him,  and
the  city  compelled  to  pay  him  a  large  sum  as
compensation.  The  people  who  cultivated  the
lands  of  the  religious  house  were  once  more
regarded  as  its  subjects,  and  the  abbot  main-
tained that  he  was  not  bound  by  any  stipula-
tions in  their  favour  in  the  treaty  of  peace;
for  that  he  was  a  free  lord,  and  the  protecting
cantons  could  lay  down  no  rule  fo'-jiis  govern-
ment. These  tenants  gradually' all  became
Catholic  again.  Fortunately  for  Toggenburg,
at  the  very  last  moment,  when  it  withdrew
from  the  cities,  it  took  better  securities  for
its  religious  freedom,  which,  thoua'h  greatly
abridged,  was  not  destroyed.  The  abbot
placed  the  government  of  the  country  in  the
hands  of  those  who  had  been  driven  out  of  it
in  the  recent  troubles.

*  The  copy  of  the  treaty  of  peace  in  Hettinger's  Ap-
pendix to  vol.  ii.  collated  anew  with  the  original.  ,

Rapperschwyl  was  also  reclaimed.  At  the
news  of  the  successes  of  their  co-religionists,
the  Catholics  rose,  and  being  reinforced  by-
succours  from  Schwytz,  were  completely  vic-
torious. The  leaders  of  the  evangelical  party
were  obliged  \o  flee,  or  were  put  to  death.
There  lived  in  the  town  a  very  skilful  gun-
smith, one  Michael  Wohlgemuth,  of  Cologne,
who  had  the  courage  to  defend  himself  after
the  fashion  of  old  times :  he  barricaded  hij3
house,  planted  his  matchlocks  at  the  windows,
and  defended  himself  for  some  time  with
equal  gallantry  and  success,  till  at  length  he
was  regularly  besieged  and  taken  prisoner.
He  was  put  to  death  with  horrible  tortures.
Of  the  remainder,  some  submitted,  some  were
thrown  into  prison,  and  some  exiled.  On  the
19th  of  November,  mass  was  performed  again.

In  the  Aargau,  the  Five  Cantons  used  the
rights  of  conquest  with  the  utmost  rigour.
Wherever  their  banner  appeared,  the  preach-
ers retreated  from  the  death  with  which  they
were  threatened  by  the  Germxan,  and  still
more  by  the  French  Swiss.  Bremgarten  and
Mellingen  were  forced  e."spressly  to  engage  to
restore  the  ancient  rites  of  the  church.  '  The
aged  Schultheiss  Mütsohli,  who  had  hitherto
governed  Bremgarten,  lay  on  his  death-bed
when  the  newly  appointed  Catholic  authorities
sent  to  order  him  to  quit  Bremgarten.  "Tell
them  that  I  shall  not  trouble  them  longy'  he
replied.  He  died  soon  after,  and  lies  buried
at  Oberwyl.

The  treaty  of  peace  did  not  leave  Thurgau
and  the  Rhine  valley  so  much  at  the  mercy
of  the  Five  Cantons;  they  were  obliged  to
content  themselves  with  restoring  the  con-
vents, which  recovered  their  old  privileges.

In  Solothurn,  on  the  other  hand,  the  Ca-
tholics were  completely  triumphant.  Nearly
seventy  Protestant  families  were  obliged  to
leave  the  city.

This  second  restoration  of  Catholicism  oc-
curring in  our  history,  was  not  so  bloody  as
the  first,  which  took  place  in  Upper  Germany
after  the  peasants'  war;  but,  like  that,  it  was
brought  about  by  the  casualties  of  war;  hke
that,  it  v.-as  violent;  and  it  was- far  more
lasting.

The  general  relation  of  the  two  confessions,
at  that  time  established  in  the  Alps,  has  en-
dured down  to  the  present  time.

Even  the  evangelical  cantons  felt  the  influ-
ence of  the  restoration.  The  Constafel  of
Zürich  regained  their  lost  privileges.  The
people  were  obliged  to  acquiesce,  so  that  Ca-
tholicism Vvas  not  again  in  activity.  The
Great  Council  was  forced  to  make  such  pro-
mises to  the  country  districts  as  greatly  limited
its  authority.

The  war" had  lasted  only  six  weeks,  but  it
had  totally  changed  the  prospects  of  Switzer-
land. Bullinger's  Chronicle  contains  at  the  end
a  short  comparison  of  what  the  reformers  had
projected,  and  what  they  had  actually  accom-
plished. They  had  desired  the  uniform  intro-
duction of  the  evangelical  faith;  the  depres-
sion of  the  oligarchies;  the  abatement  of  the
majority  of  the Five  Cantons. The  result

Chap.  V.

MAGDEBURG.

393

was,  that  the  new  doctrine  was  extirpated
from  many  places  where  it  had  been  preach-
ed ;  that  the  Papacy  was  reinstated  in  its  au-
thority; that  the  Five  Cantons  acquired  such
an  ascendancy  as  they  had  never  enjoyed  be-
fore, and  that  the  ohgarchies  had  more  power
than  ever.*  ''Honour  is  overthrown,  arbitrary
power  is  established,"  says  Bullinger.  "  The
counsels  of  the  Lord  are  marvellous.-'

CHAPTER  y.

THE  REFORMATION  IN  THE  CITIES  OF  LOWER
GERMANY.  CONCLUSION  OF  THE  SCHMALKAL-
DIC  LEAGUE.

The  spirit  of  reform  had  embodied  itself  in
two  parties  of  very  different  tendencies ;  the
one,  bold  and  comprehensive,  both  as  to  reli-
gious doctrines  and  political  views;  inclined
to  the  £^bsolute  rejection  of  the  traditional,
and  ready  for  attack  :  the  other,  conservative
(as  far  as  it  was  possible)  even  in  matters  of
doctrine;  and,  on  the  field  of  politics,  reluc-
tantly brought  to  make  a  resolute  defence.

The  former  of  these  had  failed  in  its  pro-
jects; it  necessarily  followed  that  the  whole
strength  of  the  growing  reformation  now  at-
tached itself  to  the  latter.  The  Schmalkaldic
league  was  the  more  formidable  to  its  ene-
mies, because  its  rivals  were  no  longer  in  a
state  to  compete  with  it.

The  cities  of  the  Oberland  had  already
made  as  near  an  approach  as  possible  to  the
religious  principle  of  the  Schmalkaldic  league  :
and.  since  their  Swiss  allies  were  compelled
to  dissolve  the  ties  between  them,  they  had
politically  no  other  support  remaining  than  the
strength  of  the  united  German  States.

Their  own  danger  was  increased  by  the  ca-
lamities of  the  Swiss.  They  knew  the  lively
share  which  the  court  of  Ferdinand  had  taken
in  the  affairs  of  the  Confederation,  and  rumours
were  afloat  of  warlike  preparations  in  Alsatia,
the  Breisgau  and  the  Sundgan.

The  Oberlanders  now  no  longer  hesitated
to  engage  in  a  definitive  consultation  on  a
plan^f  warfare.  This  took  place  at  a  meet-
ing at  Nordhausen,  in  November,  1531.

But,  before  we  examine  the  organisation
which  the  league  then  assumed,  we  must
endeavour  to  understand  distinctly  what  pro-
gress the  cause  of  reform  had  in  the  mean-
time made  in  the  cities  of  Lower  Germany.

REFORMATION IN THE CITIl
GERMANY.

OF LOWER

The  first  city  that  joined  the evangelical
princes  was,  as  we  have  seen,  Llagdeburg.

*  Bullinger,  iii.  353.  The  state  of  things  is  parlicularly
described  in  an  essay  written  by  Leo  fu&ce  in  his  own
justification.  "There  are  two  great  parties  in  Zürich,
the  one  will  protect  God's  word  and  help  to  secure  all  jus-
tice to  it,  the  other  will  plant  all  dishonesty,  and  uproot
the  word  of  God,  re-establish  the  Papacy,  and  take  foriegn
service  and  pensions  again.  It  appears  to  the  pious  that
the  latter  party  have  always  more  favour  and  encourage-
ment  than  they."
50

Here,  in  a  city  which  had  pretensions  to  hold
immediately  of  the  empire,  and  had  seen  it-
self, with  great  disgust,  turned  over  to  the
jurisdiction  of  the  archbishop; — here,  where
Luther  had  gone  to  school,  and  where  his  per-
sonal friends  were  still  in  possession  of  honours
and  employments,  his  ideas  had  easily  capti-
vated the  whole  body  of  the  chizens.  One
day  an  old  cloth-weaver  was  sitting  under  the
statue  of  Otho  the  Great,  singing^  a  Lutheran
hymn,  and  offering  copies  of  it  for  sale.  Just
then  the  Bürgermeister  Rubin,  who  had  been
at  mass,  came  by,  and  ordered  him  to  be
arrested.  This  was  sufficient  to  arouse  the
slumbering  fire.  The  agitation  spread  from
the  audience  collected  about  the  old  man,
over  the  whole  city.  The  citizens,  who,  ever
since  the  year  1330,  had  taken  an  important
part  in  secular  affairs,  thought  that  they  had
a  right  to  a  no  less  participation  in  spiritual.
On  the  very  same  day,  the  6th  of  IMay,  1524,
the  parish  of  St.  Ulrich  proceeded  to  exercise
this  right.  They  met  in  the  churchyard,  and
deternained  to  choose  eight  men  out  of  their
body,  who  for  the  future  should  manage  the
affairs  of  the  churchNVv-ith  their  concurrence,
and  should  choose  preachers.  Other  parishes
followed  this  example,  and  the  council  did  not
deem  itself  called  upon  to  prevent  them.
Evangelical  preachers  were  universal!}'  ap-
pointed by  the  side  of  Catholic  priests.

But  a  state  of  things  like  this  could  not  last.
The  priests  administered  the  mass  according
to  the  ancient  ritual ;  the  attacks  of  the  preach-
ers Vv^ere  mainly  directed  against  the  mass.
There  was  no  peace  till  either  the  priests  went
over  to  Protestantism,  as  M.  Scultetus  did,  or
were  silenced,  or  sent  away.  The  parishes
of  St.  John  and  St.  Ulrich  having  opened  a
formal  negotiation  with  the  dean  of  Our  Lady's
Church,  and  he  having  refused  to  grant  them
such  priests  as  they  desired,  they  solemnl}'
renounced  his  authority,  ^-'in  order  to  take
refuge  with  the  sole  eternal  supreme  priest,
guardian  of  souls,  bishop  and  pope,  Jesus
Christ;  with  him  as  their  captain,  Vv'ould  they
do  battle  like  true  knights. "t  On  the  17th  of
July,  1524,  the  sacrament  of  the  Lord's  Sup-
per was  administered  according  to  Luther's
form,  in  all  the  churches  of  the  o]d  town.
Hereupon  the  councillors  and  hundred  men
assembled  in  their  armour,  and  the  citizens,
according  to  the  four  quarters  of  the  city,  with
matchlocks  and  halberds  ;  they  swore  to  stand
truly  and  firmly  by  each  other,  if  trouble  should
come  upon  the  city  on  account  of  the  abolition
of  the  mass.  They  had  no  doubt  that  the
archbishop,  Cardinal  Albert,  would  resort  to
severe  measures  against  them.  They  there-
fore hastened  to  cut  a  canal  from  the  Elbe  to
the  city  ditches,  in  order,  in  case  of  need,  to
fill  the  latter  with  water ;  the  walls  were  raised,
the  pahsades  strengthened  with  blocks:  the
workmen  in  the  town  taken  into  their  service
for  a  small  remuneration. They  were  resolved

t  Cause  and  Proceedings  in  tlie  imperial,  honourable,
and  Christian  City  of  Magdeburg,  pertaining  to  a  Chris-
tian Walk  and  Conversation.  By  VVolfF  Cycloff;  Doctor
of  Medicine,  1524.  Printed  in  Hahn's  Collectio  Menu-
mentorum,  ii.  459.

394

REFORMATION  IN  THE  CITIES.

Book  VI.

to  defend  with  life 'and  limb  the  spiritual  in-
dependence they  had  asserted.  But  the  time
was  not  yet  come  when  their  resolution  was
to  be  put  to  the  proof;  for  the  present,  matters
did  not  go  to'  that  extremity.*

In  Brunswick  things  took  very  nearly  the
same  course  a  few  years  later.  The  citizens
read  Luther's  books,  and  translation  of  the
Bible;  above  all,  his  hymns  produced  the
strongest  sensation;  they  were  sung  in  every
house,  and  the  streets  resounded  with  them.
It  had  become  customary  here  for  the  priests
who  held  benefices  to  leave  the  business  of
preaching  to  young  men  whom  they  paid,  and
who  were  called  Heuerpfaffen  (hire-priests).
It  is  not  surprising  that  these  men  generally
espoused  the  new  doctrines,  and  took  part
v/ith  Üie  citizens.  Examples  occurred  of  their
giving  out  from  the  pulpit,  instead  of  the  Latin
hymn  to  the  Virgin,  one  of  the  new  German
psalms,  in  which  all  the  congregation  joined
with  the  greatest  enthusiasm.

Indeed,  the  people  would  no  longer  listen  to
^sermons  of  any  other  tendency.  Scholastic
demonstrations  were  tumultuously  interrupted,
and  incorrect  quotations  fiom  Scripture  loudly
and  eagerly  corrected  by  the  congregation.
The  clergy  sent  for  Dr.  Sprengel,  one  of  the
most  respected  of  the  orthodox  preachers  of
the  neighbourhood,  and  already  practised  in  the
handhng  of  controversial  points;  but  he  could
make  no  impression.  At  the  conclusion  of  his
sermon  a  citizen  called  out,  "Priest,  thou
liest,"  and  set  up  the  Lutheran  hymn,  "Ach
Gott  vom  Himmel  sieh  darein  !"'  (0  God,  look
down  fioni  heaven  !)  which  the  whole  congre-
gation sang  with  triumph.

The  priests  could  at  last  devise  no  expe-
dient, except  to  request  the  council  to  rid
them  of  their  heretical  assistants.  But  the
jcongregations  only  attached  themselves  the
more  iirmly  to  the  latter.  The  town  and  sub-
urbs united  nominated  delegates,  at  fhe  head
of  whom  was  Autor  Sander,  one  of  the  leaders
of  the  whole  movement  (he  belonged  to  the
literary  class  of  innovators  of  whom  we  have
formerly  made  mention);  they  now,  on  their
side,  petitioned  the  couiicil  to  remove  the
priests.

At  first,  the  council  inclined  to  the  existing
order  of  things,  but  it  was  soon  carried  along
by  the  popular  movement.  Reforms  were  at
that  time  going  on  in  various  places,  in  conse-
quence of  the  decree  of  the  empire  of  1526;
among  others,  in  the  neighbouring  state  of
Lüneburg ;  Duke  Henry  of  Brunswick -Wolfen-
büttel, who  would  undoubtedly  have  opposed
it,  being  occupied  in  his  expedifion  into  Italy.
Under  these  circumstances,  the  council  passed
the  resolution,  on  the  13th  of  March,  1528,
that  in  future  only  the  pure  word  of  God  should
be  preached  ;  that  the  sacrament  of  the  Lord's
Supper  should  be  administered  in  both  kinds,
and  baptism  be  performed  in  the  German  lan-
guage. Dr.  Bugenhagen  came  from  Witten-

*  Sebastian  Lan|c;lians,  at  that  time  mil!-bailifi,  left  a
history  of  ilie  year  1524,  whicli  it  is  very  desirable  to  have
printed.  Up  to  that  date,  Rathmann's  Extracts  and  Col-
lections (iii.  34G— 400)  are  very  useful.

berg,  in  order  to  give  a  permanent  form,  of  the
kind  prescribed  by  Luther,  to  the  new  order
of  things.!  The  Duke  of  Lüneburg  promised
the  city  his  protection. i

Things  took  the  same  course  in  most  of  the
towns  of  this  part  of  Germany.  In  all  of
them  we  see  preachers  arise,  the  Lutheran
hymns  become  popular,  and  the  congregations
take  part  in  religious  questions:  the  council
at  first  makes  a  greater  or  less  resistance,  but
at  length  gives  way.  In  Goslar  fifty  men
were  appointed  out  of  the  several  parishes,
and  carried  the  reforms  through ;  there  was  a
disturbance  in  Göttingen,  because  the  over-
seers of  the  commune  were  at  first  hostile  ;  in
Eimbeck  the  council  was  coi^npelled,  by  the
urgency  of  the  commune,  to  recal  the  very
preacher  whom  they  had  lately  dismissed  at
the  request  of  the  canons.

Our  readers  will  remember  the  violent  com-
motions which  broke  out  in  all  the  cities  be-
tween the  years  1510 — 1516;  even  in  those
of  Lower  Germany.  The  question  now  arose,
how  far  the  religious  impulse  was  mingled
with  this  democratic  agitation,  and  whether
the  predominant  tendency  would  not  be  po-
litical.

We  find  a  great  difference  among  the  cities
in  this  respect.

There  were  some  in  which  council  and
commune  united  in  good  time;  and  ni  these
the  municipal  constitutions  acquired  greater
strength  than  ever  during  the  troubles.  For
not  only  did  they  get  rid  of  the  influence  of
foreign  prelates,  which  had  always  been  op-
pressive to  them ;  but  the  administration  of
church  affairs  and  church  property  that  now
devolved  upon  them,  gave  them  a  common
interest  which  united  them  more  closely.
In  Magdeburg  ecclesiastical  colleges^  were
formed,  consisting  of  members  of  the  former
council,  and  the  newly  elected,  superintend-
ants  of  the  communes;  this  gave  additional
strength  to  the  democratic  element  which
already  somewhat  predominated  in  the  con-
stitution of  the  city.  The  most  remarkable
town  in  this  respect  is  undoubtedly  Hamburg.
Here,  too,  the  reformers  followed  the  advice
of  Luther,  which  Bugenhagen  had  carried
out  theoretically  in  books, II  and  practically  by
his  own  plans  in  Brunswick; — to  establish  in
every  parish  funds  or  chests  {Gotteshast en) ^  in

\  The  most  minute  account  of  these  events  is  to  be
found  in  Rehtmeiers  Kirchen  historic  dec  Stadt  Braun-
schwei'r,  part  iii.,  the  original  source  of  which  is  a  co-
temporaneous  statement  by  Heinrich  Lampe,  preacher  at
St.  Michael's  church:  "  Wiiat  happened  in  ecclesiastical
affairs,  shortly  before  and  after  the  reception  of  the  Holy
Gospel  here  in  Brunswick;"  Gasmer's  Funeral  Sermon
for  Lampe  (which  is  the  basis  of  Lenz's  "  Rraunschweii:s
Kirchenreformation,  1828")  is  also  chiefly  taken  from  that
statement.

X  Duke  Ernest  mentions  in  a  letter  of  the  2d  of  Feb-
ruary, 1.531,  a  former- compact  with  Brunswick,  in  which
they  mutually  promised,  "  in  matters  relatin;^  to  the  divine
word  and  whatever  depends  thereon,  to  risk  life  and  pro-
perty with  each  other." (W.  A.)

§  See  Rathmann,  iv.  ii.  28.

II  In  the  Appendix  to  the  treatise.  Vom  rechten  Glau-
ben (Of  the  true  Faith),  which  Bucenhagen  published,
both  in  hiffh  and  low  German,  in  1526,  ajid  dedicated  to
the  bürgermeis'ter,  councillors,  and  the  whole  community
of  the  honourable  city  of  Hamburg.

Chap.  V.

REFORM  IN  THE  CITIES.

393

order  to  meet  the  wants  of  the  clergyman  and
the  school,  and  to  provide  for  the  poor  oat  of
the  church  property;  and  chose,  as  trustees
of  the  same,  twelve  respectable  citizens,  some
of  whom  had  already  tilled  the  otlice  of  jurats
of  the  church,  and  to  wiiom  twenty-four  mem-
bers of  each  parish  were  now  attached.  The
same  form  was  adopted  m  most  other  towns;
what  distinguishes  Hamburg  js,  that  it  served
as  the  basis  of  a  new  political  constitution.
The  parish  superintendants  composed  the
college  of  the  Forty-eight,  and,  together  with
their  assistants,  that  of  the-  Hundred  and
Forty-four;  two  colleges  which  may  be  re-
garded as  a  true  representation  of  the  heredi-
tary class  of  citizens  (BLirgeischalt).  Besides
this,  a  fifth  and  principal  chest  w  ..  s  established,
m  which  the  whole  propeit)  die  churdh

was  to  be  united,*  and  the  a^  ist ration  of
it  was  entrusted  to  the  three  elders  of

the  parish  overseers. This i  ;l;ice  with

the  fall  consent  of  the  worsh .^  id  Council

on  Michaelmas-day,  1528.  it.  .  ,a.i-ut  that
{his  college  contained  the  germs  of  a  most
important  institution  for  the  improvement  and
prosperity  of  the  city,  and  we  know  how  com-
pletely it  has  falfilled  its  destination.  After  a
lapse  of  three  centuries,  the  day  of  its  estab-
lishment has  just  been  commemorated  with
civic  festivities.!

In  Rostock  also  the  council  and  the  citizens
formed  the  closest  union  in  opposition  to  the
■Mecklenburg  princes,  who  in  the  year  1531
Sided  for  a  moment  with  the  Catholic  clergy, j

But  things  were  not  everywhere  thus  peace-
fully settled.  In  Bremen,  where  the  churches
had  fallen  into  the  hands  of  the  Lutheran
preachers  as  early  as  the  year  1525,  and,  in
1527,  the  two  convents  of  the  city  had  been
converted,  the  one  into  a  school  and  the  other
into  an  hospital,  so  violent  a  hatred  of  the
clergy  had  arisen  among  the  citizens  during
the  incessant  quarrels  in  which  they  had  been
involved  with  the  priests  attached  to  the  ca-
thedral, that  they  were  not  satisfied  with
having  stripped  them  of  all  spiritual  influence
in  the  city.  They  laid  claim  to  a  number  of
fields,  gardens  and  enclosed  lands,  which,
they  said,  the  cathedral  had  unjustly  MTested
from  the  town  ;  and  as  the  council  did  not  up-
hold ,  them  in  these  claims,  they  chose  a  de-
mocratic body  of  a  hundred  and  four  mem-
bers, who not only endeavoured to carry

*  "  7\iclr»esdevveyniger  schollen  de  veer  Kisten  in  den
Carspeikarcken,  wo  se  nu  stalin,  tho  Versainelinge  de
Aüniszeu  blyven,  so  doch,  dathme  alleiidt  wes  bether  tho
da  run;  gegeven,  mid  hyrnaiuals  tho  alien  Tyden  darin  n
gegeven  werden  mag,  alles  getrouwlik  in  nnd  by  de  Ho-
vetkysten  präsentere  und  averantwehrde."  —  "  Neverthe-
less, tlie  four  chests  in  the  parish  Church,  where  they  now
stand,  shall  remain  for  the  collection  of  the  alms;  so  that
all  which  may  heretofore  have  been  given  therein,  or  may
Ijereafter  be  therein  given,  through  all  times,  may  be
truly  presented  and  answeredfor  to  the  principal  [head]
chest." — Original  form  of  the  Foundation  of  the  Overal-
len  (Over-elders),  Michaelmas-day,  1528.

t  Lappenberg  ;  Programm.e  of  the  third  secular  com-
memoration of  tile  municipal  constitution  of  Hamburg,
on  the  29th  of  September,  152S  ;  wherein  the  matter  which
Bürgermeister  Bartels  and  the  Presses  of  the  Oberalten
(Over-elders),  Rücker,  tfeated  in  a  popular  manner  in
Iheir  speeches,  is  learnedly  and  instructively  developed.

X  Rudlof  N.  Gesch.  Mecklenburgs,  i.  81.

through  all  these  measures,  but  radically  to
alter  the  constitution  of  the  city ;  they  over-
threw the  whole  groundwork,  and  rejected  all
the  documents  and  charters  upon  which  it
rested;  proceeded  with^he  greatest  violence,
and  at  length  were  only  put  down  by  force  of
arms.§

The  movement  in  Lübek  was  still  ^lore
important.

Here  the  patrician  families  had  formed  a
close  union  with  the  clergy;  the  chapter^
council,  gentry  and  great  merchants  consti-
tuted one  party. li  On  the  other  hand,  the  de-
sire for  religious  reforms  was  here  as"  rife
among  the  citizens  as  in  other  places,  but  it
was  repressed  with  unrelenting  zeal;  famihes
were  punished  only  because  the  servants  had
sung  a  German  psalm. '  Luther's  commentary
on  the  Scriptures  was  burned  in  the  market-
place.

Unfortunately  for  the  ruling  classes,  they
had  suffered  the  finances  of  the  city  to  fall
into  disorder,  and  found  themselves  compelled
to  assemble  the  citizens,  and  to  call  upon
them  for  extraordinary  supplies.

The  citizens  consented.  They  nominated
a  committed  (a,  d.  1529),  which  gradually  in-
creased to  the  number  of  sixty-four,  in  order
to  deliberate  with  the  council  on  this  grant ;
but  they  immediately  seized  the  opportunity
to  claim,  not  only  more  political  power,  but
religious  emancipation.  They  demanded  that
the  committee  should  have  a  share  in  regu-
lating the  revenue  and  expenditure  of  the
town,  and  that  freedom  of  preaching  should
be  granted  them.  The  public  voice  was  very
soon  raised  in  their  favour.  The  people  de-
manded the  restitution  of  the  preachers  who
had  been  expelled  a  few  years  before  ;  here,
too,  the  officiating  priest  was  interrupted  by
the  psalm,  "Ach  Gott  vom  Himmel  sieh  da-
rein I''  Satirical  songs  were  sung  against  Jo-
hann Rode,  the  rector  of  Our  Lady's  Church,
charging  him  vidth  having  maintained  that
Christ  had  redeemed  only  our  forefathers,  and
that  their  posterity  must  seek  salvation  from
him.  "They  who  should  feed  us,  are  they
who  mislead  us,"  (Die  uns  sollen  Weiden,
das  sind  die  uns  verleiten,)  says  one  of  these
songs. f  In  one  great  meeting  of  citizens,
those  who  wished  to  remain  Cathohc  were
asked  to  stand  aside,  when  only  one  complied.

Overpowered  by  such  manifestations,  and
deprived  by  its  financial  difficulties  of  all  sub-
stantial power,  the  council  was  compelled
step  by  step  to  give  way.

In  December,  1529,  it  recalled  the  expelled
preachers;  in  April,  1530,  it  removed  the  Ca-
tholics from  every  pulpit  in  the  city ;  in  the
June  of  the  same  year,  it  found  itself  com-
pelled to  give  notice  to  the  churches  and  con-

§  Roller,  Geschichte  von  Bremen,  ii.  p.  380,  u.  f.

li  The  priesthood  was  become  very  numerous,  especially
by  the  institution  of  vicars.  In  the  middle  of  the  IStli
century  there  were  in  Lübek  and  the  neighbouring
churches  169  vicars.  They  were  most  of  them  relations
of  those  who  had  founded  masses  for  the  dead.  See  Grau-
toff,  Schriften,  i.  2G6.  The  disposition  of  the  capital  lay
in  the  hands  of  provisors.

IT  The  song  in  Regkmann's  Chronicle,  p.  133.

896

LÜBEK.

Book  V.

vents  to  discontinue  their  established  usages.
At  the_  very  same  time  that  Charles  V.  was
attempting  to  re-establish  the  ancient  faith  in
Augsburg,  it  was  utterly  extirpated  in  one  of
the  most  considerable  cities  of  the  North.
This  did  not  pass  unobserved  at  Augsburg.
The  emperor  commanded  the  Sixty-four  in
the  most  earnest  manner,  by  a  penal  man-
date, '-to  desist  from  M'hat  they  w-ere  about;"
and  told  the  council,  in  case  this  was  not  com-
plied with,  to  apply  to  some  of  the  neighbour-
ing princes  for  assistance.  It  may  easily  be
imagined  what  effect  these  menaces  of  a  dis-
tant power  were  likely  to  produce  in  the  fer-
menting city.  The  agitation  redoubled,  and
increased  so  violently  that  the  council  was
under  the  necessity  of  requesting  the  Sixty-
four  to  retain  their  functions,  and  even  of
approving  their  making  a  fresh  addition  of  a
hundred  citizens  to  their  body.*  Doctor  John
Bugenhagen  was  also  invited  to  Liibek  to
organise  a  new  church,  with  a  commission
chosen  from  the  council  and  citizens. t  The
convents  were  converted  into  schools  and  hos-
pitals; the  nuns  of  St.  John's  were  suffered  to
remain,  on  condition  of  their  instructing  chil-
dren; in  all  parish  churches,  pastors  and  chap-
lains attached  to  the  confession  of  Augsburg
were  appointed,  under  a  superintendent,  Her-
mannus  Bonn  us.

It  followed,  of  course,  that  the  Sixty-four,
whose  origin  was  of  a  politico-religious  nature,
were  not  satisfied  with  the  concessions  made
by  the  church ;  the  council  was  obliged  to
promise  to  account  to  them  for  the  public  ex-
penditure, to  make  no  treaty  or  engagement
withoiTt  their  consent,  to  allow  them  a  short
joint  superintendence  in  military  affairs;  in
short,  to  share  all  their  most  important  func-
tions with  them.t  The  council,  accustomed
to  nearly  unhmited  sway,  reluctantly  con-
sented. There  was,  it  is  true,  a  public  recon-
ciliation between  the  bürgermeisters  and  the
president  of  the  Sixty-four;  but  solemn  acts
of  this  kind  have  never  served  to  eradicate  a
rooted  aversion :  a  few  weeks  after,  Claus
Brömse  and  Hermann  Plönnies,  the  two  bur-
germeisters,  found  the  impotency  to  which
they  were  reduced,  and  the  mistrust  of  which
they  were  the  objects,  so  intolerable,  that  they
quitted  the  city.  This  was  at  Easter,  1531.
No  sooner  was  the  departure  of  the  bürger-
meisters  known  among  the  citizens,  than  a
storm  of  anger  arose.  The  people  imputed
to  them,  and  to  the  whole  council,  an  under-
standing with  the  neighbouring  princes,  and
expected  that  the city  would  be attacked.

*  In  the  answer  of  the  citizens,  in  Regkinann,  139,  it  is
said  that  this  was  proposed  by  the  council,  "  urn  vieler
Üngestümheit  willen,  Müh'  und  Verdriess  zuvorf-zukoin-
men,"—"  in  order  to  prevent  rauch  disorder,  trouble,  and
annoyance."

t  Notices  in  Grautoff,  ii.  159.  The  influence  which  is
ascribed  in  that  work  to  a  more  moderate  party  in  the
council  stands,  however,  in  need  of  further  proof.

t  The  articles  of  the  commune  made,  agreed  on,  and
confirmed  on  the  13th  of  October,  1530.  Becker,  Liib.
Gesch.  iii.  27,  says,  not  all  the  demands  of  the  com-
mune were  granted  ;  and  he  then  adduces  only  those  ex-
pressly mentioned  in  the  journal  in  Kirchring  and  Müller,
p.  166.  Is  it  possible  that  the  title  of  the  articles  can  be
80  wrong  ?

First,  the  Sixty-four,  then  the  Hundred,  and
lastly,  all  the  members  of  the  commune,  were
called  together;  the  gates  were  closed;  the
members  of  the  council  were  arrested,  either
in  their  own  houses  or  in  the  town-house ;  till
at  length  the  council,  subdued,  shackled,  tor-
mented, and  deprived  of  its  chiefs,  deter-
mined to  give  up  the  great  seal  of  the  city  to
the  Sixty-four.  The  commune  did  not  go  so
far  as  to  depose  them ;  never  would  the  Lu-
theran preachers  have  approved  that.  But,
as  they  ,sought  out  a  document  to  prove  that
the  council  might  consist  cf  a  greater  number
of  members  than  actually  held  seats  in  it,  and
immediately  proceeded  to  appoint  the  num-
ber deficients  —  as  they  nominated  two  bur-
germeisters  instead  of  those  who  had  left  the
town;  they  did  in  fact  entirely  transform  the
council,  and  impart  to  the  victorious  opinions  a
preponderant  influence  over  all  its  decisions.
The  preachers  consented  to  this  with  great
reluctance;  for  their  idea  of  the  exalted  nature
and  dignity  of  the  civil  authority  extended  to
the  city  councillors;  and  at  every  change  they
earnestly  ^^•arned  the  people  from  the  pulpit
not  to  transgress  against  authority. §

Duke  Ernest  of  Lüneburg  was  extremely
rejoiced,  on  his  return  from  Augsburg,  to  see
around  him  how  little  people  cared  for  the
favour  or  disfavour  of  the  emperor;  on  the
contrary,  how  much  more  prosperous  was  the
evangelical  cause  in  these  cities  now  than
heretofore.il  The  emperor  had  just  admo-
nished the  city  of  Lüneburg  in  a  private  let-
ter, to  remain  constant  to  the  old  faith  ;  the
only  result  of  which  was,  that  the  city  prayed
the  duke  to  leave  Urbanus  Bhegius,  the  re-
former, whom  he  had  brought  home  with  him
from  Augsburg,  for  a  time  with  them,  for  the
purpose  of  organising  their  church,1l  which
he  gradually  accomplished.

So  powerfully  did  the  spirit  of  the  reforma-
tion diffuse  itself  through  Lower  Germany.
Already  it  had  taken  possession  of  a  portion
of  the  principalities  ;  it  w^as  triumphant  in  the
Wendish  cities;  it  had  penetrated  into  West^
phalia,  as  we  shall  see  hereafter ;  it  seemed
about  to  pervade  the  whole  character  and  con-
dition of  North  Germany.

But  it  was  easy  to  foresee  that,  bpfore  this
could  come  to  pass,  it  w^ould  have  to  encoun-
ter many  a  storm.

Very  violent  political  tendencies  mingled
themselves  with  the  attempt  to  reform  the
church;  and  it  was  a  question  how.  far  the
former could  be  guided  in the channel  of

§'  In  the  Chronicle  of  Hermannus  Bonnus  it  is  said  that
there  is  no  better  means  of  maintaining  a  stable  govern-
ment than  to  leave  the  choice  of  the  council  in  the  hands
of  the  authorities.

II  Ernest  to  Elector  John,  Zelle,  Monday,  17th  of  Octo-
ber. "Befinde,  das  wynzig  Gottlob  in  diesen  umliegen-
den Städten  kais.  Maj.  Gnaden  oder  Ungnaden  gescJieuet;
denn  sye  itzunder  heftiger,  als  vor  nie,  in  allen  Städten
predigen  und  das  Wort  Gottes  fürdern."  — "  J  find  that,
thank  God,  his  imperial  majesty's  favour  or  disfavour  is
very  little  cared  for  in  the  cities  hereabout ;  for  they  now
preach  in  all  cities  more  vehemently  than  ever  before,  and
promote  the  word  of  God." (W.  A)

IT  Letter  above:  "haben  heud  der  Rath  und  die  Ge
meyne  mir  semjjtlich  geschrieben."— "  The  council  and  the
commonalty  have  all  written  to  me  to-day."

Chap.  V.

CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  LEAGUE.

397

established  institutions,  or  how  far  they  would
assume  a  revolutionary  character.

With  these  were  also  connected  changes
of  religious  opinion,  which  did  not  always
remain  within  the  pale  of  the  Lutheran  sys-
tem, and  the  future  direction  of  which  it  was
impossible  to  foresee.

We  shall  examine  more  closely  these
changes,  which  are  extremely  important:
ther©  came  a  time  when  the  popular  mind,
violently  excited,  rushed  into  wild  and  path-
less regions. •

At  present,  however,  these  symptoms  had
not  betrayed  themselves.

At  present,  the  only  remarkable  fact  was,
the  support  which  Protestantism,  in  its  peace-
ful progress,,  experienced  from  its  new  exten-
sion, at  the  very  moment  when  it  was  most  vio-
lently menaced  by  the  emperor.  This  support
was  peculiarly  advantageous  to  the  Schmal-
kaldic  league,  to  which  we  must  now  turn  our
attention.

COXCLUSION  OF  THE  SCHMALKALDIC  LEAGUE.

The  Magdeburgers  were  included  in  the
earlier  Protestant  associations.  In  the  year
1531;  being  urged  by  their  archbishop  to  con-
form to  the  recess  of  Augsburg,  they  looked
to  the  Elector  of  Saxony  as  their  sole  refuge,
and  implored  him  -  to  protect  them  in  their
adherence  to  the  eternal  word  of  God.''  They
delayed  not  an  instant  to  join  the  league.*

Bremen,  uninvited,  asked  the  Duke  of  Lime-
burg  for  the  first  draft  of  the  convention ;  and
declared  itself  ready  to  send  a  representative
to  the  meeting,  and  to  contribute  its  share  of
aid.t

With  Lübek,  on  the  other  hand,  ^the  duke
had  to  open  negotiations.  This  was  at  a  time
M'hen  the  council  still  retained  some  povrer ;
and,  as  its  sympathies  were  quite  in  an  oppo-
site direction,  it  naturally  hesitated.  But  the
Hundred  and  Sixty-four  were  easily  won  over.
On  their  motion,  a  delegate  of  the  city  ap-
peared at  the  second  congress  at  Schmalkal-
den,  in  March,  1531.  He  desired  first  to  be  in-
formed, what  support  the  princes  could  afibrd
the  city  against  the  ejected  King  of  Denmark,
if  the  emperor  should  attempt  to  restore  him;
and  pleaded  the  necessity  of  not  exacting  too
much  assistance  from  the  citizens.  But  even
this  reservation  was  dropped,  when  the  great
change  which  we  have  described  took  place  in
Lübek.  Although  the  delegate  received/ very
unsatisfactory  answers  to  his  questions,  Liibek
immediately  after  acceded  to  the  treaty.  We
find  these  three  cities  mentioned  in  the  first
sealed  formula  of  the  league.

At  the  following  meeting  in  June,  they  were

*  JMagdeburg,  Saturday  after  Estomihi,  1531.  "  It  hap^
pinned  that  our  most  gracious  lord  cardinal's  steward  ap-
peared on  Ash-Weduesday  before  «s,  the  whole  council
sitting,  and  delivered  a  missive  from  our  above-mentioned
gracious  lord  :  and  thereupon  set  forth  that  he  had  a
printed  copy,  which  he  would  also  deliver  to  us;  and  as
he  had  before,  signified  to  our  bürgermeister  and  council,
that,  in  the  said  printed  copy,  the  recess  held  at  Augs-
burg, and  the  order  that  they  should  hold  to  the  old  usages,
were  inserted,  we  would  not  receive  it."

t  Letter  of  Duke  Ernest,  Tuesday  after  St.  Clement.
2i

joined  by  Gottingeii  and  Brunswick.  Bruns-
wick thought  that  it  belonged  sufficiently  to
the  league,  through  its  connexion  with  the
Duke  of  Lüneburg;!  but  the  allies  were  of
opinion  that  they  should  have  stronger  grounds
for  sending  assistance  to  the  city  in  case  of
need,  if  it  was  a  direct  party  to  the  conven-
tion. An  envoy  from  the  raarkgrave  at  last
removed  all  its  scruples.

Shortly  after,  Goslar  and  Eimbeck  followed.

So  rapidly  did  the  compact  of  the  princes
extend  over  both  parts  of  Germany.  It  now
included  seven  cities  of  Upper,  and  seven  of
Lower  Germany.

It  was  impossible  longer  to  delay  giving  a
constitution  to  such  a  uiuon.  We  know  how
urgently  this  was  demanded  by  events  in
Switzerland,  and  the  Oberländers  were  now
fully  prepared  for  it.§

A  preliminary  discussion  was  held  in  No-
vember, 1531,  at  Nordhausen,  and  a  definitive
one  at  Frankfurt-am-Main  in  December.

The  first  question  was  as  to  the  supreme
command  of  the  league.

It  was  an  arrangement  prompted  as  much
by  the  nature  of  tilings  as  by  habit  and  tradi-
tion, that  they  should  nominate  a  single  head
of  the  league,  who  should  also  command  them
in  war.  Saxony  wished  that  one  of  the  two
Welfs,  either  the  Lüneburger  or  the  Gruben-
hagener,  should  be  chosen.  There  was  a  ge-
neral wish  to  avoid  the  landgrave,  who  was
accounted  too  rash  and  too  intimately  con-
nected with  the  Swiss.

But  this  was  not  practicable.  The  land-
grave was  far  too  powerful  and  warlike  to
suffer  himself  to  be  excluded  from  the  com-
mand of  the  league  :  and,  since  the  defeat  of
the  Swiss,  nothing  more  was  to  be  feared  from
Ills  leaning  to  their  side.

But  as  the  Elector  of  Saxony  also  did  not
choose  to  be  thrown  into  the  shade  by  the
landgrave,  it  was  agreed  at  the  meeting  at
Nordhausen  to  elect  two  commanders,  and
that  these  two  princes  should  be  the  men.
Each  of  them  was  to  bring  up  one  half  of  the
troops,  and  they  were  alternately  to  conduct
the  affairs  of  the  whole  body  ;  if  the  war  was
to  be  carried  on  in  Saxony  and  Westphalia,  the
elector  to  have  the  command;  if  in  Hessen
and  Germany,  the  landgrave.

But  it  is  not  to  be  imagined  that  full  powers
were  given  to  these  two  chiefs  to  act  at  their
good  pleasure :  the  question  was  discussed
with  equal  earnestness,  how  the  deliberations
were  to  be  held,  and  the  votes  divided;  and
what  relation  these  should  bear  to  the  contri-
butions.

The  first  proposal  on  the  side  of  the  princes

t  Letter  of  the  city  to  Ernest  of  Lüneburg,  2-3d  March,
1531.  "Since  we  have  settled  with  your  princely  grace
concerning  our  natural  relation  as  subjects,  and  have  in-
cluded therein  our  separate  treaties  with  regard  to  the
Christian  matters  undertaken  in  God's  name."

§  Melanchthon  to  Camerarius,  30th  December.  "  Scis
ejus  periculi  partem  ad  nos  pertinere."  A  letter  from  [Jim
(Saturday  after  St.  Simon  and  St.  Jude)  announces  that
the  greatest  joy  prevailed  at  Ferdinand's  court;  in  the
Sundgau,  Breisgau,  and  Alsatia,  the  people  had  been
warned  to  hold  themselves  ready  for  war;  in  the  lands  of
the  Abbot  of  Kempten  they  had  been  ordered  when  at-
tacked to  take  up  arms  instantly  and  assemble.

CHARACTER  OF  THE  LEAGUE.

Book  VI.

was  to  create  five  votes ;  two  for  Saxony  and
Hessen,  two  for  the  cities,  and  the  remaining
one  for  the  other  princes  and  counts  conjointly.
The  ordinary  contingents,  reckoned  at  two
thousand  horse,  and  ten  thousand  foot,  were
taxed  at  severity  thousand  gulden  a  month;
of  which  the  princes  were  to  pay  thirty  thou-
sand, and  the  cities  forty.

The  objection  to  this  plan  is  obvious  at  the
first  glance.  The  greater  half  of  the  votes,
and  the  lesser  of  the  contributions,  were  al-
lotted to  the  princes.  The  cities  did  not  ne-
glect to  propose  a  different  scheme,  in  which
perfect  equality  was  observed.  Each  party
was  to  contribute  thirty-five  thousand  gulden,
and  each  to  have  four  votes.

How  was  it  to  be^  however,  if  these  votes
were  equally  divided  on  any  question  1  an  in-
convenience carefully  avoided  in  all  delibera-
tive bodies.  The  cities  proposed  to  give  a
casting  vote  to  the  electoral  prince  of  Saxony,
who  would  otherwise  have  no  voice.  But  to
this  the  landgrave  would  by  no  means  con-
sent. He  replied,  that  he  Avished  his  friend
and  brother  all  the  prosperity  in  the  world ;
he  should  be  glad  to  see  John  Frederic  Roman
king  and  emperor;  but  that,  in  this  affair,  they
must  maintain  perfect  equality,  according  to
the  original  agreement.

They  therefore  reverted  to  a  project  very
similar  to  the  first.  Nine  votes  were  created,
of  which  four  were  divided  between  Saxony
and  Hessen,  and  four  among  the  four  cilies;
the  ninth  was  to  be  held  in  common  by  the
remaining  princes  and  lords.  The  only  ad-
vantage the  cities  gained  was,  that  the  contri-
butions were  more  equally  divided.  Of  these
four  votes,  the  Oberland  towns  had  two,  and
the  Lower  Saxon  the  other  two;  and  they
took  an  equal  share  of  the  contributions  upon
themselves.  Of  the  two  Lower  Saxon  votes,
Magdeburg  and  Bremen  had  the  one,  Llibek
and  the  remaining  towns  the  other.

In  this  manner  were  the  affairs  of  the
league  arranged,  as  soon  as  it  was  concluded.
The  constitution  is  merely  the  expression  of
the  fact,  and  of  the  relations  of  the  parties ;
of  the  former,  inasmuch  as  those  on  whose
coalition  all  depended  were  now  its  recognised
chiefs;  of  the  latter,  inasmuch  as  the  legal  in-
fluence on  its  resolutions  was  determined  by
the  relative  force  and  the  contributions  of  the
members.

After  all  that  has  been  laid  before  the
reader,  it  is  unnecessary  to  observe,  that  the
principle  of  reform,  at  once  conservative  and
defensive,  such  as  Luther  conceived  it,  was
here  most  perfectly  and  eminently  repre-
sented; but  if  I  am  not  mistaken,  it  may  be
added,  that  this  league,  by  thus  combining
the  two  great  provinces  of  Upper  and  Lower
Germany,  which  had  hitherto  always  been
separated,  was  of  the  highest  value  to  the
•unity  of  development  of  the  German  mind.
There  was  now^  another  centre  besides  the
diets ;  there  was  a  unity  not  imposed  by  the
command  of  the  sovereign  power,  but  arising
spontaneously  from  the  force  of  circumstances,
and  combining  a  political  and  military;  with

an  intellectual  character.  Luther  was  the
great  author,  who,  intelligible  to  both  parties,
found  access  to  both,  and  pre-eminently  con-
tributed to  the  foundation  of  a  uniform  na-
tional culture.  It  was  a  union  which  extended
to  the  uttermost  boundaries  of  Germany  on
either  side.  Not  only  the'  neighbouring  Älag-
deburg  and  central  Strasburg,  but  biirgermeis-
ters  and  town  councillors  from  Riga  sought  aid
and  protection  from  the  Elector  of  Saxony,  on
whom,  under  God,  all  their  hopes  were  fixed.
They  came  in  the  name  of  the  evangehcal
party  in  Dorpat  and  Reval,  praying  to  be  de-
fended against  the  attempts  of  their  arch-
bishop, who  threatened  them  with  the  execu-
tion of  the  recess  of  Augsburg.*

The  league  had  likewise  a  great  political
import. All  who  had  any  thing  to  fear  from
Austria,  or  any  thing  to  complain  of  in  her  past
conduct;  rallied  round  it; — the  Duke  of,  Guel-
dres  and  Juliers,  from  whom  Ravenstein  had
been  taken ;  the  King  of  Denmark,  who  was
in  daily  dread  of  a  fresh  attack  from  Chrisliern
II.,  aided  by  Austria;  and  las%,  an  election
opposition  headed  by  Bavaria. In  February,
1531,  we  find  the  Bavarian  councillor.  Weich-
selfelder, in Torgau;t in  August,  Leonhard
Eck  visited  Landgrave  Philip  at  Giessen ;  in
October,  a  congress  of  all  the  States  hostile  to
Ferdinand  was  held  at  Saalfeld, Here  they
mutually  promised  "by  their  true  words  as
electors,  princes  and  counts,}  on  tfeeir  honour,
truth  and  faith,  not  to  consent  to  the  election,
j  and,  above  all,  to  the  administration,  of  Ferdi-
I  nand ;  and  in  case  they  were  attacked  for  the
J  same,  to  support  each  other." Some  months
!  afterwards  the  form  of  these  mutual  succours
i  was  agreed  on.§

I It  is^  curious  to  see  in  what  light  these  things
I  appeared  at  a  distance ; how,  for  example,
I  Henry VIII. expressed himself concerning
them  in  a  conversation  with  the  Danish  ara-
I  bassador, Peter Schwaben. The emperor,
I  Henry  thought,  ought  to  have  yielded  at  Augs-
j  burg,  on  the  few  points  on  which  they  could
I  not  agree, — but  Campeggi  probably  hindered
'  him. '•  The  emperor  is  foolish,"  said  he ;  "  he
understands  nothing  of  Latin. They  should
have  taken  me  and  the  King  of  France  as  um-
pires; we  would  have  summoned  the  most
learned  men  in  all  Europe,  and  would  soon
have  decided  the  afiair." He  then  proceeded
to  speak  of  the  election. ''Why  do  not  the
princes,"  said'he,  "choose  another  king? — the
Duke  of  Bavaria,  for  example,  w-ho  would  be
quite  a  fit  man. They  must  not  allow  the
emperor  to  deceive  them  as  he  has  deceived
the  pope." "Sir,"  added  he,  as  if  alarmed
at  his  "own  frankness, "nobody  must  know
that  I  have  said  this. I  am  an  ally  of  the  em-

*  Letter  of  the  Council,  Wednesday  before  Palm  Sun-
day,  and  also  that  of  the  Syndic  Lehnniiiller,  the  Wed-
nesday after  the  29th  March,  and  5th  Apfil,  1531.  (W.  A.)

t  The  Bavarian  councillors  were  expected  at  the  second
congress  at  Schmalkalden,  as  a  letter  from  Philip  to  Dr.
Leonh.  Eck  (undated,  but  without  doubt  of  the  31st  Janu-
ary) shows.

t  Neudeckers  Urkunden,  p.  60.  The  counts  of  Mana-
feld  are  those  alluded  to.

§  May,  1532.  Original  document  in  Stumpf,  No.  v.  p.  20.

Chap.  VI.

OTTOMAN  INVASION.

399

peror.  In  fact/'  continued  he  after  a  pause,
"it  would  be  a  disgrace  to  the  emperor  if  he
were  forced  to  leave  Germany  without  putting
an  end  to  these  troubles.  I  see  the  time  is
come  when  either  the  emperor  must  make
himself  renowned,  or  the  Elector  of  Saxony.*'

Thus,  then,  things  were  come  to  such  a
pass,  that  a  sagacious  neighbouring  sovereign
could  compare  the  elector's  chances  of  renown
and  universal  consideration  with  those  of  the
emperor.

We  must  not,  how^ever,  take  this  for  more
than  it  is  worth;  we  are  well  aware  that  the
king  flattered  his  own  secret  hostility  to  the
emperor  with  thoughts  of  this  kind.

But  so  much  is  clear  notwithstanding  :-^that
the  federative  position  which  the  aged  elector
acquired  now,  at  the  close  of  his  life,  Vt'as  a
very  high  and  significant  one.

If  the  aggressive  tendencies  of  the  refor-
mation in  Switzerland  had  been  crushed  in  the
attempt  to  break  down  the  iiitluences  opposed
to  it,  a  similar  calamity  was  not  to  be  feared
for  the  leagae,  whose  attitude  was  purely  de-
fensive. Even  if  the  emperor  had  taken  ad-
vantage of  the  Swiss  reverses  and  begun  a
great  war,  he  would  not  have  found  it  so  easy,
as  perhaps  Ferdinand  thought,  to  suppress
Protestantism,  and  to  make  himself  absolute
master  of  Germany.

Moreover,  circumstances  had  occurred  which  i
rendered  this  utterly  impossible.

CHAPTER  YI.

OTTOMAN IXVASIOX. FIRST PEACE OF RELI-
GION.

1531,  1532.

Destiny  (if  we  may  be  allowed  to  use  the
word)  had  for  a  time  left  the  emperor  at
liberty  to  put  an  end  to  these  religious  troubles
in  one  way  or  another.  For  two  years  he  had
been  at  peace.

But  this  period  presents  a  singular  spectacle.
We  behold  those  who  threaten  war  and  de-
struction separate,  and  each  betake  him^self  to
his  own  affairs;  while,  on  the  contrary,  those
who  are  threat-ened  adhere  with  unshaken
pertinacity  to  their  designs,  and  succeed  in
foundina:  an  effective  politico-religious  coali-
tion. The  check  which  reform  had  sustained
in  Switzerland  was  advantageous  to  its  con-
solidation in  Germany.

It  always  happens,  and  especially  under  cir-
ca nnstances  like  those  of  German}',  that  the
obvious  necessity  for  common  defence  is  a  far
better  bond  of  union  than  the  most  elaborate
plan  of  attack.

The  emperor  did  not  neglect  to  urge  the
electors  to  more  vigorous  measures.  Imme-
diately after  Ferdinand's  election,  they  formed
a  league  for  the  defence  of  it  against  all  attacks
whatsoever. In  the  spring  of  1531,  the  em-

peror proposed  to  connect  v.dth  this  a  more
extensive  coalition,  for  the  purpose  of  pre-
venting all  attempts  of  the  seceders  injurious
to  thelrue  faith.*  To  this,  however,  the  elec-
tors did  not  accede  ]  they  thought  that  sufh-
cient  security  was  afforded  by  the  rules  ami
recesses  of  the  empire.  We  know  that  there
were  other  points  on  which  the  States  of  the
empire  did  not  perfectly  agree  with  the  em-
peror; the  diplomatic  correspondence  of  the
time  shows  that  demonstrations  and  profes-
sions of  friendship  were  traversed  in  every
direction  by  under-currents  of  secret  animosity.

JMoreover,  every  attempt  to  reduce  the  Pro-
testants was  rendered  impossible  by  the  dan-
ger wh^ch  incessantly  hung  over  Europe  from
the  East.

At  length  its  most  formidable  foe  once  more
arose  in  his  might,  Ilis  recent  attack  on
Vienna  had  rather  irritated  than  intimidated
him.

Wq  have  now  to  contemplate,  not  only  the
warlike  preparations  of  the  Ottomans,  but
their  effect  on  Germany.  If  even  the  dread
of  war  was  favourable  to  the  Protestants,  we
may  expect  to  find  that  its  actual  outbreak
was  much  more  so.

OTTOMAN  INVASION.

In  the  year  1530,  both  Ferdinand  and  the
empei'or  entertained  the  idea  of  terminating
the  affair  of  Hungary  by  a  treaty  with  the  sub-
lime Porte.  As  John  Zapolya  boasted  that  he
paid  no  tribute,  the  court  of  Vienna  hoped  that
the  sultan  might  be  gained  over  by  the  offer
of  a  sum  of  money;  and  even  flattered  itself
that  it  might  be  possible  to  recover  the  whole
of  Hungary,  such  as  King  Wladislaus  had  pos-
sessed it.  In  this  spirit  were  the  proposals
conceived  which  Ferdinand  sent  to  Constanti-
nople, in  May,  loSO.-j-

In  fact,  he  hoped  nothing  more  from  the
war  with  the  woiwode.  A  fresh  attempt  on
Ofen  had  failed.  The  Hungarians  of  both  par-
ties were  evidently  weary  of  internal  discord;
they  had  even  a  project  of  proceeding  to  elect
a  third  king,  whom  all  might  acknowledge.
Ferdinand  therefore  consented  to  a  truce  with
Zapolya.  His  ho'pes  were  turned  towards  Con-
stantinople— hopes  which  were  destined  to  be
entirely  crushed.

It  was  well  known  in  Constantmople.  that  a
general  enterprise  against  the  Turks  was  in-
cessantly talked  of  in  Germany,  Italy  and
Spain;  "that  the pope and  the empire had

*  Original  document  in  the  Berlin  Archives  under  the
title:  '•  Keyser  Carls  Bedenken,  wie  die  Election  eines
romischen  Königes  zu  Cöiln  geschehen  v^nd  auf  König
Ferdinand  gericht,  wider  den  Churfiirften  von  Sachsen
und  Andre  so  dieselbe  gestritten,  möge  gehandhabt  wer-
den."—"  Emperor  Charles's  Reflections  how  the  Election
of  a  King  of , the  Romans,  which  took  place  at  Cologne,
and  fell  upon  King  Ferdinand,  is  to  be  maintained  gsainst
the  Elector  of  Saxony  and  others,  who  have  contested  it.''
There  is  in  Brussels  an  extract  from  the  elector's  answer
in  the  French  language,  in  which  the  emperor's  offer  is
described  in  the  words  ;  Offrant  derechef  avec  le  roy  son
frere  d'accomplir  et  fournir  ä  une  notable  et  durable  en-
treprise.

t  Instructions  to  Lamberg  and  Jurischitz;  Gevay,  Ur-
kunden und  Actenstücke,  Heft  i.

400

LETTERS  FROM  FERDINAND  TO  CHARLES.

Book  VL

granted  money  for  it,  and  that  the  emperor
hoped  to  render  his  name  gloriou's  by  such  a
campaign.  But  it  was  also  known  that  the
money,  though  granted,  was  either  not  forth-
coming, or  could  not  be  applied  to  its  destina-
tion ]  that  Christendom,  spite  of  ail  treaties  of
peace,  was  full  of  open  or  secret  divisions'
and  the  threat  of  uniting  its  forces  against  the
Ottomans  Avas  treated  with  derision.  "The
King  of  Spain,"  it  was  said,  "has  encircled
his  brow  with  the  diadem  of  the  empire;  but
what  then  %  is  he  better  obeyed  ?  He  is  em-
peror, who  extends  his  dominion  with  the
sword/'  When  the  envoys  appeared  with  the
proposals  above  mentioned,  the  grand  wezir
fbrahim  changed  colour,  and  dissuaded  them
from  even  submitting  such  to  the  sultan  :*  for
Hungary  belonged  not  to  the  Janusch  Krai  (as
he  called  the  king-w'oiwode),  but  to  the  sul-
tan, who  therefore  took  no  tribute  from  that
country,  but,  on  the  contrary,  gave  succours
to  his  servant  and  lieutenant  who  governed  it.
The  sultan  had  twice  conquered  Hungary  with
the  sword,  with  his  own  sweat  and  blood,  and
that  of  his  warriors,  and  it  belonged  to  him  of
right.  Indeed,  even  Vienna,  and  all  that  Fer-
dinand possessed  in  Germany,  belonged  to
him,  since  he  had  invaded  those  countries  in
person,  and  had  hunted  there.  Charles  V.
threatened  to  attack  the  Turks;  he  should  not
need  to  go  far,  they  were  making  ready  to  ad-
vance to  meet  hira.  "I  am  the  sultan,"  said
the  letter  which  Suleiman  gave  to  the  ambas-
sador, "the  great  emperor,  the  highest  and
most  excellent;  I  have  reduced  the  Greek
crown  to  subjection,  the  White  and  the  Black
Sea ; — with  God's  help  and  ray  own  labours,
after  the  fashion  of  my  father  and  grandfather,
with  my  ow^n  person  and  my  sword,  have  I
conquered  for  myself  the  kingdom  and  the
King  of  Hungary."  He  rephed  to  the^Aus-
trian  proposition  with  the  demand — made  far
more  in  earnest — that  Ferdinand  would  sur-
render all  the  fortresses  which  he  still  pos-
sessed in  a  part  of  Hungary.!

Suleiman  lived  only  in  the  thought  of  mak-
ing Constantinople  once  more  the  capital  of
the  world ;  he  called  Charles  V.  merely  King
of  Spain  ;  he  claimed  the  exclusive  title  of
emperor  (which  the  East  called  Caliph  of
Rum),  and  was  determined  to  restore  it  to  its
full  significancy.

We  see  from  a  letter  of  Ferdinand's  of  the
17th  March,  1531,  what  a  powerful  impres-
sion the  insolent  answer  brought  by  his  am-
bassadors made  upon  him.  He  represents  to
his  brother  how  contrary  it  is  to  all  reason  and
honour  to  suffer  a  kingdom  like  Hungary,  so
great  and  noble  and  fertile,  and  so  many  in-
nocent souls,  all  created  in  the  image  of  the
living  God,  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  Turk-
ish tyrant.  It  was  also  to  be  considered  that
this  would  lay  open  all  Europe  to  him.  The
sultan  would  take  possession  on  the  one  side

*  Report  of  the  envoys  and  the  letters  of  Suleiman  and
Ibrahim:  Gevay,  Urkunden  und  Actenstücke,  Heft  i.

t  From  Suleiman's  letter,  Gevay,  Urkunden  und  Acten-
stücke, Heft  i.  p.  91.  Pity  that  this  is  rather  au  extract,
as  well  as  No.  vii.,  than  a  translation.

of  Bohemia  and  Moravia,  on  the  other,  of
Inner  Austria  and  Istria :  from  Signa  he  would
not  have  far  to  go  to  the  march  of  Ancona  and
Naples. -t

In  a  succeeding  letter,  he  conjures  the  em-
peror not  to  defer  the  preparations  for  resist-
ance, because  the  advance  of  the  Ottomans
was  still  doubtful;  "For  the  danger  is  great,"
says  he,  "the  time  short,  and  my  force  insig-
nificant or  null."§

When  it  was  seen  that  the  sultan's  projects
were serious; that  he  really  contemplated,

a  short  delay,
proü

either  immediately,  or  after
marchin.o-  on  the  German  frontier,  this

pect  naturally  dictated  the  policy  of  the  two
brothers.

It  was  a  moment  like  that  in  the  beginning
of  the  tenth  century,  when  the  Hungarians
first  possessed  themselves  of  their  settlement;
and  pushed  on  from  thence  westward,  plun-
dering and  laying  waste  by  the  way.  •  The
West  had  indeed  made  enorm.ous  progress,  and
had  far  better  means  of  defence  than  it  then,
possessed  ;  but  the  enemy  was  also  incompa-
rably more  powerful  and  more  dangerous.

On  considering  how  he  was  to  be  encoun-
tered, it  became  obvious  that  the  greatest  ob-
stacle to  an  efficient  defence  was  the  divided
state  of  Germany.  "  The  succours  of  the  em-
pire," said  Ferdinand  in  his  first  letter,  "will
come  np  very  slowly.  You  must  hold  it  for
certain,  that  Luther's  adherents,  even  if  they
are  convinced  of  the  necessity  for  their  ai(.l,
and  inclined  to  grant  it,  will  yet  withhold  it,
because  they  fear  that  if  the  Turks  are  con-
quered, and  the  peace  with  France,  England
and  Italy  continues,  our  arms  will  be  turned
against  them ;  they  think  that  the  victorious
soldiery  will  not  be  satisfied  with  the  blood
they  have  shed,  but  will  seek  out  more  to
slake  their  thirst."  v

We  have  already  seen  how  great  an  influ-
ence Ferdinand's  counsels  had  on  Charles  V.
They  were,  indeed,  always  well-timed  and  ju-
dicious, and  bear  the  stamp  of  resolution  and
promptitude.  Ferdinand  now  had  no  hesita-
tion in  advising  his  brother  to  come  to  a  peace-
ful arrangement  with  the  Protestants,  in  so  far
as  that  was  possible,  without  prejudice  to  the
essential  points  of  the  Cathohc  faith.  He  said
that  their  zeal  must  be  allowed  to  consume
itself,  for  the  more  water  was  thrown  on  it,  the
fiercer  it  burned.  They  must  be  concihated
at  a  diet.  They  would  willingly  grant  aid
against  the  Turks,  as  soon  as  they  saw  them-
selves secure  in  all  that  related  to  "  their  vain
superstitions. "II

As  early  as  February,  1531,  an  attempt  was
made  by  the  emperor,  as  was  always  the  case

X  Gevay;  i.  99.  The  same  opinion  appears  again  in
the  second  part,  but  somewhat  altered.

§  27th  March.  Vra.  Magestad  si  es  razon  m  cordura,de
estar  assi  desapercebidoa  y  desunidos,  alia  defensa  nece-
saria  debaxo  desta  snmbra  de  operation  dudosa,  cerca  de
lo  qual  suplico  a  V.  Md,  quiera  mirar  y  tener  proveydo  lo
que  convenga  porque  elpeligro  es  muy  grande  y  el  tiempo
breve,  y  mi  pusanza  muy  poca  o  ninguna. (Br.  A.)

I(  Assentandose  esto  avria  mas  disyjosition  y  menos
ympedimento  para  resistir  al  Turco  assi  in  los  principes
como  en  las  otras  personas  ;  a  lo  qual  ajQdaran  de  mejor
gana,  estando  assecurados  dello  que  toca  a  sus  vanas
creencias. (Prima  27  Marzo.)

Chap.  VI.

NEGOTIATIONS  WITH  THE  PORTE.

401

in  Germany,  as  soon  as  any  division  assumed
.the  appearance  of  danger,  through  the  inter-
vention of  the  Palatinate  and  Mainz,  to  bring-
about  a  reconciliation  :  but  as  the  Protestants
demanded,  as  a  preliminary  to  all  negotia-
tions, that  the  proceedings  of  the  Imperial
Chamber  should  at  least  be  stayed  for  a  time,
nothing  came  of  it.  The  emperor  declared
that  it  would  be  difficult  for  him  to  undo  any
thing  that  had  been  determined  by  the  Estates
of  the  empire.*

But  Ferdinand  now  urgently  pressed  for  this
concession.  On  the  27 ih  April,  he  sent  the
emperor  an  opinion  of  the  council  of  war  on
the  plan  of  defence  against  the  Turks.  Mean-
while, in  order  to  avert  the  danger  arising
from  the  coalitions  and  practices  of  the  Lu-
therans, he  advised  his  brother  no  longer  to
resist  their  demands.

The  emperor  therefore,  in  convoking  a  diet
at  Regensburg,  directed  his  fiscal  ^-to  suspend
the  proceedings,  ■.  -hich  he  had  been  author-
ised by  the  recess  of  Augsburg  to  set  on  foot
in  religious  matters,  till  the  approaching  diet."t
This  rendered  negotiation  at  least  possible,
and  afforded  a  prospect  of  uniting  the  strength
of  the  empire  to  meet  any  pressing  'emer-
gency.

This  prospect  was,  however,  as  yet  very  re-
mote.

King  Ferdinand,  the  author  of  these  con-
ciliatory measures,  would  sometimes  have  pre-
ferred to  come  to  an  agreement  with  the
Turks,  even  under  the  most  unfavourable  con-
ditions. In  the  days  in  which  the  events  in
Switzerland  had  awakened  all  his  zeal  and
ambition  against  the  innovators,  he  determined
to  make  immense  concessions  with  regard  to
Hungary.  In  the  instructions  of  the  5th  No-
vember, 1531,  he  desired  his  ambassadors,
-whom  he  sent  to  Constantinople,  to  begin  by
refusing  to  cede  any  part  of  his  Hungarian  do-
minions; but,  in  case  the  sultan  should  abso-
lutely decline  to  treat  on  these  terms,  they
were  then  to  listen  to  his  demands.  They
were  to  try  at  least  to  keep  possession  of  the
castles  nearest  to  the  German  frontier,  or  to
negotiate  their  surrender  for  the  sum  the  woi-
wode  had  formerly  offered.  But  if  this  also
could  not  be  obtained,  if  the  sultan  should  be
inflexible,  and  insist  on  a  free  surrender  of  ail
the  castles  to  the  woiwode,  they  should  have
full  powers  to  consent  even  to  that ;  only  with
the  reservation,  that  both  these  castles  and
the  whole  kingdom  of  Hungary  should  revert
to  Ferdinand  at  the  death  of  the  woiwode.
So  great  were  the  concessions  Ferdinand  was
prepared  to  make.t For  so  remote  a  contin-

*  Instructions  how  we  two,  Ludwig,  Count  Stolberg,
and  Wolf  voa  Affenstein,  knight,  are  to  treat  with  his
imperial  majesty ;  Tuesday  after  Estomihi  (23d  February).
Likewise:  Summary  note  of  what  we  have  negotiated
with  his  imperial  majesty. (W.  A.)

t  "  For  excellent  and  sincere  reasons  w^  commend  thee
earnestly,  that  thou  wilt  completely  stay  such  proceedings
on  account  of  religion,  as  thou  hast  in  hand,  in  virtue  of
our  recess  of  Augsburg,  between  now  and  the  next
coming  diet."  Copy  of  a  letter  of  the  Elector  of  Mainz,
25th  July.

X  Instructio  de  iis  quae— Leonardus  Comes  de  Nogarolis
et  Josephus  a  Lamberg  — apud  sern^nm  Turcarum  impera-
51  2i*

gency  as  the  death  of  his  rival,  he  was  willing
to  surrender  all  that  yet  belonged  to  him  in
Hungary.  So  high  was  the  price  he  set  upon
peace  with  Turkey.  He  wished  his  brother
and  the  pope  to  be  included  in  the  truce.  If
his  brother  broke  it,  it  should  be  the  same  as
if  he  broke  it  himself.  And  indeed  Charles
V.  exhorted  him  to  leave  nothing  untried,  in
order  to  conclude  a  treaty  wi\h  the  Turks.

But  these  offers  were  already  vain.  Before
an  ambassador  had  reached  the  Turkish  fron-
tier, news  arrived  of  the  vast  warlike  prepa-
rations of  the  sultan  by  land  and  by  sea.  On
the  26th  April,  1532,  Suleiman  set  out  on  the
campaign  that  was  to  decide  the  struggle  with
his  mightiest  foe,  the  Emperor  Charles,  in
whose  person,  as  far  as  it  was  possible,  the
power  of  the  West  was  represented. §

A  Venetian  chronicle  has  left  us  a  descrip-
tion of  this  expedition,  which  reminds  us  of
the  pomp  of  the  earliest  eastern  monarchs.||
The  march  was  opened  by  one  hundred  and
twenty  pieces  of  artillery;  then  came  eight
thousand  Janissaries,  overjoyed  at  being  led
against  the  Germans,  and  followed  by  troops
of  camels  loaded  with  an  enormous  quantity
of  baggage.  After  them  came  the  Sipahis  of
the  Porte,  two  thousand  horse  ;  to  whom  was
entrusted  the  holy  standard,  the  Eagle  of  the
Prophet,  gorgeously  adorned  with  gems  and
pearls,  which  had  already  waved  at  the  con-
quest of  Rhodes.  To  this  were  attached  the
young  boys  who  were  exhibited  as  the  tribute
from  subject  Christians,  and  were  educated  at
the  Porte ;  dressed  in  cloth  of  gold,  with  long
locks  like  women,  red  hats  with  white  plumes
on  their  heads,  and  lances  of  exquisite  Bä-
mascus  workmanship  in  their  hands.  Behind
them  was  borne  the  sultan's  crown,  which
had  shortly  before  been  brought  to  Constanti-
nople by  a  Sanuto  from  St.  Canziano  at  Venice,  .
at  the  cost  of  120,000  ducats.  Then  followed
the  immediate  retinue  of  the  sultan, — a  thou-
sand men  of  gigantic  stature,  and  of  the  greatest
personal  beauty  that  it  was  possible  to  find  ;
some  leading  hounds  in  a  leash,  others  hold-
ing hawks  on  their  fist,  all  armed  with  bows
and  arrows.  In  the  midst  of  them  rode  Sulei-
man, in  a  garment  of  crimson  velvet  embroi-
dered with  gold,  a  snow-white  turban  deco-
rated with  precious  stones,  dagger  and  sabre
at  his  side,  and  mounted  on  a  chestnut  horse.
He  was  followed  by  the  four  wesirs,  the  most
remarkable  of  whom  was  Ibrahim,  who  bore
the  title  of  chief  counsellor  of  the  sultan,  vice-
gerent of  the  whole  empire  of  the  same,  and
of  all  his  slaves  and  barons ;  after  them  came
the  remaining  lords  of  the  court,  with  their
attendants.  The  whole  wore  an  appearance
of  discipline  and  obedience,  and  moved  on-

torem  nomine  nostro  agere  debent,  Gevay,  ii.  (1531.)
Sicubi  vero  de  hac  quoque  conditione  fuerit  desperatum,
videlicet  quod  Turcus  gratuito  et  sine  pecunia  castra  ilia
omnia  Waywodse  reddi  voluerit,  tum  demum  sic  fortuna
volente  fiat  per  eosdem  oratores  nostros  de  iis  omnibus
promissio.

§  Avviso  venuto  di  Ragusi  di  un  nuovo  esercito  messo
da  Solimano  per  ritornaruna  secunda  vojta  alia  citta  di
Vienna  I'anno  nuovo  1532,  in  der  Chronica  Yen.,  which
Guazzo  uses,  but  with  great  freedom.

II  Marchiando  con  gran  solazzo  verso  Vienna.

402

ARMAMENT  OF  THE  EMPIRE.

Book  VI.

wards  without  the slightest tumult or  dis-
order.

Such  was  the  pomp  and  majesty  with  which
the  Sublime  Porte  rose  up  and  advanced  to
take  possession  of  the  empire  of  the  ^A'orld.
From  all  sides  the  armed  bands  of  its  subjects
hastened  to  join  its  standard.  The  army  which
crossed  the  frontier  of  Hungary  in  June  was
reckoned  at  two  hundred  and  fifty  thousand
men.

Such  was  the  camp  in  w^hich  Ferdinand's
ambassadors  at  length  arrived.  But  what  ne-
gotiations were  likely  to  have  power  to  stem
this  torrent  1

I  do  not  find  that  the  envoys  adhered  very
strictly  to  their  instructions.  They  proceeded,
however,  so  far  as  to  promise-  both  the  sultan
and  the  wesir  a  yearly  tribute  for  that  part  of
Hungary  which  was  still  in  Ferdinand's  hands.
On  the  wesir  this  made  some  impression  ',  but
the  feultan  utterly  rejected  it.  ^'  For  who  would
assure  him."  he  said,  "that  while  he  was  at
peace  w^ith  Ferdinand,  his  brother,  the  King  of
Spain,  would  not  attack  him?  But  he  would
seek  out  that  monarch,  who,  for  three  years
past,  had  boasted  of  achieving  great  things.
If  the  King  of  Spain  has  the  courage,"  added
he.  "let  him  await  me  in  the  field.  With
God's  grace,  I  shall  come  up  with  him,  and
then  let  God's  will  decide  between  us."

The  ambassadors  were  asked  how  long  it
took  to  reach  Regensburg-  they  answered
that,  by  the  shortest  way,  a  man  must  ride
for  a  month.  This  long  march  the  Ottomans
seemed  resolved  to  undertake.

And  in  Regensburg-the  States  of  the  empire
were  just  assembled  to  hold  the  long-deferred'
diet  J"  on  the  17th  April,  the  proceedings  had
been  opened.

The  emperor  wished  for  an  augmentation
of  the  succours  already  granted  him  in  Augs-
burg. An  opinion  of  the  council  of  war  had
been  given  in,  according  to  which  ninety  thou-
sand men,  of  whom  twenty  thousand  were  to
be  light  horse,  were  required.^  The  emperor
wished  to  have  sixty  thousand  from  the  em-
pire, promising;  in  that  case,  to  furnish  thirty
thousand  at  his  own  expense.  But  it  was  quite
contrary  to  all  the  precedents  of  the  empire  to
increase  a  former  grant.  None  of  the  dele-
gates or  envoys  of  the  States  were  prepared
for  it ;  and  the  subsidies  already  voted — forty
thousand  foot  and  eight  thousand  horse — were
larger  than  any  ever  granted  before.  On  the
28th  of  May,'  the  emperor  declared  himself
satisfied,  and  only  urged  that  the  troops  might
be  assembled  as  rapidly  and  in  as  effective  a
state  as  possible.  The  place  of  meeting  was
not,  as  at  first  intended,  Regensburg,  but
Vienna, — nearer  to  the  enemy.  The  whole
body  of  troops  were  to  meet  there  on  the  15th
of  August. For  the  first  time,  the  military

*  They  demanded  32,000  foot  with  long  spears,  10,000
with  short  arms,  8000  good  marksmen,  500  arquebuses,
and  a  few  thousand  men  to  serve  the  artillery.  This  was
reckoned  at  118  pieces;  falcons,  falconets,  culverijies,
nightingales,  carronades,  mortars,  &c.  —  Opinion  of  the
Council  of- War.  The  Berlin  archives  contain  the  letters
of  Barfuss,  concerning  the  first  proceedings  of  the  diet,  in
which  we  see  that  the  opening  of  it  took  place  on  the  17th
April,

constitution  of  the  ^empire  was  in  real  and
active-operation.

Even  M'hile  the  diet  was  sitting,  meetings
of  the  circles  were  convoked,  commanders
appointed,  and  their  pay  provided,  and  the
whole  armament  gradually  put  in  a  train.-

But  the  thing  on  which  the  execution  of  all
these  decrees  depended  was,  the  result  of  the
negotiations  with  the  Protestants.

What  would  be  the  consequence  of  their
rejection  was  soon  seen,  when  the  emperor
prepared  to  bring  his  own  army  into  the  field.
He  was  particularly  in  want  of  fire-arms  and
of  powder,  and  he  was  obliged  to  apply  to  the
cities  of  Strasburg.  Augsburg,  Ulm,  Nürnberg,
Constance  and  Frankfurt,  to  come  to  his  aid
with  theirs. They  were  all  Protestants. t

Even  the  Catholic  States  observed  to  the
emperor  that,  before  making  war  abroad,  they
must  be  secure  of  peace  at  home.t

It  may  even  be  asserted  tiiat  the  religious
dissensions  of  the  Germans  were  not  among
the  feeblest  of  the  motives  that  prompted
Suleiman's  undertaking.  Whenever  the  am-
bassadors in  the  Turkish  camp  said  that  the
emperor  enjoyed  the  dutiful  attachment  of
his  subjects,  they  were  asked,  whether  he  had
made  peace  wnth  Martin  Luther.  The  arii-
bassadors  replied,  that  indeed  disputes  some-
times arose  in  Christendom,  but  that  they  did
not  interfere  with  the  general  welfare;  the
peace  in  question  would  soon  be  concluded. §

This  was  now  to  be  seen.  Let  us  turn  our
attention  to  the  negotiations;  momentous  as
is  the  crisis  at  which  we  are  now  arrived;
these  are  interesting  and  important  on  other
ai|^  m.ore  lasting  grounds.

NEGOTIATIONS  W^TH  THE  PROTESTANTS.

When,  in  the  summer  of  1531,  the  negotia-
tions were  opened,  the  Catholics  thought  to
resume  them  at  the  point  where  they  hg.d
tieen  broken  off  at  Augsburg.

But  it  was  immediately  evident  how  wädely
circumstances  were  altered.  The  Protest-
ants no  longer  made,  they  received,  petitions.
They  declared  that  it  no  longer  seemed  to
them  advisable  to  attempt  to  bring  about  a
unity  of  religion ;  they,  for  their  parts,  were
determined  to  adhere  to  their  protest  and  con-
fession, and  would  render  a  further  account
of  them  before  a  Christian  council.

They  had  a  corresponding  answer  ready  for
every  other  proposal.

They  w^ere  requested  no  longer  to  deprive
the  clergy  of  '•  their  own." They  replied,  that

t  Fürstenberg  to  Frankfurt,  7th  June.  ,

t  Denken  Chf  FF.  und  Stände,  wo  der  eusserlich  krieg
statlichen  sol  yolnbracht  werden,  dass  zuvor  die  hohe
Notdurft  erfordern  wolle,  anheym  den  Frieden  zu  halten,

damit  ein  3'der  wiss,  wie  er  neben  dem  andern  sitz,

dass  auch  in  allen  andern  Artikeln  vermög  E.  K.  M.  Aus-
schreybens  daneben  furgeschritten,  gehandelt,— einer  mit
dem  andern  beschlossen\verde.— The  electors,  princes,  and
states  think,  that  if  foreign  war  is  to  be  carried  on
grandly,  the  first  thing  necessary  will  be,  to  keep  the
peace  at  home,  so  that  every  man  may  know  how  he  sits
next  to  his  neighbour,— that  also  in  all  other  articles  in
virtue  of  Y.  I.  M.'s  summons,  atFairs  should  be  proceeded
with,  negotiated,  and  one  with  another  concluded.
§  Report  of  the  ambassadors,  p.  31.

Chap.  VI.

NEGOTIATIONS  IN  NÜRNBERG.

403

if  the  bishops  were  allowed  to  retain  their  juris-
.diclioii  (for  that  was  what  was  chiefly  meant
by  ■•'  their  own"'),  it  would  be  putting  ä  sword
into  their  hands,  wherewith  at  any  time  to
extirpate  the  true  doctrine.

Farther,  the  emperor  renewed  the  request
that  the  exercise  of  the  ancient  ritual,  espe-
cially the  communion  in  one  kind,  should  be
permitted.  Brück,  the  Chancellor  of  Saxony,
replied  that,  in  that  case,  the  communion  ni
both  kinds  must  be  permitted  throughout  the
empire;  peace  could  not  be  established  so
long  as  the  liberty  with  regard  to  the  two  most
important  sacraments  was  not  perfectly  equal
throughout  the  nation.

Lastly,  the  election  was  mentioned.  Turk,
the  Cnancellor  of  Mainz,  expressed  his  opinion
that  the  opposition  of  the  Protestant  party  was
raised  only  with  a  view  to  promote  their  reli-
gious interests.  Dr.  Brück  replied,  that  he
could  assure  him  that  his  party  had  no  fear
whatever  for  their  religion ;  it  had  penetrated
too  deeply  into  the  hearts  of  the  people  :  every
one  riow  knew^  how  to  discern  right  from
wrong.  The  serious  intention  of  the  Protest-
ants uas,  that  the  king  should  either,  allow
the  thing  to  come  to  a  legal  settlement,  or
content  himself  with  ruling  over  those  v»-ho
had  elected  him.*

Such  are  the  most  important  points  of  these
negotiations,  which  till  huge  bundles  of  docu-
ments in  various  archives.!  The  elector  pala-
tine kept  up  a  constant  correspondence  with
the  landgrave ;  the  Elector  of  Mainz  with  the
Elector  of  Saxony;  and  both  of  them  with
each  other,  and  with  the  other  members  of  the
Schmalkaldic  league.  Occasionally,  imperial
plenipotentiaries  came  to  Weimar ;  the  Elec-
tor of  Mainz  took  the  opportunity,  during  his
journey  between,  Halle  and  Aschatfenburg,  to
speak  with  one  or  other  of  the  most  intluen-
tial  functionaries  of  Saxony;  lastly,  the  two
chancellors  met  in  Bitterfeid,  and  drew  up
new  proposals,  Vv-hich  they  sent  to  Brussels.
The  emperor  turned  pale  vv^hen  this  at%.ir,  to
which  he  had  such  a  repugnance,  was  brought
before  him  again ;  but  he  did  not  refuse  to
hear  it,  ask-ed  his  brother's  advice,  and  mode-
rated or  confirmed  his  propositions  accord-
ingly.

So  long  as  there  remained  the  faintest  pos-
sibility of  an  accommodation  with  the  Turks,
we  need  not  wonder  that  no  progress  was
made  in  these  affairs.  In  Schweinfurt,  where
the  conferences  were  held  in  the  beginning
of  the  year  1532,  not  the  smallest  advance
was  made ;  the  mediators  deemed  it  best  to
let  the  business  of  the  election  entirely  drop;
and  in  Nürnberg,  whither  the  negotiations
were  transferred,  in  order  to  be  nearer  the
emperor,  the  mediators  at  first  only  renewed  j

*  Dr.  Briick's  Seport  of  what  he  negotiated  with  Dr.
Turk  ia  Bitterfeld,  Wednesday  in  the  Christmas  holidays
('JTth  December,  1.531).  There  was  a  second  meeting,  on
Thursday  after  the  Purificalioa  B.  V.  M.  (5th  February),
concerning  which  tliere  is  a  similar  report  in  the  Weim.
Arch.

t  In  Weimar,  Cassel,  Magdeburg,  Vienna.  (See  Bu-
choltz,  Bd.  ix.  Erhard,  Ueberlieferungen,  Bd.  i.)

I  the  old  proposals,  and  even  added  some  limi-
{ tations.if:

!  It  was  not  till  positive  intelligence  was  re-
i  ceived  thai  the  sultan's  progress  could  not  be.
arrested,  and  that  he  was  advancing  in  greater
force  than  ever,  that  the  two  parties  began
earnestly  to  endeavour  to  accommodate  their
differences.

Not  that  they  had  the  smallest  idea  of
coming  to  a  perfect  agreement.  The  Protest-
ants aspired  to  nothing  more  than  to  see  the
position  they  had  taken  up  at  least  provision-
ally recognised  by  the  emperor.  They  de-
manded the  proclamation  of  a  general  peace,
and  the  suspension  of  the  proceedings  of  the
Imperial  Chamber,  by  which  they  felt  them-
selves aggrieved.

But  even  these  proved  extremely  difficult
to  obtain.

The  mediators  had  again  used  the  expres-
sion, '-'No  one  shall  dispossess  another  of  his
own."  No  wonder  if  this  provoked  the  oppo-
sition of  the  Protestants.  There  was  again  no
mention  of  any  peace,  except  that  between
the  several  States;  whereas  the  Protestants
demanded  that  the  peace  '•  between  his  im-
perial majesty  and  themselves  should  be  also
proclaimed  to  all  the  States  of  the  German
nation."

Another  obstacle  to  an  arrangement  was,
the  description  of  the  council.  The  Protest-
ants had  demanded  "a  council  in  which  ques-
tions should  be  terminated  according  to  the
pure  word  of  God."  This  description  was
pronounced  to  be  insidious,  and  not  Catholic.
But  as  •'•  a  general  free  council,  such  as  was
determined  on  at  the  diet  of  Nürnberg,"  were
the  words  substituted,  the  Protestants  had
ample  reason  to  be  content,  since  they  had
always  insisted  on  an  adherence  to  the  reso-
lutions of  that  diet.

But  the  difficulty  arising  from  the  proceed-
ings of  the  Chamber  was  much  greater.

t  Endliche  Mittel  und  Fürschläg,  worauf  Kais.  Mt  uf
d'  Schwel nfurtiächen  Handlung  empfangenen  Bericht  —
—  zu  handeln  befohlen.  —  Final  means  and  proposals
whereupon  his  imperial  majesty,  on  the  receipt  of  the
negotiations  at  Schweinfurt,  has  commanded  us  to  treat.
Monday  after  Boniface  (10th  June).  It  is  an  error  in  most
editions  of  Luther's  Works  (e.  g.,  Walch,  xvii.  p  2202),
that  the  proposals  were  given  in  at  Schweinfurt.  The
Protestants  sent  their  answer  on  the  12th  June.  In  Art.
I.  they  missed  the  words,  "  who  adopt  in  future  into  their
doctrine  the  confession  and  apologia  they  have  already
made,  which  they  acknowledge  themselves  bound  by
Christian  duly  to  accept."  Art.  2,  concerning  the  council,
they  allege  that  the  w^ords,  "  that  it  shall  determine  ac-
cording to  the  pure  word  of  God  alone,"  are  wanting.  So
it  goes  on,  and  it  is  evident  that  they  did  not  in  the  least
give  way.  On  the  ISth  July,  on  the  contrary,  they  prayed,
''that  as  to  outward  things,  not  belonging  to  God's  word
and  to  conscience,  a  general,  permanent,  internal  peace
may  be  treated  of,  and  that  the  same  may  be  concluded."
This  turn  of  things  was  expressly  confirmed  by  a  letter
from  John  Frederic  to  the  count  of  Nuenar,  Sunday  after
St.  James  (30  July,  1532),  wherein  he  complains  that  ha
has  been  detained  eight  weeks  at  Nürnberg,  and  then  re-
ports the  negotiations.  "  His  imperial  majesty's  mind  is
kept  in  such  a  state  by  the  two  electors,  that  nothing  ad-
vantageous  could  be  transacted  ;  and  we  on  our  parts  re-
marked so  many  difficulties  therein,  that  we  could  not
treat  on  those  articles  with  the  approbation  of  God  or
with  a  good  conscience.  Hence  we  have  at  last  entirely
rejected  the  articles,  which  ought  to  have  been  conducive
to  unity,  since  such  were  the  terms  offered;  and  have  dis-
cussed laow  a  general  peace  should  be  brought  about  in
the  empire." (Weira.  Arch.)

404

CONCESSIONS  OF  THE  PROTESTANTS.

Book  VI.

The  idea  of  attacking  the  Protestants  by  pro-
cess of  law,  was  far  more  that  of  the  majority
than  of  the  emperor.  The  tribunal  itself  was,
as  we  have  seen,  an  institution  representing
the  States.  We  remember  how  much  trouble
it  cost  to  set  limits  to  the  influence  of  the  im-
perial court  over  it.  In  the  proceedings  of
that  tribunal  against  the  Protestants,  resolved
on  at  Augsburg,  and  already  in  full  progress,
the  Catholic  party  beheld  its  most  powerful
weapon.  And  in  these  they  obstinately  per-
sisted, notwithstanding  all  their  occasional
declarations  of  the  necessity  of  a  peace.  In
the  draft  of  a  recess  which  they  iaid  before
the  emperor  on  the  10th  July,  an  article  de-
clares that,  in  matters  of  religion,  the  recess
of  Augsburg  must  be  adhered  to  generally,
and  especially  by  the  Imperial  Chamber.*'
The  papal  legate  also  refused  to  give  his  as-
sent to  an  inhibition  of  the  imperial  fiscal  in
affairs  of  faith.

Such  were  the  perplexities  in  which  the
emperor  was  involved.  In  order  to  resist  the
Turks,  the  tranquillity  of  the  empire  was  ab-
solutely necessary.  But  the  sole  condition
which  could  assure  peace  to  the  Protestants,
the  Catholics  refused  him  the  power  to  grant. t

At  length  the  imperial  court  came  to  this
compromise:  —  in  the  public  proclamation,  to
announce  only  the  peace,  but  to  give  the  Pro-
testants a  private  assurance  of  the  suspension
of  the  legal  proceedings.  This,  too,  was  not
so  complete  as  ihe  Protestants  wished.  They
had  demanded  a  declaration,  that  the  emperor
would,  neither  through  his  lisca],  nor  through
his  chamber,  nor  in  any  other  court  of  justice;
and  also,  neither  officially  nor  at  the  instiga-
gation  of  any  other  person  or  persons,  allow
proceedings  to  be  taken  against  Saxony  or  his
kinsmen  and  allies^  The  emperor  was  not  to
be  induced  to  agree  to  so  many  express
clauses.  He  only  promised,  that  he  would
stay  alL  law  proceedings  instituted  ''by  his
majesty's  fiscal  and  others,"'!  in  matters  of
the  faith  against  the  Elector  of  Saxony  and  his
associates,  until  the  convocation  of  the  council.
This  promise  did  not  absolutely  offend  the
majority,  and  yet  might  be  interpreted  in  the
sense  of  the  Protestants,  and  as  satisfying
their  principal  demand.

On  the  other  hand,  that  party  had  deter-
mined on  a  great  concession,  which  is  indeed
iraphed  in  those  words.  Their  original  mean-
ing had  been  that  the  assurance  given  them
\should  also  avail  for  all  those  who  might  join
iheir  confession  in  future ;  they  had  -even
demanded  freedom  of  preaching  and  of  the
Lord's  Supper  according  to  their  ritual,  for

'  *  Letter  from  Planitz  to  Taubenheim,  11th  July.

t  Declaration  of  the  emperor,  sent  by  Planitz  to  Saxony,
Thursday  after  St.  John  the  Baptist  (27th  June).  "And
since  the  above-mentioned  States  have  seen  good  to  aban-
don all  further  means  and  negotiations  for  peace,  an,d  ad-
here to  the  recess  of  Augsburg,  his  majesty  requests  with
peculiar  earnestness  of  the  above-mentioned  States,  that
they  will  consider  what  may  be  the  consequences  to  the
cause  of  the  faith."

X  He  could  be  uf ought  to  nothing  beyond  the  addition
of  the  words,  "and  others."  In  the  original  draft  his
majesty's  fiscal  only  was  mentioned.  The  negotiations
remained  wavering  till  the  day  of  the  final  resolution,  the
Tuesday  after  S.-.  Mary  Magdalene.  '*

the  subjects  of  foreign  dominions.  But  this,
again,  it  was  impossible  to  obtain  from  the
emperor.  The  principal  motive  which  he
used  to  overcome  the  objections  of  the  legate,
was,  that  he  put  a  check  to  Protestantism  by
means  of  this  treaty. §  The  second  demand
was,  in  fact,  the  same  which  the  city  cantons
of  Switzerland  had  made,  —  the  same  which
had  led  to  war  in  that  country,  and  to  such
disastrous  consequences.  Luther  himself  said
that  it  could  not  be  complied  with  by  their
opponents;  could  it  be  hoped,  for  example,
that  Duke  George  would  freely  admit  the
evangehcal  doctrine  into  Leipsig?  Impos-
sible ;  —  they,  on  their  side,  would  not  permit
neighbouring  princes  to  interfere  in  the  inter-
nal affairs  of  their  country.  Luther  was,  as
we  have  seen,  a  faithful  ally  of  the  territorial
power  of  the  princes.  His  conception  of  the
empire  likewise  prevented  his  approving  such
a  demand.  He  said  it  was  as  if  they,  the
Protestants,  wanted  to  take  advantage  of  the
emperor;  Jhat  is  to  say,  to  usurp  an  influence
over  the  conduct  of  public  affairs,  in  conse-
quence of  the  necessity  for  defence.  He  was
rather  comforted  that  "the  emperor,  the  su-
preme authority  ordained  of  God,  should  so
graciously  offer  to  make  peace,  and  give  such
clement  and  liberal  commands  for  that  end."
"I  esteem  it  no  otherwise,"  says  he,  '-than
that  God  held  out  his  hand  to  us."  '  That  the
progress  of  the  evangelical  faith  was  thus  im-
peded, disquieted  him  little;  he  said,  "every-
body must  believe  at  his  own  peril ;"  that  is,
must  be -Sufficiently  strong  in  his  belief  to  en-
counter v/hatever  dangers  it  might  subject
him  to. II  Elector  John  was  entirely  of  the
same  opinion;  it  was  in  harmony  with  the
purely  defensive  attitude  he  had  assumed
from  the  first ;  his  ruling  sentiment  was,  the
necessity  for  a  perfect  justification  of  all  he
did  by  his  own  conscience.  He  did  not  suffer
himself  to  be  carried  away  by  the  brilliant
extension  of  the  league,  at  the  head  of  which
he  stood,  to  swerve  from  the  principles  on
which  it  was  originally  founded.  He,  too,
thought,  like  Luther,  that  they  ought  not  to
give  up  the  present  good,  the  greatest  on
earth — peace,  —  for  the  sake  of  a  contingent
addition  to  their  numbers.  And  accordingly
he  did  not  allow  any  limiting  clause  to  be  in-
serted in  the  treaty, — he  bound  himself  by  no
promise  for  the  future, — except  that  those
States  alone  should  be  admitted  into  it,  who
belonged  to  the  league,  including  Markgrave
George  and  Nürnberg;  all  the  princes  and
States,  in  short,  with  whom  we  are  already
familiar,  and  who  had  been  joined  by  Nord-
hausen  and  Hamburg.  The  Landgrave  of
Hessen,  who  entertained  the  contrary  opir
nion,  was  at  first  not  contented,  but  he  after-
wards acquiesced. IF

§  Granvella  urged  the  "  inconvenient  irremediable,  sans
quelque  traite  pour  (?)  infecter  le  reste  de  la  chretient6,
comme  I'experience  I'a  evidemment  demontre."— Bucholtz,
ix.  p.  32.

|(  Reflections  of  Luther  and  Justus  Jonas.  De  Wette,
iv.  339.  In  his  somewhat  later  reflections  he  reminds  his
prince,  in  his  relations  with  his  neighbours,  of  the  prin-
ciple, quod  tibi  non  vis  fieri,  alteri  ne  feceris.

IT  Opinion  of  his  theologians,  Neudecker  Urkk.  199.

Chap.  VI.

RECESS  OF  1532.

405

It  may  be  regarded  as  a  peculiar  favour  of
Providence,  that  the  aged  Elector  of  Saxony
lived  to  witness  these  days  of  peace.  We
have  seen  above  how  much  of  the  merit  of
founding  the  evangelical  church  was  due  to
this  simple-hearted  man.  He  now  enjoyed
great  consideration  in  the  empire.  Even  a
member  of  the  imperial  court  (Count  Nuenar)
describes  him  as  "  the  one  father  of  the  Ger-
man land  in  things  human  and  divine."*  But
his  mind  was  too  much  imbued  with  the  sen-
timents of  a  prince  of  the  empi/e,  to  be  satis-
fied so  long  as  he  was  at  variance  with  the
emperor.  It  formed  part  of  the  fulfilment  of
his  destiny,  to  have  regained  the  friendship
of  his  chief;  to  have  lived  to  see  the  legality
of  the  position  he  had  taken  up  with  regard
to  the  supreme  power,  acknowledged,  after  it
had  been  so  strenuously  denied;  and  thus  to
have  made  a  most  important  step  towards  the
permanence  of  the  religious  establishment  of
which  he  was  the  founder.  In  August,  both
the  public  declarations  and  the  private  assur-
ances of  the  emperor  appeared.  Shortly  after-
wards, when  the  elector  had  been  once  more
taking  the  pleasure  of  the  chase,  with  his  two
daughters  and  the  fugitive  Electress  of  Bran-
denburg, and  had  come  back  in  a  very  cheer-
ful mood,  he  was  struck  with  sudden  death
by  apoplexy.  ^'  He  who  can  trust  on  God,"
says  Luther,  in  the  epitaph  he  wrote  for  his
master  and  friend,  ^-abides  in  security  and
peace."

Meanwhile,  however,  the  emperor,  pressed
by  necessity,  determined  to  make  concessions
to  the  Protestants,  which  had  neither  been
suggested  nor  approved  by  the  majority ;  a
line  of  conduct  which  altered  his  whole  posi-
tion. The  experiment  which  he  had  made  in
Augsburg  —  to  govern  with  the  majority  —  he
now  relinquished;  while  the  majority,  seeing
that  they  did  not  find  in  him  the  support  they
expected,  raised  such  an  opposition  to  him  at
the  diet  of  Regensburg  as  he  had  never  before
experienced.  The  States  made  reproachful
representations  concerning  his  entire  system
of  government ; — the  delays  of  business ;  the
appointment  of  foreigners,  even  to  places  in
the  chancery ;  the  arrears  of  his  share  of  the
salaries  of  the  Imperial  Chamber;  his  arbi-
trary conduct  towards  Wiirtenberg,  Maastricht
(which  he  was  accordingly  compelled  to  sepa-
rate from  Brabant  and  reinstate  in  its  ancient
liberties),  and  Utrecht. t Not  only  did  he  not

*  William  von  Nuenar  to  .John  Frederic,  11th  June  (W.
A.),  "  Dann  wir  haben  lej'der  keynen  mynschen,  den  wir
für  ein  vaTer  des  duytschen  Vaterlandes  in  jijotlichen  und
menschlichen  Sachen  achten  mögen,  denn  allein  U.  F.  G.
Herr  Vater  und  U.  F.  G.,  wir  wollen  widder  mit  gfotlicher
Hülfe  um  U.  F.  G.  stan."  «See.  —  "  For  unhappily  we  have
no  man  v/hom  we  can  reverence  and  respect  as  a  father
of  the  German  fatherland  in  divine  and  human  things,
suve  only  Y.  P.  Grace's  father,  and  Y.  P.  G.:  we  will
again,  with  the  divine  help,  stand  around  Y.  P.  Grace,"
<&c.

t  Letter  from  Fürstenbersr,  8th  July.  The  emperor  re-
plied to  a  reproach  of  this  kind,  that  the  suggestion  was
wholly  "untimely  and  inconsiderate,  and,  aslt  appeared
to  H.  iVT.,  not  made  with  the  knowledge  of  all  the  States;
all  in  biting  and  sharp  words."  Fürstenberg  finds  the  re-
proaches very  just ;  but  he  was  not  pleased  at  them,  be-
cause they  were  likely  to  irritate  the  emperor,  who  had
'eft  his  wife  and  child  in  order  to  attend  to  the  business
of  the  empire.

dare  to  publish  the  assurances  above  men-
tioned in  favour  of  the  Protestants,  but  he
was  compelled,  in  direct  contradiction  with
them,  to  confirm  the  decrees  "which  had  been
passed  at  the  recent  visitation  of  the  Imperial
Chamber,  wherein  the  execution  of  the  recess
of  Augsburg  v/as  enjoined  afresh.  Nay,  the
majority  even  held  out  a  sort  of  distant  menace
of  the  possibihty  of  a  coalition  of  the  two  reli-
gious parties  against  him.  On  reading  in  the
recess  of  the  empire,  that  the  States  vehe-
niently  pressed  for  a  council,  we  are  not  at
first  particularly  struck  with  the  fact ;  but  if
we  weigh  these  words  with  greater  attention,
and  mark  their  origin,  we  shall  see  its  vast
importance.  In  the  summer  of  1531,  Bavaria
and  Hessen  had  jointly  determined  upon  this
point:  at  a  meeting  between  Landgrave  Philip
and  Dr.  Leonhard  von  Eck,  at  Giessen,  it  had
been  determined  that,  if  the  pope  deferred  the
council  longer,  they  would  urge  the  emperor
to  summon  one  of  his  own  authority ;  if  the
emperor  also,  from  one  cause  or  another,  ne-
glected to  convoke  it,  an  assembly  of  the
States  should  be  called  to  discuss  the  means
of  restoring  the  unity  of  religion  and  of  putting
a  stop  to  crime. I  It  is  obvious  that  the  oppo-
sition to  the  emperor  was  one  means  of  unitnig
two  leaders  of  the  hostile  parties  in  this  deter-
mination; still  the  fact  is  very  extraordinary^
It  was,  indeed,  not  with  the  emperor's  good
will  that  he  promised,  in  the  recess  of  Regens-
burg, that  if  the  general  council  was  not  con-
voked by  the  pope  within  six  months,  and
was  not  actually  held  within  a  year,  he  would
summon  an  assembly  of  the  empire,  to  delibe-
rate on  the  evils  that  afiiicted  the  German  na-
tion generally,  and  on  the  means  of  removing
them.  He  distinctly  felt  that  this  resolution
was  forced  upon  him,  and  might  become  dan-
gerous. And,  indeed,  he  avoided  sum.moning
another  diet  for  eight  yearS;  from  the  fear  that
it  should  constitute  itself  a  national  assembly,
and  pass  decrees  on  religious  affairs  entirely
at  variance  with  his  own.§

Such  was  now  the  aspect  of  things  in  Ger-
many. Not  only  did  the  two  religious  parties
stand  confronted  in  a  hostile  attitude,  but  new
divisions  had  broken  out  in  their  own  ranks.
The  Catholic  majority  was  discontented  with
the  emperor ;  while  the  Landgrave  of  Hessen
exchanged  sarcastic,  nay,  insulting  letters  with
the  electoral  prince,  John  Frederic  of  Saxony,
who  now  filled  the  place  of  his  father. ||  Hes-
sen and  Bavaria,  on  the  other  hand,  had  formed
a  closer  political  connexion ;  but  this  could  lead
to  no  result,  since  the  contrast  between  the  two
religious  tendencies  was  nowhere  so  strongly
exhibited as  in the persons of  these two

X  Correspondence  in  the  Weim.  Arch.  ;  e-'iitracts  thert
from,  and  article  of  the  agreement  of  Giessen  in  the  Ap-
pendix.

§  Declaration  of  the  emperor  to  the  pope,  in  the  year
1539.  Rainaldus,  x.xi.  104.  Rem  esse  periculi  pleiiam,
alia  indicere  comitia,  perpensa  maxime  sanctione  ordi-
num  imperii, — ut  Pp.  Clemens  de  convocando  concilio  ro-
garetur,  quo  non  convocato  Caesar  iliud  convocaret,  — ac
si  huic  muneri  is  deesset,  ut  concilium  nationale  coge-
rent.

11  There  is  a  whole  roll  of  these  letters  copied  in  the
W.A.

406

SULEIMAN  IN  HUNGARY.

Book  VI.

princes.  The  emperor  and  Saxony  had  framed
an  accommodation  ;  but  it  was  easy  to  foresee
what  difficulties  would  attend  its  execution.

The  emperor  no  longer  appeared,  as  at
Augsburg,  in  the  full  vigour  to  be  expected
from  his  time  of  life.  He  was  ill  the  whole
summer;  a  hurt  in  the  leg,  which  he  got  by  a
fall  while  hunting  the  wolf,  took  so  danoerous
a  turn,  that  his  physicians  thought  his  thigh
must  be  amputated,  and  one  night  the  sacra-
ments were  administered  to  him.  The  injury
M^as"  aftei'wards  renewed  by  the  part  he  im-
prudently took  in  a  procession,  and  perhaps
by  excesses  of  another  kind  ;  during  the  diet.
he  repaired  to  the  baths  of  Abach  in  the  hope
of  a  cure,  and  was  sometimes  inaccessible
even  to  his  brother.  When  the  States  went  to
announce  to  him  that  the  succours  for  the
Turkish  M-ar  were  granted,  they  found  him  in
his  bedroom,  sitting  on  a  wooden  bench  with-
out cushions,  in  the  plainest  dress,  with  a
green  bough  in  his  hand,  with  which  he  was
brushing  away  the  flies;  '^  in  his  vest,"  says
the  Frankfurt  ambassador,  "  with  so  lowly  an
air,  that  the  meanest  servant  could  not  bear
himself  so  humbly."*

CAMPAIGN  AGAINST  THE  TURKS.

And  this  feeble  and  sickly  emperor,  —  this
empire  torn  by  such  deep-rooted  dissensions, —
were  now  to  sustain  the  attack  of  the  mighty
chief  of  the  Ottomans,  at  the  head  of  his
countless  bands.  How  difi^erent  was  his  ap-
pearance !  When  Ferdinand's  ambassadors
had  audience  of  him,  not  far  from  Belgrade,
they  were  first  conducted  far  and  wide  through
the  camp,  both  of  the  foot  and  horse  soldiers,
splendidly  accoutred  ;  then  through  the  ranks
of  the  Janissaries,  who  met  them  with  a  some-
what insolent  air,  until  they  were  received  near
the  emperor's  tent  with  trumpets  and  clarions,
and  at  length  were  permitted  to  enter  and  to
behold  the  lord  of  all  these  armies  in  his
splendour,  sitting  on  a  golden  throne:  near
him  was  a  splendid  crown,-  and  before  him,
on  the  pillars  of  the  throne,  two  magnificent
sabres  in  scabbards  inlaid  with  mother-of-
pearl,  and  a  richly  ornamented  bow  and
quiver.  The  ambassadors  valued  the  jewels
they  saw  at  1,200,000  ducats.  On  the  20th
July,  the  Turkish  army  crossed  the  Drave
over  twelve  bridges  of  boats  in  the  neighbour-
hood of  Essek.  Suleiman  marched  through
Hungary,  as  if  it  had  been  his  own  undis-
puted territory.  The  castles  which  he  passed
sent  out  their  keys  to  meet  him.  He  punished
the  magnates  who  had  deserted  Zapolya ;  his
approach  struck  terror  into  the  others,  and
many  of  those  who  had  remained  true  to  Fer-
dinand, and  now  saw  themselves  abandoned,
fell  off  from  the  house  of  Austria.

Germany  now  began  to  make  serious  pre-
parations for  defence.

The  first  who  appeared  in  the  field,  even
before  the  negotiations  had  come  to  an  end,

*  Fürstenberg,  Tuesday  after  Whitsuntide,  and  in  other
letters. Ferdinand  to Maria, 3d  April,  1532. Gevay,

were  the  Niirnbergers.  They  were  bound
to  furnish  only  one/company;  but  "for  the
honour  of  the  empire  and  the  weal  of  Christ-
endom" they  had  equipped  two;  altogether
eight  hundred  men,  among  whom  two  hundred
w^ere  armed  with  matchlocks  and  fifty  with
arquebuses.  Meanwhile,  they,~with  some  of
their  neighbours,  recruited  a  hundred  reiters
in  Brunswick  (among  whom  we  find  a  Kamp,
a  Biirsberg,  and  a  Mimchhausen),  who  were
hospitably  received  on  their  arrival  in  the  city,
furnished  with  beer,_^wine  and  oats,  and  on  the
21st  of  August,  took  their  way  against  the
enemy  under  Sebastian  von  Jessen  and  Martin
Pfinzing.  Besides  this,  Nürnberg  gave  the
emperor  fifteen  pieces  of  heavy  artillery,  175
hundred-weight  of  powder,  1000  lafices  for  the
infantry,  200  coats  of  armour  for  the  heralds,
and  a  large  stock  of  flour. t  Such  were  the
munificent  contributions  of  a  single  city,  and
all  the  others  vied  with  Nürnberg.  The  im-
perial deputy,  who  carried  to  Ulm  the  requi-
sition to  prepare  for  war,  had  not  returned  to
his  quarters,  when  he  heard  the  sound  of  the
drum,  calling  the  people  to  arms.  Augsburg
instantly  declared  itself  ready  to  send  all  its
artillery  to  Vienna.  It  appears  from  a  letter
of  the  Frankfurt  envoy,  that  the  firmness  with
which  the  emperor  had  resisted  the  majority,
had  produced  a  great  impression  on  the  cities. t
For  a  moment,  the  Protestants  raised  the  ques-
tion, whether  it  would  not  be  expedient  to
keep  together,  and  to  fight  under  a  captain  of
their  own;  but  this  suggestion  was  speedily
dismissed;  it  would  have  involved  a  fresh
division,  and  they  chose  rather  to  serve  ac-
cording to  the  order  of  the  circles.  Meet-
ings were  held  in  all  the  circles  at  which  a
captain  was  nominated,  to  whom  each  State
in  the  circle  delivered  a  list  of  the  men  it  in-
tended to  furnish.  It  was  his  business  to  see
that  the  complement  was  actually  under  arms,
whom  it  admonished  to  be  obedient  to  their
appointed  leader.  He  had  also  the  right  to
fill  all  offices  with  the  most  capable  men  of
the  circle.  The  persons  from  whom  he  was
to  receive  his  pay  were  determined,  and  were
in  return  to  enjoy  certain  privileges. §  In  the
circle  of  Lower  Saxony,  doubtless  on  account
of  the  daily  increasing  religious  dissensions^  it
was  found  impossible  to  come  to  a  unanimous
choice  of  a  captain;  the  emperor,  therefore,
in  virtue  of  the  right  which  in  this  case  de-
volved upon  him,  nominated  the  young  Mark-
grave  Joachim  of  Brandenburg.  At  the  be-
ginning of  August,  the  whole  empire  was  in  a
state  of  warlike  preparation.  "Daily,"  says
Cardinal  Campeggi,  in  a  letter  of  the  8th,
"  do  we  see  the  finest  companies  of  horse  and

t  Müllner's  Annals  :  "all  this  was  destined  to  the  for-
tification and  provisioning  of  the  city  of  Vienna."

J  "Es  erwindet  fürwahr  nicht  an  Ks.  Mt.  und  wird  I.
Mt.  gnedig  Gemüt  und  Herz  auch  von  den  Städten  der-
massen  gespürt,  dass  sie  I.  Mt.  mehr  als  ihre  gebührliche
Hülfe  senden."—"  There  will  truly  be  nothing  wanting  to
your  I.  M.,  and  your  1.  Majesty's  gracious  mind  and  heart
are  so  understood  by  the  cities  that  they  send  more  than
their  proper  contingent."

§  Proceedings  of  the  meeting  of  the  circle  of  the  Upper
Rhine,  at  which  Philip  von  Dhun  was  appointed.  Frank-
furt Records.

VI.

SIEGE  OF  GÜNZ.

407

foot  pass  through  Regensburg ;  they  go  forth
in  high  spirits,  and  doubt  not  of  victory."
Tlie  emperor,  too,  was  full  of  courage.  He
remarked,  that  he  could  only  be  the  gainer  in
this  war,  whether  he  were  the  victor  or  the
vanquished.  Were  he  conquered,  he  would
leave  behind  him  an  illustrious  name,  and
secure  his  entrance  into  paradise;  if  he  were
victorious,  he  would  not  only  gain  favour  in
the  sight  of  God,  but  perhaps  extend  the  em-
pire to  its  ancient  limits,  live  glorious  on  earth,
and  bequeath  a  great  name  to  posterity,*  He
appeared  to  wish  nothing  more  earnestly  than
to  meet  his  adversary  face  to  face.

Meanwhile  a  most  glorious,  not  to  say  mar-
vellous, feat  of  arms  had  already  been  achieved
in  Hungary.

We  are  acquainted  with  the  name  of  Nicho-
las Jurischitz,  one  of  the  two  ambassadors  of
King  Ferdinand  to  the  sultan,  in  1530.  1531.
At  that  time,  when  the  envoys  fomid  all  nego-
tiations fruitless,  they  said  they  saw  that  Hun-
gary was  destined  to  be  the  grave  both  of
Turks  and  Christians.  Jurischitz  now  seemed
resolved  to  prove  the  truth  of  this  prediction.
He  was  just  about  to  leave  the  city  and  castle
of  Günz  (where  he  filled  the  office  of  captain)
to  a  lieutenant,  and  t(?  join  his  sovereign  with
a  small  band  of  ten  heavy  and  twenty  light
horsemen,  when  the  approach  of  the  Turks
filled  the  town  with  crowds  of  fugitives.  He
determined  to  remain,  to  afford  these  unhappy
people  at  least  a  momentary  defence,  and  to
arrest  the  progress  of  the  great  army  for  a  few
days.  He  never  entertained  a  hope  of  making
any  successful  resistance  to  such  an  enemy.
'■'I  had  made  up  my  mind,"  says  he.  "  to  cer-
tain death."  The  Turks  appeared  in  full
force  and  began  the  siege  in  the  customary
manner ;  planted  their  cannon  on  the  nearest
heights,  dug  mines  and  tried  to  enter  by  the
breaches.  Jurischitz  had  no  other  soldiers
than  his  thirty  reiters,  the  rest  were  all  inhab-
itants of  'the  town,  or  fugitive  peasants;  they
might  amount  to  about  seven  hundred  in  all.
Yet  they  drove  back  the  Turkish  storming
parties  eleven  times,  and  made  that  dauntless
resistance  which  nothing  but  the  determina-
tion rather  to  die  than  surrender,  could  have
inspired.  At  length,  however — as  was  inevita-
ble—all was  vain.  The  Turks  had  thrown  up
two  great  heaps  of  rubbish  to  the  height  of
the  wall;  on  one  of  these  they  planted  their
largest  guns,  which  now  commanded  the  walls,
and  under  cover  of  their  fire  a  broad  way
could  be  made  from  the  other  to  the  Vvall.
The  assault  thus  prepared  was  made  on  the
28lh  of  August  by  Janissaries  and  horsemen;
and  it  was  impossible,  as  may  easily  be  ima-
gined, to  m.ake  any  resistance  to  such  a  supe-
riority both  of  numbers  and  position.  The
besieged  were  soon  driven  into  their  last  en-
trenchment, where  they  still  maintained  the
fig-ht,  though  with  failing  strength; already

*  NiccoloTiepoIo,  Relatione  di  1533:  11  che  diceva  sem-
pre.  che  si  vedeva  non  solameiite  pronto  a  q.uesta  im-
presa,  ina  quasi  arder  di  desiderio  che  Ji  venjsse  occa-
sione  di  sorta  che  potesse  honestamente  esponere  la
persona  sua  a  cal  fortuna.

the  Turkish  banner  floated  from  eight  different
points  on  the  walls.  Jurischitz  expected  no-
thing but  death.  '-'I  rejoice,"  said  he,  ••that
God's  grace  hath  appointed  me  so  honourable
an  end.'"  But  he  was  reserved  for  a  wondrous
deliverance.  The  defenceless  fugitives — wo-
men, children  and  aged  men — now  beheld
themselves  given  over  to  the  fury  of  their  ter-
rible and  barbarous  foe.  At  the  moment  when
he  Mas  rushing  upon  them  they  uttered  a  cry,
in  which  the  imploring  appearto  Heaven  was
blended  with  the  shriek  of  despair;  that
piercing  cry  udiich  nature  forces  unconsciously
from  the  living  creature  when  threatened  with
inevitable  destruction.  If  this  can  be  called
a  prayer,  never  was  prayer  more  instantly
heard.  The  conquering  Ottomans  recoiled
with  alarm  from  the  terrific  sound.  The  re-
sistance they  had  encountered  had  long  ap-
peared to  them  almost  miraculous,  and  they
now  thought  they  saw  fresh  troops  issue  from
every  house;  they  imagined  they  beheld  m
the  air  a  knight  in  full  harness,  brandishing
his  sword  at  them  with  menacing  gestures.
They  retreated.  -The  Almighty  God,"  ex-
cla^imed  Jurischitz,  "has  visibly  saved  us.'-t

We  might  liken  this  to  the  Delphic  god  who
opposed  the  irruption  of  the  Gauls  into  Greece  j
to  the  apparition  which  called  aloud  to  Drusus,
in  the  centre  of  Germany,  '-'Thus  far,  and  no
farther;"  or  to  other  of  those  sudden  turns  of
fortune  which,  at  the  mom^ent  of  their  occur-
rence, have  impressed  the  minds  of  men  with
a  sense  of  the  presence  of  a  higher  Power
(under  whatever  form  they  conceived  it); —
but  we  will  not  venture  into  these  regions  ;  it
is  enough  for  us  to  say  that  dauntless  valour
and  complete  self-devotion  were  crowned  with
their  usual  success.

Suleiman  resolved  to  leave  his  brave  enemy,
who  could  not  have  held  out  one  hour  longer,
under  a  guard,  and  to  march  onward.

In  the  interval,  however,  the  emperor  had
had  time  to  collect  his  forces.  He  himself  had
raised  12.000  landskneqhts,  who  had  mustered
in  the  neighbourhood  of  Augsburg.  Spanish
grandees  had  come  to  win  honour  under  the
eye  of  their  emperor,  in  the  war  against  the
infidels.  The  Duke  of  Ferrara  had  sent  a
hundred  huomini  d'  armi.  Other  Italians  ar-
rived, under  the  conduct  of  the  young  Ippolito
de'  Medici,  nephew  of  Pope  Clement  VII.
King  Ferdinand's  hereditary  domains  had  done
their  best,  and  no  means  were  neglected  to
raise  money;  he  had  even  applied  to  several
Netherland  nobles,  and  to  devout  rich  women,
urging  that  no  one  could  better  employ  his
wealth  than  in  the  defence  of  Christendom. |:
But  the  militia  of  the  empire  formed  ^the
main  strength  of  his  army.  The  great  muster
took  place  in  the  Tulner  field,  near  Vienna.
The  numbers  cannot  be  precisely  ascertained  ;
the  most  credible  accounts  vary  from  76,000
to  86,000  men.  On  one  point,  however,  they
are  all  agreed ; — that  it  was  the  finest  army

t  Letter  from  Jurischitz  in  Gobel's  Beiträgen,  p.  303.—
Also  what  Jovius  heard  from  his  own  lips,  Üb.  xsx.  p.
105. Sepulveda,  x.  17—23.

I  Letter  from  Ferdinand  to  Maria. Gevay,  ii.  23.

408

SULEIMAN'S  RETREAT.

Book

vfr

that  had  been  seen  in  Christendom  for  centu-
ries. It  combined  the  qualities  which  had
won  the  great  victories  in  Italy;  German
strength  and  discipline,  Italian  activity,  and
the  dogged  craftiness  of  the  Spaniards.  But
the  German  ingredient  was  by  far  the  largest.

Suleiman  had  advanced  in  the  expectation
that  the  divisions  which  reigned  in  Christen-
dom, and  especially  in  Germany,  would  tie
the  emperor's  hands  and  render  a  vigorous
and  effective  resistance  impossible.  When  he
saw  before  him  so  numerous  and  well-appointed
an  army,  he  had  not  the  courage  (which  he
had  so  often  vaunted)  to  seek  them  in  the
field.

Despatching  his  Akindschi,  15,000  in  num-
ber, towards  Austria,  he  himself  marched  into
Styria  and  appeared  before  Gratz.^'  The
Akindschi  were  light  troops,  commanded  by  a
chief,  the  crest  of  whose  helmet  was  a  vulture
— the  symbol  of  swiftness  and  rapacity.  They
were,  however,  driven  by  one  band  of  Germans
into  the  hands  of  another,  and  almost  annihi-
lated ;  Gratz  defended  itself,  and,  in  the  mean
time,  tidings  arrived  that  Doria  had  obtained
signal  successes  over  Zai-beg  in  the  Ionian
seas.  Suleiman  recognised  the  ascendancy
of  the  star  of  his  rival,  and  determined  to
withdraw  from  so  perilous  a  struggle  by  a
rapid  retreat. f

The  emperor  had,  as  we  have  observed,
wished  to  give  battle  to  the  enemy  \  for  a  de-
cisive victory  might  have  restored  Hungary  to
his  brother.  But  he  was  satisfied  with  this
less  brilhant  result.  "  God's  grace  has  granted
us  the  glory  and  the  happiness,"  he  writes  to
the  pope,  "to  have  put  the  common  enemy  of
Christendom  to  flight,  and  to  have  averted  the
mischief  which  he  designed  to  inflict  on  us. "I
He  was  fully  sensible  that  this  was  not  a  mere
momaentary  advantage.  It  was  a  gain  forever,
that  the  fear  of  the  warlike  array  of  the  Ger-
mans,— the  impression  of  their  superior  force,
had  rendered  the  sultan  averse  to  engage  in
the  struggle,  and  had  determined  him  fo  re-
treat.

Doria,  too,  had  gained  brilliant  advantages
for  the  emperor.  He  had  driven  the  Ottoman
squadron  out  of  the  Ionian  seas,  pursued  them
beyond  Cerigo,  and  taken  Coron,  Patras  and
the  Dardanelles  in  rapid  succession.  Large
cannon  with  Arabic  inscriptions  were  brought
to  Genoa,  and  placed  in  the  Doria  chapel  on
the  Molo.§

The  satisfaction  of  King  Ferdinand  was  far
less  complete  than  that  of  his  brother.  He
had  really  hoped  to  recover  Hungary — Bel-
grade not  excepted,  in  the  full  tide  of  victory.
But  the  troops  thought  they  had  done  enough
in  having  repulsed  the  enemy  from  the  fron-
tiers of  Germany.  The  captains  produced
their  instructions,  in  which  no  mention  was

*  True  description  of  the  second  expedition  into  Austria.
From  an  old  Nürnberg  printed  paper  of  1539,  in  Göhei's
Beiträgen,  p.  309.  The  writing  is  taken  from  the  cor-
respondence of  the  Count  Palatine.

t  Schartlins  Lebensbeschreibung,  p.  35.  Hammer,  iii.
p.  118.

X  Sandoval,  ii.

§  Jovius,  lib.  xxxi. Historia  del  Guazzo,  p.  124.

made  of  the  conquest  of  Hungary.  The  com-
mander-in-chief. Count  Palatine  Frederic,  re-
fused to  advance.  The  main  cause  of  this
was,  that  Ferdinand  had  lost  the  favour  of  the
nation  by  the  zeal  he  had  evinced  for  the
Papacy ;  the  people  would  make  no  conquests
for  him.  They  wished  rather  to  see  him
weaker  than  stronger,  as  soon  became  evident.

CHAPTER  VII.

IXFLUEXCE  OF  FRAXCE. RESTORATION  OF  WUß-
TEN BERG.

1533,  1534.

It  had  appeared  as  if  Latin  Christendom,
united  under  the  emperor  and  the  pope,  were
about  to  fall  with  all  its  weight  upon  the  se-
ceders  from  its  body,  and  to  annihilate  them.

Instead  of  this,  however,  it  happened  that
one  of  its  chiefs  was  compelled,  in  order  to
ward  off  the  attack  of  the  powerful  foes  who
more  immediately  threatened  himself  and  his
house,  to  come  to  terms  with  the  Protestants,
and  to  grant  them  temporary  immunity.  The
positive  concession  was  not  the  only  thing  they
gained  •  it  was  a  no  less  important  advantage
to  them  to  be  thus  associated  in  the  great  na-
tional enterprise,  and  to  contribute  their  full
share  to  the  defence  of  their  common  father-
land.

But  meanwhile  the  intestine  discords  which
we  have  noticed  had  broken  out  afresh  among
those  from  whom  the  Protestants  had  the  most
to  fear.

King  Francis  was  unquestionably  bound  by
treaties  to  assist  the  house  of  Austria  against
the  Turks;  but  his  pride  forbade  him  to  do
this  in  the  manner  the  emperor  desired.
Francis  offered  to  attack  the  Turks  in  Egypt ;
but  the  imperiahsts  suspected  that  his  real
purpose  was,  to  arm  under  this  pretext,  and
then  to  fall  on  Genoa  and  Naples ;  and  they
utterly  refused  his  offer. Ii

We  have  observed  with  what  vehemence
he  rejected  the  proposal  for  a  combined  war
against  Switzerland.

In  the  matter  of  the  council,  too,  his  answer
was  evasive.  He  was  much  more  anxious  for
the  favour  of  the  pope,  who  sought  to  avoid,
than  for  the  friendship  of  the  emperor,  who
wished  to  convoke  it. IT

For  he  never  for  a  moment  thought  of  re-
garding the  concessions  which  he  had  been
forced  to  make  in  Cambray  (especially  the
renunciation  of  all  claim  to  Genoa  and  JNlilan),
as  definitive.  He  regarded  these  possessions
as  his  own  propert}*,  of  which  he  had  no  right

|(  Letter  from  A.  de  Burffo  to  Ferdinand.  Rome,  2d
March,  1531. Bucholtz,  ix.  90.

*ir  Gregorio  Casali  au  Grand  Maistre,  5  Maggio,  1531,
Le  Grand  Histoire  du  Divorce,  iii.  542.  ttuesta  corle  fin
adesso  e  stata  in  gran  timore  del  concilio,  hora  sono  al-
quanto  assicurati,  si  per  le  ultime  letieredell'  imperatore,
die  sono  state  meno  furiose  delle  altre,  si  anche  per  quelle
si  spera  in  voi  altri.

Jhap.  Vir.

SCHEMES  OF  CLEMENT  VII.

409

,  to  rob  his  ohildreiij  and  he  felt  his  honour
^  ^  wounded  as  often  as  he  thought  he  had  lost
them.

An  alhance  with  the  pope  seemed  to  him
the  only  means  for  their  recovery.

From  day  to  day  new  differences  broke  cut
between  the  pope  and  the  emperor.

The  emperor's  earnest  importunity  for  a
council  was  very  distressing  to  the  court  of
Rome.  It  had  been  represented  to  him^  that
while  he  demanded  money  from  the  pope,  he
deprived  him  of  the  means  of  raising  it ;  since
not  a  man  was  to  be  found  who  would  ad-
vance a  loan  on  ecclesiastical  revenues,  the
reduction  of  which  was  expected  from  the
council.  Besides  this,  Clement  VII.  felt  him-
self offended  that  so  little  respect  was  shown
to  his  recommendations ;  that,  in  the  granting
of  vacant  benefices,  less  attention  was  paid  to
the  interest  of  his  nephew,  Ippolito,  than  he
had  anticipated ;  that  Cardinal  Colonna,  a
sworn  enemy  of  the  court  of  Rome,  was  left
at  full  liberty  to  do  as  he  pleased  in  Naples.
But  what  chiefly  inflamed  the  old  resentment
was,  the  emperor's  decision  in  the  affair  of
Ferrara.  The  emperor  had  promised  the
pope,  that  if  he  saw  the  right  was  not  on  the
side  of  his  holiness,  he  would  pronounce  no
decision  at  all.  Nevertheless,  he  nov\^  de-
cided in  favour  of  Ferrara.  "This,"  says  a
confidant  of  the  pope,  '-has  wounded  his  holi-
ness's  heart."— ^■' Would  to  God,"  exclaims
the  charge  d'affaires  of  King  Ferdinand,  '-that
the  emperor  had  not  pronounced  that  sen-
tence !"  He  thougtit  he  observed  that  the
imperial  party  at  court  and  in  the  sacred  col-
■ lege  had  been  weakened  by  it.*

The  King  of  France,  on  the  other  hand,  had
proposed  to  the  pope  the  most  honourable
alliance  that  had  ever  been  conferred  on  a
papal  house.  He  offered  the  hand  of  his  son,
Henry  of  Orleans,  whose  prospect  of  the  throne
of  France  was  by  no  means  remote  (and  who,
in  fact,  subsequently  occupied  it),  to  the  pope's
niece,  Catharine  de  Medici.

The  value  attached  to  this  connexion  by  the
pope  may  be  inferred  from  the  treaty  which
he  concluded  on  the  9th  of  June,  1531.

The  king's  demands  were  by  no  means
humble;  above  all,  the  creation  of  a  princi-
pality for  the  young  couple,  consisting  of  Pisa
and  Leghorn,  Reggio,  Modena,  Rubiera,  Par-
ma, and  Piacenza ;  with  these,  Urbino,  which
had  for  a  time  belonged  to  Cauiarine's  father
—  nay,  even  Milan  and  Genoa,  were  to  be
united.  The  pope  was  to  promise  his  aid  to
reconquer  these  districts.!  \

The  pope  entered  earnestly  into  the  nego-
tiations. In  the  presence  of  the  French  am-
bassadors. Cardinal  Grammont  and  the  Duke
of  Albany,  he  declared  himself  ready,  as  soon
as  the  marriage  should  be  concluded,  to  cede
Pisa,  Leghorn,  Modena,  Reggio,  and  Rubiera,
to  the  young  couple  j  and  whenever  he  and

*  A.  de  Biirgo,  8th  June,  1531,  p.  99.

t  Articles  secrets  of  the  marriage  treaty,  signed,  like
that,  on  the  21th  April.  Among  other  demands  was,
"Ayde  et  secours  audit  futur  epoux  pour  luy  ayder  ä  re-
couvrer  I'etat  et  duche  de  Milan  et  la  seigneurie  de  Gen-
uas, qui  luy  appartiennent."

52  2?

the  king  sliould  deem  it  practicable  and  expe-
dient, Parma  and  Piacenza ;  for  which,  how-
ever, the  king  was  to  grant  compensation  to
the  church,  to  be  determined  by  commission-
ers appointed  by  both  parties.  He  expressed
himself  very  willing  to  contribute  his  share
to  the  reconquest  of  Urbino.  Concerning  Ge-
noa and  Milan,  he  gave  no  decisive  answer.
But  he  declared  that  he  found  the  secret
articles,  in  which  this  demand  was  contained,
generally  reasonable  and  just,  and  desired
their  execution  as  soon  as  a  good  opportunity
should  present  itself. t

It  is  evident  how  close  was  the  common  in-
terest thus  established  between  the  king  and
the  pope,  in  the  entire  reconstitution  of  Italy,
and  how  totally  this  interest  was  at  variance
with  that  of  the  emperor.

It  followed,  of  course,  that  the  pope  kept
his  engagements  with  France  as  secret  as
possible.

In  August,  1531,  he  once  ventured  to  say  to
the  Austrian  minister  plenipotentiary,  that  he
held  it  to  be  absolutely  necessary  to  do  some-
thing for  the  satisfaction  of  the  King  of  France;
he  saw  that  the  emperor  would  never  give  up
Genoa  and  JMilan,  but  would  it  not  be  possible
to  hold  out  hopes  to  that  effect,  without  really
fulfilling  them  ?§  But  the  impression  which
even  such  a  suggestion  was  calculated  to
make,  was  very  unfavourable.  At  least  the
pope  said  to  the  French  ambassador,  in  allu-
sion to  it,  that  he  saw  himself  under  the  ne-
cessity of  concealing  his  good  intentions  to-
wards France,  and  of  begging  for  delay  ;  but
that  the  French  needed  not  for  one  moment
to  doubt  of  his  dispositions.  He  several  times
admitted  in  confidence,  that  the  emperor  had
pushed  his  advantages  too  far  in  the  last
treaty,  and  that  it  were  to  be  wished  that  he
would  restore  to  the  king  his  rightful  pro-
perty. In  March,  1532,  the  ambassador  was
convinced  that  it  was  the  pope's  sincere  de-^
sire  that  the  king  should  rule  in  JMilan  and^
the  emperor  in  Naples;  then  he  would  believe
that,  placed  between  them,  he  might  enjoy
some  power. Jl

At  the  period  we  are  come  to,  we  no  longer
expect  schemes  like  those  which  all  this
weighing  of  advantages,  this  leaning  to  France,
which  he  sought  to  conceal,  at  length  led  the
pope  to  contrive.

In  Älay,  1532,  he  sent  a  proposal  to  King
Ferdinand';  to  abandon  what  he  possessed  of
Hungary  to  the  woiwode,  and  to  indemnify
himself  for  the  loss  in  Italy,  and  especially  in
the  Venetian  territory.  He  had  utterly  for-
gotten the  lessons  which  others  had  learned
from  the  war  of  the  Ligue  of  Cambray.  The
woiwode,  vv^hom  he  (though  in  the  secret  tribu-
nal of  conscience)  had  relieved  from  the  cen-
sures which  he  had  once  pronounced  against

J  N''«  St.  pere  ayant  vu  les  articles  secrets  les  a  troiives
et  trouve  tres  raisonnables.  —  MS.  Bethiine,  S541,  f.  36. —
I  found  the  article  and  declaration  in  the  King's  Library
at  Paris.

§  Burgo,  11th  August,  101.

II  Despesches  de  I'eveque  d'Auxerre,  ambassadeur  pour
le  roi  Francois  I.  pres  le  Pape  Clement,  11  Sept.,  28  Oct.,
4  Janv.,  20 'Mars. Bibl  Royale. MS.  Dupui«,  nr.  260.

410

CONFERENCE  IN  BOLOGNA,  1532.

Book:  VI.

him,  in  favour  of  the  brothers  of  Austria,  was
now  to  ally  himself  with  them  against  Venice.
The  King-  of  France  was  to  do  the  same;  and,
as  a  recompense,  was  to  have  a  part  of  the
Milanese  and  a  part  of  Piedmont.  Francesco
Sforza  was  to  be  created  Duke  of  Cremona,
and  to  be  propitiated  by  a  territory  formed
out  of  the  Milanese  and  Venetian  domains: —
m  short,  a  scheme  exactly  in  the  spirit  of  the
restless  policy  of  his  immediate  predecessor.
The  desire  to  see  the  King  of  France  once
more  povverful  in  Italy,  had  clothed  itself  in
the  most  singular  forms  in  his  mind.*

Negotiations  were  actually  set  on  foot  for
the  furtherance  of  this  project;  nor  did  it  ap-
pear utterly  out  of  the  question  to  Ferdinand's
pieu'i'otentiary,  nor  probably  to  Ferdinand
himself;  but  in  the  meantime  the  Ottoman
invasion  approached  and  demanded  exclusive
attention,  and,  while  he  was  so  occupied,  cir-
cumstances altered.

Th;'  emperor  instantly  reappeared  in  Italy.

It  may  be  true,  as  has  been  affirmed,  that
want  of  money  led  him  to  ,disraiss  his  great
army,  and  to  leave  his  brother  with  an  insuf-
ficient force:  another  motive,  however,  doubt-
less was,  that  it  was  become  extremely  urgent
for  him  to  hold  personal  communication  with
the  pope.  On  the  5th  December,  he  repaired
to  a  fresh  conference  with  him  at  Bologna.

The  affair  of  the  council  necessarily  claimed
precedence  of  all  others.  The  emperor  did
not  deceive  himself  as  to  the  pope's  desire  to
evade  it.t  But  he  probably  hoped  that  his
presence,  and  fresh  representations  of  the
state  of  things  in  Germany  (especially  the
danger  of  a  national  assembly),  Avould  extort
some  concession  from  the'pope.  The  confer-
ences began  without  delay :  the  pope  created
a  congregation  for  them,  consisting  of  Cardi-
nals Farnese,  Cesis,  and  Campeggi,  and  Alean-
der.  Archbishop  of  Brindisi,  v»-ho  held  consisto-
ries on  the  matter.  The  question  was,  whether
a  council  should  be  defiiritively  convoked,  or
Vv'hether  an  attempt  should  first  be  made  to
allay  the  pending  quarrels  between  the  Chris-
tian princes.  For  these  quarrels  were  a,lways
alleged  by  the  pope  as  the  excuse  for  his  pro-
crastination. In  the  first  consistory  the  cardi-
nals declared  for  immediate  convocation,  on
the  ground  that  the  attempt  to  effect  the  re-
concihation  alluded  to  was  too  remote  and
uncertain.  But  the  pope  deferred  receiving
the  decision  till  the  next  sitting:  and  in  this,
on  the  20th  December,  it  fell  out  in  accord-
ance with  his  wishes.  The  majority  declared,
that  until  the  reconciliation  was  effected,  the
council  could  not  be  held,  nor  any  common
measures  be  adopted  against  the  Turks  or  the
Lutherans.! The  displeasure  of  the  emperor

*  Andreas  de  Burgo  to  the  CI.  of  Trent,  23d  May,  1532,
very  circumstantial ;  see  letters  of  29th  August,  and  14th
September.

t  He  wrote  this  to  his  brother  as  early  as  the  29th  July
1.531.  Pkis  va  Von  avant,  plus  I'on  appercoit  que  ie  pape
n'y  (for  the  council)  a  voulente  et  que  le  roy  de  France  luy
lie  veult  depiaire,  pensant  par  ce  nioyen  le  tenir  gaigne.
(Brussels  Arch.)

X  This  information  is  not  given  by  Pallavicini,  but  it
is  authentic  nevertheless.  I  took  it  from  a  despatch  of
the  French  ambassador,  the  Bishop  of  Auxerre,  dated  24th

may  easily  be  imagined.  An  attempt  was
made  to  save  appearances;  declarations  were
published  that  the  council  should,  at  all  events,
be  held,  and  deputies  were  sent  to  Germany
to  make  a  show  of  preparing  for  it ;  but  all
this  was,  if  I  may  use  the  expression,  mere
fencing.  These  missions  had  no  other  serious
purpose  than  that  of  persuading  the  Germans
to  abandon  the  thought  of  the  national  coun-
cil. This  was  the  only  point  on  which  the
emperor  and  the  pope  understood  each  other. §

The  maintenance  of  peace  in  Italy  next  came
under  discussion.  The  emperor  thought  he  had
to  expect  an  attack  of  Francis  I.  on  Genoa,  and
his  scheme  was,  to  prevent  this  by  a  coalition
of  all  the  Italian  States  for  their  mutual  de-
fence. But  in  this,  too,  he  experienced  but
feeble  support  from  the  pope.  In  the  pre-
sence of  the  emperor,  Clement  spoke  indeed
in  favour  of  such  a  coalition;  but  in  secret  he
gave  the  Venetian  ambassador  to  understand,
that  in  what  he  had  said  there,  he  had  merely
expressed  the  opinion  of  the  emperor,  not  his
own ;  and  that  he  might  cautiously  intimate
this  to  the  republic. ii  The  Venetians  declared
that  their  relation  to  the  Ottoman  prevented
their  joining  this  coalition,  which  w^s  formed
solely  to  favour  Andrea  Doria.  Another  obsta-
cle arose  from  the  misunderstanding  between
the  pope  and  Ferrara.  With  the  utmost  diffi-
culty, Clement  was  brought  to  promise  the  duke
security  for  eighteen  months.!  At  length  the
treaty  was  concluded,  and  the  contributions
v.'hich  each  was  to  furnish  in  the  event  of  a
war,  determined.  But  the  negotiations  them-
selves suffice  to  show  how  little  cohesive  force
the  league  possessed.  They  were,  indeed,
rather  advantageous  to  Francis,  inasm'uch  as
they  afforded  him  a  fair  occasion  for  com-
plaining of  the  hostility  which  the  emperor
betrayed  in  these  precautions.

If  the  emperor  had  hoped  to  loosen  the  ties
between  the  pope  and  the  king  by  a  compact
of  this  kind;  he  had  fallen  into  a  gross  delu-
sion. Against  so  honourable  a  family  alliance
as  that  proposed,  no  objections  or  representa-
tions were  likely  to  have  any  effect.

In  the  following  autumn  the  pope  set  out  in
person'to  conduct  his  niece  to  France.  At
Marseilles  he  had  a  meeting  with  King  Fran-
cis, which  was  of  incomparably  more  import-
ance than  his  recent  interview  with  the  em-
peror.

Unfortunately,  from  the  nature  of  the  case

December,  1532.  "  Sire,  an  premier  consistoire,  une  partie
des  Cardiuaux  opina,  qu'il  falloit  pourvoir  de  faire  ung
concille  tant  pour  obvier  aux  Lutheriens  que  au  Turc,
disant  que  la  chose  seroit  trop  longue  de  vouloir  ä  cette
heure  appoincter  les  princes  Chretiens;  ful  par  notre  st.
pere  la  chose  remis  ä  correcture  jusqu'au  pronchain  con-
sistoire, qui  fut  vendredi  dernier,  auquel  fut  conrlu  j)ar  sa
S"=  et  ä  la  pluralite  des  voix  que  sans  accorder  lesd.  princes
Chretiens  ue  se  pouvoit  faire  iiy  concille  ny  pourvoir  au
Turc  ny  auxd.  Lutheriens."

§  Extract  from  the  Instructions  to  the  nuncio,  Ugo  Ran«
goni. Pallavicini,  lib.  iii.  c.  xiii.  (V.  i.  p.  327.)

II  "Glue  ce  qu'il  avoit  diet  present  I'empereur,  il  Pavoit
diet  comme  opinion  de  I'empereur,  mais  non  pas  coiunie
la  sienne,  et  qu'il  le  tist  entendre  saigement  a  la  &'«."
li'eveque  d'Auxerre,  1.  Janv.  1533.

IT  Compare  Guicciardini  (at  that  time  vice-legate  at
Bologna,  who  was  called  to  the  conferences),  lib.  xx.
p.  109

Chap.  VII.

INFLUENCE  ON  GERMANY.

411

(the  negotiations  being  all  conducted  orally),
we  have  no  authentic  documents  concerning
them.  The  emperor  received  warning  from
Rome  that  it  was  not  possible  but  that  the
pope  and  the  king  had  some  designs  against
him  :*  and  the  testimony  both  of  the  Floren-
tine confidants  of  the  pope,  and  of  so  acute
and  excellent  an  observer  as  the  Venetian  am-
bassador, unanimously  goes  to  prove  that  this
was  the  case.

Not  only  were  French  cardinals  nominated
at  Marseilles;  a  much  more  important  fact
was.  that  the  pope  consented,  at  the  king's
request,  to  recal  his  nuncio  in  Switzerland,
the  Bishop  of  Veroh,  who  was  thought  to  be
well  affected  to  the  emperor.t

Other  circumstances  soon  show  what  had
been  concerted  between  the  two  sovereigns.

The  Duke  of  Orleans,  husband  of  the  pope's
niece,  laid  claim  to  Urbino  as  the  inheritance
of  his  wife,  and  the  papal  nuncio  in  Germany
did  not  conceal  that  the  pope  m.eant  to  support
his  claim. t  He  was,  he  said,  certainly  for-
bidden by  treaty  to  attempt  any  changes ;  but
it  was  impossible  to  call  that  a  change,  wdiich
was  merely  a  restitution.  Urbino  w^as  a  fief
of  the  church,  and  it  could  not  be  believed
that  the  emperor  w'ould  espouse  the  cause  of
any  papal  vassal  against  the  church. I

This  matter,  however,  assumed  a  much
greater  importance  when  the  king  renewed
his  claims  to  Milan  more  energetically  than
ever.  He  demanded  that  Sforza  should  be
provided  for  by  a  pension,  and  Milan  instantly
ceded  to  him.§

If  we  bear  in  mind  that  these  were  the
stipulations  of  the  marriage  treaty,  it  will  ap-
pear extremely  probable  that  the  real  subject
of  the  conference  at  Marseilles  was,  the  mode
of  carrying  them  into  execution.  And,  indeed,
it  colild  not  be  otherwise  thaq  most  welcome
to  the  pope  to  see  his  niece  a  powerful  Italian
princess.

His  near  connexion  with  France  freed  him
from  any  immediate  fear  of  the  emperor.  We
shall  see  how  he  tied  the  hands  of  that  monarch,
and  indeed  tried  to  change  the  whole  direction
of  his  policy,  by  complpng  with  his  wishes  in
the  English  aöair.

The  question  only  remains,  how  he  meant
to  bring  him. to  give  way  in  Italian  affairs, —
whether  by  open  force^  or  by  indirect  means. H

The  Venetian  ambassador  affirms^  that  the

*  Letter  in  Sando%-al,  xx.  §20:  Que  no  se  descuyasse,
porque  no  era  possible  se  no  que  el  papa  y  el  rey  avian
tratado  alsun  negocio  contra  el.  The  emperor  himself
mentions  these  things,  "  Q.ue  Ton  y  vouclroit  practiquer
au  prejudice  des  choses  traitees  entre  ledit  Sr  Roy  et  nous."
Papiers  d'etat  de  Granvelle,  ii.  p.  73.

t  Sanchez,  in  Bucholtz,  ix.  122.

X  Letter  from  the  archbishop  of  Lunaen  to  Granvelle,
15th  February,  1534.  The  nuncio  had  said  :  "  Scire  se,  ob
id  bellum  futurum  in  Italia  etpontificem  auxilia  daturum
duel  Aurelianensi  contra  quoscunque  pro  recuperatione
dicti  ducatus.

§  Extracts  in  Raumer,  Briefe  aus  Paris,  i.  262.

Ii  The  emperor  himself  aflerwards  sav»'  the  affair  in  that
light.  After  the  breaking  out  of  the  landgrave's  war,  he
charged  his  ambassador  to  declare  to  the  king:  Q,ue  ces
moien^  qu'il  semble  etre  pour  nous  vouloir  contraindre
gout  bien  loin,  etc. Papiers  d'etat  de  Granvelle,  ii.  109.

pope  declined  the  former,  but  gave  his  assent
to  the  latter.

The  pohtical  opposition  to  the  house  of  Aus-
tria (which  had  succeeded  in  imposing  its  will
on  Catholic  Europe  by  force  of  arms)  had
been  a  little  allayed,  but  it  now  revived,  and
resumed  its  former  projects.  The  scheme
of  the  king  and  the  pope  was,  to  make  use  of
foreign  hostihties  to  further  their  own  ends.

The  Venetian  ambassador  mentions  that  a
movement  on  the  part  of  the  Ottomans  had
even  been  talked  of  in  Marseilles,  but  he  will
not  positively  affirm  it  :1[  on  the' other  hand,
he  asserts  without  the  smallest  doubt,  that  a
general  recourse  to  arms  in  Germany  was
under  dehberation.  Guicciardini  too  main-
tains, that  the  king  communicated  to  the  pope
his  design  of  setting  the  German  princes  in
motion  against  the  emperor."^*

I  find  nothing  that  can  invalidate  the  credi-
bility of  these  assertions,  or  can,  on  any  rea-
sonable grounds,  be  set  against  them^.

For  the  connexions  wliich  the  king  at  that
time  maintained  with  the  German  princes
were  solely  of  a  political  character.

He  especially  abetted  the  opposition  to  the
election  of  King  Ferdinand.  When,  in  May,
1532,  the  opposing  princes  formed  a  closer
union,  and  even  agreed  on  a  regular  military
constitution,  Francis  I.  bound  himself,  in  the
event  of  war,  to  pay  100,000  gulden  to  the
Dukes  of  Bavaria.  The  boldest  and  most
extensive  plans  were  occasionally  put  forth  j
for  example,  the  one  talked  of,  in  February,  ^
1533 — an  invasion  of  Charles's  territories  by
the  French,  simultaneously  with  an  attack  on
those  of  Ferdinand  by  Zapolya.tt  The  Ger-
man empire  w-as  incessantly  traversed  by
agents  of  the  king,  the  most  of  \vhom  were
Gervaise  Wain,  a  native  of  jMemmingen,  and
Guillaurae  du  Beilay,  in  order  to  keep  the
opposiüon  alive,  and  to  knit  closer  all  the
threads  that  bound  it  together.

But  the  affairs  of  Würtenberg  soon  became
even  more  important  than  those  of  the  elec-
tion.

The  efforts  to  restore  the  Duke  of  Würten-
berg to  the  throne  may  be  dated  from,  the
very  day  of  his  expulsion.  Innumerable  ne-
gotiations and  conferences  had  been  set  on
foot  for  that  purpose  -Ii  but  all  had  been  frus-

TT  It  is  certain,  nevertheless.  The  pope  himself,  who
wished  to  call  the  attention  of  the  emperor  to  the  subject,
gave  him  the  news.  L'empereur  au  comle  de  Reus,  19
aoiit,  1535.  Pap.  d'et.  du  C  de  Granvelle,  ii.  341,  que  le
roy  de  France  luy  avoit  respondu  en  parlant  de  la  desfen«
sion  et  provision  ä  I'encontre  diidit  Turcq,  que  non  seule-
ment  iceluy  roy  de  France  n'empescheroit  sa  venue  contre
la  dite  chrestiente,  mais  la  procureroit.

**  Relatione  di  Francia  di  M.  Marino  Giustiniani,  1535
Giudico,  che  Tintelligentia  coi  Turchi  fusse  medesima-
mente  deliberata  in  Marsiglia  con  demente  Pontifice,
comme  fu  ancora  quella  di  Germania.  Guicciardini,  xx.
Ill,  haveiidogli  (al  papa)  communicato  il  re  di  Francia
molti  di  suoi  consigli,  e  specialmente  il  disegno  che  ha-
veva  di  conciliare  contro  Cesare  alcuni  di  principi  di
Germania,  massimamente  il  landsravio  d'Hassia.  See
Sandoval,  lib.  xx.  §  20.  Hereupon  they  parted,  completely
satisfied  with  each  other.

ft  Stumpf,  Baierns  politische  Geschichte,  i.  94.

XX  E.  g.  the  negotiations  between  Landgrave  Pliilip  and

412

CHRISTOPHER  OF  WÜRTENBERG.

Book  VI.^

trated  by  the  decided  hostility  of  the  Swabian
league;  and  at  the  diet  of  Augsburg,  Ferdi-
nand received  from  his  brother  the  investiture
of  Wiirtenberg  in  the  most  solemn  manner.

In  the  year  1532,  however,  an  event  occurred
■which  gave  a  fresh  cogency  to  the  claims  of
the  sovereign  house.

After  the  expulsion  of  Duke  Ulrich,  his  son
Christopher,  then  only  five  years  of  age,  was
also  carried  out  of  Wiirtenberg.  It  was  re-
■  ported  that,  at  the  last  house  in  w^hich  he  slept
in  his  own  country,  the  boy  played  with  a
lamb,  and  when  he  went  away  earnestly  en-
treated the  host  to  take  care  of  it,  promising
that  when  he  came  back  he  would  reward  him
for  his  trouble.  It  was  long,  however,  before
this  childish  dream  was  fulfilled.  The  boy
grew  up  in  Insbruck  and  Neustadt,  under  Fer-
dinand's guardianship.  He  was  not  very  well
taken  care  of,  less  perhaps  from  evil  intention
than  from  the  general  disorderly  state  of  the
afiairs  of  the  court;  he  himself  tells  us  that
his  condition  excited  pity  ;  sometimes  he  suf-
fered absolute  want,  and  once  he  was  even  in
danger  of  being  carried  off  by  the  Turks.
Bu  t  early  suffering  is  a  better  school  for  princes
than  the  idleness  and  the  flattery  of  a  court ;
fortune  was,  in  the  main,  his  true  friend.  She
gave  him,  as  a  teacher,  the  learned  and  excel-
lent Michael  Tifernus,  who  attached  himself
to  his  charge  with  entire  devotion.  The  his-
tory of  this  man  is  extremely  characteristic  of
his  times.  When  a  child,  he  was  carried  off
/  by  the  Turks,  whence,  nobody  knew;  but  at
length  they  dropped  him  on  the  road.  The
poor  little  foundling  was  taken  to  Duino  (Ty-
bein)  near  Trieste,  from  which  town  he  took
his  name  :  there  he  was  brought  up  by  charita-
ble people,  and  afterwards  sent  to  a  college  at
Vienna,  where  his  education  was  completed.
He  carefully  watched  over  the  safety  of  his
docile  and  intelligent  pupil.  By  degrees  the
lad  was  introduced  at  court,  for  there  was  no
intention  of  breeding  him  in  a  manner  un-
seemly for  a  prince ;  and  in  1530,  he  was  with
the  emperor  in  Augsburg.  Here  he  inevitably
learned  his  true  position  in  the  world ;  for  he
became  a  centre  of  attraction  to  people  who
incessantly  reminded  him  of  his  claims  to
sovereign  power.  How  then  could  he  see
with  indifference  the  banners  of  Wiirtenberg
and  Teck  in  Ferdinand's  hand,  at  the  cere-
mony of  the  investiture  1  The  feeling  of  his
right  grew  with  his  growth,  and  strengthened
with  his  strength;  but  he  was  obliged  to  re-
press and  conceal  it.  In  this  excited  state  of
mind,  he  received  notice  that  he  was  to  ac-
company the  emperor,  with  whom  he  had  will-
ingly gone  to  the  Netherlands,  through  Italy
and  Spain.  It  is  very  probable  that  he  felt  no
inclination  for  this  expedition ;  especially  when
he  remembered  that,  immediately  after  the
expulsion  of  his  father,  there  v/as  an  idea  of
sending  him  to  Spain.  Christopher  was,  more-
over, determined  not  to  abandon  "his  rights
in  Germany." He  said  plainly  that  he  w^ould

Duke  Henry  of  Brunswick,  in  the  year  1530,  which  have
fcince  been  minutely  discussed  in  the  controversial  writ-
ings.

have  nothing  to  do  with  the  journey  to  Spain.
Accordingly,  when  the  imperial  court  crossed
the  Alps  to  Italy,  after  the  Turkish  war  in  1532,
he  contrived  to  escape  with  his  tutor.  They
wandered  away  from  the  rest  of  the  retinue  un-
observed, and  took  the  road  to  Salzburg.  Guided
by  peasants  famihar  with  the  mountain  passes,
they  w^ere  at  a  great  distance  before  they  were
missed  and  followed.  If  all  the  circumstances
related  in  the  16th  century  were  true,  their
flight  was  accompanied  with  various  perils;
one  of  their  horses  fell  ill,  and  in  order  to  avoid
being  betrayed  by  its  body,  they  determined
to  drown  it  in  a  lake ;  and  while  the  young
prince  fled  on  the  remaining  horse  from  his
pursuers,  Tifernus  lay  hidden  in  the  long  rushes
on  its  margin.*  In  short,  they  disappeared
from  the  court,  and  it  was  generally  believed
that  they  had  fallen  victims  to  bands  of  sol-
diers or  peasants  in  the  mountains.!  But  they
had  reached  a  secure  asylum,  probably  under
the  protection  of  the  Dukes  of  Bavaria,  whence
the  complaints  of  Christopher,  and  his  demands
for  the  restitution  of  his  mheritance,  were  sud-
denly proclaimed  aloud  to  the  world. t

The  re-appearance  of  a  prince  of  the  house
of  Wiirtenberg,  with  legitimate  claims  unim-
paired by  time ;  of  the  ancient  race  and  name,
and  possessed  of  the  affections  of  his  born
subjects,  was  of  itself  a  very  important  event.
At  that  moment  it  was  rendered  doubly  so  by
the  circumstance,  that  the  Dukes  of  Bavaria,
to  whom  Christopher's  father  had  been  pecu-
liarly odious,  and  whose  coalition  with  the
Swabian  league  had  been  the  main  instrument
of  his  expulsion,  now  gave  their  support  to  his
son.

The  Swabian  league  was  indeed  already  on
the  eve  of  dissolution.  One  motive  for  this
was,  the  long-existing  one. — that  the  princes
could  not  accustom  themselves  to  subnilt  to
the  council  of  the  league,  in  w^hich  prelates
and  cities  enjoyed  equal  rights  and  equal  in-
fluence with  themselves,  and  an  adroit  mem-
ber sometimes  guided  the  decision  of  the  as-
sembly at  his  pleasure. §  In  1532,  Hessen,
Treves  and  the  Palatinate  formed  a  separate
coalition,  in  which  they  promised  each  other
not  to  agree  to  the  renewal  of  the  league. II

*  The  ground-work  of  this  story  is  in  Gabelkofer,  ex-
tracted by  Sattler  and  Pfister  (DukeChristopher).  Pfister
says  (p.  80)  that  Charles  had  bejrun  to  pay  attention  to
Christopher  in  Vienna,  and  took  him  with  him  to  a  meet-
ing he  had  with  Hadrian  VI.  in  Bologna.  This  is  not
true.  Heyd,  too,  (Duke  Ulrich,  ii.  33'i,)  seems  to  me  to  go
too  far,  when  he  concludes  from  an  expression  of  Christo-
pher's, "  that  he  had  inquired  into  his  affairs  ever  since
the  diet  of  Augsburg,"  that  the  young  prince  was  not
there.

t  Letter  from  Christopher  to  his  mother,  18th  October.
Heyd,  ii.  339.

X  The  first  letter  of  the  17th  November. Sattler,  ii.  229.

§  Landgrave  Philip  says,  in  a  subsequent  letter  (25th
December,  154.5):  "  Befinden,  wie  es  im  schwäbischen
Bund  zugangen,  dass  Dr.  Eck,  so  oft  er  gewollt,  des  Mehrer
hat  machen  können,  es  sey  gleich  den  andern  Ständen
gelegen  oder  ungelegen  gewesen,  welches  auch  verursacht
das  der  schwäbische  Pund  darüber  zerrissen  worden." —
"  1  find  how  it  has  gone  on  in  the  Swabian  league,  that
Dr.  Eck,  as  often  as  he  pleased,  was  able  to  play  the
leader,  vv'hether  the  other  States  liked  it  or  not,  which  has
also  caused  the  rupture  of  the  Swabian  league."

11  Friday  after  St.  Bernard.  The  agreement  is  in  the
Archives  of  Treves  at  Coblenz.

>.  vir.

DISSOLUTION  OF  THE  SWABIAN  LEAGUE

413

The  cities,  too,  were  dissatisfied ;  especially
at  the  rigorous  Catholic  proceedings  of  the
league  tribunal.  Ulm.  Augsburg  and  Nürn-
berg united  for  their  common  protection.  But
the  highest  discontents  were  caused  by  the
affairs  of  Würtenberg.  In  the  year  1530,
Wurtenberg  shared  all  the  privileges  of  Aus-
tria, and  was  even  left  out  of  the  matricula  of
the  Imperial-Chamber.  It  seemed  that  it  was
to  enjoy  an  exemption  from  all  the  burdens  of
the  empire.  And  meanwhde  the  expenses  of
thie  war,  which  the  league  had  incurred  in
the  conquests  of  1519,  were  not  yet  paid.*
The  emperor  and  the  king  clearly  saw  how
important  it  was  for  the  possession  of  the
country,  to  be  able  to  call  out  the  well-
appointed  veteran  troops  of  the  league ;  their
plenipotentiary,  the  Bishop  of  Augsburg,  took
all  possible  pains,  in  the  year  1533,  to  hold  it
together. t  But  already  the  result  appeared
very  dubious :  under  the  existing  circum-
stances, no  one  would  undertake  the  defence
of  Würtenberg  for  Ferdinand.  Bavaria  de-
clared that  he  regarded  the  cause  of  Duke
Christopher  as  his  own.

In  December,  1533,  a  meeting  of  the  league
was  held  at  Augsburg,  for  the  definitive  ad-
justment of  the  affair.

The  poor,  despoiled,  and  almost  forgotten
young  prince  now  appeared  v/ith  a  brilliant
band  of  supporters;  councillors  from  electoral
Saxony,  Brunswick,  Lüneburg,  Hessen,  Mün-
ster, Juliers,  Mecklenburg,  and  Prussia.  Fer-
dinand's commissioners  found  themselves  con-
strained to  treat  with  him,  and  to  offer  as
compensation  Cilli,  Gorz,  or  Neuenbürg.  The
j'oung  duke,  however,  would  no  longer  listen
to  these  proposals.  He  declared  that  the  agree-
ment upon  which  they  were  founded  had  never
beeil  fulfilled,  and  hence  was  at  an  end. J  He
conducted  himself  with  prudence  and  circum-
spection, taking  care  never  to  advert  to  the
causes  of  his  father's  expulsion.  He  only
steadily  maintained,  that  unheard-of  injustice
had  been  done  to  his  house,  and  to  himself
particularly;  seeing  that  not  one  of  the  stipu-
lations made  and  agreed  to  had  been  ob-
served. He  solemnly  declared,  however,  that,
in  spite  of  this,  he  should  never  think  of  re-
venging on  the  leagued  States  the  injuries
they  had  inflicted  on  his  house.  This  assur-
ance was  repeated  in  his  father's  name  by  the
Hessian  envoys.  The  impression  made  by
these  circumstances  rendered  it  impossible
for  the  commissioners  to  advance  a  single
step.  When  the  meeting  dispersed,  it  was
obvious  to  every  one  that  the  great  league  on
which  the  power  of  Austria  ni  Upper  Ger-
many mainly  rested,  was  near  its  dissolution. §

A  French  envoy  was  present  at  this  assem-

*  Ferdinand  to  Charles,  27th  April.  V.  Bid  sab«  la
dicha  liga  no  quire  mas  servir  en  esto  hasta  ser  pasrados
dello  que  per  ello  les  fae  prometido  y  esto  al  presente  per
■•li  parte  tengolo  por  impossible.

f  The  instructions  and  statement  are  in  the  Brussels
Archives. See  Appendix.

t  See  Complete  Refutation  of  the  Treaties;  last  day  of
July,  1533. Hortleder,  i.  iii.  vii.

§  Extract  from  Gabelkofer  in  Pfister,  Duke  Christopher
I.,  102— IIG;  expressly  remarked  by  Baut. (Heyd,  ii.  424.)

2k*

bly.  We  are  so  fortunate  a^  to  possess  the
pathetic  discourse  which  he  pronounced  in
favour  of  Duke  Christopher  ;||  but  the  simple
fact  that  so  povverful  a  neighbouring  monarch
espoused  the  cause  of  the  young  prince,  pro-
duced a  greater  effect  than  all  his  eloquence.

This  happened  at  the  same  time  that  the
king  and  the  pope  were  together  in  Mar-
seilles. As  soon* as  the  pope  left  that  city,
the  king,  secure  of  a  good  understanding  with
Rome,  hastened  to  take  advantage  of  favour-
ing circumstances  for  a  decisive  movement.

In  Januar}',  1534,  he  contracted  a  still  closer
alliance  with  the  German  princes  as  to  the
affair  of  the  election.  He  engaged,  in  case  it
should  lead  to  a  war,  to  take  upon  himself  a
third  part  of  the  costs.  For  the  present,  he
paid  the  100,000  crowns  of  the  sum  he  had
promised,  which  wei'e  deposited  with  the
Dukes  of  Bavaria.

He  felt  that  his  objects  would  be  more  im-
mediately furthered  by  supporting  the  claims
of  Würtenberg,  upon  whicti  affair  he  imme-
diately entered.

Landgrave  Philip,  personally  attached  to
Duke  Ulrich  of  Würtenberg,  and  hostile  on
various  grounds  to  the  house  of  Austria,  had
long  determined  to  undertake  the  restoration,
of  the  exiled  house  at  the  first  favourable  op-
portunity. This  had  been  one  principal  aim
of  his  whole  policy  during  many  years.  Cir-
cumstances now  favoured  his  designs.  He
wanted  nothing  but  money,  in  order  to  strike
the  blow  as  quickly  as  possible,  and  without
any  obstructing  engagements  with  other  Ger-
man princes.

The  alliance  between  King  Francis  and
Landgrave  Philip  was  mainly  negotiated  by
Count  William  of  Fürstenberg,  one  of  those
partisan  leaders  \vho  attached  themselves  first
to  one  side  and  then  to  another.  After  serv-
ing the  house  of  Austria  in  the  year  1528,  he
had  now  thrown  himself  into  the  party  of
France.

From  Marseilles,  the  king  proceeded  to  the
eastern  frontier  of  his  kingdom,  under  the  con-
duct of  Count  Fürstenberg. IT  Landgrave  Philip
also  came  from  Cassel,  and  passed  through
Zweibrücken;  on  the  18th  we  find  him  at  St.
Nicholas  on  the  Meurthe.

A  meeting  between  him  and  the  king  im-
mediately took  place  in  Barleduc.  All  the
pending  questions  were  here  discussed ;  the
council  and  the  election ;  the  interests  of  Hes-
sen and  Nassau ;  and  those  of  the  Netherlands
and  Gueidres,  The  king  professed  himself  on
every  point  a  friend  of  German  independence,
and,  in  general,  of  the  Protestant  princes  ;**

11  "  The  prince  would  be  an  exile  ;  in  foreijjn  lands  men
would  point  at  him  and  say,  that  is  he  who  once  —  who

now  —  who  without  any  f"ault  of  his" he  did  not

finish  the  sentence,  because  lie  read,  as  he  said,  in  tho
eyes  of  the  assembly,  that  they  felt  his  meaning.  Dis-
cours de  M.  de  Langey,  in  the  Appendix  to  the  Memoiies
of  Bellay.  Coll.  univ.  torn,  xviii.  p.  33G.  He  was,  more-
over, commissioned  (p.  274),  "  d'essayer  tous  moyens  pos^
sibles  ä  faire  que  cette  ligue  de  Suabe  ne  se  renovast,
mais  que  de  tous  points  eile  se  dissolust."

IT  Letter  from  Philip  to  Fürstenberg.  Munch,  Fürsten-
berg, ii.  p.  37.

**  Letter  of  the  landgrave  to  the  elector,  Rommel,  iii.
p.  54,  which  is  remarkable,  as  w  ell  for  what  he  says,  as

414

GERMAN  POLICY.

Book  VI.

the  main  question,  however,  —  that  on  which
all  depended,  —  was  the  design  upon  Würten-
berg.  The  iandgrave,  who  had  no  want  of
troops  or  munitiong  of  w^ar,  demanded,  in  the
first  place,  money  to  put  them  in  motion.
The  king,  expressly  bonnd  by  the  treaty  of
Cambray  not  to  take  part  with  the  enemies  of
the  emperor,  among  whom  was  the  Duke  of
Würtenberg,  §crup]ed  thus  »formally  to  agree
to  send  subsidies  for  his  assistance,  in  open
violation  of  that  treaty.  They  hit  upon  the
/expedient  of  disguising  the  payment  of  the
sum  of  125,000  crown  dollars,  which  Francis
engaged  to  supply,  under  a  contract  for  the
sale  of  Mompelgard;  the  duke  reserving  to
himself  the  right  of  re-emption.  In  a  sub-
joined agreement,  the  king  declared  that  he
gave  the  duke  75,000  dollars  as  a  present.
On  the  27th  of  January,  the  treaty  was  con-
cluded ;*  the  landgrave  set  out  on  his  return
without  delay,  and  on  the  8th  of  February  was
again  in  Cassel.  He  now  lost  not  a  moment
in  making  his  preparations.  He  hesitated,  as
may  be  supposed,  to  confide  his  secret  to
paper ;  but  so  numerous  were  the  messages
with  which  he  despatched  his  confidential
councillors,  that  sometimes  he  had  not  one  of
them  left  at  home ;  to  the  Elector  of  Treves
and  the-  elector  palatine  he  went  in  person. t
He  also  took  part  in  the  compact  concerning
the  election;  but  when  he  sent  the  ratification
of  it  to  the  king,  he  added  that  he  should  not
wait  for  the  Dukes  of  Bavaria;  he  was  already
preparing  to  go  to  work  by  himself.t  The
king  was  delighted  at  the  prospects  which
were  thus  opened  to  him.  On  Easter  Mon-
da}-^,  1534,  he  said  to  an  agent  of  the  woivv'ode,
who  was  Vv'ith  him,  that  the  Swabian  league
was  dissolved  ]  that  he  had  sent  money  to
Germany,  and  had  many  friends  there,  and
allies  already  in  arms ;  that  he, '  Zapolya,
would  soon  be  able  to  dictate  a  peace. §

Ohe  danger  the  landgrave  had  to  avert  be-
fore he  openly  took  arms.  The  electors  who
had  chosen  Ferdinand,  would  perhaps  fear  that
a  successful  campaign  against  him  might,  in
the  end.  prove  ruinous  to  themselves.  It  ap-
peared very  possible  that  they  would  be  in-
duced by  this  consideration  to  take  up  the
king's  cause ;  and  indeed  a  diet  of  electors
was  already  fixed  to  be  held  at  Gelnhausen.
Unquestionably  the  chief  motive  of  Philip's
journey  was,  to  tranquillise  the  electors  of
Treves  and  the  Palatinate.  So  far,  he  said,
from  thinking  of  a  war  on  account  of  the  elec-
tion, the  basis  for  a  final  accommodation  of
that  matter  would  now  be  laid.  Bavaria  pro-
mised that,  if  Wiirtenburg  was  restored  to  the

for  what  he  does  not  say.  Accordinar  to  this,  the  king
only  offered  to  negotiate  between  Ulrich  and  Ferdinand.

*  Notices  hereupon  in  Rommel,  ii.  p.  298;  it  were  much
to  be  wished  that  the  treaty  itself  were  printed.

t  Tenement  que  luy  memc  en  personne  a  ete  contrainct
d'aller  devers  Tarcheveque  de  Treves  et  le  comte  palatin.
Lettre  du  chancelier  du  landgrave  a  Langey.  MS.  Be-
thune,  8816,  f  55.

X  Sommes  d6jä  pres  de  conduire  le  tout  en  effet.  Cassel,
9  Mars. MS.  Bethune,  8493.

§  From  the  interrogations  »jf  Casali  and  Corsini,  who
were  arrested  and  examined  in  Hungary,  1535.  In  the
Brussels  Archives.

hereditary  house,  it  would  make  no  further
opposition  to  the  election ;  hereupon  Branden-
burg, Cologne  and  the  Palatinate,  promised
not  to  obstruct  the  landgrave  in  his  undertak-
ing. Treves  even  consented  to  contribute
succours.  II

King  Ferdinand  suddenly  found  himself  in
a  state  of  complete  isolation.

The  emperor  was  at  a  distance,  the  King  of
France  hostile,  the  pope  (as  afterwards  more
clearly  appeared)  extremely  doubtful.  The
old  hostility  w^hich  had  formed  the  bond  of
the  Swabian  league  had  expired ;  Duke  Ul-
rich solemnly  confirmed  the  assurances  of  the
landgrave,  that  the  cities  had  nothing  to  fear
from  him.  Neither  the  engagements  entered
into  by  the  electors  at  the  king's  election,  nor
their  religious  differences,  now  operated  in
his  favour.  The  clergy  were  as  much  his
enemies  as  the  laity. 1

For  no  German  prince  could  see  with  ap-
probation an  ancient  German  sovereign  house
thus  despoiled  of  its  inheritance.

The  Wittenberg  theologians  and  his  own
subjects  warned  the  landgrave  that  he  would
bring  Hessen  into  danger;  he  replied,  half  jest-
ingly, "  I  will  not  ruin  you  this  time."  He  took
a  wider  view  of  the  state  of  things  than  they
did,  and  felt  himself  sure  of  his  cause.

He  had  to  contend  only  with  Ferdinand,  —
nay,  only  with  Ferdinand's  Wiirtenburg  forces ;
and  for  these  he  felt  himself  fully  a  match.

Whilst  he  himself  was  mainly  occupied  in
collecting  a  magnificent  body  of  cavalry — the
arm  in  v;hich,  in  the  16th  century,  Low'er
Germany  surpassed  the  rest  of  Europe — Count
William  of  Fiirstenberg,  with  the  aid  of  Stras-
burg, assembled  twenty-four  companies  of
foot  on  the  Upper  Rhine  and  in  Alsatia,  where
the  best  landsknechts  remained  all  the  win-
ter, waiting  to  be  called  into  the.  field.  They
v.-ere  fromPomerania  and  Mecklenburg,  Bruns-
Vvick  and  Eichsfeld,  the  Westphalian  bishop-
rics, and  the  archbishopric  of  Cologne;  while
the  heart  of  them  was  formed  by  Philip's  own
Hessian  vassals,  without  question  the  mihtia
most  frequently  called  out  in  all  Germany  at
that  time;  and  now  not  very  willing  to  answer
the  call.  The  two  bodies  met  at  Pfungstadt,
in  the  Odenwald.  On  Tuesday,  the  5th  May,
the  news  arrived  that  the  enemy  had  also
collected  a  fine  army  in  Stuttgart,  and  would
doubtless  appear  in  the  open  field.  All  were
in  the  highest  spirits,  and  eager  for  the  fight.
On  Wednesday  the  6th,  just  after  midnight,
they  broke  up  their  quarters.  The  landgrave,
on  horseback,  with  his  lance  in  his  hand,  re-
viewed the  troops.  'In  their  van  were  the
w^agons  with  munitions  and  stores,  driven  by
six  thousand  peasants,  all  men  capable  of
bearing  arms.  Next  came  a  company  of  light
horse,  and  then  the  artillery,  followed  by  the
great  squadron  of  heavy-armed  reiters,  under
the  chief  standard,  borne  by  the  hereditary

II  Letter  of  Philip,  in  Stumpf,  Appendix,  No.  14.  See
another  of  his  letters  to  Dr.  Eck,  mentioned  by  Stumpf  in
the  text,  p.  153.

TT  Wolfgang  Brand ner  had  already  represented  the  mat-
ter very  justly  to  the  king,  in  July,  1533.  Bucholtz,  ix.76.

Chap.  VII.

BATTLE  OF  LAUFEN.

415

grand  marshal  of  Hessen ;  after  them  the  foot
soldiersj  both  those  brought  up  by  the  land-
grave, and  the  OberlanderSj  to  whom  Duke
George  of  Wurtenberg  sent  a  very  consider-,
able  reinforcement.  There  were  about  20.000
foot  and  4000  horse;  an  army  which,  though
far  from  being  the  largest  that  had  been  seen.
even  ni  those  days,  was  yet,  for  a  single  prince
of  the  empire,  and  one  not  even  belonging  to
the  first  class,  numerous  beyond  all  expecta-
tion, excellently  equipped,  and  perfectly  pro-
vided with  all  things  necessary  for  war.  Care
had  been  taken  to  enlist  as  many  officers  as
possible  of  the  evangelical  faith,  which  was
that  of  the  majority  of  the  common  men.  It
was  the  first  army  of  a  politico-religious  oppo-
sition to  the  house  of  Austria,  on  the  part  of
Germany  and  of  Europe,  that  had  appeared
in  the  field.

On  the  other  side,  the  Austrian  government
in  Wurtenberg  had  been  arming.  Convents
of  monks  and  nuns,  cathedral  and  rural  chap-
ters had  raised  contributions,  and  the  cities
had  paid  a  war-tax.*  The  old  commanders
of  the  Italian  campaigns,  Curt  of  Bemmelberg,
Caspar  Frundsberg,  Marx  of  Eberstein,  and
ThamiSjt  surnamed  Herastede,  had  collected
bands  of  landsknechts:  we  meet  again  the
well-known  names  of  the  adversaries  of' Hes-
sen in  Siclfingen's  wars,  —  Hilch  von  Lorch,
Sickingen's  sons,  and  Dietrich  Spät,  The  king
himself  did  not  appear ;  his  place  was  filled  by
Philip  of  the  Palatinate,  heatenant  of  Wiirten-
burg,^ — the  same,  who  had  distinguished  him-
self at  the  defence  of  Vienna,  Although  the
troops  were  not  equal  to  those  of  the  land-
grave in  number  (they  might  amount  to  about
10,000  men,  including  a  considerable  number
of  Bohemians),  they  had  courage  enough  to
wait  for  him  on  his  way,  in  the  open  field  at
Laufen  on  the  Neckar.  They  did  not  even
take  the  trouble  to  obstruct  his  passage  over
the  river.

The  first  engagement  took  place  on  the  12lh
of  May.  The  king's  troops  sustained  the  as-
sault tolerably  well.  Not  only,  however,  was
the  count  palatine,  their  leader,  wounded,  but
tjie  landgrave's  superiority  became  so  mani-
fest, that  they  saw  they  had  no  chance  of
making  any  successful  resistance.  In  the
night,  Dietrich  Spät  set  out  to  bring  up  more
cavalry.  Early  in  the  morning  of  the  follow-
ing day,  the  array  itself  sought  to  take  up  a
more  secure  position.

But  it  was  not  likely  that  the  fiery  landgrave
would  sufi'er  them  to  accomplish  this.  In  an
instant,  he  was  in  motion.  He  would  listen  to
no  objections  :  he  saw  well  what  an  advantage
it  would  be  for  him,  with  his  superior  cavalry
and  his  good  artillery,  to  fall  upon  the  enemy
when  dislodged  from  his  position.  It  was  by
such  a  movement,  that  the  bands  of  armed
peasants  had  formerly  been  routed.  The  Aus-
trian army  had,  indeed,  experienced  lands-
knechts and  brave  officers:  but  the  want  of
horses  brought  them  into  the  same  perilous

situation  as  that  which  had  proved  fatal  to
the  peasants.  By  a  charge  of  cavalry  on  their
flank.  Landgrave  Philip  detained  the  enemy
in  a  vineyard  till -his  artillery  could  come
up.  He  then  hastened  back  to  bring  up  the
infantry  for  a  decisive  attack.  But  before
they  could  come  up,  the  cavalry  and  artillery
had  already  combined  their  efibrts  with  such
dfect,  that  the  enemy  fell  into  complete  dis-
order, and  retreated  across  the  Bidembach.'
The  few  reiters  that  remained  escaped  to  the
Asperg;  the  foot  soldiers  were  dispersed,  and
many  perished  in  the  Neckar.?  The  land-
grave himself  ^^■a3  astonished  that  leaders  of
such  reputation  had  made  so  little  resistance.

A  field  of  battle  is,  in  general,  the  place  on
which  the  collective  forces  of  two  opposite
states  of  moral  culture  come  into  collision,  and
try  their  respective  strength.  Landgrave  Philip
had  the  most  fortunate  combination  of  Euro-
pean circumstances,  the  secret  or  declared
good  wishes  of  all  Germany,  and  a  host  of
religious  sympathies,  on  his  side.  Ferdinand
had  only  himself  to  trust  to;  he  defended  a
dubious  right  and  unpopular  ideas,  and  he
had  proved  the  weaker  in  the  land  he  pos-
sessed.

But  this  battle  is  also  deserving  of  all  atten-
tion on  account^of  its  consequences.  It  de-
cided the  fate  of  one  of  the  most  important
German  principalities.  The  country  fell  at
once  into  the  power  of  the  conquerors.  Duke
Ulrich  re-appeared  after  his  long  absence  ;  the
citizens,  after  ratifying  the  treaty  of  Tübingen,
did  hoiTiage  to  him  for  his  capital  city  of  Stutt-
gart, in  a  meadow  on  the  road^  to  Canstadt;
the  other  towns  and  villages  followed  their
example.  Nor  did  the  castles  hold  out  for
Ferdinand.  Either  their  commanders  were
in  their  hearts  inclined  to  the  returning  princes
of  the  land ;  or  they  feared  for  their  estates,
which  had  already  fallen  into  the  hands  of  the
conquerors;  or  they  yielded  to  force.  Even
the  Asperg  surrendered  on  the  8th  of  June.

Thus  was  Wurtenberg  once  more  in  the
hands  of  a  Wurtenberg  sovereign.  Duke  Ul-
rich'S  enemies  had  given  him,  in  derision,  the
nickname  of  broom-maker;  the  other  side
now  retorted  the  jest,  and  said  that  he  was
come  to  sweep  all  the  spiders'  webs  from  out
the  land.  The  people  were  delighted  to  see
once  more  the  hunting-horn;§  after  which-they

*  Spanish  report  in  tlie  Appendix,
t  This  is  doubtless  the  Von  Thönis.in  the  song  in  Heyd,
Battle  of  Lau. en,  p.  88.

X  Neue  Zeitung  von  des  Landgrafen  zu  Hessen  Kriegs-
handlang, bei  Hortleder,  I.  vol.  iii.  c.  12,  is  neither  graphic
nor  correct,  especially  as  to  time.  Philip's  letter  to  his
councillors  (Ilomniel,  ii.  319)  gives  the  best  account.  The
other  reports,  however,  are  still  more  useless  than  the
Neue  Zeitung.  Jovius  makes  out  that  the  count  palatine
was  wounded  on  the  day  of  battle  ;  probably  merely  for
the  sake  of  effect  (lib.  xxxii.  p.  128).  Nicolaus  Asclepius
Barbatus  insists  upon  the  circumstance  that  the  landgrave
attacked,  "  ea  manu  quce  hostium  numero  vix  responde-
ret."  It  is  clear  that  he  could  not  attack  with  all  his
troops  at  once  ;  but  he  had  a  most  decided  advantage  in
point  of  numbers.  'J'ehlinger  gives  a  kind  of  general  de-
scription of  "  equitum  fremitus,  armorum  crepitus  strepi-
tusque,"  of  no  value  whatever.  Von  Heyd"s  careful
monograph.  Die  Schlacht  von  Laufen,  Stuttgart,  1834,
contains  a  fragment  of  another  letter  by  Philip,  coinciding
with  the  first,  and  a  very  good  passage  from  Gabelkofer
(Beil.  iii.  v.),  which  confirm  the  statement  inade  above, —
besides  some  new  landsknecht  songs,  very  interesting  and
valuable.

§  A  badge  of  the  house  of  Wurtenberg.— Transl.

416

CONDUCT  ÖP  THE  POPE.

Book  VI.

had  so  long  yearned;  and  proclaimed  in  their
songs  the  happiness  of  the  country  that  had
recovered  its  native  prince.  Politically,  it  was
of  great  moment  that  a  prince,  who  might  be
regarded  as  the  most  complete  representative
of  the  opposition  to  Austria,  was  now  called
to  play  a  part  in  the  centre  of  Upper  Germany.
His  well-known  sentiments  left  no  doubt  from
the  first,  as  to  what  his  conduct  would  be  in
religious  affairs.

The  behaviour  of  Pope  Clement  VII.  on  this
occasion  was  very  remarkable.  The  ambas-
sador of  King  Ferdinand  implored  his  assist-
ance in  this  imminent  danger,  which,  he  said,
might  also  become  extremely  formidable  to
the  Church  and  to  Italy.  The  pope  brought
tne  matter  before  the  next  consistory ;  he  re-
peated the  ambassador's  words,  and  even
heightened  his  expressions ;  but  as  to  the  as-
sistance to  be  rendered  to  the  king,  he  did  not
so  much  as  make  a  suggestion.  Hereupon  a
letter  arrived  from  Ferdinand  himself  to  the
pope,  and  the  affair  was  again  brought  before
the  consistory.  But  the  pope  chose  this  mo-
ment to  revive  the  emperor's  demands  with
regard  to  a  council,  which  were  so  intensely
odious  to  the  Curia;  the  consequence  was,
that,  though  the  subsidies  already  granted  to
the  emperor  and  the  king  were  paid,  the  pro-
posal for  further  aid  was  sent  back  for  the  con-
sideration of  a  congregation.  The  pope  said,
the  king  lay  ill  of  a  disease  which  no  slight
tinctures  or  syrups  could  cure, — nothing  less
than  a  violent  medicine.  Accordingly,  the
congregation  decided  that,  as  it  could  not  grant
the  king  a  large  subsidy,  it  was  better  to  grant
him  none.  To  the  great  vexation  of  the  am-
bassador, the  news  had  arrived,  that  the  land-
grave on  his  entry  into  Wiirtenberg  had  at-
tempted no  hostile  measure  against  the
churches;  whereupon  the  pope  declared  that
the  war  was  a  private  one,  in  which  he  w^ould
not  interfere;  if  the  enemy  should  attack  the
Church,  it  would  then  be  time  enough  for  him
to  think  of  subsidies.  The  ambassador  re-
marked, with  all  the  vivacity  consistent  with
his  respect  for  the  pope,  how  important  the
affair  was  ;  how  dear  it  might  cost  the  Holy
See,  nay,  the  city  of  Rome  and  all  Italy.  But
the  pope  too  was  excited  and  almost  angry ;
he  asked,  where  then  was  the  emperor  ?  and
why  he  had  not  provided  against  these  disas-
ters'?  he  (the  pope)  had  long  ago  called  his
attention  to  the  conduct  that  was  to  be  ex-
pected from  the  landgrave.* In  short,  the

*  Bericht  desköniirl.  Gesandten  Sancliez  an  Ferdinand,
.1.5  Juni,  1534.  (July  is  probably  an  error  of  the  copyist.)
Bucholtz,  ix.  247.  All  that  surprises  me  is,  that  Bucholtz
fancies  liiixiself  to  have  disproved  the  assumption  1  have
here  made,  that  the  pope  was  informed  beforehand  of  the
landgrav.e's  intention  to  take  up  arms.  He  has  under-
lined all  the  civil  speeches  wliich  the  pope  made  to  the
nuncio,  in  order  to  keep  hiui  quiet;  as  if  any  vveij,'ht  was
to  be  attached  to  such  things,  and  the  historian  were  not
to  judge  from  actions.  But  Sanchez  was  by  no  means  so
devout  a  believer  in  the  pope  as  our  Bucholtz.  He  ac-
quaints his  master  with  the  coarse  which  things  are
taking,  "ut  melius  M^  Vra.  istorum  mentes  et  cogitationes
intelligat,quibus  technis  parent  isti  rem  longius  differre."
He  su.spects:  "suborta  mihi  fuit  suspectio.  Stem  g.  non
satis  efficaci  fervore  procedere ;"  he  is  indignant  at  the
excuses  that  are  made  :  "dolore  et  indignatione  assensus
replicui,  cum  tamen  reverentia  debita;"  and  ends  byco»-

pope  was  not  to  be  moved  to  take  any  part  in
the  affair-^not  the  shghtest.  He  would  wait
till  he  heard  of  the  ruin  of  the  Church  before
he  would  do  any  thing  to  prevent  it ;  at  present,
he  regarded  the  matter  merely  from  apolitical
point  of  view.  The  German  princes — as,  for
example,  Duke  George  of  Saxony — reproached
the  pope  with  being  in  an  understanding  with
the  king,  to  keep  Germany  in  a  state  of  con-
fusion, in  order  not  to  be  forced  to  convoke  a
council. t

Such  a  state  of  things  seemed  to  open  the
most  brilliant  prospects  to  the  King  of  France.

On  the  18th  of  June,  the  victors  had  reached
Taugendorf,  on  the  Austrian  frontier.  "  My
friends,"  said  Francis,  '-have  conquered  Wiir-  '
tenberg, — only  onw-ards  I  more!"  Meanwhile
Barbarossa  too  had  appeared  at  sea,  plundered
the  Neapolitan  coast  far  and  wide,  and  then
fallen  upon  Tunis,  which  he  captured.  He
assumed  a  most  threatening  attitude  towards
Spain,  as  we  shall  have  occasion  to  show  here-
after. Francis  I.  thought  that  the  emperor,
oppressed  by  the  various  dangers  which  me-
naced his  house,  would  yield  to  his  demands.
He  demanded  Genoa,  Montferrat,  and  a  part
of  Milan,  immediately. t  The  schemes  with
regard  to  Urbino  began  to  be  agitated.

In  Germany  a  flame  seemed  to  be  kindled
which  would  not  easily  be  quenched.

As  soon  as  the  emperor  received  the  news
of  his  brother's  defeat,  he  despatched  a  mes-
senger with  a  considerable  sum  of  money,  with
which  to  bring  an  army  into  the  field  to  chas-
tise the  landgrave. §  Nothing  could  better
have  suited  the  views  of  his  enemies.

But  in  Germany,  people  were  not  inclined  to
allow  things  to  go  to  such  lengths,  either  on
the  one  side  or  the  other.

The  aggressors  did  not  feel  themselves
strong  enough  to  carry  on  a  protracted  war,
and  least  of  all  would  they  fight  for  a  foreign
interest.

If  Francis  I.  had  intended  to  turn  the  ani-
mosities of  the  Germans  to  his  own  account,
they,  on  their  part,  had  designed  to  use  the
French  for  the  attainment  of  their  own  ends :
that  was  all.

vincinghimself  that  nothing  will  he  done  :  "  opinor  papam
daturum  nobis -bona  verba."  If  I  may  venture  to  offer
another  conjecture  with  respect  to  this  affair,  [  would
suggest  thatKing  Francis  T.  had  really  promised  the  pope
that  the  landgrave's  enterprise  should  have  no  conse-
quences which  might  affect  the  church  ;  a  condition  always
made  by  tlie  kings  of  France,  when  they  supported  the
Protestants  during  the  Thirty  Years'  War.

That  such  a  promise  could  not  have  been  kept,  espe-
cially in  times  of  such  vehement  zeal,  is  obvious.

t  L'empereur  au  comte  de  Nassau,  29th  Aout :  Papiers
d'etat  du  C  Granve!le,ii.  171:  Se  sent  indignez  les  elect-
eurs,  princes  et  autres  .  .  .  ä  I'occasion  de  la  responce
faite  par  le  due  Georges  de  Saxen  au  nunce  de  pape  la  ou
il  le  touche  (le  roi)  grandement  avec  le  dit  st.  pere  de  non
chercher  autre  chose  que  d'entrelenir  la  diteGermanye  en
trouble  et  s'entendre  avec  le  dit  st.  pere  pour  empescher  le
concille.

J  This  appears  from  the  instructions  of  the  emperor  to
the  count  of  Nassau,  12th  August,  1534,  from  which  Von
Raumer  has  given  extracts  in  his  Briefe  aus  Paris,  i.  2G2.
Since  then  printed  in  the  Pap.  d'etat  du  C  Granvelle,
ii.  15.

§  We  have  a  minute  report  on  this  subject  by  the  Bishop
of  Lunden,  who  went  from  one  Rhenish  court  to  an(  ther,
in  order  to  negotiate  the  matter;  1st  August,  1534.  Br.
Archives.

Chap.  VIII.

PEACE  OF  CADAN.

417

It  was  certainly  agreed  in  the  treaty  con-
cerning the  affairs  of  the  election,  that  neitlier
parly  should  conclude  a  peace  without  the
other;  but;  as  Phihp  of  Hessen  observed,  the
war  in  question  had  not  then  broken  out.*  He
had  taken  care  to  prevent  this  before  he  took
up  arms.  The  Dukes  of  Bavaria  had  remained
quiet ;  the  French  deposit  lay  unemployed  in
their  coffers.

The  whole  question  was,  whether  King
Ferdinand  could  resolve  to  give  up  Würten-
berg.

He,  too,  was  placed  in  a  very  doubtful' posi-
tion. Should  he,  in  order  to  recover  what  he
had  lost,  imperil  all  that  he  possessed  by  a
better  and  more  unquestionable  right  1  He
was  told  that  if  he  was  not  ready  for  battle  in
a  few  dayS;  all  would  be  lost.  His  councillors,
Rogendorf.  Hofmann,  and  the  Bishop  of  Trent,
joined  in  the  opinion  that  he  had  better  deter-
mine to  give  up  Wtirtenberg.

A  meeting  of  German  princes  was  already
opened  at  Annaberg,  on  this  and  other  busi-
ness.

In  order  to  take  part  personally  in  the  pro-
ceedings, King  Ferdinand  repaired  to  Cadan,
a  httle  place  in  the  neighbourhood,  between
Annaberg  and  Saatz.

He  did  not,  indeed,  consent  to  renounce
Würtenberg,  absolutely  and  forever;  for,  he
said,  he  had  been  most  solemnly  invested  with
the  fief  in  the  presence  of  the  assembled  diet
— his  brother  had  grasped  the  banner  with  his
own  hand ;  he  could  not.  and  would  not.  suffer
himself  to  be  despoiled  of  his  right.  But  he
consented  that  Duke  Ulrich  should  take  pos-
session of  Würtenberg  as  a  sub-fief  of  Austria,
though  with  seat  and  voice  in  the  empire. t
With  this,  Landgrave  Philip,  and  at  length
Duke  Ulrich  himself,  was  satisfied.

In  return,  the  Elector  of  Saxony  now  de-
clared himself  ready  to  acknowledge  Ferdi-
nand as  King  of  the  Romans.  He  did  not  con-
fess that  he  had  been  in  the  wrong;  on  the
contrary,  he  demanded  that  a  clause  should  be
annexed  to  the  Golden  Bull,  laying  down  such
directions  for  future  cases,  as  might  amount  to
a  sanction  of  his  conduct  in  the  present  case.j
But  this  reservation  did  not  prevent  him  from
going  to  Cadan  on  the  27th  of  June,  nor  from
paying  to  his  former  adversary  all  the  honour
due  to  a  King  of  the  Romans.  His  adherents,
too,  to  whom  this  opposition  alone  had  given

*  "  Alldiweil  man  der  wale  sachen  halben  nicht  krieget."
"All  this  nhile  there  is  no  war  on  account  of  the  election
business."  Philip's  instructions  to  his  envoys  to  the
king,  Rommel,  iii.  65.

t  Letter  of  George  von  Carlowitz,  in  Sattler,  iii.  Urk,  p.
104.

J  "  Das  kiinftislich,  wann  bei  leben  ains  Rom.  Kaisers
oder  königs  ain  Rom.  König  soll  erwelt,  alle  Churfürsten
zuvor  samen  beschaiden  werden,  davon  zu  reden,  obur-
Sachen  senug^am  vorhanden  und  dem  Reich  furderlichfey
ainen  Rom.  König  —  zu  erwehlen,  und  wann  sie  sich  da
verainigt,  das  alsdann  und  nicht  eher  der  Churfürst  zur
königlichen  wähl  erfordert  werde." —  "  That  in  future,
when  in  the  lifetime  of  a  Roman  emperor  or  king,  a  king
of  the  Romans  is  to  be  elected,  all  electors  should  be  con-
voked beforehand  to  consult  about  it,  whether  there  be
causes  sufficient,  and  whether  it  be  profitable  to  the  em-
pire to  elect  a  Roman  king;  and  when  they  are  there  as-
sembled, that  then,  and  not  before,  each  elector  should  be
called  upon  to  elect  a  king."  Mainziscli-sächsisches  Be-
denken, ibid.  101.
53

a  legitimate  ground  for  refusing  allegiance  to
Ferdinand,  could  now  no  longer  withhold  it.
By  degrees  all  acquiesced.

The  ambassador  of  Charles  had  just  com-
menced his  negotiations  on  the  Rhine  against
the  landgrave,  when  this  intelligence  arrived
and  caused  him  to  suspend  them.

Whilst  King  Francis  was  daily  hoping  to
hear  of  further  hostilities  in  Germany,  peace
was  already  concluded.  From  this  quarter,  at
least,  he  could  expect  nothing  more,  calculated
to  forward  his  Italian  schemes.

On  the  contrarj',  it  was  evident  that  the
landgrave's  enterprise,  though  its  success.was
to  be  entirely  attributed  to  a  concurrence  of
European  circumstances,  would  nevertheless
produce  no  effect  on  political  relations  in  gene-
ral :  its  results  were  bounded  by  the  frontiers
of  Germany;  and  there  they  were  by  no
means  exclusively  political,  as  had  been  anti-
cipated, but  were  also  of  the  greatest  import-
ance to  rehgion.  Some  other  stipulations  were
made  at  Cadan,  which  eventually  contributed
greatly  to  the  permanence  and  stability  of
Protestantism.  But  they  belong  to  another
cycle  of  events,  which  we  shall  contemplate
hereafter.

CHAPTER  VIII.

PROGRESS OF THE REFORMATION DURING THE
YEARS  1532—1534.

It  is  evident  that  an  event  like  the  peace
of  Nürnberg  must  inevitably  contribute,  in  a
very  high  degree,  to  confirm  and  develope  the
principle  of  the  reformation,  in  those  countries
where  it  had  been  established  in  consequence
of  the  recess  of  1526.

The  Protestants  had  not  suffered  the  epis-
copal jurisdictions  to  be  re-imposed  upon
them;  they  thought  themselves  guarantied,
by  the  emperor's  promise,  from  further  pro-
ceedings on  the  part  of  the  Imperial  Chamber; .
and  at  the  same  time  from  the  immediate
hostilities  of  the  majority  of  the  States  of  the
empire.

Hereupon,  the  Saxon  diet,  assembled  at
Weimar  towards  the  end  of  1532,  no  longer
hesitated  to  ordain  the  resumption  of  the  visit-
ation of  the  churches,  which  had  naturally
been  interrupted  at  a  lime  when  every  thing
was  in  suspense.^'

The  mass,  which  in  some  places  had  been
adhered  to,  was  now  entirely  prohibited :  the
few  convents  that  still  existed  w;ere  ordered
to  adopt  the  evangelical  doctrme,  and  were
forbidden  to  receive  novices.  A  universal  se-
questration of  conventual  lands  w^as  organised,
with  the  co-operation  of  the  States.  Their
design  was  to  apply  the  proceeds  to  some  of
the  most  pressing  wants  of  the  country,  espe-

6  Extracts  from  the  Reports  of  Visitations,  Seckendorf,
iii.  §  25.  Add.  iii.  The  instruction  is  dated  19th  Decem-
ber. 1532.

419

OEGANISATION  OF  THE

cially  to  pay  off  the  public  debt;  for  which
they  had  hkewise  just  granted  a  tax.  But  as
they  expressed  themselves  very  humbly  on
this  subject,  and  even  held  out  a  prospect  of
re-payment,  if  necessary,*'  the  elector  insisted
with  the  greater  earnestness  on  the  necessity
of  keeping  in  view  the  original  purpose  of  the
endowments.  The  first  care  was  for  the  pa-
rish churches.  The  idea  had  originally  been,
that  the  parish  churches  might  be  provided
for  out  of  the  small  foundations,  confranities,
endowments  for  masses  for  souls,  and,  where
these  were  insufficient,  new  rates,  levied  upon
the  communes.  But  this  proved  wholly  im-
practicable. The  communes  —  burghers  and
peasants,  as  well  as  nobles —  were  vainly  re-
minded how  much  their  masses  and  indul-
gences had  heretofore  cost  them;  they  an-
swered, that  times  were  altered.^  It  was
therefore  necessary  to  apply  to  the  parishes
a  large  portion  of  the  conventual  property ;
which,  at  first,  while  many  monks  were  still
to  be  maintained,  and  ah  expensive  adminis-
tration to  be  kept  on  foot  out  of  it,  yielded  no
very  large  revenue. t  It  is  scarcely  credible
in  what  a  state  they  were  found.  But  at
length  the  end  was  accomplished.  "With
great  care,  trouble,  and  labour,"  says  Myco-
nius,  himself  one  of  the  Visitators,  "  we
brought  it  to  pass  that  every  parish  should
have  its  teacher,  and  its  allotted  income;
every  town  its  schools,  and  all  that  belongs
to  a  church. "t  The  visitation  now'  extended
to  the  domains  of  the  princes  of  Heuss  and
Schwarzburg.  The  clergy  there  showed  less
refractoriness  than  ignorance  and  immorality ;
it  was  impossible  to  retain  them,  however
willing  they  were  to  remain:  they  were  almost
all  replaced  by  disciples  of  the  Wittenberg-
school.  This  metropolis  of  Protestantism  was
now  rather  better  provided  for.§  The  old
order  of  things  was  utterly  overthrown,  and
Wittenberg  stood  at  the  head  of  the  new
church. From  her  had  emanated  the  doc-

*  "  Zu  einer  Fiirstreckung  und  Mithülfe,  jedoch  der-
gestalt (lass  solchs  der  Nntturft  und  Gelejienheit  nach
wieder  ergänzt  vvorde."  "  For  a  loan  and  aid,  but  in  sucii
wise  that  the  same  be  restored  according  to  need  and  oc-
casion." Transactions  of  the  diet  at  Jena,  F.rhardi,  15.?3.

I  As  an  example  we  will  cite  the  yarisli  of  Unipferstedt.
The  decree  of  the  visitors  was  as  follows:  "  Als  wir  —
—  befunden  das  die  pfarhe  zu  Unipferstedt  und  Wigendorf
zur  Unterhaltung  eines  pfarjiers  vast  zu  wenig  hett,  so
haben  wir  verordent,  nachdem  das  Dorf  Unipferstedt  dem
Closter  Oberweyniar  an  alle  myttel  und  eygenthiinilich
zugethan  sejn  soll,  das  einem  iden  pfarrer  zu  Unipferstedt
von  gedachtes  Closters  zu  Oberweyniar  Gutern  zugelegt
iind  gegeben  werden  soll  eines  yeden  Jahres  ein  Acker
Holz  samt  dem  Closterholz  zu  Drostet,  ein  Acker  oder  an-
derthalb ungefährlich  Wisewachs  zu  Neuendorf  und  ein
halb  weimarisch  maiter  kornsvon  Adam  Rosten  zu  Wei-
mar, von  beiden  Dörfern  die  Decimation." — "Seeing  that

we have  found  that  the  parish  of  Umpferstedt  and

Wigendorf  hath  two  little  for  the  support  of  a  priest,  we
do  hereby  order  and  direct  that,  seeing  the  village  of
Umpferstedt  is  claimed  as  pertaining  and  subject  to  the
convent  of  Oberweymar,  every  priest  at  Umpferstedt  shall
duly  receive  from  the  property  of  the  said  convent  of
Obervveymar  each  year  one  acre  of  wood,  over  and  above
the  convent  wood  at  Drostet,  an  acre  or  an  acre  and  a
half,  more  or  less,  of  forage  from  Neuendorf,  and  half  a
Weimar  measure  of  grain  from  Adam  Rosten  at  Weimar,
besides  tithes  from  both  villages."

X  Lommatzsch,  Narratio  de  Myconio,  p.  55.

§  Its  whole  revenue  amounted  to  281]  g.  11  grs. ;  to  this
,1900  g.  more' were  added.  Hitherto  Luther's^  salary  had
been  200  g. :  it  was  now  increased  to  300  g.

EVANGELICAL  CHURCH.  Book  VL

>. (

trines  which  had  already  begun  to  be  rendered
imperative  on  the  preachers ;||  and  ordination
was  conferred  by  the  spiritual  members  of
her  university.

This  system  was  also  adopted  almost  un-
changed in  Jessen,  where  the  original  sketch
of  a  constitution  of  the  church,  founded  on
the  idea  of  the  commune,  as  conceived  by
Zwingli,  had  long  been  abandoned.  Visita-
tions were  held ;  the  parishes  were  put  upon
a  better  footing,  as  the  landgrave  boasted,
than  they  had  ever  been ;  superintendents
were  appointed,  and  divine  service  was  con-
ducted after  the  manner  of  Whtenberg.  The
chief  difference  was,  that  the  church  in  Hes-
sen was  far  richer  than  in  electoral  Thuringia
and  Saxony,  which  rendered  it  practicable  to
make  some  large  endowments.  In  the  year
1532,  the  convents  of  Wetter  and  Kaufungen,
with  revenues  which  had  been  estimated  as
equal  to  a  small  count's  fee,  were  consecrated
to  the  portioning  of  noble  young  ladies  in  mar-
riage. In  the  year  1533,  the  houses  of  Haina
and  Merxhausen,  and,  shortly  after,  those  of
Hofheim  and  Gronau,  were  converted  into
national  hospitals.  Ten  monasteries  in  the
upper  and  lower  principalities  were  gradually
incorporated  into  the  university  of  Marburg,
and  a  part  of  the  revenue  of  five  others  de-
voted to  the  same  purpose.  A  theological
seminary  was  established,  supported  by  con-
tributions from  the  sovereign,  and  all  the
(Bürgerschaften)  town  corporations  of  the
country.*!!

In  Lüneburg,  the  jurisdictions  of  Bremen,
Verden,  Magdebuig  and  Hildesheim  had  al-
ready been  separated.  They  were  now  en-
tirely abolished,  and  the  supreme  §.uperin-
tendency  over  all  these  distiicts  was  confided
to  Urbanus  Rhegius.  He  deemed  it  his  duty
to  remain  in  this  laborious  and  not  very  secure
post,  although  he  was  invited  to  return  to  the
Oberland,  of  which  he  was  a  native.  His
sovereign.  Duke  Ernest,  was  his  zealous  sup-
porter. We  frequently  see  him,  accompanied
by  his  /chancellor  and  one  of  the  preachers,
visiting  the  monasteries  in  person,  and  recom-
mending the  cause  of  reform:  and,  indeed,
most  of  the  monks,  as  well  as  the  prioresses,
with  their  nuns,  went  over  to  the  evangelical
faith.  Sometimes  the  priors  or  canons  had  a
common  interest  with  the  duke ;  for  example,
in  Bardewik,  which  the  Arclxbishop  of  Bremen
wanted  to  incorporate  with  Verden.  Gradu-
ally the  Saxon  forms  predominated  here  as
in  Hessen.  An  annual  church  visitation  was
held.**

In  Franconian  Brandenburg,  too,  the  monas-
teries were  successfully  put  under  the  civil
administration.  There  were  still  monks  in
many  places,  but  some  of  them  had  taken
wives — even  here  and  there  an  abbot, ft  But
no  fresh  elections  of  abbots  or  abbesses  were

11  [{^napp,  Narratio  de  lusto  lona,  p.  17.

IT  Extracts  from  the  Reports.  Rommel,  i.  p.  191,  and
note.

**  Schreiben  des  Urbanus  Rhegius  an  die  Augspurger,
14  Juli,  1535,  bei  Walch,  xvii.  2507;  See  Schlegel,  ii.  51,
95,  211.

tt  Report  by  Cornelius  Ettenius,  p.  498.

Chap.  VIII.

TRIUMPH  OF  THE  SECULAR  PRINCIPLE.

419

allowed:  in  some  cases  we  find  administra^
■trixes,  as,  for  example,  Dorothea  of  Hirsch-
hard,  in  the  chapter  for  noble  maidens  at  Bir-
kenfeld. An  order  of  chancery  was  drawn  up,
according  to  which,  the  surplus  of  the  reve-
nues of  the  monasteries  was  to  be  thrown  into
a  common  fund,  and  reserved  for  any  cases
of  need  occurring  to  the  state  generally.  All
the  proceeds  of  other  foundations  and  bene-
fices that  might  become  vacant,  were  to  be
apphed  to  the  maintenance  of  parish  churches
and  schools.  In  the  year  1533,  an  ecclesias-
tical ordinance  was  drawn  up,  in  concert  with
Nürnbero-.  for  the  governance  of  churches  and
convents.*

All,  as  we  perceive,  was  yet  in  its  infancy,
and  nearly  formless ;  a  regular  and  stable
ecclesiastical  constitution  was  as  yet  out  of
the  question.  Thus  much  only  is  evident, —
that  the  secular  authorities  generally  obtained
great  advantages  over  the  spiritual.

A  portion  of  the  ecclesiastical  revenues  fell
into  the -hands,  either  of  the  sovereign,  or  of
the  nobility,  or  of  the  community  at  large.
In  all  the  reformed  countries  a  clergy,  indebt-
ed for  its  position  and  importance  to  the  zeal
and  efforts  of  the  civil  power,  was  substituted
for  one  whose  rights  were  exclusively  derived
from  episcopal  ordination.

We  find  a  proof  how  little  the  laity  were
inclined  to  submit  to  any  domination  on  the
part  of  the  new  clergy,  in  the  ecclesiastical
ordinance  of  Nürnberg  and  Brandenburg,  just
alluded  to.

The  clergy  of  those  districts  wished  for  the
re-introduction  of  the  power  of  excommuni-
cation, for  which  'those  of  Nürnberg  formally
petitioned;  those  of  Brandenburg  were  at  least
not  opposed  to  it,  and  indeed  in  their  report
they  adduced  arguments  in  favour  of  that  in-
stitution. But  they  could  not  prevail.  The
laity  would  not  submit  to  this  despotism,  and,
in  the  publication  of  the  ordinance,  the  para-
graph treating  of  it  was  expunged.!

Wittenberg  itself  was  opposed  to  it.  Luther
said.-t  that  public  sentence  of  excommunica-
tion ought  to  be  preceded  by  previous  inquiry,
and  followed  by  a  universal  avoidance  of  the
excommunicated  :  now  the  former  could  not
easily  be  conducted ;  the  latter  would  cause
great  confusion,  especially  in  large  towns.  He
clearly  saw  that  it  was  not  the  province  of
religion  to  maintain  public  order  by  any  coer-
cive measures  whatsoever,  which  properly
belong  to  the  state  alone.  The  church  of
Wittenberg  contented  itself  with  refusing  the
sacrament  of  the  Lord's  Supper  to  notorious
sinners,  without  attempting  to  interfere  with
the  civil  relations  of  society.  The  preachers
condemned  vice  in  the  pulpit,  and  admonished
the  authorities  not  to  tolerate  it.

Nor  did  the  spiritual  power  achieve  any
greater conquests elsewhere. In the year

*  Lang,  ii.  42.

t  Considerations  of  the  Clerjjy  of  the  jMargravate  con-
cernins:  Church  Discipline.  Strobel,  Miscellaneen,  ii.  p.
14?.  Even  so  recently  as  in  1741,  the  worthy  [lausmann
did  not  venture  to  tell  what  he  knew  of  this  matter.
Hausmann  in  Spengler,  pp.  55,  297.

1  Bedenken  bei,  D.  W.  iv.  p.  389.

1533,  a  provincial  synod  was  established  in
Strasburg,  which  included  various  secular  ele-
ments, together  with  the  spiritual;  a  commis-
sion of  the  council  (which,  indeed,  had  pre-
cedence), the  wardens  of  the  city  churches,
the  doctors  and  teachers  of  the  liberal  arts.
In  the  articles  which  it  adopted,  the  office  of
preventing  blasphemy  and  open  scandal  was
specially  committed  to  the  civil  authorities  ;^
whereas  the  council  never  would  consent  to
the  introduction  of  church  discipline,  pro-
perly so  called.  In  affairs  of  faith,  they  said,
nothing  was  to  be  effected  by  commands;
as  they  could  not  possibly  be  enforced,  the
publication  of  them  could  only  be  attended
with  loss  of  consideration.  The  blameless
life  and  conversation  of  the  clergy  (each  of
whom  was  to  be  seriously  admonished  in  pri-
vate), the  good  example  of  the  higher  classes,
and  exhortations  to  the  lower  by  the  masters
of  the  guilds,  appeared  to  them  the  oidy  prac-
ticable means  to  the  attainment  of  the  object. i|

The  church  was  regarded  as  an  institution,
for  the  propagation  of  religion — not  so,  much
outward  as  inward.  Every  thing  approaching
to  papacy  was  avoided.  To  free  themselves
from  the  coercive  power  of  the  spiritual  body
— the  exercise  of, which  was  most  oppressive,
while  its  relaxation  was  most  destructive  to
morality  —  was  the  chief  aim  of  the  whole
movement.  And  if  the  people  would  no  longer
endure  the  influence  and  the  spiritual  tyranny
of  the  prelates,  neither  were  they  disposed  to
confer  analogous  powers  on  the  inferior  clergy
who  had  abandoned  the  hierarchical  system.
The  demand  for  a  more  rigid  church  discipline
was  immediately  met  by  the  conviction,  that
the  Christian  principle  ought  to  act  upon  the
will,  by  penetrating  the  heart;  not  to  subdue
the  former  by  force,  nor  to  alienate  the  latter
by  coercion.

While,  however,  the  reformers  w^ere  busied
with  these  arrangements  and  considerations,
and  thought  themselves  perfectly  secured  by
the  concessions  of  Nürnberg,  it  proved  that
this  was  not  entirely  the  case  :  the  higher
clergy  of  the  Catholic  church  were  far  too
powerfully  represented  in  the  constitution  of
the  empire,  and  too  expressly  supported  by
the  laws  of  the  empire,  so  easily  to  abandon
their  cause.

The  emperor,  indeed,  issued  an  injunction,
to  the  Imperial  Chamber  from  Mantua  (6th
November,  1532),  to  stop  all  hostile  proceed-
ings concerning  religious  matters  till  his  fur-
ther commands. H

A  great  number  of  prosecutions  of  that  kind
were  already  begun.  Accusations  were  laid
by  the  higher  clergy  against  Strasburg,  Con-
stance, Reutlingen,  Magdeburg,  Bremen  and

§  The  sixteen  articles  of  the  synod  of  1533.  Röhrich,
ii.  2Ö3,  and  especially  Art.  15.
II  Declaration  of  the  council  of  1534,  id.  p.  41,
^  Harj)precht,  v.  295.  Saxon  delegates  vi'ere  sent  thither
to  carry  on  the  business.  Schreiben  von  Planitz,  Mantua,
7th  Dec.  They  received  through  Held  this  answer:  "Und
so  weit  die  Forderungen  am  Kammergericht  und  zu  Roth-
weil belangen  thut,  wiiszte  sich  I.  Mt.  wohl  zu  erinnern
des  Vertrags,"  &c. — "  So  far  as  the  demands  made  on  the
ImperialChamber  and  at  Rothwill  are  concerned,  his  imp.
majesty  was  mindful  of  the  treaty,"  &c.

420

DISPUTES  WITH  THE  IMPERIAL  CHAMBER.

Book  VI.

Nürnberg,  as  well  as  against  some  sovereign
princes;  among  whom  were  Ernest  of  Lüne-
burg and  George  of  Brandenburg.  Most  of
the  confiscated  property  was  reclaimed ;  and
occasionally  the  interest  due  to  a  chapter,  or
an  endowment  in  a  town  was  withheld  \  or  an
attempt  was  made  to  remove  married  priests ;
or  to  place  zealous  Catholic  priests  in  a  Pro-
testant city,  against  the  will  of  its  inhabitants.

The  Protestants  thought  they  were  perma-
nently protected  by  the  emperor's  injunction.
The  Imperial  Chamber,  however,  was  not  of
that  opinion.

The  Chamber  was  bound  to  the  observance
of  the  recess  of  Augsburg ;  it  M-ell  knew  that
the  majority  had  committed  the  war  against
Protestantism  to  its  hands;  and  no  man,  or
body  of  men,  will  ever  willingly  surrender
functions  which  confer  power.  On  the  other
side,  could  it  venture  to  disobey  an  injunction
of  the  emperor,  from  whom  its  authority  was
derived,  and  in  whose  name  its  judgments
■were  pronounced  %

In  this  dilemma,  the  Imperial  Chamber  de-
vised the  expedient  of  declaring  that  the  pend-
ing trials  were  not  affairs  of  religion,  but
breaches  of  the  public  peace,  and  acts  of  spo-
liation ;  and  that  the  offence  charged  was.
transgressions  of  the  recess  of  the  empire.

The  first  case  in  which  this  distinction  was
taken,  was  in  the  course  of  the  proceedings
concerning  the  claim  of  the  city  of  Strasburg
to  the  revenues  and  jewels  of  the  chapter  of
Arbogast.  The  city  advocate.  Dr.  Herter.  said,
that  was  indeed  the  suit  against  Strasburg,  an
aiiair  in  which  all  Protestants  vrere  civilly  in-
terested, but  that  it  also  concerned  religion,
and  therefore  could  not  be  proceeded  in,  con-
formably with  the  emperor's  recent  proclama-
tion. The  bishop's  advocate  replied,  that  his
gracious  master  had  nothing  to  do  with  the
Protestant  body;  that  the  business  regarded
things  wholly  distinct  from  religion.  The  Pro-
testants said,  that  a  peace  of  the  kind  under-
stood by  the  Chamber  could  be  of  no  value  to
them,  nor  would  his  imperial  majesty  have
troubled  himself  to  ordain  such  a  one ;  the
truce  included  persons,  property,  and  co-de-
pendencies. Nevertheless,  they  could  obtain
nothing  further  from  the  court,  than  a  resolu-
lution  to  ask  the  emperor  for  an  explanation
of  his  words.

The  emperor  was  still  in  Bologna,  as  it  were
the  guest  of  the  pope,  and  in  daily  communi-
cation with  his  holiness,  when  this  question
was  laid  before  him..  He  dared  not  offer  a
fresh  offence  to  the  pope,  already  vacillating  ;
nor  dared  he  offend  the  majority  of  the  States.
And  yet  he  could  not  revoke  his  truce.  He
gave  an  answer  as  dark  as  the  response  of  an
oracle.  '•  The  words  of  our  injunction,"  says
he,  '•  extend  only  to  affairs  of  religion ;  what,
however,  affairs  of  religion  are,  does  not  ad-
mit of  any  better  explanation  than  that  which
the  affairs  '  themselves  afford."*  Probably
Held,  an  old  assessor  of  the  Imperial  Cham-
ber, who had accompanied  the  emperor  to

*  26th  Jan.  1533. Harpprecht,  v.  300.

Bologna,  was  the  inventor  of  this  interpreta-
tion. Obscure  as  it  is,  it  leaves  no  doubt  of
its  tendency.  The  government  wished  to  con-
firm the  Chamber  in  the  course  it  had  taken.

A  commission  which  visited  the  tribunal  in
May,  1533,  also  admonished  the  members  of
it  afresh  to  maintain  the  recess  of  Augsburg,
especially  in  regard  to  religion. t

Fortified  by  this  double  admonition,  the  Im-
perial Chamber  now  knew  no  moderation.
The  plaints  were  received  and  reproduced ;
the  objection  raised  by  the  defendants,  that
the  Chamber  was  not  the  proper  tribunal  for
religious  matters,  made  no  impression  ;  the
accusers  charged  them  with  an  offence  against
the  imperial  authority,  the  inevitable  conse-
quence of  which  was  sentence  of  ban.

Had  the  Protestants  submitted  to  this,  their
union  would  have  been  totally  useless.

They  first  addressed  themselves  (according
to  a  resolution  of  their  meeting  at  Schmalkal-
den,  in  July,  1533)  to  the  elector  palatine  and
the  Elector  of  Mainz,  who  had  negotiated  the
peace,  and  who  now  took  part,  by  their  coun-
cillors, in  the  recess  of  visitation.  The  electors
declared  that  they  could  not  take  this  matter
upon  themselves.  Hereupon  the  Protestants
appealed  to  the  court  itself.  As  a  proof  that
the  pending  trials  turned  upon  affairs  of  reli-
gion, they  cited  the  traditional  maxim  of  the
church  of  Rome, — that  every  thing  relating  to
a  benefice  is  to  be  considered  a  spiritual  mat-
ter. Their  sole  purpose,  they  said,  in  con-
cluding the  peace,  was  to  guard  themselves
from  the  complaints  and  accusations  of  the
clergy, — that  in  consequence  of  the  change  of
doctrine  they  were  robbed  of  their  usufructs.
But  besides  this,  they  had  been  expressly
promised  that  the  proceedings  at  Strasburg
should  be  stopped.  They  pressed  for  a  dis-
tinct explanation,  whether  the  Imperial  Charh-
ber  v.-ould  stay  the  proceedings  in  comphance
with  the  emperor's  commands,  or  not.  The
direct  answers  of  the  Chamber  were  obscure
and  evasive;  the  indirect — its  actions — were
perfectly  clear.  In  November,  1533,  the  guild-
masters  and  council  of  Strasburg  were  declared
guilty.  The  city  advocate  again  objected,
that  it  was  no  longer  an  affair  concerning  Stras-
burg alone,  but  all  Protestants;  upon  which
the  bishop's  advocate  asked  the  judge  of  the
Imperial  Chamber,  Count  von  Beichlingen,
whether  his  grace  would  allow  his  sentence,
given  doubtless  after  mature  reflection,  to  be
impeached  in  so  unfair  a  manner.  Judge  and
court,  after  a  short  delay,  declared,  that  if
within  fourteen  days  nobody  should  come  to
terras  on  behalf  of  the  city  of  Strasburg,  judg-
ment would  be  executed  on  the  demand  of  the
bishop's  advocate.

At  the  same  time  difficulties  were  vexa-
tiously  thrown  in  the  way  of  the  Protestant
procurator.  Helfmann,  because  he  persisted  in
taking  the  oath  to  God  alone,  and  not  to  the
saints  also.

t  "  Dem  Abschied  von  Augsburg,  sonderlich  der  christ-
lichen Religion  und  Glaubens  halber,  nachzukommen  und
stracks  zu  geleben."—"  To  follow  the  decree  of  Augsburg,
especially  touching  the  Christian  religion,  and  to  live
strictly  according  to  it."

Chap.  VIII.

PEACE  OF  CADAN.

42i

The  Protestants  saw  that  the  concessions
they  had  obtained  in  the  treaty  of  Nürnberg
were,  under  these  circumstances,  of  no  avail
to  them.  ]Mean\vhile  they  were  far  from
abandoning  their  claims:  on  the  30th  July,
1534.  they  proceeded  to  a  formal  recusation
of  the  acts  of  the  Imperial  Chamber.

The  Council  of  Regency  was  abohshed  ;  the
emperor  at  a  distance;  King  Ferdinand  not
yet  secure  of  the  allegiance  of  his  subjects,
and  the  administrative  powers  which  the  em-
peror had  committed  to  him,  very  imperfectly
recognised.  To  all  these  elements  of  disorder
was  now  added,  that  the  authority  of  the  tri-
bunal which  was  the  sole  remaining  represent-
ative of  the  unity  of  the  empire,  was  repugned
by  a  large  portion  of  the  States.

It  is  obvious  how  much  these  troubles  tended
to  heighten  the  discontent  which  the  rapid
success  of  Landgrave  Philip  in  his  Wurten-
berg  campaign  had  already  seriously  aggra-
vated.

They  were  accordingly  among  the  most  im-
portant subjects  of  discussion  at  Annaberg  and
Cadan.

One  main  inducement  for  the  Elector  of
Saxony  to  give  way  as  to  the  election  was,  that
King  Ferdinand,  from  whom  liitherto  nothing
could  be  expected  but  a  hostile  influence  on  the
Chamber,  now  bound  himself,  '-seeing  that  a
misunderstanding  had  arisen  concerning  the
peace  of  Xilrnberg,"  to  bring  about  an  abandon-
ment of  the  proceedings  commenced  against
those  included  in  that  treaty.  These  words  must
be  well  weighed.  The  admission  that  a  misun-
derstanding had  arisen ;  the  promise  of  a  com-
plete stop  to  proceedings,  were  clearly  intended
to  silence,  as  far  as  it  lay  in  the  king's  power,
the  cavils  of  the  Imperial  Chamber.  So  the
Protestants  understood  it.*  We  do  not  know
the  injunction  which  the  king  hereupon  issued
to  the  Imperial  Chamber;  but  it  is  the  fact,
that  we  find  no  complaint  of  any  further  pro-
ceedings of  that  tribunal.

The  benefit  of  the  truce  extended,  of  course,
only  to  those  who  were  included  by  name  in
the  peace  of  Nürnberg.  But  another  point
was  determined  at  Cadan  which  tended  ma-
terially to  the  spread  of  Protestantism.

King  Ferdinand  had  at  first  not  only  wished
to  bind  the  Duke  of  Wurtenberg  by  the  terms
of  the  peace,  to  receive  his  country  as  a  fief
held  of  him.  but  also,  to  attempt  no  alteration
in  religious  matters  ]  and  an  article  was  ac-
tually proposed,  stipulating  that  the  duke
should  leave  everybody  as  he  had  found  him
in  the  matter  of  relis'ion.t But  if  Ferdinand

obstinately  persisted,  as  we  have  seen,  in  the
former  demand,  the  elector  was  equally  in-
flexible in  rejecting  the  latter.  It  was  impos-
sible, he  said,  that  he  could  ever  consent  that
the  word  of  God  should  not  be  preached  ac-
cording to  his  own  confession  and  that  of  his
deceased  father  ]  he  could  not  obstruct  the  free
course  of  the  Gospel ;  he  would  not,  even  were
the  duke  willing;  rather  would  he  withdraw
his  opposition  to  the  election ;  the  article  in
question  must  absolutely  be  erased.?  Upon
this  the  duke  received  the  joyful  intelligence
that  he  was  to  rem.ain  unshackled  as  to  reli-
gion, and  have  power  to  take  measures  for
Christian  order  in  concert  with  his  subjects. §
The  only  restrictions  imposed  on  him  were  in
regard  to  those  who,  being  possessed  of  certain
regalia,  were  not  properly-  to  be  considered  his
subjects.

These,  then,  are  the  decisions  which  render
the  peace  of  Cadan  so  important  to  the  cause
of  Protestantism.  It  is  clear  that  no  such
result  was  contemplated  in  the  attempt  on
Wurtenberg;  that  the  Protestant  theologians
hoped  nothing,  the  pope  feared  nothing,  from
it.  But,  concluded  by  one  of  the  chiefs  of  the
evangelical  party,  in  favour  of  a  prince  who
during  his  banishment  had  imbibed  similar
sentiments,  and  ratified  under  conditions  like
those  we  have  described,  this  peace  could  not
fail  to  bring  about  a  total  alteration  of  the  reli-
gious state  of  Wurtenberg.

The  form  which  the  reforniation  here  as-
sumed was  also  to  a  certain  extent  prescribed
by  the  course  of  events.

Had  the  duke's  restoration  been  brought
about  sooner  by^  one  of  those  political  combi-
nations which  Zwingli  contemplated,  it  is
probable  that  his  views  of  church  government
would  also  have  gained  an  ascendancy  in  the
duchy.

But  now,  the  war  having  been  conducted  by
Hessen,  and  the  peace  brought  about  by  Sax-
ony, after  the  defeat  of  the  Swiss  and  the  ap-
proximation of  the  Oberländers  to  the  Saxon
confession,  that  result  was  not  to  be  expected.
On  the  contrary,  the  duke  adopted  the  form  of
expression  in  use  since  that  approximation  ;
he  announced  that  he  would  tolerate  no  one
who  preached  any  other  doctrine  than  that  of
the  true  body^  and  blood  of  Christ  in  the  Lord's
Supper.  An  article  of  the  peace  of  Cadan
was  expressly  directed  against  the  Sacra-
'  menters.ll

J At the same time he  invited  Ambrosius
!  Blaurer,  one  of  the  most  eminent  Oberland

*  Saxon  memorial  to  the  congress  at  Vienna,  ]535.  The
pretext  of  the-  Imperial  Chamber,  that  it  did  not  listen  to
any  religious  affairs,  was,  according  to  this,  obviated  by
the  treaty  :  "  Indem  das  sich  K.  Mt.  verpflichtet  hat,  obwol
uf  beruften  nürnbergischen  Frieden  etwas  Missverstand,
—welcher  Missverstand  eben  des  Kamniergerichts  Gegen-
fürwenduns  gewest,— fürgefalien,  soll  er  doch  aufgehoben
seyn."  —  "Inasmuch  as  his  imperial  majesty  has  bound
himself,  although  a  certain  misunderstanding  has  occurred
concerning  the  above-mentioned  treaty  'of  Nürnberg,"
(which  misunderstanding  was  neither  more  nor  less  than
this  pretext  of  the  Imperial  Chamber^)  "  that  it  should  be
removed."

t  That  is,  without  doubt,  the  meaning  of  the  somewhat
obscure  words  ;  "  Das  Herzog  Ulrich  einen  jedera  in  dem
2i

Fürstenthumb  Wirtenberg  der  Religionsachen  halber  in
dem  Wesen  wie  sie  bis  uf  sein  Einnehmen  (gewesen),
verfolgen,  und  zugestellt  werden."  — >' That  Duke  Ulrich
should  allow  all  men  in  the  duchy  of  Wirtemberg  to  con-
tinue and  be  established  in  the  state  in  which  they  were,
as  to  religious  matters,  up  to  the  time  of  his  restoration."

X  We  know  these  negotiations  from  a  letter  of  the
Elector  of  Saxony  to  the  king.  Sattler,  ill.  p.  1-23.  On
the  margin,  by  the  side  of  this  article,  is  written  :  "  Sol
aussen  pleiben." — "  Must  be  left  out."  /

§  Through  Hans  von  Dölzk  ;  Letter  from  Ulrich,  ibid.
124.

|!  Letter  to  Blaurer,  22d  December,  1534.  The  addition,
"Wie  Euch  denn  selber  alles  wohl  wissen  ist,"— "As  all
is  known  to  yourself,"  shows  that  Ulrich,  from  the  first,
held  the  same  language.

422

EEFORMATION  IN  WURTENBERG.

Book  VI.

theologians  and  an  intimate  friend  of  Butzer's,
together  with  the  Marburg  professor  Erard
Schnepf,  a  decided  follower  of  Luther,  to  or-
ganise the  church  of  Wilrlenberg.  They  be-
gan by  agreeing  on  a  formula  satisfactory  to
both.  Their  agreement  is  a  symptom  of  the
gradual  consolidation  of  the  unity  of  ihe  Ger-
man evangelical  church."*

Thereupon  Blaurer  undertook  the  reforma-
tion of  the  country  above,  and  Schnepf  that
of  the  country  below,  the  Staig.t  The  priests
were  no  longer  convoked  according  to  the  rural
chapters,  as  heretofore,  but  according  to  the
secular  division  of  the  country  into  bailiwicks  j
and  after  the  main  points  of  the  evangelical
doctrine  had  been  expounded  to  them,  were
asked  to  state  what  the  government  had  to
expect  from  them.  Spite  of  all  the  exertions
of  the  Austrian  government  for  the  mainte-
nance of  the  religious  edicts,  there  were  still
a  considerable  number  even  of  the  priests  who
joined  the  evangelical  party  at  the  first  invi-
tation. In  the  bailiwick  of  Tübingen  there
W'ere  seven ;  the  remaining  twelve  asked  for
time  to  consider.?  Under  these  circumstances
the  ritual  was  altered  without  difhculty.  In
many  places  the  mass  was  voluntarily  aban-
doned; in  others,  it  was  discontinued  accord-
ing 1o  order.  Schnepf  instituted  a  form  of  the
Lord's  Supper  with  which  the  Oberländers  were
satisfied.

The  monasteries  were  next  taken  in  hand.
Duke  Ulrich  made  no  secret  of  ''  his  intention
of  applying  their  property  to  the  payment  of
the  public  debt,  and  the  relief  of  the  people
from  intolerable  burdens."  As  he  had  been
so  long  out  of  the  country,  and  had  taken
upon  him  Ferdinand's  debts  to  the  Swabian
league,  it  is  not  to  be  wondered  at  that  he
found  himself  in  pecuniary  difficulties,  for
W'hich  this  was  the  only  remedy.'^

He  did  not  suflTer  himself  to  be  restrained
by  the  limitations  laid  down  in  the  peace  of
Cadan. The Austrian  government had led

*  They  both  confessed,  Corpus  et  sanguinem  Christi
vere,i.  e-siibstaritialiter  et  essentiaüter,  nou  autem  quan-
titative aiit  qualitative  vel  localiter,  prcesentia  esse  et
exhiheri  in  ccena;  a  formula,  the  scholastic  fashion  of
which  scandalised  many  of  the  evangelical  party.

t  In  Schnurrer's  Erläuterungen  der  W.  K.  und  Ref.
Gesch.  it  is  stated  as  a  fact,  (p.  127,)  that  many  whom
Schnepf  sent  away  as  doubtful,  went  a  few  miles  further
and  were  accepted  by  Blaurer.  Schnurrer  refers  for  this
to  Füssli's  EpistolBB  Reformatorum,  p.  99.  There  is  a  let-
ter of  Haller  to  Builinger.  in  which  the  former  relates
what  he  had  heard  from  Thomas  Blaurer  in  August,  1534,
— consequently  at  the  very  beginning  of  the  difference
l.etween  the  two  parlies;  quam  male  conveniat  Wirtem-
bergeiisibiis  ministris(as  the  Schnepfians  are  full  of  sneers
at  enthusiasts),  et  dum  quibusdam  de  Schnepfio  periculum
sit,  cum  ad  ministeriuni  apti  sint,  quum  prima  prope  sit
interrogatio  de  eucharistoe  causa,  si  Lutheranus  fuerit,
quantumvis  alioquin  doctus,  admittatur,  sin  minus,  reji-
ciatur  et  ab  Ambrosio  recipiatur.  It  is  clear  that  Thomas
Blaurer  speaks  of  it  only  as  a  danger,— a  possibility.  Jac.
Sturm  was  of  the  same  opinion:  "  Schriepf  schuhe  die
unsern,  werde  die  in  Anstellung  der  Kirche  meiden."—
"Schnepf  is  shy  of  our  people,  and  will  avoid  them  in
his  appointments  to  the  church."  But  it  remains  to  be
proved  whether  circumstances  really  turned  out  as  Schnur-
rer  sets  forth.

J  Bericht  Ambrosii  Blaurers  was  er  mit  den  Pfaffen  Tü-
binger Umts  ausgerichtet. (Report  of  Ambrose  Blaurer
what  he  effected  with  the  priests  of  the  Tübinger  baili-
wick.) Sattler,  iii.  App.  No.  16.
.  §  Schnurrer  Erläuterungen,  p.  149,  No.  1.

the  way;  it  had  asserted  the  rights  of  the
state  over  endowments  of  doubtful  sovereignty,
and  could  not  make  much  objection  if  its  suc-
cessor did  the  same.

The  whole  country  was  thus  in  a  short  time
transformed.  Duke  Ulrich  had  the  merit  of
devoting  particular  attention  to  the  university.
We  find  many  distinguished  names  among  the
teachers;  the  system  of  stipends  adopted  in
Hessen  was  introduced  with  increased  eff'ect
into  Würtenberg.  Tübingen  gradually  became
one  of  the  most  distinguished  nurseries  of
Protestant  learning.

Würtenberg  was  a  conquest  of  Protestantism
based  on  the  old  hereditary  rights  of  German
princes ;  a  conquest  of  double  value,  inasmuch
as  it  was  achieved  in  precisely  that  region
where  the  Swabian  league  had  hithertq  ob-
structed the  progress  of  the  evangelical  faith. ||
Throughout  the  Oberland  this  now  acquired
fresh  activity;  in  Alsatia,  where  the  influence
of  Strasburg  had  not  been  impaired ;  in  the
neighbouring  dynastic  domains ;  Markgrave
Bernhard  of  Baden,  Count  Philip  IV.  of  Ha-
nau, Louis  of  Falkenstein,  William  of  Für-
stenberg (the  joint  leader  in  the  Würtenberg
war),  gradually  reformed  the  church  in  their
territories,  as  did  also  numerous  imperial  cities.
Scarcely,  could  the  news  of  the  battle  of  Lau-
fen be  known,  when  Michael  Kress,  the  parish
priest  of  Weissenburg  in  the  Wasgau,  discon-
tinued the  mass  (June,  1534);  the  council  con-
curred with  him,  and  warned  the  discontented
servants  of  the  chapter  to  quit  the  town  with-
out delay.  The  greatest  impression,  however,
was  made  by  the  conversion  of  Augsburg.
The  reformed  doctrine  had  long  been  gaining
ground  there,  but  the  old  opinions  had  still
powerful  supporters,  among  whom  were  the
Fuggers ;  and  had  any  thing  been  attempted
against  the  bishop  and  chapter,  the  law  or  the
Swabian  league  would  have  hastened  to  their
assistance.  It  is  obvious,  however,  that  a
state  of  things  in  which  the  minds  of  men
were  daily  embittered  by  conflicting  or  hostile
preaching,  was  not  tenable  in  a  community
that  pretended  to  some  poHtical  weight  in  the
empire;  these  points  of  difl^erence  now  con-
stituted the  most  important  part  of  public
affairs.  The  evangelical  party,  which  had
long  been  the  majority,  now  took  courage,
under  the  political  influences  of  those  times,
to  assert  their  rights.l  A  disputation  was
proposed  to  the  clergy.  As  they  either  en-
tirely refused  to  enter  into  it,  or  would  do  so
only  under  conditions  which  the  city  ,could
not  accede  to,  the  greater  and  lesser  council,
wäth  the  bürgermeister  Wolf  Rehlinger  at  their
head,  passed  a  resolution,  that  no  more  papisti-
cal preaching  should  be  allowed;  no  mass
tolerated,  except  in  the  church  immediately
belonging  to  the  bishop.  This  happened  on
the  22d  July.  Hereupon  most  of  the  chapels
were  closed,  a  part  of  the  clergy  left  the  city,

11  Gassarus,  in  Mencken,  i.  p.  1798:  this  took  place  "Non
sine  totius  Suevise  pfafforum  monachorumque  consterna-
tione."  (

IT  Gassarus,  passim.  Statten,  335.  Zapf,  Leben  Stadions,

p.  83.

Chap.  YIII.

REFORMATION  IN  ANHALT.

423

while  another  rallied  the  more  closely  round
the  bishop  and  the  chapter.

Analogous  motives  regarding  the  internal
affairs  of  the  city  led,  about  the  same  time,
to  the  formal  conversion  of  Frankfurt ;  though
^vilhout  so  marked  an  influence  of  political
causes.*

We  need  not  adduce  any  more  facts  to
show  that  the  new  religion,  though  certainly
favoured  by  the  course  of  poliiical  affairs,  pos-
sessed great  independent  force  and  activity ;
it  had  prepared  the  very  events  which  contri-
buted to  its  emancipation.

It  was  sometimes  sufficiently  strong  to  main-
tain itself  in  complete  contradiction  to  what
the  political  situation  of  the  country  seemed
to  require  ;  as,  for  example,  in  Anhalt.

Fur  what  could  be  more  perilous  for  the
majority  of  the  Anhalt  princes  (in  whose
nauio  one  of  them  —  Prince  John  —  had  sub-
scribad  the  recess  of  Augsburg),  than  to  re-
tract, in  direct  opposition  to  those  powerful
neigiiüours  whose  favour  was  absolutely  essen-
tial to  them, — Duke  George  of  Saxony,  the
Elector  Joachim  of  Brandenburg,  and  the
Archbishop  Albert?  One  of  the  brothers,
Prince  George,  was  an  ecclesiastic,  and  al-  j
ready  prebendary  of  Llagdeburg  and  Merse-  i
burg  cathedrals;  his  prospects  seemed  bound  j
up  with  the  existence  of  the  Catholic  church.
Yet  it  was  he  who  contributed  the  most  to
the  change.  He  declared  that,  near  as  he
lived  to  the  birth-place  of  Lutheranism,  he
liatl  been  deceived  as  to  its  true  character ;  it
had  been  represented  to  him  in  the  most  un-
favourable light  possible  ;  he  had  been  told
that  good  works  were  forbidden  by  it,  good
ordinances  subverted,  and  license  given  for
all  unchristian  practices.  But  he  had  con-
vinced himself  of  the  contrary.  He  had  found
that  the  Holy  Scriptures  were  taught  conform-
ably with  the  ancient  Romish  churcli.t  He
gradually  became  so  zealous,  and  so  persua-
vsive  in  his  exhortations  to  his  brothers,  that  a
Dominican  friar  having  indulged  in  violent
language  against  the  use  of  the  sacrament  in
both  kinds,  on  Holy  Thursday  of  the  year
1532,  in  the  pulpit  at  Dessau,  they  displaced
him,  and  appointed  in  his  stead  Nicholas
Hausmann,  a  friend  of  Luther.  Duke  George
of  Saxony  instantly  threatened  them  with  the
emperor's  displeasure  ;  he  predicted  the  utter
failure  of  their  attempts,  and  the  ruin  of
Prince  George's  prospects  in  the  church ;  but
he  made  no  impression  upon  them,  either  by
repr&sentations  of  this  kind,  or  by  his  doc-
'  trinai  arguments.?  They  went  on  fearlessly.
The circumstance, that a member of the

*  Kirchner,  Geschichte  von  Frankfurt,  ii.  84.  I  shall
revert  to  both  these  cities.

t  Letter  from  Georire  to  the  emperor,  in  Fürst  Georgs
Schriften  und  Predigten  (Prince  George's  Writings  and
Sernioiis),  p.  3o3.

J"  Letter  of  Prince  Joachim  to  George,  Fürst  Georgs
Schriften  und  Predigleu,  p.  384.  Luther  rejoices  at  this
conunenccment,  "  Etiantsi  id  factum  non  sit  sine  gravi
periculo,  magnis  principibus  coiUrariuni  suarientibus,  in-
EUpor  etiam  minantibus."  Letter  to  the  tiiree  brothers,
J'l'hn,  Joacliini,  and  George,  in  Lindner's  Mittheilungen
aus  der  Anhaltischen  Geschichte  (Communications  from
the  History  of  Anhalt),  part  ii.,  which  contains  some
letters  wailtins  in  De  Wette,

reigning  house  also  held  a  high  office  in  the
diocese,  was  of  great  importance.  As  arch-
deacon and  prebendary  of  the  church  ofSMag-
deburg.  Prince  George  deemed  himself  en-
titled to  exercise  a  regular  spiritual  authority
in  his  dominions.  In  virtue  of  this  combined
spiritual  and  temporal  power,  he  convoked
the  clergy  of  the  Anhalt  country  on  the  16th
March,  1534^  and  admonished  them  in  future
to  administer  the  Lord's  Supper  in  both  kinds. §
The  archbishop  cardinal  was  dissatisfied,  as
may  be  imagined;  but  Prince  George  insisted
that  the  spiritual  jurisdiction  belonged  in  the
first  place  to  him,  as  archdeacon ;  while  the
archiepiscopal  supeiintendence  remained  with,
the  cardinal.  Spite  of  all  opposition,  he  gra-
dually filled  the  benefices  south  of  the  Elbe
with  disciples  of  Luther.  But  when  the  re-
form was  about  to  begin  in  the  country  on
the  other  side,  within  the  jurisdiction  of  the
Bishop  of  Brandenburg,  matters  were  altered.
At  first.  Prince  George  requested  the  bishop
to  ordahi  whatever  priests  he  might  send  him.^
But  as  the  latter  naturally  refused  to  admit
married  priests  into  the  Catholic  church.
Prince  George  no  longer  hesitated  to  send  his
candidates  to  Wittenberg,  where  Luther  e'xa-
mxined  them,  and,  if  he  found  them  attached
to  pure  and  sound  doctrine,  gave  them  a  cer-
tificate, and  ordained  them.

It  was  fortunate  that  things  anywhere  took
so  peaceful  a  course.

In  other  parts,  as,  for  example,  in  Pomera-
nia,  there  were  the  most  violent  intestine
struggles.  Indeed,  there  had  always  been
peculiar  exasperation  between  parties  in  that
country.  In  some  of  the  towns  there  had
been  iconoclastic  riots,  and  v.'ith  what  hatred
the  adherents  of  popery  requited  them,  may
be  seen  in  the  satirical  songs  which  are  ex-
tant. '  The  nobility  and  clergy  of  the  \vhole
country  were  leagued  against  the  towns.  The
two  princes,  George  and  Barnim,  quarrelled.
Even  in  1531,  the  Protestants  had  feared  that
George  would  take  an  active  share  in  the  war
which  threatened  them.  But  Barnim — -the
same  who  had  taken  part  in  the  Leipzig  dis-
putation —  sent  word  to  the  league,  that  what
his  brother  built  up,  he  would  pull  down  ^f
that  he  had  wdshed  for  a  division  of  the  pro-
vinces and  a  separate  government,  in  order
that  he  might  be  able  to  support  the  religious
reforms.  At  this  moment,  however,  Duke
George  died,  and  his  son  PhiMp,  young,  eager
for  instruction,  and  rather  at  variance  with
his  Catholic  step-mother,  was  more  easy  to
gain  over.  It  is  probable  that  Barnim  and
Philip,  at  an  interview  at  Cammin,  in  August,
1534,  agreed  to  undertake  in  their  dominions
v.diat  had  already  been  effected  in  so  many
others.  At  a  diet  at  Treptow,  in  the  follow-
ing December,  they  laid  before  the  meeting  a
project  of  a  reformation,  which  was,  in  fact,
founded  on  a  proposition  of  the  towns,  and,

§  Instructions  to  the  envoys  of  John  and  Joachim  of
Anhalt  to  the  archbishop. (Dessau  Archives.)

TT  Proceedings  at  Schmalkalden,  Judica,  153L  He  de-
clined  joining  the  Schnialkaldic  league, '- because  the  do-
mains were  still  undivided  between  him  and  his  brothers."

424

REFORMATION  IN  WESTPIIALIA—SOEST.

Book  VI.

with  some  trifling  alterations,  joyfully  ac-
cepted by  thenri.  The  excellent  Pomeranian,
Doctor  Bugenhagen,  was  invited  to  midertake
a  visitation  of  the  churches  in  the  manner  of
Wittenberg.  But  the  nobles  and  clergy  raised
a  most  violent  opposition.  The  Bishop  of
Cammin,  who  had  been  entreated  to  direct
the  changes,  utterly  refused ;  the  Abbot  of
Altencamp  produced  a  mandate  of  the  Impe-
rial Chamber,  forbidding  the  dukes  to  make
any  innovation.  The  knights  were  made  to
believe  that  a  league  was  in  agitation  between
the  princes  and  the  tow^ns,  which  could  only
turn  out  to  their  injury;  and  therefore  refused
to  take  the  smallest  share  in  the  reforms."*

This  was,  indeed,  the  state  of  a  great  part
of  Lower  Germany.  Duke  Henry  of  Mecklen-
burg, who,  in  1534,  took  the  sacrament  in  both
kinds,  was  opposed  by  his  brother  Albert,  to-
gether with  the  greater  part  of  the  country.
The  resistance  which  the  change  still  expe-
rienced in  Holstein,  appears  in  a  letter  of
Landgrave  Philip  to  Duke  Christian,  as  to  the
means  of  gaining  over  the  nobility.  Almost
everyw^here  we  find  the  chapters  and  the
equestrian  order  (Ritterschaften)  in  array
against  the  reforming  tendencies  of  the  cities.
In  Westphalia,  especially^  the  most  violent
contest  had  broken  out.

The  course  and  progress  of  things  in  the
cities  of  Westphalia  were  the  same  as  in
those  of  Saxony.  Lutheran  hymns  were  sung
by  boys  in  the  streets,  by  men  and  women  in
the  houses,  first  in  an  evening,  and  then  by
day:  and  Lutheran  preachers  arose.  Here
and  there  a  convent  voluntarily  broke  up,  as
at  Hervord,  while  the  priories  of  monks  and
nuns  which  remained  adopted  the  reforma-
tion.t  The  priest  of  Lemgo,  who  had  been  a
steady  adherent  of  John  Eck,  was  at  length
convinced  by  the  writings  of  his  antagonists,
and  travelled  to  Brunswick  in  order  to  inspect
the  nature  and  mode  of  the  change ;  he  re-
turned an  evangelical  preacher,  and  intro-
duced reform  into  the  town.  The  old  bur-
germeister  Florken,  who  had  been  a  great  ad-
mirer of  the  hierarchical  system,  and  held  it
to  he  the  only  legitimate  form  of  Christianity,
was  obliged  to  yield  to  the  innovators,  who
confuted  the  scholastic  doctrines  out  of  the
Epistle  to  the  Romans.;'

There  w^ere,  however,  but  two  or  three
places  in  which  the  movement  was  so  peace-
fully carried  forward ;  elsewhere,  it  gave  oc-
casion to  scenes  of  violence  and  blood,  espe-
cially in  Soest  and  Paderborn.

In  the  former  city,  the  biirgermeister  and
councillors  had  been  compelled,  against  their
will,  to  sanction  the  Lutheran  preaching,  and

*  Letter  of  Abbot  Johann  Hüls  (8th  June),  and  llie  Po-
meranian Order  of  Knights  (25th  October,  1535),  in  Me-
deni,  Gesch.  ;der  Einführung  der  ev.  Lehre  in  Pommern,
197,  231.

t  "  Wolte,"  .says  Luther,  "dassdie  Klöster  alle  so  ernst-
lich GcAtes  Wort  v.'olten  beten  und  halten."  — "  Would
that  the  con^'ents  all  would  so  earnestly  pray  (i.  e.,  read
with  devotion),  and  keep  God's  word."

%  The  other  biirgermeister  who  then  resigned  was  An-
dreas Kleinsorg,  grandfather  of  Gerhard  von  Kleinsorgen,
who  wrote  a  history  of  the  Westphalian  church,  of  a
Catholic  tendency.

to  adopt  the  Confession  of  Augsburg,  and  an
evangelical  form  of  church  government. §  But
since  they  remained  in  ofRce,  it  was  impossi-
ble to  avoid  continual  irritation  between  them
and  the  leaders  of  the  evangelical  party  in
the  commune.  There  was  a  tanner,  named
Schlachtorp,  who  was  peculiarly  odious  to
them ;  and  thinking  to  re-establish  their  tot-
tering authority,  at  least  in  civil  matters,  they
seized  on  the  pretext  of  an  excess  of  which
he  and  two  or  three  others,  heated  w^ith  wine,
had  been  guilty,  to  arrest  him,  bring  him  to
judgment,  and  condemn  him  and  his  com-
panions to  death.  Nobody  was  prepared  for
such  a  sentence — for  their  only  crime  in  fact
was  some  insulting  and  irritating  language —
Schlachtorp  least  of  all,  for  otherwise  he  could
easily  have  made  his  escape.  No  representa-
tion as  to  the  trifling  nature  of  the  offence,  no
intercession,  was  of  any  avail ;  the  day  of  exe-
cution was  fixed.  In  order  to  protect  them  in
this  act,  the  council  entrusted  the  most  loyal
of  the  citizens,  who  were  still  in  part  Catholic,
wMth  arm.s.  We  must  accompany  the  victim
to  the  scaffold.  When  he  reached  it.  he  turned
to  the  multitude  of  his  fellow-citizens  of  his
own  opinions,  who  were  assembled  in  great
numbers,  though  unarmed,  and  after  protest-
ing that  he  died  for  the  cause  of  religion
alone,  he  began  to  sing  the  hymn.  —  '-Mit
Fried  und  Freud  fahr  ich  dahin."  (With  peace
and  joy  I  go  hence.)  The  whole  multitude
joined  in.  They  were  convinced  that  the  un-
fortunate man  was  a  victim  to  arbitrary  power  •
but  the  council  wielded  the  sword  of  justice,
and  they  did  not  think  themselves  justified  in
interposing.  The  executioner  asked  which  of
the  condemned  w^ould  die  first.  Schlachtorp
craved  that  honour,  sat  down  upon  the  chair,
suffered  his  shirt  to  be  pulled  off,  and  pre-
sented his  neck  to  the  stroke.  As  fortune
would  have  it,  the  executioner  did  not  take
good  aim,  and  the  stroke,  instead  of  falling  on
his  neck,  fell  on  his  back  ;  so  that  Schlachtorp
and  the  chair  in  which  he  was  seated  were
overturned,  and,  though  fearfully  wounded,  he
was  still  living.  The  other  executioner  came
forward,  raised  him  up,  and  placed  his  neck
in  a  position  to  receive  a  second  stroke.  But
meantime  Schlachtorp  had  recovered  his  con-
sciousness; he  thought  he  had  given  justice
her  due,  and  was  absolved  from  all  further
obligations:  though  his  hands  were  bound,  by
a  rapid  turn  he  snatched  the  sword,  already
again  uplifted,  from  the  executioner's  hand,
and  grasped  it  w^ith  a  strength  redoubled  by
the  mortal  peril,  till  he  had  torn  the  cords  from
his  hands  with  his  teeth ;  when  he  brandished
the  weapon,  crimsoned  with  his  own  blood,
around  him  with  such  force,  that  neither  of
the  executioners  dared  to  approach  him.  All
this  was  the  work  of  a  moment.  But  in  that
moment  the  sympathy  of  the  people,  which
had  been  repressed  with  such  difficulty,  burst
forth.  The  magistrates  ordered  the  execu-
tioners to  desist;  the  crowd  carried  Schlach-

§  The Catholic  clergy  were  commanded  "ut  honesta

vivereni ^abolita  superslitione  tantum." Most  of  them

quitted  the  city.

Chap.  VIII.

REFORMATION  IN  V/ESTPHALIA— PADERBORN.

425

torp,  holding  the  captured  sword  in  his  hand,
in  triumph  to  his  house,  where,  on  the  follow-
ing day,  he  died  from  loss  of  blood  and  violent
agitation.  Never  was  there  such  a  funeral
seen  as  his.  Men  and  women,  old  and  young,
evangelical  and  Catholic,  accompanied  the
body,  all  pressmg  to  see  the  sword  of  justice
which  was  laid  on  the  coffin.  This  incident
raised  the  ferment  of  all  spirits  and  the  exas-
peration against  the  council  to  such  a  pitch,
that  the  latter  thought  itself  every  moment
menaced  with  violence  and  tumult,  and  at
length  deemed  it  best  to  leave  the  town  (July,
1533).  A  new  council  was  then  appointed,
and  the  evangelical  organisation  completed.

The  events  which  occurred  at  Paderborn
also  lead  us  to  the  foot  of  the  scaffold,  though
not  to  witness  so  terrible  a  catastrophe.  Here,
too,  the  common  people  had,  by  violence  and
intimidation,  obtained  liberty  of  preaching,  and
had  already  delivered  over  several  churches
to  Protestant  preachers;  no  negotiation  of  the
Landdroste,^  no  orders  of  the  diet,  had  availed
to  reclaim  them.  Sach  was  the  state  of  things
when  the  newly  elected  administrator  of  the
chapter,  Hermann  of  Cologne,  rode  into  the
town  at  the  head  of  the  leading  men  of  the
land  and  an  armed  retinue,  to  receive  their
homage,  Hermann  was  by  nature  no  zealot
(we  shall  meet  him  hereafter  on  a  totally  dif-
ferent path) ;  but  the  representations  of  the
canons  and  the  council,  joined  to  some  re-
sentment at  the  disregard  shown  to  his  author-
ity, at  length  moved  him  to  a  violent  step.
He  once  more,  and,  as  he  said,  in  order  to  take
a  gracious  leave,  invited  the  citizens  to  the
garden  of  the  monastery  of  Abdinkhoven;  on
their  arrival,  they  were  surrounded  with  armed
soldiers;  the  leaders  of  the  evangelical  party
w^ere  seized  and  thrown  into  pnson.  They^
were  accused  of  a  design  to  deliver  up  the
city  to  the  Landgrave  of  Hessen,  pat  to  the
torture,  and  sentenced  to  death  in  presence
of  the  assembled  people,  and  in  sight  of  the
scaffold,  already  strewn  with  the  sand  that
was  to  drink  their  blood.  But  things  w^ere
not  allowed  to  pass  here  as  in  Soest.  The
first  executioner  declared  that  they  were  in-
nocent men,  and  that  he  would  rather  die
himself,  than  put  them  to  death.  An  aged
man  was  heard  to  call  out  of  the  crowd,  into
which  he  had  crawled,  leaning  on  his  staff',
that  he  was  as  guilty  as  the  condemned,  and
that  he  demanded  to  be  executed  with  them  :
at  the  same  m.oment.  the  women  and  young-
maidens  of  the  town  rushed  out  of  an  adjoin-
ing house  with  disordered  garments  and  di-
shevelled hair,  and  implored,  weeping,  mercy
for  the  prisoners.!  The  tears  came  into  the
eyes  of  Elector  Hermann  (one  of  the  house  of
Wied),  who,  as  we  have  said,  loved  not  deeds
of  violence ;  and  as  he  saw  that  his  temporal
lords  were  also  moved,  he  granted  the  con-
demned men  their  lives.  But  their  doctrines
were  effectually  put  do^^^^.  Those  inclined  to
them  were  kept  under  strict  supervision,  and

*  A  sort  of  magistrate;  high  bailiff. — Transl.
t  Hainelmann  Hist,  renov.  evangelii,  1328;  here,  my
chief  authority.

64  2l*

fined  at  the  pleasure  of  the  authorities.  A
recess  was  drawn  up,  by  which  the  new
doctrines  were  forbidden  under  the  severest
penalties. I

Such  were  the  conflicting  powers  in  West-
phalia: on  the  one  side,  spiritual  princes,
cathedral  chapters,  knightly  orders  and  city
authorities,  closely  bound  together;  on  the
other,  bodies  of  citizens  vehemently  excited,
and  inflamed  by  zealous  preachers ;  the  one
class  not  less  wilful  and  violent  than  the  other.
The  former  scrupled  not  to  employ  their  juris-
dictional and  magisterial  powers  with  the  ex-
tremest  se^verity  to  suppress  the  new  opinions ;
the  other,  obedient  so  long  as  the  strict  letter
of  the  law  was  concerned,  were  ripe  for  revolt
at  any  moment  when  that  appeared  to  be  in
the  least  degree  violated.  The  spiritual  go-
vernment, which  held  together  the  higher
classes  by  the  bonds  of  a  common  interest,
was  attacked  by  the  lower,  who  rejected  its
authority,  with  all  the  violence  of  incipient
rebellion.

Nowhere,  however,  did  these  conflicting
elements  come  into  fiercer  collision,  than  in
the  centre  of  spiritual  organisation ;  in  that
place  where  the  word  used  to  denote  the  con-
vent founded  on  the  banks  of  the  Aa,  at  the
time  of  the  first  introduction  of  Christianity,
had  superseded  the  ancient  name  of  the  place
and  the  district,  and  had  become  the  name  of
the  town  and  the  country — in  IMünster.

Bernhard  Rottman,  a  Lutheran  preacher,
who  had  already  been  driven  away,  fixed
himself  again  at  the  church  of  St.  Maurice  in
the  suburbs,  and  became  so  popular,  that  at
length  the  bishop,  urged  by  the  clergy  of  the
city,  sent  him  a  safe-conduct,  and  desired  him
to  go.  The  .consequence  of  this,  however,
was,  that  his  followers  in  the  city  itself  re-
ceived him;  they  first  built  him  a  wooden
pulpit  in  a  churchyard,  but  soon  after — rather
by  the  threat,  than  the  actual  application  of
force — opened  to  him  the  church  of  St.  Lam-
bert.«} A  committee  of  the  citizens  was  next
appointed  to  defend  the  new  doctrines  against
the  clergy  and  the  council.  Other  Lutheran
preachers  appeared,  and  a  disputation  was
held,  the  object  of  which  was,  to  show  the
abuses  of  the  established  mode  of  worship.
As  they  found  no  able  defender,  the  senti-
ments of  the  people  gained  influence  over  the
council  (which,  consistent  with  the  ancient
constitution  of  the  country,  was  open  to  popu-
lar influences),  and  at  length  obtained  a  ma-
jority. They  then  proceeded  without  delay
to  a  final  arrangement.  At  a  solemn  meeting
at  the  Schauhaus,  all  the  parish  churches  w^ere
delivered  up  to  the  newly  come  preachers,  by
the  council,  aldermen  (oldemanner)  and  guild-
masters. The  clergy,  together  with  the  mi-

ll "We  will  that  now  and  henceforth  no  strange  man
or  woman,  serving-man  or  maid,  who  come  out  of  such
towns  or  villages  as  are  attached  to  the  new  doctrine,  or
are  accused  of  the  same,  be  received  as  servants  in  our
city  of  Paderborn,"  1532,  lüth  October.  Kleinsorgea,  \i.
364.

§  So  the  oldest  and  simplest  report  relates.  "  Dorpius
Wahrhaftige  Historie,  wie  das  Evangelium  zu  Münster
angegangen  ;"  "  True  history  how  the  gospel  was  assailed
at  Münster."

426

REFORMATION'  IN  WESTPHALIA— MUNSTER.

Book  VI.

nority  of  the  councH,  quitted  thp  city.  The
religious  revolution  was,  as  so  often  happened
in  those  times,  connected  wilh  civil  changes.

But  those  who  had  been  expelled  were  less
inclined  in  Münster  than  elsewhere  to  despair
of  their  cause  :  they  found  natural  allies  in
the  knights  (Ritterschaft)  and  the  chapter.
Here,  too,  advantage  was  taken  of  the  acces-
sion of  a  new  bishop,  Francis  von  Waldeck,  to
excite  the  whole  country  against  the  city.  All
communication  with  it  was  cut  off,  its  rents
and  the  interest  of  its  mone3^s  were  withheld,
and  the  citizens  themselves  taken  prisoners
wherever  they  were  caught.  The  condition
attached  to  the  removal  of  these  oppressive
measures  was,  the  restoration  of  the  old  reli-
gion.

The  evangelical  party,  however,  who  thought
themselves  in  the  right,  were  not  disposed  to
yield.  If  force  were  appealed  to,  they  felt
themselves  strong  enough  to  resist-  and  the
best  opportunity  soon  offered  for  striking  a
blow  w-hich  must  decide  the  contest.

The  bishop  had  just  ridden  with  the  Stales
to  receive  homage  at  Telgte,  a  mile  from
Münster.  The  injunction  to  the  citizens,  to
conform  again  to  the  ancient  faith,  was  issued
from  this  place,  on  the  Christ  mas- day  of  1532.
They  instantly  resolved  what  course  to  pursue.
During  the  following  night  they  marched  upon
Telgte,  nine  hundred  strong;  partly  brave  citi-
zens, partly  tried  soldiers,  armed  with  match-
locks and  two  or  three  small  cannon,  laid  on
four-wheeled  wagons.  Fortune  favoured  them
so  far  that  the  bishop's  mounted  posts  did  not
fall  in  with  them.  They  arrived  at  Telgte  in  the
gray  of  the  morning,  broke  in  the  gates,  look  pos-
session of  the  streets,  and  found  their  way  into
the  houses  where  their  enemies  were  quietly
sleeping.  They  look  them  nearly  all  prisoners ;
the  princes,  councillors,  the  highest  members
of  the  ^cathedral  chapter,  and  of  the  equestrian
order,  together  with  their  own  councillors  who
had  quitted  the  town;  the  prince  himself,  by
good  luck,  was  gone ;  they  suffered  the  depu-
ties of  the  small  towns  to  depart,  but  they
carried  all  the  rest — all  their  opponents — back
to  Münster  on  carts.*  At  about  eleven  o'clock
the  train,  announced  by  the  joyous  beat  of  the
drum,  re-entered  the  city  in  triumph.

The  people  thus  for  the  present  attained
their  end.  The  bishop  could  not  make  a  regu-
lar attack  upon  them ;  for  even  had  he  had
the  means,  he  would  have  been  restrained  by
fear  of  the  vengeance  the  citizens  might  take
on  the  prisoners  in  their  hands.  The  anxious
families  of  these  prisoners  now  endeavoured
to  put  an  end  to  the  hostilities  they  themselves
had  excited. I By  the  mediation  of  Hessen,  a

'*  Instructions  and  Report  of  Tlianne  von  Hardt,  Mar-
shal of  Münster,  in  the  Cleves  Records,  Düsseldorf  Ar-
chives. Neeotiations  and  attack  as  already  related:
"Alsdann  etlicl)  unser  gewaltigen  Herren  von  Münster,
desgleichen  rede,  verordente,  eins  Domcapitels  und  der
Ritterschap,  ok  souiige  ander  des  Adels,  ok  somige  von
den  Stedten  gefenglich  (renummen."  — "  Then  certain  of
our  powerful  lords  of^Münster,  the  council  of  the  same,
the  delegates  from  the  chapter  of  the  cathedral  and  the
order  of  knights,  and  some  of  the  nobles  and  some  of  the
citizens  were  taken  prisoners."
t  Letter  of  Bishop  Francis  (after  confirmation),  17th

peace  was  at  length  concluded  in  February,
1533  ;  according  to  the  terms  of  which,  liberty
to  follow  the  Confession  of  Augsburg,  both  as
to  ceremonies  and  preaching,  was  guarantied
to  the  city  for  its  six  parish  churches;  while,
on  the  other  hand,  the  citizens  were  to  permit
the  exiles  to  return,  and  allow  the  ancient
ritual  to  subsist  for  the  bishop,  chapter  and
monastery.  The  landgrave  as  mediator,  the
bishop  and  chapter,  the  delegates  of  the  Order
of  knights  (among  whom  were  a  Raesfeld,
two  Drostes,  and  a  Büren),  and  the  councillors
of  the  cities,  signed  the  treaty  of  peace.  All
seemed  now  set  at  rest.  The  bishop  appeared
in  the  city,  and  received  the  homage ;  an
evangelical  church  ordinance  was  published,
in  w^hich  a  provision  was  made  for  the  poor,
and  negotiations  were  opened  for  joining  the
Schmalkaldic  league.

Had  these  things  remained,  says  Kersen-
broik,  the  clergy  of  Münster  would  have  fallen
under  a  yoke  never  again  to  be  thrown  off.
We  may  add,  that  had  these  things  remained,
Protestantism  would  now  be  the  prevalent  re-
ligion of  town  -and  country  in  Westphalia.
The  neighbouring  communes,  Warendorf,
Beckum,  Aalen,  Coesfeld,  already  imitated
the  example  of  Münster.  The  bishop  him-
self, who  was  not  more  fixed  in  his  opinions
than  Hermann  of  Cologne,  would  at  length
have  been  borne  \\\\\\  the  stream,  and  Münster
would  have  decided  the  fate  of  Westphaha.

But  a  signal  example  was  to  be  given  to  the
world,  of  the  dangers  inevitably  attending  a
change  in  long-established  things.

The  principle  of  the  reformation  was  once
more  in  living  progress  ;  it  was  spreading  vic-
toriously through  all  Germany;  but  for  that
very  reason,  its  effect  on  the  actions,  the  v/ants
and  the  passions  of  men  admitted  neither  of
restraint  nor  calculation.  It  is  truß  that  the
Protestants  had  at  length  acquired  a  regularly
constituted  organ,  whose  legality  and  compati-
bility with  the  condition  and  welfare  of  the
empire  had  obtained  recognition,  though  at
first  an  unwilling  and  partial  one;  but  even  to
this  the  innovators  could  not  entirely  adhere.
The  members  of  the  Schmalkaldic  league,  in
whose  favour  the  peace  had  been  made,  were
specified  by  name ;  and  these  did  not  yet  ven-
ture to  unite  wdth  others.  The  new  opinions
were  compelled  to  make  their  way  by  their
own  strength ;  and  it  naturally  followed  that
they  struck  into  paths  deviating  from  the  con-
stituted evangelical  church.

At  an  earlier  period  of  the  reformation,  the
movement  in  the  towns  of  Lower  Saxony  was
Avith  difficulty  arrested  at  the  results  of  its  first
successes,  or  appeased  by  the  mere  freedom
of  divine  worship  according  to  the  new  ritual.
In  Magdeburg,  community  of  goods  had  been
preached  under  some  lingering  influences  of

Jan.  153.3,  "sind  wir  durch etzliche  Grafen  auch  ein  treffli-
chen Adel  und  Verwandte,  sunderlich  den  von  Buern  und
Mengersheim  umb  Erlösung  derselben  die  also  in  unserni
Dienst  niedergelacht,  sehr  heftig  angesoicht."— "  We  are
very  vehemently  solicited  by  certain  counts,  also  excel-
lent nobles  and  kinsmen,  especially  by  them  of  Biiern
and  Mengersheim,  for  the  liberation  of  those  who  have
thus  succumbed  in  our  service."

Chap.  IX.

DISORDERS  IN  MUNSTER.

427

the  peasants'  war  ',  and  it  required  as  deter-
mined a  will  .as  that  of  Amsdorf,  who  was
chosen  superintendent  of  the  church  of  Mag-
deburg, to  assert  and  maintain  the  pacific  in-
tentions of  Luther.  In  Brunswick,  an  niclina-
tion  to  Zwingli's  views  showed  itself  soon  after
the  creation  of  the  Lutheran  church-establish-
ment, even  among  the  preachers  who  had
assisted  in  constructing  it;  they  rejected  the
organ  and  singing  in  parts,  and  especially  cei'-
tani  hymns  sung  during  the  communion,  ex-
pressive of  the  Lutheran  view  of  that  institu-
tion ;  but  the  council  of  the  city,  and  espe-
cially the  syndic  Levin  of  Emden,  declared
themselves'against  every  innovation,  and  would
not  suffer  any  thing  at  variance  with  the  re-
ceived ordinances  of  the  church  to  be  devised ;
doubtless  they  feared  that  it  would  not  be  easy
to  set  limits  to  a  new  movement.  We  observe
similar  appearances  in  Goslar.  They  arose  in
part  from  the  Zwinglians  who  had  been  driven
out  of  Brunswick;  but  here,  too,  Amsdorf
watched  over  the  integrity  of  the  Wittenbeig
ordinances,  and  their  opponents  were  driven
away.

Movements  of  a  kindred  nature,  but  far
more  violent,  now  took  place  in  Münster.  The
preachers  who  had  arisen  during  the  conflict
(of  whom  the  most  zealous,  Rottmann,  now
held  the  office  of  superintendent)  not  only
betrayed  a  leaning  to  the  Zwinglian  view  of
the  Lord's  Supper,  but  what  (considering  the
manner  in  which  opinions  were  at  that  time
implicated)  was  much  more  important, —  a
wide  departure  even  from  Zwingli  in  relation
to  the  other  sacrament.  Rottmann  rejected_
infant  baptism.  All  the  lovers  of  peace  in
Münster,  all  who  were  satisfied  with  what
they  had  obtained,  were  alarmed;  the  coun-
cil, democratically  as  it  was  constituted,  op-
posed him ;  a  disputation  was  held,  the  result
of  which  was,  a  formal  declaration  against
Rottmann.  Th«  university  of  I\Iarburg  too
gave  in  an  opinion  against  him,  and  certain
Hessian  theologians  came  to  support  the  coun-
cil in  its  resistance  to  the  innovators.  With
all  this,  however,  the  new  council,  which  had
still  to  contend  with  the  tendencies  of  the
Catholic  party,  was  not  strong  enough  to  haye
recourse  to  energetic  measures.  Rottmann  and
his  followers  remained  in  the  town,  and  their
secret  influence  was  the  greater,  the  more  it
was  openly  controlled.  They  were  not  in-
clined to  submit  to  a  secular  authority,  owing
its  existence  to  a  religious  movement  which
had  been  headed  by  themselves.

In  this  state  of  things  they  fell  upon  the
thought  of  publicly  introducing  in  Münster  an
element  of  the  general  moral  and  intellectual
confusion  to  which  they  had  already  been
somewhat  inclined  —  Anabaptism.  This  has
frequently  crossed  our  path  in  the  course  of
our  history ;  and  we  have  seen  how,  expelled
and  persecuted  by  every  legitimate  authority,
it  yet  always  exercised  a  resistless  power
over  the  minds  of  men.

The  importance  of  its  admission  into  Mün-
ster was  by  no  means  confined  to  that  city.
It  was  an  event  of  universal  signiiicancy.

The  principle  of  reform,  now  embodied  in
a  regular  system,  again  saw  tendencies  rise
around  it,  by,,  which  it  was,  in  its  turn,  threat-
ened with  destruction.

If,  on  the  one  side,  it  had  established  itself
on  impregnable  foundations  against  the  as-
saults of  the  ancient  church,  it  was  destined
to  encounter,  from  the  opposite  quarter,  dan-
gers which  at  some  moments  seemed  to
threaten  its  very  existence.  '

The  arena  for  the  free  struggles  of  the  in-
tellect was  now  thrown  open ;  it  was  soon  to
appear  that  conquests  on  that  field  are  neither
easy  to  wm,  nor  to  maintain,

CHAPTER  IX.

ANABAPTISTS IN MUNSTER. CURSORY AND GE-
NERAL VIEW  or  ANABAPTISM.

At  a  moment  when  the  great  ecclesiastical
institutions  Vvhich  for  centuries  had  held  all
consciences  enthralled  by  ordinances  more  or
less  arbitrary,  was  shaken,  partially  over-
thrown and  robbed  of  its  influence,  it  was
not  probable  that  the  minds  of  men  could  be
brought  again  to  concur  in  one  positive  set  of
opinions.

The  wonder  is  less  that  this  could  not  be
completely  effected,  than  that  it  was  actually
accomplished  to  so  great  an  extent.

At  the  moment  before  us,  however,  antago-
nist principles  were  about  once  more  to  come
into  violent  collision.

We  saw  the  resistance  that  Zwingli,  as  well
as  Luther,  had  to  encounter  from  a  third  party,
which  rejected  infant  baptism.  We  observed
at  the  same  time,  that  this  rejection  formed
by  no  means  the  exclusive  point  of  dissent ;
but  was  merely  the  badge  of  a  party  which,
differed  on  innumerable  other  points,  and  ex-
hibited infinite  shades  and  varieties.

It  were  well  worth  while  to  explore  this
eccentric  state  of  opinion;  to  collect  the  strange
writings  in  which  it  found  utterance,  and  to
trace  out  their  inward  connexion.

So  far  as  I  can  gain  a  general  view  of  the
matter,  it  appears  to  me  that  there  were,  in
regard  to  doctrine,  two  distinct  lines  of  opi-
nion, diverging  from  the  same  point.

The  dogma  of  justification  occupied  the  at-
tention of  the  Anabaptists,  as  well  as  of  their
cotemporaries,  and  gradually  led  them  to  the
discussion  of  the  questions  of  the  two  natures
in  Christ,  and  the  powers  and  qualities  of  the
soul.  They  all  adhered  to  the  belief  of  the
freedom  of  the  will  (and  in  that  respect  were
opposed  to  Luther);  but  they  differed  in  the
conclusions  they  drew  from  it.

The  one  party  thought  the  question  a  very
simple  one.  They  held  that  man  could  un-
questionably earn  salvation  by  virtuous  con-
duct and  by  his  own  efforts ;  that  Christ  was
rather  our  teacher  and  father  than  our  re-
deemer. This  opinion  was  particularly  ox-

428

GARDENER-BRETHREN  OF  SALZBURG.

Book  VL

poimded  by  Hans  Denk,  a  very  distinguished
young  man;  —  learned,  coifscientious  and  mo-
dest; at  least  he  acknowledged,  what'scarcely
any  other  of  his  associates  M'ould  grant,  that
it  was  possible  he  might  err.  The  basis  of  his
doctrine  is,  that  God  is  love :  which,  he  said,
flesh  and  blood  could  never  have  understood,
had  it  not  been  embodied  in  certain  human
beings,  who  might  be  called  divine  men,  or
the  children  of  God.  But  in  one  of  them,  love
was  supremely  exemplified ; — in  Jesus  of  Na-
zareth. He  had  never  stumbled  in  the  path
marked  out  by  God  ;  He  had  never  lost  his
unity  with  God ;  He  was  a  saviour  of  his
people ;  for  he  was  the  forerunner  of  all  those
who  should  be  saved.  This  was  the  meaning
of  the  words,  that  all  should  be;  saved  by
Christ.*

Intimately  connected  with  Hans  Denk  was
Ludwig  Hätzer;  they  translated  a  part  of  the
prophets  into  German  together.  Hatzer,  how-
ever, was  not  only  hcentious  in  his  life,  but
pushed  his  doctrines  to  their  extremest  conse-
quences. He  was  the  first  man  of  that  time
who  denied  the  divinity  of  Christ.  We  are
not  able  to  say  how  he  arrived  at  this  opinion,
nor  by  what  arguments  he  maintained  it;  the
book  he  wrote  upon  it  was  never  printed,  and
Ambrosius  Blaurer  burned  the  last  manuscript
copy.

Hans  Kautz,  of  Bockenheim,  near  Worms,
put  forth  similar  doctrines.  He  maintained
that  Jesus  Christ  of  Nazareth  was  our  Saviour,
inasmuch  as  he  left  footsteps,  by  treading  in
which  we  might  attain  to  salvation ;  w^hoever
taugh
idol.t

It  is  difficult  to  believe  how  widely  these
opinions  were  diffused.  We  find  them  in
Salzburg,  without  being  able  to  trace  how
they  got  there.  They  were  professed  by  a
community  of  poor  people  who  rejected  all
divine  worship,  lived  together  in  solitary
places,  and  established  confraternities  by  vo-
luntary contributions;  they  called  themselves
Gardener-brethren  {Gärtnerbrüder).  They  be-
lieved that  the  desire  to  do  good  was  inherent
in  man,  and  that  if  he  fulfilled  the  law,  it  was
enough;  for  that  Gpd  drew  us  to  himself  by
that  necessity  of  acting  justly,  which  He  had
imposed  on  us:  that  Christ  was  by  no  means
the  fulfiller  of  the  law,  but  a  teacher  of  Chris-
tian  life;:|:  —  doctrines  of  no  very  profound,

*  Passages  from  his  Buch  von  der  Liebe  (Book  of  Love)t
Arnold,  i.  1305.  He  was  not  consistent  in  his  opinions.
CEkolampadius  (Epp.  Zw.  et  CEc.  p.  169),  maintains  that
he  retracted  shortly  before  his  death.  "Etiamsi  nee  ilia
purgatissima  erant."  See  Vadian  to  Zwick,  in  Fiissli,
IJeitrage,  v.  397.

(  Röhrich  Gesch.  der  Ref.  in  Elsass.  1.  338.  Zwingli  re-
fers to  him  in  the  Elenchus  contra  Catabaptistas,  in  which
he  says,  Apud  Vangiones  Denckii  et  Hetzeri  cum  Cutiis
(lescio  quibus  nihil  obscure  plenara  perlitationem  per
Christum  negant,  quod  nihil  aliud  est  quam  novum  lesta-
inentum  conculcare."

X  Newe  Zeyttung  von  den  widdenteufern  und  yhrerSect,
J528.  — New  Journal  of  the  Anabaptists  ^and  their  Sect,
1528.  Appended  are  13  articles,  "  welche  sie  sur  warhaftig
halten,"  "which  they  hold  for  true;"  e.g.,  "Es  sey  ein
inniges  ziehen  des  Vaters  damit  er  uns  zu  yhm  ziehe,  das
spy  wenn  man  lere  recht  thun  von  aussen." — "  Sie  mögen
Guts  thun  von  yhnen  selbst  wie  sie  erschaffen."  —  "That
there  is  an  inward  attraction  of  the  Father,  whereby  he

but  of  a  perfectly  innocuous  character.  Never-
theless, they  drew  down  upon  these  poor
people  the  most  terrific  punishment.  Some
of  them  being  discovered  at  a  meeting  in  the
house  of  a  parish  priest,  had,  without  hesita-
tion, given  the  names  of  the  absent  members
of  their  society.  Hereupon,  they  were  all
delivered  up  to  justice.  Those  of  weaker
faith,  who  allowed  themselves  to  be  persuaded
to  recant,  were  first  beheaded  and  then  burnt.
Those  who  refused  to  recant,  were  consigned
alive  to  the  flames.  "They  lived  long,"  says
a  cotemporaneous'Uccount,  "and  called  aloud
upon  God,  so  that  it  was  most  piteous  to  hear."
In  other  places  they  were  brought  together
into  the  house  where  they  had  frequently  held
their  meetings  and  preached  to  ane  another,
fastened  in,  and  the  house  set  fire  to.  "  They
cried  out  most  lamentably  together,  and  at
length  gave  up  the  ghost :  God  help  them  and
us  all  !"

There  was  a  beautiful  girl  of  sixteen,  who
could  by  no  means  be  induced  to  recant ; — for
indeed  the  soul  is  at  that  age  stronger  and
more  capable  of  the  highest  flights  of  devoted-
ness  to  a  great  moral  sentiment,  than  at  a  more
advanced  period  of  life; — it  is  certain  that  she
was  guilty  of  the  things  wherepf  she  was  ac-
cused, but  in  all  other  respects  she  had  the
consciousness  and  the  expression  of  the  purest
innocence.  Everybody  supphcated  for  her
life.  The  executioner  took  her  in  his  arras,
carried  her  to  a  place  near  where  horses  were
watered,  and  held  her  under  the  water  till  she
was  drowned;  he  then  drew  out  the  hfeless
body  and  committed  it  to  the  flames. §

The  other  party,  of  whom  mention  was
made,  was  led  to  totally  different  conclusions
on  the  same  questions  of  redemption  and  jus-
tification. They  assumed  a  fundamental  sepa-
ration between  flesh  and  spirit.  Instead  of
holding  that  man  is  able  of  his  own  strength
to  do  that  which  is  right,  and  is  saved  by
righteousness,  and  that  this  is  the  doctrine
preached  by  Christ,  they  maintained,  that  the
flesh  alone  sinned,  and  that  the  spirit  was  not
affected  by  its  acts,  since  it  did  not  participate
in  the  fall :  that  the  whole  man  was  rendered
as  free  by  the  restoration,  as  before  the  fall,
or  even  more  so.  Inasmuch  as  they  ascribed
this  restoration  to  Christ,  they  taught  that  his
humanity  was  of  a  peculiar  nature,  that  he
took  nothing  of  his  mother  at  his  birth,  but  in
him  the  pure  word  was  made  flesh,  for*  the
flesh  of  Adam  was  accursed.  These  views
were  also  very  widely  disseminated ;  there
are  Anabaptist  hymns  in  which  they  are  dis-
tinctly expressed.il It  is  not  improbable  that

may  draw  us  to  himself:  that  is,  if  we  teach  men  to  do
rightly  from  without  {i.  e.  in  outward  acts).  "  'I'hey  may
do  good  of  themselves,  as  they  are  created  to  do."

§  Newe  Zeyttung.  In  Zauner's  Salzburger  Chronik,  v.
119,  there  are  some  further  notices  concerning  these
priests,  &c.,  although  the  anecdote  above  was  unknown
to  him.

|(  The  song,  for  example,  which  is  inserted  in  the  history
and  traditions  of  Münster,  (Münsterischen  Geschichte  und
Sagen,)  p.  291.  The  prisoner  is  there  asked  whether  Chrjst
be  of  the  flesh  and  blood  of  the  Virgin  Mary.
"  Das  hab  ich  nie  gelesen,  hab  ich  vor  ihnen  bekannt,

Wie  soll  der  von  Erde  wesen  den  Gott  uns  hat  gesandt."

Chap.  IX.

ANABAPTIST  DOCTRINES.

429

Caspar  Schwenkfeld,  who  also  rejected  the
church,  as  then  constituted,  and  infant  bap-
tism, and  denied  that  the  body  of  Christ  was
created,  contributed  greatly  to  their  develop-
ment.* Melchior  Hoffmann,  who  busied  him-
self so  much  with  these  points,  was  certainly
instigated  by  him.  Hoffmann  declared  him-
self at  first  for  unconditional  election  by
grace ;  but  he  afterwards  maintained  that
every  man  might  be  made  partaker  of  grace;
those  only  were  lost  without  hope  of  mercy,
who,  having  been  once  enlightened,  fell  off
again  from  the  truth.  He  proposed  to  unite
all  in  whom  any  sign  of  grace  manifested
itself,  into  one  congregation  by  second  bap-
tism.!

Many  and  still  greater  diversities  showed
themselves  among  the  Anabaptists  in  respect
of  conduct  and  practice.

Some  regarded  infant  baptism  as  useless,
others  as  an  abon^ination;  some  demanded  the
strictest  community  of  goods,  others  went  no
further  than  the  duty  of  mutual  help.  Some
segregated  themselves  as  much  as  possible,
and  held  it  to  be  unchristian  to  celebrate  the
Sabbath;  others  declared  it  culpable  to  follow
after  singularities.  Sebastian  Frank,  v\dio
knew  them  well,  and  was  even  thought  to
belong  to  them,  gives  a  long  list  (^  divergen-
cies which  he  had  observed  among  them.i:

It  was  impossible  that  they  should  not  come
into  collision  with  the  civil  power  in  various
ways.

This  was  obviously  the  case  with  those  who
refused  to  perform  military  service,  or  to  take
an  oath.  They  esteemed  it  a  crime  to  take
away  life  under  any  circumstances  whatso-
ever, and  regarded  an  oath  as  sinful  and  for-
bidden. This  could  not  possibly  be  allowed
in  the  cities,  the  defence  of  which  was  still
entirely  confided  to  the  citizens  themselves ;
nor  in  those,  like  Strasburg,  where  the  Vvdiole
allegiance  was  connected  with  the  oath  of
citizenship  (Bürgereid),  which  was  taken  on
the  yearly  swearing  day  (Schwörtag).

As  we  advance,  we  find  others  who  thought
themselves  called  upon  to  reform  the  institu-
tion of  marriage,  on  the  plea  that  none  was
valid,  save  such  as  was  concluded  in  the  spirit.
One  of  this  class  of  reformers  was  the  tanner,
Claus  Frei,  who  had  deserted  his  wife,  and
rambled  about  the  world  with  another  wo-
man, whom  he  called  "  his  only  true  spiritual
wedded  sister. "§

All,  however,  agreed  in  declaring  the  church
government,  formed  by  the  combined  author-
ity of  the  magistrate  and  the  priest,  insupport-

"  'I'hat  have  I  never  read,  as  I  confess'd  before  j^'ou,

How  should  He  have  been  of  earth,  whom  God  hath  sent
to  us."

*  Biillinger,  writing  to  Vadian,  says  of  Schwenkfeld,
"  Hoffmanni  dogma  de  carne  Christi  coelitusdelata  primus
iiivenit,  etsi  jam  dissimuiat."  Butzer  accuses  him  of  the
whole  of  the  Anabaptist  doctrines. Epp.  Ref  p.  112.

t  Extract  from  his  Exposition  of  the  12th  Chapter  of
Daniel,  in  Krohn's  Geschichte  der  Wiederläufer  (only  cou-
cerning  Melch.  Hofimann),  p.  90.

t  Die  dritt  Chronika  Von  den  Päpsten  und  geistlichen
Händeln.  (The  third  Chronicle  of  the  Popes  and  religious
quarrels),  p.  165.

§  Rofarich,  ii.  93, 101.

able;  and  maintained  that  if  everybody  were
allowed  to  preach,  there  would  be  no  such
thing  as  schism.  They  declared  that  the  in-
stitutions framed  by  the  evangelical  leaders
were  nothing  else  than  a  new  kind  of  papacy.

They  were  persuaded,  too,  that  these  could
not  last  long.  One  of  the  most  essential  points
of  their  creed  is,  the  apocalyptic  expectation
of  a  speedy  and  total  revolution  and  a  com-
plete victory,  which  Münzer  and  Storch  had
fostered.  Following  their  example,  the  later
leaders  had  also  indulged  in  the  most  mag-
nificent visions,  each  on  his  own  behalf,  and
had  contrived  to  procure  belief  in  them,  at
least  among  his  imm^ediate  friends  and  fol-
lowers.

Hubmayr  likened  Nicolspurg,  where  one  of
the  house  of  Lichtenstein  hospitably  enter-
tained him,  to  Emraaus;  -''for  it  began  to  be
night,  and  the  last  days  were  at  hand."

Melchior  Hoffmann,  a  travelling  tanner,  al-
ready mentioned,  whom  we  meet  with  in  Alsa-
tia,  in  Stockholm,  in  Livonia,  in  Kiel  a,nd  in
East  Friesland, — one  while  intimately  con-
nected with  powerful  princes,  and  another^
pining  in  prison, — at  length  returned  to  Stras-
burg. This  city,  he  declared,  was  destined  to
be  the  seat  of  the  New  Jerusalem,  whence,
according  to  the  Apocalypse  (c.  xiv.),  a  hun-
dred and  forty-four  thousand  virgin  apostles
were  to  issue  forth,  to  gather  all  the  elect  of
God  into  the  fold.

By  degrees,  the  idea  of  introducing  such  a
state  of  things  by  force  was  agitated.

Hans  Hut  imagined  he  could  prove  out  of
Moses  and  the  Prophets,  that  the  Anabaptists
were  destined,  as  children  of  God,  like  the
Israelites  of  old,  to  root  out  the  ungodly,  to
which  God  himself  could  call  them.|j

In  the  Würtenberg  territory,  a  man  named
Zuberhans,  who  was  taken  prisoner  in  the
year  1528,  confessed  that  he  and  other  true
believers  had  determined  to  begin  the  work
on  the  following  Easter;  seven  hundred  of
them  were  to  meet  at  Reutlingen,  and  to  pro-
ceed immediately  to  overthrow  the  govern-
ment of  Würtenberg,  to  put  the  priests  to
death,  and  to  effect  a  complete  revolution. IT

Melchior  Hoffman  did  Hot  threaten  to  use
the  sword  himself,  but  he  was  persuaded  that
recourse  must  be  had  to  it.  He  had  been  for
a  time  in  personal  communication  with  Fre-
deric I.,  King  of  Denmark,  and  he  declared
him  to  be  one  of  the  two  sovereigns  by  whom,
when  the  times  should  be  come  (for  they  had
not  yet  arrived),  all  the  first-born  of  Egypt
should  be  slain,  till  the  true  gospel  should
possess  the  earth,  and  the  marriage  of  the
Lamb  be  accomphshed.  But  all  his  disciples
had  not  his  moderation.  Some  of  them  were
of  opinion  that  the  times  were  actually  come,
and  that  they  were  themselves  destined  to
wield  the  sword.  Thus  these  opinions  very
quickly  rose  from  the  more  strange  than  dan-
gerous peculiarities  of  the  Quietists  {Stillen  im
Lande),  to  the  furious  violence  of  fanatical
world-reformers.

II  Sebast.  Frank,  p.  169.
IT  Sattler,  Herzöge,  ii.p.  174.

430

ANABAPTIST  DOCTRINES.

Book  VI.

Every  part  of  Germany  was  traversed  by
wandering  apostles  of  these  various  sects ;  no
one  knew  whence  they  came,  or  whither  they
were  going.  Their  first  salutation  was,  The
peace  of  the  Lord  be  with  you !  and  with  this
they  connected  the  doctrine  of  a  fraternal
community  of  all  things.  They  then  went  on
to  discourse  of  the  corruption  of  the  world,
which  God  was  about  to  chastise;  and  re-
marked that  the  power  He  had  given  to  the
Turks  might  be  regarded  as  a  beginning  of
that  chastisement.  They  next  turned  to  the
expectation,  then  very  v/idely  diffused,  of
an  impending  mystical  transformation  of  all
things.  Rumours  had  come  from  the  East  of
the  birth  of  Antichrist,  which  had  already
taken  place  at  Babylon  amidst  signs  and  won-
ders :  some  even  said  he  was  grown  up  and
worshipped  as  a  god.^'  In  the  West,  the  suc-
cesses of  the  emperor,  Charles  V.,  had  ex-
cited the  most  extravagant  hopes.  He  was  to
conquer  Jerusalem,  and  to  issue  a  command-
ment to  put  to  death  every  man  on  earth  who
did  not  adore  the  cross;  he  would  then  be
crowned  by  an  angel  of  God,  and  die  in  the
arms  of  Christ. f  In  some  places  people  se-
riously expected  the  end  of  the  world,  the  day
and  hour  of  which  was  fixed.  To  dreams  of
this  sort,  the  Anabaptists  attached  their  pro-
phecies. They  declared  that  the  messengers
of  God  who  were  to  seal  the  elect  of  God  with
the  sign  of  the  covenant,  were  already  abroad
in  the  world.  When  the  time  was  come,  those
who  were  sealed  were  to  be  gathered  together
from  the  four  ends  of  the  earth ;  and  then
would  Christ  their  king  come  among  them,
v,nd  deliver  the  sword  into  their  hand.  The
ungodly  were  to  be  utterly  swept  away;  but
to  the  elect  a  new  life  was  appointed,  without
laws,  or  authorities,  or  marriage,  in  the  enjoy-
ment of  overflowing  abundance. I

It  is  evident  that  the  Anabaptists  proceeded
upon  principles  which  leaned  on  the  one  side
to  mysticism,  and  on  the  other  to  rationalism;
but  they  always  concurred  in  the  feeling  of
the  necessity  for  the  strictest  union,  and  in
the  arrogance  of  an  elect  people  ;  these,  comx-
bined;  led  to  views,  at  once  transcendent  and
sensual,  of  the  mission  of  a  Messiah.  There
was  no  novelty  in  what  they  promulgated.
These  were,  in  fact,  only  the  same  promises
which  the  Talmud  held  out  to  true  believers
among  the  Jews:  —  that,  at  the  end  of  days,
all  the  peoples  of  the  earth  should  be  de-
stroyed, or  should  become  the  servants  of  the
elect,  who  should  live  in  glory,  and  feast  on
Behemoth  and  Leviathan. But  such  was  the

*  A  letter  published  iiflhe  year  ]532  by  the  Rhodisern  ;
in  Corrodi's  Geschichte  des  Chiliasmus,  iii.  p.  20.  His
mother's  name  was  Rachuma  (the  Merciful).  On  the
night  in  which  he  was  born  (5th  March),  the  sun  shone,
and  disappeared  the  following  day.  It  rained  pearls,
which  typified  the  people  that  had  bound  themselves  by
oath  to  follow  him.

t  Antonius  Pontus,  Hariadertus  Barbarossa,  in  Matthaji
Analecta  veteris  ;evi,  i.  p.  1,  mentions  it,  "  ut  vulgatissi-
mum  ita  antiquissimum  verbum  divinum."

J  Der  Wiedertäufer  lere  und  geheimniss  aus  h.  Schrift
widerleght,  durch  Justum  Meninm.  (The  Doctrine  and
Mystery  of  the  Anabaptists  confuted  out  of  the  Holy
Scripture,  by  Justus  Menius.)  In  Luther's  Works,  Wit-
tenberg edition,  ii.  262.

universal  ferm.entation  in  the  minds  of  mei:i,
that  they  produced  a  certain  efiTeci.  They
addressed  themselves  not,  as  before,  to  pea-
sants, but  to  artisans.  The  dark  and. dingy
workshop,  where  continuous  toil  still  leaves
the  spirit  free  for  a  certain  degree  of  medita-
tion, was  suddenly  illumined  by  these  notions
of  a  near  and  blessed  futurity;  —  a  dream  too
intoxicating  not  to  find  believers.

The  German  governments  of  both  confes-
sions delayed  not  t,o  put  in  force  against  them
all  the  severity  which  they  were  bound  by  the
constitutions  of  the  empire  to  employ.

The  Protestants  were  for  a  while  perplexed :
the  constitutions  of  the  empire  had  been  de-
clared, at  the  meetings  at  Schmalkalden,  too
severe  ;§  and  they  at  length  came  to  the  reso-
lution not  to  punish  men  for  their  belief,  but
only  for  the  crime  of  promulgating  insurrec-
tionary doctrines.  There  is  a  little  book  ex-
tant, printed  at  Wittenberg,  in  which  this  dis-
tinction is  more  fully  expanded ;  the  Berlin
copy  of  it  contains  notes  m  the  margin,  writ-
ten by  an  Anabaptist,  in  which  he  persists  in
affirming  that  the  Anabaptists  have  nothing  to
do  with  the  insurrectionary  disorders. ||  But
the  very  difficulty  was,  to  separate  tendencies
so  intimately  blended.  In  Saxony,  the  govern-
ment adhered  steadily  to  the  principle  of
examining  the  doctrines  taught  by  each  man,
and  dealing  with  him  accordingly .H  Land-
grave Philip,  on  the  other  hand,  always  leaned
to  milder  measures;  he  contented  himself
with  keeping  Anabaptists,  who  openly  pro-
fessed revolutionary  opinions,  in  prison.  The
Oberland  governments,  supported  by  his  ex-
ample, declared  they  would  not  stain  their
hands  with  the  blood  of  these  poor  people;
and  in  Strasburg,  children  were  permitted  to
attain  the  age  of  seven,  before  their  parents
were  compelled  to  have  them  baptized.**

In  the  Cathohc  countries,  on  the  contrary,
vrhere  heresy  was  even  more  severely  pun-
ished than  revolt,  executions  took  place  in
mass.  The  Gardener-brethren  were  treated
with  the  same  rigour  as  at  Munich;  ^-sonie
were  deprived  of  their  limbs,  others  beheaded,
others  cast  into  the  Isar,  and  others  burned
alive  at  the  stake."  Similar  punishments
were  inflicted  at  Passau,  where  thirty  perished
in  dungeons. tt  There  are  circumstantial  ac-
counts of  the  deaths  of  George  Wagner  at
Munich,  Hatzer  at  Constance,  and  Hubmayr
at  Vienna,  who  all  perished  in  the  flames.
How  terrible  is  the  cry  uttered  by  Jacob  Hut-
ter,  when  the  Anabaptists,  who  had  sought
refuge  under  the  protection  of  the  nobles  of
Moravia,  were  driven  forth  again  ! ''We  are

§  "  Zu  geschwinde" — "  too  hasty."  Recess  of  the  Meet-
ing at  Frankfurt. Trinity,  1531.

\l  Das  weltliche  Oberkeit  den  Weidertäuffern  mit  leib-
licher  Strafe  ?u  wehren  schuldig  sey,  Etlicher  Bedenken
zu  Witenberg,  l.'SSG.  Tlie  secular  authorities  are  bound
to  put  down  the  Anabaptists  by  corporal  punishment.
Some  Reflections  at  Wittenberg,  1536.  In  the  notes  the
Maulchristen  (Mouth-Christians)  are  particularly  attack-
ed ;  the  evangelical  doctrine  is  not  censured.

TT  Melanchthon,  in  Luther's  Letters,  by  Lindner,  p.  24.

**  Sattler,  iii.  44. Röhrich.

ft  Winter,  Geschichte  der  baierschen  Wiedertäufer,
p.  35.

Chap.  IX.

BERNHARD  ROTTMANN.

431

in  the  desert,  on  a  wild  heath,  under  the  bare
heavens!"  Yet  even  there  toleration  was
denied  them.*

But  with  all  these  persecutions  the  govern-
nients  did  not  attain  their  end, — least  of  all,
indeed,  where  they  were  the  most  inhuman,
as  in  the  Netherlands.  Here,  the  Lutheran
opinions  had,  from  the  first,  found  very  general
acceptance  •  violently  as  they  were  repressed,
we  Und  a  confession,  dated  in  the  year  1531,
th~at  if  coercion  were  withdrawn,  all  the  people
would  receive  them.  It  was  this  forcible  re-
pression of  the  principles  of  the  reformation
which  prepared  the  soil  for  the  doctrines  of
the  Anabaptists.  Jan  Matthys,  a  baker  at
Leyden  and  a  disciple  of  Hoffmann,  combined
with  tlie  fanatical  and  mystical  views  of  reli-
gion of  his  master,  ihe  notion  that  the  restora-
tion of  all  things  was  at  hand,  and  must  be
brought  about  by  the  sword.  He  declared
himself  to  be  the  Enoch  who  was  to  announce
the  things  to  come ;  formally  established  him-
self as  a  prophet,  and  sent  twelve  apostles  to
the  six  neighbouring  provinces,  who  made
numerous  proselytes,  and  sealed  them  with
the  mark  of  the  covenant  of  the  Anabaptists.
We  may  trace  the  progress  of  Jan  Bockelsolm
from  Leyden  to  Briel,  Rotterdam,  Amsterdam,
Enkhuysen  and  Alkmar ;  baptizing  wherever
he  went,  and  establishing  small  associations
often,  twelve,  and  fifteen  true  believers,  who,
in  their  turn,  propagated  his  doctrines.  In
Holland,  generally,  we  find  a  very  powerful
xAnabaptist  party,  which  started  up  suddenly  in
all  directions,  and  sought  to  conquer  a  Held  for
the  further  development  of  its  forces.

It  happened  that  affairs  were  now  in  such
a  state  in  Münster,  that  people  were  well  in-
clined to  receive  them.  The  apostles  of  Jan
Matthys,  Avho  made  their  appearance  there,
gained  access  not  only  to,  the  artisans,  but
also  to  those  very  preachers  v.ho  had  been
nourished  with  the  marrow  of  the  evangelical
doctrine.

PvISS  OF  THE  ANABAPTISTS  IN  MÜNSTER.

This  was  not  the  first  example  of  such  lean-
ings; Capito  of  Strasburg  betrayed  them  for  a
time,  though  in  him  they  yielded  to  raaturer
reflection.

The  motives,  however,  which  led  Bernhard
Rottmann  to  give  himself  up  to  them  without
reserve,  were,  if  we  may  believe  a  report  ori-
ginating with  Älelanchthon,  of  a  very  personal
nature.

There  lived  ill  Münster  a  certain  Syndic
Wiggers,  from  Leipzig,  a  worthy  and  honour-
able man,  but  married  to  a  woman  of  very
equivocal  conduct.  Her  husband's  house  and
garden  were  daily  thronged  with  her  pas-
sionate admirers,  among  whom  was  Bernhard
Rottmann  ]  an  attachment  of  the  most  violent
nature  was  soon  formed  between  them,  and
at  the  death  of  her  husband,  which  occurred
soon  after,  it  was  commonly  reported  that  she

*  Missive  from  Jacob  Hutter  to  the  Governor  of  Mo-
ravia. Annales  Anabaptistici,  p.  75.

had  poisoned  him.t  Rottmann  immediately
married  her.  There  is  no  need  to  substantiate
all  the  rumours  that  were  circulated,  in  order
to  explain  the  coldness  and  aversion  with
which  every  man  of  decency  and  honour  re-
garded Rottmann,.  The  consequence  of  this
was,  that  he  strove  to  re-establish  his  reputa-
tion by  excessive  severity  of  manners.  He
began  to  discourse  on  the  corruption  of  the
world,  and  the  necessity  for  works  of  charity,
and  expressed  himself  dissatisfied  with  the
state  of  things  brought  about  by  the  Lutheran
reformation.  In  dogma,  too,  he  continually
receded  further  from  the  reformers;  vrhether
from  the  influence  of  the  secret  emissaries  of
the  Anabaptists,  or  from  the  suggestions  of  his
own  mind,  we  are  not  able  to  discover.  After
having  altered  the  ceremony  of  the  Lord's
Supper,?  he  began,  as  we  have  said,  to  im-
pugn the  lawfulness  of  infant  baptism,  xis
soon  as  the  number  of  the  Anabaptists  became
considerable,  he  openly  joined  them.  Rott-
mann  and  his  colleagues  had  just  fallen  into
violent  disputes  with  the  council.  They  had
at  first  been  compelled  to  give  way  and  to
quit  the  town.  What  better  allies  could  they
have  found  than  the  new  prophets,  v\-hose  pre-
dictions and  doctrines  exercised  so  great  and
Vv'ide  an  influence?  The  Lutheran  system
ascribed  great  power  to  the  civil  government
— even  to  the  magistracy  of  a  city;  —  for  the
recognition  of  the  independence  of  the  secular
element  in  the  state  was  of  its  very  essence.
On  the  other  hand,  Anabaptism  was  decidedly
hostile  to  it ;  its  own  aspirations  after  an  ex-
clusive despotism  were  incompatible  with  any
other  authority.  Nothing  could  be  more  wel-
come to  the  preachers  of  LJünster,  in  the
struggle  they  were  carrying  on.  One  of  them
assigns  as  the  motive  for  the  cordiality  with
which  they  had  received  the  prophets,  that
he  might  predict  (••  vorwittige"'  is  his  expres-
sion) that  God  the  Lord  would  purge  the
whole  country  of  Münster,  and  drive  the  un-
godly out  of  it.§

The  important  coincide'nce  was,  that  the
growing  Anabaptism  of  Holland  happened  to
find  its  way  into  Münster  at  a  point  of  time
vv  hen  the  politico-religious  movement  had,  as
yet,  no  definite  aim ; and  a  half-suppressed

"t  Lnconim  communium  collectanea  a  Johanne  Maniio
excerpia.  p.  483.  Habebat  conjugem  niirahilem,  quce  cojpit
insanire  amore  Rotmanni,  qnapropter  et  viruni  veneno
interemil.  In  Kersenbrnik  this  is  not  stated  witli  such
certainty.  On  the  other  hand,  a  still  severer  version  of
the  same  story  is  to  be  found  in  the  Postilla  Melanch-
thoniana.  Extracted  in  Stobel  Von  der  Verdiensten  Me-
lanchthuns  nm  die  Jieil.  Schrift,  (Of  the  services  rendered
by  Melanchthon  to  the  Boly  Scriptures,)  1773,  p.  89.

1  Dorpius,  Wahrhafftige  Historie  wie  das  Evangelium
zu  Münster  angefangen.  (True  history  how  ttie  gospel
began  (to  be  preached)  in  Münster.)  Sheet  C.  "Brach
seme!  in  ein  grosse  breite  Schüssel,  gos  v.ein  darauff,  und
nachdem  er  die  Wort  des  Herrn  vom  naclumal  dazu  ges-
prochen hatt,  hies  er  die  so  des  Sacraments  begerten  zu-
greiffen  und  essen  :  davon  ist  er  Stuten  Beruhard  genannt
worden,  denn  semel  heisst  auf  ire^prach  Stuten."'  —  "  He
broke  white  bread  into  a  larse  wide  dish,  poured  wine
thereon,  and  after  he  had  spoken  the  words  of  the  Lord  at
the  Last  Supper,  he  told  those  who  desired  the  sacrament
to  take  and  eat ;  hence  he  was  called  Stuten  Bernhard,
for  white  bread  is  called  Stuten  in  their  tongue."

§  Confession  of  the  Anabaptist  preacher  Dionysius  von
Diest,  surnamed  Vynne,  in  Nieserts  Münsterischer  Ur-
kundensammlung,  i.  p.  48.

RISE  OF  ANABAPTISM  IN  MUNSTER.

Book  VI.

party  was  rousing  itself  for  fresh  struggles
with  the  existing  order  of  things.  The  leaders
of  this  party  seized  upon  it,  partly  from  con-
viction, partly  as  means  to  their  own  ends;
and  it  was  thus  adopted  by  a  numerous  com-
munity,  amidst  whom  it  could  expand  all  its
forces.

At  the  end  of  the  year  1533,  Münster  was
filled  with  Anabaptists.  On, the  festival  of  the
Three  Kings,  in  1534,  the  prophet  Jan  Matthys
appeared  with  his  fanatical  apostle,  Jan  Bock-
elson  of  Leyden.  A  considerable  burgher  of
the  city,  Bernhard  Knipperdolling,  who,  being
formally  expelled  from  Münster,  had  con-
nected himself  with  the  Anabaptists  in  Stock-
holm, received  them  into  his  house.  The  two
Dutchmen,  with  their  remarkable  dress,  their
enthusiastic  deportment,  their  daring,  and  yet,
to  the  people  of  those  parts,  attractive  man-
ners, made  a  great  impression  in  Münster.
Religious  opinion  was  still  in  a  state  of  violent
oscillation,  and  on  the  M'atch  for  novelty.  It
was  tobe  expected  that  women,  and  especially
nuns,  would  be  easily  carried  away  by  doc-
trines which  proclaimed  the  coming  of  a  life
of  holy  sensuality.  Seven  nuns  of  the  con-
vent of  St.  vEgidius  were  baptized  at  once,  and
their  example  was  soon  followed  by  those  of
Overrat.  The  citizens'  wives  next  went  by
stealth  to  the  meetings  of  the  Baptists,  and
brought  their  jewels  aß  the  first  fruits  of  their
devotion.  Their  husbands  began  by  being  in-
dignant, and  ended  by  being  converted.  After
the  preachers  of  the  city  had  themselves  re-
ceived baptism,  they  administered  it.  Rott-
mann  taught  these  new  doctrines  with  all  the
talent  and  all  the  zeal  which  he  had  before
devoted  to  the  cause  of  the  reformation.  It
was  the  same  voice  which  had  seduced  men
from  the  church  of  Rome, — the  voice  which
no  one  could  withstand.  People  said  he  car-
ried a  philtre  about  hira,  by  which  he  bound
all  whom' he  baptized  forever  to  himself.

He  was  soon  strong  enough  tobe  able  to  set
the  council;  which  had  thought  to  control  him,
at  defiance!  Women  reproached  the  bürger-
meister  for  favouring  a  Hessian  preacher,  who
could  not  even  speak  the  language  of  Münster ;
nuns  spoke  with  scorn  in  the  open  market  of
the  Hessian  god  whom  men  ate;  girls  of  six-
teen cried  aloud,  Woe  to  sinners  I  the  journey-
men blacksmiths  forced  the  council  to  hberate
one  of  their  comrades  who  had  been  impri-
soned for  preaching.

Nevertheless,  the  Anabaptists  were  not  yet
masters.

On  the  8th  of  February  a  tumult  occurred,
in  which,  excited  by  a  real  or  an  imaginary
danger,  they  took  possession  of  the  market-
pl^ace  ;  while,  on  the  other  hand,  the  council
and  the  anti-Anabaptists  invested  the  walls
and.gates.  It  was  soon  evident  that  the  latter
had  a  great  superiority  both  in  numbers  and
strength,  being  joined  by  auxiliaries  from  the
neighbouring  peasants  and  the  bishop.  They
dragged  cannon  to  all  the  entrances  to  the
market;  and  many  thought  that  the  matter
must  now  be  decided,  the  market-place  se-
cured, and  the  Anabaptists,  of  whom  so  many

were  strangers,  be  expelled.  The  houses  of
those  who  had  not  been  rebaptized  were  al-
ready marked  by  garlands  of  straw,  as  a  pro-
tection in  the  approaching  pillage.  On  the
other  hand,  enthusiasm  and  fear,  courage  and
danger,  produced  in  the  Anabaptists  an  exalta-
tion of  mind  in  which  they  beheld  the  most
extraordinary  visions; — a  man  with  a  golden
crown,  a  sword  in  one  hand  and  a  scourge  in
the  other;  or  a  human  form  with  gouts  of
blood  dropping  from  his  clenched  fists.  Or
they  fancied  they  saw  the  city  full  of  lurid
fire,  and  the  man  on  the  white  horse  of  the
Apocalypse,  riding  on  the  flames  and  brandish-
ing a  sword.*  It  became  a  question  whether
wild  fanatics  like  these  should  be  attacked
with  artillery ;  and  the  Hessian  preacher  Fa-
bricius,  who  had  been  the  object  of  so  much
contumely,  exerted  all  his  influence  to  prevent
it;  he  admonished  those  who  were  prepared
for  the  fight,  to  spare  the  blood  of  brethren.
Some  members  of  the  council,  too,  were  moved
with  pity,  if  not  with  secret  sympathy.  They
also  reflected  that  they  should  certainly  meet
with  resistance,  and  that  perhaps,  in  the  uni-
versal confusion,  the  bishop  would  make  him-
self master  of  the  city.  In  short,  instead  of
proceeding  to  the  attack,  they  began  to  nego-
tiate. Plenipotentiaries  were  named,  and  hos-
tages mutually  given  ;  at  length  it  was  settled
that  every  one  should  enjoy  freedom  of  con-
science, but  should  keep  the  peace,  and  obey
the  civil  authorities  in  all  temporal  things.!
The  Anabaptists  regarded  their  deliverance
(and  with  justice)  as  a  victory.  In  one  of
their  writings  on  the  restitution  it  is  said.  "  the
faces  of  the  Christians  (for  this  n^me  they  ar-
rogated exclusively  to  themselves)  became
beautiful  in  colour."  Children  of  seven  years
old  prophesied  in  the  market-place.  "  We  do
not  believe."  adds  the  writer,  ''that  a  greater
joy  was  ever  known  on  earth."

And  in  truth,  from  this  hour,  they  daily, ad-
vanced to  a  decided  superiority  in  power.  ^

They  had  now,  for  the  first  time,  acquired
a  leoally  recognised  existence.  Men  of  con-
genial sentiments  flocked  to  Münster  from  all
sides;  husbands  without  their  wives,  wives
without  their  husbands,  sometimes  whole
families  together.  Rottmann  had  promised  to
every  man^who  would  repair  thither,  tenfold
compensation  for  all  that  he  abandoned.

So  sudden  was  the  revolution,  that  on  the
21st  Februar)^,  when  the  election  of  a  new
council  took  place,  the  Anabaptists  had  the
majority.  The  electors  w^ere  no  longer  ap-
pointed according  to  the  flesh,  but  according
to  the  spirit ;  they  were  all  inspired  artisans.

*  Restitutie  (Jes  rechten  und  warrachtijjen  Verstandes
förniger  articule:  einein  Münster  gedruckte  Schrift,  aus
der  Arnold  (Kirchen-  und  Ketzer-historie)  die  Besli^ytre-
den  hat  abdrucken  lassen.— "  Restitution  of  the  right  and
true  understanding  of  foregoing  articles:  a  writing  printed
in  Münster,  of  which  Arnold  (Kirchen-  und  Ketzerhis-
torie) has  reprinted  the  concluding  discourse."  See  the
Confession  of  Jacobliafschmidt,  in  Niesert,  p.  15.').

t  Dorpius,  D.  iii.  :  "Das  ein  jeder  solt  frei  sein  bei
seinem  Glauben  zu  bleiben,  solten  alle  Widder  heim,  ein
jeder  in  sein  haus  ziehen,  frieden  haben  und  halten."--
"  That  every  one  be  free  to  abide  by  Ins  faith,  and  all
shall  go  home  again,  every  man  to  his  own  house,  and
have  and  hold  peace."

Chap.  IX.

CHARACTER  OF  ANABAPTISM.

433

Nor  were  these  men  at  all  disposed  to  spare
their  adversaries,  or  to  tolerate  their  existence
near  themselves.  On  the  27th  Febpuary  a
great  meeting  of  armed  Anabaptists  was  held
at  the  town-house.  It  began  with  prayers,
which  lasted  for  some  time;  the  prophet
seemed  to  be  sunk  into  a  deep  slumber ;  sud-
denly, however,  he  started  up  and  declared
that  such  of  the  mibehevers  as  would  not  be  con-
verted must  instantly  be  driven  out  ]  such  was
the  will  of  God.  He  made  no  secret  of  his
designs.  "Away  with  the  children  of  Esau  !"'
exclaimed  he,  "the  inheritance  belongeth  to
the  children  of  Jacob."  Rapacity  was  com-
bined with  enthusiasm.  Hereupon  the  streets
resounded  with  the  fearful  cry  of  "Out  with
the  ungodly  !"  It  was  on  a  stormy  day,  in
the  middle  of  winter.  The  snow,  which  still
lay  very  deep,  began  to  melt ;  a  violent  wind
drove  the  rain  and  sleet  through  the  air.  The
houses  were  broken  open,  and  all  who  would
not  abjure  their  baptism  were  driven  from
their  homes  and  hearths.  An  eye-witness  has
painted  the  wTetched  spectacle  of  mothers,
who  could  rescue  nothing  else  from  their
houses,  with  their  half-naked  babes  in  their
arms ;  little  children  wading  barefoot  through
the  snow ;  old  men,  who  left  the  city  leaning
on  a  staff,  stripped  of  the  last  penny  of  the
miserable  remnant  of  the  earnings  of  a  long
and  toilsome  life.*

The  Anabaptists  were  thus  not  only  the
masters  of  the  city,  but  its  sole  occupants.
What  their  adversaries  had  scrupled  to  do  to
them,  they  inflicted  with  fanatical  eagerness.
They  divided  the  city  among  themselves;  and
coihmunities  from  different  parts  of  the  coun-
try took  possession  of  the  religious  houses.
The  movable  property  of  the  exiles  vvas  col-
lected together,  and  seven  deacons  were  ap-
pointed by  Matthys  to  distribute  it  gradually
to  the  faithful,  according  to  their  several  ne-
cessities.

The  Anabaptists  would  have  immediately
proceeded  to  extend  their  dominion  beyond
the  city,  had  not  the  bishop,  now^  supported
by  the  neighbouring  princes,  encamped  around
it  with  a  splendid  army.

Cleves  and  Cologne  had  at  first  hesitated
whether  they  should  merely  keep  off  the  in-
fection from  their  ovfn  territory,  or  render  as-
sistance to  the  bishop.  But  the  consideration,
that  the  Landgrave  of  Hessen  might  send  him
succours,  and  that,  in  case  these  were  victo-
rious, a  change  might  be  attempted  in  the  see
under  his  influence,  induced  both  these  west-
ern neighbours  to  follow  his  example. t  They
found  that  the  bishop  was  ill  armed  and  ill
ad  vised  ;  they  saw  what  danger  might  ensue
if  the  Anabaptists  succeeded  in  gaining  over
the  smaller  towns  subject  to  thfe  see,  and  they

*  Kersenbroik.  Ilistoria  Anabaptistica  MS.;  for  it  is
necessary  alwaj's  to  compare  the  German  translation  of
this  work,  of  1771,  with  the  original.  Mencken's  reprint
contains  scarcely  a  third  of  the  original,  and  just  the
most  important  things  are  left  out.

t  Protocol  of  a  sitting  of  the  council  at  Berg  (Düsseid.
A.)  "  Nachdem  zu  besorgen,  das  Hessen  mit  underlouffen,
und  vielleicht  eine  verennderung  der  stifte  gescheen  mochr
te."  —  "Afterwards  it  is  to  be  feared  that  Hessen  might
interfere,  and  perhaps  an  alteration  of  the  see  take  place."
5^  2  m

therefore  determined  to  send  succours,  first  of
artillery  and  infantry,  and  then  of  cavalry ;
always,  however,  under  the  condition  that'  the
see  should  compensate  them  for  their  outlay.
The  bishop  now  strained  every  nerve;  fresh
taxes  were  levied,  and  all  the  jewels  from  the
churches  were  devoted  to  the  expenses  of  the
war;  the  bishop's  vassals  took  the  field  at
their  own  cost.  In  April  and  May,  1534,  the
city  was  beleaguered  on  all  sides.  If,  as  it
was  very  well  provided  with  the  requisites  for
war,  the  allied  troops  could  not  flatter  them-
selves that  they  should  immediately  reduce  it,
they  at  all  events  attained  no  inconsiderable
advantage  by*  confining  the  disorders  within
the  walls  of  Münster.

The  matter  of  immediate  interest  is,  to
watch  the  internal  and  spontaneous  develop-
ment of  this  singular  phenomenon.  We  shall
see  a  religious  element  (such  as,  under  one
form  or  another,  had  appeared  in  the  eccle-
siastical movements  of  preceding  ages)  at
V70rk  within  a  narrow  sphere,  but  in  complete
freedom,  and  producing  the  most  remarkable
results.

CHARACTER AND

PROGRESS OF
MÜNSTER.

ANABAPTISM IN

It  might  be  presumed  that,  from  the  time
the  Anabaptists  were  masters  of  Münster,
hardened  by  success  in  the  narrowness  of
mind  common  to  sectarians,  they  would  not
only  tolerate  nothing  that  was  likely  to  oppose
them,  but  even  nothing  that  was  not  com-
pletely identified  with  themselves.  Accord-
ingly, all  the  pictures  and  statues  in  the  cathe-
dral and  the  market-place  were  destroyed.
The  almost  entire  disappearance  of  the  monu-
ments of  the  Westphalian  school  of  art,  which,
if  in  existence,  would  assert  their  place  by  the
side  of  those  of  Cologne,  is  to  be  ascribed  to
the  wanton  barbarism  with  which  they  were
destroyed  at  this  period.  Rudolph  von  Langen
had  brought  back  from  Italy  a  noble  collection
of  old  engravings  and  manuscripts,  illustrative
of  the  great  recent  revolution  in  Jiterature ;
these  were  solemnly  burnt  in  the  market-
place.t  The  reformers  even  held  it  a  duty  to
destroy  all  musical  instruments.  Nothing  was
to  remain  but  the  Bible,  and  even  that  subject
to  the  interpretation  of  their  prophets.

Every  thing  was  to  be  in  common  among
those  who  had  undergone  the  second  baptism.
The  rule  which  had  been  laid  down  as  to  the
property  of  the  exiles,  was  very  soon  applied
to  the  possessions  of  the  faithful.  They  were
ordered,  under  pain  of  death,  to  deliver  up
their  gold  and  silver,  their  jewels  and  effects,
to  the  chancery,  for  the  common  consumption.
In  short,  a  sort  of  St.  Simonism  was  established.
While  the  idea  of  property  was  abolished,  each
man  was  to  continue  to  exercise  his  craft.
Regulations  are  extant,  in  which  journeymen
shoemakers  and tailors  are specially  men-

I  Kersenbroik.  In,campum  dominicum  cum  incredibihS
Ijbrorum  multitude  perlata  esset,  qui  etiam  ultra  viginti
millibus  dorenorum  valebant,— incomparabilera  urbis  the;-
saurum  flauiraa  subita  absumit.

434

JAN  BOCKELSON,  OR  JOHN  OF  LEYDEN.

Book  VI.

tioned  ';  the  latter  being  enjoined  to  take  heed
that  no  new  garment  or  fashion  be  introduced.
There  are  also  rules  for  the  smiths  and  lock-
smiths: in  short,  every  trade  was  treated  as  a
public  charge  or  office.  The  most  honourable
of  all  these  was,  as  may  be  imagined,  the  de-
fence of  the  country.  Even  boys  were  trained
to  this,  and  acquired  an  extraordinary  dexte-
rity in  shooting  with  the  bow.  which  was  not
yet  entirely  superseded  by  firearms.  Those
to  whom  a  special  office  was  committed,  were
exempted  from  the  service  of  the  watch.  The
w^hole  community  formed  one  military-reli-
gious family.  Meat  and  drink  were  provided
at  the  common  cost ;  the  two  sexes,  "brethren
and  sisters,"  sat  apart  from  each  other  at
meals;  they  ate  in  silence,  while  one  read
aloud  a  chapter  of  the  Bible.*

It  is  obvious  that  a  comm.unity  so  singularly
constituted  could  not  consist  with  the  forms  of
municipal  administration,  in  which  the  biirger-
meister  and.  city  councillors  possessed  power
and  pre-eminence.  The  prophet,  Jan  Malthys,
"who  devised  the  new  institutions,  very  soon
seized  on  the  supreme  authority,  which  con-
temporary writers  describe  as  truly  ro^'al  —
a.bsolute.t  Matthys,  however,  did  not  survive
the  Easter  of  1534. '  At  a  tumult  in  which  he
was  foremost  —  for  his  fanaticism  was  not  of
the  cowardly  sort — he  was  killed.

We  have  already  mentioned  that  he  had
been  accompanied  to  Münster  by  Jan  Bockel-
son,  surnamed  of  Leyden.  the  son  of  a  magis-
trate (Schulz)  of  the  Hague,  and  a  Westpha-
lian  serf  woman  who  had  been  bought  from
her  husband.:!:  In  his  wanderings  as  journey-
man tailor,  he  had  been  as  far  as  Lisbon  on
the  south  and  Liibek  on  the  north,  and  had  at
length  settled  in  Leyden,  near  the  gate  lead-
ing to  the  Hague.  He  soon  grew  discontented
with  his  business,  and  opened  a  sort  of  inn^
W|[iere  he  and  his  wife  sold  beer  and  wine.
It  was  his  great  ambition  to  make  a  figure  in
the  poetical  association  which  Leyden.  like
most  of  the  cities  of  the  Netherlands,  at  that
time  possessed,  called  the  Kammer  van  Rhe-
toryke.  The  flow  of  his  verses  (Refereyne)
was  the  easiest,  his  scholars  were  the  most
distinguished ;  he  wrote  dramas,  in  which  he
pJayed  a  part;  and  it  is  very  likely  that  he
here  became  imbued  with  the  spirit  of  hos-
tihty  to  the  church  which  was  common  to  the
schools  of  rhetoric  of  that  day.  In  this  state
of  mind,  Anabaptism  fell  in  his  way,  and
took  complete  possession  of  him.  He  speedily
acquired  a  tolerable  knowledge  of  the  Holy

*  Kersenbroik,  fol.  218.  Ordinatio  politici  regiminis  a
32  senioribus  recens  introducta.  §9.  Ut  in  cibis  admiiiis-
trandis  legitimus  servetur  ordo,  pracfecti  ejus  rei,  officii
sui  me  mores,  ejnsdem  generis  fercuJa^uti  hactenus  fieri
cnnsuevit  singulis  diebus  fratribus  sororibusque  in  dis-
junctis  et  disparatis  mensis  modeste  et  cum  verecundia
sedentibus  apponent.  It  appears,  indeed,  as  if  this  re-
lated more  particularly  to  those  engaged  in  the  defence.

t  Hortensius,  p.  SOI.  Joannes  Matthias  hanc  autorita-
tem  sibi  pararat,  ut  unus  jam  inde  supra  leges  esset,  unus
scisceret,  juberetque  quee  viderentur,  antiquas  et  abroga-
ret  leges,  aliasque  pro  libidine  conderet.

X  Confession  of  Jan  Bockelson.  "  His  father  was  called
Bockel,  and  was  a  Schulte  (magistrate)  in  Sevenhagen."
It  should  be  Grevenhagen,  in  which  place  Kersenbroik
was  praetor.  Bockelson's  mother  was  a  serf  woman  of
gichedelich,  from  Zolke,  in  the  Münster  territory.

Scriptures;  though,  as  is  usual  wnth  such
autodidactic  artisans,  he  utterly  confounded
national  and  rehgious  elements,  and  applied
whatever  seized  upon  his  ardent  imagination,
with  all  its  accidental  circumstances  and  rela-
tions, to  the  actual  w^orld.  He  possessed  an
agreeable  exterior,  natural  eloquence,  fire  and
youth  ;§  even  before  Matthys'  death  he  played
a  certain  part,  and  after  that  event  (which
he  said  he  had  predicted)  he  took  his  place.
And  in  boldness  at  least,  he  w^as  nowise  in-
ferior to  his  predecessor.  The  opinion  was
already  afloat,  that,  even  in  civil  aflairs,  it  was
our  duty  to  disregard  all  human  laws  and  oidi-
nances,  and  to  hold  merely  to  the  word  of
God.  The  public  attention  was  turned  upon
the  new  prophet.  After  he  had  remained
silent  some  days,  '-'because  God  had  closed
his  m.outh,"  he  at  length  declared,  that  there
must  be  twelve  elders  in  the  new  Israel,  as  in
the  ancient,  and  immediately  proceeded  to
name  them.  Rottmiann,  on  his  side,  assured  the
congregation  that  such  was  the  will  of  God,
and  presented  the  newly  appointed  elders  to
it.  The  preacher  and  the  prophet  now  dis-
pensed with  all  the  civic  forms  of  election,
and  nominated  the  magistrates.  The  people
universally  acquiesced,  and  accepted  them.
Six  of  them  were  to  sit  to  administer  justice
every  morning  and  afternoon;  the  prophet,  Jan
Bockelson,  was  to  proclaim  their  sentences  to
the  whole  people  of  Israel,  and  Knipperdolling
to  execute  them  with  the  sword.

It  is  evident  that  this  was  a  new  step  in
the  progress  of  visionary  religion,  or  rather  of
fanatical  prophecy.  A  table  of  laws  was  an-
nounced, composed  exclusively  of  passages
from  Scripture,  especially  the  books  of  Moses.

The  extravagant  abuse  to  which  such  an
application  of  Scripture  naturally  leads,  soon
became  evident  in  other  ways.

Jan  Matthys  had  already  abandoned  his
wife,  who  was  advanced  in  years,  and  had
married  a  young  girl  called  i)ivara;  he  had
persuaded  her  that  this  was  the  will  of  Heaven,
and  had  brought  her  to  Münster.  Jan  Bockel-
son coveted  not  only  the  post,  but  the  wife,  of
his  predecessor ;  but  as  he  was  already  mar-
ried, he  put  forth  the  doctrine,  that  it  was
allowable  for  a  man  now,  as  -weW  as  under
the  old  covenant,  to  have  several  wives.  At
first,  the  natural  good  sense  of  m^ankind  re-
volted against  such  a  proposition.  We  may
remember  that  propositions  of  this  kind  had
been  long  before  submitted  to  Luther,  who
had  rejected  them  on  the  ground  that  mar-
riage was  a  civil  ordinance,  and  therefore
must  be  obeyed.  In  Münster,  arguments  of
this  nature  were  utterly  despised ;  people  in-
sisted on  living  merely  in  accordance  wdth  the

§  "  Doch  find  ich  von  jenem  in  Truck  ausgangen,  dass  er
von  Angesicht,  Person,  Gestalt,  Vernunft  ein  redsprech,
rahtweiss  anschlegig,  an  Behendigkeit  unerschrockenem
stolzen  Gemüt  von  künen  Taten  und  Anschlegen  ein  edel
wohlgeschickt  und  wunderbarlich  Mann  sey  gewesen." —
"  But  I  have  found  from  that  printed  book,  that  he  was  in
countenance,  person,  stature  and  intellect,  an  eloquent,
sagacious,  cunning  man;  of  prompt,  dauntless,  and
haughty  spirit;  of  bold  deeds  and-designs ;  a  noble,  capa-
ble,  and  extraordinary  man."  Sebastian  Frank,  die  an-
dere  Chronik,  266.

CflAP.  IX.

CHARACTER  OF  ANABAPTISM.

435

Holy  Scriptures.  Rottmann  preached  the  new
doctrine  for  several  days  in  the  churchyard  of
the  cathedral.*  Things  were  not,  however,
come  to  such  a  pass,  that  so  crying  an  insidt
to  good  morals  and  to  ail  honest  usage  and
tradition  could  escape  opposition,  even  under
existing  circumstances.  All  that  remained  of
the  old-established  citizens,  all  who  were  not
utterly  given  over  to  the  new  opinions,  rallied
around  a  smith  of  the  name  of  MoUenhok.
The  watchword  of  "the  gospel"  was  heard
once  more ;  there  was  a  talk  of  recalling  the
exiles,  and  restoring  the  old  constitution  of  the
city,  and  some  of  the  prophets  and  preachers
were  actually  imprisoned.  But  they  were  now
become  too  strong  for  opposition  3  there  were
too  many  enthusiastic  strangers  in  the  town;
and  the  common  people  were  intoxicated  by
the  doctrine  of  equality.  Mollenhok's  parly
were  soon  compelled  to  take  refuge  in  the
town-house;  and  cannon  being  posted  in  front
of  it  (partly  drawn  by  women),  they  waved
their  hats  out  of  the  windows,  in  token  of  sur-
render. They  ought  to  have  known  that  this
would  not  save  their  lives.  Never  were  prison-
ers more  pitilessly  treated  than  these,  by  men
who  were  but  yesterday  their  '-brethren  in  the
spirit;"  Many  were  bound  to  trees  and  shot.
'•He  who  fires  the  first  shot,'-  exclaimed  Jan
Bockelson,  "does  God  a  service."  The  others
were  beheaded. t

It  was  consistent  with  that  fanatical  narrow-
ness which  acknowledges  nothing  but  its  own
creed,  to  punish  every  deviation  from  it  with
death  and  destruction.  Terror  is  the  neces-
sary and  invariable  offspring  of  a  system  of
belief  which  rejects  every  other.  At  the  pro-
clamation of  the  table  of  laws  above  mentioned,
extermination  from  among  God's  people  was
denounced  against  every  man  who  shoukl  dis-
obey them.  Above  all,  wo  to  him  who  should
call  in  question  the  divine  commission  of  the
lawgiver !  Even  Matthys  had  caused  the
punishment  of  death  to  be  inflicted  on  one
Master  Truteling,  a  smith,  a  man  of  good^  re-
pute, who  had  addressed  some  disrespectful
words  to  him.  We  stated  that  Knipperdolling
undertook  the  office  of  executioner.  He  had
the  power  of  putting  to  death  any  man  whom
he  detected  in  disobedience  to  the  new  laws,
on  the  spot,  and  without  trial :  for  the  wicked,
it  was  said,  must  be  rooted  out  of  the  earth.
Preceded  by  four  heralds,  with  a  drawn  svkord
in  his  hand,  he  traversed  the  streets,  carrying-
terror  wherever  he  went.

But  since  every  thing,  however  wild  and
eccentric,  must  still  follow  the  laws  of  its  pe-
culiar nature,  nor  can  stop  in  its  career  till  it
has  displayed  its  original  instincts  in  the
clearest light, this  monstrous  phenomenon,'

*  In  a  contemporaneous  notice  in  Spalatin's  Annales
Reformationis,  p.  302,  it  is  stated  that  Rottmaiin  also
took  four  wives.

t  Ne  escrebris  bombardarum  tonitrnishostes  oppidanos
inter  se  dissidere  snspicentur  neque  tantani  pulveris  jactu-
ram  faciant,  decretuni  est  reliqiios  sexaginta  sex  gladio
ferire.  quis  pcetiEe  executio  Knipperdollingo  committitur,
q;'i  sinjfiilis  diebus  aliquot  pro  arbitrio  suo  productos  et
tandem  ad  unum  o.iines  capite  plectit,  nisi  quod  propljeta
interim  animi  et  exercitii  causa  iu  nonnullos  animad-
verterit. (liersenbroik.)

having  vanquished  all  external  opposition,
now  entered  on  the  last  stage  of  its  internal
development.

The  spiritual  power,  in  conflict  with  the
temporal,  had  called  prophecy  to  its  aid ;  and
had  first  opposed,  then  defied,  and  finally
overthrown,  the  civil  authority;  it  had  then
driven  out  or  exterminated  all  its  opponents,
and  had  established  a  sort  of  government,  over
which  it  exercised  absolute  sway.  But  it  had
not  yet  reached  its  culminating  point.  Theo-
cracy, being  founded  on  the  claim  to  a  pecu-
liar preference  and  favour  of  the  Divine  Being,
has  a  natural  tendency  to  assume  a  monarchi-
cal form.  The  chief  prophet  could  not  con-
tent himself  with  merely  proclaiming  the  will
of  the  elders  to  the  people  of  Israel,  although
they  were  in  fact  appointed  by  him ;  he  con-
ceived the  project  of  becoming  the  king  of
that  people.

Another  prophet,  who  had  arisen  by  his
side,  one  Dusentschuer,  formerly  a  goldsmith,
spared  him  the  trouble  of  announcing  his  in-
tentions. -  Dusentschuer  declared  that  God  had
revealed  to  him  that  John  of  Leyden  should
be  king.  The  preachers,  who  aKvays  advo-
cated the  most  extravagant  ideas,  immedi-
ately supported  him  ;  indeed,  John  himself
afterwards  avowed  that,  without  their  assist-
ance, he  could  neither  have  introduced  poly-
gamy, nor  established  monarchy.  He  accord-
ingly granted  them  a  share  of  his  power.  After
the  people  had  given  their  assent  to  his  new
dignity  (every  man  subscribing  his  name),  he
declared  that  he  could  not  tarry  alone  in  the
sanctuary;  the  congregation  must  join  him  in
praying  to  God  for  good  servants  of  his  house.
After  all  the  people  had  prayed,  Rottmann
appeared,  and  read  from  a  paper  the  names
of  those  who  were  pointed  out  by  the  divine
approbation  for  the  highest  dignities.  One  of
the  highest  was  himself.  He  was  the  presi-
dent or  speaker  (worthalter),  —  like  the  pre-
siding bürgermeisters  of  the  free  cities ;  Knip-
perdolling, who  had  frequent  fits  of  prophetic
ecstacy,  was  Statthalter,  or  lieutenant ;  while
the  king's  privy  council  was  composed  of
preachers  and  the  most  eminent  of  the  fana-
tics. In  short,  the  principle  of  spiritual  fana-
ticism now  attained  to  absolute  sway  in  this
monarchi-theocratic  government.

The  mystical  views  which  lay  at  the  bottom
of  the  whole  Anabaptist  movement  now  as-
sumed a  more  distinct  form.  The  hopes
which  had  hitherto  seemed  dim  and  remote,
appeared  more  attainable,  more  possible  to
be  realised.

The  Anabaptists  deduced  from  Scripture
that  in  the  beginning  God  had  created  all
things  good  by  the  word ;  but  they  had  not
remained  good,  and  God's  ordinance  now  re-
quired their  restoration  by  the  word.  But  all
things  had  their  course  in  triads — in  three  pe-
riods. One  was  to  be  succeeded  by  another,
so  that  the  past  should  be  eclipsed  by  the
present;  tiU  at  length  a  third  should  appear —
that,  namely,  to  which  there  should  be  no
alteration  or  end.

The  first  age  of  the  world  ended  with  the

436

ANABAPTIST  BOCTFJNES.

Book  VI.

deInge.  It  had  now  reached  its  second  epoch.
God  had  resorted  to  various  means  of  turning
men  to  himself;  he  had  sent  them  Abraham
and  the  prophets,  had  showed  them  signs  and
wonders,  had  given  his  written  word  ]  lastly,
had  sent  his  only  Son:  but  ail  in  vain  —  men
would  not  tolerate  righteousness  near  them,
much  less  let  it  rule  over  them ;  therefore
must  the  wrath  of  God  go  forth,  even  as  in
the  days  of  Noah,  and  be  poured  out  upon  the
heads  of  the  wicked,  in  order  to  bring  about
the  third  age,  and  the  perfecting  of  the  whole
world. This  moment  was  now  arrived.*

Rottmann,  in  his  treatise  on  temporal  and
earthly  power,  viewed  the  matter  from  an-
other side;  but  the  tendency  of  his  opinions
was  the  same.

He  says,  that  it  was  God's  will  that  all  men
should  be  subject  to  him  alone,  should  behave
as  brethren,  and  should  live  quietly  and  joy-
fully under  him.  But  in  consequence  of  the
fall,  the  divine  government  had  ceased,  and
an  earthly  power  become  necessary.  This,
however,  vi-as  in  its  very  nature  bad.  and  was
constantly  becoming  worse.  Four  monarchies
had  been  ordained  by  God  from  the  beginning.
The  first  had  been  likened  by  Daniel  to  a
"beast ;  but  the  fourth,  or  last,  was  a  monster
which  had  not  its  equal  upon  earth  for  blood-
thirsty tyranny.  But  the  time  of  this,  too,
was  come ;  its  cracking  betrayed  the  nearness
of  its  fall  ]  all  its  wealth  and  treasure  would
become  the  spoil  of  the  true  brethren. t

He  exhorted  them  to  seize  the  present  mo-
ment, that  it  might  not  be  with  the  Christians
as  formerly  with  the  Jews,  who  did  not  per-
ceive the  time  of  their  visitation.

The  objection,  that  the  kingdom  of  Christ
was  not  of  this  world,  they  put  aside  in  their
own  peculiar  manner. J  They  made  a  distinc-
tion between  a  spiritual  kingdom,  which  be-
longed to  the  age  of  suffering,  and  a  corporeal
kingdom  of  glory  and  splendour,  which  Christ
was  to  enjoy  with  his  true  disciples  for  a  thou-
sand years. § They  were  persuaded  that  the

*  Von  der  Verborgenheit  des  Rykes  Christi,  ende  von
den  Dagen  des  Herrn  (Of  the  hidden  Mj'stery  of  the  King-
dom of  Christ,  tlie  end  of  the  Days  of  the  Lord),  cap.  v.
Arnold,  Kirchen-  und  Ketzer-gesciiichte,  i.  994.  Pity  that
the  last  seven  chapters  were  left  out,  merely  for  the  sake
of  sparing  a  few  leaves.

t  Rottman,  Von  tydliker  und.  irdisclier  Gewalt  (On  tem-
poral and  earthly  Power),  MS.  in  Münster.  Extracts
from  it,  in  Jochnuis,  Geschichte  der  Wiedertäufer,  p.  188.
It  is  remarkable  what  a  striking  resemblance  these  no-
Jions  have  with  those  proclaimed  by  Robespierre,  after  he
thought  he  had  put  down  atheism.  .Compare  his  speech
at  the  fete  de  I'Etre  Supreme,  8th  June,  1794.  "L'auteur
de  la  nature  avait  lie  les  mortels  |»ar  une  chaine. immense
d'amour  et  de  felicite  ;  p6rissent  les  tyrans  qui  ont  os6  la
briser!  Francais  republicains,  c'est  ä  vous  de  purifier  la
terre  quMls  ont  souillee,  et  d'y  appeller  la  justice  qu'ils  en
ont  ban  nie."  Buchez  et  Roux,  Histoire  Parlementaire,
xxxiii.  p.  179.  The  difterence  lies  only  in  the  religious
ideas;  the  intention— to  establish  a  primitive  state  of  uni-
versal happiness— is  exactly  the  same.

I  A  specimen  of  their  exegesis  is  to  be  seen  in  the  Con-
fession of  a  Deist,  formerly  a  Priest.  "  Christus  spreckt,
myn  rike  ist  nicht  van  duser  werlt,  heft  dusen  Verstand  :
Christus  rick  ist  ein  rick  der  Gerechticheit  und  der  Wair-
hc-it,  dat  rike  avers  duser  werlt  ist  ein  rike  der  bosheit
und  ungerechticheit."— "  Christ  says,  '  My  kingdom  is  not
of  this  world;'  the  meaning  of  which  is,  that  Christ's
kingdom  is  a  kingdom  of  justice  and  truth,  but  the  king-
dom of  this  world  is  a  kingdom  of  wickedness  and  injus-
tice."

§  See  the  conference  of  John  of  Leyden  with  Corvinus.

kingdom  of  Münster  would  endure  until  the
commencement  of  that  millennium,  and  ought
therefore  to  foreshow  it,  and  be  an  image  of
it.  They  regarded  the  siege  which  they  had
to  sustain  as  necessary :  for  the  sacrifice  must
be  offered  up  in  the  desert ;  the  woman  must
suffer  their  strife ;  the  court  of  the  temple
must  be  filled  with  dead.  God,  however,
would  not  only  avert  the  arm  of  force,  but
would  also  put  his  sword  into  the  hand  of  hfs
people  without  delay,  that  they  might  destroy
all  that  did  evil  from  the  face  of  the  earth.
''Thrust  in  thy  sickle  and  reap,  for  the  time
is  come. "II

This  was  also  the  mystical  reason  for  their
appointing  a  king  over  them  ;  for  the  prophe-
cies refeired  especially  to  a  king  w^ho  was  to
be  the  lord  of  all  the  earth.  Dusentschuer
called  Jan  Bockelson  king  of  the  whole  world.

This  young  visionary  artisan  was  entirely
persuaded  that  the  whole  future  destiny  of  the
world  rested  on  him.  He  called  himself  John,
the  rightful  king  in  the  new  temple.  In  his
edicts  he  says,  that  in  him  the  kingdom  an-
nounced by  Christ  was  incontestably  come;
that  he  sat  upon  the  throne  of  David. IF  He
wore  round  his  neck  a  chain  of  gold,  to  which
hung  the  symbol  of  his  dominion, — a  golden
globe  transfixed  with  two  swords,  the  one  of
gold,  the  other  of  silver,  above  the  handles  of
which  was  ä  cross.  His  attendants  wore  the
same  badge  on  their  green  sleeves ;  for  green
was  his  colour.  Like  all  upstarts,  he  loved,
magnificence.  Thrice  a  week  he  appeared
with  his  crown  and  golden  chain  in  the  market-
place, seated  himself  on  his  throne,  and  ad-
ministered justice ;  Knipperdolling  standing
one  step  lower,  wäth  the  sword.  When  he
rode  through  the  town,  two  boys  walked  beside
him,  the  one  carrying  the  Old  Testament,  the
other  a  naked  sword  :  all  who  met  him  fell  on
their  knees.**  There  were  some  who  expressed

11  Rev.  xiv.  This  is  the  reference  in  the  orisiiial.  But
the  words  quoted  are,  "Schenket  ihrdopiieit  ein,  denn  die
Zeit  ist  vorhanden."  (Pour  ye  in  double,  for  the  time  is
at  hand.)  Such  differences  in  the  two  versions  are,  how-
ever, of  very  frequent  occurrence. — Transl.

^  Oue  of  his  laws,  given  in  Latin  by  Kersenhroik,  and
with  slight  differences  by  Herrsbach,  is  to  be  found  in
German,  in  the  Archives  at  Düsseldorf  It  begins  very
characteristically.  "  Kiindlich  und  openbar  sy  alien  Lief-
hebberen  und  Tostendern  der  Warheit,  und  gotlicher  Ge-
rechticheit, sowol  den  Unvorstendigen,  als  in  der  Verbor-
genheit Gottes  Verstiindigen.  So  und  in  wetmaten  de
Christen  und  ere  Tostendere  sick  under  dem  Panier  der
Gerechticheit  als  ware  Israeliten  in  dem  nyen  Tempel  in
jegenwerdicheit  des  Richs,  vorlanges  verseen,  durch  den
munth  der  Propheten  belovet.  vermitz  (vermittelst)  Chris-
tum und  seiner  Ajtosteln  in  Kraft  des  Geistes  angefangen
und  geopenbaret,  und  nu  an  Johann  den  Gereciiten  in
dem  Stule  Davids  gelofflichen  und  inwedersprechlichen
vorhanden,  schicken  wandern  und  haben  sollen."—"  Be  it
known  and  proclaimed  to  all  lovers  and  followers  of  the
truth  and  godly  righteousness,  as  well  tho?e  who  under-
stand not,  as  they  who  understand  the  mystery  of  God  :
Inasmuch  as  the  Christians  and  their  adherents  have  sent
forth,  under  the  bannerof  righteousness,  as  true  [sraelites
in  the  new  temple,  in  the  present  existence  of  the  king-
dom long  foreseen,  promised  by  the  mouth  of  the  prophets,
begun  and  revealed  by  means  of  Christ  and  his  apostles,
in  the  power  of  the  spirit,  and  now  come  in  (the  person
of)  John  the  Rightful,  the  promised  and  incontestable  oc-
cupant of  the  throne  of  David."

**  Ant.  Corvinus  de  miserabili  Monasteriensium  Ana-
baptistarum  obsidione  ad  G.  Spalatinum,  ap.  Scliardium,
ii.  315.  Aulam  prsefecturis  ac  officiis  ita  instituerat,  ut
si  natus  rex  fuisset,  prudentius  non  potuerit:  erat  enim
in  excogitandis  iis  quas  regalem  pomiiam  decebant,  mirus
artifex.

Chap.  IX.

ANABAPTIST  DISORDERS.

437

disgust  at  his  pomp,  and  at  the  number  of  his
wives,  to  which  he  was  continually  adding.
"Out  upon  you! ".exclaimed  he;  "  but  I  will
rule  over  you,  and  over  the  whole  world,  in
spite  of  you  !"  Even  Knipperdolling  could
not  help  mixing  buffoonery  with  his  terrible
functions.  He  once  caui3ed  himself  to  be  sus-
pended over  the  heads  of  the  crowded  multi-
tude in  the  market-place,  that  he  might  breathe
the  spirit  into  them  all.  He  danced  indecent
dances  before  the  king,  and  seated  himself  on
his  throne,  i  These  men  were  like  madmen ;
a  secret  and  irresistible  consciousness  of  the
untruth  of  all  their  wild  visions  forced  itself
upon  theni.  Knipperdolling,  indeed,  had  once
a  serious  quarrel  with  the  king,  but  it  was
soon  made  up;  Knipperdolling  did  penance,
and  all  things  returned  to  the  track  of  credu-
lous obedience.  In  October,  1534,  the  whole
city  celebrated  the  Lord's  Supper  in  the  fol-
lowing manner  : — Tables  were  set  for  all  the
adult  women  (who  were  far  more  numerous
than  the  men),  and  for  those  of  the  men  who
did  not  hold  watch  on  the  walls, — four  thou-
sand two  hundred  persons ;  John  of  Leyden
and  his  wife  Divara  appeared  with  all  their
courtiers,  and  served  at  the  tables;  it  was  a
regular  meal.  After  this  they  took  wheaten
calces,  ate  of  them  first,  and  gave  of  them  to
the  others — the  king  the  bread,  the  queen  the
wine;  saying,  "Brother  (or  sister),  take  and
eat ;  as  the  grains  of  wheat  are  baked  together,
and  the  grapes  are  pressed  together,  so  are
we  also  one."  Then  they  sang  the  psalm,
"Allein  Gott  in  der  Höh'  sey  Ehr"  (To  God
alone  in  the  highest  be  honour).*  So  far,  this
ceremony  might  appear  religious  and  innocent.
But  mark  the  sequel.  The  king  thought  he
perceived  at  the  feast  "  one  who  had  not  on  a
wedding-garment."  He  fancied  that  this  man
was  Judas,  ordered  him  to  be  led  out,  went
out  himself,  and  cut  off  his  head ;  he  believed
he-had  felt  himself  commari^ded  by  God  to  do
this,  and  returned  cheerful  and  delighted  to
the  feast. t

Of  all  the  phenomena  which  attended  this
monstrous  delusion,  the  mixture  of  piety,  sen-
suality, and  blood-thirstiness  is  the  most  re-
volting; however  reluctantly,  we  must  pursue
our  observation  of  it  somewhat  farther.

There  was  a  woman  in  Münster  who  boasted
that  no  man  could  control  her;  this  boast  had
irritated  the  desire  of  John  of  Leyden  to  have
her  among  his  wives:  she  lived  with  him  for
some  time,  but  growing  tired  of  him,  she  gave
him  back  the  presents  she  had  received  from
him  and  left  him.  The  Anabaptist  king  re-
garded this  as  the  greatest' of  all  crimes,  led
her  to  the  market-place,  beheaded  her  himself,
and  kicked  away  the  corpse  with  his  foot.
Hereupon  all  his  other  wives  joined  in  singing,
"  To  God  alone  in  the  highest  be  honour."

Every  thing  being  overthrown  and  trans-
formed, and  universal  equality  established,
nothing  remained,  save  the  self-love  and  self-

*  Neuste  Zeitung  von  den  Wiedertäuffern  zu  Münster,
1535.

t  Dorpius;  "  and  he  was  so  pleased  with  this  murder,
that  he  continually  laughed."

2m*

will  of  the  visionary  fanatic  to  whom  all  paid
willing  homage.  In  him  spiritual  pride  and
sensual  desire,  frenzied  enthusiasm  and  natural
coarseness,  formed  a  strange,  we  might  say  a
grotesque  mixture,  which  is  very  remarkable,
viewed  as  a  psychological  product.  Freedom
was,  of  course,  out  of  the  question,  among
men  who  had  given  themselves  up  to  courses
of  so  horrible  and  disgusting  a  character.
How  frightful  is  the  contrast  between  the  in-
nocence of  the  little  sect  of  the  Gardener-
brethren  of  Salzburg  and  their  delirious  de-
pravity !

Yet  it  riveted  the  affections  of  men ;  they
fought  for  it  with  the  intensest  animosity.

A  woman  of  Sneek,  in  Friesland,  named
Hille  Feike,  who  had  travelled  to  Münster  to
seek,  as  she  said,  the  salvation  of  her  soul
from  God's  w^ord,  felt  herself  incited  by  the
story  of  Judith,  which  she  had  heard  read  at
table,  to  follow  her  example.  She  actually
set  out,  on  a  similar  errand,  dressed  in  all  the
bravery  she  could  collect,  with  jewels  fur-
nished her  from  the  treasury,  and  provided
with  a  sum  of  money.  But  the  unusual  splen-
dour of  her  dress  excited  suspicion.  She  was
taken  before  the  bishop  whom  she  had  in-
tended to  kill,  and  being  questioned,  she  con-
fessed her  design,  and  was  put  to  death. t

On  the  30th  of  August,  1534,  the  bishop
made  an  attempt  to  storm  the  city ;  but  he
found  it  excellently  prepared  to  receive  him.
A  small  body  of  picked  men  stood  in  the  mar-
ket-place, ready  to  hasten,  under  the  king's
orders,  to  those  points  which  were  most
threatened.  Others  were  posted  in  the  alleys
of  trees  behind  the  walls.  The  main  force
awaited  the  enemy  on  the  walls;  between  the
men  stood  women  and  boys,  the  latter  armed
with  bows  and  arrows,  the  former  with  large
cauldrons,  in  which,  as  they  said,  they  were
cooking  the  enemy's  breakfast.  At  five  in  the
morning  the  great  Hessian  carronade,  called
the  Devil,  gave  the  signal  in  the  camp;  the
landsknechts  moved  upon  six  different  points
at  once,  and  succeeded  in  passing  over  the
ditches  and  stockades ;  they  placed  their  lad-
ders, and  already  more  than  one  standard-
bearer  had  planted  his  colours  on  the  walls.
But  the  besieged  had  allowed  them  to  come
on  thus  far  unmolested,  in  order  to  over-
whelm them  with  more  certain  destruction.
The  fire  of  musketry  now  poured  down  among
the  crowded  ranks.  The  women  threw  down
wreaths  of  burning  pitch  on  the  necks  of  those
who  w^re  climbing,  or  they  poured  the  seeth-
ing lime  which  they  had  mixed  in  their  caul-
drons over  them;§  the  storm  was  totally  re-

J  Bekanntnisse  Hyllen  Feyken  aen  p3Ti  am  Freydag
nach  Nativitis  Joh.  Baptistse. — Pynlig  Bekanntnisse  Hyl-
len Feyken  am  Saterdag  na  J.  B. Niesert,  i.  40,  44.

§  Here  is  another  specimen  of  Kersenbroik's  descriptive
powers.  Piceas  coronas  adhibita  face  incendunt,  atque
ita  fragrantes  furciilisquibusdam  ferreis  in  ascendentium
colla  injiciunt,  qui  horrendis  flammis  ipsa  arma  penetran-
tibus  niiseris  modis  excrnciati  ^orsum  deorsumque  cursi-
tant  majorique  motu  flammas  exsuscitant  et  frustra  chi-
rotecis  e  crassioribus  femorum  pellibus  ad  hoc  comparatis
ardentia  serta  eximere  tentant,  ita  ciiim  fragranti  pice  et
resina  contrahuntur  ut  manus  inde  retrahe;;e  nequeant-:
tandem  quidam  eorum  proni  concidunt,  seseque  in  terre
algenti  pree  intolerabili  cruciatu  ita  volvunt  ut  herbs  cir-

438

SPREAD  OF  ANABAPTISM.

Book  VI.

pulsed  without  need  of  any  assistance  from
those  posted  in  the  interior  of  the  city;  the  in-
habitants had  displayed  military  talents  and
courage  which  robbed  the  landsknechts  of  all
spirit  for  a  renewal  of  the  onslaught.

The  prince  bishop  was  obhged  to  content
himself  with  surrounding  the  city  with  block-
houses, for  which  he  had  to  levy  a  ne'vv  tax.

The  spirits  of  the  Anabaptists  were  natu-
.  rally  raised  by  so  brilliant  a  victory.

In  October,  after  the  communion  described
above,  some  of  the  faithful  were  charged  to
go  into  the  neighbouring  cities,  and  to  relate
the  signs  and  Vvonders  that  had  been  done
amongst  them.  In  the  very  hour  in  which
they  received  these  orders,  they  set  out  to
execute  them.  They  all  fell,  as  was  to  be
expected,  into  the  '  hands  of  the  bishop's
people,  and  expiated  their  design  with  their
death.

This,  however,  by  no  means  induced  John
of  Leyden  to  renounce  his  vast  projects.

We  may  remember  that  a  universal  fer-
mentation had  seized  on  the  lower  classes,
especially  the  artisans,  in  the  German  towns;
and  that  the  Anabaptist  spirit  tooli  root  more
•particularly  among  these  classes.  At  this  mo-
ment we  meet  with  the  same  appearances  in
almost  every  part  of  Gernnany.  In  Prussia,
the  Anabaptists  enjoyed  the  protection  of  one
of  the  most  powerful  men  in  the  country,
Frederic  von  Heideck,  who  was  in  high  favour
with  Duke  Albert;  and  they  even  gained  over
a  portion  of  the  nobility.*  Great  as  was  the
number  of  fugitives  from  Mürb.»-ia,  we  still
find  them  there  by  thousands.  In  1534,  the
Saxon  visitators  found  the  valley  of  the  Werra
filled  with  them,  and  in  Erfurt  they  avowed
that  they  had  sent  forth  three  hundred  pro-
phets to  convert  the  world. t  In  the  year
1534,  we  trace  single  emissaries  in  Anhalt,
and  iu  Franconian  Brandenburg,  where  people
had  to  produce  their  baptismal  register  before
they  could  be  admitted  to  the  second  baptism.
In  Wiirtenburg,  the  duke's  hereditary  mar-
shal, a  Thumb  von  Neuburg,  kinsman  of
Schwenkfeld,  gave  them  as3-ium  for  a  time  in
his  lands  in  the  Rerasthal.t  In  Ulm,  there
were  threatenings  of  new  opinions  bordering
on  Anabaptism,  like  those  of  Sebastian  Frank
or  Schwenkfeld  ;  while  in  Augsburg  an  Ana-
baptist king  actually  arose.  In  Switzerland
they- were  always  to  be  found  in  the  Protest-
ant cantons;  and  as  their  denunciations  were
chiefly  directed  against  the  bad  life  of  pre-
tended Christians,  the  zealous  Haller^sought
to  turn  their  appearance  to  account,  for  the
purpose  of  establishing  a  better  church  disci-
pline.§  la  Strasburg,  many  pertinaciously  ad-
hered to  the  belief  that  Hoffmann  would  come
forth  from  his  prison  in  glory  and  splendour ;
they  also  added  an  Enoch  to  this  their  Elias.

cumquaquc  flammas  emarcescerent :  hinc  magno  clamore
animam  evomuiu:  alii  vero  conceptas  flarnnias  vestinc-
turi  in  fossas  proruunt  et  pondere  arinoruai  depress!  sub-
sidunt.

*  Baczko,  iv.  219.

t  Seckendorf,  Hist.  Lutli.  iii.  §  25,  p.  71.

X  Lang,  ii.  33. Sattler,  iii.  p.  104.

§  Haller  and  Frecht  in  Ottius,  p.  69,  81.

Dreams  and  prophecies  of  this  kmd  were  rife
along  the  whole  course  of  the  Rhine ;  in  Co-
logne and  Treves,  troops  of  light  cavalry  tra-
versed the  country,  to  prevent  or  disperse  as-
semblages of  Anabaptists.  11  But  their  strong-
hold was  the  Netherlands.  In  Amsterdarn,
where,  a  short  time  before,  an  emissary  from
Münster  had  made  numerous  proselytes,  they
more  than  once  ventured  to  show  them&elves
openly.  When  Count  Hoogstraten,  the  privy
councillor  of  the  regent,  came  thither  in  Octo-
ber, and  endeavoured  to  introduce  some  more
rigorous  measures  both  against  Lutherans  and
Anabaptists,  a  nocturnal  tumult  arose,  which
very  nearly  led  to  the  most  formidable  conse-
quences.! From  that  time  there  were  inces-
sant rumours  of  the  design  of  the  Anabaptists
to  take  possession  of  the  city.  Leyden  was
kept  in  a  constant  terror  of  fires  and  tumults.**
In  the  beginning  of  the  year  1535,  a  meeting
of  nearly  a  thousand  Anabaptists  took  place
in  the  Groningerland,  which  the  stadtholder
was  obliged  to  disperse  by  an  armed  force. ft
In  East  Friesland,  a  prophei  expressed  the
hope  that  the  whole  of  Upper  and  Lower  Ger-
many would  rise,  as  soon  as  the  king  should
go  forth  with  his  mighty  banner.  Even  those
who  did  not  share  in  their  opinions,  thought
that  if  John  of  Leyden  could  only  win  a  few
succe.ssful  battles,  'he  would  find  followers
enough  to  convulse  the  world,  as  the  Longo-
bards  or  Franks  had  done  of  old.tJ  We  have
seen  that  John  of  Leyden  laid  claim  to  the
whole  world  as  his  property.  He  once  gravely
appointed  twelve  dukes,  amongst  whom  he
formally  partitioned  the  world,  and  in  the  first
place  Gei-many.  He  treated  the  neighbouring
princes  of  the  empire  as  his  equals.  In  a
letter  to  Landgrave  Philip  of  Hessen,  he  calls
him  "dear  Phil"  (lieber  Lips),  as  the  land-
grave's most  intimate  brothers  in  arms  were
wont  to  do.H  He  begged  him  to  take  up  the
Bible,  and  especially  to  study  the  lesser  pro-
phets; there  he  would  find,  as  he  says,
"Whether  we  have  usurped  the  power  and
title  of  king,  or  whether  this  matter  is  ordained
of  God  to  some  other  end."

But  before  things  were  ripe  for  a  general
and  combined  effort  on  their  part,  the  empire
was  roused  to  take  energetic  measures  to  stem
the  rising  torrent.

PREPARATIONS FOR AN ATTACK ON MUNSTER.
REDUCTION OF THE CITY.

The  mode  in  which  this  look  place,  may

II  Protocol  of  the  Council  of  March,  1534.

IT  Lambertus  Hortensius  Tumultuum  Anabaptistarum.
liber  unus,  Schardius  Scriptt.  rer.  Germ.  ii.  p.  306.  These
Netherland  reports  are  the  most  important  thing  in  Hor-
tensius.

**  Brandt,  Histoire  de  la  Reformation,  i.  p.  50.

tt  Letter  of  the  Stadtholder  of  Friesland  to  the  Bishop
of  Münster. Levvarden,  25th  January. (Düss.  A.)

Jt  Sebastian  Frank,  Andre  Chronik,  p.  267-

§§  14th  Jan.  1535.  Printed  in  the  little  book:  Acta
Handlungen  Legation  und  Schriften,  so  durch  Landgraf
Philippseli  in  der  Müusterschen  Sache  geschehen.— DocUr
ments  of  the  Proceedings,  Legation,  and  Correspondence
of  Landgrave  Philip,  coricerning  the  Affairs  of  Münster.
1536,  sheet  ii.

Chap.  IX.

PROCEEDINGS  OF  THE  CIRCLES.

439

serve  as  a  perfect  specimen  of  the  conduct  of
-affairs  in  the  empire  generally.

It  would  have  been  natural  to  expect  that
this  triumph  of  opinions,  so  severely  prohibited
by  all  successive  lecesses  of  the  erapire,  in  a
considerable  city,  and  the  new  vigour  thus
given  to  them  in  many  other  places,  would
have  caused  the  whole  empire  to  arise  in  its
strength  to  crush  a  danger  threatening  to  every
condition  of  men.

Yet  the  affair  was  left  almost  entirely  to  the
Bishop  of  Münster,  and  his  political  friends.

We  have  seen  how  their  jealousy  of  Hes-
sen, and  their  own  danger,  had  induced  Co-
logne and  Cleves  to  come  to  the  bishop's
assistance.

Each  of  them  sent,  in  the  first  place,  some
artillery ;  though  only  on  the  security  of  \the

But  it  was  sufficiently  evident  that  Münster
would  never  be  reduced  in  this  way.  'I'hey
determined,  as  had  been  proposed  from  the
first,  to  apply  to  the  nearest  circles,  and  to
engage  their  co-operation.

Cologne  belonged  to  the  circle  of  the  elec-
torate of  the  Rhine ;  Cleves  was  head  of  that
of  Westphalia  and  the  Lower  Rhine,  The
circles  had  begun,  for  the  first  time,  to  take
an  important  part  in  affairs  during  the  last
Turkish  war;  and  the  princes  were  now  au-
thorized by  the  recesses  of  the  empire,  to
require  their  co-operation  in  this  matter.

It  was  first  discussed  in  ]Mainz,  at  a  meeting
of  the  circle  of  the  electorate  of  the  Rhine.
Cologne  and  Cleves  reckoned  their  outlay,
and  demanded  compensation,  and,  more  es-
pecially, that  the  other  states  of  the  circle!

chapter,  and  under  condition  that  any  damage  |  should  immediately  share  it. But  the  only

done  to  the  guns  should  be  repaired

The  councils  of  Cologne  and  Cleves  then
had  a  meeting  to  deliberate  on  what  was
further  to  be  done.

They  met  on  the  26th  of  Llarch,  1534,  at
Orsoy,  and  determined  to  send  the  bishop  suc-
cours of  men,  but  not  of  money:  each  prince
to  send  two  companies  of  landsknechts  at  his
own  cost.  On  the  7th  of  May,  at  a  second
meeting  at  Neuss,  they  added,  that  each
should  also  have  two  hundred  fully  mounted
horsemen  before  Münster,  in  readiness  for  the
storming  of  the  city.  The  Duke  of  Cleves  had
already  commanded  his  subjects  to  take  no
foreign  service,  nor  to  permit  any  one  belong-
ing to  them  to  do  so,  till  this  matter  was  ter-
minated.

Meanwhile,  the  bishop  required  other  aid
than  that  of  troops.  As  the  resources  of  his
country  were  not  sufficient,  he  incessantly
pressed  for  a  ''brave  sum  of  money"'  on  loan.
At  first,  there  was  an  idea  of  raising  him  a
thousand  gulden  on  security;  but  as  this  turned
out  to  be  either  impracticable  or  insufficient,  it
was  resolved,  at  a  fresh  meeting  between  the
council  of  Münster  and  those  of  Cologne  and
Cleves,  at  Neuss,  on  the  20th  of  June,  that
each  party  should  contribute  twenty  thousand
gulden  —  sixty  thousand  in  all  — in  order  to
provide  every  thing  necessary  for  the  as-
sault;* the  bishop,  however,  engaging  to  repay
the  two  other  pov/ers,  after  the  conquest  of
Münster.  We  have  seen,  however,  the  bad
success  of  that  enterprise.  When  the  coun-
cils met  in  camp  in  the  beginning  of  Septem-
ber, they  hoped  to  find  the  city  reduced;  they
found  nothing  but  the  consequences  of  defeat,
and  universal  discouragement.  The  erection
of  the  block-houses  took  place  in  consequence
of  the  common  resolution  of  the  three  sove-
reigns. They  agreed  again  to  raise  fifty  thou-
sand gulden  for  that  purpose.

*  "  That  each  prince,  Cologne,  Cleves,  and  Münster,
should  contribiUe  and  pay  4000  soldiers,  for  tlie  support
of  the  kiiechts  who  now  lie  before  Münster,  and  1000
miners  for  a  iiionlh  (which  sives  a  sum  of  12,000  knechjs
and  3Ü0U  sappers  and  miners);  and  also,  shall  altogether
furnish  10,000  Emden  gulden,  f'or  the  purchase  of  powder;
which,  reckoning  each  kneclit's  and  miner's  pay  at  four
Emden  gulden,  together  with  the  actual  10,000  E.  g.,
amount  in  all  to  70,000  E.  g.,  which  are  equal  to  60,000
gold  gulden  ;  so  that  each  elector  and  prince  has  under-
taken to  contribute  20,000  gulden."

j  result  of  this  was,  that,  in  spile  of  all  their
,  resistance,  the  meeting  ordered  them  to  keep
'up  the  block-houses;  agreeing,  however,  to
i  deliberate  further  on  the  matter  at  a  general
assembly.!

I  On  the  27th  of  October,  the  states  of  the
'  circle  of  the  Lower  Rhine  and  Westphalia
met  in  a  convent  at  Cologne.  As  a  general
meeting  was  in  prospect,  they  declined  voting
any  permanent  succours.  But  in  order  to  be
prepared  at  any  moment  to  send  such  as
might  be  demanded  in  haste,  they  agreed  to
raise  the  same  sum  of  money  as  a  month's
tax  for  the  last  Turkish  war  would  have
amounted  to.-

Meanwhile,  the  more  distant  circles,  like
those  of  Hessen  and  Saxony,  were  invited  to
join  in  the  deliberations.  Saxon  councillors
met  those  of  Cologne  and  Cleves  at  Essen,
in  the  beginning  of  November;  the  Hessian,
shortly  after,  those  of  the  Palatinate,  Mainz,
Treves  and  Vv'ürzburg,  at  Oberwesel.  Their
deliberations  acquired  great  earnestness  and
energy,  from  their  fear  lest  the  bishop  should
apply  for  aid  to  the  house  of  Burgundy,  which
might  seize  this  opportunity  to  get  possession
of  iMünster;  for  Mary  had  already  asked  for
succours  for  that  city,  from  her  states  in  the
Netherlands.  Rather  than  this  should  hap-
pen. Saxony  bound  itself  to  take  an  equal
share  of  the  expenses  of  the  blockade.  Here,
too,  ambitious  schemes  were  at  work;  but
mutual  jealousy  compelled  every  one  to  keep
within  legitimate  bounds.

The  meeting  of  the  three  circles  —  the  two
above  named  and  that  of  the  Upper  Rhine  —
determined  on  at  Mainz,  took  place  in  Decem-
ber, at  Coblenz.  They  expressed  their  readi-
ness to  bear  the  expenses  of  the  continued
blockade.  Three  thousand  men  were  to  be
kept  before  IMünster,  and  to  that  end  fifteen
thousand  gulden  were  to  be  raised  monthly.
Count  Whirich  von  Dhaun  was  appointed  com-
mander; four  councillors  of  w^ar,  from  Cologne,
TreveSj  Cleves  and  Hessen,  were  to  accom-

t  Extract  from  the  recess  of  Mainz,  in  the  Düss.  Arch.
"  The  electoral  councillors  consider  of  the  most  useful  and
profitable  way,  how  other  princes  and  states  of  the  em-
pire, besides  their  own  electoral  circle,  the  circle  of  the
Upper  Rhine,  and  that  of  the  Lower  Rhine,  and  West»
phalia,  may  be  induced  to  take  part  ia  tliis  business."

440

RISING  OF  THE  ANABAPTISTS,

Book  VI.

pany  him,  and  the  troops  were  to  take  the
oath  to  the  states  of  the  circles.*

It  is  evident,  however,  that  even  this  was
rather  a  measure  of  defence  against  any  attack
on  the  part  of  the  besieged,  than  one  at  all
calculated  to  effect  the  subjugation  of  the
city.  For  this  the  circles  did  not  think  them-
selves powerful  enough;  they  determined  to
call  the  entire  empire  to  their  aid.

The  course  of  this  affair,  as  we  have  already
remarked,  strikingly  illustrates  the  character
of  the  German  commonwealth.  The  mea-
sures necessary  to  reduce  to  obedience  a  city
in  open  rebellion,  did  not  originate  with  the
supreme  head  of  the  empire ;  but  the  sove-
reign to  whom  that  city  belonged,  and  his
nearest  neighbours,  were  left  for  a  long  time
to  struggle  with  it  unassisted;  till  the  growth
of  the  danger  gradually  widened  the  circle  of
allies,  and  at  length  drew  the  whole  body  of
the  empire,  though  not  without  partial  oppo-
sition, into  the  contest.

One  of  the  first  acts  that  Ferdinand  had  to
perform  after  his  recognition  as  King  of  the
Romans,  was,  to  convoke  a  general  assembly
at  Worms  on  the  fourth  of  April,  in  conformity
with  the  petition  of  the  three  circles.

The  States  were  not,  it  is  true,  unanimous;
the  Elector  of  Brandenburg,  for  example,  main-
tained that  the  three  circles  were  able  alone
to  make  an  end  of  the  Anabaptists,  and  re-
fused to  take  any  part  in  the  measures  for
that  object.  But  by  far  the  greater  number  of
the  States  sent  delegates.  A  resolution  was
passed,  to  levy  one  month  and  a  quarter  of  the
last  general  tax  for  the  empire,  on  all  the
States.  The  amount  which  this  might  be  ex-
pected to  produce  was  not  great  enough  to
enable  the  allied  princes  to  bring  any  consi-
derable accession  of  force  into  the  field.  The
only  advantage  was,  that  they  were  now  sure
of  being  able  to  continue  the  blockade  till
they  could  obtain  a  decisive  result.  The  ap-
pointment of  the  commander-in-chief,  which
had  taken  place  at  Coblenz,  was  confirmed  by
the  imperial  authorities ;  only  with  the  addi-
tion of  two  councillors  to  the  other  four:  after
ihe  conquest  of  the  city,  the  emperor  and  the
wStates  w^ere  to  decide  on  the  course  to  be  pur-
sued with  it.

It  v/ere  superfluous  to  enter  into  any  minute
recital  of  the  deeds  of  this  little  array.  It  is
sufficient  to  say  that  it  succeeded  in  cutting
off  all  communication  with  the  city,  and  in
reducing  it  by  hunger.

The  chief  hope  of  the  besieged  was,  that
they  should  receive  help  and  supplies  from
the  country  where  their  doctrines  were  the
most  widely  diffused,  and  whence  they  them-
selves had  mostly  sprung.  Zealous  Anabap-
tists from  the  Netherlands  had  come  to  see  the
state  of  things  in  Münster,  and  had  gone  back
and  announced  the  approaching  triumphal
procession  of  the  king,  whom  they  also  ac-
knowledged, and  whom  they  were  to  accom-
pany through  the  world.  The  cry  of,  Death
to  all  priests  and  nobles !  w^as  revived ;  with

*  The  recess  of  Coblenz  is  only  to  be  found  in  Kcrsen-
broik. I  sought  it  in  vain  in  Coblenz  and  in  Düsseldorf.

the  addition,  that  the  only  lawful  sovereign  in
the  world  was  the  King  of  Münster.t  About
Easter,  1535,  they  were  all  in  motion.  The
West  Frieslanders  took  Oldenkloster,  not  far
from  Sneek;  the  Groningers  marched  upon
the  monastery  of  Warfum ;  while  |he  Holland-
ers, many  thousand  strong,  crossed  over  to
Overyssel,  thinking  to  meet  others  of  the
faithful  at  the  hill  convent  in  the  Hasselt
country.

It  seems  as  if  they  had  intended  to  make
these  convents,  whence  Christianity  had  once
radiated,  centres  from  which  to  spread  Ana-
baptism  over  the  land,  and  then  to  go  to  meet
their  appointed  king.  But  the  organised  and
armed  force  of  the  provinces  was  stronger  than
these  irregular  bands.  The  Groningers  and
Hollanders  were  dispersed  on  their  way  with-
out djfficulty.i'  Oldenkloster,  which  the  Ana-
baptists had  possession  of,  made  some  resist-
ance, and  was  not  retaken  without  loss.  They
afterwards  made  an  attempt  to  conquer  Am-
sterdam for  the  King  of  Zion,  and  actually  got
possession  of  the  town-house  one  night;  —
though,  indeed,  for  that  one  only.§  They  did
not  choose  to  observe  the  conditions  under
which  their  co-religionists  had  succeeded  in
obtaining  power  in  Münster,  and  ascribed  that
success  to  a  miraculous  interposition  of  God,
which  they  expected  to  be  extended  to  them-
selves; and,  of  course,  expected  in  vain.
'  The  prophet  had  incessantly  encouraged  the
people  of  Münster  with  the  hope  of  the  as-
sistance of  his  countrymen,  whom,  he  said,
neither  sword  nor  any  other  deadly  peril,
neither  fire  nor  water,  would  prevent  from
m.aking  their  way  to  see  their  king:  but  as
these  prophecies  Vv'ere  not  fulfilled,  some  mur-
murs arose  among  them.||  By  degrees  the
famine  became  insupportable.  Those  of
weaker  faith  began  to  doubt  of  the  whole
matter,  and  quitted  the  city.  They  were  at
first  repulsed  by  the  camp :  women  with  their
children  were  seen  sitting  in  the  ditches  by
the  stockade;  through  which  some  compas-
sionate landsknechts  handed  them  food ;  but
it  was  found  impossible  to  drive  back  whole

t  "  Slan  dout  alle  Monniken  und  Papen  und  alle  Overi-
cheit  de  in  der  werlt  sint,  went  allenne  unse  Konink  is  de
rechte  Overicheit."— "  Slay  all  monies  and  priests,  and  all
sovereigns  in  the  world  ;  since  our  king  alone  is  the  true
sovereijrn."  Beninjia  Historie  van  Onstfriesland,  bei
MaithJius.  Analecta  vet.  sevi,  iv.  p.  680;  where  some
characteristic  details  are  to  be  found.

J  Extraict  de  ce  que  Maistre  Everard  Nicolai,  conseiller
au  grand  conseil  ordonne  ä  Malines  escript  ä  son  frere
Mr.  Nicolas  Nicolai.  Les  Anahaptistes  par  instig:ation
et  messaigos  se  sont  esmens  et  rassembles  en  nomhre  de
plusieurs  mille  sur  la  costc  de  la  mer  d'Hollande  pour  de
la  neviger  au  pays  d'Overyssel  oil  i!s  devaieat  ä  certain
jour  prefix  teiiir  communication  de  ieurs  affaires  dedans
un  monastere  qui  s'appelle  Ber-rklooster  aupres  de  la  ville
de  Hasselt,  «fcc.  Nicolai  was  gone  there  expressly  to  con-
vert  them.  According  to  him,  there  were  tv/enty  wagons
and  three  thousand  people.  He  found,  however,  only  five
men  and  thirteen  women,  whom  he  soon  convinced  of
their  error.

§  Hortensius  Tumult.  Anabaptistarum,  bei  Schardius
ii.  310.

|(  Nie  Tydongen  en  den  Erzb.  tho  Collen.  (New  tidings
to  the  Archbishop  of  Cologne.)  Niesert,  p.  198.  Accord-
ing to  a  letter  of  the  commander  of  the  7th  of  May,  a
soldier  who  had  escaped  said,  there  was  great  distress,  the
common  people  murmured,  the  king  with  his  retinue  only
sought  to  prevent  an  insurrection.

Chap.  IX.

TAKING  OF  MUNSTER.

441

troops  into  the  city.  They  presented  a  spec-
tacle which  recalled  to  their  learned  contem-
poraries the  horrors  of  Saguntum  and  Numan-
tia.  Skeletons  covered  with  a  shrivelled  skin,
with  a  neck  scarcely  able  to  support  the  weight
of  the  head,  meagre  lips^  and  hollow,  trans-
parent cheel?^  ; — all  of  them  filled  with  horror
at  the  famine  they  had  shared  and  witnessed,
and  hardly  able  to  stand.  But  many  were
still  determined  ''not  to  flee  back  to  Egypt,"
as  the  king  expressed  it.  They  rejected  the
summons  sent  them  in  the  beginning  of  June,
by  the  commander-in-chief,  wnth  the  indigna-
tion of  men  assured  tha.t  they  have  truth  on
their  side.  Not  that  they  concealed  from
themselves  that  they  should  perhaps  be  tram-
pled under  the  hoofs  of  the  last  monster  de-
scribed by  Daniel;  but  they  clung  to  the  hope
that  he  would  soon  be  crushed  by  the  corner-
stone, and  the  kingdom  be  given  to  the  saints
of  the  Most  High.  They  are  said  to  have  in-
tended, when  all  was  lost,  to  set  fire  to  the
city,  and  rush  out  uj^on  the  enemy's  guns.

And  perhaps  it  would  have  come  to  this,
had  there  not  been  found  a  traitor  willing  to
help  the  besiegers  (who  had  not  yet  forgotten
the  disastrous  assault  of  last  year)  to  cross  the
ditches  and  walls.  If  they  had  only  the  inner
walls  /and  the  musketry  to  contend  with,  the
result  could  not  be  doubtful.  Those  who  re-
mained in  the  city  could  not  be  in  much  better
phght  than  those  who  had  quitted  it ;  the  king
only  and  those  belonging  to  his  court,  —  his
councillors,  friends,  the  new  dukes  and  go-
vernors, and  such  privileged  persons,  had  sus-
tenance for  a  short  time.^  When  the  bishop
disclosed  his  plan  to  the  landsknechts,  and
promised  them  that  the  commander,  with  the
nobles  and  captains,  should  lead  the  way,  they
expressed  themselves  willing;  for  they  were
tired  of  their  straw  beds  in  the  block-houses.
The  scene  before  us  is  a  deplorable  one  ; — on
the  one  side  wild,  violent  men,  hurried  away
by  their  dreams  into  excess  and  crime,  now
famished  and  desperate,  yet  still  drunk  with
enthusiasm  ;  and  on  the  other,  bands  of  lands-
knechts kept  together  with  difficulty ;  slug-
gish and  listless  in  their  movements,  and  only
roused  to  make  a  decisive  attack  when  there
could  remain  no  doubt  of  the  result.  Here-
was  no  field  for  glorious  exploits.  'At  the
appointed  hour,  on  St.  John's  eve,  1535,  a
few  hundred  landsknechts  crossed  the  ditches
where  they  were  the  narrowest,  and  mounted
their  ladders  where  the  walls  where  the
lowest.  They  knew  the  Anabaptists'  watch-
word, deceived  the  sentinels,  and  then  threw
them  over  the  walls:  thus  they  took  a  bas-
tion, made  their  way  to  the  cathedral  close,
and.  without  waiting  long  for  their  comrades,
shouted  their  war-cry  and  beat  their  drums.  The
Anabaptists  sprang  from  their  beds  and  rushed
together  to  defend  themselves.  The  result  was
for  a  moment  doubtful;  but  only  until  the
main  body  of  the  besiegers  pressed  in  through

*  Corviniis  ad  Spalatinum:  Vidi  ipse  multos  ibi  lihros,
tjiiorum  detracta  coria  victuin  miseris  supiieditarunt —
immo  scio  pueros  quoque  comesos  ibi  esse,  id  quod  ab  iis
auditum  mihi  est,  qui  in  reliquias  quasdam  capta  urbe
ejus  rei  testes  inciderunt.
56

a  gale  opened  from  within.  The  Anabaptists
then  fought  with  fury,  and  did  great  mischief
to  the  assailants  with  their  musketry;  they
killed  a  hundred  and  fifty  nobles  and  officers,
who  were  in  the  foremost  ranks  of  the  enemy :
but  it  was  the  struggle  of  desperation.  As  the
king  was  attempting  to  retreat  to  the  strongest
bastion,  he  was  taken  prisoner.  Rottmann,
resolved  to  escape  the  ignominy  that  awaited
him  as  captive,  rushed  into  the  thickest  of  the
fight,  and  found  his  death  there.  A  few  hun-
dred of  them  still  defended  themselves  behind
a  heap  of  carriages  near  St.  Michael's  chapel,
with  such  bravery,  that  their  assailants  deter-
mined to  allow  them  to  capitulate.  It  appears
that  the  terms  granted  were  not  observed.
They  were  told  they  should  be  allowed  to  go
home,  and  that  when  the  bishop  came  JFie
would  determine  what  further  should  be  done.
It  is  true,  indeed,  that  he  would  hardly  have
spared  their  lives.  But  the  landsknechts,  ex-
asperated by  the  loss  of  their  comrades,  were
not  to  be  prevailed  on  to  wait  for  his  coming;
they  rushed  after  the  people  retreating  into
their  houses,  and  it  was  almost  impossible  to
stay  the  slaughter  ;  and  this,  when  stayed,  was
only  succeeded  by  more  formal  executions."!"

For,  as  things  now  stood,  it  is  not  to  be
wondered  at  that  the  entire  extirpation  of
Anabaptism  was  contemplated.  Even  the
women  were  driven  out  of  the  city,  and  every
one  who  afforded  them  shelter  was  threatened
to  be  treated  as  an  Anabaptist.  No  one  knew
what  became  of  them.  Gradually,  those  who
had  been  driven  out  of  the  city  before,  and
who  formed  abqut  a  third  of  the  former  popula-

t  Here,  as  well  as  in  the  account  of  the  conquest  of  tlie
city,  I  follow  a  pamphle«  called  '•  WarhafFtiger  bericht  der
wunderbarliclien  Handlung  der  Dueffer  zu  Münster  in
VVestvalen,  wie  sich  alle  Sachen  nach  eroberung  der  stat
und  in  der  Eroberung  zugetragen  ;  die  noch  vor  der  Exe-
cutioh  des  Jan  von  Leiden  geschrieben  worden,  sie  hat
sein  Eildnissin  Holz."— "  True  account  of  the  wonderful
affair  of  the  Baptists  in  Münster  in  Westphalia,  how  aU
things  after  the  conquest  of  the  city  and  during  the  con-
quest happened;  which  was  written  even  before  the  exe-
cution of  .John  of  Leyden  ;  it  has  his  etBgy  in  wood  (en-
graving)." Kersenbroik,  however,  relates  otherwise:
Donantur  vita  et  positis  armis  urbe  protinus,  prreeuntibus
quibusdam  militiae  ducibus,  exire  jubentur.  Cum  vero
liberum  exeundi  coninieatum  impetrassent,  multi  eorum
ad  aides  suorum  necessariorum  forte  aliquid  inde  alJaturi
sese  subducunt  atque  iter  ab  aliis  ad  exeundum  paratis
sponte  sua  divelluntur,  ubi  cum  longiorem  moram  fecis-
sent,  jam  tuto  egressos  eodem  certe  commeatu  confisi  sine
ducibus  subsequi  contendunt,  qui  a  militibus  intercept!
mactantur.  I  leave  every  one  free  to  judge,— but  this  ap-
pears to  me  like  a  dressing  up  and  apology.  The  old  ac-
count above  says:  —  "Ward  auf  beiden  partheien  so  vil
gehandlet  das  ein  yetlicher  solt  wider  heim  in  sein  haus
ziehen,  bis  auf  die  Zukunft  des  bischofs  des  gnädigen
herrn.Klann  solt  weiter  in  den  sachen  gehandlet  werden,
Darauff  wa/d  jenen  glauben  zugesagt,  und  zoch  ein  yet-
licher wieder  heim  in  sein  haus.  Ais  aber  die  landsknecht
grossen  merklichen  schaden  empfangen — fielen  sie  mit
erimmigen  Zorn  in  die  heuser  und  wo  sieder  einen  fun-
ö:<:'\\,  rissen  sies  mit  den  köpfen  aus  den  heusern  auf  die
Strassen,  howens  zu  stucken,  stechns  all  zu  tod.  Kurz
demnach  ward  umbgeschlagen  daz  man  kein  mer  todt-
schlagen  solt,"  &c. — "  it  was  agreed  by  both  parties  that
every  one  should  go  to  his  own  home  again  till  the' com-
ing of  the  Lord  Bishop's  Grace,  and  then  the  matter  should
be  further  handled.  Thereupon  this  was  trusted  to, 'and
every  man  went  to  his  own  home  again.  But  as  the  lands-
knechts had  suffered  great  and  notable  damage,  they  fell
with  furious  rage  on  the  houses,  and  where  they  found
any  one  they  dragged  him  by  the  head  out  of  the  house
into  the  street,  hewed  him  to  pieces,  or  stabbed  him  dead.
Shortly  afterwards  they  sl^w  all  round,  till  there  were  no
more  to  slay,"  &c.

443

REACTION  IN  MUNSTER.

Book  VI.

tion,  returned;  but  as  even  they  v/ere  not  held
entirely  guiltless,  they  were  obliged  to  pay  a
small  acknowledgment-  to  the  bishop  for  the
recovery  of  their  estates.  No  one  suspected
of  Anabaptism  could  be  re-admitted  into  the
city,  without  giving  security  to  the  amount  of
four  hundred  gulden.  Cleves  and  Cologne
endeavoured  to  mitigate  the  severity  of  the
re-action,  and  especially  expressed  their  dis-
approbation of  the  plan  of  building  a  fortress
in  the  city.*  We  shall  see,  at  a  subsequent
period  of  our  history,"  what  were  the  plans  of
these  two  sovereigns,  in  regard  to  religion;
plans,  which  they  required  the  bishop  to  pro-
mise beforehand  to  adopt.  A  deputation  of
the  empire  also  demanded  the  restoration  of
the  city  to  its  ancient  rights  and  privileges.
But  of  this  there  was  not  the  slightest  hope.
The  bishop,  chapter  and  equestrian  order,  or
nobles  [Ritterschaft);  w^ere,  indeed,  only  pre-
served from  utter  destruction  by  the  help  of
their  neighbours;  and  the  army  which  had
won  the  victory  lor  them  had  been  assembled
in  virtue  of  a  decree  of  the  empire ;  but  the
admxinistration  of  the  empire  was  very  far  from
having  energy  enough  to  take  the  affair  into
its  own  hands.  On  the  contiary,  the  chapter
and  nobles  seized  this  opportunity  entirely  to
annihilate  the  independence  of  the  city,  which
had  long  been  odious  to  them.  In  spite  of  the
intervention  of  the  two  powers  above  men-
tioned, it  was  decided  to  build  a  fortress  in
Münster,  and  even  at  the  cost  of  the  city
itself;  the  half  of  its  revenues  were  to  be
applied  to  that  purpose :  the  commander  of
this  citfidel  was  to  be  taken  from  among  the
nobility  of  the  country,  nominated  only  with
the  consent  of  the  chapter  and  body  of  nobles,
to  whom  he  was  to  swear  allegiance,  ami
whose  commands  he  was  to  obey,  even  if  the
sovereign  v^^ere  present.!  The  town  council,
too,  was  for  the  future  to  be  nominated  with
the  consent  of  the  chapter  and  the  nobles.
The  city,  which  had  nearly  emancipated  itself
from  j:he  yoke  of  the  nobles  and  clergy,  was
thus  once  more  entirely  subjected  to  it,  as  a
consequence  of  the  insurrection.  The  chap-,
ler  and  the  nobles  got  possession  of  far  more
power  than  the  prince;  as  Bishop  Francis,
who  had  to  encounter  their  violent  opposition,
afterwards  experienced.  The  restoration  of
Catholicism,  in  all  its  rigour,  followed  of  course
in  the  train  of  these  events.

Meanwhile,  the  captive  king  and  his  coun-
cillors, Knipperdolling  and  Krechting-,  were
already  brought  to  trial.  The  king  was  at
first  full  of  defiance,  treated  the  bishop  with
insolent  familiarity,  jested  with  those  who  re-
proached him  with  his  polygamy,  and  pro-
.  tested  that  he  would  never  have  surrendered

*  Proceedings  at  the  meeting  9t  Nuyss,  1535,  15  July.
They  objected  that  for  this  the  consent  of  emperor  and
empire  were  necessary  ;  it  was  contrary  to  the  privileges
tof  the  city,  and  it  would  be  better  to  raze  the  walls,  and
fill  up  the  ditches.

t  Kersenbroik  gives  the  Articuli  de  propugnaculo,  which
are  not  quite  correct  in  the  German  re-translation  ;  e.  g.
§4.  Neque  hie  sine  capituli  et  nobilitatis  consensu  in-
auctorabitur  neque  exauctorabitur ;  the  translation  of
which  is,  "  he  should  neither  be  appointed  nor  dismissed
without  the  approbation  of  the  chapter."

the  town,  even  if  all  his  people  had  died  of
hunger.  In  the  first  conversation  which  seve-
ral Hessian  theologians  had  with  him,  he  mani-
fested the  greatest  obstinacy.  But  he  very
soon  requested  another  conference,  in  which
he  said  that  none  of  them  in  Münster  had
any  certain  knowledge  of  the  millenium,  the
clear  perception  of  which  had  been  revealed
to  him  in  prison;  he  now  confessed  that  the
resistance  he  had  offered  to  the  authorities
was  unlawful,  polygamy  rash  and  untimely,
and  he  even  acknowledged  the  obligation  of
infant  baptism. t  He  promised,  if  he  were  par-
doned, together  with  Melchior  Hoffmann  and
his  wives,  to  try  to  bring  all  Anabaptists  to
silence  and  submission.  In  this  disposition
he  remained,  even  after  he  must  have  known
that  it  could  avail  him  nothing.  He  confessed
to  the  bishop's  chaplain  that  if  he  M-ere  to
suffer  ten  deaths,  he  had  deserved  them  all.
Knipperdolling  and  Krechting,  on  tl^e  other
hand,  were  perfectly  obdurate  :  they  appeared
far  less  versed  in  theological  questions  than
.lohn  of  Leyden,  and  their  convictions  being
founded  on  less  knowledge,  were  more  stub-
born ;  they  persisted  in  declaring  that  they
had  only  followed  the  admonitions  of  God.
They  were  all  condemned  to  be  put  to  death
with  red-hot  pincers  in  the  market-place  of
Münster. §

Protestantsand  Catholics  witnessed  the  exe-
cution, which  was  the  result  of  their  combined
efforts ;  but  what  wa«  already  their  temper  ta-
wards  each  other  !  One  of  the  Hessian  divines
above  mentioned,  describes,  in  a  letter  to  the
court  chaplain  of  Saxony,  the  delight  of  the
mass-priests  at  the  execution.  Some,  how-
ever, he  adds,  appeared  to  want,  to  complete
their  ^satisfaction,  that  the  Lutherans  should
be  disposed  of  in  the  same  manner.  The
Lutherans  did  not  disguise  from  themselves,
that,  for  the  present,  there  remained  no  hope
for  the  progress  of  their  doctrines  in  Münster. |j

The  effect  of  this  catastrophe  on  the  Ana-
baptists was,  that  the  anarchical  principles
they  had  professed,  although  they  still  found
champions,  were  gradually  abandoned ;  and
the  milder  form  of  their  opinions  remained
the  prevailing  one.  This  change,  it  is  clear,
could  be  of  little  immediate  avail  to  them;
they  were  not  the  less  obnoxious  to  severe
and  bloody  persecution.

This  later  and  mitigated  period  gave  birth
to  the  spiritual  songs  which  haye  been,  from
time  to  time,  republished  from  their  hymn-
books. They  contain such sentiments and

J  Gesprech  oder  disputation  Antonii  Corvini  und  Jo-
hannis  Kymei  mit  Johann  von  Leiden.  Printed  contem-
poraneously at  Wittenberg.  In  sheet  G  there  is  a  con-
fession of  John  of  Leyden,  "  mit  miner  eigiiene  hand  on-
dertekent,"  "  undersigned  with  my  own  hand."

§  Des  Münsterischen  Königreichs  an  und  abgang,  Blu-
thandel und  End;  the  rise  and  fall  of  the  kingdom  of
Münster;  trial  and  execution  ;  Samstag  nach  Sebastiani,
Anno  1536.  The  frontispiece  represents  the  tower  of  St.
Lambert's  church,  with  the  iron  baskets  in  which  the
bodies  were  exposed,  that  of  the  king  rather  higher  than
the  two  others.  The  pamphlet  is  merely  a  history  of  the
execution.

II  Corvinus  ad  Spalatinum,  1.  1.  318.  Tanto  An-abaptis-
tis  iniquior  sum,  quanto  certius  comperi  illorum  malitia
factum  esse  ut  vix  mutire  nunc  audeant  qui  antea  Veri-
tät! erant  addictissimi.

Chap.  X.

SCANDINAVIA  AND  THE  HANSA.

443

expressions  as  the  following : — They  are  beset
on  every  side  by  crafty  and  malignant  ser-
pents; the  great  dragon  hath  arisen,  and  rideth
in  hia  wrath  throuoh  Germany  ]  but  they  are
resolved  not  to  suffer  themselves  to  be  fright-
ened by  fire,  or  water,  or  sword ;  they  know
that  God  can  save  his  true  children,  and  that
He  will,  in  every  case,  take  care  of  the  soul,
even  though  the  flesh  should  bleed.  ^' The
tyrants  of  the  Burgundian  court''  are  arrayed
against  them  ]  they  imprison  men  and  women,
and  make  inquisition  into  their  faith.  These,
however,  display  a  single  and  steadfast  mind;
they  will  not  deny  Him  who  is  the  eternal
good,  and  they  seal  their  belief  in  him  with
their  blood. ^'  Therefore  they  are  thrown  into
prison.'  They  are  happy,  for  they  see  them-
selves surrounded  by  the  heavenly  hosts  and
martyrs;  they  behold  God  in  the  sun  of  grace,
and  know  that  no  man  can  banish  them  from
their  fatherland,  which  is  with  God.  They
call  to  mind  analogous  events ;  such  as  the
miracles  in  the  old  martyrologies  (treating
them  after  their  manner).!  Lastly,  they  pre-
pare today  themselves  as  victims  on  the  altar,
and  to  be  led  to  the  place  of  execution ;  the
clear  fountain  of  the  divine  word  consoles
them  with  the  hope  of  being  made  like  unto
the  an  gels,  t

In  Germany,  the  utmost  they  could  obtain
for  their  opinions,  under  their  mildest  forms,.
was  some  degree  of  toleration.

But  at  the  moment  of  their  total  overthrow
in  Münster,  many  had  fled  in  despair  to  Eng-
land. Here,  amid  the  storms  of  the  seven-
teenth century,  their  w^hole  system  of  opinions
assumed  a  most  remarkable  form.  For  ex-
ample, a  great  deal  of  what  is  peculiar  in  the
mode  of  life  of  the  Quakers  is  a  mere  repro-
duction of  what  Justus  Menius  imputes  to  the
Anabaptists.

But  the  colonies  of  North  America  now  lay
open  to  them.  Those  things  for  which  there
was  no  room  in  a  constituted  society,  where
such  experiments  could  produce  nothing  but
disorder  and  destruction,  were  practicable  in
a  world  where  every  thing  had  to  be  created.
In  Providence  and  Pennsylvania  the  moral  and
religious  icfeas  of  the  Anabaptists  were  first
developed  and  reduced  to  practice.

CHAPTER  X.

BÜRGERMEISTER  WULLENWEBER  OF  LIJBEK.

The  disturbances  created  by  the  Anabap-
tists were  not  the  sole  interruption  to  the  regu-
lar progress  of  the  reformation  in  Germany.
The source  whence  these  had  sprung  gave

*  See  the  Lied  des  gefangenen  Wiedertäufers  (Song  of
the  imprisoned  Anabaptist),  Die  zwei  Jungfrauen  von
Beckum,  (The  two  Virgins  of  Beckum,)  "  O  lieber  vater
und  herzog  mild,"  ("Ö  beloved  Father  and  clement
Duke,")  in  the  Münsterischen  Geschichten  und  Sagen,  p.
277,  f.

t  See  Pura,  in  the  Wunderhorn,  1. 146,  and  Algerius,  in
the  same,  p.  353.

X  Abschied  vom  Leben  (Farewell  to  Life),  Münst.  Gesch.
u.  Sag.  p.  284.

birth  to  other  movements,  which,  although
they  took  very  diff"erent  directions,  threatened
to  become  equally  formidable,

A  spirit  of  anarchy  and  insubordination  had
prevailed  in  the  towns  ever  shice  the  begin-
ning of  the  sixteenth  century ;  and  now  that
the  commonalty  took  so  active  a  part  in  carry-
ing out  the  reformation,  the  religious  move-
ment couid  not  fail  to  be  tinctured  with  this
democratic  spirit.

Nevertheless,  respect  for  established  politi-
cal institutions  was  a  leading  principle  of  the
German  reformation.  In  by  far  the  greater
number  of  towns,  the  lawful  authorities  kept
their  place;  indeed,  there  were  only  two  of
the  larger  ones  in  which  the  old  councils  were
completely  overthrown,  Münster  and  Liibek.

To  these  two  cities,  therefore,  all  restless
and  innovating  tendencies  impetuously  rushed.

At  Münster,  where  the  clergy  had  ahvays
been  paramount,  attempts  were  made,  as  our
readers  have  seen,  to  establish  a  kind  of  so-
cialist theocracy.

A  strong  moral  or  intellectual  impulse,  if
allowed  its  free  course,  will  always  set  at
work  the  most  peculiar  powers  and  instincts
of  the  organization  upon  which  it  acts;  now
Lübek,  the  centre  of  the  Hanse  towns,  had
interests  of  a  mercantile  and  warlike  nature;
and  precisely  these  were  the  most  powerfully
acted  upon  by  the  prevailing  democratico-
rehgious  spirit.  The  incidents  which  occurred
there  were  not  less  remarkable  than  those  in
Münster,  but  of  a  totally  different  character.

But  in  order  to  understand  them,  we  must
first  cast  our  eyes  round  the  theatre  on  which
they  were  acted.

The  first  consideration  that  will  strike  us  is,
that  the  power  of  the  old  Hansa  rested  on  two
main  points ;  first,  the  union  of  all  the  mari-
time towns  of  Germ^any,  from  Narwa  to  Bru-
ges; and,  secondly,  the  ascendancy  which  the
more  central  of  them — the  so-called  Weiidish
cities  —  had  acquired  over  the  Scandinavian
kingdoms.

In  that  age  Scandinavia  w^as  still  of  the
greatest  importance  to  the  commerce  of  Ger-
many. Calculations  were  published  at  the
time,  of  the  possible  products  of  the  moun-
tains of  the  great  peninsula,  the  plains  of  the
Vorlande,  and  the  surrounding  sea  ;  the  copper
and  iron  of  Sweden  ;  the  furs  of  the  northern,
and  the  masts  of  the  southern  parts  of  Nor-
way ;  the  produce  of  the  cattle-breeding  and
the  agriculture  of  Denmark;  above  all,  the
profits  arising  from  the  herring  fishery,  which
supplied  the  whole  of  northern  Germany  as
far  as  Swabia  and  Franconia ;  and  lastly,  the
advantages  of  the  command  of  the  sound. §

As  governments  were  now  continually  spring-
ing up,  anxious  to  improve  the  natural  resources
of  their  country  for  their  own  profit,  the  north-
ern kings  had  long  been  trying  to  oppose  a
check  to  the  excessive  influence  of  the  cities.

This  would  not  have  been  of  great  moment,

§  Summarium  von  allem  was  die  drei  Reiche  Denemark,
Schweden  und  Norwegen  an  whare  und  anderm  vermüeen ;
im  Archiv  zu  Brüssel.  Summary  of  all  that  the  three
kingdoms,  Denmark,  Sweden,  and  Norway,  possess  iii
wares  and  other  property. In  the  Archives  at  Brussels.

444

LUBEK  AND  DENMARK.

Book  VI.

had  not  the  union  between  the  latter  been  dis-
solved. In  the  private  war  which  broke  out
in  1427,  between  the  Wendish  cities  and
Erich;  the  sovereign  of  the  united  kingdoms
of  Scandinavia,  the  Netherlands  severed  them-
selves from  the  former,  obtained  peculiar  pri-
vileges, and  followed  their  own  separate  inte-
rests. Lübek  was,  indeed,  in  the  fifteenth
century,  strong  enough  to  prevent  their  ac-
quiring an  ascendancy;  but  it  was  not  able
completely  to  counteract  their  influence  in  the
East.

When  Christiern  IL,  the  last  of  the  kings
who  wore  the  united  Scandinavian  crowns,
married  the  sister  of  Charles  V.,  he  was  not
only  intent  on  securing  powerful  political  allies,
but  also  on  gaining  a  firm  support  for  his  com-
mercial schemes  in  the  Netherlands.

We  accordingly  find  that  he  was  assisted  in
his  attempt  on  Sweden  by  the  Netherlands —
especially  by  the  dowry  of  the  Burgundian  prin-
cess; and  immediately  afterwards,  in  defiance
of  all  treaties,  began  to  violate  the  privileges
of  the  Hansa.  Hanseatic  merchants  were  de-
tained at  Schonen,  ships  coming  from  Riga
carried  off",  and  new  and  exorbitant  duties  im-
posed. The  king's  wish  was,  to  emancipate
himself  completely  from  Lübek,  and  to  raise
Copenhagen  to  be  the  great  emporium  of  the
trade  of  the  North.  The  Hanse  towns  were
fully  persuaded  that  the  king,  contrary  to  all
he  had  signed  and  sealed  and  sworn,  aimed  at
nothing  less  than  the  ruin  of  the  maritime
towns.

The  gallant  resistance  made  by  Lübek  is
well  known.  It  was  she  who  sent  to  Sweden
Gustavus  Vasa,  the  enemy  and  rival  before
whom  Christiern's  star  paled,  and  supported
him  with  all  her  might.  When  Stockholm
surrendered  to  him,  the  keys  of  that  city  were
presented  to  the  two  town-councillors  who  ac-
companied the  Lübek  fleet;  by  them  they
were  then  delivered  to  the  new  king,  who  had
just  granted  them  a  most  hberal  and  advanta-
geous charter.*

Nor  was  the  share  which  Lübek  took  in  the
change  of  affairs  in  Denmark  much  less  im-
portant. When  Frederic  of  Holstein  accepted
the  crown  offered  him  by  the  aristocracy  of
that  country,  and  repaired  to  Copenhagen,  a
Lübek  army  accompanied  him  by  land  and  a
Lübek  fleet  was  ready  to  support  him  by  sea.

Severin  Norby,  who  still  for  a  while  kept
Christiern's  flag  afloat  in  the  Baltic,  at  length
succumbed  mainly  to  the  exertions  of  the  navy
of  Lübek,  which  burnt  his  ships  on  the  coast
of  Schonen.

From  that  time,  Christiern  incessantly  me-
naced the  country  from  which  he  had  been
driven,  with  an  invasion.  He  formed  an  alli-
ance with  England ;  raised  troops  in  Germany
with  the  aid  of  his  kinsmen  and  friends ;  sent
ships  to  sea  against  the  Han  seats  from  Zealand
and  Brabant ;  and;  as  he  still  had  communica-
tion with  the  interior  of  the  country,  and  an
imperial  party  still  existed  in  the  towns,  he

*  Regkmann  lübliche  Chronik,  otherwise  a  mere  repe-
tition of  Bonnus,  has  an  article  peculiarly  confirming  this
statement.

was  always  feared.  Lübek  enjoyed  the  fran-
chises it  had  obtained,  without  molestation,
mainly  because  the  two  kings  could  not  do
without  her  assistance  against  their  menacing-
foe.

Their  alliance  was  drawn  closer  w^hen  Chris-
tiern, notwithstanding  the  Protestant  zeal  he
had  formerly  manifested,  returned  to  Catholi-
cism; and  now,  supported  by  efficient  aid
from  the  emperor,  seriously  prepared  to  make
an  effort  to  recover  his  throne.  It  is,  hovvever,
clear  that  there  was  not  always  the  best  un-
derstanding bet  wen  the  brothers-in-law.  While
Christiern  was  arming  in  Friesland,  ^an  impe-
rial envoy  endeavoured  to  bring  about  a  recon-
ciliation between  him.  King  Frederic  of  Den-
mark, and  the  Hanse  towns.  King  Frederic
declared  that  he  would  submit  to  an  arbitra-
tion if  Christiern  consented  to  do  the  same,
and,  above  all,  to  suspend  hostilities;  a  pro-
posal which  the  enyoy  hastened  to  lay  before
Christiern  in  Friesland.  That  monarch,  how-
ever, answered  him  with  violent  complaints,
that  after  being  so  long  an  exile  from  his  coun-
try, he  was  not  yet  to  be  permitted  to  return
to  it,  nor  to  be  restored  to  his  rightful  throne. t
Instead  of  disbanding  his  troops,  he  marched
without  delay  into  Holland.  That  which  he
could  not  obtain  by  fair  means,  he  extorted  by
force — ships  and  money.  He  knew  that  the
court  of  Vienna  approved  of  his  undertaking
(if  not  at  the  present  moment,  yet  on  the
whole),  and  wished  for  the  same  results.  The
emperor  had  often  enough  declared  that  he
regarded  Christiern's  cause  as  his  own.  Ne-
therland  merchants  afforded  the  king  volun-
tary assistance ;  the  houses  of  Frei  of  Cam-
pen,  Schultis  of  Enkhuysen,  Bur  of  Amsterdam,
and  Rath  of  Alkmar.  were  mentioned  as  those
to  whom  he  was  chiefly  indebted  for  the  funds
necessary  to  his  designs ;  and  he,  in  return,
granted  them  the  most  advantageous  charters.
On  the  15th  October,  1531,  they  set  sail  from
Medenblik.

The  Lübekers  now  addressed  themselves  to
the  Schmalkaldic  league.  They  declared  that
nothing  less  was  intended  than  the  destruction
of  Protestantism,  and  that  there  was  au  express
understanding  with  all  the  bishops  to  that
effect.  King  Frederic  offered  to  join  the
Schmalkaldic  league  with  his  hereditary  do-
mains, if  at  least  the  most  considerable  mem-
bers of  it,  Saxony,  Hessen  and  Lüneburg,
would  conclude  a  similar  treaty  with  him  in
respect  of  his  elective  kingdom. t  For,  he
said,  that,  however  strong  his  attachment  to

t  Liters  Banner!  ad  Csesarem,  de  gestis  apud  Vandalicas
civitates,  s.  a. Brussels  Archives.

X  The  acceptation  generally  given  must  be  so  modified.
"Your  grace  will  be  pleased  to  know,"  says  King  Frede-
ric in  a  letter  to  Landgrave  Philip,  dated  St.  John's  Day,
1531,  "  tiiat  we  are  earnestly  well  inclined  to  enter  upon
a  union  and  alliance  of  our  kingdom,  and  also  our  heredi-
tary  domains,  concerning  secular  affairs,  commerce  and
transactions,  with  you  and  our  beloved  uncle,  the  Elector
of  Saxony,  together  with  the  Duke  of  Lüneberg."  Tf  this
alliance  should  be  concluded,  "  we  are  consequently  not
disinclined,  but,  on  the  contrary,  fully  minded,  then  to
contract  a  union,  understanding  and  alliance,  on  behalf
of  our  hereditary  dominions  alone,  with  all  electors,
princes,  counts  and  estates  attached  to  the  evangelical
party."  The  landgrave  hoped  that  Hamburg,  Rostock,
Wismar  and  Stade  would  also  join.

Chap.  X.

GEORGE  WULLENWEBER.

445

the  evangelical  cause,  lie  would  be  prevented
.from  expressing  it  by  tJie  power  of  his  bishops,
every  one  of  whom  had  a  great  following  of
nobles.

Thus,  as  a  counterpoise  to  the  influence
which  Catholicism  had  exercised  on  the  one
side,  an  attempt  was  made  to  implicate  the
scarcely  formed  anti-catholic  league  in  these
pohtical  affairs.  But  it  did  not  succeed.
Elector  John  would  not  hear  of  this  twofold
character  of  a  member  of  the  league  ;  nor  in-
deed was  it  necessary.  No  sooner  had  King
Frederic  given  the  Llibekers  sufficient  secu-
rity for  the  trade  with  Holland,*  than  four
Liibek  men-of-war  put  to  sea,  before  the
Danes  had  made  any  preparations.  Christiern
had  indeed  landed  in  the  mean  time  in  Nor-
way, and  had,  without  difficulty,  gained  pos-
session of  the  whole  of  that  country,  with  the
exception  of  a  few  fortified  towns;  but  the
Liibek  cruisers  burnt  his  ships  on  the  coasts,
provisioned  Aggerhus,  and  formed  a  central
point  for  the  greater  force  which  assembled
in  May,  1532;  reheved  Aggerhus,  and  com-
pelled Christiern  to  negotiate,  to  capitulate,
and  finally  to  surrender  himself  into  the  hands
of  his  enemies.  As  far  as  I  have  been  able
to  discover,  it  was  the  delegate  from  Lübek
who  counselled  the  perpetual  detention  of
Christiern.

As  the  Dutch  were  parties  to  this  defeat,
they  instantly  began  to  feel  the  consequences
of  it.  In  the  summer  of  the  y-ear  1532,  above
four  hundred  merchant  vessels  were  lying
.useless  in  the  ports  of  Holland;  there  were
ten  thousand  boatmen  out  of  employment,
and  wheat  rose  to  double  its  usual  price. t
While  Christiern  was  in  Norway,  King  Fre-
deric had  allowed  himself  to  be  prevailed  on
to  sign  an  ignominious  treaty ;  but  in  virtue
even  of  that  he  now  claimed  compensation,
which  he  rated  extrem'ely  high,  and  which
the  Netherlands  refused  to  pay.  The  king-
dismissed  the  ambassadors  of  the  stadthol-
deress  with  an  unfriendly  message;  upon
which  the  Lubekers  took  the  confiscated
church  treasures  out  of  the  sacristies,  and
fitted  out  a  squadron  with  them,  which,  in
the  year  1533,  lay  in  the  Sound.

Upon  this,  the  great  towns  of  Holland  fitted
out  a  fleet  to  chastise  that  of  Liibek  —  "the
rebel  and  foe  to  his  majesty."

They  insisted  on  the  high  dignity  with  which
their  sover'eign  was  invested,  as  if  that  gave  a
greater  colour  of  right  to  their  proceedings.'

It  seemed  as  if  matters  must  come  to  a
decision  by  arms,  now  and  for  ever,  between
the  two  divisions  of  the  ancient  Hansa ;  espe-
cially since  the  democratic  faction  in  Liibek,
the  rise  of  which  during  the  religious  troubles
we  have  noticed,  was  now  at  the  helm,  and
engaged  in  these  affairs  with  the  most  ardent
zeal.

In  the  early  and  primitive  days  of  Liibek,

*  Bonnus  and  Regkmann  : "  with  the  assurance

that  they  would  agaia  assist  the  city  of  Liibek  against
the  Hollanders,  and  not  allow  them  afterwards  fo  sail
through  the  Sound  with  so  many  ships."

t  Wagenaar,  Niederländische  Geschichte,  ii.  423.
2n

when,  as  in  Venice,  a  share  in  the  administra-
tion of  public  affairs  was  regarded  as  a  bur-
den, a  statute  was  framed,  according  to  which,
a  man  who  had  sat  two  years  in  the  council,
was  at  liberty  to  quit  on  the  third. t  People
had,  however,  long  been  accustomed  to  re-
gard this  burden  as  an  honour,  and  were  jea-
lous of  sharing  it  with  anybody.  Neverthe-
less, the  rising  faction  interpreted  the  statute
to  mean  that  no  one  should  be  allowed  to  sit
more  than  two  years  in  the  council ;  conse-
quently, that  a  third  part  of  the  college  must
be  renewed  every  year.  The  most  active
supporter  of  this  construction  M'as  George
Wullenweber,  one  of  the  directors  of  the
Hundred  and  Sixty-four  ;  he  probably  thouoht
it  the  best  means  of  getting  possession  of  the
supreme  power,  with  an  appearance  of  lega-
lity; and  it  was  entirely  approved  of  by  the
excited  citizens.  In  February,  1533,  the  coun-
cil was  renewed,  and  Wullenweber  was  one
of  the  first  elected  to  it ;  scarcely  had  he  sat
a  fortnight,  when  (8th  March)  he  was  chosen,
bürgermeister.  This  completed  the  overthrow
of  the  constitution  of  Lübek.  Wullenweber
now  united  the  power  of  a  popular  leader
with  that  of  a  lawful  magistrate.  He  seemed
determined  immediately  to  prosecute  the  war
with  Holland  with  the  utmost  vigour;  order-
ing even  the  great  chandeliers  of  St.  Mary's
church  to  be  taken  down,  and  cast  into  guns.

But  before  he  proceeded  farther,  changes
took  place  which  gave  his  activity  a  totally
different  direction.

It  was  natural  that  the  northern  govern-
ments, delivered  from  the  enemy  they  had  so
long  feared,  should  not  cling  so  closely  to  the
cities  which  had  hitherto  afforded  them  pro-
tection. They  were  now  once  more  free  to
feel  the  oppression  which  these  protectors
exercised  over  them ; — the  obstruction  which
they  offered  to  their  own  commercial  activity.
In  the  victory  of  Liibek  over  Holland,  they
could  not  possibly  see  any  direct  advantage
to  themselves ;  for  there,  too,  a  dernocratic
faction,  against  which  they  had  a  natural  an-
tipathy^  had  gained  the  upper  hand.  Had
they  not  reason  to  fear  that  it  might  excite
similar  agitations  among  their  own  subjects?

While  things  were  in  this  state,  King  Fre-
deric died  at  Gottorp,  in  April,  1533,  and  a
number  of  pretenders  to  the  Danish  crown
arose,  Frederic's  sons,  of  whom  the  one^
Christian,  w-as  inclined  to  Protestantism,  the
other,  John,  was  trained  in  the  Catholic  faith,
had  both  numerous  adherents;  the  latter,  espe-
cially among  the  higher  clergy.  It  is  affirmed
that  a  distant  relation.  Joachim  of  Brandenburg,
also  put  in  claims  to  the  succession,  and  ven-
tured to  entertain  hopes. Others  thought  of

t  "Des  driden  Jaers  sol  he  frye  sin  des  Rads,  men  lie
möghe  id  dann  mit  Bedde  von  erne  hebben,  dat  iso  soekö
den  Rad."— "The  third  year  he  should  be  free  from  the
council,  unless  he  be  requested  to  offer  himself  as  a  mem-
ber again."— Becker,  ii.  p.  54.  I  do  not  know  on  what
grounds  Barthold  rests  his  interpretation  of  the  statute,
in  his  aj-ticle  on  Wi»llenweber,  in  Raumer's  Taschenbuch,
for  1835,  p.  37.  It  is  as  follows:  — No  man  shall  sit  for
more  than  two  years  in  the  council,  unless  the  citizens
propose  an  extension  of  the  term,  for  some  special  rea-
sons.

446

HENRY  VIII.  OF  ENGLAND  AND  MARCUS  MEIER.

Book  VI.

the  Elector  of  Saxony.  The  me^.ory  of  Chris-
tiern  was  not  yet  wholly  effaced,  but  the  house
of  Austria  hastened  to  set  up  a  new  pietendef
in  his  place;  Count  Palatine  Frederic,  to  v\  horn
the  emperor  gave  the  daughter  of  Christiern
in  marriage.

In  this  general  uncertainty,  Lübek  thought
it  might  also  have  a  voice,  and  that  it  per-
ceived in  what  direction  its  interests  lay.
Wullenweber  went  to  Copenhagen,  and  ad-
dressed himself  first  to  the  council  of  state  on
the  subject  of  the  Dutch  war;  but  he  found
no  ericouragement.  He  then  turned  to  the
nearest  Protestant  pretender,  Duke  Christian,
and  offered  him  his  assistance  to  obtain  the
crovni.  Christian  had,  however,  sufficient  pru-
dence and  reserve  to  decline  this.  Wullen-
weber saw  that  he  should  gain  nothing  by  a
war  with  Holland,  if,  meantime,  he  lost  Den-
mark. He  conceived  the'  idea  of  taking  ad-
vantage of  the  confusion  of  the  moment,  and
establishing  in  that  country  the  dominion  of
his  city  (and  consequently  his  own),  on  a
firmer  and  more  extensive  basis  than  ever.
He  thought  that  he  might  reckon  on  the  sym-
pathy of  a  party  in  the  country,  and  at  the
same  time  on  the  support  of  one  of  the  great
powers  of  Europe.

A  part  of  the  Lübek  fleet  which  had  put  to
sea  against  the  Dutch,  had  touched  on  the
English  coast,  when  its  commander,  Marcus
Meier,  had  ventured  to  land  without  a  pass-
port, and  had  been  arrested  and  lodged  in  the
Tower  of  London. This  happened  just  at  the

;  time  in  which  Henry  VIH.  (as  we  shall  have
occasion  to  relate  more  at  length)  had  entirely
broken  with  the  see  of  Rome,  and  had  deter-
mined to  emancipate  his  kingdom  from  the
povi^er  of  the  pope  ;  he  was.  therefore,  looking
round  on  every  side  for  allies  to  assist  him  in
his  defence..  We  have  a  resolution  of  his
privy-council,  in  pursuance  of  which  an  em-
bassy was  to  be  sent  to  the  Hanse  Towns
(among  other  places),  in  order  to  form  an  alli-
ance with  them.*  Considering  also- the  grow-
ing coolness  with  the  emperor,  it  could  not

^  be  a  matter  of  indifference  to  the  English
whether  the  throne  of  Denmark  was  filled  by
a  prince  in  the  interest  of  the  house  of  Bur-
gundy, or  in  that  of  its  opponents.  It  is,  there-
fore, /no  wonder  that  the  king,  instead  of
'  punishing  the  commander  of  a  fleet  which
had  taken  the  sea  against  the  Netherlandere,
invited  him  to  his  presence,  and  negotiated
w'ith  him.  From  the  documents  extant,  it
appears  that  Marcus  Meier  promised,  in  the
name  of  his  party  and  his  city,  that  no  prince
phould  mount  the  Danish  throne,  whom
Henry  VHI.  did  not  approve.  Henry,  on  the
other  hand,  showed  himself  ready  to  sup-
port Lübek  in  its  undertaking,  and  hoped  to
gain  over  the  King  of  France  to  the  same
cause.

Meier  returned  to  Lübek,  full  of  this  most
■unexpected  result  of  his  expedition.

This  man  had  formerly  been  a  blacksmith
at  Hamburg,  but  had  left  his  trade  to  enter  the

*  Propositions  for  the  King's  Council,  in  Strvpe's  Me-
morials Ecclesiastical,  i.  238. State  Papers,  i.  411.

army.  He  served  first  in  that  body  of  adven-
turers v;hich  Christiern  II.  collected  in  Fries-
land,  and  conducted  into  Holland  and  then  to
Norway.  Here  he  was  taken  prisoner,  but  he
immediately  seized  the  opportunity  to  take
service  with  Lübek.  This  unquiet  commu-
nity was  just  the  element  for  him ;  he  attached
himself  to  the  rising  chiefs  of  the  popular
party,  and  as  early  as  the  year  1532,  the  com-
mand of  the  troops  destined  for  the  Turkish
war  was  entrusted  to  him,  and  he  marched  to
the  frontier  and  back  again,  through  the  whole
German  empire,  at  their  head.  He  next,  ready
for  either  kind  of  warfare,  went  to  sea;  and
he  returned  fi^m  England,  decorated  with  a
gold  chain  and  the  honour  of  knighthood.  He
now  began  to  play  a  great  part  in  Lül^ek,
keeping  a  vast  retinue  of  servants  and  horses,  .
and  going,  after  the  somewhat  barbaric  fashion
of  that  age,  dressed  with  the  utmost  possible
splendour;!  he  was  young,  handsome,  and
brave ;  and,  of  course,  found  favour  in  the
eyes  of  the  principal  citizens'  wives.  By  a
marriage,  contracted  shortly  after  his  return,
with  the  rich  widow  of  the  lately  deceased
bürgermeister,  Lunte,  he  gained  a  footing
among  the  patrician  families;  and,  at  his
wedding,  the  captain  of  the  city,  surrounded
by  a  mounted  band,  escorted  him  from  the
Holstein  Gate.

Marcus  Meier  had,  from  the  first,  been  on
intimate  terms  with  Wullenweber ;  their  inti-
macy now  became  closer  than  ever.  At  the
sittings  of  the  Hansa  they  appeared  at  the
head  of  a  numerous  retinue,  in  glittering-
armour,  and  preceded  by  trumpets.  The  good
fortune  that  had  hitherto  attended  them,  gave
them  confidence  in  the  future.

Their  first  efforts  were  directed  towards
ruling  in  Lübek  itself.

There  were  still  in  the  council  some  of  the
former  members,  and'these,  as  may  be  ima-
gined, did  not  concur  in  all  the  propositions
of  the  innovators.  At  Easter,  1534,  they  were
turned  out  of  office  without  ceremony,  not-
withstanding the  utter  repugnance  of  such  a
proceeding  to  the  principles  laid  down  by
Luther.  The  superintendent,  Bonnus,  would
no  longer  look  on,  while  the  authorities  were
attacked,  dismissed,  and  banished  ;$  he,  there-
fore, sent  in  his  resignation.

Their  main  object  now  was  to  have  their
hands  free  in  pohtics  and  war;  and  they  there-
fore determined,  though  after  some  hesitation,
to  conclude  a  truce  with  the  Dutch  for  four
years;  even  on  the  condition  of  granting  the
free  passage  through  the  Sound,  demanded  by
Holland.

They  could  now  direct  all  their  thoughts
and  plans  tow^ards  the  North,  where  things
assumed  the  most  favourable  aspect  for  them.

In  the  Danish  cities,  nay,  even  in  the  capital
of  Sweden,  as  well  as  on  the  south  of  the
Baltic,  there  were  civic  bodies  impatient  of  the
yoke  of  an  oppressive  aristocracy.

t  Sastrow,  i.  115.

J  Letter  of  Hermannus  Bonnus  to  the  extraordinary
Council,  4th  May,  ]o34.  Starke,  Lübekische  Kirchenhis-
-torie,  i.,  Eeila-e,  lu.  v.

Chap.  X.

CHRISTOPHER  OF  OLDENBURG.

447

In  Denmark  the  citizens  had  discovered,
after  the  lapse  of  some  time,  that  the  expul-
sion of  Christiern  II.  had  been  of  no  benelit  to
them .  All  the  immunities  from  burdens  which
that  king  had  granted  them,  had  been  gradually
revoked.  They  u^ere  especially  indignant  that
the  nobility,  not  content  with  the  enormous
privileges  it  enjoyed,  endeavoured  to  get  the
profits  of  commerce  into  its  hands.*  The  two
biirgermeisters,  Jorg  Mynter  of  Malmoe.  and
Ambrosius  Bogbinder  of  Copenhagen,  both
Germans,  entirely  shared  Wullenweber's  de-
mocratic sentiments.  Protected  by  Frederic,
Jorg  Mynter  had  introduced  the  reformation
into  JMalmoe,  and  would  not  allow  it  to  be  put
down,  as  the  national  council  seemed  to  intend.
They  promised  the  Lübekers  that,  as  soon  as
their  men-of-war  shonld  appear  off  the  Danish
coasts,  they  would  abandon  the  council,  and
fight  openly  on  their  side.  It  appears  as  if  it
had  been  concerted  that  both  cities  should  join
the  league  of  the  Hansa  ]  but  on  this  point  the
authorities  are  not  unanimous.

Very  similar  views  were  entertained  by
Andres  Handson,  master  of  the  mint  at  Stock-
holm :  with  whom  all  the  German  citizens,
and  a  part  of  the  Swedish,  seem  to  have  been
in  an  understanding.  King  Gastavus  affirmed
that  their  designs  aimed  directly  at  his  life,
and  that  powder  was  laid  under  his  seat  in  the
church,  with  the  intention  of  blowing  him  up
in  the  sight  of  the  assembled  congregation.

If  we  remember  that,  in  all  the  Hanse  towns,
nay,  in  all  nether  Germany,  the  popular  incli-
nations had  manifested  themselves  in  a  simi-
lar manner,  and  though  repressed  for  the  mo-
ment, were  by  no  means  entirely  extinguished;
— if  we  combine  with  this  the  popularity  ac-
quired in  the  West  by  Anabaptism  (w^hich  w^as
only  a  religious  cloak  for  the  democratic  prin-
ciple), we  shall  perceive  how  mighty  was  the
agitation  w^hich  shook  the  North  German  w^orld.
It  was  a  ferment  like  that  preceding  the  revolt
of  the  peasants,  which  had  not  then  penetrated
Lower  Germany,  but  had  been  arrested  and
quelled  on  its  frontiers.  Now,  however, — after
a  lapse  of  ten  years, — Lower  Germany  was  in
a  state  of  agitation  not  less  violent.  At  the
lime  of  the  peasants'  war,  some-  few  towns
partook  of  it :  now,  they  were  its  leaders  and
champions.  Lubek,  Vvdiich  Bonnus  calls  the
capital  of  all  the  Saxon  tongues,  led  the  w^ay.
What  was  to  be  expected  if  bold  demagogues
were  already  masters  there,  and  had  at  their
disposal  the  means  for  the  execution  of  their

plans  ?

— . y ■■ —

*  Address  from  the  Commons  of  Copenhajren  to  Q,ueen
I^Iary,  Ma\',  1535,  (BrusseJi?  Arch.,)  specifies  the  reasons  for
their  irritation,  "  Darum  das  dieses  P^ichs  Raidt  und  der
Adel,  über  das  sie  unsern  rechten  König— eiitsetst,  bisher
mit  manigfaltiger  unredlicher  Beswerung  niciit  weniger
uns  denn  alle  andere  Stette  und  gemeinen  Mann  im  gan-
zen reich  fon  unsern,  christlichen  Freiheiten  und  Gerech-
tigkeiten gezwungen,  die  Kaufmaiinschap  hinweggenom-
men,"  &c. — "  Because  that  the  conncil  of  this  kingdom,
and  the  nobility,  besides  that  they  have  deposed  our  right-
ful king,  have  hitherto,  with  manifold,  dishonest,  and  in-
tolerable conspiracies,  forcibly  suppressed  our  Christian
liberties  and  rights,  taken  away  our  privileges  as  mer-
chants," &:c.  The  last  complaint  is  also  reported  in  the
Rerum  Danicarum  Chronologia,  in  Ludewig  Reliqufe  MSS.
ii-p.  70,  auf.  Nobilitatis  osores  gravissimi  ob  negotia-
tioiies  quas  exercebant  ditiores.

But  the  cities  now,  like  the  peasants  before
them,  could  not  do  without  a  commander  of
noble  bii'th.  They  engaged  the  services  of
Christopher  of  Oldenburg,  who,  though  a  canoa
of  Cologne  cathedral,  was  a  brave  warrior  and
a  zealous  Protestant.  As  a  child,  his  mind  had
been  richly  stored  with  history;  and  when,  at
a  riper  age,  he  had  repaired  to  the  court  of
Philip  of  Hessen,  it  was»  thoroughly  imbued
with  that  mingled  spirit  of  war  and  religion
which  then  reigned  there ;  he  had  afterwards
assisted  in  putting  down  the  peasants,  and  in
delivering  Vienna;  he  was  not  without  eleva-
tion of  mind,  and  had  all  the  parts  and  quali-
ties of  a  gallant  soldier.

It  was,  however,  impossible  that  a  member
of  the  house  of  Oldenburg  should  adopt  the
quarrels  of  a  few  biirgermeisters  without  solid
grounds;  or,  at  the  least,  without  a  plausible
pretext.

The  Liibekers  determined  to  allege  that  they
were  about  to  liberate  and  reinstate  on  his
throne  the  captive  king  Christiern,  whom  no-
body had  more  bitterly  hated,  or  more  success-
fully sought  to  injure,  than  they.  Yet  there
was  a  certain' tincture  of  "truth  in  this.  The
object  they  had  immediately  in  view,  w^as  not
their  mercantile  interests  (which  Christiern
had  thwarted),  but  the  democratic,  or  rattier
anti-aristocratiC,  which  he  had  always  es-
poused.t  But  they  took  ample  precautions  as
to  the  former.  Count  Christopher  promised
that,  if  he  conquered,  he  would  cede  Gothland,
Helsingborg,  and  Helsingör  to  the  Liibekers,
whose  ascendancy^  in  the  Baltic  would  thus
have  been  secured  forever.  Nay,  he  gave
them  the  assurance  that  he  w^ould  deliver  King
Christiern  into  their  hands,  as  soon  as  he  had
rescued  him  from  prison.!  What  a  power
over  the  three  Scandinavian  kingdoms  w-ould
they  have  acquired  by  the  possession  of  the
person  of  their  legitimate  monarch  !

For  they  were  resolved  not  to  suffer  Gus-
tavus  Vasa  to  remain  in  Sweden ;  they  had
even  thought  of  setting  up  the  young  Svante
Sture  as  a  temporary  rival  and  competitor.

In  May,  1534,  Count  Christopher  entered
Liibek.  The  present  intention  of  the  inhabit-
ants was  to  seize  upon  the  property  of  the
cathedral,  which  they  meant  to  confiscate  at
the  death  of  the  bishop.  Christopher  took
Eutin  without  difficulty.  His  attack  on  some
castles  in  Holstein,  such  as  Trittow,  which  he
conquered,  and  Segeberg,  was  merely  in  order
to-  give  occupation  to  Duke  Christian,  and  in
the  mean  time,  undisturbed  by  him,  to  attain
his  ends  in  Denmark;§

Disregarding  the  means  of  defence  which
Duke  Christian  instantly  raised,  and  the  ad-
vantages which  he  obtained,  Count  Christo-
pher, eager  to  complete  the  great  work,  put  to
sea  at  Travemiinde,  on  the  19th  June,  1534,
with  twenty-one  ships  lOf  war.
Never  did  an  invading  army  find  a  country

t  See  Havitfield,  G.  ii. Pontanus  ap.  Westphalen,  1144.

J  Declarations  of  Wullenweber  in  his  Interrogatorium ;
authenticated  by  Gebhardi,  ii.  135.

§  Wullenweber  declared  that  these  schemes  related  only
to  Denmark.

448

LUBEK  AND  ENGLAND.

Book  VL

better  disposed  for  its  reception.  The  bürger-
meister  Mynter  put  out  to  meet  the  fleet,  with
the  news  that  he  had  raised  a  revolt  in  Mal-
moe,  and  had  got  possession  of  the  citadel,
which  he  had  destroyed .  Hereupon  Christo-
pher cast  anchor  some  miles  in  front  of  Copen-
hagen. As  soon  as  he  showed  himself,  the
insurrection,  for  which  every  thing  was  ready,
and  which,  like  those'in  Germany,  was  directed
against  the  nobles  and  the  clergy,  broke  out  in
Seeland.  In  Roschild  the  multitude  plundered
the  bishop's  palace  and  delivered  up  the  city.
They  fell  upon  the  castles  of  the  nobles  and
rased  them  to  the  ground.  The  majority  of
the  nobles,  solely  to  save  their  lives,  consented
to  renew  their  former  oath  to  Christiern  IL,
and  in  an  unusual  form.  On  the  15th  of  July,
Copenhagen  went  over;  Laaland,  Langeland,
and  Falster  followed  the  example  of  Seeland
without  delay.  Nothing  was  wanting  but  the
arrival  of  the  count  in  Malmoe,  to  carry  all
Schonen  with  him.  In  Fünen  it  seemed  for  a
moment  as  if  the  revolt  of  the  peasants,  which
had  just  arisen,  woukl  be  put  down  by  the
council  of  state  ani  the  nobility;  but  some
small  succours  from  the  count  sufficed  to  in-
sure victory  to  the  peasants,  and  recognition
to  the  exiled  king.  There  remained  only  Jut-
land. A  pirate,  named  Clemint,  who  had
joined  Count  Christopher  in  Malmoe,  fell  upon
Aalborg;  and  collecting  the  Jütish  peasants
around  tiim,  soon  drove  the  nobles  and  their
heavy  cavalry  put  of  the  field.

While  thesis  tidings  were  coming  in,  the
syndic  of  Liibek,  Doctor  Oldendorp.  one  of  the
most  active  members  of  the  reforming  party —
a  man  ^-of  unquiet  spirit,"  to  use  the  words
of  old  Kantzow^ — travelled  through  the  Swed-
ish cities,  to  invite  their  participation  in  this
undertaking.  He  was  personally  a  represent-
ative of  the  democratic  interests,  and  he  now
unfolded  the  most  flattering  prospects  that  it
was  possible  to  conceive ;  it  may  easily  be
imagined  how  he  was  received  by  the  people.
A  few  of  the  old  councillors  opposed  him,  but
in  vain.  The  Stralsunders  threw  their  bürger-
meister,  Claus  Smiterlow^,  into  prison,  carried
the  cannon  on  board  the  ships  of  war,  and
elected  a  new  council.  The  expenses  of  the
war  were  to  be  paid  by  forced  contributions
from  the  richer  sort,  without  any  assistance
from  the  people.  '  The  old  bürgermeisters  of
Rostock  were  compelled  by  force  to  give  their
assent  to  the  preparations  for  war.  All  the
towns  of  the  surrounding  countries  were  roused
to  attempt  great  things.  Reval  and  Riga  sent
contributions.  Nothing  was  heard  of  but  Lii-
bek. '-Had  the  cities  succeeded  as  they
hoped,"  says  Kantzow,  ''not  a  prince  or  a  no-
bleman would  have  been  left."'^'

Meanwhile,  the  people  of  Liibek  did  not
neglect  to  cultivate  their  friendship  with  Eng-
land. On  the  30th  May,  they  sent  three  coun-
cillors to  that  country,  to  express  to  the  king
their  sentiments  as  to  his  quarrel  with  the
pope to  ofler  hira  their  alliance  against  the

*  Kantzows  Chronik  von  Pommern,  in  the  accurate  edi-
tion of  Böhmer,  p.  211.

see  of  Rome,  and  at  the  same  time  to  request
his  support  and  assistance  in  their  own  affairs. t

We  have  before  us  the  copy  of  a  treaty  of
the  2d  August,  1534,  according  to  which  they
also  left  the  king  the  free  disposal  of  the
crown  of  Denmark,  in  case  he  desired  either
to  take  possession  of  it  himself,  or  to  recom-
mend another  candidate;!  while  he,  on  his
side,  confirmed  all  their  ancient  privileges,
gave  them  a  sum  of  money,  and  promised  them
further  support.

One  symptom  of  the  impression  which  these
events  made  in  Europe,  may  be  found  in  a
letter  of  the  Archbishop  of  Lund,  in  wfiich  he
begs  the  emperor  to  reflect  on  the  conse-
quences of  an  alliance  between  the  Hanse
towns  and  England ;  how  easily  Holland
might  then  be  invaded,  and  an  insurrection
raised  there ;  and  conjures  him  to  take  some
means  to  prevent  it.  He  added,  that  if  the
emperor  thought  himself  bound  by  his  treaties
with  the  house  of  Oldenburg,  he  might  declare
war  in  the  name  of  Frederic  of  the  Palatinate
and  the  youthful,  Dorothea.  There  was  living
in  Liibek  one  Hopfensteiner,  formerly  in  the
service  of  the  Archbishop  of  Bremen,  who  in-
cessantly entertained  the  imperial  ministers
with  reports  of  the  great  regard  still  paid  to
the  emperor's  interests  in  the  Hanse  towns,
and  represented  an  enterprise  of  this  kind  as
very  easy.  The  Archbishop  of  Lund  offered,
in  case  of  need,  to  carry  on  the  war  in  his  own
name.§

But  before  the  imperial  court,  or  the  govern-
ment of  the  Netherlands,  could  resolve  on  a
measure  of  so  decisive  a  kind,  the  Liibekers
had  met  with  a  resistance  in  the  North,  which
daily  assumed  a  more  formidable  character.

Duke  Christian  of  Holstein  was  a  man  of
tranquil,  North-German  temper:  a  nature  not
lightly  m.oved,  but  when  once  urged  by  ne-
cessity, capable  of  acting  with  admirable  per-
severance and  discretion.  He  had  already
shown  of  what  he  was  capable,  by  the  man-
ner in  which  he  had  introduced  the  reforma-
tion into  the  duchies.  His  mind  and  character
Vv-ere  profoundly  penetrated  with  the  religious
and  .moral  spirit  of  the  German  reformation.
He  sang  the  Lutheran  hymns  with  as  much

t  Oratores  missi  de  villa  de  Lubicke,  in  Rhymer's  Fee-
dern, vi.  ii.  214.  Further  information  on  these  affairs  may
be  expected  from  the  continuation  of  the  State  Paj)ers.
It  is  remarkable  that  the  king  wished  also  to  form  an
alliance  with  the  Hamhurghers,  "for  the  redressing  and
amending  of  the  injuries  doon  to  his  majestie  by  the
Bishop  of  Rome."  Articles  were  to  be  laid  before  thenu
for  their  acceptance,  e.g.,  "Against  Goddes  prohibitions
the  dispensation  of  the  Bishop  of  Rome  or  of  an  other
man  is  utferlie  nought  and  of  no  value;"  the  same  which
were  after  laid  before  the  Liibekers,  and  also  some  others
specially  relating  to  the  bishop's  government:  they  were
to  send  twelve  ships  to  the  king's  assistance,  and  raise
]0,()00  men  at  liis  cost— 3000  horse  and  7000  foot.  Printed
in  the  Report  of  the  Rec.  Commission,  App.  C.

t  If  he  would  do  neither,  for  he  was  as  yet  undecided,
they  engaged  to  repay  his  loan.  "Alle  und  itlik  Geld,  so
S.  K.  M.  der  Stadt  thom  besten  vorstrecket."  —  "All  and
every  money  which  H.  R.  M.  had  advanced  for  the  benefit
of  the  city."  Words  of  the  treaty,  which  Dr.  Schmidt
had  the  kindness  to  procure  me  from  the  Bremen  Arcliives.

§  Litera;  Archiepiscopi  ad  Csesarem  et  D"».  de  Granvella,
in  the  third  volume  of  the  Imperial  Documents  at  Brus-
sels. The  letter  of  the  1st  of  August,  1534,  which  I  in-
tend  to  give  in  the  Appendix,  is  particularly  worthy  of
note.

Chap.  X.

CHRISTIAN  ELECTED  KING  OF  DENMARK.

449

fervour  as  any  worthy  artisan  of  an  imperial
city.  Perjury  he  visited  with  new  and  in-
creased penalties.  To  read  the  Bible,  to  listen
to  passages  from  history,  to  converse  at  table
with  some  learned  divine  or  wise  statesman,
to  follow  the  discoveries  in  astronomy  —  such
were  his  pleasures.  His  political  and  military
acts  were,  as  we  see,  based  on  deep  and  solid
grounds,  and  prompted  by  elevated  motives
and  tendencies. =*

To  this  prince  the  leaders  of  the  popular
party  in  Lübek  had,  as  we  have  stated,  oftered
the  crown  of  Denmark  j  he  had  declined  it,
because  he  would  not  owe  it  to  force,  and
they  had,  in  consequence,  dh'ected  their  first
hostilities  against  him;  being  at  length  irri-
tated, and  earnestly  supported  by  his  subjects
and  his  neighbours  (and  among  them  the
Landgrave  of  Hessen),  he  at  length  took  the
field  with  a  considerable  force,  in  the  intention
of  chastising  the  Lübekers  for  their  attacks. t
In  September,  1534,  he  appeared  before  the
city,  and,  in  order  to  cut  off  the  communica-
tion with  the  sea,  proceeded  without  delay  to
block  up  the  Trave.  Marcus,Meier  protested
that  he  should  not  succeed  in  this.  But
Meier's  arrangements  only  proved  his  com-
plete unfitness  for  serious  warfare.  The  Hol-
steiners first  took  possession  of  the  bank  of
the  Trave  as  far  as  Tremsmühle  ]  they  then
took  up  a  strong  position  on  the  opposite  bank,
on  the  Burgfeld,  and  connected  their  posts  by
a  bridge  which  effectually  closed  the  river.
All  attempts  of  the  Lübekers,  both  by  land
and  water,  to  get  possession  of  this  bridge,
were  fruitless;  they  were  repeatedly  beaten
before  the  eyes  of  their  wives  and  children,
and  were  forced  to  yield  other  important
points.  The  city  which  was  laying  plans  to
get  the  whole  North  under  its  influence,  saw
itself  cut  off  from  all  communication  with  the
sea  at  its  very  g-ates.

The  first  and  most  urgent  of  all  necessities
for  Lübek  was.  to  rid  itself  of  so  imminent  a
foe.  Already  misunderstandings  broke  out  in
the  city;  the  citizens  were  discontented,  the
Hundred  and  Sixty-four  resigned,  and  even  in
the  council  the  men  in  power  encountered  re-
sistance. They  were  compelled  to  enter  upon
negotiations  with  Holstein,  which  they  were
no  longer  in  a  condition  to  conduct  according
to  their  wishes.  We  have  no  accurate  infor-
mation either  concerning  the  preceding  move-
ments in  the  town,  or  these  negotiations;  but
it  is  evident  that  the  latter  embraced  the
affairs  of  Denmark  as  well  as  those  of  Hol-
stein, and  that  a  considerable  approximation
was  made  between  the  parties.  Christian
seemed  inclined  to  make  some  concessions,
and  WuUenweber  declared  that  he  would
have  consented  to  the  terms  of  peace,  had
not  Dr.  Oldendorp  prevented  him.  Thus  it
happened  that  they  agreed  on  nothing  but
the  affairs  of  Holstein ;  Lübek  ceded  all  that
she  had  taken  from  Holstein.  But  a  stranger
peace  was  never  concluded. Whilst  the  con-

*  Eracius,  Historia  Christiani,  iii.  p.  395. Hemming,
Oratio  funebris  ad  calcem  historise  Craginffi.
t  Chytrffius,  Hist.  Sax.  p.  408.
57  2n*

tracting  parties  agreed  about  Holstein,  each
reserved  to  itself  the  right  to  continue  the
war  with  all  its  might  concerning  the  affairs
of  Denmark. I

Bat  these  also  were  decided  by  the  per-
sonal qualities  of  Duke  Christian.

Such  were  the  straits  in  which  the  states  of
Denmark  found  themselves,  in  consequence
of  attacks  from  without  and  revolt  weithin,
that  they  had  at  length,  although  not  without
strenuous  resistance  on  the  part  of  the  clergy,
determined  to  elect  the  duke  to  the  throne.

By  this  measure,  all  the  fears  of  the  Protest-
ants of  that  kingdom,  which  had  been  very-
lively,  were  dissipated.  In  their  manifesto,
the  Lübekers  had  spoken  of  the  introduciion
of  pure  religion  as  the  chief  object  of  their
undertaking.  This  was  now  of  course  with-
out a  meaning,  and  all  the  sympathy  that  they
could  look  for  on  this  score,  had  vanished.

Now,  moreover,  the  interests  of  Denmark
were  defended  by  an  able  and  courageous
champion.  As  he  would  perhaps  have  yielded
too  much  in  the  camp  before  Lübek,  so  he
would  afterwards,  perhaps,  have  consented  to
extend  anew  the  privileges  of  the  Lübekers  ;t
but  they  would  be  contented  w^ith  nothing  less
than  the  disposal  of  the  kingdom  and  the
crowm.  There  was  now  no  other  resource,
therefore,  than  the  sword.  Without  loss  of
time.  Christian  turned  with  his  victorious
troops  from  Lübek  to  Jutland.  Even  in  De-
cember, 1534,  he  succeeded  in  retaking  Aal-
borg,  and  pacifying  the  whole  province.  .  His
two  brothers-in-law,  the  King  of  Sweden  and
the  Duke  of  Prussia,  took  up  arms  for  him;
the  former  by  sea  and  land,  and  the  latter  by
sea  only.  His  other  brother-in-law,  the  Duke,
of  Pomerania,  sent  him  subsidies  which  arrived
just  at  the  critical  moment.  Two  or  three
Hessian  companies,  which  he  had  had  with
him  at  Lübek,  marched  with  him  to  the
North.  Throughout  a  great  part  of  Norway,
he  was  already  acknowdedged  king.

On  the  other  side,  the  Lübekers  once  more
collected  all  their  forces.

They  succeeded  in  gaining  over  to  their
cause  a  neighbouring  prince,  Duke  Albert  of
Mecklenburg.

Duke  Albert,  who  had  adhered  with  great
fidelity  to  the  party  of  the  deposed  and  impri-
soned Christiern,  subsequently  declared  that
he  had  received  no  pay  from  Lübek ;  his  only
motive  was,  ''  that  it  seemed  to  him  good  and
praiseworthy  to  set  free  an  anointed  king,  who,
contrary  to  bond  and  seal,  had  been  thrown
into  prison. "II It  was  said  that  the  crown  of

I  Regkmann's  Chronicle  (p.  176)  agrees  with  the  Inter-
roiratorium  of  WuUenweber,  if  accurately  compared.
Only  Regkmann  gives  some  conjectures,  e.  g.  that  Wul-
lenweber's  enemies  would  not  permit  that  Lübek  should
be  aggrandized  by  him.

§  According  to  a  letter  of  Hopfensteiner,  20th  of  Janu-'
ary,  1535,  the  king  promised,  first,  that  the  captive  king
Christiern  should  be  well  taken  care  of;  secondly,  satis-
faction given  to  Count  Christopher:  thirdly,  restitution
of  what  Lübek  had  expended  on  the  kingdom  of  Denmark,
"in  his  father's  time;"  fourthly,  much  more  liberty  and
justice  than  they  have  hitherto  had,  and  also  certain
towns  as  pledges: — "  but  they  would  not  consent."

II  Albert's  Declaration,  Monday  after  Reminiscere,  1537.
,  (Brussels  Archives.)

450

CHRISTIAN  III.

Book  VI.

Denmark,  or  even  that  of  Sweden,  had  been
promised  to  him  as  a  recompense  for  his  ser-
vices. It  does  not  appear  that  any  such  direct
and  positive  engagement  was  entered  into;
according  to  Wullenweber's  declaration,  the
promise  made  to  him  was,  that  Liibek  would
protect  him  in  the  possession  of  whatever  he
might  obtain  from  King  Christiern.=*  It  is  pos-
sible, however,  that  more  distinct  views  were
held  out  to  him ;  according  to  Hopfensteiner,t
the  plan  of  the  Lübekers  was,  that,  if  King
Christiern  was  liberated,  Duke  Albert  should
continue  to  govern  Denmark  as  regent,  while
the  king  should  be  maintained  suitably  to  his
rank  in  Liibek;  they  enjoying  all  the  advan-
tages they  had  ever  claimed, — Helsingor  and
Helsingborg,  with  the  tolls,  Gothland,  and  per-
haps even  Calmar  and  the  Swedish  miiT,es.
On  the  9th  April,  Duke  Albert  embarked  at
Warnemünde.  ,He  seemed  to  have  made  pre-
parations for  a  permanent  residence  in  Den-
mark; taking  with  him  his  wife,  who  was
with  child,  his  court,  and  even  his  huntsmen
and  hounds,  in  order  that  he  might  enjoy  the
pleasures  of  the  chase,  after  the  German
fashion,  in  the  thick  forests  of  Denmark.  It
was  of  great  advantage  to  the  Lübekers,  that
a  distinguished  prince  of  the  empire,  sovereign
of  no  inconsiderable  territory,  had  espoused
their  cause.  It  inspired  the  Danish  towns  like-
wise with  courage  and  confidence.  Hitherto
they  had  borne  the  whole  weight  of  the  con-
test alone;  but  Albert  brought  some  indepen-
dent power  to  their  aid,  and  was  rather  to  be
regarded  as  an  auxiliary  than  a  salaried  com-
mander. Wullenweber,  who  accompanied  the
duke,  at  length  succeeded  in  bringing  about
an  understanding  between  him  and  Count
Christopher,  who  had,  at  first,  shown  consider-
able dissatisfaction.  Shortly  after,  a  Liibek
squadron  brought  further  reinforcements,  un-
der the  Counts  of  Hoya  and  Tecklenburg.

Meanwhile,  Marcus  Meier,  who  had  been
sent  to  Schonen,  had  bestirred  himself  there
with  great  success.  He  executed  one  of  his
usual  daring  and  dexterous  manoeuvres.  Be-
ing taken  prisoner,  he  turned  his  ill  luck  to
such  good  account,  that  he  got  possession  of
the  very  castle  in  which  he  was  imprisoned —
Warburg,  in  Holland.

The  two  parties  were,  as  w^e  perceive,  very
equally  matched ;  perhaps  that  of  Liibek  and
the  cities  was  somewhat  superior  in  numbers.

The  question  was  no  longer,  as  perhaps  at
an  earher  period,  w^hether  the  ecclesiastical
reform  would  extend  to  Denmark ;  its  destiny
was  completely  secured  by  the  accession  of  a
Protestant  king.  The  question  rather  was,
whether  the  ecclesiastical  reform  would  com-
bine with  a  political  revolution  ;  whether  the
democratical  principle,  which,  emanating  from
Liibek,  had  spread  itself  over  the  whole  North,

*  Interrogatorium.

t  Hopfensteiner,  26th  November,  1534,  at  which  time
the  negotiation  was  already  begun.  The  prospect  of
gaining  Mecklenburg  contributed  the  most  to  bring  about
the  rejection  of  Christian's  proposals.  Wullenweber  de-
clares that  he  neither  prevented  the  peace,  nor  engaged
Duke  Albert  on  his  side;  but  that  this  was  done  by
others:  this  account  is  perfectly  consistent.

would  be  triumphant  there,  or  not ;— the  same
question  M'hich,  from  the  moment  of  its  first
agitation  at  Wittenberg,  in  Carlstadt's  time,
had  kept  Upper  (and  more  recently  Lower)
Germany  in  that  state  of  ferment  which  had
just  been  so  terribly  quelled  in  Münster.

The  whole  force  of  the  democratic  principle
was  now  united  at  this  remote  point  of  the
North.  Had  it  conquered,  it  would  have  caused
a  fresh  and  mighty  reaction  in  Germay.

On  the  11th  June,  1535,  on  the  spot  where
of  yore  Odin  was  worshipped  with  sanguinary
rites  —  where  legends  of  the  greatness  of  the
house  of  Oldenburg,  mutilated  by  its  own  divi-
sions, have  their  seat— on  the  island  of  Fünen,
not  far  from  Assens,  near  the  Oxnebirg,  this
awful  question  was  decided.  On  both  sides
were  Germans  and  Danes.  The  royal  party
were  led  by  Hans  Rantzau,  who  had  won  his
knighthood  at  Jerusalem,  and  had  traversed
the  whole  of  Europe ;  and  who  combined,  in
a  still  higher  degree  than  his  master,  zeal  for
Protestantism,  and  love  of  arts  and  science,^
with  address  in  the  council  and  valour  in  the
field ;  the  troops  of  the  cities  were  commanded
by  the  Count  of  Hoya.  Rantzau  conquered, —
like  Landgrave  Philip  at  Laufen — like  the
princes  in  the  peasants'  war  —  by  the  supe-
riority of  his  cavalry  and  artillery.  It  was  in
his  favour  that  the  enemy  did  not  wait  for
him,  but  made  the  first  onset,  and  fell  into
disorder.  The  best  men  of  the  cities'  army
fell,  and  it  sustained  a  total  defeat. §

At  the  same  time,  the  fleets  met  at  Born-
holm.  The  king's  fleet  included  Swedish  and
Prussian,  that  of  Lübek,  Rostock,  and  Stral-
sund ships.  It  was  now  to  be  decided  whether
the  princes  or  the  cities  were  henceforth  to  be
masters  of  the  seas.  The  battle  had  already
begun,  when  they  w^ere  parted  by  a  storm  ;
but  the  royal  fleet  w^as  evidently  superior ;
the  Danish  admiral,  Skram,  who  commanded
it,  captured  a  great  number  of  Lübek  trading
vessels  on  the  coasts.

Christian  III.  was  thus  victorious  by  land
ahd  by  sea.  Fiinen  had  been  forced  imme-
diately to  submit,  and  did  homage  to  him  at
Odensee.  With  the  help  of  the  fleet,  which-
arrived  at  that  moment,  he  crossed  over  to
Seeland^  where  he  was  received  with  great
joy  by  the  nobles.  The  inhabitants  of  Scho-
ningen did  him  homage,  as  soon  as  he  ap-
peared. Warburg  was  soon  retaken,  and  used
as  a  pledge  between  Denmark  and  Sweden.
In  the  beginning  of  August,  1535,  the  con-
quests made  by  the  cities  were  once  more
reduced  to  Malmoe  and  Copenhagen.

Notwithstanding  this,  the  possession  of
these  two  points  would  still  have  rendered  a
resumption  of  their  former  plans  possible,  had
not  the  discontents  which  had  arisen  at  the
first  reverses,  ripened  meanwhile  into  a  com-
plete revolution.

And  lastly,  that  interposition  on  the  part  of
the  authorities  of  the  empire  in  the  internal

X  ChytfEeus :  oculus  nobilitatis  eruditae  in  his  terris  ful-
gentissimus.  See  Christiani,  N.  Gesch.  von  Schleswig
und  Holstein,  i.  479,  ii.  54.

§  Cragius,  Historia  Christiani  III.  p.  95.

Chap.  X.

REACTION  IN  LUBEK.

451

affairs  of  Lübek,  which  the  imperial  envoys
had  two  years  before  demanded,  was  now
energetically  put  in  practice.  The  city-was
admonished,  by  a  mandate  of  the  Imperial
Chamber,  to  reinstate  the  expelled  biirger-
meisters;  and  all  the  members  of  the  town-
council.  In  itself,  this  mandate  would  have
had  little  effect ;  but  it  expressed  a  demand
which  was  now  imperiously  heard  in  almost
all  the  other  cities  of  Lower  Germany,  and
was,  therefore,  supported  by  public  opinion.
Above  all,  the  Lübekers  felt  that  they  were
beaten ;  their  world-embracing  plans  had  en-
countered an  invincible,  nay,  a  triumphant
resistance;  the  energy  of  the  democratic  spirit
was  broken  by  their  failure.

On  the  15th  August,  1535,  the  council  con-
voked the  commons,  and  laid  before  them  the
mandate  of  the  Imperial  Chamber.  The  mo-
ment in  which  Wullenweber  was  on  a  journey
of  business  in  Mecklenburg  was  not  taken
without  design.  The  commons  first  convinced
themselves  that  the  mandate  contained  no-
thing about  the  re-establishment  of  the  ancient
ecclesiastical  forms  ]  and,  being  satisfied  on
that  point,  declared  themselves  ready  to  obey
it,  and  to  put  a  stop  to  all  innovations  in  tem-
poral things.  At  the  next  sitting  of  the  coun-
cil, George  von  Hövelen,  who  had  been  made
bürgermeister  against  his  will,  rose  up  and
took  his  old  place  among  the  councillors.
The  councillors  appointed  by  the  commons
perceived  that,  under  these  circumstances,
they  could  not  maintain  their  posts,  and  quit-
ting their  chairs,  they  resigned  their  dignity.
We  may  imagine  the  astonishment  of  Wullen-
weber, when  he  returned  and  found  so  com-
plete a  change  effected  in  his  absence.  He
had  long  ceased  to  possess  the  popularity
which  had  raised  him  to  power,  and  no  effort
to  regain  it  had  been  of  any  avail.  He,  too,
was  compelled  to  resign.  Recalled  by  his
fellow-citizens,  escorted  into  the  town  by  a
hundred  and  fifty  old  friends,  and  the  ambas-
sadors from  Cologne  and  Bremen,  —  for  the
Hansa  happened  to  be  sitting,  —  Nicholas
Brömse  re-entered  Lübek.*  A  recess  was
drawn  up,  in  virtue  of  which  the  evangelical
doctrines  were  retained ;  while,  on  the  other
hand,  the  council  was  reinstated  in  its  former
rights.  The  Lutheran  principle,  which  de-
manded only  a  reconstitution  of  spiritual
things,  and  allowed  the  temporal,  wherever
it  was  possible,  to  subsist,  was  here,  too,  tri-
umphant.

It  was  obviously  no  longer  to  be  expected
that  the  Danish  war  could  be  carried  on  with
vigour.  Gert  Korbmacher,  the  miner,  who
joined  another  expedition  to  the  Sound,  ex-
presses his  disgust  at  the  little  earnestness
that  was  shown  in  it.

The  wg,r,  however,  went  on,  though  feebly
enough,  and  sometimes  new  and  extensive
plans  were  connected  with  it.

From  the  trial  of  Wullenweber,  it  appears
indisputable  that  he  had  intended  to  resume
his  schemes  and  enterprises. There  were  at

*  Becker,  Geschichte  von  Lübek,  aus  Reiinar  Kock  und
Lambert  von  Dalen,  ii.  91—95.

that  time  a  few  bands  of  landsknechts,  under
the  command  of  a  colonel  named  Uebelacker,
recruited  in  the  name  of  the  Count  Oldenburg
in  the  Hadeln  country.  Wullenweber  set  out
to  join  them.  On  his  trial,  he  declared  that
his  intention  was  to  lead  these  troops  across
the  Elbe  at  Boitzenburg,  and  before  the  walls
of  Lübek,  without  delay  ;  his  partisans  would
have  opened  the  Mohlenthor  to  him,  he  would
have  overthrown  the  council,  and  have  estab-
lished a  completely  democratical  government,
together  with  Anabaptism.  But  even  in  his
examination,  these  plans  appear  in  the  light
of  half-matured  projects;  and  before  his  death,
Wullenweber  utterly  denied  them,!  and  espe-
cially retracted  all  personal  accusations  of  par-
ticipation which  had  been  extorted  from  him.
It  is  difficult  to  reject  a  confession,  the  most
material  points  of  which  were  made  without
the  fearful  agency  of  the  rack ;  but  it  is  utterly
impossible  to  ground  any  belief  on  a  declara-
tion which  the  accused  retracted  at  the  mo-
ment of  his  death.  The  existence  of  these
plans,  therefore,  must  for  ever  remain  pro-
blematical. If  they  ever  existed,  they  could
have  had  no  other  result  than  that  which  we
have  already  witnessed.  Wullenweber  fell —
as  he  had  been  forewarned — into  the  hands  of
his  bitterest  enemy,  the  Archbishop  of  Bremen,
who,  as  in  his  quality  of  spiritual  lord  he  could
not  stain  his  hands  with  blood,  gave  him  up,
to  his  brother,  Duke  Henry  of  Brunswick.
Here  he  was  subjected  to  the  examination
above  mentioned,!  accused  by  both  Denmark
and  Lübek,  and  because  he  would  not  deny
all  that  he  was  accused  of,  condemned  to  die
according  to  the  old  forms  of  the  German  law.
The  justice  of  the  land  pronounced  that  '-he
might  not  have  done  unpunished,  that  which
he^had  done."  He  was  beheaded,  and  thea
quartered.

Wullenweber  is  a  perfect  representative  of
the  rash  and  perverse  spirit  which  was  rife,
during  that  period,  among  the  inhabitants  of
the  German  cities.  He  had  begun,  like  so
many  demagogues  in  other  towns ;  the  talent
of  leading  a  mobile  population  at  his  pleasure,
and  the  natural  force  of  the  political  and  reli-
gious interests,  elevated  him  to  a  station
whence  he  could  dare  to  intrude,  self-sup-
ported, among  the  great  powers  of  the  world.
He  knew  no  moderation ;  failures  did  not
teach  him  caution ;  he  evoked  once  more  the
ancient  spirit  of  the  Hansa,  prevailed  on  Ger-

t  In  Article  31,  he  saj's,  "  They  have  never  entirely  con-
cluded the  affair  of  the  Anabaptists;  but  one  thing
brought  on  another."

X  In  Regkmann's  ClT,ronicle  there  is  a  report  of  his  last
accusation  and  execution,  with  some  of  his  letters  writ-
ten from  his  prison.  Strangely  enough,  the  defence  has
thus  been  published  without  the  accusation.  This,  which
is  contained  in  the  trial,  I  intend  to  print  in  the  Appen-
dix. The  trial,  which  1  found  in  the  Weimar  Archives
among  the  Wolfenbüttel  papers,  has  been  of  great  use
and  value  to  me.  Wullenweber  confessed  but  few  of  the
charges,  and  those  the  most  doubtful  ones,  under  the  tor-
ture. On  the  other  hand,  there  is  much  of  another  kind
without  any  immediate  relation  to  the  criminal  accusa-
tion, and  rather  of  an  historical  nature,  which  is  occa-
sionally strikingly  confirmed  by  passages  of  the  Chroni-
clers not  generally  considered  authentic,  or  by  forgotten
documents.  Of  course  I  have  admitted  nothing  that  WuK
lenweber  denied  again  before  his  death.

452

PROTESTANTISM  IN  DENMARK.

Book  VI.

man  princes  to  engage  in  his  wars,  and  con-
tracted alliances  with  foreign  potentates.  Mo-
tives of  all  sorts  —  democratic,  religious,  mer-
cantile and  political — were  confusedly  blended
in  his  mind;  he  entertained  the  project  of
making  the  reformed  Lübek  the  centre  and
head  of  the  democracy  of  the  North,  and  him-
self the  director  of  this  newly  organised  world.
But  he  thus  deserted  the  sphere  of  the  ideas
which  had  given  force  and  success  to  the
German  reformation ;  the  powers  which  he
attacked  were,  at  length,  too  strong  for  him  ;
the  reverses  which  democracy  suffered  on
every  hand,  reacted  on  his  native  city  :  the
ground  was  thus  cut  from  under  his  feet,  and
he  fell  into  the  hands  of  his  enemies.  Having
failed  to  conquer  the  North,  the  only  alterna-
tive that  remained  to  him,  was  to  die  on  the
scaffold.

It  is  altogether  a  remarkable  generation
which  we  here  find  engaged  in  conflict.  Bold
demagogues  Avho  have  raised  themselves  to
power,  and  stubborn  patricians  who  never  for
an  instant  gave  up  their  cause ;  princes  and
lords  who  make  war  for  war's  sake;  and
others  who  steadily  contemplate  an  object,
Vt'hich.they  pursue  with  persevering  resolu-
tion :  all  robust,  violent,  aspiring  natures ;  all
connecting  some  public  interest  with  their
ovvu  private  advantage.  Among  them,  and
&econd  to  none  in  capacity,  the  aged  king,  to
whom  the  greater  part  of  all  that  was  con-
tended for,  legally  belonged ;  whose  name
sometimes  resounded  in  the  fight  as  a  war-
cry,  but  who  expiated  the  sins  of  his  youth  by
an  endless  captivity.  Victory  declared  her-
self on  the  side  of  the  strongest.  >  She  could
neither  be  won  by  those  who  had  not  yet
thoroughly  secured  their  own  cause,  nor  by
those  who  had  adopted  projects  to  which  they
were  in  fact  strangers.  Victory  remained
with  the  duke,  raised  to  the  royal  throne,  who
fought  with  ardour  and  energy  for  himself,
and  who  was  connected  with  the  existing  and
the  past  by  his  policy,  and  with  the  progres-
sive and  the  future,  by  his  religion.  All  the
intrigues  of  foreign  potentates  were  abortive.
In  the  year  1536,  Christian  III.  (we  shall  see
hereafter  under  what  combinations)  took  pos-
session of  his  capital,  and  remained  master  of
the  field.

Independent,  however,  of  all  personal  con-
siderations, it  may  be  affirmed  that  the  enter-
prise of  Lübek  was  no  longer  compatible  with
the  spirit  and  circumstances  of  the  times.
Those  great  communities  which,  in  the  middle
ages,  pervaded  and  bounded  together  all  states,
and  the  organisation  of  which  is  one  of  the
most  striking  peculiarities  of  that  period  of
history,  were  now  on  the  eve  of  complete  de-
composition. In  presence  of  an  all-embracing
sacerdotal  order,  and  of  an  equestrian  order
which  bound  the  whole  nobility  of  the  West
in  a  sort  of  corporation  or  guild,  civic  bodies
might  also  aspire  to  extend  their  commercial
monopoly  over  kingdoms  far  and  near.  But,
with  their  cotemporary  institutions,  they  too
were  doomed  to  fall.  The  principle  which
pervades  modem  history,  tends  to  the  mutual

independence  of  the  several  peoples  and  king-
doms, on  every  political  ground.  That  Lübek
should  emancipate  herself  from  the  hierarbhy,
yet  think  to  maintain  a  commercial  supremacy
(and  not  by  the  natural  superiority  of  industry,
capital,  or  skill,  but  by  the  force  of  compul-
sory treaties  and  edicts),  involved  a  historical '
contradiction.

But  it  must  not  be  supposed  that  the  influ-
ence of  Germany  over  the  North  was  thus  de-
stroyed. On  the  contrary,  it  was  now  estab-
lished on  a  more  liberal,  but  a  firmer  basis
than  ever.  It  was  no  longer  the  influence  of
force,  but  of  intelligence.  Who  does  not  know
what  efforts  were  made  in  earlier  ages  to  carry
Christianity  into  the  North  from  Germany'?
yet  an  accurate  investigation  will  convince  us
that  England  was  far  more  instrumental  to  its
conversion.  That  alliance  of  a  specially  reli-
gious nature  which  Anscharius  and  his  suc-
cessors failed  to  bring  about  between  Germany
and  the  northern  kingdoms,  was  now  effected,
though  in  another  manner,  by  the  reformation.
The  destruction  of  the  influence  of  Lübek  did
not  prejudice  Protestantism;  scarcely  had
Christian  III.  taken  Copenhagen,  when  he  pro-
ceeded to  introduce  its  doctrine  and  rites  as
they  prevailed  in  Germany,  under  the  direc-
tion of  the  same  Wittenberg  theologian,  who
had  reformed  so  many  parts  of  Lower  Ger-
many— Doctor  Bugenhagen.  This  system  of
faith  struck  root  there,  with  the  same  rapidity'
and  depth  with  which  it  had  established  itself
in  Germany,  and  formed  the  basis  of  the  inti-
mate union  of  the  whole  moral  life  of  the  North
with  that  of  Germany.  From  that  time,  the
same  current  of  thought,  the  same  develop-
ment of  ideas,  has  distinguished  the  German
and  the  Scandinavian  portions  of  the  great
Teutonic  family.  In  the  North,  too,  the  church
severed  herself  from  the  restless  domain  of
politics ;  her  whole  activity  was  confined  to
the  intellectual  regions.

We  have  observed  the  same  result  in  all
the  events  of  the  latter  years  of  our  history.

Zwingli,  who  contemplated  not  only  a  puri-
fication of  faith  and  doctrine,  but  a  radical
change  in  the  Swiss  confederation,  and  espe-
cially the  progress  of  democratic  ideas,  had
fallen ;  his  political  projects  had  failed  ;  in  the
last  days — perhaps  the  last  moments — of  his
life,  he  could  seek  consolation  only  in  the
prospects  of  the  church.  The  Anabaptist
movement,  which  aimed  at  so  complete  a
change  of  all  the  conditions  of  society,  was
suppressed,  and,  in  Germany,  annihilated.
Even  the  general  agitation  of  the  middle
classes  of  the  trading  cities,  which  had  been
connected  with  the  schemes  of  Lübek,  proved
fruitless,  and  necessarily  subsided.  If  seemed
as  if  the  religious  principle  which  had  arisen,
in  its  ow^n  peculiar  strength,  could  en«lure  no
such  intimate  connexion  with  politics.

The  chief  anxiety  of  the  reformers  was,  to
protect  their  faith  from  all  interpretations
which  could  lead  its  followers  into  these  de-,
vious  and  dangerous  paths.

To  this  anxiety  may  be  attributed  the  intro-
duction of  symbolical  books  among  the  Pro-

Chap.  X.

ASPj:CT  OF  AFFAIRS.

453

testanls.  In  order  to  secure  themselves  from
the  propagation  of  Anabaptist  opinions,  the
Wittenberg  teachers  once  more  solemnly-
adopted  the  resolutions  of  the  early  assembhes
of  their  church,  in  wliich  the  doctrines  of  the
Trinity,  and  the  two  natures  in  Christ,  were
originally  established ;  as  had  already  been
expressed  in  the  Confession  of  Augsburg.
They  held  it  necessary  to  render  conformity  to
these  doctrines  indispensable  both  to  theolo-
gical advancement  in  the  universities,  and  to
appointments  in  the  church.*

Not  that  they  meant  by  any  means  to  hold
up  their  Confession  as  an  eternal  and  immuta-
Ijle  rule  or  form  of  faith.  In  the  negotiations
carried  on  with  England  in  the  year  1535,  the
case  was  expressly  pronounced  possible,  that
some  things  in  the  Apology  and  Confession
might,  on  further  examination  of  God's  word,
be  found  susceptible  of  correction  and  im-
provement.t  Nor,  keeping  in  view  the  rela-
tions with  Switzerland,  can  it  be  denied  that
the  doctrine  itself  was  in  a  state  of  living  pro-
gress and  construction.  The  connexion  formed
by  Saxony  with  the  Oberländers,  which,  spite
of  a  great  approximation,  did  not  amount  to  a
complete  adhesion  on  the  part  of  the  latter,  in-
volved an  influence  of  their  dogmatic  view^s

*  Statuta  coUegii  facultatis  theologicte  in  Förstemann,
Liber  Decanorum,  p.  152.  Volumiis  puram  evangelii  doc-
trinam,  consentaneam  confessioni  quam  Augustifi— exhi-
buimus,  —  pie  proponi ;  —  severissime  etiara  prohibemus
spargi  liEBreses  damnatas  in  synodis  Nicfena,  Constanti-
nopoJitaoa,  Ephesina  et  Chalcedonensi,  nam  harumsyno-
dorum  decretis  de  explicalione  dpctrinte,  de  Deo  Patre,
Filio,  et  spiritu  Sancto,  et  de  duabus  naturis  in  Christo
nato  ex  virgine  Maria  assentimur,  eaque  judicamus  in
scriptis  apostolicis  certo  tradita  esse.

t  Petitio  illustrissimorum  principum  data  lagatis  ser™ae
r^ise  dignitatis,  25th  December,  1535. The  king  was  to  |
promise  to  conform  to  the  Confession  and  Apology:  nisi  i
forte  qusedam  — ex  verbo  Dei  merito  corrigenda  aut  mu-  |
tanda  videbuntur.  i

on  those  of  Saxony ;  we  shall  shortly  see  how
earnest  were  the  efforts  made  to  bring  about
a  complete  amalgamation.

The  example  of  Saxony  was  soon  followed
by  the  cities  of  Lower  Germany.  In  April,
1535,  the  preachers  of  Bremen,  Hamburg,  Lü-
bek,  Rostock,  Stralsund  and  Lüneburg  entered
into  a  convention,  in  which  they  determined,
that,  in  future,  no  one  should  be  permitted  to
preach  who  did  not  solemnly  subscribe  to  the
sound  doctrines  contained  in  the  Confession
and  Apology.  This  appeared  to  them  the  only
means  of  keeping  down  Anabaptists  and  other
heretics,  who  would  otherwise  throw  every
thing  in  church  and  state  into  confusion. :|:

And.  we  may  ask,  was  not  this  in  conformity
with  the  principle  in  which  the  whole  Protest-
ant movement  had  originated '?

The  intention  of  its  authors  was  not  to  pre-
scribe new  laws  to  the  world ;  they  had  no  de-
sire to  shake  the  foundations  of  political  and
social  life,  as  actually  constituJ;ed  :  their  only
object  was,  to  emancipate  themselves  from  a
hierarchy  which,  exclusive  and  worldly  as  it
had  become,  still  laid  claim  to  absolute  and
divine  authority.

In  this  undertaking  vast  progress  had  now
been  made ;  but  it  \vas  far  from  being  tho-
roughly accomplished.  Mighty  powers,  con-
strained by  their  nature  and  interests  to  resist
all  attempts  at  separation,  were  still  arrayed
against  it.  We  shall  still  have  to  tell  of  the
stern  conflicts  and  the  various  fortunes  of  this
high  mtellectual  warfare.

t  Bericht  von  etlicher  grossen  Gemeinen  Prediger  Un-
terredung. Report  of  the  conference  between  certain
great  preachers.  In  Schroder's  Evangelischem  Meklen-
burg,  i.  301,  "  qui  v'elut  obliti  humani  nominis  omnia  sur-
sum  ac  deorsum  miscent  tarn  id  republica  quam  in  causa

Christians  religionis ne  dissimulatione  malum  irre-

pat  atque  magistratus  auctoritas  labefactetur."

^^

4«'  % '

•>0,  A

"oo^

'^^<^

^^'^ -^"t.

.0*

.0^ ^  ^ ^  0  ^

PreservationTechnoIr

^-s

a'

%:

IX/ZiA.:^':

r)>  111  Thomson  Parn  u

A-^  Cranberry  Township,

•^^, \ "<$^ S  '  r7P4W79-2ir

t/ranoei  i  y
(724)  779-;

\%

^0^^.

v^^  -^^^

^  *  «  ^ '^C'

i^" .

'^^ -y

O^ «  "^  *  0

^  -

^f^^^ -*«^ :  "^'  .^^^

^\-^  ..:  7 '^

.^>^

sO^

^.^' ^Ä

^  ^>

^^

5 -^c^

:^#^^^'-  "^^  ^'  .'.^t^w:

:f

<

.^

/

%

«  -t

0  ■<

J  o

vO  o

%/^^:.s^  4^^

^,.  .^^'

^^ - 0 N C  -^

\" c

BOUND TO PLEASE

^^ AUG .67

^nm N. MANCHESTER,
INDIANA

LIBRARY  OF  CONGRESS

0  014  086  442  0

U^'

;. ,',
