HAUSA  FOLK-LORE
II
OXFORD UNIVERSITY  PRESS
LONDON EDINBURGH GLASGOW NEW  YORK
TORONTO MELBOURNE BOMBAY
HUMPHREY MILFORD M.A.
PUBLISHER TO THE UNIVERSITY
PLATE  I
CHIEF, WIVES, AND RETINUE
[Front.
HAUSA  FOLK-LORE
CUSTOMS,  PROVERBS,  ETC.
COLLECTED  AND  TRANSLITERATED  WITH  ENGLISH
TRANSLATION  AND  NOTES
BY
R.  SUTHERLAND  RATTRAY,  F.R.G.S.,  F.R.A.I.
OF EXETER  COLLEGE,  OXFORD
ASSISTANT  DISTRICT  COMMISSIONER,  ASHANTI,  WEST  AFRICA
AUTHOR OF 'CHINYANJA  FOLK-LORE'
QUALIFIED INTERPRETER  IN HAUSA, T&I,  CHINYANJA, MOLE
IN  TWO  VOLUMES :  VOL.  II
OXFORD
AT  THE  CLARENDON PRESS
1913
CONTENTS  OF  VOL.  II
PART  III
PAGE
ANIMAL STORIES:
22.  The  lion  and  the  leopard  ....... 10
23.  The  water  of  Ladi  and how  the  hyena was  made  to
disgorge  the  maiden  he  had  eaten . . . .14
24.  The  lizard  and  the  hyena,  and  how  the  latter  came  to
leave  the  home  and  live  in  the  bush . . . .26
25.  The  he-goat  and  how  he  came  to  be  a  domestic  animal,
while  the  lion,  the  leopard,  and  the  hyena,  live  in  the
bush 34
26.  The  beetle  and  how  he  got  his  thatching  done  for  him . 58
27.  The  spider  and  the  lion 74
28.  The  spider  and  the  crows 88

29.  The  spider  and  the  Dodo .106

30.  The  spider,  and  the  hippo,  and  the  elephant . . .124

PART  IV
CUSTOMS  AND  ARTS:

31.  Marriage,  the  bride,  and  naming  of  a  child . . .150

32.  Marriage,  the  bridegroom,  and  telling  the  age  a  girl  has  her

menses . . .170

33.  Marriage  of  a  widow  or  divorced  person . . . .174

34.  The  actual  marriage  ceremony 178

35.  The  birth  of  a  child 186

36.  The  naming  of  a  child 188

37.  Circumcision 192

38.  Removal  of  the  clitoris  of  a  girl 200

39.  Burial  customs,  preparing  the  body  (general) . . . 204


6  CONTENTS

PAGE

40.  Burial  customs,  the  digging  of  the  grave . . . .214

41.  Burial  customs,  washing  of  the  corpse . . . .218

42.  Trading 222

43.  Buying  of  '  cloths '......  . 230

ARTS:

44.  How  '  Benin '  figures  are  made .  -234

45.  Tanning,  and  dyeing  of  leather 244

46.  How  '  kuloko '  is  made 248

PART  V
PROVERBS. 133  Proverbs 251

PART  VI

NOTES  281


ILLUSTRATIONS

PLATE  I. Chief,  wives,  and  retinue . .  Frontispiece

PLATE  II. Heads,  showing  cire  perdue  method  of  casting,

front  view .... to  face  page 240

PLATE  III. Heads, showing  cire  perdue  method  of  casting,

side  view to  face  page 242


WAN  AN  BABI  NB  NA GATANAR
NAMUN  DAJI

THIS IS  THE  BEGINNING  OF  TALES
ABOUT  WILD  ANIMALS


io  ANIMAL  STORIES. No.  22

NO.  22.

Wanan  tatsunlar  zaki  che

da  damisa.

1  Gatanan,  gatanan,  ta  je,  ta  komo. Zaki,
da  shi,  da  damisa,  su-ka-gamu  wurin  farauta. Zaki
3  ya  kashe  nama,  ya  aje,  ya  tafi  shi-na-bidan  wani.
Sai  damisa  ya  tafo,  ya  ishe  nama,  babu  kowa.
Shi  kua  ya  ji  yunwa,  sai  ya  tsuguna,  shi-na-chi. Sai
zaki  ya  tarda  shi,  shi-na-chi. Sai  zaki  ya  kama
shi. Da  kokua,  su-na-kokua,  sai  kura
ta  zo. Ta-na-wuchewa  da  hamzari. Ba  ta  che  masu
komi  ba. Ashe  fakara  ta-na  bisa  itache,  3  ta-na
-ganin  kura,  sai  ta  che, '  Ke  kura  ki-na-gani
mainya  su-na-fada,  ki-na-wuchewa,  ba  ki  raba  su.'

This  story  is  about  a  lion  and  a  leopard.  A  story,  a  story.
Let  it  go.  Let  it  come.  A  lion  and  a  leopard  met  (when)
out  hunting.  The  lion  killed  some  game,  put  it  away,  (and)
went  off  to  look  for  some  more.  And  the  leopard  came
(and)  found  the  meat,  with  no  one  near  it.  Now  he  felt
hungry,  so  he  squatted  down  and  was  eating  (it).  And  the
lion  came  across  him  as  he  was  eating;  and  the  lion  seized
him.  They  were  struggling  and  wrestling,  when  a  hyena
came  up.  He  was  scuttling  past,  and  did  not  say  anything
to  them ;  but  a  bush  fowl  was  up  above  on  a  tree,  (and)  she
saw  the  hyena,  (and)  she  said,  '  You,  hyena,  you  see  the  great
ones  quarrelling,  (and)  you  pass  on  (and)  do  not  separate
them.'


•  ^IS*  1^ A^ ^

»• -~/>/«/^ yT


12  ANIMAL  STORIES. No.  22

Sai  ta  4kyale,  ta-na-5  tafia  tata. Sai  zaki  ya  daka

mata  tsawa,  ya  che,  '  Ke,  kura,  komo.' Sai  ta  ko-

-mo,  ta  che,

'  Zaki  bari,  damisa  ban,  fadanku  na  mainya,  wa  shi  ke  shiga,

sai  wawa,  sai  mahaukachi  ? '
Sai  zaki  ya  ji  dadi,  sai  ya  6  kwashi  rawa,  ya  tafi
da  nisa. Damisa  shi  kuma  ya  ji  dadi,  ya  kwa-
-shi  rawa,  ya  tafi  da  nisa. Ba  su  komo  maza  ba.
Sai 7  kura  ta  gudu. Shi  ke  nan. 8  Kungurus

kan  kusu.


But  she  paid  no  attention,  (and)  was  going  off  her  own  way.
But  the  lion  roared  out  at  her  (and)  said,  4  You,  hyena,  come
back.'  So  she  returned  and  said,  (sang)

'Lion,  leave  off! leopard,  leave  off!
Your  fighting  is  the  quarrelling  of  the  mighty  ones,
Who  is  going  to  mix  himself  up  in  it
Except  a  fool,  except  a  madman  ? '

Now  the  lion  felt  tickled  (by  the  tune)  and  danced  off  to  it
and  went  far  away.  The  leopard  too  was  pleased  (with  the
song)  (and)  he  commenced  to  dance,  (and)  went  far  away.
They  did  not  soon  return.  And  the  hyena  ran  off,  That  is
all.  Off  with  the  rat's  head.


14  ANIMAL STORIES. No.  23

No.  23.

Wanan  tatsuniar  man  Ladi.

che.

Wani  mahalbi l  ya  yi  gida  tsakar  daji. Ya  haifi  diansa
bm.  Ya  mutu,  ya  bar  su,  da  mache  da  namiji. Su-na  nan,  kulum
namiji  shi  tafi  farauta,  shi  bar  kanwa  tasa  a-gida,
shi  dauki  kaia,  shi  2  toshe  bakin  kofa. Idan  ya
tafo  daka  daji  sai  shi  che,  '  Fatsimatan,  Fatsimatan,
Magira,  bude  mani  kofa  in  shiga  Magira,
bude  mani  kofa  in  shiga,  in  fita,  glwar  gari.'
Kulum  idan  ya  fito  daka  daji,  hakanan  shi  ke  yi.
Ashe  kura  ta  ji. Ranan  ya  tafi  daji. Sai  3kura
ta  zo,  ta  che,  ' 4  Fajimata,  Fajimata,  Majia,  buje  mani
kofa  in  shiga  Majia,  bude  mani  kofa  in  shiga,
giwa  gai.' Sai  yarinya  ta  che,  '  Ai  5  na  san  ki


This  story  is  about  the  water  of  Ladi.  A  certain  hunter
made  a  hut  in  the  middle  of  the  bush.  He  begat  two  children.
He  died  and  left  them,  a  girl  and  a  boy.  And  so  they  lived ;
and  always  the  man  (when)  he  went  to  hunt  (and)  left  his
sister  in  the  house,  took  thorns,  (and)  shut  up  the  entrance  to
the  door.  If  he  returned  from  the  bush  then  he  said,
4  Fatsimata,  Fatsimata,  Magira,  open  the  door  for  me  to  enter,
Magira.  Open  the  door  for  me  to  enter,  to  come  out,  the
elephant  of  the  town.'  Always  if  he  came  from  the  bush  he
used  to  do  this.  Now  of  a  truth  the  hyena  overheard  (him).
One  day  he  went  to  the  bush.  Then  the  hyena  came  and
said,  '  Fajimata,  Fajimata,  Majia,  open  je  door  for  me  that
I  may  enter,  Majia.  Open  de  door  for  me  to  enter,  the
elephant  of  je  town.1  But  the  girl  said,  '  No,  I  have  known
you,


$&H$y


1 6  ANIMAL STORIES. No.  23

ke  che  kura,' Sai  kura  ta  koma,  ta  tafi

wurin  zaki,  ta  karbo  magani  wurin  zaki,

na  6  yamin  baki,  ta  zo,  ta  che, '  Fatsimatan,  Fa-

-tsimatan,  Magira,  bude  mani  kofa  in  shiga

Magira,  bude  mani  kofa  in  shiga,  in  fita,

giwar  gari.'

Sai  yarinya  ta  bude  kofa,  sai  kura

ta  kame  ta,  ta  hadie. Sai  wan  yarinya

ya  komo  daka  daji,  ya  che,

'  Fatsimatan,  Fatsimatan,  Magira,  bude  mani  kofa

Magira,  bude  mani  kofa  in  shiga,  in  fita,

giwar  gari.'

Sai  ya  ji  shiru ;  ya  kara,  bai  ji  ta  amsa  ba,


you  are  the  hyena.'  Then  the  hyena  went  off,  (and)  went  to
the  lion.  She  received  from  the  lion  medicine  for  curing  a
lisp,  and  came  back,  (and)  said,  'Fatsimata,  Fatsimata,  Magira,
open  the  door  that  I  may  enter,  Magira,  open  the  door  that
I  may  enter,  that  I  may  come  out,  the  elephant  of  the  town.'
So  the  maiden  opened  the  door,  and  the  hyena  seized  her,
(and)  swallowed  her.  And  the  elder  brother  of  the  girl
returned  from  the  bush  and  said, '  Fatsimata,  Fatsimata,  Magira,
open  the  door  for  me,  Magira,  open  the  door  for  me  to  enter,
to  come  out,  the  elephant  of  the  town.'  Then  he  was  silent  ;
he  repeated  it  again ;  he  did  not  hear  her  answer,


•


'/ -


i8  ANIMAL  STORIES. No.  23

har  sau  uku,  sai  ya  yi  kokari,  ya  bude  kofa.

Ya  shiga,  bai  gani  yarinya  ba. Sai  ya  fita,  ya  dauki

goransa,  shi-na-tafia  har  ya  kai  bakin  ramen

kura,  ya  gani 7  alagidigua  da  zanen  yarinya,

shi-na-kwanche  bakin  rame. Sai  ya  che, '  Abin  nan  kura

ta  yi  shi.' Sai  ya  wuche. Akwai  wani  tabki  da  na-

-mun  daji  duka  nan  8  su-ke-shan  rua. Sai  ya  je  nan,  babu

wani  rua  kuma,  ya  dauki  goransa  na  magani,

ya  kwalfe  rua  nan  duka. Ya  je,  ya  hau  bisa  itache,

shi-na-zamne. Sai  garken  giwa  ya  zo,  9  zaa  su

shan  rua. Sai  ya  che,  '  Ke  giwa  ina  zaa  ki  ? ' Ta  che,

'  Zaa  ni  man  Ladi.' Sai  ya  che, '  Ruan  Ladi 10  ya  kafe.


till  (he  repeated  the  words)  three  times,  then  he  tried  hard
(and)  opened  the  door.  He  entered,  he  did  not  see  the
maiden.  Then  he  came  out,  lifted  his  calabash,  and  travelled
until  he  reached  the  mouth  of  the  hyena's  den.  He  saw  the
girl's  waist-beads  and  cloth  lying  at  the  mouth  of  the  hole.
And  he  said,  '  This  thing  the  hyena  did,1  and  he  passed  on.
Now  there  was  a  certain  pool  where  all  the  wild  animals  of
the  place  were  wont  to  drink  water.  And  he  went  there,
there  was  no  other  water  but  this.  He  lifted  up  his  magic
calabash  and  scooped  up  all  the  water  there,  (and)  went  and
climbed  up  a  tree  and  was  sitting  there.  Then  a  herd  of
elephants  came,  (and)  were  going  to  drink  the  water,  when  he
said  (to  one),  'You  there,  elephant,  where  are  you  going
to  ? '  She  replied,  *  I  am  going  to  the  water  of  Ladi.'  And
he  said,  '  The  water  of  Ladi  has  dried  up.


20  ANIMAL STORIES. No.  23

11  Daa  kin  ba  ni  ma-chi  kanwana,  daa  na  ba  ki  ruan  Ladi.'

Sai  giwa  ta  yi  amai  chlawa  da  ta  chi,  '  Hab  1  ka  ga  abinda

na  chi,  hab !  abin  chiki  sai  tunbi.' Sai  giwa

ta  wuche,  ta  je,  ta  kwanta,  ta  na  haki.

Garken  bauna  ya  tafo,  sai  yaro  ya  che,

4  Ke  bauna  ina  zaa  ki  ? ' Ta  che,  '  Zaa  ni  ruan  Ladi.' Ya  che,

4  Ruan  Ladi  ya  kafe,  daa  kin  ba  ni  ma-chi  kanwana,  daa  na  ba

ki  ruan  Ladi.' Sai  bauna  ta  che,  4  Hab !  ka  ga  abinda

na  chi,  abin  chiki  sai  tunbi.' Kowane  garken

namun  daji  ya  zo,  hakanan  shi  ke  tanbaya  su,  su

kuma  hakanan  su  ke  amsa  masa,  saanan

su  wuche,  su  je  bakin  rafi,  su  kwanta,  su-na-

-haki,  har  namun  daji  duka  su-ka-wuche. Sauran

When  you  have  given  up  to  me  the  one  who  ate  my  sister,
then  I  have  given  you  back  the  water  of  Ladi.1  So  the
elephant  brought  up  the  grass  she  had  eaten,  saying,  *  Hab !
you  have  seen  what  I  ate,  what  is  inside  me  now  is  only  my
stomach.'  And  the  elephant  passed  on  and  went,  (and)  lay
down,  she  was  panting.  A  herd  of  bush-cows  came  up,  and
the  boy  said  (to  one), 4  You,  bush- cow,  where  are  you  going  ? '
And  she  said,  4 1  am  going  to  the  water  of  Ladi.'  He  said,
'  The  water  of  Ladi  has  dried.  When  you  have  given  me  him
who  has  eaten  my  sister,  then  I  have  given  you  the  water
of  Ladi.'  Then  the  bush-cow  said,  '  Hab !  you  have  seen
what  I  ate,  what  is  inside  is  only  my  stomach.'  Whatever
herd  of  wild  animals  came  it  was  so ;  he  used  to  ask  them,
(and)  they  too  made  answer  so,  and  then  passed  on,  (and)
went  to  the  edge  of  the  pool,  and  lay  down  (and)  were
panting,  until  all  the  wild  animals  in  the  bush  had  passed.
There  remained


fcH*Mfttt^i^&^£
^fef^fef^^U

^^«|p45t,4iNft^

l^u^^^i^i^

«t  ^^^  ^™^^  / ^^


o

'^


ILit,  ^^Ji.  ^|44)Li^».'.  JS^J
(^J^^fc^^^j^U


22  ANIMAL  STORIES. No.  23

garken  kura. Sai  su-ka-tafo,  kura  wada  ta  chi

kanwa  tasa  ta-na-gaba,  ta-na-hamzari,  ta  je,  ta  sha

ma. Sai  ya  che,  '  Ke  kura  ina  zaa  ki  ? ' Ta  che, '  Zaa  ni

yuan  Yadi.'  Ya  che, '  Ruan  Ladi  ya  kafe,  daa  kin  ba  ni  ma  chi

kanwata  daa  na  ba  ki  man  Ladi.' Shiru  !  har  sau

uku,  ba  ta  tanka  ba. Sai  zaki  ya  ji  haushi,

sai  ya  zaabura,  ya  kama  ta,  ya  tsaga  ta  blu,  sai

yarinya  ta  fito. Sai  zaki  ya  che, '  Ga  kanwarka.'

Shi  kua  ya  12  bulbule  masu  rua,  domin  da  ya  gani  kanwa

tasa  da  rai. Sai  namun  daji  su-ka-rika  13ribibi

shan  ma,  mainya  mainya  su  ka  take

kankanana,  su-ka-mutu  dayawa. Sai  ya-

-ro  ya  sabko  daka  bisa,  da  su-ka-watse ;


the  house  of  the  hyena.  Then  they  came  up  ;  the  hyena
which  had  eaten  his  sister  was  in  front ;  she  was  in  great  haste
to  come  (and)  drink  water.  And  he  said,  *  You,  hyena,  where
are  you  going  ? '  And  she  said, '  I  am  going  to  the  yater  of
Yadi.'  He  said, '  The  water  of  Ladi  is  dried  up.  If  you  have
given  me  the  one  who  ate  my  sister  then  I  have  given  you  the
water  of  Ladi.'  Silence  reigned  until  (he  had  repeated  it)
three  times.  She  did  not  answer.  But  the  lion  got  angry,
and  he  sprang,  (and)  caught  her,  (and)  tore  her  in  two,  and
the  maiden  came  forth.  And  the  lion  said,  'Behold  your
sister.'  So  he  (the  hunter)  poured  out  the  water  for  them
because  he  had  found  his  sister  alive.  Thereupon  the  wild
beasts  began  to  rush  to  the  water  to  drink,  the  great  ones
trampled  on  the  little  ones,  many  died.  And  the  boy  got
down  from  up  above  when  they  had  dispersed ;


&Sffii^£SffifouJ


—  «  A»


24  ANIMAL  STORIES. No.  23

ya  yi  uta  kwasa  nama,  har  ya  gaji. Ya  tafi  wani  gari
ya  yi  15  gaya. Su  ma  su-ka-kwache  nama,  har
su-ka-bar  shi  nan. Shi  ke  nan. 16  Kungurus

kan  kusu.


he  collected  meat,  till  he  was  weary.  He  went  to  another
town  and  summoned  help.  They  too  collected  meat  till  they
even  left  some  there  (there  was  so  much).  That  is  it.  Off
with  the  rat's  head.


26  ANIMAL  STORIES. No.  24

No.  24.

Wanan  tatsuniar  damo  che.

1  Gatanan,  gatanan,  ta  je,  ta  komo. 2  Maatar  3  kura
4  ta  tafi  wurin  diba  wuta,  zaa  ta  yi  dafua. Sai
ta  taras  ana-kokua,  kowa  ya  yi  kaye,  sai
shi  dauki  wanda  ya  kayas,  shi  je,  shi  chi. Sai  maatar
kura  ta  che,  gada  ta  zo  su  yi  kokua. Sai
gada  ta  fito,  su-ka-kama  kokua,  sai  kura
ta  kada  gada,  sai  ta  dunkule,  ta  damre,  ta  kai
gida. Sai  mijinta  ya  che, '  Ina  ki-ka-samu  ? '
Ta  che, ' 5  Na  je  na  taras  ana-wasan  kokua  ne,
kowa  ya  kayas  shi  dauki  wanda  ya  kayas,
shi  chi,  sai  ni  kua  na  che  shi  zo  mu  yi  kokua,
sai  ya  fito  mu-ka-yi  kokua  da  shi. Na  6  kashe  shi.


This  is  a  story  about  a  lizard.  A  story,  a  story.  Let  it
go.  Let  it  come.  The  wife  of  the  hyena  went  to  a  place  for
getting  fire,  in  order  to  cook,  and  she  came  across  people
who  were  wrestling ;  whoever  won  a  fall  took  up  him  whom
he  had  thrown  (and)  came  (and)  ate  him.  And  the  wife  of
the  hyena  said  the  antelope  was  to  come  forward  and  they
would  wrestle.  So  one  came  out  and  they  wrestled,  and  the
hyena  threw  the  antelope,  and  she  rolled  him  up,  (and)  tied
him,  (and)  brought  him  home.  And  her  husband  said,
1  Where  did  you  get  (him)  ? '  She  said,  '  I  have  gone  and
found  people  playing  at  wrestling ;  whoever  threw  (another)
was  to  lift  up  the  one  thrown  down  and  eat  him.  So  I  too
said  he  was  to  come  forward  and  we  should  wrestle,  and  he
came  out  and  we  (I)  wrestled  with  him.  I  threw  him.


28  ANIMAL STORIES. No.  24

Sai  su-ka-che  in  dauki,  sai  na  dauki,  na  zo  da  shi.1

Sai  mijinta  ya  che,  '  Ba  ni  kadan.' Ta  ba  shi. Sai  ya  che, '  Kara  mani.'

Ta  kara  masa,  ya  chainye. Da  ya  ji  dadi,  sai  ya  che,

*  Dauki  duka  ki  ba  ni  in  chainye,  idan  7  na  je,  ni  ma

naa  kayar  naa  kawo  mu  chi.1 Da  ya  gani  kamar  zaa  ta  Ida,

sai  ya  che, '  Ba  ni,  ke  ma  da  ki  ke  mache,  kin  kayar,

bale  ni  namiji ! ' Sai  ta  dauki  duka,  ta  ba  shi,  ya  chi.

Sai  ya  tashi,  ya  tuma,  ya  buga  katara,  ya  che, '  Idan  na

je,  naa  kashe  su,  su  duka,  in  kawo

mu  chi.' Sai  ya  tafi. Maatar  tasa  ta-na-yi  masa

8  adaa,  ta-na-che, '  Ala  shi  sa  shi  kashe  su  duka.'

Shi  kua  da  zuansa,  sai  ya  gani  damo

shi  na  zamne  bisa  itache,  sai  ya  che,


And  they  told  me  to  take  him  away.  And  I  lifted  him  up  (and)  brought
him  (here).'  And  her  husband  said,  '  Give  me  a  small  piece.'  She  gave
him.  And  he  said,  '  Give  me  some  more.'  She  gave  him  some  more,
he  ate  it  up.  When  he  found  it  good  then  he  said, '  Lift  it  all  and  give
me  to  eat.  When  I  have  gone  (there)  I  shall  easily  throw  some  one
and  bring  back  and  we  shall  eat.'  When  he  saw  she  was  apparently
going  to  refuse  then  he  said, '  Give  me.  As  for  you  who  are  a  woman,
you  have  thrown  (some  one) ;  how  much  more  I  who  am  a  man ! '  So
she  took  all  and  gave  him.  He  ate.  Then  he  rose  up,  jumped  and  hit
(his)  thigh,  (and)  he  said,  'When  I  have  come  (to  the  place)  I  shall
throw  them,  all  of  them,  (and)  bring  (and)  we  shall  eat.'  So  he  set  out.
His  wife  wished  him  good  luck.  She  said,  *  May  Allah  cause  him  to
throw  them  all.'  As  for  him,  on  his  arrival,  he  saw  a  lizard  sitting
on  a  tree ;  and  he  said,


3o  ANIMAL  STORIES. No.  24

*  Kai 9  sabko,  mu  yi  da  kai.' Sai  aka-che, '  Kai  bako

ne,  ba  ka  sani  ba  ne,  ai  sarkin  gari  ke  nan  ? ' Sai

kura  ya  che, '  Shi  sabko  naa  yi  da  shi.' Aka-che,

'  Ke  kura  kar  ki  nidi  kainke.' Ya  che,  '  Shi  dai,

shi  sabko,  naa  yi  da  shi.' Yau  damo  ya  sabko,

Su-ka-kama  kokua. Sai  damo  ya  dauki

wutsia  tasa,  ya  nade  kafafun  kure,  sai

ya  kashe  shi. Sai  ana-shiri,  a-damre  kure,

sai  ya  zaabura,  ya  tashi,  ya  sheka,  su-ka-bi  shi,

zaa  su  kama  shi. Ya  tsere,  ya  je,  ya  tarda  maatarsa,

ta  fura  wuta,  ta-na-jiran  nama. Sai  ya  zamna.

Shi  na  fuchi,  jikinsa  na-makarkata.

Sai  ta  che, '  Me  ya  faru  ? ' Sai  ya  che,  '  Na  je,  na  gamu


'You  get  down.  Let  us  try  conclusions  with  you.'  And
they  (the  people  assembled  there)  said,  'You  are  evidently
a  stranger.  Do  not  you  know  that  is  the  chief  of  the  town  ? '
But  the  hyena  said,  '  Let  him  come  down ;  I  would  (wrestle)
with  him.'  They  said,  '  You,  hyena,  do  not  deceive  yourself.'
He  said, '  As  for  him,  let  him  come  down,  I  intend  to  wrestle
with  him.'  So  the  lizard  descended.  They  wrestled.  But
the  lizard  lifted  his  tail,  and  twined  (it)  round  the  hyena's  legs,
and  threw  him.  And  they  were  preparing  to  tie  up  the
hyena,  but  he  sprang  (and)  got  up  (and)  ran  off.  They
followed  him  to  catch  him.  He  escaped,  and  went  and  came
across  his  wife,  she  has  kindled  a  fire ;  she  was  waiting  for
meat.  And  he  sat  down.  He  was  panting;  his  body  was
quivering.  And  she  (his  wife)  said,  '  What  is  the  matter  ? '
And  he  said, 1 1  have  gone  (and)  closed


J.  to^4&ytytofrAtf

lisLs^ii


32  ANIMAL  STORIES. No.  24

da  wani  kato. Ya  kashe  ni. Zaa  su  yanka  ni,  na  10  gudano.'
Sai  maata  ta  bar  fura  wuta  kuma,  su-na-zamne. Aka-jima
sai  gwamki  ya  zo. n  Maatar  ta  che,  '  Wanan  ya  kashe  ka  ? '
Ya  che, '  Aa  wanan  ba  shi  iya  kashe  ni.' Aka-jima  sai
bauna  ta  zo,  sai  ta  che, '  Wanan  ya  kashe  ka  ? ' Sai  ya  che,
'  Kai,  wanan  ba  shi  iya  kashe  ni.' Sai  zaki  ya  zo,  shi-na-
-wuchewa. Ta  che,  '  Wanan  ya  kashe  ka  ? ' Sai  ya  che,  '  Kai,  ba  shi  ba  ne.'
Aka-jima  sai  kadangare  ya  zo,  shi  na  bin  jikin  daki
kar !  kar ! Sai  ya  che, '  To  ga  shi  nan.' Sai  ya  tashi,  ya  sheka,
maatarsa  ta  bi  shi. Mafari  ke  nan,
da  wuri  kura  gida  shi  ke.
Kadangare  ya  kore  shi.
Ya  shiga  daji. Shi  ke  nan.
12  Kungurus  kan
kusu.


with  a  certain  huge  creature.  He  threw  me  down.  When  they  were
about  to  cut  (my  throat),  I  ran  here.'  Thereupon  the  wife  left  off  blowing
the  fire  again.  They  are  sitting  there.  So  after  a  short  time  a  hartebeest
came  along.  The  wife  said,  'Was  that  the  one  who  threw  you?'  He
said,  'No,  that  could  not  throw  me.'  In  a  little  while  a  bush-cow  came
along,  and  she  said,  *  Did  this  one  not  throw  you  ? '  And  he  said,  '  Tut !  that
thing  could  not  throw  me.'  And  a  lion  came  along;  he  is  passing  by.
She  said,  'Did  this  one  throw  you?'  And  he  said,  'Tut!  it  was  not
he.'  A  little  later  a  lizard  came  along ;  he  was  following  along  the  wall  of
the  hut,  scuttling.  And  he  said, '  Yes,  there  he  is.'  And  he  got  up  (and)  ran
off;  his  wife  followed  him.  That  was  in  the  beginning.  Long  ago  the
hyena  was  in  the  home,  the  lizard  drove  him  out.  He  entered  the  bush.
That  is  it.  Off  with  the  rat's  head.


vjHit*


^f^U^U^J^^:.^
i  O^v  ^J5  -Z3/^  ^


i\ .


»  ««


34  ANIMAL STORIES. No.  25

No.  25.

Wanan  tatsumar  bunsuru  che.
1  Gatanan,  gatanan. Bunsuru  2  ya  je  daji,  ya  nemi
sabo  wuri,  ya  nome,  zaa  shi  yin  sabo  gida.
Da  ya  nome,  sai  ya  komo  gida. Gari  ya  waye,
ya  je  shi  sa  gutsun  daki. Sai  ya  taras  wani
ya  yi  noma  kusa  da  shi,  bai  san  kowanene  ba,
sai  ya  3  kyale. Ya  aza  gutsun  daki,  ya  tafo  gida.
Da  gari  ya  waye,  ya  koma,  ya  taras  noman  nan
na  kusa  da  shi,  anyi  gini,  wani  kuma  ya  yi  noma
kusa  da  wanchan. Ashe  nafarin  4  kura  ne,
na  bayan  kua  damisa  ne. Yau,  ya  yi  gini,  ya  koma
gida. Gari  ya  waye,  sai  ya  koma  wurin  gini.
Ya  taras  wani  ya  yi  noma,  ya  kara  kusa  da  wadanchan.

This  is  a  story  about  the  he-goat.  A  story,  a  story.  The
he-goat  went  to  the  bush  ;  he  sought  a  new  place  to  clear  (as)
he  was  about  to  make  a  new  home.  When  he  had  cleared
(a  place)  then  he  returned  home.  At  dawn  he  went  to  put
in  the  posts  for  his  house.  Then  he  found  that  some  one  had
cleared  the  ground  near  him ;  he  did  not  know  whom,  but  he
paid  no  attention.  He  set  up  the  foundations  of  the  house
and  went  home.  At  dawn  he  returned,  and  found  that  a
clearing  was  (now)  near  his,  and  (foundations)  had  been  dug
(in  readiness  to  put  in  sticks  for  a  house);  and  moreover
some  one  else  had  cleared  close  to  that  again.  Of  a  truth,
the  first  (clearing)  was  the  hyena's ;  the  next  again  was  the
leopard's.  And  he  dug  and  returned  home.  At  dawn  then
he  returned  to  the  place  where  he  was  digging.  He  found
some  one  else  had  cleared  still  nearer  the  other  (clearings).


36  ANIMAL  STORIES. No.  25

Sai  ya  kyale,  ya  yi  gininsa  ya  tafi  gida. Da  gari  ya  wa-
-ye,  sai  ya  koma,  ya  taras  su  duka  sun  yi  gini,  sai
shi  kuma  ya  karkare  gini,  ya  koma  gida,  ya  nemo
chiawa,  zaa  shi  baibaya. Sai  ya  taras,  su  ma  sun  ka-
-re  nasu  gini. Sai  ya  baibaiye,  ya  koma  gida. Ranan
ya  yi  shiri,  zaa  shi  komo  sabo  gidansa,  ashe  su  ma,
sun  gama  nasu  aiki,  ranan  zaa  su  komawa. Shi  kua,
bai  san  ko  suwanene  ba. Bunsuru  ya  kwache
dlansa,  da  5  maatarsa,  da  tarkachensa,  ya  kai  6  gidan.
Shi-na-zamne. Sai  kura  ta  zo,  da  kayanta,  da  tar-
-kachenta,  ta  shiga  dakinta. Aka-jima,  sai  damisa
ya  zo,  shi  kuma  da  dlansa,  da  maatarsa,  da  tarkachensa.


But  he  said  nothing,  did  his  building  (and)  went  home.  At
dawn  then  he  returned  and  found  that  all  have  built  (houses)  ;
and  he  too  finished  building,  (and)  returned  home,  and  looked
for  grass  to  thatch.  And  he  found  that  they  too  have  com-
pleted their  building.  So  he  thatched  (his  roof)  and  went
home.  On  the  day  he  made  ready  to  go  to  his  new  home,
truly  they  too  have  completed  their  work,  and  on  that  day
were  about  to  come.  As  for  him,  he  had  not  the  least  idea
who  they  were.  The  he-goat  carried  off  his  children  and
wives  and  furniture,  and  brought  them  to  the  home.  He  was
living  (there).  And  the  hyena  came  with  his  belongings,
and  household  goods,  (and)  entered  the  house.  Soon  after
the  leopard  came,  he  too  had  his  children,  and  wife,  and
household  goods.


38  ANIMAL  STORIES. No.  25

Sai  aka-jima  zaki  ya  zo. Sai  kura  ya  che, '  Ina  lala-

-tachen  nan  ya  fito  ? ' Sai  zaki  bai  tanka  ba. Da  gari

ya  waye,  sai  kura  ya  che, '  Mu  chainye  lalatache  nan.'

Sai  zaki  ya  che, '  Kai  ka  na  gani  mutun,  ba  ka  san

wurinda  ya  fito  ba,  ka  che,  mu  chainye  shi, 7  ka  sani,

ko  idan  ka  je  garin  kamunsa,  shi  rinja-

-ye  ka  ? ' Sai  kura  ya  che, 4  Na  san  wada  zaa  mu  yi

mu  chi  shi.' Sai  zaki  ya  che. '  Kaka  zaa  mu  yi  mu  chi  shi  ? '

Kura  ya  che, 4  Zaki  kirawo  shi,  ka  che  masa

wurin  nan,  da  mu-ka-zamna,  sabo  wuri  ne,

ba  azama  banza. Kowa  shi  tafi  daji,

shi  samu  naman  daji,  8  mu  giyara  wuri,

domin  mu  zamna  lafia. Idan  ya  che,  To,


And  soon  after  the  lion  came.  And  the  hyena  said,  '  where
did  that  worthless  fellow  come  from  (meaning  the  he-goat)  ? '
But  the  lion  did  not  answer  him.  Next  morning  the  hyena
said,  'Let  us  eat  this  worthless  person.'  But  the  lion  said,
4  You,  you  are  seeing  a  man  (for  the  first  time),  you  do  not
know  whence  he  came,  and  you  say,  Let  us  eat  him  up.
Have  you  known  if  you  have  come  to  catch  him  he  might  get
the  better  of  you  ? '  But  the  hyena  said, 4  I  have  known  what
I  am  going  to  do  that  we  may  eat  him.'  And  the  lion  said,
4  What  are  we  going  to  do  that  we  may  eat  him  ? '  The
hyena  said,  4Lion,  call  him  here.  Say  to  him,  The  place
where  we  live  is  a  new  place,  people  do  not  stay  here  without
doing  something.  Let  each  go  to  the  bush  and  find  a  wild
animal,  that  we  may  propitiate  the  spot,  (and)  live  in  health.
If  he  says,  It  is  well,


40  ANIMAL STORIES. No.  25

saanan  kai  zaki  ka  tafi,  ka  samu,  saanan
damissa  shi  tafi,  shi  samu,  saanan  ni  kuma
in  tafi,  in  samu. Saanan  mu  che,  shi  kuma
shi  tafi  daji,  shi  samu. Idan  bai  samu  ba,
mu  kama  shi,  mu  chainye.' Sai  zaki  ya  che, 4  To.
Ku  kirawo  shi.' Aka-kirawo  bunsuru. Zaki
ya  che,  '  Dan  uwa  lafia,  mu-ka-kirawo  ka,  mu-na-
-so  mu  giyara  wurin  zama  nan  namu,  ka  san
sabo  wuri,  idan  babu  giyara,  ba  ajin  dadin  zama.'
Bunsuru  ya  che, '  Gaskla  ne.' Sai  zaki  ya  che,
4  Gobe  ni  ke  fara  zua,  idan  na  komo
drimisa  shi  tafi,  idan  ya  komo  kura


then  do  you,  lion,  go  and  find  (some  game) ;  then  the  leopard
goes  and  gets  some ;  then  I  too  go  and  get  some.  Then  we
say,  he  too  must  go  to  the  bush  and  get.  If  he  does  not  get
any,  we  seize  him,  (and)  devour  him.'  And  the  lion  said,
*  It  is  well.  Call  him  to  us.'  The  he-goat  was  called.  The
lion  said,  '  Brother,  greetings ;  we  called  you.  We  are  wishing
to  propitiate  this  place.  We  have  come  to  settle.  You  have
known  it  is  a  new  place ;  if  we  do  not  propitiate  it,  it  will  not
be  a  good  place  to  reside.'  And  the  he-goat  said,  '  That  is
true.'  (And)  the  lion  said,  '  To-morrow  I  am  the  first  to  go ;
when  I  have  returned  the  leopard  goes ;  when  he  has  come
back  the  hyena


)a  li


42  ANIMAL STORIES. No.  25

ta  tafi ;  idan  ta  komo,  kai  kuma  ka  tafi.'

Bunsuru  ya  che,  '  Na  ji.' Da  gari  ya  waye  zaki

ya  je,  ya  kaso  gumki. Ya  kira  su. Su-ka-je,

su-ka-kwaso  nama,  su-ka-kawo. Gari  ya  waye

damisa  ya  je  daji,  ya  kaso  maraya. Da  gari

ya  waye,  sai  kura  ta  tafi,  ta  kaso  gada.

Dada  sauran  bunsuru. Gari  ya  waye  su-ka-che,

4  Bunsuru  sauran  kai.' Ya  che,  '  To.' Sai  bunsuru

ya  tafi  daji. Tun  da  safe  shi  na  yawo,  har

mareche,  bai  samu  komi  ba. Yunwa  ta  ka-

ma  shi,  ya  kwanta  gutsun  kuka,  kamar

ya  rautu. Sai  maiki  ya  gane  shi. Shi  na  zato


will  go  ;  when  she  has  come  back  you  also  will  go.'  The
he-goat  said,  'I  have  heard.'  When  it  was  dawn  the  lion
went  (and)  killed  a  hartebeest.  He  called  them.  They  came
(and)  gathered  up  the  meat  (and)  brought  (it)  back.  Next
morning  the  leopard  went  to  the  bush.  He  killed  a  bush-
buck.  Next  morning  then  the  hyena  went  and  killed  an
antelope.  Then  there  remained  the  he-goat.  At  dawn  they
said, '  He-goat,  there  remains  you.'  He  said,  *  All  right.'  So
the  he-goat  went  to  the  bush.  From  early  morning  he  was
roaming  till  evening;  he  did  not  find  anything.  Hunger
seized  him  (and)  he  lay  down  at  the  foot  of  a  baobab-tree  as
if  dead.  And  an  eagle  saw  him.  He  thought


u£*


44  ANIMAL  STORIES. No.  25

matache  ne. Sai  maiki  ya  sabka  bisansa,

domin  shi  chi. Sai  bunsuru  ya  kama  shi,

ya  rike,  zaa  shi  kashewa,  sai  maiki  ya  che,

'  Bar  ni  domin  Ala,  bunsuru.' Ya  che,  '  Ba  ni  bari-

-nka. Idan  na  bar  ka,  ni,  ba  abari  na.' Sai

maiki  ya  che, '  Wanene  ba  shi  barinka  ? ' Ya  che,

'  Ka  ji  ka  ji  wada  mu  ka  yi  da  makwabta  na,

ni  kua,  idan  ban  kai  komi  gida  ba,

da  ni,  da  yayana  da  maatata,  baa  su  barin  mu.'

Sai  maiki  ya  che,  c  Sake  ni, 9  naa  ba  ka  magani,

kulum  kaa  kashe  nama  da  shi.' Bunsuru

ya  che, '  Rudi  na  ka  ke  yi.' Maiki  ya  che,  '  Aa,


he  was  dead.  Then  the  eagle  alighted  on  him  in  order  to
eat  (him).  But  the  he-goat  seized  him  (and)  held  (him),  (and)
was  about  to  kill  him,  when  the  eagle  said,  '  Release  me,  for
the  sake  of  Allah,  O  he-goat.'  He  said,  '  I  shall  not  release
you.  If  I  let  you  go,  as  for  me,  they  will  not  let  me  go.'
And  the  eagle  said,  '  Who  will  not  let  you  go  ? '  He  said,
'  Such  and  such  is  the  state  of  affairs  between  me  and  my
neighbours,  and  as  for  me,  if  I  do  not  bring  something  home,
myself,  and  children,  and  wife,  they  will  not  allow  us  (to  live).'
Then  the  eagle  said,  '  Let  me  go.  I  shall  give  you  a  charm,
always  you  will  kill  game  by  means  of  it.'  The  he-goat  said,
1  You  are  deceiving  me.'  The  eagle  said, '  No,


46  ANIMAL  STORIES. No.  25

ba  rudin  ka  ni  ke  yi  ba,  daidai  sake  ni.' Bunsuru

ya  sake  maiki. Sai  maiki  ya  yi  amai  kara

guntaye  farfaru  guda  uku,  ya  che,  '  Ga  su,

amshi,  idan  ka  tafi,  ka  gani  kowane  iri

nama,  komi  girmansa,  ka  dauki

karanga,  ka  sainya,  tsakanin  kafa  baban

yan  yasanka,  kai  yi  lakato,  sai  ka

bari,  ya  wuche  tukuna,  saanan  ka  yi  lakato.'

Bunsuru  ya  che, '  Na  ji.' Maiki  ya  tuma,  ya  yi  bisa,

ya  bar  bunsuru,  shi-na-zamne. Sai  ya  gani

gumake  sun  tafo,  sai  ya  bari  sai  da

su-ka- wuche. Saanan  ya  yi  magani,  ya  yi  lakato,

sai  gumki  ya  fadi,  ya  bushe. Bunsuru


it  is  not  to  deceive  you  I  say  so,  but  do  you  let  me  go.'  The
he-goat  let  the  eagle  off.  Then  the  eagle  vomited  up  small
white  straws,  three  in  number,  (and)  said, '  Behold  them.  Take
them,  if  you  are  going  along  and  see  any  species  of  game
whatever,  whatever  its  size,  take  these  straws  and  place  them
between  your  big  toes,  turn  head  over  heels,  then  let  (the
animal)  go  on  a  little  way,  then  turn  head  over  heels.'  The
he-goat  said,  '  I  have  heard.'  The  eagle  jumped  and  went
aloft,  and  left  the  he-goat  sitting.  Then  he  saw  (some)  harte-
beest  have  come  and  he  let  them  pass.  Then  he  brought  the
charm  into  use,  turned  head  over  heels,  and  a  hartebeest  fell,
(and)  stiffened.  The  he-goat


y.-lZ«  «^Z  C».i-.t.iT<«.gJr^r

I •/


48  ANIMAL  STORIES. No.  25

ya  zo  gida,  ya  che, '  Na  kashe  nama,  ku  tafi

ku  dauko.' Su  ka  che, '  Mu  je  ka  goda  muna.' Sai

ya  wuche  gaba. Su-ka-tafi,  ya  nuna  masu.

Su-ka-dauke  nama,  su-ka-kawo  gida,  su-na-

kakabi. Sai  zaki  ya  che, '  Kura  kin  gani,

ai  da  wuri  kin  che  ba  shi  iyawa.' Kura  ta  che,

*  Gaskia  ne  ba  shi  iyawa,  ko  yanzu

ba  shi  ya  kashe  wanan  ba.1 Sai  zaki  ya  che, '  Ku  bari

mu  gani.' Da  su-ka-gama  wanan  kilinbibi,  sai

su-ka-kirawo  shi,  su-ka-che,  '  Yanzu  mun  giyara

gida  mun  kare,  mu-na-so  abinchinmu

shi  zama  guda  daia. Idan  wanan  ya  je  daji


came  home  (and)  said,  '  I  have  killed  some  game,  do  you  go
and  bring  it  in.'  They  said, '  Let  us  go  ;  you  show  us  (where
it  is).'  So  he  passed  on  in  front.  They  went  on.  He  showed
them  (the  place),  they  lifted  up  the  meat,  they  brought  it  home.
They  were  astonished.  And  the  lion  said,  4  You  have  seen,
hyena;  formerly  you  said  he  was  not  capable  (of  killing
game).'  The  hyena  said, '  It  is  true,  he  is  not  able.  Even  in
this  case,  it  is  not  he  who  has  killed  it.'  And  the  lion  said,
'You  wait  and  we  shall  see.'  When  they  had  finished  this
plotting,  then  they  called  him  to  them  and  said, '  Now  we  have
finished  making  the  home  proper  for  living  in  (by  killing  the
game)  we  are  desirous  that  our  food  should  be  the  same  for
all.  If  this  one  has  gone  to  the  bush


Jt?iT ^  >


^tf&2jjL^ikfUw&*

4l£^>^.-*l*p'<{Wtf


50  ANIMAL  STORIES. No.  25

ya  kaso  nama  mu  taru  mu  chi. Idan  gari  ya  waye

wanan  shi  tafi,  shi  kaso,  mu  taru,  mu  chi ;  mu  dinga  yin  hakanan.'

Bunsuru  ya  che, '  Ya  yi  mani  dadi.' Yau  gari  ya  waye,

zaki  shi  ya  fara  zua,  ya  kaso  bauna. Su-ka-taru

su-ka-chi. Gari  ya  waye,  damisa  ya  tafi  ya  kaso,

su-ka-taru  su-ka-chi. Da  gari  ya  waye,  kura  ya  tafi

daji,  ya  kaso  nama,  ya  kawo,  su  duka  su-ka-taru,

su-ka-chi. Da  gari  ya  waye,  su-ka-che, '  Bunsuru  sau-

-ran  kai.' Ya  che, '  To.' Bunsuru  ya  tafi  daji,  zaki

ya  bi  sau  sa. Ya  boye,  ya  gani  wada  shi  ke  yi,  shi  kashe

nama,  sai  ya  gudano  maza  shi-na-ba  su  labari,

sai  kura  ya  che,  bai  yarda  ba,  sai  ya  gani. Aka-jima

and  has  killed  game  we  shall  meet  together  (and)  eat.  When
it  was  dawn,  this  one  goes  (and)  kills,  we  meet,  (and)  eat;
(and)  we  continue  to  do  so.'  The  he-goat  said,  *  That  is  just
what  I  want.'  So  when  dawn  came,  the  lion  first  went.  He
killed  a  bush  cow.  They  met  (and)  ate.  Next  dawn  the
leopard  went  (and)  killed;  they  met  together  (and)  ate.
When  it  was  dawn  the  hyena  went  to  the  bush;  he  killed
meat  (and)  brought  it  back,  (and)  they  all  met  (and)  ate.
When  dawn  came  they  said,  '  He-goat,  it  is  your  turn.'  He
said,  'All  right.'  The  he-goat  went  to  the  bush,  (and)  the  lion
followed  his  spoor.  He  hid,  and  saw  what  he  did  to  kill
game.  Then  he  ran  back  quickly  (and)  was  giving  them  the
news,  but  the  hyena  said  he  would  not  believe  (consent)  unless
he  has  seen.  In  a  little  while


52  ANIMAL  STORIES. No.  25

sai  bunsuru  ya  zo. Ya  che,  '  Na  kashe  nama,  ama  ba  ni  iya

dauka.' Su-ka-che, '  Mu  je,  mu  dauko.' Su-ka-tashi. Ya  wu-

-che  gaba. Su-ka-tafi,  ya  nuna  masu  bauna,  ta-na  kwa-

-nche,  sai  shi  ya  komo  gida. Su  kua  su-ka-ya-

-yage  nama,  su-ka-kawo  gida. Wata  rana  kuma,  da  zaa  shi,

sai  damisa  ya  bi  shi,  ya  gani,  ya  komo,  shi-na-

-gaia  masu. Kura  ya  che,  shi  dai  sai  ya  gani.

Tukuna  bunsuru  ya  zo  ya  che,  '  Na  kashe  nama,

ku  je  ku  dauko.' Dada  sun  shiga  tsoro(n)sa.

Sai  su-ka  tashi,  maza  maza  ya  kwatamta  masu  wurin  da

nama  shi  ke. Sai  su-ka-je,  su-ka-dauko,

su-ka-kawo. Wata  rana  kuma,  da  zaa  shi,  kura  ta  bi  shi  ;


then  the  he-goat  came.  He  said,  '  I  have  killed  game,  but
I  cannot  carry  it.'  They  replied, '  We  will  come  to  lift  (it).'
They  rose  up.  He  (the  he-goat)  passed  on  in  front.  They
went  (and)  he  pointed  out  to  them  a  bush-cow,  lying ;  then
he  went  back  home.  And  they  tore  apart  the  meat  (and)
brought  it  home.  Another  day  also  when  he  (the  he-goat)
was  about  to  go  (to  hunt)  the  leopard  followed  him.  He  saw.
(he  returned  (and)  told  them.  The  hyena  said,  as  for  him
He  would  not  credit  it)  till  he  has  seen.  Soon  after  the  he-
goat  came,  (and)  said,  '  I  have  killed  game,  you  come  and  lift
it.'  By  this  time  they  have  entered  into  fear  of  him,  so  they
rose  up  very  quickly,  (and)  he  directed  them  to  where  the
game  was.  Then  they  went  (and)  lifted  (and)  brought  (it).
Another  day  also,  when  he  was  going  off  (to  hunt),  the  hyena
followed  him ;


54  ANIMAL  STORIES. No.  25

ta-na  sanda,  bar  ya  je  ya  gani  gumake. Sai

ya  kyale,  su-ka-shude,  saanan  ya  bi  sau(n)su. Da

ya  kusa  da  su,  sai  ya  dauki  kara  nan  guda  uku,

ya  sainya  tsakanin  baban  dan  yatsansa,  sai

ya  tuma,  ya  yi  lakato,  sai  wani  baban  gumki

da  shi  ke  baya,  shi  kuma  ya  tuma,  ya  fadi. Kura  kua

shi-na-gani,  sai  ya  gudano,  partab !  partab !

ya  zo  gida,  shi-na-fadi. Sai  bunsuru  ya  zo,

ya  che,  *  Ku  tashi,  ku  je,  ku  dauko  nama.' Sai  su-ka-ta-

-shi,  ya  wuche  gaba,  ya  kai  su,  su-na-fida  nama.

Kura  kua,  tsoro  ya  kama  shi,  idan  ya  gani

bunsuru,  zaa  shi  wuchewa  bayansa,  sai


she  was  following  him  stealthily  till  he  (the  he-goat)  went  and
saw  (some)  hartebeest.  Then  he  did  nothing  till  they  passed,
then  he  followed  their  tracks.  When  he  was  near  them,  then
he  took  his  straws,  three  in  number.  He  set  them  between
his  big  toes,  then  he  leaped  up,  turned  head  over  heels,  and
one  big  hartebeest  which  was  behind,  he  too  leaped  up  and
fell.  The  hyena  too  was  looking  on.  Then  he  ran  off  in
great  haste.  He  came  home  and  told  (what  he  had  seen).
Then  the  he-goat  arrived  and  said, '  You,  get  up,  go  (and)
bring  in  the  meat.'  So  they  rose  up,  he  went  in  front  (and)
took  them  to  the  place  (and)  they  took  off  the  meat.  As  for
the  hyena,  fear  seized  on  him  ;  if  he  saw  the  he-goat  was  going
to  pass  behind  him,  then


•^ 77" 2


'••


fc^a**!^  fc&iy^


56  ANIMAL  STORIES. No.  25

kura  shi  tashi,  shi  koma  wani  wuri. Idan  bunsuru
ya  bi  nan,  sai  kura  shi  bi  wani  wuri,  har  kura
ya  gaji,  ya  che,  *  Haba  aboklna  me  na  yi  maka,  ko-
-ina  na  bi,  ka-na-bi  na  ?' Bunsuru  ka  kyale,  har
su-ka-zo  gida. Su-ka-chi  abinchi,  su-ka-kare.
Kowa  ya  shiga  daki. Sai  kura  ya  je  wurin  za-
-ki,  su-ka-tada  damisa,  su-ka-yi  shawara,  su-ka-che,
4  Wanan  ya  fi  karfinmu,  idan  ba  mu  gudu  ba,  wata  rana
mu  ma  shi  kashe  mu.J Sai  su-ka-fita,  su-ka-gudu,
bunsuru  na  kwana. Mafari  ke  nan,  zaki,  da  kura,

da  damisa,  su-ka-shiga  daji,  da  wuri  makwobtan

bunsuru  ne. Shi  ke  nan.

10Kungurus  kan

kusu.


the  hyena  rose  up  and  moved  to  another  place.  If  the  he-
goat  followed  there,  then  the  hyena  went  to  some  other  place,
till  the  hyena  got  tired  (and)  said,  '  Haba !  my  friend,  what  am
I  doing  to  you,  that  wherever  I  go  you  keep  following  me  ? '
The  he-goat  did  not  reply,  till  they  came  to  the  house.  They
finished  eating  the  food.  Every  one  entered  the  house.  But
the  hyena  went  to  the  lion,  (there)  they  woke  the  leopard,
(and)  they  held  a  council,  (and)  said,  '  This  thing  is  too  much
for  us.  If  we  do  not  flee  some  day,  as  for  us,  he  will  kill  us.'
So  they  came  out  and  ran  away.  The  he-goat  was  asleep.
That  was  the  first  time  the  lion  and  the  hyena  and  the  leopard
went  to  live  in  the  bush.  Formerly  they  were  neighbours  of
the  he-goat.  That  is  it.  Off  with  the  rat's  head.


. .  .


58  ANIMAL  STORIES. No.  26

No.  26.

Wanan  tatsuniar  l  alkume  che.

2Gatanan,  gatanan. Ta  je,  ta  komo. Buzuzu  shi  ne
3ya  yi  4gaya,  ayi  masa  shibchi. Ya  je,  ya  gaya  ma  za-
-kara. Zakara  ya  che, '  Yaushe  ?' Ya  che,  4  Jibi.' Ya  che, '  In  ji  ba  ka  gaya
ma  5muzuru  ba  ? ' Ya  che,  '  Aa.' Ya  che,  '  Kar  ka  gaya  masa.' Buzuzu
ya  che, '  To.' Da  fitansa,  sai  ya  je  gidan  muzuru,  ya  fada  masa.
Muzuru  ya  che,  *  In  ji  ba  ka  gaya  ma  kare  ba  ? ' Ya  che, 4  Aa.' Ya  che,
4  Kar  ka  gaya  masa.' Da  fitansa,  sai  ya  je  gidan  kare,  ya  gaya
masa. Kare  ya  che,  '  In  ji,  ba  ka  gaya  ma  6kura  ba  ? ' Ya  che,
1  Aa.' Kare  ya  che, '  Kar  ka  gaya  mata.' Ya  che,  '  To.' (df)
Da  fitansa,  sai  ya  je  gidan  kura,  ya  gaya  mata. Ta  che,
4  In  ji  ba  ka  gaia  ma  damisa  ba  ? ' Ya  che,  *  Aa.' Ta  che, '  kar  ka  gaya
masa.' Sai  ta  che, '  Tafi  gida.' Da  fitansa,  sai  ya  je


This  is  a  story  about  a  beetle.  A  story,  a  story.  Let  it  go.  Let  it
come.  The  beetle  made  an  arrangement  for  people  to  come  and  assist
him  with  his  thatching.  He  went  and  told  the  cock.  The  cock  said,
4  When  (is  it)  ?'  He  said, '  The  day  after  to-morrow.'  He  (the  cock)  said,
4  You  did  not  tell  the  cat,  did  you  ? '  He  said, '  Oh  no.'  He  said,  *  Do  not
tell  him.'  The  beetle  said,  'All  right.'  On  his  coming  away  then  he  went
to  the  house  of  the  cat  (and)  told  him.  The  cat  said,  *  I  suppose  you  did
not  tell  the  dog  ? '  He  said,  '  Oh  no.'  He  said,  '  Do  not  tell  him.'  When
he  left  (there)  he  next  went  to  the  dog's  home  (and)  told  him.  The  dog
said, 4  You  did  not  tell  the  hyena,  did  you?'  He  said,  4  Oh  no.'  The  dog
said, 4  Do  not  tell  her.'  He  said,  4  All  right.'  On  coming  away  from  there
then  he  went  to  the  house  of  the  hyena,  and  told  her.  She  said,  '  Let  me
hear,  you  did  not  tell  the  leopard  ?'  He  said, 4  Oh  no.'  She  said,  4  Do  not
tell  him.'  Then  she  said,  *  Go  off  home.'  On  leaving  her,  next  he  went


60  ANIMAL STORIES. No.  26

gidan  damisa  ya  gaya  masa. Damisa  ya  che,  '  In  ji

ba  ka  gaya  ma  mainya  dawa  ba  ? ' Buzuzu  ya  che, '  Aa.' Damisa

ya  che, '  Kar  ka  gaya  masa.' Ya  che,  '  To.' Da  fitansa,  sai  ya  je

gidan  zaki,  ya  gaya  masa. Mainyan  dawa  ya  che, '  To.' Ranan

gaya  ta  zo. Zakara  ya  fara  zua,  ya  ishe  buzuzu,

su-ka-tashi,  su-ka-gewaya  bayan  gida,  su-na-yankan

yanta. Aka-jima,  sai  muzuru  ya  zo,  ya  yi  salama. Sai

zakara  ya  che. '  Wa  ke  salama  ? ' Buzuzu  ya  che, '  Muzuru  ne.' Sai

zakara  ya  che, '  Ai  na  che  kar  ka  gaya  masa  ? '  Ya  che, '  Ai,  ban  gaya  mass

shi  dai  7ya  ji  labari  ne  ya  zo.' Zakara  kua  ya  zo

da  masu(n)sa,  guda  blu,  ya  kafa,  ya  gudu,  ya  shiga  daki,

ya  bar  su,  ya  boye. Muzuru  ya  zo,  ya  che, '  Wa  ke  da  masu  ? '


to  the  house  of  the  leopard  and  told  him.  The  leopard  said, '  You  did  no
tell  the  great  one  of  the  forest,  did  you  ?'  The  beetle  said, 4  Oh  no.'  Th<
leopard  said, '  You  must  not  tell  him.'  He  said, '  All  right.'  On  leaving
him  he  next  went  to  the  home  of  the  lion,  he  told  him.  The  grea
one  of  the  bush  said,  '  All  right.'  The  day  when  all  the  people  were  t(
assemble  came.  The  cock  was  the  first  to  come.  He  met  the  beetle,  (and
they  rose  up  (and)  went  behind  the  house  (and)  were  cutting  grass.  Shortlj
after  the  cat  came  (and)  hailed,  and  the  cock  said,  '  Who  is  hailing  ? '  Th<
beetle  said,  *  It  is  the  cat.'  Then  the  cock  said, '  What !  Did  not  I  say  yoi
were  not  to  tell  him  ?'  He  replied,  *  No,  I  did  not  tell  him ;  it  is  he  himsel;
has  heard  the  news  (and)  come.'  Now  the  cock  has  brought  his  spears,  twc
in  number.  He  stuck  them  in  the  ground,  he  fled,  he  entered  the  house
(and)  left  them.  He  hid  (himself).  The  cat  came  (and)  and  said,  '  Whom
do  the  spears  belong  to  ? '


•  -


6a  ANIMAL STORIES. No.  26

Aka-che  na  zakara  na. '  Ina  zakara  ?' '  Shi-na  daki.' Sai

muzuru  ya  je,  ya  bude  kofa,  ya  kama  shi,

ya  kashe. Sai  buzuzu  ya  zo,  ya  che,  '  Kawo  in  bo-

-ye  maka  har  mu  gama.' Ya  ba  shi,  ya  kai  wani  daki,  ya  rufe.

Su-ka-je,  su-na-aiki. Aka-jima,  sai  kare  ya  yi  salama.

Muzuru  ya  che,  '  Wa  ke  salama  ?' Buzuzu  ya  che,  '  Kare  ne.'

Sai  muzuru  ya  shiga  daki,  ya  boye. Kare  ya  zo,  su-ka-yi

gaisua  da  buzuzu,  sai  ya  gani  masu,  ya  che, '  Wa  ke  da  ma-

-su  ?' Aka-che,  na  zakara  ne. '  Ina  zakara  ?' Muzuru  ya  kashe.

'  Ina  muzuru  ?' '  Shi-na  daki.' Sai  kare  ya  shiga  daki,  ya  kama

muzuru,  ya  kashe. Buzuzu  ya  che, '  Kawo  in  boye  maka,

har  mu  gama  aiki.3 Ya  ba  shi,  ya  kai  daki,  ya  rufe. Su-ka-je.


He  was  told  they  belonged  to  the  cock.  (He  said), 4  Where  is  the
cock?'  'He  is  in  the  house.'  Then  the  cat  came  (and)  opened
the  door,  (and)  caught  him  (and)  killed  him.  And  the  beetle  came
(and)  said,  '  Bring  (him)  (and)  I  will  hide  him  for  you  till  we  have
finished.'  He  gave  the  cock  to  him.  He  took  it  to  another  room
(and)  covered  (it  up).  They  went  back  (and)  were  at  work.  Soon
after  the  dog  hailed.  The  cat  said,  '  Who  is  that  calling  out  his
arrival?'  The  beetle  said, '  It  is  the  dog.'  And  the  cat  went  into
the  house  (and)  hid.  The  dog  came.  He  greeted  the  beetle  ;  then
he  saw  the  spears  (and)  said,  '  Whose  are  the  spears  ? '  He  was
told  they  were  the  cock's.  '  Where  is  the  cock  ? '  '  The  cat  has
killed  (it).'  '  Where  is  the  cat  ? '  *  He  is  in  the  house.'  Then  the
dog  entered  the  house.  He  seized  the  cat  (and)  killed  it.  The
beetle  said,  '  Bring  (it)  here  that  I  may  hide  it  away  for  you  till  we
have  finished  the  work.'  He  gave  him  (and)  he  took  it  to  a  room,
(and)  covered  (it  up).  They  went  off.


64  ANIMAL STORIES. No.  26

Su-na  aiki. Aka-jima,  sai  kura  ta  zo,  ya  yi  salama.

Kare  ya  che, '  Wa  ke  salama  ?' Buzuzu  ya  che, '  Ban  sani  ba,

kamar  kura  che.' Ya  che, '  Bari  in  je,  in  gani.' Sai  ya  che,

4  Shiga  nan.' Kare  ya  shiga  daki. Kura  ta  zo.

Su-ka-yi  gaisua. To  gani  masu,  ta  che. *  Wa  ke  da  ma-

-su  ?' Ya  che  na  zakara  ne. 4  Ina  zakara  ?' '  Muzuru

ya  chainye.' '  Ina  muzuru  ?' '  Kare  ya  chainye.' '  Ina

kare?' '  Shi-na  daki.' Sai  kura  ta  shiga  daki,

ta  kama  kare,  ta  kashe. Buzuzu  ya  zo,  ya  che,

'  Kawo  in  boye  maka  har  mu  gama  aiki.' Kura

ta  ba  shi,  ya  ja,  ya  kai  daki,  ya  rufe. Su-ka-je

su-na  aiki. Aka-jima,  sai  damisa  ya  zo,  ya  yi

salama. Sai  kura  ta  che, '  Wa  ke  salama  ? ' Buzuzu

They  were  working.  In  a  little  while  the  hyena  came  (and)
hailed.  The  dog  said,  '  Who  is  hailing  ? '  The  beetle  said,
'  I  am  not  sure  ;  it  appears  to  be  the  hyena.'  He  said,  '  Wait
till  I  go  and  have  a  look.'  And  he  said,  '  Get  in  here.'  The
dog  got  into  the  house.  The  hyena  came.  They  exchanged
greetings.  She  (the  hyena)  saw  the  spears.  She  said,  *  Who
possesses  the  spears  ? '  He  (the  beetle)  said,  '  They  are  the
cock's.'  '  Where  is  the  cock?'  '  The  cat  has  eaten  (it)  up.'
'  Where  is  the  cat  ? '  '  The  dog  has  eaten  it  up.'  '  Where  is
the  dog  ?'  '  He  is  in  the  house.'  Then  the  hyena  entered  the
house,  caught  the  dog  (and)  killed  it.  The  beetle  came  (and)
said,  '  Bring  (it)  here,  that  I  may  hide  it  for  you  till  we  have
finished  the  work.'  The  hyena  gave  it  to  him ;  he  drew  (it)
along,  put  it  in  the  room,  (and)  covered  it  up.  They  went
back.  They  were  working.  A  short  time  passed,  and  the
leopard  came.  He  hailed  them.  And  the  hyena  said, c  Who
is  that  wanting  admittance  ? '  The  beetle


ffi« *  ft

cTv"4^/4  :^" — "*-rOT""»J
*,»,  ^^^^^s^^^t^i^

^^-^yM^^
»\g^^^f~s2^5.%^t^l^U

CT^^


J«  »M^»^

•


66  ANIMAL  STORIES. No.  26

ya  che,  '  Damisa  ne.' Kura  ta  che,  '  Ai  na  che  kar  ka  gaya

masa  ? ' Ya  che, '  Ban  gaya  masa  ba,  ko  ya  ji  labari  ne.' Sai

kura  ta  yi  zai  zai,  zaa  ta  gudu. Sai  buzuzu  ya  che,

'  Kar  ki  gudu,  tafo  ki  boye  nan,  ko  ya  zo  gaishe  ni  ne.'

Sai  kura  ta  shiga  daki,  ta  boye,  damisa  ya  shigo.

Su-ka-yi  gaisua  da  buzuzu,  su-ka-dinga  yankan

yanta,  sai  ya  tada  kai,  ya  gani  masu,  kafe. Ya  che,

'  Buzuzu  wa  ke  da  masu  ? ' Ya  che,  '  Na  zakara  ne.' '  Ina

zakara  ? ' '  Muzuru  ya  kashe.' '  Ina  muzuru  ? ' ' 8  Kare  ya  kashe.'

'  Ina  kare  ? ' '  Kura  ta  kashe.' '  Ina  kura  ? ' l  Ta  na  daki.'

Damisa  ya  tashi,  9  sannu,  ya  shiga  daki. Kura

ta  zaabura,  zaa  ta  gudu,  sai  ya  sainya  mata  akaifa


said,  'It  is  the  leopard.'  The  hyena  said,  'Oh!  Did  not  I  say
you  must  not  tell  him  ? '  He  replied,  '  I  did  not  tell  him,  perhaps
he  has  heard  about  it.'  And  the  hyena  ran  here  and  there  (looking)
for  a  way  to  escape.  And  the  beetle  said,  '  Do  not  run  away,
come  here,  hide  in  this  place,  perhaps  he  has  only  come  to  greet
me.'  The  hyena  got  inside.  Then  (the  leopard)  exchanged
greetings  with  the  beetle.  They  were  working  away  at  cutting
the  grass,  when  he  (the  leopard)  raised  his  head  (and)  saw  the
spears  stuck  (in  the  ground).  He  said,  'Beetle,  who  possesses
the  spears?'  He  replied,  'They  are  the  cock's.'  'Where  is  the
cock  ? '  '  The  cat  has  killed  (it).'  '  Where  is  the  cat  ? '  '  The  dog
has  killed  it.'  '  Where  is  the  dog  ? '  '  The  hyena  has  killed  it.1
'  Where  is  the  hyena  ? '  '  She  is  in  the  house.'  The  leopard  rose
up  softly  and  entered  the  house.  The  hyena  leaped  up,  to  run
away,  but  he  stuck  his  claws  in  her


68  ANIMAL STORIES. No.  26

ga  chiki. Ya  falke,  sai  hanji  ya  fito,  sai

kura  ta  fadi ;  ta  mutu. Sai  alkume  ya  zo,

ya  che,  '  Bari  mu  boye  ta,  har  mu  gama  aiki.' Su-ka-ja

su-ka-kai  claki,  su-ka-aje,  su-ka-ja  askunia,

su-ka-rufe  kofa  daki. Su-ka-koma  bayan  gida,

su-na-yankan  shibchi. Gaya  na-tarua,  masu-aiki

su-ka-taru  dayawa,  su-na-yankan  yanta. Aka-dade,

su  gada,  su  barewa  duka,  su  zomo,  su  bachla,

su  maje,  su  hargini,  su  gumki,  su  bauna,

su  giwa,  duka  su-ka-taru,  da  kurege,  da  ku-

-sa,  da  namun  daji  mainya  mainya,  da  kankanana.

10  Hata  tsuntsaye  duka  sun  taru  wurin  gayan  buzuzu.

body.  (She)  fainted,  and  the  intestines  came  out,  and  the
hyena  fell,  (and)  died.  Then  the  beetle  came  (and)  said,
4  Let  us  hide  her  away  till  we  finish  the  work.'  They  dragged
(and)  brought  (it)  into  the  room,  (and)  set  it  down.  They
drew  the  mat  for  covering  the  doorway  (and)  shut  the  door
of  the  house.  They  went  to  the  back  of  the  house.  They
were  cutting  grass.  The  helpers  were  (by  this  time)  assembling,
and  many  workers  had  assembled  (and)  were  cutting  thatching
grass.  They  went  on  increasing  in  numbers,  duyker,  all  the
bush -buck,  hares,  bush-goats,  *  maje '  (?)  hargini  (?)  hartebeest,
bush-cow,  elephants,  all  assembled,  and  jerboas,  and  rats,
and  the  great  beasts  of  the  forest  and  the  small.  Even  all
the  birds  have  assembled  to  assist  the  beetle  (in  his  getting
grass).


"l^iAi


70  ANIMAL  STORIES. No.  26

Sai  zaki  kadai  ne  bai  zo  ba. Ana-nan  ana-

-aiki  ankusa  gajia,  sai  zaki  ya  zo.

Ya  kwanta  kusa  da  su. Ya  yi  nishi. Sai  gaya

ta  watse. Mainya  mainya  su-ka-dinga  take

kankana. A-take  kankana  dayawa. Sai  zaki

ya  taso,  ya  zo,  ya  gani,  ya  che, '  Ina  alkume  ? '

Ya  che,  '  Ga  ni.' Sai  zaki  ya  che, '  Ga  tawa

gaya  nan,  fito  ka  kwache,  ko  bai  yi  maka

dadi  ba  ?' Ya  che, '  Ya  yi  mani  dadi.' Sai  zaki  ya  juya,

ya  yi  tafia  tasa. Buzuzu  ya  yi  ta  kwasa  nama,

ya  kwashe,  ya  tara. Shi-na-chin  abinsa  da  maatarsa. Ashe

sun  gama  baki  ne,  da  zaki  ya  yi  hakanan. Mafari

ke  nan,  idan  ka-na-so  ka  samu  abinchi

11  alhali  ka-na-jin  yunwa,  sai  ka  gama


And  it  was  only  the  lion  that  had  not  come.  And  they  were
all  working  and  getting  weary  when  the  lion  came.  He  laid
down  near  to  them  (and)  roared.  Then  the  assembled  helpers
scattered.  The  great  ones  kept  trampling  on  the  small  ones.
Many  of  the  small  ones  were  trampled.  Then  the  lion  rose
up  (and)  came  forward.  He  looked  (and)  said,  '  Where  is  the
beetle  ? '  He  said,  '  Behold  me.'  And  the  lion  said,  '  Look
at  (what)  my  alliance  (with  you  has  done).  Come  out  and
collect  them.  Or  is  it  not  pleasing  to  you?'  He  said,  'It
has  pleased  me.'  Then  the  lion  turned  round  (and)  went  his
own  way.  The  beetle  collected  the  meat,  and  pulled  it  off,
(and)  heaped  it  together.  He  was  eating  his  spoils  with
his  wife.  Of  a  truth  they  had  arranged  it  all  with  the  lion
to  do  all  this.  That  was  the  origin  (of  what  you  do  now)  if
you  want  to  get  food  when  you  feel  hungry ;  for  you  join


&um*-&h*.&*^^

C  { J  ^  o  ^^


c^^45*rt^gj*^f*


72  ANIMAL  STORIES. No.  26

da  mai-12karfl  tukuna,  saanan  ka  samu.

Shi  ke  nan. 13  Kungurus  kan  kusu. Kusu  ba  ya  chi
kai  na  ba,  sai  in  chi  kai,  dan  banza.


with  some  powerful  person  first,  then  you  get  (it).  That  is  it.
Off  with  the  rat's  head.  The  rat  has  not  eaten  my  head,
rather  will  I  eat  its  head,  son  of  a  worthless  fellow.


•*. it.. •  -»  ^l«.

^


74  ANIMAL  STORIES. No.  27

No.  27.

Wanan  tatsuniar  xgizo  che  de  zaki.
Gizogizo  ya  tafi  2sun  kifi. 3Ya  kama  klfi  dayawa.
Shi-na-4banda,  sai  zaki  ya  zo,  ya  che, '  Gizo  me  ka  ke  yi  nan  ?'
Gizo  ya  che, '  Ina-banda  klfi  ne.' Zaki  ya  che, '  Ba  ni  guda
in  chi.' Ya  ba  shi,  ya  chi. Ya  ji  dadi,  ya  che, '  Kara  mani.' Sai
ya  kara  masa,  ya  chi. Sai  ya  che,  '  Kara  mani  kuma.' Sai
gizo  shi-na-kuka. Sai  zaki  ya  che, '  Gizo  ku-
-ka  ka  ke  yi  ?' Gizo  ya  che, '  Aa,  ba  kuka  na  ke  yi  ba,
hayaki  ke  shiga  mani  idanu.' Sai  zaki  ya  che, '  Dauki
duka,  ka  ba  ni,  in  chainye.' Sai  ya  dauki  duka,  ya  ba  shi,
ya  chainye. Shi-na-kuka. Aka-jima,  sai  5makwarwa  ta  zo
ta-na-kuka,  kuker !  kuker ! Sai  gizo  ya  che,

This  is  a  story  about  the  spider  and  the  lion.  The  spider
went  to  fish.  He  caught  many  fish.  He  was  frying  them
when  the  lion  came  (and)  said, '  Spider,  what  are  you  doing
there?'  The  spider  replied,  4I  am  frying  fish.'  The  lion
said, '  Give  me  one  to  eat.'  He  gave  him  (and)  he  ate.  He
found  it  was  sweet  (and)  he  said, '  Add  some  more.'  He  added
some  more  (and)  he  ate.  Then  he  said,  'Add  some  more
again.'  But  the  spider  was  crying,  and  the  lion  said,  '  Spider,
you  are  crying.'  And  the  spider  said,  '  Oh  no,  I  am  not
crying ;  the  smoke  is  getting  in  my  eyes.'  And  the  lion  said,
'  Lift  them  all  (and)  give  me  to  devour.'  And  he  lifted  them
all  (and)  gave  him,  (and)  he  ate  them  up.  He  (the  spider)
was  weeping.  Soon  after  the  bush-fowl  came  along  crying
kuker !  kuker !  And  the  spider  said,


M*MH*44i*Jta&*^iis


76  ANIMAL  STORIES. No.  27

'  Yar  nema,  dube  ta,  ta-na-yi  mani  takama,  ko  gaishe  ni

ba  ta  yi  ba,  sai  ka  che  ba  ni  ya  yi  mata  zane  nan  ba.' Sai

zaki  ya  che, '  Gizo  kai  ka  yi  mata  ?' Gizo  ya  che, '  Ni  na  yi  mata.'

Sai  zaki  ya  che,  '  Gizo  ba  ka  yi  mani  ? ' Domin  wauta. Sai  gizo

ya  che, '  6Naa  yi  maka.' Da  wuri  kua  ya 7  kyale. Sai  zaki  ya  dinga

lalashinsa,  saanan  ya  yarda, Gizo  ya  che, '  Ama  da  wia.'

Zaki  ya  che, '  Da  wane  abu  ake  yi  ?' Gizo  ya  che, '  Da  gawurtache

bauna,  saanan  a-bidi  baba  kazaura.' Sai  zaki  ya  che,

4  Ab !  wanan  babu  wia.' Sai  zaki  ya  shiga  daji  maza  maza,

ya  samu  bauna  gawurtache,  ya  kashe,  ya  jawo,  ya  kawo.

Su-ka-fede. Gizo  ya  rede  fata,  ya  che, '  Sauran  kazaura.'

4  Daughter  of  a  profligate !  Look  at  her,  she  is  showing  off  her
airs  before  me.  Even  a  greeting  she  does  not  give  me,  even  you
might  suppose  (say)  it  was  not  I  who  gave  her  (her)  spotted
plumage.'  And  the  lion  said, '  Spider,  was  it  you  who  made  them
for  her?'  The  spider  said, '  I  made  them  for  her.'  And  the  lion
said, c  Spider,  will  not  you  make  them  for  me  ? '  For  he  was  a  fool.
And  the  spider  said, '  I  will  make  them  for  you.'  (Now)  at  first  he
was  going  to  refuse,  but  the  lion  implored  him,  and  at  last  he  con-
sented. And  the  spider  said, '  But  it  is  difficult.'  The  lion  said,
4  What  is  it  done  with?'  The  spider  said,  'By  means  of  a  huge
bush-cow,  next  a  big  kazaura-tree.'  And  the  lion  said,  *  Tut,  that
is  not  hard.'  Then  the  lion  went  quickly  off  to  the  bush.  He
found  a  big  bush-cow  (and)  killed  it.  He  dragged  it  (and)  brought
it.  They  skinned  it.  The  spider  cut  the  skin  in  strips,  (and)  said,
4  There  remains  the  kazaura-tree.1


78  ANIMAL  STORIES. No.  27

Ya  che, '  Sai  ka  je  ka  gani  kazaura,  ka  8banke  ta
da  kirjinka,  da  9  karfl,  idan  ta  motsa,  ka  sakewa  ta,
wanan  ba  ta  yi,  sai  wada  ka  banka,  ba  ta  motsa  ba,  ita  ke  yi.'
Yau,  zaki  ya  shiga  daji,  shi-na-neman  kazaura. Idan  ya  ga
wanan,  sai  shi  zabura,  shi  banke  ta,  ta  yi  motsi. Hakanan
bar  ya  samu  wata  kazaura  mai-girma,  ya  banke  ta,
ba  ta  motsa  ba  bar  sau  uku. Saanan  ya  zo,  ye  kirawo
gizo. Gizo  ya  che, '  Sauran,  runfa,  a-dora  nama.' Akai,
zaki  ya  kario  itache,  su-ka-yi  runfa,  su-ka-dora  nama.
Su-ka-fura  wuta. Saanan  gizo  ya  che  zaki  shi  zo  shi  kwa-
-nta. Zaki  ya  zo,  ya  kwanta  gutsun  kazaura. Gizo
ya  dinga  daurinsa  da  klri,  ya  tanke  shi  duka,  ya  rika


He  said, '  Still  you  have  to  go  (and)  look  for  a  kazaura-tree.
Hit  it  hard  with  your  chest  (and)  if  it  moves,  leave  it ;  such  an
one  will  not  do.  Only  one  that  when  you  beat  against  it  does
not  move,  it  will  suffice.'  So  the  lion  entered  the  bush  in
search  of  a  kazaura-tree.  If  he  saw  one,  then  he  sprang  at  it,
(and)  beat  against  it.  It  moved.  And  so  on,  till  he  found  a
huge  kazaura-tree  (which)  when  he  shook  it,  did  not  stir  after
(testing  it)  three  times.  Then  he  came  and  called  the  spider.
He  said,  '  There  remains  a  rack  for  putting  the  meat  on.'  It
(the  meat)  was  brought,  the  lion  broke  sticks,  (and)  they  made
a  rack,  (and)  put  the  meat  on  it.  They  kindled  a  fire.  Then
the  spider  said  the  lion  was  to  come  and  lie  down.  The  lion
came  and  lay  down  at  the  foot  of  the  kazaura-tree.  The
spider  began  to  tie  him  up  with  the  (bush -cow)  hide ;  he
bound  him  up  completely,  (and)  kept


8o  ANIMAL  STORIES. No.  27

tanbaya  sa, '  Ina  ne,  bai  tanko  ba  ?' Sai  zaki  shi  motsa,

shi  ji  wurinda  shi  ke  iya  motsi,  shi  che, '  Nan  ne  bai  tanko  ba.'

Sai  gizo  shi  tanke  da  keau,  shi  che, '  Motsa  in  gani.' Shi  mo-

-tsa,  idan  ya  gani  wurinda  shi  ke  iya  motsi,  sai  shi  tanke

da  keau. Hakanan  hakanan  har  ya  tanke  shi,  ba  shi  iya  motsi

kuma. Saanan  ya  dauko  10churakai  ya  sa  wuta. Su-ka-yi  ja  zur.

Sai  shi  dauko  guda  daia,  shi  nana  masa,  shi  che,  n '  Chuwai !

kifina,  chuwai !  gargazata,  chuwai !  rajiata,  chuwai !

gwandona,  chuwai !  kulumeta,  chuwai !  glwaruata.' Har

ya  zane  jikin  zaki  duka  da  churakai. Ya  kwashe  na-

-ma,  da  shi,  da  12maatar  tasa,  da  yayansa. Su-ka-kai  gida,

su-ka-bar  zaki  kwanche  gutsun  kazaura,  har  zaki  ya  lalache


asking  him,  '  Where  is  it  I  have  not  bound  ? '  And  the  lion
squirmed  about,  that  he  might  perceive  where  he  could  move,  (and)
said, '  Here  is  a  place  you  have  not  bound  up.1  Then  the  spider
trussed  him  beautifully  and  said, '  (Try)  and  move  that  I  may  see.'
He  moved.  If  he  saw  the  place  he  could  move,  then  he  fastened  it
up  well.  And  thus  till  he  bound  him  that  he  could  not  stir  again.
Then  he  lifted  up  the  skewers  and  put  them  in  the  fire.  They
became  red  hot.  Then  he  lifted  up  one  and  pressed  it  (against  the
lion)  and  said,  *  Chuwai !  that 's  for  my  fish.  Chuwai !  that 's  for  my
gargaza  (a  kind  of  fish).  Chuwai!  that's  for  my  "kulume"  fish.
Chuwai !  that 's  for  my  "  elephant  of  the  water  "  (a  kind  of  fish),'
and  so  on  till  he  had  spotted  all  the  lion's  skin  with  the  skewers.
He  carried  off  the  bush-cow  meat,  he  and  his  wife  and  children.
They  reached  home,  and  left  the  lion  lying  at  the  foot  of  the
kazaura-tree,  until  the  lion  wasted  away


8a  ANIMAL STORIES. No.  27

ya  kusa  mutua. Sai  gara  ta  zo. Ta  che, '  Mutun,  mutun  dan  Adam,

idan  ka  yi  masa  rana,  sai  shi  yi  maka  dare.' Sai  zaki

ya  che. 13 '  Asha  haba  gara,  yanzu  kaman  da  ni  ke  nan  mutun  shi  yi  mani

rana,  in  yi  masa  dare  ? ' Sai  gara  ta  lashe  klri. Zaki

ya  tashi,  da  tashinsa,  sai  ya  lashe  gara. Ya  wuche

ya  shiga  daji. Shi-na-neman  gizo,  shi-na-yawo.

Shi-na-tafi  kamar  zaa  shi  fadua,  sai  ranan  ya  gamu

da  kwarangaman  barewa. Sai  zaki  ya  che,  '  Ke  bare-

-wa  ina  zaa  ki  ?' Ta  che, '  Ina  yawo  ne.' Daga  nisa

bai  kusa  da  ita  ba,  bale  shi  san  kowanene. Ya  che

4  Ba  ki  ga  gizo  ba  ?' Ta  che, '  Aa,  Ala  shi  tsare  ni  da  ganin  gizo,

mai-mugun  kai,  ai  wanda  ke  neman  gizo,  ai  shi  ma,


(and)  was  near  to  death.  Then  a  white  ant  came  along.  She  said, '  Man,
man,  the  son  of  Adam,  if  you  have  made  it  day  for  him,  he  makes  it  night
for  you.'  And  the  lion  said, '  Come  now,  do  not  say  so,  white  ant.  Now
placed  as  I  am  here,  if  a  person  made  it  day  for  me,  would  I  make  it  night
for  him  ?'  Then  the  white  ant  licked  the  strips  of  hide  through,  (and)  the
lion  got  up,  and  on  getting  up,  licked  up  the  white  ant,  and  passed  on  (and)
entered  the  bush.  He  was  searching  for  the  spider,  and  walking  about.
He  went  along  as  if  about  to  fall,  and  one  day  he  met  a  very  thin  bush-
buck.  And  the  lion  said,  *  You,  bush-buck,  where  are  you  going?'  She
said, '  I  am  walking.'  From  some  distance  off  (he  spoke).  He  (the  lion)
did  not  go  near  him,  much  less  did  he  know  who  it  was.  He  said, '  Have
you  not  seen  the  spider  ? '  He  said,  '  No,  may  Allah  protect  me  from
seeing  the  spider,  the  evil-headed  one.  Now  surely  he  who  is  seeking  the
spider,  as  for  him,


§^%^W5^

-*>fft$ifS)i>*f*>jfeugt&

«/  V * ^*^  ^^^

*  -— /^  ^^^r  ^ •

^^^/^^f|ity^^^^


84  ANIMAL STORIES. No.  27

Mya  fl  shi  mugun  kai.' Sai  zaki  ya  che, '  Me  ya  faru  ?' Sai

ta  che, '  Ai  kwananga  barna  shi  ke  yi  chikin  daji,  ba  ka  gani  wada

na  zama  ba,  na  lalache,  mun  yi  fada  da  gizo,  sai  ya  nuna  mani

hannu,  na  lalache,  bai  buge  ni  ba,  kowa  ya  yi  fada  da  shi  idan

ya  nuna  masa  hannu,  sai  mai-shi  shi  lalache.' Sai  zaki  ya  che,

'  Domin  Ala  barewa  idan  kin  gane  shi,  kar  ki  che  ina  bidansa.'

Sai  barewa  ta  che, 15<  Na  ji.' Ashe  gizo  ne  ke  child. Zaki  kua

tsoro  ya  kama  shi. Sai  gizo  ya  yi  maza  maza,  ya  yada  fatar

barewa,  ya  komo,  shi-na-fadi,  '  Ina  16zakin  shi  ke  ?'

Har  ya  chika  da  shi. Ya  che,  '  Ga  ni,  an-che  ka-na-bida  na.' Sai  za-

-ki  ya  fadi  kasa,  shi-na-afi,  shi-na-fadi,  '  Na  tuba,  ba  ni  bidanka.'

Gizo  kua,  shi-na-zagi,  shi-na-fadi,  '  Gobe  in  kara  ji  ka-na-

-bida  na,  17kaa  gani,  ai  na  che  idan  ba  ku  kiyaye  ni  ba,  chikin  dajinga


he  has  surpassed  him  in  evil.'  And  the  lion  said, '  What  is  the  matter  ? '
And  she  said, '  Oh,  in  these  times  evil  is  he  doing  in  the  bush.  Do  not
you  see  what  I  became  ?  I  have  wasted  away.  We  have  quarrelled
with  the  spider,  and  he  pointed  his  hand  at  me  and  I  wasted  away.
He  did  not  strike  me ;  whoever  fights  with  him  if  he  points  his  hand  at
him,  then  he  who  has  this  done  to  him  wastes  away.'  Then  the  lion
said,  '  For  the  sake  of  Allah,  bush-buck,  if  you  have  seen  him,  do  not
say  I  was  looking  for  him.'  And  the  bush-buck  said, '  I  have  heard.'
Now  really  the  spider  was  inside.  As  for  the  lion,  fear  seized  hold  on
him.  Then  the  spider  made  haste ;  he  threw  off  the  bush -buck  skin
(and)  carne  back,  (and)  was  saying,  '  Where  is  that  lion  ? '  till  he  met
him.  (And)  he  said,  'See  me,  I  am  told  you  are  looking  for  me.'
But  the  lion  fell  down  (and)  prostrated  himself  and  said,  '  I  have
repented ;  I  will  not  follow  you.'  And  the  spider,  too,  was  swearing
and  saying, '  To-morrow  if  I  hear  you  are  following  me  you  will  see.
Moreover,  I  have  said  if  you  do  not  obey  me  in  this  bush


^ M*8

>J^-^^^lii^^

^ii^Ls^j.^i^  siari^.-A  n/M?.tiil_S


AttW


^f^tl^^MS^'  -

T^ste^Mfab.^--*1-  •


—  A  ? A*


M


-dUbt-M  ^


ft^^lU^jLA^jtlAU-f,^?^, "

\  HL/ -, v^^^W^A^c^f^cWtt/^


86  ANIMAL  STORIES. No.  27

18kaa  ga  wia.' Sai  ya  che,  *  Anbar  ku  ne,  ku  ke  rena  mutane,
tashi  munafiki.' Shi  ke  nan. 19  Kungurus  kan  kusu.
Kusu  ba  ya  chi  kaina  ba,  sai  in  chi
kai,  dan  banza.


you  will  see  trouble.'  And  he  said,  '  You  are  pardoned,  you
(who)  despise  people.  Get  up,  you  hypocrite.'  That  is  it.
Off  with  the  rat's  head !  The  rat  has  not  eaten  my  head,
rather  will  I  eat  the  head  of  the  son  of  the  worthless  fellow.


88  ANIMAL  STORIES. No.  28

No.  28.

Wanan  tatsuniar  l  gizo  da  hankaka  che.

Wata  shekara  aka-yi  yunwa,  bisa,  kasa,  babu  abinchi. Hanka-
-ki  su-na-zua  tsakar  rua,  su-na-debo  baure,  su-na-kawo  gida
su-na-chi. Wata  rana  gizo  2  ya  ji  labari,  da  su-ka-komo  gida,
sai  ya  dauko  katanga,  wai  shi 3  zaa  shi  dlban  wuta.
Ya  bidi  danko,  ya  like  duwawunsa  da  shi,  ya  tafi  gidan
hankaka. Ya  ishe,  4  su-na-chin  baure,  su-na-zuba
wani  kasa. Sai  ya  je  bisan  baure,  ya  zamna. Ya  gaishe  su.
Ya  tashi. Baure  ya  mane  ga  gutsunsa. Ya  debe  wuta,  ya  tafi
gida,  ba  su  sani  ba. Ya  kai  gida,  ya  aje. Ya  kashe  wuta  ya  komo
ya  zamna  bisa  baure,  ya  mane  masa,  ga  gutsu. Ya  debi  wuta,
ya  kai  gida,  ya  aje  baure. Ya  kashe  wuta,  ya  komo  kuma

This  is  a  story  about  the  spider  and  the  crows.  A  certain  year
there  was  a  famine,  above,  (and)  below  there  was  no  food.  The
crows  used  to  go  to  the  middle  of  a  river  and  pluck  figs  (from  a  tree
that  stood  in  the  water)  and  bring  them  home  (and)  eat  them.  One
day  the  spider  heard  about  this,  (and)  when  they  (the  crows)  came
back  home,  then  he  took  up  a  piece  of  broken  pot,  saying  he  was
going  to  get  some  fire.  He  (then)  sought  for  some  wax  and  plastered
his  testicles  with  it  (and)  went  off  to  the  crows'  home.  He  came  on
them  eating  figs,  and  they  were  throwing  some  down  on  the  ground.
Then  he  went  on  top  of  the  figs,  (and)  sat  down.  He  greeted  them.
He  rose  up.  The  figs  stuck  to  his  bottom.  He  drew  some  hot  ashes
from  the  fire  (and)  went  home.  They  did  not  know  what  he  had
done.  He  took  (the  figs)  home  (and)  put  them  aside.  He  put  out
the  fire,  (and)  went  back,  (and)  sat  down  on  top  of  the  figs ;  (they)  it
stuck  to  his  bottom.  He  drew  out  some  fire.  He  took  (them)  home
(and)  put  the  figs  aside.  He  put  out  the  fire  (and)  returned  again


y "


9o  ANIMAL STORIES. No.  28

har  sau  uku. Hankaka  ta  che, '  Wani  irin  diba  wuta  ke  nan,

ka-na-zua,  ka-na-kashewa,  ka-na-komowa  ? ' Sai  gizo  ya  che,

'  Aa  ba  kashewa  na  ke  yi  ba,  mutua  ta  ke  yi  da  kai(n)ta.'

Hankaka  ta  che,  '  Karia  ne,  domin  baurenga

ka  ke  komowa.' Hankaka  ta  dlbi  baure,  ta  ba

shi,  ta  che,  l  Ba  domin  mugun  halinka  ba, 5  daa  sai  mu  di-

-nga  zua  tare.' Sai  gizo  ya  fadi  da  kuka,  '  I !  i !  i !

Domin  uwayenmu  sun  mutu  kuma  ba  mu  rika  zumunta.

I !  i !  i ! Ai  da  uwayenmu  zaa  su  mutua,  su-ka-che

mu  rika  zumunta,  kowa  ya  6  shamu  abinchi  shi  bai  da-

-n  uwansa.' Sai  hankaka  ta  che, '  Bari  kuka,

tafi  gida,  idan  gari  ya  waye,  da  asuban  farin

ka  zo,  mu  taiS  da  kai.' Gizo  ya  che, '  To.' Ya  share


(and  did  so)  three  times.  A  crow  said,  '  What  kind  of  way
is  that  to  get  fire  ?  You  are  going,  (and)  quenching  it  (on
purpose)  (and)  coming  back  again.'  But  the  spider  said,
'  No,  no,  I  am  not  quenching  it,  it  died  out  itself.'  The  crow
said, l  It  is  a  lie ;  because  of  these  figs  you  keep  coming  back.1
The  crow  picked  out  a  fig  (and)  gave  him,  (and)  said,  '  If  it
was  not  for  your  evil  nature,  then  we  might  have  gone
together  (to  where  the  fig-tree  is).  And  the  spider  fell  down
with  sobs, '  E  !  e !  e !  Since  my  parents  have  died,  we  have
not  made  any  friends  again.  E  !  e !  e !  No,  when  my  parents
were  about  to  die,  they  said  I  must  make  friends  (with  people) ;
whoever  jot  (got)  food  was  to  give  his  fellow  creature.1  And
the  crow  said, '  Stop  crying,  go  home.  When  it  is  dawn  at
the  very  first  streak  come,  we  will  take  you.'  The  spider
said,  '  It  is  well.'  He  dried


92  ANIMAL  STORIES. No.  28

hawaye,  ya  tafi  gida. Da  aka  yi  kwanan  farin,  sai  gizo

ya  tara  7  yayi,  ya  fura  wuta  wajen  gabas,  gabas  ta  yi  haske.

Sai  ya  zo,  ya  tada  hankaka,  ta-na-kwana,  sai  ya  che,

'  Asuba  8  ta  yi.' Sai  hankaka  ta  che, '  Haba  gizo,  ai  kai  ne

ka  sa  wuta,  tafi  tukuna,  sai  kaji  sun  yi  kuka,

saanan  ka  zo.' Da  zuansa,  ya  kwanta  kadan. Sai  ya  ta-

-so,  ya  bude  akurkin  kaji. Shi-na-bugunsu. Su-na-

-kuka. Sai  ya  zo,  ya  tada  hankaka,  ya  che, '  Kun  ji

kaji  su-na-kuka.' Hankaka  ta  che,  '  Haba  gizo,

ai  kai  ne  ka  ke  bugan  kaji,  tafi,  sai  ladan  9  ya  yi  kiran

sala,  saanan  ka  zo.' Ya  koma  gida. Da  zuansa,  sai

ya  dinga  kiran  sala, '  10Ayahu  akubai,  ayahu  akubai.'


his  tears  (and)  went  home.  When  people  were  having  their
first  sleep  then  the  spider  collected  straws  (and)  kindled  a  fire
towards  the  east,  (and)  the  east  became  bright.  Then  he
came  and  found  the  crow  asleep,  and  he  said,  '  Early  dawn
has  come.'  But  the  crow  said, '  Come  now,  spider,  it  is  you
(who)  made  a  fire.  Off  with  you,  in  the  meantime  till  the
fowls  have  crowed,  then  you  can  come.'  On  his  going  off  he
slept  a  little ;  then  he  got  up  (and)  opened  the  fowl-house,
(and)  was  beating  them,  (and)  they  were  crowing.  Then  he
came  (and)  met  the  crow,  (and)  said,  'You  have  heard  the
fowls  are  crowing.'  The  crow  said,  '  Come  now,  spider,  was
not  it  you  who  were  beating  the  fowls  ?  Off  you  go,  and  not
until  the  muezzin  has  called  to  prayer  must  you  come.'  He,
(the  spider)  went  off  home.  On  his  coming,  then  he  began
to  call  to  prayer,  'Yallah  is  yate,  yallah  is  yate'  (Allah  is
great).


xU^M8UtotiU&afJ&*4

rZ  jv  O  O


94  ANIMAL STORIES. No.  28

Sai  ya  komo,  ya  tada  hankaka,  ta  che, '  Ai  kai  ne,

ina-ji  ka  ke  yi.' Sai  ta  che,  '  Tafi  gida,  idan  gari  ya  wa-

-ye,  n  naa  zo  in  tashe  ka,  kar  ka  zo  kuma.' Saanan

gizo  ya  hankura. Da  asuba  ta  yi,  sai  hankaka

ta  je,  ta  tashe  shi. Su-ka-yi  masa  tarbachen  fikafikai,

su-ka-tashi,  su-ka-tafi  tsakar  gulbi,  su-ka-hau

baure,  su-na-diba. Sai  idan  ya  gani  zaa  su  diba

wani,  sai  shi  che,  '  Nawa  ne,  ni  na  gane  shi  tunda  farin,

kar  ku  diba.' Sai  su  bari,  shi  je,  shi  debe,

shi  sa  mala. Hakanan  har  ya  debe  baure  duka,

ya  bar  su. Hankaka  da  ta  kawo  shi  ta  che, '  To  gizo

ba  (ka)  ga  abinda  na  ke  fadi  ba  ? ' Sai  su-ka-yi  fushi  (sk)


Then  he  went  back,  (and)  met  the  crow.  (And)  she  said,
'  Oh  no,  it  was  you.  I  heard  you  doing  it.'  And  she  said,
4  Go  home.  If  it  is  dawn,  I  shall  come  (and)  waken  you.  Do
not  come  again.'  Then  the  spider  had  patience.  When
dawn  came  then  the  crow  came  and  roused  him.  They  (the
crows)  gave  him  a  feather  each,  (and)  they  rose  and  went  to
the  middle  of  the  river  (and)  climbed  the  fig-tree  (and)  were
plucking  the  fruit.  But  (the  spider)  when  he  saw  they  were
about  to  pick  one  (of  the  figs),  then  he  said,  '  That  is  my  one,
I  saw  (it)  long  ago;  you  must  not  pluck  it.'  And  they
desisted,  and  he  came,  (and)  plucked  it  (and)  put  it  in  his
bag.  And  thus  (he  did)  till  he  had  plucked  all  the  figs  and
let  them  (get  none).  The  crow  who  had  brought  him  said,
'  All  right,  spider,  do  not  you  see  the  thing  I  was  saying
(about  your  bad  character)  ? '  And  they  (the  crows)  got
angry,


fc.&£<


•«


96  ANIMAL STORIES. No.  28

su-ka-kwache  fikafikaisu,  su-ka-tashi,  su-ka-zo  gida,
su-ka-bar  shi  12  tsugune,  bisa  baure. Ya  rasa  wurinda  zaa  shi  bi,
gaba  ma,  baya  ma. Shi-na  nan  har  rana  ta  kusa  faduwa,  sai
ya  die,  '  Bari  ni  ma  in  tuma,  ai  su  ma  turna  su-ka-yi.' Sai
ya  tuma,  sai  ya  fadi  chikin  gulbi,  punjum ! Sai  gidan  kada.
Sai  ya  che,  4 13  La  iya,  ashe  nan  ku  ke.' Sai  ya  dinga  kuka.
Su-ka-che,  '  Ina  ka  fito,  ka  zo,  ka-na-kuka  ? ' Sai  ya  che, '  Ya-
-ya  ku  bar  tanbaya. Tun  zamanin  kakaninku,  domin
kin  ji  ina  yaro,  na  bache,  a-ka-yi  bida,  aka  gaji  (ba  g)
ba  agane  ni  ba,  sai  yau  Ala  ya  kawo  ni.' Shi-na-kuka
da  hawaye  shabshab  !  har  su-ka-che, '  Bari  kuka  hakanan
kuma,  ai  ka  zo  gida  ne.' Sai  su-ka-ba  shi  daki  wurin  da  kada


(and)  snatched  out  their  feathers,  (and)  rose  up  (and)  went  home,
(and)  left  him  squatting  there  on  top  of  the  fig-tree.  He  could
not  think  where  to  go,  water  in  front,  water  behind.  He  was
there  till  nearly  sunset,  and  he  said,  '  Wait,  I  too  must  jump,  for
it  was  merely  a  jump  they  (the  crows)  gave.'  So  he  jumped,
but  he  fell  into  the  river,  plump !  And  it  was  the  home  of  the
crocodile.  And  he  (the  spider)  said,  '  There  is  no  God  but  Allah,
this  is  the  place  you  are.'  And  he  commenced  to  cry.  And  they
(the  crocodiles)  said,  '  Where  have  you  come  from,  that  you  come
(and)  are  weeping  ? '  And  he  said,  '  Children,  leave  off  asking.
Since  the  days  of  your  grandfather,  that  you  may  understand  I
must  tell  you  I  was  then  a  boy,  I  was  lost.  I  was  sought  for  till  they
were  weary,  and  have  not  been  seen  except  to-day  (when)  Allah
brought  me  here.'  He  was  weeping,  with  tears  falling  splashing,
till  they  said,  '  Stop  crying  like  this  now,  for  now  you  have  come
home.  Then  they  gave  him  a  room  where  the  crocodiles


98  ANIMAL  STORIES. No.  28

kada  ke  kwai. Achikinsu,  wani  mai-hankali,  ya  che, '  Ku  bari
mu  gani  idan  gaskla  ne  shi  danginmu  ne.' Sai  ya  che,
'  Ayi  kunun  laka  aba  shi,  idan  ya  sha,  gaskla  ne,  idan  bai
sha  ba,  karla  shi  ke  yi.' Yau  sai  aka-yi  kunun  laka,  aka-ba  shi
chike  da  kworia,  da  aka-kai  masa. Sai  ya  che,  '  Yaya  wa  ya  gwoda
maku  irin  abinchin  nan,  na  mutanen  da  wuri  ? ' Sai  ya  fude
gUtsun  kworia,  ya  gina  rame,  ya  aza  kworlan  bisansa.
Kunun  ya  yoye  duka,  ya  shiga  rame. Sai  ya  che,  '  Yaya
ku  tafo  ku  dauki  sudi.' Sai  yara  su-ka-zo,  su-ka-dauki
kworia,  su-ka-che,  '  Ashe  danginmu  ne.' Dakin  da  aka-sa
shi,  akwai  kwai  kada  chiki,  guda  dari  da  guda  daia.
Da  zaa  ashiga  kwana,  sai  ya  che. '  To  yaya,  idan


crocodiles  laid  eggs.  (Now)  among  them  (the  crocodiles)  one  who
had  all  his  wits  about  him  said,  '  Wait,  let  us  see  if  it  is  true  he
is  one  of  our  family.'  So  he  said,  '  Let  some  mud  gruel  be  made
(and)  given  him.  If  he  drinks  it  is  true  (what  he  says),  if  he  does
not  drink  he  is  telling  lies.'  So  they  made  mud  gruel  (and)  gave
him  a  calabash  full,  which  they  brought  him.  And  he  (the  spider)
said, '  Children,  who  has  shown  you  this  kind  of  food  of  the  people
of  long  ago  ? '  But  he  bored  a  hole  in  the  bottom  of  the  calabash.
He  dug  a  hole,  he  set  down  the  calabash  over  the  hole;  all  the
gruel  drained  through  and  went  into  the  hole.  And  he  said,
'Children,  come  and  take  what  is  left.'  And  the  children  came
(and)  lifted  up  the  cup,  and  said,  'Truly  he  is  of  our  family.'
(Now)  in  the  room  where  he  had  been  put  there  were  the  crocodiles'
eggs,  one  hundred  and  one  in  number.  When  he  was  going  in  to
sleep,  then  he  said,  '  All  right,  children,  if


ioo  ANIMAL  STORIES. No.  28

kun  ji  pus !  ku  che,  Tusan  bako,  tusan  bako.'

Ashe  ya  yi  haraman  chinye  kwai  kada. Ana- nan  dare

ya  yi,  sai  gizo  ya  dauki  kwai  kada,  ya  jefa  wuta,

sai  kwai  ya  pashe  pus !  da  ya  ji  zafin  wuta. Yara

su-ka-che,  '  Tusan  bako,  tusan  bako.' Sai  uwa-

-yensu  su-ka-dinga  yi  ma  yara  fada. Sai  ya  che,  *  Ku  bar  su,

ai  jlkoklna  ne.' Yau  idan  aka-jima,  sai  ku  ji  pus  !

*  Tusan  bako,  tusan  bako.' Hakanan  har

ya  gashe  kwai  duka,  sauran  guda  daia. Da  gari

ya  waye  sai  aka-che, '  Yara  ku  dauko  kwai  nan

a-kidaya.' Sai  ya  che,  * u  Ku  bai,  ku  bai,  ni  na  dauko.'

Sai  ya  je  ya  dauko,  aka-zana. Aka-che,  '  Ajie  nan.' Sai  ya  che,


you  have  heard  pop!  you  must  say,  It  is  the  stranger  breaking
wind,  it  is  the  stranger  breaking  wind.'  Of  a  truth  he  had  the  evil
design  of  eating  up  the  crocodiles'  eggs.  Then  when  night  came
the  spider  lifted  a  crocodile  egg  and  cast  it  on  the  fire  (and)  the
egg  broke  pop !  when  it  encountered  the  heat  of  the  fire.  The
children  said,  '  (It  is)  the  stranger  breaking  wind,  (it  is)  the  stranger
breaking  wind.'  But  their  parents  began  to  scold  the  children,
but  he  (the  spider)  said,  'Leave  them  alone,  are  they  not  my
grandchildren.'  Now,  every  now  and  then  you  heard  pop !  and,
'  It  is  the  stranger  breaking  wind,  it  is  the  stranger  breaking  wind.'
And  so  (he  went  on)  till  he  had  put  all  the  eggs  on  the  fire  except
one  solitary  one.  When  it  was  dawn  they  were  told,  '  Children,
lift  up  the  eggs  and  let  them  be  counted.'  But  he  (the  spider)  said,
'  Stop,  stop,  I  have  lifted  them.'  Then  he  went  and  lifted  one,  and
marked  (it).  They  said,  '  Set  it  down  here.'  But  he  (the  spider)
said,


102  ANIMAL  STORIES. No.  28

4  Aa  ban  in  dinga  kai  ina  komowa.' Aka-che,

*  To.' Ya  rika  daukowa,  ana-zanawa,  shi-na-zua,
shi-na-lashe  zanen  da  aka-yi,  shi-na-komowa

da  shi. Hakanan  har  ya  chika  guda  dari  da  guda  daia.

Saanan  aka-che  ya  chika. Shi  ke  nan  dada  ya  che, ' 15  Na  gani

gida  kuma,  naa  tafi  in  dauko  kaninku,

da  mata,  in  kawo  zama  daia,  komi  mutun  shi  ke  bida

babu  kamar  mahaifa.' Sai  su-ka-che,  *  To,  babu  laifi,

ka  zo  maza  ga  jlkokinka,  ka  zo  ku  di-

-nga  wasa  da  su.' Ya  che, '  To.' Sai  su-ka-che,

'  Akai  shi  gulbi,  a-fishe  shi.' Aka-kai  shi,  aka-sa  jirgi.

4  No,  no,  let  me  keep  taking  (them)  back  and  returning  (with
another).'  They  said,  'All  right,'  (and)  he  kept  bringing  them
backward  and  forward;  it  was  marked ;  (and) he  was  going  back
and  licking  off  the  mark  they  had  made  and  returning  with  it
(the  same  egg).  And  so  on  till  he  had  reached  one  hundred
and  one  ;  then  they  said  he  had  accounted  for  all.  Things  were
thus  when  he  said,  '  I  have  seen  home  again.  I  shall  set  out
and  get  your  younger  brothers  and  (my)  wives  that  I  may
bring  them,  (and  we  may  all)  become  one  (family).  Whatever
a  man  may  seek  for  there  is  nothing  to  compare  with  those
who  bore  him.'  And  they  said,  '  It  is  well,  there  is  no  harm
in  that.  Come  back  quickly  to  your  grandchildren,  come
and  play  with  them.'  He  said,  *  All  right.'  And  they  said,

*  Let  him  be  escorted  to  the  river  and  taken  over.' He  was
escorted  and  put  in  a  canoe.


104  ANIMAL  STORIES. No.  28

Ana-tuka  shi  har  su-ka-kai  tsakan  rua. Saanan
wani  mai-hankali  ya  che, '  A-je,  a-duba  kwai,  a-gani.' Aka-je,
aka-duba,  aka-gani,  kwai  guda  daia  ya  saura.
Aka-che, '  A-yi  maza  a-komo  da  bako  nan. Sai  aka-je  ba-
-kin  rafi,  ana-che,  '  A-komo  da  bako  nan.' Wanda
ke  tuka  shi  kuruma  ne,  ba  shi  ji  kwarai. Idan  aka-che,
'A-komo  da  bako  nan.' Sai  gizo  shi  che,  *  To,  ka  ji,
wai  a-yi  maza  da  bako  nan,  sabon  rua  ya  zo,  yi  maza.'
Hakanan  har  aka-fishe  shi,  ya  yi  tafia  tasa. Shi  ke  nan.
16  Kungurus  kan  kusu.


He  was  paddled  until  he  reached  mid-stream.  Then  one  of
the  crocodiles  who  was  smart  said,  '  Let  us  go  and  look  at  the
eggs.'  (So)  they  went  and  looked,  and  saw  one  single  egg
was  left.  And  they  said,  '  Let  this  stranger  be  brought  back
at  once.'  And  they  went  to  the  edge  of  the  river  and  were
saying,  '  Let  the  stranger  be  brought  back.'  The  one  who
was  paddling  was  deaf,  he  did  not  hear  very  well.  And  when
they  said,  l  Let  the  stranger  be  brought  back,'  then  the  spider
he  said,  *  There  you  are,  have  you  heard,  They  say,  Hurry
up  with  the  stranger,  as  a  freshet  has  come  down.  Make
haste.'  And  so  (he  said)  till  he  was  across ;  (and)  he  went
his  way.  That  is  it.  Off  with  the  rat's  head.


pLJ


io6  ANIMAL  STORIES. No.  29

No.  29.

Wanan  tatsunlar  Jgizo  che.
Gizo  ke  da  2maata  tasa,  sunanta  3wake,  ta-na  da
saniarta. 4Ta  haifi  da,  namiji,  ta  mutu,  tabar  6dan. Shi-na  nan.
Maatar  gizo  ta-na-kiwonsa  har  ya  girma. Ranan
gizo  ya  kwanta  chiwo  na  karia,  sai  ya  che,  ta  tafi
ta  yi  boka,  ta  gani,  me  ya  faru,  chiwo  nan  ya  ki  karewa.
Sai  ya  gwoda  mata  wurin  wani  6  tanbo. Ya  che, '  Akwai
wani  boka  nan,  mai-ido  guda,  tafi  wurinsa,
ki  yi  duba.' Shi-na  kwanche,  shi-na  nishi,
4  i !  i ! ' Da  fitanta,  sai  shi  kuma  ya  fita,
ya  bi  wani  wuri,  ya  yi  maza  maza,  ya  je,  ya  shiga  chikin
tanbo. Da  zuanta,  sai  ya  che, '  Marhabi  da  maatar  abo-


This  story  is  about  the  spider.  The  spider  had  a  wife.  Her
name  was  Bean  (and)  she  had  a  cow  of  her  own.  It  bore  a  son,
(and)  died  (and)  left  the  son.  It  was  there,  (and)  the  spider's
wife  was  looking  after  it,  until  it  got  big.  One  day  the  spider
was  laid  up  with  a  pretended  illness,  and  he  said  she  (his  wife)
must  go  and  consult  a  wizard  (and)  see  what  was  the  matter  with
this  sickness,  that  it  refused  to  get  better.  And  he  showed  her
where  there  was  a  certain  ruin,  (and)  he  said, '  There  is  a  certain
wizard  here,  with  one  eye ;  go  to  him  (and)  consult  the  lots.'
He  was  lying  down,  and  groaning  '  e  !  e ! '  On  her  going  out
then  he  too  went  out,  (and)  took  another  way,  (and)  proceeded
very  quickly,  (and)  went  (and)  entered  the  ruin.  When  she  (the
wife)  came  then  he  said, '  Welcome  to  my  friend's  wife.'


UL&*Sl.b-jJl*yf*fa&

tk^4i>A|^,&tt4


W  \-x


io8  ANIMAL  STORIES. No.  29.

-klna.' Su-ka-yi  gaisua. Ta  zube  kurdi,  ta  che, '  Mijina

ne,  ba  shi  da  lafia,  domin  hakanan  na  zo,  a-duba  mani.' Sai

ya  che,  *  Hakanan  mi-jinki  shi-na  nan  kwanche,  chlwonsa

ya  yi  tsanani,  idan  ba  7  saniar  nan  naki  ki  ba  shi  ba,

shi  tafi  da  ita  daji,  wurinda  babu  kowa,  babu  kuda,

shi  kai  nan,  shi  yanka,  idan  ba  hakanan  ki-ka-yi  ba,  sai  shi  mutu.'

Maatar  gizo  ta  che,  'To  babu  laifi.' Sai  ta  tashi  ta  tafo

gida. Kamin  ta  isa  gida,  sai  gizo  ya  rigawo  ta  gida,

ya  zo,  ya  kwanta,  shi-na-nlshi,  '  I !  I ! '  Maatarsa  ta  zo,

ta  ishe  shi,  ta  che, ' 8  Na  komo,  boka  ya  che  in  gaishe  ka.'

Sai  ya  che, '  Kaka  shi  ke,  me  ya  gaya  maki,  chlwo  nawa

na  mutua  ne,  ko  9naa  yi  rai  ?' Ta  che,  '  Ya  che  wai  ka  tafi  daji


They  exchanged  greetings.  She  poured  out  cowries  (and)  said,
'  It  is  about  my  husband.  He  is  not  well,  (and)  for  that  reason
I  came  that  you  may  search  out  the  cause  for  me.'  And  he  said,
4  This  is  how  matters  stand.  Here  is  your  husband  lying  down ;
his  illness  is  very  severe.  If  you  do  not  give  him  this  cow  of
yours,  that  he  may  go  to  the  bush  with  it,  to  some  place  where
there  is  no  one,  not  (even)  a  fly,  and  he  take  it  there,  and  kill  it ;
if  you  do  not  act  so  then  he  must  die.'  The  spider's  wife  said,
1  It  is  well ;  there  is  no  harm  in  that.'  And  she  rose  up,  (and)
went  home.  When  she  got  home  the  spider  had  already  got
there  first ;  he  went,  (and)  lay  down,  (and)  was  groaning, '  e !  e ! '
His  wife  came  (and)  found  him  (and)  said, '  I  have  returned.  The
wizard  says  I  must  greet  you.'  And  he  said,  *  How  is  it  ?  What
did  he  tell  you  ?  Is  my  illness  to  be  fatal,  or  shall  I  get  better  ? '
She  said, '  He  says  you  must  go  to  the  bush


—  2*


n


i  io  ANIMAL  STORIES. No.  29

da  saniar  nan,  wurinda  babu  kuda,  ka  yanka.' Sai

gizo  ya  tashi  ya  che, '  Hi  him !  har  na  ji  10shauki,  shauki  ? '

Yanzu  sai  ya  tashi,  ya  zamna,  maatarsa  ta  che,  *  Ka-na-iya

zua  ?' Ya  che, '  Naa  "yayafa  hakanan.' Sai  su-ka-tashi,  su-ka-kama

sanla,  su-ka-shiga  daji  da  shi. Su-ka-je  wani  wuri

da  babu  kowa,  su-ka-che  yaro  shi  tsuguna,  shi  yi  bayan  gida,

su  gani,  ko  akwai  kuda. Yaro  ya  tsuguna,  ya  yi  bayan

gida,  sai  kuda  su-ka-zo  dayawa. Sai  su-ka-che,  '  Tashi.'

Sai  yaro  ya  tashi. Su-ka-kara  gaba,  su-ka-che  shi  tsuguna.

Ya  tsuguna  ya  yi  torotso. Sai  kuda  guda  uku

su-ka-zo. Sai  su-ka-che,  *  Tashi.' Ya  tashi. Su-ka-kara

gaba,  su-ka-tashi  su-ka-tafi  da  nlsa,  su-ka-che


with  this  cow,  to  some  place  where  there  are  no  flies  (and)  slaughter
it.'  At  that  the  spider  got  up  and  said,  '  Until  I  have  got  well,  eh  ?'
And  now  he  rose  up  (from  his  bed)  and  sat  down.  His  wife  said,
1  Are  you  able  to  come  ? '  He  said, '  I  shall  cyawl  (crawl)  thus.'  So
he  rose  up  (and)  caught  the  cow  (and)  entered  the  bush  with  it.  They
came  to  a  certain  place  where  there  was  no  one,  and  they  told  (their)
boy  to  sit  down,  and  ease  himself,  that  they  might  see  if  there  were
any  flies.  The  boy  squatted  down  and  eased  himself,  but  the  flies
came  in  great  numbers.  And  they  said,  'Get  up,'  and  the  boy
rose  up.  They  went  on.  They  told  him  to  squat  down.  He  did
so,  (and)  eased  himself,  but  three  flies  came.  And  they  said, '  Get  up.'
He  got  up  (and)  they  went  on.  They  rose  up  and  went  far  away,
(and  then)  they  told


^^J^rtyr^jte^


^-^ij^^^i^fiij^j


us  ANIMAL  STORIES. No.  29

yaro  shi  tsuguna. Yaro  ya  tsuguna,  ba  su  gani  komi  ba,  sai
kuda  guda  daia,  rana  kua  ta  kusa  fadua,  ta  aza  ganmo,
ta  yi  ja  zur !  kamar  garwashi. Sai  su-ka-che, '  Domin  kuda
guda  daia,  me  zaa  shi  yi,  mu  yanka  shi  nan.' Sai  su-ka-che,

*  Mu  yanka  shi  nan.' Sai  su-ka-yanka  sa. Su-ka-fede,  da  gizo
ya  gani  jan  rana,  kamar  jan  wuta,  sai  ya  che, '  Yaro  shi  tafi.

Ga  wuta  chan,  yi  maza  ka  debo.' Sai  yaro  ya  yi  gudu.
Kamin  shi  kai,  rana  ta  fadi,  sai  jan  tsuliar  Dodo.
Sai  yaro  ya  kai  wurin  tsuliar  Dodo,  sai  ya  dauki
kara  ya  tsokana,  shi-na-che  wuta  che. Sai  Dodo
ya  che, '  Kai  wanene  ?' Sai  yaro  ya  ji  tsoro,  ya  che,

*  Babana  wai  ka  zo.' Sai  Dodo  ya  tashi,  ya  biyo


the  boy  to  squat  down.  The  boy  did  so,  and  not  a  thing  did
they  see,  but  one  single  fly.  (Now)  the  sun  was  near  to  setting,
it  has  got  big,  it  was  fiery  red  like  burning  charcoal.  And  they
said, '  Because  of  one  single  fly,  what  will  he  do  ?  Let  us  slaugh-
ter it  here.'  Then  they  said,  'Let  us  kill  it  here.'  So  they
slaughtered  the  bull.  They  flayed  (it).  When  the  spider  saw
the  red  sun,  like  red  fire,  then  he  said, '  Let  the  boy  go.  See
the  fire  there ;  make  haste  and  bring  some  here.'  Then  the  boy
ran  off.  By  the  time  he  got  there  the  sun  had  set,  and  (nothing
remained)  but  the  red  anus  (of  the  bush  spirit  called)  the  Dodo.
And  the  boy  got  to  where  the  anus  of  the  Dodo  was.  Then  he
took  up  a  straw  and  poked  it ;  for  he  was  supposing  it  was
a  fire.  And  the  Dodo  said, { Who  are  you  ?'  But  the  boy  was
terrified  (and)  said,  *  My  father  says  you  are  to  come.'  And  the
Dodo  rose  up  and  followed


M -%!?.. i> _l4il -oJ»'*%lTo


1425-2


H


ii4  ANIMAL STORIES. No.  29

yaro,  ya  zo,  ya  ishe  gizo. Sai  ya  kwanta,  ya  che,  '  Ga  ni.'

Sai  gizo  ya  che, '  Wa  ya  kira  ka  ?' Dodo  ya  che, '  Danka  ya  kirawo  ni.'

Sai  gizo  zaa  shi  bugun  yaro. Sai  Dodo  ya  che,  '  Kar  ka  huge  shi.'

Sai  ya  bar  shi,  ya  yanka  nama  tsoka  guda,  ya  bai  wa

Dodo. Sai  Dodo  ya  che, '  Dan  kankane  abinan  aboki

kiran  aboki? Karo  dai,  12dadi  ne.' Sai  gizo

ya  kara  masa. Sai  Dodo  ya  che, '  Dan  kankane  abinan

aboki  kiran  aboki  ? Karo  dai,  dadi  ni.'

Hakanan  hakanan,  har  Dodo  ya  karbe

naman  gizo  duka. Sauran  gizo,  da  maatarsa,

da  dansa. Sai  Dodo  ya  che, '  Dan  kankane  abinan  abo-

-ki  kiran  aboki  ? Karo  dai,  dadi  ne.'


the  boy,  (and)  he  came,  (and)  met  the  spider.  Then  he  sat  down  and
said, '  Here  I  am.'  And  the  spider  said, <  Who  called  you  ? '  The  Dodo
said, '  Your  son  called  me.'  And  the  spider  was  about  to  strike  the  boy,
but  the  Dodo  said,  '  You  must  not  beat  him.'  So  he  refrained,  (and)  cut
off  one  lump  of  meat  (and)  gave  to  the  Dodo.  And  the  Dodo  said,
'  For  a  little  thing  like  this  does  a  friend  call  a  friend  ?  Add  to  it,
increase  it.'  So  the  spider  added  some  more  to  it.  But  the  Dodo  said,
'  For  the  sake  of  a  little  thing  like  this  does  a  friend  summon  a  friend  ?
Add  to  it,  increase  it.'  And  so  on,  and  so  on,  until  the  Dodo  had  taken
all  the  spider's  meat  from  him.  There  remained  only  the  spider,  his
wife,  and  his  son.  And  the  Dodo  said, '  For  a  little  thing  like  this  does
a  friend  call  a  friend  ?  Add  to  it,  increase  it.'


n6  ANIMAL  STORIES. No.  29

Sai  gizo  ya  che,  *  Nama  ya  kare,  wane  abu  zaa  ni  ba  ka  ?'
Dodo  ya  che,  *  Ko  kai  dakai(n)ka  ka  ba  ni,  ban  kia  ba.'
Sai  gizo  ya  dauki  dansa,  tilas,  ya  ba  shi. Dodo  ya  che,
4  Dan  kankane  abinan,  aboki  kiran  aboki  ? Karo  dai,
dadi  ne.' Sai  ya  dauki  maatarsa,  ya  ba  shi. Dodo  ya  che,
1  Dan  kankane  abinan  aboki  kiran  aboki  ? Karo  dai  dadi
ne.' Gizo  ya  che, '  Ko  ni  dakaina  kuma,  zaa  ka  kama.'
Dodo  ya  che, '  Tafo,  shiga  burgame.' Dodo  kua,  bur-
-gamen  giwa  ke  gareshi. Da  gizo  ya  gani  hakanan,
akwai  yayan  duma  wurin,  sai  ya  dinga  kwasan
yayan  duman. Shi-na-zubawa  chikin  burgamen  Dodo,
wai  domin  shi  chika,  har  dian  duma  su-ka-kare. Dodo


And  the  spider  said,  '  The  meat  is  finished.  What  kind  of
thing  must  I  give  you  ?'  The  Dodo  said, '  Even  if  you  give
me  yourself,  I  shall  not  refuse.'  But  the  spider  lifted  up  his
son  by  force  (and)  gave  to  him.  The  Dodo  said, *  For  the  sake
of  this  little  thing  does  a  friend  summons  a  friend  ?  Add  to  it,
increase  it.'  So  he  took  up  his  wife  and  gave  him.  The
Dodo  said,  *  For  a  little  thing  such  like  this  does  a  friend  call
a  friend  ?  Add  to  it,  increase  it.'  The  spider  said,  *  Even  me
too  you  are  going  to  catch.'  The  Dodo  said,  *  Come,  enter
the  sack.'  Now  the  Dodo  had  a  sack  made  out  of  an  ele-
phant's skin.  When  the  spider  saw  this — (now)  there  were
young  pumpkins  at  the  place — then  he  began  to  gather  up
the  young  pumpkins  (and)  was  pouring  them  in  the  Dodo's
bag,  as  he  said,  to  fill  it ;  (and  he  kept  on  doing  this)  till  the
young  pumpkins  were  finished.  The  Dodo


••  •


n8  ANIMAL  STORIES. No.  29

ya  che, '  Dan  kankane  abin  nan  aboki  kiran  aboki  ?

Karo  dai,  dadi  ne.' Sai  gizo  ya  che,  '  To  babu  wani  abu

sai  ni  kadai,  idan  ni  zaa  ka  kamawa  to,  ka  kama.1

Sai  Dodo  ya  bude  bakin  burgame,  ya  che,  *  Tafo

shiga.' Sai  gizo  ya  shiga  tilas,  ba  da  sosa  ba.

Sai  Dodo  ya  damre  bakin  jika,  ya  tashi.

Shi-na-bidan  itache,  domin  shi  gasa,  sai  rakumi

ya  zo,  barwansa  na  bisa,  da  13banbadawa  su-na-

-yi  masa  kirari. Ya  wuche,  bai  che  masa  komi  ba. Aka-jima,

bunsuru  ya  zo,  da  barwansa,  ya  wuche. Aka-jima,

sai  kusu  ya  zo,  ana-yi  masa  kirari,  shi-na-tsale.

Ana-fadi, '  Furub !  bata  kayan  Dodo. Furub ! '  utuntoja.


said, '  For  this  little  thing  a  friend  calls  a  friend  ?  Add  to  it,
increase  it.'  But  the  spider  said, '  Well,  there  is  not  another
thing  but  myself.  If  you  want  to  catch  me,  well  and  good,
you  can  catch  me.'  So  the  Dodo  opened  the  mouth  of  his
bag  (and)  said, '  Come  here.  Get  in.'  And  the  spider  entered
by  compulsion,  not  of  his  own  wish.  Then  the  Dodo  tied  up
the  mouth  of  the  bag  (and)  rose  up.  He  was  searching  for
a  tree  in  order  to  roast  (them).  And  the  camel  came  along ;
his  servant  was  on  top,  and  his  followers  were  singing  his
praises.  He  passed  on  (and)  did  not  say  anything  to  him
(the  Dodo).  Soon  after  the  he-goat  came  with  his  followers,
(and)  passed.  Soon  after  then  the  rat  came ;  they  (his  fol-
lowers) were  singing  his  praises ;  he  was  leaping  about.  They
were  saying,  '  Furub  !  Spoil  the  Dodo's  bundle.  Furub ! '
plucking  (at  the  hair  on  the  rat's  back).


t-  • »  >


i^4j*f*


i2o  ANIMAL STORIES. No.  29

Zaa  shi  wuchewa,  sai  aka-che, '  Ai  ga  Dodo  chan,  da  wani  abu

gabansa.' Sai  ya  che, '  Mu  je  mu  gani.' Su-ka-tafi,  su-ka-i-

-she  burgame  gabansa. Sai  kusu  ya  che, l  Kai,  me  ka  ke  yi

nan.' Dodo  ya  che,  *  Kai  sani  wurin  da  dare  ya  yi  maka.' Kusu

ya  che,  *  Ku  kwanche  burgame  nan  mu  gani.' Sai  Dodo  ya  yi

fushi,  ya  tashi,  ya  kama  kusu,  ya  hade. Sai  kusu  ya  fito

masa  ga  shakira  ya  kuma  hade  shi  ya  fito  masa

ga  idanu,  ya  kuma  hade  shi  sai  ya  fito  masa

ga  chibla. Sai  Dodo  ya  fadi,  ya  mutu. Kusu  ya  che,

'  Ku  kwanche  kaya  nan  in  gani.' Aka-kwanche.

Sai  ga  gizo,  da  maatarsa,  da  dansa,  su-ka-fito.

Sai  kusu  ya  che, l  Me  ya  kawo  ku  nan  ?' Gizo  ya  che,

4  Ka  ji  ka  ji  wada  mu-ka-yi.' Sai  kusu  ya  che, '  Lalatache,


He  (the  rat)  was  about  to  pass,  but  they  said,  *  Oh  !  look  at  the
Dodo  there  with  something  in  front  of  him.'  And  he  said,  *  Let
us  go  and  see.'  They  went  and  found  (the  Dodo)  with  the
bag  in  front  of  him.  And  the  rat  said,  '  You,  what  are  you
doing  here?'  The  Dodo  replied,  'You,  know  when  night
overtakes  you,  and  be  wise  (and  sleep  there).  The  rat  said,
'Unfasten  your  bag  that  we  may  look.'  But  the  Dodo  got
angry.  He  rose  up,  he  seized  the  rat  (and)  swallowed  (him).
But  the  rat  came  out  from  his  anus.  He  swallowed  him  again,
but  he  came  out  at  his  eyes.  He  swallowed  him  again,  but  he
came  out  at  his  navel.  Then  the  Dodo  fell  down  and  died.
The  rat  said,  'Unloose  this  bundle  (and)  let  me  see.'  It  was
loosened.  Then,  behold  the  spider,  and  his  wife,  and  his  son,
came  out.  And  the  rat  said, '  What  brought  you  here  ? '  The
spider  said,  '  So-and-so  and  so-and-so  is  what  we  did.'  And
the  rat  replied, '  Worthless  one,


Jtt<^£tti4aU&JLrj.

O* **O


**


j^a^yjj^sU^jteOj/


-^.i .  >;


« «»

-  --y*<


122  ANIMAL  STORIES. No.  29

kwashi  namanka  ka  tafi  gida. Ala  ya  so  ka  yau.'
Sai  kusu  ya  yi 16  tafia  tasa. Gizo  ya  kwashi  na-
-mansa,  ya  kai  gida,  ya  yi  gaya. Aka-zo  aka-yanyanka
naman  Dodo,  aka-kai  gida. Domin  hakanan,  mugun
kwadai,  da  mugun  rowa,  ba  su  da  chau. 16  Kungurus

kan  kusu !


take  your  meat,  (and)  get  off  home.  Allah  has  been  good
to  you  this  day.'  And  the  rat  went  his  way.  The  spider
gathered  up  his  meat  (and)  took  it  home,  (and)  summoned  all
the  people.  And  they  came  (and)  cut  the  flesh  of  the  Dodo
in  pieces  (and)  took  it  home.  And  from  this  (you  perceive)
that  evil  longing  and  evil  greed  are  not  beautiful.  Off  with
the  rat's  head.


124  ANIMAL  STORIES. No.  30

No.  30.
Wanan  tatsunlar

1  gizo  che.

Wani  zamani  aka-yi  yunwa,  tudu  da  chikin  rua  babu  abinchi.
Sai  gizo  da  dlansa  su-ka-rame,  ba  su  samun  abinchi.
Ana- nan  ranan  gizo  2  ya  tafi  wurin  glwa,  ya  che, '  Sar-
-ki,  Ala  shi  dade  da  raika,  3  shaki  yuwa,  doyina,
ta  aiko  ni  gareki,  wai  in  gaia  maki,  ba  ta
kwando  hatsi  dari,  in  kawo  mata,  idan  kaka
4  ta  yi,  5  taa  ba  ki  doki  algarma,  ama  wai  zanche,  kune
na  mainya,  kar  ki  bari  wani  shi  ji.' Glwa  ta  che, '  To  babu
laifi.' Glwa  ta  bari  aka-kawo  kwando  hatsi  dari


This  story  is  about  the  spider.  Once  upon  a  time  there
was  a  famine,  on  land  and  in  the  water  there  was  no  food.
And  the  spider  and  his  children  had  become  thin  for  want
of  food.  And  things  were  in  this  state,  when  one  day  the
spider  went  to  the  elephant  (and)  said,  'Chief,  may  Allah
prolong  your  life.  The  shief  (chief)  of  the  shater  (water),  the
hipopojmus  (hippopotamus),  sends  me  to  you.  She  says
I  am  to  tell  you  to  give  her  one  hundred  baskets  of  grain,
and  I  am  to  take  (them)  to  her.  When  the  harvest  season
has  come  she  will  give  you  a  great  horse.  Moreover,  she  says
these  words  are  only  for  the  ears  of  the  great  ones,  and  you
must  not  allow  any  one  else  to  hear.'  The  elephant  said,
4  All  right,  there  is  no  harm  in  that.'  The  elephant  allowed
them  to  bring  one  hundred  baskets  of  grain


7A  i_«-  •


*4*M4MM9H****-

V  -

<j*^sJ>-M mSyfttf&W  -^

^^^ ^r ' ^^^


126  ANIMAL  STORIES. No.  30

maza  maza  aka-bari  samarin  giwa,  su-ka-dauki  su-ka-kai

bakin  rSfi. Da  su-ka-kai,  sai  gizo  ya  che,  '  Ku  aje  nan,

ku  koma  gida,  in  shiga  in  gaya  mata. Ta  bari  sama-

-rinta  su  zo,  su  dauki,  ai  ku  kun  gama  mai-wia.'

Yau,  samarin  giwa  su-ka-koma  gida. Shi  kua,

da  su-ka-tafi,  sai  ya  koma  gidansa,  ya  kirawo  6  maatarsa

da  yayansa,  su-ka-kwashe  hatsi  duka,  su-ka-kai  gida.

Da  gari  ya  waye,  sai  ya  je  bakin  rafi,  ya  shiga  chikin  rua.

Ya  je  fadar  dorina,  ya  taras  fadanchi,  ya  chika. Sai

ya  wuche,  ya  tafi,  har  wurin  zaman  dorina,  ya  zamna,  ya  che,


at  once,  (and)  some  youths  of  the  elephants  were  allowed  to
lift  them  (and)  take  them  to  the  edge  of  the  river.  When
they  had  brought  them  then  the  spider  said, '  Lay  them  down
here,  (and)  go  back  home.  I  must  go  into  the  water  and  tell
her,  (the  hippopotamus),  that  she  may  allow  her  young  men
to  come  and  lift  (them).  For  your  part,  you  have  finished
the  hardest  of  the  work.'  So  the  elephant's  young  men  went
back  home.  He  indeed  (the  spider)  when  they  had  gone  off,
went  to  his  home  and  called  his  wife  and  children,  and  they
carried  off  all  the  grain,  and  took  it  home.  When  it  was
dawn,  then  he  went  to  the  river  bank,  (and)  entered  into  the
water.  He  went  to  the  court  of  the  hippopotamus'  house
(and)  met  the  councillors.  He  went  among  them,  (and)
passed  on,  (and)  went  till  he  came  to  where  the  hippo  was
sitting,  (and  then)  he  sat  down,  (and)  said,


IjUjU


i28  ANIMAL  STORIES. No.  30

'  Ala  shi  dada  da  rai  sarki.' Dorina  ta  che,  '  Amin

7  gizama  na  koki,  ina  aka-fito  ? ' Sai  gizo  ya  che,

4  Ga  mu  dai,  8  yanju  ina-zamne,  shaki  tudu  giwa

ta  aiko,  aka-yi  kira  na,  na  je,  ta  aiko  ni  wurinki.

Wai  in  gaia  maki,  ta-na  da  tuo,  ba  ta  da  abin  mia,

ki  ba  ta  kwando  kifi  dari,  idan  kaka  ta  yi,

taa  ba  ki  doki  algarma.' Dorina  ta  che,  '  Babu

laifi.' Sai  gizo  ya  yi  maza  maza,  ya  che, '  Wai  zan-

-nchenku  na  mainya,  kar  ki  gaia  ma  kowa,  ke  kua

kar  ki  tanbaye  ta,  sai  ta  waiwaie  ki.' Dorina

ta  che, '  Babu  laifi.' Dorina  ta  bari  aka-kawo  kwando


'  May  Allah  lengthen  your  days,  O  chief.'  The  hippo  said,
4  Amen,  spider  (husband)  of  the  koki  (fern,  spider),  whence
came  you  ? '  And  the  spider  replied,  '  Behold  me,  I  was
living  until  just  jow  (now)  as  ujal  (usual)  when  the  shief
(chief)  of  the  land,  the  elephant,  sent  and  had  me  called  (to
her).  I  went,  (and)  she  sent  me  here  to  you.  She  bade  me
tell  you  that  she  has  grain  foods,  but  has  nothing  for  making
soup  with,  (and)  you  must  give  her  one  hundred  baskets  of
fish.  When  the  harvest  season  has  come  round  she  will  give
you  a  great  horse.'  The  hippo  said,  *  That  is  all  right.'  And
the  spider  made  haste  to  say, '  He  says,  your  words  are  only
for  (the  ears)  of  the  great,  you  must  not  mention  (it)  to
anybody,  and  you,  too,  you  must  not  ask  her  (any  more  about
all  this)  till  she  comes  and  mentions  it  first  to  you.'  The
hippo  said,  '  There  is  no  harm  in  that.'  (Then)  the  hippo  let
them  bring  baskets  of


r^; vj


i3o  ANIMAL  STORIES. No.  30

klfi  dari  aka-sa  samari  su-ka-dauka,  su-ka-kawo

bakin  rafi,  su-ka-aje. Sai  gizo  ya  che, '  To,  ku  koma,

in  tafi,  in  kirawo  samarin  giwa,  su  zo,  su  dauki.' Sai  sama-

-rin  dorina  su-ka-che,  '  Idan  mu-ka-tafi,  wani  abu  ya  zo  ya  chi  fa.'

Gizo  ya  che, '  Ku  dai  ku  tafi,  babu  abinda  ke  tabawa,

idan  ku-ka-tsaya,  samarin  giwa  su-ka-zo,  samarin  wani  sar-

-ki,  da  samarin  wani  sarki,  baa  su  gamuwa,  idan

ku-ka-tsaya,  su-ka-zo  ba  asan  abinda  zaa  shi  abkua

tsakaninku  ba. Saanan  kun  sa  manyanku  yawan  magana

ke  nan. Chin  wake  na  yara,  kunburin  chiki  na  mainya.' Sai

baban  samarin  nan  ya  che, '  Gaskla  ne,  mu  je  gida.'


fish,  one  hundred,  (and)  boys  were  made  to  lift  them  (and)  bring
them  to  the  bank  of  the  river;  and  they  set  them  down  there.
Then  the  spider  said,  '  It  is  all  right,  you  go  back  (now).  I  must
go  and  call  the  elephant's  young  men  to  come  and  lift  them.'
But  the  hippo's  young  men  said,  '  If  we  went  off  something  else
might  come  and  eat  it  up.'  The  spider  replied,  '  As  for  you,  off
you  all  go,  there  is  nothing  going  to  touch  them.  If  you  were  to
stand  here,  the  youths  from  the  elephants  would  be  here,  and  (you
know)  the  young  men  of  one  chief  and  the  young  men  of  another
cannot  meet.  If  you  stood  and  they  came,  who  knows  what  might
happen  among  you  all?  And  by  that  time  you  have  put  your
elders  at  variance.  Boys  may  eat  beans,  but  it  is  (their)  elders
who  get  swollen  bellies '  (i.e.  boys  may  quarrel,  but  their  elders
settle  the  case).  Then  the  eldest  of  the  lads  there  said, '  It  is  true,
let  us  go  home.'


1 32  ANIMAL STORIES. No.  30

Su-ka-tafi  gida. Gizo  ya  je,  ya  kirawo  9  maatansa,  da  yayansa,

su-ka-kwache  kifi  duka,  su-ka-tafi  da  shi  gida,  su-na-chi,

su-na-tumkar  igia. Su-ka-tumka  igia  dayawa. Da  kaka

ta  yi,  su-ka-tumka  gindi  mai-tsawo,  kamar  nan

da  10  Bajimso. Ana- nan,  ranan  aka-kone  daji,  sai

giwa  ta  che, '  Ku  nemo  gizo.' Aka-je,  aka-nemo  gizo.

Ya  zo. Aka-che, '  Ina  alkawalin  da  mu-ka-yi  da  kai  zua  ga  dorina  ? '

Gizo  ya  che,  l  Babu  laifi,  naa  tafi  in  gaia  mata,  jibi

naa  komo.' Gizo  ya  tafi,  kwanansa  uku,  saanan

ya  komo. Ashe  ya  je  bakin  rafi,  ya  bidi  wani  baban

itache,  ya  damra  masa  gindi. Ya  kawo  bakin  igiar


They  went  home.  The  spider  went  and  called  his  wife  and
children,  and  they  removed  all  the  fish  and  went  off  home  with
them,  and  were  eating  them,  and  twisting  string.  They  twisted  an
immense  quantity  of  string.  By  the  time  the  harvest  season  came,
they  had  twisted  a  long  horse-rope,  as  (long  as)  from  here  to
Bajimso.  Now  one  day  when  the  bush  was  burned  (by  the  annual
bush  fires)  the  elephant  said,  'You  must  look  for  and  bring  the
spider.'  (So)  they  went  and  sought  for  the  spider.  He  came.
They  said,  '  What  about  the  promise  we  made  with  you  with
regard  to  the  hippo  ? '  The  spider  said,  '  There  is  no  harm  done.
I  shall  go  and  tell  her.  The  day  after  to-morrow  I  shall  return.'
The  spider  went  off;  for  three  days  (he  was  gone)  then  he  returned.
Now  what  he  had  done  was  this  (aske).  He  had  gone  to  the  river
bank,  (and)  searched  out  a  huge  tree,  (and)  tied  the  horse -rope
to  it.  He  took  the  end  of  the  rope


134  ANIMAL  STORIES. No.  30

wurin  giwa,  ya  che,  '  Ga  igiar  n  dokin  da  dorina  ta  ba  ki.
Gobe  ake-fida  doki  nan  chikin  rua,  wai  ki  bidi  baban
itache  adamra  masa  igia. Idan  gari  ya  waye,  idan
ku-ka-gani  itache  nan  shi-na-motsi,  ki  bari  samari
su  kama  igia  nan,  su  ja,  doki  nan,  ke  nan.' Giwa  ta  che,
'Ashe  hakanan  gizo  ? ' Gizo  ya  che, '  I.' Giwa  ta  che,
f  Ala  shi  kai  mu  gobe.' Da  wayewa  gari,  giwa
ta  tara  samari. Ashe  gizo  ya  je,  ya  gaia  ma  do-
-rina,  ya  che,  '  Giwa  12ta  ba  ni  doki,  in  kawo  maki,
ama  ba  ni  iya  jansa,  ama  igiarsa  da  tsawo,  13  na
jawo,  na  kawo  bakin  rafi,  na  damra  ma  itache.


to  where  the  elephant  was  (and)  said,  '  Behold  the  rope  of  the
horse  which  the  hippo  gives  you.  To-morrow  they  are
going  to  take  out  this  horse  from  the  water,  and  she  says  you
must  look  for  a  huge  tree  to  tie  the  rope  to.  When  it  is
dawn  (and)  if  you  saw  (see)  this  tree  shaking,  let  the  boy
seize  this  rope  and  pull  it,  for  that  is  this  horse  (pulling  the
tree).'  And  the  elephant  said,  '  Is  it  really  so,  spider  ? '  The
spider  said,  '  Yes.'  (And)  the  elephant  said,  '  May  Allah  give
us  a  to-morrow.'  When  the  dawn  came  the  elephant  assembled
the  young  men.  Now  of  a  truth  the  spider  has  gone  and
told  the  hippo  saying,  '  The  elephant  has  given  me  a  horse  to
bring  to  you,  but  I  am  not  able  to  pull  it;  but  its  rope  is
long;  I  have  dragged  it  along  and  have  brought  it  to  the
bank  of  the  river  and  have  fastened  it  to  a  tree.


^^<J5^^-U-S<


136  ANIMAL  STORIES. No.  30

Idan  gari  ya  waye,  ki  bari  samari  su  tafi,  su  ja,
mahaukachin  doki  ne.' Dorina  ta  che,  '  To.' Da  gari
ya  waye,  samarin  dorina  su-ka-fito,  su-ka-taras
itachen,  da  aka-damra  ma  igia. Shi-na-motsi,  kamar
shi  chire. Sai  su-ka-kama,  su-na-ja. Mutanen
giwa,  su  kuma,  su-na-ja. Idan  mutanen  giwa
su-ka-ja  mutanen  dorina,  sai  akara  masu  wadansu
mutane. Idan  mutanen  dorina  su-ka-jaye  muta-
-nen  giwa  sai  akara  masu  wadansu  mutane.
Hakanan  hakanan  har  mareche  ya  yi,  su-ka-bari,
su-ka-kwanta. Gari  ya  waye,  da  asuba  su-ka-tashi


When  it  is  dawn  let  your  boys  go  and  pull,  for  the  horse  is
a  rogue.'  The  hippo  agreed.  When  it  was  dawn  the  hippo's
boys  came  up  (from  the  water)  and  found  the  tree  to  which
the  rope  had  been  tied.  It  was  swaying  about  as  if  it  was
about  to  be  uprooted.  Then  they  seized  hold  and  pulled.
The  elephant's  people  also  were  pulling.  When  the  ele-
phant's people  were  pulling  the  hippo's  people,  then  some
more  people  were  added.  When  the  hippo's  people  were
pulling  the  elephant's  people,  then  more  persons  were  added
to  them.  And  so  it  went  on  till  evening  came,  and  they
desisted,  (and)  lay  down.  When  it  was  dawn,  very  early
they  rose  up


\jyffilk


138  ANIMAL  STORIES. No.  30

su-na-ja,  bar  rana  ta  yi  bisa. Sai  dorina  ta  che,  '  Abari,

atafi,  atanbayi  giwa,  agani  wane  irin  doki  ta  ba  ni,

aka-ja  aka  gaji.' Giwa  kuma  ta  che,  '  Ku  ban  aje  agani

wane  irin  doki  ke  nan  dorina  ta  ba  ni,  aka-ja  aka  gaji.'

Yau  yara  su-ka-tafi,  sai  su-ka-gamu  tsakan  daji.

Sai  samari  giwa  su-ka-tanbayi  samarin  dorina,

su-ka-che, '  Ina  zaa  ku  ? ' Su-ka-che,  *  An-aike  mu  wurin  giwa,

mu  je,  mu  gani  wane  irin  doki  ta  bai  wa  dorina,  tun  jia

ana-ja,  har  dare  ya  yi,  har  gari  ya  waye.' Samari-

-n  giwa  su-ka-che, '  Mu  ma  aikinmu  aka-yi  gun

dorina  mu  tanbaye  ta  hakanan. Ama  da  ya  zama  hakanan

mu  koma  gida. Ku  kuma  ku  koma,  ku  je


and  were  pulling  till  the  sun  was  above  (them).  Then  the
hippo  said, '  Let  them  cease,  and  go  and  ask  the  elephant  and
let  them  see  what  kind  of  a  horse  she  give  me,  that  had  been
pulled  and  pulled  and  tired  (every  one)  out.'  Now  the  ele-
phant also  said, '  You  leave  off.  Let  some  one  go  and  see
what  kind  of  a  horse  this  is  that  the  hippo  give  me,  that  they
had  pulled  and  got  weary  (pulling).'  So  the  boys  went  off,
and  they  met  in  the  middle  of  the  bush.  Then  the  youths
from  the  elephant's  asked  the  youths  from  the  hippo's  and  said,
'  Where  are  you  going  ?'  They  replied,  '  We  have  been  sent
to  the  elephant  to  go  (and)  see  what  sort  of  a  horse  she  had
given  to  the  hippo.  Since  yesterday  they  have  been  pulling
at  it,  till  night  came,  till  dawn  came.'  The  elephant's  youths
said, '  We  too,  our  errand  was  with  the  hippo,  that  we  ask  her
this  same  thing.  But  since  things  are  so  let  us  turn  back.
You  too  turn  back  (and)  go


^jfe,iLSj«j:t^^W;^f#'

\  i i  — ^^


140  ANIMAL  STORIES. No.  30

ku  fadi  abinda  ku-ka-gani,  ku  che  karta  ne  gizo

ya  yi,  ba  mu  gani  doki  ba.' Yau  su-ka-koma  daga  wurin  nan,

samarin  dorina  su-ka-je,  su-ka-gaia  mata  wada  su-ka-yi.

Samarin  giwa  su-ka-je,  su-ka-labarta  mata. Giwa

ta  che, '  Ai  dorina  ba  ta  bii  na  bashi,  ni  ke  biinta

bashi.' Dorina  kuma  ta  che, '  Ai  giwa  ba  ta  bii  na  bashi,

ni  ke  biinta  bashi.' Alamari  ya  zo,  ya  bayana  gizo

ya  yi  karla  ne,  ya  karbi  abinchinsu,  ya  chi. Sai

dorina  ta  aika  wurin  giwa,  ta  che,  kar  ta  yi  fushi.

'  Domin  ita  mai-girma  che,  ni  kuma  mai-girma  che,  idan

mu  duka  mu  ka  yi  fushi,  abin  ba  shi  giyaru  ba.


(and)  say  what  you  had  (have)  seen ;  say  it  is  a  lie  that  the
spider  told,  (and)  that  we  have  not  seen  any  horse.'  So  they
went  away  from  this  place.  The  hippo's  young  men  went
and  told  her  what  they  had  done.  The  elephant's  youths
went  and  told  her  (the  elephant)  the  news,  (and)  the  elephant
said,  'What 's  all  this,  I  do  not  owe  the  hippo,  the  hippo  owes
me.'  And  the  hippo  said,  '  What 's  all  this  ?  I  do  not  owe

the  elephant,  the  elephant  owes  me.' When  the  affair  came

•
to  be  discussed  it  became  clear  it  was  the  spider  that  had  lied,

(and)  received  their  food,  (and)  eaten  it.  Then  the  hippo
sent  to  the  elephant,  and  said  she  must  not  be  angry,  (saying),
'  Because  she  is  strong,  and  I  also  am  strong ;  if  we  both  get
angry,  the  thing  cannot  be  settled.


142  ANIMAL  STORIES. No.  30

Mu  bari  mu  yi  fako  gizo.' Glwa  ta  che, '  Gaskia  ne.1

Dada  su-ka-dinga  bidan  gizo. Ba  su  gane  shi  ba. Gizo  ya  bo-

-ye,  ba  shi  fita  har  ya  lalache. Ranan  yunwa  ta  chi  kar-

-finsa,  ya  fito,  shi-na-bidan  abinchi. Sai  ya  gani  fatar

barewa,  ta  mutu,  wani  abu  ya  chinye  ta,  ya  bar  fata,

da  kai,  da  kafafu. Sai  ya  dauki,  ya  shiga  chiki. Shi-na-

-yawo. Sai  ya  gamu  da  glwa. Glwa  ta  gane  shi,

ta-na-zato  kwarangamar  barewa  che. Sai  glwa

ta  che, '  Ke  barewa  ba  ki  gani  mani  gizo  ba  ?'

Sai  barewa  ta  che,  *  Gizo  ki  ke  bida  ? Rufa  ma  kaiki

asiri,  tunda  mu-ka-yi  fada  da  shi,  ya  nuna  mani


Let  us  desist,  and  lie  in  wait  for  the  spider.'  (And)  the  ele-
phant said,  *  That  is  true.'  Then  they  continually  sought  for
the  spider.  They  did  not  see  him.  The  spider  was  in  hiding,
and  he  did  not  come  out  until  he  had  got  weak  and  thin.
One  day  when  hunger  had  overcome  his  strength,  he  came
out  (and)  was  looking  for  food,  when  he  saw  the  skin  of  an
antelope,  (which)  had  died — something  had  eaten  it  up,  and
left  the  skin,  and  head,  and  hoofs.  Then  he  lifted  it  up
and  went  inside.  He  was  walking  about  when  he  met  the
elephant.  The  elephant  saw  him  and  thought  he  was  a  de-
crepit old  antelope.  Then  the  elephant  said, '  You,  antelope,
will  you  not  look  for  the  spider  for  me?'  And  the
antelope  said,  '  Is  it  the  spider  you  are  seeking  ?  Keep  that
your  secret.  Since  we  fell  out  with  him  he  pointed  at  me


144  ANIMAL  STORIES. No.  30

hannu  na  lalache. Ba  ni  kamnar  in  gane  shi. Yanzu,

kowa  ya  yi  fada  da  shi,  sai  shi  nuna  masa  hannu,

shi  lalache.' Sai  giwa  ta  che,  *  Shi  ne  ya  yi  maki  haka  ? '

Ta  che, '  I.' Glwa  ta  che, '  Idan  kin  gane  shi  kar  ki  che  ina-

-bidansa.' Barewa  ta  che,  '  To.' Giwa  ta  wuche,

ta  tafi. Sai  gizo  ya  yada  fatar  barewa,  ya  gudu,

ya  chika  da  giwa,  ya  che. '  Ga  ni,  anche  ki-na-bida  na.'

Sai  giwa  ta  dinga  makerketa,  ta  na  che, '  Na

tuba,  ba  ni  bidanka.' Ta  na  fitsari  daga  tsaye.

Sai  ya  che, '  In  kara  ji  wani  shi-na-bida  na,  mu  gamu  da  shi.'

Ya  komo,  ya  dauki  fatarsa,  ya  shiga,  shi-na-yawo.

his  hand  (and)  I  wasted  away.  I  do  not  want  to  see  him.
Nowadays  whoever  quarrels  with  him  then  he  points  his
hand  at  him  (and)  he  pines  away.'  And  the  elephant  asked,
'Was  it  he  who  made  you  become  like  this?'  She  (the
antelope)  said, '  Yes.'  The  elephant  said,  '  If  you  have  seen
him  you  must  not  say  I  was  seeking  him.'  The  antelope  said,
'  All  right.'  The  elephant  passed  and  went  on.  Then  the
spider  cast  aside  the  antelope  skin,  (and)  ran,  (and)  met
the  elephant  (and)  said, '  Behold  me,  they  say  you  are  seeking
me.'  Then  the  elephant  kept  shaking  and  saying,  '  I  repent.
I  am  not  seeking  you.'  He  was  making  water  through  fear,
from  a  standing  position.  Then  he  (the  spider)  said,  '  If  I
hear  again  that  some  one  is  seeking  me,  we  (I)  will  join  with
him.'  He  went  back,  lifted  his  skin,  entered,  (and)  was
walking  along.


K


146  ANIMAL  STORIES. No.  30

Aka-jima  kadan,  sai  su-ka-gamu  da  dorina. Sai  ta  che,  '  Ke  barewa
ko  kin  gani  gizo  ? ' Sai  ta  che, '  Wanda  ki  ke  bida  nan,  ni  ba
ni  so  in  ji  sunansa,  domin  shi  ya  bari  na  lalache  nan,' Sai
dorina  ta  che, '  Hakanan  ? ' Barewa  ta  che, '  I.' Dorina  ta  che, '  Idan
kin  gane  shi,  kar  ka  che  ina-nemansa.' Yau  ta  wuche. Sai  gizo
ya  yada  fata,  ya  komo,  shi-na-fadi, '  Ina  dorina  ? Ga  ni
anche  ki-na-bida  na.' Da  ta  waiwaya,  ta  gane  shi,  sai  ta  fada
rua,  punjum ! Gizo  ya  samu  kai(n)sa. Shi  ke  nan. 14  Kungurus

kan  kusu.


Soon  they  (he)  fell  in  with  the  hippo.  And  she  said,  '  You,  antelope,
perhaps  you  have  seen  the  spider  ? '  But  she  said,  '  This  one  whom
you  are  searching  for,  for  my  part  I  do  not  want  to  hear  his  name,  for
he  is  the  cause  of  my  wasting  away  like  this.'  And  the  hippo  said,
'Is  that  so?'  The  antelope  said,  'Yes.'  The  hippo  said,  'It  you
have  seen  him,  do  not  say  I  was  seeking  him.'  So  she  passed  on.
Then  the  spider  threw  off  the  skin  and  returned.  He  said,  '  Where
is  the  hippo  ?  Behold  me,  I  am  told  you  are  looking  for  me.'  On
her  (the  hippo)  looking  behind  she  saw  him  and  fell  splash  into  the
water.  The  spider  (thus)  saved  himself.  That  is  it.  Off  with  the
rat's  head.


• -,


•  .t£/%  *«>(*


<^*^M%y^^**i


PART  IV
CUSTOMS  AND  ARTS


150  CUSTOMS  AND  ARTS. No.  31

No.  31.

Wanan  l  babi  ne  na  2  alaada  aure

da  3  suna.

Wada  mu  ke  aure  4  nana,  tafarkin  Muhamadia.
Idan  5  ka  gani  yarinya,  ka-na-so,  ko
budrua,  sai  ka  bidi  tsofua  a  gidanku.
Idan  babu  tsofua  mahankalchia  a  gida-
-nku,  ka  je  wani  6gu,  ka  nema. Ka  sai  goro  goma
sha  blu,  ka  aike  ta  da  su,  wurin  iyayen
yarinya  nan. Ta  kai  musu,  ta  che  in  ji  ka,  ta  gaishe  su.
Idan  ta  kai,  idan  su-na-so  su  ba  ka,  baa  su
tanbaya  tsofua  nan  me  shi  ke  so,  sai  su  7  kyale  har
ta  komo  sau  uku. Saanan  su  che,  '  Keauta  nan


This  is  the  opening  of  (a  description)  of  a  marriage  and
a  naming  ceremony.  The  way  we  marry  here  (is  after)  the
Mohammedan  fashion  (lit.  way).  If  you  have  seen  a  little
girl  you  want,  or  a  maiden,  then  you  look  out  some  old
woman  belonging  to  your  household.  If  there  is  no  sensible
old  woman  at  your  own  home,  you  look  somewhere  else  for
one.  (Then)  you  buy  twelve  kola  nuts,  and  send  her  (the  old
woman)  with  them,  to  the  parents  of  this  maiden  (whom  you
fancy).  She  takes  them  to  them,  and  says  you  have  sent
them.  She  greets  them.  When  she  has  brought  the  gift,  if
they  want  to  give  you  (the  girl  eventually),  they  will  not
inquire  of  the  old  woman  what  she  wants,  but  they  do  and
say  nothing  till  she  comes  back  three  times.  Then  they  say,
'  These  gifts


flf^y^r

^l^j^t^UL$^}te&$t)ft

w  ^*^


i52  CUSTOMS AND  ARTS. No.  31

ta  yi  yawa,  me  shi  ke  so  ? ' Sai  tsofua  ta  che, '  Labuda

wanche  ya  gani  shi  ke  so  domin  zumuntarku  ta  8sa-

-du  da  shi.' Idan  ta-na  da  miji,  idan  mutane  gaskia

ne,  tunda  wuri,  sai  su  che,  *  Aa  ta-na  da  miji.' Su  che,  '  Ama

zuria  dayawa,  sai  shi  tarbi  gaba.' Idan  ba  ta  da  miji

sai  su  che, '  To,  Ala  shi  sa  mu  ga  nagari.' Sai  su  juye

keautar  da  ka  kawo,  su  bada  tukwichi,  dada  ka

shiga  surukuta  ke  nan,  ka-na-yi. Wata  rana

ka  kai  nama,  wata  rana  ka  kai  kurdi,  wata  rana

goro. Duka  nan  da  mu-ka-kidaya  ba  da  sai  ka  kai

kaza  ba,  aa  gworgwodo  ikonka. Haka

ka  ke  kai,  har  9uban,  idan  ya  chika  masa  ido,


have  become  many,  what  is  he  wanting?'  Then  the  old
woman  says,  '  No  doubt  he  saw  what's-her-name  and  wants
(her),  in  order  that  your  house  may  be  joined  with  him.'
(Now)  if  she  (the  girl)  had  a  husband  since  some  time  ago
(betrothed),  then,  if  they  are  truthful  people,  they  say, '  No,
she  (already)  possesses  a  husband.'  (And)  they  say, '  But  the
family  are  many,  so  let  him  wait  till  some  future  time.'  If  she
has  no  husband  then  they  say, '  It  is  well,  may  Allah  cause  us
to  see  good  (come  of  this  union).'  Then  they  turn  out  the
presents  which  you  have  brought,  (and)  give  a  return  present.
Then  you  enter  this  courtship  stage.  You  are  courting.  One
day  you  bring  meat,  another  day  money,  another  day  kola
nuts,  all  these  things  which  we  have  enumerated,  not  only
such  you  bring,  oh  no,  but  (anything  else)  according  to  your
means.  And  thus  you  keep  giving,  till  the  father,  if  it  is  suffi-
cient in  his  eye,


•  •


*' O


154  CUSTOMS  AND  ARTS. No.  31

saanan  su  che,  azo  ayi  roko. Saanan  ka  bidi

goro  goma,  da  10kurdi  alif,  agama,  asamu

datljai. Su  je,  su  kai,  su  che, '  Ga  shi. Wane  ya  che

mu  kawo,  shi-na-roko  aba  shi  wanche.' Saanan

su  karba,  su  aje,  ku  tafo  gida. Saanan  su  juye,

su  bada  tasa,  akawo  gida  tare  da  tukwichi.

Saanan  kuma  ka  bidi  kurdi,  araba,  da  goro,

aje,  ayi  ma  uwayenta  adua. Malamai  unguwarku,

da  su-ka-je,  da  malamai  unguwar  surukunaika,  sai  su  ra-

-ba  kurdin  tsaka,  da  goro. Su,  su  dauki  rabi,

ku  kuma,  ku  dauki  rabi,  ku  zo  gida,  ku  raba

a  junanku. Saanan  kai,  miji,  ka  bidi  kurdi,


then  says,  they  must  come  and  ask  (for  the  girl).  Then
you  seek  for  ten  kola  nuts,  and  a  thousand  cowries,  and  when
that  is  done,  some  persons  of  importance  are  sought,  and  they
go  (and)  reach  the  place  (and)  say, '  Behold  it.  So-and-so
said  we  were  to  bring  (these),  he  is  begging  that  he  be  given
what's-her-name.'  Then  they  accept  it  (and)  set  it  aside,  and
you  (all)  come  back  home.  Then  they  turn  (the  cowries)  out
and  give  back  the  cup,  (and)  it  is  taken  home  together  with
the  return  presents.  Then  you  again  seek  cowries,  (and)
divide,  (and)  some  kola  nuts,  and  they  are  taken,  and  given
with  a  prayer  to  her  parents.  Then  the  learned  men  from
your  town  who  have  come,  and  the  learned  men  from  your
father-in-law's,  divide  up  the  cowries  in  two  portions — also  the
kola  nuts.  They  for  their  part  take  half,  (and)  you  (all),  you
take  half,  and  you  return  home  (and)  divide  it  up  among
you.  Then  you,  the  man,  seek  cowries,


156  CUSTOMS  AND ARTS. No.  31

zanbar  goma,  da  goro,  nkworia  guda,  da  zanua
biu. 12Matan  unguwarku  su  dauki,  su  kai.
Idan  aka-yi  hakanan,  aka-wanye,  sauran  aure.
Idan  yarinya  ta  chika,  ba  wani  abu  ake  che  ma
chika  ba,  idan  yarinya  ta  isa  13marmarin  namiji
shi  ne  chika,  to,  idan  ta  isa  aure,  sai  miji
shi  nemi  zanen  dauri,  fudu,  da  14shata,  da  mayafi,
da  fatala,  da  dafuan  akoko. Shi  akan-che  15lalata,
da  takalma,  taki  biu,  da  kurdi  zanbar  ishirin,
da  wuri  zanbar  goma  ne. Su  ne  akan-che  kurdi  -
-n  tuo. Saanan  abidi  kurdi  alif  wa  metin
azuba  karkashin  lefe. Zanua  kua  ajera  su


ten  thousand,  and  kola  nuts,  one  calabash  full,  and  two  cloths.
The  women  belonging  to  your  part  of  the  town  lift  them  and
bring  along.  When  all  this  has  been  done  and  finished,  there
remains  the  marriage.  If  the  maiden  is  '  complete ' — now  by
1  complete '  I  mean,  if  the  maid  has  reached  an  age  when  she
desires  a  man,  that  is  '  complete ' — well,  if  she  has  reached  the
marriage  age,  then  the  husband  seeks  four  robes,  and  white
cloths,  and  coverings  (for  the  bed),  and  head  kerchiefs,  and
dyed  calico — this  is  called  lalata,  i.  e.  worthless — and  slippers,
two  soles  (pairs),  and  twenty  thousand  cowries,  formerly  it  was
ten  thousand.  And  this  last  is  called  '  the  food '  cowries.
Then  twelve  hundred  cowries  are  sought  and  poured  under
(the  cloths,  &c.,  in  the)  basket.  The  cloths,  too,  they  lay
them  out


i».»lr-t.»Jg»1rlflL! fo

^P.^>>^£Si^


^^VV.^^^

"  * >> ^dt^i^e^l^jr


158  CUSTOMS AND  ARTS. No.  31

achikin  lefe,  aajie. Saanan  abidi  goro

ishirin,  akai  wurin  uban  maata,  ache  ana-so  akawo

lefe. Idan  ya  gama  shiri  shi  che, '  To." Idan  bai  gama

ba  shi  che, '  Tukuna.' Goro  nan  shi  ne  akan-che  '  goro

neman  baki'. Idan  aka  amsa,  sai  ku  kai  lefe,

ama  alif  wa  metin  ni  nan. Su  ne  akan  che, '  rubudinali.'

Idan  kun  yi  hakanan  kun  kare,  sai  asa  rana

ache,  ka  kawo  kurdin  16lale. Su  kuma  alfen  ne.

Idan  aka-kai  sai  asa  amarla  lale.

Wanan  fasali  ne

da  zaa  shi  gwoda  muna  wada  ake  sainya
amarla  lale.


in  a  basket,  and  they  are  set  on  one  side.  Then  twenty  kola
nuts  are  sought  and  taken  to  the  father  of  the  wife  (to  be),  and
they  say  they  want  him  to  bring  the  basket.  If  he  has  every-
thing prepared  (for  the  final  ceremony)  he  says,  '  All  right.'
If  he  is  not  ready  he  says, l  Not  just  yet.'  The  name  by  which
these  kola  nuts  are  known  is  '  the  kola  nuts  which  seek  of  the
mouth  '  (i.  e.  seek  an  answer).  If  a  reply  is  given,  then  you
bring  the  basket,  the  one  of  the  twelve  hundred  cowries.
They  are  called  rubudinali.  If  you  have  completed  all
this,  then  a  day  is  fixed  on  which  you  are  told  to  bring  the
'  henna '  cowries.  They  amount  to  two  thousand.  When  this
is  brought  then  the  bride  has  henna  put  on  (her  feet).  This
now  is  a  description  of  how  they  put  henna  on  a  bride.


^^.^^y^f
m^&^ti&j&>^u&*


:.L^:J+Li^


A


U*


•*•  i*<


• »t*


(^-


•'»44?X


160  CUSTOMS  AND  ARTS. No.  31

Idan  matanbayi  ya  tanbaye  ka  ina  hukumchin  sa  amar-
ia lale,  ka  amsa  masa  17jawabi  ka  che. Hakumchi
wada  ake  sa  amaria  lale. Idan  aka-yi  nufi  za  asa
amaria  lale,  sai  abido  gainye  lale,  asainya
achikin  18daro,  azuba  rua  achiki,  aajie  chikin  rana.
Shi-na  nan. Yarinya  nan  kua,  aaike  ta  daji,  ko
gona,  ko  kauye,  domin  idanunta  kar
shi  gani. Idan  ta  komo  da  dare,  aba  ta  tuo,
ta  chi. Idan  ta  chi  ta  kare,  ta-na-sude  hannu,
sai  wata  tsofua,  ko  kaka  tata,  ko  baba-
-nia  tata,  ta  dibi  lale,  19ta  zuba  mata. Sai  ta  di-
-nga  kuka,  ta-na-kuka. Idan  aka  jima,  sai  ta  yi  kiirum


If  a  questioner  asks  you  the  manner  in  which  henna  is  put  on
a  bride  answer  him  in  these  words  (and)  say.  The  manner  in
which  a  bride  has  henna  put  on  is  this.  If  they  wish  to  put
henna  on  a  bride  then  they  seek  fresh  henna  (and)  put  it  in
a  large  cup  (and)  pour  water  in  (and)  set  it  in  the  sun.  It
remains  there.  This  maid  also  is  sent  off  to  the  bush,  or  to
an  (outlying)  farm  or  outlying  village  that  her  eyes  may  not
look  on  (the  henna).  When  she  returns  at  night  she  is  given
food  (and)  she  eats.  When  she  has  finished  eating  (and)  is
licking  her  (fingers)  hand,  then  a  certain  old  woman,  perhaps
her  grandmother  or  her  father's  sister,  takes  up  the  henna
(and)  pours  it  over  her.  Then  she  cries  and  cries.  She  is
crying.  If  they  wait  a  little  while  then  she  is  silent


1 62  CUSTOMS  AND  ARTS. No.  31

Yan  uwanta  buduri  sai  su  zo,  su  taya  ta
kuka. Alaada  su  che  hakanan,  ba  domin
ba  su  so  ba  ne. Idan  aka-jima  kadan,  sai
su  fita,  su  tafi  wurin  wasa. Idan  dare
ya  yi  kwarai,  sai  su  tafi  wurin  samarinsu,
su  kwana. Da  asubahin,  su  gudu,  su  komo
dakin  da  aka  sainya  su. Idan  gari  ya  waye,
idan  ta  na  da  abuya,  sai  abidi  goro,  atafi
wurin  iyayenta,  akai  masu  goro,  ache
ana-so  wanche  ta  zo,  ta  chi  20abuyar  amaria.
Sai  su  karbi  goro  su  raraba  ma  dangi,  domin,
idan  21zaa  wurin  aiki,  su  taru,  su  tafi.


Now  her  sisters  come  and  help  her  to  weep.  It  is  the  custom
for  them  to  do  so ;  they  do  not  do  so  because  they  want  to.
In  a  little  while  then  they  come  out,  (and)  go  to  where  the
dancing  and  rejoicing  is.  When  it  is  quite  dark,  then  they  all
go  off  to  their  young  men,  (and)  sleep.  At  early  dawn  they
run  off  (and)  come  back  to  the  room  where  they  had  been  put.
When  it  is  dawn  (and)  if  she  has  any  girl  friend,  then  kola
nuts  are  sought  and  they  go  to  her  (friend's)  parents,  (and)
take  the  kola  nuts,  (and)  say  they  want  What's-her-name  to
come  (and)  act  *  the  bride's  friend '.  Then  they  receive  the
kola  nuts  and  divide  them  up  among  the  relations,  in  order
that,  if  they  are  about  to  go  to  assist  at  the  ceremony,  they
should  assemble  and  set  off.


1 64  CUSTOMS  AND  ARTS. No.  31

Ita  kua,  amarla,  ta-na-kwana  uku  gidansu,

ana  yi  mata  kumshi. Saanan  ayi  mata  wanka  da  mareche,

saanan  idan  dare  ya  yi,  ataru,  da  mata,  da

buduri,  da  makada,  ana-waka  da  22guda,  da  kade

kade. Arufa  ma  abuyar  amarla  alkeba,

aaza  ta  bisa  godla. Idan  ba  asamu  go-

-dia  ba,  asamu  doki,  mai-lafia,  ta  hau.

Ama  batun  nan  da  mu  ke  yi,  amarla  23ta  je

gidan  mijinta  tun  dadewa. Wanan  da  za  akai

bisa  doki,  sunanta, '  amarlan  boko.'

Idan  su-ka-kai  gidan  ango  sai  su  tsaya

waje,  su-na-waka,  su-na-che, '  Ba  mu  shiga  ba,


She  indeed,  the  bride  to  be,  sleeps  for  three  (days)  at  their
(her  parents')  home  (where)  she  is  bound  up  (in  cloths  to  keep
the  henna  off  her  clothes).  Then  she  is  bathed  in  the  evening,
and  then  when  night  comes  they  (all)  assemble,  women  and
maidens,  and  the  ones  who  play  on  drums,  they  sing  and  sound
the  guda  with  much  beating  of  drums.  And  'the  bride's
friend '  is  covered  with  a  burnous,  (and)  she  is  set  on  a  mare.
If  they  cannot  get  a  mare,  a  fine  healthy  horse  is  got  for  her
to  mount.  But  during  all  this  time  we  have  been  talking
about,  the  bride  has  already  come  to  her  husband's  house,
(since  sunset).  This  one  whom  they  were  about  to  bring  on
horseback  is  called  '  the  pretended  bride '.  When  they  (the
dancers,  &c.)  get  to  the  bridegroom's  house  then  they  stand
outside  and  are  singing,  saying, '  We  do  not  enter,


^HH^W^


166  CUSTOMS AND  ARTS. No.  31

ba  mu  shiga  ba,  tsaitsaye,  sai  da  bauya  tsaitsaye.'

Domin  akawo  masu  tukwichi. Idan  aka-kawo  masu

tukwichi  sai  su  sabke  amaria  su  kai  ta

daki. Sai  ta  kwaranye  alkeba,  ta  yes,  ta  fita

wurin  wasa,  ama  amaria  ta  gaskia,  ita

ta-na  daki,  kwanche. Idan  mutane  sun  watse,

sai  akai  ta  24dakin  mijinta,  su  kwana. Idan

ya  iske  ta  budrua,  sai  shi  bada  25kari,  ko  zo-

-be,  ko  mundua  ta  azurfa,  ko  kurdi,

ko  zane,  ko  wani  abu  da  shi  ke  da  iko.

Saanan  su  kwana  fudu  daki,  da  buduri

da  samari  su-na-wargi. Ranan  fudu,  su  fita,

su  yi  buki. Amaria  ta  yi  kwalla,  ango  shi  ma,  shi  yi  ;


we  do  not  enter,  (we)  stand  outside,  unless  (we  are  given  a  gift
of)  a  slave,  (we)  stand  without.'  (They  sing  so)  because  they
want  a  present.  When  a  gift  has  been  given  they  take  the
bride  (the  mock  one)  down  from  the  horse  (and)  escort  her
into  the  room.  Then  she  takes  off  the  burnous  (and)  casts  it
down,  (and)  comes  forth  again  among  the  revellers,  but  the
real  bride  is  lying  down  in  the  room.  If  the  people  disperse
she  is  conducted  to  her  husband's  room,  (and)  they  sleep
together.  If  he  finds  she  is  a  virgin  then  he  gives  her  gifts,
perhaps  a  finger  ring  or  armlets  of  silver,  or  cowries,  or  a
cloth,  or  something  which  is  within  his  means  to  give.  Then
they  sleep  four  days  in  the  house,  and  the  maidens  and  youths
are  playing  and  rejoicing.  On  the  fourth  day  they  come  out
(and)  hold  the  marriage  feast.  The  bride  decks  herself  up,
and  the  bridegroom,  as  for  him,  he  does  so  too ;


* »  j>  v


x^
4^£'^l&*^}*t+lf£WMLX4tii*

^^i^^.^^t^^^
&  *^k^^t**4gJ


1 68  CUSTOMS  AND  ARTS. No.  31

shi  rufa  alkeba. Shi  fita,  shi  yi  yawo,  shi  gaida  mutane.
Shi  ke  nan. Hukumchi
amaria  ya  kare.


he  covers  himself  with  a  burnous.  He  comes  forth  (and)
walks  about,  (and)  greets  people.  That  is  it.  The  bridal
ceremony  is  completed.


170  CUSTOMS  AND  ARTS. No.  32

No.  32.

Faslu.

Wanan  fasall  ne  na  angwonchi. Idan  matanbayi  ya  tanbaye  ka,
ina  wada  ake  angwonchi,  ka  amsa  masa  jawabi,
ka  che, '  Idan  yaro  ka  aure,  randa  aka-kama  amarla,
sai  tsofin  gidansu  su  je  dakinsa,  bai  sani  ba,
ashafa  masa  l  lale. Shi  kuma  shi  zamna  daki
shi  yi  lulubi. Samari  su  dinga  zua  wurinsa,  su-na-
-zanche  har  akawo  amarla.' Shi  ke  nan.

Faslun.

Wanan  fasall  ne  zaa  shi  gaia  mani  wada  shekaran
yarinya  ke  kai,  ta  yi  z  haila,  ayi  mata  aure.
Mafi  karamchin  shekara  da  yarinya  ke  ganin  haila,
shekara  tara,  mafi  yawansa  goma  sha  biar.

Descriptions  (of  Customs}.

This  is  a  description  with  regard  to  the  condition  of  being
a  bridegroom.  If  a  questioner  asked  you  what  ceremony  they
have  with  regard  to  a  bridegroom's  condition,  answer  him  words
such  as  these,  saying, '  If  a  boy  is  going  to  marry,  on  the  day  on
which  the  bride  is  to  be  brought,  then  the  old  women  of  his
house  come  to  his  room  without  his  knowing  it  was  going  to
happen,  (and)  rub  henna  on  him.  For  his  part  he  sits  veiled
in  the  house.  The  other  young  men  (then)  come  and  chat  with
him  until  the  bride  is  brought.'  That  is  it.

The  Descriptions.

This  description  which  is  about  to  be  given  will  tell  what  year
a  girl  reaches  when  she  first  had  her  menses,  and  is  married.
The  earliest  age  which  a  girl  has  (lit.  sees)  her  menses  is  nine
years,  and  the  latest  fifteen  years  of  age.


172  CUSTOMS  AND  ARTS. No.  32

Mafi  rinjaya  shekara  goma  sha  biu  wa  3  kila,

in  ji  malamai  na  4  suna. Idan  yarinya  ta  kai  shekara

goma  sha  biu,  akai-ta  gidan  miji  ko  ba  ta  yi

haila  ba. Idan  aka-kai  ta  miji,  shi  bar  ta,  ama

ta-na  tuo,  ama  ba  ta  kwana  wurinsa. Idan

ya  gani  ta  yi  haila,  shi  kiraye  ta,  ta  kwana

dakinsa  banda  sauran  6  matansa.

Shi  ke  nan.


Most  commonly  it  is  said  to  be  about  twelve  years  of  age ;
so  say  those  learned  men  of  holy  repute.  If  a  maiden  reaches
the  age  of  twelve,  she  is  taken  to  her  husband's  house,  even
if  she  has  not  had  her  menses.  If  she  is  taken  (thus)  the  man
leaves  her  alone,  and  she  cooks  (for  him)  but  she  does  not
sleep  with  him.  If  he  sees  she  has  had  her  menses  he  calls
her,  (and)  she  sleeps  in  his  room  without  any  of  the  rest  of
his  wives  (being  there).  That  is  it.


JftlH^^^"^'

ti?ltaUi;JtJt


ufc^^.&^£[&^*$

(j^^^J^^sy^LS
^f£J^'j»^|j^^Aj£u^tt;.4JU«'.

^^ft^^i^^


i;4  CUSTOMS  AND  ARTS. No.  33

No.  33.

1  Faslun.

Wanan  fasali  ne  na  hukumchin  aure  bajawara. Idan  mutun
ya  gani  bajawara  ko  2  ya  ji  labarinta,  sai  shi  nemi
wata  tsofua,  mai-hankali,  shi  aike  ta  kirawo  ta.
Idan  ta  zo,  su-ka-yi  gaisua. Shi  che,  '  Lafia  ? Na  che
akirawo  ki,  na  gane  ki  ne,  hankalina  ya  kwanta
da  ke,  ina-son  ki  aure,  ko  Ala  ya  sa  akwa-
-i  kafa,  mu  sa  hannu.' Idan  ita  kua  ta-na-so,
sai  ta  che, '  Na  ji. Sai  ku  je  wurin  3  waliyina.' Idan
kai  kua  ka-na  da  wani  abu  kusa,  kamar  sile,
ko  yar  takofa,  sai  ka  ba  ta. Idan  ta  je  gida,
sai  ka  bidi  goro,  ko  nama,  ka  aika,  akai  ma
uwayenta,  ache,  in  ji  ka,  idan  sun  4lamun  ta.

The  Descriptions.

This  is  a  description  of  the  marriage  of  a  woman  of  some
age  whose  husband  is  dead  or  has  left  her.  If  a  man  saw
a  woman  (widow  or  divorced),  or  has  heard  about  her  (whom
he  wishes  to  marry),  then  he  looks  out  for  some  old  woman
of  sense  and  sends  her  to  call  her  to  him.  When  she  comes
they  greet  one  another,  and  he  says,  '  Is  it  well  with  you  ?
I  said  you  were  to  be  called  to  me,  I  have  looked  on  you,  and
my  mind  is  at  rest  owing  to  your  presence.  I  want  to  marry
you,  if  perhaps  Allah  causes  that  an  opportunity  arrives  that
we  may  place  our  hands  on.'  If  she  too  is  agreeable  then
she  says,  '  I  have  heard,  but  you  must  go  to  my  guardian.'
Now  if  you  have  seen  some  little  thing  handy,  as  a  shilling
or  a  trifle  like  a  sixpence,  then  you  give  it  her.  When  she
goes  home  then  you  seek  kola  nuts  or  meat,  and  send  (them)
to  be  given  to  her  parents  from  you,  if  they  have  consented
(to  give)  her.


* 1  & /4*  i—  1  .T  j  ^  — /—  J 44

% 1-r % ' a*  <>Fl« •*(-  ^o 4»  '0  >*7

''J-^c^'^Hdv


176  CUSTOMS  AND  ARTS. No.  33

Shi  ke  nan. Idan  ka  yi  surukuta  kwana  biu
sai  ka  aiki  mutanenka,  su  yi  roko  aba  su.
Idan  aka  die  anba  shi,  sai  ka  bidi  5  kurdi  alfin,
aje,  ayi  ma  uwayenta  adua. Saailin  ka  bidi
kurdi  arba,  da  6  goro  hamsin,  ka  baiwa
matan  unguarku,  su  kai,  kurdin  gaisua
ke  nan. Idan  aka  yi  haka  aka  gama,  sai  ka  bidi
zanen  dauri  blu,  masu-cheau,  da  mayafi,  asainya
chikin  lefe,  da  kurdi  zanbar  goma,  su  ne
ake  che,  kurdin  tuo. Saanan  ka  bidi  rubudmari,
ka  zuba,  akai  gidan  maata,  da  goro  kwor-
-ia  guda. Saanan,  kamar  gobe  za  adaura
aure,  ka  bidi  goro,  ka  raba. Su,  liman


That  is  all.  When  you  have  wooed  her  for  two  days,  then
you  send  your  people  to  ask  that  she  (the  woman)  be  given
them.  If  they  say  she  is 'to  be  given  him  (?you)  then  you
seek  two  thousand  cowries  and  they  go  and  say  a  prayer
over  her  parents.  Then  you  seek  four  thousand  cowries,  and
fifty  kola  nuts  and  give  to  the  women  of  your  part  of  the
town,  (and)  they  take  it.  This  is  (called)  'the  cowries  for
exchanging  greetings  '.  When  this  is  all  completed,  then  you
seek  for  two  fine  cloths  capable  of  being  twined  round
a  person,  and  coverings  (for  the  couch),  (and)  they  are  put
in  a  basket,  with  ten  thousand  cowries,  and  these  are  called,
'  the  cowries  for  the  food.'  And  then  you  seek  the  cowries
called  '  the  rubudinari '  and  pour  out,  and  they  are  taken  to
the  wife's  house ;  also  one  calabash  of  kola  nuts.  Then  if  it
be  to-morrow  that  they  are  going  to  celebrate  the  marriage
you  seek  kola  nuts,  (and)  divide  them  up.  They,  the  priests


'•fed***


.»  &  «•»  yS  *  «5Fi


%^V*^M^^


*.  M?^jv>i.«.v^|f.)?T  ^jfr&H'  r1-3


/m  ^  i *" %

/' % ^>  «^  6  n A*  &" ova (A 4«  .^^ &*

j^^(^r^^^?(J^^  *


J^NIjjfeJ^


1425-2


M


178  CUSTOMS  AND  ARTS. No.  33

da  jamaa  masu-yawa,  da  malamai,  su  taru  gidan

uban  maata,  su  zamna  su  damra  aure. Idan

aka-gama  su-ka-watse. Mata  su  taru,  su  tuka

tuo,  su  kai  gidan  ango,  araraba  ma  mutane

tuo,  damri  aure. Idan  dare  ya  yi,

akai  amaria  gidan  ango. Saanan  mata

su  taru,  babu  kidi,  sai  waka. Arufa  7  abuyar  amar-

-la,  akai  ta,  domin  wasa. Idan  zaa  su  komo,

su  komo  tare. Ita  kua  akanche,  '  amarlan  boko.'

No.  34.

Faslu.

Wanan  fasali  ne  na  dauri  aure. Wada  ake  daura
aure. Mutane  sun  taru,  limami  shi  tanbaia
shi  che,  '  Wanene  l  wakili  ? ' Ache,  '  Wane.' Su  che,  '  Kaka


and  a  great  number  of  people  and  the  doctors  of  learning
assemble  at  the  house  of  the  father  of  the  (wife  to  be)  and  sit
there,  and  perform  the  marriage  ceremony.  When  they  have
finished,  they  disperse.  The  women-folk  meet  and  stir  the
food  (in  the  pot)  (and)  take  it  to  the  bridegroom's  house  (and)
divide  it  out  among  the  people  (present).  (It  is  called),  '  the
food  of  the  marriage  ceremony.'  When  it  is  night  they  take
the  bride  to  the  bridegroom's  house.  When  the  women
assemble,  there  is  no  drumming,  only  singing.  '  The  friend
of  the  bride '  (the  girl  who  personates  the  bride)  is  covered
(head  to  foot)  (and)  taken  (to  the  husband's  house),  in  play.
When  they  are  about  to  turn  back,  they  go  back  with  her
(the  pretended  bride).  Now  she  is  called,  'the  pretended
bride.'

Descriptions.

This  is  a  description  of  the  marriage  ceremony.  What  (they
do)  in  the  marriage  ceremony  (is  this).  The  people  are
assembled  and  the  priest  asks,  '  Who  is  the  person  who  gives
this  girl  away  ? '  They  say,  '  So-and-so.'  They  ask,  '  What


*W^J%*^W^%


i8o  CUSTOMS  AND  ARTS. No.  34

sunan  miji  ? ' Ache, '  Sunansa  wane.' Shi  che, '  Kaka

sunan  maata  ? ' Ache,  '  Sunanta  wanche.' Saanan

shi  tanbayi  sadaki  shi  che, '  Sadaki  nawa  ? ' Ache,

'  Kaza.' Saanan  idan  sun  yi  2  taralia  tsaka-

-nin  juna,  sai  liman  shi  che, '  Mu  yi  salatu  g6ma

goma  ga  anabi.' Saanan  taro  duka  su  che,

'  3Alahuma  swali  ala  sayidina  Muhamadi  wa  Ala  ali

sayadina  Muhamadi  wasalim.' Har  su  yi  goma

goma. Saanan  su  yi  shiru,  sai  liman  shi  che,

'  4Alahuma  swali  Ala  sayidina  Muhamadi  wa  Ala  ali  sayidi-

-na  Muhamadi  warham  sayidina  Muhamadi  wa  Ala  ali

sayidina  Muhamadi  wabarik,  Ala  sayidina  Muhamadi

wa  Ala  ali  sayidina  Muhamadi  kama  swalaita  warhinta


is  the  husband's  name  ? '  They  reply,  '  His  name  is  So-and-so.'
He  asks,  '  What  is  the  wife's  name  ? '  They  say,  *  Her  name
is  So-and-so.'  Then  he  asks  about  the  marriage  settlement,
saying,  '  How  much  is  it  ? '  They  say, '  It  is  such  and  such  an
amount.'  Then  if  they  (the  girl's  parents)  have  given  their
joint  consent,  then  the  priest  says,  '  Let  us  say  prayers  ten
times  to  the  prophet.'  Then  the  whole  assembly  repeat,

O  God  be  gracious  to  our  lord  Mohammed  and  the  family  of
our  lord  Mohammed  and  salute  them,'  till  they  have  done
so  ten  times.  Then  they  are  silent.  Then  the  priest  says,

'O  God  be  gracious  to  our  lord  Mohammed,  and  the  family  of
our  lord  Mohammed,  and  have  mercy  on  our  lord  Mohammed
and  the  family  of  our  lord  Mohammed,  and  then  our  lord
Mohammed  and  the  family  of  our  lord  Mohammed,  even  as
he  wast  gracious  unto  and  will  have  mercy  on


1 82  CUSTOMS  AND  ARTS. No.  34

wabarakata  ala,  Ibrahima  wa  Ala  ali  sayidina  Ibra-

-hima  inaka  hamidu  majidu  amin. Wane

6  ya  wakilche  mu  daurin  aure  abin  walichinsa  mu  daura

auren  wanche  da  wane  bisa  farilan  Ala  sunan

manzo  Ala  bisa  sadaki  kaza. 6  Nakadan  ga

shi  hanu.' Idan  anbia  shi  ke  fadi  hakanan,

idan  ba  abia  ba  shi  che,  ' 7  Ajalan,  sai  wata  kaza

abia.' Saanan  su  yi  fatiha  uku. Idan  shi-na  da

kokari,  shi  yi  wadansu  adua. Bayan

hakanan  kamar  shi  che,  '  Ala  shi  bada  chi  da  sha,  Ala

shi  bada  haifua. Ala  shi  ba  wakilai  ladan  sadawa

miji  da  maata,  Ala  shi  sada  hankulansu,  Ala  shi  ba

gari  lafia. Musulmi  da  su-ka-mutu  tun  zamanin


and  bless  Abraham  and  the  family  of  our  lord  Abraham.
Verily  thou  art  praiseworthy.  Amen.  So-and-so  has  given
us  a  union  to  bind,  and  the  ceremony  we  have  to  perform  for
him  is  that  we  bind  in  marriage  What's-her-name  and  What's-
his-name,  upon  the  faith  of  Allah,  in  the  name  of  the
messenger  of  Allah,  on  such  and  such  a  dower.  Behold  it  in
(my)  hand.'  If  it  has  been  paid  (already)  he  speaks  thus.
If  it  has  not  been  paid  (then)  he  says,  'And  such  and  such
a  moon  they  will  pay.'  Then  they  recite  three  verses  (of  the
Koran).  If  he  (the  priest)  is  very  diligent  he  may  say  some
other  prayers  after  this,  as,  '  May  Allah  give  food  and  drink ;
may  Allah  give  offspring;  may  Allah  give  the  parents  (of
the  bride  and  bridegroom)  the  reward  for  the  union  of  the
man  and  wife ;  may  Allah  complete  their  intelligence ;  may
Allah  give  health  to  the  town  ;  the  Mussulmans  who  have
died  since  the  days


184  CUSTOMS  AND  ARTS. No.  34

anabi  Adamu  bar  yau,  maza  da  mata,  Ala  shi  jikai  su,  mu
kua,  Ala  shi  sa  mu  wanye  da  alhairi,  amin.' Shi  ke  nan,
sai  mutane  su  watse,  kowa
shi  tafi  gidansu.


of  the  prophet  Adam  till  to-day,  men  and  women,  may  Allah
have  mercy  on  them.  We  too  may  Allah  cause  us  to  die  in
peace.  Amen.'  That  is  it.  Then  the  people  disperse,  each
goes  to  his  own  home.


-> .  p


r+b


*

JL a"  **»

f  ' "* ^"


1 86  CUSTOMS  AND  ARTS. No.  35

No.  35.

1  Faslun.

Wanan  fasali  ne  zaa  shi  gaia  muna  hukumchi  haifua.
Idan  matanbayi 2  ya  tanbaye  ka,  ina  wada  hukumchi  haifua
shi  ke,  ka  che,  *  Karamchi,  chikin  mache  wata  shida,
mafiyawansa  wata  tara,  saanan  ta  haifu. Wani  chiki
shekara  fudu,  wanan  chuta  ne. Ama  idan  mache
ta  haifu,  wada  mu  ke  yi  mata,  sai  adafa  rua  shi  yi  zafi,
adinga  yi  mata  wanka,  da  ita  da  yaro,  har  kwana
bakwoi. Ranan  mijinta  shi  sa  goro,  araba  chikin  gari.
Idan  gari  ya  waye,  mutane  su  taru,  akawo  goro
da  kurdi,  3azana  suna.' Shi  ke  nan.

Faslun.

The  Descriptions.

This  description  will  explain  to  us  the  ceremony  at  the
birth  of  a  child.  If  a  questioner  has  asked  you  what  the
ceremony  at  birth  is,  say,  'The  shortest  time  (in  which
a  woman  can  give  birth  after  conception)  is  six  months,  (and)
the  longest  nine  months ;  then  she  brings  forth.  Some
conceptions  are  for  four  years,  but  that  is  owing  to  some
disease.  But  if  a  woman  bore  (a  child)  what  is  done  to  her
is  this.  Water  is  cooked  till  it  is  hot,  and  she  and  the  child
are  continually  bathed  during  seven  days.  On  that  day  (the
seventh  day)  the  husband  sets  down  kola  nuts  (and)  they  are
distributed  in  the  town.  When  it  is  dawn  the  people  all
assemble,  (and)  kola  nuts  and  cowries  are  brought,  (and)  the
naming  (of  the  child)  performed.'  That  is  it.

The  Descriptions.


i. f


•••


nr^s


4P

V>


£


L


1 88  CUSTOMS  AND  ARTS. No.  36

•

No.  36.

^Faslun.

Wanan  fasali  ne  na  hukumchin  suna. Idan  matanbayi
ya  tanbaye  ka,  ina  wada  ake  zana  sunan  jinjiri  ka  che : —
'  Ana-zana  sunan  jinjiri  da  swafe  rana  da  ta  haifu,
idan  ta  kewayo,  mutane  su  taru. Llman  shi  che,  Muyi
salati  goma  goma  ga  anabi. Idan  su  ka  gama  shi  che,
2Alahuma  swali  Ala  Muhamadi  wa  Ala. Ali  Muhadin  warham  Muhamadin
wa  ali  Muhamadin  wabarik  Ala  Muhamadi  wa  Ala  ali  Muhamadin
kama  swalaita  warahimta  wabarakta  Ala  Ibrahima
wa  Ala  ali  Ibrahima  filalamina  inaka  hamidu  majidun.
Saanan  shi  yi  fatiha  uku  shi  che,  Samaina  mauludu. Idan
namiji  ne  shi  che  Ibrahima  ko  Muhamadu  ko  wani
suna,  idan  mache  che  shi  che  3  Fatimata  ko  Hadljatu.


The  Descriptions.

This  is  a  description  of  the  ceremony  of  naming  (a  child).  If  a  questioner
asked  you  what  was  done  at  the  naming  of  an  infant  you  say,  '  An  infant
is  named  on  the  morning  of  the  day  she  (the  mother)  bears  it,  when  the
day  comes  round,  the  people  assemble.  The  priest  says,  Let  us  offer  up
prayers  ten  times  to  the  prophet.  When  they  have  finished  he  says,
O  God  be  gracious  to  Mohammed  and  the  family  of  Mohammed  and  have
mercy  on  Mohammed  and  the  family  of  Mohammed  and  bless  Mohammed
and  the  family  of  Mohammed  even  as  thou  wast  gracious  to,  merciful
towards,  and  didst  bless  Abraham  and  Abraham's  family  in  the  world,
verily  thou  art  praiseworthy  and  glorious.  Then  he  repeats  three  verses
(of  the  Koran)  (and)  says,  We  name  the  child.  If  it  is  a  male  child  he  says
Abraham  or  Mohammed  or  some  other  name,  if  it  is  a  girl  he  says
Fatimata  or  Hadijatu.


i9o  CUSTOMS  AND ARTS. No.  36

Saanan  shi  yi  adua,  kaman  da  ya  so  shi  che,  'Ala  shi  raya  shi,
Ala  shi  ba  uwa  da  uba  lafia.' Shi  yi  adua  dayawa,  saanan
mutane  su  watse. Ama  anyanka  rago  tun  mutane
ba  su  taru  ba. Saanan  azana  suna,  saanan
4  wanzamai  su  taru,  mata  su  yi  buki,  idan  mai-gata
ne. Idan  mareche  ya  yi  naman  rago  araraba
abai  wa  kowa  sadaka. Ita  kua  maata  nan,  ana-ba
ta  abinchi  mai-dadi,  ta-na-chi  har  jinin  haifua
shi  zuba  duka,  saanan  ta  samu  lafia.'

Shi  ke  nan.


Then  he  gives  a  prayer,  if  he  wishes ;  he  says,  May  Allah
prolong  his  life ;  may  Allah  give  (his)  mother  and  father
health.  He  prays  many  times  and  then  the  people  disperse.
Now  a  ram  had  been  slaughtered  before  the  people  had
assembled.  After  that  they  name  the  child.  Then  the  barbers
assemble  (and)  the  women  make  a  feast,  if  the  man  was  of
a  wealthy  family.  When  evening  comes  the  ram's  flesh  is
divided  up  and  given  as  alms  to  any  one.  And  as  for  her,
this  wife,  she  is  given  the  choicest  food  to  eat  until  all  the
after-birth  has  come  away.  By  that  time  she  has  regained  her
health.'  That  is  it.


192  CUSTOMS  AND  ARTS. No.  37

No.  37.

1  Babun.

Wanan  babi  ne  zaa  shi  gwoda  muna  wada  ake  yi  2  sha  gaba.
Idan  matanbayi  ya  tanbaye  ka,  shekara  nawa  ake  yi  ma  yaro
kachia,  ka  che, '  Shekara  tara.'  Achikin  musulumchi  ina  wada
ake  kachia  ka  che. '  Idan  yaro  ya  isa  kachia,  sai
akirawo  wanzamai,  su  tafo  da  asake,  su  yi  ma  yara
aski. Saanan  agina  3  rame,  asaka  suma  nan
achikin  rame. Saanan  akamo  yaro,  azamna
da  shi  bakin  rame,  4  aririke  shi. Wanzame  shi  hau
kafafunsa,  shi  zamna  saanan  shi  kama  bakin
loba  shi  jawo,  shi  yimte,  saanan  shi  sake,
shi  fida  aska  daga  kube. Shi  kama  loba


The  Beginnings.

This  is  the  opening  of  what  we  are  going  to  be  shown  of
what  is  done  at  circumcision.  If  a  questioner  asks  you  how
old  a  boy  is  when  he  is  circumcised,  say, '  Ten  years.'  Among
Mussulmans  what  is  done  at  circumcision,  you  say  (is  as
follows) :  '  When  a  boy  has  reached  the  age  of  circumcision
then  the  barbers  are  summoned  (and)  they  come  with  razors
and  shave  the  boy  (head).  Then  a  hole  is  dug  in  the  ground
and  this  cut  off  hair  put  in  the  hole.  They  then  seize  the
boy,  (and)  sit  with  him  over  the  hole  and  hold  him  tight.
The  barber  gets  across  his  legs  (facing  him)  and  sits  down,
then  he  takes  hold  of  the  edge  of  the  foreskin  (and)  pulls  it
back  (and)  pinches  it  tight,  then  he  lets  it  go  (and;  takes  his
razor  out  of  the  sheath.  He  catches  the  foreskin


3ft


fca^^M^^Lf^
W^^^i,^,.^^

_^^ v~~  ™* • ^^x  ~~


lijjA^;
^Ii4;

f^i^WJU,

•^  v/*


1421-2


N


i94  CUSTOMS  AND  ARTS. No.  37

iyaka  wurin  da  ya  yimche,  shi  sa  aska,  shi  yanka

maza  maza. Idan  ya  kai  wurin  tantani,  shi  ake  che

"jar  fata",  sai  shi  tsaga  da  hannu,  saanan  shi  sa

aska,  shi  yanke. Sai  shi  tamna  bagarua  shi  pesa,

sai  shi  tashi. Idan  sun  yi  su  dari,  hakanan

ake  yi  masu. Loba  da  aka-yanka,  sai  ajefa  shi

chikin  rame. Idan  angama  sai  adaure  da  moda,

har  shi  kwana  uku. Saanan  atafo  akunche  moda,

awanke  asa  magani,  amayar,  adaure  hakanan

ake  yi. Wanda  maganinsa  ke  da  kyeau,  kamin

kwana  goma  sha  fudu,  5  ya  warke. Wani  kua

shi-na-kai  wata  guda,  bai  warke  ba,  idan  bai  gamu

da  magani  mai-cheau  ba. Ama  wadansu  ba  su  damrewa,


at  the  limit  of  the  spot  where  he  had  pinched  it,  he  places  the
razor  (and)  quickly  cuts.  If  when  he  gets  to  where  the  red
flesh  begins — this  part  is  called  "jar fata  ",  i.  e.  red  skin — then
he  tears  the  skin  with  his  hand — then  he  inserts  the  razor  and
cuts  off  (the  skin).  Then  he  chews  up  some  of  the  seeds  of
the  acacia  tree  and  spits  (on  the  wound);  then  he  gets  up.
If  a  hundred  have  to  be  done,  this  is  the  method.  The  fore-
skin which  has  been  cut  off  is  then  thrown  into  the  hole.
When  it  (the  operation)  is  finished  then  they  tie  up  the  part
with  the  leaves  of  the  moda  (hemp)  tree,  for  three  days,  when
they  come  and  unfasten  the  leaves,  wash  (the  sore),  put  on
medicine,  put  on  leaves  again,  and  tie  up  as  before.  For  one
who  has  good  medicine,  in  about  fourteen  days  it  has  healed
up,  but  some  reach  a  moon  without  healing,  if  it  has  not  had
good  medicine  put  on  it.  But  some  again  are  not  for  tying
up  (the  wound)  at  all,


196  CUSTOMS  AND  ARTS. No.  37

sai  su  sa  kara,  su  na  turarawa  da  hayaki. Da  a-

-subahin  idan  ya  bushe,  su  jika  achikin

sabo  kasko. Sai  shi  banbare,  asa

magani  kuma. Hakanan  wadansu  ke  yi

har  shi  warke  ama  ba  su  kwanchi  bisa  tabarma,

ko  buzu,  ko  dan  sarki  ne,  sai  bisa

rai  rai,  idan  wurin  rai  rai  ne. Idan  babu

rai  rai  agarin,  sai  adebo  gainye  dayawa,

azuba  chikin  daki,  su-na-kwana  bisansa

har  su  warke. Ba  su  sa  riga,  ba  su  damra

bante,  ko  zane,  ama  ana-kashe  masu

gara  dayawa  su  chi. Idan  sun  ji  kai  kai


but  set  down  straw  (and  set  fire  to  it)  and  smoke  the  wound.
Early  next  morning  if  it  (the  wound)  is  dry  they  soak  it  (the
penis)  (in  water  and  medicine)  in  a  new  clay  pot.  When
(the  water)  loses  its  medicinal  properties,  some  more  medicine
is  put  in.  Thus  some  do,  till  (the  wound)  heals.  Now  they
(the  ones  operated  on)  never  lie  on  a  mat  or  on  a  skin,  even  if
he  be  the  son  of  a  chief,  but  on  sand,  if  there  is  sand  about.
If  there  be  no  sand  in  the  town,  they  then  pluck  many  leaves,
(and)  spread  them  in  the  room  (and)  they  sleep  on  them  till
they  recover.  They  wear  no  cloak,  they  fasten  on  no  loin
covering,  or  cloth,  but  are  given  all  kinds  of  luxuries  to  eat.
If  they  have  felt  any  irritation


198  CUSTOMS  AND  ARTS. No.  37

ba  su  sosawa. Ana  sainya  karta  su  yi  jira-
-nsu  domin  mugun  kwana  kar  su  fama
miakunsu. Domin  hakanan  akwai  wani  abu
ana-che  da  shi  "  Aka-chi ",  su  kan  rika  bugawa  su-na-
-che :  "  Aka-chi,  aka-sha,  aka-kwana  kasa,  ko  dan  sar-
-ki,  a-shi-kwana  kasa,  ko  dan  malam,  a-shi-kwana
kasa,  ko  atajir,  a-shi-kwana  kasa,  bale
talaka,  wofin  banza,  a-shi-kwana  kasa,  aka-chi
aka-sha,  aka-kwana  kasa,  ko  dan  wane,  a-shi-kwana
kasa." Ama  mache  ba  ta  zua
6  wurin,  domin  kar  su  gane  ta,
kwodainsu  shi  je

gareta.'
Shi  ke  nan.


they  must  not  scratch.  Big  powerful  men  are  set  to  watch
them  in  order  that  they  (the  patients)  may  not  hurt  their
sores  by  tossing  about  in  their  sleep.  Because  of  this  there  is
a  kind  of  (musical)  instrument  they  call  the  "Akach?\  which
they  beat  while  at  the  same  time  say  (sing) :  "  They  eat,  they
drink,  they  lie  on  the  ground,  be  he  the  son  of  a  chief,  he
must  lie  on  the  ground ;  or  be  he  the  son  of  a  doctor  of
learning,  he  must  lie  on  the  ground ;  or  a  wealthy  man,
he  must  lie  on  the  ground ;  how  much  more  the  poor  man,
the  useless  vagabond,  must  he  lie  on  the  ground.  They  eat,
they  drink,  they  lie  on  the  ground,  but  he  the  son  of  So-and-
so,  he  must  lie  on  the  ground."  Now  no  woman  comes  there
lest  they  behold  her  and  desire  go  out  towards  her.'  That
is  it.


200  CUSTOMS  AND ARTS. No.  38

No.  38.
1  Faslun.

Wanan  fasali  ne  na  2  kachiar  3  mata. Idan  matanbayi

ya  tanbaye  ka,  '  Ana  wada  ake-yi  kachiar  mata  ? '  ka  che

wada  ake-yi :  '  Idan  za  afarawa  sai  ache  su  tafi  su  kama

rua. Idan  sun  kama  rua,  sai  su  zo,  su  kwanta,

su  mike  kafafunsu. Wani  shi  zamna  bakin  rame

bisa  chikinsu. Saanan  wata  mache  (mch)  da  ta  iya

ta  zo,  ta  zamna  tsakanin  kafafunta,  wadansu

su  kan  kama  kafafunta. Saanan  4  maatar  nan

ta  sa  hannu,  ta  5  kamo  dan  tsakanta. Ta  sa

aska  daga  karkashin  abin,  ta  6  sharo  shi  har

bisa,  ta  kwalfe  shi  duka,  ta  jefa  rame.

Saanan  ta  tashi,  ta  je,  ta  tsuguna. Wata  kuma  ta  zo


The  Descriptions.

This  is  a  description  of  the  removal  of  the  clitoris  of
a  woman.  If  a  questioner  asks  you  (saying),  '  But  how  do
they  perform  the  operation  of  removing  the  clitoris  of  a
woman?'  say  what  is  done  is  as  follows:  'When  they  are
about  to  begin,  then  they  (the  girls)  are  told  to  go  and  take
water  (and  wash).  When  they  have  washed,  then  they  come
(and)  lie  down  (and)  stretch  out  their  legs.  Some  one  sits,
near  the  edge  of  the  hole  (they  have  already  dug),  on  their
bellies.  Then  a  certain  woman  who  is  skilled  (in  the  work)
comes  and  sits  between  her  legs,  others  seize  hold  of  her  feet.
Then  this  woman  (who  is  operating)  puts  her  hand  and  draws
out  the  clitoris.  She  places  the  razor  under  the  thing,  (and)
draws  it  up  to  the  top  (and)  cuts  it  all  out  (and)  casts  it  into
the  hole.  Then  she  (the  girl)  rises  (and)  goes  (and)  sits
down.  Another  also  comes


•0

c>


202  CUSTOMS AND ARTS. No.  38

ayi  mata  hakanan,  ko  sun  kai  nawa  hakanan
ake  yi  masu. Idan  jini  ya  kare  tsiyaya,  sai
anarka  mai  kadainya,  asainya  masu,  ayi  masu
kirshe. Idan  gari  ya  waye  awanke,  asainya
mai  kade,  wadansu  7  saboni,  hakanan  ake  yi,
har  shi  kare.' Shi  ke  nan.


and  the  same  is  done  to  her,  and  so  on  whatever  number
there  have  been.  When  the  blood  ceases  to  flow  then  shea
butter  is  melted  and  put  on  them  (on  the  place  cut)  and
a  cloth  is  tied  between  the  legs.  Next  day  they  bathe,  (and)
put  on  (more)  shea  butter,  some  (put  on)  soap,  and  this  is
what  they  do,  till  the  place  is  healed  up.'  That  is  it.


-r •


204  CUSTOMS AND  ARTS. No.  39

No.  39.

1  Babun.

Wanan  babi  ne  na  matache. Idan  matanbayi
ya  tanbaye  ka, '  Idan  mutun  ya  mutu,  ana  wada  ake  ma  gawa
tasa  ? ' Ka  che : — '  Idan  mutun  ya  mutu  dafarin,  sai  adi-
-bi  rua,  ashafa  ga  idanunsa,  domin  idanunsa
shi  rufe. Saanan,  idan  mai-gata  ne,  sai
adebo  rua,  ayi  masa  wanka. Saanan  adauke  shi
bisa  tabarma,  aaje  shi  akasa,  afuskanta
da  shi  zua  2Alkibla,  arufa  masa  farin  zane.
Saanan  afita,  agaia  ma  mutane,  domin
kowa  shi  sani. Azo  wurin  biso,  saanan
ache,  Ana  wurin  3  kabri  ? Idan  angwoda  wurin  kabri  ache,  Abido


The  Beginnings.

This  is  the  commencement  of  a  (description)  about  the  dead.  If
a  questioner  asked  you  (saying),  'If  a  man  died  what  is  done  to  his
corpse  ? '  you  (can)  say,  '  When  a  man  dies,  then,  first  of  all,  water
is  drawn  (and)  his  eyes  are  bathed  in  order  that  his  eyes  may  close.
Then,  if  (the  deceased)  was  a  man  of  means,  water  is  drawn  and  he  is
bathed  (all  over).  Then  he  is  lifted  on  a  mat,  (and)  placed  on  the
ground  (and)  set  with  his  face  turned  to  the  East  (and)  covered  with
a  new  cloth.  They  then  come  out  and  tell  the  people  in  order  that
every  one  may  know  (he  is  dead).  They  go  to  the  burying-ground,
and  they  say,  Where  is  the  place  for  the  grave  ?  When  shown
where  the  grave  is  to  be,  they  say,  Let  a  stalk  of  corn  be  sought


206  CUSTOMS  AND  ARTS. No.  39

kara  agwoda. Idan  aka-samu  kara,  sai

aje  wurin  gawa  nan,  adaidaita  tsawo  kara  nan

da  tsawon  gawa. Saanan,  idan  aka  zo  da  karan,

sai  agwoda  da  kushewan  adaidaita,  agina.

Saanan  ana-gina,  masu-gawa  su  komo

wurinsa,  su  debo  rua  adama  da  magaria,

ayi  masa  wanka. Akoma,  aajiye  shi.

Su  zo  wurin  jamaa,  ache,  Ana  likafani  ? Saanan

asamu  fari,  azo,  adumka  likafani

da  shi,  ana-yi  ma  gawa  likafani. Idan  mai-ga-

-ta  ne,  da  abu  biar,  wadansu  shida,  wada-

-nsu  bakwoi,  da  kworzale  da  fula


and  (the  corpse)  measured.  When  a  stalk  has  been  found,
then  they  go  to  where  the  body  is,  (and)  compare  the  length
of  the  stalk  with  the  length  of  the  corpse.  Then  when  they
come  with  the  stalk,  they  lay  it  on  the  grave  (and)  measure  it
out  (and)  dig.  While  (the  grave)  is  being  dug  the  people
who  have  been  attending  to  the  corpse  go  back  to  where  it  is.
Water  is  drawn  and  mixed  with  (the  leaves)  of  the  lotus,
(and)  they  wash  it  (the  body).  He  is  once  more  set  back  (on
the  mat).  (Then)  they  come  to  the  people  and  ask,  Where
is  the  shroud  ?  Then  the  white  (sheet)  is  procured  and  they
come  and  sew  a  shroud  of  it  and  make  a  winding-sheet  for
the  corpse.  If  he  was  a  man  with  rich  relations,  as  many
as  five  (robes)  things,  in  some  cases  six,  in  others  seven,  and
a  waist-cloth  and  cap


O4H%#^


WMW4  ^

'>
S^^mp

jj^tajjjJU/U .'.  *UUfA/lU/<


208  CUSTOMS AND  ARTS. No.  39

da  rawani,  da  riga,  da  uwan  likafani. Idan  anka-
-re,  saanan  aturara  shi  da  kafur,  ko  da  ja-
-wul. Wadansu  malamai  sun  kia. Idan  za  ayin
turare,  sai  abido  rua,  amurza  turare  chikin
rua,  saanan  adibi  azuba  ga  likafani,
ayafa  masa. Saanan  asamu  rua  tsaltsalka,
aje,  ayi  ma  gawa  wankan  farila. Saanan  asa
masa  likafani,  aajie  shi,  aje  aduba  ma-
-su-ginan  kushewa  sun  kare. Idan  sun  kare
adauki  gawa,  akawo  wurin,  sarari  mai-chau,
aajie,  akirSwo  malamai  su  zo,  su  yi  masa
sala. Idan  sun  kare,  adauki,  aje,  abisna,


and  turban,  and  cloak  and  the  mother  shroud  (i.  e.  large)  (are
put  on  the  corpse).  When  they  have  finished  they  anoint
him  with  camphor  or  spices.  Some  learned  men  have  not
permitted  this.  If  they  are  going  to  perfume  the  body  then
water  is  sought  and  the  scents  mixed  in  the  water,  then  it
is  taken  (and)  sprinkled  on  the  shroud  (and)  rubbed  over
him  (the  corpse).  Next  they  take  some  of  the  purest  water
and  come  and  wash  the  corpse  according  to  the  religious
custom.  Then  the  shroud  is  put  on  (and)  (the  body)  set
down.  They  go  and  see  if  those  digging  the  grave  have
finished.  If  they  have  finished  the  body  is  lifted  up  and
taken  to  some  clear  open  space,  (and)  set  down,  (and)  the
learned  men  are  called  to  come  and  say  prayers  over  it.
When  they  have  ended  they  lift  it  (and)  go  (and)  bury  it,


1125-2


O


210  CUSTOMS  AND  ARTS. No.  39

Idan  anbisna,  asamu  kurdi  kadan

akawo,  abai  wa  malamai,  su  yi  adua. Akawo  na  mai-

-wanka  daban,  da  na  mai-sala,  da  na  masu-ginan  kushewa.

Idan  aka-kare,  sai  kowa  su  watse. Mai-ku-

-ka  na-kuka,  mai-murna  na-murna,  har  kwana

bakwoi,  saanan  akirawo  malamai. Su  taru,  su  yi

adua,  su  watse. Babu  mai-zakua  kuma. Mata

su  shiga  takaba. Idan  mai-mutua  ya  kai  kwana

arbain,  akirawo  malamai,  su  yi  adua. Idan

shi-na  da  dukia,  shi-na  da  yaya,  araba  masu

gado. Idan  ba  shi  da  yaya,  akai  duklasa

gidan  sarki,  ya  zama  na  talakawa  da  marayu.


When  he  has  been  buried,  a  small  amount  of  cowries  are
brought,  (and)  given  to  the  malamai  (learned  men),  and  they
offer  prayers.  Those  who  washed  the  body,  and  those  who
prayed,  and  those  who  dug  the  grave  are  each  given  some
separately.  When  it  is  all  finished,  every  one  disperses.  The
mourners  mourn,  (and)  they  who  are  glad  rejoice,  till  seven
days  pass ;  then  the  malamai  are  summoned.  They  assemble
and  pray  (and)  disperse  (again).  There  is  no  further  coming
(of  friends  and  relations).  The  wives  of  the  deceased  enter
upon  the  period  of  retreat  for  the  dead.  When  the  deceased
has  been  dead  for  forty  days  the  malamai  are  called  (and)
they  pray.  If  he  (the  dead  man)  had  property  and  if  he  had
children  the  inheritance  is  divided  up  among  them.  If  he
had  no  children  his  property  is  taken  to  the  chief's  house  and
becomes  (the  possession)  of  the  poor  and  orphans.


ta^*£0;&4


.


212  CUSTOMS AND  ARTS. No.  39

Ama  matansa  su-na-zamnawa  daki  4  wata  fudu

da  kwana  goma,  su-na-kukya  kukye,  saanan

su  fita  su  yi  aure. Idan  su-na-kukya  kukye

namiji  ba  shi  magana  da  su. Su  kuma  ba  su  magana

da  namiji  bar  su  kare. Wanan  alaada  che  ta  Muhamadla.

Idan  namiji  shi-na-son  wata  chikinsu,  ba  shi  magana,

sai  sun  kare. Idan  ya  yi  magana  da  su  tun  ba  su

kare  ba,  ko  sun  yi  aure,  idan  mahukumta  sun

gani  hakanan,  sai  araba  su. Shi  ke  nan.


But  his  wives  remain  in  the  house  for  four  months  and  ten
days  (and)  they  mourn ;  after  that  they  come  forth  and  (can)
marry  again.  During  this  time  when  they  are  mourning
a  man  does  not  hold  conversation  with  them,  and  they  too  do
not  converse  with  a  man  until  (this  period)  is  over.  This  is
Mohammedan  custom.  If  a  man  wants  one  from  among
them  (for  a  wife)  he  does  not  speak  until  (the  time  of  retreat)
is  completed.  If  he  hold  converse  with  them  before  they
have  completed  this  period  or  if  they  have  married,  if  the
lawgivers  have  seen  that  this  has  been  done  then  they  separate
them.  That  is  it.


— w_i?


214  CUSTOMS AND  ARTS. No.  40

No.  40.

1  Faslun.

Wanan  fasali  ne  zaa  shi  gwoda  muna  wada  ake  ginan
kushewa  da  wada  ake  biso. Idan  matanbayi
ya  tanbaye  ka, '  Ana  wada  ake  ginan  kabri  ? ' Ka  che :  '  Idan
mutun  ya  mutu,  sai  abido  kara  agwoda  da  shi. Saanan
atafi  wurin  da  ake  ginan,  anome  wuri  da  chau.
Saanan  agina  kadan. Saanan  agwoda  kara,  idan
ya  yi  daidai. Saanan  agina. Idan  kara  ya  fi
tsawo,  sai  akara  gina  da  tsawo. Idan  aka  gina,
ya  kai  ga.  kwobri,  sai  2  agina  wata  karama  chiki. Saanan
agiyara  da  chau. Abido  itache  3  asasare.
Saanan  idan  angama,  sai  adauko  gawa  atura  shi


The  Descriptions.

This  description  will  show  us  how  the  grave  is  dug  and
the  burial  conducted.  If  a  questioner  asked  you  how  the
grave  is  dug  you  say,  '  If  a  man  dies,  then  a  corn  stalk  is
sought  (and)  the  corpse  measured  with  it.  Then  they  go  to
where  they  are  digging.  A  place  is  well  cleared  of  bush ;
then  they  dig  a  little ;  next  they  measure  with  the  stalk  (to
see)  if  it  is  the  proper  length ;  then  they  dig.  If  the  stalk
is  longer  than  (the  place)  they  have  dug,  then  they  increase
the  length.  When  they  have  dug  a  trench  about  the  depth
of  a  leg  bone,  then  they  dig  a  smaller  (trench)  inside  (this
one).  Next  all  is  neatly  prepared.  Sticks  are  sought  and
cut  (the  proper  length).  Then  if  they  have  finished,  the
corpse  is  lifted  and  laid


^^^fo^^fc^s-l.

l&tf$&£*fyto

^^^^^(^

t^pj&tyto&s&tiiP*
^^\tf^$tf*&*

_  _ > »  4  . ^  A.  4^^  -^ A.  A ^  ^^

Jf
>/


-**-21«.lC7M


-l*  »-,V


^^U^ijLi^:^^^^


q^sr^a/^


2i6  CUSTOMS  AND  ARTS. No.  40

chiki,  sannu. Aajiye  shi  da  sauki ;  ba  akama  shi

da  4karfi. Idan  aka-ajiye  shi  chikin  kushewa,  5amaida  gabansa

gabas. Sai  ayi  adua  ashafa  masa  ga  goshi. Saanan

asa  itache. Saanan  asa  gainye  ko  haki.

Ama  wadansu  ba  su  sawar  itache  sai  tubali,

ko  katangu. Saanan  asainya  dainyar  kasa

ayabe. Saanan  amaida  busasa  aturbude.

Mutane  su  watse. 6  Ya  kare.' Shi  ke  nan.


inside  very  gently.  It  is  set  down  with  care,  (and)  not  laid
hold  of  violently.  When  the  body  has  been  set  down  in  the
grave  its  front  is  turned  towards  the  East.  Then  prayers
are  said  and  the  hair  on  the  corpse's  forehead  is  gently
brushed  back.  Then  the  sticks  are  laid  across  and  leaves  or
grass  put  (on  top).  But  some  do  not  put  sticks  but  mud
or  potsherds.  Then  they  put  on  wet  earth  and  plaster  over,
and  the  dry  earth  (dug  out)  is  replaced  and  (all)  covered  over.
The  people  disperse.  It  is  finished.'  That  is  it.


JfitfJiMf^ci^fc&a*6*
^te4to*lki*^$£«^


C/5-"!


»/


•Wl


-ffii®


x^

^


218  CUSTOMS  AND  ARTS. No.  41

No.  41.
Faslu.

Wanan  fasali  ne  zaa  shi  gwoda  muna  wada  ake  wankan  gawa.
Idan  za  awankan  gawa,  idan  ankawo  rua  mai-chau.
Sai  akirawo  wani  malami  shi  yi  wankan. Idan  zaa  shi  Tarawa,
sai  shi  dauki  wata  jika,  shi  sainya  ga  hannu,  dada  shi  debi
rua,  shi  kurkure  ma  gawa  baki ;  shi  wanke  hanuansa
blu. Saanan  shi  kama  masa  rua  shi  wanki  maremara-
-insa. Saanan  shi  sa  masa  rua  ga  hanchi. Saanan
shi  wanke  masa  idanu,  shi  yi  masa  alwala.
Saanan  shi  yi  masa  wanka,  shi  wanke  kai(n)sa. Saanan
shi  wanke  kafada  tasa  ta  dama  har  kasa. Saanan
shi  wanke  kafada  tasa  ta  hagu  har  kasa. Saanan
shi  wanke  bayansa. Saanan  shi  wanke  kirjinsa


Description.

This  description  will  show  us  how  the  corpse  is  washed.
If  they  are  about  to  wash  a  corpse,  when  they  have  brought
some  clear  water,  then  they  will  call  some  malam  to  do  the
washing.  When  he  is  about  to  begin  he  takes  a  kind  of  bag
and  puts  it  on  his  hand.  Then  he  takes  the  water  and  washes
the  corpse's  mouth ;  he  washes  its  two  hands,  he  washes  all
the  private  parts.  Then  he  puts  water  up  the  nose.  Then
the  eyes  are  washed  and  ablutions  performed  for  it  (the
body).  Next  he  washes  it  all  over  ;  he  bathes  its  head  ;  then
he  washes  the  right  shoulder  right  down,  then  he  washes  the
left  shoulder  down  to  the  bottom ;  then  he  washes  its  back ;
then  he  washes  from  its  breast


220  CUSTOMS  AND  ARTS. No.  41

bar  ga  mara. Dada  wanka  l  ya  kare. Sai  asumke  shi

chikin  likafani. Ama  ana-yi  ma  gawa  wanka  ba  da  so-

-so  ba,  ba  da  sabuni  ba,  da  rua  tsartaka.

Ana-yi  ma  wani  daga  zamne,  ana-yi  ma  wani  daga  kwanche.

Duka  nan  ana  yi,  da  adua  ake  yi,  bar  agama. Ama

ba  awanka  kasashe  fagin  fama,  ba  ayi  masa

sala,  hakanan  saryaye. Shi  ke  nan.


to  below  the  navel.  Then  the  washing  is  completed  and  (the
body)  is  put  in  a  shroud.  But  a  corpse  is  never  washed  with
a  sponge  and  soap,  (but)  with  pure  water  (only).  Some  are
bathed  (while)  held  in  a  sitting  position,  some  from  a  lying
position.  All  this  is  performed  with  prayers,  (and)  they  are
offered  till  all  is  finished.  But  those  who  fall  in  battle  have
not  this  done  to  them,  nor  prayers  said ;  and  so  it  is  also  in
the  case  of  a  person  executed.  That  is  it.


-T/kilppj^trff


VA  i

**  —


222  CUSTOMS AND  ARTS. No.  42

No.  42.

1  Babun.

Wanan  babi  ne  na  2  chiniki. Ala  taala  3  ya  halalta
chiniki  ama  ya  hana  riba,  shi  ne  4  chin  kura. Idan
ka-na-so  ka  saya,  idan  ka  je  5  kausuwa,
ko  doki,  ko  jaki,  ko  sania,  ko  ra-
-kumi,  ko  rago,  ko  akwia,  ko  kaza,  ko  za-
-bo,  ko  jimina,  ko  alfadari,  ko  dangogi
daga  tufa,  ko  alkeba,  ko  riga,  gare,  ko  gir-
-ke,  ko  tago,  ko  jaba,  ko  6  sha  jiki,
ko  fula,  ko  wando,  ko  balar,  ko  zane,
ko  alkila,  ko  wadansu  kayan  aiki,
ko  sirdi,  ko  likafa,  ko  bauji,  ko
kafu,  ko  linzame,  ko  kamazuru,  ko


The  Beginnings.

This  is  the  beginning  of  (a  description)  of  how  people
trade.  Allah  the  exalted  has  made  trade  lawful,  but  he
forbade  unjust  profits,  that  is  (known  as)  the  eating  of  the
hyena.  If  you  want  to  buy  a  thing  when  you  come  to
the  market,  whether  a  horse,  or  an  ass,  or  cow,  or  camel,
or  ram,  or  goat,  or  hen,  or  guinea-fowl,  or  ostrich,  or  mule,
or  of  the  nature  of  clothes,  or  a  burnous,  or  cloak,  or  tobe,
with  ornamental  hems,  or  strips  of  cloth,  or  a  short  shirt
without  sleeves,  or  a  jacket,  or  a  second-hand  shirt,  or  a  cap,
or  trousers,  or  wide-legged  trousers,  or  cloth,  or  a  striped
shawl,  or  any  implement  of  work,  or  a  saddle,  or  stirrup,  or
girth,  or  saddle-cloth,  or  bit,  or  reins,  or


—^T.llt-jlr *» - /  «

/•Dxl  -  /  H  c»»1f% ^V*  •  •  '• L—  •«  »r

uiu^fWiuu  /%%e  ^A!  «v»^ ***+/*•  r~*J

\J ^  (J*%% •.  *(-/— ^

!98^4^SM^^«^

^^A^^^r^'^U-d


224  CUSTOMS  AND  ARTS. No.  42

kayamai,  ko  wani  abu  ka  ke  so  ka  saya,

idan  ka  je  sai  ka  che,  '  Nawa  ? ' Ache, '  Nawa  ka  saya,

nawa  ka  bari  ? '  ' 7  Zanbar  dari.' '  Albarka.' '  Na  rage

alfin.' '  Albarka.' ' 8  Na  rage  alfin  kuma.' Ka  che,

*  Albarka,  naa  saye  zanbar  arbain.' Shi  kuma

shi  che,  '  Albarka.' Kai  kuma  ka  che,  '  Na  kara  hamsa.'

Shi  che, '  Albarka.'  Ka  che, '  Nawa  ne  gaskla  tasa  ?'  Shi  che,

'  Gaskla  tasa,  zanbar  tamanin.' Sai  ka  che,  '  Naa

saya  zanbar  hamsin.' Shi  che,  '  Albarka.' Kai  kua,

idan  ba  ka  so  ka  bari,  idan  ka-na-so  ka  kara.

Idan  ya  game  shi,  shi  bar  maka,  idan  bai  game  shi  ba

shi  che,  '  Albarka.' Sai  ka  wuche  gaba. Idan  ka  gani


spurs,  or  some  thing  you  wish  to  buy,  if  you  have  come  (to
the  market)  then  you  say,  '  How  much  ? '  You  are  asked,
'  How  much  will  you  buy  it  for,  how  much  will  you  allow  me.
One  hundred  thousand  (cowries)  ? '  (Buyer)  '  No,  thank  you.'
(Seller)  *  I  have  reduced  it  by  two  thousand.'  You  say,  '  No,
thank  you.'  (Seller)  'I  have  reduced  it  by  two  thousand
again.'  You  say,  'No  thank  you,  I  will  buy  it  for  forty
thousand.'  He  too  (the  seller)  now  says,  'No,  thank  you.'
You  again  say,  *  I  have  added  five  thousand.'  He  says,  '  No,
thank  you.'  You  say,  c  How  much  is  the  real  price  ? '  He
says,  'The  true  price  is  eighty  thousand.'  Then  you  say,
4 1  buy  for  fifty  thousand.'  He  says,  '  No,  thank  you.'  You,
for  your  part,  if  you  do  not  wish  (the  thing  at  that  price)  you
leave  off;  if  you  want  you  increase  your  offer.  If  it  has
come  up  to  what  he  expects,  he  lets  you  have  (the  thing) ;  if
not,  he  says,  '  No,  thank  you.'  Then  you  pass  on.  If  you
have  seen


Ug^J^i&^^^jLAil

lJtei.*{i$J»;.i+J*)


«% /•


142B-2


226  CUSTOMS  AND  ARTS. No.  42

wani  ka  saya. Idan  ba  ka  gani  ba,  idan  ka-na-karawa
ka  koma,  ka  kara. Idan  ya  game  shi  shi  salama,
idan  bai  game  shi,  ba  ka  bar  masa. Ama  wada  alaada
ta  Muhamadia  ta  ke. Idan  ka  sal  doki,
sai  ahau,  ayi  sukua,  ku  gani  idan  ba  shi  gar-
-dama,  shi-na  da  gudu  kworai,  ba  shi  tabaria,  ba
shi  tutsu. Saanan  ache, '  Ansaya,  ama  9  muu
kai  gida  mu  dubi  kamun  hakinsa  da  shan  rua-
-nsa  kwana  uku.' Idan  masu-shi  sun
lamunta  ka  kama,  ku  kai  gida,  ku  daure.
Idan  kun  gani  abinda  ku  ke  so,  ba  shi  da
alafa,  ba  shi  da  ruaye,  ba  shi  da  kasa,  ba  shi  da
kilmiso,  ba  shi  da  wani  aibi,  saanan


another  you  buy  (from  him).  If  you  do  not  see  another  (and)
if  you  are  going  to  increase  your  offer  you  come  back  (to
the  first  seller).  If  he  agrees  to  (your  offer)  he  says  you  can
take  it,  if  not  you  leave  (the  thing)  with  him.  Now  there
is  another  custom  among  the  followers  of  Mohammed.  If  it
is  a  horse  you  have  bought  then  it  is  mounted  and  galloped.
You  see  that  it  is  not  stubborn,  (if)  it  has  great  speed,  it  does
not  rear  up  and  does  not  buck,  then  it  is  said,  '  It  has  been
bought,  but  we  will  take  it  home  and  see  how  it  feeds  and
drinks  for  three  days.'  If  the  owners  of  it  have  granted
permission  you  catch  (it)  and  take  it  home  and  tie  it  up.
When  you  have  seen  what  you  wish,  (i.  e.)  that  it  has  no  hoof
disease,  or  hock  disease,  or  eye  disease,  or  sickness  of  the  legs
(or)  other  blemish,  then


' ~  ^

U^jL^j^iu^j^yx

J^u^feiif4|yli4^j^
.^^^r^5^Bs^A'.|^4

^*^i^Uto^^5j

Cjr^^^M^^&St^

^I%^1


«^i


228  CUSTOMS  AND  ARTS. No.  42

ku  bia. Idan  ka  sai  bawa,  sai  ayi  masa  wanka,
adubi  jikinsa  duka. Idan  ba  shi  da  albaras,  ko
kuturta,  ko  10  idanu  guda  daia,  ko  wani  aibi
mabayani,  saanan  ku  che  adakata  muku  kwana
uku,  ko  bakwai,  domin  ku  gani,  ko  shi-na  da
aiki. Idan  ba  shi  da  kyuya,  saanan  ku  bia. Idan
kun  gani  wani  aibi  gareshi,  ku  mayar,  ama
da  chi,  da  sha,  ku  ke  ba  shi. Idan  ya  yi  maku  n  murgu
ba  naku  ba  ne  na  ubangijinsa  ne. Shi  ke  nan.


You  pay  (for  it).  If  you  have  bought  a  slave  he  is  washed,
(and)  his  whole  body  examined.  If  he  has  not  white  leprosy
or  leprosy  or  one  eye  only  or  other  blemish  apparent  then
you  say  he  must  wait  on  you  for  three,  or  perhaps  seven
days,  in  order  that  you  may  see  if  he  is  a  worker.  If  he  is
not  a  lazy  man  then  you  pay  (the  price).  If  you  have  found
any  blemish  in  him  you  give  him  back,  but  food  and  drink
you  are  the  one  to  supply.  If  he  has  done  any  work  for  you
(the  proceeds)  are  not  yours  but  his  master's.  That  is  it.


^ifi$>&lf£j$^£*ft)fl

j.  ^^u^lfiiJ^^s^U


tfft^fcl^&jaa^.^


%
»*>


^-^rr^^^r^


230  CUSTOMS AND  ARTS. No.  43

No.  43.

Faslu.

Wanan  fasall  ne  zaa  shi  gwoda  muna  wada  ake  chinikin  tufafi.
Idan  kaa  sai  kore,  sai  arare  ta,  ka  duba  da  chau
gaban  dilali. Idan  Jta  game  ka,  ka  bia,  idan  ba  ta  game  ka  ba,
ka  bari,  ka  bidi  wata. Hakanan,  ko  rlga,  ko  wando,
ko  alkeba,  sai  ka  duba  da  chau  wurin  masayi.
Ba  ka  zua  da  shi  gida. Idan  dare  ya  yi,  ba  achinikin
tufa  ko  wani  abu. Idan  rlga  saki  ka  saya,  sai
ka  duba  da  chau  gaban  masayi. Idan  ka-na  da
abokin  shawara,  ka  yi  shawara  da  shi  nan  kausuwa,
ba  ka  zua  gida. Saanan  idan  ka  saye  aje  gida
akirga  kurdi. Idan  ka-na  da  dirhami  nan  ko
miskali,  ka  bia,  ka  dauki  abinka,  ka  tafi  gida.


Description.

This  description  will  tell  us  what  is  done  when  buying
clothes.  If  you  are  going  to  buy  a  black  tobe,  it  is  opened
out  that  you  may  see  it  well,  in  front  of  the  trader.  If  it  is
what  you  wanf  you  pay  for  it ;  if  it  does  not  please  you,  leave
it  and  look  for  another.  And  so  with  a  gown  or  trousers  or
a  burnous,  until  you  have  examined  it  well  in  the  presence
of  the  vender,  you  do  not  take  it  home.  If  darkness  comes
on  there  is  no  further  trading  in  clothes  or  other  things.  If
it  is  a  blue  striped  tobe  you  are  buying,  then  you  examine  it
well  before  the  one  who  is  selling.  If  you  have  some  friend
to  advise  you  (about  the  purchase)  get  his  advice  here  at  the
market-place ;  you  must  not  go  home.  Then  if  you  have
bought,  lay  it  aside  in  the  house  and  let  the  money  be  counted
out.  If  you  have  silver  or  gold  with  you  here  pay  (and)  lift
your  purchase  (and)  go  home.


?3KQt*£4


i» w
l»«tH


iV-rt*


*CJ^


232  CUSTOMS AND  ARTS. No.  43

Achikin  sharaa  ta  Muhamadia  babu  rikichi,
domin  Ala  taala  2  ya  fadi  chikin  Alkorani : —
4  Idan  ku  ka  yi  alkawali,  ku  chika,  domin
alkawali  abin  tanbaya  ne.' Shi  ke  nan.


In  the  laws  of  the  Mohammedan  faith  there  is  no  deceit.
Allah  the  Exalted  has  said  in  the  Koran,  '  If  you  made
a  promise  fulfil  it,  for  a  promise  is  something  to  be  accounted
for.'  That  is  it.


%  ^ 4«<il-;


»KCV4C»»


•«»


234  CUSTOMS AND  ARTS. No.  44

No.  44.

1  Bismi  alahi  alrahmani  alrahlmi.

Wanan  fasall  ne  zaa  shi  gwoda  muna  kaman  da  ake  kera  2mutun  mutumi.
Alamarin  nan  shi-na  da  bai  mamaki,  Ama  ana-yin  dabara  nan
da  yinbu,  da  danko,  da  jan  3  karfe,  da  sinadari,
da  dalma,  da  wuta. Farm,  idan  za  ayin  mutun  mutumi,
sai  abido  yinbu,  agiyara  shi  da  chau,  afida  tsakuwa
da  ke  chiki,  alude  shi  da  chau. Saanan  agina
panpama,  saanan  agina  haba,  ama  na  ga  panpamar.
Saanan  ayi  hanchi  da  idanu. Agerta  dunbarun  baki.
Saanan  asainya  wani  itache  da  aka-gerta  kaman  wuka.
Adinga  shafe  shi. Ana-sa  rua  kadan  kadan  ana-shafe  shi


In  the  name  of  Allah  the  Compassionate,  the  Merciful.  This  account
will  show  how  the  (Benin)  figures  are  made.  This  work  is  one  to
cause  wonder.  Now  this  kind  of  work  is  done  with  clay,  and  wax,  and
red  metal  (copper),  and  solder  (zinc),  and  lead,  and  fire.  The  first  thing
to  be  done  if  one  of  the  figures  is  to  be  made,  is  to  get  clay  and  work
it  most  thoroughly,  and  get  the  little  stones  which  are  in  it  worked
out.  It  is  well  worked  in  the  hands.  Next  the  shape  of  the  top  of  a  head
is  constructed  (from  the  clay),  and  then  the  jaws  on  the  same  piece  as  the
top  of  the  head.  Then  the  nose  is  shaped,  and  the  eyes  and  the  lips  made.
Then  a  certain  stick  which  has  been  shaped  like  a  knife  is  put  (against
the  model)  and  it  is  smoothed  (with  this).  A  very  little  water  is  put  on
when  it  is  being  thus  smoothed


6fe^i2ffcijSij<i  ^J£5iSr
V  c/ i/-  L/ "\y— '


I^^U


236  CUSTOMS  AND  ARTS. No.  44

har  shi  yi  chau  saanan  4  ashainya  rana  shi  bushe. Saanan

anarka  danko,  azuba  bisansa. Saanan  asainya  wuka.

Idan  ya  yi  karfl,  ana-karchewa. Akarche  da  chau. Saanan

afura  wuta,  ana-sa  wuka  chikin  wutan. Shi  yi  zafi

kadan,  adauki  ana-mana  ma  danko,  domin  shi  damparu

da  chau. Agerta  idanu,  da  gira,  da  baki,  da  haba,

da  geme. Saanan  abido  itache  nan,  mai-kaman  wuka,

ana-tsomawa  chikin  rua,  ana-mana  ga  danko,  ana-sha-

-fe  shi. Ashafe  shi  da  chau,  5shi-na-walkla. Idan  mache  che,

saanan  ayi  mata  zankaye. Wada  shi  ke  yi  6  zankayen,  shi-na-

murza  danko  kamar-igia,  da  rua,  shi  yi  tsawo. Saanan  (s)


until  it  is  perfect ;  then  it  is  set  in  the  sun  to  dry.  Next  wax
is  melted  and  poured  over  it  (the  clay  model),  (and)  then  it  is
gone  over  (again)  with  the  knife.  As  it  (the  wax)  hardens
it  is  smoothed  over.  When  it  has  been  well  done,  then  a  fire
is  kindled,  (and)  a  knife  put  in  the  fire.  When  it  is  slightly
warm  it  is  taken  up  and  pressed  over  the  wax  in  order  that  it
may  adhere  well  (to  the  clay  foundation).  The  eyes  get  the
finishing  touches,  (and)  the  eyebrows,  and  mouth  and  chin
and  beard.  Then  this  stick  like  a  knife  is  got  out  (and)
dipped  in  water  (and)  pressed  against  the  wax,  (and)  passed
over  it — it  is  well  smoothed  (and)  shines  (all  over).  If  the
model  is  of  a  woman's  head  then  the  hair  adornment  is  put
on.  How  the  adornment  of  the  hair  is  made,  is  as  follows.
Wax  is  rolled  out  till  it  is  like  a  string — water  is  used  ;  it
forms  a  long  piece.  Then


faj^jft&**&1p


238  CUSTOMS  AND  ARTS. No.  44

shi  yanyanke  shi  mana  bisa  kai. Saanan  shi  sa  aska

shi  tsatsage. Saanan  shi  yanka  wani  danko  gajejeru,

shi  kakafa  bisa  kai. Saanan  shi  murza  wani  danko  da  rua,

shi  yi  tsawo  kamar  igia. Shi  ribia  blu,  shi  daidaita,

shi  aza  bisa  zankayen,  shi  mana. Abinda  ya  saura  shi  yanke,

shi  yas. Saanan  shi  gerta  wani  danko  da  fadi,  shi  yi

kunnuwa  da  shi,  shi  mana. Ama  kowane  zaa  shi  manawa,

sai  ya  sainya  wuka  chikin  wuta,  shi  mana  ga  danko.

Saanan  shi  zamna,  wanan  7  ya  kare. Sauran  zubin

karfe. Idan  8  ya  gama  wanan  sai  shi  debi  yinbu,

shi  rufe  pampamar  duka  da  yimbu,  shi  bar  kafa  kadan  shi  shainya

shi  bushe. Wanan  ya  kare,  sauran  zubin  karfe.


he  (the  smith)  cuts  it  into  pieces  (and)  fastens  them  on  top  of  the
head.  Then  he  takes  a  razor  (and)  cuts  (them  the  required  length).
Next  he  cuts  off  other  short  pieces  of  wax  (and)  sticks  them  along
the  head.  Then  he  rolls  out  another  bit  of  wax  with  water,  making
it  long  like  a  rope.  He  divides  it  in  two  (down  the  middle,  not
across),  lays  them  side  by  side,  and  puts  them  on  the  top  of  the
first  upright  pieces  and  sticks  (the  whole)  on.  The  part  left  over
he  cuts  off  (and)  casts  aside.  Then  he  prepares  a  certain  broad
piece  of  wax  and  makes  ears  out  of  it  (and)  fixes  them  on.  But
whenever  he  is  about  to  stick  any  piece  on,  first  he  puts  the  knife
in  the  fire  and  presses  it  against  the  wax.  Then  he  sits  down —
this  (part  of  the  work)  is  completed.  There  remains  the  pouring
in  of  the  metal.  When  he  has  finished  (the  part  just  described)  he
takes  up  mud  (and)  covers  the  whole  head  with  it ;  leaving  only
a  small  hole.  He  puts  it  in  the  sun  to  dry — this  part  is  finished.
There  remains  the  pouring  in  of  the  metal.


240  CUSTOMS AND ARTS. No.  44

Wanan  fasali  ne  na  zubin  karfe.

Wada  ake  zubin  karfe. Idan  aka-debo  wuta,  azuba  chikin  murfun
kira,  asainya  zuga  zugi,  ana-fura  wuta  azuba  gawayi.
Saanan  adauki  9  mutun  mutumin,  adora  bisan  wuta,  azuba  rua  achikin
kasko  ko  tasa. Idan  mutun  mutumi  nan  ya  yi  zafi,  sai
danko  da  ke  chiki  shi  narke. Sai  adauko  shi,  adoro  awartaki
bisa  kasko(n)  ruan,  ko  wadansu,  itache,  adora  mutun  mutumin
bisansu  danko  shi  rika  tsiyayewa. Hakanan  ake  yi
har  danko  shi  narke  duka  atsiyaye  shi  chikin  rua.
Saanan  azuba  gawayi  dayawa. Adora  mutun  mutumin  bisa  wuta.
Adauko  sandar  karfe  adinga  sarawa  da  muntalaga,  asara
dayawa  azuba  chikin  tukuniar  kira. Saanan  atona  gawayi
asa  chiki,  amaida  gawaye  arufe,  akawo  mutun  mutumi,  adora.


This  description  is  of  the  pouring  in  of  the  metal.  The  way  the
metal  is  poured  in  is  (as  follows).  When  the  fire  has  been  brought  it
is  poured  into  the  melting-furnace,  (and)  the  bellows  are  set  to  work
(and)  the  fire  blown  (and)  charcoal  poured  in.  Then  the  model  is
lifted  (and)  placed  on  the  fire.  Water  is  poured  into  a  pot  or  cup.
When  the  model  has  become  heated  then  the  wax  inside  melts.
Then  it  is  taken  up,  the  tongs,  or  some  (take)  a  stick,  are  placed
across  the  pot  (of  water),  and  the  figure  put  on  top,  and  the  wax
keeps  dropping  out.  And  it  is  held  so  till  all  the  wax  has  melted  and
dropped  into  the  water.  Then  a  great  quantity  of  charcoal  is  poured
(into  the  furnace).  The  figure  (in  clay)  is  set  on  the  fire.  Bars  of
metal  are  continually  being  cut  with  a  hammer;  many  pieces  are
broken  up  in  this  way,  (and)  put  in  the  smelting-pot.  Then  they
scrape  out  a  hole  in  the  charcoal  and  put  the  smelting-pot  in,  replace
the  charcoal  again,  (and)  cover  up.  The  (mud)  figure  is  brought
and  set.


PLATE  II


co

6


t,

o

o
o

x N-
h  £


co


o

£


[P.  240


CUSTOMS  AND  ARTS. No.  44

adora  bisa  wutan. Adinga  zuga,  ana-jujuya  kasar  nan
ta  mutun  mutumi  har  shi  yi  ja. Saanan  karfe  ya  narke,
sai  adauko  mutun  mutumi,  atona  rame,  akafa  shi  chiki,
domin  shi  tsaya  da  chau. Abude  kafar,  azuba  narkaken
karfe  chiki. Idan  ya  chika,  to,  ya  yi  chau  ke  nan. Idan
bai  chika  ba,  sai  akara  domin  shi  chika. Idan  ya  chika,  ya
kare  ke  nan. Sai  aaje  har  shi  yi  sainyi, 10  saanan
aparpashe. Sai  ka  gani  mutun  mutumi  mai-chau. Shi  ke  nan.
Aikin  Ali  ya  kare.


[it  is  set]  on  the  fire.  They  keep  blowing  the  bellows,  and
this  clay  lump  is  turned  till  red  hot.  Then  the  metal  has
melted,  then  the  figure  is  taken  up,  a  hole  is  dug,  (and)  it  is
placed  in  it  so  that  it  is  firmly  set.  The  hole  left  in  the  clay
is  cleared  out  and  the  melted  metal  poured  in.  If  it  is  filled,
that  is  well ;  if  not,  more  is  added  to  fill  it.  If  full  then  (the
work)  is  finished.  Next  it  is  set  aside  to  cool,  then  (the  out-
side covering  of  clay)  is  broken  off.  Then  you  see  a  beautiful
figure.  That  is  it.  The  work  of  Ali  is  completed.


PLATE  III


CO

6
ft*


242


244  CUSTOMS  AND  ARTS. No.  45

No.  45.
1  Babun.

Wanan  babi  ne  na  jtraar  fata. Ana  jimar
fata  iri  blar,  da  jar  fata,  da  baka,  da  fara,
da  gangamo,  da  korino. Ama  wada  ake  jimar
jar  fata. Idan  aka-samu  buzun  rago,
ko  na  akwia,  sai  abido  toka  da  gainye
gwanda,  asaba,  azuba  chikin  toka,  saanan
asainya  fata  achiki. Ta  kwana  blu  achiki,
saanan  afitas,  akware  2  gashin,  awanke.
Saanan  abido  bagarua,  adaka,  ajikata  da  rua,
saanan  asainya  fata  child. Ta  kwana  blu
achiki  afitas  awanke  ashainya. Ta  bushe
saanan  ashafa  mata  mai(n)  shanu  ko  alayadi.


The  Beginnings.

This  is  the  commencement  of  (a  description)  ot  tanning
skins.  There  are  five  ways  of  tanning  skins  (so  that  they
become)  red  skins,  and  black,  and  white,  and  cream  coloured,
and  green.  Now  how  red  leather  is  tanned  (thus : — )  When
a  ram's  or  goat's  skin  has  been  procured,  then  ashes  and
pawpaw  leaves  are  sought.  They  (the  leaves)  are  rubbed
down  and  poured  among  the  ashes  (and)  then  the  skin  is  put
in.  It  is  left  two  days  in  the  mixture  (and)  then  removed,
(and)  the  hairs  rubbed  off  (and)  washed.  Then  the  seeds
of  the  acacia  are  procured  (and)  pounded  (and)  moistened
with  water,  (and)  then  the  skin  put  in.  It  lies  in  it  two  days,
is  taken  out,  washed,  spread  in  the  sun.  It  dries,  (and)  then
the  fat  of  a  cow  is  rubbed  on  it,  or  palm  oil.


—  9~  r  -m


4  /v  .>  MI

°«^^

••<^.'./^


246  CUSTOMS AND  ARTS. No.  45

Achude  ta  da  shi. Saanan  adaka  karan  daft

da  kanwa,  asainya  chikin  rua,  asainya  fatar  achiki.

Achudeta  asainya  ta  chikin  ruan  zafi  azazage  ta.

Saanan  ayanyanka  laimu,  asainya  ta  achiki,  amurza  ta,

Saanan  afitas,  ashainya  chikin  inua,  sai  ta  yi  chau.

Haka  ake  yin  jar  fata. Ama  baka,  idan  aka  sainya

buzu  achikin  toka  aka-jeme,  sai  asainya

ta  chikin  bagarua,  achude  ta,  abar  ta,  ta  yi  kwana

bm  chiki,  saanan  afitas,  ashainya.

Idan  ta  sha  iska  sai  asa  kuloko. Shi  ke  nan.


It  is  rubbed  well  with  it.  Next  stalks  of  dafi  (?)  and  natron  are
pounded  and  put  in  water,  and  the  skin  put  in.  It  is  worked
soft  (and)  then  put  into  hot  water  and  shaken  out.  Then
limes  are  cut  up  (and)  it  (the  skin)  is  put  among1  them  (and)
rolled  about  (in  them).  Then  it  is  taken  out  and  dried  in  the
shade,  until  it  is  as  desired.  This  is  how  red  leather  is  made.
As  for  black,  when  the  skin  has  been  put  among  the  ashes
(and)  the  hair  rubbed  off,  then  it  is  put  among  the  acacia
(seeds)  and  worked  with  the  hands,  and  then  left  in  for  two
days.  Then  it  is  taken  out  (and)  spread  out.  When  it  has
been  aired  (lit.  drunk  the  air)  then  the  '  kuloko '  is  put  on.
That  is  it.


ff iTiif* ^Sr*  ?!-•*  if*  L.  Vf  z*<
v»/l>M/»»fja^U»U<UiL4^M»|»  Aj  €M,"

X7  H  ^ «• ••

^^t^-^b**^

5iaif«ft. ,^«-Uf.\aiLsu^r^5


248  CUSTOMS  AND  ARTS. No.  46

No.  46.
Faslu«

Wanan  fasall  ne  na  kuloko. Wada  ake  yin  kulo-
-ko. Ana-bida  kashin  makera,  idan  ba-
-bu,  asamu  guntayen  karufa. Asainya
achikin  kasko,  ko  tukunia. Azuba  rua,
da  zumuwa,  ko  sikiri,  ko  giar  hatsi,  ko
man  fura,  azuba  chiki. Shi  tsima,  ya  zama  kulo-
-ko  ke  nan. Kome  ka  ke  so  ka  mayar  baki,
ko  da  l  ya  yi  fan  kamar  takarda. Idan  ka  dibi,
ka  zuba  akai(n)sa  sai  shi  zama  baki. Shi  ke  nan.
2  Na  chi,  na  bia,  ban  hadie  ba,
ka  ga  bakina.


Descriptions.

This  is  a  description  of '  kuloko'.  The  way '  kuloko '  is  made
(is  as  follows).  Iron  filings  are  sought,  or  if  not  to  be  had,
pieces  of  iron.  They  are  put  into  a  clay  pot  or  iron  vessel
(and)  water  poured  in,  also  honey,  or  sugar,  or  beer  made  of
corn,  or  water  of  porridge,  is  poured  in.  It  stands  (for  about
three  days).  This  becomes  'kuloko'.  Whatever  you  wish
you  can  change  it  black,  though  it  has  been  as  white  as  paper.
If  you  take  it,  the  '  kuloko ',  and  pour  it  on  the  top  then  it
becomes  black.  That  is  it.

I  have  eaten,  I  have  paid,  I  have  not  swallowed,  you  have
seen  my  mouth  (i.  e.  I  have  taken  your  pay,  I  have  finished
your  work,  I  have  not  refused  to  tell  you  all,  behold  my
work).


k^U?*^:&^i.£-5:.}pJz

x**^9jF*a«^Fr*

k<t)L&


PART  V
PROVERBS


Babun.

Wanan  babi  ne  na  sherbachen  magana
shi  akan  che, c  habaichi.' Mun  fara  anan.


The  Beginnings.

This  is  the  beginning  of  words  which  are  taken  and  jumbled
up  (that  a  man  may  not  know  their  meaning),  and  such  is
called  a  *  habaichi\  proverb.  We  have  here  begun.


254  PROVERBS

1.  Bakin  jini  na  l  muzuru,  mai-kaza  zagi,  maras  kaza  zagi.

2.  Hanunrua  ba  goro  ba,  agulu  ba  nama  ba.

3.  Kafar  agulu  bata  mia.

4.  Idan  ka  gani  akwia  makwanchin  zaki,  sai  aji  tsoronta.

5.  Idan  ka  gani  zdmo  shi  na  2baje  3bunga  kare,  ya  goyo  damisa  ne.

6.  4Agwagwa  ba  ruanki  da  tsafi.

7.  Hanchi  bai  san  dadin  gishiri  ba.

8.  Abinda  ke  giwayan  bayan  gida,  zaa  shi  shiga  gida  ne.

9.  5  Wa  masani  ? Wa  ya  ki  nasa,  sai  wawa  ?

10.  Idan  6ka  kori  yaro  shi-na-gudu,  ka-na-binsa  zaa  shi  shiga  zaure
ya  komo,  ya  tsaya,  ba  banza  ba,  akwai  ubansa  ne.


1.  The  torn  cat  is  a  bad  character,  the  owner  of  a  fowl  curses  him,
and  he  who  has  no  fowl  curses  him.

2.  The  hanunrua  (nut)  is  not  a  real  kola  nut,  (though  like  it),  the
vulture  is  not  meat  (i.e.  you  do  not  eat  it).

3.  The  vulture's  foot  spoils  the  soup.

4.  If  you  see  a  goat  at  the  lion's  sleeping-place,  you  fear  her.

5.  If  you  see  a  hare  dancing  on  the  dog's  earth  mound,  you  may  be
sure  he  is  carrying  a  leopard  on  his  back.

6.  Duck,  you  have  nothing  to  do  with  the  sacrifice.

7.  The  nose  does  not  know  the  flavour  of  the  salt.

8.  The thing  (you  see)  going  round  the  back  of  the  house,  it
intends  to  enter  the  house.

9.  Who  knows  best  ? Who  hates  his  own  relations,  except  a  fool  ?
10.  If  you  have  chased  a  boy,  (and)  he  runs  off,  (and)  you  follow

him,  (and)  when  he  is  just  about  to  enter  the  porch  leading  to  his
house,  he  comes  back  (and)  stands  (waiting  for  you),  he  does  not  do
that  for  nothing,  his  father  is  there.


256  PROVERBS

n.  Damana  mai-ban  samu.

12.  Rashin  farm  wata,  tamraro  ke  haske.

13.  Rashin  uwa,  akan  yi  uwar  daki.

14.  Kusu  ne  ba  shi  gida,  domin  hakanan  su  ke  ajia  barkatai.

15.  7Kinwa  che  ba  ta  gida,  domin  hakanan  bera  ke  gada.

1 6.  Ai  wane  kifin  rijia  ne.

1 7.  Nama  mai-wari  shi-ka-kama  kura.

1 8.  Sania  ashafanta  ake-yi,  tun  ba  afara  twatsanta  ba.

19.  Gatari  da  wuta,  mai-wiar  rataya.

20.  Lizame  da  wuta  maganin  tsayayan  doki.

21.  Kaza  mai-yaya,  ita  ke  ts5ro  shirwa.


11.  It  is  the  rainy  season  that  gives  wealth.

12.  When  the  moon  is  not  full,  the  stars  are  bright.

13.  If  one  has  not  a  mother  of  one's  own,  one  makes  one
whom  one  calls  one's  '  house-mother '.

14.  There  is  not  a  rat  in  the  house,  that  is  why  the  things
are  left  scattered  about  just  anyhow.

15.  The  cat  is  not  at  home,  because  of  that  the  mice  are
playing.

1 6.  No,  So-and-so  is  a  fish  from  a  well. (A  shy  man.).

1 7.  It  is  the  stinking  bit  of  meat  that  catches  the  hyena.

1 8.  They  pat  the  cow  before  they  begin  to  milk  her.

19.  A  (red) -hot  axe  is  difficult  to  carry  on  the  shoulder.

20.  A  hot  bit  is  the  cure  for  a  stubborn  horse.

21.  It  is  the  hen  with  chickens  that  fears  the  hawk.


R


258  PROVERBS

22.  Tsoro  na  daji,  kumya  ta-na  gida.

23.  8  Akwia  taa  yi  wayo  da  yankaken  kunne.

24.  Idan  mugun  mutun  ya  shibka  zanba,  kai  ka  sa  lauje  ka  yanke.

25.  Tantabara  dukla  sama,  idan  kin  tashi,  Ala  ka  kawo  ki  gida.

26.  Idan  da  kamar  nika,  kwado  ya  fi  kwagua.

27.  9Gatari  ga  nama,  nama  ga  wuta.

28.  A  shekara  saran  rua,  sai  tanbatse.

29.  Gumagumai  ka  kwana  da  wuta,  kirarua  sai  toka.

30.  Rimi  tsakar  gida,  ranan  sara  mutanen  gida  na  kuka,  na  waje  na  murna.

3 1 .  Yaro  ya  so  aure,  10  gidansu  babu  godla.

32.  n  Adawa  ba  ta  hana  samu  ba.

22.  Terror  is  a  thing  of  the  wilds,  shame  of  the  home  (the  abode  of  men).

23.  The  goat  will  learn  sense  by  having  its  ears  slit.

24.  If  a  bad  man  has  sown  evil,  do  you  set  your  sickle  to  it  and  cut  it
down.

25.  Pigeon,  your  riches  (food)  are  in  the  sky ;  when  you  have  risen  aloft,
Allah  it  is  who  brings  you  back  home.

26.  If  it  is  a  matter  of  grinding  corn  (between  two  stones)  the  frog
should  be  better  at  it  than  the  crab.

27.  Axe,  there  is  the  meat ;  meat,  there  is  the  fire.

28.  Though  one  were  to  spend  a  year  hacking  at  water  (one  would
make  no  impression  on  it)  it  only  splashes  up  (and  is  still  again).

29.  (If  you  have)  a  big  log  you  have  a  fire  beside  you  all  night,  if  a  stick,
then  ashes  only.

30.  The  silk  cotton  tree  in  the  middle  of  the  compound,  on  the  day  it
cut  down  the  people  of  the  house  grieve,  outsiders  rejoice.

31.  The  boy  wants  to  marry,  but  at  their  (his)  house  there  is  no
(he  has  no  money).

32.  Because  a  person  hates  you,  that  does  not  prevent  you  getting  wl
you  want.


26o  PROVERBS

33.  Jia  Ka  raba  yau  aka-ba  mu.

34.  Zaman  dunia  hakuri,  mai-kla  sun  fi  ma-soya.

35.  Domin  12  dan  karamin  tsuguni  nan,  ba  shi  yi  mani  komi.

36.  Aki  marada,  azamna  da  wa  ?

37.  Ma-aikata  da  '  wai ',  zunubinku  ka  dadu.

38.  13  Lale  mai-saurin  kamu.

39.  Gingidin  kunama,  kowa  ya  taba,  shi  sha  kashi.

40.  Mai-hali,  mai-sabo.

41.  Ala  ke  da  rabo,  daa  mutun  ke  da  rabo,  daa  wani  bai  samu  ba.

42.  Ala  ya  glara  rlmi,  chidia  ta  bar  fushi

43.  Harara  bai  mari  ba.

44.  u  Idanun  da  ya  gani  sarki  ba  shi  tsoro  galadlma.

33.  Yesterday  You  (Allah)  portioned  out  (good  and  evil  fortune),  to-
day we  shall  be  given  (our  share).

34.  Live  patiently  in  the  world ;  (know  that)  those  who  hate  you
are  more  numerous  than  they  who  love  you.

35.  Because  of  these  few  people (shall I  desist)  ? they  cannot
harm  me.

36.  If  you  refuse  to  live  with  the  slanderer,  whom  are  you  going  to
live  with  ?

37.  You  who  condemn on hear-say  evidence alone,  your sins
increase.

38.  Henna  stains  quickly.

39.  The  snoozing  scorpion,  whoever  touches  it  (quickly)  gets  a  blow.

40.  He  who  is  naturally  gifted  in  anything  becomes  expert  in  it.

41.  Allah  has  the  portioning  out  (of  blessings),  if  it  was  man  who
had  the  distribution  of  them,  some  would  go  without.

42.  Allah  made  the  (great)  silk  cotton  tree  beautiful,  let  the  (little)
chidia  tree  cease  being  angry  (discontented).

43.  A  frown  is  not  a  slap,  (it  does  not  hurt).

44.  The  eyes  that  beheld  the  chief  do not  fear  the  galadima
(a  court  official).


#>•"»•  flfc'5


• M


•  •-'
C(-i]
iA/'«i-SJ


262  PROVERBS

45.  Mai-chiniki  chikin  dufu,  kai  dai  jimri  lalabe.

46.  Dainyan  kasko  wanda  ba  shi  kai  ma  bai'  daki.

47.  Murfu  uku  ba  shi  kasa  wa  yaro  rlga.

48.  Tuo  tulu  mai-wlar  kwashewa  da  15  mara.

49.  Munduwar  wla,  ana-so  zarewa,  ana  tsoro  jin  chiwo.

50.  Wanda  bai  sha  kashi  ba,  ba  shi  jin  bari.

51.  Mai-lamuni,  shi  ne  ma-bachi.

52.  Mai-dadin  kai  shi-na-fito  daga  Ala.

53.  Wanda  ya  bi  ki,  ya  bi  iska.

54.  Gangara  kogi,  mu  je  Zaria.

55.  Har  shi  mutu  ba  shi  kula  kaba.

45.  The  man  who  works  at  his  business  in  the  dark  must
always  be  feeling  about  with  his  hands.

46.  An  unburned  earthen  pot  is  not  one  to  bring  water  in
behind  the  house.

47.  The  three  cooking-stones  (i.e.  the  family)  do  not  fail
to  give  the  boy  a  coat.

48.  The  food  in  the  pot  with  the  narrow  neck  is  difficult  to
take  out  with  the  'mara'  (spoon)  (a  flat  bit  of  a  broken  calabash).

49.  The  ornamental  metal  rings  round  the  neck,  when  one
wants  to  take  them  off,  one  cannot,  for  fear  of  hurting  the
person.

50.  One  who  has  never  had  a  flogging  will  not  pay  any
attention  when  you  merely  tell  him  to  stop.

5 1 .  He  who  goes  surety  is  (often)  the  one  who  has  to  pay.

52.  The  truly  contented  man  comes  from  Allah.

53.  He  who  follows  you  (the  advice  given)  follows  the  wind.

54.  Here  is  the  river  bank,  let  us  slide  down  and  go  to  Zaria.

55.  Till  he  dies  he  will  not  twist  a  '  kaba '  palm -leaf  even.
(He  is  good  for  nothing.)


264  PROVERBS

56.  Idan  ba  ka  shan  fura,  bari  dama  ta.

57.  Magani  ya  kare  ana-16gudin  jan  jika.

58.  Dutsi  afar  maka  babu  dadi,  ka  far  ma  mutun  babu  dadi.

59.  Makwanchin  zaki  damisa  na  haushi.

60.  Suturan  Ala  ta  yi  gaba,  ama  mazambachi  ya  bi  ya  gaji.

61.  Mutun  ba  shi  sani  wada  laifi  dunia  shi  ke  ba,  ko  baba  da  babanai.

62.  Kuyenga  yi  magana,  che  ba  ki  kara  kai  taki  bakin  marmaro.

63.  Harara  da  ya  tsuna  ba  shi  tada  gofna  shi  na  bakin  mashaya.

64.  Kumurchi  yai  hadia,  bai  hadi  ba,  anmatse  baki,  ya  tudas.

65.  Ko  dawuri  na  fadi  daria  'ga  ta  yi  yawa,  barna  achiki.

66.  Wanda  bai  yi  tara  kashi  ba  ya  chiji  shakiraka,  kar  ka  ji  tara

majina  chiji  hanchinsa.


56.  If  you  are  not  going  to  drink  the  pap,  stop  stirring  it.

57.  When  the  medicine  (in  the  medicine  bag)  is  finished,  (the  doctor)
runs  away  for  fear  they  snatch  the  bag  from  him.

58.  You,  O  stone,  if  a  man  falls  on  you,  it  is  not  pleasant,  if  you  fall  on
a  man,  it  is  not  pleasant  (for  him).

59.  The  leopard  envies  the  lion's  resting-place.

60.  The  blessing  of  Allah  goes  before,  but  the  evildoer  follows  it  in
vain  till  he  is  weary.

6 1.  A  man  does  not  know  what  evil  there  is  in  the  world  be  he  (your)
father  or  father's  brother  (i.e.  old  and  full  of  experience).

62.  Slave  girl,  speak  ;  say  you  will  not  carry  the  sweepings  of  the  house
to  the  spring,  any  more. (Meaning  obscure.)

63.  A  scowling  look  will  not  cause  the  '  gofna  (?) '  to  rise  up  from  the
drinking-place.

64.  When  the  python  is  swallowing  (anything),  but  has  not  yet  finished
swallowing,  and  they  squeeze  its  mouth,  it  vomits  it  up.

65.  From  the  first  I  maintained  that  this  excessive  laughter  had  evil  as
its  cause.

66.  He  who  is  not  averse  to  eating  excrement,  and  therefore  bites  you
on  the  anus,  as  for  you,  do  not  be  squeamish  about  mucus,  but  bite  him  on
the  nose.


266  PROVERBS

67.  Ala  ba  Ka  da  keta,  gonar  maye  rua  Ka-ke-yi.

68.  Ai  Hausa  ba  dabo  ba  che.

69.  Baban  kai  ba  kaya  ba  ne.

70.  Namiji  tankwa  ne,  sai  antamna  akan-san  mai-yaji.

71.  Haba  yi  hankali,  ai  ba  dukan  tafasa  ta  ke  nuna  da  naman  kai  ba.

72.  Tuo  na  iyali,  nama  na  mai-gida.

73.  Kad  alura  ta  tono  galma.

74.  Sankara  bata  gorla.

75.  Gorla  mai-tankwa  sankara  ba  ta  chi  ba.

76.  Uwar  dla  da  dla  tata,  du'  ka  san  ba  ka  gama  su  ka  aure  ba.

77.  Shi  wanda  ke  jiran  kabaki  baba,  ka  san  ba  ya  tsaya  jira  ta  da  lomajba.


67.  Allah,  You  have  no  evil,  You  make  the  rain  to  fall  even  on  the
wizard's  garden.

68.  Oh,  no,  Hausa  is  not  a  conjuring  trick  (it  is  easy  to  learn).

69.  A  big  head  is  not  a  big  load  (a conceited man not  necessarily
a  wealthy  one).

70.  A  man  is  like  a  pepper,  till  you  have  chewed  it,  you  do  not  know
how  hot  it  is.

71.  Come,  be  patient,  not  all  the  boiling  will  cook  the  meat  on  a  head.

72.  The  'tuo '  (food  made  of  grain)  is  for  the  household,  the  meat  (a  greate
delicacy)  is  for  the  master  of  the  house.

73.  Do  not  let  a  needle  turn  up  a  hoe  (a  mountain  out  of  a  mole-hill).

74.  The  '  sankara '  insect  spoils  the  big  kola  nut.

75.  The  big  kola  nut,  sprinkled  with  ground  pepper,  the  'sankara'  ins
does  not  eat.

76.  The  girl's  mother,  and  her  daughter,  both  you  know  you  cannc
join  together  and  marry.

77.  He  who  is  waiting  for  a  huge  helping,  you  have  known  is  not  goinj
to  stand  and  wait  for  a  handful.


268  PROVERBS

78.  Aja  mu  akai  mu,  anba  uwar  makafo  kashi.

79.  Mazo  gaba  ya  yi  ko,  na  baya  sai  labari.

80.  Kututure  dabino  ba  kamar  kututure  kirya  ba.

81.  Farfaru  likafu  ko  afada,  sai  yan  sarki.

82.  Komi  chau  tafarnua,  ba  ta  yi  kamar  albasa  ba.

83.  Matanbayi  ba  shi  rasa  huja  ba,  sai  ya  ki  jin  abinda  ka  nuna  mai.

84.  Me  kare  goma  ke  yi  da  kura  ?

85.  Wanda  bai  bata  dare  ba,  bai  abata  da  rana  ba.

86.  Bakin  bunu  bata  baibaia.

87.  Rugurugu  baban  dafua.

78.  Let  them  pull  me,  let  them  take  me  there,  (that  is  what)  the
blind  man  (says)  when  (he  hears)  his  mother  is  being  beaten.

79.  The  one  in  front  has  reached  there,  the  one  behind  only  hears
about  it.

80.  The  date-tree  stump  is  not  like  the  stump  of  the  kirya-tree.

81.  Silver  stirrups  even  (when  you  see  them)  at  the  chief's  court-
yard, it  is  the  chief's  son  who  has  them. (There  are  plenty  of  rich
and  powerful  people  about,  but  none  of  them  have  the  privilege  of
having  silver  stirrups.)

82.  However  fine  the  garlic  may  be,  it  is  never  like  the  onion.

83.  The  questioner  does  not  inquire  without  good  cause  unless  he
refuses  to  hear  what  you  tell  him.

84.  What  can  ten  dogs  do  with  a  hyena  ?

85.  He  who  does  not  get  lost  by  night,  will  not  get  lost  by  day.

86.  Old  grass  spoils  a  roof.

87.  Thunder  is  a  mighty  (pot)  boiling.


270  PROVERBS

88.  Mu  kwankwanbishi  ne  ba  yada  gatari.

89.  Mai-shanyayen  gindi  ke  da  kwatana  tasa  bsbu  mai-kwache  masa.

90.  Mun  san  juna,  kai  mu  ya  yi  dai  dai.

91.  Mahasada  ku  bar  gajia,  yaro  ya  getere.

92.  Tabarman  kashi,  madajin  karfe,  machi  awazain  kato.

93.  Klfin  fadama  ba  shi  gasa  da  na  gulbi.

94.  Wane  ya  haye  tudu  ya  bar  na  gangare  sai  leke.

95.  Idan  kun  so  mun  yi  ko,  idan  ba  ku  so  ba  mun  yi  ko  sarautar  ala  ta  issa.

96.  Tudun  mahasada  abi  shi  da  sunan  Ala.

97.  Fada  ma  kia,  Ala  ya  fi  su.

98.  17  Wiar  nika  pashi,  idan  anpasa  wlar  nika  ta  kare.

88.  We  are  (like)  the  little  biting  ants  (on  trees)  that  (when  you  go  to
cut  a  tree  down  fall  on  you)  and  make  you  throw  away  the  axe.

89.  No one  can  pull  off  the  girdle  from  another,  even  if  he  has  no
buttocks. (One  has  a  right  to  what  is  one's  own.)

90.  We  know  one  another,  our  heads  have  made  one.

91.  Slanderer,  cease  tiring  yourself  out,  the  boy  has  crossed  (i.e.  I  am
beyond  your  reach  and  power  now).

92.  A  mat  made  of  bones,  edged  with  metal,  is  the  thing  to  eat  into  the
shoulders  of  even  a  huge  man.

93.  The  fish  from  the  well  does  not  make  itself  the  equal  of  that  from
the  river.

94.  So-and-so  has  climbed  the  hill  and  left  the  one  on  the  slope  peering
up  at  him.

95.  If  you  wished  us  to  prosper,  even  so  we  have  prospered,  if  you'dk
not  wish  it,  even  so  we  have  prospered,  the  kingdom  of  Allah  has  beer
sufficient  (for  us).

96.  The  hill  of  the  slanderer,  (when  you  take  that  way)  follow  it  wit
the  name  of  Allah  (on  your  lips).

97.  Say  to  them  who  hate  you,  Allah  is  more  powerful  than  they.

98.  The  hard  part  of  grinding  is  the  first  grinding,  when  that  is  don<
the  rest  is  easy.


r  »  -  !•  *  r

MCi/irr\a^1-


272  PROVERBS

99.  Daga  kan  fako  koma  kan  dabe.

100.  lyaka  kurji,  iyaka  ruansa.

101.  Kai  ba  shi  wuche  wla,  wia  kua  ba  shi  wuchi  kai.

102.  Idan  da  kamar  nika,  kwado  ya  fi  kusa  da  kasa

103.  Tsanin  tsani  ke  nan  kuwar  kuwa.

104.  Duba  shi,  shi-na-sumumu  kamar  tusa  achikin  gora.

105.  Idan  klfi  ya  fito  rua,  ya  che,  idanun  kada  guda  ne  wa  ke  musu  ?

106.  Wane  mai-karanglar  hanu  ne.

107.  Yau  wane  ya  fada  fako.

1 08.  Garwashin  wane  ya  hababaka.

109.  Wane  daga  tafo  na  tafo  shii  zama  zumunta  ?


99.  From  a  hard  bare  piece  of  ground,  to  come  to  a  hard  beaten
floor  (six  and  half  a  dozen).

100.  The  limit  of  a  sore  is  the  limit  to  which  the  matter  from  the  sore
spreads.

101.  The  head  does  not  go  on  and  leave  the  neck  behind,  nor  the
neck  the  head.

1 02.  If  it  was  a  matter  of  grinding  grain  (between  two  stones)  the
frog  should  be  the  best  at  it,  it  is  so  close  to  the  ground  (but  it  is  not).

103.  A  ladder  above  a  ladder,  a  friend's  friend.

104.  Look  at  him,  he is as sulky as  a '  tusa ' circulating  round
a  calabash.

105.  If  the  fish  comes  out  of  the  water,  and  says  the  eyes  of  the
crocodile  are  one  in  number,  who  is  going  to  argue  with  him  ?

106.  So-and-so  is  like  the 'karangiar' thorn  (he  clutches  hold
everything).

107.  To-day  So-and-so  has  fallen  on  a  hard  place. (Met  with  a  greed)
person.)

1 08.  So-and-so's  cinders  are  flaring  up. (He  is  in  a  rage.)

109.  So-and-so  has  come  (from  far  away),  I  have  come  (we  have  met)
does  that  make  us  relations  ?


«»*


»  »


1425.2


274  PROVERBS

1 10.  Mai-kaza  ba  shi  jimrim  as  !

in.  Ala  shi  sa  akwia  ta  sha  kunu  sanbiru.

112.  Ala  shi  tsarimu  da  mai-kai-komo.

113.  Da  wla  ni  kidan  ganga  da  lauje.

1 14.  Idan  ka  ji  ganga  ta-na-zaki,  ta  kusa  pashewa.

115.  Bako  ba  bawa  ba  sai  ya  so.

1 1 6.  Chin  bashi  da  dadi,  ranan  bia  da  wla.

117.  Abu  ne  mutun,  idan  ba  ka  da  abu,  babu  mai-so  ka.

1 1 8.  Inuan  bagarua,  ga  sainyi,  ga  kaya.

119.  Talaka  ba  shi  aboki.

1 20.  Me  gara  ka  yi  da  dutsi  sai  ta  kwana  gewaya  ?


no.  The  owner  of  a  fowl  is  sure  to  be  angry  with  any  one
who  says  shu !  (though  it  may  not  be  his  fowl  that  is  being
chased).

in.  Allah  causes  the  goat  to  drink  the '  sanbiru '  (poison)  pap.

112.  Allah  protect  us  from  the  tell-tale.

113.  It  is  difficult  to  beat  a  drum  with  a  sickle.

114.  If  you  hear  the  drum  sounds  sweet,  (you  can  be  sure)
it  is  near  to  the  time  it  will  split.

1 15.  A  stranger  is  not  a  slave,  unless  he  voluntarily  becomes
one.

1 1 6.  To  borrow  is  sweet  (easy),  the  day  of  payment  is  hard.

117.  Things  (wealth)  is  the  man  (so  it  seems) ;  if  you  have
nothing  no  one  loves  you.

1 1 8.  Shade  of  the  'bagarua'  tree,  behold  coolness,  behold
thorns.

1 19.  A  poor  man  has  no  friend.

1 20.  What  has  the  ant  to  do  with  a  stone  (it  cannot  eat  it)
(they)  it  can  only  lie  round  it  ?


276  PROVERBS

121.  Maganin  komi  Ala.

122.  Abu  duka  shi-na  ga  wa? Shi-na  ga  Ala.

123.  Ba  reshi  ga  Ala.

124.  18Dakin  kasa  da  kasa,  gobara  tai  kumya.

125.  Ba  aure  ke  da  wia  ba,  bidan  kurdi.

126.  Ai  sama  ba  ta  komo  kasa  harabadi,  tudu  ba  shi  komowa  gangare.

127.  Dutsi  ba  shi  zama  rua.

128.  Akwia  ba  ta  gasa  da  kura.

129.  Bawa  ba  shi  gasa  da  yaya.

130.  Bawan  19Maku  dai  dai  da  Maku.

131.  Idan  sarki  ya  che,  kowa  shi  yi  kuka  shi  chika  masaki
da  hawaye,  kai  mai-idanu  guda  dai,  fara  tun  dawuri.

121.  Allah  is  the  cure  for  all  (ills).

122.  To  whom  does  everything  belong?  to  Allah.

123.  There  is  no  not  getting  a  thing  if  you  seek  it  from  Allah.

124.  A  house  of  nothing  but  mud,  the  conflagration  (turns  away)  in
shame.

125.  It  is  not  the  act  of  marrying  that  is  difficult,  it  is  getting  the
money  (to  marry).

126.  No,  the  heavens  do  not  ever  come  down  to  the  earth,  the  hills  do
not  come  down  to  the  valleys.

127.  A  stone  does  not  become  water.

1 28.  A  goat  does  not  make  itself  the  equal  of  the  hyena.

129.  A  slave  does  not  make  himself  the  equal  of  a  free  man.

130.  The  slave  of  Maku  is  one  with  Maku.

131.  If  the  chief  commands  that every  one is to  weep and fill
a  calabash  with  tears,  do  you,  who  have  only  one  eye,  begin  from  the
very  first.


278  PROVERBS

132.  Rabon  kunkuru  ba  shi  chikin  wuta.

133.  Kurtun  zuma,  gama  da  madachi.

20Tamat.


132.  The  share  of  the  turtle  is  not  found  in  the  fire.

133.  A  pot  of  honey  mixed  with  bitter  herbs.

Finis.


o
*•


NOTES

PART I. HISTORICAL

No.  i

1  Bismi  alahi Arabic ;  a  common  opening. Used  in  manu-
scripts even  where  the  remainder  of  the  text  may  be  in  Hausa. Note  the
alif  da  tabi  ())  in  alahi  and  alrahmani,  &c.,  which  causes  these  words
to  be  pronounced  'laht,  'rahmani,  &c.

2  Karlowa. The  termination  of  the  verb  (or,  as  here,  the  verbal
noun)  in  o  signifies  motion  towards  or  advantage  to  the  subject. Tafi
means  'to  go',  but  tafo  means  'to  come'  to  the  speaker,  and  is
equivalent  to  zo.

3  Mai-chdu. Also  written  and  pronounced  mai-kyeau  •  better  thus.

4  Barebari. The  name  for  the  inhabitants  of  the  country  round
Lake  Chad,  the  Bornu  people. Their  taftoo  marks  are  easily  recog-
nizable. One,  or  sometimes  two,  lines  down  the  forehead  and  along
the  bridge  of  the  nose,  seven  longitudinal  cuts  on  the  right  cheek,  six
on  the  left. Three  on  the  upper  and  fore-arm,  three  on  each  side  of
the  body. Three  on  the  thighs,  legs,  and  instep. These  people  are
also  sometimes  known  as  Kukawa.

6  Arewawa.  Lit.  'the  northerners';  wa  termination  denoting
'people',  'nation'.  Hausawa,  Turdwa,  Tonawa.

6  Barno. The  district  of  Bornu,  bordering  on  Lake  Chad.

7  Dokin  nan. Here  we  have  the  first  example  in  this  book  of  the
Hausa  definite  article. Canon  Robinson  in his  Hausa  Grammar,
chap,  i,  p.  9  (new  edition),  states,  '  There  is  no  article  in  Hausa.'

One  has  here  an  instance  of  the  value  of  a  thorough  acquaintance
with  Hausa  in  the  written  characters.  In  colloquial  Hausa  it  would
be  impossible,  or  at  least  very  difficult,  to  detect  the  presence  of  the
final  (^)  nun,  or  (J)  ra,  which  is  undoubtedly  the  equivalent  of  the
English  definite  article.  A  double  wasali  or  double  rufua  sometimes
takes  the  place  of  the  nun.


282  NOTES

The  definite  article  in  Hausa  is  rendered  by  affixing  n  or  r  to  the
noun,  according  to  the  gender,  masculine  or  feminine.

It  is  often  replaced  by  the  demonstrative  adjective  (here  curiously
enough  it  is  found  coupled  with  it).

Sometimes  again  it  will  be  omitted  in  Hausa  where  one  would
expect  to  find  it  in  English.  This  may  be  due  to  carelessness  in
writing  or  to  a  certain  laxness  in  the  use  of  it  in  Hausa.  The  writer
believes  the  honour  of  first  finding  the  long-lost  definite  article  belongs
to  Professor  Mischlich,  who  in  the  course  of  a  conversation  with  the
writer  in  1908  stated  he  had  come  across  it.  Professor  Mischlich,
however,  did  not  inform  him  what  form  it  took  in  Hausa,  and  it  was
not  till  some  months  later  that  a  careful  perusal  of  Hausa  manuscripts
revealed  it  to  the  present  writer.

8  Aka-boye. Passive  voice  past  tense  (ka). Note  the  object  of  the
verb,  shi. The  pronoun  is  in  the  objective  case  governed  by  the
verb. Here,  which  is  rarely  the  case  in  Hausa,  the  verb  is  a  true  verb
and  governs  a  pronoun  in  the  accusative,  instead  of  being  qualified
by  a  possessive  adjective,  or  in  other  words  not  being  a  verb  at  all,
but  at  best  a  verbal  noun. So  much  of  a  noun  often  that  it  has
a  gender. This  is  seen  in  the  passive  voice  in  the  present  tense.
Here  the  verb  seems  to  lose  any  true  verbal  form  it  ever  possessed,
and  becomes  a  noun,  the  na  alone  retaining  the  function  of  a  verb.
E.  g.  ana-boye-n-sa,  lit.  '  There  is  (ana)  a  hiding  (bqye)  of  (na  or  «)
him  (so).' Here  boye  is  a  masculine  noun  as  is  seen  by  the  na.

9  Sarkin. Definite article, 'the chief. Vide note above on
dokin  nan.

10  Dinga,  'to  do  anything  repeatedly.' Also  expressed  by  kan.
The  latter  perhaps  expresses  the  idea  more. 'To  be  accustomed'
to  do  a  thing.

11  Tasa. The  so-called  Hausa  '  possessive  pronoun '  always  appears
to  present  some  difficulty  to  students. This  difficulty  will  disappear
if  one  realizes  that  there  is  no  exact  equivalent  in  Hausa  of  the
English  possessive  pronoun.

In  Hausa  the  possessive  pronoun  is  simply  the  personal  pronoun
(inflected  for  gender  as  in  English)  and  a  connective  particle  (one  can
hardly  term  it  a  preposition  as  it  has  an  inflexion  for  gender)  which
can  be  readily  translated  by  the  English  'of.

Thus  in  English  where  we  say  'mine',  'thine',  'his',  in  Hausa
they  say  '  of  me ',  '  of  thou ',  '  of  him '.


PART  I. HISTORICAL  283

The  only  thing  to  remember  is  that  the  particle  corresponding  to
'of  in  English  must  in  Hausa  agree  with  its  antecedent  noun  in
gender.  Once  remember  this  and  the  rest  is  easy.

In  English  we  say  'his  mare'.  In  Hausa  they  say  'the  mare
of  him'.

Now  '  mare ',  or  rather  the  word  for  mare,  is  feminine  in  Hausa,
therefore  the  connective  particle  'of  must  be  feminine  too.  Hence
we  have

godla,  fern,  noun;

/a,  '  of,  fern,  agreeing  with  godia]

sa,  '  him ',  masc.  pronoun  as  in  English.

Note  the  ist  person  sing,  has  the  peculiar  form  wa,  and  the  form
sa  is  generally  used  instead  of  shz.

12  Ranan,  'one  day'. Note  the  vowel  lengths  in  the  following
words  :  oi j ,  rand,  '  the  sun ' ;

\J>K,  raand,  '  the  day '  as  opposed  to  '  the  night '.

13  Baye. Used  of  horses  only ;  of  persons,  tdra,  chi,  &c. ;  of  cattle,
goats,  barbara.

14  Sarkt. One  would  expect  the  definite  article,  sarkin,  omitted
in  the  Hausa.

16  Rigayi. To  do  anything  previously,  first,  before  another  person.
18  Aka-gani. The verb governs kowa, the object, which here
precedes  the  verb,  in  the  accusative. Vide  note  above  on  *  aka-bqye.
"  Ranan. Vide  note  above  on  12  ranan.

18  Akdwo. Vide  note  on  *karbowa  above.

19  Su-ka-wdtsu. Middle  voice.

20  Tafo,  '  come '. Vide  note  above  on  2  karbawa.

21  Mutun  blic. Note  this  idiom  is  as  correct  if  not  better  Hausa
than  mutdne  blu.

22  Wafse, '  were  scattered '. Cf. 19  wdtsu  above.

23  Akdmo,  '  seize  and  bring  back  to'. These  two  ideas  are  expressed
in  one  verb,  the  first  by  the  verb  itself,  the  second  by  the  final  o.
Vide  note  above  on  2  karbowa.

24  Tafia  iasa. For  tasa  vide  note  above  on  u  tasa. Tafia  here
a  feminine  verbal  noun. Yi  oryin  is  probably  understood.

25  Ahawa.  This  should  be  hau,  having  a  rufua  lisa,  not  a  wasalibisa.

26  Daura. An  Emirate  about  60  miles  north  of  Kano  and  40  east
of  Katsina.


284  NOTES

27  Garin,  '  the  town '. Definite  article  seen  in  the  final  «.

28  Ta-na-sonsa. So  here  a  noun. Vide  note  above  on  8  aka-boye.
'nsa  is  for  nasa,  the  former  Katsina,  the  latter  Kano  Hausa.

29  Ydye,  '  to  wean '.

30  Mafarin  fitar. Two  verbal  nouns,  the  first  masc.,  the  second
fern.,  as  seen  in  the  connective  particles  n  and  r.

31  Bar  no,  Bornu. Vide  note  above  on  6J3arno.

32  Fasara. Arabic,  'interpretation',  'meaning'.

33  Maabochin  —  Mai-shi.

34  Rinjdya  =  Iko.

35  Abubakari-Sidiku. This  name  serves  to  show  more  or  less  exactly
when  this  history  of  the  conversion  of  Hausaland  to  Mohammedanism
purports  to  begin,  for  it  is  undoubtedly  that  of  the  first  of  the  four
Califs  or  Halifs. Abubakari-Sidiku  ('the  father  of  the  maiden',  as
the  Arabic  word  means)  was  the  father  otAishatu,  one  of  Mohammed's
wives. His  successors,  also  mentioned  in  this  history,  were  Omar,
Osman,  and  Alt,  here  called  Umaru,  Usmanu,  and  Aliu.

How  long  previous  to  this  the  supposed  flight  of  the  son  of  the
king  of  Bornu,  and  the  founding  of  the  Hausa  race  took  place,  it
is  of  course  impossible  to  say.  In  this  history  we  have  undoubtedly
historical  facts  interwoven  with  mythology,  as  is  common  in  most
histories  or  traditions  of  barbaric  and  savage  peoples;  nor  are  the
historical  facts  of  less  value,  or  to  be  rejected,  because  the  historian
has  sought  to  fill  up  the  gaps  he  finds  in  authentic  records,  by
resorting  to  his  own  imagination  or  to  myths  and  traditions  common
among  his  people.

36  Wanchananka. Wanchan,  wanchana,  and  'nka  =  naka,  lit.  '  that
person  of  yours  I  have  told  you  about '. Plural  wanchananku.

37  Mazdwan tawaye. Mazdwa  =  maabocht  =  mai-shi. Tawaye,
'  twins ',  a  way  of  saying  '  the  father  of  the  twins  '. The  writer  does  not
know  to  whom  this  refers.

38  Umaru  Ibunuhutdbi. Omar,  the  second  of  the  four  Califs. Vide
note  above  on  ™  Abubakari-Sidiku.

39  Sahabai. Arabic,  '  friends '.

40  Kasausawa  =  Mashi.

41  Garkua. Generic name for all shields. Kunkele,  'a  round
shield',  kwangwara,  'oval',  the  latter  introduced  from  Asben  into
Hausaland.

42  Fular  sarauia. A  red  fez ;  a  turban  is  bound  round  it.


PART I. HISTORICAL  285

43  Kasanashe. Sanashe,  '  to  instruct '. A'a,  meaning  and  use  here
obscure. One  would  expect  the  personal  pronoun  ya  before  the  verb.
Ka  may  stand  for  kan  or  be  an  unusual  use  of  the  ka  of  the  past
tense,  plural. Probably  though  an  error  in  the  script.

44  Sdbunta, '  to  establish '  or  'confirm ',  here,  his  right  to  the  kingship.

45  Maiukan. Maluka  —  iydka.

40  Shigifu. Singular  shigifa,  the  flat  roof  of  a  house.

47  Muldnen. Perhaps  for  mutun.

48  Garin. Note  the  definite  article.

49  Kali,  north-east  of  Kano.

50  Mainamugabadi. Maina  =  sarki  in  the  language  of  Bornu.

61  Alfahari. Arabic,  '  boasting '.

62  Alkunia. A  sobriquet.

53  Suna. Note  the  short  u. Suna  is  a  different  word.

54  Fa  che. Translate  by,  '  only  that  ...  not '.

55  Kachia. Of  a  woman,  better  maskasche. For  a  description  of
these  operations  vide  nos.  37,  38,  and  pp.  258-63.

56  Gila. Also  zamba. To  kill  a  man  from  behind. Punishable
by  death  in  the  Mohammedan  law.

57  Yankake. Past  part,  passive,  fromyan&a.

68  Sashe,  'cast  out',  perhaps  from  sa. Cf.fadade  from  f adz,  '  to  fall '.

59  Sanania. As  above,  yankake. The  participle  is  here  feminine
to  agree  with  kushewa. Masculine  form  is  sanane.

60  Mai-kalgo. A  kalgo-tree  (Bauhinia  reticulata)  grows on  the
grave,  which  is  thus  known  as  '  the  Kalgo  man's  grave '.

This  tree  has  aromatic  leaves.  These  leaves,  when  they  first  open,
are  semicircular  in  shape,  but  later  on  one  side  of  the  leaf  folds  back,
when  the  whole  leaf  becomes  a  circle.  A  decoction  is  made  from  the
leaves  and  used  as  a  cough  medicine.

61  Gwoboron  du/si,  '  the  single  rock '. A  hill  near  Kano.

62  Usmanu  dan  Fodio. The  Fulani  conqueror  of  Hausaland.

63  Sasan. Sasan  =  wajen.

64  Gobir. A  district  in  Hausaland. The  chief  town  in  it  was
Alkalawa,  from  which  Shefu  drove  out  the  king  of  Gobir.

65  Kinkumu. Used  of  lifting  a  very  heavy  load  with  great  difficulty.

66  Dawama. Dawama  =  tabata,  Arabic.

67  Bbka. A  wizard,  a  quack  doctor. The  word  is  used  by  a
mdlam  to  describe  any  person,  not  a  recognized  mdlam,  who  practises
medicine.


286  NOTES

88  Kidayuwa. The  termination  tava  signifies  '  able  to  be  done '.
Some  other  examples  are  iyuwa,fonaua,  geteruwa.

69  Marddi. A  town  on  the  borders  of  Hausaland  and  the  French
Soudan.

70  Bida. Arabic. Certain  prohibited  conduct,  e.g.  drinking,  card-
playing.

71  Bdwa-jan-gwarzd. The  opposite  of  rago. A  brave  man,  warrior.

72  Takaita. To stop doing any work before you have quite
finished  it.


PART  II. STORIES ABOUT  PEOPLE

No.  i

1  Bismi  alahi.... Note  the  alif  da  tabi  ())  in  alahi,  alrahmani,
alrahimi,  alahu,  causing  these  words  to  be  pronounced  'lahi,  'rahmani,
'rahtmt,  'lahu.

2  Bdbi. Bali,  Arabic,  lit.  '  gateway '. Here  metaphorically,  '  the
entrance ',  '  the  commencement  of  the  story '.

3  Gdtanan,  gdtanan,  ta  je,  ta  komo. '  A  story,  a  story. Let  it  go,
let  it  come.' Gdtanan  is  used  for  '  story ',  as  tdtsuma,  but  is  really
not  a  noun  but  a  sentence. Gd  ta  nan,  i.  e.  '  See  it  there ',  ta  being
feminine  to  agree  probably  with  the  noun  tdsturiiar. A  story-teller
always  commences  thus,  his  hearers  replying  Ta  je,  ta  komo,  '  Let
it  (the  story)  go,  let  it  come  (to  us)';  the  o  form,  motion  to  the
speaker. Vide  note  on  2  karbowa  (Part  I).

The  form  tajet  ta  komo  is  sometimes  varied  to  taje  ta  dawo.

4  Maatansa. Mistake  for  maatarsa. Note  the  following  words
differently  spelt,  differently  pronounced,  and  with  different  meanings :

1.  Maata,  liU«,  'a  wife',  sing.

2.  Mdta,  5Li,  'wives',  plur.

3.  Mdtd,  \3\Jo,  'women',  plur.  of  mache.

6  Bai  zaka  ba. Zaka  here  equal  to  zo. Not  to  be  confused  with
zaa  ka,  future,  '  above '.


PART  II. STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE 287

8  Maatar,  ' the  wife'.  Note  the  definite  article.  Vide  note  on
7  ddkin  nan  (Part  I.  Historical).

7  Galddiman. Note  the  wasali  lisa  btu,  giving  the  nasal  ending  in
place  of  a  ((j)  nun.

8  Baubawa. Used  of  a foreigner  who  does  not  speak  Hausa
properly ;  possibly  an  onomatopoetic  word.

9  Galddiman. Vide  note  above  on  galddiman. Here  the  nasal
ending  is  the  definite  article.

10  Gado. Note  the  two  words  differing  only  in  the  length  of  the
vowel  sounds,  but  with  totally  different  meanings :

gado,  »&9,  'a  bed'.
gado,  olj,  'inheritance'.

11  Galadiman. The  galadima. Definite  article.

12  Zamne. Present  participle. The  author  of  Hausa  Notes  thinks
there  is  no  present  participle  in  Hausa  (vide  p.  56,  chap,  xvi,  Hausa
Notes),  but  we  have  here  an  example  of  it. Zamne  is  from  the  verb
zamna. The  past  participle  is,  masc.  zamnane,  fem.  zamnam'a,  plur.
zamnanu. Cf.  *  tsugune  (No.  21,  Part  II).

13  Yd  zo. Perfect  (or  aorist)  tense.

Previous  writers  on  the  Hausa  language  appear  either  to  have
overlooked  the  fact  that  the  Hausa  verb  has  a  distinct  form  for  the
perfect  and  past  tenses  in  the  singular  as  it  has  for  these  tenses  in  the
plural,  or  to  have  come  to  the  conclusion  that  there  is  no  inflexion
of  the  pronoun  for  the  first  three  persons  of  the  singular  in  the  past  tense
(Hausa  Notes,  p.  38,  chap.  x).

The  present  writer  is  convinced  that  distinct  forms  do  exist  for  the
singular  as  for  the  plural  in  the  past  and  aorist  tenses.  This  distinction
is  seen  in  the  length  of  the  vowels.

The  full  forms  for  the  aorist  and  past  tenses  are  as  follows :


288


NOTES


Perfect  or  Aorist.


Past.


In  English  writing.


In  Hausa
characters.


In  English  writing.


In  Hausa
characters.


Singular,
ist  person.  Nd

2nd „ Ka  (fem.  kin)
3rd „ Yd  (fem.  /a)

Plural,
ist  person.  Mun


Na

Ka  (fem.  ki)
Ya  (fem.  to}

Mu  ka
Kuka
Suka


It  is  seen  that  in  the  plural  the  well-known  forms  mun,  kun,  sun ;
mu  ka,  ku  ka,  su  ka,  for  the  perfect  and  past  tenses  are  found,  but
that  in  the  singular  number  the  only  difference  is  in  the  length  of
the  vowel  a,  which  is  short  in  all  the  persons  of  the  past  tense,  but
long  in  the  corresponding  persons  of  the  perfect.

That  such  (to  the  English  idea)  apparent  slight  variation  should
be  sufficient  to  alter  the  tense  of  a  verb  is  not  surprising  when  one
conies  to  understand  the  great  influence  of  lengths  of  vowels  in  Hausa,
for  the  entire  meaning  of  a  word  can  be  altered  by  the  omission  or
addition  of  an  accent  on  a  vowel.

The  present  tense  is  too  well  known  to  require  special  remark.  It
is  worth  while  to  note  perhaps  that  in  the  present  tense  (ina,  ka
na,  &c.  and  ni  ke,  ka  ke,  &c.)  the  pronouns  are  real  pronouns  and  do
not  suffer  any  inflexion.

In  the  use  of  the  past  and  aorist  tenses  one  should  note  that,  except
in  certain  well-defined  instances,  the  use  of  the  past  for  the  aorist  and
vice  versa  seems  permissible,  or  at  least  they  would  often  appear  to
be  interchangeable.  In  cases  where  one  finds  a  past  where  an  aorist


PART  II.  STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE 289

would  have  been  expected  in  written  Hausa,  the  fault  probably  lies
in  the  writing.

Some  examples  are  now  given  to  show  how  these  tenses  (the  past
and  aorist)  are  used.  In  the  instances  the  plural  forms  which  are  in
these  tenses  impossible  of  confusion  are  given,  and  then  the  corre-
sponding tense  in  the  singular.

Kun  gama  aikin  ? Have  you  (plur.)  finished  the  work  ?

Kd  gama  aikin  ? Have  you  (sing.)  finished  the  work  ?

Mun  gama. We  have  finished.

Nd  gama. I  have  finished.

A.  Tun ku na samari  na  yi  muku  alheri,  ama ku  ka  yi  mini
mund  futshi.

Here  both  the  verbs  na  yi  and  ku  kayi  are  past  tense.
If  made  perfect  the  sentence  would  read

B.  Tun  ku  na  samari  ndyi  .  .  .  kunyi  .  .  .

The  meaning  is  only  slightly  different ;  the  point  to  notice  is  that
na  yi  in  A  is  not  the  same  tense  as  nd  yi  in  B.

Da  mu  ka  tafi  ,  .  . When  we  went  . .  .  (past  tense).

Da  na  tafi  .  .  . When  I  went  ...  „ „

Mun  diba  rua,  mun  kdwo  chidwa,  mun  zo  wurinka  domin  .  .  .

Nd  diba  rua,  nd  kdwo  chidwa,  nd  zo  wurinka  domin  .  .  .

Here  the  verbs  are  aorist  tense.

We  have  seen  the  two  distinct  verbal  pronominal  forms,  the  long  d
for  the  aorist,  the  short  a  for  the  past.  There  is  still  a  third  vowel
sound  for  the  future  singular.  In  this  the  a  is  not  so  much  a  long  a,
as  most  writers  seem  to  have  rendered  it,  as  a  double  a  sound — two
distinct  as — and  it  is  thus  the  sound  has  been  written  in  this  work.
This  is  more  akin  to  the  Hausa  than  its  transliteration  by  d.  In  the
plural  the  writer  has  repeatedly  found  this  reduplication  of  the  last
vowel  (in  the  plural  a  u  not  an  a),  and  has  not  met  with  the  mua,
kua,  &c.,  which  are  generally  given.  This  tense  therefore  stands :


290


NOTES


Future  Tense.


In  English  writing.


Singular,
ist  person.  Naa

2nd „ Kaa  (fern,  kit  or  kya)
3rd „ Yaa*  (fem.  faa)

Plural.
ist  person.  Muu


In  Hausa  characters.


The  other  form  of  the  future  the  writer  also  prefers  to  transliterate
zaa  ni,  zaa  ka,  &c.  instead  of  the  usual  za  m,  za  ka,  &c.

14  Ke  wacheche  anan. Imitating  the  bad  grammar  the  slave  spoke.
16  Ki. As  above ;  for  ka.

16  Shi-na-kunche. Kunche,  pronounce  kwanche.

17  Gaza. Gaza  as  kdsa,  '  to  take  no  notice '.

18  Mdtasa. Should  be  maata  tasa.

19  Keya  dulin  .  .  .  kin  lena  Duma. The  bad  grammar  is  to  imitate
the  slave's  speech  as  above.

20  Maida  magana. '  To  state  a  case '  (in  Court).

21  Kungurus  kan  kusu. Kungurus,  an  onomatopoetic  word  sup-
posed to  represent  the  sound  of  an  object  falling  on  the  ground  (here
a  rat's  head). All  Hausa  tales  end  thus. The  meaning  seems  to
be  that  the  story  is  ended,  the  rat's  head  is  off,  that  is  the  end  of  him.
Sometimes  the  phrase  is  enlarged  on  by  the  story-teller  saying,  '  The
rat  will  not  eat  my  head,  rather  shall  I  eat  his  head,  the  son  of  a
worthless  fellow.'

*  Sometimes  shii.


PART  II. STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE 291

No.  2

1  Gdtanan,  gdtanan. Vide  note  on  ^  gdtanan  (No.  i,  Part  II).

2  Machen,  'the  female'. Note  the  definite  article;  vide  note  on
7  ddkin  nan  (Part  I). Matche  appears  to  be  treated  as  masculine.

3  Baban  wansu. Wa  =  elder  brother ; kane  =  younger  brother.
The  fern,  of  these  being ya  and  kanwa  respectively.

4  Ta  batche. Ta,  aorist  tense. Vide  note  on  13_yd  zo  (No.  i,  Part  II).

5  Unguan. Ungua, a small hamlet composed of  only one or
two  huts.

6  Shiije. Future  tense. Oratio  recta  would  be  naaje. Vide  note
on  ™yd  zo  (No.  i,  Part  II).

7  Daure. Present  participle. More  correct  daurania,  the  perfect
participle.

8  Mddugun, Note  the  definite  article.

9  Bigire. Wuri.

10  Sa  .  .  .  zane. Sa  zane,  a  euphemistic  phrase  for  consummating
a  marriage.

11  Uba  ya  komd. Fa,  and  following  verbs  aorist  tense. Vide  note
on  lzya  zo  (No.  i,  Part  II).

Komd  here  equal  to  zama,  '  to  become ',  '  turn  out  to  be '.

12  Ta-na-kunche. Pronounce  kwanche.

13  Jdrtriya. Feminine. Masculine,  jarlri. .

14  Uban,  '  the  father '. Note  the  definite  article.

15  Bakd. Here  fern.,  generally  masc.

16  Yan  uba. The  children  of  one  father  by  different  mothers ;  half-
brothers  and  sisters.

17  Kungurus  kan  kusu. Vide  note  on  21  kungurus  (No.  i,  Part  II).

No.  3

1  Gdtanan. Vide  note  on  *  gdtanan  (No.  i,  Part  II).

2  Ya  sa  .  .  .  ya  gam'. Note  aorist  tense. Vide  note  on  ™yd  zo
(No.  i,  Part  II).

3  Kaa  gam'. Vide  future  tense  note  on  ls_yd  zo  (No.  i,  Part  II).

4  Sat  yard  ya  .  .  .  ta  ...  ta  .  .  .  sat  ya  halbe  ta. Note  all  the  verbs
past  tense. Vide  note  on  13j/a  zo  (No.  i,  Part  II).

5  Tsara. Perhaps  for  tsakar.

6  Kungurus. Vide  note  on  21  kungurus  (No.  i,  Part  II).

T  2


292  NOTES

No.  4

1  Goya. An  alliance  generally  for  some  work  such  as  hoeing,
gathering  grass  for  roofing,  &c.

Derivation  probably  gaya,  '  to  tell ',  '  to  inform '. Goya  wane  da
wane,  '  tell  so  and  so  and  so  and  so  that.'

2  Gdtanan. Vide  note  on  8  gdtanan  (No.  i,  Part  II).

3  Shi-ka-aure. Perhaps  for  shi  ke  aure.

*  Maald,  'a  wife'. Vide  note  on  *maalansa  (No.  i,  Part  II).

5  Kunya,  '  a  furrow '.

6  Gumkt. Pronounce  gwamki. Here  evidently  from  the  context
'  a  hartebeest ',  not  gumki,  '  a  fetish '.

7  Tanpasua. As  alura,  '  a  needle '.

8  Kungurus. Vide  note  on  zlkungurus  (No.  i,  Part  II).


No.  5

1  Shasharbo. An onomatopoetic word, the sound of  a stick
beating  an  object,  sharb  !  sharb  /

2  Mdtansa. Vide  note  on  *  maatansa  (No.  i,  Part  II).

3  Sai  ta  dauki  . .  .  la  je,  ta  .  .  .  ta. Note  all  these  verbs  past  tense.
Vide  note  on  ™yd  zo  (No.  i,  Part  II).

*  Su-ka-chi. Note  the  past  tense  as  continued  from  the  preceding
sentence.

6  Ta  je,  ta  .  .  .  ta  .  .  . As  above,  vide  note  on  3  sat  ta  dauki.

6  Taiga. To  stir  with  the  murchia,  of  a  fluid ;  of  a  thicker  sub-
stance, tuka.

7  Farutanka. Sing,  farehe, of  persons only. Of  animals,  cat
tribe,  akai/a,  kumba ;  of  cattle,  horses,  &c.,  kofato.

8  Zaa  ni. Vide  note  on  future  tense  under  "_>•«  zo  (No.  i ,  Part  II).

9  Walki. A  skin  loin-cloth.

10  Nd  tsoma,  'I  have  put  in'. Here  na  homa  would  be  quite
wrong  and  would  never  be  used  by  a  Hausa. Vide  note  on  l*yd  zo
(No.  i,  Part  II).

11  Kai  ka  ji  da  abinfadi. Ka  should  be  future. This  sentence
is  peculiar  and  difficult  to  translate  in  English. It  seems  to  mean
<  you  will  regret  this ',  '  I  shall  pay  you  back  for  this '.

12  Kyale. Spelt  Me,  but  pronounced  kyale.


PART  II. STORIES  ABOUT PEOPLE 293

13  Mara. A  broken  bit  of  calabash  used  as  a  spoon  to  serve  out
food  from  a  pot. Roughly  shaped  round.

14  Sannu. Note  this  is  one  of  the  few  words  in  Hausa  spelt  with
a  double  consonant. The  effect  is  to  make  each  syllable  pronounced
distinctly  san-nu.

15  In  gwiya. Better  in  gwaiya. In  answer  to  the  salutation  sannu
(Sokoto  Hausa).

16  Maatar  nan. Cf.  7  dokin  nan  (No.  i,  Part  I).

17  Shibshibto. Shibto  =  debo,  '  to  serve ',  '  to  help  food '.

18  Tuka. Vide  note  above  on  6  taiga.

19  Ta  dauko,  ta  .  .  .  ta  .  .  .  ta  .  .  .,  su-ka-koshi. Note  the  past  tense
throughout ;  ta  aorist  would  be  quite  wrong  here. Vide  note  I9_yd  zo
(No.  i,  Part  II).

20  Maatar. Note  the  definite  article.

21  Rufewa. A  storehouse  for  corn,  &c. Also  rumbu  and  runbu.

22  Matan. Plural. Vide  note  on  *  maatansa  (No.  i,  Part  II).
28  Abuya. Feminine  of  aboki. Abuya  —  kawa.

24  No.  tuba,  'I  have  repented'. Note  long  a. Aorist  tense  na
tuba  would  be  quite  incorrect  here.

25  Taje...ta...ta...ta  che. Note  the  past  tense.

26  Ka  gam',  na  sdmu. Aorist  tense.

27  Kunche. Pronounce  kwanche.

28  Kunta. Pronounce  kwanta.

29  Kungurus. Vide  note  on  21  kungurus  (No.  i,  Part  II).

No.  6

1  Gatanan. Vide  note  on  *gdtanan  (No.  i,  Part  II).

2  Naa  mulu.  Vide  note  on  future  tense  under  I5jyd  zo  (No.  i,  Part  II).

3  Ka  mutu. Aorist  tense. Vide  note  on  ls_yd  zo  (No.  i,  Part  II).

4  Kiira,  '  the  hyena ',  feminine. Jfure,  masculine. The  personifica-
tion in  Hausa  folk-lore  of  all  that  is  greedy  and  treacherous. Quite
a  different  character  from  that  ascribed  to  the  gizd  gizo  for  instance,
whose  cunning  and  plausibility  are  rather  admired  than  otherwise.
Chin  kura,  '  to  eat  as  a  hyena ',  that  is,  to  charge  exorbitant  prices  or
interest.

5  Chinto. Also  tsintua.

6  Sdnia. Note  spelt  (in  error  ?)  chania  throughout.

7  Kafahu. Plural. Sing.  kafa. Note  kafo,  kafoni,  '  horn '.


294  NOTES

8  Watanda. Yi  watanda,  '  to  buy  food  on  credit ',  more  especially
of  meat. When  an  ox  is  killed  the  meat  is  divided  up,  and  people  are
allowed  to  buy  on  credit.

9  Kabarin. Arabic. Hausa  is  kushewa.

10  Kafa. Kofa.

11  Dawo. Also  Fura  (Kano),  made  with  maize  or  guinea-corn.

12  Asha, Note  also  exclamation  ashe  !  '  indeed ! '  a  different  word.

13  Iddnu  gudd. Cf.  expression  mutun  btu. Here  perhaps  the  idea
is  '  eyes,  one  in  number '.

14  Naman. Note  the  definite  article. Vide  note  on  7 dokin  nan
(No.  i,  Part  I).

15  Ka  tafia(r}ka. Cf.  u  tafia  tasa  (No.  i,  Part  I).

16  Su-na-duka. Note  length  of  vowel,  duka,  '  to  beat ' ;  duka,  '  all ',
a  different  word.

17  Sdmo,  '  find  and  bring  back '. Both  these  ideas  expressed  in  the
one  Hausa  word. Vide  note  on  *karbozva  (No.  i,  Part  I).

18  Ya  sdmu  .  ,  .  ya  kdwo. Su-ka  .  .  . Note  the  past  tense  in  the
verb  throughout. Vide  note  on  ™yd  zo  (No.  i,  Part  II).

19  Ndman. Definite  article.

20  Galabaita,  '  to  become  insensible '.

21  Shi-na-kira. Note  kira,  '  to  call ' ;  kira,  '  to  forge '.

22  Danfara,  '  to  plaster ',  '  to  stick  on '.

23  Kyale. Spelt  keif.

24  Rdgada,  '  to  work  up  and  down '.

25  Gizo  gizo,  '  the  spider ',  also  called  lau  tau. The  spider  is  the
hero  of  many  Hausa  animal  stories. The  same  is  the  case  among
the  Ashanti. In  fact  the  Ashanti  name  for  a  story,  even  when  the
spider  does  not  appear  in  the  narrative  at  all,  is  anansesem,  \.  e.  ananse
asem,  lit.  'words  about  the  spider'. The  Hausas  call  the  praying
mantis  the  spider's  wife  (koki).

The  character  given  to  the  spider  in  West  African  fables  is  not
unlike  that  ascribed  to  the  rabbit  (kalulu)  and  the  tortoise  (kamba)
in  the  stories  of  the  Bantu  Mang'anja  in  British  Central  Africa
(Nyassaland).  Vide  also  note  above  on  4  kura.

26  Kungurus. Vide  note  on  21  kungurus  (No.  i,  Part  II).

No.  7

1  Gdtanan. Vide  note  on  *gdtanan  (No.  i,  Part  II).

2  Mdtansa. Vide  note  on  4  maatansa  (No.  i,  Part  II).


PART  II.  STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE 295

3  Nd  bar. Aorist. Vide  note  on  ™ya  zo  (No.  i,  Part  II).

4  Kunche. Pronounce  kwanche.

5  Klshia  uwa  tata. Lit.  'the  hater  of  her  mother',  or  'the  one
who  was  jealous  of  her  mother'. This  phrase  has  been  translated
freely  throughout  by  '  stepmother '  to  avoid  the  clumsy  Hausa  idiom.
When  a  man  has  more  than  one  wife,  then  each  is  called  the  kishiar
of  the  other,  this  even  should  they  be  the  best  of  friends.

6  Ta  tashi . . .  ta  ...  ta  ...  la  che. Note  the  past  tense  throughout.
Vide  note  on  13yd  zo  (No.  i ,  Part  II).

7  Uma. Arabic. Hausa  uwa.

8  Daka. The  process  of  pounding  (in  a  wooden  mortar  with  pestle,
just  such  as  is  used  on  the  East  Coast)  is  as  follows :

The  first  pounding  is  called  susuka  (surfe).  The  corn  is  taken  out
and  winnowed  (bakdche)  and  the  husks  thereby  removed.  The  result
of  this  process  is  put  in  the  mortar  and  pounded  again  (daka\  then
winnowed  again  (tankade).  The  grain  is  again  put  in  the  mortar  and
pounded  a  little,  water  being  sprinkled.  This  third  pounding  is  called
ribidi.  Next  the  grain  is  washed  and  rolled  into  balls  (dunkula).
The  balls  are  put  in  boiling  water,  boiled,  taken  out  again,  pounded
(kirbi),  rolled  into  balls  again  (dunkula),  and  are  ready  for  eating.
Chase  is  to  pound  rice.

9  Nasa. As  jefa.

10  Tsinbire. To  get  burned  by  sticking  to  the  pot.

11  Tsdme. To  lift  out  with  a  spoon.

12  Sdsanwa. As  girki,  to  set  a  pot  on  the  three  stones  (murfu)
which  form  the  fire-place. '  To  take  off  the  fire ',  shide.

13  Jarabt. Arabic. Hausa  duba.

14  Naa  tafi. Vide  note  on  future  tense  under  ™ya  zo  (No.  i,  Part  II).

15  Angarmu,  '  a  big  horse '. A  pony  is  kuru.

16  Kyale. Pronounced  thus ;  spelt  kele.

17  Kashedi. An  exclamation,  '  Have  a  care ! '

18  Nasa. Better  tasa. Vide  note  ntasa  (No.  i,  Part  I).

19  Kungurus. Vide  note  21  kungurus  (No.  i,  Part  II).

No.  8

1  Maya,  '  a  witch  '. Masc.  maye ;  plur.  mqyu.

-  Gatanan. Vide  note  on  s gatanan  (No.  i,  Part  II).

3  Ta  je. Past  tense. Vide  note  on  uyd  zo  (No.  i,  Part  II).


296  NOTES

4 Wakatin. Arabic. Hausa  lokachl.

6  Ya  tdshi,  ya  .  .  .  ya  . .  .  ya  ... Note  past  tense  throughout.
Yd  would  here  be  quite  incorrect.

6  Kunche. Pronounce  kwanche.

7  Mazan. Note  the  definite  article. Vide  note  on  7  dokin  nan
(No.  i,  Part  I).

8  Mdtan. Vide  note  on  *maa/ansa  (No.  i,  Part  II),  and  for  the
definite  article  vide  note  on  7  dokin  nan  (No.  i,  Part  I).

s  Ddkin. Definite  article.

10  Yankaki, Perfect  participle. Error  foryankaku.

11  Zaa  ta. For  future  tense  vide  note  on  lzjyd  so  (No.  i,  Part  II).

12  Kyale. Spelt  keif.

13  Magaria. The  zizyphus  lotus.

14  Naa. Vide  note  on  future  tense  under  I3yd  zo  (No.  i,  Part  II).

15  Maraki. Better  here  maraka  (fern.).

16  Muu  rama. Vide  note  on  the  future  tense  under  ™yd  zo  (No.  i,
Part  II).

17  Nd  kdwo. Aorist  tense. Vide  note  on  ™yd  zo  (No.  i,  Part  II).

18  Urna. Arabic. Hausa  uwa.

19  La  ila'. The  complete  sentence  is  La  ilaha  ila  alahu,  'there
is  no  god  but  Allah '.

20  Hannu(n)ki. Note the double consonant «. Vide note  on
usannu  (No.  5,  Part  II).

21  Shu  gani. Vide  note  on  future  tense  under ™yd  zo  (No.  i.
Part  II).

22  Sasdre. Note  the  reduplication,  not  uncommon  in  Hausa. Cf.
the  reduplication  in  Greek  verb.

23  Ya  tashi,  su-ka-gudu. Note  the  past  tense. Vide  note  on  18j/c  zo
(No.  i,  Part  II).

24  Ya  che  yd  ydda. Here  we have  a  good  example  of  the  past
tense  ya,  with  the  aorist  yd. In  oratio  recta  it  would  stand  nd  ydda.
One  could  use  the  past  tense  in  both  verbs  here  in  Hausa,  as  in
English.

26  Dauko. The  idea  of  '  lift '  and  '  return  with '  expressed  by  the
o  termination. Vide  note  on  ^karbowa  (No.  i,  Part  I).

26  Ya  che,  yaa  koma. Here  again  we  have  an  example  side  by  side
of  the  two  tenses,  the  past  ya,  the  future  yaa ;  cf.  note  above  ya  che,

yd  ydda. For  both  vide  note  on  ™ya  zo  (No.  i,  Part  II).

27  Tunka. Pronounce  iankwa,  as  berkdno.


PART  II.  STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE 297

28  Kyaure, 'a  wooden door'. A  grass  door,  tufania; of  iron,
gambo,  in  wall  of  a  town.

29  Kuble,  '  to  close  a  door  *.

30  Ya  che  yd  ba  shi  .  .  .  ya  che  yd  baiwa. Vide  note above  on
z*ya  che  yd  ydda.

31  Tsari,  'a  protection',  'something  to  ward  off'.

32  Kungurus, Vide  note  on  21  kungurus  (No.  i,  Part  II).


No.  9

1  Mdlami. Also  mdlam ;  plur.  mdlamai. There  would  seem  to  be
a  slight  distinction  in  the  use  of  the  words  mdlami  and  mdlam,  the
former  being  used  when  speaking  about  the  person  or  in  his  absence,
the  latter  in  addressing  him  or  using  his  name,  e.  g.  Mdlam  Manzo,
not  mdlami  Manzo. Derivation  perhaps  Arabic,  mualami.

2  Kura, Vide  note  on  4  kura  (No.  6,  Part  II).

3  Godiar, Note  the  definite  article. Vide  note  on  7  dokin  nan
(No.  i,  Part  I).

4  Zaa  ka. Vide  note  on  I3jyd  zo  (No.  i,  Part  II).

5  Asha. Vide  note  on  ™asha  (No.  6,  Part  II).

6  Nd  gani. Vide  note  on  lsyd  zo  (No.  i,  Part  II).

7  Ta  kdma,  la  ...  ta  ...  ta  .  .  .  gida. Note  the  past  tense. Vide
note  on  13_y<z  zo  (No.  i,  Part  II).

8  Karen  buki.  Also  dtld,  'the  jackal'.  The  personification  of  cunning.

9  .ZVa  taso. Note  aorist  tense. Vide  note  on  ™yd  zo  (No.  i,  Part  II).

10  Karfl. Note  the  two  different  words  kar/l, 'strength',  and
karfe,  '  metal '.

11  Kyale. Written  kele.

12  Naa. Future  tense. Vide  note  on  future  under  ls_ya  zo  (No.  i,
Part  II).

13  Mamdya. Fern,  to  agree  with  sdnia.

14  Nd  zo. As  above,  9  nd  taso.

15  La  ila'. Vide  note  on  19  la  tla'  (No.  8,  Part  II).

16  Ndman, The  definite  article. Vide  note  on  ' 'dokin  nan  (No.  i,
Part  I).

17  Ndji. Aorist  naji  would  be  quite  incorrect  here. Vide  note  on
I3j>d  zo  (No.  i,  Part  II).

18  Tafianla.  Better  tafiarta.  Vide  note  on  *  tafia  tasa  (No.  i,  Part  I).

19  Kungurus. Vide  note  on  21  kungurus  (No.  i,  Part  II).


298  NOTES

No.  10

1  Garnakaki, As  gwarzo,  '  a  very  powerful  man ',  '  a  warrior '.

2  Karfl. Vide  note  on  lo  karfi  (No.  9,  Part  II).

8  Yafida. Ya  past  tense. Vide  note  on  ™yd  zo  (No.  i,  Part  II).

4  Maatansa. Better  maatarsa. Vide  note  on  ^maatansa  (No.  i,
Part  II).

5  Ta-na-so(n)sa. Vide  note  on  8  aka-boye  (No.  i,  Part  I).

6  Aka-kdwo  ski. Vide  note  on  8 aka-boye  (No.  i,  Part  I).

7  Naa. Future  tense. Vide  note  on  13jyd  zo  (No.  i,  Part  II).

8  Maatar  nan. Note  the  definite  article. Vide  note  on  9  do  kin  nan
(No.  i,  Part  I).

9  Tanadi. Arabic. Hausa  zanba.

10  Kungurus. Vide  note  on  21  kungurus  (No.  i,  Part  II).

No.  ii

1  Yayi .  .  .ya  .  .  .ya  .  .  . Note  the  past  tense  throughout. Vide
note  on  is_ya  zo  (No.  i,  Part  II).

2  Kori. Pronounce  kwori.

3  Kungurus. Vide  note  on  21  kungurus  (No.  i,  Part  II).

No.  12

1  Gdtanan. Vide  note  on  3 gdtanan  (No.  i,  Part  II).

2  Yafilo. Past  tense. Vide  note  on  ™ya  zo  (No.  i,  Part  II).

3  Maatarsa. Vide  note  on  *maatansa  (No.  i,  Part  II).

4  Kaa. Future  tense. Vide  note  under  ls_yd  zo  (No.  i,  Part  II).

5  Yd  kdwo. Aorist  tense. Vide  13_yd  zo  (No.  i,  Part  II).

6  Maatar. Note  the definite  article. Vide  note  on  7  do 'kin  nan
(No.  i,  Part  I).

7  Ka. Aorist. Vide  note  above,  *ya  kdwo.

8  Wasaki. A  skin  gathered  up  all  round  the  edge,  forming  a  bag
Also  guga,  but  latter  rather  of  a  calabash.

9  Ydron, Note  the  definite  article.

10  Zannuansu.  Note  double  consonant  n.  Vide  note  14  sannii  (No.  5,
Part  II). Found  also  spelt  with  one  n,  but  better  two.

11  Rigdye. Vide  note  on  ls  rigdyi  (No.  i,  Part  I).

12  Ya  che  yaa  je. Vide  note  on  the  past  and  future  tenses  under
13 yd  zo  (No.  i,  Part  II).


PART  II. STORIES ABOUT  PEOPLE 299

13  Rufewa. Vide  note  on  n  ru/ewa  (No.  5,  Part  II).

14  Yd. Aorist  tense.

15  Ina-jt(n}-warin  mutun. Cf.  '  Jack  and  the  Bean-stalk '  of  our
own  folk-lore.

16  Daa. Note  the  following  words, daa  .  .  .  daa,  in  the  protasis
and  apodosis  of  a  conditional  sentence. Da  (short  a)  when  and  with
da,  ( a  son '.

17  Sasabe. The  first  clearing  of  the  '  bush '  for  a  garden.

18  Fuda. Of  ploughing  with  a  galma. Noma  used  when  a  hauya
is  employed.

19  Takuna. Error  for  tukuna.

20  Kaso. From  kashe. Here  the  idea  contained  in  the  verb  with
the  o  termination  is  '  kill  and  bring  back '. Vide  note  on  2  karbowa
(No.  i,  Part  I).

21  Hannunsa. Vide  note  on  14  sannu  (No.  5,  Part  II).

22  Dinga  ragdwa. Ragdwa,  derivation  rege,  '  to  diminish '. Trans-
late '  make  light  of  it ',  '  do  not  make  a  fuss  of  it '.

23  Karfl. Vide  note  on  10  karfl  (No.  9,  Part  II).

24  Kd  gam'. Aorist  tense. Ka  would  not  be  correct  here.

25  Kungurus. Vide  note  on  21  kungurus  (No.  i,  Part  II).

No.  13

1  Gdtanan. Vide  note  on  s gdtanan  (No.  i,  Part  II).

2  Ya  mutu. Past  tense. Vide  note  on  lzyd  zo  (No.  i,  Part  II).

3  Too.  mutu.  Future  tense.  Vide  note  under  I3j>a  zo  (No.  i ,  Part  II).

4  Klshia. Vide  note  on  5kishia  (No.  7,  Part  II).

5  Chiutar  nan. Note  the  definite  article.  Vide  note  on  ^  do  kin  nan
(No.  i,  Part  I).

6  Yd  karbi. Aorist  tense. Vide  note  on  ™yd  zo  (No.  i,  Part  II).

7  Nd  bar. Vide  note  above,  6yd  karbi.

8  Matsdfa. Cf.  safe  =  turn.

9  Kun  ka  gani. Should  be  kun  gam'.

10  Karfe. Vide  note  on  ^  karfl  (No.  9,  Part  II).

11  Kungurus. Vide  note  on  21  kungurus  (No.  i,  Part  II).

No.  14

1  Gdtanan. Vide  note  on  3 gdlanan  (No.  i,  Part  II).

2  Ya  tdshi,ya  koma.  Past  tense.  Vide  nqte  on  ™yd  zo  (No.  i, Part  II).


300


NOTES


3  Maatansa. Mistake  for  maatarsa.  Vide  note  on  *  maatansa  (No.  i  ,
Part  II).

4  Gartn.  Note  the  definite  article.  Vide  note  on  7  dokin  nan  (No.  i,
Part  I).

5  Naa  ba. Future  tense. Vide  note  on  ™yd  zo  (No.  i,  Part  II).

6  Yaa  tafi. As  above,  6  naa  ba.

7  Tafiasa. For  tafia(r)sa. Vide  note  on  M  /a/fo  /aja  (No.  I,  Part  I).

8  Tatara. Reduplication  of  tara.

9  Kungurus. Vide  note  on  n  kungurus  (No.  i,  Part  II).


No.  15

1  .Fa  /a/. Past  tense. Vide  note  on  13_y<z  zo  (No.  i,  Part  II).

2  Budurin. Note  the  definite  article. Vide  note  on  '  dokin  nan
(No.  i,  Part  I).

3  Yd  far  a. Aorist. Vide  note  on  ™_yd  zo  (No.  i,  Part  II).

4  Kd  chika. As  above.

5  Kungurus. Vide  note  on  ^kungurus  (No.  i,  Part  II).


No.  16


1  Gdtanan.

2  jPJz  haifu.


Vide  note  on  3 gdtanan  (No.  i,  Part  II).

Past  tense. Vide  note  on  I3_ya  zo  (No.  i,  Part  II).

3  Ya  bi  ta  kdfar, Cf.  idiom,  shiga  ta  kofa  nan. The  ta  perhaps
is  explained  by  the  word  hainya  being  understood  before  it.

4  Guda. Note  the  length  of  the  vowel. Guda  means  the  dot
below a letter, and number. Guda  is  a  sound  made  on  joyful
occasions. It  is  made  by  holding  the  nose  and  making  a  shrill  cry,
rul  ru!  rul  ru! Cf.  the  ntulungwani  of  the  Mang'anja  of  Nyassaland,
who  make  this  same  sound,  but  by  rubbing  the  lips  with  the  finger.

5  Kungurus. Vide  note  on  21  kungurus  (No.  i,  Part  II).


No.  17

1  Daudawa. Seeds  of  the  dorawa  tree.

2  Gabu. Onion  leaves  dried  and  pounded  (?).

3  Daudawar  batso. Pounded  seeds  of  \h&yakua  tree.

4  Gdtanan. Vide  note  on  3gdianan  (No.  i,  Part  II).

6  Zaa  su.  Vide  note  on  future  tense  under  13j/a  zo  (No.  i,  Part  II).
6  Ta  bi. Past  tense. Vide  note  on  lsyd  zo  (No.  i,  Part  II).


PART  II. STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE 301

7  Make, As  labe,  '  to  slink ',  '  sidle  past '.

8  Kyale. Spelt  keif.

9  Ndji. . .  nd  fi.  Aorist  tense.  Vide  note  on  ^yd  zo  (No.  i,  Part  II).

10  Kudai. Better  kadai,  singular.

11  KiRshi. Note  the  long  vowel. Kilishi  is  dried  meat.

12  Koran  fa. Vide  note  on  8  aka-boye  (No.  i ,  Part  I)

13  Naa  dinga.  Vide  note  on  future  tense  under  ™yd  zo  (No.  i ,  Part  II).

14  Kuyanginta. Kuyanga,  '  a  girl  slave ',  masc.  magudanchi.

15  Kungurus. Vide  note  on  21  kungurus  (No.  i,  Part  II).


No.  18

1  Musa. Hausa  for  '  Moses '.

2  Gdtanan. Vide  note  on  zgatanan  (No.  i,  Part  II).

3  Fa  haifi. Past  tense. Vide  note  on  13_yd  zo  (No.  i,  Part  II).

4  Wane  wai  ka  zo. A  Hausa  will  never  call  her  husband  by  his
name  nor  talk  about  him  by  his  name. He  is  usually  spoken  to  and
of  as  mai-gida.

5  Naayi. Future  tense. Vide  note  under  13_yii  zo  (No.  i,  Part  II).

6  Kyale. Spelt  kele.

7  Ruan. Note  the  definite  article. Vide  note  on  7  do fan  nan  (No.  i,
Part  I).

8  Gaia. As  kela,  ( spiteful '.

9  Ruan. As  above,  definite  article,  ruan.

10  Nd  ki. Aorist  tense. Vide  note  on  l*yd  zo  (No.  i,  Part  II).

11  Yaa. Vide  note  on  future  tense  under  I3jyd  zo  (No.  i,  Part  II).

12  Kungurus. Vide  note  on  21  kungurus  (No.  i,  Part  II).


No.  19

1  Ya  ydda. Past  tense. Vide  note  under  I3yd  zo  (No.  i,  Part  II).

2  Gasa,  '  to  roast '. Note  the  word  gdsa  !  an  interjection  of  wonder.

3  Nd  yas. Aorist  tense. Vide  note  on  Kyd  zo  (No.  i,  Part  II).

4  Tafia(f]sa. Vide  note  on  ™  tafia  lasa  (No.  i,  Part  I).

5  Uwar  gidansa. When  a  man  has  more  than  one  wife  the  first
one  he  married  is  called  uwar  gida,  '  mother  of  the  house '.

6  Yd  zo. Vide  note  above,  3  nd  yas. Here  ya  zo  would  be  quite
incorrect.


302  NOTES

7  Guda. Vide  note  on  *  guda  (No.  16,  Part  II).

8  Su-ka-sasdre. Note  reduplication  of  the  verb.

9  Kuyangi. Vide  note  on  14  kuyanginla  (No.  17,  Part  II).

10  Naa. Vide  note  on  future  tense  under  lsj>d  zo  (No.  i,  Part  II).

11  Au  .  .  .  au. Unusual. Ko  .  .  .  ko  generally  used,  '  either  .  .  .  or '.

12  Kungurus. Vide  note  on  21  kungurus  (No.  i,  Part  II).


No.  20

1  Ta  haifi. Past  tense. Vide  note  on  Kyd  zo  (No.  i,  Part  II).

2  Yd  chainye. Aorist  tense. Vide  note  on  lzyd  zo  (No.  i,  Part  II).

3  Yd  komo. As  above,  zyd  chainye.

4  Zaa  ka  chi.  Vide  note  on  future  tense  under  ™yd  zo  (No.  i,Part  II).

5  Kungurus. Vide  note  on  21  kungurus  (No.  i,  Part  II).


No.  21

1  Lddi. Perhaps  for  Idhadi. So  called  because  bom  on  a  Sunday.

2  Mdtansa. Vide  note  on  *maaiansa  (No.  i,  Part  II).

3  Td  yi. Aorist  tense. Vide  note  on  13_yd  zo  (No.  i,  Part  II).

4  Bubuge. Note  the  reduplication  of  the  verb.

5  Kyale. Spelt  kele.

6  Tsugune.  Present  participle.  Vide  note  on  ™zamne(No.  i,  Part  II).

7  Mdlam. Vide  note  on  mdlami  (No.  9,  Part  II).

8  Mdlam. Better  mdlami.

9  Nd  gaia. Aorist  tense. Vide  note  onj/a  zo  (No.  i,  Part  II).

10  Ashd. Note  different  from  the  word  ashe,  '  indeed ',  '  truly '.

11  Ashe. Vide  above,  10  ashd.

12  Ina-sonsa. Vide  note  on  8 aka-bdye  (No.  i,  Part  I).

13  Yaa. Vide  note  on  future  tense  under  ™yd  zo  (No.  i,  Part  II).

14  Ana-guda. Vide  note  on  *guda  (No.  16,  Part  II).

15  Maatar. Note  the  definite  article. Vide  note  on  '  dokin  nan
(No.  i,  Part  I).

16  Kungurus. Vide  note  on  2l  kungurus  (No.  i,  Part  II).


3°3


7


PART  III. ANIMAL STORIES

No. 22

1  Gatanan. Vide  note  on  3 gdtanan  (No.  i,  Part  II).

2  Ya  kashe. Past  tense. Vide  note  on  ™yd  zo  (No.  i,  Part  II).

3  Ta-na-ganin. Note  verbal  noun. Vide  note  on  * aka-boye  (No.  i,
Part  I).

4  Kyale. Pronounce  thus. Spelt  kele.

6  Tafia  tata. Vide  note  on  24  tafia  tasa  (No.  i,  Part  I).
6  Kwdshi. As  soma,fdra,  '  to  begin '.

Kura. Vide  note  on  4  kura  (No.  6,  Part  II).

Kungurus. Vide  note  on  21  kungurus  (No.  i,  Part  II).


No.  23

1  .Fa  j//'. Vide  note  on  lsjyd  zo  (No.  i,  Part  II).

2  Toshe  =  Rufe.

3  Kura. Vide  note  on  *  £«ra  (No.  6,  Part  II).

4  Fdjimata  .  .  .  ^izt'a  gat. Imitating  the  hyena's  supposed  bad
accent  or  lisp. Fatimata  was  the  daughter  of  Mohammed.

5  Nd  san  ki. Aorist  tense. Vide  note  on  ™yd  zo  (No.  i,  Part  II).

6  Ydmin  bdki,  '  a  lisp '.

7  Aldgidigua. Also  kwatana,  'waist  beads'. Of  a  man,  guru.

8  Su-ke-shan. Verbal  noun,  ska. Vide  note  on  8  aka-bqye  (No.  i,
Part  I).

9  Zaa  zu. Vide  note  on  future  tense  under  ™yd  zo  (No.  i,  Part  II).

10  Yd  kafe. Aorist  tense. Vide  note  on  18j/<z  zo  (No.  i,  Part  II).

11  Daa  .  .  .  daa. Vide  note  on  16  daa  .  .  .  daa  (No.  1 2,  Part  II).

12  Bulbule. A  pretty  example  of  onomatopoeia.

13  Ribibi. As  wasoso,  '  to  scramble '.

14  Ta  kwdsa. A  curious  use  of  fa,  the  idiom,  if  one  is  not  known
to  the  writer. Perhaps  an  error  in  the  Hausa  script.

15  Goya. Vide  note  on  1  gayd  (No.  4,  Part  II).

16  Kungurus. Vide  note  on  21  kungurus  (No.  i,  Part  II).


3°4


NOTES


No.  24

1  Gdtanan. Vide  note  on  3 gdtanan  (No.  I,  Part  II).

2  Maatar. Vide  note  on  ^maatansa  (No.  i,  Part  II).

3  Kura. Vide  note  on  4  kura  (No.  6,  Part  II).

4  Ta  tafi. Past  tense. Vide  note  on  ™yd  zo  (No.  i ,  Part  II).

6  Na  je  na  tar  as. Aorist  tense. Vide  note  on  I3yd  zo (No.  i,
Part  II).

6  Kdshe. Note  long  d. Kashe  is  a  different  word.

7  Nd  je  .  .  .  naa  kayar. Aorist  and  future  tense. Vide  note  on
lsj>d  zo  (No.  i,  Part  II).

8  Adaa  =  Adua.

9  Sabko. Note  the  idea  of  ' to  me ',  'for  me '  in  the  o  termination.
Vide  note  on  zkarbowa  (No.  i,  Part  I).

10  Guddno,  '  ran  and  came  here '. Vide  above,  9  sabko.

11  Maatar. Note  the  definite  article. Vide  note  on  7  dbkin  nan
(No.  i,  Part  I).

12  Kungurus. Vide  note  on  21  kungurus  (No.  i,  Part  II).


No.  25

1  Gdtanan. Vide  note  on  3 gdtanan  (No.  i,  Part  II).

2  Ya  je  .  .  .  ya  .  .  .  ya  name. Past  tense. Vide  note  on  uyd  zo
(No.  i,  Part  II).

8  Kyale. Spelt  kele.

4  Kura. Vide  note  on  4  kura  (No.  6,  Part  II).

5  Maatar sa. Vide  note  on  4  maatansa  (No.  i,  Part  II).

6  Gidan. Vide  note  on  ^  dokin  nan  (No.  i,  Part  I).

7  Kd  sani .  .  .  idan  kd  je. Aorist  tense.
(No.  i,  Part  II).

8  Mu  giydra  wuri. Here  we  have  a  record  of  an  ancient  heathen
custom  among  the  Hausas  before  their  conversion  to  Mohammedanism.
A  similar  custom  is  found  among  the  Mang'anja  of  Nyassaland.

9  Naa  .  .  .  kaa. Future  tense. Vide  note  on  future  tense  under
™yd  zo  (No.  i,  Part  II).

10  Kungurus. Vide  note  on  21  kungurus  (No.  i,  Part  II).


Vide  note  on  lzyd  zo


PART  III. ANIMAL  STORIES  305


No.  26

1  Alkume. Here also called  bitzuzu, 'the dung  beetle'. An
onomatopoetic  word.

2  Gdtanan. Vide  note  on  * gdtanan  (No.  i,  Part  II).

3  Ya  yi. Past  tense. Vide  note  on  13j/a  zo  (No.  i,  Part  II).

4  Goya. Vide  note  on  *gaya  (No.  4,  Part  II).

5  Muzuru,  '  a  torn  cat '. Fem.  kyanwa. The  torn  cat  is  a  regular
bad  character  according  to  the  Hausas. Cats  are  nevertheless  rather
held  in  awe  by  the  Hausas. Cf.  the  status  of  cats  in  ancient  Egypt.

6  Kura. Vide  note  on  4  kura  (No.  6,  Part  II).

7  Fa  ji. Aorist  tense. Vide  note  on  I3yd  zo  (No.  i,  Part  II).

8  Kareyd  kashe  . . .  kura  td. This  story  contains  excellent  examples
of  the  past  and  aorist  tenses  all  through ;  note  the  correctness  with
which  each  is  used  in  turn. Vide  note  on  these  tenses  under  I3_yd  zo
(No.  i,  Part  II).

'  Sannu. Vide  note  on  "  sannu  (No.  5,  Part  II).

10  Hata. Arabic  =  har.

11  Alkali. Arabic  =  kadan.

12  Karfi. Vide  note  on  ™  Karfi  (No.  9,  Part  II).

13  Kungurus. Vide  note  on  21  kungurus  (No.  i,  Part  II).


No.  27

1  Gizo. Vide  note  on  2S  gizo  (No.  6,  Part  II).

2  Sun. Su,  '  to  look  for  anything  in  the  water '. Cf.  the  Fante
root  su,  '  water ',  but  this  is  probably  only  a  coincidence.

3  Fa  kdma. Past  tense. Vide  note  on  13j/a  zo  (No.  i,  Part  II).

4  Banda,  '  to  roast  over  a  fire '.

5  Makwarwa. Also  fakara.

6  Naayi. Vide  note  on  the  future  tense  under  13j>a  z<?  (No.  i,Part  II).

7  Kyale. Spelt  kele.

8  Banke. As  buga.

9  Karfi. Vide  note  on  ™karfi  (No.  9,  Part  II).

0  Churakai.  Churaki,  an  iron  skewer  about  12  in.  long,  the  point
slightly  bent,  used^to  burn  the  skins  of  horses,  donkeys,  and  cattle,  to
cure  them  of  colds.

1«B  2  TJ


306  NOTES

11  Chuwai. Supposed  to  imitate  the  burning  flesh.

12  Maalar. Vide  note  on  *  maatansa  (No.  i ,  Part  II).

13  Asha. Not  to  be  confused  with  ashe,  '  indeed ',  '  truly ',  which  is
a  different  word.

14  Ya  fi. Aorist  tense. Vide  note  on  lsj>d  zo  (No.  i,  Part  II).

15  Nd  ji. As  above,  uydfi.

16  Zdkin. Note  the  definite  article. Vide  note  on  7  dokin  nan  (No.  i ,
Part  I).

17  Kaa  gam'. Vide  note  on  the  future  tense  under  ™yd  zo  (No.  i,
Part  II).

18  Kaa  ga. As  above, 17  kaa  gani.

19  Kungurus. Vide  note  on  21  kungurus  (No.  i,  Part  II).


.No.  28

1  Gizo. Vide  note  on  Kgizo  (No.  6,  Part  II).

2  Yaji . . .  (fa  su-ka-komo. Past  tense. Vide  note  on  I3jrd  zo  (No.  i,
Part  II).

3  Zaa  shi.  Vide  note  on  future  tense  under  ™yd  zo  (No.  i,  Part  II).

4  Su-na-chin. Vide  note  on  8  aka-boye  (No.  i ,  Part  I). Here  chi
is  a  verbal  noun.

5  Daa. Vide  note  on  16  daa  (No.  12,  Part  II). Here  the  daa  in
conditional  sentence  is  omitted. Or  the  daa  here  may  be  for  dd,  '  of
old ',  '  long  ago '.

6  Shdmu. For  samu. Imitating  the  spider's  supposed  lisp.

7  Ydyi, '  straws ',  '  refuse '. Possible  derivation,  yas>  '  to  cast  out '.

8  Td  yi. Aorist  tense. Vide  note  on  ™yd  zo  (No.  i,  Part  II).

9  Yd  yi. As  8  td  yi  above.

10  Aydhu  akubai  =  Aluhu  akubar. Cf.  esMmu  above.

11  Naa  zo.  Vide  note  on  the  future  tense  under  ™yd  zo  (No.  i,  Part  II).

12  Tsugune.  Present  participle.  Vide  note  on  ™zamne  (No.  i,  Part  II).

13  La  iya\ For  la  ila'. Vide  note  on  19  la  ild  (No.  8,  Part  II).

14  Ku  bai  =  Ku  ban'. Imitating  the  spider.

16  Nd  gani . .  .,  naa  tafi. Nd,  aorist,  naa,  future. Vide  note  on
13 yd  zo  (No.  i,  Part  II).

16  Kungurus. Vide  note  on  21  kungurus  (No.  i,  Part  II).


PART  III. ANIMAL  STORIES  307

No.  29

1  Gizo. Vide  note  on  n  gizo  (No.  6,  Part  II).

2  Maata. Vide  note  on  *  maatansa  (No.  i,  Part  II).

3  Wake,  'bean'.

4  Ta  haifi)  ta  ...  ta  .  .  . Past  tense. Vide  note  on  ™yd  zo  (No.  i,
Part  II).

8  Dan. Note  the  definite  article. Vide  note  on  7  dokin  nan  (No.  i ,
Part  I).

6  Tanbo. As  kango.

7  Sdniar  nan. Cf.  13  dokin  nan  (No.  i ,  Part  I).

8  Na  komo. Aorist  tense. Vide  note  on  I3ya  zo  (No.  i,  Part  II).

9  Naa  yi. Future  tense. Vide  note  on  l*yd  zo  (No.  i,  Part  II).

10  Shauki. Sauki.

"  Yayafa. Rarafa.

12  Dadi. Note  </«</*'  is  a  different  word,  means  'sweet'.

13  Banbaddwa. Followers  of  a  chief  who  sing  his  praises.

14  Tunloja. Tujewa,  '  to  pluck '.

18  Tafia  tasa. Vide  note  on  u  tafia  tasa  (No.  i,  Part  I).
18  Kungurus. Vide  note  on  21  kungurus  (No.  i,  Part  II).

No.  30

1  Gizo. Vide  note  on  w  gizo  (No.  6,  Part  II).

2  Ya  tafi  . .  .ya  che. Past  tense.  Vide  note  on  13_ya  zo  (No.  i,  Part  II).

3  Shaki  yuwa,  ddyina. Sarkin  rua,  donna,  to  imitate  the  supposed
lisp  of  the  spider.

4  Ta  yi. Aorist  tense. Vide  note  on  ™yd  zo  (No.  i,  Part  II).

5  Taa  ba. Future  tense. Vide  note  on  the  future  tense  under  ™ya
zo  (No.  i,  Part  II).

6  Maatarsa. Vide  note  on  4  maatansa  (No.  i,  Part  II).

7  Gizama  na  koki. Kdki,  '  the  praying  mantis ',  said  by  the  Hausas
to  be  the  wife  of  the  spider.

8  Yanju  .  .  .  shaki .  .  . Imitating  the  spider.

9  Maatansa. Better  maatarsa.

10  Bajimsd. Bajamsu  on  the  Volta  river,  north  of  Kratchi.

11  Dokin. Note  the  definite  article. Vide  note  on 7  dokin  nan  (No.  i,
Part  I).

12  Ta  ba. Aorist. Vide  note  on  ™ya  zo  (No.  i,  Part  II).
18  No.  jawd,  nd  kawd. As  above,  12  id  ba.

14  Kungurus. Vide  note  on  21 kungurus  (No.  i,  Part  II).

U  2


3o8  NOTES

PART  IV. CUSTOMS  AND  ARTS

No.  31

1  Babi.  Arabic,  'gate',  'gateway'. Hence  'entrance',  'beginning'.

2  Alaada. Arabic. Also  ada,  'custom',  'religious  observance'.

3  Suna. Note  long  vowel. Suna  is  a  different  word.

4  Nana. Nanga.

5  Ka  gam'. Aorist  tense. Vide  note  on  "  yd  zo  (No.  i,  Part  II).

6  Gu. Wuri.

7  Kyale. Spelt  kele.

8  Sadu. Gamu.

9  Uban. Note  the  definite  article. Vide  note  on  7  doktn  nan  (No.  i,
Part  I).

10  Kurdialif.  Equivalent  to  6d.  English  currency ;  500  cowries  =  3<f.

11  Kworia  guda. A  standard  of  currency,  100  kola  nuts  value  IQS.

12  Ma/an. Vide  note  on  4maatansa  (No.  i,  Part  II).

13  Marmarin. Plur.  marmaruna,  'sexual  desire'. Used  of  the
female  for  the  male.

14  Shata,  '  slashed  white  cloth '.

18  Ldlata. Lit. '  worthless ',  i.  e.  it  is  something  thrown  in  as  it  were.

16  Lale. A  decoction of  the leaves of  the Lawsonia  inermis.
Henna,  used  by  the  Hausas  to  stain  the  nails ;  in  the  case  of  a  bride
the  whole  feet  are  stained  up  to  the  ankles,  the  hands  to  the  wrists.
. 17  Jawabi. Arabic  =  magana.

18  Daro. As  tasa.

19  Ta  zuba. A  drop  of  the  henna  is  put  on  the  girl,  and  as  soon  as
this  is  done  the  person  who  has  done  so  sounds  the  guda. Vide  note
*  guda  (No.  1 6,  Part  II).

20  Abuyar  amaria. Vide  note  on  Z3aZ>uya(No.  5,  Part  II). This
custom  of  having  a  pretence  bride  is  probably  a  survival,  and  was
intended  to  distract  the  attentions  of  any  evil  spirits  from  the  true  bride.

21  Zaa. Su  understood.

22  Guda. Vide  note  on  'guda  (No.  16,  Part  II).

23  Ta  je. Aorist  tense. Vide  note  on  I3_ya  zo  (No.  i,  Part  II).

24  Dakin  mijinta. Each  wife  has  a  hut  of  her  own,  where  she
sleeps. When  the  husband  wants  a  particular  wife  he  does  not  go
to  her  hut  but  she  comes  to  his  sleeping-place,  called  turaka.

25  Kari. As  kyeauta.


PART  IV. CUSTOMS  AND  ARTS  309

No.  32

1  Late. Vide  note  on  ulale  (No.  31,  Part  IV). The  bridegroom  is
supposed  to  have  this  done  without  warning. The  writer's  malam
was  touched  with  henna  when  at  prayers.

2  Haila. Arabic. Hausa  idiom,  yin  jini,  paske  salla.

3  Wa  klla. Arabic. In  Hausa,  wadansu  sun/adz.

4  Suna. Cf.  suna,  '  a  name '.

5  Matansa. Vide  *maaiansa  (No.  i,  Part  II).

No.  33

1  Faslun. Note  the  definite  article  in  the  rufua  bissa  biu. Vide
note  on  '  dokin  nan  (No.  i,  Part  I).

2  Ya  ji. Aorist  tense. Vide  note  on  I3_ya  zo  (No.  i,  Part  II).

3  Waliyina. Arabic,  '  guardian '  (wait). The  person  who  gives  the
bride  away,  father,  mother,  or  guardian. The  dower,  sadak  (Hausa
sadaki),  is  fixed  by  the  guardian,  and  no  marriage  can  take  place
unless  the  woman  is  so  represented. Waklli  used  in  a  similar  sense.

4  Ldmu. Yerda.

5  Kurdi  alfin. 2,000  cowries,  value  is.

6  Goro  hamsin. Vide  note  on  "  kworia  guda  (No.  31,  Part  IV).

7  Abuyar  amaria. Vide  note  on 20  abuyar  amaria  (No.  31,  Part  IV).

No.  34

1  Waklli. Vide  note  on  *waliyina  (No.  33,  Part  IV).

2  Tardlta. Yerda.

3  Alahuma  .  .  .  wasalim. These  lines  are  Arabic.

4  Alahuma  .  .  .  amin. As  above.

5  Ya  wakilche: Ya  che.

6  Nakadan. Arabic.

7  Ajalan. Arabic.

No.  35

1  Faslun. Note  the  double  rufua  bisa  the  definite  article. Vide
note  on  7  dokin  nan  (No.  i,  Part  I).

2  Ya. Aorist  tense. Vide  note  on  ™ya  zo  (No.  i,  Part  II).

3  Azana  suna. Note  the  idiom  for  naming  a  child  is  zana  suna.
Suna,  long  u. Suna  is  a  different  word.


310


NOTES


No.  36

1  Faslun. Vide  note  on  lfaslun  (No.  35,  Part  IV).

2  Alahuma  . .  .  majidun. Arabic.

3  Fdtimata  ko  Hadijatu. The  first  a  daughter,  the  second  a  wife,
of  Mohammed.

4  Wanzdmai. The  infant's  head  is  shaved.

No.  37

1  Bdbun. Vide  note  on  *£a£z  (No.  i,  Part  II).
a  Sha  gaba,  '  to  circumcise ' ;  also  kdchia. As  applied  to  a  woman,
makasche.

3  Rame. A  small  hole  about  half  a  foot  across  is  dug,  and  the
foreskin  is  buried  in  it.

4  Aririke. Reduplicated  from  rika.

6  Yd  warke. Aorist  tense. Vide  note  on  ™yd  zo  (No.  i,  Part  II).
6  Wurin. Note  the  definite  article. Vide  note  on  7  dokin  nan  (No.  i,
Part  I).

No.  38

1  Faslun. Vide  note  on  lfaslun  (No.  35,  Part  IV).

2  Kdchiar. Also  makasche,

3  Mdta. Vide  note  on  *maatansa  (No.  i,  Part  II).

4  Maatar  nan. Definite  article. Vide  note  on  '  dokin  nan  (No.  i,
Part  I).

8  Kama,  '  seize  and  draw  towards ',  the  latter  idea  expressed  in  the
o  termination  of  the  verb. Vide  note  on  *karbozva  (No.  i,  Part  I).

6  Shard. As  above,  8  kdm 5,  '  cutting  towards ',  o  termination.

7  Sdboni. Soap  made  of  ashes  (wood).


No.  39

1  Bdbun. Vide  note  on  2&z3/(No.  i,  Part  II).

2  Alkibla. Gabas.

3  Kabri. Arabic. Hausa  kushewa.

4  Wdta  fudu  da  kwdna  goma. The  idat  period  of  retreat,  enjoined
by  Mohammedan  law. Idat,  Arabic ;  in  Hausa  takaba.


PART  IV. CUSTOMS  AND  ARTS  311


No.  40

1  Faslun. Vide  note  on  lfaslun  (No.  35,  Part  IV).

3  Agina  wata  karama  chiki.  A  ledge  is  thus  formed  all  round  on
which  the  cross-sticks  are  laid,  the  idea  being  of  course  to  keep  the
earth  from  falling  on  the  body.

Compare  the  mudzi  of  the  Mananja  grave,  where  an  ordinary  pit
is  first  dug  and  then  a  side  niche  or  room  made  in  which  the  body  is
placed.

3  Asasdre. Note  the  reduplication.

4  Karfl. Vide  note  on  10  karft  (No.  9,  Part  II).

5  Amaida  gabansa  gabas. The  corpse  is  laid  full  length,  lying  on
its  right  side,  the  head  to  south,  feet  to  north. The  grave  is  very
narrow,  just  wide  enough  to  let  the  body  in  sideways.

6  Yd  kare. Aorist  tense. Vide  note  on  I3j>d  zo  (No.  I,  Part  II).


No.  41

1  Yd  kdre. Aorist  tense. Vide  note  on  l*yd  zo  (No.  i ,  Part  II).

No.  42

1  Bdbun. Vide  note  on  *bdbi  (No.  i,  Part  II).

2  Chiniki. Any  kind  of  trade  or  business.

3  Yd  halalla. Vide  note  on  I3yd  zo  (No.  i,  Part  II).

4  Chin  kura. Lit.  'the  eating  of  the  hyena'. Vide  note  on  *kura
(No.  6,  Part  II).

5  Kausuwa. Also  kasua.

6  Sha  jiki. Lit.  'drink  the  body'. Any  second-hand  garment  is
so  called.

7  Zanbar  dari. 100,000  cowries  ==  50^.

8  Nd  rage  .  .  .  naa  saye. Aorist  and  future. Vide  note  on  13j>d  zo
(No.  i,  Part  II).

9  Muu. Future  tense. Vide  note  on  ™yd  zo  (No.  i,  Part  II).

10  Iddnu  guda  data. Vide  note  on  13  iddnu  guda  (No.  6,  Part  II).

11  Murgu. Work  done  by  a  slave  who  is  away  from  his  master
for  the  time  being.


3"  NOTES

No.  43

1  Td  game. Aorist  tense. Vide  note  on  13j>a  zo  (No.  i,  Part  II).

2  Fa  fadi. As  above. Aorist  tense.

No.  44

1  Bismi  aldhi  alrahmani  alrahimi. Pronounce  bismi  'Idhi  'rahmani
'rahimi. Vide  note  on  1  bismi  aldhi  (No.  i,  Part  I).

2  Mutun  mutumi. Brass  castings ;  '  Benin '  figures.

3  Karfe. Vide  note  on  10  karfi  (No.  9,  Part  II).

4  Ashainya  rdna  shi  bushe. This  is  the  first  stage  in  the  process
of  making. Vide  Plate  III,  Fig.  i  a,  and  Plate  II,  Fig.  i  b.

5  Shi-na-walkza. Here  ends  the  second  stage of  the  process.
Vide  Plate  III,  Fig.  2  a,  and  Plate  II,  Fig.  2  b.

6  Zankdyen. Note  the  definite  article. Vide  note  on  7 'dokin  nan
(No.  i,  Part  I).

7  Yd  hare. Aorist. Vide  note  on  ™yd  zo  (No.  i,  Part  II).

8  Yd  gama. As  above,  ^yd  kdre.

9  Mutun  mutumin. Note  the  definite  article. Vide  note  on 7  dokin
nan  (No.  i,  Part  I).

10  Saanan  aparpashe. This  final  stage  is  illustrated  in  Plates  II
and  III,  Figs.  3  a  and  3  b.

The  following  notes  are  from  an  article  by  Professor  Henry
Balfour,  which  appeared  in  the  Journal  of  the  Royal  Anthropological
Institute ',  vol.  xl,  1910:

'  Of  the  specimens  secured  by  Mr.  Rattray,  the  clay  head  (Plates
II  and  III,  Figs,  i  a  and  i  b},  which  forms  the  first  stage  in  the
process,  is  27  cm.  high,  and  is  carefully  fashioned  to  form  the  core
on  which  the  wax  model  may  be  built.  It  is  of  well-worked  clay,  and
while  accurately  shaped  as  regards  the  general  outline  of  the  desired
design,  is  not  worked  up  in  detail,  and  has  no  suggestion  of  ears  and
other  surface  details.  It  is  merely  the  base  on  which  the  wax  may
be  spread  to  a  more  or  less  uniform  thickness.  The  core  is  hollow,
with  a  view  no  doubt  of  giving  it  an  equal  thickness  with  that  of  the
outer  casting-mould  so  as  to  admit  of  a  uniform  rate  of  heating  and
of  cooling  throughout  the  mass.

'  Figs.  2  a  and  2  b  show  a  similar  clay  core  enveloped  in  the  finished
wax  model.  In  this  brass  model  all  the  details  required  in  the  brass


PART  IV.  CUSTOMS  AND  ARTS 313

casting  appear.  The  wax  is  of  an  average  thickness  of  about  3  mm.,
the  ears  being  much  thinner  and  unsupported  by  the  core.

'  In  the  next  stage  (Figs.  3  a  and  3  b,  also  Figs.  4  and  5)  the  wax
model  having  been  first  completely  encased  in  clay  to  a  thickness
varying  from  about  1-5  cm.  to  3-3  cm.,  is  melted  and  allowed  to
escape  through  the  duct  (seen  in  Fig.  3  a  (at  a)  and  in  Fig.  5)  which
is  left  for  the  purpose.  The  molten  brass  is  poured  in  through  the
same  duct,  and  if  the  casting  is  successful  completely  fills  the  space
formerly  occupied  by  the  wax,  the  result  being  an  exact  replica  of  the
wax  model  in  brass.

'  Some  of  Ali's  designs  in  brass  are  fairly  ambitious,  as  may  be
seen  in  the  examples  shown  in  Plates  I  and  II.  In  II  is  seen  a  chief
on  horseback  attended  by  his  wives,  one  with  a  child  on  her  back,
and  sundry  retainers ;  at  the  top  a  lion  surrounded  by  four  cocks.


Fig-  4-  Fig.  5.


'  The  other  piece  (Plate  I)  has  a  male  and  female  figure  each  about
50  cm.  high,  designed  to  form  supporters  of  a  pair  of  small  elephant's
tusks.  Behind  each  figure  is  a  dog.  The  large  hollow  cast  head
suspended  between  the  figures  is  hung  from  a  short  flat  bar  furnished
with  two  rings  set  at  an  angle  so  that  they  could  be  slipped  over  the
points  of  the  tusks,  from  which  the  head  was  suspended.

'  The  links  seen  hanging  below  the  head  are  for  attaching  to  the
loose  links  upon  two  rings  fitting  round  the  tusks  about  halfway
down,  by  which  the  head  was  held  steady  and  prevented  from
swinging.  Mr.  Rattray  tells  me  that  these  elaborate  designs  are
probably  now  purely  fanciful,  and  without  any  special  symbolic
meaning  or  obvious  utility.

'  Although  the  products  of  Ali's  foundry  fall  far  short  of  the  finer
bronze  castings  of  the  old  artists  of  Benin,  they  are  none  the  less
a  very  creditable  production,  and  betray  considerable  knowledge  of
the  higher  cire  perdue  technique.  They  are  interesting,  not  only  as


3i4  NOTES

examples  of  a  slightly  degenerate  survival  of  a  once  flourishing  local
art,  but  also  as  giving  an  insight  into  the  details  of  the  process
whereby  the  wonderful  ancient  Benin  bronze  castings  were  achieved.'


No.  45

1  Babun. Vide  note  on  2  bdbi  (No.  i,  Part  II).

2  Gashin.  Note  the  definite  article.  Vide  note  on  7  doktn  nan  (No.  i,
Part  I).

No.  46

1  Yd  yi. Aorist. Vide  note  on  ™yd  zo  (No.  i,  Part  II).

2  Nd  chi,  nd  .  .  .  kd  ga  bdkina. Note  the  aorist  tense. Vide  note
above,  1yd  yi.

The  mdlam  who  wrote  this  understood  the  book  ended  here. The
proverbs  were  added  later,  and  are  written  by  a  different  hand.


PART  V. PROVERBS

1  Muzuru. Vide  note  on  5muzuru  (No.  26,  Part  III).

2  Baje. A  dance.

3  Bunga. A  single  mound  of  earth  in  which  the  Indian  corn  is
planted. Cf.  kunya,  '  a  long  furrow '.

4  Agwdgwa. Only  fowls  are  offered  as  sacrifices.

5  Wa  masani . . .  sat  wdwa  ? This  is  supposed  to  be  said  to  a  man
who  is  remonstrating  with  another  because  he  is  lavish  in  what  he
gives  his  relations.

6  Kd  kore. Aorist  tense. Vide  note  on  I3_yd  zo  (No.  i,  Part  II).

7  Kinwa. Pronounce  kyanwa. Vide  note  on  5muzuru  (No.  26,
Part  III).

8  Akwia  .  .  .  kunne. If  a  goat  is  troublesome  and  is  always  going
into  a  hut  and  upsetting  things  it  is  caught  and  its  ears  are  slit.

9  Gdtari  ga  ndma  .  .  .  wuta. Said  to  two  persons  who  have  been
vowing  vengeance  against  each  other  by  a  third  person  who  sees  them
meet,  to  egg  them  on.

10  Gidansu. Note  only  the  head  of  the  household  will  say  gidana,


PART  V. PROVERBS  315

'my  house';  any  other  member  of  the  family  will  say  gidamu,  so
gidansa  would  only  be  used  when  speaking  of  the  owner.  Here  the
son  is  spoken  of,  hence  gidansu,  not  gidansa.

11  Addwa. Arabic. Hausa,  kiyaya.

12  Dan  karamin  tsuguni. An  expression  used  to  denote  a  small
settlement.

13  Lale. Vide  note  on  ulale  (No.  31,  Part  IV).

14  Iddnun. Note  the  definite  article. Vide  note  on  7  dokin  nan
(No.  i,  Part  I). Note  the  singular  pronoun  ya.

15  Mara. Vide  note  on  "  mar  a  (No.  5,  Part  II).

16  Gudin. Probably  gwodin. Gwoda,  '  to  show '.

17  Wlar  nika  .  . .  td  kdre. Grain  is  ground  (between  two  flat  stones).
The  first  grinding  (pashe)  is  gathered  up  and  re-ground;  this  second
grinding  is  called  tushi.

18  Ddkin. P.  276,  Proverb  No.  128. Ddkin  kasa  da  kasa. An
all  mud  house,  called  soro.

19  Mdku. Chief  of  Bida  in  the  Nupe  country.

20  Tamat. Arabic. Hausa, yd  kdre,  'it  is  finished'.


OXFORD:  HORACE  HART  M.A.
PRINTER  TO  THE  UNIVERSITY


M
59


61

S  ft

o

Q


f'


is


<D


I


•S *
I §

« 9)


3 S
•< H


Uoiversiiy  of  Toronto
Library


DO  NOT

REMOVE

THE

CARD

FROM

THIS

POCKET


Acme  Library  Card  Pocket

Lniler  Pat.  "Rcf.  Index  File"

Made  by  LIBRARY  BUREAU
