>
HAUSA FOLK-LORE
WAN  AN  LIT  API  TATS  UN  I  A  NE
THIS  IS  A  BOOK  OF  STORIES
\Front.
HAUSA  FOLK-LORE
CUSTOMS,  PROVERBS,  ETC
COLLECTED  AND  TRANSLITERATED  WITH  ENGLISH
TRANSLATION  AND  NOTES
BY
R;  SUTHERLAND  RATTRAY,  F.R.G.S.,  F.R.A.I.
OF EXETER COLLEGE, OXFORD
ASSISTANT DISTRICT COMMISSIONER, ASHANTI, WEST AFRICA
AUTHOR  OF 'CHINYANJA FOLK-LORE'
QUALIFIED INTERPRETER IN HAUSA, TWI, CHINYANJA, M5LE
WITH  A  PREFACE  BY
R. R. MARETT, M.A.
READER IN SOCIAL ANTHROPOLOGY IN THE UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD
PRESIDENT  OF THE FOLK-LORE SOCIETY
IN  TWO  VOLUMES:  VOL. I
OXFORD
AT  THE CLARENDON PRESS
1913
OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS
LONDON EDINBURGH GLASGOW NEW  YORK
TORONTO MELBOURNE BOMBAY
HUMPHREY MILFORD M.A.
PUBLISHER TO THE UNIVERSITY
PREFACE
IT  is  our  privilege  at  Oxford  to  be  visited  from  time  to
time  by  officers  of  the  Public  Service,  who  modestly  apply
to  us  for  instruction  in  Anthropology,  more  particularly  as  it
bears  on  the  history  of  the  native  races  of  the  Empire.  Not
infrequently,  however,  they  bring  with  them  a  previously
acquired  stock  of  anthropological  information,  such  as  almost
takes  away  the  breath  of  their  duly  constituted  teachers.
Thereupon  the  latter  feel  inclined  to  offer  to  change  places  ;
and,  instead  of  teaching,  to  play  the  part  of  learners  in  regard
to  them.
Mr.  Rattray  furnishes  a  case  in  point.  When  he  joined  our
School  of  Anthropology,  he  was  already  a  past-master  in  all
that  relates  to  Chinyanja  folk-lore,  a  subject  on  which  he  had
actually  published  a  useful  book.  Besides,  though  but  recently
transferred  from  British  Central  Africa  to  the  West  Coast,  he
was  already  at  close  grips  with  more  than  one  of  the  lan-
guages current  in  that  most  polyglot  of  regions.

To  claim,  therefore,  any  share  whatever  in  the  origination
of  the  present  work  would  ill  beseem  one  who  merely  offered
sympathetic  encouragement  when  Mr.  Rattray  proceeded  to
unfold  his  latest  design.  This  design  was  to  compass  two
ends  at  once — to  obtain  trustworthy  linguistic  material,  and
to  explore  the  inner  secrets  of  the  Hausa  mind — by  giving  a
somewhat  novel  turn  to  an  old  and  approved  method.

As  regards  the  collection  of  folk-lore,  the  approved  method
— in  fact,  the  only  method  likely  to  satisfy  the  demands  of
science — is  this :  the  observer  must  draft  word-for-word
reports  of  what  he  hears ;  and  must  further  give  the  original


vi  PREFACE

words,  when  a  foreign  tongue  is  used,  so  that  it  may  be
possible  independently  to  control  the  version.

Such  a  method,  however,  is  more  easily  prescribed  on
paper  than  followed  in  the  field.  When  the  witness  is
illiterate — as  commonly  happens  when  there  is  genuine  folk-
lore to  be  gathered — its  application  proves  exceedingly
troublesome,  for  reasons  that  may  readily  be  divined.  A
more  or  less  formal  dictation  lesson  has  somehow  to  be  given
and  received ;  and  the  several  parties  to  it  are  only  too  apt  to
conspire  each  in  his  own  way  to  render  it  a  failure.  Thus
the  story-teller,  on  the  one  hand,  is  probably  shy  and  sus-
picious at  the  outset ;  is  put  out  of  his  stride  by  the  slightest
interruption ;  and,  becoming  weary  all  too  soon,  tends  to  take
short  cuts,  instead  of  following  to  the  end  the  meandering
path  of  the  genuine  tradition.  The  reporter,  in  his  turn,  is
incessantly  puzzled  by  the  idiom,  more  especially  since  in
such  a  context  archaisms  will  be  frequent ;  boggles  over  a
pronunciation  adapted  to  a  monotonous  sing-song  delivery,
or  else,  perhaps,  to  a  dramatic  mimicry  carried  on  in  several
voices;  and  is  likely  to  be  steadily  outpaced  into  the
bargain.

Mr.  Rattray's  happy  thought,  then,  was  to  remedy  the
practical  shortcomings  of  the  standard  method  by  finding
some  one  who,  as  it  were,  could  dictate  to  himself;  who,  in
other  words,  could  successfully  combine  the  characters  oi
^story-teller  and  reporter  in  his  single  person.

Moreover,  as  Mr.  Rattray  was  not  slow  to  perceive,  the
existing  conditions  of  Hausa  culture  bring  it  about  that
the  very  type  of  helper  needed  is  with  due  search  to  be
procured.  A  malam  of  the  best  class  possesses  all  the
literary  skill  which  a  knowledge  of  Arabic  and  of  the  Arabic
script  involves.  None  the  less,  he  remains  thoroughly  in
touch  with  his  own  people,  a  Hausa  of  the  Hausas.  In  his
hands,  therefore,  the  traditional  lore  loses  nothing  of  its


PREFACE  vii

authentic  form  and  flavour.  In  short,  the  chance  of  literary
manipulation  may  be  ruled  out.

Hence  it  would  seem,  if  I  may  venture  to  say  so,  that
the  Government  of  the  Gold  Coast  was  no  less  wise
than  liberal  in  its  policy  when,  by  the  grant  of  a  subven-
tion, it  enabled  Malawi  Shaihu's  work  to  be  perpetuated  in
the  fullest  way,  namely,  not  only  by  transliteration  and
translation,  but  likewise  by  actual  reproduction  in  fac-
simile.

For,  apart  from  its  value  as  a  masterpiece  of  artistic
penmanship,  this  clear  and,  I  understand,  correct  calligraphy
must  prove  of  great  assistance  to  European  students  of  Hausa
to  whose  official  lot  it  falls  to  wrestle  with  the  productions  of
the  native  scribe.  Then,  conversely,  if  an  educated  Hausa
aspire,  as  well  he  may,  to  learn  the  English  language,  to-
gether with  the  use  of  the  English  alphabet,  he  has  here  an
invaluable  means  of  comparing  his  own  system  of  written
symbols  with  ours.  So  much,  then,  for  the  more  obvious
advantages  to  be  derived  from  a  study  of  the  malam1?*  actual
manuscript.  Over  and  above  this,  it  proves  of  assistance  to
the  philologist,  as  Mr.  Rattray  shows,  by  making  clear  certain
finer  points  of  grammar  in  regard  to  which  evidence  was
hitherto  lacking.  Also,  I  suppose,  simply  as  exemplifying
the  characteristic  differences  between  the  African  and  the
classical  modes  of  writing  Arabic,  it  would  not  be  without
a  certain  scientific  interest  of  its  own.

Concerning  the  worth  of  the  collected  matter  to  the  student
of  language  and  to  the  folk-lorist,  I  am  hardly  called  upon  to
speak  here,  even  were  I  competent  to  do  so.  Suffice  it  to  say
that,  in  respect  of  its  contents,  the  book  does  not,  of  course,
claim  to  stand  alone.  Yet,  though  a  considerable  library  of
Hausa  literature  is  already  in  existence,  it  can  well  bear  to  be
enriched  by  another  volume  such  as  this,  which  manages  to
dispense  with  the  middle  man  of  another  mental  type,  and


Vlll


PREFACE


brings  us  directly  into  contact  with  the  native  intelligence  as
it  witnesses  to  itself.

For  the  rest,  I  take  it  that  the  study  of  Hausa  folk-lore
offers  fascinating  problems  to  the  student,  if  only  because
it  calls  for  a  critical  sifting  and  weighing  of  the  most  drastic
kind.  The  culture  of  the  Hausas  is  not,  in  any  sense  of  that
much  abused  term,  primitive. v  They  have  undergone  inter-
penetration  on  the  part  of  the  Fulani  and  other  alien  stocks.
They  have  more  or  less  universally  embraced  Mohammedan-
ism. '  They  engage  in  trading  expeditions  which  bring^  them
into  touch  with  most  of  the  peoples  of  West  Africa.  Alto-
gether, then,  they  are  far  away  from  that  state  of  aboriginal
innocence  in  which  a  strictly  homegrown  tradition  perpetuates
itself  by  means  of  stories  that  almost  amount  to  oral  rites,
so  undeviating  is  their  form,  so  solemn  their  import  and
associations.

On  the  contrary,  the  most  characteristic  feature  of  Hausa
lore,  when  purged  of  its  more  obvious  accretions  from  with-
out, consists  in  the  folk-tale ;  which  some  authorities  go  so  far
as  to  regard  as  typically  reminiscent  of  some  degenerated  and
desolemnized  myth.  Nor  can  it  be  denied  that,  for  example,
various  survivals  in  this  region  of  what  may  be  termed  in  a
broad  sense  totemism  lend  colour  to  the  view  that  the  animal
story  may  have  fallen  from  a  far  higher  estate,  if  the  criterion
of  value  be  the  seriousness  of  the  beliefs  which  it  embodies.
To  the  student  of  folk-lore  origins,  however,  the  material
available  here  is  at  least  as  good  as  to  be  got  nearer  home ;
and,  in  so  far  as  there  still  exist  in  Hausaland  odd  corners
where  customs  lurk  of  a  quite  primaeval  appearance,  the
chance  of  discovering  the  laws  of  change  involved  is  relatively
the  better.

Besides,  quite  apart  from  the  purely  scientific  interest  in
origins,  the  reader  will  come  to  understand  the  thoughts  and
ways  of  the  Hausas  as  they  are  now.  Their  notions  about


PREFACE  ix

right  and  wrong,  for  instance,  are  indicated  pretty  clearly  by
many  of  the  animal  stories ;  seeing  that  each  animal  tends  to
represent  a  type  of  character  calling  either  for  admiration  or
detestation,  and,  being  more  or  less  humanized  into  the  bar-
gain, affords  a  nucleus  round  which  a  nascent  moral  philo-
sophy can  be  observed  to  gather.

Even  more  directly,  too,  may  we  obtain  insight  into  the
present  conditions  of  Hausa  culture  by  studying  what
the  mdlam  has  to  say  about  their  history,  manners,  and
arts.  If  brief,  his  notices  are  always  business-like  and  to  the
point;  while  he  plainly  has  access  to  information — for  in-
stance, in  regard  to  bronze-casting  by  the  cire  perdue  process
— for  which  the  European  investigator  might  for  the  most
part  snap  his  fingers  in  vain.

But,  as  the  Hausas  say,  '  If  you  are  not  going  to  drink  the
pap,  stop  stirring  it.'  The  pap,  I  am  convinced,  is  excellent.
So  let  us  drink  without  more  ado.

R.  R.  MARETT.


AUTHOR'S NOTE

ON  first  proceeding  to  West  Africa  (the  Gold  Coast),  and
on  commencing  a  study  of  the  Hausa  language,  the  compiler
of  this  work  was  struck  by  the  comparatively  high  standard
of  education  found  among  the  Hausa  MALAMAI  or  scribes*
Arabic  characters  are  used  by  them,  as  by  the  Swahili  of  East
and  Central  Africa ;  but,  whereas  any  natives  met  with  there
possessed  but  a  very  superficial  knowledge  of  the  Arabic
language  or  writing,  the  Hausas  could  boast  of  a  legal,
historical,  and  religious  literature,  which  was  to  be  found
preserved  by  manuscripts.  The  MALAMAI  were  everywhere
the  most  respected  and  honoured  members  of  the  community.
It  was  disappointing,  however,  at  any  rate  for  one  who  wished
to  study  Hausa,  to  find  that  all  their  manuscripts  were  written
not  only  in  Arabic  characters,  but  also  in  that  language.  This
appears  to  be  universally  the  case,  even  in  Nigeria.  The
use  of  Arabic  to-day  among  the  educated  Hausas  corresponds
to  that  of  French  and  Latin  in  England  in  the  middle  ages.

The  writer's  intention  was,  as  soon  as  he  had  acquired
a  sound  colloquial  knowledge  of  the  Hausa  language,  to
collect  some  of  their  folk-lore  and  traditions,  taking  down
such  information  as  was  required  verbatim,  and  translating
afterwards  into  English.  This  plan  he  had  adopted  when
collecting  his  Chinyanja  folk-lore.

The  advantage  of  such  a  system  is  that  the  original  text
will  help  the  student  of  the  language  to  appreciate  its  structure
and  idioms,  in  a  way  that  the  best  grammars  could  hardly  do.
The  translator  will  also  be  bound  down  thereby.  There  will
thus  be  no  room  for  embellishments  or  errors  creeping  in,


AUTHOR'S  NOTE  xi

as  is  liable  to  be  the  case  when  the  investigator  has  had  to
rely  on  the  vagaries  of  his  cook,  '  boy,'  or  other  interpreter
for  his  information.  It  follows  that  such  a  collection  will  be
of  more  value  from  the  anthropological  standpoint.  Indeed,
of  late  years  many  collections  of  native  folk-lore  compiled
according  to  this  method  have  been  called  into  being  by  the
demand  created  by  this  new  science  of  anthropology.

As  is  to  be  expected,  there  are  not  many  persons  who  have
the  fortune — or  misfortune — to  spend  four  or  five  preliminary
years  in  acquiring  a  knowledge  of  the  language  of  the  people
whose  traditions  they  hope  to  study;  yet  such  a  probation
is  very  necessary,  if  the  collection  is  to  be  of  any  real  value
to  the  anthropologist.

Stories  and  traditions  collected  through  the  medium  of  an
interpreter  are  amusing,  and  might  prove  of  interest  in  the
nursery  (though  much  would  have  to  be  omitted  or  toned
down,  as  savage  folk-lore  is  often  coarse  and  vulgar  according
to  our  notions,  and  hardly  fit  pour  les  j'eunes  filles) ;  but  for
the  student  of  anthropology  such  collections  cannot  be  con-
sidered to  possess  much  value.

The  anthropological  theorist,  who  is  probably  some  learned
professor  at  one  or  other  of  our  great  Universities,  where  he
made  a  life-study  of  primitive  customs  and  beliefs,  has,  in
most  cases,  to  rely  for  his  data  on  the  field-worker.  He
needs  to  feel  perfectly  convinced  that  the  information  on  which
he  is  seeking  to  base  some  far-reaching  generalization  is
absolutely  correct ;  and  this  can  hardly  be  the  case,  however
skilled,  conscientious,  or  well  trained  the  field- worker  may  be,
if  the  latter  be  wholly  ignorant  of  the  language  of  the  people
from  whom  he  is  collecting  his  information.

Now  the  literary  skill  of  the  Hausas,  already  referred  to,
led  the  writer  to  depart  somewhat  from  the  modits  operandi
employed  in  his  Chinyanja  folk-lore,  the  subject-matter  of
which  was  taken  down  from  the  lips  of  the  raconteur.


xii  AUTHOR'S  NOTE

For  the  present  work  the  services  of  a  learned  MALAM,
by  name  MALAM  Shaihu,  were  secured.  He  himself  wrote
down,  or  translated  from  manuscripts  in  Arabic,  such  informa-
tion as  was  required.  Much  of  the  work  contained  in  the
present  volumes  involved,  first,  a  translation  from  Arabic  into
Hausa,  secondly,  a  transliteration  of  the  Hausa  writing,  and
thirdly,  a  translation  into  English  from  the  Hausa.

During  the  writer's  '  tours '  of  service  in  West  Africa,  as  also
during  his  furloughs  in  England,  this  MALAM,  who  was  entirely
ignorant  of  English,  made  a  collection  of  many  hundreds  of
sheets  of  manuscripts  (1907-11).

In  the  meantime  the  present  writer  was  making  a  study
of  the  Hausa  language  and  script,  by  way  of  securing
the  key  to  their  transliteration  and  translation.  He  was
fortunate,  in  the  course  of  his  official  duties,  in  being  stationed
for  some  time  at  YEGI  on  the  VoLTA  river.  YEGI  lies  on  the
main  caravan  route  between  Nigeria  and  Ashanti.  Each
month  thousands  of  Hausas  from  all  parts  of  Nigeria  cross
the  river  here,  going  to  and  from  Nigeria  with  kola  or  cattle.
Such  a  position  enables  a  student,  even  better  perhaps  than
if  he  were  resident  in  Hausaland,  to  get  into  touch  with
Hausas  from  all  parts  of  Nigeria.  It  was  thus  possible  to
select  such  stories  or  traditions  as  seemed  most  generally  and
widely  known,  and  therefore  likely  to  be  of  historical  value
on  account  of  their  antiquity.

The  Hausa  given  in  the  text  is  that  of  Kano  or  Sokoto,
where  by  general  consent  the  purest  dialect  is  spoken.

The  Hausa  Manuscript.  The  writing  is  throughout  clear,
correct,  and  legible.  It  has  been  written  with  the  ay  a  (.*.)
between  most  of  the  words  to  facilitate  easy  reading.  Some
of  the  specimens  of  Hausa  writing  that  have  been  reproduced
from  time  to  time  are  obviously  the  work  of  illiterate  Hausas,
or  at  best  are  very  carelessly  written  manuscripts,  and  as  such
afford  little  criterion  of  the  best  work  of  these  people.  The


AUTHOR'S NOTE  xiii

hasty  scrawls,  which,  it  is  true,  form  the  larger  part  of  the
existing  manuscripts,  in  which  vowel-signs  are  missed  out
and  words  run  together,  often  cannot  be  deciphered  by  the
Hausas,  and  sometimes  not  even  by  the  writers  themselves,
unless  they  know  the  context  or  subject  by  heart.  Such
manuscripts  are  therefore  worthless  for  scientific  purposes.
They  cannot,  for  instance,  serve  to  disclose  those  nice  points
of  grammatical  construction  which  the  perusal  of  a  carefully
written  manuscript  will  reveal,  though  they  can  hardly  be
noted  in  the  spoken  language.

The  Transliteration.  This  has  been  given,  letter  by  letter,
word  for  word,  line  by  line.  Thus  it  is  easy  for  the  student
to  follow  the  original  on  the  page  opposite.

The  Translation.  As  literal  a  translation  as  is  consistent
with  making  the  subject-matter  at  all  readable  has  been  given
throughout.  It  is  primarily  as  a  text-book  for  students  of
the  language  that  this  work  is  intended,  and  for  such  a  literal
translation  will  be  of  most  use.  The  author  would  crave  the
pardon  of  the  general  reader  for  the  baldness  and  utter  sacrifice
of  the  English  idiom  which  such  a  style  of  translation  must
necessarily  involve.  The  latter  may,  however,  find  here  and
there  a  certain  touch  of  *  local  colour '  in  the  phraseology,
which  may  compensate  for  its  other  obvious  defects.

The  value  of  Hausa  writings.  Hitherto,  perhaps,  it  has
not  usually  been  deemed  essential  to  know  much  about
Hausa  writing.  (A  slight  knowledge  of  it  is  necessary,  it  is
true,  for  the  higher  standard  Government  examination.)  This
work  attempts  to  go  somewhat  fully  into  the  subject  of  the
writing  and  the  signs  used,  in  order  to  assist  the  student
who  desires  a  knowledge  of  the  writing  that  will  enable  him
to  decipher  manuscripts  as  apart  from  the  printed  type.  The
writer  is  convinced  that  a  thorough  knowledge  of  Hausa
writing  is  essential  for  any  advanced  study  of  the  language.
Thus  he  has  so  far  been  rewarded  for  the  time  spent  in  the


xiv  AUTHOR'S  NOTE

minute  perusal  of  the  manuscripts  comprising  the  Hausa  por-
tion of  this  book  by  the  further  elucidation  or  confirmation
therein  of  grammatical  structures  not  perhaps  wholly  accepted
as  proved,  and  by  the  discovery  of  some  new  idioms  which,
to  the  best  of  his  knowledge,  had  apparently  escaped  the
vigilance  of  previous  writers  on  this  subject,  or  else  had  taxed
their  powers  of  explanation.

The  length  of  vowels,  which  is  so  distinctly  shown  in  the
written  word,  does  not  hitherto  appear  to  have  had  that
attention  paid  to  it  that  it  undoubtedly  deserves.  Yet  the
length  of  a  vowel  may  alter  the  meaning  of  a  word  entirely,
e.g.  guda,  guda;  suna,  suna;  gado,  gddo,  and  so  on.  Indeed,
an  educated  MALAM  would  consider  a  word  as  wrongly  spelt
whenever  a  long  vowel  was  written  where  it  should  have  been
short,  or  vice  versa.  In  Hausa  writing  such  an  error  would
amount  not  merely  to  the  dropping  of  an  accent,  as  in  English,
but  to  the  omission  of  a  letter.  Moreover  such  a  slip  may
lead  to  serious  confusion,  since  the  tense  of  a  verb,  or  even,
as  has  been  seen,  the  entire  sense  of  a  word,  may  depend  on
the  length  assigned  to  the  vowel.

The  author  of  Hausa  Notes,  perhaps  the  best  treatise  on  the
language  yet  written,  remarks  at  some  length  on  the  apparent
4  absurdity '  of  the  want  of  any  inflexion  for  the  ist,  2nd,  and
3rd  persons  singular  of  the  past  tense,  for  the  plural  of  which
the  well-known  forms  in  ka  exist,  and  thinks  the  forms  for
these  persons  are  the  same  as  those  used  for  the  aorist  tense.
Yet  a  perusal  of  almost  any  half-dozen  pages  of  the  present
manuscript  will  reveal  the  hidden  missing  forms.  Were  the
student  to  search  for  these  by  ear  only,  he  might  easily  never
discover  them,  as  they  are  almost  indistinguishable  in  the
spoken  word.

Again,  the  definite  article,1  for  many  years  conspicuous  by  its

1  First  noted  by  Professor  A.  Mischlich.


AUTHOR'S  NOTE  xv

absence,  will  be  met  with  repeatedly  in  these  pages  in  the
final  nun,  or  ra,  or  the  wasali  or  rufua  bissa  biu.

Enough  has  been  said  to  show  the  value  and  importance
of  a  close  perusal  of  Hausa  manuscripts ;  but  emphasis  must
be  laid  on  the  fact  that  such  writing  must  be  the  work  of
a  learned  MALAM,  or  probably  these  very  details,  which  are
of  such  importance  to  the  scientific  investigator,  will  be
omitted,  either  through  carelessness  or  ignorance.

Proverbs.  So  far  as  possible,  the  endeavour  has  been
made  to  omit  such  proverbs  as  have  already  been  collected
and  published.

The  Notes.  The  student  is  expected  to  be  familiar  with
the  well-known  works  on  the  Hausa  language  by  Canon
Robinson,  Dr.  Miller,  and  others;  hence  only  such  phrases,
words,  or  grammatical  points  as  are  not  considered  in  these
works  are  noticed  here.

Acknowledgments.  The  debt  is  vast  which  the  student  of
any  language  owes  to  those  who  have  by  their  labours  reduced
that  language  to  a  definite  form.  This  makes  it  possible  in
a  comparatively  short  time  for  him  to  master  what  it  has  cost
the  pioneers  many  years  of  ceaseless  labour  to  create  out  of
nothing.  Availing  himself  of  the  fruits  of  their  labour,  he  can
thus  move  forward  to  fresh  fields  of  research.  Such  is  the
debt  that  the  writer  owes  to  Canon  Robinson,  Dr.  Miller,  and
others.  His  thanks  are  also  due  to  his  friend  Mr.  Diamond
Jenness,  of  Balliol  College,  Oxford,  for  revising  the  English
translation ;  to  Mr.  Henry  Balfour,  Curator  of  the  Pitt-Rivers
Museum,  Oxford,  for  having  had  the  photographs  taken  that
appear  in  this  work,  and  for  his  valuable  notes  on  the  same
which  are  again  published  through  the  courtesy  of  the  Royal
Anthropological  Institute;  to  Professor  Margoliouth  for
having  translated  the  Arabic  lines  which  occur  in  the  Hausa
script ;  to  Mr.  R.  R.  Marett,  of  Exeter  College,  Oxford,  Reader


xvi  AUTHOR'S NOTE

in  Social  Anthropology,  his  tutor,  who  by  his  wonderful
enthusiasm  and  ability  may  be  said  to  have  organized  a  school
of  working  anthropologists,  building  upon  the  noble  founda-
tions laid  by  Sir  E.  B.  Tylor  and  Dr.  Frazer ;  to  the
authorities  of  the  Clarendon  Press,  who,  besides  dealing  most
generously  with  a  work  not  likely  to  prove  remunerative,
have  likewise  laid  the  author  under  deep  obligation  by
their  friendly  interest  and  advice.

Finally,  the  publication  of  this  work  has  only  been  made
possible  by  the  generous  grant  from  the  Government  of  the
Gold  Coast,  to  whom,  as  also  to  the  Secretary  of  State  for
the  Colonies,  on  whose  recommendation  the  grant  was  made,
the  writer  has  the  honour  to  tender  his  sincerest  thanks.


R.  SUTHERLAND  RATTRAY.


EjURA,  ASHANTI,

WEST  AFRICA.
Sept.  8,  1911.


CONTENTS  OF  VOL.  I

PAGE

PREFACE v

AUTHOR'S  NOTE x

ALPHABET , .  . xix

PART I

A  SHORT  HISTORY,  PURPORTING  TO  GIVE  THE  ORIGIN  OF
THE  HAUSA  NATION  AND  THE  STORY  OF  THEIR  CON-
VERSION TO  THE  MOHAMMEDAN  RELIGION,  pp.  1-35.

PART  II

STORIES  IN  WHICH PEOPLE  ARE  THE  HEROES  AND
HEROINES

1.  The  story  of  the  slave  by  name  'The  World' .  .38.

2.  How  brothers  and  sisters  first  came  to  quarrel  and  hate

each  other  .  50

3.  The  story  of  the  boy  and  the  old  woman,  and  how  the

wasp  got  his  small  waist . . . . . .68

4.  The  story  about  a  beautiful  maiden,  and  how  the  harte-

beest  got  the  marks  under  its  eyes  like  teardrops . . 74

5.  How  the  whip  and  the  '  mara '  spoon  (a  broken  bit  of

calabash)  came  to  the  haunts  of  men .... 80

6.  A  story  about a  chief,  and  how  his sons observed his

funeral,  and  the  origin  of  the  spider . . . . 108

7.  A  story  about  an  orphan,  showing  that  '  he  who  sows  evil,

it  comes  forth  in  his  own  garden ' 1 30

8.  A  story  about  a  witch,  and  how  the  baby  of  the  family

outwitted  her,  and  invented  the  first  walled  town . .162
b


xviii  CONTENTS

PAGE

9.  The  doctor  who  went  a  pilgrimage  to  Mecca  on  a  hyena . 186

10.  A  story  about  a  chief  and  his  cook 200

11.  A  story  about  three  youths  all  skilled  in  certain  things,  and

how  they  used  'that  skill  to  circumvent  a  difficulty  . . 204

12.  A  story  about  a  giant,  and  the  cause  of  thunder  . . .210

13.  A  story  about  an  orphan  which  was  the  origin  of  the  saying

'  The  orphan  with  a  coat  of  skin  is  hated,  but  when  it  is

a  metal  one  he  is  honoured ' . . . . .232

14.  A  story  of  a  jealous  man  and  what  befell  him . . . 248

15.  A  story  of  a  great  friendship  and  how  it  was  put  to  the

test , . 254

1 6.  A  story  about  a  test  of  skill 256

17.  A  story  about  Miss  Salt,  Miss  Pepper,  &c. . . .260

1 8.  The  story  of  Musa  (Moses)  and  how  it  came  about  that

brothers  and  sisters  do  not  marry  each  other. . .274

19.  A  story  about  a  hunter  and  his  son . . . . .284

20.  A  story  about  a  maiden  and  the  pumpkin  .... 300

21.  The  Gawo-tree  and  the  maiden,  and  the  first  person  who

ever  went  mad . . 312


ILLUSTRATION

Modern  Brass  Castings  .....  Frontispiece


ALPHABET  AND  WRITING  SIGNS


The  following  are  the  letters  employed  in  the  Hausa  Text :


HAUSA  NAME  OF  LETTER.*

LETTER.

1  ,

2  s

'5  rt

I.S

REMARKS.

nding  alone.

Ulected  with
bllowing.

o  ^

13 flj
O  *"G

S  o

inected  with
^receding.

3

M •*-!

o
U

J3

U

Alif

\

i

\


The  bearer  of  vowel-sounds

Alif  baki  (black  alif)

I

only,  as  is  also  am,  really
consonants.

Ba  guje

o

b

Guje,  lit.  ba  with  the  twirl.

Ba

*

A

^

Ta  guje

U3

t

Lit.  ta  with  the  twirl.

Ta

»

X

0.

Tsha  guje

0

tsch

Lit.  tsch  with  the  twirl.

Tsha

3

X

&•

Jim  karami  koma  baya

s

j

[hind.
Lit.  small/  with  a  twirl  be-

Jim  karami

£*.

Lit.  small/.

Jim  sabe

2CV.

Lit/with  the  part  projecting.

Jim  sabe  koma  baya

e

Lit./  with  the  part  project-
ing and  a  twirl  behind.

Ha  karami  koma  baya
Ha  karami

t

^

h

Lit.  little  h  pointing  back-
Lit,  little  h. Oards-

Ha  sabe

sv

•£

Lit.A  with  the  part  projecting.

Ha  sabe  koma  baya

Lit.  h  with  the  part  point-
ing backwards.

*  These  names  are  given  by  the  malam  when  teaching  small  children  in  the  masalachi  (schools)
and  are  in  no  way  classical,  just  as  in  English  one  might  say  big  A,  little  a,  &c.


XX


ALPHABET  AND  WRITING  SIGNS


LETTER.

B

0 .

y

-C

—

^

73 ea

HAUSA  NAME  OF  LETTER.

J

£ fcjj

0 ui

•|  ^

.2  p

0 rt

REMARKS.

13

tuo

11

««

"S^

|K

£

0 O

ft;  i—  <

a  5

H  "

4> 03

o  .S

a
•2

cS

C 0

cj-°

C i.

c  cu
o

co

c3

U

Ha  mai-rua  koma  baya

6

h  (as  in
Scotch

Lit.  h  with  the  water  (i.e.
drop,  dot)  and  pointing

loch}

backwards.

Ha  mai-rua

iL

h  with  the  (drop  of)  water.

Ha  sabe  mai-rua

s=v

h  with  the  projecting  part

and  dot.

Ha  sabe  mai-rua  koma  bay  a

^

h  with  the  projecting  part

pointing  backwards.

Dal

o

o

0

cV

d

Zal

0

<3

c>

^

2

Ra

^

^

^

^

r

Zaira

)

;

y

>

z

Tsa  mal  hannu

L

L

k

L

ts

Zadi

b

b

la

.^

z

Kaf  lasan

4

r

s:

iiX.

k

Lam  arat

J

I

Lam

)

Lam  jaye

i

Lam  arat

j-

Mim  arat

r

m

Mim

,0

Mim  jaye

4.

Mim  arat

r

ALPHABET  AND  WRITING  SIGNS


xxi


HAUSA  NAME  OF  LETTER.

LETTER.

Pronunciation
in  Hausa.

REMARKS.

i)

a

13

M

_c

•3

a

Sn

Connected  with
following.

o .

m

§•5

O °

Connected  with
preceding.

Nun  arat

&

•

Nun  guda

i

A

Nun  arat

0

Sodi  arat

(jm

,

Sodi

AO

xa

-

Sodi  arat

^

Lodi  arat

U»

/

Lodi

AO

xi

Lodi  arat

^

Like  alif  bearer  of  vowel-

sounds.

Ain  baki  w5fi  k5ma  baya

<£

—

Lit.  ain  with  the  open  mouth
and  the  twirl  backwards.

Ain  baki  wofi

£

Ain  with  the  open  mouth.

Ain  likafa

A

Stirrup  ain.

Ain  likafa  koma  baya

e

Stirrup  ain  with  the  twirl
back.

V
Angai  baki  wofi  koma  baya

6

t

Angai  with  the  open  mouth
and  the  backward  twirl.

Angai  baki  wofi
Angai  likafa
Angai  likafa  koma  baya

C

3L

2

Angaz'vfith  the  open  mouth.
Stirrup  angai.

Stirrup  angai  vt\\h  the  back-
ward twirl.

Fa  guje

e,

f

f  with  the  twirl.

Fa

9

3L

Fa  guje

^

XX11


ALPHABET  AND WRITING SIGNS


LETTER.

e

d

3

H

^

.2 •

HAUSA  NAME  OF  LETTER.

I

'*  to

O .

*o 1*

'I  ti

1  1

u  rt

REMARKS. •

*rt

-a  .S

4)  ^

'O ^*

^  tTi

.a

S  *

<J O

y  'ua

o  *!

l.s

v  r3

B-^

** ni

1_

*O

S  o

c  15

|

u

d*

U

Kaf  wau

<j

*  (gut-

Mai-rua, lit.  with  the  water,

Kaf  mai-rua

j

A

tural)

i.e.  drop,  dot.

Kaf  wau

a

Sin  arat

u*

s

Sin

AK»

At*

Sin  arat

C^

Schin  mai-rua  arat

cA

sch

Mai-rua,  vide  above,  Kaf.

Schin  mai-rua

A

JUJ

JOA.

Schin  mai-rua  arat

LA

Ha  kuri

V

h

Ha  baba

A

«

Ha  kuri

*

Wau

j

J

>

>

w

Ya  arat

^

y

Ya

.>

A

Ya  arat

C5

ALPHABET  AND WRITING SIGNS xxiii


VOWELS

The  vowel-signs  in  Hausa  are  :

1.  —  (above  the  line)  called  wasali  bisa  =  a.

2.  —  (below  the  line) „ wasali  kasa  =  *'.

3.  —  (below  the  line) „ guda  casa =  e.

4.  —  (above  the  line) „ rufua  =  o  or  u.

Long  vowels  are  distinguished  from  short  vowels  in  writing  as  in
pronunciation,  and  the  length  of  a  vowel  is  of  such  importance  that  the
meaning  of  a  word  is  often  entirely  changed,  or  the  tense  of  a  verb
altered  according  as  a  vowel  is  long  or  short.

Long  vowels  are  distinguished  from  short  in  writing  in  the  following
manner :

1.  A  long  a  sound  by  an  alif  following  the  wasali  bisa  (— ).

2.  A  long  i  sound  by  a_ya  following  the  wasali  kasa  (-— ).

3.  A  long  e  sound  by  -&.ya  following  the  guda  kasa  (-^-).

4.  A  long  o  or  u  sound  by  a  wau  following  the  rufua  (~^~)«

EXAMPLES  :


LONG

VOWELS

SHORT

VOWELS

I. IS

= ba

I. o

=  ba.

2. ,0

-  bl

2. (_J

- bi

3- t>

=  be

3. (_^>

=  be

4- £

=  bo  or  <5#

4. (_^

=  bo  or

^»

DIPHTHONGS

There  are  three  diphthongs  in  Hausa  ;  they  are  written  and  pro-
nounced as  follows  :


i.


=  at  (like  i  in  nice).

2. °« =  au  (like  ow  in  how).

o >

3» fi  =  oi  (like  oy  in  boy).


xxiv ALPHABET AND  WRITING SIGNS
READING SIGNS

1.  (•")  This  is  known  as  karfi  (i.e.  strength). It  is  placed  over  a

consonant,  which  is  then  pronounced  as  if  doubled.

2.  (*)  Called  hamza. It  is  put  above  an  alif  when  the  wasali  is

above,  and  below  when  the  wasali 'is  below.  It  has  no  effect
on  pronunciation.  It  is  not  used  after  a  wasali  lisa  or
kasa  biu.

3.  (?)  Hamza  da  dauri  (hamza  with  a  dauri}  is  placed  over  a  con-

sonant to  indicate  that  a  syllable  is  of  medium  length.

4.  (°)  Dauri  indicates  the  end  of  a  syllable  or  the  omission  of  a

vowel,  and  the  vowel  over  which  it  is  placed  is  doubled  in
pronunciation.  This  is  most  important  as  it  alters  the  mood
in  certain  pronominal  forms  of  the  verb.

By  the  doubling  of  the  vowel-signs  the
final  vowel  is  pronounced  nasally,  that


(— )  Wasali  lisa  bin
(— )  Wasali  kasa  biu
(— )  Rufua  biu


is,  as  if  followed  by  an  n  (nun).  Note
the  alif  following  a  wasali  biu  has  no
hamza.  The  wasali  or  rufua  biu  is
sometimes  used  instead  of  the  final  n to
denote  the  definite  article.

6.  (! ,  1)  Alif  da  tabi,  6isa,  or  kasa  signifies  that  the  alif  and  the
following  letter  are  not  to  be  pronounced  at  all.

R.  S.  R.


PART I
HISTORICAL


s/


2  HISTORICAL

1  Bismi  alahi  alrahmani  alrahimi  wa  sala  alahu  ala  man  la  nabiu  baadahu.
Wanan  shi  ne  labarin  Hausa. Kowa  ya  san  shi  garesu  tun  za-
-manin  kakaninsu  da  uwayensu,  abin  2  karbowa  ne  wurin  ma-
-lamai(n)su  da  tsofafinsu. Wanda  ya  zama  wani,  ba  wanan  ba,
bai  zama  3  mai-chau  garesu  ba. Idan  matanbaiyi  ya  tanbaye  ka,
4  Ana  mafarin  Hausawa  ? ' Ka  che,  '  Gaskla  mafarinsu  4  Barebari
da  5Arewawa.'  Wada  alamari  ya  yi  ya  zama  hakanan. Sarkin  6Barno  shi  na
da  doki  da  kafo  na  zlnaria. 7  Dokin  nan  ba  shi  hanlnia  banza  banza,
sai  ranan  jumaa. Idan  ya  yi  haninia,  sai  ka  che  hadari  ne.
8  Aka-boye  shi  chikin  gida. 9  Sarkin  kua,  shi  na  da  dansa,  ya  10  di-
-nga  baiwa  mai-kiwo  nasa  kurdi  da  rlguna,  domin  shi  fito
da  dokinsa,  su  je,  shi  gama  da  godia  ll  tasa. Kulum  hakanan.
12  Ranan  sai  mai-kiwo  doki  ya  fito  da  doki,  ya  kawo. Dan  sarki
kuma  ya  fito  da  godia  tasa. Su-ka-tafi  daji. Su-ka-yi 13  baye.
14  Sarki  kua  ya  15  rigayi,  ya  fadi. Kowa  16  aka-gani  dan  dokinga

In  the  name  of  Allah  the  Compassionate,  the  Merciful,  and  may  the
peace  of  Allah  be  upon  him,  after  whom  there  is  no  prophet.  This  is  the
history  of  the  Hausa  (nation).  It  has  been  familiar  to  every  one  from
the  time  of  their  grandfathers  and  grandmothers,  (and)  is  a  thing  which
has  been  handed  down  from  the  malamai  (learned  men)  and  the  elders.
Any  account  other  than  this  one  is  not  authentic.  If  a  questioner  ask
of  you  (saying) '  Where  did  the  Hausa  people  have  their  origin  ? '  Say  (to
him)  '  Truly  their  origin  was  (from)  the  Barebari  and  Northerners '.  And
this  is  the  account  of  how  this  came  to  pass.  The  king  of  Bornu  had
a  horse  with  a  golden  horn.  This  horse  did  not  neigh  just  at  any  time,
but  only  on  Fridays.  If  it  neighed  you  would  say  it  was  a  tornado.
It  was  hidden  away  in  a  house.  Now  the  king  had  a  son.  He  (the  son)
continually  gave  him  who  looked  after  the  horse  money  and  robes
in  order  that  (he  might  persuade  him)  to  bring  his  horse  out,  and
they  should  come,  and  he  should  mate  the  horse  with  his  mare.  And
it  was  always  thus.  (And)  one  day  the  man  who  was  looking  after  the
(king's)  horse  took  (it)  the  horse  out  and  brought  it.  The  king's  son  too
took  his  mare  out.  They  went  into  the  forest  and  the  mare  was  covered.
Now  the  king  has  (had)  previously  said  that  whoever  was  seen  (with)  a  foal
from  this  horse


- •zi.r


>  5T4-

"*4f^  fe+ji+x-ifrif  t*  j^f  frfy*  >^S^

- *•£_•  ^VP *r4r/  /  -  7 \s **
_•••  ~  v_|i|T.p4  ^^  / ViiLS»A-  ^T^s  -

T*  ;  •"  .!ittt  ^M  <t^j9Ky^fv_


/«


-> «


4  HISTORICAL

gidansa,  shi-na-yanka  shi. Yau  ana-nan, 1T  ranan  godia  ta  haifu.

Har  da  ya  girma. Ranan  dokin  sarki  ya  yi  hanmia. Sai  dan  doki

ya  amsa. Sai  sarki  ya  che, l  Ko  gidan  wa  aka-gani,  ayanka  shi,  kar

18akawo  shi  gabana.' Sai  fadawa  su-19ka-watsu  chikin  gari. Su-na-

-neman  dan  doki. Sai  su-ka-je  gidan  dan  sarki,  kamar  dokin  sarki

da  kafo  nasa  na  zlnaria. Sai  fadawa  su-ka-che, '  Sarki  ya  che

mu  20  tafo  da  kai.' Sai  dan  sarki  ya  dauki  takobi,  ya  sare

21  mutun  blu,  saura  su-ka-22  watse. Sai  ya  daura  ma  dan  doki

sirdi,  ya  hau. Sarki  ya  che, 23  akamo  shi. Gari  duka  su-ka-hau

dawaki,  su-ka-bi  shi. Ba  su  chika  da  shi  ba. Ya  24  tafia  tasa. Sar-

-ki  kua  ya  che  kar  25  ahawa  doki  nasa. Idan  ba  dokinsa  ba

babu  dokin  da  ke  chikawa  da  shi. Dan  sarki  ya  tafi,  ya  sabka

kasar  26  Daura. Ya  gani  yar  sarkin  Daura,  ita  ke  da  27  garin,  shi  na

wurinta. Sai  ranan  ta  che  28  ta-na-sonsa  aure. Shi  kua  ya  che

shi-na-so  nata. Sai  su-ka-yi  aure. Yar  sarki  ta  yi  chiki,  ta  haifu

da,  namiji,  ta  29yaye.  Ta  yi  chiki  kuma,ta  haifu  mache,Mafarin  30fitarHausawa

at  his  house,  he  would  have  his  throat  cut  Things  remained  at  this,  (and)
one  day  the  mare  gave  birth,  (and  nothing  happened)  till  the  colt  grew
up,  (when)  one  day  the  king's  horse  neighed,  then  the  young  horse
answered.  And  the  king  said, '  At  whose  ever  house  they  see  it  let  (that
person)  be  killed  (lit.  be  cut),  and  do  not  let  him  be  brought  before  me.1
Then  the  councillors  scattered  (to  make  search)  in  the  town.  They  were
searching  for  the  young  horse.  And  they  came  to  the  house  of  the  king's
son,  and  behold  as  it  were  the  king's  horse  with  its  golden  horn.  Then
the  councillors  said,  '  The  king  has  said  we  must  come  with  you.'  Then
the  king's  son  lifted  his  sword.  He  cut  down  two  men,  the  remainder
were  scattered.  Then  he  saddled  up  the  young  horse.  He  mounted.
The  king  ordered  he  should  be  seized  and  brought  (before  him).  The
whole  town  mounted  their  horses  (and)  followed  him.  They  did  not  come
up  with  him.  He  has  gone  his  way.  The  king,  moreover,  has  given
orders  that  his  own  horse  is  not  to  be  mounted,  and  if  not  his  horse,  then
there  was  not  the  horse  to  overtake  him.  The  king's  son  (rode)  went  on
and  (eventually)  dismounted  in  the  country  of  Daura.  He  saw  the  daughter
of  the  king  of  Daura,  she  possessed  the  town.  He  stayed  with  her.  And
one  day  she  said  she  wanted  him  in  marriage  and  he  too  said  he  loved  her.
So  they  married.  The  king's  daughter  became  with  child.  She  bore
a  child,  a  son.  She  weaned  it.  She  was  again  with  child  (and)  bore  a  girl.
And  that  was  the  origin  of  the  Hausa  nation.


jJt)&isJ&*kilk*4tJfi&*%  **

- 1^  ^* iL  Af~

MX^^^Jf^^^^^

\«X  •  O'j ^^ . JT -r  t « ^T


fi«^|ar^i^4  cjfgp^  ^T*

^>s  ^j^>_^te^^^


6  HISTORICAL

ke  nan. Barebari  da  Daurawa  su  ne  kakaninsu. Ama  wajan  Musulumchi
daga  31  Barno  ya  fito. Hausawa,  da  Barebari,  da  kowane  iri,  duka  nan
yanma  da  wuri  kafurai  ne. Saanan  malamai  su-ka-che,  wada  alamari  ya

zama. Akwai

wani  mutun,  chana  Barno,  daga  yayan  sarakunansu,  sunansa  Dalama.
Da  ya  chi  sarauta,  ana-che  masa  Mainadinama. 32  Fasara  tasa,  wai  sarki
33  maabochin  34  rinjaya. Saada  sarauta  tasa  ta  wuche,  watani  sai  ya  a-
-ika  manzo,  zua-ga  halifa. Saanan  kua  35  Abubakari-Sidlku,  yarda(n)  Ala
shi  tabata  gareshi,  shi  ne  halifa. Ka  ga  mafarin  aikawa  tasa,  chewa
36  wanchananka  mutun  ya  kashe,  shi-na-jin  labarin  Musulumchi  tun
bai  chi  sarauta  ba. Ka  ga  sunan  manzo  nasa,  da  ya  aika,  su-
-nansa  Gujalo. Sailin  da  manzo  ya  zo,  ya  iske  halifa,  batun
yaki  ya  dauki  hankalinsa,  bai  che  ma  manzo  komi  ba,  sai  ya  che
da  shi  zamna  nan,  saanan  bai  koma  tuna  magana  tasa,  domin
daukan  hankalinsa  da  maganar  yaki  na  37  mazowan  tawaye.  Manzo  ya  za-
-mna  chana,  har  manzo  ya  mutu. Bayan  wata  uku  da  kwanaki  kadan
saanan  Halifa  Abubakari  Sidiku  shi  kuma  ya  mutu. Bayan  watani
sailinda  aka-aje  38  Umaru  Ibunuhutabi. Shi  ne  Halifa  bayan  Abubakari

The  Barebari  and  Daura  people  were  their  ancestors.  But  the  Mohammedan
religion,  as  far  as  that  is  concerned,  from  Bornu  it  came.  Hausas  and  Barebari
and  whatever  race  (you  can  name)  in  the  West  were  at  first  in  early  times
pagans.  Then  the  malamai  (scribes)  said  that  this  is  what  happened.
There  was  a  certain  man  away  there  at  Bornu  from  among  the  children
of  their  royal  house,  his  name  (was)  Dalama.  When  he  came  to  the  throne
he  was  called  Mainadinama,  the  meaning  of  that  is,  '  a  chief  more  powerful
than  any  other.'  After  he  had  reigned  for  some  months  then  he  sent
a  messenger  to  the  Caliph.  Now  at  this  time  Abubakari-Sidiku,  the
blessing  of  Allah  be  upon  him,  he  was  Caliph.  You  have  seen  the
beginning  of  his  being  sent,  referring  back  to  that  man  (Mainadinama),
was  that  he  was  hearing  about  Mohammedanism  before  he  succeeded  to
the  kingdom.  Behold  the  name  of  his  envoy  whom  he  sent,  his  name  was
Gujalo.  At  the  time  when  the  envoy  came  he  found  the  Caliph's  attention
occupied  with  a  war.  He  said  nothing  to  the  envoy.  All  he  said  was,
'  Remain  here.'  Then  he  did  not  again  remember  his  words  because  his  mind
was  so  occupied  with  words  of  the  war  of  the  father  of  the  twins.  The
messenger  remained  there  till  the  messenger  died.  After  three  months
and  a  few  days  then  the  Caliph  Abubakari  Sidiku  he  too  died.  After
some  months  Umaru  Ibunuhutabi  was  set  up.  He  was  the  Caliph  after
Abubakari


^30 -a*jd  >  •  %


ofytffi*.  j*2*gH**  ^  ^x

-  * to  '^fej  ^^U&Jj^^  <*^


M&?M»rjn?

*'jJaSaW?»P^^


x^ L  V  >  ~"l

t,  "j^r^l^x  «^fH

^V  -1 .. —  ^ M ->

^^ Ak  -r  ^»  -cr  I •»  XT  *?  Z. .  I* ^k. &  3


8  HISTORICAL

Asidiku. Sai  ya  tuna  alamarin  manzo  da  mutua  tasa. Saanan  su-ka-yi

shawara  su  sauran  39  sahabai. Su-ka-gama  kai  bisa  aaika,

zua  Barno  manzo. Aka-aiki  Umaruasi,  da  takardu  na  Alkorani.

Aka-che  rubutun  Abdulahi  dan  Umoru  hallfa,  da  rawam,  da  takobl,

da  40  kasausawa,  da  41  garkua,  da  *2  fular  sarauta,  da  tarkache  ma-

-suyawa,  da  akushl. Dukanta  keauta  ne,  daga  halifa,  zua  Maina-

-dinama. Sailin  da  manzo  ya  kusa,  sai  ya  aika  garesu,  wanda

43  kasanashe  su  labarin  zuansa. Sarkin  Barno,  da  mutane(n)sa,

su-ka-hau  dawaki,  su-ka-gamu  da  shi  nlsa. Sailin  da  ya  shiga  gari-

-nsa  sai  ya  nada  masa  rawani,  ya  44  sabunta  sarauta  tasa,  ya  sa

masa  suna,  Sarkin  Barno,  ya  ba  shi  dukan  abinda  aka-che

shi  ba  shi,  domin  kyeauta  wanan  da  aka-aiko  da  ita  gareshi.

Ya  zamna  garesu. Shi-na-sanashe  su  admin  Ala,  da  sunno-

-ni  manzo  nasa,  tsira  da  aminchin  Ala,  shi  tabala  garesu.

Sun  kashe,  su-na-girmama  shi, 4S  matukan  ban  girma,  su-na-neman

albarka  da  sauran  kalachi  nasa,  da  abinchinsa,  da  wurin  aje.


Asidiku.  Then  he  called  to  mind  the  report  of  the  envoy  and  his  death.
Then  they  held  a  consultation,  they  his  friends  who  remained.  They
joined  their  heads  about  the  question  of  sending  an  envoy  to  Bornu.
Umaruasi  was  sent  with  manuscripts  of  the  Koran.  It  was  said  the
writing  of  Abdulahi  the  son  of  Umoru  the  Caliph,  and  turbans  and
a  sword  and  spears  and  shields  and  the  kingly  fez  and  such  things  and
plates;  all  these  presents  from  the  Caliph  to  Mainadinama.  When  the
envoy  drew  near  he  sent  to  them  one  to  acquaint  them  of  the  news  of  his
coming.  The  king  of  Bornu  and  his  men  mounted  their  horses  and  met
him  afar  off.  When  he  (the  envoy)  entered  his  town,  then  he  bound  the  turban
on  him,  he  was  established  in  his  right  to  the  kingdom,  he  was  given  the  name
of  the  king  of  Bornu,  he  (the  king)  gave  him  everything  he  was  told  to
give  him,  because  of  the  presents  which  he  (the  envoy)  had  been  sent  with
for  him.  He  lived  among  them.  He  was  instructing  them  (the  people
of  Bornu)  in  the  creed  of  Allah  and  the  names  of  His  messengers,  may  the
salvation  and  trust  of  Allah  be  assured  to  them.  They  continued  to  honour
him,  to  the  extreme  that  honour  could  be  carried.  They  sought  a  blessing
(by  eating)  the  remains  of  his  meals  and  his  food  and  from  the  spot  (he)  set


Htap*99*r^

^-**l- i&iMt


-••


^AJ|MWW^«


-.•ic.i Ayt+iij&A  iSUikiCJ ^  <\( 4
\y
Ut°


c^i^^su^u-^

— c>^^  _  o • o — •  .1  __ >_»


io  HISTORICAL

kafafu  nasa. Sashensu  su-na-neman  albarka  da  flatachen  majina

tasa  da  miawunsa. Su-na-hawan  46  shigifu,  domin  ganinsa. Su-na-neman

alberka  kuma  da  shafan  tufafi  nasa,  da  takalminsa,  da  bulala

tasa,  har  aka-che,  su-na-neman  albarka  da  daba  tasa,  da  sauran  harawa

tasa,  da  toroso  nata. Ya  rubuta  masu  takardu  kuma,  da  rubu-

-tun  hannu  nasa,  mai-alberka. Ya  zamna  bisa  hakanan  matukan

zamani,  har  aka-che  gareshi,  wadansu  mazowan  kasa  su-na

bayanka,  su-na-so  Musulumchi  indaa  sun  gane  ka,  daa  sun  bi  ka.

Bai  gaskata  ba,  sai  ya  aiki  mai-tono  boye,  ba  asan  sunansa  ba.

Ya  tafi,  ya  yi  yawo  chikin  kasan  Hausa. Ya  tone  ya  ji  su-na-yabo

Musulumchi,  su-na-so  nasa. Ya  komo,  ya  baiwa  Umaru  Ibunua-

-si  labari. Umaru  Ibunuasi  ya  gaia  ma  mutanensa,  ya  che

su  tafi. Su-ka-yarda. Saanan  ya  yi  shiri. Ya  aiki  Abdulkarimu-

-Mukaila  zua  Kano. Kwatamchin  mutun  dari  uku,  Larabawa,  su-ka-bi  shi.

Sailin  da  Abdulkarimu  ya  kusa  da  su,  sai  ya  aiki  wanda

ke-gaia  masu. Ya  zo,  ya  che, '  Gaia  masu  manzo  na  manzo  ya  zo.'

his  feet  Half  of  them  were  seeking  blessing  from  the  mucus  from  his
nose  and  his  spittle  (by  rubbing  it  on  their  persons).  They  were  climbing
the  roofs  in  order  to  see  him.  They  also  sought  blessing  by  touching  his
robes  and  his  slippers  and  his  whip,  until  it  was  even  said  they  looked  for
a  blessing  from  his  beasts,  and  the  remains  of  their  fodder  and  their  dung.
Now  he  wrote  manuscripts  for  them  in  the  writing  of  his  own  hand,  the
blessed  one.  He  lived  amid  such  works  up  to  the  very  end  of  (his)  sojourn
(and  this  went  on)  till  he  was  informed  that,  '  Other  owners  of  (another)
land  are  behind  you  (and)  are  wishing  for  the  Mohammedan  religion,
should  they  see  you  they  would  follow  you.'  He  did  not  give  (this  report)
credence  until  he  had  sent  one  to  spy  out  (the  land),  his  name  is  unknown.
He  (the  spy)  went  and  travelled  over  Hausa-land.  He  made  secret
inquiries,  he  heard  they  were  praising  the  Mohammedan  faith  and  that
they  wished  for  it.  He  returned  and  gave  Umaru  Ibunuasi  the  news.
Umaru  Ibunuasi  told  his  people.  He  said  they  must  go  (and  preach  the
Mohammedan  religion).  They  agreed.  Then  he  made  preparations.  He
sent  Abdulkarimu-Mukaila  to  Kano.  About  300  men,  Arabs,  followed
him.  When  Abdulkarimu  was  near  to  them  (the  people  of  Kano)  then  he
sent  one  to  inform  them.  He  (the  messenger)  came  and  said,  *  Tell  them
the  envoy  of  the  envoy  has  come.'


™fy  A*.  s*  ''fcl  &J&tep&&&  *2jfe

^i^4^  t^^7  9^

%&&3^>tja^J>i&&

t  __o. ^ ^^  ^^*  ^^^ >•«»  ^^  • ^  „.


A>  ^^r  ^%  ^a^S|U

)%ii^^^j^%jA  ;jK>^


M%


12  HISTORICAL

Sailin  da  ya  zo  masu  ya  gaia  masu  abinda  aka-aiko  shi  da  shi.
Su-ka-gaskata  shi,  su-ka-karbi  abinda  ya  zo  da  shi. Sailin  Kano
ta  kashe  alkaria  che,  ama  babu  birni,  sunan  47  mutanen  Kano,
Muhamadu-da-Jakara,  sailin  da  Abdulkarimu  ya  sabka  garesu.
Ya  rubuta  masu  litafi  da  rubutun  hannu  nasa,  mai-albarka,
domin  bai  zo  musu  da  litafi  ba,  daga  wajen  Umaru  Ibunu(l)asi.
Domin  hakanan  alamari  ya  kashe,  dukan  wanda  ke  so  shi  iya
rubutu  mai-chau,  sai  shi  tafi  zua  Barno,  shi  zamna  chana,  saanan
shi  komo. Ama  Abdulkarlmu  ya  kashe  shi-na-sanashe  su
sharaa  Ala,  da  hukumchin  sharaa,  har  su-ka-tanbaye  shi  abubua
da  ba  su  kasan  Larabawa. Bai  san  jawabin  da  zaa  shi  gaia  masu  ba.
Sai  ya  che  da  su,  su  bari  har  shi  komo. Akwai  daga  abinda
su-ka-tanbaye  shi,  tunku  da  yanyawa,  da  gafia,  da  budari,  da  tsara,
da  waninsa. Ya  zamna  garesu  watani,  kowache  rana  shi-na
-sanache  su  Alkorani  da  Hadisai,  masu-chau,  har  aka-che
da  shi,  '  Akwai  wata  alkaria  kusa  da  alkaria  nan,  ana-che  mata  Kashina,


When  he  came  to  them  he  told  them  what  (message)  he  had  been  sent
with.  They  believed  him,  they  received  the  thing  which  he  had  brought.
Now  at  this  time  Kano  was  an  unenclosed  town  but  not  a  walled  town,
the  name  of  the  men  (man)  at  Kano  (was)  Muhamadu  Dajakara  at  the  time
when  Abdulkarimu  alighted  amongst  them.  He  (Abdulkarimu)  wrote
them  books  in  the  writing  of  his  own  hand,  the  blessed  one,  because  he
had  not  come  to  them  bringing  books  from  Umaru  Ibunu(l)asi.  And  thus
it  has  come  to  be  reported  that  every  one  who  wished  to  be  able  to  write
well  let  him  set  out  towards  Bornu  and  remain  there  (till  he  had  learned  to
write)  and  then  return  (home).  But  Abdulkarimu  continued  to  instruct
them  the  laws  of  Allah  and  the  commands  of  the  law  until  they  made
inquiries  about  things  which  were  not  (to  be  found)  in  Arabia.  He  did
not  know  what  answer  to  give  them.  Then  he  said  to  them  to  leave  the
matter  open  till  he  returned  (to  Arabia).  Among  the  things  they  were
asking  about  were  panthers,  and  civet-cats,  and  rats,  and  servals,  and  tiger
cats,  and  such  like  (whether  clean  or  unclean).  He  lived  with  them  (many)
months  (and)  every  day  instructed  them  well  in  the  Koran  and  the
Traditions,  till  at  length  he  was  informed, '  There  is  another  town  near  this
town,  it  is  called  Katsina,


» A


i4  HISTORICAL

indaa  sun  gane  ka,  mutanen  48  garin,  daa  sun  bada  gaskia  gareka  da  wanda
ya  aiko  ka. Sailin  da  ya  ji  hakanan,  sai  ya  yi  shiri,  ya  tafi  da  kansa,  zua
gareta. Sailin  da  su-ka-ji  labari  zuansa,  sai  su-ka-gamu  da  shi  msa.
Sailin  da  ya  sabka  garesu,  ya  sanashe  su  abinda  ya  sanashe  su,  ya  fori
wanda  ke  rubuta  musu  litafi. Aka-che,  chewa  shia,  bai  rubuta
musu  Alkorani  ba  da  hannu  nasa,  domin  hakanan  ne,  mutanen  Kano  sun  san
Alkorani,  sun  fi  mutanen  Kashina  har  yau. Saanan  bayan  karewa
tasa  daga  alamarin  Kashina,  sai  ya  koma  zua  Kano,  ya  zamna  kadan.
Saanan,  sailin  da  ya  yi  nufi  komawa  zua  Barno,  ya  die  da  su,
'  Da  sannu  naa  komo  gareku  da  jawabai  abinda  ku  ka  tanbaye  ni
gareta.' Saanan  ya  tashi,  ya  tafi. Ama  dayawa  chikin  mutanensa  ba

su  bi  shi  ba,

sai  kadan  su-ka-bi  shi  chikinsu. Saura  su  ka  zamna,  su-na  abin  girmamawa
chikin  Kano. Danginsu  sun  kashe  mabayana  sananu  chikin  Kano
har  yau,  har  mutane  su-ka-che  masu  sharifai,  aa  ba  sharifai  ba  ne
su  dai  Larabawa  ne. Hakikan  Abdulkarimu  ya  sainya  alkali
chikin  Kano,  da  shugaban  sala,  da  mai-yanka,  da  wanda  ke  sanada  yara,

should  the  people  of  the  town  see  you  they  would  believe  you  and  him
who  sent  you.'  When  he  heard  (them  speak)  thus,  then  he  made  ready.
He  set  out  himself  to  go  to  it  (the  town).  When  they  got  news  of  his
coming,  then  they  met  with  him  afar  off.  When  he  alighted  among  them
he  taught  them  about  what  (he  had  come)  to  instruct  them  in.  He
instructed  one  who  was  to  write  books  for  them.  It  was  said,  speaking
of  him,  he  did  not  write  the  Koran  with  his  own  hand,  and  because  of  this
the  Kano  people  surpass  the  Katsina  in  their  knowledge  of  the  Koran  till
to-day.  Then,  after  the  completion  of  his  work  at  Katsina,  he  went  back,
going  to  Kano,  (and)  remained  there  a  short  time.  Then  when  he  thought
of  returning  to  go  to  Bornu  he  said  to  them,  '  Shortly  I  shall  return  to
you  with  the  answer  to  what  you  were  asking  about.'  Then  he  rose  up
and  went  away.  But  many  among  his  people  did  not  follow  him,  only
a  few  among  them  followed  him.  The  rest  remained  and  continued  to
perform  great  deeds  in  Kano.  Their  descendants  are  found  (and)  known
in  Kano  until  to-day,  till  people  called  them  seraphs,  but  surely  they  were
not  seraphs,  they  were  just  Arabs.  Of  a  truth  Abdulkarimu  has  set  up
a  judge  in  Kano,  and  one  to  lead  in  prayers,  and  one  to  slaughter  (live
stock),  and  one  who  was  to  instruct  the  youths


jy,  J4KNM»*tJ#£  •**#-

-^r_Sx...*«T,  .  V,°aTot>i*  j«Ai*l^  jfrJiSEr


,«

=^f/


•%  M

«f  L.z


^&&^&^^  r^

U >  i,i  , .  I  7> fe  f  JTr  1^^2l  J^U


(  jjU^ )";§;'i;j

^S^^'AfMffM^fK


syfav.ysftffjfff'*'  «*@s  i

.^^^i^ffi

fiSAUJ  fei^^A^i-  r^-


, ,«,

^ta/,


r^JUf u  ^Wy^^er'r*  ^
^^^^^^(^^^


%>«/•]


1 6  HISTORICAL

Alkorani,  da  mai-kiran  salla.  Ya  halalta  masu  abinda  Ala  ya  halalta,  ya  hana

masu  abinda  Ala  ya  hana. Sailin  da  ya  koma  zua  ga  Umaru  Ibunula-

-si,  ya  ba  shi  labari  da  abinda  su-ka-tanbaye  shi. Sai  Umani  Ibunula-

-si  ya  yi  kurum,  bar  ya  koma  zua  ga  hallfa,  saanan  ya  aiko  da  jawa-

-binta,  bayan  wata  shida. Ya  halalta  masu  sashenta,  ya  hane  su

sashe. Ama  Abdulkarimu  bai  koma  zua  Barno  ba,  bayan

komawa  tasa  zua  garinsu,  ko  zua  Kano. Hakanan  Umaru

Ibunulasi,  ama  ya  yi  sarautar  Masar,  bayan  komawa  tasa

gida. Ama  sauran  garurua,  su-na-zua,  sashe  zua  Kano  domin

sanin  adini,  sashe  kua  zua  Kashina,  har  adini  ya  chika  kasan

Hausa  dukanta. Sai  kasan  49  Kabi,  chewa  su,  sun  ki

Musulumchi,  su-ka-tabata  bisa  Kafirchinsu. Su-ka-tabata  chikinsa.

Sarakunansu  sun  kashe,  sunansu,  Barbarma,  Argqji,

Tabariu,  Zartai,  Gobari,  Dadafani,  Katami,  Bardo,  Kudamdam

Sharia,  Badoji,  Karfu,  Darka,  Gunba,  Katatar,  Tamu.

Wadanan  dukansu  sun  ki  Musulumchi  bayan  shiga  tasa  kasan


in  the  Koran,  and  one  to  call  (them)  to  prayer.  He  made  lawful  for  them
that  which  Allah  had  made  lawful,  and  forbade  that  which  Allah  had
forbidden.  When  he  returned  to  go  to  Umaru  Ibunulasi  he  gave  him  an
account  of  what  they  had  asked  him  about.  And  Umaru  Ibunulasi  was
silent  (on  the  subject)  till  he  returned  to  go  to  the  Caliph  and  then  he  sent
an  answer  to  it  (the  question)  after  six  months  had  elapsed.  He  made
lawful  for  them  half  of  it,  half  he  made  unlawful.  But  Abdulkarimu  did
not  return  to  Bornu  after  his  return  to  their  (his,  Abdulkarimu's)  town
or  to  Kano.  Thus  (also)  Umaru  Ibunulasi,  but  he  ruled  over  Egypt  after
his  return  home.  Now  the  remainder  of  the  towns  were  coming  in,  half
of  them  to  Kano  in  order  to  know  about  the  (new)  religion,  and  half  also
to  Katsina,  until  the  creed  filled  all  Hausa-land.  Now  the  Kibi  country,
speaking  of  them,  they  refused  (to  adopt)  the  Mohammedan  religion,  they
continued  in  their  paganism.  They  persisted  in  it.  Their  kings,  (these)
were  their  names,  Barbarma,  Argoji,  Tabariu,  Zartai,  Gobari,  Dadafani,
Katami,  Bardo,  Kudamdam,  Sharia,  Badoji,  Karfu,  Darka,  Gunba,  Katatar,
Tamu.  All  these  refused  the  Mohammedan  creed  after  his  advent  into
the  land


1 8  HISTORICAL

Hausa. Saanan  sailin  da  Zaidu  ya  chi  sarauta,  sai  ya  musulumta  da  wadanda
ke  tare  da  shi,  kasan  Kabi  ta  musulumta,  zua  wakatin  Bata-Musa ;  wadanan
su  ne  sarakai  Kabi  chikin  Musulumchi. Farinsu,  Zaidu,  Muhamadu,
Namakata,  Sulaimana,  Hisrikoma,  Abdulahi,  Dunbaki,  Alia,
Usmanu,  Chisgari,  Barbarmanaba,  Muwashi,  Muhamadu-Karfi,  Bata-
-Musa. Bayansu  Fumu  ya  yi  sarauta. Ya  juya  Musulumchi  da  Kafurchi.
Wadanan  su  ne  wadanda  su-ka-kafurta. Farinsu,  Fumu,
Kautai,  Gunba,  Sakana-Murtamu,  Kanta,  Rataini,  Gaiwa,  Gado,
Masu,  Chidagora,  Gabangari,  Maikebe,  Marshakoki,  Lazimu,
Mashirana,  Makata. Wadanan  su  ne  dukansu  sun  tabata  chikin  Ka-
furchi. Sailin  da  Kanta  ya  chi  sarauta,  ya  sabunta  Musulumchi,  ya  tanbayi
malamai  abinda  ke  chikin  litafi. Ya  tsaida  adini  chikin  zamaninsa  da  wada-
-nda  ke  bie  da  shi,  har  kasan  Kabi  duka  ta  musulumta. Wanan  shi  ne  su-
-nansu. Kantahu,  Gofe,  Dauda,  Hamidu,  Sulaimana,  Malu,
Ishaka,  Muhamadu-Nashawi,  Amum,  Muhamadu- Kabe,  Kantanabaiwa,
Muhomadu-Shlfaya,  Hamidu. Wadanan  dukansu  sun  tabata  chikin

Musulumchi.

of  the  Hausas.  Then  at  the  time  when  Zaidu  came  to  the  throne  [then]
he  became  a  Mohammedan  and  those  who  were  with  him.  The  Kabi
country  became  Mohammedan  up  to  the  time  of  Bata-Musa.  These  were
the  kings  of  Kabi  under  the  Mohammedan  regime.  The  first  of  them
was  Zaidu,  (then)  Muhamadu,  Namakata,  Sulaimana,  Hisrikoma,  Abdulahi,
Dunbaki,  Alia,  Usmanu,  Chisgari,  Barbarmanaba,  Muwashi,  Muhamadu-
Karfi,  Bata-Musa.  After  them  Fumu  ruled.  He  turned  Mohammedanism
into  paganism.  These  were  they  who  became  pagans.  The  first  of  them
(was)  Fumu,  (then)  Kautai,  Gunba,  Sakana-Murtamu,  Kanta,  Rataini,
Gaiwa,  Gado,  Masu,  Chi-da-gora,  Gaban-gari,  Maikebe,  Marshakoki,
Lazimu,  Mashirana,  Makata.  These  were  they  who  all  continued  in
paganism.  At  the  time  when  Kanta  ruled  he  revived  the  Mohammedan
religion  (and)  inquired  of  the  learned  men  the  contents  of  (their)  books.
He  established  the  faith  in  his  time  and  in  that  of  them  who  followed
him,  till  the  whole  of  the  Kabi  country  became  Mohammedan.  These
were  their  names,  Kantahu,  Gofe,  Dauda,  Hamidu,  Sulaimana,  Malu,
Ishaka,  Muhamadu-Nashawi,  Amuru,  Muhamadu- Kabe,  Kantanabaiwa,
Muhamadu- Shifaya,  Hamidu.  All  these  continued  in  the  Mohammedan
faith.


£gF&&g£i  6j»jft3g)  *l^Lg#


Mj>4  asi^t^^i^  &t2*  ja^w
£%  4^^UUji  ^fc^ieUAtMr  &/4


c^«


^K' ,A.  «^ t..>^  ^1

k ^f^^^^^^m

^^"  ^  -  *• A


;.  '^(SUr^^Us  /MI^JWiP>^w!S

i-^^^>l^JiUy-  ^.u  «a§>i«>

^X  • vX ^^  y^^


20  HISTORICAL

Sailin  da  Barbarma  ya  yi  sarauta,  ya  musaya  Musulumchi,  ya  zama  Ka-

-furchi. Kafurchi  ya  tabata  zua  wakatin  Hudu. Shi  ne  wananda  Usmanu

dan  Fodio  ya  yi  yaki  da  shi. Ya  kore  shi,  har  ya  kashe  shi

kusa  da  Kebi. Buhari  dan  Abdu-Salami,  shi  ya  kashe  shi. Shi  ne

sarkin  Jega. Danginsu  su  ne  sarakaita  zua  yau. Ya  kare.

Ama  chikin  Kano  adlni  ya  tabata  bayan  komawa  tasa,  shi

Abdulkarimu,  admi  ya  dinga  dadua  kulum,  da  girma  da  daukaka.

Ya  tabata  bisa  hakanan  shekaru  dayawa,  zua  wakatin  50  Mainamugabadi.

Shi  ne  wanda  ya  juya  abinda  Abdulkarimu  ya  aje. Ya  walakanta

suna,  ya  daukaka  sarauta,  ya  walakanta  Musulumchi,  ya  girmama

gumakai,  ya  yi  girman  kai,  ya  yi  shishigi. Masu-waazu  su-ka-

yi  masa  waazu,  bai  anpane  shi  ba  waazunsu  sai  ya  dada  gir-

-mankai. Shi-na-51alfahari.  Ya  tabata  bisa  hakanan  har  ya  mutu.  Danuwa-

-nsa  Kunbari  ya  zamna  mazamninsa,  ya  bi  tafarkinsa.

Ya  tabata  ga  wanan  har  wakatin  Runfa. Shi  kuma  ya  dada  Kafurchi

da  shishigi. Shi  ne  wanda  ya  aure  budrua  alif. Ya  yi  foro  da

yin  afi  da  turbla  gaba  gareshi,  saan  gaisua. Ya  che,

When  Barbarma  became  king  he  changed  the  Mohammedan  religion  (and)
became  a  pagan.  Paganism  lasted  up  to  the  time  of  Hudu.  He  was  the
one  Usmanu  the  son  of  Fodio  made  war  against.  He  drove  him  out  (and
pursued  him)  till  he  slew  him  near  to  Kebi.  Buhari  the  son  of  Abdu-
-Salimi,  he  it  was  who  slew  him.  He  was  the  king  of  Jega.  His  family
are  its  kings  till  to-day.  It  is  finished.  But  as  for  Kano  in  (it)  the  faith
continued  after  his,  Abdulkarimu's,  return  (home).  The  faith'continued  to
increase  always  with  force  and  power.  And  it  lasted  on  such  footing  for
many  years  until  the  time  of  Mainamugabadi.  It  was  he  who  changed
the  order  of  things  Abdulkarimu  had  set  up.  He  set  at  naught  the  law
(of  Mahomed),  he  made  the  kingship  all  powerful,  he  disregarded  the
Mohammedan  faith,  he  exalted  fetish  worship,  and  was  arrogant.|  He
surpassed  (all  his  predecessors  in  evil).  Instructors  endeavoured  to  instruct
him,  but  their  admonitions  were  of  no  avail  against  him,  but  he  increased
in  pride.  He  was  vainglorious.  He  continued  thus  till  he  died.  His
brother  Kunbari  reigned  in  his  stead  and  followed  in  his  ways.  He  too
continued  in  this  (evil)  till  the  time  of  Kunfa.  He  also  spread  paganism
and  evildoing.  It  was  he  who  married  1,000  maidens.  He  instructed
(people)  to  prostrate  themselves  and  put  earth  on  their  heads  before
saluting  him.  He  said,


Ut&^^-^^/ra^ki
"  ^iWHwaW  ¥*$**  ^?


/ '


?  OK  Lah  4^>^-  ^/


jg**¥t?  wjnmKlf  W??*

^C.,  r ^Srtf  -  grt^7 f^,  ^^ ^  rV^g

v  /M  CA^X
•^Zir^i-  ^Lf-  ^


fi^^f**aMkVi


^^^iaa^  ^.ij^^Li

££&i£ftr  ^iiJiu-  iSaa^  ^t«J


22  HISTORICAL

kar  akirayi  wanda  sunansa  ya  katarta  da  sunan

uwayensa  sai  da  52  alkunia. Ya  bata  adini  dukansa,  ya  sai  da

yaya,  ya  ginan  gidan  sarauta,  wanan  da  sarakai  Kano  ke  shiga

bar  yau. Ya  aikata  abinda  ya  so. Hakanan  mutanen  kasan  Kano

dukansu,  sai  dai  daia  chewa  su,  su-na-riko  53  suna,

babu  girma  garesu, 54  fa  che  mutanen  kasan  Kano  ba  su

san  dafuan  gia  ba,  sai  kadan  chikinsu,  mutanen  kauye.

Hakanan  ba  su  chin  mushe. Su-na-55kachia  matansu,  su-na-

-rufe  kanunsu  da  lulubi. Ba  su  wani  aiki  sai  wanan. Su-ka-

-tabata  bisa  hakanan  har  aka-samu  malamai  chikin  Kano,  mai-gudu-

-ndunia,  mai-tsoro  Ala. Sunansa  Muhamadu-Zari. Ya  tsaya

da  waazu,  Runfa  bai  ji  ba  kowanin  abinda  ya  ke  yi  masu  waazu

da  shi. Sai  su-ka-yi  dabara  chikin  kashinsa,  har  su-ka-kashe  shi

da  dare,  kashin  66  gila,  chikin  tafarkin  masalachi,  ya  kwana  57  yankake,

ya  58  sashe,  har  gari  ya  wave. Aka-bisna  shi  wakatin  luha.

Kushewa  tasa  69  sananla  che  chikin  Kano. Ana-ziara  tata


let  not  him  whose  name  happened  to  be  the  same  as  that  of  his  parents
be  called  so,  but  (let  him  be  called)  by  some  sobriquet.  He  completely
destroyed  the  creed,  he  sold  free  men,  he  built  a  palace,  the  one  which
the  kings  of  Kano  enter  to-day.  He  did  what  he  wished.  And  it  was
so  with  all  the  people  of  Kano  except  a  very  few,  speaking  of  them,  they
kept  to  the  Mohammedan  faith,  they  were  not  powerful,  only  the  Kano
people  did  not  know  how  to  make  beer,  except  a  few  among  them,  men  in
outlying  villages.  Thus  they  did  not  eat  any  animal  that  had  died  a  natural
death.  They  removed  the  clitoris  of  their  women,  they  covered  their
heads  with  a  veil.  They  did  nothing  else  but  this.  They  continued  in
such  (conduct)  until  learned  men  were  found  in  Kano,  who  had  renounced
the  world,  who  feared  Allah.  (Of  these  learned  men  one)  his  name  was
Muhamadu-Zari.  He  stood  up  and  preached.  Rumfa  paid  no  heed  to
whatever  admonitions  he  admonished  them.  But  they  planned  to  kill  him,
till  at  last  they  did  kill  him  in  the  night  by  slaying  him  from  behind,
in  the  road  to  the  mosque,  and  he  lay  (there)  murdered,  cast  aside,  till
dawn.  He  was  buried  about  eight  in  the  morning.  His  grave  is  known  in
Kano,  it  is  visited


.V*&&i*


»4  HISTORICAL

ana-tsaro  nata,  ana-che  da  shi 60  mai-kalgo,  ana-neman  albarka  da  adua

gareshi. Saanan  Abdulahi-Sako  ya  tsaya  bayansa. Shi-na-waazu,

ba  su  ji  ba  gareshi,  sai  walakantatu,  ama  mainya  mainya  ba  su  ji  ba.

Sai  su-ka-ba  shi  tsoro,  har  ya  fita,  ya  gudu,  zua  kauye,  domin

shi  yi  ma  mutanen  kauye  waazu. Saanda  sarki  ya  aiki  wanda  ke  ka-

-mo  shi. Su-ka-kamo  shi,  su-ka-dinga  bugunsa,  har  su-ka-kawo

shi. Shi-na  maras  lafia. Ya  mutu  bayan  kwanaki  kadan. Kushewa

tasa  sanania  che  bayan  61  gwoboron  dutsi,  ama  ba  aziara  tasa,  ba

atsaro  nasa. Kafurchi  ya  tabata  hakanan  har  wakatin  Muhamadu-Alwali.

Shi  ne  wanan  62  Usmanu  dan  Fodio  ya  yi  yaki  da  shi,  bayan

zamansa  chikin  sarauta  shekara  goma  sha.bakwoi. Ya  fita  shi

da  mutanensa,  ya  gudu,  zua  63  sasan  dama. Wani  bai  san  wurin  da  ya

zamna  ba

har  yau,  aka-che  Barnabarna,  aka-che  ba  nan  ba. Malami  su-ka-che  tun  zuan
Abdulkarimu,  har  zua  zamani  Usmanu  dan  Fodio,  saraki
sabain  da  shida. Kushewansu  dukansu  ta  tabata  chikin  birnin  Kano,
biu,  Bawa  da  Muhamadu-Alwali,  ama  chikin  Kashina.  Admi  ya  tabata  bayan

and  watched  over,  he  was  called  'the  Kalgo  man',  blessings  are  sought
by  prayers  being  made  for  him.  Then  Abdulahi-Sako  stood  up  (to
proclaim  the  creed)  after  him.  He  was  admonishing  them  but  they  paid
no  heed  to  him,  except  some  people  of  no  importance,  but  those  in
authority  did  not  hear.  And  they  frightened  him  so  that  he  fled  to  the
outlying  towns  in  order  to  instruct  the  people  of  the  lesser  towns.  Then
the  king  sent  one  to  seize  him.  They  seized  him,  and  continually  flogged
him  till  he  was  brought  before  (the  king).  He  was  (by  this  time)  ill  and
died  after  a  few  days.  His  grave  is  known,  (it  lies)  behind  the  rock
(known  as)  '  the  single  rock ',  but  it  is  not  visited  or  watched  over.  And
so  it  came  to  pass  that  paganism  existed  till  the  time  of  Muhamadu-Alwali.
It  was  he  Usmanu,  the  son  of  Fodio,  made  war  on,  after  he  had  ruled
in  the  kingdom  for  seventeen  years.  He  (Usmanu-dan-Fodio)  drove  him
out  and  his  men,  he  fled  in  the  direction  of  the  country  on  the  right  and
none  know  where  he  settled  till  this  day,  (some)  say  Barnabarna  (some)
say  it  was  not  there.  The  learned  men  said  that  from  the  coming  ot
Abdulkarimu  till  the  coming  of  Usmanu,  the  son  of  Fodio,  there  were
seventy-six  kings.  All  their  graves  have  remained  in  the  town  of  Kano,
but  two  of  them,  that  of  Bawa  and  Muhamadu-Alwali,  are  in  Katsina.
The  creed  continued  after


*""*  cJj  ^ytLT  /^^

? ^l^ ./• 2lc» €*  4T»  »f  «:r?  ^- ^.  li  ?»J-X..t


f^^^j/^r3^  4;^^>-

.yfc&S^  4S^4^f>t4Af^


t$^ij^^uy^a»^  ^t


26  HISTORICAL

komawan  Abdulkarlmu. Adini  ya  dinga  dadawa  kulum,  ya  tabata
da  girma. Mutanin  64  Gobir  su-ka-dinga  zua  Kashina,  su-na-
-karban  adini  garesu,  da  gaskia,  da  kokari. Su-ka-shiga
chikinsa  bald  dai. Adini  ya  tabata  garesu  kuma,
tamkar  da  ya  tabata  chikin  Kashina. Ama  Musulumchi  ya  tabata
chikin  Kashina ;  hakanan  zua  wakatin  Agarga. Shi  ne  farko
wanda  ya  juya  abinda  Abdulkarlmu  ya  aje  chikin  Kashina.
Masu-waazu  su-ka-yi  masa  waazu. Bai  ji  ba. Ya  tabata  ga  Ka-
-furchinsa  bar  ya  mutu. Kaura  ya  yi  sarauta,  da  dansa,
ya  bi  hainyar  ubansa. Kafurchi  ya  tabata  har  zamanin
Wari-mai-kworia. Shi  ne  wanda  ya  yi  shishigi,  ya  yi  gir-
-man  kai,  girman  kai  baba. Ya  auri  budrua  alif. Ya  66  kinkumu
chikin  barna,  bai  bari  ba. Shi-na-neman  magani  domin
shi 66  dawama  chikin  dunia,  kar  shi  mutu,  har  wani 67  boka  ya  ru-
-de  shi,  wai  ba  shi  mutua  harabadi. Wanchananka  mai-
-magani  ya  aikata  masa  abinda  ya  aikata  daga  magani.

the  return  of  Abdulkarimu.  The  faith  continued  to  grow  always  and  took
firm  hold.  Men  from  Gobir  continued  to  come  to  Katsina  and  were
adopting  the  Mohammedan  faith  with  (in  all)  truth  and  earnestness,  they
embraced  it,  all  together.  The  faith  took  hold  among  them  also  as  it
had  taken  hold  in  Katsina.  And  so  it  was  until  the  time  of  Agarga.  He
was  the  first  who  changed  the  state  of  things  that  Abdulkarimu  had
established  in  Katsina.  Instructors  (strove)  to  admonish  him.  He  heard
not.  He  remained  in  his  heathenism  till  he  died.  Kaura  ruled  the
kingdom,  and  (then)  his  son;  he  followed  the  path  his  father  had  taken.
Paganism  continued  till  the  time  of  Wari-mai-kworia.  It  was  he  who
did  evil  and  was  most  arrogant.  He  married  i  ,000  maidens.  He  embraced
evil  (and)  did  not  cease.  He  sought  for  (a)  medicine  in  order  that  he
might  go  on  living  in  the  world  and  not  die,  till  (at  last)  a  certain  wizard
deceived  him,  saying  he  would  never  die.  That  doctor  did  for  him  what
he  did  from  (his  knowledge  of)  medicines.


sr  fti  ;z«zAft  M  •%  -*-<»  .2 «»T


cJ^eU^aaaJjat!
> / ^ •n/^Ti*

J/^^a  ^4/4^

o T- Xr« *J %•  • -  7 ' V^X  ^

A. A C2 _ I *y ~  i~ . _•  A _ f^ \  *.


28  HISTORICAL

Sarkin  nan  ya  ba  shi  dukia  dayawa,  aka-che  bawa  dari,  kuyenga
dari,  da  doki  dari,  da  kore  dari,  da  sania  dari,  mache  da  bajinin  sanla
dari,  da  rago  alif,  da  akwia  alif.  Ya  ba  shi  tufafi  wadanda  ba  su  68kidayuwa
domin  yawa,  da  wanin  wanan,  Ala  shi  ne  masani. Chikin  zamaninsa  ne

aka-samu

malami  blu  chikin  Kashina,  masu-gudu  dunia,  masu-tsoro  Ala. Su-
-nan  guda  Muhamadu-Ibnumusina,  sunan  guda  kua,  Muhamadu-Dunmurna.
Kowane  daia  chikinsu  ya  yi  waazu,  waazu  mai-shiga  chikin  zuchla,  bai
[bai]  ji  ba. Sai  su-ka  ba  shi  tsoro  domin  su  bar  waazu. Ba  su  bari  ba.
Sarakai  kua,  ba  su  ji  ba,  har  malamai  nan  su-ka-mutu. Chikin  Kashina

kushewa

tasa  sanania  che  har  yau,  wurin  yaro  da  baba  ana-ziyari  tasa,  ana-

-kiwo,  ana-neman  albarka  da  adua  garesu. Ama  Wari-mai-kworia,  chewa

shia,  ya  zamna  shekara  tokwas  bayan  an-yi  masa  maganin,  kar  shi  mutu.

Ya  mutu  chikin  shekara  ta  tara. Sailin  da  ya  mutu  gardaman  sarauta  ta  a-

-bko  tsakanin  yan  sarakai. Sashe  su-ka-kashe  sashe,  har

aka-kashe  kamar  mutun  alif  chikin  birnin  Kashina,  tsakanin  da

da  bawa. Saanan  kanin  Wari  ya  chi  sarauta,  bayan  ya  kashe  dan  Wari.

This  king  gave  him  much  wealth,  it  was  said  one  hundred  slaves,  one
hundred  female  slaves,  a  hundred  horses,  a  hundred  black  tobes,  and
a  hundred  cattle,  cows  and  bulls  a  hundred,  and  a  thousand  rams,  and
a  thousand  goats.  He  gave  him  robes  which  could  not  be  counted  by
reason  of  their  number,  and  things  of  this  description,  Allah  he  know
(what  all).  In  his  reign  two  learned  men  made  their  appearance  in
Katsina,  men  who  renounced  the  world  (and)  who  feared  Allah.  The
name  of  one  was  Muhamadu  Ibnumusina,  the  name  of  the  other  also  was
Muhamadu  Dunmurna.  Each  one  among  them  gave  instruction,  (such)
instruction  as  enters  into  the  heart.  He  did  not  hear  them.  Then  they
made  them  afraid  in  order  to  dissuade  them  from  preaching.  They  did
not  desist.  The  kings  also  did  not  pay  any  attention  till  these  learned
men  died.  In  Katsina  their  graves  are  known  till  to-day,  where  young  and
old  visit  and  guard,  and  at  which  blessings  are  sought  by  prayers  for  them.
Now  Wari-mai-kworia,  speaking  of  him,  he  lived  eight  years  after  he  had
had  the  medicine  made  for  him  to  prevent  his  dying.  He  died  the  ninth
year  after  (taking)  it.  When  he  died  a  quarrel  about  the  kingdom  arose
among  the  king's  sons.  Half  were  slaying  the  other  half  until  about  1,000
men  were  killed  in  the  town  of  Katsina  among  both  free  men  and  slaves.
Then  the  younger  brother  of  Wari  ruled  after  slaying  the  son  of  Wari.


f^Ll


f^i  WWgpelti'^S*  *3r

J>M^|^di6feitSi?  GWU  jj^k.

i  ., — . ^^  ^X 5> ^ ' —  /«.  ^^


!tr^


f>^ -J;  _y .0 'VO^

plM^^fe^^^d^^
^^^^^%-^8^Wi^


30  HISTORICAL

Shi  kuma  ya  tabata  bisa  Kafurchinsa. Kafurchi  ya  tabata  chikin
Kashina  bar  wakatin  Bawa-Dungaimawa. Shi  ne  wanda  Usmanu
dan  Fodio  ya  fita  daga  Kashina,  shia  da  mutaninsa  su  ka  nufi  69  Maradi,
su-ka-zamna  chana  har  yau. Danginsa  sun  kashe,  su-na-yaki  da  dangin
Usmanu  dan  Fodio  har  yau. Ama  Gobir  su-ka-taru,  su-ka-tabata
bisa  adini,  su-ka-tabata  chikinsa  har  wakatin  Babari. Shi  ne
farin  wanda  ya  musaya  suna,  ta  zama  70  bida,  ya  daukaka  ginin
Kafurchi,  ya  yi  girman  kai. Masu-waazu  su-ka-yi  masa  waazu,
bai  karba  ba,  sai  ya  tabata  bisa  Kafurchinsa  har  ya  mutu.
Bachira  ya  chi  sarauta,  ya  aikata  kaman  aikinsa,  sai  ya  dada  barna
da  batarwa,  kunfan  Kafurchi  ya  daukaka  chikin  kasar  Gobir,  sara-
-kanta  su-ka-yi  girman  kai,  su-ka-sai  da  dia,  su-ka-aikata  abinda
su-ka-so,  har  alamari  ya  zama,  kowane  sarki  ya  chi  sarauta,
sai  shi  auri  budrua  dari. Sai  su  dai  ba  su  san  dafuan  gia  ba,
sai  kadan  chikinsu. Ba  su  chin  musai,  ama  sailin  da  zaa  gaisua
su-na-zuba  kasa  ga  kainsu,  su-na-bauta  ma  turu,  masu-riko

He  again  continued  in  heathenism.  (And)  heathenism  continued  in  Katsina
till  the  reign  of  Bawa-Dungaimawa.  It  was  he  Usmanu,  the  son  of  Fodio,
drove  out  of  Katsina,  he  and  his  men,  they  went  to  Maradi,  they  settled
there  until  to-day.  His  descendants  continue  to  make  war  on  the  descen-
dants of  Usmanu,  the  son  of  Fodio,  till  to-day.  But  the  (men  of)  Gobir
assembled  together  and  continued  in  the  faith  and  dwelt  in  it  till  the  reign
of  Babari.  He  was  the  first  who  changed  the  true  faith,  it  became  lax,
he  exalted  (and)  set  up  paganism  (and)  was  arrogant.  The  preachers  (of
the  faith)  preached  to  him  but  he  would  not  receive  (their  instructions),
but  persisted  in  his  heathenism  till  he  died.  Bachira  ruled  over  the
kingdom,  he  did  what  his  predecessor  had  done,  he  added  to  the  evil
he  had  done,  and  the  harm,  the  foam  from  the  wave  of  heathenism  rose
in  the  land  of  Gobir,  its  kings  were  proud.  They  sold  free  men,  they
acted  as  they  wished  until  report  had  it  that  every  king  that  ruled  married
one  hundred  maidens.  But  (the  only  redeeming  point  was)  they  did  not
know  how  to  make  beer,  except  a  few  among  them,  (and)  they  did  not  eat
animals  that  had  died  a  natural  death,  but  when  they  greeted  (their  kings)
they  poured  earth  over  their  heads,  they  served  idols.  (Some)  who  cleaved
to  the  faith


%»/>*x


. ^T&J-t^sg*  Sfc/^H

d^^^^^fe^4??%


32  HISTORICAL

su-na  chikinsu,  sailin  kadan  ne,  walakantatu,  babu  girma

garesu. Su-ka-tabata  bisa  hakanan  har  wakatin  n  Bawa-jan-gwarzo.

Ya  dada  Kafurchi,  ya  yi  girman  kai,  har  aka-samu  malami  chikin

zamaninsa,  mai-gudun  dunia,  mai-bautar  Ala,  ana-che  masa  Alhaji  Jibrilu.

Aka-che,  chewa  shla,  ya  tafi  tun  Gobir,  ya  je  Maka,  ya  yi  haji,  ya  za-

mna  chana  kama  shekara  ishirin. Aka-che  ya  zamna  Masar  shekara

goma  sha  takwas. Ya  zamna  chikin  Maka  shekara  biu,  saanan

ya  komo  zua  Gobir. Ya  waazche  su  sabunta  dare  da  rana,

boye  da  bayene. Su-ka-ki  abinda  ya  fadi,  sai  su-ka-nufi  kashinsa.

Sarakunan  Hausa  duka  su-ka-gama  kai  bisa  su-kashe  shi.

Ba  su  iya  ba. Malamai  sun  kashe  Kalawa,  sailin  ama

ba  su  iya  fadin  wani  abu  chikin  sani,  sai  boye,  domin

tsoro  sarakai. Sai  Alhaji-Jibrilu,  chewa  shia,  ya

tsaya  da  waazu,  ya  yi  kokari  bayane,  ba  su  iya  sun  kashe  shi  ba.

Shi  kua  bai  iya  ya  hane  su  ba  ga  abinda  su  ke  chiki.

Sai  su-ka-dada  shishigi  da  Kafurchi-chikin  wakatin  nan.


were  (still)  among  them,  at  that  time  only  a  few  (and)  without  power  or
influence  among  them.  And  they  continued  thus  till  the  time  of  Bawa-
jan-gwarzo.  He  went  on  (living)  in  heathenism.  He  was  arrogant  till
a  learned  man  was  found  in  his  reign,  one  who  had  fled  from  the  world,
one  who  served  Allah.  He  was  called  Alhaji-Jibrilu.  It  was  said,  speaking
of  him,  he  went  from  Gobir,  he  came  to  Mecca  and  performed  the  pilgrimage
and  resided  (away)  there  twenty  years.  It  was  said  he  lived  in  Egypt
eighteen  years.  He  stayed  in  Mecca  two  years,  and  then  returned  to
Gobir.  He  instructed  them  each  new  day  and  night,  in  secret  and  openly.
They  refused  the  thing  (message)  he  brought  and  thought  to  kill  him.
All  the  kings  of  Hausa(land)  plotted  to  slay  him.  They  could  not.  The
malamai  were  in  Kalawa  at  that  time,  but  they  could  not  speak  from  their
(store)  of  knowledge  for  fear  of  the  chiefs.  Only  Alhaji-Jibrilu,  speaking
of  him,  he  stood  (fast)  in  (his)  preaching  and  strove  openly  (and)  they  were
not  able  to  kill  him.  He  could  not,  however,  prevent  them  (doing)  the  evil
they  dwelt  in.  And  they  continued  in  evildoing  and  heathenism  in  this
reign.


/rii^t  JJ  *•


34  HISTORICAL

Aka-haifi  Usmanu  dan  Fodio,  sailin  da  Alhaji  Jibrilu
ya  mutu. Usmanu  dan  Fodio  ya  fara  waazu  kadan  kadan,
har  Bawa-jan-gwarzo  ya  mutu. Dan  uwansa,  Yaakubu,
ya  zamna  mazamninsa. Sailin  Usmanu  ya  bayana  waazu
sarari,  har  ya  aikata  abinda  ya  aikata,  ya  kare.

Mun72  takaita  zanche  nan. Ala

shi  ne  mai-katari. Ya  kare.

Tslra  da  aminchin  Ala

shi  tabata  ga  anabi.

Amin.

(Then)  Usmanu,  the  son  of  Fodio,  was  born  at  the  time  when  Alhaji-
Jibrilu  died.  Usmanu,  the  son  of  Fodio,  began  to  preach  little  by  little  till
(the  time  when)  Bawa-jan-gwarzo  died.  His  brother  Yaakubu  reigned  in  his
stead.  Then  Usmanu  proclaimed  (his)  preaching  openly  till  he  did  what
(all  the  world  knows)  he  did  (and)  finished.  We  have  drawn  the  history
to  a  close.

Allah,  he  is  the  one  who  knows  all. It  is  finished.

The  salvation  and  blessing  of  Allah  be  upon  the  prophet. Amen.


PART II
STORIES ABOUT PEOPLE*


38  STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  i

No.  i.

1  Bismi  alahi  alrahmami  alrahimi,  wa  sala  alahu  ala  mam  la

nabiu  baadahu

Wanan  2  babi  ne  na  gatanar

mutane.

3  Gatanan,  gatanan,  ta  je,  ta  komo. Bawan
sarki  shi  ke  da  *  maatansa,  aka-che  ta-na-neman
maza. Ya  che  karia,  maata  ta  ba  ta  neman  maza.
Sai  ranan  wata  tsofua  ta  che  masa, '  Kulum  idan
ka  tafi  fadanchi,  sai  ta  je  wurin  maza ' ;  sai  tsofua
ta  che, '  Yau  ka  hau  dokinka,  ka  che  zaa  ka
kauye,  ka  kwana.' Sai  bawa  sarki  ya  damra
sirdi,  ya  hau,  ya  kama  hainya,  ya  tafi.
Da  marenche  ya  yi,  5  bai  zaka  ba,  shi  kua  ya  che,

In  the  name  of  Allah,  the  Compassionate,  the  Merciful,  and
may  the  peace  of  Allah  be  upon  him,  after  whom  there  is
no  prophet.  This  is  the  beginning  of  a  story  about  people.
A  story,  a  story.  Let  it  go,  let  it  come.  A  slave  of  a  chief
had  a  wife,  and  it  was  said  of  her  she  was  of  a  loose  character.
He  (the  husband)  said  it  was  a  lie,  (and)  that  his  wife  did  not
go  after  men.  At  last,  one  day,  a  certain  old  woman  said  to
him,  *  Always  when  you  go  to  the  council  then  she  (your  wife)
is  after  the  men ' ;  and  the  old  woman  said, '  To-day  mount
your  horse  (and)  say  you  are  going  to  an  outlying  village
(and)  you  are  going  to  sleep  there.'  Then  the  chief's  slave
saddled  up,  mounted,  took  the  road  and  went  off.  When
evening  came  he  had  not  come,  for  he  had  said,


it.* -> ^«T* /f* «%**L A"»-*»~|L_£

^^^fi^Cf^  9^

s A  TtL*g>A  ^r , a; sLrtL^ii •  ^^f


Skli;,^>  i


^U^^^yj^u^

H(^^2n* /r  : 7

^•^^f4fefcfe44  ^


40  STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  i

1  Ina  je,  baa  ni  komowa,'  6  Maatar  kua,  ashe  7galadiman
gari,  da  waziri,  da  wani  bawa(n)  sarki,  sunansa
Duma,  8baubawa  ne,  da  fitar  mai-gida,  sai  maata
ta  aika  gun  farkonanta,  ta  che  '  Mai-gidana  yaa  tafi
kauye,  ama  baa  shi  komowa  yau,  sai  gobe.'
Sai  9galadiman  ya  sai  naman  arba  da  shinkafar  alfin,
wazlrin  gari  ya  sai  naman  arba  da  shinkafar  alfin.
Bawan  sarki  Duma  ya  sai  naman  arba  da  shinka-
-far  alfin,  aka-kai  mata. Dare  ya  yi,  sai  galadima
ya  zo,  aka-sainya  masa  shinkafa  da  nama,  shi-na-chi.
Sai  ya  ji  motsin  takalmin  waziri. Sai  ya  fada
karkashin  10gado,  aka-dauki  shinkafa,  aka-rufe.


'  I  am  going  and  shall  not  return.'  Now  the  wife  (possessed
some  lovers),  the  galadima  and  the  vizier,  and  a  certain  of
the  chief's  slaves,  a  foreigner,  by  name  'The  World',  and
on  the  master  of  the  house  going  out,  then  the  wife  sent
to  (these)  her  lovers,  she  said,  '  My  master  will  go  to  an
outlying  village,  and  he  will  not  return  to-day  but  to-morrow.'
Then  the  galadima  brought  four  thousand  cowries  worth  of
meat  and  two  thousand  cowries  worth  of  rice  to  bring  to
the  woman.  When  night  came  the  galadima  arrived,  the
meat  and  rice  was  set  out,  and  he  ate.  Then  he  heard  the
sound  of  the  slippers  of  the  vizier,  and  down  he  fell  under
the  bed,  and  the  rice  was  lifted  and  covered  up.


^to^V;4utoK5'^U^
/I  /• v  77  P77


>^aLfliV»  ^ilift^/Lg-


42  STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  i

Ashe  waziri  ne. Sai  ya  zamna ;  shi  kuma

aka-ba  shi  shinkafa  da  nama,  shi-na-chi. Sai  ya  ji

motsin  takalmin  Duma,  shi-na-che

mai-gida  ne. Sai  ya  fada  karkashin-gado.

Sai  ya  iske  "galadiman  12zamne. Sai  ya-che,

1  aa  galadima  ne  ? ' Ya  che,  *  I,'  ya  che,  '  mu  rufa  ma  kaimu

aslri,'  ya  che,  *  Babu  laifi.' Su-na-nan,  zamne.

Sai  aka  ba  Duma  nasa  rabo ;  shi  kuma

shi-na-chi. Sai  su-ka-ji  mostin  kofato

dokin  mai-gida, 13  ya  zo. Sai  Duma  ya  yaada

akoshin  tuo ;  ya  fada  karkashin  gado.


Sure  enough  it  was  the  vizier.  Then  he  sat  down,  (and)
he  also  was  given  rice  and  meat.  He  ate.  Then  he  heard
the  noise  made  by  the  slippers  of  him  called  '  The  World '.  He
thinks  it  is  the  master  of  the  house.  So  he  fell  under  the
bed,  when  he  discovered  the  galadima  sitting  (there).  Then
he  said,  '  Oh,  it 's  the  galadima,  is  it  ? '  And  he  said,  '  Yes,'
(and)  said,  'Let  us  keep  this  secret.'  And  he  said,  'There
is  no  harm  in  that.'  They  were  sitting  there  then,  (and  the
one  called)  '  The  World '  was  given  his  share,  and  he  also  was
eating.  Then  they  heard  the  hoofs  of  the  horse  of  the  master
of  the  house ;  he  has  come.  Then  '  The  World '  threw  away
the  plate  of  food  (and)  fell  under  the  bed.


^i£jw


44  STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  i

Sai  Duma  ya  gani  mutum. Sai  ya  che, 14' Ke  wacheche  anan ?'

Sai  galadlma  da  waziri  su-ka-che, '  Mu  ne.' Sai

Duma  ya  che,  '  Galadlma  me  ta  kawo  15  ki  nania  ? ' Sai

su-ka-che, '  Domin  Alia,  Duma  ka  bari  mu  rufa  makanmu

aslri.' Sai  Duma  ya  che,  *  To,  ku  yi  kulum.' Sai  su-ka-yi

shiru ;  mai-gida  kua  shi-na  wurin  dokinsa, 16  shi-na-

-kunche  sirdi ;  bai  sani  ba. Sai  ya  che  maata  ta  ba  shi

rua,  shi  yi  wanka. Ta  ba  shi  rua,  ya  yi  wanka. Sai

ya  shiga  daki,  ya  zamna  bisa  gado. Sai  maata

ta  che,  *  Sannu  da  zua.' Sai  ya  17  gaza  amsawa,  shi-na-

-mamaki,  shi-na-che, '  Duma,  Duma.' (Domin

da  aka-yi  masa  karla,  aka-che  18  matasa  ta-na-neman

maza,  ga  shi  ya  zo  bai  ga  kowa  ba),  shi-na-

-fadi, '  Duma,  Duma.' Maata  tasa  ta-na-che,


Then  'The  World'  saw  a  man  (there).  He  said,  'Who  are
you?'  Then  the  galadima  and  the  vizier  said,  'It  is  we.'
Then '  The  World'  said,  'You,  galadima,  what  brings  you  here?'
And  they  said,  *  For  the  sake  of  Allah,  World,  let  us  keep
this  secret  among  us.'  And  'The  World'  said,  'All  right,
keep  silent.'  Then  they  kept  still.  The  master  of  the  house
meanwhile  was  at  his  house  taking  off  the  saddle,  he  did  not
know.  Then  he  told  his  wife  to  give  him  water  to  wash.
She  gave  him  water  and  he  washed.  Then  he  entered  the
house  and  sat  on  the  bed,  and  his  wife  said,  'Greetings  to
you  on  your  coming.'  He  did  not  reply,  he  was  wondering
and  saying, '  The  World,  the  World '  (because  he  had  been
lied  to  and  told  his  wife  went  after  the  men,  and  behold,
he  had  come  and  saw  no  one).  And  he  kept  saying,  'The
World,  the  World.'  His  wife  said,


46  STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  i

4  Me  ya  faru  mai-gida  ? ' Sai  Duma  baubawa  shi-na-che

da  shi  ake  yi.  Ashe  ya  yi  fushi.  Sai  ya  che, 19 '  Ke  ya  dulin  wa-

-nan  Duma  ki  ka  lena,  Duma  kadai  ki  ka  gani,

ba  ki  gani  galadlma  da  waziri  ba,  sai  Duma,  domin

kin  lena  Duma  ? ' Sai  kokua  ta  kable  chikin

daki. Sai  galadlma  da  waziri  su-ka-fita  da  gudu,

su-ka-bar  Duma  da  mijin  maata,  su-na-kokua.

Tsofua  ta-na-kuwa,  ta-na-che,  gudunmawa,  bar

aka-zo,  aka-raba  su. Gari  ya  waye,  aka-kai  sharaa

wurin  sarki. Sai  mai-maata  ya  20  maida  magana. Sai

fadanshi  ya  pashe  da  daria. Sai  sarki  ya  che,

'  Ina  galadlma  da  waziri  ? ' Aka-che  ba  su  zo  ba. Sar-

-ki  ya  che  '  Atafi,  agani  lafia '. Aka-je


'  What  is  the  matter,  master  ? '  Now  he  (by  name)  '  The  World ',
the  foreigner,  thought  it  was  to  him  he  was  speaking.  Truly

he  waxed  angry,  and  spoke,  saying,  'You  ,  is  it  (him

called)  "  The  World  "  only  you  have  to  find  fault  with  ?  Look,
do  you  not  see  the  galadima  and  the  vizier,  but  only  "  The
World  ",  seeing  that  it  is  "  The  World  "  you  are  finding  fault
with  (only)  ? '  On  that  all  was  confusion  in  the  room,  and  the
galadima  and  the  vizier  ran  out,  and  left  him  called '  The  World'
and  the  woman's  husband  fighting.  The  old  woman  was
shouting  and  calling  for  help.  They  (people)  came  and
separated  them.  Next  morning  the  matter  was  brought
before  the  chief,  when  the  woman's  husband  stated  the  case,
but  the  councillors  split  themselves  with  laughing,  and  the
chief  said, '  Where  are  the  galadima  and  the  vizier  ? '  and  he
was  told  they  had  not  come.  And  the  chief  said,  *  Let  some
one  go  and  see  if  all  is  well  with  them.'  (And)  they  went


48  STORIES  ABOUT PEOPLE. No.  i

aka  ishe  galadlma  da  waziri,  baa  su  gida. Ashe
sun  shiga  daji,  har  wayau  ba  agansu  ba,  domin
kumia. Domin  hakanan  mutum  mai-girma
bai  kamata  shi  yi  aikin  da  bai  kamata  ba. Shi  ke  nan.
21  Kungurus  kan  kusu.

and  found  that  the  galadima  and  the  vizier  were  not  at  their
house.  Of  a  truth  they  had  gone  to  the  bush ;  and  until  now
they  have  not  been  seen,  for  very  shame.  And  the  moral
of  this  (is  that)  it  does  not  behove  a  man  of  position  to  act
improperly.  That  is  all.  Off  with  the  rat's  head.


50  STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  a

No.  a.

1  Gatanan,  gatanan. Wanan  tasuniar
yarinya  che. Wani  mutun  ke  da  yayansa  uku,
biu  maza,  daia  mache. 2  Machen  ita  ake  so.
Sai  3  baban  wansu  ya  tafi  da  su  daji. Ya  che
su  je  itache. Da  su-ka-je  daji,  sai  ya  kama  ta.
Ya  hau  itache  da  ita ;  ya-damre  bissa  itache ;
ya  zo,  ya-che, '  Yarinya  *  ta  batche  daji,  (ba  su)
ba  su  gane  ta  ba. Sai  su-ka-komo  gida.' Su-na-
-kuka. Sai  ubansu  ya  tanbaye  su  me  ya  faru.
Su-ka-che,  '  Kanwamu  che  ta  batche  chikin  daji,  (ba  mu)
ba  mu  gane  ta  ba,  munyi  nema  mun  gaji,  ba  mu  gane  ta  ba.'

A  story,  a  story.  This  tale  is  about  a  maiden.  A  certain
man  had  three  children,  two  boys  and  a  girl,  (and)  it  was  the
girl  he  loved.  Then  (one  day)  their  big  brother  went  with
them  to  the  forest  (bush),  telling  them  to  come  for  sticks.
And  when  they  had  reached  the  forest,  he  seized  her  (the
girl),  climbed  a  tree  with  her,  (and)  tied  her  on  to  the  tree,
(and)  came  (and)  said,  'The  maiden  has  been  lost  in  the
forest,'  (and  said)  they  did  not  see  her,  so  they  came  home.
They  were  weeping.  Then  their  father  asked  them  what
had  happened,  (and)  they  said,  '  Our  young  sister  she  was
lost  in  the  forest  (and)  we  did  not  see  her.  We  searched
until  we  were  tired,  but  we  did  not  see  her.'


*  •


•  •


53  STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  a

Sai  ubansu  ya  che,  '  babu  laifi.' Ana-nan  wata  rana
sai  fatake  su-ka-zo,  su-na-wuchewa  chikin  daji.
Ta  ji  maganansu. Sai  ta-che, '  Ku,  ku,  ku,  ma-
-su  gorina,  idan  kun  je  5  unguan  tudu,  ku  gaida
wana  Hallabau,  ku  gaida  wana  Tanka-baka,
ku-gaida  wana  Shadusa  ? ' Sai  fatake  su-ka-ji
hakanan. Sai  su-ka-che,  tsuntsua  ke  yin  wanan
abu. Sai  kuma,  ta  kara. Sai  madugun  ayari
ya-che,  6  shii-je  shi-gani,  ko  menene  ke  yin
hakanan. Sai  ya  tafi ;  ya  je ;  ya  iske  yarinya
bisa  itache, 7  daure. Sai  ya-che, '  Masurai
ko  masu-mutua  ? ' Yarinya  ta  che,  '  Masu-


Then  their  father  said,  '  It  cannot  be  helped.'  Then  one  day
traders  came  and  were  passing  in  the  forest  She  (the  girl)
heard  their  voices  and  she  (sang)  said, '  You,  you,  you,  who
are  carrying  kola  nuts,  if  you  have  come  to  the  village  on
the  hill,  greet  my  big  brother  Hallabau,  greet  my  big  brother
Tanka-baka,  (and)  greet  my  big  brother  Shadusa.1  When
the  traders  heard  this  they  said  that  birds  were  the  cause
of  this  (singing).  Then  again  she  repeated  (the  song).  Then
the  leader  of  the  caravan  said  he  would  go  (and)  see  what
it  was  that  was  doing  (singing)  thus.  So  he  went  off  (and)
came  across  the  maiden  fastened  to  the  tree.  And  he  said,
'  (Are  you)  alive  or  dead  ? '  The  maiden  said, '  Alive,


54 STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE.  No.  2

rai  (masurai).' Sai  shi  madugu,  dakainsa  ya  hau  bissa

itache,  ya  kunche  ta. Da  wuri  kua,  shi, 8  madugun

ya  nemi  haifua,  bai  samu  ba. Sai  ya  che  '  Wanan

yarinya  daka  ina  (daga  enna)  ? ' Sai  yarinya  ta  che,  '  Ubamu

ya  haife  mu,  mu  uku,  bm  maza,  uwarsu

guda. Ni  kua,  ni  kadaiche,  gun  uwata.

Ubamu  kua  da  uwamu  su-na-so  na,  ba  su

so  yan  uwana,  domin  hakanan  baban  wamu

ya  tafo  da  ni  nan,  ya  rude  ni  ya  che  mu  tafi

itache,  ya  zo  da  ni  nan,  ya  daure  ni  bisa

itache,  ya  tafi,  ya  bar  ni. Ubanmu  atajiri  ne,

domin  hakanan,  ya  yi  mani  hakanan.' Sai  madugu


alive.'  So  the  leader  of  the  caravan  himself  climbed  up  the
tree  and  untied  her.  Now  long  ago  the  caravan  leader  had
wished  for  offspring,  but  he  was  childless.  Then  he  said,
'Where  is  the  maiden  from?'  And  the  maiden  said,  'Our
father  begat  us,  we  were  three,  two  boys  by  one  mother,
I  also  alone,  by  my  mother.  Our  father  and  mother  loved
(me),  (but)  did  not  love  my  brothers.  And  because  of  that
our  big  brother  brought  me  here,  deceiving  me  by  saying
we  were  going  for  sticks.  He  came  with  me  here,  tied  me
to  a  tree  (and)  left  me.  Our  father  is  a  wealthy  man,  and
because  of  that,  he  (my  brother)  did  this  to  me.'  Then  the
leader  of  the  caravan


^^i^4f^AM*5


56  STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  2

sai  ya  che,  '  Ni  kua,  kin  zama  dlana.'

Sai  madugu  ya  kai  ta  gida ;  ya  yi  jinya,

bar  ta  warke. Ta-na  nan  gunsa  har  ta  issa

aure. Ta  zama  budrua,  babu  irinta  ko-

-ina. Da  kowane  9  bigire  ana-jin  labari-

-nta,  ana-zua  garin  kalo(n)ta,  har  ranan

shi  baban  wansu,  ya  balaga,  bai  samu

maata  ba. Sai  ya  ji  labari,  aka-che  wani  a-

-tajiri  shi-na  da  dlansa,  gari  kaza,

sararin  nan,  babu  kamanta. Sai  shi  kuma  ya  je  gun

ubansu,  ya  che  ya  ji  labarin  dlar  wani  atajiri,

ita  shi  ke  so. Sai  ubansa  ya  gama  masa


said,  'As  for  me,  you  have  become  my  daughter.'  So  the
leader  of  the  caravan  took  her  home  (and)  nursed  her  till
she  recovered.  She  remained  with  him  until  she  reached
a  marriageable  age,  and  grew  into  a  maid  whose  like  was
nowhere.  And  whenever  she  was  heard  of,  people  came  to
look  on  her,  until  a  day  (when)  her  elder  brother  reached
manhood.  He  had  not  found  a  wife.  Then  he  heard  the
report  which  said  that  a  certain  wealthy  man  had  a  daughter
in  such  and  such  a  village ;  in  all  the  country  there  was  not
her  like.  Then  he  went  to  their  (his)  father  (and)  said  he
had  heard  about  the  daughter  of  a  certain  wealthy  man  (and)
it  was  her  he  wished  (to  marry).  So  his  father  gave  him


58  STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  2

kaya ;  ya  je  wurin  neman  aure. Da  ya  tafi  Ala  ya  yi  masa

katar,  ya  samu. Aka-ba  shi  yarinya. Su-ka-yi  aure.

Su-ka-zo  gida,  zaa  shi 10  sa  yarinya  zane,  yarinya

ta  kia. Kulum  kakanan,  sai  idan  su-ka-tafi  gona,

sai  ta  dauko  turmi,  da  tabaria  na  zinaria,

da  ubanta  ya  ba  ta. Ta  dauko  hatsin,  da  uwar

miji  ta  ba  ta,  wai  ta  yi  fura. Sai  ta  zuba-chikin

turmi(n)  zinaria,  ta-na-daka,  ta-na-fadi,

1  Daka,  daka,  turmina,  ll  uba  ya  komo

uban  miji,  waio  kaitonia,  uwa  ta  ko-

-mo  uwar  miji,  waio  turmina.' Hakanan

bar  ta  kare  daka. Ta-na-kuka,  ta-na-waka

gifts,  (and)  he  came  to  seek  a  wife  in  marriage.  And  Allah
blessed  his  quest  and  he  found  what  he  sought,  and  the  maid
was  wedded  to  him.  They  came  home,  but  when  he  would
consummate  their  union,  she  would  not  give  herself  to  him ;
(and)  it  was  always  thus.  Only,  when  they  (all)  went  off
to  the  farms  she  would  lift  her  mortar  and  golden  pestle
which  her  father  had  given  her,  saying  she  was  going  to
make  'fura'  cakes.  And  she  poured  the  grain  into  the
mortar  of  gold  and  pounded  and  (sung)  said, '  Pound,  pound,
mortar,  father  has  become  the  father  of  my  husband,  alas
for  me!  Mother  has  become  the  mother  of  my  husband,
alas,  my  mortar ! '  And  so  on  till  she  had  finished  pounding.
She  was  weeping  (and)  singing.


6o  STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  2

Ashe  wata  tsofua  na  nan  ta-na-ji  abinda,

ta  ke  fadi. Kulum  hakanan,  sai  ranan  ta  kwarmata

ma  uwayan  miji. Sai  ta  che,  '  Idan  zaa  ku  gona,

ke  uwar  miji  ki  fita,  ki  ba  ta  hatsi,  ki  che,

ta  daka  fura,  zaa  ki  gona,  idan  kin  fita,

ki  labe,  ki  komo,  ki  shige  daki,  ki  yi

kurum,  ki  ji  abinda  ita  ke  fadi.' Yau  uwar  miji

ta  fita,  ubansu  ya  fita,  yara  da  mata  duka

su-ka-fita,  su-ka-che,  zaa  su  gona. Aka-jima,

sai  uwar  miji  ta  komo,  ta  shiga  daki,

12  ta-na-kunche. Sai  yarinya  ta  dauko  turminta

na  zinaria,  da  tabananta  na  zinaria,  ta-na-


Now  a  certain  old  woman  of  the  place  heard  what  she  was
(saying).  It  was  always  so,  until  one  day  she  told  the  mother
of  (the  girl's)  husband,  and  she  said,  '  When  you  are  all  about
to  go  to  the  farm,  do  you,  mother  of  the  husband,  come  out,
give  her  grain,  (and)  bid  her  pound  "  fura  ",  as  you  are  going
to  the  farm.  When  you  get  outside  steal  away  (and)  come
back,  enter  the  house,  (and)  remain  silent  (and)  hear  what  she
says.'  So  the  mother  of  the  man  came  out,  their  father  came
out,  the  boys  and  the  woman  all  came  out,  and  said  they
were  off  to  the  farm.  A  little  while  after  the  man's  mother
came  back  (and)  entered  the  hut  (and)  crouched  down.  Then
the  maiden  lifted  her  mortar  and  golden  pestle.  She  was


^


62  STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  a

waka,  ta-na-fadi,  '  Daka,  daka,  turmina,  uba

ya  komo  uban  miji,  wayo  turmina  uwa

ta  komo  uwar  miji,  wayo  kaitonia.'

Ta-na-yin  waka  hakanan,  ta-na-kuka  da  hawaye.

Uwa  kua  ta-na  daki,  ta-na-ganinta,  bar  ta  gama

abinda  ta  ke  yi  duka. Mutanen  gida,  da  su-ka-tafi

gona,  su-ka-komo. Uwa  ba  ta  che  ko-

-mi  ba. Da  dare  ya  yi,  sai  ta  gaya  ma  mai-gida,  ta  che

'  K.%  ji,  ka  ji,  abinda  yarinya  nan  ke  yi.' Uba,

ya  che,  '  Ko  yarinya  da  ta  bache,  ko  ita  che  ? '

Sai  su-ka-che,  '  Ama  idan  ita  che,  akwai  wani  tambo

ga  bayanta,  tun  ta-na  13  jaririya,  aka-bar  ta

daki  wurin  wuta,  ya  kone  ta  ? ' Aka-kirawo  ta.

singing  and  saying,  'Pound,  pound,  my  mortar,  father  has
become  (my)  husband's  father,  alas,  my  mortar !  Mother  has
become  (my)  husband's  mother,  alas  for  me ! '  She  was  singing
thus  (and)  shedding  tears,  the  mother  also  was  in  the  room
and  was  watching  her  until  she  had  done  all  she  had  to  do.
When  the  people  of  the  house  who  had  gone  to  the  farms
came  back,  the  mother  did  not  say  anything.  When  night
came,  then  she  told  her  husband ;  she  said,  '  Such  and  such
the  maid  did.'  The  father  said,  *  Could  it  possibly  be  the
maid  who  was  lost  ? '  Then  they  said,  '  But  if  it  is  she  there
is  a  certain  mark  on  her  back  ever  since  she  was  an  infant,
she  had  been  left  in  a  house  with  a  fire  (and)  it  had  burned
her.'  She  was  summoned.


ijfiiUfgZ*  *fr  ^'V|£S''«  -^f

^*^y^^M^


64  STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  2

Aka-gama  ta  da  Ala  da  anabi  aka-che,  '  Mutume  nan,

da  ya  yi  maki  aure  nan,  ubanki  ne,  ko  kua

anba  shi  riko  ne  ? ' Sai  yarinua  ta  kla

ta  fadi. Aka  yi,  aka  yi,  ba  ta  fadi  ba. Sai  u  uban

ya  che,  '  Kawo  bayanki  en  gani.' Ta  juya

bayanta. Su-ka-ga  tanbo,  wanda  wuta

ta  kone  ta  tun  tana  jariria. Sai

su-ka-che,  '  Ashe  hakana  ne,  tunda  farm

da  ki-ka-zo  domin  me  ki  (ki)  gaia  mani  ? '

Sai  su-ka-sani  diarsu  che. Sai

su-ka-aike  gun  ubanta,  wanda

ya  tsinche  ta,  aka-gaia  masa  kaman  da  aka-yi.

They  adjured  her  by  Allah  and  the  Prophet  (and)  said,  '  This
man  who  gave  you  in  marriage,  is  he  your  father  or  were
you  given  to  him  to  be  brought  up  only  ? '  But  the  maiden
refused  to  answer.  Try  as  they  could  they  could  not  get
an  answer.  Then  the  father  said,  'Present  your  back  that
I  may  see.'  She  turned  her  back,  (and)  they  saw  the  scar
where  the  fire  had  burned  her  when  she  was  an  infant.  Then
they  said,  'Truly  it  is  so.  From  the  first  when  you  came
why  did  you  (refuse)  to  tell  me  (us)  ? '  And  they  knew  it
was  their  daughter.  And  they  sent  to  her  (foster)  father,  the
one  who  had  found  her,  and  he  was  told  what  had  happened.


&^^4tY&jfc4i£«r
94^4^fM4lN!*


I V ^^

^JTjUfd:./-  *•  »•'•

L; J^^T  v.

^^f^^^^


C  ?  !  «»..?  1


lU^j^VLliiiJ^^-

i^.\A^4f:.f^


66  STORIES ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  2

Sai  shi  kua  ya  che,  '  Babu  laifi  ina  roko
ku  ba  ni  yarinya,  idan  na  ga  wani,  in  ba  shi.
Sai  su  kuma  su-ka-ki  yarda.1 Miji  kua,  da  ya  ji
hakanan,  sai  ya  dauki  kwari,  da  15  baka  tasa,
ya  shiga  daji,  ya  rataye  kainsa,  ya  mutu. Mafarin
kiyaya  16  yan  uba  ke  nan. Shi  ke  nan, 17  kungurus
kan  kusu.

And  he  said,  '  There  is  no  harm  done.  I  beg  you  give  me
the  maiden.  If  I  have  found  another  I  shall  give  her  to  him
(the  husband).'  But  they  (the  girl's  real  father  and  mother)
refused  to  consent  to  this.  As  for  the  husband,  when  he
heard  this  he  took  his  quiver  and  bow.  He  went  into  the
forest  (and)  hanged  himself.  He  died.  And  this  was  the
beginning  of  hatred  among  the  children  of  one  father  by
different  mothers.  That  is  all.  Off  with  the  rat's  head.


****•

™ V~~


rf^^Hp


M


?.A*ldl  • %4  -* A — v /HA  r S't% *

"M^tVAAiiatfL^glA^r  ^.AlcLgJLJT

*^ d/**^^ ^y* /*•  ft.  i

U*%|yf^^g£^^


68  STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  3

No.  3.

Wanan  tatsumar  konan  daji  che.
1  Gatanan,  gatanan,  ta  je,  ta  dawo. Sarki
ya  bari  aka-sa  ma  daji  wuta. Aka-gewaye,
ba  asamu  komi  ba,  har  daji  ya  kone
duka. Sai  wani  mugun  yaro  ya  gani  wani  rame.
Ya  gina,  bai  ga  komi  ba,  sai  wata  tsofua
ta  fito  achiki. Da  fitowa,  sai  ta  pasa  kuwa,
ta  che,  '  Sarki  2  ya  sa  ma  daji  wuta,  kowa
ya  gani  ramenga  ya  wuche,  sai  kai  ka  gina,
yau  3  kaa  gani. Sai  ta  fafari  yaro. 4  Sai
yaro  ya  buge  ta  da  gatari. Ta  tuma  bisa,
ta  zama  shafb,  zaa  ta  fauche  shi,  sai  ya  halbe  ta ;


This  tale  is  about  a  bush-burning.  A  story,  a  story.  Let
it  go,  let  it  come.  A  chief  gave  permission  for  the  grass
to  be  burned.  They  went  all  round  but  did  not  see  anything
(game)  until  all  the  grass  was  burned.  Then  a  certain  bad
boy  saw  a  hole  and  dug  (there) ;  he  did  not  see  anything.
But  an  old  woman  came  out,  and  on  her  emerging  she
screamed  (with  rage)  and  said,  '  The  chief  has  set  fire  to  the
bush ;  (hitherto)  whosoever  has  seen  this  hole  has  passed  on,
and  now  you  must  dig  it  up.  To-day  you  will  see.'  Then
she  sprang  on  the  boy,  but  the  boy  struck  her  with  his  axe.
Up  she  leaped  and  turned  into  a  hawk,  and  when  she  was
about  to  swoop  down  on  him  he  shot  at  her ;


70  STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  3

hakanan  har  ta  rinjaye  shi. Ya  gudu. Shi-na-gudu,  ya  je,

ya  iske  zanzaro,  shi-na-saka. Sai  zanzaro

ya  che,  '  Ina  zaa  ka.' Ya  che,  '  Wata  tsofua  ta  koro  ni.' Sai

zanzaro  ya  che,  '  Zamna  nan  ta  tafo.' Sai  yaro  ya  za-

-mna. Shi-na  nan,  sai  tsofua  ta  zo,  babu  shawara,

sai  ta  zabura,  zaa  ta  kama  yaro. Sai  zanzaro  ya  hade  ta.

Sai  zanzaro  ya  dauki  sillli  guda  daia,  ya  ba

yaro,  ya  che,  shi  damre  tsakar  bayansa. Sai

yaro  ya  damre  shi,  har  bayansa  zaa  shi  tsumke.

Mafarin  ka  gani  chikin  zanzaro  da  girma

ke  nan,  tsofua  ke  chiki. Bayansa  kua,

da  ya  zama  sillli,  yaro  ya  damre  shi


and  so  (they  fought  on)  until  she  got  the  better  of  him.  He
ran  away.  (As)  he  ran  he  came  across  a  wasp,  he  was
weaving  cloth.  Then  the  wasp  said, '  Where  are  you  going  ? '
He  said,  '  An  old  woman  chased  me.'  Then  the  wasp  said,
'  Sit  here  (till)  she  comes.'  So  the  boy  sat  down.  He  was
there  when  the  old  woman  came  sure  enough,  and  she  sprang
to  catch  the  boy;  but  the  wasp  swallowed  her.  He  lifted
a  single  thread  and  gave  it  to  the  boy  (and)  said  he  must  tie
it  round  his  middle.  So  the  boy  tied  him  up,  until  his  back
was  almost  cut  in  two.  That  is  the  origin  of  what  you  see  ;
the  wasp's  belly  is  big,  the  old  woman  is  inside.  His  back,
which  has  become  a  thread,  the  boy  bound  it


f/ri..  >*>


w


•  •


•  II


•4*

C  2~*i


••


te^H^^^^r*


/••  JuU_i>-iS^i>
L>^~ /• <^««


72  STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  3

ga  5  tsara  bay  a. Shi  ke  nan,  6  kungurus

kan  kusii. Kusu  ba  ya  chi

kaina  ba,  sai  in  chi

kain  dan  banza.

at  the  middle,  behind.  That  is  all.  Off  with  the  rat's  head.
The  rat  will  not  eat  my  head,  rather  will  I  eat  (its)  head,  son
of  a  worthless  fellow.


»•


74  STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  4

No.  4.

Wanan  tatsunlar  l  gaya  che.
2  Gatanan,  gatanan,  ta  je,  ta  komo. Sarki  ya  haifi
dlansa  mai-keau,  babu  kamanta  achikin  gari.
Sai  ya  che, '  Wanda  ya  yi  noma  raana-gaya,  gonansa
ya  wuche-kowa,  3  shi  ka  aure  dia  sarki. Yau,
ranan  sarki  ya  yi  gaya,  atafo  ayi  masa  noma,
ama  wanda  ya  yi  noma,  ya  wuche  kowa,  shi  ke  da  4maata.'
Yau  ashe  hawainya  ya  ji  tundadewa,
ya  je,  shi-na-chin  maganin  noma. Yau  da  raanar  gaya
ta  zo,  hawainya  shi-na  gida,  bai  fito  ba,  har  ma-
-sunoma  su-ka-yi  noma,  su-ka-yi  nisa. Kana
hawainya  ta  zo. Da  ya  sara  hauya  kasa  so  daia,

This  is  a  story  about  an  alliance.  A  story,  a  story.  Let
it  go,  let  it  come.  A  chief  begat  a  beautiful  daughter ;  she
had  no  equal  in  the  town.  And  he  said,  '  He  who  hoes  on
the  day  the  people  come  together  and  whose  area  hoed
surpasses  every  one  else's  he  marries  the  chief's  daughter.
So  on  the  day  the  chief  calls  his  neighbours  to  hoe  (gaya),
let  them  come  (the  suitors)  and  hoe  for  him.  But  he  who
hoes  and  surpasses  every  one  else,  to  him  a  wife.'  Now  of
a  truth  the  chameleon  had  heard  (about  this)  for  a  long
time  past,  (and)  he  came  along.  He  was  eating  hoeing
medicine.  Now  when  the  day  of  the  hoeing  came  round  the
chameleon  was  at  home.  He  did  not  come  out  until  those
hoeing  were  at  work  and  were  far  away ;  then  the  chameleon
came.  When  he  struck  one  blow  on  the  ground  with  the  hoe,


• '•/_ £ow • . IltT

••  *44^£  A*-*  fa


f  2k&&l&*&L*:.&

j  ***: 7  •/*£>.


^^^f^lM-Ml^j^"

/- -  > /  > / •*

( IJ^A/HI 4  4V^ltf^^^;4^M^ALJ

w  O  **c/ C/ ^  vj u/


76  STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  4

sal  ya  hau  bisa  hauya  ya  zamna. Sat  hauya

ta  kama  noma,  ta-na-tafia  tar !  har  ta  chika

da  manoma,  ta  wuche,  ta  kai  bakin  5  kunya.

Hawainya  ya  sabka,  ya  zamna,  ya  fiita,  kana

manoma  sun-ka-kawo. Saanan  sarki,

shi  bai  yarda  ba,  sai  wanda  ya  yi  gudu,  ya  tsere

kowa  duka,  shi  ke  aure  dlarsa.

Sai  6  gumki  ya  che  shi  ya  fi  kowa

gudu. Sai  su-ka-yi  gudu,  sai  hawainya  ta  zama

7  tanpasua,  ta  tuma,  ta  mane  ga  wutslar

gumki. Sai  gumki  shi-na-gudu,  har  ya  wuche

kowa,  har  ya  kawo  kofar  gidan


then  he  climbed  on  the  hoe  and  sat  down,  and  the  hoe  started
to  hoe,  and  fairly  flew  until  it  had  done  as  much  as  the  hoers.
It  passed  them,  and  reached  the  boundary  of  the  furrow.
The  chameleon  got  off,  sat  down,  and  rested,  and  later  on  the
(other)  hoers  got  to  where  he  was.  Then  the  chief  would
not  consent,  but  now  (said)  he  who  ran  and  passed  every  one,
he  should  marry  his  daughter.  Then  the  hartebeest  said  he
surpassed  every  one  in  running.  So  they  had  a  race.  But
the  chameleon  turned  into  a  needle;  he  leaped  (and)  stuck
fast  to  the  tail  of  the  hartebeest,  and  the  hartebeest  ran  until
he  passed  every  one,  until  he  came  to  the  entrance  of  the
house


78  STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  4

(gidan)  sarki. Ya  wuche. Sai  hawainya  ya  saki
wutslar  gumki. Ashe  hawainya  ya  gani
yarinya. Sai  ya  rungume  ta. Kamin  gumki
shi  komo,  sai  ya  tarda  hawainya  shi-na-
-rungume  da  yarinya. Sai  gumki  ya  rika
kuka  da  hawaye. Mafarin  abinda  ka  ke  gani
ga  idanunsa,  kaman  hawaye  ke  nan,  tun  ranan
ya  ke  kuka,  bai  share  hawaye  ba.
8  Kungurus  kan  kusu.

of  the  chief.  He  passed  it.  Then  the  chameleon  let  go  the
hartebeest's  tail;  of  a  truth  the  chameleon  had  seen  the
maiden.  So  he  embraced  her,  and  when  the  hartebeest  came
along  he  met  the  chameleon  embracing  the  girl.  Thereupon
the  hartebeest  began  to  shed  tears,  and  that  was  the  origin
of  what  you  see  like  tears  in  a  hartebeest's  eyes.  From
that  day  he  has  wept  and  not  dried  his  tears.  Off  with  the
rat's  head.


%
••


«•


8o  STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  5

No.  5.

Wanan  tatsuniar
1  shasharbo  mani  che.

Wani  mutum  ke  da  8  matansa  blu,  guda  ta  haifu
yaya  bm,  guda  kua  ba  ta  haifu  ba,  sai  dan  wani
ke  wurinta. Shi  kua  ba  shi  so  wanda  ta  haifu,
sai  wanda  ba  ta  haifu  shi  ke  so. Yau  ananan
ranan  yunwa  ta  zo  garinsu,  sai  shi  tafi  daji,
shi  samu  abinchi. Shi  hana  mai-yaya,  shi  bai
maras  dla. Su  chi,  su  blu. Hakanan  kulum,  ranan
ya  tafi  daji,  ya  samu  kwain  zabo  guda
ishirin. Sai  ya  kiraye  ta,  ya  che,  *  Ki  zabi
guda  daia,  wanda  ya  fi  girma.' 3  Sai  ta  dauki

This  story  is  (called)  '  Whack  me '.  A  certain  man  had
two  wives ;  one  bore  two  children  and  the  other  had  not  any
children,  except  the  child  of  another  who  lived  with  her.
Now  he  (the  husband)  did  not  like  the  one  who  had  borne,
but  the  one  who  had  not  borne.  Now  it  came  about  that
a  day  of  famine  came  on  them.  Then  he  (the  husband)  went
to  the  bush  (and)  found  food,  and  refused  the  one  with
children  and  gave  to  the  one  without  children,  (and)  they  two
ate;  and  it  was  so  always.  And  one  day  he  went  to  the
bush  and  found  guinea-fowl's  eggs,  twenty  in  number.  Then
he  called  her  (the  one  he  did  not  love)  and  told  her  to  choose
the  largest  of  them.  So  she  took


•  o  w  • i^l  t?o 4

* *. « A «. L-4 & •  ~  ^ A


:«i^s


"tdAAiS  It

*  ~/y

-i'-'F  .•'.-*  /

•!•!£•*•  I -* % a^^t-ac/^

^4»»/>J^»%[A|| »;»Atfl  •>^>*  ?


i»S*«

4^^'

A °  •(  *f»  -

^/*uw'

j^diiLur/.


••

/i-


e

^f«^;.^Aa*S^4£js

O^O^  MvT7  /  &


••


-^'T A+tMl&J^  • A* -  • ••  f  —  ^1-

^/^•TS  ••  K4u^V«  U^>^/ J^3&

-  * %•  M/ T««


*?A-^ii£JS^4;t^?  ^»


>f>M

'ILx


8a  STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  5

guda,  ta  je,  ta  dafa,  ta  ba  yara. 4  Su-ka-chi.
Ranan  ita  kuma  6  ta  je  daji,  ta  samu
hatsinta,  ta  6  taiga  kunu,  ta  kiraye  shi,
ta  che, '  Duba  chikin  yan  7  farutanka,
ka  tsoma  guda  daia  wanda  ya  fi  girma  ka  la-
-she,  ka  tashi,  ka  bar  ma  yara  saura.' Sai
ya  rika  duba  yan  yatsa,  shi-na-jujuyawa,
shi-na-fadi,  '  Wani 8  zaa  ni  tsomawa  chiki  ? ' Shi-na-
-fadi, '  Wanga  ko  wanga  ? ' Ashe  hannunsa
guda  shi-na  wurin  gutsunsa,  shi-na-kunta  walki.
Sai  ya  kunche  9  walki  maza  maza,  ya  tura  chikin
kunu. Idanun  maata  shi-na-duban  wani  vvuri,


one,  she  went  and  boiled  it,  and  gave  it  to  the  children  to
eat.  And  on  that  day  she  too  went  to  the  bush,  she  found
corn,  and  stirred  (it  into)  gruel.  And  she  called  him  (her
husband)  and  said, '  Look  among  your  nails  and  dip  (into  the
pot)  one,  the  largest  one  of  all,  then  lick  (it),  rise  up,  and
leave  the  rest  to  the  children.'  Then  he  began  to  examine  his
nails,  he  turned  them  about,  saying,  '  What  one  must  I  dip
in  ? '  (and)  he  kept  saying, '  Is  it  this  one  or  that  one  ? '  But
all  the  time  his  one  hand  was  between  his  legs  loosening  his
skin  waist  covering.  Then  he  swiftly  unfastened  it,  and
plunged  it  into  the  pap,  (in  the  pot)  (when)  the  woman's  eyes
were  looking  the  other  way ;


84  STORIES ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  5

ba  ta  gani  ba. Sai  ya  tashi  ya  che,  ' 10  Na  tsoma  dai.'

Sai  ta  che, ' n  Kai  ka  ji  da  abin  fadi.' Sai  ta  12  kyale.

Wata  raana  ta  tafi  daji,  ta  gano  13  mara. Sai

ta  wuche. Sai  mara  ta  che,  l  Kaka  ki  ke  wuche  ni

ba  ki  gaishe  ni  ? ' Sai  ta  che,  ' u  Sannu.' Sai  mara

ta  che, '  15in  gwiya.' Sai  16maatar  nan  ta  kyale,  ta  wuche.

Sai  mara  ta  che,  '  Ba  ki  tanbaya  na  sunana  ? '

Sai  maatar  nan  ta  che,  '  Kaka  sunanki  ? '

Sai  mara  ta  che,  '  Sunana,  17  Shibshibto  mani,'

Sai  maatar  nan  ta  kyale,  zaa  ta  wuchewa.

Sai  mara  ta  che,  '  Ba  ki  tanbaya  sunana  ? ' Sai

maatar  nan  ta  che,  '  Kaka  sunanki  ? ' Sai


she  did  not  see.  Then  he  stood  up  and  said, '  I  have  put  one
in.'  And  she  said, '  You  will  get  put  to  shame  over  this,'  and
she  refrained  from  saying  any  more.  Another  day  she  went
to  the  bush,  and  saw  a  spoon  and  she  passed  on.  But  the
spoon  said,  '  How  is  it  you  would  pass  on  and  not  salute
me  ? '  So  she  said, '  Greetings  to  you.'  And  the  spoon  said,
'  Greetings.'  Then  the  woman  would  have  let  it  go  at  that,
and  passed  on,  but  the  spoon  said,  'Will  not  you  ask  my
name  ? '  So  the  woman  said,  *  What  is  your  name  ? '  And
the  spoon  answered, '  My  name  is  Help  me.'  And  the  woman
did  not  speak  again,  and  was  about  to  pass  on,  but  the  spoon
said,  *  Will  not  you  ask  me  my  name  ? '  So  the  woman  said,
4  What  is  your  name  ? '  And


^}-U'.^i.fi&*ffi$


86  STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  5

mara  ta  che,  '  Sunana  Shibshibto  mani.' Sai  mara
ta  che,  '  Ke  kua  che,  Shibshibto  mani  in  jia.' Sai
ita  kua  ta  che,  '  Shibshibto  mani  in  jia.' Sai  mara
ta  che,  '  Kawo  kworianki.' Ta  kawo  kworianta,  sai
mara  ta  rika  zuba  mata  tuo,  ta  zuba  mata
har  kworianta  ya  chika. Ta  tafo  gida,  ta  di-
-ba,  ta  bai  mijinta. Saura  kua  ita  da  yara
su-ka-chi. Gari  ya  waye,  sai  mijinta  ya  zo. Sai
ya  che,  '  Domin  Ala  ina  ki-ka-samu  abinchi  nan  ? '
Sai  ta  che, '  Na  samu  kudi  ne,  na  gani  hatsi,
na  saye,  na  daka,  na  18  tuka  tuo.' Sai  ya  che,
'  Babu  laifi.' Sai  ya  tashi,  ya  fita,  ya  bar  ta.


the  spoon  said,  '  My  name  is  Help  me  ' ;  and  the  spoon  said,
4  You  too  say,  Help  me  that  I  may  taste.'  So  she  also  said,
'Help  me  that  I  may  taste.'  Thereupon  the  spoon  said,
'Bring  your  calabash.'  She  brought  her  calabash.  Then
the  spoon  kept  filling  it  with  food,  he  poured  it  out  for  her
till  her  calabash  was  full.  She  went  home,  took  it  out,  and
gave  her  husband,  and  the  remainder  she  and  her  children
ate.  Next  day  her  husband  came  and  said,  '  For  the  sake  of
Allah  where  did  you  get  that  food  ? '  Then  she  said, '  I  got
money,  I  saw  grain,  I  bought  it,  I  pounded  it,  and  made
food.'  And  he  said,  'That  is  all  right,'  and  stood  up,  and
went  out,  and  left  her.


*..>.*.&&&


88  STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  5

Ita  kua  sai  ta  tashi,  ta  dauki  kworianta,

ta  fita,  ta  tafi  daji,  wurin  da  mara  ta  ke,

ta  iske  mara,  ta  che  mata,  '  Kaka  sunanki  ? '

Sai  mara  ta  che,  '  Sunana  ShibshibtS  mani.'

Ta  che,  '  Shibshibto  mani  in  jia.' Sai  mara

ta  rika  zuba  mata  tuo,  har  kworianta

ta  chika. 19  Ta  dauko,  ta  tafo  gida,  ta  diba,

ta  ba  shi,  ya  chi,  da  shi  da  maatansa  guda,  (sk)

su-ka-koshi. Kulum  hakanan,  sai  ranan  ya  che,

4  Domin  Ala  ba  ki  kai  ni  wurinda  ki  ke  samu

tuo  nan.' Sai  ta  che  masa,  *  In  garin  Ala  ya  waye

ka  zo.' Yau,  da  gari  ya  waye  sai  ya  zo,  su-ka-je  wurin


She  also  got  up,  lifted  her  calabash  (and)  went  out,  and  went
off  to  the  bush  where  the  spoon  was.  She  came  to  where  he
was  and  said  to  him,  '  What  is  your  name  ? '  And  the  spoon
said,  *  My  name  is  Help  me.'  She  said,  *  Help  me  that  I  may
taste.'  Thereupon  the  spoon  commenced  to  pour  out  food
for  her  until  her  calabash  was  full.  She  lifted  it  and  went  oft
home,  took  (the  food)  out  and  gave  him.  He  ate,  with  his
one  wife.  They  were  filled.  And  this  happened  again  and
again,  till  one  day  he  said,  *  For  the  sake  of  Allah  will  you
not  take  me  to  where  you  are  finding  this  food  ? '  Then  she
said  to  him,  l  When  the  dawn  of  Allah  appears,  come.'  So
when  it  was  dawn,  he  came,  and  they  went  to  the  place


^uiA/kiyLLs^^^


Iti*  f. £***•$  ZS.S* -/ I-  •  _"«  A> 7

»1**f^»  t^^e^^J^.a^


90  STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  5

mara  ta  che, '  Gaishe  ta.' Sai  ya  gaida  mara. Sai

maatarsa  ta  che,  '  Tanbaye  ta  mana,  che,  Kaka

sunanki  ? ' Sai  ya  che,  '  Kaka  sunanki  ? '

Sai  mara  ta  che,  '  Sunana  Shibshibto  mani.'

Sai  20  maatar  kua  ta  che  masa,  '  Che,  Shibshibto  mani

in  jia.' Sai  ya  che,  '  Shibshibto  mani  in  jia.' Sai

mara  kua  ta  dinga  zuba  masu  tuo,  har

korainsu  su-ka-chika. Su-ka-dauki,  sa-ka-ka-

-wo  gida,  su-ka-chi. Da  dare  ya  yi,  sai  mijin  ya  koma,

ya  dauke  mara,  ya  kawo  gida,  ya  sainya

chikin  21  rufewa. Idan  ya  ji  yunwa,  sai  shi  che  maa-

-tansa  ta  shiga  chikin  rufewa,  ta  gani  me


where  the  spoon  was.  She  said,  '  Salute  her,'  so  he  saluted
the  spoon.  Then  his  wife  said,  '  Ask  her,  can't  you  (her
name)  ?  say,  What  is  your  name  ? '  So  he  said,  '  What  is
your  name  ? '  And  the  spoon  said, '  My  name  is  Help  me.'
And  the  wife  said  to  him, '  Say,  Help  me  that  I  may  taste.'
And  he  said,  'Help  me  that  I  may  taste.'  Thereupon  the
spoon  commenced  to  pour  out  food  for  them  until  their
calabash  was  full;  then  they  lifted  it  and  took  it  home.
They  ate.  When  night  came  then  the  husband  returned.
He  lifted  up  the  spoon  and  came  back  to  the  house,  and  put
the  spoon  inside  the  grain  store.  When  he  felt  hungry  then
he  told  his  wife  to  go  into  the  grain  store  and  see  what


92 STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE.  No.  5

ke  child. Sai  ta  shiga  rufewa,  ta  iske  mara.

Ta  che,  '  Kaka  sunanki  ? ' Sai  mara  ta  die,

'  Sunana  Shibshibto  mani.' Sai  ta  che,  '  Shibshibto

mani  in  jia.' Sai  mara  ta  chika  mata  kworia

da  tuo. Ba  su  bai  wachan  maata  da  ta  gwoda  masa.

Ita  kua  ba  ta  samun  abinchi,  hakanan  kulum.

Sai  ranan  maatansa  wa(n)da  shi  ke  so,  mai-gida

ba  shi  gida,  ya  je  daji. Sai  ta  dauki

mara  ta  kai  raafi,  ta-na-wanki. Sai 22  matan

sarki  su-ka-zo,  su-ka-gaishe  ta,  su-ka-che

4  Me  ki  ke  yi  ? ' Ta  che,  *  Ga  shi  dai.' Sai  su-ka-kyale.

Sai  ta  che, '  Ba  ku  gaishe  ta  ? ' Sai  su-ka-che, '  Sannu,  sannu.'

was  inside.  When  she  entered  the  store  she  met  the  spoon.
She  said, '  What  is  your  name  ? '  Then  he  said, '  My  name  is
Help  me.'  And  she  said,  '  Help  me  that  I  may  taste.'  And
the  spoon  filled  her  calabash  with  food.  And  they  did  not
give  that  wife  who  had  told  him  all  about  it.  She  also  did
not  find  any  food.  It  was  always  so,  until  one  day  his  wife,
the  one  the  man  loved,  when  the  husband  was  not  at  home,
he  had  gone  to  the  bush,  took  the  spoon.  She  came  to  the
stream  and  was  washing  it,  when  the  chief's  wife  came  and
greeted  her  and  said,  'What  are  you  doing?'  She  said,
'Look  at  that'  Then  they  said  nothing  more.  Then  she
said,  'Are  you  not  going  to  salute  her?'  And  they  said,
'  Greetings,  greetings.'


94  STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  5

Ta  amsa  gaisua. Sai  maatar  nan  ta  che,  '  Ku  tanbaye  ta
ku  che,  Kaka  sunanki  ? ' Ta  che, '  Sunana
shibshibto  mani.' Sai  su-ka-che,  '  Wani  abu  kuma  aka-che
masa  Shibshibto  mani  ? ' Sai  maata  nan  ta  che,  *  Ku  che,
Shibshibto  mani  in  jia.' Sai  su-ka-che, '  Shibshibto  mani
in  jia. Sai  mara  ta  dinga  zuba  masu  tuo.
Wadansu  sun  debi  rua,  sai  su-ka-zuba,  su-ka-kawo,
ta  zuba  masu  tuo,  su-ka-dauki,  su-ka-kai  gida,
Sarki  ya  tanbaye  su. '  Ana  ku-ka-samu  abin  nan  ? '
Sai  su-ka-che,  '  Raafi  mu-ka-je,  mu-ka-ishe  maatar
wane,  sai  ta  che,  Ba  ku  gani  ina  wanki  mara  ba  ?
Mu-ka-che,  Mun  gani. Sai  ta  che,  Ba  ku  gaishe  ta  ?


It  answered  the  salute.  Then  this  wife  said,  '  Ask,  What  is
your  name  ? '  It  answered,  '  My  name  is  Help  me.'  Then
they  said, '  What  sort  of  a  thing  now  do  they  call  Help  me  ? '
Then  this  woman  said, '  You  say,  Help  me  that  I  may  taste.'
And  they  said,  '  Help  me  that  I  may  taste.'  Thereupon  the
spoon  kept  pouring  out  food  for  them.  Some  have  (had)  drawn
water,  but  they  poured  it  out,  and  brought  (their  calabashes),
and  the  spoon  poured  in  food  for  them,  and  they  lifted  it  and
took  it  home.  And  the  chief  asked,  l  Where  did  you  get  this
thing  ? '  And  they  said, '  We  went  to  the  stream  and  we  met
there  the  wife  of  So-and-so,  and  she  said,  Don't  you  see  I  am
washing  a  spoon?  We  said,  We  have  seen,  and  she  said,
Will  you  not  salute  it  ?


It*


*/• Vl<y


fc/jtfjji43*4fc^.*tfp

*^?>" — .  >, v  «"  •


96  STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  5

Mu-ka-che,  Sannu  23abuya.  Ta  che,  Sannu  kade.  Sai  mu-ka-yi

shiru,  mu-na-kalo,  sai  maatar  nan  ta  che,  Ba  ku  tanbaya  su-

nanta  ? Sai  mu  kua,  mu  ka  che,  Kaka  sunanki  ?

Ta  che,  Sunana  Shibshibto  mani. Sai  mu-ka-yi  shiru,

mu-na-dubanta,  sai  maatar  nan  ta  che,  Ku  kawo

korainku,  ku  che,  Shibshibto  mani  in  jia. Sai

mu  kua  mu-ka-che,  Shibshibto  mani  in  jia,  ta  di-

-nga  zuba  muna  tuo,  ta  chichika  muna  korai

da  tuo.' Sai  sarki  ya  che,  '  Ku  je,  ku  kawo  ta,

in  gani.' Sai  aka-tafi  da  fadawa  da  dogarai,

aka-je,  aka-tarda  mutume  nan,  aka-che,  '  Sarki  ya  che

ka  ba  mu  Shibshibto  mani,  mu  kawo,  shi  gani.' Sai

ya  dauko  ta  dakansa,  ya  ba  su. Shi  na  mai-bakin  child


We  said,  Greetings,  lady  friend.  And  it  said,  Greetings
to  you.  Next  we  were  silent,  we  were  gazing,  when  that
woman  said,  Will  you  not  ask  its  name  ?  So  we  then  said,
What  is  your  name?  and  it  said,  My  name  is  Help  me.
Then  we  were  silent  (again),  we  were  watching,  when  that
woman  said,  Bring  your  calabashes  and  say,  Help  me  that
I  may  taste.  And  we  too  said,  Help  me  that  I  may  taste.
And  it  kept  pouring  out  food  for  us  and  filled  up  our  cala-
bashes with  food.'  Then  the  chief  said,  *  Go  and  bring  it  that
I  may  see.'  So  they  went  off,  the  court  officials  and  the
chief's  body-guard,  and  they  went  and  met  this  person,  and
they  said,  *  The  chief  says,  give  us  Help  me,  that  we  may
bring  it  for  him  to  see.'  So  he  took  it  himself  and  gave
them ;  he  was  black  of  heart


i>  Mv^^a "|


4 _  £•&.&•  'Si? >»A  *
**^*  jy  ^ ^i ;  *tf  yn  ^  ^  |  ^  «"f^  f


^•t^M/gft/^  ^^^^


iA^i»4fv^

•T»


H


98  STORIES  ABOUT PEOPLE. No.  5

Su-ka-karbe,  su-ka-kai  ma  sarki,  su-ka-che,  '  Ga  ta.1

Sarki  ya  che,  '  Sannu,  abuya,'  sai  ta  amsa,  sai  ya  che,

'  Ku  kawo  akushi.' Aka-kawo  akushi,  ya  che,

1  Kaka  sunanki  ? ' Ta  che,  '  Sunana  Shibshibto  mani.'

Sarki  ya  che,  '  Shibshibto  mani.' Sai  ta  dinga  zuba  masa

tuo,  ta  chika  masa  akushi. Sai  sarki

ya  che,  '  Wanan  ya  fi  karfin  gidan  talaka.' Sai

sarki  ya  che  akai  ta  gida. Aka-kai  ta  gida,  ta-na-bai

gidan  sarki  abinchi. Shi  kua,  wanda  ke  da  mara,

shi-na-mutua  da  yunwa. Ana-nan,  ranan,  maatansa,

wanda  ta  gwoda  masa  mara,  ya  dauke,  ya  bar  ta,

sai  ta  je  daji,  bidan  abinchi. Sai  ta  gani  tsumajia,


They  received  (it)  (from  him),  they  brought  (it)  to  the  chief
and  said,  '  Behold  it.'  The  chief  said, '  Hail,  lady  friend,'  and
it  answered.  And  he  said,  '  Bring  large  wooden  dishes,'
and  large  wooden  dishes  were  brought.  Then  he  (the  chief)
said,  '  What  is  your  name  ? '  and  it  said,  '  My  name  is  Help
me.'  And  the  chief  said,  4  Help  me,'  and  it  kept  pouring  out
food  and  filled  the  wooden  plates  for  him.  And  the  chief
said,  '  This  is  too  good  a  thing  to  be  in  a  poor  man's  house.'
So  the  chief  ordered  it  to  be  brought  to  his  house.  It  was
brought  to  his  house  and  it  supplied  the  chief's  house  with
food,  but  as  for  him  who  had  the  spoon  (formerly)  he  was
dying  of  hunger.  Then  one  day  his  wife,  the  one  who  had
shown  him  the  spoon,  when  he  had  taken  it  and  left  her,  went
to  the  bush  to  look  for  food.  And  she  saw  a  branch  of
a  tree,


• It


ioo  STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  5

wadansu  su-ka-che,  'kurfu,'  ta  gani  chikin  daji.

Ta  che, '  Sannu.' Ta  che,  '  Sannu  kade.' Maatar  nan

ta  che,  '  Kaka  sunanki  ? ' Kurfu  ta  che,

4  Sunana  Sharsharbo  mani. Sai  maatar  nan

ta  che, '  Sharsharbo  mani  in  jia.' Sai  kurfu

ya  dinga  feadinta,  sharb !  sharb !  ta-na-

-gudu,  ta-na-kuwa,  ta-ma-che,  '  Wayo  24  na  tuba,

na  bi  ka,  baa  ni  karawa.' Kurfu  kua

shi-na-dukanta,  har  mutane  su-ka-zo,  (sk)

su-ka-fafeta. 25  Ta  je  gida ;  ta  kirawo  mijinta  ;

ta  kai  shi  wurin  bulala  ;  ta  che,  ' 26  Ka  gani,

na  samu  wani  abu  kuma  mai-bada  abinchi.'


some  say  a  whip ;  she  saw  it  in  the  forest  (bush).  She  said,
'Greetings,'  and  it  said,  'Greetings  to  you.'  And  the  wife
said, '  What  is  your  name  ? '  and  the  whip  said, '  My  name  is
Whack  me.'  And  the  woman  said,  '  Whack  me  that  I  may
feel.'  Thereupon  the  whip  kept  flogging  her,  whack !  whack !
She  was  running  away,  she  was  yelling,  she  was  saying,
'  Alas,  I  am  repentant,  I  shall  follow  you,  I  won't  do  it  again.'
But  the  whip  flogged  her  until  people  came  and  rescued  her.
She  went  home  and  called  her  husband,  and  took  him  to
where  the  whip  was,  and  said,  '  Have  you  seen,  I  have  found
another  thing  again  for  giving  food.'


102  STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  5

Sai  ta  tsaya  daga  nlsa,  ta  che,  l  Ga  shi  chan.' Sai  miji  ya  tafi

da  hamzari,  farm !  farm !  sai  ya  tarda  bulala,  ta-na-

27  -kunche. Ya  che,  '  Sannu,  abokina.' Bulala  ya  che,

4  Sannu  kade.1 Shi-na-tsamani,  ko  abin  kirki  ne.

Sai  ya  che,  '  Kaka  sunanki  ? ' Sai  kurfu  ya  che,

'  Sunana  Sharsharbo  mani  in  jia.' Sai

mutume  nan  ya  che,  '  Sharsharbo  mani  in  jia.' Sai

bulala  ya  dinga  dukansa,  har  ya  gaji. Ya  ko-

-mo,  ya  28  kunta  kurum. Mutume  nan  shi  kuma

ya  tafi  gida,  ya  kunta,  shi-na-nlshi. Maatarsa  wa(n)da

shi  ke  so,  ta  zo,  ta-na-fadi,  '  Me  ya  faru  ? ' Bai

tanka  ba. Shi-na-kurum,  har  ya  samu  sauki.


Then  she  stood  afar  off,  she  said,  '  There  it  is  over  there.'
Then  the  husband  went  off  in  haste,  tramp !  tramp !  until  he
met  the  whip ;  it  was  lying  down.  He  said,  '  Hail,  friend,'  and
the  whip  said,  '  Hail  to  you.'  He  was  all  the  time  thinking  it
was  something  good.  Then  he  said,  *  What  is  your  name  ? '
and  the  whip  said,  '  My  name  is  Whack  me  that  I  may  feel.'
Then  this  man  said,  '  Whack  me  that  I  may  feel.'  Thereupon
the  whip  kept  beating  him  until  it  was  tired.  And  the  whip
went  back  and  lay  quite  still,  and  the  man  too  went  home  and
lay  down.  And  the  wife  he  loved  came  along  and  said,
1  What  has  happened  ? '  And  he  did  not  answer.  He  lay
quiet  until  he  got  better.


&&?&:&'?*&*

N <>/ tV  _•  .0*  • ^  ;


104  STORIES ABOUT PEOPLE. No.  5

Sai  ya  tafi  ya  iske  bulala  kunche. Sai  ya  di-

-nga  kunta. Shi-na-kunto,  bar  ya  kai  kusa

da  ita. Sai  ya  zabura,  ya  taushe  ta,  ya  kawo  gida,

ya  sainya  chikin  runbu. Sai  ya  zamna  kurum

har  maatar  nan  da  shi  ke  so  ta  zo,  ta  che,

'  Yau  yunwa  ni  ke  ji.' Sai  ya  che,  '  Shiga  chikin

runbu,  ki  gani  me  ke  chiki.' Sai  ta  tashi

maza  maza,  ta  che,  '  Me  ka  samu  yau  ? ' Ya  che,

4  Kedai  shiga.' Sai  ta  che,  '  In  dauki  koria  ? '

Ya  che,  *  I.' Ta  dauki  koria,  ta  shiga  chikin  runbu.

Ya  rufe,  ya  che,  '  Me  ki  (ka)  gani  ? ' Sai  ta  che, '  Wani  abu

na  gani  mai-tsawo.' Ya  che,  *  Gaishe  shi  mana  ? ' Ta  che,

Then  he  went  and  came  to  where  the  whip  was  lying.  Then
he  kept  crouched  down,  he  crouched  down  until  he  got  near
it,  then  he  jumped  and  held  it  down,  and  took  it  home,  and
put  it  away  in  the  grain  store.  Then  he  sat  quietly  until  his
favourite  wife  came.  And  she  said,  'To-day  I  am  feeling
hungry.'  Then  he  said,  '  Go  into  the  grain  store  and  see
what  is  inside.'  Then  she  rose  up  in  great  haste,  she  said,
'What  did  you  find  to-day?'  And  he  said,  'You  yourself
enter.'  Then  she  said, '  Must  I  take  a  calabash  ? '  He  said,
'Yes.'  She  took  a  calabash  and  went  into  the  grain  store.
He  closed  it.  He  said,  '  What  do  you  see  ? '  And  she  said,
'  Something  I  have  seen  which  is  long.'  And  he  said, '  Greet
it,  cannot  you  ? '  She  said,


jL


ff^&fei^iH


106  STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  5

'  Sannu  da  futawa.' Ta  che,  '  Kaka  sunanka  ? '

Ya  che,  '  Sunana  Sharsharbo  mani.' Ta  che,  '  Sharshar-

-bo  mani  in  jia.' Sai  bulala  ya  dinga  fladinta,

ta-na-kururua. Mijinta  da  ya  ji,  sai  ya  sheka  da  gudu,

ya  yi  dawa,  maatarsa,  wa(n)da  ba  shi  so,  ita  kuma

sai  ta  fita,  ta  yi  dawa,  domin  tsoro. Ita  kua

wachan,  daket  ta  samu  kafa,  ta  gudu. Su-ka-bar  gida

kango. Da  wuri  mara  da  bulala  daji  su  ke.

Mafarin  zuansu  gida  ke  nan.

29  Kungurus  kan  kusu.

4 1  greet  you  (who  are)  resting,'  (and)  she  said, '  What  is  your
name?'  It  said,  'My  name  is  Whack  me,'  and  she  said,
*  Whack  me  that  I  may  feel.'  Thereupon  the  whip  set  about
beating  her,  she  was  shouting.  Her  husband,  when  he  heard,
ran  off  to  the  forest,  and  his  wife,  the  one  he  did  not  love,  also
ran  out  to  the  forest,  through  fear ;  and  she  also,  the  one  who
had  entered  the  grain  store,  with  difficulty  she  found  a  way
of  escape  and  ran  off;  and  they  left  the  house  deserted.
Long  ago  the  spoon  and  the  whip  lived  in  the  wilds,  and  this
was  the  first  time  they  made  their  appearance  in  the  home.
Off  with  the  rat's  head.


<%^^^/s^;g*


uf


/ftAj&V«^-^^^^-*«f*


••


liiii^;^  $.3.  l«
I' 7»


io8 .STORIES  ABOUT PEOPLE. No.  6

No.  6.

Wanan  tatsunlar  wani  sarki  che

1  Gatanan,  gatanan,  ta  je,  ta  komo. Wani  sarki

ana-che  da  shi  Kurungu-mugun-kifi,  ya  tsu-

-fa  chikin  sarauta. Da  ya  kusa  mutua,  shi-na  da  dla

dayawa,  sai  ya  tara  su,  ya  che, '  Idan  2  naa  mutu  me  zaa  ku

giyara  makokina  da  shi  ? ' Baban  dansa  ya  che,

'  Idan  3  ka  mutu  naa  giyara  makokinka  da  zaki.'

Kowa  ya  fadi  abinda  zaa  shi  yi. Autansa  ya  che,

1  Idan  ka  mutu,  ina-yin  makokinka  da  4  kura.'

Yau  ana-nan  ba  adade  ba  sai  ya  mutu. Kowa

ya  kawo  abinda  ya  che. Sauran  babansu  da  auta.

Sai  auta  ya  tafi  daji,  shi-na-yawo,  sai  ya  5  chinto


This  is  a  story  about  a  certain  chief.  A  tale,  a  tale.  Let
it  go  and  let  it  return.  A  certain  chief,  by  name  Kurungu-
the-bad-fish,  grew  old  in  his  kingdom,  and  when  he  was  near
to  death — he  had  many  children — he  called  them  together  and
said,  '  If  I  were  to  die  what  would  you  all  do  to  observe  my
funeral  ? '  His  eldest  child  said,  '  When  you  are  dead  I  shall
mourn  for  you  by  (slaughtering)  a  lion.'  Each  one  said  what
he  would  do.  His  youngest  said, '  When  you  are  dead  I  shall
mourn  for  you  by  killing  a  hyena.'  And  it  came  to  pass  that
not  long  after  he  died,  and  each  brought  what  he  said ;  only
the  eldest  and  the  youngest  remained  (to  fulfil  the  promise).
Then  the  youngest  went  to  the  bush,  he  was  walking,  and
he  came  across


no  STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  6

6  sania,  ya  kawo. Su-ka-yanka,  su-ka-yi  salka,

su-ka-dauki  kan  sania  da  7  kafahu,  (sk)

su-ka-tura  chikin  salka. Sai  ya  je  ya  kirawo  kura.

Ta  zo,  ya  che,  *  Mun  yi 8  watanda,  ba  ka  nan,  mu-ka-ajie

naka.' Su-ka-goda  masa  burgame,  su-ka-che,

'  Ga  shi  nan,  shiga,  ka  dauka.' Sai  kura

ta  kuna  kai,  ta  shiga. Sai  auta  ya  yi  maza  maza,

ya  rufe  bakin  burgame,  su-ka-damre

kura  chiki,  su-ka-ja  kura,  su-ka-kai

bisa  9  kabarin  ubansu. Su-na-duka  bar  kirgi

ya  pashe. Kura  ta  samu  10  kafa,  ta  fita,  ta  gudu.

Sai  auta  ya  ji  haushi,  ya  che, '  Naa  kama  ta

kuma.' Ana-nan,  wata  raana  kuma  ya  samu


a  cow  and  brought  it  back.  They  slaughtered  it  and  made
a  skin  bag  of  it,  and  they  took  the  cow's  head  and  feet  and
pushed  them  into  the  bag.  Then  he  went  and  called  the
hyena.  She  came  (and)  he  (the  man)  said,  'We  divided  up  the
meat  (when)  you  were  not  there,  (and)  we  set  aside  your  share.'
They  showed  her  (lit.  him)  the  bag,  they  said,  '  There  it  is,
go  in  and  lift  (the  meat).'  Then  the  hyena  put  in  her  head
and  entered.  Then  the  youngest  son  immediately  closed  the
mouth  of  the  bag  (and)  they  tied  it  up,  the  hyena  inside,
and  they  dragged  the  hyena  and  brought  her  above  their
father's  grave.  And  they  kept  flogging  her  until  the  skin
burst.  The  hyena  found  an  exit,  got  out,  and  ran  off.  Then
the  youngest  son  got  angry  and  said,  '  I  shall  catch  her
again.'  And  so  another  day  he  found


}

cC7*»T  Q*»'Q/;«


ii2  STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  6

sania,  ya  kawo,  ya  yanka,  ya  bidi  n  dawo,  ya  like
idanunsa  da  shi,  ya  tafi  daji,  ya  gani  kura,  ya  che,
4  Kura,  mun  yi  watanda  ba  ki  nan,  mu-ka-neme  ki
mu-ka-gaji,  mu  kua  masuriko  alkawali  ne,
gama  uwayenmu,  da  zaa  su  mutua,  su-ka-che
mu  rika  baya,  kowa  ya  samu  wani  abu,  shi  bidi
dan  uwansa.' Kura  ya  che,  '  Gaskia  ne,  ama
wani  mutum  ya  zo  nan  ya  rude  ni,  hakanan
ya  kai  ni,  shi-na-so  shi  kashe  ni.' Sai  auta
ya  che,  ' 12  Asha  kiira  mutum  shii  kira  dan  uwansa
domin  shi  kashe  ? ' Kura  ta  che,  '  Mu  tafi.'
Su-ka-kama  hainya,  su-na-zua,  sai  kura  ta  tsaya

a  cow,  he  brought  it  back  and  killed  (it),  he  searched  for
porridge  and  covered  his  eye  with  it  and  went  off  to  the
forest.  He  saw  the  hyena  and  said,  '  Hyena,  we  have
divided  up  the  meat  in  your  absence,  we  looked  for  you  until
we  were  tired.  And  as  for  us,  we  are  a  people  who  keep
a  promise  to  our  parents,  and  when  they  were  about  to  die
they  said  we  must  continually  give  (gifts),  and  whoever  found
anything  let  him  seek  his  brother  (to  share  with  him).'  The
hyena  said,  '  That  is  quite  true,  but  some  one  has  come  here
and  deceived  me.  It  was  thus  he  enticed  me  away  and  he
was  wanting  to  kill  me.'  Then  the  youngest  son  said, '  Come
now,  hyena,  would  a  man  call  his  brother  to  kill  (him)?1
The  hyena  answered,  'Let  us  go.'  They  took  the  road,
they  were  coming,  when  the  hyena  stood  still


<-Z^;^«\u^;«  ..ifrVrtlttA


•^•^^^  *•


vl^^r^^;^)>A^^^aii^J
»  •*  y/^ **  c *- *•  **  dx

^  A  ^4^»v^^'s^Sfi4^


^^Mj^i


ii4  STORIES ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  6

ta  che,  '  Ai,  jia  wanda  ya  zo  ya  kiraye  ni,  kamanka

shi  ke,  in  ji  ba  kai  ba  ne.' Auta  ya  che,  *  Mutume  nan

shi-na  da  13  idanu  guda  ? ' Kura  ya  che,  '  Mu  tafi.'

Su-ka-kama  hainya,  su-na-tafia  su-ka-kai  gida.

Sai  auta  ya  goda  masa  wurin  fata  sania.

Ya  che,  '  Shiga,  akwai  naka  chiki.' Sai  kura

zaa  shi  kuna  kai  chiki,  sai  ya  fitar  ya  che,  '  Ai

aboki,  kad'  ka  zo  ka  yi  mani  kamar  da  dan  uwa-

-nka  ya  yi  mani.' Auta  shi-na-tsaye. Sai  ya  che,

4  Haba  kura,  idan  baa  ka  so  u  naman  ne,

ka  bari, 15  ka  tafia(r)ka. Mutum  shi  kirawo  dan  uwa-

-nsa  domin  shi  chuche  shi  ? Nama  na  goda  maka


and  said, '  No,  yesterday  he  who  came  to  call  me,  like  you
was  he,  let  me  hear  it  was  not  you.'  The  youngest  son  said,
4  This  man,  had  he  one  eye  ? '  The  hyena  said,  '  Let  us  go
on.'  They  took  the  road  and  were  going  on  (and)  they
reached  the  house.  Then  the  youngest  son  showed  him  (her)
where  the  cow's  hide  was,  and  he  said, '  Enter,  your  (share)  is
within.'  Then  the  hyena,  when  he  (she)  was  about  to  push
in  his  (her)  head,  came  out  and  said, '  No,  friend,  do  not  come
and  do  to  me  as  your  brother  did  to  me.'  The  youngest  son
was  standing  by,  and  he  said,  'Come  then,  hyena,  if  it  is
that  you  do  not  want  the  meat,  leave  it,  and  go  about  your
business.  Does  a  man  call  his  brother  in  order  that  he  may
do  him  harm  ?  The  meat  I  show  you


ii6  STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  6

in  ba  ka  chi,  ka  bari,  ka  fita.' Sai  kura  ya  che,  '  Aa
ina-chi.' Sai  ya  tura  kai  achiki,  sai  ya  shiga.
Kamin  shi  dauko  shi  fito,  sai  auta  ya  mfe
kofa,  ya  kama  bakin  burgame,  ya  rufe.
Su-ka-taru,  su-ka-damre  kura,  su-ka-ja,  (sk)
su-ka-kai  bisa  kabarin  ubansu,  16  su-na-duka,
su-ka-duke  ta  har  su-ka-pashe  kirgi. Kura
ya  samu  kofa,  ya  fita,  ya  gudu. Sai  auta
ya  che,  '  Naa  17  samo  ta  kuma.' Sai  aka  dede,  kura
ta  manche. Sai  auta  1S  ya  samu  bajinin  sania,
ya  kawo. Su-ka-yanka,  su-ka-fede,  su-ka-yi
salka,  su-ka-dauki  katara  na  baya,  su-ka-sa


if  you  do  not  eat,  leave  it,  and  get  out.'  Then  the  hyena  said,
4  No,  I  am  (going)  to  eat  it. '  So  he  (she)  put  his  (her)  head  in  and
entered.  As  he  (she)  was  going  to  lift  the  meat  and  then  come
out,  then  the  youngest  son  seized  the  mouth  of  the  bag  and
closed  it.  And  they  all  came  up  and  tied  up  the  hyena  and
dragged  it  and  brought  it  over  their  father's  grave.  They
kept  beating  it,  they  beat  it  till  the  skin  burst,  and  the  hyena
found  an  exit,  and  came  out,  and  ran  off.  But  the  youngest
son  said,  '  I  will  find  and  bring  her  back  again.'  Then  some
time  passed  and  the  hyena  forgot.  And  the  youngest  son
found  a  very  large  cow  and  brought  it  back.  They  slaughtered
it,  flayed  it,  and  made  a  skin  bag ;  they  lifted  a  hind  leg  and
put  (it)


n8  STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  6

chikin  burgame,  su-ka-yi  tarko. Sai  auta

ya  bidi  dawo,  ya  tafi  daji,  ya  je  kusa  da  rame  kura.

Sai  ya  dauki  dawo,  ya  like  idanunsa,  dada

ba  shi  gani. Sai  shi-na-kira,  '  Ina  wajen  ratne(n)

kura,  ga  shi,  ankashe  sania,  tun  jia

aka-aje  masa  katara,  ba  agane  shi  ba.' Sai  kura

ya  ji,  shi-na  chikin  rame. Sai  ta  fito,  ta  che,

1  Ga  ni.' Sai  kura  ya  che,  '  Ina  19  naman  shi  ke  ? '

Sai  auta  ya  mika  mata  baban  tsoka,

ya  che,  '  Kin  gani  shaida.' Sai  kura  ya  karbi,

ya  hade  nan  da  nan. Sai  kura  ya  che,  '  Mu  tafi

maza  maza.' Sai  kura  ya  tuna,  sai  ya  tsaya,  ya  che,


in  the  bag,  and  made  a  trap.  Then  the  youngest  son  got
some  porridge,  went  to  the  bush,  came  near  the  hole  where
the  hyena  was,  then  took  the  (dawo)  porridge,  and  covered
up  his  eyes ;  then  he  could  not  see.  Then  he  called,  '  Where
is  the  hyena's  den  ?  Look  at  this,  a  cow  has  been  slaughtered
since  yesterday,  they  put  on  one  side  a  leg  for  him  (her),  and  he
(she)  is  not  to  be  seen.'  Then  the  hyena  heard,  he  (she)  was  in
the  hole,  so  out  he  (she)  came  and  said,  '  Here  I  am.'  And  the
hyena  said, 4  Where  is  the  meat  ? '  Then  the  youngest  son  held
out  to  her  a  large  piece  of  meat  and  said, '  You  see  the  sign  (that
what  I  say  is  true).'  Then  the  hyena  took  it  and  swallowed
it  right  off,  and  the  hyena  said,  'Let  us  go  at  once.'  Then
the  hyena  remembered,  and  he  (she)  pulled  up,  and  said,


J^4^t^^

^jp^^^^gggtagg


jgiiiL&tA*^****


•  •«


W  O i»

s«cA2u


fjjAifaS^.'.^''


120  STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  6

'  Aboklna,  wani  dan  uwanka,  hakanan  ya  rude  ni,

ya  kai  ni,  shi-na-so  shi  kashe  ni.' Sai  auta  ya  che,

'  Haba  kura,  kaka  makafo  shi-ka-yi

shi  kashe  wani  ? ' Sai  kura  ya  che,  '  Mu  tafi.' Su-ka-kama

hainya,  su-na-zua,  sai  su-ka-kai  wurin  tarko.

Sai  auta  ya  che,  '  Kura  ga  nama  nan.' Sai  kura

ta  gani  katara  mai-mai,  kura  bai  yi  shawara  ba,

sai  ya  zaabura,  ya  shiga,  garin  daukan  nama,  bai  san

tarko  ba  ne. Sai  tarko  ya  kama  shi. Sai

kura  kua  shi-na-kuwa. Sai  auta  ya  gudu,

ya  je  gida,  ya  kirawo  yan  uwansa. Su-ka-yi  ta  bugu

kura,  har  kura  ya  20  galabaita. Su-ka-damre  shi

'My  friend,  some  one  of  your  kindred,  it  was  just  thus  he
deceived  me ;  he  took  me  away  and  he  wanted  to  kill  me.'
Then  the  youngest  son  said,  'Come  now,  hyena,  how  can
a  blind  man  manage  to  kill  another  person?'  And  the
hyena  said,  '  Let  us  go  on.'  They  took  the  road,  they  were
coming,  until  they  got  to  where  the  trap  was.  Then  the
youngest  son  said,  '  Hyena,  look  at  the  meat  there.'  Then
the  hyena  saw  a  very  fat  hind-quarter.  The  hyena,  without
a  thought,  leaped  and  went  in,  in  order  to  lift  the  meat  out ;
he  (she)  did  not  know  it  was  a  trap,  till  the  trap  caught  him  (her).
Then  the  hyena  began  to  shout,  and  the  youngest  son  ran  off
and  went  home  and  called  his  brothers,  (and)  they  flogged
the  hyena  until  the  hyena  became  insensible.  (And)  they
bound  him  (her)


122  STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  6

su-ka-ja,  su-ka-kai  gun  kushewan  ubansu,
su-ka-yanka,  su-ka-fede,  su-ka-raba  nama,  su-ka-chi.
Dada  su-ka-che,  '  Kowa  ya  gerta  makoki
ubanmu,  saura  babanmu.' Sai  babansu  ya  dauki
makera,  ya  kai  daji. 21  Shi-na-kira. Sai  zaki
ya  zo,  ya  che,  '  Abokina  makeri  in  tafo
in  yi  maka  zuga.' Ya  che,  '  I.' Sai  zaki  ya  tafo,  shi-na-
-yi  masa  zuga. Ashe  makeri  ya  yi  wani  abu,
ya  bido  wani  irin  gainye,  ya  22  danfara  ga  gu-
-tsunsa,  sai  ya  dauki  muntalaga,  ya  tura
wuta. Sai  ya  che,  zaki  shi  yi  zuga. Zaki
shi-na-zuga  bar  muntalaga  ya  yi  ja. Sai

and  dragged  him  (her),  and  brought  him  (her)  to  their  father's
grave,  and  (there)  they  cut  (her  throat),  and  skinned  (her),  and
divided  up  the  meat,  and  ate.  Then  they  said,  '  Each  one
has  observed  the  funeral  rites  of  our  parent  with  the  excep-
tion of  our  eldest  brother.'  Then  their  eldest  brother  lifted
up  an  anvil,  and  took  it  to  the  bush ;  he  was  forging  metal.
Then  the  lion  came,  and  said,  '  Friend  smith,  let  me  come  and
work  the  bellows  for  you.'  He  said,  'Yes.'  So  the  lion
came  and  worked  the  bellows.  Now  of  a  truth  the  smith  had
done  something,  he  had  sought  leaves  of  a  certain  kind  and
put  (them)  between  his  legs.  Then  he  lifted  the  tongs  and
put  (them)  in  the  fire,  and  he  told  the  lion  to  blow  the
bellows  ;  and  the  lion  blew  them  until  the  tongs  were  red
hot.  Then


-  -  .


\  CJ


124  STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  6

makeri  ya  tashi,  ya  yi  gofo,  ya  che  ma  zaki,

'  Aboklna  tsullata  ta-na-yi  mani  kai  kai.'

Ya  dauki  muntalaga  ya  tura  chikin  gainye. Gainye

na-k6newa. Zaki  shi-na-che  tsuliar

makeri  che. Makeri  kua  ya  23  kyale,  bar

muntalaga  ya  yi  sainye. Daga  nan  zaki  ya  che,

'  Kai  dan  kankane  nan,  kai  ka  yi  karfin

hali  hakanan  ? ' Sai  zaki  shi  ma  ya  sainya

muntalaga  chikin  wuta,  shi-na-zuga  har  muntalaga

ya  yi  ja. Sai  zaki  ya  che,  '  Aboklna

dauki,  ni  ma  ka  sainya  mani.' Sai  makeri

ya  dauki  muntalaga  shi-na-24  ragada  ma  zaki

the  smith  got  up  and  bent  down  and  said  to  the  lion,  '  Friend,
my  anus  is  itching';  (and)  he  lifted  the  tongs  and  pushed
them  among  the  leaves,  (and)  the  leaves  were  set  on  fire.  The
lion  thought  it  was  the  smith's  anus.  The  smith  too  left
them  there  until  the  tongs  were  cold.  After  this  the  lion
said,  '  An  insignificant  person  like  you,  you  have  strength
of  mind  to  do  this  ? '  Then  the  lion  put  the  tongs  into  the
fire,  he  was  blowing  the  bellows  until  the  tongs  were  red
hot.  Then  the  lion  said,  '  Friend,  lift  (them)  and  place  them
for  me.'  So  the  smith  lifted  the  tongs,  he  worked  them  up
and  down  the  lion's


126 STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE.  No.  6

chikin  shakira,  bar  zaki  ya  suma.

Sai  makeri  ya  yi  maza  maza,  ya  tafi  gida,

ya  kirawo  kaninsa. Su-ka-zo,  su-ka-ja,

su-ka-kai  gida. Sai  ya  shiga  gida

garin  shi  debo  rua,  shi  kawo  ma  samari.

Zaki  na-kunche. Sai  makeri  ya  debo

rua,  ya  zo,  mutane  sun  taru,  su-na-kalo,

sai  zaki  ya  falki,  ya  che,  '  Abokma,

haka  ka  yi  mani  ? ' Sai  makeri  ya  che,

'  Na  gani  ka  galabaita,  domin  hakanan

na  kawo  ka  gida  domin  in  zuba

maka  rua.' Sai  zaki  ya  che,  '  Karla  ne.'

anus  until  the  lion  fainted.  Then  the  smith  with  all  speed
went  home  and  summoned  his  younger  brothers,  (and)  they
came  (and)  they  pulled  (the  lion)  (and)  brought  it  home.  Then
he  entered  the  house  to  get  some  water  to  bring  for  the
young  men — the  lion  is  lying  still.  Then  the  smith  drew
the  water  (and)  came,  (and)  the  people  gathered  round  and
looked  on,  then  the  lion  came  round  from  his  faint  and  said,
'  My  friend,  what  are  you  doing  to  me  ? '  And  the  smith
said,  '  I  have  seen  you  were  weary,  and  so  I  brought  you
home  to  pour  water  on  you.'  But  the  lion  said,  'You  are
a  liar.'


«  «  /r-=


128 STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE.  No.  6

Sai  zaki  ya  zaabura,  ya  take  shi,  ya  fashe.
Mafarin  25gizo  gizo  ke  nan,  da  ya  take  shi,
ya  fashe,  sai  ya  yi  kafafu  dayawa.
Mafarin  tautau  ke  nan,  da  makeri  ne.

26  Kungurus  kan  kusu.


And  the  lion  leaped  and  trampled  him  and  tore  (him).  That
was  the  origin  of  the  spider ;  when  he  (the  lion)  trampled  on
him  (the  smith),  he  broke  up.  and  made  many  feet.  That
was  the  beginning  of  the  spider ;  formerly  he  was  a  smith.
Off  with  the  rat's  head.


-  T.  T«  '«k.%


••  *


K


1 30  STORIES ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  7

No.  7.

Wanan  tatsunlar  marayu  che.
1  Gatanan,  gatanan,  ta  je,  ta  komo. Wani  mutum
ke  da  2  matansa  guda  blu. Ya  mutu,  ya  bar  su. Guda
daia  chikin  matan  ta  samu  chiwo. Ta  gani
ta  kusa  mutua. Sai  ta  che  ma  kishiyanta,  '  Dada
kin  gani  chiwo  nan  ba  shi  bari  na,  ga  dla
ta  3  na  bar  taulafi  gareki,  domin  Ala  da  anabi
ki  duba  mani  ita  da  ke(a)u.' Yau,  mache  ta  mutu,
aka-bisna  ta,  su-na-nan  da  yarinya. Sai  kulum
ta-na-gwoda  mata  wahala,  bar  ranan  yarinya,
chiwo  ya  kama  ta. Ta-na-4  kunche  ;  5  klshia
uwa  tata  ta  che,  '  Tashi  ki  tafi  raafi.'

This  is  the  story  about  orphans.  A  story,  a  story.
Let  it  go,  let  it  come.  A  certain  man  had  wives,  two  in
number.  He  died  and  left  them.  One  among  the  wives
fell  ill.  She  saw  she  was  near  to  death,  so  she  said  to
the  second  wife,  '  Now  you  have  seen  this  illness  will
not  leave  me.  There  is  my  daughter,  I  have  left  her  as
a  trust  to  you;  for  the  sake  of  Allah  and  the  prophets
look  after  her  well  for  me.'  So  the  woman  died  and  was
buried,  and  they  were  left  with  the  maid  (her  child).  Now
always  they  were  showing  her  cruelty,  until  one  day  a  sickness
took  hold  of  the  maiden.  She  was  lying  down.  Her  step-
mother said,  '  Get  up,  (and)  go  to  the  stream.'


4^^^Hi^^

,A4%^J,^i^A^^3j^

ts  ,\^iJu^l-M»^--^«A^^

"«-«« - •  O^  s>'


^j,,S^


ro-^^'"-^

&  w  > __

« 4 I . A  «  •T? Z  « T SAt  .A -rlr- *  !• ?4

^k^^^^ '^^-

^^^AJ^^Ujfc^
b^Kj.a£^|^i/Ju&!.&4ti


i3a  STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  7

Yarinya  6  ta  tashi,  ta-na-mshi,  ta  dauki

dan  maburmi,  ta  kama  hainya. Ta  tafi  raafi,

ta  dauko  rua,  ta  kawo,  ta  che, ' 7  Uma  sabke  ni.'

Sai  klshiar  uwa  tata  ta  che,  '  Ba  ki  gani  ina-8da-

-ka  ba  ne,  sai  na  gama  ? ' Ta  yi  surfe,  ta  kare,

ta-na-bakache,  yarinya  na-tasye. Yarinya

ta  che,  '  Uma  sabke  ni.' Sai  klshiar  uwa  tata

ta  che,  '  Ba  ki  gani  ina-bakache  ba  ne  sai  na  gama  ? '

Yarinya  na-tsaye,  bar  ta  gama,  har  ta  wanke,

ba  ta  kula  da  yarinya  ba. Yarinya  ta  che,  '  Uma  sabke  ni.'

Ta  che,  '  Ba  ki  gani  na  zuba  hatsi  turmi  ba,

sai  na  gama  daka  ? ' Yarinya  na-tsaye


The  maid  got  up,  she  was  groaning,  she  lifted  a  small
calabash,  (and)  took  the  road.  She  went  to  the  stream  (and)
drew  water;  she  took  it  back  (and)  said,  'Mother,  lift  the
calabash  down  for  me.'  But  her  step-mother  said,  '  Do  you
not  see  I  am  pounding?  Not  now,  when  I  have  finished.'
She  finished  husking  the  grain,  she  was  winnowing,  the
maiden  was  standing  by.  The  maiden  said,  'Mother,  lift
down  the  calabash  for  me.'  But  her  step-mother  said,  '  Do
you  not  see  I  am  winnowing?  (Not  now),  when  I  have
finished.'  The  maiden  stood  by  till  she  had  finished,  until
she  had  washed  ;  she  paid  no  attention  to  the  maiden.  The
maiden  said,  'Mother,  help  me  down  (with  the  water-pot).'
She  said,  '  Do  you  not  see  I  am  pouring  grain  into  the
mortar?  (Not  now),  but  when  I  have  finished  pounding.'
The  maiden  kept  standing  by


u*t


'&&&&%

SJiifii.-.^ii"

•  %%T *  "  •


II *-  •  •


&S&


134  STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  7

har  ta  gama  daka ;  ta  yi  ribidi,  ta  yi  tankade,

ta  kare,  yarinya  na-tsaye. Yarinya  ta  che,  '  Uma

sabke  ni.' Sai  ta  che,  '  Ba  ki  gani  ina-nasa  fura  ba,

sai  na  kare  ? ' Yarinya  ta-na-tsaye  har  ta  gama

9  nasa  fura. Yarinya  ta  che,  '  Uma  sabke  ni.' Sai  ta  che,

1  In  je  garin  sabke  ki,  fura  ta  10  tsinbire,  sai

fura  ta  tafasa.' Fura  ta  tafasa,  ta  n  tsame,

har  ta  kirba,  ta  dunkula,  ta  gama,  ba  ta  che  ma  yarinya

komi  ba. Sai  iska  ya  zo  kamar  gugua.

Ya  dauke  yarinya,  ya  tafi  da  ita,  ba  agane  ta  ba.

Iska  ya  kai  ta  daji,  babu  kowa  sai  ita  kadai.

Ta-na-yawo  chikin  daji,  sai  ta  gani  buka. Sai  ta  je.


till  she  finished  pounding;  she  re-pounded,  she  winnowed,
she  finished,  the  maiden  was  still  standing.  The  maiden  said,
1  Mother,  help  me  down,'  but  she  said,  '  Do  you  not  see  I  am
putting  porridge  in  the  pot  ?  When  I  have  finished.'  The
maiden  kept  standing  by  till  she  (the  step-mother)  had  finished
putting  the  porridge  (in  the  pot).  The  maiden  said,  '  Mother,
help  me  down,'  but  she  said,  '  If  (I)  come  to  help  you  down
the  porridge  will  get  burned;  (wait)  till  the  porridge  boils.'
The  porridge  boiled,  she  took  it  out  of  the  water,  till  (then)
she  pounded  it,  squeezed  it,  and  finished.  She  did  not  say
anything  to  the  maid,  till  the  wind  came  like  a  whirlwind ;
it  lifted  the  maiden  and  went  off  with  her  (and)  she  was  not
seen.  The  wind  took  her  to  the  forest  (bush),  there  was  no
one  but  she  alone.  She  was  roaming  in  the  forest  till  she
saw  a  grass  hut.  Then  she  went  (up  to  it).


;.£>-*£U4


\

•*


•'•  (*i%&^%5*£i£*


^iUfj^l/^V^^M

rT* ly • /  L!x


cj^^*t*^~r


136  STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  7

Ta  leka,  ta  iske  katara  da  kare  ke  chiki.

Sai  ta  koma,  sai  katara  ta  che,  '  Us !  us ! ',  sai  kare

ya  che,  '  Wai  ki  komo.' Yarinya  ta  komo,

sai  katara  ta  che, '  Us !  us ! ',  sai  kare  ya  che,  '  Wai  ki  shigo.'

Yarinya  ta  shiga  buka,  ta  rusuna  ta-na-gurfane,

sai  katara  ta  che,  4  Us !  us ! ,  sai  kare  ya  che, '  Wai  kin  iya

tuo  ? ' Yarinya  ta  che,  4 1.' Sai  su-ka-ba  ta  shinka-

-fa  kwara  guda,  su-ka-che  ta  dafa. Ta  dauki

shinkafa  kwara  guda. Ba  ta  yi  gardama  ba,

ta  nasa  chikin  turmi,  ta-na-daka,  kamin  ta  daka

ta  kare,  shinkafa  ta  chika  turmi.

Ta  susuka  shinkafa  ta  kare,  ta  sheke.

She  peeped  in,  (and)  met  a  thigh-bone  and  a  dog  inside.
Then  she  drew  back,  but  the  thigh-bone  said,  '  Us !  us ! ',  and
the  dog  said,  '  He  says  you  are  to  come  back.'  The  maiden
came  back,  and  the  thigh-bone  said,  '  Us !  us ! ',  and  the  dog
said,  '  He  says  you  are  to  enter.'  The  maiden  entered  the
hut,  and  bowed  down  and  prostrated  herself,  and  the  thigh-
bone said,  '  Us !  us ! ',  and  the  dog  said,  '  He  says,  Can  you
(cook)  food?'  And  the  maiden  said,  'Yes.'  So  they  gave
her  rice,  one  grain,  and  said  she  was  to  cook  it.  She  picked
up  the  single  grain  of  rice.  She  did  not  grumble,  she  put
it  in  the  mortar  and  pounded,  and  when  she  had  finished
pounding,  the  rice  filled  the  mortar.  She  dry  pounded  the
rice  and  finished,  and  poured  it  from  a  height  to  let  the
wind  blow  away  the  chaff  (sheke}.


^^u^:.^>^5^«^4^


138  STORIES ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  7

Ta  je  raafi,  ta  wanke,  ta  kawo  gida,  ta  12  sasanwa,

ta  zuba  shinkafa,  kanda  ajima  shinkafa

ta  chika  tukunia. Sai  katara  ta  che,  '  Us !  us  ! ',  sai  kare

ya  che,  '  Wai  kin  iya  mia  ? ' Yarinya  ta  che,  '  I,  na  iya.'

Katara  ta  che,  '  Us !  us ! ',  sai  kare  ya  tashi,  ya  je

kan  jibji,  ya  tono  wani  tsofo  kashi,

ya  ba  yarinya. Ta  karbi,  ta  sainya  tukunia.

Kamin  ajima  kadan,  sai  nama  ya  chika  tukunia.

Sai  nama  ya  nuna,  ta  zuba  gishiri  da  daudawa,  ta  zuba

kayan  mia  duka. Mia  ya  nina,  ta  stride  tukunia,

ta  tuka  tuo,  ta  kwache,  ta  sainya  ma

katara  malmala  goma,  ta  sainya  ma  kare

She  went  to  the  stream  and  washed  (it) ;  she  brought  (it)  back
home,  she  set  (the  pot)  on  the  fire,  she  poured  in  the  rice  and
in  a  short  time  the  rice  filled  the  pot.  Then  the  thigh-bone
said,  '  Us !  us ! ',  and  the  dog  said,  '  He  says  are  you  able  (to
make)  soup?'  The  maiden  said,  'Yes,  I  can.'  The  thigh-
bone said,  l  Us !  us ! ',  so  the  dog  got  up  and  went  to
a  small  refuse  heap,  (and)  scraped  up  an  old  bone,  and
gave  it  to  the  maiden.  She  received  it  and  put  it  in
the  pot.  When  a  little  while  had  passed,  the  meat  filled
the  pot.  When  the  meat  was  ready,  she  poured  in  salt
and  (daudawa}  spice,  (and)  she  put  in  all  kinds  of  soup
spices.  When  the  soup  was  ready  she  took  the  pot  off  the
fire,  she  served  out  the  food  and  divided  it  up.  Ten  helpings
she  set  aside  for  the  thigh-bone,  for  the  dog  she  set  aside


140  STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  7

malmala  tara,  ta  sainya  ma  kanta  malmala  bm.

Su-ka-chi,  su-ka-koshi. To,  domin  hakanan

ne,  idan  bako  ya  zo  gareka,  ka  girmama  shi,

ka  ba  shi  abinchi  shi  chi,  saanan  ka  13  jarabi

halinsa,  ka  gani  mugu  ne,  ko  nagari  ne.

Yau,  shi  ke  nan  tashin  zanche,  su-ka-kwana,

gari  ya  waye,  sai  katara  ta  die,  '  Us !  us ! ',  sai

kare  ya  che  ma  yarinya,  '  Wai  kin  iya  fura  ? ' Ta  che,

*  I.' Katara  ta  che, '  Us  !  us  ! ' Sai  kare  ya  tashi,

ya  je,  ya  dauko  kwara  hatsi  guda  daia,

ya  kawo,  ya  ba  ta. Ta  karbi  ta  sainya  chikin

turmi,  ta  zuba  rua,  ta  dauki  tabaria,


nine  helpings,  (and)  she  set  out  for  herself  two.  They  ate
(and)  were  filled.  So  it  is,  because  of  this,  if  a  stranger  has
come  to  you,  honour  him,  give  him  food  to  eat.  Meanwhile
you  study  his  nature,  you  see  if  (it)  is  bad  or  good.  To
return  to  the  story.  They  went  to  sleep.  At  dawn  the
thigh-bone  said, '  Us !  us ! ',  and  the  dog  said  to  the  maiden,
'He  says,  Can  you  make  "fura"  cakes?'  She  said,  'Yes.'
The  thigh-bone  said,  '  Us !  us ! '  Then  the  dog  got  up  (and)
came  (and)  lifted  one  grain  of  corn ;  he  brought  it  and
gave  her.  She  received  it  (and)  put  it  in  the  mortar;  she
poured  in  water,  she  lifted  the  pestle,


cM-^r^^^^

/5^4ttfci^S^*4W**a


142  STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  7

ta-na-daka ;  karain  ta  surfe,  hatsi  ya  yi

yawa. Ta  kwache,  ta  bakache,  ta  kai  raafi,

ta  wanke,  ta  komo,  ta  daka,  ta  kwache,

ta  bakache,  ta  komo,  ta  zuba,  ta  ribde,  ta  kwa-

-che,  ta  chibra,  ta  nasa  tukunia,  har  ya  tafasa,

ta  sabke,  ta  tsame,  ta  zuba  turmi,

ta  kirba,  ta  kwache,  ta  dunkula,  ta  bai

wa  katara  dunkuli  uku,  ta  ba  kare

dunkuli  bm. Dada  gari  ya  waye

katara  ta  che, '  Us !  us ! ',  sai  kare  ya  che,

'  Wai  kii  tafi  gida  ? ' Ta  che,  u '  Naa  tafi  ama

ban  san  hainya  ba.' Sai  katara  ta  che, '  Us !  us ! ',

she  was  pounding;  as  she  (wet)  pounded,  the  corn  became
much.  She  took  it  out,  she  winnowed,  she  took  it  to  the
water,  she  washed  it,  she  returned,  she  pounded,  she  took  it
out,  she  winnowed,  she  returned,  (and)  poured  (it  in  again).
She  pounded  it  very  finely,  she  took  it  out,  rolled  it  into
cakes,  and  put  it  in  the  pot  until  it  boiled.  She  took  it  off
(the  fire),  set  it  down,  poured  it  into  the  mortar,  pounded,
took  it  out,  rolled  it  up  into  balls,  and  gave  to  the  thigh-bone
three  balls,  to  the  dog  she  gave  two.  When  it  was  dawn  the
thigh-bone  said,  4  Us !  us ! ',  and  the  dog  said, '  He  says,  Are
you  going  home  ? '  She  said,  1 1  will  go,  but  I  do  not  know
the  way.'  Then  the  thigh-bone  said, '  Us !  us ! ',


144  STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  7

sai  kare  ya  tashi ;  ya  je,  ya  kawo  bayi

masu-keau,  ya  kawo  shanu,  da  tumaki,

dawaki  da  kaji,  da  rakuma  da  dawaki,

15  angarmu,  da  jiminu  da  riguna,  komi

duka  na  dunia,  kare  ya  kawo  ya  bai  wa

yarinya. Ya  che, '  Ga  shi,  katara  ta  che,  in  ba  ki,

ki  yi  guzuri,  wai  ta  salame  ki,  ki  tafi  gida.'

Sai  yarinya  ta  che,  '  Ban  san  hainya  ba.'

Sai  kare  ya  gaia  ma  katara,  sai  katara  ta  che,

'  Us  !  us ! ' Sai  kare  ya  che,  '  Wai  mu  tafi  in  gwoda

maki  hainya.' Sai  kare  ya  wuche  gaba,  yarinya

ta  hau  rakumi,  ana-jan  rakumi.

and  the  dog  rose  up ;  he  went  and  brought  slaves,  beautiful
ones,  he  brought  cattle  and  sheep,  horses  and  fowls,  camels
and  war-horses,  and  ostriches,  and  robes,  everything  in  the
world,  the  dog  brought  and  gave  to  the  maiden.  He  said,
'  There  they  are,  the  thigh-bone  says  I  must  give  you  (them) ;
you  will  make  them  the  provision  for  your  journey.  And  he
says  he  gives  you  leave  to  set  out,  and  go  to  your  home.'
But  the  maiden  said,  4 1  do  not  know  the  way.'  So  the  dog
told  the  thigh-bone,  and  the  thigh-bone  said,  *  Us !  us ! '  And
the  dog  said,  '  He  says  let  us  set  out,  (and)  I  must  show  you
the  way.'  So  the  dog  passed  on  in  front,  the  maiden  mounted
a  camel,  the  camel  was  led.


«tetf%^%>e


«•


146  STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE, No.  7

Su-na-tafia. Kare  ya  kawo  su,  bar  kusa  da  gida.

Kare  ya  koma. Ita  kua,  ta  aiki  chikin  gari

ta  che,  agaia  ma  sarki  ita  che  ta  zo. Sarki

ya  che,  '  Aje  atarbo  ta.' Aka-je,  aka-tarbo  ta.

Su-ka-sabka  kofan  sarki. Sarki

ya  ba  su  masabki,  su-ka-sabka. Ta  fi  da  ushuri,

ta  ba  sarki. Ta-na  nan,  har  sarki

ya  che  shi-na-son  ta  aure. Su-ka-yi  aure.

Ita  kua,  wachan  klshiar  uwa  tata,

ta  ji  haushi,  sai  ta  che  dlar  ta  ta  tafi

raafi,  ta  dauko  mata  rua. Sai  yarinya

ta  che,  '  Uma  ni  ba  ni  zua.' Sai  ta  dauki  kara

They  were  going  along.  The  dog  brought  them  till  (they
reached)  close  to  (her)  home.  The  dog  turned  back,  but  she
herself  sent  into  the  town ;  she  said,  let  the  chief  be  told  it
was  she  who  was  come.  The  chief  said,  '  Let  them  go  and
meet  her.'  They  went  and  met  her.  They  drew  up  at  the
chief's  doorway,  the  chief  gave  them  permission  to  alight,
they  alighted.  She  took  out  one  tenth  and  gave  the  chief.
She  stayed  there  until  the  chief  said  he  wished  her  in  marriage.
They  were  married.  She  also,  that  step-mother  of  hers,  (her
late  father's  second  wife)  was  envious,  so  she  told  her  own
daughter  to  go  to  the  stream  to  draw  water  for  her.  But
the  little  girl  said,  'Mother,  I  am  not  going.'  But  she  (the
mother)  lifted  a  reed


148  STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  7

ta  kore  ta,  ta  tafi  raafi  tllas. Yau  yarinya

ta  je  raafi,  ta  dauko  rua,  ta  kawo,  ta  iske

uwa  tata,  ta-na-daka,  ta  che,  '  Uma  sabke  ni.'

Sai  uwa  tata  ta  che,  '  Ina  surfe,  sai  na  gama.'

Ta  gama  surfe,  yarinya  ta  che,  '  Uma  sabke  ni.'

Sai  ta  che,  '  Zaa  ni  bakache  ne,  sai  na  gama.' Ta  gama

bakache. Yarinya  ta  che,  l  Uma  sabke  ni.' Ta  che,

'  Zaa  ni  daka  ne,  sai  na  gama.' Kanda  ta  gama

daka,  sai  ta  nemi  yarinya  kasa  da  bisa,

ba  ta  gane  ta  ba,  iska  ya  dauke  ta,  ya  kai

daji. Ya  yar,  ta-na  nan,  ta-na-yawo  chikin  daji,

sai  ta  gani  buka. Ta  je  ta  leka  buka,  sai  ta  gani


and  drove  her,  (and)  she  went  to  the  stream  by  compulsion.
Now  the  girl  went  to  the  stream,  drew  water,  and  took  (it)
home.  She  came  across  her  mother  as  she  was  pounding;
she  said,  'Mother,  help  me  down  (with  the  pot).'  But  her
mother  said,  '  I  am  pounding,  (wait)  till  I  have  finished.'  She
finished  pounding,  and  the  girl  said,  '  Mother,  help  me  down.'
But  she  answered,  '  I  am  about  to  winnow,  (wait)  till  I  have
finished.'  She  finished  winnowing  (and)  the  girl  said, '  Mother,
help  me  down  (with  the  pot).'  She  replied,  I  am  just  going
to  pound — when  I  have  finished.'  When  she  had  finished
pounding  then  she  sought  the  girl  low  and  high ;  she  did  not
see  her,  the  wind  has  (had)  lifted  her  (and)  taken  her  to  the
bush.  It  cast  her  there,  she  was  roaming  in  the  forest,  when
she  saw  a  grass  hut.  She  went  and  peeped  in  the  hut,  and
she  saw


150  STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  7

katara  da  kare. Sai  ta  koma,  sai  katara

ta  che,  *  Us !  us ! ' Kare  ya  che,  '  Wai  ki  zo.' Sai  ta  zo

ta  che,  '  Ga  ni.1 Katara  ta  che,  '  Us !  us ! ' Kare  ya  che,  (wk)

'  Wai  ki  zamna.' Sai  ta  zamna  ta  che,  '  Mu  dai  alhairi

katara  da  magana,  wani  abu  ne  Us !  us  ? ' Sai  su-ka-16  kyale.

Aka-jima  katara  ta  che, '  Us !  us ! ' Sai  kare  ya  che,

4  Wai  kin  iya  tuo  ? ' Sai  ta  che,  '  Ai  ana-mugunya

shekara,  makwarwa  ta  ga  dashe. Katara  kuma,

har  ita  da  mai-gaio ;  na  iya,  ku  kuma

hatsi  ke  gareku  har  ku  na-tanbaya  wai  aniya

tuo.' Su-ka-kyale,  kare  ya  tashi,  ya  dau-

-ko  kwara  shinkafa  guda  daia


a  thigh-bone  and  a  dog.  Then  she  drew  back,  and  the  thigh-
bone said,  '  Us !  us ! '  The  dog  said,  '  He  says  you  are  to
come.'  So  she  came  and  said,  '  Here  I  am.'  The  thigh-bone
said,  '  Us !  us ! '  The  dog  said,  '  He  says  you  are  to  sit
down.'  So  she  sat  down,  (and)  said,  '  Mercy  on  us,  a  thigh-
bone that  talks.  What  sort  of  a  thing  is  Us !  us  ? '  But  they
gave  no  answer.  A  short  time  after  the  thigh-bone  said,
*  Us ! '  us ! '  Then  the  dog  said,  *  He  says,  Can  you  (cook)
food  ? '  And  she  said,  'Ah,  it 's  a  bad  year  when  the  partridge
has  seen  them  planting  out  the  young  trees  (instead  of
sowing,  when  it  could  eat  the  seed).  A  thigh-bone,  too,  even
it  has  an  interpreter.  I  am  able,  you,  I  suppose,  have  the
grain,  when  you  are  asking  if  people  can  cook  food.'  They
gave  no  answer,  (but)  the  dog  got  up ;  he  lifted  one  single
grain  of  rice


ai^/^LsiL^^j^A^


152  STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  7

ya  ba  ta. Ta  che,  '  Gasa,  yau  zaa  ni  gani

kaman  da  shinkafa,  kwara  guda  daia,

ta  ke  yin  tuo.' Kare  ya  che,  '  Kedai  yi  hakanan,'

Ta  dauki  shinkafa,  ta  nasa  turmi,

ta-na-daka. Kanda  ajima  kadan,  shinkafa

ta  yi  yawa. Ta  chashe,  ta  kwashe,  ta  sheke,

ta  zuba  rua,  ta  dafa. Kanda

ta  gama  dafua  shinkafa  ta  chika

tukunia. Ta-na-mamaki. Kare  ya  dauko

wani  shekarare  kashi,  ya  kawo,  ya  ba  ta.

Sai  ta  che,  '  Kaka  zaa  ni  yi  da  shi,

wanga  shekarare  kashi  ? ' Kare  ya  che,


(and)  gave  her.  '  What 's  this  ? '  she  said,  l  to-day  I  am  about
to  see  how  one  single  grain  of  rice  makes  food.'  The  dog
replied,  '  As  for  you,  make  it  thus.1  She  lifted  the  rice  and
put  it  in  the  mortar,  she  was  pounding,  and  after  a  little  while
the  rice  became  much.  She  dry  pounded  it,  took  it  out,
poured  it  out  so  as  to  blow  away  the  chaff,  poured  on  water,
cooked  it.  By  the  time  she  had  finished  cooking  it  the  rice
filled  the  pot.  She  was  amazed.  The  dog  lifted  up  a  year-
old  bone,  brought  it,  and  gave  her.  Then  she  said,  '  What
am  I  to  do  with  it,  this  is  a  year-old  bone  ? '  The  dog
replied,


154  STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  7

1  Kedai  yi  kakanan.' Ta  che,  l  In  ji  ku  masu-

-sidabaru  ne,  "  kashedi,  babu  ruana  ma-

-yu  su  chainye  ni.' Kare  na  kurum,  bai  che

komi  ba. Ta  wanke  kashi,  ta  nasa

tukunia. Kamin  ajima,  tukunia  ta  chika

da  nama. Yarinya  ta-na-mamaki. Sai  ta  tuka

tuo,  ta  kwache,  ta  sabke  mia,  ta  sainya  ma

katara  malmala  uku,  kare  malmala  biu.

Sai  kare  ya  yi  fushi,  domin  ya  gani

nata  dayawa,  nasu  kadan  kadan. Sai  ya  che,

'  Haba.' Garin  shi  che,  '  Haba,'  sai  ya  che,  '  Hab  hab,'

domin  da  bai  gaia  ma  katara  ba. Da  wuri  kare  bafade  ne


4  As  for  you,  make  it  thus.'  She  said,  '  Are  you  supposed  to
be  conjurers  ?  I  warn  you ;  it  is  not  my  business  that  wizards
should  eat  me.'  The  dog  remained  silent ;  not  a  thing  did
he  say.  She  washed  the  bone  and  put  it  in  the  pot,  and  in
a  short  time  the  pot  was  full  of  meat.  The  girl  was  amazed,
but  she  stirred  the  food,  she  took  it  out  (and)  set  the  soup
down.  She  put  aside  for  the  thigh-bone  three  helpings,  for
the  dog  two.  But  the  dog  was  angry  because  he  saw  her
share  was  large,  theirs  very  small,  and  he  said,  'What's
this  ? '  When  he  would  have  said,  '  Haba,'  he  could  only  say,
4  Hab  hab,'  because  he  had  not  told  the  thigh-bone  first
before  he  spoke.  Formerly  the  dog  was  a  minister  at  court


• ->


S^^^t<&^LjfyfejJ

k^j^gjifrtUt.j&GU


d

•


j

«  v  •


156  STORIES ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  7

magana  shi  ke  yi  kamar  mutum,  da  ya  yi  fushi

gaban  sarki,  shi  ya  sa  shi  ke  yin  4  Hab,

hab  ',  idan  ya  tashi  zaa  shi  yin  fada.

Domin  hakanan  ne  yaro  ba  shi

fushi  wurin  da  baba  shi  ke.

Yau,  su-ka-chi  abinchinsu,  su-ka-kwana.

Gari  ya  waye  katara  ta  che,  '  Us !  us ! '

Dada  kare  bai  iya  ya  yi  magana  ba.

Sai  ya  je,  ya  kawo  makafi  mutane,

da  kutare,  da  makafi  dawaki,

da  gurgun  jaki,  da  ragogi,

riguna  da  wanduna  aka-ba  ta,  kare  ya  gwoda  mata


and  used  to  talk  like  a  person,  when  (on  this  day)  he  got  in
a  temper  in  front  of  the  king,  he  condemned  him  to  say
'  Hab !  hab ! '  if  he  rose  up  to  quarrel.  And  the  moral  of  this
is,  a  youth  must  not  lose  his  temper  in  the  presence  of  an
elder.  Now  they  had  eaten  their  food  and  slept.  At  dawn
the  thigh-bone  said,  'Us!  us ! '  Then  the  dog  was  not  able
to  speak,  but  he  went  and  brought  blind  men,  and  lepers,
and  blind  horses,  and  lame  asses,  and  sheep,  robes  and
trousers  were  brought  to  her,  (and)  the  dog  showed  her


158  STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  7

hainya. Ya  kawo  ta  kusa  da  gida,  ya  koma.

Sai  katara  ya  kore  shi,  sai  ya  komo

maza  maza,  ya  chika  da  su,  ya  bi  su  bar

su-ka-kawo  gida. Mafarin  kare  shi  zo

gida  ke  nan,  da  wurin  dawa  shi  ke. To,  tashin

zanche,  da  su-ka-kawo  kusa  da  gida,  sai

ta  aika  kuturu  guda  daia  chikin  mutanenta,

shi  na  bisa  makafo  doki,  wai  shi  je

shi  gaya  ma  sarki  ta  zo. Sarki  shi  bari

atarbe  ta. Sarki  ya  sa  galadima

da  mutane  dayawa  aka-je,  aka-tarbe  su.

Da  su-ka-zo  fagashi,  sai  dwai  ya  chika  gari.


the  way.  He  brought  her  to  near  (her)  home  and  turned
back.  But  the  thigh-bone  drove  him  away,  so  he  came  back
very  quickly  and  joined  them,  and  followed  them  until  they
reached  the  house.  That  is  the  first  time  the  dog  came  to
the  house,  formerly  he  was  in  the  bush.  Well,  to  continue,
when  they  had  got  near  the  house,  then  she  (the  girl)  sent  one
leper  from  among  her  retinue.  He  sat  on  a  blind  horse  and
his  message  was  to  tell  the  chief  she  has  come.  The  chief
allowed  her  to  be  met.  The  chief  made  the  galadima  and
many  people  to  go  and  meet  them.  When  they  reached  the
open  space  in  front  of  the  chiefs  house,  then  a  stink  filled
the  town.


•W  *Jk»tef^:

( r ••


— ' "<J


ft


•  */

f  ^*.-m  - • -  — ^  v ^^HM^^. '•  —  - — w  ,

*«r  C  )  •


160  STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  7

Sai  sarki  ya  che  akoma  da  su  chan  bayan  gari.

Aka-kai  su  bayan  gari,  chan  su-ka-yi  gidaje  su.

Uwar  yarinya  nan  ta  gani  kakanan,  sai  ta  yi

bakin  chikin,  ta  mutu. Mafari  ke  nan  zanba,

ba  ta  da  keau  (chau). Kowa  ya  yi  zanba  ga  dan  wani

ta-na-komawa  ga  dansa,  kaman  da  wani  malami

ya  yi  waka,  Ala  shi  jikainsa,  ya  che,

'  Kowa  ya  shibka  zanba,  ta  na  fita  gona  18  nasa.'

Wanan  hakikan  babu  wawa  kun  jia  ? '

Shi  ke  nan,  19  kungurus
kan  kusu.


Then  the  chief  said  they  were  to  be  taken  far  back  to
a  distance  behind  the  town.  They  were  led  behind  the  town,
far  away  they  were  to  make  their  houses.  When  the  mother
of  this  maiden  saw  all  this,  then  she  became  black  of  heart,
(and)  died.  That  was  the  first  appearance  of  wickedness,
(which)  is  not  a  beautiful  thing.  Whoever  commits  a  sin
against  another  it  comes  back  on  himself,  as  a  certain  learned
man  sung,  may  Allah  dispense  mercy  on  him,  he  says,
4  Whosoever  sows  evil  it  conies  forth  in  his  own  garden.  That
is  true  without  a  doubt,  have  you  heard  ? '  That  is  all.  Off
with  the  rat's  head.


^Y^fis^/^r


(j^M^^t^f^^


HI


,,T  t


/  vo^^/x

A.  .  r^ ~  r-  j»  *


••


**>JT —


J&jffc^fi*


«\


M


i6a  STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  8

No.  8.

Wanan  tatsunlar  l  maya  che.

2  Gatanan,  gatanan,  ta  je,  ta  komo. Wata  tsofua  ta  ke  da

yayanta,  buduri  tara,  sai 3  ta  je  doka  daji  ta  zarana.

Sai  wadansu  yara,  samari,  su  tara,  su-ka-tashi  daka  gari-

-nsu,  su-ka-tafi  gidan  maya,  wurin  buduri. Su-ka-je.

Buduri  su-ka-ba  su  rua,  kowa  buduransa

ta  ba  shi  rua  ya  sha. Sai  karaminsu,  karamar

buduri  ta  kawo  rua,  ta  ba  shi,  sai  ya  ki  sha. Dare

ya  yi,  kowa  buduransa  ta  yi  tuo,  ta  ba  shi.

Su-ka-chi, Autan  buduri  ta  yi  tuo,  ta  kawo

ma  autan  samari,  sai  ya  ki  chi. Aka  che,  '  Kaka,  da  ka  zo

kowa  ya  chi  abinchi,  sai  kai  daia  ka  ki  chi  ? ' Ya  che, '  Idan


This  is  a  story  about  a  witch.  A  story,  a  story.  Let  it
go,  let  it  come.  A  certain  old  woman  had  children,  nine
girls,  and  she  went  far  into  the  bush  and  lived  (there).  Now
some  boys,  youths,  there  were  nine  of  them  too,  set  out  from
their  village  and  went  to  the  house  of  the  witch,  where  the
girls  were.  They  came.  The  girls  gave  them  water,  each
had  a  maid  who  gave  him  water  to  drink.  Now  the  youngest
(among  the  boys)  the  youngest  maid  brought  water  to  (him)
and  gave  him,  but  he  refused  to  drink.  When  night  came
each  of  (the  young  men's)  maids  made  food  and  gave  him  ;
(and)  they  ate.  The  youngest  of  the  maidens  made  food  and
brought  it  to  the  youngest  of  the  youths,  but  he  refused  to
eat.  They  said,  '  How  is  it  when  you  come  every  one  eats
food,  but  you  alone  refuse  to  eat  ? '  He  said,  '  If


•'/ -F  -7;  • t  j  i  n  *  2

~*fe%af  L1


1 64  STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  8

samari  su-ka  zo  gidan  buduri,  su-na-chin  abinchi,

saanan  sun  zama  samarin  banza.' Aka  che,  '  Gaskia  ne.'

4  Wakatin  kwana  ya  zo,  sai  kowa  duka  budrua  tasa

ta  yi  masa  shinfida,  su-ka-kwanta,  su-na-kwana. Autan

samari 6  ya  tashi,  ya  6  kunche  bantu  nan  waninsu,

ya  damra  ma  buduri. Ya  fida  rigunansu,  ya  sainya  ma  buduri,

ya  dauki  fataloli  buduri,  ya  damra  ma  7  mazan,  ya  dauki

zannuan  8  matan,  ya  damra  masu. Aka-jima,  ana-kwana,

sai  tsofua  nan  ta  zo. Idan  ta  lalaba,  ta  gani

mai-rlga  da  bante. Sai  ta  yanke,  hakanan  har  ta  yanke

dlanta  duka,  ta  koma,  ta  kwanta. Sai  auta  kua

shi-na-ganinta,  bai  yi  kwana  ba. Ya  tashi,  ya  gina


young  men  come  to  the  house  of  maidens  and  eat  food,  then
they  have  become  worthless  young  men.'  And  they  said,
'  That  is  true.'  The  time  for  sleep  came,  when  for  each  and
all  his  maiden  prepared  his  couch,  and  they  lay  down  and
were  sleeping.  The  youngest  of  the  boys  got  up  and  un-
fastened the  others'  waist-cloths  and  tied  them  on  the  maidens.
He  took  off  their  cloaks  and  put  them  on  the  maidens,  he
lifted  the  kerchiefs  of  the  maidens  and  tied  them  on  the  boys.
He  took  away  the  dresses  of  the  girls  and  tied  them  on  (the
boys).  A  short  time  passed,  they  were  asleep,  when  this  old
woman  came.  When  she  felt  about  with  her  hand,  she  dis-
covered who  had  cloaks  and  who  waist-cloths.  Then  she  cut
(their  throats),  and  thus  she  did  till  she  had  cut  off  (the  heads)
of  all  her  daughters ;  (then)  she  returned  and  lay  down.  But
the  baby  of  the  family  also  had  seen  her,  he  had  not  slept.
He  got  up,  dug


166  STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  8

rame  tun  daga  9  dakin  da  su  ke  kunche  har  dakin

uwansu. Sai  auta  ya  tada  waninsa  daga  kwana.

Su-ka-shiga  chikin  rame,  su-ka-tafi  gida,  su-ka-bar  dianta

kunche, 10  yankaki. Da  gari  ya  waye,  tsofua  ta  zo.

Ta  na  murna,  n  zaa  ta  chin  nama,  sai  ta  iske  dianta  yankaki.

Sai  ta  chizi  hannu,  domin  haushi,  sai  ta  12  kyale,

ta  che,  '  Naa  rama.' Wata  rana  sai  ta  tafi  chikin  garin.

Ta  zama  13  magarta,  sai  yara,  mutun  goma  sha  biar

su-ka-hau,  su-na-zamne. Sai  ta  chire  da  su,

ta  tafi  gidanta  da  su. Uwayen  yara

su-na-kuka. Auta  ya  zo  ya  che,  '  Ku  bar  kuka,

naa  kawo  maku  dlanku.' Ya  tafi  daji,  ya  gani

saniar  tsofua  nan,  sai  ya  shiga  chikin  chikinta.


a  hole  from  the  house  where  they  were  lying  to  their  mother's
house.  Then  the  baby  of  the  family  wakened  the  others
from  sleep.  They  entered  the  hole  and  went  home  and  left
her  daughters  lying  (with  their  throats)  cut.  When  day
dawned  the  old  woman  came.  She  was  rejoicing  (because)
she  was  about  to  eat  meat,  then  she  came  across  her  daughters
(with  their  throats)  cut ;  then  she  ate  her  hand  from  vexation.
Then  she  left  off,  and  said,  '  I  shall  be  revenged.'  Another
day  she  went  into  the  town  (of  the  young  men).  (And)  she
turned  herself  into  a  magaria  tree,  then  the  boys,  fifteen  in
number,  climbed  up  and  were  sitting  there.  But  she  tore  up
(the  tree)  with  them  and  went  off  to  her  house  with  them.
The  boys'  parents  were  lamenting.  The  baby  of  the  family
came  and  said,  'Leave  off  crying,  I  shall  bring  you  your
children.'  He  went  off  to  the  bush,  (and)  he  saw  this  old
woman's  cow,  then  he  went  inside  its  belly.


yppfiiM^$^*£&
yfy^Jfojfr*gaff.V*


t»


c^*«%**i^^f*J*'

*.  i.  /«,«..  '$2;.L5


fyJb4i.tfL*

^m^f / /  — V


1 68  STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  8

Da  sania  ta  komo  gida,  ta  yi  kamar  mai-chiki.

Sai  tsofua  ta  che  saniar  nan  tawa, '  Idan

ki  haifu  namiji,  u  naa  yanka  ki,  idan  ki  haifi

mache,  naa  bar  ki.' Ananan,  ranan,  sai  ta  haifi

mache. Ashe  auta  ne,  ya  zama  dan  sania.

Su-na  nan,  sai  auta,  idan  tsofua  ta  yi

wanke  korai,  sai  ya  tuma,  shi  fada  achiki,  •

shi  farfasa. Ranan  ta  wanke  korainta,

ta  shainya,  sai 15  maraki  sania  ta  tuma,  ta  fada

achiki,  ta  farfasa. Sai  tsofua  ta  yi  fushi,

ta  che  yara  nan  su  duka  su  tashi,  su  tafi,

su  kamo  shi,  su  yanka. Sai  yara

su-ka-tashi,  su  ka  bi  maraka. Maraka  ta  sheka


When  the  cow  came  home,  it  was  as  if  in  calf.  And  the
old  woman  said  (to)  this  cow  of  hers,  '  If  you  give  birth  to
a  son,  I  shall  cut  your  throat ;  if  you  give  birth  to  a  daughter
I  shall  leave  you  alone.'  And  it  came  to  pass  that  one  day
the  cow  gave  birth  to  a  daughter.  Now  of  a  truth  it  was  the
baby  of  the  family,  he  had  turned  into  the  child  of  a  cow.
They  were  living  like  this,  when  the  baby  of  the  family  (who
was  now  a  calf),  if  the  old  woman  washed  her  calabashes,
jumped  and  fell  among  them  and  smashed  them.  One  day
she  washed  her  calabashes  and  put  them  in  the  sun  to  dry,
then  the  cow's  calf  jumped  and  fell  on  them  and  smashed
them.  And  the  old  woman  got  in  a  rage,  and  said  to  these
boys  that  they  must  all  rise  up,  and  go  and  catch  and  bring
it,  and  cut  (its  throat).  So  the  boys  rose  up  (and)  followed
the  calf.  The  calf  ran  off


170  STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  8

har  chikin  gari,  yara  su-ka-bi  ta. Sai  maraka

ta  zama  mutun,  ashe  auta  ne. Sai  ya  che, '  Kowa

shi  zo  shi  kama  dansa.' Sai  kowa  ya  fito,

ya  kama  dansa,  auta  kua  sai  ya  tafi  gidansu.

Sai  ta  che,  '  Naa  kama  shi  kuma.' Sai  ta  zama  Bihilata,

ta  dauki  nono,  ta  kawo  chikin  gari. Aka-che,

kar  kowa  shi  duba  chikin  nono,  sai  baban

wan  auta  ya  duba,  sai  idanunsa  ya  fada.

Sai  ta  dauki  nono  ta,  ta  zama  gugua,  ta  tafi

da  shi. Sai  ya  zo  da  wuri,  ba  shi  gida. Aka  che,  l  Wata

Bihilata  ta  zo  da  nono,  ta  dauki  idanu

wanmu,  ta  tafi  da  su.' Sai  auta  ya  che,


till  (it  came)  right  into .  the  town ;  the  boys  followed  it.
Then  the  calf  turned  into  a  person,  truly  it  was  (he  who  was)
the  baby  of  the  family.  And  he  said,  l  Let  each  come  and
catch  his  son.'  So  each  one  came  out  and  caught  his  son,
and  the  baby  of  the  family  he  also  went  home.  Now  she  (the
old  witch)  said,  '  I  will  catch  him  again.'  So  she  turned  into
a  Fulani  woman,  (and)  took  some  milk,  (and)  brought  it
into  the  town.  It  was  said  that  no  one  was  to  look  into  the
milk.  But  one  of  the  baby  of  the  family's  elder  brothers
looked  in,  and  his  eyes  fell  out.  Then  she  took  her  milk,
turned  into  a  whirlwind,  (and)  went  off  with  him.  Then  he
(the  baby  of  the  family)  came  early,  (and  found  his  elder
brother)  was  not  at  home.  And  they  said,  '  A  certain  Fulani
woman  came  with  milk  and  lifted  the  eyes  of  our  elder
brother  and  went  off  with  them.'  And  the  baby  of  the  family
said,


V  i


&2i»p£^:»f<i2!.&jJ£AjiSfj


i;2  STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  8

'  Naa  karbo  su.' Sai  ya  damra  zane  da  fatala,  ya  tafi  gidan

tsofua. Da  ta  gane  shi,  ya  yi  kama  da  auta  dlanta,

sai  ta  che, '  Marhabi,  marhabi.' Da  auta  shi  kua  sai  ya  rika

kuka,  shi-na-kuka,  shi-na-fadi, '  Laalatatu  samari

sun  zo,  sun  yi  mani  zanba,  sun  kashe  mani  wani.' Tso-

-fua  kua  ta-na-che  autan  dlanta  ne,  sai  ta  che,  '  Bari  kuka

auta,  ai  mu  ma,  16  muu  rama.' Ta  che,  '  Ai  ni  ma,  ga  idanu

babansu,  17  na  kawo.' Sai  auta  ta  che,  '  Ba  ni  in  gani

18  uma  nama  in  yi  wasa  da  su.' Sai  tsofua  ta  dau-

-ki,  ta  ba  shi,  ba  ta  san  shi  ba  ne. Shi-na-wasa  da  su

sai  ta  che,  '  Zamna  ki  duba  gida,  zaa  ni  raafi

in  komo.' Ta  dauki  tulu,  ta  bada  baya.


4 1  shall  get  them  back.'  So  he  fastened  on  a  (girl's)  dress
and  head  kerchief,  (and)  went  to  the  old  woman's  house.
When  she  saw  him,  he  was  like  her  (own)  youngest  daughter,
and  she  said,  'Welcome,  welcome.'  And  the  baby  of  the
family  he  also  began  to  cry,  he  was  weeping  and  said,  '  Bad
boys  came  and  sinned  against  me,  they  killed  my  elder
sisters.'  The  old  woman  too  was  saying,  'It  is  the  youngest
of  my  daughters.'  And  she  said,  '  Cease  crying,  youngest  of
my  children,  as  for  us,  we  shall  be  revenged.'  She  said,  '  As
for  me,  see  the  eyes  of  the  eldest  of  them  I  have  brought.'
And  the  baby  of  the  family  said,  '  Give  me  that  I  may  see,
mother,  the  meat  (eyes),  (and)  that  I  may  play  with  them.'
So  the  old  woman  took  them,  and  gave  him,  she  did  not
know  it  was  he.  He  was  playing  with  them,  when  she  said,
'  Sit  and  look  after  the  house ;  I  am  going  to  the  stream  and
shall  return.'  She  lifted  up  the  water-pot  (and)  turned  her
back.


174  STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  8

Sai  auta  ya  tashi,  ya  sheka  da  idanun  wansu,

ya  tafi  da  shi,  ya  bai  wansu. Sai  tsofua

ta  komo,  ta  che,  '  Ina  auta  ? ' Ba  ta  gani  auta  ba,

sai  ta  sabke  rua. Aka  jima,  sai  yarinya  ta  zo,

tsofua  ta  che, '  Kawo  idanu,  mu  dafa.'

Yarinya  ta  che,  '  Ai  ba  ki  ba  ni  idanu  ba.' Sai  ta  che,

' 19  La  ila  autansu  ne  ya  zo  ya  rude  ni,  ina-che

ke  che,  ama  babu  laifi  naa  kama  shi.1 Ta  kyale.

Wata  rana  auta  ya  tafi  daji,  shi-na-farauta,  sai

ya  gamu  da  tsofua. Ta  kama  shi,  ta  kai  gidanta,

ta  sainya  rame,  ta  rufe  sai  ta  tafi  raafi. Ta  bar

dianta  karama,  ta  che  ta  jiran  auta  kada  shi  gudu.


Then  the  baby  of  the  family  rose  up,  and  ran  off  with  his
brother's  eyes;  he  went  with  it  (them)  (and)  gave  his  elder
brother.  Then  the  old  woman  returned  (from  the  stream)
(and)  said,  '  Where  is  (my)  youngest  child  ? '  She  did  not
see  her  youngest  child,  and  she  set  down  the  water.  After
a  little  while  then  the  maiden  came,  and  the  old  woman  said,
'Bring  the  eyes  that  we  may  cook  (them).'  The  maiden
said,  'No,  you  did  not  give  me  any  eyes.'  And  she  said,
''La  ila  it  is  the  youngest  of  their  family,  he  came  and  deceived
me ;  I  said  (thought)  it  was  you,  but  it  cannot  be  helped,  I  shall
catch  him.'  She  ceased.  Another  day  the  baby  of  the  family
went  to  the  bush.  He  was  hunting  when  he  met  the  old
woman.  She  caught  him,  (and)  took  him  to  her  house,  put
him  in  a  hole,  (and)  covered  (him)  up,  while  she  went  to  the
stream.  She  left  her  youngest  daughter  and  told  her  to  wait
and  watch  the  baby  of  the  family  lest  he  ran  away.


176  STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  8

Sai  ta  tafi  raafi. Sai  auta  dianta  ta  je  wurin  auta
wanda  ke  chikin  rame,  ta  che, '  Auta  me  ka  ke  chi  ? '
Sai  shi  kua  ya  che, '  Mlko  20  hannu(n)ki  in  ba  ki,
abinda  ni  ke  chi.' Sai  ta  mika  hannu. Sai  auta
ya  kama  hannunta  ya  ja  ta,  ya  nasa  rame. Ta-na-
-chiki,  ta-na-kuka. Auta  ya  rufe  ta,  kaman  da  uw(a)-
-nta  ta  rufe  shi,  ya  dauki  zane  da  fatala,
ya  damra. Shi-na  nan,  shi-na-wasa,  har  tsofua
ta  zo. Ta  che, '  In  ji  auta  bai  gudu  ba.' Sai  ya  che,
'  Shi-na-nan,  bai  gudu  ba.' Ta  dafa  man  zafi,  ya  tafasa
ta  dauki  ta  che, '  Dan  nema  yau  21  shii  gani.' Sai  ta  je
wurin  rame,  ta  zuba,  sai  yarinya,  da  da  ji  zafi


Then  she  went  off  to  the  stream.  Then  her  (the  witch's)
youngest  daughter  came  to  the  place  where  the  baby  of  the
family  was  in  the  pit  (and)  she  said, '  Oh,  baby  of  the  family,
what  are  you  eating.'  And  he  said, '  Stretch  out  your  hand
and  I  will  give  you  what  I  am  eating.'  So  she  put  out  her
hand,  but  the  baby  of  the  family  seized  her  hand,  (and)  pulled
her,  (and)  cast  her  into  the  pit ;  she  was  inside,  she  was
crying.  The  baby  of  the  family  covered  her  up  as  her
mother  had  covered  him.  He  took  (her)  dress  and  kerchief
and  tied  them  on.  He  remained  there,  and  was  playing
about  until  the  old  woman  came.  She  said,  'Let  me  hear
that  the  baby  of  the  family  has  not  run  away,'  and  he  replied,
'  He  is  here,  he  has  not  run  away.'  She  boiled  hot  water,  it
boiled,  she  took  it  up,  and  she  said,  'Son  of  a  profligate,
to-day  he  will  see.'  Then  she  went  to  the  hole  and  poured
in  (the  water),  and  the  maiden,  when  she  felt  the  heat


142E


N


178  STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  8

ta-na-kuwa,  ta-na-fadi, '  Uraa  ni  che,  uma  ni  die.' Auta

shi-na-fadi,  '  Karia  ka  ke  yi. Ala  shi  tsari  uma  ta  haife  ka,

Ala  tsare  ta  ta  haife  ka.' Hakanan  har  ta  mutu.

Ta  dauko,  ta  22  sasare,  ta  nasa  tukunia,  ta  dafa.

Yarinya  ta  nina,  ta  sainya  daudawa  da  gishiri,

ta  shlde  tukunia,  ta  tsame  nama,  ta  che, '  Auta

tafo,  kedai  mu  chi  dan  nema.' Sai  ya  che, '  Aa

ni  ba  ni  chi,  yanzu  kedai  chi,  ki  koshi.' Ta-na-

ham !  ham !  har  ta  kusa  chinye  nama. Sai  ta  rage,

ta  che. 4  Ga  naki  auta.' Auta  ya  che,  '  Uma,  idan  ba  ki  k6-

-shi  ba,  ki  chainye  duka,'  sai  ta  dauki  saura,  ta  chi.

Ta  rage  kankane,  ta  aje,  ta  che,  '  Ga  naki.'


kept  shouting  out,  and  saying,  '  Mother,  it  is  I,  mother,  it
is  I.'  He,  the  baby  of  the  family,  said,  *  It  is  a  lie  you  are
telling.  May  Allah  guard  mother  from  giving  birth  to  such
as  you,  may  Allah  guard  her  from  giving  birth  to  such
as  you,'  and  so  on  till  she  died.  She  (the  old  woman)  lifted
her  out,  cut  (her)  up  in  small  pieces,  put  her  in  a  pot  and
cooked  her.  When  the  girl  was  cooked  she  put  in  daudawa
spice  and  salt,  took  the  pot  off  the  fire,  took  out  the  meat  and
said,  'Youngest  daughter,  come  forward.  You  alone  will
eat  the  son  of  the  profligate  woman.'  But  he  said,  '  No,  as
for  me  I  shall  not  eat,  now  you  yourself  eat  and  be  filled.'
She  was  crunching,  crunch!  crunch!  until  she  had  almost
eaten  (all)  the  meat.  Then  she  ceased,  and  said,  '  There  is
your  share,  little  daughter.'  The  baby  of  the  family  replied,
'  Mother,  if  you  are  not  full  eat  up  all,'  and  she  (the  old
woman)  took  up  what  was  left  and  ate.  She  left  a  small
piece,  put  it  aside,  and  said,  '  There  is  yours.'


i8o  STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  8

Sai  auta  ya  che,  '  Yau  kin  chainye  dlanki  duka,  sauran
ki  chi  kainki.1 Sai  ya  yada  zane,  ya  che,  *  Kin  gane  ni,  ni  ne
auta,  ba  ki  chi  na.1 Sai  ya  sheka,  ya  tafo  gida,  ya  gaya
ma  mutanen  gidansu,  ya  che, '  Mu  gudu.' Sai  garin  duka

23  ya  tashi,  su-ka-gudu. Da  su-ka-tafi,  sai  baban  wansu

24  ya  che  ya  yada  takalminsa,  ya  che  shi  koma,  shi 25  dauko.
Auta  ya  che,  kar  ka  koma. 26  Ya  che,  yaa  koma . Auta
ya  che,  *  Bari  ni  in  koma.' Auta  ya  koma,  ya  je,  ya  shiga
daki. Sai  ta  rufe  shi,  ya  hau  bisan  daki,  ya  kama

tanka. Sai  ya  che  mata,  *  Idan  ki-na-so  ki  chainye  ni,

sai  ki  bude  mani  idanu,  in  ji  tsoro,  in  fado,

ki  kama  ni.' Sai  ta  tada  kainta  bisa,  ta  bubude


And  he  who  was  the  youngest  of  the  family  said,  '  To-day
you  have  eaten  up  all  your  daughters,  and  there  only  remains
for  you  to  eat  yourself.'  Then  he  threw  aside  the  cloak  (and)
said, '  Do  you  see  it  is  I,  the  baby  of  my  family,  you  did  not
eat  me.'  Then  he  ran  off,  and  went  home  and  told  the  people
of  his  town  (saying)  '  Flee '.  And  the  whole  town  rose  up  and
fled.  When  they  had  gone,  then  their  elder  brother  said  he  has
dropped  his  slipper ;  he  said  he  would  turn  back  and  get  it.
The  baby  of  the  family  said, '  Do  not  go  back,'  (but)  he  said
he  would  return  (for  it).  The  baby  of  the  family  said,
*  Allow  me  to  return.'  The  baby  of  the  family  returned,  he
went  and  entered  the  house.  And  she  (the  old  woman)  came
and  closed  (the  door) ;  he  climbed  on  to  the  top  of  the  house
and  caught  hold  of  a  beam.  Then  he  said  to  her  (the  old
witch),  *  If  you  are  wanting  to  eat  me  up,  you  have  only  to
open  your  eyes  at  me  when  I  shall  be  afraid  and  fall  down
(on  you)  (and)  you  will  catch  me.'  Then  she  raised  her  head,
and  opened  very  widely


»  oS  -°f-(,7

rV,»  T^^Ld'i  T/  ?«tiUAl4l!t


/ .  P^  •*  • rr ^M^


1 82  STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  8

masa  idanu. Shi  kua,  akwai 2T  tunka  wurinsa

nikake,  sai  ya  watsa  mata  ga  idanu,  sai  ta  rufe

idanu. Ya  sabko,  zaa  shi  fita,  sai  ta  kama  kafansa,

sai  ya  che,  '  Wawa,  kin  kama  itache,  ki-na-che

kafa  na.' Sai  ta  sake  kafafunsa,  ta  kama  itache.

Sai  ya  fita  ya  kama  28  kyaure,  ya  29  kuble  ya  chuna  ma  daki

wuta. Tsofua  ta  kone. Sai  ya  je,  ya  gaya  ma  sarki,

kaman  da  su  ka  yi  da  tsofua,  ya  che,  '  Mu  koma  gida.'

Sai  su-ka-koma  gida. Sarki  ya  che,  'Ayi  gangami

birni  da  kauye  su  taru.' Aka-yi  gangami

birni  da  kauye,  duka  su-ka-taru. Sarki  ya  kawo

rlga  dari,  wando  dari,  sania  dari,  doki  dari,


her  eyes  at  him.  As  for  him,  he  had  ground  peppers  with
him,  so  he  cast  (them)  at  her  eyes,  and  she  closed  (them)  the
eyes.  He  came  down,  and  as  he  was  about  to  go  outside,
she  caught  his  foot.  But  he  said,  '  Fool,  you  have  caught
a  stick,  and  you  think  it  is  my  foot.'  Then  she  let  go  his
foot  and  caught  hold  of  a  post ;  and  he  came  out,  seized  the
door,  shut  it  (and)  set  fire  to  the  house.  The  old  woman  was
burned.  Then  he  went  and  told  the  chief  what  they  (he)
had  done  with  the  old  woman,  (and)  he  said, '  Let  us  return
home.'  So  they  returned  home.  And  the  chief  said,  'Let  the
drums  be  beaten  in  town  and  village  and  let  them  assemble.'
Drums  were  beaten  in  town  and  village  and  every  one
assembled.  And  the  chief  brought  one  hundred  cloaks,  one
hundred  trousers,  one  hundred  cattle,  one  hundred  horses,


(J^l^j^l&pz&tot^

«=  ;4M.'«4t4'f  ^^•'!®%J''


4rt^J^^t&$j^
^0i4%&*^l*i^


1 84  STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  8

komi  duka  na  dunla  dari  dari. 30  Ya  che  ya  ba  shi

rabin  gari,  abin  nan  da  aka  tara  duka  sarki  ya  che  ya  baiwa

auta. Sai  auta  ya  che,  '  Sarki,  gari,  idan  ba  shi

da  31  tsari,  banza  ne,  ka  bari  agina  birni,  tun  mutane

ba  su  watse  ba.' Sarki  ya  che, '  Babu  wanda  ya  iya  ginin

birni.' Auta  ya  che, '  Ni  naa  gina,  kai  kadai  ka  taimake  ni

da  mutane.' Sarki  ya  amsa,  sai  auta  ya  gina  birni.

Mafarin  ginin  birni  ke  nan,  auta  ya  fara,  kowa

ya  gani. 32  Kungurus  kan  kusu.


of  everything  in  the  world  one  hundred  of  each.  He  said
he  gave  him  half  his  town  (and)  all  the  things  which  had
been  brought,  the  chief  said  he  gave  to  the  baby  of  the
family.  And  the  baby  of  the  family  said,  'Chief,  a  town,
if  it  has  not  a  protection,  is  worthless.  Let  a  wall  be  built
before  the  people  have  dispersed.'  And  the  chief  said,
'There  is  no  one  able  to  build  a  walled  town.'  And  the
baby  of  the  family  said,  '  I  shall  build  it ;  do  you  only  give
me  assistance  with  the  men.'  The  chief  consented,  so  the
baby  of  the  family  built  a  walled  town.  And  that  was  the
origin  of  walled  towns,  the  baby  of  the  family  began  that
every  one  might  see.  Off  with  the  rat's  head.


i86  STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  9

No.  9.

Wanan  tatsuniar  l  malami  che.

Wani  malami  ya  tashi  zua  Maka,  domin  shi  dada  ladansa
shi  yi  yawa. Shi-na  da  kwarangaman  godlansa. Ya  hau,  ya  je
tsakan  dokar  daji,  sai  ya  gani 2  kura. 3  Godlar  ta.  gaji,
sai  kura  ta  che,  '  Malam  ina  4  zaa  ka  ? ' Malami  ya  che,  '  Zaa  ni
haji.'  '  Me  ya  faru  ? ' Ya  che, '  Godia  ta  che  ta  gaza.'  Ta  che, '  Ita  ke  nan  ? '
Kura  ta  che,  '  Ba  ni  ita,  in  yanke,  in  chainye,  ka  hau  ni,
mu  tafi.' Malami  ya  che,  '  Hakanan  ? ' Ta  che, ' 1.' Malam  ya  che,
'  Kar  ki  rude  ni.' Ta  che,  1 5  Asha  malam,  domin  6  na  gani
ba  ta  iya  tafia,  domin  hakanan  ne ;  ni  kua,
idan  ka  hau  ni,  yanzu  yanzu  naa  kai  ka  Maka.'
Malam  ya  che,  *  Babu  laifi,  kama,  ki  chainye.' Kura


This  is  a  story  about  a  learned  man.  A  certain  doctor  of  learning
set  out  to  go  to  Mecca  in  order  to  add  to  his  rewards  hereafter  that
they  might  be  many.  He  had  a  very  thin  mare.  He  mounted,  (and)
went  deep  into  the  forest  when  he  saw  a  hyena.  The  mare  was  weary
and  the  hyena  said,  '  Doctor,  where  are  you  going  ? '  The  doctor  said,
'  I  am  going  the  pilgrimage.'  '  What  is  the  matter  ? '  (said  the  hyena).
He  said,  '  It  is  the  mare,  she  is  weary.'  She  (the  hyena)  said, 4  Is  that
it  ? '  the  hyena  said, '  Give  her  (the  mare)  to  me,  I  shall  kill  her,  and  eat
her  up.  You  will  mount  me  and  we  shall  set  out'  The  doctor  said, '  So  ?'
She  (the  hyena)  said,  'Yes.'  The  doctor  said,  'You  must  not  deceive
me.'  She  replied,  '  Come  now,  Doctor,  because  I  have  seen  she  was
unable  to  go  on,  it  is  because  of  that,  (I  speak  thus)  I  for  my  part,
if  you  mount  me,  this  instant  will  I  carry  you  to  Mecca.'  The  doctor
said,  '  All  right,  catch  (the  mare)  and  eat  (it)  up.'  The  hyena


1 88  STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  9

7  ta  kama  godia,  ta  yage,  ta  dlbi  nama,

ta  kai  gida. Su  ka  chi  da  dlanta,  su-ka-chainye  nama,

ta  ki  zakua. Malami  ya  zamna,  ya  gaji,  bai  gani

kura  ta  zo  ba. Ananan,  sai 8  karen  buki

ya  zo,  ya  tarda  malam  shi-na-zamne,  karen  buki

ya  che, '  Malam  me  ya  faru  ? ' Malami  ya  che,  ' 9  Na  taso

daga  gidana,  zaa  ni  Maka,  godlata  ta  gaji,

ina  zamna,  kura  ta  tarshe  ni,  ta  che,  me  ya  faru,

na  che  mata,  Zaa  ni  Maka  ne,  godlata  ta  gaji,

shi  ya  sa  ina  zamne  nan. Kura  ta  che,  Ai  wanan

ba  ta  iya  kai  ka  Maka,  ba  ni  ita  in  chainye,

in  ji  dadi,  in  kara  10  karfi,  in  kai  ka  Maka.


seized  the  mare,  tore  it  up,  picked  up  the  meat  (and)  took  it
home.  She  ate  it  with  her  cubs  (children),  they  ate  up  (all)
the  meat ;  (then)  she  refused  to  return.  The  doctor  sat  down
(and)  got  tired  (of  waiting),  he  did  not  see  that  the  hyena  has
(had)  come  back.  Things  were  like  this,  when  a  jackal  came
and  met  the  doctor  sitting  there.  The  jackal  said,  '  Doctor,
what  has  happened  ? '  The  doctor  said,  '  I  have  set  out  from
my  home  going  to  Mecca,  my  mare  got  tired,  I  was  sitting
down,  the  hyena  came  across  me  and  asked  what  was  the
matter,  and  I  said,  I  am  going  to  Mecca,  my  mare  got  tired,
and  that  is  the  cause  of  my  sitting  here.  And  the  hyena
said,  Oh,  this  thing  can  never  take  you  to  Mecca.  Give  her
to  me  to  eat  that  I  may  feel  joy,  and  increase  my  strength,  so
that  I  may  carry  you  to  Mecca.


190  STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  9

Ni  kua  na  che,  Kura  kar  ki  rude  ni,  ki  chainye  mani

godlata,  saanan  ki  gudu,  ban  gane  ki  ba. Ta  che,

Ina  ake  yin  hakanan,  da  gaskia  na  ke  fadi,  babu  karla

achiki. Ni  kua  ina  che  gaskia  ne,  na  che  ta  kama.

Shi  ke  nan,  kura  ta  tafi,  har  yau  ban  gane  ta  ba.'

Sai  karen  buki  ya  che,  ' u  Kyale  malam  12  naa  kawo  maka  ita,

yanzu.' Ya  dauki  sirdi  da  kafu,  da  linzame,  da  ragama,

da  kayamai,  da  bulala,  ya  tafi,  ya  samu  tsoka  nama,

ya  tafi  da  shi. Shi-na-tafia,  shi-na-yada  kayan  doki

guda  guda,  har  ya  kai  kusa  da  bakin  raminta,  ya  aje

kafu,  ya  wuche,  ya  je  bakin  ramenta,  ya  tsaya,

ya  yi  salama. Su-ka-kyale,  da  wuri  kua  kura  ta  gaya  ma


I  then  said,  Hyena,  you  must  not  deceive  me,  eat  up  my
mare  for  me,  and  then  run  away,  (and)  I  shall  not  see  you
again.  She  replied,  Where  do  they  do  that  sort  of  thing?
it  is  the  truth  I  told  you,  there  is  no  lie  in  it,  then  I  said
(thought)  it  was  true,  (and)  told  her  to  catch  (the  mare).  That
is  all,  the  hyena  went  off;  till  to-day  I  have  not  seen  her.'
And  the  jackal  said,  *  Leave  off,  Doctor,  I  will  bring  her  to
you  now.1  He  lifted  the  saddle  and  saddle-cloth  and  bit
and  halter  and  spurs  and  whip  and  went  off,  and  he  got
a  lump  of  meat  and  took  it.  As  he  went  he  was  dropping
the  horse  furniture  one  by  one  until  he  got  near  the  mouth
of  the  hole  (where  the  hyena)  was.  He  put  aside  the  saddle-
cloth and  passed  on,  and  came  to  the  mouth  of  her  hole,  and
stood,  and  announced  his  arrival.  No  answer,  for  previous
to  this  the  hyena  has  told


o  w  4fi  ci

ttf'H


tSfe,


i9a  STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  9

dlanta  ta  che,  '  Kowa  ya  zo  nan,  shi-na-nema  na,  ku  che  ba  ni  nan.1
Da  dila  ya  yi  salama,  sai  su  ka  che, '  Ba  ta  nan.'  Dila  ya  che, '  Tir  Ala  wadai
maras  arziki  ana-neman  mu trine  da  arziki  tsla
ta-na-hana  su,  ga  wani  sania  ya  mutu, 13  mamaya,
14  na  zo  domin  in  kiraye  ta,  in  gwodu  mata,
sai  ku  che,  ba  ta  nan,  bari  in  koma.' Sai  kura
ta  che,  '  Wa  ke  nema  na  ? ' Dila  ya  che,  '  Ni  ke  nemanki,
wata  sania  ta  mutu,  mamaya,  na  yanko  baba
tsoka,  na  kawo  maki,  domin  ki  gani  shi  ne,
yaranga  su  ka  che,  ba  ki  nan.' Sai  kura  ta  che,
' 15  La  ila,  ka  ga  lalatatu,  ina-kwana,
ana-bida  na,  ku  che  ba  ni  nan.' Sai  kura  ta  fito.


her  children  saying,  'Whoever  comes  here  looking  for  me,  you  must
say  I  am  not  here.'  So  when  the  jackal  hailed,  they  said,  '  She  is  not
here.'  And  the  jackal  said,  '  Allah  curse  her,  she  has  no  luck ;  men
are  sought  for  that  they  may  get  something  good,  and  bad  luck  prevents
them  from  getting  it.  See,  a  cow  has  died,  a  very  fat  one,  I  have  come
to  call  her  and  show  her,  and  you  say,  she  is  not  here.  Let  me  return.'
Then  the  hyena  said,  '  Who  is  seeking  me  ? '  The  jackal  said,  '  I  am
seeking  you.  Some  cow  died,  a  very  fat  one,  I  cut  off  a  big  lump
and  have  brought  it  to  you,  but  these  boys  are  saying  you  are  not
here.'  And  the  hyena  said,  '  There  is  no  God  but  Allah !  you
have  seen,  worthless  fellows.  I  was  asleep  and  was  sought  for,  (and)
you  say  I  am  not  here.'  So  the  hyena  came  out.


jfijj^^jM4&»3


;.


/  •*  -D\|  rf*^^  l^f  wj /.  f^  iiijjL^rf  *•

$Jttfr*fiyUt&&**fife
.•,ji^Ui;^(/^^


s^^44^^«


o


i94  STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  9

Sai  ta  fito  ta  che, '  Ga  ni.' Dila  ya  che,  '  Amshi,  dandana.'

Ta  karbi,  ta  hade,  ba  ta  bai  dianta. Ta  che,  '  Mu  tafi.'

Su-ka-kama  hainya,  su-na-tafia,  kura  ta-na-gaba

gaba,  dila  na  baya. Sai  ta  che,  '  Kai  ba  ka  iya  tafia,

hau  ni,  mu  tafi  maza  maza.' Dila  ya  hau  ta,  su-na-tafia,

su-ka-iske  mashimfidi. Dila  ya  che,  '  Bari  in  shifida

abinga  ga  bayanki,  gashin  bayanki  shi-na-

-sukana.' Sai  ta  che,  '  Yi  maza  maza  mu  tafi.'

Dila  ya  dauki,  ya  shimfida,  ya  hau,  su-na-tafia.

Su-ka-iske  linzame,  sai  dila  ya  che, '  Ban  in  dauki

abinan  in  sa  maki  baki,  ko  naaji  dadi-

-n  riko.'  Ta  che, '  Sa  maza  maza  mu  tafi.' Dila  ya  sainya  mata


When  she  came  out  she  said,  '  Here  I  am.'  The  jackal  said,
'Take  (it),  taste.'  She  received  (the  meat),  swallowed  it;
she  did  not  give  to  her  children.  She  said,  '  Let  us  be  off.'
They  took  the  road,  they  were  going  along ;  the  hyena
was  in  front  a  long  way,  the  jackal  behind.  Then  she  said,
'  You  cannot  walk,  mount  me  (and)  let  us  get  along  quickly.'
The  jackal  mounted  her,  they  were  going  along ;  they  come
across  the  saddle-cloth.  The  jackal  said,  '  Let  me  spread
this  thing  on  your  back,  the  hair  on  your  back  is  getting
ruffled.'  And  she  said,  'Do  it  quickly  and  let  us  get  on.'
The  jackal  lifted  and  spread  it.  He  mounted,  they  were
going  along.  They  came  across  the  bit,  when  the  jackal
said,  'Let  me  lift  up  this  thing  and  put  it  in  your  mouth;
perhaps  it  will  be  better  for  me  to  hold.'  She  said,  '  Put  it
on  quickly  and  let  us  get  on.'  The  jackal  put  on


196  STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  9

lizarae,  ya  hau. Su-na-tafia,  su-ka-iske  kayamai.

Ya  sabka,  ya  dauki  kayamai,  ya  sainya  a-kafa,

ya  hau. Su-na-tafia,  su-ka-kusa  da  malami,  sai

kura  ta  che,  l  Kar  mu  bi  nan. Dila  ya  che, l  Gurin  da  16  naman

shi  ke  ke  nan.' Kura  ta  che,  '  Mu  karkata  wajen  haka.'

Su-ka-karkata  wani  wuri  da  dila  ya  sani,

sun  kai  dai  dai  da  malami,  sai  ya  karkata  lizame

zua  wurin  malami,  ya  kafa  mata  kaimi. Sai  kura

ta  zaabura,  ta-na-che,  '  Uu,  uu.' Ba  su  zame  ba,

sai  wurin  malami. Dila  ya  zame  gaban  malami,

ya  sabka,  ya  che,  '  Malam  ga  mabachinka,  tashi,

ka  hau,  kar  ka  sabka,  sai  ka  kai  wurinda  zaa  ka.


the  bit  (and)  mounted.  They  were  going  along ;  they  came
across  the  spurs.  He  dismounted,  picked  up  the  spurs,  (and)
put  them  on  his  feet,  (and)  mounted.  They  were  going
along,  they  were  near  the  doctor,  when  the  hyena  said,
1  You  must  not  take  this  way.'  The  jackal  replied,  '  This  is
where  the  meat  is.'  The  hyena  said,  '  Let  us  make  a  detour
thus.'  They  have  turned  off  another  way,  which  the  jackal
knew,  and  got  opposite  to  where  the  doctor  was,  when  he
turned  the  bit  towards  where  the  doctor  was  and  struck  her
with  the  spurs.  Then  the  hyena  sprang  forward,  saying,
4  Uu,  uu.'  They  did  not  pull  up  till  (they  reached)  where  the
doctor  was.  The  jackal  pulled  up  in  front  of  the  doctor,
dismounted,  and  said,  '  Doctor,  behold  your  debtor.  Rise  up,
mount,  and  do  not  get  off  until  you  reach  where  you  are
going.


M


A^4^4s^^45


198  STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  9

Idan  ka  sabka,  ko  rua,  kar  ka  che  akai  ta  raafi.1
Malami  ya  che, ' 17  Na  ji.v Malami  ya  hau,  bai  sabka  ba
har  ya  kai  Maka. Saanan  ya  sabka,  ya  ba  yara
rik6,  ya  che,  '  Kar  ku  hau,  kar  ku  kai  ta  raafi.' Malami
ya  shiga  masalachi,  su-na-sala. Sai  yara  su-ka-hau,
su-ka-tafi  da  ita  raafi. Da  su-ka-fita  bayan  gari,  sai
su-ka-yi  sukua. Kura  ta  dauke  su,  ta  shiga  dawa  da  su,
ta-na-gudu,  har  ta  kashe  su,  ta  18  tafianta. Malami
ya  fito  masalachi,  bai  gani  yara  ba,  bai  gani  kura  ba.
Shi  ke  nan, 19  kungurus  kan  kusu.


If  you  dismount,  even  at  the  water,  do  not  say  she  is  to  be
taken  to  the  stream.'  The  doctor  replied,  '  I  have  heard.'  The
doctor  mounted,  (and)  did  not  get  down  till  he  had  reached
Mecca.  Then  he  dismounted  and  gave  (the  hyena)  to  (some)
boys  to  hold,  saying,  lYou  must  not  mount,  you  must  not
take  her  to  the  stream.'  The  doctor  entered  the  mosque,
they  were  praying.  Then  the  boys  mounted,  (and)  went  off
with  her  to  the  stream.  When  they  got  behind  the  town  then
they  galloped.  The  hyena  carried  them  off,  and  entered
the  bush  with  them,  and  ran  until  she  threw  them  and  went
her  own  way.  (Then)  the  doctor  came  out  of  the  mosque ;
he  did  not  see  the  boys,  he  did  not  see  the  hyena.  That
is  all.  Off  with  the  rat's  head.


V


200 STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  10

No.  10.

Wanan  tatsumar  ]  Garnakaki  che.

Wani  sarki  ne  mai-2karfl  kwarai,  wata  rana  3  ya  fida  sansani
zaa  shi  yaki. Shi-na  da  wani  mai-dafuwan  tuo,  shi-na  da  4maatansa,
shi  sarki  nan,  wada  shi  ke  so. Komi  na  sarki
shi-na  wurin  maata  nan  ne. Mai-dafuwan  tuo  shi-na-neman  maa-
-ta  nan,  ita  kua  5  ta-na-so(n)sa,  har  wata  rana  aka-kwar-
-mata  ma  sarki. Sarki  ya  kama  mai-dafuwan  tuo,
ya  sainya  shi  kurkuku. Shi,  sarkin,  shi-na-so  mai-dafuwa
nan  kwarai,  sai  ya  che  afida  shi. Aka-fishe  shi,  6  aka-kawo  shi.
Sarki  ya  che,  *  Ama  idan  ka  bar  maata  ta,  ka  koma,
ka-na-dafuwan  tuo.1 Sai  ya  che,  ' 7  Naa  bar  ta.'
Ashe  karla  ne.


This  is  a  story  about  (a  chief)  Garnakaki.  A  certain  very  powerful
chief  one  day  struck  camp  to  go  to  war.  He  had  a  certain  cook,
(and)  he  had  a  wife,  this  chief,  whom  he  loved.  Everything  the  chief
had  was  in  this  wife's  possession.  The  cook  was  after  this  woman,
and  she  also  loved  him,  until  one  day  the  chief  was  secretly  informed.
The  chief  seized  the  cook  (and)  put  him  in  prison.  Now  he,  the
chiefj  was  very  fond  of  the  cook,  so  he  said  he  was  to  be  taken  out.
He  was  taken  out  and  brought  forward.  The  chief  said,  '  In  spite  of
all  if  you  give  up  my  wife,  you  may  return  and  continue  cooking
food.'  And  he  said,  '  I  shall  leave  her.'  Truly  it  was  a  lie.


;.  e^^^^iS^n^^

** _  *  —  ^. i.  -

i&JbCLXxj

A «r<«l« *r  M4


iii.v6iii_£x_i£^^  •  *•  §u


:.^u^j&a


•  ->  • »
^H«-*^

iiiL^^u^^tifa

Vx /  S\Jr2'  •« *•

U^MJ^^J^c^L^s^s

M^l^^t^^J^^ft.!

a

Ji: JUAil^  ?=: er-Jr

vl)


202 STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  10

Shi-na  nan,  shi-na-dafa  ma  sarki  tuo. Ashe  su-na-

-tare  da  8  maatar  nan,  su-na-yi  ma  sarki 9  tanadi,

bar  su-ka-karbo  magani,  su-ka-sainya  wa  sarki

achikin  abinchi. Sarki  ya  chi,  ya  mutu. Maatar  nan

ta  diba  kayan  sarki  dayawa,  da  kurdin  sar-

-ki  dayawa,  ta  ba  shi  daga  boye,  babu

wanda  ya  sani,  har  aka  gama  komi  duka. Saanan

ta  fita,  ta  aure  shi. Mafari  ke  nan

aka-che,  '  So  mai-sonka,  rabu  da  makiyinka,

kar  shi  ba  ka  magani,  ka  chi,  ka  mutu.'

10  Kungurus  kan  kusu.


Time  went  on,  (and)  he  was  cooking  food  for  the  chief.  Of
a  truth  they  were  together,  (he)  and  this  woman,  (and)  they
were  sinning  against  the  chief,  until  (one  day)  they  got
medicine,  (and)  put  it  in  the  chief's  food.  The  chief  ate  and
died.  This  woman  took  possession  of  much  of  the  chief's
property  and  much  of  the  chief's  money.  She  gave  him  (the
cook)  (them)  secretly  (and)  no  one  knew,  until  they  had
finished  taking  everything.  Then  she  came  forward  and
married  him.  That  was  the  origin  of  the  saying,  '  Love  him
who  loves  you,  leave  him  who  hates  you,  lest  he  give  you
medicine  to  eat  (and)  you  die.'  Off  with  the  rat's  head.


204 STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  n

No.  ii.

Wanan  tatsuniar  samari  che.
Wadansu  samari  su-ka-tafi  kauye  wurin
buduri. Su-ka-je,  su-ka-iske  raafi,  hainya  babu
rua,  rua  iyaka  idanun  sau. Su-ka-wuche.
Su-ka-isa  gurin  buduri,  su-ka-je,  su-ka-gaishe  su,
su-ka-dauko  su. Su-ka-zo  wurin  raafi,  su-ka  i-
-she,  ya-chika  da  rua. Sai  su-ka-che,  '  Af  ai
mun  wuche  ruanga,  bai  kai  haka  ba.' Su-ka-che,
'  Kaka  ke  nan  ? ' Daia  chikinsu  ya  che,  '  Mu  koma.'
Saura  su-ka-che, '  Aa  ba  mu  komawa.'
Su  kua,  su  uku  ne,  da  dan  sarkin  ko-
-kua,  da  dan  sarkin  mahalba,  da  dan  limami.


This  tale  is  about  (some)  youths.  Certain  young  men
went  to  an  outlying  village  where  some  young  girls  were.
They  went  on,  and  came  to  a  stream ;  there  was  (practically)
no  water  on  the  road;  the  water  came  (only)  up  to  their
ankles.  They  passed  on.  They  came  to  where  the  maidens
were,  and  came  and  greeted  them,  and  carried  them  off.
They  came  to  the  stream  and  found  it  full  up  with  water.
(Then)  they  said,  'Ah  (when)  we  passed  this  water  it  was
not  so,'  and  they  said,  '  How  is  this  ? '  One  among  them
said,  '  Let  us  turn  back.'  The  rest  said,  '  No,  we  do  not  go
back.'  Now  they  were  three,  the  king  of  wrestlers,  the  king
of  bowmen,  and  the  king  of  prayer.


206 STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  n

Su-ka-che, '  Kowa  shi  yi  dabara  gidansu,  ta  fishe  shi.'

Su-ka-che,  '  Dan  limami  shi  fara.' Sai l  ya  yi  adua,

ya  tofa  ga  sandarsa,  ya  buga  rua,  rua  ya  tsage,

da  shi  da  budura  tasa  su-ka-wuche. Sai  rua  ya  koma  wada  shi  ke.

Sai  dan  sarkin  mahalba  ya  zazage  kibau  nasa

daga  chikin  2  kori,  ya  jera  su  bisa  rua,  tun  daga

wanan  ganga  har  wanan  ganga,  ya  komo,  ya  dau-

-ki  budura  tasa. Su-ka-taka  kan  kibau,

su-ka-wuche. Sai  ya  komo,  ya  tsinche  kabausa.

Sauran  dan  sarkin  kokua. Shi  kua

ya  bidi  wada  zaa  shi  yi,  ya  rasa. Shi  bi  nan,  shi  rasa

gurin  bi,  shi  yi  wanan  dabara,  shi  rasa,  har  ya  gaji.


(And)  they  said,  '  Let  each  try  and  get  out  of  the  difficulty
by  resorting  to  his  own  particular  skill.'  They  said, '  Let  the
one  who  is  strong  in  prayer  commence.'  So  he  prostrated
himself,  spat  on  his  staff  (and)  struck  the  water;  (and)  the
water  opened,  and  he  with  his  maiden  passed  over.  Then
the  water  returned  to  where  it  was.  Next  the  prince  of
bowmen  drew  out  his  arrows  from  his  quiver,  he  set  them
in  a  line  on  the  water,  from  one  bank  to  another,  he  returned
and  lifted  up  his  maiden.  They  stepped  on  the  arrows,  (and)
passed  over.  Then  he  came  back,  (and)  picked  up  his
arrows.  There  remained  the  king  of  wrestlers.  He  too
sought  for  what  he  should  do;  he  could  not  find  a  way.
He  tried  this  way,  (and)  failed,  he  made  that  plan  (and)  failed,
until  he  was  weary.


2o8 STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  n

Sai  ya  yi  fushi,  ya  kama  budrua  tasa,  da  ko-

-kua  ya  nada  mata  hardla,  su-ka-tuma,  su-ka-yi

bisa,  ba  su  fadi  ba,  sai  bakin  ganga. To,

chikinsu  wa  ya  fi  dan  uwansa  ? Idan  ba-ka-san  wanda

ya  fi  ba,  shi  ke  nan. 3  Kungurus  kan  kusu.

Then  he  got  in  a  rage,  (and)  seized  his  maiden,  and  with
a  wrestling  trick  twisted  his  leg  round  hers  (and)  they  jumped,
(and)  rose  in  the  air,  (and)  did  not  fall,  except  on  the  edge
of  the  (far)  bank.  Now  among  them  who  was  better  than
another  ?  If  you  do  not  know  who  was  least,  there  you  are.
Off  with  the  rat's  head.


210 STORIES ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  12

No.  12.
Wanan  tatsunlar  dugun  daji  che,

da  shi  da  Namijin-Mijin-Maza.

1  Gatanan,  gatanan,  ta  je,  ta  komo. Wani  mutun  ne,
sunansa  Namiji-Mijin-Maza,  kulum  idan  z  ya  fito
daji  shi  kan  dauko  itache,  shi  tafo,  shi  yas,
shi  che,  '  Ni  Namiji-Mijin-Maza.' 3  Maatarsa  ta  che,  '  Haba
bari  fadi  kai  namiji-mijin-maza,  idan  ka  gani
namiji-mijin-maza,  *  kaa  gudu.' Sai  shi  che,  '  Karla  ne.'
Yau  hakanan  hakanan  kulum,  idan  5  ya  kawo  itache,
sai  shi  yas  da  karfl,  shi  che,  '  Ni  Namiji-Mijin-Maza.'
6  Maatar  ta  che,  '  Haba  bari  fadi  hakanan,  idan  7  ka  gani


This  story  is  about  a  forest  giant,  about  him  and  a  man
called,  A-Man-among-Men.  A  story,  a  story.  Let  it  go,  let
it  come.  There  was  a  certain  man  by  name,  A-Man-among-
Men,  always  when  he  came  from  the  bush  he  used  to  lift  up
a  tree  (and)  come,  (and)  throw  (it  down),  and  say,  'I  am
A-Man-among-Men.1  His  wife  said,  'Come  now,  leave  off
saying  you  are  a-man-among-men  ;  if  you  saw  a-man-among-
men  you  would  run.'  But  he  said,  'It  is  a  lie.'  Now  it  was
always  so,  if  he  has  brought  in  wood,  then  he  would  throw  it
down  with  force,  (and)  say,  '  I  am  A-Man-among-Men.'  The
wife  said,  '  Come  now,  leave  off  saying  so ;  if  you  have  seen


212  STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  12

namiji-mijin-maza,  kaa  gudu.' Sai  shi  che,  l  Karia  ne.' Yau

ranan  maatarsa  ta  tafi  raafi,  ta  je  gurin  wata  rijla ;

8  wasakin  rijian  mutun  goma  ke  jawo  shi.

Ta  je,  ta  rasa  rua,  sai  ta  koma. Zaa  ta  gida,  ta  gamu

da  wata  mache,  ta  che,  '  Ina  zaa  ki  da  kworia,  babu  rua  ? '

Ta  che,  '  Na  je,  na  gani  guga  nan,  ba  ni  iya  jansa,

shi  ya  sa  ina-komawa  gida.' Sai  maatar  nan,

da  ke  da  yaro  nan,  ta  che,  '  Mu  koma  ki  samu.'

Ta  che,  '  To.' Sai  su-ka-koma  tare  wurin  rijia.

Maatar  nan,  da  ke  da  yaro,  ta  che  yaro  shi  dauki

wasaki,  shi  debo  rua,  9  yaron  kua  kankane  ne,

bai  wuche  goyo  ba. Sai  ya  dauki  guga

nan  da  nan,  ya  nasa  rljia,  ya  jawo  rua. Su-ka-chika


a  man-among-men,  you  would  run.'  But  he  said,  '  It  is  a  lie.'
Now  one  day  his  wife  went  to  the  stream.  She  came  to
a  certain  well ;  the  well  bucket,  ten  men  were  (necessary  to)
draw  it  up.  She  came,  (but)  had  to  do  without  the  water,
so  she  turned  back.  She  was  going  home,  when  she  met
another  woman  (who)  said,  'Where  are  you  going  with  a
calabash,  with  no  water  ? '  She  said,  '  I  have  come  and  seen
a  bucket  there.  I  could  not  draw  it ;  that  is  what  caused  me
to  turn  back  home.'  And  this  (second)  woman,  who  had  this
(a)  son,  said,  '  Let  us  return  that  you  may  find  (water).'  She
said,  'All  right.'  So  they  returned  together  to  the  well.
This  woman,  who  had  the  son,  told  the  boy  to  lift  the  bucket
and  draw  water.  Now  the  boy  was  small,  not  past  the  age
when  he  was  carried  on  his  mother's  back.  Then  he  lifted
the  bucket  then  and  there,  and  put  it  in  the  well,  (and)  drew
up  the  water.  They  filled


'•


STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  12

masukansu,  su-ka-yi  wanka,  su-ka-wanke  10  zannua-

-nsu,  su-ka-dauki  rua,  zaa  su  gida. Wanan  ta-na-ma-

-maki,  sai  ta  gani  wachan  da  ke  da  yaro,  ta  ratse,

ta  na  shiga  daji. Sai  wanan  maatar  Namiji-Mijin-Maza

ta  che, '  Ina  zaa  ki  ? ' Ta  che  mata, '  Zaa  ni  gida  ne.' Ta  che, '  Hainya

gidanku  ke  nan  ? ' Ta  che,  'I.' Ta  che,  ' Gidan  wa  ke  nan  ? '

Ta  che,  '  Gidan  Namiji-Mijin-Maza.' Sai  ta  yi  kurum,  ba  ta  che

kome  ba,  har  ta  je  gida,  ta  gaia  wa  mijinta.

Ya  che  gobe  ta  kai  shi. Ta  che,  '  Ala  shi  kai  mu  gobe.'

Da  gari  ya  waye,  shi  ya  n  rigaye  ta  tashi  daga

kwana,  ya  dauki  kayan  shiga  dajinsa.

Ya  rataya,  ya  saba  gatarinsa,  ya  tashe  ta  daga

kwana,  ya  che,  *  Tashi  mu  tafi,  ki  kai  ni,  in  gani


their  large  water-pots,  they  bathed,  they  washed  their  clothes,  they
lifted  up  the  water  to  go  home.  This  one  was  astonished.  Then  she
saw  that  one  who  had  the  boy  has  turned  off  the  path  and  was
entering  the  bush.  Then  the  wife  of  (him  called)  A-Man-among-
Men  said,  '  Where  are  you  going  ? '  She  said  to  her,  '  I  am  going
home,  where  else  ? '  She  said,  '  Is  that  the  way  to  your  home  ? '
She  said,  '  Yes.'  She  said,  '  Whose  home  is  it  ? '  She  said,  '  The
home  of  A-Man-among-Men.'  Then  she  was  silent ;  she  did  not  say
anything  till  she  got  home.  She  told  her  husband.  He  said  that
to-morrow  she  must  take  him  (there).  She  replied,  '  May  Allah  give
us  a  to-morrow.'  Next  morning  he  was  the  first  to  get  up  from
sleep.  He  took  the  weapons  of  the  chase  and  slung  them  over  his
shoulder.  He  put  his  axe  on  his  shoulder  and  wakened  her  (his  wife)
from  sleep.  He  said,  '  Get  up,  let  us  go.  Take  me  that  I  may  see,


^.i-^J^,',^,<.^J(^tiM4


<fr*f&&*<-Jbtal'y>***
ktfto&^^^^+awfr*

fW^^^^^ft^

V^ 4 (^  W


2i6  STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  12

in  gani  Namiji-Mijin-Maza.' Ta  tashi,  ta  dauki  masakinta,
ta  wuche  gaba. Shi-na-binta  bar  su-ka-kai,  bakin  rijla.
Su-ka-yi  katar  kua.  Su  na  zua,  maatar  Namiji-Mijin-Maza  ta  zo,
da  ita  da  danta. Su-ka-gaishe  ta,  sai  maatar  wanan  ta  goda
masa  guga,  ta  che,  '  Dauki  ka  debo  mani  rua.'
Sai  ya  je,  ya  dauki  guga,  da  fushi,  ya  nasa
chikin  rijia,  sai  guga  ta  ja  shi,  zaa  shi  fada  rijia,
sai  yaro  kankane,  ya  kama  shi,  da  shi  da  guga,
ya  fisgo,  ya  yas  waje. Sai  yaro  ya  dauki  gu-
-ga,  ya  sainya  chikin  rijia,  ya  debo  rua. Su-ka-chika
tulunansu. Maatarsa  ta  che,  '  Ka  che  ka-na-zua  ka  gani
Namiji-Mijin-Maza,  ka  gani  maatarsa  ke  nan,  da  dansa,
idan  ka-na-zua,  ku  je  tare,  ni  ba  ni  zua.' Uwar  yaro  ta  che,


that  I  may  see  the  (one  called)  A-Man-among-Men.'  She  got
up,  lifted  her  large  water-pot,  and  passed  on  in  front.  He
was  following  her  until  they  got  to  the  edge  of  the  well.
Now  they  found  what  they  sought  indeed.  (As)  they  were
coming,  the  wife  of  A-Man-among-Men  came  up,  both  she
and  her  son.  They  greeted  her,  and  the  wife  of  this  one
showed  him  the  bucket  (and)  said,  'Lift  it  and  draw  water
for  me.'  So  he  went  and  lifted  the  bucket  in  a  rage  and  let  it
down  the  well;  but  the  bucket  pulled  him,  (and)  he  would
have  fallen  into  the  well,  when  the  little  boy  seized  him,  both
him  and  the  bucket,  and  drew  (out)  and  threw  them  on  one
side.  Then  the  boy  lifted  up  the  bucket,  put  it  in  the  well,
drew  water,  and  filled  their  water-pots.  His  wife  said,  *  You
have  said  you  are  going  to  see  him  called  A-Man-among-Men.
You  have  seen  this  is  his  wife  and  son.  If  you  still  want  to
go  you  can  go  together.  As  for  me,  I  am  not  going.'  The
boy's  mother  said,


t£J^^A^/^A^J|
il6.^k;.L*4tyAi.tL*i£*J&tdf£

lJj^?^lJlpiAtj$li&flfiA>  &

/^yffituZfc.a  A JHJ  .%£&%

V^^X  ^— /  x  »


TT^^XT

*-r  \  y


^^^44j?«^f-{^#

^^iU)4i£CLS;..9dU(  n^fU


2i8 STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  12

'  A  me  ya  faru  ? Kad  ka  je.' 12  Ya  che  yaa  je,  ta  che, '  Mu  je.'

Su-ka-tafi. Da  su-ka-je,  sai  ta  goda  masa  13  rufewa

na  mana,  ya  shiga. Shi  kua  mai-gida  ba  shi  gida ;

14  ya  tafi  daji. Ta  che, '  Ka  gani  ya  tafi  daji,  ama  kar

ka  yi  motsi  idan  ya  zo.' Ya  zamna  chiki,

har  mareche  ya  yi. Mai-gidan  ya  zo. Shi-na-fadi

4 15  Ina-ji(n)  warin  mutun.'  Maatarsa  ta  che, 'Akwai  wani  mutun

nan,  ba  ni  ba  ? ' Hakanan  idan  ya  che  shi-na-jin  warin  mutun,

sai  ta  che, '  Akwai  wani  mutun  nan,  ba  ni  ba  ? Idan

ka-na-so  ka  chinye  ni  ne,  to,  babu  kowa,

sai  ni.' Shi  kua  kato  ne,  maganansa  kamar

hadari,  giwa  goma  shi  ke  chi. Idan  gari  ya

waye,  shi  kare  kumalo  da  guda  daia,  kana


4  Oh,  what  is  the  matter  ?  You  had  better  not  come.'  (But)
he  said  he  would  come  ;  and  she  said, 4  Let  us  be  off.'  They
set  out.  When  they  arrived  (at  the  house)  then  she  showed  him
a  place  for  storing  meat,  (and)  he  got  inside.  Now  he,  the
master  of  the  house,  was  not  at  home ;  he  has  gone  to  the
bush.  She  (his  wife)  said,  '  You  have  seen  he  has  gone  to
the  bush;  but  you  must  not  stir  if  he  has  come.'  He  sat
inside  till  evening  came.  The  master  of  the  house  came.
He  keeps  saying, '  I  smell  the  smell  of  a  man.'  His  wife  said,
4  Is  there  another  person  here  ?  It  is  not  I.'  Thus,  if  he  said
he  smelled  the  smell  of  a  man,  then  she  would  say,  4  Is  there
another  person  here.  Is  it  not  I  ?  If  you  want  to  eat  me  up,
well  and  good,  for  there  is  no  one  else  but  I.'  Now  he  was
a  huge  man,  his  words  like  a  tornado  ;  ten  elephants  he  would
eat.  When  dawn  came,  he  made  his  morning  meal  of  one ;
then


220 STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  12

shi  tafi  daji,  idan  16daa  ya  gani  mutume  nan,  daa  ya  kashe  shi.

Yau  shi-na  chikin  runbu  ya  boye. Maatar  mai-gidan

ta  gaia  masa  ta  che, '  Kar  ka  yi  motsi  har  shi  yi  kwana,

idan  ka  gani  wuri  da  dufu,  bai  yi  kwana  ba,  idan  ka

gani  wuri  ya  yi  kashe,  ya  yi  kwana  ke  nan,

ka  fita  ka  gudu.' Ana-nan  sai  ya  gani  wuri  ya  yi

haske  kamar  rana. Sai  ya  fita. Shi-na-gudu,  shi-na-

-gudu  har  gari  ya  waye,  shi-na-gudu,  har  rana

ta  fito  shi-na-gudu,  bai  tsaya  ba. Sai  mutume  nan  ya  falka

daga  kwana,  sai  ya  che,  '  Ina-jin  warin  mutun,  ina-

-jin  warin  mutun.' Ya  tashi,  ya  bi  wurin  da  mutume  nan

ya  bi. Shi-na-gudu. Shi  kuma,  wa(n)chan,  shi-na-gudu


he  went  to  the  bush,  and  if  he  should  see  a  person  there  he
would  kill  him.  Now  he  (A  Man-among-Men)  was  in  the
store-house,  hidden.  The  man's  wife  told  him,  saying, '  You
must  not  move  till  he  is  asleep.  If  you  have  seen  the  place
dark,  he  is  not  asleep  ;  if  you  have  seen  the  place  light,  that
is  a  sign  he  is  asleep;  come  out  and  fly.'  Shortly  after  he
saw  the  place  has  become  light  like  day,  so  he  came  out.  He
was  running,  he  was  running,  until  dawn,  he  was  running,
till  the  sun  rose  he  was  running,  he  did  not  stand.  Then
that  man  woke  up  from  sleep  and  he  said,  '  I  smell  the  smell
of  a  man,  I  smell  the  smell  of  a  man.'  He  rose  up,  he  followed
where  the  man  had  gone.  He  was  running.  He  also,  the
other  one,  was  running


222 STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  12

har  ya  tarda  masu-17sasabe,  su-ka-che  me  ya  faru.

Ya  che, '  Wani  mutun  ya  koro  ni.' Su-ka-che, '  Tsaye  nan  har

shi  tafo.' Zua  anjima,  sai  iskansa  ya  zo,

shi-na-daukansu,  shi-na-kaiyaswa. Sai  ya  che, '  To

iskansa  ke  nan,  tukuna  shi  dakaisa  bai  zo  ba,

idan  ku-na-iyawa  ku  gaia  mani,  idan  ba  ku  iyawa

ku  gaia  mani.' Su-ka-che, '  Yi  gaba.' Sai  ya  sheka  da  gudu,

ya  je  ya  iske  wadansu,  su-na-18fuda. Su-ka-che,

'  Me  ya  koro  ka  ? ' Ya  che, '  Wani  mutun  ya  koro  ni.'

Su-ka-che, '  Wani  irin  mutun  ya  koro  kamanka.' Ya  che,

1  Wani  ne  wai  shi  Namiji-Mijin-Maza.' Su-ka-che,

4  Ba  Mijin-Maza  ba,  Mijin-Mata,  tsaya  har  shi  tafo.'

Ya  tsaya. Shi-na-nan,  iskansa  ya  zo,  shi-na-tunkude


till  he  met  some  people  who  were  clearing  the  ground  for
a  farm,  (and)  they  asked  what  had  happened.  And  he  said,
'  Some  one  chased  (is  chasing)  me.'  They  said,  '  Stand  here
till  he  comes.'  A  short  time  passed,  and  the  wind  caused  by
him  came;  it  lifted  them  (and)  cast  them  down.  And  he
said,  '  Yes,  that  is  it,  the  wind  he  makes  (running) ;  he  himself
has  not  yet  come.  If  you  are  able  (to  withstand  him)  tell
me.  If  you  are  not  able,  say  so.'  And  they  said,  '  Pass
on.'  So  he  ran  off,  and  came  and  met  some  people  hoeing.
They  said,  'What  chased  (is  chasing)  you?'  He  replied,
'  Some  one  pursued  (is  pursuing)  me.'  They  said,  '  What
kind  of  a  man  chased  (is  chasing)  (one)  such  as  you.'  He
said,  '  Some  one  who  says  he  is  A-Man-among-Men.  They
said,  '  Not  a  man-among-men,  a  man-among- women.  Stand
till  he  comes.'  He  stood.  Here  he  was  when  the  wind  of
him  came,  it  was  pushing  about


224 STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  12
masu-noma. Sai  ya  che,  '  Kun  gani  iskansa  ke  nan,
19  takuna  shi  dakaisa  bai  tafo  ba,  idan  ku-na-iyawa,
ku  gaia  mani,  idan  ba  ku  iyawa,  ku  gaia  mani.' Sai  su-ka-che,
4  Yi  gaba ' ;  sai  ya  sheka  da  gudu. Shi-na-gudu  ya  iske  masu-
-shibka. Su-ka-che, '  Me  ka  kewa  gudu  ? '  Ya  che, '  Wani  ya  koro  ni.'
Su-ka-che,  '  Wane  irin  mutun  ne  ya  koro  kamanka  ? ' Ya  che,
1  Sunansa  Namiji-Mijin-Maza.' Su-ka-che,  '  Zamna  nan
shi  zo.' Yaa  zamna. Aka-jima  kadan  sai  iskansa  ya  zo.
Shi-na-daukansu,  shi-na-kayaswa. Sai  su-ka-che,  *  Wane  irin
iska  ne  haka  ? ' Shi,  mutume  nan  da  aka-koro  shi,
ya  che, '  Iskansa  ke  nan.' Sai  su-ka-che,  '  Yi  gaba.' Su-ka-yada
abin  shibka,  su-ka-shiga  daji,  su-ka-boye,


the  men  who  were  hoeing.  So  he  said,  *  You  have  seen,  that  is  the
wind  he  makes ;  he  has  not  yet  come  himself.  If  you  are  a  match
for  him  tell  me ;  if  not  say  so.'  And  they  said,  '  Pass  on ' ;  and  off  he
ran.  He  was  running.  He  came  across  some  people  sowing ;  they
said,  '  What  are  you  running  for  ? '  He  said,  '  Some  one  chased  (is
chasing)  me.'  And  they  said,  l  What  kind  of  a  man  is  it  who  chased
(is  chasing)  the  like  of  you  ? '  He  said,  '  His  name  is  A-Man-among-
Men.'  They  said, '  Sit  here  till  he  comes.'  He  sat  down.  In  a  short
time  the  wind  he  made  came  (and)  it  lifted  them  and  cast  them  down.
And  they  said,  '  What  kind  of  wind  is  that  ? '  He,  the  man  who  was
being  pursued,  said,  '  It  is  his  wind.'  And  they  said,  '  Pass  on.'
They  threw  away  the  sowing  implements,  (and)  went  into  the  bush
(and)  hid,


226  STORIES ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  12

shi  kua  wanchan  shi-na-gudu. Ya  je,  ya  tarda  wani  gawurtachen

mutun,  shi  kadai  gutsun  kuka  shi-na-zamne.

Ya  20  kaso  giwaye,  shi-na-banda,  shi  kua,  giwa

ishirin  shi  ke  chi,  da  safe  shi  karia  kumalo  da  blar.

sunansa,  Dungun-Daji. Sai  ya  tanbaye  shi,  ya  che,

'  Ina  zaa  ka  da  gudu  ? ' Ya  che,  '  Namiji-Mijin-Maza  ya  koro  ni.'

Sai  Dungun-Daji  ya  che,  '  Tafo,  zamna  har  shi  zo.'

Ya  zamna. Aka-jima  iskan  Namiji-Mijin-Maza  ya  zo,

ya  dauke  shi,  zaa  shi  da  shi,  sai  Dungun-Daji  ya  buga

tsawa  ya  che,  *  Komo.' Ya  che,  *  Ba  ni  dakaina  ke  tafia  ba,

iskan  mutume  nan  ke  dauka  na.' Sai  Dungun-Daji  ya  yi  fushi.

Ya  tashi,  ya  kamo  21hannunsa,  ya  sainya  karkashin

but  that  one  was  running  on.  He  came  (and)  met  a  certain  huge
man ;  he  was  sitting  alone  at  the  foot  of  a  baobab  tree.  He  had
killed  elephants  and  was  roasting  them,  as  for  him,  twenty  elephants
he  could  eat;  in  the  morning  he  broke  his  fast  with  five.  His
name  was  'The  Giant  of  the  Forest.'  Then  he  questioned  him
and  said,  '  Where  are  you  going  in  all  this  haste  ? '  And  he  said,
'  A-Man-among-Men  chased  (is  chasing)  me.'  And  the  Giant  of
the  Forest  said,  '  Come  here,  sit  down  till  he  comes.'  He  sat  down.
They  waited  a  little  while.  Then  a  wind  made  by  A-Man-among-
Men  came,  and  lifted  him,  (and)  was  about  to  carry  him  off,  when  the
Giant  of  the  Forest  shouted  to  him  to  come  back.  And  he  said,
'  It  is  not  I  myself  who  am  going  off,  the  wind  caused  by  the  man
is  taking  me  away.'  At  that  the  Giant  of  the  Forest  got  in  a  rage,
he  got  up  and  caught  his  hand,  and  placed  it  under


228  STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE. No. 12

chinyasa. Shi-na-zamne  har  Namiji-Mijin-Maza  ya  zo,
ya  che,  '  Kai  wa  ke  zamne,  masu-rai,  ko  masu-
-mutua  ? ' Sai  Dungun-Daji  ya  che, l  Karanbani  gare-
-ka.' Sai  Namiji-Mijin-Maza  ya  che,  *  Idan  ka-na-so
ka  samu  lafia,  ba  ni  ajiana.1 Sai  Dungun-Daji
ya  che,  l  Tafo  ka  dauki.' Sai  ya  yi  fushi,  ya  zaabura,
ya  kama  shi. Su-na-kokua. Da  su-ka-nada  ma  majuna
hardia,  su-ka-tuma,  su-ka-yi  bisa. Har  wa  yau
su-na-chan,  su-na-kokua. Idan  sun  gaji,  su  za-
-mna,  su  futa,  idan  sun  tashi  kokua,  shi  ne
ka  kan  ji  chida  chikin  samau,  su  ne  su  ke  ko-
-kua. Shi  kua,  wanchan,  ya  samu  kansa,
ya  je  gida,  shi-na-bada  labari. Sai  maatarsa


his  thigh.  He  was  sitting  until  A-Man-among-Men  came  up
and  said,  '  You  sitting  there,  are  you  of  the  living,  or  of  the
dead  ? '  And  the  Giant  of  the  Forest  said,  '  You  are  inter-
fering.' And  A-Man-among-Men  said,  '  If  you  want  to  find
health  give  up  to  me  what  you  are  keeping  there.'  And  the
Giant  of  the  Forest  said,  '  Come  and  take  (him).'  And  at
that  he  flew  into  a  rage  and  sprang  and  seized  him.  They
were  struggling  together.  When  they  had  twisted  their  legs
round  one  another  they  leaped  up  into  the  heavens.  Till
this  day  they  are  wrestling  there ;  when  they  are  tired  out
they  sit  down  and  rest ;  and  if  they  rise  up  to  struggle  that
is  the  thunder  you  are  wont  to  hear  in  the  sky;  it  is  they
struggling.  He  also,  that  other  one,  found  himself  (escaped),
and  went  home,  and  told  the  tale.  And  his  wife


M


<^>:r*tr^

A- ^K,« •» ^w_

rsWwJKif


^tyt^LX,


23o STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  12

ta  che,  '  Domin  hakanan  ni  ke  gala  maka,  kulum  komi
ka  ke  yi,  zz  dinga  ragawa. Idan  23  karfl,  idan  sarauta,
idan  kurdi,  idan  tsia,  ka  ke  takama,  duka  dai,
wani  ya  fi  ka,  ka  che,  karia  ne,  ga  shi,  24  ka  gani
da  idanunka.' 25  Kungurus  kan  kusu.


said,  '  That  is  why  I  was  always  telling  you  whatever  you  do,
make  little  of  it.  Whether  it  be  you  excel  in  strength,  or  in
power,  or  riches,  or  poverty,  and  are  puffed  up  with  pride,  it
is  all  the  same;  some  one  is  better  than  you.  You  said,
it  was  a  lie.  Behold,  your  own  eyes  have  seen.'  Off  with  the
rat's  head.


\,/~ t  I  *  **/

'


232 STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  13

No.  13.

Wanan  tatsuniar  marayu  che.

1  Gatanan,  gatanan. Ta  je,  ta  komo. Wani  mutun  2  ya  mutu
ya  bar  diansa  blu  maza,  da  uwayensu  blu  mata.
Ana-nan  chikin  uwaye  mata  daia  ta  samu  chlwo.
Ta-na-jinya  chiuta,  ta  ki  karewa. Da  ta  gani  kamar
3  taa  mutu,  sai  ta  che  da  yar  uwa  tata,  ai  4  klshia  tata,
wanche,  '  Kin  gani 5  chiutar  nan  tawa  ta  ki  kare-
-wa,  na  san  zaa  ni  mutua  ne,  idan  Ala  taala
6  ya  karbi  rai  na,  ga  danki  nan,  7  na  bar  maki  taulafi ,
domin  Ala  da  anabi.1 Ta  che,  '  To,  na  ji.' Ana-nan  sai
ranan  ta  mutu,  yaro  kua  ba  shi  da  wayo. Aka-yi  ko-
-mi  da  komi  aka-gama. Aka-yi  kwanaki  bayan
mutuanta,  ana-nan  danta  da  dan  wachan  su-na-


This  story  is  about  orphans.  A  story,  a  story.  Let  it  go.
Let  it  come.  A  certain  man  died  and  left  two  sons,  and
their  mothers,  two  women.  Then  among  the  mothers  one  fell
sick.  She  was  taking  medicine  for  her  illness,  (but)  it  refused
to  mend.  When  she  saw  she  was  apparently  going  to  die ;
then  she  said  to  her  sister,  that  one  (her  late  husband's)  second
wife,  '  You  have  seen  this  illness  of  mine  will  not  go  away.
I  know  I  am  going  to  die,  when  Allah,  the  exalted  one,  has
taken  my  life  from  me,  behold  there  is  a  son  (lit.  your  son)
I  have  left  to  you  and  put  in  your  charge,  for  the  sake  of
Allah  and  the  prophets.'  She  said,  '  It  is  well,  I  have  heard.'
And  it  came  to  pass  the  day  came  when  she  died,  and  the
boy  had  not  reached  an  age  when  he  had  full  knowledge.
Then  the  funeral  rites  were  completed.  Some  time  passed
after  her  death.  Now  her  son  and  the  son  of  the  other
(woman)  possessed


234 STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  13

da  kaji,  su-na-kiwo,  nasa  guda,  na  maraya  guda.

Ranan  ta  dauki  sanda,  ta  buge  na  maraya  da  gangan,

ta  kashe,  ba  shi  gida. Da  ya  zo,  ya  gani  kaza

tasa  matachia,  bai  che  komi  ba,  sai  ya  che,

*  Wayo  Ala  mai-girma  yau  kazata  ta  mutu.'

Sai  ya  dauki,  ya  fige,  ya  babake,  ya  gerta  da  keau,

ya  dora  tukunia  bisa  wuta,  ya  dafa  da  keau,

ya  dauki,  ya  kai  kasua. Kowa  ya  zo,  ya  che

shi  na  so  shi  saia,  sai  shi  che,  shi,  ba  shi

sairwa,  sai  doki. Ana-nan  dan  sarki,  wanda

shi  ke  so,  ya  zo,  shi  kua  yaro  ne  kankane.

Shi-na  bisa  algarma,  sai  ya  che,  naman  kaza  nan

shi  ke  so  sai  asai  masa. Maraya  kua  ya  che,


fowls,  (and)  were  rearing  them,  he  (had)  one,  (and)  the  orphan
one.  One  day  she  lifted  a  stick,  and  hit  the  orphan's  (fowl)
on  purpose,  (and)  killed  it  (when)  he  was  not  at  home.  When
he  returned  he  saw  his  hen  dead ;  he  did  not  say  anything
except  '  Alas !  Allah,  the  powerful  one,  to-day  my  hen  has
died.'  Then  he  picked  it  up,  (and)  plucked  it,  (and)  put  it
on  the  fire,  and  prepared  it  well,  (and)  placed  a  pot  on  the
fire,  (and)  cooked  it  thoroughly.  He  took  it  up,  (and)  went
(with  it)  to  the  market.  Whoever  came  and  said  he  wanted
to  buy  it,  he  would  answer  he  would  not  sell  it,  except  for
a  horse.  Then  the  chief's  son  came,  the  one  the  chief  loved ;
he  too  was  quite  a  little  boy.  He  was  mounted  on  a  powerful
horse ;  and  he  said  the  flesh  of  this  hen  was  what  he  wanted
and  it  must  be  sold  to  him.  But  the  orphan  said,


/qji^M&^M^H^

•  -> I  ->l  Xx  &
/• •** /*  •*/ ^ *S IA^JA*  l^IUwW


236 STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  13

idan  ba  doki  aka-ba  shi  ba,  shi  kua  babu  mai-chin

namansa. Yau  sai  aka-ba  shi  doki,  aka-baiwa  dan  sarki

nama,  shi  kua  ya  kawo  dokinsa  gida.

Sai  uwa  tasa  ta  che, '  Dauki  dokinka  ka  sainya

achikin  dakinga,  ka  like  da  kasa,  kamin  kwana

bakwoi,  idan  ka  bude,  sai  ka  gani  yaa  yi  kiba,

kamar  zai  pashe  dakinsa. Zatonta  idan

ya  yi  hakanan  sai  shi  mutu.' Shi  kua  yaro  shi-na-

zato  gaskia  ne. Sai  ya  sainya  doki  chikin  daki,

ya  like  kofa. Aka-kwana  kamar  goma,  ya  bude

kofa,  sai  ya  gani  dokinsa  ya  yi  kiba. Sai

klshiar  uwa  tasa  ya  yi  bakin  chiki  domin  da  doki


if  he  did  not  give  him  the  horse,  as  for  him,  no  one  would  eat
his  meat.  So  he  was  given  the  horse,  (and)  the  chief's  son
the  meat,  and  the  former  took  his  horse  home.  But  his
mother  said,  '  Take  your  horse  (and)  put  it  in  this  house,  and
close  up  the  door  with  earth ;  in  about  seven  days,  if  you
open  it,  you  will  see  it  has  become  fat  enough  to  burst  its
house.'  Her  idea  was  if  he  did  so  it  (the  horse)  would  be  dead.
Now  the  boy  thought  this  was  true,  so  he  put  the  horse  in
the  house,  and  plastered  up  the  door.  When  about  ten  days
had  elapsed,  he  opened  the  door,  and  he  saw  his  horse  had
become  fat.  But  his  step-mother  got  black  of  heart  because
the  horse


238  STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  13

bai  mutu  ba. Yau  ana-nan  ranan  ta  che, '  Yau  babu  karan  da-

-fua.' Shi  saiar  da  dokinsa,  shi  sayo  kara. Sai  ya  che,

'  Haba  uwana,  ana  wada  ake  sai  da  doki,  asai

kara  ? ' Ta  che,  '  Domin  ba  uwa(r)  ka  ni  ke  ba,  domin

hakanan  ka  ke  gardama  da  ni  ? ' Ya  che, '  Ba  gardama

ni  ke  yi  ba,  naa  tafi  in  bldo  kara.' Ta  che, '  Bari  idan

ba  ka  sai  da  dokinka  ka  bari.' Sai  maraya  ya  che,

'  Babu  laifi.' Ya  je,  ya  sai  da  doki,  ya  karbo  kara.

Ya  kawo  mata. Ta  kone  kara  duka,  ba  ta  rege  ko

kadan  ba,  sai  yan  guntaye  guda  uku  su-ka-saura.

Ya  tsinche,  ya  dunka  yar  jaka,  ya  dura  su  achiki.

Sai  wata  rana  ya  tashi,  ya  je  wani  gari  yawo,

did  not  die.  Well,  things  went  on,  and  one  day  she  said,
'To-day  there  are  no  grain -stalks  to  cook  with.'  He  must
sell  his  horse  and  buy  stalks  of  grain.  But  he  said, '  Oh  my
mother,  why  must  the  horse  be  sold  to  buy  stalks  of  grain  ? '
She  said,  '  Because  I  am  not  your  mother,  because  of  that  do
you  argue  with  me  ? '  He  said,  '  I  am  not  disputing,  I  shall
go  and  seek  the  grain  stalks.'  She  said,  '  Stop  !  If  you  do
not  sell  the  horse  leave  things  as  they  are.'  And  the  orphan
said,  '  It  cannot  be  helped.'  He  went  and  sold  the  horse  and
received  the  grain  stalks,  (and)  brought  them  to  her.  She
burned  all  the  stalks;  she  did  not  leave  any  at  all,  except
three  very  small  pieces  which  were  left.  He  picked  them  up,
sewed  a  little  bag  and  tied  them  inside.  Another  day  he  rose
up  and  went  to  another  village  for  a  walk,


240  STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  13

sai  ya  hau  8  matsafa. Su-ka-gane  shi,  su-ka-kama  shi,

su-ka-che,  zaa  su  yanka  shi. Sai  ya  che, '  Na  ji  labari

sarkinku  ya  makabche,  domin  hakanan  na  zo

in  yi  masa  magani,  idan  ba  ku  so,  ku  yanka  ni.' Sai

su-ka-che,  '  Mu-na-so.' Sai  aka-kai  shi  gidan  sarki,

aka-ba  shi  daki. Dare  ya  yi,  ya  dauki  karansa,  saura-

-n  bakin  wuta  nan. Ya  kuna  wuta  ga  guda,  ya  gewaiya  ba-

-yan  dakin  sarki,  kamin  shi  mutu. Sai  sarki  ya  fara

gani  kadan  kadan. Sai  ya  kuna  guda  kuma,  kamin  wanan

shi  kare,  sai  idanun  sarki  ya  bude  duka.

Sai  su-ka-girmama  shi. Gari  ya  waye,  sarki  ya  tara

mutane,  ya  che, 9 '  Kun  ka  gani  yaro  ya  yi  mani  magani.

and  climbed  up  on  the  fetish  altar.  They  saw  him,  (and)
seized  him,  (and)  said  they  would  cut  (his  throat).  But  he
said, '  I  have  heard  the  news  that  your  chief  is  blind,  and  for
that  reason  I  came  to  make  medicine  for  him.  If  you  don't
want  (me  to)  then  kill  me.'  But  they  said,  4We  wish  (it).'
So  he  was  brought  to  the  chief's  house  and  given  a  hut.
When  night  came  he  lifted  up  his  grain  stalks ;  these  which
the  fire  had  left.  He  set  fire  to  one  (stalk)  and  walked  round
the  back  of  the  chief's  house  till  it  died  out.  And  the  chief
began  to  see  a  very  little.  Then  he  lit  another,  when  it  was
finished  (burned  out),  then  both  the  chief's  eyes  opened.
Thereupon  they  gave  him  honour.  At  dawn  the  chief
assembled  the  people  (and)  said, '  You  have  seen  the  boy  has
made  medicine  for  me.


R


242  STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  13

Idanuna  ya  warke,  ama  naa  ba  shi  rabin  gari,

shi  chi  sarauta.' Sai  ya  che, '  Ni  falke  ne,  ba  ni  chin  sarauta.'

Su-ka-che, '  Idan  ba  ka  chin  sarauta,  ka  dlbi  abinda

ka  ke  so,  ka  tafi.' Sai  ya  debi  bayi,  da  shanu,

da  komi  masu-chau,  ya  tafo  da  su,  ya  shigo

gari  da  su. Mutane  su-na-mamaki. Sai

kishlar  uwa  tasa  ta  che,  *  Tafo  mu  je  hainya

rafi,  na  gani  wani  kusu,  ya  shiga  rame,

ka  gina  mani,  in  yi  raia.' Sai  ya  che, '  Haba  uwana

wane  irin  nama,  ga  zabi,  ga  kaji,  ga  raguna  ? '

Sai  ta  che,  '  Ansani  ka-na  da  dukla,  ni  dai  na-

-man  kusu  ni  ke  so.' Sai  ya  che,  '  Babu  laifi

mu  tafi  ka  gwoda  mani.' Ashe  ta  gani  ramen  kumurchi  ne


My  eyes  are  healed,  and  I  shall  give  him  half  of  the  town  to
rule  over.'  But  he  (the  boy)  answered, '  I  am  only  a  trader,
passing,  and  I  do  not  rule.'  They  said,  *  If  you  will  not  rule,
take  whatever  you  wish  and  go.'  So  he  took  slaves,  and
cattle,  and  everything  beautiful,  and  went  off  with  them,
and  entered  (his)  town  with  them.  The  people  were  astonished.
But  his  step-mother  said,  '  Come,  let  us  go  to  the  road  by
the  stream,  I  have  seen  a  rat  enter  a  hole ;  you  dig  it  for  me
to  make  soup.'  And  he  said, '  Come  now,  my  mother,  what
kind  of  meat  (is  a  rat's)  ?  Behold  guinea-fowls,  and  hens,  and
rams.'  And  she  said, '  We  all  know  you  have  wealth ;  as  for
me  though,  rat's  meat  is  what  I  want.'  So  he  said,  '  There
is  no  harm  in  that.  Let  us  go,  you  show  me.'  Now  really
she  has  seen  it  was  a  snake's  hole  (but  she  told  him  this)


j.  £%$t^x$^£r^


244 STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  13

domin  ta  kai  shi  shi  halaka. Sai  baban  bawansa

ya  tashi. Ta  che, '  Zamna,  na  gane  ka,  mai  bayi,

kai  dakainka  zaa  mu  da  kai,  idan  ba  ka  zua,  ka  bari.'

Sai  ya  che  bayinsa  su  zamna,  shi  shii  tafi. Su-ka-zamna,

su-ka-tafi  tare  da  kishiar  uwa  tasa. Ta  je,  ta  gwoda

masa  ramen ;  zaa  shi  gina,  sai  ta  che,  '  Ajie  hauya,

tura  hanunka.' Sai  ya  tura  hanu. Sai  ya  jawo  kwandage.

Ya  che, '  Ga  shi.' Ta  che, '  Ba  shi  ba,  kusu  na  che  akwai  shi

nan.' Sai  ya  tura  hannu  kuma,  sai  ya  zaro  kwanda-

-ge  na  zlnaria. Sai  ta  yi  fushi,  ta  koraa  gida,

ta  kirawo  danta. Ya  zo,  sai  ta  che  shi  tura  hannu,

shi  kamo  mata  kusu. Da  tura  hanunsa,

kumurchi  ya  chije  hannunsa,  sai  aka-dauke  shi


in  order  that  she  might  bring  him  trouble.  Now  a  big  slave
of  his  rose  up  (to  accompany  him).  She  said,  '  Sit  down,
I  have  seen  you  are  the  owner  of  slaves,  but  it  is  you  alone
we  (I)  will  go  with.  If  you  will  not  come,  then  stay.'  So  he
told  his  slaves  to  sit  down  and  he  would  go  (alone).  They
sat  down.  They  set  off,  (he)  and  his  step-mother.  She  went
and  showed  him  the  hole.  When  he  was  about  to  dig,  then
she  said, '  Put  down  your  hoe  (and)  push  in  your  hand.'  So
he  put  in  (his)  hand  and  drew  out  a  bracelet.  He  said,  4  There
it  is.'  She  said,  '  That  is  not  it.  A  rat,  I  said,  was  there.'
So  he  put  in  his  hand  again  and  drew  out  a  golden  bangle.
But  she  got  angry  and  went  back  home.  She  called  her  own
son ;  he  came,  whereupon  she  said  he  must  put  in  his  hand
and  catch  a  rat  for  her.  On  putting  in  his  hand  a  snake  bit
his  hand,  and  they  carried  him


« •  z  /  4;^*LJ:.iLi:./&te

i •


• !* €  A


,^fc^


« .  -«/


>o  / «•  •*°i^l

'  %<l_a« /mJt***1*/*^
iiii  iV 7>ikU —  i, N /


246 STORIES ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  13

zua  gida. Bai  kai  gida  ba,  sai  ya  mutu. Ita  kua  kwa-
-nanta  uku,  sai  ta  mutu. Maraya  ya  gade  gida.
Mafari  ke  nan  akan-che, '  Aki  maraya  da  rlgan
buzu,  agane  shi  da  ta  10  karfe.' Shi  ke  nan.
11  Kungurus  kan  kusu.


home.  He  died  before  they  reached  home.  She  also  died
in  three  days.  The  orphan  inherited  the  house  (property).
This  is  the  origin  of  the  saying, '  The  orphan  with  the  cloak
of  skin  is  hated,  but  when  it  is  a  metal  one  he  is  looked
(favourably)  on.'  That  is  all.  Off  with  the  rat's  head.


S^Jftf

^  M/

(^jLj&JjJ.

v-x

0

» ***A  w  *  i

**  >W«v2li-^»«JMl^bJ2*ta3


•  .f


248 STORIES ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  14

No.  14.

Wanan  tatsuniar  maklsanchi  che.
1  Gatanan,  gatanan,  ta  je,  ta  komo. Wani  mutun
shi-na  chikin  birni,  sai  2  ya  tashi,  ya  koma  daji
domin  kar  anemi 3  maatansa,  har  wata  rana  sar-
-kin  *  garin  ya  ji  labari,  sai  ya  che, '  Wanda  ya  je,
ya  nemi  maatarsa,  idan  ya  zo,  6  naa  ba  shi  doki,  da
riga,  da  kurdi,  zanba  dari.' Sai  wani  mutun  ya  che
shi 6  yaa  tafi,  ya  kwana  da  maatarsa,  gaban  idammsa.
Sai  ya  je  ya  bidi  yayan  kuka. Ya  fiide,  ya  ger-
-ta  chikinsu  da  chau,  ya  nemi  kurdi  kankanana,
ya  zuba  chiki. Ya  je,  ya  kai,  ya  ba  shi  keauta.
Sai  ya  pasa,  ya  gani  kankananan  kurdi  ke  chiki,
ya  pasa  wani  kuma. Hakanan  ya  pasa  wani  kuma  hakanan.


This  is  a  story  about  a  jealous  man.  A  story,  a  story.
Let  it  go.  Let  it  come.  There  was  a  certain  man  who  used
to  live  in  a  town,  but  afterwards  he  rose  up  and  went  to  the
bush,  lest  people  might  go  after  his  wives,  until  one  day
the  chief  of  the  town  heard  about  him)  and  he  said,  '  He  who
goes  and  seduces  his  wives,  if  he  comes  (to  me)  I  will  give
him  a  horse,  and  a  cloak,  and  one  hundred  thousand  cowries.1
Then  a  certain  man  said  he  would  be  the  one  to  go  and  lie
with  his  wife  before  his  eyes.  Then  he  went  off  and  sought
some  baobab  seeds.  He  opened  them,  (and)  cleaned  out  the
inside  well ;  he  sought  for  some  very  small  pieces  of  money
and  poured  them  inside.  He  went,  reached  (the  place  where
the  man  was)  (and)  gave  him  a  present  of  them.  When  he
broke  (one)  open  he  saw  the  small  money  inside.  He  broke
another  also,  (and)  in  the  same  way  broke  open  another.


/^7&-;-


250 STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  14

Sai  ya  che,  '  Aboki-na  ba  ka  gwoda  mani  wurin  da  kuka  nan

ta  ke ? ' Ya  che,  '  Wurin  kuka  nan  shi-na  da  msa.' Ya  che, l  Kai  ni.'

Ya  che,  *  Ba  shi  hauuwa  sai  da  tsani,  babu  wanda  ya  san  wurin  da

ta  ke  sai  ni.' Sai  ya  dinga  lalashi,  shi  kua  kwar-

-to,  sai  ya  che, i  Mu  tan"  in  kai  ka,  ama  ba  domin

kai  ba,  ba  ni  kai  kowa.' Sai  su-ka-tafi  tare  da  maatar-

-sa. Da  su-ka-isa  wurin  kuka,  sai  kwarto  ya  dauko

tsani,  ya  dangana,  ya  che  mai-maata  shi  hau. Sai  ya  hau.

Da  ya  hau  ya  kare,  sai  ya  dauke  tsani,  ya  kai  wani  wuri,

ya  aje,  ya  komo,  ya  karaa  maatar,  ya  kayas.

Shi-na  nasa  abu,  mai-maata  shi-na  gani,  ba  shi  iya

sabkowa,  sai  ya  che,  '  Naa  zuba  maku  miau,  naa  zuba

maku  miau.' Har  su-ka-gama  abinda  su  ke  yi. Kwarto


And  he  said, '  My  friend,  will  you  not  show  me  where  this  baobab
tree  is  ? '  He  replied,  '  The  place  where  this  baobab  tree  is  is  far
away.'  (And)  he  said, '  Take  me  (to  it).'  And  he  said, '  It  cannot
be  climbed  except  by  a  ladder,  (and)  no  one  knows  where  it  is
save  me.'  And  he  continued  to  entreat  him ;  and  at  last  the
seducer  said,  '  Let  us  go,  I  will  take  you  there,  but  if  it  was  not
for  you,  I  would  not  show  any  one  the  place.'  So  they  set  out
along  with  his  wife.  When  they  came  to  the  baobab  tree  then  the
seducer  lifted  the  ladder  and  placed  it  (against  the  tree),  (and)  told
the  woman's  husband  to  climb  up.  So  up  he  climbed.  When  he
had  finished  climbing,  then  he  lifted  away  the  ladder,  (and)  carried
it  somewhere  else  (and)  set  it  down,  (and)  came  back.  He  seized
the  wife  and  threw  her  down.  He  did  what  he  intended,  the
woman's  husband  looking  on  (and)  not  able  to  descend;  but  he
said,  'I  shall  spit  on  you,  I  shall  spit  on  you,'  until  they  had
finished  what  they  were  doing.  The  seducer


252  STORIES ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  14

ya  yi 7  tafiasa. Ya  je,  ya  gaia  wa  sarki  kamar  da  su-ka-yi.
Sarki  ya  ba  shi  lada  tasa,  ya  kara  masa  keauta.
Ya  che,  '  Maganinsa  ke  nan.' Shi  kua  maatarsa
ta  yi  kokari,  ta  dauko  tsani,  ta  kawo  masa,
ya  sabka. Da  zuansa  gida,  sai  ya  8  tatara  kayansa,
ya  komo  chikin  gari. Ya  che,  '  Klshi-na
ya  jawo  mani  haka,  idan  ina-nan,  mutane  su  halaka  ni.'
Shi  ke  nan. 9  Kungurus  kan  kusu.


went  his  way.  He  came,  (and)  told  the  chief  what  they  had
done.  The  chief  gave  him  his  reward,  and  added  to  his  gifts.
He  said,  'That's  the  medicine  he  required.'  As  for  the
(jealous)  man,  his  wife  with  difficulty  lifted  the  ladder,  (and)
brought  it  to  him,  (and)  he  descended.  On  his  return  home
he  collected  all  his  goods,  (and)  returned  (to  live)  in  the  town.
He  said, '  My  jealousy  dragged  me  into  this  ;  if  I  remain  here,
people  will  destroy  me.'  That  is  the  story.  Off  with  the
rat's  head.


•**&**#


254  STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  15


No.  15.

Wanan  tatsuniar  samari  che,  aboki  da  aboki.

Wadansu  yara  su-ka-yi  abuta ;  su-na  nan  tare  ba  su

rabua. Su-na  da  buduri(n)su  kauye. Kulum  su  kan  tafi  tare,

su  dauko  su. Ranan  dan  uwansa  bai  je  ba,  sai  guda

daia  l  ya  tafi  dauko  2  budurin. Da  ya  je,  ya  dauko  buduri. Shi-na-

-zakua,  sai  su-ka-gamu  da  zaki,  sai  ya  taushe  budrua  guda,

sai  shi  kua,  ya  zare  takobi,  ya  sare  kan  zaki.

Zaki  ya  mutu,  ya  tada  budrua  ba  ta  mutu  ba,  sai  ya  che  ta  kwanta  karkashin

zaki  tare  da  shi,  guda  kua  ta  je,  ta  gaia  wa  abokinsa.

Sai  ta  che, '  To.' Ta  sheka  da  gudu,  ta  iske  shi  3  ya  fara  kwana.

Ta  tashe  shi,  ya  che,  *  Ana  wane  da  wanche  ? ' Ta  che, '  Su-na-chan,

zaki  ya  kashe  su.1 Sai  ya  tashi,  bai  dauki  komi  ba,

ya  tafi,  ya  je,  ya  tarda  zaki,  shi-na  bisansu. Bai  yi  shawara  ba,

sai  ya  zabura,  ya  hau  bissa  zaki. Shi-na-che  mai-rai  ne,  ashe  matache  ne.

Sai  abokinsa  ya  tashi  ya  che, '  Tashi  wane,  4  ka  chika  da.' Sai  su-ka-tada

budrua,  su-ka-tafo  gida. To,  chikinsu  wa  ya  fi  wani  ? Idan  ba  ka  sani  ba,

shi  ke  nan. 5  Kungurus  kan  kusu.


This  story  is  about  some  young  men  who  were  friends.  Some  boys
made  a  covenant  of  friendship ;  they  lived  together,  (and)  were  inseparable.
They  had  their  maidens  in  an  outlying  village.  Always  they  used  to  go
together  (and)  bring  them.  On  one  occasion,  one  of  his  friends  did  not
go,  so  only  one  went  to  bring  the  maidens.  When  he  went,  he  brought
back  the  maids.  (As)  they  were  going  along,  they  met  a  lion ;  and  it
knocked  down  and  lay  on  one  of  the  girls,  but  he,  he  drew  his  sword  and
cut  at  the  lion's  head.  The  lion  died,  and  he  found  the  maiden  was  not
dead.  And  he  told  her  to  lie  down  beneath  the  lion  along  with  him,  and
one  of  them  was  to  go  and  tell  his  friend.  So  she  consented,  (and)  ran  off
(and)  found  he  has  begun  to  sleep.  She  roused  him,  (and)  he  said,  '  Where
are  So-and-so  and  So-and-so  ? '  And  she  said, '  They  are  out  there,  a  lion
has  killed  them.'  And  he  rose  up,  he  did  not  take  anything  with  him,
he  went  along  and  came  and  reached  (where)  the  lion  was ;  it  was  above
them.  He  did  not  hesitate,  but  sprang  and  climbed  on  the  lion.  He
thought  it  was  alive.  Truly  it  was  dead.  Then  his  friend  rose  up  and
said,  '  Rise,  So-and-so,  you  have  proved  yourself  (a  free-born)  man.'  So
they  lifted  up  the  maiden  (and)  went  home.  Now  among  them  who  was
better  than  another  ?  If  you  do  not  know,  there  it  is.  Off  with  the  rat's
head.


« *  «;r  Lr«'i».^1iS

i  ml  iffllfi1T''"  •=?/•*•*,


^;4;.^4^.^j^


Ji


256 STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  16

No.  1 6.

Wanan  tatsunlar  gwanaye  che. l  Gatanan,  gatanan.

Wani  sarki z  ya  haifu  dlansa  uku  maza. Ranan  fada-

-nchi  ya  taru,  ya  che  shi  shi-na-so  shi  gani  gwani

chikinsu. Akwai  wata  gawurtata  kuka  fagashin

sarki. Ya  che  shi-na-so  su  hau  dawaki,  su  zo,

su  gwoda  gwaninta,  wurin  kuka  nan. Sai  su-ka-hau

algarmu,  su-ka-tafi  da  msa. Babansu  ya  yi

sukua,  ya  zo,  ya  nashi  kuka  nan  da  mashi. Mashi

ya  zarche, 3  ya  bi  ta  kafar  mashi  nan  da  dokinsa,  ya  wuche.

Ma-bi  baban  ya  tafo. Da  ya  kusa  da  kuka,  sai

ya  kinkimi  dokinsa,  sai  ya  tsalache  kuka.

Da  autansa  ya  yi  sukua  ya  zo,  sai  ya  chire


This  story  is  about  a  (test  of)  skill.  A  story,  a  story.
A  certain  chief  begat  children,  three  males.  One  day  his
councillors  assembled.  He  said  he  himself  wished  to  see  the
most  skilled  among  them.  There  was  a  huge  baobab  tree
(near)  the  entrance  to  the  chief's  house.  He  said  he  wanted
them  to  mount  (their)  horses,  (and)  come  (and)  show  their
skill,  where  this  baobab  tree  was.  So  they  mounted  their
chargers,  (and)  went  far  away.  The  eldest  galloped  (and)
came,  (and)  thrust  that  baobab  with  (his)  spear.  The  spear
went  right  through  and  he  followed,  passing  through  the
hole  made  by  the  spear,  with  his  horse.  And  he  passed  on.
The  next  to  follow  the  eldest  came  on.  When  he  was  near
to  the  baobab  tree  he  lifted  his  horse  (on  the  bit)  and  jumped
the  baobab.  When  the  youngest  galloped,  he  came,  (and)
pulled


>  *

*»-.*  *?-,  •" ^ /•£•«*• iiL**ii/T

^S^ili^^^

^<f  5^_»  >_ -.. >.•*-


(^^U^^^^'^

^  t^j^  AMBW^


...,  - >«


258  STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  16

kuka  duka  da  sauyanta,  ya  je,  ya  yi  ma  ubansu

jinjina. Sai  4  guda  ta  gama  wuri. Yanzu

tanbaya  ka  na  ke  yi,  chikinsu  wa  ya  fi. Idan  ba  ka  sani  ba,

shi  ke  nan. 5  Kungurus  kan  kusu.


up  the  whole  baobab,  roots  and  all,  and  came  on  waving  it
aloft  at  his  father,  and  the  place  rang  with  applause.  Now
I  ask  you  who  excelled  among  them.  If  you  do  not  know,
that  is  all.  Off  with  the  rat's  head.


4


260 STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  17

•  •

No.  17.

Wanan  tatsunlar  Gishiri  che,

da  l  Daudawa,  da  Nari,  da  2  Gabu,

da  Tankua,  da  3  Daudawar

batso.

4  Gatanan,  gatanan,  ta  je,  ta  komo. Gishiri,  da  Daudawa,
da  Nari,da  Gabu,da  Tankua,da  Daudawar  batso,  su-ka-ji  labari
wani  sarmayi,  sunansa  Daskandarmi. Shi  kua
sarmayi  ne  mai-chau  (keau),  dan  Iblisai  ne. Su-ka-tashi
su-ka-zama  buduri  masuchau,  su-ka-tafi.  Da  5zaa  su,  Daudawar
batso  6  ta  bi  su. Su-ka-kore  ta  su-ka-che  ta-na  da  wari.
Sai  ta  7  make,  har  su-ka-tafi,  ta  dinga  binsu  baya
baya,  har  su-ka-kai  gurin  wani  rafi. Su-ka-tarda
tsofua,  ta-na- wanka. Ta  che,  su  chuda  mata  ba-
-yanta,  sai  wanan  shi  che,  '  Ala  shi  tsare  ni  in  dauki  hanu  na


This  story  is  about  Salt,  and  Daudawa  (sauce)  and  Nari
(spice),  and  Onion-leaves,  and  Pepper  and  Daudawar-batso
(a  sauce).  A  story,  a  story !  Let  it  go,  let  it  come.  Salt,  and
Daudawa,  and  Ground-nut,  and  Onion-leaves,  and  Pepper,
and  Daudawar-batso  heard  a  report  of  a  certain  youth,
by  name  Daskandarini.  Now  he  was  a  beautiful  youth,  the
son  of  the  evil  spirit.  They  (all)  rose  up,  (and)  turned  into
beautiful  maidens,  (and)  they  set  off.  As  they  (Salt,  Onion-
leaves,  &c.)  were  going  along,  Daudawar-batso  followed
them.  They  drove  her  off,  telling  her  she  stank.  But  she
crouched  down  until  they  had  gone  on.  She  kept  following
them  behind,  until  they  reached  a  certain  stream.  (There)
they  came  across  an  old  woman ;  she  was  bathing.  She  said
they  must  rub  down  her  back  for  her,  but  this  one  said,  '  May
Allah  save  me  that  I  should  lift  my  hand


^S5&4JWI^


furor***


i*fcW*#*K /<MV

^™ ^  ^^


^/  >^


262  STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  17

in  taba  bayan  tsofua.' Sai  tsofua  ta  8  kyale.
Su-ka-wuche,  aka-jima,  Daudawar  batso  ta  zo,  ta  ishe  ta,
ta-na-wanka. Ta  gaishe  ta,  ta  amsa,  ta  che,  '  Yarinya,
ina  zaa  ki  ? '  Ta  che, '  Zaa  mu  wurin  wani  sarmayi  ne.'  Ta  che, '  Chuda  mani
bayana.' Sai  ta  che,  '  To.' Ta  tsaya,  ta  chuda  ta  da  chau.
Tsofua  ta  che,  '  Ala  shi  yi  maki  albarka.' Ta  che,  '  Sarmayi  nan
da  ku  ke  zua  wurinsa,  kun  san  sunansa  ? ' Ta  che,
4  Aa  ba  mu  san  sunansa  ba.' Sai  tsofua  ta  che, '  Da-
na ne,  sunansa  Daskandarlni,  ama  kar  ki  gaya
masu.' Ita  kua  ta  kyale,  ta-na-binsu,  baya  baya,
har  su-ka-kai  wurin  yaro. Zaa  su  shiga. Sai  aka-che,
'  Ku  koma,  ku  shigo  daia  daia.' Su-ka-che. '  To.'
Su-ka-koma. Sai  Gishiri  ta  zo,  zaa  ta  shiga,


to  touch  an  old  woman's  back.'  And  the  old  woman  did  not  say  anything
more.  They  passed  on,  and  soon  Daudawar-batso  came,  (and)  met  her
washing.  She  greeted  her,  (and)  she  answered  (and)  said,  l  Maiden,  where
are  you  going  ? '  She  replied,  '  I  am  going  to  where  a  certain  youth  is.'
(And)  she  (the  old  woman)  said,  '  Rub  my  back  for  me.'  '  She  said,
'  All  right.'  She  stopped,  (and)  rubbed  her  back  well  for  her.  The  old
woman  said,  *  May  Allah  bless  you.'  And  she  said,  '  This  youth  to  whom
you  are  (all)  going  to,  have  you  known  his  name  ? '  She  said,  '  No,  we  do
not  know  his  name.'  Then  the  old  woman  said,  '  He  is  my  son,  his  name
is  Daskandarini,  but  you  must  not  tell  them.'  Then  she  ceased.  She  was
following  them  far  behind  till  they  got  to  the  place  where  the  boy  was.
They  were  about  to  enter,  but  he  said,  '  Go  back,  (and)  enter  one  at
a  time.'  They  said,  '  It  is  well,'  and  returned.  And  then  Salt  came
forward,  (and)  was  about  to  enter,


264 STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  17

aka-che, 4  Wanene  nan  ? ' Ta  che,  '  Ni  che.' « Ke  che  wa  ? ' » Ni  che

Gishiri,  mai  mia  da  zaki.' Su-ka-che, '  Wanene  sQ-

-na  na  ? ' Ta  che, '  Ban  san  sunanka  ba  dan  yaro,

ban  san  sunanka  ba.' Aka-che,  '  Koma  da  baya

yarinya,  koma  da  baya.' Ta  koma. Sai  Dau-

-dawa  ta  zo. Zaa  ta  shiga  aka-che,  *  Wacheche  ? ' Ta  che, '  Ni  che.'

4  Ke  che  wa  ? Wane  sunanki  ? ' '  Sunana  Daudawa,

mai-mia  da  dadi.' Sai  ya  che,  *  Wane  sunana  ? ' Ta  che,

4  Ban  san  sunanka  ba  dan  yaro,  ban  san  sunanka  ba.1

Ya  che, 4  Koma  da  baya  yarinya,  koma

da  baya.' Ta  koma,  ta  zamna. Sai  Nari  ta  taso,

ta  zo. Zaa  ta  shiga  sai  aka-che,  '  Wanene  nan  ya-

-rinya  ? Wanene  nan  ? ' Ta  che, 4  Ni  che  ke  gaisua  dan  yaro,

when  she  was  addressed  with,  *  Who  is  there  ? '  She  said,  '  It  is
I.'  '  Who  are  you  ? '  '  It  is  I,  Salt,  who  make  the  soup  tasty.'  They
(he)  said,  4  What  is  my  name  ? '  She  said,  4 1  do  not  know  your  name,
little  boy,  I  do  not  know  your  name.'  Then  he  said,  4Go  back,
little  girl,  go  back.'  She  turned  back.  So  Daudawa  came  forward.
When  she  was  about  to  enter,  she  was  asked,  '  Who  are  you  ? '  She
said,  4  It  is  I.'  4  Who  are  you  ?  What  is  your  name  ? '  '  My  name  is
Daudawa,  who  makes  the  soup  sweet.'  And  he  said,  '  What  is  my
name  ? '  She  said,  4 1  do  not  know  your  name,  little  boy,  I  do  not
know  your  name.'  He  said,  'Turn  back,  little  girl,  turn  back.'  She
turned  back,  (and)  sat  down.  Then  Nari  (spice)  rose  up  and  came
forward,  (and)  she  was  about  to  enter  when  she  was  asked,  4  Who  is
this  little  girl  ?  Who  is  this  ? '  She  said,  4  It  is  I  who  greet  you,
little  boy,


-jtffcMi


J.


J^>*-1^^'ycyty&


266 STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  17

ni  che  ke  gaisua.' '  Wane  sunanki  yarinya,  wane

sunanki  ? ' '  Sunana  Nari,  mai-mia  da  gardi.'

' 9  Na  ji  naki  suna  yarinya,  na  ji  naki

suna,  fadi  nawa  suna.' Ta  che,  '  Ban  san  sunanka  ba

dan  yaro,  ban  san  sunanka  ba  dan  yaro  ban  san  su-

-nanka  ba.' *  Koma  da  baya  yarinya,  koma

da  baya.' Sai  ta  koma,  ta  zamna. Sai  Gabu

ya  taso,  sai  ya  kuna  kai. Aka-che,  '  Wanene  nan  yarinya,

wanene  nan  ? ' '  Ni  che  ke  gaisua  dan  yaro,  ni  che

ke  gaisua.' Wane  sunanki  yarinya,  wane

sunanki  ? ' *  Sunana  Gabu,  dan  yaro,

sunana  Gabu,  mai-mia  da  kamshi.' Ya  che,  '  Naji

naki  suna  yarinya,  ina  nawa  suna  ? '

it  is  I  who  greet  you.'  '  What  is  your  name,  little  girl,  what
is  your  name  ? '  '  My  name  is  Nari,  who  makes  the  soup
savoury.'  '  I  have  heard  your  name,  little  girl,  I  have  heard
your  name.  Speak  my  name.'  She  said,  '  I  do  not  know
your  name,  little  boy,  I  do  not  know  your  name.'  'Turn
back,  little  girl,  turn  back.'  So  she  turned  back,  (and)  sat
down.  Then  Onion-leaves  rose  and  came  up,  and  she  stuck
her  head  (into  the  room)  and  was  asked,  '  Who  is  this  little
girl,  who  is  this  ? '  *  It  is  I  who  salute  you,  little  boy,  it  is
I  who  salute  you.'  'What  is  your  name,  little  girl,  what
is  your  name  ? '  '  My  name  is  Onion-leaves,  who  makes  the
soup  smell  nicely.'  He  said,  '  I  have  heard  your  name,  little
girl.  What  is  my  name  ? '


x

y  _  f


.\4U>a:.  •


•o
>^^>^^^ui*

(y^^^^^;.^


,  Sj^^^JlijfejJtt^fJffJ&UJjWLj

W'  * *c/  O  ^-'{J  "^  **


^^- -^^  •»»•

^y;^-Hf4^»4r^
$^u.%Ai£^$fc!4Lj


268 STORIES ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  17

Ta  che,  '  Ban  san  sunanka  ba  dan  yaro,  ban  san  sunanka  ba.'

'  Koma  da  baya  dan  yard,  koma  da  baya.' Sai

ta  koma. Sai  Tankua  ya  zo,  ya  che, '  Gafaran  10  kudai  dan  ya-

-ro,  gafara  kudai.' Aka-che, '  Wanene  nan  ? ' Ya  che, '  Ni  che,

Tankua  dan  yaro,  ni  che  tankua,  mai-mia  da  yaji.'

'  Na  ji  naki  suna  yarinya,  na  ji  naki

suna,  fadi  nawa  suna  yarinya,  fadi  nawa

suna.' '  Ban  san  sunanka  ba  dan  yaro,  ban  san  su-

-nanka  ba.' Aka-che,  '  Koma  da  baya  yarinya,  ko-

-ma  da  baya.' Sauran  Daudawar  batso,  sai  aka-che,

'  Ke  ba  ki  zua  ? ' Ta  che,  *  Mu  tafi  gida,  mutanen  kirki

sun  tafi,  ankoro(n)su,  bale  ni  mai-wari.' Aka-che,

She  said,  '  I  do  not  know  your  name,  little  boy,  I  do  not
know  your  name.'  '  Turn  back,  little  boy  (girl),  turn  back.'
So  she  turned  back.  Now  Pepper  came  along;  she  said,
4  Your  pardon,  little  boy,  your  pardon.'  She  was  asked  who
was  there.  She  said, '  It  is  I,  Pepper,  little  boy,  it  is  I,  Pepper,
who  make  the  soup  hot.'  'I  have  heard  your  name,  little
girl,  I  have  heard  your  name.  Tell  (me)  my  name,  little
girl,  tell  (me)  my  name.'  *  I  do  not  know  your  name,  little
boy,  I  do  not  know  your  name.'  He  said,  'Turn  back,
little  maid,  turn  back.'  There  was  only  left  Daudawar-batso,
and  they  said,  '  Are  not  you  coming  ? '  She  said,  '  Can  I  enter
the  house  where  such  good  people  as  you  have  gone,  (and)
been  driven  away?  Would  not  they  the  sooner  (drive)  me
out  who  stink  ? '  They  said,


STORIES ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  17
*  Tashi,  ki  tafi.' Sai  ta  tashi,  ta  je. Aka  che,  '  Wanene  nan
yarinya  wanene  nan  ? ' Sai  ta  che,  '  Ni  che  ke  gaisua
dan  yaro,  ni  ke  gaisua.' '  Kaka  sunanki  yarinya,
kaka  sunanki  ? ' '  Sunana  Batso,  dan  yard,
sunana  Batso,  mai-mia  da  wari.' Aka-ka  che,  '  Na  ji
naki  suna  yarinya,  na  ji  naki  suna,
sauran  nawa  suna.' Ta  che,  '  Daskandarmi  da-
-n  yaro,  Daskandarmi.' Sai  aka  che,  '  Shigo.'
Aka-shinfida  mata  n  killshi,  aka-ba  ta  tufafi,
aka-ba  ta  takalmin  zinaria,  dada  sai
wadan  da  ke  12  koran  ta  wanan  shi  che. * 13  Naa  dinga
yi  maki  shara.' Wanan  shi  che,  '  Naa  dinga  yi  maka  daka.'


'  Rise  up  (and)  go.'  So  she  got  up  (and)  went.  He  asked
her,  '  Who  is  there,  little  girl,  who  is  there  ? '  And  she  said,
4  It  is  I  who  am  greeting  you,  little  boy,  it  is  I  who  am
greeting  you.'  '  What  is  your  name,  little  girl,  what  is  your
name  ? '  '  My  name  is  Batso,  little  boy,  my  name  is  Batso,
which  makes  the  soup  smell.'  He  said,  '  I  have  heard  your
name,  little  girl,  I  have  heard  your  name.  There  remains
my  name  to  be  told.'  She  said,  '  Daskandarini,  little  boy,
Daskandarini/  And  he  said,  '  Enter.'  A  rug  was  spread
for  her,  clothes  were  given  to  her,  and  slippers  of  gold  ;  and
then  (of)  these  who  had  driven  her  away  one  said,  4I  will
always  sweep  for  you ' ;  another,  *  I  will  pound  for  you.'


c^4^^*^5

N^-?-WJrf^^

.  cr  >^>< jr/i iJ, »°

^%.U^*  tj^jAjiLsAIa^iSLMMljwX

h  **«  ^^^y 4&.

*^r %%  ^  ^^r^r


t^fi^ta^M^


O  |


272  STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  17

Wanan  shi  che, 4  Naa  dinga  yi  maki  dauka  rua.'  Wanan  shi  che,
'  Naa  daka  maki  mia.' Wanan  shi  che, '  Naa  tuka  maki
tuo.' Su  duka  su-ka-zama  u  kuyanginta. Domin
hakanan,  idan  ka  gani  mutum  talaka  ne,  kar
ka  rena  shi ;  ba  ka  sani  ba  wata  rana  shi  fi  ka.
Shi  ke  nan. 15  Kungurus  kan  kusu.


Another  said,  '  I  will  see  about  drawing  water  for  you ' ;  and
another,  '  I  will  pound  (the  ingredients)  of  the  soup ' ;  and
another,  '  I  will  stir  the  food.'  They  all  became  her  hand-
maids. And  the  moral  of  all  this  is,  if  you  see  a  man  is  poor
do  not  despise  him ;  you  do  not  know  but  that  some  day  he
may  be  better  than  you.  That  is  all.  Off  with  the  rat's
head.


ro °— • * *"
. -  I  ^  ?. lY <•» A


^^^J.^^^

^-.^-^U.'.i^J^.^U^

^fc  d^6.V^J-^^^


274 STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  18

No.  1 8.

Wanan  tatsuniar  l  Musa  che.

2  Gatanan,  gatanan,  ta  je,  ta  komo. Wani  sarki 3  ya  haifi
dlansa  guda  biu,  da  mache  da  namiji. Su-ka-girma.
Aka  ba  ta  miji,  ita  mache,  ta  che  ba  ta  so,  sai  wanta
ta  ke  so. Idan  aka-che,  ta  je,  ta  kirawo  Musa,  sai
ta  je,  ta  che,  ' 4  Wane  wai  ka  zo.' Hakanan  kulum,  ranan
sai  wanta  ya  che,  ' 5  Naa  yi  maganinsa.' Akwai  wata  korama
garinsu,  yara  na  wanka  child,  idan  rana  ta  yi ;
akwai  wani  itache  tsakan  korama  garin  nasu,
buduri  na  danri  bante  ne. Sai  Musa  ya  6  kyale,
saada  su-ka-zo,  sun  shiga  achikin  rua,  su-na-wanka,
su-ka-aje  bantunansu  gefe,  sai  ya  zo  ya  kwa-
-che  duka,  ya  je,  ya  hau  itachen  tsakan  7  ruan


This  story  is  about  (a  boy  called)  Musa.  A  story,  a
story.  Let  it  go.  Let  it  come.  A  certain  chief  begat
children,  two  in  number,  a  girl  and  a  boy.  They  grew  up.
A  husband  was  found  for  her,  the  daughter,  (but)  she  said
she  did  not  want  him ;  only  her  big  brother  she  loved.  If
she  was  told  to  go  and  call  Musa,  then  she  went,  (and)  said,
'  What's-your-name,  they  say  you  are  to  come.'  And  it  was
always  so,  (till)  one  day  her  brother  said,  '  I  shall  cure  her
of  that.'  (Lit.  I  shall  make  its  medicine.)  There  was  a  small
stream  at  their  village,  the  children  used  to  bathe  in  it  when
the  sun  was  up ;  there  was  a  tree  in  the  middle  of  the  stream
at  their  village  where  the  girls  used  to  fasten  their  little  loin-
cloths. And  Musa  waited  in  the  meantime.  When  they  had
come  (and)  entered  the  water  (and)  bathed  they  laid  aside
their  loin-cloths  at  the  water's  edge.  Then  he  (Musa),  came
and  took  them  all  away,  and  went  and  climbed  the  tree  in  the
middle  of  the  water


"**
i  •  «*• *•>  /  •'


,  T •  «*  *•  «

<*  <A)»  fl  •**>«».  h  Li  <La  .-

' /M  -7^ ty^


•«

o

r»r


» «  -  ^f  A  -I  **»  £•/-  ?•»•-•  •»  •

:.p>^f(^iLiisUU^.:.^


•  M  7 1  •» A^^a  » •  *-g  k-§  J  ^  *^  *•  ZK-^**  -^J*  •  j


^^^\J LJ' ^".OT"


>0o?


276 STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  18

tsatsakin  ruan,  kowa  ya  fito  bai  gani  bantensa  ba,

sal  shi  dinga  kuka. Sai  Musa  kua  shi-na  bisa,  shi-na-

-gani,  har  su  duka  su-ka-fito,  ya  che,  '  Ku  duka  ga

bantunanku  wurina,  kowa  ya  kirayi  sunana

naa  ba  shi  bantensa,  idan  ba  hakanan  ba ;  ba  ni  ba  ku.'

Sai  wata  ta  zo,  ta  che,  '  Kai ;  Musa,  kai  Musa,  Musa

8  gaia,  Musa  dan  sarakai,  domin  Ala  Musa  ba  ni

bantena.' Sai  shi  ba  ta. Hakanan  hakanan  har  su  duka

su-ka-karbi  bantunansu. Sauran  kanua  tasa.

Sai  aka-che,  '  Tafi  ki  karbi  bantenki.' Ruan  kua

iyakan  idanun  sau  shi  ke. Sai  ta  shiga  9  ruan,

ta  che,  '  Kai  Musa,  Musan  gaia  Musa  dan  sara-

-kai  domin  Ala  Musa  ba  ni  bantena.' Sai  Musa  ya  che,


(middle  of  the  water),  each  one  who  came  out  did  not  see  his
(her)  cloth,  whereupon  he  (she)  began  to  cry.  And  Musa  was
up  above  and  watching  till  they  all  came  out.  He  said,  'All
of  you,  see,  your  cloths  are  with  me.  Whoever  calls  out  my
name,  I  will  give  him  (her)  his  (her)  cloth ;  otherwise  I  will
not  give  you.'  Then  one  girl  came  forward.  She  said,
'  You,  Musa,  you,  Musa,  Musa  the  spiteful  one,  Musa  the  son
of  chiefs,  for  Allah's  sake,  Musa,  give  me  my  loin-cloth.'
And  he  gave  her  (it).  And  so  on,  and  so  on,  until  they  all
received  from  him  their  cloths,  and  there  was  only  left  his
little  sister.  And  she  was  told,  'Go  and  get  your  cloth.'
Now  the  water  was  up  to  the  ankles.  Then  she  entered  the
water  (and)  said,  '  You,  Musa,  Musa,  the  spiteful  one,  Musa
the  son  of  chiefs,  for  Allah's  sake,  Musa,  give  me  my  loin-
cloth.' But  Musa  said,


278 STORIES ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  18

1  Ba  ni  ba  ki  sai  kin  kara  fadi,  saanan  in  ba  ki.' Ashe

ta  manche  ne  da  ta  tuna  sai  ta  che,  '  Kai  wane,  kai  wane

wanen  gaia,  wane  dan  sarakai,  domin  Ala  wane

ba  ni  bantena.' Sai  ya  che,  ' 10  Na  ki  ba  ki,  na  ki  ba  ki,

sai  kin  che,  Kai  Musa,  kai  Musa,  Musan  gaia,  Mu-

-sa  dan  sarakai,  domin  Ala  Musa  ba  ni  bantena.'

Sai  nan  da  nan  rua  ya  kama  mata  kwobri. Sai  ta  che,

4  Kai  wane,  kai  wane,  wane(n)  gaia,  wane  dan  sar-

-akai,  domin  Ala  wane  ba  ni  bantena.' Sai  rua

ya  kama  ta  ga  katara. Sai  Musa  ya  che,  '  Na  ki  ba  ki

sai  kin  che,  Kai  Musa,  Musan  gaia,  Musa

dan  sarakai,  domin  Ala  Musa,  ba  ni  bantena.'


*  I  do  not  give  it  to  you  till  you  have  said  it  again,  then  I  will
give  it  to  you.'  Now  she  has  forgotten  (for  a  minute  that  she
would  not  say  his  name) ;  when  she  remembered,  then  she  said,
•You,  What's-your-name,  you,What's-your-name,What's-your-
name  the  spiteful  one,  What's-your-name  the  son  of  chiefs,  for
the  sake  of  Allah,  What's-your-name,  give  me  my  cloth.'  But
he  said, '  I  have  refused  to  give  you,  I  have  refused  to  give  you,
till  you  say,  You,  Musa,  you,  Musa,  Musa  the  spiteful  one,
Musa  the  son  of  chiefs,  for  the  sake  of  Allah,  Musa,  give  me
my  cloth.'  Now  by  this  time  the  water  was  up  to  her  shins.
Then  she  said,  'You,  What's-your-name,  you,  What's-your-
name,  What's-your-name  the  spiteful  one,  What's-your-name
the  son  of  chiefs,  for  Allah's  sake,  What's-your-name,  give  me
my  loin-cloth.'  But  now  the  water  had  reached  her  thighs.
But  Musa  said,  4 1  have  refused  to  give  you  unless  you  have
said,  You,  Musa,  Musa  the  spiteful  one,  Musa  the  son  of
chiefs,  for  the  sake  of  Allah,  Musa,  give  me  my  cloth.'


L0f:f"%£


28o STORIES  ABOUT PEOPLE. No.  18

Ta  che,  '  Kai  wane,  kai  wane,  wanen  gaia,  wane  dan  sara-

-kai,  domin  Ala  wane  ba  ni  bantena.' Sai  Musa

ya  che,  '  Na  ki  ba  ki,  na  ki  ba  ki  sai  kin  che,  Kai  Mu-

-sa,  kai  Musa,  Musan  gaia,  Musa  dan  sarakai

domin  Ala  Musa  ba  ni  bantena.' Sai  ma  ya  kama  ta

ga  kirji. Sai  ta  che,  '  Kai  wane,  kai  wane,  wanen  gaia,

wane  dan  sarakai,  domin  Ala  wane  ba  ni  bantena.'

Sai  Musa  ya  che,  '  Na  ki  ba  ki,  sai  kin  kirayi  su-

-nana.' Sai  rua  ya  kama  ta  ga  wia. Aka-che,  '  Ke  fadi

sunansa,  idan  ba  ki  fadi  ba  rua  n  yaa  chi  ki.'

Rua  kua  shi-na  kokari,  shi  kama  ta  ga  haba,

sai  ta  che,  '  Kai  Musa,  kai  Musa,  Musan  gaia


She  said,  'You,  What's-your-name,  you,  What's-your-name,
What's-your-name,  the  spiteful  one,  What's-your-name  the  son
of  chiefs,  for  the  sake  of  Allah,  What's  your  name,  give  me  my
loin-cloth.'  But  Musa  said, '  I  have  refused  to  give  you,  I  have
refused  to  give  you,  unless  you  say,  You,  Musa,  you,  Musa,  Musa
the  spiteful  one,  Musa  the  son  of  chiefs,  for  the  sake  of  Allah,
Musa,  give  me  my  cloth.'  And  the  water  reached  to  her
breasts,  but  she  said,  '  You,  What's-your-name,  you,  What's-
your-name,  What's-your-name,  the  spiteful,  What's-your-
name  the  son  of  chiefs,  for  Allah's  sake,  What's-your-name,
give  me  my  cloth.'  But  Musa  said,  '  I  have  refused  to  give
you  till  you  have  called  out  my  name.'  And  the  water  was
up  to  her  neck.  And  they  said,  '  Speak  his  name ;  if  you  do
not  speak  the  water  will  swallow  you  up.'  Now  the  water
was  trying  hard  to  reach  her  chin.  Then  she  said,  'You,
Musa,  you,  Musa,  Musa  the  spiteful  one,


^-^fe^j^!^te^

i^y^^^ffi^:
t^&4i*4&<*i*'A&t


-^4'fe-F*^^®^^2^^


282 STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  18

Musa  dan  sarakai  domin  Ala  Musa  ba  ni  bantena.'
Sai  ya  che,  '  Kara  fadi.' Ta  fadi. Ya  che,  '  Kara.' Ta  kara  bar  uku.
Ya  che,  '  Kii  kara  fadi  ni  mijinki  ? ' Ta  che,  '  Aa.'
4  Ki-na  so  mijin  da  aka-ba  ki  ? ' Ta  che,  4  I.' Mafari
ke  nan,  wa  ba  shi  auren  kanua. Shi  ke  nan.
12  Kungurus  kan  kusu.


Musa  the  son  of  chiefs,  for  the  sake  of  Allah,  Musa,  give  me  my
cloth.'  But  he  said,  'Repeat  it.'  She  said  it  (again).  He  said,
'Again.'  She  repeated  it,  until  three  times.  He  said,  'Are  you
going  to  say  again  that  I  am  your  husband  ? '  She  said,  '  No.'  '  Do
you  want  the  husband  whom  you  have  been  given?'  She  said,
4  Yes.'  This  was  the  beginning  (of  the  custom)  that  a  brother  should
not  marry  his  sister.  That  is  all.  Off  with  the  rat's  head.


,y^gfr^j>&p*^

Jfr^^fy&l*$&ty


284  STORIES ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  19

No.  19.

Wanan  tatsunlar  mahalbi  che

da  sarki.

Wani  mutun  ne,  ba  shi  da  aiki  komi  sai  halbi,
da  shi  da  dansa. Ranan  su-ka-tafi  daji,  da  dansa,
ba  su  samu  komi  ba,  sai  kusu. Sai
dansa  l  ya  yada  kusu. Sai  su-ka-ji  yunwa. Uban
ya  che,  ' 2  Gasa  muna  kusunmu,  mu  chi.' Yaro  ya  che,
'  Ai  3  na  yas.' Uban  ya  che,  '  Ka  ga  dan  durun  uwa.'
Uban  ya  dauki  gatari,  ya  buge  yaro,
ya  suma. Ya  4  tafia(r)sa,  ya  bar  shi. Yaro
ya  falka,  ya  tashi,  ya  tafo  gida  da  dare.
Ya  iske  sun  yi  kwana,  sai  ya  shiga  da-
-kinsa,  ya  dauki  tarkachensa,  ya  kama  hainya,


This  tale  is  about  a  hunter  (lit.  a  shooter)  and  a  chief.
There  was  once  a  certain  man  who  had  no  other  work
but  hunting,  both  he  and  his  son.  One  day  (he)  they  went
to  the  bush  with  his  son.  They  did  not  find  anything  but
a  rat,  and  his  son  threw  the  rat  away.  But  they  became
hungry  (and)  the  father  said,  '  Roast  our  rat  for  me,  (and)  let
us  eat.'  The  boy  said,  'Oh,  but  I  have  thrown  it  away.'
The  father  said,  ' .  .  . '  (cursing  him),  (and)  the  father  lifted
(his)  axe  and  struck  the  boy;  he  fainted.  He  (the  father)
went  his  way,  (and)  left  him.  The  boy  came  round,  he  rose
up,  and  went  home  by  night.  He  found  them  asleep,  so  he
entered  the  room  and  lifted  his  belongings.  He  took  the
road,


•2^A/£4:.«32


-tj^-ft,"^-^


286  STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  19

shi-na-zua  wani  gari. Da  ya  kai  gari  da  dare,  sai

ya  shiga  chikin  gari. Kowa  ya  yi  kwana.

Shi-na-tafia  chikin  gari  har  ya  kai  gidan  sarki.

Ya  shiga  har  chikin  gida,  funtu,  babu  rlga,

babu  wando. Sai  ya  tada  sarki. Sarki

ya  che,  '  Daga  ina  ? ' Ya  che,  '  Daga  gari  kaza.1 Sai  sarki

ya  che,  '  Lafia  ? ' Yaro  ya  che,  '  Da  ni  da  ubana  mu-ka-je

daji  yawo  halbi,  ba  mu  samu  komi,  sai

kusu  guda  daia,  ya  ba  ni  riko,  na  manche  shi

wani  wuri. Da  mu-ka-ji  yunwa  sai  ya  che,  Kawo  kusu,

mu  gasa,  mu  chi. Sai  na  che,  Na  yashe  shi  ban  sani  ba.

Sai  ya  yi  fushi,  ya  dauki  gatari,  ya  buge  ni,

na  suma. Da  mareche  ya  yi,  sai  na  falka  na  tashi,


(and)  was  going1  to  a  certain  town.  When  he  reached  the
town  it  was  night ;  he  entered  into  the  town.  Every  one  was
asleep.  He  proceeded  into  the  middle  of  the  town  until  he
reached  the  chief's  house.  He  entered  until  he  was  right
in  the  house,  (he  was)  naked,  without  clothes,  without  trousers,
and  he  met  the  chief.  The  chief  said,  '  From  where  ? '  (And)
he  replied,  '  From  such  and  such  a  village.'  And  the  chief
said,  '  Is  it  well  with  you  ? '  The  boy  said,  '  Both  I  and  my
father  went  to  the  bush  to  walk  and  shoot.  We  did  not  find
anything  but  one  single  rat,  he  gave  (it)  me  to  keep,  I  forgot
it  somewhere.  When  we  became  hungry,  then  he  said,
Bring  the  rat  that  we  may  roast  it  and  eat.  And  I  said,
I  have  dropped  it,  I  do  not  know  where.  Thereupon  he
became  angry.  He  lifted  his  axe  (and)  struck  me.  I  fainted.
When  evening  came  then  I  recovered  (and)  rose  up,


288  STORIES ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  19

na  zo  nan.' Sarki  kua  ya  je  yaki,  aka-kama  dansa

aka  yanke  shi. Sarki  ba  shi  da  da,  namiji. Sai  sarki

ya  che,  '  Yanzu  ba  ka  rufa  mani  aslri  ? ' Yaro  ya  che,  4  Rufin

asiri  kaman  kaka  ? Sarki  ya  che,  4  Ba  ni  da  da  namiji,

in  gari  ya  waye,  in  che  kai  dana  ne,  da  aka-kama

wurin  yaki,  ka  gudano,  ka  zo.' Yaro  ya  che,  4  Wanan

ai  ba  shi  da  wia.' Sarki  ya  shiga  daki,  ya  dauko

bindiga,  ya  buga  chikin  dare. Sai  6uwar  gidansa  ta  fito,  ta  che,

'  Alfanda  zaki  bada  razana,  bindigar  me  ka  ke  bugu

da  da  darenga  ? ' Sarki  ya  che, l  Wane  6  ya  zo.' Sai  uwar  gida

ta  rangada  7  guda. Sai  gari  ya  tashi  tsaye,  ana-che,

4  Menene  ya  faru,  gidan  sarki  ana-buga  bindiga

da  dadarenga  ? ' Aka-che  dan  sarki  ya  zo  wanda  aka-kama

(and)  came  here.'  Now  the  chief  had  gone  to  war,  and  his
son  had  been  captured  and  killed.  The  chief  had  no  male
child.  And  the  chief  said,  l  Now  will  you  not  keep  a  secret
for  me  ? '  The  boy  said,  '  What  kind  of  a  secret  ? '  The  chief
said,  '  I  have  no  male  child,  when  dawn  comes  I  shall  say  you
are  my  son,  who  was  caught  at  the  war,  and  that  you  ran
away  and  came  back.'  The  boy  said,  'That  is  surely  not
difficult.'  (Then)  the  chief  entered  his  room  (and)  took  up
his  gun  (and)  fired  it  (it  was)  in  the  middle  of  the  night.
And  '  the  mother  of  the  house  '  came  out  (and)  said,  4  King,
lion  who  causes  fear,  what  is  the  gun  you  are  firing  in  the
night  ? '  The  chief  said, 4  So-and-so  has  returned.'  Thereupon
the  mother  of  the  house  raised  the  sound  of  joy,  and  the  town
rose  up,  (and)  they  were  asking,  4  What  had  happened  at  the
chief's  house,  (seeing  that)  they  are  firing  a  gun  at  this  time
of  night  ? '  (And)  they  said  that  the  chief's  son  had  come,  he
who  had  been  caught


>>>^^i^Ur:.fr^^^£-J

^^^fcfi^t6^^4^FA^#.*


1425


u


290 STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  19

wurin  yaki.' Aka  che,  '  Madala,  madala.' Gari  ya  waye,

yaro  ya  yi  wanka,  sarki  ya  gama  masa

kaya,  ya  fito. Fadanchi,  wadansu  su-na-chewa,

'  Ba  dansa  ba  ne.' Wadansu  su-na-chewa, '  Dansa  ne.' Ranan

sai  sarakai  su-ka-gama  kai,  su-ka-che,  '  Ku  bari

mu  gani,  izan  dansa  ne.' Su-ka-gama  ma  diansu

kaya,  su-ka-damra  masu  sirida  bisa  angarmu,

su-ka-hau,  su-ka-che  masu, '  Ku  bi  gidan  sarki,

ku  kirayi  dansa,  ku  che  ku  tafi  kilisa.' (sk)

Su-ka-che, '  In  kun  je,  kun  yi  sukua,  in  kun  zame,

ku  sabka,  ku  sare  dawakin,  ku  komo  gida.'

Kowa  ya  ba  dansa  kansakali,  ya  rataya,

su  ka  je  gidan  sarki,  su  ka  kira  yaro. Ashe


at  the  war.'  And  they  said,  'Indeed!  indeed!'  When  it
was  dawn  the  boy  bathed  (and)  the  chief  gave  him  (gifts)
goods  (and)  he  came  forth.  (Among)  the  councillors  some
said,  '  It  is  not  his  son.'  Others  said,  '  It  is  his  son.'  Now
one  day  the  head-men  joined  their  heads  together,  (and)  said,
'  Wait,  and  we  shall  see  if  it  is  (really)  his  son.'  Then  they
added  goods  (presents)  to  those  their  children  already  had,
(and)  they  put  the  saddles  on  the  war-horses  for  them.  (And)
they  (the  children)  mounted,  (and  the  fathers)  said  to  them,
4  Go  to  the  chief's  house  and  call  his  son,  and  say  you  are
going  to  take  horse  exercise.'  And  they  said,  'When  you
have  gone  and  galloped  and  pulled  up,  you  must  dismount,
(and)  kill  your  horses,  (and)  come  home.'  (And)  each  one
gave  his  son  a  sword  (and)  he  slung  it  on  his  shoulder,  (and)
they  came  to  the  chiefs  house  and  called  the  boy.  Now
truly


292 STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  19

makwarmachi  ya  ji,  ya  je,  ya  gaya  ma  sarki.

Sarki  ya  yi  shiri  ya  aje  ya  che,  '  Funtu  ya  yi

rawa,  bale  mai-riga.' Sarki  ya  kirayi  yaro,

ya  fada  masa,  ya  che, '  In  kun  je,  komi  ka  gani

sun  yi,  kai  ma  ka  yi.1 Yau  yara  su-ka-zo,  su-ka-kirayi

dan  sarki,  su-ka-tafi. Da  su-ka-je,  su-ka-yi  sukua,

sai  su-ka-sabka,  su-ka-sare  dawaki. Yau

dan  sarki,  shi  ma  ya  yi  suka,  ya  zame,

ya  sabka,  ya  sare  dokinsa. Su-ka-komo  gida.

Sai  sarakai  su-ka-che, '  Karia  ne,  gobe

ku  koma,  gari  ya  waye  su-ka-zo,  su-ka-kira  shi.'

Sarki  ya  sa  dogarai,  su-ka-damra  masa

sirdi  bisa  baban  doki,  su-ka-tafi. Da  su-ka-je


some  tale-bearer  has  overheard,  (and)  he  went  and  told  the
chief.  The  chief  made  similar  preparation  (horse,  &c.)  and
put  the  things  aside,  (and)  said,  '  If  the  naked  man  can  dance,
much  more  can  the  man  with  the  cloak.'  The  chief  called  the
boy,  (and)  told  him,  (and)  said, '  When  you  have  gone,  every-
thing you  see  they  have  done,  do  you  also  do.'  So  the  boys
came,  (and)  called  the  son  of  the  chief,  (and)  they  set  off.  As
they  went  they  galloped ;  then  they  dismounted  (and)  killed
their  horses.  So  the  son  of  the  chief  he  too  galloped,  pulled
up,  dismounted,  (and)  killed  his  horse.  They  went  home.
And  the  head-men  said,  '  It  is  a  lie,  to-morrow  you  go  back.'
When  it  was  dawn  they  came  (and)  called  him.  The  chief
caused  (his)  body-guard  to  fasten  the  saddle  on  a  great  horse
for  him.  They  went  off;  as  they  went


fi^M


294 STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  19
su-ka-yi  sukua. Sai  su-ka-sasabka, 8  su-ka-sasare
dawakinsu. Dan  sarki,  shi  kuma  da  ya  yi  suk(u)a,
sai  ya  sare  dokinsa,  su-ka-komo  gida.
Sai  sarakai  su-ka-bai  diansu  bayi,  buduri
masu-chau,  su-ka-che,  '  Ku  tafi  da  su  chikin  daji,
ku  sasare  su.' Makwormachi  ya  je,  ya  kwormata
ma  sarki,  sai  sarki  ya  ba  dansa  9  kuyangi
blu,  ya  che,  '  Ku  tafi,  komi  ka  gani  sun  yi,
kai  ma  ka  yi.' Su-ka-tafi  daji,  yan  sarakai
su-ka-sasare  kuyanginsu,  dan  sarki
shi  kuma  ya  sasare  nasa,  su-ka-komo
gida. Sai  su-ka-che  dansa  ne. Ana-nan,


they  galloped.  Then  they  dismounted,  (and)  killed  their
horses.  The  chiefs  son  also,  when  he  had  galloped,  then
he  killed  his  horse,  (and)  they  returned  home.  Then  the
sub-chiefs  gave  their  sons  slaves,  beautiful  maidens,  (and)
said,  'Take  them  to  the  midst  of  the  bush  (and)  slaughter
them.'  The  tale-bearer  (again)  went  and  informed  the  chief,
and  the  chief  gave  his  son  two  female  slaves,  he  said,  '  Go,
whatever  you  see  they  have  done,  do  you  do  too.'  They
went  to  the  bush.  The  sons  of  the  head-men  killed  their
female  slaves  (and)  the  chief's  son  also  killed  his,  (and)  they
returned  home.  And  they  said,  '  It  is  his  son.'  And  so  time
went  on,


'^^^fi^^f^.

^^^^^l^&^^S


^j^tofct^^;^

;.t_£&iixi  *»>ffiA»  r4ii£#

'  /  ' x^^X  " V J A


>


296 STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  19

sai  ranan  uban  yaro  ya  zo,  shi-na-rataye  da  kwori.

Ya  iske  fadanchi,  ya  chika,  sai  ya  wuche  har

gaban  sarki,  ya  gaishe  su. Yaro  na  zamne.

Sai  ya  che,  '  Ba  ka  tashi,  mu  je,  mu  yi  ginan  kusanmu  ? '

Yaro  shi  na  kurum. Sai  sarki  ya  tashi,  ya  shiga

gida,  ya  kiraye  su,  ya  che,  '  Mahalbi  ka  rufa  mani

asiri,  komi  ka  ke  so  naa  ba  ka.' Mahalbi

ya  Ida. Sarki  ya  yi  lalashi,  sarki  ya  che,  4  Komi

na  dunianga  10  naa  baka  dari  dari.' Sai  mahalbi

ya  kia. Sarki  ya  che,  '  Ku  damra  mani  sirdi.'

Aka-damra  sirdi,  aka-damra  ma  yaro  sirdi,  sarki

ya  ba  yaro  takobi,  ya  rataya. Su-ka-tafi


till  one  day  the  boy's  father  came ;  he  was  carrying  his  quiver
slung.  He  met  the  councillors ;  he  heard  all  he  wished  to
know,  (and)  then  passed  on  till  (he  came)  before  the  chief.
He  greeted  them ;  the  boy  was  sitting  (by  his  side) ;  and  he
said,  '  Are  you  not  going  to  get  up  that  we  may  go  and  dig
for  our  rats  ? '  The  boy  was  silent.  Then  the  chief  rose  up,
(and)  entered  the  house,  (and)  called  them.  He  said,  '  Hunter,
keep  the  secret  for  me,  and  whatever  you  wish  I  will  give
you.'  The  hunter  refused.  The  chief  entreated  him.  The
chief  said,  'Everything  in  the  world  I  will  give  you,  one
hundred  of  each.'  But  the  hunter  refused.  The  chief  said,
4  Saddle  up  for  me.'  They  saddled,  they  saddled  (a  horse)
for  the  boy.  The  chief  gave  the  boy  a  sword,  (and)  slung  it
across  his  shoulder.  They  went  off


:,


298 STORIES ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  19

daji. Sarki  ya  tsaya,  ya  che  ma  yaro,  ' n  Au  ka  sare  ni,
ka  dauki  kayanga,  ka  ba  ubanka,  ku  koma
gari,  ku  chi  duniarku,  au  ka  sare  ubanka,
ni  da  kai  mu  koma,  mu  zamna.' Yaro  ya  yi  barkatai.
To  in  kai  ne  Bature,  chikinsu,
wa  zaa  ka  sarewa  chikinsu  ?
In  ba  ka  san  wanda  zaa
ka  sare  ba,
shi  ke  nan.
12  Kungurus  kan  ku-
-su.


to  the  bush.  The  chief  halted  (and)  said  to  the  boy,  '  Either
you  kill  me,  (and)  take  these  goods  (horse,  &c.),  (and)  give  to
your  father,  (and)  return  to  the  town,  (and)  enter  into  your
(kingship)  world,  or  you  kill  your  father,  (and)  you  and
I  will  go  back  and  live  (as  before).'  The  boy  was  distracted,
(not  knowing  what  to  do).  Now  if  it  were  you,  O  white  man,
among  them  whom  would  you  kill  ?  If  you  do  not  know
whom  you  would  kill,  there  it  is.  Off  with  the  rat's  head.


C?*/*^


300 STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  20

No.  20.

Wanan  tatsunlar
duma  che  da  yarinya
Wani  mutum  ne,  sunansa  Alabarma,  atajiri.

Shi-na  da  kurdi  dayawa,  bai  samu  haifua  ba.

*

Sai  chikin  sadakunsa,  wata  ana-che  mata  Watapansa,

ita  che  l  ta  haifi  dia  guda  daia,  mache,  shi  kua

Alabarma  ba  shi  so  abinda  ke  taba  yarinya

nan. Ita  kua  yarinya  sunanta,  Furaira.

Yau  ranan  uwa  tata  ta  goya  ta,  su-ka-tafi  daji

domin  ta  yi  torotso. Sai  Furaira  ta  ga

dan  dume  guda  daia,  shi  ke  nan  gare  ta,  babu

wani  kuma. Sai  ta  che,  '  Alabarma,  tsumke  mani  dan  dume


This  is  a  story  about  a  pumpkin  and  a  maiden.  There
was  a  certain  man  by  name  Alabarma,  a  rich  man.  He  had
much  money,  (but)  he  had  not  any  children.  But  among  his
concubines  was  one  called  Watapansa,  (and)  she  had  given
birth  to  one  daughter ;  and  he,  Alabarma,  did  not  wish  any-
thing to  touch  this  little  girl.  Now  the  girl's  name  was
Furaira.  And  one  day  her  mother  took  her  on  her  back  and
they  went  off  to  the  bush  in  order  that  she  might  ease  herself.
And  Furaira  saw  one  young  pumpkin,  that  was  all  she  (the
mother  pumpkin)  had;  there  was  not  another.  And  she,
(the  little  girl)  said,  '  Alabarma  (Watapansa  ?)  pluck  the  baby
pumpkin  for  me


302  STORIES ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  20

in  yi  wasa.1 Sai  Alabarma  ta  che,  '  Haba  Furaira

kaka  dan  dume  guda  daia  shi  ke  nan,

ga  uwa(r)sa,  ni  ke  tsumkewa,  in  ba  ki.' Sai  Furaira

ta  rika  kuka,  sai  uwa  tata  Alabarma

ta  che,  '  Idan  ki  yi  kuka  ne,  sai  ki  yi,  ama

ba  ni  tsumke  dan  dume  guda  dai  in  ba  ki.'

Su-ka-zo  gida,  yarinya  ta-na-kuka.

Ubanta  ya  tanbaya,  uwa  ta  gaya  masa

mafari. Sai  uban  yarinya  ya  che,  '  Koma,

ki  tsumke,  ki  ba  ta.' Yau,  ta  koma,

ta  tsumke,  ta  ba  ta. Ana-nan,  sai  ranan

dan  dume  ya  rika  bin  yarinya,  shi-na-

-fadi, '  Nama  in  chi  Furaira,  nama  in  chi.'


to  play  (with).'  But  Alabarma  (Watapansa?)  said,  'Come
now,  Furaira,  how  is  this?  One  solitary  baby  pumpkin  is
there.  See,  there  is  its  mother,  (which)  I  will  pluck  and  give
you.'  But  Furaira  began  to  cry  and  her  mother  Alabarma
(Watapansa  ?)  said,  '  If  you  are  going  to  cry  you  must  just
cry,  but  I  am  not  going  to  pluck  the  solitary  baby  pumpkin
to  give  you.'  They  returned  home,  (and)  the  little  girl
continued  weeping.  Her  father  asked  (the  cause).  Her
mother  told  him  from  the  beginning.  And  the  little  girl's
father  said,  '  Go  back,  (and)  pluck  (it),  and  give  to  her.'  So
she  returned,  (and)  plucked  it,  (and)  gave  her.  Then  that
day  the  baby  pumpkin  commenced  to  follow  the  maiden.  It
kept  saying,  '  Meat  I  must  eat,  Furaira,  meat  I  must  eat.'


fi^j^frtostyfrti

:-&*it  *^%4i&^^&^


(j^^^^4^j^

(^ ^fe-ttygg*&Lgf

G


-f  -!?  .iljf


^.\^^:^V^4;.^L

jjt^^^Ufciii^4^

X>  ;._


304 STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  20
Sai  aka-zo,  aka-shaida  masa,  aka-che,  l  Ga  Furaira
dan  dume  na-bin  ta,  shi-na-che,  wai  nama  shi  chi.'
Alabarma  ya  che,  '  Aje  chikin  akuyoyi.' Aka-kai  shi
chikin  akuyoyi,  ya  chinye. Aka-kai  shi  ga  wadansu,
ya  chinye,  hakanan  har  ya  chinye  garken  awaki
dari  uku  da  hamsin. Sai  dume  ya  komo,
shi-na-fadi,  '  Nama  in  chi  Furaira,  nama  in  chi.1
Aka-zo,  aka-fada  ma  ubanta,  sai  ya  che,  '  Akai-shi
garken  tumaki.' Aka-kai  shi,  ya  chainye
garke  dare  bakwoi  na  tumaki,  ya  komo,
shi-na-bin  yarinya,  shi-na-fadi,  '  Nama  in  chi  Furaira,
nama  in  chi.' Sai  aka-che,  ' 2  Ya  chainye  garken


And  they  came  and  bore  witness  to  him  saying,  'Look  at
Furaira,  the  baby  pumpkin  is  following  her  (and)  saying  he
must  eat  meat.'  Alabarma  said,  '  Put  it  among  the  goats.'  It
(the  pumpkin)  was  put  among  the  goats.  It  ate  them  up.
It  was  taken  to  some  others.  It  ate  them  up.  And  so  on  till
it  had  devoured  three  hundred  and  fifty  flocks  of  goats.  But
the  pumpkin  returned  and  said,  '  Meat  I  must  eat,  Furaira,
meat  I  must  eat.'  They  came  and  told  her  father  and  he  said,
4  Let  it  be  taken  to  the  sheep-fold.'  It  was  taken,  and  ate  up
a  flock  of  seven  hundred  sheep.  It  came  back,  (and)  kept
following  the  maiden,  (and)  saying,  '  Meat  I  must  eat,  Furaira,
meat  I  must  eat.'  And  they  said,  4  It  has  eaten  the  flock  of


i.  ~8L*Lajj££5£&*


i^, i£r« /.>« T*


ajJ.^.uJf.IJ.Aa^.'.^W
w  s««-' ^^  x^


sL^^^JSj^M


1425


306 STORIES ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  20

tumaki, 3  ya  komo,  shi-na-bin-ta.' Ubanta  ya  che,
'  Akai  shi  garken  shanu.' Aka-kai  shi  garken
shanu,  ya  chainye  garken  shanu  duka.
Ya  komo,  shi-na-bin  yarinya,  shi-na-fadi, '  Nama
in  chi  Furaira,  nama  in  chi.1 Sai  aka-zo,
aka-gaya  ma  ubanta,  sai  shi  kuma  ya  che,  '  Akai -shi
garken  rakuma.' Aka-kai  shi  garken  rakuma,
sai  ya  chainye,  ya  komo,  shi-na-bin  yarinya,
shi-na-fadi, '  Nama  in  chi  Furaira,  nama  in  chi.'
Sai  ya  che,  'Akai-shi  gidan  bayi  ? ' Akai-shi  gida-
-n  bayi,  ya  chainye-su,  ya  komo,  shi-na-bin  yarinya,
shi-na-fadi,  l  Nama  in  chi  Furaira,  nama  in  chi.'


sheep,  (and)  has  come  back  and  is  following  her  (the  maiden).'
Her  father  said,  '  Let  it  be  taken  to  the  cattle  kraal.'  It  was
taken  to  the  cattle  kraal.  It  ate  up  the  whole  kraal  of  cattle.
It  returned,  (and)  was  following  the  maiden  (and)  saying,
'  Meat  I  must  eat,  Furaira,  meat  I  must  eat.'  And  they  came
and  told  her  father,  and  he  again  said,  '  Let  it  be  taken  to  the
camel  kraal.'  It  was  taken  to  the  camel  kraal;  but  it  ate
them  up,  (and)  returned.  It  was  following  the  maiden  (and)
saying,  'Meat  I  must  eat,  Furaira,  meat  I  must  eat.'  And
they  said,  'Let  it  be  taken  to  the  slaves'  quarters.'  It  was
taken  to  the  slaves'  quarters,  it  ate  them  up ;  it  returned,  (and)
was  following  the  maiden,  (and)  saying,  'Meat  I  must  eat,
Furaira,  meat  I  must  eat.'


308  STORIES  ABOUT PEOPLE. No.  20

Ubanta  ya  che,  '  Ku  kai  shi  ruga.1 Aka-kai  shi  ruga,

ya  chainye  mutanen  ruga,  ya  komo,  shi-na-fadi,

*  Nama  in  chi  Furaira,  nama  in  chi.' Hakanan

har  ya  chainye  mutane  duka,  shanu,  akuyoyi

tumaki,  rakuma,  dawaki,  duka  ya  chainye,

hata  kaji,  zabi,  agwagwa,  tantabara,

duka,  sauran  mai-gida  kadai. Sai  ya  bi  yarinya,

sai  ta  gudu,  ta  bi  ubanta,  sai  ubanta  ya  che,

'  Babu  komi  kuma  sai  ni  kadai,  idan  ni

4zaa  ka  chi,  dauke  ni,  ka  chi.' Sai  dan  dume  ya  dauke  shi,

ya  hade. Sai  ya  bi  yarinya,  ta  gudu,  ta  je

wurin  rago  lahia  ubanta. Sai  ya  je,  zaa  shi  kama  (ya)

Her  father  said, '  Take  it  to  the  cattle  grazing  ground.'  They
took  it  to  the  grazing  ground  (and)  it  devoured  all  the  people
on  the  ground,  (and)  came  back,  (and)  said, '  Meat  I  must  eat,
Furaira,  meat  I  must  eat.'  And  so  on,  until  it  ate  up  all  the
people,  cattle,  goats,  sheep,  camels,  horses,  all  it  devoured,
even  the  fowls,  guinea-fowls,  ducks,  pigeons,  everything  (and)
there  remained  only  the  master  of  the  household.  And  it
(the  pumpkin)  followed  the  maiden,  and  she  ran,  (and)  went
after  her  father,  and  her  father  said,  '  There  is  nothing  left  but
I  myself.  If  it  is  I  you  would  eat,  take  me,  (and)  eat  me.'
And  the  baby  pumpkin  took  him  up  and  swallowed  him ;
then  it  followed  the  maid.  She  fled,  and  came  to  the  paschal
ram  of  her  father's.  And  it  came  on,  (and)  was  about  to
seize


3io  STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  20

yarinya,  sai  ragon  lahia  ya  zabura,
ya  buga  dan  dume  da  kafo. Sai  ya  pashe,
sai  tumaki,  da  akuyoyi,  da  shanu,  duka
su-ka-rika  fitowa. Shi  ke  nan. 5  Kunguru-
-s  kan  kusu.


the  maiden,  but  the  paschal  ram  sprang  forward,  (and)  struck
the  young  pumpkin  with  his  horn.  And  thereupon  it  split
open,  and  sheep,  and  goats,  and  cattle,  all  kept  coming  forth.
That  is  all.  Off  with  the  rat's  head.


3i2  STORIES ABOUT PEOPLE. No.  21

No.  21.
Wanan  tatsunlar  gawo  che

da  yarinya.

Wani  mutun  ne,  ana- che  masa  malam  Umaru  mijin
1  Ladi. Shi-na  da  2matansa  bm,  wanan,  Mowa,  wanan,
Baura. Su  duka  su-na  da  yayansu,  mata.
Wanan  Mowa  nan,  kulum,  idan  3  ta  yi  shara,
sai  ta  ba  dianta,  ta  kai  gun  gawo,  ta  zubar.
Gawo  kua  shi-na  da  wani  abu  kamar  chibi,
idan  yarinyar  nan  ta  kai  shara,  sai  ta  taba,
ta  che,  '  Gawo  da  chibi.' Kulum  hakanan
ta  ke  yi. Ranan  ta  je,  ta  zuba  shara,  sai  ta  taba.


This  story  is  about  a  'gawo '-tree  and  a  maiden.  There
was  a  certain  man,  by  name,  Doctor  Umaru,  the  husband  of
Ladi.  He  possessed  two  wives,  one  (called)  Mowa,  one
(called)  Baura.  They  both  had  children,  girls.  The  one
called  Mowa,  always,  if  she  has  swept,  then  she  used  to  give
(the  sweepings)  to  her  daughter,  (and)  she  took  them  to
where  the  gawo-tree  was  and  threw  (them)  away.  Now  the
gawo-tree  had  some  growth  on  it  that  looked  like  a  person's
navel,  and  if  this  maiden  took  the  sweepings  (there)  she  used
to  touch  (it)  and  say,  '  The  gawo-tree  with  the  navel.'  And  it
was  always  so  she  used  to  do.  One  day  she  went,  (and)
threw  out  the  sweepings,  (and)  then  touched  (the  mark).


3H STORIES ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  21

Sai  gawo  ya  chire,  ya  bi  ta,  shi-na-fadi,

'  Da  safe,  gawo  da  chibi,  da  yama  gawo

da  chibi.' Sai  yarinya  ta  sheka,  gawo

ya  bi  ta. Taje,  ta  iske  masu-shibka,

su-ka-che,  '  Ke  yarinya  me  ya  faru  ? ' Ta  che, '  Wani  abu  ne

ke  bii  na.' Su-ka-che, 4  Zamna  nan  har  shi  zo.

Mu  dauki  abin  shibka,  mu  bubuge  shi,  mu  kashe.'

Aka-jima  kadan  sai  gawo  ya  zo,  shi-na-

-fadi,  '  Da  safe  gawo  da  chibi,  da  yama  gawo

da  chibi.' Sai  masu-shibka  su-ka-che,

'  Yarinya  kara  gaba.' Sai  yarinya

ta  sheka,  ta  je,  ta  iske  masu-noma,

sai  su-ka-che,  '  Ke  yarinya  me  ya  faru  ? '


But  the  gawo-tree  pulled  himself  out  (of  the  ground)  (and)
followed  her,  (and)  was  saying,  '  Of  a  morning  it 's,  The  gawo-
tree  with  the  navel ;  of  an  evening  it 's,  The  gawo-tree  with
the  navel.'  Then  the  maiden  ran  away,  (and)  the  gawo-tree
followed  her.  She  came  (and)  met  some  people  sowing,  (and)
they  said,  'You,  maiden,  what  is  the  matter?'  She  said,
'  Something  is  following  me.'  (And)  they  said,  l  Sit  down
here  till  it  comes.  We  will  take  the  sowing  implements,
(and)  beat  him  (and)  kill  (him).'  They  waited  a  little  and
then  the  gawo-tree  came  along.  He  was  saying,  '  In  the
morning  it 's,  The  gawo-tree  with  the  navel ;  in  the  evening
it 's,  The  gawo-tree  with  the  navel.'  Thereupon  the  sowers
said,  *  Maiden,  go  further  on.'  And  the  maiden  ran  on.  She
came  and  met  some  people  hoeing,  and  they  said,  '  Maiden,
what  is  the  matter  ? '


316  STORIES ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  21

Sai  ta  che,  '  Wani  abu  ke  bii  na.' Su-ka-che,  '  Tsaya  nan

shi  zo,  ko  hauyomu  ba  mu  dauki,  mu  4  bubuge  shi,

mu  kashe  ? ' Aka-jiraa,  sai  gawo  ya  tafo,

shi-na-fadi,  '  Da  safe  gawo  da  chibi,  da  yama

gawo  da  chibi,  yau  kl  ga  gawo  da  chibi.'

Sai  su-ka-che, '  Yarinya  kara  gaba.' Sai  ta  kara

gaba,  ta  je,  ta  iske  masu-fuda,  su-na-

-fuda,  sai  su-ka-che, '  Ke  yarinya  me  ya  farii  ? '

Ta  che, '  Wani  abu  ke  bii  na.' Sai  su-ka-che, '  Zamna

nan  har  shi  zo.' Aka-jima,  sai  gawo

ya  tafo,  shi-na-fadi,  '  Da  safe  gawo  da

chibi,  da  yama  gawo  da  chibi,  yau  kl  ga


And  she  said,  '  Something  is  following  me.'  (And)  they
said,  '  Stand  here,  let  him  come.  Can  we  not  then  lift  our
hoes,  (and)  hit  him,  (and)  kill  (him)  ? '  They  waited  a  little
while,  then  the  gawo-tree  came  towards  them ;  he  was  saying,
'  In  the  morning  it 's,  The  gawo-tree  with  the  navel ;  in  the
evening  it 's,  The  gawo-tree  with  the  navel ;  to-day  you  see
the  gawo-tree  with  the  navel.'  And  they  said,  *  Maiden,  pass
on.'  So  she  passed  on,  and  went  and  met  some  people
ploughing.  They  were  ploughing,  and  they  said,  'You,
maiden,  what  is  the  matter?'  She  replied,  'Something  is
following  me.'  And  they  said, '  Sit  down  here  till  he  comes.'
In  a  little  while,  then  the  gawo-tree  came  up ;  he  was  saying,
'  In  the  morning  it 's,  The  gawo-tree  with  the  navel ;  in  the
evening  it 's,  The  gawo-tree  with  the  navel.  To-day  you  see


= Mf^tgk^\i^1$jjL&,

—  » •_"*/•'/  _•


3i8  STORIES ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  21

gawo  da  chibi.' Sai  su-ka-che,  '  Yarinya  kara  gaba.'

Sai  yarinya  ta  sheka. Sai  ta  je  ta  iske  kadangare,

shi-na-saka,  shi-na-fadi,  '  Kiryan,  ba  kiryan  ba,

zarta  dama,  zarta  hagu.' Sai  ya  che. '  Ke  yarinya

ina  zaa  ki,  ki  na  gudu  ? ' Ta  che, '  Wani  abu  ke  kora  na.'

Ya  che, '  Tsaya  nan  har  shi  zo.' Yarinya  ta  labe  gun

kadangare,  shi-na-fadi, '  Kiryan,  ba  kiryan  ba,

zarta  dama,  zarta  hagu.' Har  gawo  ya  zo,  shi-na-fadi,

'  Da  safe  gawo  da  chibi,  da  yama  gawo  da  chibi,

yau  ki  ga  gawo  da  chibi.' Sai  yarinya  ta  che,

'  Ga  shi  chan  zakua.' Sai  kadangare  ya  che,

'  Bari  shi  zo,  ama  in  ya  zo,  ina-raba  ki  da  shi,

ki-na-amre  na  ? ' Ta  che,  *  I.' Yau,  sai  gawo  ya  zo.


the  gawo-tree  with  the  navel.'  Thereupon  they  said,  '  Maiden,
pass  on.'  So  the  maiden  ran  on.  Then  she  came  (and)  met  a
lizard  ;  he  was  weaving  and  was  saying,  '  Kiryan,  not  kiryan,
throw  to  the  right,  throw  to  the  left  (of  the  shuttle).'  And
he  said,  *  You,  maiden,  where  are  you  going  (that)  you  are
running  (so)  ? '  She  said,  '  Something  is  pursuing  me.'  He
said, '  Wait  here  till  it  comes.'  The  maiden  nestled  close  up
to  the  lizard,  (who)  was  saying,  '  Kiryan  not  kiryan,  a  cast
to  the  right,  a  cast  to  the  left,'  until  the  gawo-tree  came  up.
He  was  saying,  '  In  the  morning  it 's,  The  gawo-tree  with  the
navel,  in  the  evening  it 's,  The  gawo-tree  with  the  navel ;
to-day  you  see  the  gawo-tree  with  the  navel.'  And  the
maiden  said,  '  See,  there  he  is  coming.'  And  the  lizard  said,
'  Let  him  come,  but  if  he  has  come,  (and)  I  save  (lit.  separate)
you  from  him,  are  you  going  to  marry  me  ? '  She  said,
'  Yes.'  Now  the  gawo-tree  came  up.


_  -. S  «-*  • r»  _


320 STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  21

Ya  che,  '  Ina  ajiana  ? ' Kadangare  ya  che,

4  Wani  ajla  ka  ba  ni  ? ' Gawo  ya  che,  4  Yarinya  nan,

da  ke  bayanka.' Kadangare  ya  che,  l  Wanan  ya-

-rinya  ta  fi  harfinka.' Sai  gawo

ya  che,  '  Kadangare  karanbani  gareka.' Sai

kadangare  ya  che, '  Ai  namiji  tonka  ne,

sai  antaba,  akan-san  mai-yaji.' Sai

gawo  ya  yi  fushi,  ya  kama  kadangare,

ya  hade,  sai  ya  fito  ga  idanun  gawo.

Sai  ya  kuma  kama  shi,  ya  hade,  sai  ya  fito

ga  kunuwansa. Sai  ya  kuma  kama  shi,  ya  hade,

sai  ya  fito  ga  kirjinsa. Sai  ya  kuma  kama  shi,

ya  hade,  kadangare  ya  fito


He  said,  4  Where  is  the  thing  I  gave  you  to  keep  for  me  ? '
The  lizard  said,  l  What  did  you  give  me  ? '  The  gawo-tree
replied,  4  The  maiden  who  is  behind  you.'  The  lizard  said,
4  This  (maid)  is  stronger  than  you.'  And  the  gawo-tree  said,
'  Lizard,  you  are  forward.'  But  the  lizard  replied,  '  Ah !
A  man  is  like  the  little  red  peppers,  not  till  you  have  touched
(tasted)  them  do  you  know  how  hot  they  are.'  Then  the
gawo-tree  got  angry.  He  seized  hold  of  the  lizard.  He
swallowed  him,  but  he  came  out  of  the  gawo-tree's  eyes.
Then  he  caught  him  again  (and)  swallowed  him,  but  he  came
out  at  his  ears.  Then  he  caught  him  again  and  swallowed
him,  but  he  came  out  of  his  breast.  Then  he  caught  him
again  and  swallowed  him,  but  the  lizard  came  out


H?%


•^  -I f Q

tfOx* /£?tf


**CTA


••^4*5


322  STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  21

ga  chiblarsa. Sai  gawo  ya  fadi,  ya  mutu.

Sai  kadangare  ya  che,  4  Tashi  in  rake  ki  gida.'

Sai  ta  tashi. Su-ka-je  gidansu,  ya  tsaya  bakin

kofar  gida,  ita  kua  ta  shiga  gida,  ta  yi

zamanta. Aka-tanbaye-ta,  '  Ina  ki  tafi  ? ' Ta  5  kyale. Sai

ubanta  ya  fito,  ya  iske  mutun  6  tsugune

kofar  gida. Sai  ya  che,  '  Lafia.' Ya  che,  '  Ni  da

yarinya  nan  mu-ka-zo,  kaji  kaji  wada

mu-ka-yi  da  ita.' Sai  ubanta  ya  che,  '  Ai  ba  ta  fadi  ba.'

Sai  ya  shiga  gida,  ya  gaia  ma  mata. Sai

aka-che,  '  Kaka  ki  zo,  ba  ki  fada  ba  ? ' Sai

ta  che,  '  Ala  shi  kyashe  ni,  in  amri  kadangare.'

Sai  ubanta  ya  koma  waje  daia,  ya  kirayi  Baura,


at  his  navel.  And  the  gawo-tree  fell  down  and  died.  And
the  lizard  said,  '  Rise  up,  and  I  shall  accompany  you  home.'
So  she  rose  up.  They  went  to  their  (her)  home.  He  (the
lizard)  stood  at  the  entrance  to  the  door  of  the  house,  but  she
entered  into  the  house  and  went  about  her  affairs.  They  asked
her,  *  Where  did  you  go  to  ? '  She  did  not  make  any  answer.
Then  her  father  came  out,  (and)  met  a  man  sitting  at  the
door  of  the  house.  And  he  said, '  Greetings.  Are  you  well  ? '
He  replied,  '  I  and  the  maiden  have  come,  and  so  on,  and  so,
and  so,  and  so  (relating  all  that  happened),  we  did  with  her.'
And  her  father  said,  *  Oh,  she  did  not  talk  about  (it).'  And
he  entered  the  house,  (and)  told  the  women.  Then  they  said,
«How  is  it  you  came  and  did  not  say  anything  about  it?'
And  she  said,  *  May  Allah  save  me  from  marrying  a  lizard.'
Then  her  father  went  aside,  (and)  called  Baura,


\


• •


324  STORIES  ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  21

ya  che, '  Ba  ki  ba  ni  dlarki  in  yi  keauta  da  ita  ? ' Sai  ta  che,

'  Haba  7  malam,  ina  da  dia  ? Ai  kai  ke  da  abinka,

kiraye  ta,  ka  yi  magana  da  ita.' 8  Sai  malam  ya  kirayi

yarinya,  ya  che, '  Ina-so  in  dauke  ki,  in  yi  keauta,

9  na  gaia  ma  uwarki,  ta  che  in  kiraye  ki,  in  gaia  maki.'

Ta  che,  ' 10  Asha  malam,  ai  ba  uwana  ke  da  ni  ba,  kai

kai  ke  da  ni,  ko  kare,  ko  naman  daji,  ka  dauke  ni,

ka  ba  shi,  shi  ke  nan.' Sai  ubanta  ya  che, '  Ala  shi  yi  maki

albarka.' Sai  ya  je,  ya  gaia  ma  kadangare. n  Ashe  dan

sarki  ne. Sai  ya  je  gida,  ya  gaia  ma  ubansa,

sai  ubansa  ya  che,  '  Madala.' Ya  bada  bawa  goma,  (k)

kuyanga  goma,  sania  goma,  komi  duka

goma  goma,  aka-kai  ma  ubanta. Kana  aka-bada

zanua,  aka-je  aka-damra  amre,  aka-kawo  amaria.


(and)  said,  'Will  you  not  give  me  your  daughter,  to  make
a  present  of  (to  the  lizard)  ? '  And  she  said,  '  As  for  that,
O  learned  one,  do  I  possess  a  daughter?  No,  you  are
a  master  of  your  own  property.  Call  her  (and)  speak  with
her.'  Then  the  Doctor  called  the  maiden,  and  said, '  I  wish
to  take  you  away  and  make  a  present  of  you.  I  have  told
your  mother,  (and)  she  said  I  must  call  you  (and)  tell  you.'
She  replied,  '  O  learned  father,  no,  it  is  not  my  mother  who
possesses  me,  it  is  you,  you  possess  me.  Be  it  a  dog  or
a  wild  beast,  take  me  and  give  to  him.  That  is  all  I  have
to  say.'  And  her  father  said,  '  May  Allah  bless  you.'  Then
he  came  and  told  the  lizard,  in  reality  he  was  a  chief's  son.
Then  he  went  home  (and)  told  his  father,  and  his  father  said,
4  Indeed ! '  And  he  gave  him  ten  slaves,  ten  female  slaves,
ten  cattle,  and  everything  imaginable,  ten  of  each,  and  took
them  to  her  (his  future  wife's)  father's.  Then  he  gave  her
clothes,  (and)  they  came  and  were  married,  (and)  he  took
away  his  bride.


326  STORIES ABOUT  PEOPLE. No.  21

Akwai  wani  bawa  ubansu,  sunansa  Albarka,  kuturu  ne,

sai  ya  je  gidansu,  ya  che  shi-na-so(n)  wachan,  da  aka-ba  kada-

-ngare,  ta  kia. Sai  uwanta  ta  che,  '  Me  ta  ke  yi  da  kuturu  ? '

Sai  diarta  ta  che, ' lz  Ina-sonsa,  dan  sarki  ne.' Sai  su-ka-che

anba  shi. Su-ka-damra  masu  amre,  har  aka-kai  ta  gida-

-n  miji,  gona,  ba  su  ga  kowa  ba,  har  ranan  kadangare

da  aka-ba  shi  maata,  diar  Baura,  sai  ya  che,  13  yaa  je  gewaiya

gona. Ya  hau  doki  da  kade  u  ana-guda,  su-ka-je,

ya  che,  '  Albarka  na  gida  ? ' Sai  ya  fito,  ya  gane  shi,  sai

ya  koma  da  gudu  gida,  ya  che,  '  Kawo  ma  dan  ubangijina,  rua.'

Sai 15  maatar  ta  che,  *  Ubangijinka  ? ' Ya  che,  *  I,'  *  Ashe  kai  bawa  ne  ? '

Ya  che,  '  I.' Ita  kua  ta-na-daka. Sai  ta  aje  tabaria,

ta-na  da  chiki,  sai  ta  shiga  daji. Mafarin  shiga  daji

ke  nan. 16  Kungurus  kan  kusu.


Now  their  (the  lizard's)  father  had  a  certain  slave,  by  name  Albarka,
a  leper,  and  he  went  to  their  house,  and  said  he  was  in  love  with  that
one,  whom  they  had  given  to  the  lizard  (and  who)  had  refused  him.
But  her  mother  said  to  her,  '  What  will  you  do  with  a  leper  ? '  But
her  daughter  said,  '  I  love  him,  he  is  the  son  of  a  chief,  (in  disguise).'
So  they  said  she  was  to  be  given  to  him.  They  were  married  (and
all  the  ceremonies  performed)  even  up  to  taking  her  to  her  husband's
home ;  it  was  in  the  fields.  And  (the  pair)  did  not  see  any  one,  till
one  day  the  lizard,  who  had  been  given  the  daughter  of  Baura  for
a  wife,  said  he  was  going  for  a  walk  round  the  farms.  He  mounted
his  horse  amid  clapping  and  sounds  of  joy.  They  came  (and)  he
said,  '  Is  Albarka  at  home  ? '  Then  he  (Albarka)  came  out  (and)  saw
him,  then  he  ran  back  in  haste  to  the  house  (and)  said,  '  Bring  out
water  for  my  master's  son.'  But  the  wife  said,  '  Your  master  ? '  He
replied,  l  Yes.'  '  You  are  indeed  a  slave  ? '  He  said,  '  Yes.'  Now  she
was  pounding,  then  she  put  down  the  pestle.  She  was  with  child.
Then  she  entered  the  bush.  That  was  the  first  person  who  went  to
the  bush  (became  mad).  That  is  all.  Off  with  the  rat's  head.


^


OXFORD:  HORACE  HART,  M.A
PRINTER  TO  THE  UNIVERSITY


' 43
I


x-s


o

6

DO


O


•d

!


Q)


f

<D  H

^  9

a,  I

I  ^

-p  (d


s ~

•< H


University  of  Toronto
Library


DO  NOT

REMOVE

THE

CARD

FROM

THIS

POCKET


Acme  Library  Card  Pocket

Under  Pat.  -Kef.  Index  File-
Made  by  LIBRARY  BUREAU
