Experiments on the Generation of Insects (Francesco Redi, 1668)
===============================================================
Francesco Redi — Esperienze intorno alla generazione degl'insetti (1668), translated by Mab Bigelow (1909). Public domain. Scan via Internet Archive (experimentsongen00redi).

THE  GENERATION  OF  INSECTS 


FRANCESCO  REDI 

From  a  medal  dated  1684  in  the  Stover  Collection 
of  the  Boston  Medical  Library. 


i^ 


Experiments 


ON  THE 


Generation  of  Insects 


FRANCESCO   REDI 

OF  AREZZO 


TRANSLATED  FROM  THE  ITALIAN  EDITION 
OF  1688  BY  MAB  BIGELOW 


CHICAGO 
THE  OPEN  COURT  PUBLISHING  COMPANY 

LONDON    AGENTS 

Kegan  Paul,  Trench,  Trubner  &  Co.,  L't'd. 
1909 


Copyright  by 
THE  OPEN  COURT  PUBLISHING  CO. 

1909 


CONTENTS 


PAGES 

Introduction. 

Life  of  Redi 5-8 

Significance  of  his  work 8-1 1 

Bibliography 13 

Experiments  on  the  Generation  of  Insects. 

Plea  for  the  experimental  method 19-21 

Historical  review 21-26 

Redi's  hypothesis 26-27 

Experiment  on  dead  snakes 27 

Experiments  with  various  meats 30 

Meat  placed  in  sealed  flasks 33 

Discussion   of   Kircher's   experiment 34 

Air  admitted  to  flask,  but  flies  excluded  by  a  net  .  .  36 
Criticism  of  previous  writers  and  description  of  an- 
cient beliefs  in  the  spontaneous  generation  of  bees  37-43 
Explanation  of  Biblical  story  of  bees  in  carcass  of  lion  44-45 
Digression  on  the  habits  of  bees  and  wasps  ....  46-50 
History  of  opinions  on  the  origin  of  scorpions     .     .  51-53 

Observations   on    scorpions 53-62 

Further  observations  disproving  spontaneous  generation  62-66 

Observations  on  spiders 66-72 

Experiments  with  cheese 73-75 

On  insects  appearing  in  fruits  and  vegetables     .     .     .  75-76 
Explanation  of  the  belief  that  animals  arise  from  mud 

and  soil 76-80 

Toads   that   appear   with   rain 80 

Refutation  of  the  belief  in  organisms  part  plant  and 

part  animal 81-85 

On  the  mantis.     Grafting  experiment 85-89 

Final  conclusions  on  the  breeding  of  flies  and  other 

wing  insects  in  dead  flesh,  fish,  plants,  and  fruits     .  89-90 

Occurrence  of  worms  in  living  fungi 90 

Liceto's   corpuscular  hypothesis 91 

Redi's  belief  in  heterogenesis  in  living  plants     ,      ,      ,  92-94 


/  L^  I  r 


CONTENTS 

PAGES 

Galls  and  gall  insects 94-95 

On  the  argument  that   the  lower  cannot  produce  the 

higher 95 

On  the  sensitiveness  of  plants 96-99 

Fruit  worms 99-102 

Butterflies,  their  metamorphoses  and  egg  laying     .      .  102-107 

Parasites  of  cabbage  butterfly 107 

Willow  galls 108-109 

No  other  caterpillars  produced  by  trees 109-113 

Internal   parasites 113-116 

Lice  and  other  external  parasites 1 16-125 

Conclusion 126 

Plates     127-155 

Index i57 


INTRODUCTION 

The  life  of  Francesco  Redi  centers  in  a  period  favor- 
able to  his  fame.  He  was  born  in  Arezzo,  Tuscany,  in 
1626,  sixteen  years  after  the  publication  of  Galileo's 
"  Sydereus  Nuncius  "  and  six  years  before  his  "  Dia- 
logues on  the  Ptolemaic  and  Copernican  Systems,"  at  a 
time  when  the  twenty  century  old  authority  of  Aristotle 
was  still  undiminished. 

The  speculative  philosophers  Bruno,  Campanella,  Va- 
rini,  and  Kepler,  all  critics  of  Aristotle,  prepared  the  way 
for  the  new  Master,  who  was  creator  as  well  as  critic. 
There  was  a  third  influence,  however,  to  be  considered : 
the  Jesuits  had  monopolized  all  branches  of  learning,  and 
had  made  Aristotle  their  own.     His  observations  pre- 
sented in  the  form  of  concrete  and  isolated  facts,  and 
especially   his   theories   concerning  the   stability   of   the 
earth  and  the  fixity  of  species,  were  not  subversive  of 
theological  doctrine,  hence  the  fathers  invoked  his  name 
to  clench  every  proposition.     But  the  Mathematician  put 
the  Biologist's  simple  ''  qualities  "  together  and  on  com- 
paring them  with  his    own    ascertained    "  quantities," 
found  new  values,  hence  new  truths.     The  combination 
of  mathematical  and  natural  science  was  formidable,  espe- 
cially when   expressed   in  the  vernacular;   the   Church, 
alarmed  by  Galileo's  "  Dialogues,"  demanded  his  abjura- 
tion. 

Redi  was  committed  early  to  the  care  of  the  Jesuit 
Fathers.      After   leaving   their   school   in   Florence,   he 

5 


6  GENERATION  OF  INSECTS 

studied  medicine  and  philosophy  at  the  University  of 
Pisa,  whence  he  returned  with  his  Doctor's  degree  to 
practice  in  Florence,  where  his  family,  meanwhile,  had 
settled.  His  parents  were  of  the  provincial  nobility,  and 
his  father,  Gregory,  a  well-known  physician,  supported  the 
family  by  his  profession.  Francesco  had  the  good  luck 
to  be  called  to  attend  the  Grand  Duke  after  a  hunting 
accident.  Subsequently  he  became  court  physician  and 
was  much  beloved  by  Ferdinand  II  and  by  his  son  and 
successor,  Cosimo  III.  This  prince  did  not  resemble 
his  magnanimous  father,  the  founder  of  the  Accademia 
del  Cimento,  for  he  did  not  protect  the  arts  and  sciences 
through  love  of  them,  but  rather  from  vanity  and  a  sense 
of  his  own  importance.  Cosimo  was  a  bigot,  whose  mind 
was  chiefly  occupied  in  prosecuting  religious  offenders 
or  in  settling  matters  of  etiquette.  Small  wonder  that 
Swammerdam  refused  an  invitation  to  this  Court,  or  that 
Steno,  his  friend,  who  accepted  it,  soon  afterwards  ab- 
jured Protestantism.  Redi's  training  admirably  fitted 
him  for  this  position,  which  was  a  difficult  one;  for  be- 
sides his  duties  as  physician  and  head  of  the  Medicean 
laboratory,  he  was  often  commanded  to  negotiate  minor 
diplomatic  matters  or  requested  to  act  as  mediator  when 
friction  occurred  between  the  Grand  Duke  and  his  son. 
He  was  obliged  to  follow  the  Court  in  its  migrations  to 
seaside  and  villa,  forced  to  interrupt  his  own  work,  and 
to  add  to  his  troubles,  his  nephews  (Redi  was  unmar- 
ried), who  through  his  influence  held  lucrative  positions, 
were  often  in  difficulties  of  a  compromising  nature. 

The  favor  accorded  to  Redi  by  Cosimo  caused  him  to 
be  courted  by  many  learned  men,  and  he  unselfishly  used 
his  privileges  for  the  benefit  of  his  numerous  friends, 
among  whom  were  the  poets  Filicaja  and  Menzini,  Bel- 


INTRODUCTION  7 

lini  the  physician,  and  Marchetti,  mathematician  and 
translator  of  Lucretius.  BelHni  wrote  of  him  to  Mal- 
pighi :     "  Everyone  burns  incense  to  the  Idol." 

Redi  never  failed  in  deference  to  the  Jesuits.  Father 
Segneri,  the  most  celebrated  orator  of  the  day,  v^^as  his 
close  friend,  and  to  Father  Kircher,  the  founder  of  the 
collection  in  the  Collegio  Romano,  is  inscribed  his  re- 
port on  ''  Various  Natural  Curiosities  brought  from  In- 
dia;" Redi  even  expressed  esteem  for  Father  Gottignes 
of  Brussels,  *'  a  mathematician,  who  disliked  algebra,  and 
an  astronomer,  who  contested  Cassini's  discoveries." 
This  constant  friendship  for  the  Jesuits  must  have  had 
a  maleficent  effect  on  our  Author's  mind,  as  it  exacted 
blind  faith  and  put  a  limit  to  his,  logic.  It  is  pleasanter 
to  think  of  his  relations  with  such  scientists  as  Borelli 
and  Magalotti,  to  the  latter  of  whom  the  ''  Observations 
on  Vipers  "  was  written  in  epistolary  form,  and  Carlo 
Dati,  to  whom  the  present  work  was  addressed ;  all  were 
of  the  Galilean  school  and  members  of  the  Accademia 
del  Cimento,  reorganized  in  1657  by  Leopoldo  Medici, 
Ferdinand's  brother,  for  the  purpose  of  investigating  the 
nature  of  things  according  to  Galileo's  experimental 
method.  Redi  was  also  a  member  of  the  Lincei,  the 
earliest  scientific  academy,  founded  at  Rome  in  1603, 
and  an  Arcadian,  under  the  patronage  of  Queen  Christina, 
of  Sweden.  He  was  arch  consul  of  the  famous  Ac- 
cademia della  Crusca,  created  to  preserve  the  purity  of 
the  Tuscan  language,  and  aided  in  compiling  the  third 
edition  of  its  dictionary. 

Redi  was  a  rare  combination  of  naturalist  and  poet. 
As  the  latter,  he  is  best  known  in  Italy,  where  his  writ- 
ings are  admired  for  their  clearness  and  grace,  and  where 
his  famous  dithyramb  on  wine  is  still  popular,  being  sold 


8  GENERATION  OF  INSECTS 

in  penny  prints  in  open  stalls.  This  festive  song  describes 
Bacchus  in  the  act  of  sampling  the  Tuscan  vintages,  which 
he  praises  and  offers  to  Ariadne. 

In  a  sequel  to  this  composition,  v^ritten  in  similar 
vein,  Ariadne  is  ill  from  excessive  potations,  and  tells 
her  maidens  to  bring  water  from  all  the  fountains  of 
Europe,  that  her  thirst  may  be  quenched.  From  the 
equal  justice  done  both  subjects,  it  is  apparent  that  the 
Author's  mind  was  ever  in  equilibrium  and  that  he  ap- 
preciated the  value  of  opposite  things.  In  true  Ana- 
creontic spirit,  he  sings  of  the  vivifying  power  of  wine, 
and  again  he  wisely  lauds  the  healing  virtue  of  water. 
Indeed  Redi  was  the  first  to  reintroduce  the  use  of 
water  in  medical  treatment,  much  to  the  disgust  of  his 
father,  Gregory,  who  disliked  Hippocratian  remedies  and 
preferred  prescriptions  "  a  mile  long  "  after  the  Arabian 
fashion.  Francesco  believed  with  Galen  that  Nature 
possesses  a  healing  power  of  her  own,  which  the  phy- 
sician can  only  aid.  Levi  calls  him  "  the  Father  of  Tus- 
can medicine." 

In  the  latter  part  of  his  life,  Redi  suffered  from  senile 
debility  and  other  ailments,  but  he  bore  all  patiently, 
and  when  a  friend  asked  if  he  did  not  dread  the  approach 
of  death,  he  replied  that  it  was  useless  to  do  so,  as  he 
had  never  observed  that  death  could  be  kept  away  through 
fear.  He  died  suddenly  in  Pisa,  March  ist,  1697.  Abbe 
Salvini  writes  of  his  end :  "  Death,  his  great  enemy, 
whom  he  had  so  often  fearlessly  encountered  and  de- 
feated, not  daring  to  look  into  his  face,  approached  him 
stealthily  as  he  lay  unconscious,  and  took  him  unawares, 
so  he  passed  in  an  instant  from  sleep  to  eternal  repose." 

As  has  been  said,  Redi  was  able  to  delve  deeply  in  the 
Aristotelean  mine  of  thought  by  aid  of  Galileo's  meth- 


INTRODUCTION  9 

ods;  that  he  strictly  belongs  to  the  Galilean  school,  as 
many  writers  state,  is  hardly  exact.  He  was  not,  nor 
were  most  pure  biologists,  led  into  the  acceptance  of  an 
entirely  physico-mechanical  interpretation  of  Nature,  as 
were  Borelli,  Descartes,  and  others,  who  carried  the  new 
teaching  to  the  extreme,  and  ended  in  assuming  that  the 
human  body  is  a  machine,  moved  (Aristotle  to  the  res- 
cue!) by  the  pneuma,  or  spiritus. 

Galileo  had  proved  the  falsity  of  Aristotle's  theory  of 
motion,  but  another  doctrine  of  his  lay  open  to  discus- 
sion, namely:  spontaneous  generation,  an  ancient  and 
persistent  popular  belief,  which  the  father  of  biology  had 
accepted,  being  unable  to  find  any  other  origin  for  the 
lower  animals.  Paracelsus  was  an  extreme  exponent  of 
the  theory,  attempting,  it  was  said,  to  re-create  human 
life.  His  reported  experiments  in  this  line  excited  the 
indignation  of  our  orthodox  author,  who  saw  in  them 
an  attack  on  the  mystery  of  Faith.  Harvey,  in  spite  of 
""  omne  vivum  ex  ovo,"  did  not  contradict  the  Greek 
philosopher,  neither  did  Cesalpino  of  Arezzo,  the  discov- 
erer, of  the  circulation  of  blood  in  the  lungs.  Giuseppe 
Aromatari  of  Assisi  was  the  first  to  publish  his  disbe- 
lief in  the  time-honored  tradition.  In  his  treatise,  *'  De 
Rabia  Contagiosa"  (Venice,  1625),  writing  on  the  gen- 
eration of  plants,  he  insists  that  they  arise  from  the  seed, 
and  that  likewise  all  animals  are  born  from  the  t%g. 
Redi,  however,  was  the  first  to  prove  this  truth  by  ex- 
periments, that  have  been  compared  to  those  of  Tyndall 
and  Pasteur  two  hundred  years  later.  Not  content  with 
merely  recording  what  he  perceived,  he  created  new 
conditions  in  which  the  objects  examined  presented  new 
aspects,  reaching  in  this  way  a  different  viewpoint  from 
that  of  the  ordinary  observer.     Redi  also  possessed  a 


lO  GENERATION  OF  INSECTS 

singularly  clear  reasoning  power,  and  a  large  measure 
of  common  sense,  not  an  habitual  concomitant  of  knowl- 
edge at  the  time.  After  disproving  the  generation  of 
animals  in  dead  matter,  he  logically  tried  to  disprove  it 
in  a  living  medium,  and  in  the  case  of  insects  arising 
from  galls,  he  thought  that  the  fly  laid  its  egg  in  the 
slit  twig,  and  that  the  usual  transformation  occurred. 
Unfortunately  his  observations,  far  from  confirming  his 
opinion,  caused  him  to  change  it;  that  Nature  prepared 
the  gall  for  the  insect  seemed  evident,  so  Redi,  ever  dis- 
trustful of  himself,  sacrificed  his  idea  to  that  of  Aris- 
totle, acknowledging  the  creative  power  of  the  spiritus. 
This  error  was  subsequently  corrected  by  Redi's  pupil, 
Vallisneri,  who  continued  his  investigations. 

The  *'  Esperienze  Intorno  alia  Generazione  degl'  In- 
setti  "  gives  the  circumstances  and  methods  by  which 
Redi  reached  his  important  conclusions  and  is  the  work 
by  which  he  is  best  known  to  men  of  science.  Many 
editions  prove  that  it  was  fully  appreciated  by  his  con- 
temporaries:  the  book  appeared  in  1668,  and  in  1688 
reached  the  fifth  edition,  the  one  from  which  the  follow- 
ing translation  was  made.  A  Latin  version  was  pub- 
lished in  Amsterdam  in  1671  and  was  reprinted  as  Part 
1st  of  a  larger  work,  ''  De  Insectis,"  in  1686.  Pou- 
chet  (1859)  mentions  a  French  translation:  "Collection 
Academique,"  Tome  YI.  The  title  of  the  work  gives  lit- 
tle hint  of  its  varied  contents.  It  is  a  formal  letter 
grown  into  a  book  showing  the  attitude  of  seventeenth- 
century  Italians  towards  their  surroundings,  and  afford- 
ing a  clear  insight  into  their  conception  of  Nature.  The 
opinions  of  priests,  philosophers,  and  poets  of  the  period, 
on  natural  phenomena  of  perennial  interest,  are  here  set 
down  with  grave  simplicity  enlivened  by  occasional  hu- 


INTRODUCTION  1 1 

morous  comment,  and  many  elaborate  quotations  from 
the  classics  are  inserted  as  proof  or  refutation  of  theories 
advanced. 

To  the  student  of  the  history  of  biology,  the  book  is 
a  milestone  marking  the  beginning  of  a  great  epoch.  It 
records  the  first,  and  therefore  the  most  important,  state- 
ment supported  by  experimental  evidence  of  that  great 
generalization  named  by  Huxley  the  theory  of  biogenesis, 
a  theory,  which  in  its  application,  has  probably  been  of 
more  benefit  to  mankind  than  any  other  result  of  scien- 
tific investigation. 

The  Translator. 


TRANSLATOR'S  NOTE 

This  work  is  indexed 

and  revised  by 

Dr.  Robert  P.  Bigelow 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Aristotle  —  History  of  Animals. 

CuviER,  G  —  Histoire  des  sciences  naturelles. 

Fabroni  —  Vitae  Italorum  Illustrium. 

GoRANi  —  Elogi  di  due  illustri  scopritori  italiani   (unable  to 

procure). 
Imbert,  Gaetano  —  F.  Redi,  Uomo  di  Corte  e  Uomo  privato, 
N.  Antologia,  October,   1895. 
"  "  F.   Redi,   Cenni    Biografici,   nel   Practico 

(out  of  print). 
JouRDAN  —  Biographic  medicale. 

Niceron  —  Memoires,  iii  Vol.  10   (unable  to  procure). 
Pouchet,    F.    a. —  Heterogenic,   ou   traite  dc   la   generation 
spontanee,  base  sur  dc  nouvelles  experi- 
ences, Paris,  1859. 
Radl,   E. —  Geschichte   der   biologischen  Theorien.     Teil    i, 

Leipzig,  1905. 
Redi,  F. —  Osservazioni  intorno  alle  vipere,  Firenze,  1664. 
"      "        Esperienze  intorno  alia   generazione  degl'  insetti, 

Firenze,  1668. 
"     "       Lettera    sopra   alcunc    opposizioni    fatte    alle    sue 
osservazioni  intorno  alle  vipere,  Firenze, 
1670. 
"     "       Esperienze  intorno  a  diverse  cose  naturali  e  par- 
ticolarment  a  quelle   che  ci   son   portate 
deir   Indie,   Firenze,   1671. 
"      "        Lettera    intorno    alia    invenzione    degli    occhiali, 

Firenze,  1678. 
"      "        Osservazioni    intorno   agli    animali   viveni    che   si 
trovano   negli    animali    viventi,    Firenze, 
1684. 
"      "        Consult!  medici,  Firenze,  1726. 
"      "       Lettere   di    Redi.     Ed.   2,    Firenze,    1779-1795.     3 
Vols. 
Salvini  —  Vite  degl'  Arcadi. 
Settembrini,  Luigi  —  Lezioni  di  Ictteratura  Italiana,   Vol. 

2,  Napoli. 
Thompson,  J.  A. —  Science  of  Life,  1899. 
TiRABOSCHi  —  Storia  della  Letteratura  Italiana,  Vol.  8. 

13 


ESPERIENZE 

Intorno  alia  Gcncrazione 

DEGUINSETTI 

P    A    T    T    E 

DA    FRANCESCO    REDI 

Ccntilucmo  AretinO)  e  Accadcmico  dclla  Crufci 

£  da  Lui  serine  in  una  Lett  era 
ALL'  ILLVSTRISSIMO  SIGNOR 

CARLO   DATL 

^IntA  ImfrefsmCm 


IN    F  I  R  E  N  Z  E.  M-ncLxxxviiT. 


NdU  Staojpena  di  Picro  Macini ,  all' liifcgna  del  Lion  d'Oio. 


15 


V  nvotK  o  ' 


Experiment  adds  to  knowledge, 

Credulity  leads  to  error. 

Arab  proverb,  Erpenius,  57. 


17 


Nature  is  nowhere  to  be  seen  to  greater  perfection  than  in 
the  very  smallest  of  her  works.  For  this  reason  then,  I  must 
beg  of  my  readers,  notwithstanding  the  contempt  they  may  feel 
for  many  of  these  objects,  not  to  feel  a  similar  disdain  for  the 
information  I  am  about  to  give  relative  thereto,  seeing  that 
in  the  study  of  nature,  there  is  none  of  her  works  that  is  un- 
worthy of  our  consideration. 

Pliny.^ 


1  Trans,  of  Bostock  and  Riley. 
i8 


SIR: 

There  is  no  doubt  that  the  senses  were  ^iven  to  Rea- 
son by  the  Supreme  Architect  as  aids  to  the  better  com- 
prehension of  natural  things.  They  are  Hke  windows  or 
doors  through  which  she  may  look  out  on  those  things, 
or  through  which  they  may  come  in  and  make  them- 
selves known.  Still  better  said:  the  senses  are  scouts, 
or  spies,  that  seek  to  discover  the  nature  of  things,  and 
report  these  observations  to  Reason  within,  who  passes 
judgment  on  everything,  describing  with  more  or  less 
clearness  and  precision,  according  to  the  validity,  alert- 
ness, and  accuracy  of  her  informers.  Hence  it  is  that 
in  order  to  verify  observations,  we  frequently  approach 
or  recede  from  the  object  that  we  wish  to  examine, 
change  its  position  or  its  light,  and  perform  many  other 
actions  relating  not  only  to  the  sense  of  sight,  but  also  to 
those  of  hearing,  smell  and  touch.  In  fact,  no  one  of 
the  slightest  intelligence  would  attempt  to  exact  judg- 
ment from  Reason  in  any  other  way  than  this.  There- 
fore, I  believe  Nature  could  not  possibly  choose  any 
more  useful  gift  for  man  than  his  five  perfect  senses. 
It  is  evident  that  a  man  searching  for  the  truths  of  Nat- 
ural History  would  go  far  astray  if  he  did  not  keep  his 
senses  clear,  for  Reason,  if  set  to  work  on  a  superficial 
report  of  the  senses,  would  render  a  hasty  and  faulty 
verdict.  Thus  it  happens  that  even  young  men  new  to 
the  schools  hold  this  opinion,  which  is  but  common  sense, 

19 


20  GENERATION  OF  INSECTS 

and  has  been  stated  by  wise  men  of  early  days,  who  in 
philosophical  matters  were  singularly  in  advance  of  their 
time.  Among  these,  that  great  genius  who  knew  every- 
thing and  could  write  wonderfully  well  on  all  subjects, 
said  in  the  second  canto  of  Paradiso :  ^ 

Somewhat  she  smiled ;  and  then,  "  If  the  opinion  of  mortals 
be  erroneous,"  she  said, 
"Where'er  the  key  of  sense  doth  not  unlock, 
Certes  the  shaft  of  wonder  should  not  pierce  thee 
Now,  forasmuch  as  following  the  senses. 
Thou  seest  that  the  reason  has  short  wings." 

But,  if  the  senses  do  not  do  their  duty,  if  they  do  not 
obtain  correct  information  of  what  is  happening  in  Na- 
ture and  thus  do  not  aid  Reason,  is  it  strange  that  she 
should  make  but  uncertain  progress,  now  hastening  for- 
ward impetuously,  now  retarded  by  fallacy  and  caught  in 
the  net  of  error?  Hence,  though  my  philosophical  stud- 
ies have  been  pursued  with  more  zeal  than  profundity,  I 
have  nevertheless  given  myself  all  possible  trouble  and 
have  taken  the  greatest  care  to  convince  myself  of  facts 
with  my  own  eyes  by  means  of  accurate  and  continued 
experiments  before  submitting  them  to  my  mind  as  mat- 
ter for  reflection.  In  this  manner,  though  I  may  not 
have  arrived  at  a  perfect  knowledge  of  anything,  I  have 
gone  far  enough  to  perceive  that  I  am  still  entirely  ig- 
norant of  many  things  the  nature  of  which  I  supposed 
was  known  to  me,  and  when  I  discover  a  palpable  false- 
hood in  ancient  writings  or  in  modern  belief,  I  feel  so 
irresolute  and  doubtful  of  my  own  knowledge  that  I 
scarcely  dare  attack  it  without    first    consulting    some 

iThe  Dante  quotations  in  this  work  are  from  Longfellow's  ver- 
sions. All  other  extracts  from  Italian  verse  are  Englished  by  the 
translator. 


EXPERIMENTAL  METHOD  ai 

learned  and  prudent  friends.  Thus  having  recently  made 
many  experiments  especially  in  regard  to  the  origin  of 
those  living  creatures  considered,  to  the  present  day,  by 
all  schools  to  have  been  generated  by  chance,  that  is 
spontaneously,  without  paternal  seed ;  and  being  distrust- 
ful of  myself,  but  still  desirous  of  submitting  the  results 
of  my  labors  to  other  minds,  it  occurred  to  me  that  I 
might  have  recourse  to  you,  Signor  Carlo,  as  you  have 
graciously  given  me  a  place  among  your  closest  friends. 
Your  great  knowledge  fortified  by  philosophy  and  nobly 
adorned  with  varied  erudition  is  admired  by  all  men  of 
learning,  and  is  the  pride  of  Tuscany,  who  envies  neither 
Latium  her  Varros,  nor  Greece  her  Plutarchs.  There- 
fore I  beg  you  to  take  the  trouble  to  read  this  letter  in 
your  leisure  moments  and  to  give  me  your  sincere  opin- 
ion of  it,  together  with  your  friendly  advice  and  wise 
counsel,  by  the  aid  of  which  I  shall  be  enabled  to  remove 
all  superfluous  and  trivial  matter  and  to  add  whatever 
may  be  necessary. 

"  Perchance  I  may  with  greater  diligence 
And  patient  study  yet  perfect  this  work." 

Many  have  believed  that  this  beautiful  part  of  the  uni- 
verse which  we  commonly  call  the  earth,  on  leaving  the 
hands  of  the  Eternal,  began  to  clothe  itself  in  a  kind  of 
green  down,  which  gradually  increasing  in  perfection 
and  in  vigor,  by  the  light  of  the  sun  and  nourishment 
from  the  soil,  became  plants  and  trees,  which  afforded 
food  to  the  animals  that  the  earth  subsequently  produced 
of  all  kinds,  from  the  elephant  to  the  most  minute  and 
invisible  animalcule.  But  the  Earth,  not  content  with 
producing  dumb  animals,  desired  the  glory  of  being  the 
Mother  of  Man.     Hence,  we  are  told  by  Lactantius  that 


22  GENERATION  OF  INSECTS 

the  Stoics  asserted  that  human  beings  sprang  forth  from 
the  soil  of  hill  and  plain  like  sprouting  mushrooms.  It 
was  the  general  belief  that  they  did  not  originate  every- 
where, but  arose  in  some  special  place  or  country ;  hence 
the  Egyptians,  the  Ethiopians,  and  the  Phrygians  gave 
the  credit  to  their  own  lands,  and  the  Arcadians,  Phoe- 
nicians, and  inhabitants  of  Attica  put  forth  their  claims. 
The  Athenians,  as  a  sign  that  the  fathers  of  the  human 
race  originated  in  Greece  (being  born  from  the  soil  direct 
as  even  now  grasshoppers  are  supposed  to  be  born)  wore 
golden  ornaments  in  the  hair  fashioned  like  the  grass- 
hopper. But  whatever  may  have  been  the  country  of 
origin,  according  to  the  teaching  of  Archelaus,  a  pupil 
of  Anaxagoras,  light,  arid  soil  would  not  do  nor  would 
a  mere  sand  bank  serve  the  purpose  of  creation.  It  was 
necessary  that  the  ground  should  be  rich,  warm,  and 
capable  of  germination,  whereupon  a  milky  substance 
would  be  produced  forming  the  first  food  of  man  and 
beast. 

Those  creatures  living  in  the  early  days  of  the  world 
were,  according  to  Empedocles  and  Epicurus,  born  all 
at  once,  hastily  and  in  disorder  from  the  womb  of  Earth, 
still  unused  to  motherhood.  Such  haphazard  generation 
resulted  in  great  confusion;  some  animals  were  born 
without  mouths  and  without  arms,  others  without  eyes 
and  without  legs;  some  creatures  with  monstrous  graft- 
ing of  hands  and  feet  tumbled  about  headless;  still  others 
were  seen  with  a  human  head  and  the  body  of  a  beast; 
others  had  foreparts  of  beasts  and  the  nether  limbs  of 
man;  and  certain  ones  were  perhaps  made  in  such  guise 
as  the  poets  describe  the  Minotaur  of  Crete,  the  Sphinx, 
the  Chimera,  the  Siren,  and  winged  horse  of  Perseus, 
or  like  the  Atlante  of  Corena  described  by  Ariosto: 


GENERATIVE  PRINCIPLE  23 

"Nature's  own  work,  no  artificial  steed. 
His  dam  a  mare,  a  griffin  fierce  his  sire 
Who  'queathed  his  plumage  and  his  wings,  indeed 
His  head  and  fore  feet  and  the  beak  entire. 
In  other  parts  he  to  the  mare  came  nigher ; 
Fleet  as  the  wind  was  Hyppogriff  in  speed." 

But   at  last  the   great  mother,   perceiving  that   such 
monstrosities  were  neither  good  nor  likely  to  endure,  and 
having  become  more  expert  in  the  art  of  generation, 
succeeded  in  producing  men  and  animals  according  to 
their  species.     Democritus  bears  witness  that  men  first 
appeared  in  the  form  of  small  worms,  which  little  by  little 
assumed  human  shape;  or,  as  Anaximander  relates,  on 
escaping  from  the  womb  of  Earth  they  were  enveloped 
in  a  kind  of  rough,  spiny  skin,  not  unlike  the  burr  of  a 
chestnut.     After  a  long  period  of  fertility,  during  which 
many  monstrous  and  marvelous  generations  were  brought 
forth,  the  Earth  Mother  became  at  last  exhausted  and 
sterile  and  lost  her  power  of  producing  men  and  the 
larger  animals,  still  she  retained  enough  vigor  to  bring 
forth  (besides  plants  that  are  presumed  to  be  generated 
spontaneously)    certain    small    creatures    such    as    flies, 
wasps,   spiders,   ants,   scorpions,   and  all  the  other  ter- 
restrial and  aerial  insects,  called  by  the  Greeks  eVo/xaCdJa 
and  by  the  Latins,  insecta  animalia.     The  schools,  both 
ancient  and  modern,  all  agree  in  this,   and  constantly 
teach  that  the  Earth  has  continued  to  produce  these  crea- 
tures and  will  produce  them  so  long  as  she  exists.     They 
do  not,  however,  agree  as  to  the  manner  in  which  these 
insects  are  generated,  nor  how  life  is  communicated  to 
them;  for  they  say  that  not  only  does  the  Earth  possess 
this  occult  power,  but  that  it  is  possessed  by  all  animals 
living  and  dead,  also  by  all  things  produced  from  the 


24  GENERATION  OF  INSECTS 

Earth,  and  finally  by  those  which  are  about  to  decay  and 
return  to  dust.  Hence  others  have  claimed  putrefaction 
itself  to  be  the  all-potent  cause  of  generation,  and  still 
others,  natural  heat.  Many  additional  causes  have  been 
adduced,  conforming  to  the  divers  modes  of  thought  of 
different  sects,  who  speak  of  active  and  efficient  forces, 
the  world  soul,  so  to  say  —  the  spirit  of  the  elements, 
ideas,  the  heavens,  their  light  and  motion,  and  higher  in- 
fluences. Nor  was  there  lacking  the  assertion  that  the 
generation  of  all  insects  is  caused  by  the  generative  prin- 
ciple residing  in  the  original  and  sentient  vegetative 
souls,  of  which  particles  remain  alive  in  the  dead  bodies 
of  animals  and  plants,  in  a  quiescent  state,  which  is 
changed  into  activity  by  contact  with  surrounding  heat 
and  communicates  new  life  to  corrupt  matter.  There  is 
still  another  class  of  wise  persons  who  hold  it  to  be  true 
that  generation  proceeds  from  certain  minute  agglomera- 
tions of  atoms,  which  contain  the  seed  of  all  things. 
These  persons  say  further  that  the  seed  was  created  by 
God  at  the  beginning  of  the  world  and  scattered  in  all 
directions  for  the  fertilization  of  the  elements,  bestowing 
upon  them,  not  a  transitory,  but  a  permanent  fecundity 
as  stable  as  the  elements  themselves;  in  this  way,  they 
say,  are  to  be  interpreted  the  words  of  the  Sacred  Book, 
"  God  created  all  things  together."  But  that  great  philos- 
opher of  our  time,  the  immortal  William  Harvey,  also 
held  that  all  living  things  are  born  from  seed  as  from 
an  egg,  be  it  the  seed  of  animals  of  the  same  species  or 
elsewhere  derived ;  thus  he  says,  "  Because  this  is  com- 
mon to  all  living  creatures,  viz:  that  they  derive  their 
origin  either  from  semen  or  eggs,  whether  this  semen 
have  proceeded  from  others  of  the  same  kind,  or  have 
come  by  chance  or  something  else.    For  what  sometimes 


HARVEY'S  THEORY  25 

happens  in  art  occasionally  occurs  in  nature  also;  those 
things,  namely,  take  place  by  chance  or  accident  which 
otherwise  are  brought  about  by  art,  of  this  health  (ac- 
cording to  Aristotle)  is  an  illustration.  And  the  thing 
is  not  different  as  respects  generation  (in  so  far  as  it  is 
from  seed)  in  certain  animals;  their  semina  are  either 
present  by  accident,  or  they  proceed  from  an  univocal 
agent  of  the  same  kind.  For  even  in  fortuitous  semina 
there  is  an  inherent  motive  principle  of  generation,  which 
procreates  from  itself  and  of  itself;  and  this  is  the  same 
as  that  which  is  found  in  the  semina  of  congenerative  ani- 
mals —  a  power,  to  wit,  of  forming  a  living  creature."  ^ 
But  at  first  he  had  said  that  those  invisible  seeds,  like 
atoms  floating  in  the  air,  were  scattered  hither  and 
thither  by  the  winds ;  although  he  never  explains  whence 
or  from  whom  they  take  origin ;  only  it  may  be  gathered 
from  the  above  quoted  words  that  he  believes  that  those 
fortuitous  seeds,  flying  in  the  air  and  carried  by  winds, 
proceed  from  an  agent  not  univocal,  to  express  myself 
in  the  language  of  the  schools,  but  equivocal.  Perhaps, 
however,  he  would  have  stated  his  opinion  with  greater 
clearness  and  precision  if  the  notes  which  he  had  col- 
lected on  this  subject  had  not  been  dispersed  during  the 
tumult  of  civil  war,  to  the  deplorable  loss  of  the  republic 
of  philosophy.  Many  persons  would  have  difficulty  in 
believing  that  Harvey  could  have  hit  upon  the  truth, 
in  as  much  as  they  obstinately  assert  that  it  is  impossible 
to  indicate  the  efficient  cause  of  the  procreation  of  in- 
sects. The  subtlest  philosopher  of  past  centuries,  after 
vainly  seeking  it  in  our  world,  declared  that  the  imme- 

1  Anatomical  Exercises  on  the  Generation  of  Animals  (1651). 
Translated  by  Robert  Willis.  Works  of  William  Harvey.  Lon- 
don:    Sydenham  Society,  1847.     p.  427. 


26  GENERATION  OF  INSECTS 

diate  cause  of  the  generation  of  insects  was  none  other 
than  the  Omnipotent  Hand  of  Him  whose  knowledge 
transcends  all,  that  is,  the  great  and  good  God,  from 
whom  all  flying  animals  received  their  spirit  directly,  as 
Ennius  thought,  if  we  are  to  believe  Varro,  who  wrote  in 
the  fourth  book  "  De  Lingua  Latina  "  :  "  Ova  parire  solet 
genu'  penneis  condecoratum ;  Non  animus,  ut  ait  Ennius. 
Et  post.  Inde  venit  divinitu'  pulleis  insinuans  se  ipsa 
anima."  Hereupon  others  add  that  it  is  no  wonder  Galen 
should  confess  so  modestly  in  his  book  his  inability  to 
find  this  origin,  and  therefore  prays  all  philosophers  who 
may  happen  to  fall  in  with  it  to  let  him  know  of  it. 
But  he,  holding  opinion  contrary  to  the  Platonists,  was 
never  able  to  believe  that  the  Power  and  Wisdom  which 
produces  perfect  animals,  could  be  the  same  which 
stoops  to  form  scorpions,  flies,  worms,  and  such  like, 
called  imperfect  by  the  scholastics.  What  may  be  the 
truth  among  so  many  opinions  or  what  comes  nearest 
to  it,  I  am  unable  to  say,  nor  is  it  now  in  my  power  or 
intent  to  decide,  but  if  it  happens  that  I  disclose  my  own 
belief  on  the  subject,  I  do  so  with  much  hesitation,  and 
fear,  as  I  imagine  that  the  lines  sung  by  our  divine  poet 
sound  in  my  ear: 

"  Aye  to  that  truth  which  has  the  face  of  falsehood 
A  man  should  close  his  lips  as  far  as  may  be. 
Because  without  his  fault  it  causes  shame." 

Although  content  to  be  corrected  by  any  one  wiser 
than  myself,  if  I  should  make  erroneous  statements,  I 
shall  express  my  belief  that  the  Earth,  after  having 
brought  forth  the  first  plants  and  animals  at  the  begin- 
ning by  order  of  the  Supreme  and  Omnipotent  Creator, 
has  never  since  produced  any  kinds  of  plants  or  animals, 


BIOGENESIS  2f 

either  perfect  or  imperfect;  and  everything  which  we 
know  in  past  or  present  times  that  she  has  produced, 
came  solely  from  the  true  seeds  of  the  plants  and  ani- 
mals themselves,  which  thus,  through  means  of  their 
own,  preserve  their  species.  And,  although  it  be  a  mat- 
ter of  daily  observation  that  infinite  numbers  of  worms 
are  produced  in  dead  bodies  and  decayed  plants,  I  feel, 
I  say,  inclined  to  believe  that  these  worms  are  all  gen- 
erated by  insemination  and  that  the  putrefied  matter  in 
which  they  are  found  has  no  other  office  than  that  of 
serving  as  a  place,  or  suitable  nest,  where  animals  de- 
posit their  eggs  at  the  breeding  season,  and  in  which  they 
also  find  nourishment ;  otherwise,  I  assert  that  nothing  is 
ever  generated  therein.  And,  in  order,  Signor  Carlo, 
to  demonstrate  to  you  the  truth  of  what  I  say,  I  will  de- 
scribe to  you  some  of  those  insects,  which,  being  most 
common,  are  best  known  to  us. 

It  being  thus,  as  I  have  said,  the  dictum  of  ancients 
and  moderns,  and  the  popular  belief,  that  the  putrescence 
of  a  dead  body,  or  the  filth  of  any  sort  of  decayed  matter 
engenders  worms ;  and  being  desirous  of  tracing  the  truth 
in  the  case,  I  made  the  following  experiment : 

At  the  beginning  of  June  I  ordered  to  be  killed  three 
snakes,  the  kind  called  eels  of  ^sculapius.  As  soon  as 
they  were  dead,  I  placed  them  in  an  open  box  to  decay. 
Not  long  afterwards  I  saw  that  they  were  covered  with 
worms  of  a  conical  shape  and  apparently  without  legs. 
These  worms  were  intent  on  devouring  the  meat,  in- 
creasing meanwhile  in  size,  and  from  day  to  day  I  ob- 
served that  they  likewise  increased  in  number;  but,  al- 
though of  the  same  shape,  they  differed  in  size,  having 
been  bom  on  different  days.  But  all,  little  and  big,  after 
having  consumed  the  meat,  leaving  only  the  bones  intact. 


28  GENERATION  OF  INSECTS 

escaped  from  a  small  aperture  in  the  closed  box,  and  I 
was  unable  to  discover  their  hiding  place.  Being  curious, 
therefore,  to  know  their  fate,  I  again  prepared  three  of 
the  same  snakes,  which  in  three  days  were  covered  with 
small  worms.  These  increased  daily  in  number  and  size, 
remaining  alike  in  form,  though  not  in  color.  Of  these, 
the  largest  were  white  outside,  and  the  smallest  ones, 
pink.  When  the  meat  was  all  consumed,  the  worms  ea- 
gerly sought  an  exit,  but  I  had  closed  every  aperture.  On 
the  nineteenth  day  of  the  same  month  some  of  the  worms 
ceased  all  movements,  as  if  they  were  asleep,  and  ap- 
peared to  shrink  and  gradually  to  assume  a  shape  like  an 
egg.  On  the  twentieth  day  all  the  worms  had  assumed 
the  egg  shape,  and  had  taken  on  a  golden  white  color, 
turning  to  red,  which  in  some  darkened,  becoming  almost 
black.  At  this  point  the  red,  as  well  as  the  black  ones, 
changed  from  soft  to  hard,  resembling  somewhat  those 
chrysalides  formed  by  caterpillars,  silkworms,  and  similar 
insects.  My  curiosity  being  thus  aroused,  I  noticed  that 
there  was  some  difference  in  shape  between  the  red  and 
the  black  eggs  [pupae], ^  though  it  was  clear  that  all  were 
formed  alike  of  many  rings  joined  together;  neverthe- 
less, these  rings  were  more  sharply  outlined,  and  more 
apparent  in  the  black  than  in  the  red,  which  last  were 
almost  smooth  and  without  a  slight  depression  at  one  end, 
like  that  in  a  lemon  picked  from  its  stalk,  which  further 
distinguished  the  black  egg-like  balls.  I  placed  these 
balls  separately  in  glass  vessels,  well  covered  with  paper, 
and  at  the  end  of  eight  days,  every  shell  of  the  red  balls 
was  broken,  and  from  each  came  forth  a  fly  of  gray 

1  Throughout  this  work  Redi  uses  the  word  "  uova  "  where  the 
context  shows  that  pupa  is  meant.  In  this  he  followed  Harvey, 
who  called  any  embryonic  mass  an  "  egg." 


FIRST  EXPERIMENTS  29 

color,  torpid  and  dull,  misshapen  as  if  half  finished,  with 
closed  wings;  but  after  a  few  minutes  they  commenced 
to  unfold  and  to  expand  in  exact  proportion  to  the  tiny 
body,  which  also  in  the  meantime  had  acquired  symmetry 
in  all  its  parts.  Then  the  whole  creature,  as  if  made 
anew,  having  lost  its  gray  color,  took  on  a  most  brilliant 
and  vivid  green;  and  the  whole  body  had  expanded  and 
grown  so  that  it  seemed  incredible  that  it  could  ever  have 
been  contained  in  the  small  shell.  Though  the  red  eggs 
[pupae]  brought  forth  green  flies  at  the  end  of  eight 
days,  the  black  ones  labored  fourteen  days  to  produce 
certain  large  black  flies  striped  with  white,  having  a 
hairy  abdomen,  of  the  kind  that  we  see  daily  buzzing 
about  butchers'  stalls.  These  at  birth  were  misshapen 
and  inactive,  with  closed  wings,  like  the  green  ones  men- 
tioned above.  Not  all  the  black  eggs  [pupae]  hatched 
after  fourteen  days ;  on  the  contrary,  a  large  part  of  them 
delayed  until  the  twenty-first  day,  at  which  time  there 
came  out  some  curious  flies,  quite  distinct  from  the  other 
two  broods  in  size  and  form,  and  never  before  described, 
to  my  knowledge,  by  any  historian,  for  they  are  much 
smaller  than  the  ordinary  house-flies.  They  have  two 
silvery  wings,  not  longer  than  the  body,  which  is  entirely 
black.  The  lower  abdomen  is  shiny,  with  an  occasional 
hair,  as  shown  by  the  microscope,  and  resembles  in  shape 
that  of  the  winged  ants.  The  two  long  horns,  or  antennae 
(a  term  used  by  writers  of  natural  history)  protrude 
from  the  head ;  the  first  four  legs  do  not  differ  from  those 
of  the  ordinary  fly,  but  the  two  posterior  ones  are  much 
larger  and  longer  than  would  appear  to  be  suitable  for 
such  a  small  body;  and  they  are  scaly,  like  the  legs  of 
the  locusta  marina;  they  are  of  the  same  color,  but 
brighter,  so  red,  in  fact,  that  they  would  put  cinnabar 


30  GENERATION  OF  INSECTS 

to  shame;  being  all  covered  with  white  spots,  they  re- 
semble fine  enamel  work. 

That  different  generations  of  flies  issued  from  the  same 
dead  body  was  perplexing,  and  I  sought  further  knowl- 
edge from  experiment.  To  this  end,  having  made  ready 
six  boxes  without  covers,  I  placed  in  the  first,  two  of  the 
snakes  described  above,  in  the  second,  a  large  pigeon,  in 
the  third  two  pounds  of  veal,  in  the  fourth  a  large  piece 
of  horse-flesh,  in  the  fifth,  a  capon,  in  the  sixth,  a 
sheep's  heart;  and  all  became  wormy  in  little  more  than 
twenty-four  hours.  The  worms,  five  or  six  days  after 
birth,  changed  as  usual  to  eggs  [pupae].  From  those  in 
the  snakes  there  hatched,  after  two  days,  large  flies,  some 
blue  and  some  purple.  The  eggs  [pupae]  in  the  second 
box,  some  of  which  were  red  and  others  black,  hatched 
out  flies;  green  flies  being  produced  from  the  red  eggs 
[pupae]  after  eight  days,  and  after  fourteen  days  the 
black  eggs  [pupae]  broke  in  the  place  where  there  was 
no  depression,  and  there  escaped  from  the  shell  the  same 
number  of  black  flies  striped  with  white.  Similar  flies 
were  seen  issuing  from  all  the  other  eggs  [pupae]  in  the 
boxes  containing  the  veal,  the  capon,  the  horse-flesh, 
and  the  sheep's  heart;  but  with  this  difference,  that  in 
the  sheep's  heart,  blue  and  violet  flies  were  produced,  as 
well  as  the  black  flies  striped  with  white. 

In  the  meanwhile  I  had  placed  in  a  glass  dish  some 
skinned  river  frogs,  and  having  left  the  dish  open,  I  found 
the  next  day,  on  examination,  that  some  small  worms 
were  occupied  in  devouring  them,  while  some  others 
swam  about,  at  the  bottom  of  the  dish,  in  a  watery  mat- 
ter that  had  run  out  of  the  frogs.  The  next  day  the 
worms  had  all  increased  in  size  and  many  others  had  ap- 
peared that  also  swam  below  and  on  top  of  the  water, 


MAGGOTS  FROM  EGGS  31 

where  they  devoured  the  floating  fragments  of  flesh; 
and  after  two  days,  having  consumed  all  that  was  left 
of  the  frogs,  they  swam  and  sported  about  in  the  fetid 
liquid,  now  creeping  up,  all  soft  and  slimy,  on  the  side 
of  the  glass,  now  wriggling  back  to  the  water  until  at 
last  on  the  following  day,  without  my  knowledge,  they 
all  disappeared,  having  reached  the  top  of  the  dish. 

At  the  same  time  I  enclosed  some  fish,  called  Barbi, 
in  a  box  full  of  holes,  with  a  lid  perforated  in  the  same 
way.  When  I  opened  it  after  four  hours,  I  found  a 
large  number  of  very  minute  maggots  on  the  fish,  and  I 
saw  a  great  many  tiny  eggs  adhering  in  bunches  to  the 
joints  and  around  all  the  holes  in  the  interior  of  the  box: 
some  of  these  were  white  and  others,  yellow.  I  crushed 
them  between  my  nails  and  the  cracked  shell  emitted  a 
kind  of  whitish  liquid,  thinner  and  less  viscuous  than  the 
white  of  a  fowl's  egg. 

Having  rearranged  the  box  as  it  was  before,  and  hav- 
ing opened  it,  on  the  following  day,  I  observed  that  all 
the  eggs  had  hatched  into  the  same  number  of  maggots, 
and  that  the  empty  shells  were  still  attached  in  the  places 
where  the  hatching  occurred;  I  also  noted  that  the  first 
maggots  hatched  had  increased  to  double  their  size;  but 
what  surprised  me  most  was  that  on  the  following  day 
they  had  grown  so  large  that  every  one  of  them  weighed 
about  seven  grains,  while  only  the  day  before  there  would 
have  been  twenty-four  or  thirty  to  a  grain.  All  the 
later  ones  hatched  were  very  small.  The  whole  lot,  al- 
most in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye,  finished  devouring  the 
flesh  of  the  fish,  leaving  all  the  bones  so  clean  and  white 
that  they  looked  like  skeletons  polished  by  the  hand  of 
the  most  skilful  anatomist. 

All   these   maggots,   having  been  placed   where   they 


32  GENERATION  OF  INSECTS 

could  not  escape  in  spite  of  all  their  endeavors,  five  or 
six  days  after  birth  turned  as  usual  into  as  many  eggs 
[pupae],  some  of  red  and  some  of  black  color,  and  not 
of  the  same  size;  subsequently,  at  the  proper  time,  dif- 
ferent kinds  of  flies  came  out,  green  flies,  big  blue  flies, 
black  flies  striped  with  white,  and  others  resembling  the 
marine  locust  and  winged  ants,  which  I  have  described. 
Besides  these  four  kinds  I  also  saw  eight  or  ten  common 
flies,  such  as  daily  hover  and  buzz  about  our  dinner  tables. 

Having  on  the  twentieth  day  noticed  that  among  the 
larger  eggs  [pupae],  there  were  some  still  unhatched,  I 
separated  them  from  the  others  in  a  different  vessel,  and 
two  days  after  there  gradually  came  out  of  them  some 
very  small  gnats,  the  number  of  which  after  two  days 
had  greatly  exceeded  the  number  of  eggs  [pupae].  I 
opened  the  vessel  and  having  broken  five  or  six  of  the 
eggs  [pupae]  I  found  them  so  packed  with  gnats  that 
each  shell  held  at  least  twenty-five  or  thirty,  and  at  most 
forty. 

I  continued  similar  experiments  with  the  raw  and 
cooked  flesh  of  the  ox,  the  deer,  the  buffalo,  the  lion,  the 
tiger,  the  dog,  the  lamb,  the  kid,  the  rabbit;  and  some- 
times with  the  flesh  of  ducks,  geese,  hens,  swallows,  etc., 
and  finally  I  experimented  with  different  kinds  of  fish, 
such  as  sword-fish,  tun,  eel,  sole,  etc.  In  every  case,  one 
or  other  of  the  above-mentioned  kinds  of  flies  were 
hatched,  and  sometimes  all  were  found  in  a  single  animal. 
Besides  these,  there  were  to  be  seen  many  broods  of  small 
black  flies,  some  of  which  were  so  minute  as  to  be 
scarcely  visible,  and  almost  always  I  saw  that  the  decay- 
ing flesh  and  the  fissures  in  the  boxes  where  it  lay  were 
covered  not  alone  with  worms,  but  with  the  eggs  from 
which,  as  I  have  said,  the  worms  were  hatched.     These 


MEAT  IN  CLOSED  FLASKS  33 

eggs  made  me  think  of  those  deposits  dropped  by  flies 
on  meats,  that  eventually  become  worms,  a  fact  noted  by 
the  compilers  of  the  dictionary  of  our  Academy,  and  also 
well  known  to  hunters  and  to  butchers,  who  protect  their 
meats  in  Summer  from  filth  by  covering  them  with  white 
cloths.  Hence  great  Homer,  in  the  nineteenth  book  of 
the  Iliad,  has  good  reason  to  say  that  Achilles  feared 
lest  the  flies  would  breed  worms  in  the  wounds  of  dead 
Patrocles,  whilst  he  was  preparing  to  take  vengeance  on 
Hector. 

Having  considered  these  things,  I  began  to  believe  that 
all  worms  found  in  meat  were  derived  directly  from  the 
droppings  of  flies,  and  not  from  the  putrefaction  of  the 
meat,  and  I  was  still  more  confirmed  in  this  belief  by 
having  observed  that,  before  the  meat  grew  wormy, 
flies  had  hovered  over  it,  of  the  same  kind  as  those  that 
later  bred  in  it.  Belief  would  be  vain  without  the  con- 
firmation of  experiment,  hence  in  the  middle  of  July  I 
put  a  snake,  some  fish,  some  eels  of  the  Arno,  and  a  slice 
of  milk-fed  veal  in  four  large,  wide-mouthed  flasks ;  hav- 
ing well  closed  and  sealed  them,  I  then  filled  the  same 
number  of  flasks  in  the  same  way,  only  leaving  these 
open.  It  was  not  long  before  the  meat  and  the  fish,  in 
these  second  vessels,  became  wormy  and  flies  were  seen 
entering  and  leaving  at  will;  but  in  the  closed  flasks  I 
did  not  see  a  worm,  though  many  days  had  passed  since 
the  dead  flesh  had  been  put  in  them.  Outside  on  the 
paper  cover  there  was  now  and  then  a  deposit,  or  a  mag- 
got that  eagerly  sought  some  crevice  by  which  to  enter 
and  obtain  nourishment.  Meanwhile  the  different  things 
placed  in  the  flasks  had  become  putrid  and  stinking;  the 
fish,  their  bones  excepted,  had  all  been  dissolved  into  a 
thick,  turbid  fluid,  which  on  settling  became  clear,  with 


34  GENERATION  OF  INSECTS 

a  drop  or  so  of  liquid  grease  floating  on  the  surface; 
but  the  snake  kept  its  form  intact,  with  the  same  color,  as 
if  it  had  been  put  in  but  yesterday;  the  eels,  on  the  con- 
trary, produced  little  liquid,  though  they  had  become 
very  much  swollen,  and  losing  all  shape,  looked  like  a 
viscous  mass  of  glue ;  the  veal,  after  many  weeks,  became 
hard  and  dry. 

Not  content  with  these  experiments,  I  tried  many 
others  at  different  seasons,  using  different  vessels.  In 
order  to  leave  nothing  undone,  I  even  had  pieces  of  meat 
put  under  ground,  but  though  remaining  buried  for  weeks, 
they  never  bred  worms,  as  was  always  the  case  when 
flies  had  been  allowed  to  light  on  the  meat.  One  day  a 
large  number  of  worms,  which  had  bred  in  some  buffalo- 
meat,  were  killed  by  my  order;  having  placed  part  in  a 
closed  dish,  and  part  in  an  open  one,  nothing  appeared  in 
the  first  dish,  but  in  the  second  worms  had  hatched,  which 
changing  as  usual  into  egg-shape  balls  [pupae],  finally 
became  flies  of  the  common  kind.  In  the  same  experi- 
ment tried  with  dead  flies,  I  never  saw  anything  breed  in 
the  closed  vessel. 

Hence  I  might  conjecture  that  Father  Kircher,  though 
a  man  worthy  of  esteem,  was  led  into  erroneous  state- 
ments in  the  twelfth  book  of  "  The  Subterranean  World," 
where  he  describes  the  experiment  of  breeding  flies  in 
the  dead  bodies  of  the  same.  "  The  dead  flies,"  says  the 
good  man,  "  should  be  besprinkled  and  soaked  with 
honey-water,  and  then  placed  on  a  copper-plate  exposed 
to  the  tepid  heat  of  ashes ;  afterward  very  minute  worms, 
only  visible  through  the  microscope,  will  appear,  which 
little  by  little  grow  wings  on  the  back  and  assume  the 
shape  of  very  small  flies,  that  slowly  attain  perfect  size." 
I  believe,  however,  that  the  aforesaid  honey-water  only 


KIRCHER'S  EXPERIMENT  35 

serves  to  attract  the  living  flies  to  breed  in  the  corpses 
of  their  comrades  and  to  drop  their  eggs  therein;  and  I 
hold  that  it  is  of  little  use  to  make  the  experiment  in  a 
copper  vessel  heated  by  warm  ashes,  for  without  these 
accessories  the  worms  would  have  bred  in  the  dead  bodies. 
I  also  frankly  confess  my  inability  to  understand  how 
those  small  worms,  described  by  Kircher,  could  change 
into  small  flies  without  at  first,  for  the  space  of  some 
days,  being  converted  into  egg-like  balls  [pupae] ,  nor  how 
those  small  flies  could  hatch  out  so  small  and  then  grow 
larger,  as  all  flies,  gnats,  mosquitoes  and  butterflies,  as 
I  have  observed  many  times,  on  escaping  from  the  chrys- 
alis are  of  the  same  size  that  they  keep  through  life. 
But,  oh,  how  this  single,  ill-considered  experiment  of 
Kircher  must  have  delighted  and  elated  those  persons 
who  fondly  imagined  that  they  could  re-create  man  from 
man's  dead  body  by  means  of  fermentation,  or  other  sim- 
ilar or  still  more  extraordinary  processes!  I  am  of  the 
opinion  that  they  might  have  used  it  as  a  base  for  their 
theories,  and  would  have  boastfully  said : 

"  Thus  'do  great  sages  openly  proclaim 
That  Phoenix  dies  and  is  reborn  the  same." 

Whereupon  these  same  boasters  would  perhaps  have  be- 
stirred themselves  about  that  incredible  undertaking, 
which  has  been  attempted  more  than  once,  as  I  have 
heard  but  have  not  believed.  The  absurd  tale  is  not 
worth  the  trouble  of  confutation,  for  as  Martial  says: 

"  Turpe  est  difficiles  habere  nugas, 
Et  stultus  labor  est  ineptiarum." 

Even  Father  Kircher,  in  the  eleventh  book  of  the  "  Sub- 
terranean World,"  has  nobly  stood  out  against  the  folly 


36  GENERATION  OF  INSECTS 

of  the  charlatan,  Paracelsus,  who,  impiously,  would  have 
us  believe  that  there  is  a  way  to  create  manikins  in  the 
retorts  of  alchemists.  I  am  still  more  scandalized  at  the 
assertions  of  others,  who  make  these  lies  a  foundation 
for  conjecture  concerning  the  greatest  mystery  of  the 
Christian  faith,  namely,  the  resurrection  of  the  body  at 
the  end  of  the  world.  The  Greek,  George  Pisida,  was 
one  of  those  who  exhorted  people  to  believe  in  the  Res- 
urrection, giving  the  phoenix  as  an  example  of  it;  and 
the  famous  chemist.  Sir  Kenelm  Digby,  tried  to  prove 
the  same  by  re-creating  crabs  out  of  their  own  salts,  by 
chemical  means.  The  holy  mysteries  of  our  Faith  can- 
not be  comprehended  by  human  intelligence;  unlike  nat- 
ural things,  these  are  of  the  special  workmanship  of 
God,  who  is  believed  to  be  omnipotent,  and  therefore  it 
is  possible  to  believe  blindly  in  all  His  works,  for  so  they 
are  best  understood.  In  this  sense  a  charming  Italian 
poet  wrote: 

"  Heaven's  secrets  he  alone  of  men  perceives, 
Who  shuts  his  eyes  and  trustfully  believes." 

Leaving  this  long  digression  and  returning  to  my  ar- 
gument, it  is  necessary  to  tell  you  that  although  I  thought 
I  had  proved  that  the  flesh  of  dead  animals  could  not 
engender  worms  unless  the  semina  of  live  ones  were  de- 
posited therein,  still,  to  remove  all  doubt,  as  the  trial  had 
been  made  with  closed  vessels  into  which  the  air  could 
not  penetrate  or  circulate,  I  wished  to  attempt  a  new  ex- 
periment by  putting  meat  and  fish  in  a  large  vase  closed 
only  with  a  fine  Naples  veil,  that  allowed  the  air  to  en- 
ter. For  further  protection  against  flies,  I  placed  the 
vessel  in  a  frame  covered  with  the  same  net.  I  never 
saw  any  worms  in  the  meat,  though  many  were  to  be 


GAUZE  COVERED  FLASK  37 

seen  moving  about  on  the  net-covered  frame.  These,  at- 
tracted by  the  odor  of  the  meat,  succeeded  at  last  in  pen- 
etrating the  fine  meshes  and  would  have  entered  the  vase 
had  I  not  speedily  removed  them.  It  was  interesting,  in 
the  meanwhile,  to  notice  the  number  of  flies  buzzing 
about  which,  every  now  and  then,  would  light  on  the 
outside  net  and  deposit  worms  there.  I  noted  that  some 
left  six  or  seven  at  a  time  there,  and  others  dropped  them 
in  the  air  before  reaching  the  net.  Perhaps  these  were 
of  the  same  breed  mentioned  by  Scaliger,  in  whose  hand, 
by  a  lucky  accident,  a  large  fly  deposited  some  small 
worms,  whence  he  drew  the  conclusion  that  all  flies  bring 
forth  live  worms  directly  and  not  eggs.  But  what  I  have 
already  said  on  the  subject  proves  how  much  this  learned 
man  was  in  error.  It  is  true  that  some  kinds  of  flies  bring 
forth  live  worms  and  some  others  eggs,  as  I  have  proved 
by  experiment.  Nor  am  I  in  the  least  degree  convinced 
by  the  authoritative  testimony  of  Father  Honore  Fabri 
of  the  venerable  Company  of  Jesus,  who  asserts,  in  his 
book  on  the  "  Generation  of  Animals,"  that  flies  always 
drop  eggs  and  never  worms.  It  is  possible  (I  neither 
affirm  nor  deny  it)  that  flies  sometimes  drop  eggs  and  at 
other  times  live  worms,  but  perhaps  they  would  habit- 
ually drop  eggs  if  it  were  not  for  the  heat  of  the  season 
that  matures  the  egg  and  hatches  it  in  the  body  of  the  fly, 
which  as  a  consequence  brings  forth  live  and  active 
worms. 

Johann  Sperling,  who  is  usually  accurate  in  his  state- 
ments, is  also  mistaken  in  writing  in  his  "  Zoology  "  that 
worms  are  not  engendered  by  flies,  but  arise  from  the 
dung  of  the  same,  and  in  explanation  adds  with  false 
premises:  Ratio  huius  rei  animis  candidis  obscura  esse 
nequit;  muscce  enim  omnia  liguriunt,  vermiumque  ma- 


38  GENERATION  OF  INSECTS 

teriam  una  cum  cibo  assumunt,  assumptamque  per  ahum 
reddunt"  Sperling  failed  to  observe  what  may  be  daily 
seen  by  everyone,  namely,  that  flies  have  their  ovaries 
divided  into  two  separate  cells  which  contain  the  eggs  that 
are  sent  down  through  a  single  and  common  canal  from 
which  they  are  ejected,  and,  indeed,  in  such  large  quanti- 
ties as  would  appear  incredible,  certain  green  flies  being 
so  fertile  that  each  one  would  have  in  its  ovary  as  many 
as  two  hundred  eggs.  Hence  Sperling  erred  in  his  be- 
lief that  the  maggots  of  flies  are  generated  from  the  dung 
of  the  same.  A  friend  of  mine  went  equally  wide  in  his 
conclusions,  for  having  noticed  that  a  fly,  entangled  in  a 
web,  dropped  a  worm  whenever  the  spider  bit  it,  he  be- 
lieved that  the  spider's  bite  had  power  to  create  worms  in 
the  bodies  of  flies.  Hence  as  I  have  shown,  no  dead 
animal  can  breed  worms. 

How  then  can  it  be  true  that  bees  are  born  in  the  de- 
cayed flesh  of  bulls  ?  Yet  this  statement  has  been  made 
and  believed.  Varro  relates  that  the  Greeks  called  them 
Povy6va<i  on  that  account.  This  is  a  sample  of  one 
of  those  ancient  falsehoods  of  fabulous  origin,  which  are 
subsequently  confirmed  as  truth  by  other  writers  and  al- 
ways with  some  addition ;  for  all  do  not  describe  the  won- 
derful generation  of  bees  in  the  same  way.  Columella 
declared  that,  not  wishing  to  waste  time,  he  would  ad- 
here to  the  opinion  of  Celsus,  who  conceded  immortality 
to  the  bees,  hence  it  was  superfluous  to  seek  for  them  in 
the  entrails  of  a  decayed  bull.  But  Magone,  quoted  by 
Columella,  teaches  that  the  decayed  viscera  of  the  bull 
is  their  place  of  origin ;  to  which  Pliny  adds,  as  necessary, 
a  covering  of  dung.  Antigonus  Carystius,  in  his 
"  Collection  of  Wonderful  Histories,"  says  that  a  whole 
bullock  must  be  put  under  ground,  allowing  the  horns 


BEES  39 

to  protrude;  these,  in  due  time  being  sawn  off,  out  fly 
(says  he)  the  bees.  Ovid  in  the  first  book  of  the 
''  Fasti  "  largely  follows  Antigonus : 

"  Qua,  dixit,  re  pares  arte,  requiris,  apes? 
Obrue  mactati  corpus  tellure  invend; 
Quod  petis  a  nobis,  obrutus  ille  dabit. 
lussa  facit  pastor,  fervent  exaniina  putri 
De  bove:  mille  animas  una  necata  dcdit." 

Varro,  in  the  second  book  ["  De  Re  Rustica  "]  does  not 
state  whether  the  bullock  must  be  buried,  or  whether  it 
might  be  left  to  rot  above  ground.  Neither  does  Colu- 
mella mention  this  detail,  and  Galen  is  silent  concerning 
it  in  the  fifth  chapter  of  that  book  in  which  he  inquires : 
"Is  that  which  is  contained  in  the  uterus,  an  animal?" 
Virgil  in  his  "  Georgics,"  fourth  book,  seems  to  have  been 
of  the  opinion  that  it  is  not  necessary  to  bury  the  animal, 
but  that  it  might  be  left  in  the  open  air  in  the  woods. 

"  Quattuor  eximos  praestanti  corpore  tauros. 

Qui  tibi  nunc  viridis  depascunt  summa  Lycaei, 
Delige,  et  intacta  totidem  cervice  invencas. 
Quattuor  his  aras  alta  ad  delubra  Dearum 
Constitue,  et  sacrum  iugulis  demitte  cruorem, 
Corporaque  ipsa  bourn  frondoso  desere  liico. 

And  further: 

"  Post,  ubi  nana  suos  Aurora  induxerat  ortus, 
Inferias  Orphei  mittit,  lucumque  revmt. 
Heic  vero  subitum,  ac  dictu  mirabUe,  monstrum 
Adspiciunt:  liquefacta  bourn  per  viscera  toto 
Stridere  apes  utero,  et  ruptis  effervere  costis, 
Immensasque  trahi  nubes:  iamque  arb ore  summa 
Coniluere,  et  lentis  uvam  demittere  ramis!' 


40  GENERATION  OF  INSECTS 

And  yet  he  had  stated  in  some  verses  preceding  these, 
that  a  walled-in  and  covered  place  was  requisite  for  this 
wonderful  creation; 

Exiguus  primum,  atque  ipsos  contractus  ad  usus 
Eligitur  locus  "... 

But  Juba,  king  of  Libya,  according  to  Fiorentino,  in  the 
fifteenth  book  of  the  teachings  of  agriculture,  in- 
sisted that  the  calf  be  placed  in  a  wooden  chest.  Fioren- 
tino does  not  seem  to  approve  of  this,  on  the  contrary, 
holding  the  opinions  of  Democritus  and  Varro,  and  re- 
membering the  saying  of  Virgil,  he  affirms  that  this 
operation  must  proceed  in  a  room  especially  built  for  the 
purpose,  which  he  describes  minutely,  adding  that  com- 
mon bees  arise  from  the  flesh  of  the  bull,  but  that  the 
queens  are  generated  in  the  brain  and  in  the  spinal 
marrow;  those  originating  in  the  brain  being  stronger, 
larger,  and  more  beautiful.  As  for  the  number  of  days 
required  for  this  work  of  creation,  Varro  differs  from 
Virgil,  assigning  thirty-two  instead  of  nine.  Giovanni 
Rucellai  is  silent  on  this  point,  but  he  has  otherwise  fully 
described  this  remarkable  process,  in  his  charming,  little 
poem  on  bees: 

"  In  the  green  country,  bordering  on  the  Nile, 
Whose  waters  rear  the  savage  crocodile, 
Are  people  versed  in  many  a  skilful  art. 
A  means  they  know,  that  I'll  to  thee  impart, 
Of  adding  to  the  number  of  their  bees, 
Should  these  be  lessened  by  some  dire  disease. 
Or  Winter's  frost,  or  any  sudden  harm 
Come  to  the  members  of  the  busy  swarm. 
This  is  the  way  to  recreate  the  race : 
Choose  first  of  all  a  very  sunny  place, 
Enclose  it  well,  with  walls  encircling  round, 


BEES  41 

And  with  a  tiled  roof  let  the  room  be  crowned; 

Four  windows  full  ope  then  to  the  four  winds, 

To  let  in  light,  life's  maker,  without  blinds. 

A  fine  young  bull  I  then  would  have  thee  take, 

(Now  hearken  well,  that  there  be  no  mistake) 

He  must  be  wearing  newly  his  curved  horn ; 

Scarce  three  years  may  have  passed  since  he  was  born; 

His  noble  vigor  will  his  roar  proclaim, 

That  echoing  loud  puts  thunder,  e'en,  to  shame. 

Now,  haply,  hast  thou  heavy  boughs  and  sound 

To  beat  the  calf  till  he  fall  on  the  ground; 

Then,  having  shut  him  in  the  walled  space. 

Fresh  poplar  twigs  and  willow  thou  must  place 

Under  the  body,  and  on  top  be  spread 

Thyme  and  serpellium;  cassia's  for  the  head. 

This  must  occur  in  the  fair  time  of  Spring, 

When,  to  the  Alps,  on  ever  hastening  wing. 

The  cranes  return  in  a  long,  fleeting  tribe 

And  the  Greek  delta  in  the  air  describe. 

Now  from  the  bullock's  tender,  yielding  bones 

A  tepid  humor  gently  oozing  comes. 

(Oh,  Power  of  God,  how  measureless  Thou  art!) 

Marvel  of  marvels !     Now,  from  every  part. 

There  come  forth  animals  of  simple  kind. 

Formless  at  first,  dragging  no  legs  behind. 

Wingless,  mere  worms,  that  scarcely  seem  in  motion. 

What  they  may  be,  at  first,  one  has  no  notion; 

But  soon  the  spirit  does  in  them  create 

The  members  all,  and  limb  to  limb  relate, 

And  many  varied  colors  charm  the  eye. 

As  with  spread  wings  the  creatures  humming  fly ; 

Like  misty  rain,  they  seem,  as  on  they  come, 

Lashed  by  the  wind  and  sparkling  in  the  sun; 

Or  like  bright  arrows  from  the  bended  bow 

Of  Turk  or  Parthian,  they  swiftly  go." 

Among  the  Greeks  and  the  Latins  there  were  many 
poets,  who  described  this  origin  of  bees,  or  alluded  to  it 
in  various  writings ;  Philetas  of  Cos,  preceptor  of  Ptolo- 


42  GENERATION  OF  INSECTS 

mseus  Philadelphus,  Archelaus,  the  Athenian,  cited  by 
Varro,  Philas  of  Tarsus  (in  the  description  of  his  famous 
antidote),  Georgius  Pisida,  Nicander  and,  lastly,  Ovid, 
who  sings  in  the  fifteenth  of  the  "  Metamorphoses  " : 

"  I  quoque,  delectos  mactatos  obrue  tauros : 
(Cognita  res  usu)  de  putri  viscere  passim 
Florilegae  nascuntur  apes,  quae  more  parentum 
Rura  colunt,  operique  favent,  in  spemque  laborant." 

Many  prose  writers  also  add  confirmation  to  the  the- 
ory, among  whom  may  be  mentioned  Origen,  Plutarch, 
the  Hebrew  Philo,  etc.  These  ancients  are  followed  by 
all  the  modern  philologists  and  philosophers,  who  admit 
this  fable  to  be  true,  and  often  on  this  foundation  aspire 
to  erect  great  structures.  Even  that  sublime  writer,  that 
brilliant  light  of  the  modern  schools,  Pierre  Gassendi, 
relates  the  tale  as  a  true  one,  and  having  noticed  that 
Virgil  prescribes  that  the  aforesaid  operation  should  oc- 
cur in  the  beginning  of  Spring,  before  the  plants  begin  to 
flower : 

"  Hoc  geritus,  Zephyris  primum  impellentibus  undas, 
Ante  novis  rubeant  quam  prata  coloribus;  ante 
Garrula  quam  tignis  nidum  suspendat  hirundo:" 

Gassendi  says  that  the  admonition  is  wisely  made,  for 
in  that  season  the  bullock  [of  the  experiment]  has  fed 
on  grasses  bearing  seeds,  which  later  would  have  flow- 
ered ;  and  he  further  adds  that  Virgil  and  Fiorentino  cor- 
rectly advise  that  the  dead  calf  be  placed  on  a  layer  of 
thyme  and  cassia,  for  these  herbs  contain  seeds,  most 
efificacious  in  the  generation  of  bees ;  being  very  aromatic 
and  pungent,  they  penetrate  the  rotten  mass  of  the  dead 
body,  and  make  it  turn  into  those  same  industrious  in- 
sects. 


BEES  43 

I  repeat  that  many  were,  and  still  others  are  now,  im- 
bued with  this  idea,  as  for  instance;  Pietro  Crescenzi, 
Ulysse  Aldrovandi,  Fortunio  Liceto,  Jerome  Cardano, 
Thomas  Moufet,  John  Johnston,  Francis  Grembs,  Thom- 
as Bartholin,  Francesco  Folli,  inventor  of  the  instru- 
ment which  indicates  the  humidity  and  dryness  of  the 
air,  and  Philip  James  Sachs,  a  man  of  most  inquiring 
mind,  who  in  his  learned  book  the  "  Gamberologia " 
makes  every  effort  to  uphold  this  thing  as  true;  and 
though  Johann  Sperling,  who  is  an  accurate  writer,  had 
stated  in  his  "  Zoology  "  that  during  a  great  pestilence 
among  the  herds  of  Wittemburg,  that  fictitious  genera- 
tion of  bees  was  not  observed,  nor  seen  in  any  way,  nev- 
ertheless, Sachs,  quoting  in  his  own  defense  the  "  Idol- 
atry," of  Gerard  Voss,  answers  that  the  coldness  of  the 
climate  of  that  country  was  the  cause  of  the  failure  to 
produce  bees. 

The  artificial  generation  of  bees  was  also  a  matter  of 
belief  with  Father  Athanasius  Kircher,  who  even  went 
further,  stating  in  the  twelfth  book  of  the  "  Subterranean 
World  '^  that  worms  resembling  caterpillars  arise  in  the 
dung  of  oxen,  and  putting  out  wings  change  into  bees. 
I  do  not  know  whether  that  estimable  author  had  ever 
carefully  made  this  experiment ;  but  when  I  made  it,  fol- 
lowing Father  Kircher's  directions  and  leaving  the  dung 
in  an  exposed  place,  worms  were  hatched  invariably  in 
Spring,  Summer  and  Fall,  and  from  the  worms  arose 
flies  and  gnats,  but  not  bees :  if  however  the  dung  were 
kept  in  a  tight  place  where  no  flies  nor  gnats  could  pene- 
trate to  lay  their  eggs,  I  observed  no  generation  of  any 
kind. 

Returning  to  my  subject,  I  afUrm  anew  that  numerous 
modern  authors  are  convinced  that  bees  originate  in  the 


44  GENERATION  OF  INSECTS 

flesh  of  bulls.  The  learned  Father  Honore  Fabri,  whose 
famous  works  will  never  be  buried  in  the  gloom  of  ob- 
livion, reiterates  this  belief  in  his  book  on  the  "  Genera- 
tion of  Animals."  I  could  name  many  more  if  I  were 
not  summoned  to  answer  the  reproof  of  some  persons 
who  sharply  remind  me  of  the  account  given  in  the  four- 
teenth chapter  of  the  Book  of  Judges,  where  Samson 
having  killed  a  lion,  down  in  the  vineyards  of  Timnath, 
on  going  afterwards  to  view  the  carcass,  found  in  it  a 
beautiful  swarm  of  bees,  that  had  already  built  their 
honey-combs  therein.  From  this  source  comes  also  the 
statement  of  Thomas  Moufet,  in  his  work  on  insects, 
that  some  bees  are  born  in  the  flesh  of  bulls,  which  are 
called  Tavpoy€V€i<s  and  others  in  the  flesh  of  lions, 
called  on  that  account  AcovTToycvcis,  and  that  these  last 
are  the  better  race,  being  stronger  and  more  courageous, 
for  they  inherit  ferocity  from  their  parent  and  do  not 
fear  if  irritated  to  attack  men  and  to  kill  animals  of  all 
kinds;  hence  Aristotle  and  Pliny  bear  witness  that  even 
horses  have  been  slain  by  them.  For  this  reason  in  the 
Holy  Scriptures  the  strongest  and  most  terrible  enemies 
are  often  compared  to  bees.  In  Isaiah  we  read :  "  The 
Lord  shall  hiss  for  the  bee,  that  is  in  the  land  of  Assyria," 
which  was  thus  interpreted  by  Chaldseus :  *'  The  Lord 
will  give  voice  to  the  armies,  that  are  as  strong  as  bees, 
and  will  lead  them  to  the  borders  of  the  land  of  As- 
syria." Rabbi  Salomon,  explaining  this  passage,  says: 
"  He  will  call  the  bees,  that  is,  an  army  of  strong  men, 
who  will  inflict  wounds  like  bees."  This  difliculty  was 
considered  by  the  erudite  Samuel  Bochart  in  his  treatise 
on  the  animals  of  the  Bible,  where  he  wisely  says  that  the 
story  of  finding  bees  in  the  lion's  carcass  is  true  enough, 
but  that  it  is  no  reason  for  the  conclusion  that  they  were 


BEES  45 

born  there ;  the  Sacred  Text  does  not  state  it,  on  the  con- 
trary, one  would  rather  assume  that  when  Samson  re- 
turned to  look  at  the  dead  lion,  it  was  no  longer  a  car- 
cass, but  rather  a  skeleton  without  flesh.  This  same  au- 
thority adds  subsequently,  that  the  lion  might  well  in- 
deed have  become  a  mere  dried  skeleton,  for  when 
Samson  returned  it  was  ''  after  some  days,"  as  the  He- 
brew text  reads,  which  means  "  after  a  year."  Bochart 
affirms  that  this  manner  of  using  days  instead  of  a  year 
is  of  frequent  occurrence  in  the  Holy  Scriptures,  and 
cites  numerous  passages  which  I  omit  for  the  sake  of 
brevity. 

If  then  Samson  returned  after  a  year's  time  to  view 
the  lion's  body,  it  is  most  probable  that  nothing  was  left 
of  it  but  a  bare  skeleton,  inside  of  which  bees  may  well 
have  been  at  honey-making,  for  Herodotus  mentions  such 
a  case;  relating  that  the  Anathusians  having  cut  off  the 
head  of  a  certain  man  named  Onesilo,  and  spiked  it  on  the 
gate  of  Amatunta,  on  becoming  dry  it  was  inhabited  by  a 
swarm  of  bees.  The  same  thing  happened  in  the  tomb  of 
divine  Hippocrates  (if  we  may  believe  the  account  given 
in  his  life  by  Soranus).  For  my  part,  I  remember  often 
having  heard  stated  by  Cav.  Albergati  (a  man  of  letters 
of  much  erudition),  that  he  saw  a  large  swarm,  one  day, 
hanging  on  the  skull  of  a  horse.  At  this  point  the  ques- 
tion might  arise  whether  some  bees  might  have  sought 
to  eat  the  flesh  of  Samson's  dead  lion,  and  in  eating  it 
might  have  dropped  eggs  upon  it,  that  later  hatched  into 
young  bees,  which  proceeded  to  build  their  combs  in  the 
bony  structure.  To  this  question  I  would  at  once  re- 
spond by  saying  that  bees  are  very  dainty  animals,  and 
of  such  nice  and  delicate  taste,  that  they  not  only  do  not 
eat  dead  flesh,  but  they  loathe  it  extremely.     I  have  made 


46  GENERATION  OF  INSECTS 

the  experiment,  at  different  times  and  places,  of  putting 
pieces  of  meat  near  the  apiaries,  but  the  bees  would  never 
go  near  them.  Still,  if  you  do  not  credit  my  statement 
in  the  matter,  Signor  Carlo,  at  least  you  will  believe  what 
Aristotle  says  in  chapter  40  of  book  14  of  the  "  History 
of  Animals  " ;  you  will  believe  Varro,  and  Didymus,  who 
copied  him;  and  the  Greek,  Manuel  Philes,  who  once 
flourished,  having  obtained  all  the  material  of  his  work 
from  ^lianus.  Then  there  is  the  authority  of  Curopalata 
and  of  Balbo,  emperors  of  Constantinople,  and  finally 
there  is  Pliny,  who  surely  has  weight  with  you ;  he  wrote : 
"  Omnes  carne  vescuntur,  contra  quam  apes,  quae  nullum 
corpus  attingunt."  But  good  Pliny,  forgetting  probably 
this  statement,  contradicts  himself  in  chapter  14,  book  21, 
where  he  wrote :  "  Si  cibus  deesse  censeatur  apibus, 
uvas  passas  siccasve,  ficosque  tusas,  ad  fores  earum 
posuisse  conveniet.  Item  lanas  tractas  madentes  passo, 
aut  defruto,  aut  aqua  mulsa.  Gallinarum  etiam  crudas 
carnes." 

On  considering  this  manifest  contradiction  of  Pliny's 
I  thought  it  might  be  due  to  an  error  in  the  copy,  but  I 
removed  all  doubt  by  comparing  this  passage  with  many 
old  written  texts  of  the  most  celebrated  libraries  of  Italy. 
In  all  I  invariably  found  the  same  words  as  occur  in  the 
old  Pliny  printed  in  Rome  in  1473  ^^^  ^^  ^^^  Parma  edi- 
tion of  1480.  There  is  however  this  difference  to  be 
noted,  i.  e.  all  the  printed  works  give :  "  Gallinarum 
etiam  crudas  carnes,''  while  the  MSS  read :  "  gallinarum 
etiam  nudas  carnes."  I  leave  the  critics  to  decide  which 
is  the  better  reading,  but  I  believe  that  Pliny  wrote :  "  cru- 
das carnes,"  having  obtained  his  data  from  Columella, 
who,  in  chapter  14  of  book  9  of  his  treatise,  states  that 
when  food  was  lacking  for  the  bees,  many  persons  were 


HORNETS  AND  WASPS  47 

wont  to  put  unpicked  dead  birds  in  the  apiaries.  It  is 
strange  how  writers  itch  to  contradict  each  other;  and 
this  is  perhaps  why  Pietro  Crescenzi  insists  that  hungry 
bees  should  not  be  fed  with  raw  meat,  but  should  be 
given  roast  chicken.  I  prefer  to  believe  as  Pliny  does, 
that  bees  do  not  eat  meat  unless  forced  to  do  so  by 
famine. 

Bees  are  of  different  nature  from  hornets  and  wasps, 
for  these  greedily  devour  any  kind  of  meat  and  putrefied 
flesh,  that  may  be  placed  before  them,  as  I  have  tried 
several  times ;  not  only  do  they  eat  meat,  but  they  scrape 
and  roll  it  into  little  balls,  which  they  carry  to  their 
nests.  These  insects  are  so  immoderately  greedy  that 
sometimes,  when  hungry,  they  even  dare  to  attack  living 
animals.  Thomas  Moufet,  in  his  "  Theatrum  Insect- 
arum,"  relates  that  in  England  a  wasp  was  seen  to  pursue  a 
swallow,  and  having  stung  it  to  death,  gorged  itself  with 
the  blood.  Nor  do  they  leave  human  flesh  alone.  Hence 
Cointo  of  Smyrna  said  that  the  Greeks  led  by  Neoptole- 
mus  hurled  themselves  into  the  fray  like  wasps  flying 
from  their  nests  in  search  of  human  food.  Likewise 
the  sovereign  poet,  who  in  his  divine  works  "  showed 
the  full  power  of  the  Tuscan  tongue,"  took  as  his  theme 
the  sufferings  of  those  doomed  ones,  who  on  the  other 
side  of  Hell's  gate  were  tormented  with  wasps : 

"  These  miscreants  who  never  were  alive 
Were  naked  and  were  stung  exceedingly 
By  gad-flies  and  by  hornets  that  were  there. 
These  did  their  faces  irrigate  with  blood, 
Which  with  their  tears  commingled  at  their  feet 
By  the  disgusting  worms  was  gathered  up." 

Wasps  are  gluttonous  eaters  of  serpents,  if  we  are  to 
believe  Pliny,  and  this  food,  says  he,  makes  their  sting 


48  GENERATION  OF  INSECTS 

more  venomous ;  which  statement  is  confirmed  by  ^lianus 
in  chapter  15  book  9  of  the  ''  History  of  Animals,"  where 
he  relates  that  wasps  hasten  to  infect  their  sting  with 
the  toxin  of  the  dead  viper;  from  which  human  malice 
subsequently  got  the  art  of  poisoning  darts.  Ulysses, 
as  is  recounted  in  the  Odyssey,  sailed  to  Ephyra  to  learn 
this  art  from  a  certain  Ilus  Mermerida,  and  Hercules, 
still  earlier  than  Ulysses,  as  is  told,  made  his  arrows 
deadly  by  dipping  them  in  the  Hydra's  blood.  It  is  not 
credible  that  the  stings  of  wasps  and  hornets  are  poison- 
ous because  these  insects  have  fed  indiscriminately  on 
serpent's  flesh,  for  that  could  be  granted  only  in  case 
they  had  dipped  their  stings  in  the  fatal  liquid  hidden  in 
the  sheaths  that  cover  the  canines  of  the  viper,  as  I 
stated  in  my  "  Observations  of  Vipers."  If  indeed  wasps 
and  hornets  possessed  this  malicious  natural  disposition 
(as  ^lianus  asserts),  I  for  one,  would  not  be  willing  to 
believe  it.  In  the  remaining  fragment  of  a  book  of  Theo- 
phrastus,  preserved  in  the  Library  of  Fozio,  on  "  Ani- 
mals that  are  supposed  to  be  malicious,"  he  sagely  holds 
that  malice  is  never  found  in  animals  that  are  not  en- 
dowed with  speech.  For  if  the  newt,  as  people  say,  eats 
its  cast  off  skin ;  if  the  sea  calf,  on  being  caught,  vomits 
its  rennet ;  if  mares  tear  from  their  foals'  heads  the  fab- 
ulous hippomane  and  devour  it;  if  the  deer  (which  is  also 
a  lie)  hides  his  right  horn  underground  when  it  falls  off; 
if  the  lynx  conceals  his  urine  from  the  sight  of  man ;  and 
if  the  hedgehog,  when  caught  by  the  hunter,  spoils  his 
skin  by  urinating  on  it;  these  acts,  according  to  Theo- 
phrastus,  are  performed  either  through  fear  or  for  some 
other  reason  peculiar  to  the  animals  in  question,  but  not 
because  they  maliciously  desire  to  deprive  man  of  those 
excrements,  which  the  common  people  believe  to  be  use- 


HORNETS  AND  WASPS  49 

ful  in  certain  diseases  and  also  in  the  ridiculous  com- 
pounds of  witches.  Imitating  Theophrastus,  I  would 
still  further  say,  that  wasps  and  hornets  buzz  about  the 
dead  bodies  of  snakes,  not  in  order  to  obtain  poison  for 
their  stings,  but  to  get  nourishment ;  and  to  the  same  end 
do  they  persecute  bees  and  flies.  But  still  wasps  do  live 
on  fruit  and  flowers,  both  fresh  and  dry,  and  they  devour 
grapes,  particularly  of  the  Muscat  variety,  with  incredi- 
ble greediness,  as  Cointo,  the  Smyrnian,  testifies  and  as 
may  be  daily  verified  by  observation. 

As  I  have  said,  it  is  false  that  bees  are  born  in  the 
decayed  flesh  of  bulls;  neither  can  one  believe  the  tale 
that,  in  some  parts  of  Russia,  serpents  are  found,  which 
feed  on  milk,  and  have  a  head  shaped  like  a  duck's,  with 
a  bill.  These  snakes  are  called  "  zmya,"  and  are  said  to 
generate  bees  in  their  living  bodies  and  then  to  throw 
them  up  little  by  little,  at  the  rate  of  two  swarms  a  year ; 
these  bees,  being  called  "  zmyoiocki,"  in  the  language  of 
the  country,  retain  much  of  their  serpentine  nature,  and 
are  armed  with  a  poisonous  sting,  that  is  often  fatal. 
This  story  is  held  to  be  a  fact  in  those  provinces,  and 
many  report  that  they  have  seen  those  peculiar  snakes. 
A  man,  named  Szizucha,  in  Paris,  confirmed  this  account, 
as  I  have  learned  in  a  letter  to  me  from  the  erudite  Signor 
Menagio,  who  does  not  believe  the  tale,  however.  On 
the  contrary,  Signor  Menagio  considers  that,  assuming 
the  existence  of  snakes  that  vomit  bees,  they  must  have 
been  swallowed  alive,  at  some  time  when  the  snakes 
were  robbing  honey  from  the  hives.  He  says  in  the  let- 
ter :  "  II  n'y  a  point  d'  apparence  de  croire,  que  ces  abeil- 
les  s'engendrent  dans  le  corps  de  cette  sorte  de  serpens; 
et  il  est  vraisemblable,  que  ces  serpens  les  ayant  avallees 
avec  leur  miel,  car  'la  plupart  des  serpens  aiment  les 


50  GENERATION  OF  INSECTS 

choses  donees,  ils  les  revomissent  de  suite,  en  estant 
piquez."  Perhaps  this  phenomenon  may  have  occurred 
once,  and  have  been  observed  once,  which  was  enough 
to  give  rise  to  a  fable,  that  gained  universal  credence. 
Be  this  as  it  may,  I  shall  add  another  fable  to  it,  namely 
the  origin  of  wavSps  and  hornets  from  dead  flesh,  al- 
though by  universal  conformity  of  opinion  it  has  been 
accepted  as  the  truth. 

Antigonus,  Pliny,  Plutarch,  Nicander,  ^lianus,  and 
Archelaus,  as  quoted  by  Varro,  teach  that  wasps  orig- 
inate in  the  dead  flesh  of  horses.  Virgil  admits  it  to  be 
also  the  origin  of  hornets.  Ovid  mentions  only  hornets : 
"  Pressus  humo  bellator  equus  crabronis  origo  est." 
Thomas  Moufet  reports  that  hornets  are  generated  in 
the  hard  parts  of  horseflesh,  and  wasps  in  the  tender 
parts.  The  Greek  commentators  of  Nicander  attribute 
the  creative  property  to  the  horse's  skin  alone,  adding 
as  a  necessary  condition  that  the  horse  must  have  been 
bitten  and  torn  by  a  wolf.  But  Servius,  the  grammarian, 
turned  everything  topsy-turvy  by  asserting  that  drones 
come  from  horses,  hornets  from  mules,  and  wasps  from 
asses.  Olimpiodorus,  Pliny,  Cardano  and  Porta  insist 
that  ass-flesh  gives  birth  to  drones  and  beetles,  but  not  to 
wasps.  Oro  in  the  twenty-third  chapter,  book  second, 
of  the  "  Hieroglyphics,"  speaks  of  wasps  born  in  the  flesh 
of  the  crocodile ;  and  Antigonus  in  the  twenty-third  chap- 
ter of  "  Wonderful  Histories  "  had  occasion  to  say  that, 
terrestrial  scorpions,  but  not  wasps  are  born  spontane- 
ously in  the  flesh  of  the  crocodile.  If  such  creation  really 
occurs  in  the  flesh  of  this  reptile,  I  shall  not  perplex  my- 
self with  dwelling  on  it,  because  I  have  not  made  any 
experiments  in  the  case  nor  do  I  think  that  I  shall  be 
able  to  make  any  at  present.     I  wish  firmly  to  believe 


HORNETS  AND  WASPS  5 1 

that,  as  I  have  found  out  the  falsehood  concerning  the 
origin  of  those  other  insects  supposed  to  arise  from  the 
flesh  of  mules,  asses,  and  horses,  I  should  find  the  story 
of  the  dead  and  decayed  crocodile  as  the  parent  of  wasps 
and  scorpions  to  be  equally  fabulous.  My  experiments 
have  proved  just  as  false  the  accounts  of  Fortunio  Liceto, 
Giovanni  Batista  Porta,  Grevino,  Moufet,  and  Nierem- 
berg  wherein  is  asserted  that  scorpions  originate  from 
buried  crabs.  These  writers  have  accepted  with  too 
much  credulity,  and  too  naively  Pliny's  doctrine,  which 
perhaps  in  turn  was  borrowed  from  Ovid's  "  Metamor- 
phoses," 

"  Concava   littoreo  demas   si   brachia  cancro, 
Caetera  supponas  terrae,  de  parte  sepulta 
Scorpius  exhibit,  caudaque  minabitur  unca." 

But  Pliny  adds  to  this  saying  of  Ovid's  a  condition  of 
the  kind  held  in  veneration  by  the  people,  i.  e.  that  this 
work  should  be  done  on  precisely  those  days,  during 
which  the  sun  travels  in  the  sign  of  Cancer.  "  Soli  Can- 
cri  signum  transeunte,  fet  ipsorum,  cum  examinati  sint, 
corpus  transfigurari  in  scorpiones,  narratur  in  siceo." 
This  fable  was  not  in  the  least  credited  by  Thomas 
Bartholin,  a  man,  by  universal  consent,  numbered  among 
the  greatest  and  most  famous  physicians  and  anatomists 
of  past  and  present  ages,  for  in  a  letter  written  to  the 
learned  Philip  James  Sachs,  he  repeatedly  affirms  having 
observed  that  in  Denmark,  where  there  is  an  abundance 
of  crabs,  scorpions  do  not  breed  in  their  dead  bodies. 
Sachs  does  not  adhere  however  to  the  ideas  of  Bartholin ; 
on  the  contrary,  he  believes  in  such  generation,  adding 
that  the  experiments  made  in  Denmark  prove  nothing 
at  all,  as  Northern  countries  are  always  entirely  lacking 


52  GENERATION  OF  INSECTS 

in  scorpions.  Nevertheless,  I  feel  inclined  to  believe  (be 
it  said  with  all  due  deference  to  such  a  worthy  man  of 
letters)  that  Sachs  is  perhaps  mistaken,  as  are  all  the 
aforesaid  modern  authors  in  common  with  Ovid  and 
Pliny.  Not  content  with  having  scorpions  come  out  of 
crabs,  Pliny  would  have  it  that  sweet  basil,  when 
pounded,  and  then  covered  with  a  stone,  would  also 
breed  them,  and  his  ideas  were  largely  followed  in  later 
times  by  the  Greek  compiler  of  agricultural  rules,  who 
however  does  not  allow  the  sweet  basil  to  be  buried  under 
the  stone,  but  avows  that  it  must  be  masticated  and  then 
exposed  to  the  sun.  Porta  foUov/s  this  man's  opinion, 
but  Mattiuoli  and  Liceto  hold  to  that  of  Pliny.  In  fact 
an  infinite  number  of  others  attribute  a  like  faculty  to 
this  aromatic  herb.  Wolfgang  Oeffer,  quoted  in  Sachs's 
"  Cammaralogia,"  relates  that,  in  our  times,  a  certain 
apothecary  of  Vienna,  more  ingenious  than  his  fellows, 
had  found  a  way  to  breed  the  dangerous  little  creatures  ar- 
tificially. In  the  months  of  July  or  August,  the  sun  being 
in  Cancer,  he  pounded  the  sweet  basil  thoroughly  and 
spread  it  over  a  red-hot  tile  to  the  depth  of  three  fingers ; 
this  he  covered  immediately  with  a  similar  tile  and  ce- 
mented the  joints  with  mud  made  of  sand  and  horse- 
dung  ;  then  he  put  the  tiles  in  the  cellar  for  a  month,  and 
afterwards  on  opening  them,  he  found  the  scorpions 
ready  born  inside.  Whereupon  the  good  man  made  use 
of  them  for  all  purposes  in  which  scorpions  are  medically 
efficacious. 

An  old  opinion,  though  it  be  false,  has  great  power 
over  the  minds  of  men.  It  is  therefore  not  strange  that 
Jacques  Houllier,  a  physician  of  great  repute,  should  be- 
lieve, as  is  stated  in  Book  first  of  his  '*  Practice  of  Medi- 


SCORPIONS  53 

cine,"  that  a  scorpion  was  born  in  the  head  of  a  certain 
man,  an  Italian,  who  had  smelt  sweet  basil  too  freely. 

"'Twas  perchance  true,  but  not  within  belief 
Of  him   who  is  the  master  of  his  mind." 

But  if  Houllier  had  believed  what  Galen  wrote  about 
sweet  basil  in  the  second  book  of  the  "  Properties  of 
Foods  "  such  an  absurdity  would  not  have  escaped  his 
pen.  Michael  Fehr,  quoted  by  Sachs,  was  more  accurate 
in  his  statements  and  more  commendable,  for  having  read 
in  Galen  that  scorpions  are  not  generated  in  sweet  basil, 
he  tried  the  experiment,  and  found  that  Galen  was  right 
and  all  the  others  wrong.  Equally  ignorant  are  those, 
who  assert  that  not  only  sweet  basil,  but  other  things, 
such  as  watercress  and  rotten  wood,  produce  these  crea- 
tures. Fortunio  Liceto  relates  that  J.  Marta,  the  Nea- 
politan, could  breed  scorpions  from  the  soil  of  the  earth 
by  sprinkling  it  with  onion-juice,  and  the  wonderful 
secret  mentioned  by  Avicenna  was  of  similar  nature. 
Aristotle  more  truly  taught  that  scorpions  are  generated 
by  the  union  of  the  males  with  the  females,  which  do  not 
lay  eggs  subsequently,  as  is  the  habit  of  many  other  in- 
sects, but  bring  forth  the  young  scorpions  alive  and  per- 
fect according  to  their  species. 

I  also  made  frequent  experiments  with  scorpions. 
Having  ordered  a  large  quantity  of  them  to  be  brought 
to  me  from  the  mountains  of  Pistoia,  I  selected  some  fe- 
males, which  are  easily  distinguished  from  the  males  by 
their  large  size,  and  on  the  twentieth  of  July  I  put  them 
separately  into  glass  vessels,  leaving  them  without  food. 
Some  of  them  died  before  parturition  but  one  of  them,  on 
August  fifth,  brought  forth,  not  as  according  to  Pliny 


54  GENERATION  OF  INSECTS 

and  Aristotle  only  eleven,  but  as  many  as  thirty-eight 
young  scorpions,  well-formed  and  of  milk-white  color, 
that  changed  to  a  rusty  red,  and  on  the  sixth  day  of  the 
same  month  another  female,  enclosed  in  another  vessel, 
brought  forth  twenty-seven  young  of  the  same  color  as 
the  first.  The  young  behaved  in  the  same  manner,  re- 
maining attached  to  the  back  and  the  belly  of  the  mother. 
They  were  alive  up  to  the  nineteenth  day,  but  from  that 
time  they  began  to  die,  and  only  two  were  alive  on  the 
twenty-fourth  day  of  August,  after  which  they  were  also 
found  dead.  In  the  meanwhile,  in  order  to  ascertain 
how  the  insects  were  placed  in  the  abdomen  of  the  mother 
before  birth,  I  cut  open  several  females  and  found  that 
there  were  never  less  than  twenty-four  nor  more  than 
forty  young  inside.  These  were  all  united  in  a  row,  and 
covered  with  an  almost  invisible  membrane,  through 
which  the  scorpions  could  be  distinctly  seen,  each  one 
being  separated  from  the  other  by  a  very  fine  thread,  a 
thickening,  as  it  were,  of  the  membrane  itself.  On  this 
occasion  I  perceived  that  there  was  no  truth  in  the  re- 
ports of  Aristotle  and  A.  Caristio  that  the  mothers  are 
killed  by  the  newborn  young,  nor,  as  Pliny  relates,  that 
the  young  are  all  killed  by  the  mother,  with  the  exception 
of  one  more  clever  than  the  rest,  who  runs  up  on  his 
mother's  back  out  of  reach  of  her  sting,  and  afterwards 
avenges  his  brothers'  death  by  killing  his  parent.  I  took 
pains  to  verify  Rodio's  statement  concerning  a  second 
litter  following  the  first  in  a  short  time,  but  I  did  not 
succeed  in  observing  anything  further,  nor,  on  opening 
the  bellies  of  some  pregnant  females,  did  I  see  anything 
but  the  usual  string  of  white  scorpions.  Still  it  is  not 
impossible  that  the  females  had  already  brought  forth 


SCORPIONS  55 

many  litters,  and  that  I  had  always  chanced  upon  the 
last. 

I  would  not  like  to  have  you  believe,  Signor  Carlo,  that 
there  is  such  a  scarcity  of  scorpions  in  our  Italy  as  Pliny 
says  obtained  in  his  time,  writing  in  book  eleven  of  his 
Natural  History :  "  Ssepe  Psylli,  qui  reliquarum  venena 
terrarum  invehentes,  qusestus  sui  causa  peregrinis  malis 
implevere  Italiam,  hos  quoque  importare  conati  sunt. 
Sed  vivere  intra  Siculi  coeli  regionem  non  potuere.  Vi- 
suntur  tamen  aliquando  in  Italia,  sed  innocui ;" —  for 
even  to-day  in  the  city  of  Florence  alone,  nearly  four 
hundred  pounds  are  consumed  in  the  making  of  oil  as  an 
antidote  to  poison.  I  believe,  however,  that  Pliny  was 
right  in  affirming  that  the  Italian  scorpions  are  not  poi- 
sonous, as  I  have  often  seen  the  peasants  carry  them 
about  for  sale  in  Florence,  and  handle  them  freely,  thrust- 
ing their  bare  hands  into  the  sacks  and,  though  frequently 
stung,  show  no  signs  of  poison.  And  yet  all  the  Tuscan 
scorpions  are  of  the  kind  that  have  six  joints,  or  vertebrae, 
in  the  tail,  which  Avicenna  considered  more  poisonous 
than  others. 

I  do  not  wish  to  neglect  telling  you  that,  as  the  Italian 
scorpions  which  I  have  examined,  have  only  six  joints 
in  the  tail,  the  same  is  so  with  the  scorpions  of  Egypt, 
as  I  noticed  in  the  case  of  those  which  were  sent  in  the 
year  1657  to  my  Lord,  the  Grand  Duke.  There  is,  how- 
ever, no  little  difference  between  ours  and  the  foreign 
ones :  though  both  are  of  the  same  blackish  color,  the 
Egyptian  scorpions  are  much  larger  and  fuller  than  the 
others.  Having  placed  in  the  scales  an  Egyptian  scor- 
pion, cleansed  of  its  entrails,  I  found  that  it  weighed 
twenty  grains,  while  one  from  Italy  on  being  weighed, 


56  GENERATION  OF  INSECTS 

scarcely  reached  five.  The  joints  in  the  tail  of  the 
Egyptian  scorpion  are  all  of  almost  equal  length  and  size, 
but  in  our  kind  the  fifth  vertebrae  before  the  sting  is  al- 
v^ays  twice  as  long  as  the  others.  I  have  seen  another 
species  of  scorpion  somewhat  different  from  the  two 
kinds  above  mentioned.  This  was  sent  to  me  from  the 
kingdom  of  Tunis  by  Dr.  Pagni,  a  celebrated  professor 
of  medicine  in  the  famous  Pisan  Academy,  who  is  at 
present  in  Africa.  Tunis  produces  these  scorpions  most 
abundantly :  they  are  called  "  akrab "  in  the  Berber 
tongue  and  are  larger  than  the  Egyptian  kind.  Once  I 
weighed  two  live  ones,  each  of  which  attained  to  the  fifth 
part  of  an  ounce,  and  they  were  lighter  than  usual  owing 
to  long  deprivation  from  food.  Their  color  is  mostly  of 
a  faded  yellow  green,  almost  transparent  like  amber,  ex- 
cept in  the  two  claws,  which  are  of  a  dirty  color  like 
chalcedony ;  the  point  of  the  sting  is  quite  black.  There 
are  some  white  ones,  but  black  ones  are  rare.  The  claws 
are  made  up  of  four  joints.  The  legs  are  eight  in  num- 
ber, and  the  two  nearest  the  claws  are  shorter  than  the 
others ;  the  second  pair  are  longer  than  the  first,  and  the 
third,  longer  than  the  second ;  the  fourth  are  longer  than 
all  the  others.  The  whole  back  is  made  up  of  nine  joints 
and  in  the  part  between  the  two  branches  of  the  claws 
can  be  seen  two  very  small,  round  eminences,  which  are 
black  and  shiny.  Under  the  belly,  which  is  composed  of 
five  joints,  there  are  two  dentated  blades,  that  look  ex- 
actly like  saws,  which,  when  the  scorpion  walks,  he  dis- 
tends and  agitates  as  if  he  wished  to  use  them  as  wings. 
The  tail  has  six  vertebrae  or  joints,  and  the  last  of  these 
is  the  sting,  very  large  and  hooked.  The  other  five  ver- 
tebrae at  the  upper  end  are  hollowed  out  with  dentated 
edges,    and    underneath    they    are    round,    convex    and 


SCORPIONS  57 

marked  longitudinally  with  raised  lines  made  of  black 
dots.  These  Barbary  scorpions  hold  the  tail  up  and 
arched  over  the  back  not  only  when  in  a  crouching  posture 
but  also  when  they  walk.  This  seems  to  be  a  common 
trait  of  all  the  other  kinds.  Hence  Tertullian  writes  in 
the  "  Scorpiacus  " : 

**  Arcuato  impetu  insurgens  hamatile  spiculum  in  sum- 
mo,  tormenti  ratione,  restringens ;"  and  Ovid  in  Book 
fourth  of  the  "  Fasti  " :  "  Scorpius  elatae  metuendus 
acumine  caudse." 

There  is  a  great  dispute  among  writers  whether  the 
point  of  the  sting  has  any  aperture  from  which  a  drop  of 
venomous  liquid  might  issue  when  the  scorpion  wounds ; 
and  indeed  the  point  is  so  polished  and  fine,  that  it  is 
impossible  for  the  eye  to  discover  if  it  be  really  pierced. 

Galen  said  that  there  is  no  hole  or  aperture  of  any 
kind.  On  the  other  hand,  Pliny,  Tertullian,  St.  Jerome, 
Aldrovandi,  and  many  moderns  have  held  that  the 
scorpion  not  only  pierces  with  the  point  of  his  needle, 
but  also  pours  a  liquid  venom  out  of  it  into  the  wound 
thus  caused.  And  Master  Domenico  Bandino  of  Arezzo, 
famous  in  his  time  as  a  writer  of  many  ponderous  works, 
some  of  which  I  have  in  manuscript  in  my  library,  as- 
serted that  the  venom  from  the  scorpion's  needle  is  a 
thin  white  fluid.  The  poets  say,  on  the  contrary,  that 
it  is  black :  .  .  .  "  nigrumque  gerens  in  acumine 
virus ;"  sang  one  of  them.  In  order  to  be  clear  as  to  the 
truth,  I  selected  from  a  great  number  of  microscopes, 
belonging  to  His  Serene  Highness,  the  Prince  of  Tus- 
cany, two  of  the  finest,  one  of  Roman  and  the  other  of 
English  workmanship,  with  the  aid  of  which  I  in  vain 
attempted  to  discover  the  opening  in  the  spear  end  of  the 
sting  of  the  Tunisian,  Egyptian,  and  Italian  scorpions; 


58  GENERATION  OF  INSECTS 

and  if  I  had  given  credence  only  to  what  was  dis- 
closed to  me  and  my  friends  by  these  extremely  fine 
instruments,  I  would  have  certainly  declared  that  there 
was  no  aperture  in  the  sting.  But  I  was  not  satisfied 
with  this  evidence  and  therefore  began  to  squeeze  the 
scorpion's  weapon;  nor  did  this  means  at  first  suc- 
ceed, as  it  was  of  a  hard,  crustaceous  substance,  which 
would  not  be  compressed  so  as  to  allow  the  con- 
tents to  squirt  out.  I  irritated  the  scorpion  and 
excited  him  to  attack  a  steel  blade  with  his  sting,  but  no 
sign  was  left  on  it  of  any  liquid.  I  was  about  to  re- 
nounce further  experiment  and  return  to  Galen's  opin- 
ion, when  suddenly  there  appeared  on  the  point  of  the 
sting  a  very  small,  almost  invisible  drop  of  white  water, 
which  I  have  since  observed  many  times,  when  the  scor- 
pion is  irritated  and  makes  attacks  with  his  tail. 

When  I  was  making  these  experiments,  one  of  the 
Tunisian  scorpions  was  killed  by  one  of  his  companions ; 
I  thereupon  took  the  sting  and  punctured  forthwith  the 
breast  of  a  pigeon  with  it  four  times;  to  the  surprise  of 
the  onlookers  there  seemed  to  be  no  effect  whatever  from 
the  punctures,  and  a  slight  doubt  as  to  the  venomosity 
of  the  Berber  scorpions  began  to  take  hold  of  me.  Dr. 
Pagni,  mentioned  above,  writes  to  me  from  Tunis,  that 
the  Moors  of  the  country  constantly  affirm  that  no  year 
passes  in  which  many  men  are  not  stung  by  scorpions, 
and  that  their  poison  is  terrible  and  acts  with  incredible 
rapidity.  Some  time  ago,  says  my  friend,  one  Pietro  da 
Santis,  a  merchant  of  Tunis,  who  was  wounded  by  one 
of  those  little  beasts  in  the  left  foot,  suffered  atrocious 
pains  not  only  in  the  affected  part,  but  along  the  whole 
thigh  up  to  the  shoulder.  The  man  made  great  lamenta- 
tion, and  imagined  that  his  whole  left  side  was  paralyzed. 


POISON  OF  SCORPIONS  59 

He  was  indeed  lucky  to  get  well  after  so  much  scarifica- 
tion of  the  wounds  and  repeated  doses  of  teriac,  with 
which  also  his  whole  foot  was  plastered,  besides  being 
treated  with  many  other  medicines. 

Pagni  also  writes  that  the  Berbers  have  the  habit  of 
carrying  on  their  persons,  or  of  affixing  to  the  doors 
of  their  houses,  a  kind  of  bulletin  made  of  a  square  piece 
of  sheepskin  on  which  are  written  certain  Arabic  names, 
together  with  seals  and  amulets.  Such  a  superstitious 
preventive  as  those  ridiculous  bulletins  coupled  with  an- 
other supposedly  infallible  remedy  used  by  African  physi- 
cians, i.  e.  giving  water  to  drink,  contained  in  fanciful 
cups  of  Unicorn  horn,  all  this,  I  say,  increased  my  doubt, 
but  I  did  not  dare  to  express  it  in  view  of  such  deeply 
rooted  belief;  still  I  resolved  to  persevere  in  the  solution 
of  the  problem.  Having  prepared  a  live  scorpion  in  such 
a  way  that  he  could  not  hurt  me,  and  having  thoroughly 
exasperated  and  irritated  him,  I  forced  him  to  sting  the 
breast  of  a  pigeon,  several  times,  but,  to  the  astonishment 
of  many  spectators,  the  bird  showed  no  symptom  of 
poisoning ;  the  same  can  be  said  of  a  chicken  and  a  puppy 
upon  which  I  experimented. 

Here  I  can  foresee  the  onslaught  of  an  army  of  phi- 
losophers, physicians,  and  writers  of  natural  history,  who, 
holding  up  their  arms  in  the  sign  of  the  cross  to  conjure 
the  evil,  call  out  to  me  scornfully  that  the  scorpion  does 
kill  not  only  small  animals,  but  will  not  let  even  the 
largest  and  fiercest  alone.  He  attacks  the  lion,  and,  ac- 
cording to  Dr.  Kemal  Eddin  Muhammed  Ben  Musa  Ed- 
demiri,  he  is  not  afraid  of  camel  nor  elephant.  Others  of 
these  learned  men  tell  me  with  an  ironical  smile,  that  it 
was  no  great  wonder  that  the  animals  struck  by  my 
Tunisian  scorpion  did  not  die,  since  the  scorpion  had  been 


6o  GENERATION  OF  INSECTS 

shut  in  a  vessel  without  food  for  four  months,  and  hence 
had  lost  his  venomous  spite.  Furthermore,  as  the  ex- 
periment was  made  in  the  month  of  November,  they 
recall  to  my  mind,  that  Tertullian,  who  was  born  in 
Africa  himself,  in  speaking  of  scorpions  said:  "  Famil- 
iare  periculi  tempus  ^stas ;  Austro  et  Af rico  ssevitia  veri- 
ficat." 

They  also  beg  me  to  remember  the  saying  of  Macro- 
bius,  in  the  first  book  of  the  "  Saturnalia,"  "  Scorpius 
hyeme  torpescit,  et  transacta  hac,  aculeum  rursus  erigit 
vi  sua,  nullum  natura  damnum  ex  hyberno  tempore  per- 
pessa."  My  critics  would  also  remind  me  of  the  state- 
ment of  Leo  Africanus,  who  relates  that  scorpions  are  so 
abundant  and  so  annoying  in  the  city  of  Pescara  in 
Africa,  that  the  inhabitants  are  obliged  to  leave  during 
the  Summer,  returning  only  in  November.  This  last  ob- 
jection is  not  only  well  founded,  but  it  is  also  true,  and 
proved  by  experiment,  as  I  shall  relate  to  you  now. 

The  same  scorpion,  whose  sting  had  no  poisonous  ef- 
fect in  November,  continued  to  live  throughout  the  Win- 
ter, being  imprisoned  in  a  glass  vessel.  In  the  month 
of  January  it  had  become  so  dull  and  drowsy  that  it 
looked  as  if  about  to  die,  but  in  February,  though  still 
without  food,  it  began  to  revive  and  to  take  on  strength ; 
as  it  happened  that  I  was  then  with  the  Court  at  Pisa,  I 
decided  on  the  twenty-third  of  February  to  try  whether 
the  scorpion  had  also  renewed  its  poisonous  and  deadly 
powers.  Monsieur  Charles  Maurel,  a  famous  French 
surgeon,  happened  to  come  to  see  me  on  that  morning, 
and  in  his  presence  I  made  the  following  experiment. 
Having  plucked  the  feathers  from  the  breast  of  a  pigeon, 
I  thrust  the  sting  of  the  angry  scorpion  into  its  bare 
and  bleeding  flesh.     Three  times  this  was  repeated ;  then 


POISON  OF  SCORPIONS  6l 

the  pigeon  began  to  tremble  and  to  move  around  in  a 
circle  with  frequent  gasps  and  palpitations.  At  four 
o'clock  it  fell  to  the  ground,  where  it  remained  in  con- 
vulsions until  six  o'clock,  when  it  stretched  out  its  legs, 
stiff  and  cold,  as  if  the  lower  part  were  already  dead; 
some  tremors  and  movements  of  the  head  and  wings 
still  continued  until  eight  o'clock,  when  the  pigeon  died ; 
five  hours  having  elapsed  since  it  was  wounded.  As 
soon  as  it  was  dead,  I  received  a  visit  from  the  erudite 
and  celebrated  Signor  Nicholas  Steno,  who  was  anxious 
to  observe  the  state  of  the  entrails  of  the  poisoned 
pigeon.  At  his  advice  I  repeated  the  experiment,  the 
second  pigeon  dying  in  half  an  hour.  A  third  experi- 
ment followed,  in  which  the  wounded  pigeon  not  only 
did  not  die,  but  seemed  to  feel  no  ill  effects  from  the 
treatment.  Thereupon  I  concluded  to  allow  the  scorpion 
to  rest  and  recuperate  its  strength.  In  the  meantime, 
I  observed  that  the  dead  pigeons  had  not  become  swollen, 
nor  did  the  wounds  appear  livid,  neither  was  there  any 
change  in  the  state  of  the  entrails.  The  blood,  however, 
though  remaining  liquid  had  collected  in  large  quantities 
in  the  ventricles  of  the  heart,  which  seemed  tumid  and 
bloated,  without  having  changed  color  in  the  least. 

Having  had  frequent  proof  that  animals  killed  by  a 
snake's  bite,  or  by  tobacco,  which  is  a  terrible  poison, 
can  be  eaten  with  impunity,  I  gave  these  pigeons  to  a 
poor  man,  who  was  overjoyed,  and  ate  them  with  great 
gusto,  and  they  agreed  with  him  very  well. 

Having  allowed  the  scorpion  to  rest  until  the  follow- 
ing day,  which  was  the  twenty-fifth  of  February,  at  four 
o'clock  I  pierced  the  side  of  a  deer  with  its  sting,  five 
times,  and  also  punctured  the  buttocks,  where  the  skin 
is  less  thick  and  is  hairless.     But  the  deer  did  not  suffer 


62  GENERATION  OF  INSECTS 

from  the  prick.  I  observed  that  in  these  experiments, 
the  scorpion  of  its  own  accord  having  twice  stung  the 
deer,  did  not  succeed  in  penetrating  the  skin  of  the  ani- 
mal; this  had  to  be  done  with  my  aid.  Therefore  I 
doubt  whether  the  Barbary  scorpions  have  the  power  to 
kill  such  thick  skinned  animals  as  lions,  elephants,  camels, 
etc.,  still  I  must  rely  on  the  good  faith  of  the  writers, 
who  make  these  assertions,  all  the  more  as  I  must  take 
into  consideration  that  the  scorpion,  with  which  I  made 
all  these  experiments,  was  out  of  his  native  land,  and 
had  been  more  than  eight  months  without  food,  hence 
was  weak  and  worn  out. 

In  the  case  of  the  deer  and  the  pigeon  that  were  not 
killed,  it  is  possible  that  the  scorpion's  supply  of  poison 
had  been  exhausted  and  he  had  not  time  to  renew  it. 
After  some  more  experiments  with  different  animals  that 
resulted  ineffectually,  my  scorpion  died,  so  that  I  have 
not  been  able  to  determine  whether  a  week's  rest  would 
have  enabled  him  to  renew  his  supply  of  poison.  But 
I  hope,  nevertheless,  to  make  all  this  clear  with  time, 
and  also  to  explain  other  curious  things  about  these 
strange  little  animals,  so  I  have  sent  to  Tunis  and  to 
Tripoli  for  a  supply,  and  I  am  sending  you  a  drawing 
of  them  in  natural  size. 

To  conclude  my  remarks  on  scorpions,  I  must  add 
that  the  account  of  some  of  Pliny's  followers,  i.  e.,  that 
dead  scorpions  come  to  life  on  being  moistened  with  the 
juice  of  white  hellebore,  is  an  old  wife's  tale.  As  for 
Avicenna's  assertion  that  a  scorpion  will  fall  dead  if 
confronted  with  a  crab  to  which  a  piece  of  sweet  basil 
has  been  tied,  it  is  likewise  false,  and  having  proved  it 
so,  I  passed  on  to  further  experiments. 

I  killed  half  a  pound  of  scorpions  and  exposed  them 


POISON  OF  SCORPIONS 


(>z 


64  GENERATION  OF  INSECTS 

to  the  sun  in  an  open  glass  vessel.  In  a  short  time  they 
grew  wormy,  the  worms  being  transformed  as  usual 
into  black  eggs  [pupae],  from  which,  after  an  interval 
of  fourteen  days,  an  equal  number  of  large,  striped  flies 
came  out.  As  Father  Kircher  had  stated  that  scorpions 
are  reborn  from  dead  scorpions  themselves,  if  exposed 
to  the  sun  and  sprinkled  with  sweet  basil  and  water,  I 
risked  a  second  and  a  third  experiment,  only  to  be  dis- 
appointed and  to  await  in  vain  the  desired  young  scor- 
pions, instead  of  which  I  always  got  flies ;  and  when  at  the 
fourth  attempt  I  saw  neither  worms,  flies  nor  scorpions 
I  was  still  further  strengthened  in  my  opinion  that  no 
animal  of  any  kind  is  ever  bred  in  dead  flesh  unless  there 
be  a  previous  egg-deposit. 

This  was  a  favorable  opportunity  for  proving  the  state- 
ment of  Batista  Porta,  that  the  toad  is  generated  from 
a  duck  putrefying  on  a  dung-heap.  Three  experiments 
with  this  material  brought  no  result,  hence  I  was  con- 
vinced that  Porta,  otherwise  a  most  interesting  and  pro- 
found writer,  had  been  too  credulous.  And  Avicenna  was 
none  the  less  so,  for  he  would  have  it  that  women's  hair, 
lain  in  a  damp  and  sunny  place,  would  turn  into  snakes. 
Now,  I  believe  that  snakes  are  only  generated  by  means 
of  coition,  and  all  other  kinds  of  serpentine  creation, 
from  rotten  matter,  or  by  other  process  mentioned  by 

writers,  are  utterly  false. 

******** 

The  story  of  Kiranis,  that  the  tun-fish  thrown  up  by 
the  sea  on  the  shore  of  Libya  produces  worms,  that 
change  to  flies  first,  then  to  grasshoppers,  and  finally 
to  quails,  is  not  to  be  credited.  No  one  in  these  days 
would  be  so  ignorant  or  so  stupid  as  not  to  laugh  at  such 
tales.     Still,  though  I  am,  as  you  know,  accounted  the 


MYTHS  DISPROVED  65 

most  incredulous  man  in  the  world  with  regard  to  nat- 
ural phenomena,  I  desired  to  ascertain  with  my  own 
eyes  what  the  tun-fish  might  be  capable  of  producing; 
but  I  had  the  usual  result,  and  found  only  worms,  which 
changed  into  flies,  according  to  their  species.  I  remem- 
ber also  that,  wishing  to  see  what  effect  oil  had  on  the 
worms,  as  it  is  so  pernicious  to  insects,  I  selected  some 
of  the  largest  worms  born  in  the  tun-fish  and  dipped 
some  into  vinegar,  some  into  lemon- juice,  and  others 
into  oil,  sugar,  salt  and  saltpetre.  I  found  that  all  lived 
and  followed  their  usual  transformations  excepting  the 
worms  covered  with  oil;  the  flies  of  these  died  on  escap- 
ing from  the  shell,  and  some  of  them  before  leaving  it. 
Hence  I  argued  that  the  assertions  of  Galen,  Lucian,  A. 
Aphrodisius,  U.  Aldrovandi,  and  Sperling  were  cor- 
rect :  i.  e.,  flies  die  on  coming  in  contact  with  oil.  Indeed, 
it  was  wonderful  to  see  how  quickly  a  fly  died  when  I 
dropped  oil  on  it.  Aldrovandi  and  Sperling  also  add 
that  flies  killed  in  this  manner  return  to  life  if  left  in 
the  sun  or  sprinkled  with  hot  ashes.  Not  caring  to  ac- 
cept a  mere  assertion,  I  had  the  curiosity  to  verify  it 
with  my  own  eyes,  but  I  never  had  the  good  luck  to 
see  a  single  fly  return  to  life,  though  I  repeated  the  ex- 
periment several  times.  Then,  again,  I  had  read  ^lianus, 
Pliny,  and  some  moderns,  who  state  that  these  same  crea- 
tures, after  having  been  drowned  in  water,  revive  on  ex- 
posure to  the  mild  heat  of  ashes.  In  order  to  prove  this, 
I  placed  eight  ordinary  flies  in  a  glass  jar,  well  filled 
with  iced  water;  after  half  an  hour  I  found  that  one 
had  gone  to  the  bottom,  and  one  of  those  floating 
seemed  to  be  still  alive;  the  other  seven  were  apparently 
dead.  I  took  all  out  of  the  water  and  placed  them  in 
the  sun;  scarce  half  a  minute  passed  when  two  began 


66  GENERATION  OF  INSECTS 

to  move  and  seemed  to  be  about  to  fly  away ;  of  the  other 
six,  the  one  which  had  gone  to  the  bottom,  and  three 
others  that  had  floated  on  top,  gave  signs  of  hfe  after 
three  minutes  by  moving  their  legs  and  thrusting  out  their 
proboscides,  but  soon  after  they  ceased  all  motion,  and 
were  really  dead.  A  few  days  after,  I  made  many  ex- 
periments, keeping  the  flies  in  the  water  for  longer  or 
shorter  periods;  the  water  being  sometimes  iced  and 
sometimes  of  ordinary  temperature;  sometimes  I  held 
the  flies  under  the  water ;  then  again  I  would  allow  them 
to  float.  At  last  I  ascertained  that  if  the  flies  be  really 
drowned  they  cannot  be  restored  by  the  potency  of  the 
sun.  Hence,  I  cannot  see  how  it  is  possible  to  believe 
Columella,  who  reports  that  bees  found  lying  dead  under 
the  beanstalks  and  which  are  kept  all  Winter  in  a  dry 
place,  return  to  life  if,  during  the  mild  season  of  the 
equinox,  they  are  exposed  to  the  sun  and  powdered  with 
fig-tree  ash.  I  have  not  made  this  experiment,  but  I 
esteem  it  to  be  beyond  belief. 

I  return  to  the  flies  hatched  in  the  tun-fish :  these,  like 
all  the  others,  on  escaping  from  the  shell  began  to  ex- 
crete the  natural  abdominal  impurities  that  are  due,  I 
believe,  to  the  food  consumed  by  them  while  they  were 
still  worms,  in  which  state  I  noticed  that  they  never  ex- 
crete anything.  The  flies  do  not  live  more  than  four 
days  after  birth,  when  retained  in  the  closed  jars  with- 
out food ;  but  this  is  not  an  unusual  rule  in  Nature. 

What  seems  more  strange  is  that  spiders,  born  in 
closed  jars  from  the  eggs  of  the  same,  can  live  so  many 
months  without  apparent  food.  On  the  fifth  of  July  I 
shut  up  a  female  spider  in  a  glass  jar  covered  with  paper, 
and  I  observed  that  on  the  twelfth  she  had  spun  herself 
a  nest  on  the  lower  part  of  the  paper,  in  the  shape  of  half 


SPIDERS  67 

a  nutshell,  and  in  the  cavity  of  this  structure,  called  by 
Aristotle  ''  seno  orbiculato,"  there  could  be  seen  through 
the  web-work  round  white  eggs  not  larger  than  millet 
grains.  From  these  eggs  there  hatched  out  on  the  last 
day  of  August  a  like  number  of  tiny  white  spiders,  which, 
immediately  after  birth,  began  to  emit  filaments.  During 
the  following  two  days  all  the  eggs  hatched,  fifty  in  num- 
ber, and  in  order  to  see  how  long  the  young  spiders  could 
live  without  food,  I  did  not  put  anything  eatable  in  the 
jar;  hence,  on  the  eighth  of  September,  some  of  them 
died,  and  in  the  first  week  of  October  nearly  all  were 
dead,  except  three,  which  remained  alive  together  with 
the  mother,  which  in  turn  died  on  the  thirtieth  of  De- 
cember. The  young  ones,  having  noticeably  increased 
in  size,  lived  until  the  eighth  of  February.  If  you  asked 
me  why  these  three  grew  and  became  larger  I  should 
probably  find  a  reason  in  their  having  obtained  nourish- 
ment from  the  bodies  of  their  dead  brothers  and  mother 
by  slightly  sucking  them;  or  if  this  were  not  so,  the  ex- 
pansion of  their  bodies  might  make  them  appear  to  have 
really  grown.  However,  I  hold  to  the  first  opinion  more 
than  to  the  second,  and  it  does  not  trouble  me  that  peo- 
ple believe,  and  writers  assert,  that  no  animal  will  eat 
individuals  of  its  own  species,  since  I  have  found  by 
many  experiments  that  no  fable  was  ever  more  fabulous 
than  this  one,  and  no  one  ever  heard  a  more  lying  false- 
hood. I  remember  having  forced  a  lion  to  eat  the  flesh 
of  a  lioness,  nor  did  he  do  it  from  starvation,  for  on  the 
same  day  he  had  eaten  many  pounds  of  mutton.  The 
most  ordinary  hunter  knows  by  experience  that  a  dead 
boar  left  in  the  woods  will  be  devoured  by  the  live  ones. 
Bears  eat  bear-meat  and  tigers,  tiger-flesh,  and  I  can 
assure  you  of  a  fact  in  proof  of  this.     Meemet  Bey, 


68  GENERATION  OF  INSECTS 

General  of  the  Tunisian  forces,  sent  a  large  number  of 
strange  animals  from  Africa  to  my  Lord  the  Grand 
Duke.  Among  these  there  was  a  tigress  with  a  new- 
born cub.  On  the  way  to  Florence  the  good  tigress, 
whether  playfully  or  in  anger  I  know  not,  tried  her  teeth 
on  the  cub  and  neatly  broke  off  a  paw  and  the  attached 
shoulder,  which  she  swallowed  greedily,  although  there 
was  other  meat  in  the  cage.  Cats,  on  being  castrated, 
sometimes  devour  their  own  testicles,  and  females  of  their 
kind  eat  up  their  newborn  young.  The  pike,  fierce  in 
pursuit  of  prey,  does  not  spare  his  fellows ;  indeed,  these 
fish  pursue  each  other  most  greedily;  and  it  often  hap- 
pens that  a  pike  of  seven  or  eight  pounds  will  attack 
one  of  three  or  four  pounds.  It  is  curious  to  watch  the 
larger  fish  struggle  to  swallow  the  smaller  one,  which 
often  sticks  out  of  his  mouth  a  hand's  breadth,  and  for 
an  hour  or  so  the  victor  will  swim  about  in  the  water 
in  this  way  until  the  head  of  the  swallowed  fish  enters 
the  stomach  of  the  other,  and  becomes  gradually  disinte- 
grated and  absorbed,  making  room  for  the  rest  of  the 
body,  which  eventually  slips  in. 

I  enclosed  other  spiders,  both  male  and  female,  in 
glass  jars,  but  did  not  observe  anything  except  their  ex- 
traordinary capability  of  living  long  without  food.  I 
also  noticed  that  one  of  the  spiders,  after  a  month's  im- 
prisonment, shed  his  entire  skin,  that  looked  exactly  like 
another  spider ;  another  waited  fifty  days  before  shedding 
his.  I  am  not  the  first  to  notice  this  peculiarity,  which 
was  alluded  to  by  the  learned  Englishman,  Thomas 
Moufet,  in  his  celebrated  work  on  insects,  where  he  as- 
serts that  they  not  only  shed  their  skin  once  a  year,  but 
even  every  month;  this  I  would  dare  neither  to  afiirm 
nor  to  deny,  not  having  seen  it.     I  thoroughly  examined 


SPIDERS  69 

the  different  forms  of  glands  and  sacks  in  which  the  fe- 
males lay  and  hatch  their  eggs  as  in  a  nest,  and  I  admired 
the  wonderful  manner  in  which  the  threads  were  strongly 
attached  even  to  smooth  glass.  But  I  will  not  dwell  on 
this  longer,  nor  on  the  labor  and  marvelous  design  of  the 
web,  as  so  many  writers  have  described  it  admirably, 
and  you  yourself  have  written  about  it,  in  one  of  your 
erudite  "  Tuscan  Vigils,"  that  is  entitled,  "  Nature,  the 
Geometrician."  Moufet  asserts  that  there  are  often  as 
many  as  three  hundred  eggs  in  those  nests,  and  I  have 
counted  one  hundred  and  sixty  from  one  insect,  which 
having  deposited  them  all  close  together,  wrapped  them 
with  her  thread,  and  built  around  the  ball  a  larger,  white 
cocoon,  in  which  it  was  left  suspended.  As  the  spider  was 
weaving  this  covering  I  noticed  that  the  thread  did  not 
come  out  of  her  mouth,  but  out  of  the  end  of  the  abdomen, 
and  I  thus  verified  the  statements  of  ^lianus  and  Moufet. 
Pliny  wrote  that  the  thread  was  kept  in  the  uterus: 
"  Orditur  telas,  tantique  operis  materiae  uterus  ipsius 
sufficit."  But  Moufet,  taking  into  consideration  that  the 
males,  which  have  no  uterus,  are  able  to  spin  as  well  as 
the  females,  does  not  approve  of  Pliny's  opinion  and 
taxes  him  with  error.  This  is,  however,  wrong,  because 
the  word  "  uterus  "  used  in  this  occasion  by  the  great 
writer  is  adopted  by  the  Latin  authors  not  only  in  the 
sense  of  womb,  but  also  in  that  of  abdomen,  as,  according 
to  Isidorous  2nd.  ist.,  "  Uterum  solae  mulieres  habent, 
auctores  tamen  uterum  pro  utriusque  sexus  ventre  po- 
nunt."  Therefore,  Pliny  did  not  err  when  he  wrote: 
"  orditur  telas  .  .  .  etc.,"  but  Aristotle  erred  greatly 
in  contradicting  wise  Democritus,  writing  in  the  ninth 
book  of  his  "  History  of  Animals,"  that  spiders  do  not  ex- 
tract their  thread  from  the  interior  of  the  abdomen,  but 


70  GENERATION  OF  INSECTS 

from  the  external  part  of  the  body  in  general,  as  though 
the  material  of  the  filaments  were  a  kind  of  down,  that 
covered  them  all  over  like  bark.  Aristotle  was  also 
wrong  in  instructing  us  that  spiders  bring  forth  live 
worms  instead  of  eggs,  for  I  have  invariably  found  the 
contrary  to  be  the  case.  And  though  others  write  that 
spiders  are  generated  from  flying  seeds  and  from  rotten 
filth,  I  cannot  induce  myself  to  credit  them,  especially  as 
they  only  give  the  popular  belief  in  the  matter  as  proof, 
i.  e.,  that  spiders  and  their  webs  are  to  be  found  in  new 
houses,  before  the  plaster  on  the  walls  is  dry;  but  mark 
that  houses  are  not  built  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye,  as 
Alcina  and  Atlantus  built  them,  in  ancient  times;  there- 
fore it  is  natural  that  the  spiders  should  have  found  the 
dust  and  refuse  lime  a  good  place  for  making  their  nests, 
and  for  hiding,  and  on  coming  out,  they  could  climb 
up  any  high  wall  in  a  moment,  and  weave  their  webs 
there. 

Another  fabulous  generation  of  spiders  was  given  out 
as  true  by  various  authors,  among  whom  are  Pietro 
Andrea  Mattiuoli,  Castore  Durante,  and  Fathers  Kircher 
and  Fabri.  Mattiuoli  affirms  that  oak-galls  produce  spi- 
ders as  well  as  worms  and  flies ;  he  also  says  that  all  galls, 
which  have  not  been  pierced,  contain  one  of  these  three 
kinds  of  small  animals,  from  the  nature  of  which  he  de- 
duces a  terrible  prognostic,  saying  that  flies  in  the  galls  in- 
dicate war  to  occur  in  that  year;  if  worms  are  found,  the 
harvest  will  be  poor ;  if  spiders,  there  will  be  a  pestilence. 
Father  Fabri  laughs  at  this  prognostic;  as  for  myself,  I 
could  easily  cite  many  experiments  to  confute  Mattiuoli, 
for  in  the  space  of  three  or  four  years  I  have  opened 
more  than  twenty  thousand  galls,  and  have  never  found 
a  single  spider  inside,  but  only  flies  and  gnats  and  worms, 


SPIDER  WEBS  71 

according  to  the  season  in  which  I  opened  them ;  nor  was 
there  meanwhile  war  or  famine  in  Tuscany.     It  is  true, 
to  be  sure,  that  I  sometimes  found  a  little  spider  in  a  gall, 
but  always  in  an  open  one,  into  which  it  had  probably 
crept  for  hiding.     This  I  deem  at  present  sufficient  an- 
swer to  the  assertions  of  Mattiuoli,  but  I  reserve  myself 
to  speak  later  on  of  flies,  gnats,  and  worms  found  in  galls. 
It  is  a  little  more  difficult  to  answer  those  who  desire 
to  know  how  spiders  succeed  in  taking  the  ends  of  their 
thread  from  one  tree  to  another,  since  not  having  wings, 
they  cannot  fly.     Moufet  bears  witness  that  spiders  hop 
and  throw  themselves  from  one  place  to  the  other,  and 
there  is  truth  in  this  as  regards  any  slight  jump,  for  I 
remember  that  a  gentleman  of  high  rank  told  me  that 
while  he  was  traveling  a  spider  spun  his  thread  from  one 
side  of  the  coach  door  to  the  other,  and  the  carriage 
having  stopped,  the  spider  threw  himself  suddenly  on  to 
the  hat  of  an  approaching  horseman.    Thus  it  is  possible 
that  they  jump,  and  it  may  be  also  that  wishing  to  stretch 
the  thread  from  one  tree  to  another,  they  first  attach  it 
to  a  branch,  and  then  let  themselves  down  by  the  thread 
to  the  level  ground,  thence  they  go  by  way  of  the  sur- 
face to  the  foot  of  another  tree,  which  they  climb,  drag- 
ging the  thread  after  them  and  stretching  it  at  a  suitable 
height.     A   friend  told  me  that  one  day  he  saw  two 
spiders  hanging  from  two  trees  not  far  apart,  and  he 
noticed  that  they  jumped  towards  each  other,  and  hook- 
ing themselves  together,  they  securely  tied  their  threads, 
and  then  proceeded  to  weave  a  large  web.     One  might 
also  suppose  that,  when  a  spider  makes  a  web  between 
two  distant  trees,  it  is  by  mere  chance :  that  is,  the  spider, 
dangling  from  the  tree  by  the  thread  may  be  carried  by 
the  wind  to  the  nearest  tree,  and  the  thread  not  having 


J2  GENERATION  OF  INSECTS 

been  broken,  is  able  to  make  his  web.  Father  Blancano 
asserts  that  he  has  ascertained  by  experiment  that  the 
spider's  thread  is  not  simple  and  smooth,  but  is  composed 
of  many  fine  strands,  so  light  that  they  float  out  in  the 
air,  in  all  directions,  and  catch  in  the  branches  of  nearby 
trees,  of  which  circumstance  the  spider  quickly  avails 
himself  to  make  fast  the  first  lines  of  the  future  web. 
This  is  possible,  provided  that  the  spider  hangs  down 
from  a  high  tree.  I  have  not  had  occasion  to  observe 
this,  though  I  have  frequently  seen  the  spiders  stretch 
their  thread  from  one  part  of  the  highway  to  the  other, 
and  attach  the  ends  to  the  tops  of  the  stakes  that  support 
the  vines,  but  since  these  stakes  are  not  higher  than 
three  or  four  yards,  and  the  road  is  at  least  eight  or  ten, 
wide,  I  cannot  see  how  the  spiders,  from  so  low  a  height, 
could  acquire  sufficient  force  to  give  the  principal  thread 
the  required  length,  so  that  the  lateral  filaments  could 
reach  the  other  side  of  the  road.  Everyone  may  think 
as  he  chooses  about  this;  for  my  part  I  must  return  to 
my  preceding  argument  and  tell  you  that  I  collected  a 
large  quantity  of  spiders,  and,  having  killed  them,  left 
them  in  a  large,  open  dish,  whither  the  flies  eagerly 
swarmed  to  feed  and  to  deposit  their  maggots,  almost 
vengefully,  so  that  the  dead  spiders  soon  became  wormy, 
and  the  w^orms  having  hardened  into  eggs  or  chrysalides, 
from  these  flies  hatched  out,  such  as  daily  circle  about 
our  houses. 

Leaving  this  subject  for  the  present,  as  it  seems  to  be 
sufficiently  proven  that  flesh  does  not  become  wormy  of 
itself,  I  deem  it  time  to  pass  to  the  consideration  of  other 
things  that  have  been  supposed  to  produce  worms;  this 
opinion  being  held  not  only  by  the  common  people,  but 
even  by  men  of  science.     One  of  the  most  important 


CHEESE  WORMS  73 

things  subject  to  invermination  is  cheese,  and  epicures 
boast  that  they  know  how  to  grow  worms  in  it  to  tickle 
the  palate,  the  recipe  being  one  of  those  that  I  enumerated 
at  the  beginning  of  this  letter.  But  the  learned  Gassendi 
suggests  that  flies  and  other  winged  animals  having  de- 
posited or  disseminated  their  seed  on  leaves  and  grass, 
these  being  subsequently  eaten  by  cows,  sheep,  and  goats, 
introduce  into  milk  and  cheese  the  seed  capable  of  pro- 
ducing worms.  Many  people  do  not  dislike  this  theory, 
nor  do  I  deny  it,  but  with  all  due  deference  to  this  illus- 
trious philosopher,  I  cannot  understand  how  those  de- 
posits could  retain  their  special  powers  after  having 
passed  through  the  complicated  process  of  mastication 
in  the  mouth,  and  of  digestion  in  the  stomach,  of  the  ani- 
mals that  have  swallowed  them.  What  seed  could  hold 
out,  unchanged,  against  the  double  action  of  the  pan- 
creatic acid  and  of  the  bile  in  the  intestines,  whence  in 
the  passage  to  the  udder  it  is  further  acted  upon?  For 
if  Gassendi's  idea  were  correct,  one  might  expect  to  ob- 
tain mullet  and  eels  from  cheese  made  of  woman's  milk, 
if  the  woman  had  eaten  the  eggs  of  the  same;  or  indeed, 
cockerels  and  pullets,  if  she  had  swallowed  hen's  eggs. 
Many  women  suck  them  raw,  as  they  come  from  the 
nest,  though  even  supposing  them  to  have  been  eaten 
cooked,  by  the  woman  in  question,  it  would  have  made 
no  difference,  for,  according  to  Gassendi,  cooking  does 
not  affect  the  generative  principle,  as  witness  the  worms 
that  appear  in  curds,  etc.  It  would  seem  more  probable 
that  the  invermination  of  milk,  cheese,  and  curds  is  due 
to  the  same  cause  that  I  have  given  above,  in  the  case 
of  meats  and  fish,  that  is  to  say,  flies  deposit  eggs  in  them 
from  which  worms  are  hatched,  which  change  into  flies. 
This  will  appear  evident  to  anyone  who  considers  the  mat- 


74  GENERATION  OF  INSECTS 

ter  in  the  light  of  reason,  for  neither  milk  nor  cheese  ever 
grow  wormy,  if  they  are  kept  in  a  place  secure  from 
flies;  this  is  sufficiently  proven  by  the  experiments  al- 
ready made,  and  the  contrary  happens  in  case  of  expo- 
sure to  flies.  As  I  recall  certain  things  that  I  have  ob- 
served in  connection  with  the  breeding  of  worms,  I  shall 
relate  them  to  you,  leaving  out  such  as  appear  superflu- 
ous and  tiresome. 

I  had  placed  half  of  a  fresh  cheese,  the  best  to  be  found 
in  June,  in  a  large,  uncovered,  glass  dish;  after  a  few 
days  several  worms  appeared  in  it,  which  upon  examina- 
tion seemed  of  two  kinds;  the  larger  were  of  the  ordi- 
nary sort  produced  on  meat,  and  the  smaller  were  of 
the  same  shape,  but  had  this  peculiarity :  they  were  more 
spry  and  agile  than  the  others;  they  moved  about  with 
great  ease,  and  would  take  their  tails  in  their  mouths, 
thus  forming  a  circle,  or  would  skip  here  and  there, 
sometimes  escaping  from  the  vase.  Three  or  four  days 
after  birth  all  the  worms  ceased  from  motion,  as  usual, 
and  shrunk  into  eggs  [pupae],  differing  only  in  size; 
these  I  separated  and  placed  in  different  vessels.  After 
eight  days  ordinary  flies  came  out  of  the  larger  balls 
[pupse],  and  from  the  smaller  there  emerged,  after  twelve 
days,  small  flies  resembling  winged  ants,  which  imme- 
diately after  birth  skipped  about  with  incredible  spright- 
liness  and  vivacity  so  that  they  seemed  to  be  the  em- 
bodiment of  perpetual  motion.  Then,  every  male  pair- 
ing with  a  female,  performed  those  acts  from  which 
propagation  might  be  expected,  but  owing  to  lack  of 
nourishment  they  died  after  a  short  time.  While  mak- 
ing this  experiment  I  fortunately  found  a  cheese  that 
had  just  begun  to  grow  wormy,  and  after  separating 
the  good  part  from  the  bad  I  enclosed  both  in  separate 


CHEESE  WORMS  75 

dishes;  from  the  good  part  worms  were  hatched,  and 
from  those  worms  already  in  the  bad  part  there  appeared 
numerous  Httle  black  flies,  like  those  mentioned  above, 
but  not  a  single  common  fly.  I  know  that  it  is  hard  to 
believe  that  milk  products  do  not  breed  worms  spon- 
taneously, for  worms  are  often  found  in  the  heart  of  our 
most  delicate  Lucca  cheeses.  I  could  suggest  that  the 
eggs  producing  these  worms  were  laid  by  flies  in  the  milk 
at  milking  time,  when  the  milk  is  left  in  the  pails  to 
gather,  and  is  surrounded  by  swarms  of  flies.  Hence 
the  Greek  poet,  "  to  whom  the  muses  gave  suck  more 
freely  than  to  others,"  in  the  sixteenth  book  of  the  Iliad, 
verse  641,  compares  the  Greeks  and  Trojans,  who  were 
fighting  over  the  body  of  Sarpedon,  to  the  flies  that 
buzz  over  the  milk-buckets  in  the  Spring.  This  reason, 
though  not  without  value,  does  not  satisfy  me,  neverthe- 
less, and  I  think  it  probable  that  the  eggs  were  laid  by 
flies  in  the  cracks  of  the  ripening  cheese,  and  the  young 
maggot,  seeking  the  tenderest  food,  worked  his  way  to 
the  heart  of  the  cheese;  escaping  thence  at  the  deter- 
mined time,  he  seeks  a  place  where  he  can  fix  himself  for 
the  few  days  of  transformation,  whence  he  issues  in  the 
flying  stage,  according  to  the  type  of  parent. 

Feeling  that  I  have  spoken  sufficiently  about  this  mat- 
ter, perhaps  even  with  too  great  prolixity  and  tedious- 
ness,  I  shall  pass  on  to  tell  you  about  those  worms 
popularly  and  erroneously  believed  to  arise  spontane- 
ously in  vegetables  and  decayed  fruits,  in  wood  and  in 
trees. 

Know,  then,  that  as  it  is  true  that  meats,  fish  and  milk 
products  kept  in  a  protected  place  do  not  breed  worms, 
it  is  likewise  true  that  fruits  and  vegetables,  raw  and 
cooked,  secured  in  the  same  way,  do  not  grow  wormy; 


76  GENERATION  OF  INSECTS 

or  in  the  contrary  case,  left  in  an  exposed  place,  will  pro- 
duce various  insects  of  different  species,  according  to  the 
animals  that  have  made  deposits  therein.  But  I  have 
noticed  that  a  preference  is  sometimes  shown  for  a 
special  vegetable  or  fruit  in  selecting  the  nesting-place.  I 
had  seen  many  flies  light  on  a  melon  that  showed  later 
small  worms,  which,  after  four  days,  changed  into  eggs 
[pupse]  from  which  in  four  more  days  there  were  born 
an  equal  number  of  gnats. 

In  some  pieces  of  mashed  melon  on  which  gnats  and 
common  flies  had  been  feeding,  together  with  another 
kind  of  fly,  small,  black,  and  with  long  antennae,  there 
were  dropped  worms  of  different  size,  that  in  due  time 
were  changed  into  eggs  [pupse]  of  different  size.  Com- 
mon flies  came  out  of  the  larger  ones  in  eight  days; 
from  some  of  the  smaller  ones  gnats  appeared  after  four 
days,  and  from  those  of  medium  size  were  hatched  the 
largest  flies  of  all.  I  had  the  same  result  in  experiment- 
ing with  cucumbers,  strawberries,  pears,  apples,  plums, 
lemons,  figs  and  peaches. 

In  my  experiments  with  raw  and  cooked  pumpkin,  the 
common  fly  was  the  only  insect  that  hatched.  But  I 
must  not  neglect  to  mention  that  all  worms  hatched  in 
a  certain  preparation  of  boiled  pumpkin  and  egg,  which 
had  reached  the  state  of  decomposition,  acted  in  an  ex- 
traordinary manner,  rolling  themselves  about  in  the  pap 
that  stuck  fast  and  covered  them  up,  so  that  they  re- 
sembled little  clods  of  earth  from  which  finally  the  flies 
were  hatched.  Now,  anyone  who  did  not  know  that  an 
egg  was  concealed  in  each  ball  would  have  reasonably 
judged  that  those  flies  were  hatched  directly  from  the 
little  balls.  From  some  such  illusion,  I  believe,  originated 
the  error  of  Pliny  and  others,  who  relate  that  infinite 


FRUIT  FLIES  ^J^ 

kinds  of  animals  are  bred  in  the  soil,  in  mud,  in  swamps, 
and  in  the  bed  of  rivers.  Thus  Ovid,  in  the  first  book  of 
the  "  Metamorphoses  "  writes : 

**  Sic  ubi  deseruit  madidos  septemfluus  agros 
Nilus,  et  antiqua  sua  flumina  reddidit  alveo, 
Aetherioque  recens  exarsit  sidere  limus: 
Plurima  cultores  versis  animalia  glebis 
Inveniunt,  et  in  his  quaedam  modo  coepta  sub  ipsum 
Nascendi  spatium:  quaedam  imperfecta,  suisque 
Trunca  vident  numeris :  et  eodem  in  corpore  saepe 
Altera  pars  vivit;  rudis  est  pars  altera  tellus. 
Quippe  ubi  temperium  sumpsere  humorque,  calorque : 
Concipiunt;  et  ab  his  oriuntur  cuncta  duobus. 
Cumque  sit  ignis  aquae  pugnax ;  vapor  humidus  omnes 
Res  creat,  et  discors  concordia  foetibus  apta  est." 

This  opinion  was  seconded  by  Plutarch,  by  Macrobius 
in  the  *'  Saturnalia,"  by  Pliny,  and  finally  an  innumerable 
host  of  ancients,  who  were  followed  like  sheep  by  an  in- 
finite number  of  modern  writers.  Thus  it  is  that  I  am 
sometimes  astonished  in  considering  how  these  authors 
conceived  Nature  to  be  so  careless  a  generatrix,  now 
creating  animals  of  flesh  and  bone,  and  then  making 
others  of  pure  clay.  But  we  have  ^lianus's  word  for  it 
that  he  saw  animals  made  in  this  manner  on  a  journey 
from  Naples  to  Pozzuoli;  and  Ovid,  not  content  in  the 
above-quoted  verses  with  having  driven  into  our  heads 
his  story  of  seeing  animals  in  mud,  without  legs  or  joints, 
clenches  the  fact  again  in  book  fifteen : 

"  Semina  limus  habet  virides  generantia  ranas  : 
Et  generat  truncas  pedibus ;  mox  apta  natando 
Crura  dat,  utque  eadem  sint  longis  saltibus  apta." 

But  what  causes  me  most  amusement  is  the  statement 
of  Pliny  that  these  same  frogs,  after  a  short  life  of  six 


78  GENERATION  OF  INSECTS 

months,  return  suddenly  to  dust  and  mud,  whence  they 
again,  on  the  approach  of  Spring,  resuscitate  to  a  new 
life. 

This  thought  of  Pliny's  has  been  approved  by  many 
grave  philosophers  of  our  century,  and  particularly  by 
Father  Fabri,  who  in  his  justly  celebrated  book  on  the 
generation  of  animals,  at  propositions  seventy-five  and 
seventy-six,  admits  that  frogs  are  regenerated  from  the 
decayed  bodies  of  other  frogs.  At  present  I  am  not  in- 
clined to  believe  this,  not  having  seen  anything  of  the 
kind;  but  I  am  always  ready  to  change  my  mind,  espe- 
cially if  Pliny's  frogs  had  happened  to  have  been  torn 
and  bitten  by  some  hydra  or  other  beast  of  serpentine 
nature  such  as  our  divine  poet  put  in  hell,  and  whose 
bite  utterly  consumed  one  of  the  damned,  the  ashes  of 
whom,  however,  had  power  to  gather  together  and  re- 
form the  victim.  But  these  are  all  fables.  Those  ani- 
mals that  apparently  were  made  of  earth,  had  they  been 
closely  examined,  it  would  have  been  evident  that  they 
were  merely  covered  with  mud ;  and  though  living  things 
do  arise  in  swamps  and  mudholes,  it  is  because  eggs  have 
first  been  laid  in  those  places,  just  as  Aristotle  and  Pliny 
tell  of  locusts  and  mantis. 

Land-turtles  also  lay  eggs  and  put  them  under  ground ; 
and  those  that  live  in  fresh  or  salt  water  lay  eggs  on 
the  shore  and  cover  them  with  sand,  where  they  are 
acted  upon  by  the  sun's  heat,  and  hatch;  whence  an  in- 
experienced person  might  conclude  that  the  little  turtles 
were  born  directly  from  the  earth,  from  which  they  are 
seen  issuing.  Something  of  this  sort  explains  Father 
Athanasius  Kircher's  curious  experiment.  This  learned 
man  of  letters,  who  is  very  ingenious  in  his  speculations, 
says  as  follows :    "  At  the  beginning  of  March,  the  frogs 


FROGS  79 

deposit  their  eggs  freely  in  the  ditches  where  they  live; 
this  humus,  on  becoming  dry,  turns  to  dust  with  its 
contents.  Hence,  if  you  wish  to  create  a  new  genera- 
tion of  frogs,  you  will  proceed  in  this  manner:  take 
the  fertile  dust  of  the  swamp  or  ditch  where  the  frogs 
have  made  nests,  moisten  it  with  rain-water  and  put  it 
in  an  earthen  dish  in  a  place  exposed  to  the  warm  rays 
of  the  summer  sun;  see  that  it  does  not  get  dry,  and  keep 
it  well  sprinkled  with  the  aforesaid  rain-water,  and  you 
will  notice  first  of  all  certain  little  balls,  that  swell  up 
and  emit  a  large  number  of  little  white  frogs,  which 
have  only  their  forefeet  and  a  tail,  that  afterwards  di- 
vides into  two  parts,  forming  the  hind  feet;  these  little 
creatures  become  perfectly  formed  frogs."  This  experi- 
ment ought  by  all  probabilities  to  succeed,  but  I  have 
never  had  the  honor  of  being  able  to  confirm  it,  owing 
possibly  to  some  lack  of  attention  on  my  part,  or  to  some 
unknown  obstacle,  which,  however,  may  be  found  in  my 
having  carried  out  Father  Kircher's  rule  to  the  letter, 
using,  namely,  the  dried  mud  of  the  ditches,  to  obtain 
which  I  must  perforce  wait  until  summer-time,  when 
all  the  frogs  were  already  hatched.  I  have,  however, 
observed  that  frogs  and  toads  first  appear  after  birth, 
in  the  swamps  and  ditches,  shaped  like  a  fish,  not  with 
forelegs  alone,  but  without  any  legs,  and  having  a  long, 
flat  and  sharp-edged  tail;  and  in  this  shape  they  swim 
about  for  days,  feeding  and  growing;  then  they  thrust 
out  the  two  forelegs,  and  after  several  days,  the  two  hind- 
legs,  from  a  skin  that  covers  the  whole  body;  some  time 
having  elapsed,  they  cast  their  tail,  which  does  not  divide 
into  two  parts  to  form  the  legs,  as  Pliny  and  others  be- 
lieved. This  fact  may  be  proven  by  anyone  who  will  take 
the  trouble  to  examine  some  newborn  frogs  by  means 


8o  GENERATION  OF  INSECTS 

of  a  dissecting  knife,  when  it  will  be  seen  that  the  hind- 
legs  and  the  tail  are  separate  members  of  the  body;  and 
if  the  frog  be  kept  in  an  aquarium  it  will  be  seen  to 
swim  about  for  several  days  equipped  with  its  tail  as  well 
as  its  four  legs. 

What  shall  I  say  in  regard  to  those  frogs  or  toads 
which  people  believe  are  rained  down  from  the  clouds 
in  summer,  or  are  created  in  the  dust  by  the  raindrops? 
I  have  treated  the  subject  at  length  in  my  "  Observations 
on  Vipers,"  in  which  I  said  that  those  small  frogs  ap- 
pearing during  a  shower  have  already  been  hatched  sev- 
eral days  before,  and  have  meanwhile  hidden  during  the 
dry  weather  among  bushes,  behind  stones,  or  in  holes, 
and  being  of  the  same  color  as  the  soil,  it  is  not  easy  to 
distinguish  them  from  the  ground  on  which  they  squat. 
The  fact,  also,  that  their  stomachs  are  full  of  food  and 
their  intestines  full  of  excrement,  at  the  moment  when 
they  are  supposed  to  have  been  born,  appears  to  me  a 
clear  contradiction  of  the  truth  of  this  account,  which 
dates  from  the  114th  Olympiad,  and  was  recited  in  the 
peripatetic  school  of  Theophrastus  Eresius,  the  successor 
of  Aristotle.  A  fragment  of  Theophrastus' s  book  about 
animals  which  make  sudden  appearances  may  be  found 
in  the  Library  of  Fozio,  to  which  I  refer  you,  as  I  wish 
to  speak  of  something  else. 

As  I  asserted  above  my  disbelief  in  the  statement  that 
animals  had  been  found,  in  the  fields  inundated  by  the 
Nile,  that  were  partly  composed  of  pure  earth,  so  it  is 
equally  difficult  for  me  to  believe  that  trees  and  plants 
may  produce  creatures  of  similar  nature,  found  to  be  half 
alive  and  half  of  inanimate  wood,  as  if  incomplete;  and 
though  the  aforesaid  Father  Athanasius  Kircher,  in  the 
second  volume  of  "  The  Subterranean  World,"  writes 


ERRORS  EXPOSED  8l 

that  he  has  seen  such  things,  and  has  even  shown  them 
to  others,  as  occurring  on  branches  of  viburnum,  brionia 
and  on  twigs  of  the  plant  called  horse-tail  in  Tuscany; 
but  I  do  not  doubt  that  there  was  some  ocular  illusion  in 
the  matter,  and  I  do  not  hesitate  to  freely  record  my 
doubt,  knowing  Father  Kircher  to  be  a  sincere  lover  of 
truth,  who  has  spared  himself  neither  mental  nor  bodily 
fatigue  in  its  eager  pursuit.  Thus  I,  having  the  same 
object,  write  my  opinion  freely,  being  mindful  of  the 
poet's  words: 

"  If  to  the  truth  I  prove  a  timid  friend, 
I  fear  lest  I  at  last  my  days  may  end 
Among  those  men   who  will  on  History's  page 
Be  censured,  for  they  were  behind  their  age." 

And  this  fear,  together  with  my  love  of  truth,  impels  me 
to  confess  frankly  that  even  I,  in  days  gone  by,  when 
blinded  by  inexperience,  have  believed  in  things  that  I  am 
ashamed  to  remember  now.  Really,  I  must  have  seen 
double  when  I  wrote  in  my  "  Observations  on  Vipers  " 
that  the  heart  of  the  snake  has  two  auricles,  and  two  cavi- 
ties or  ventricles,  because  a  viper's  heart  has,  in  fact, 
only  a  single  auricle  and  a  single  cavity;  though  it  is 
true  that  the  single  auricle,  when  swelled,  divides  itself 
into  two  trunks,  as  it  were,  and  has  internally  a  fine 
membrane  that  almost  divides  it  into  two  cells ;  and  it  was 
in  exploring  these  two  divisions  with  the  probe  that  I 
hit  upon  the  error  of  the  two  ventricles,  one  of  which  is 
really  there,  but  the  other  was  carelessly  made  with  the 
probe. 

I  had  become  so  interested  in  the  curious  animals, 
part  animate  and  part  woody,  described  by  Father 
Kircher,  and  was  so  desirous  of  finding  some,  that  I 


82 


GENERATION  OF  INSECTS 


^       O  S  >S  1 A  C  A  xV  TA.  o 
'-'^  PI NBI  AN" CO 


TUMORS  ON  PLANTS 


83 


^\\\irea  feconda  del  c/JJ" 


84 


GENERATION  OF  INSECTS 


99^ 


cttW'^J_^i^^^^^^^^  > 


MANTIS  85 

made  every  effort  in  the  search.  Whereupon,  on  the 
thirtieth  of  May,  having  received  some  branches  of  white- 
thorn, which  presented  various  deformed  and  knotty 
growths,  I  hoped  to  witness  the  desired  transformation. 
I  also  obtained  and  closely  observed  similar  growths  on 
branches  of  Fillerea  seconda,  and  others  on  sprigs  of 
clematis,  called  vitalba  in  Tuscany,  but  I  at  last  recog- 
nized the  fact  that  these  growths  are  a  natural  freak  of 
the  plants  that  occurs  every  year  and  does  not  produce 
worms.  You  can  examine  the  accompanying  plates, 
which  I  gladly  send,  especially  as  I  believe  that  the  freak 
or  sport  has  not  been  noticed  before  by  any  writer. 

I  hope  it  will  not  tire  you  if  I  describe  another  little 
animal  mentioned  by  Father  Kircher,  supposed  to  breed 
in  rotten  cane  and  straw.  While  with  the  Court  this 
year  at  Artiminio,  for  the  hunt,  I  saw  on  the  broom  in 
the  woods  an  infinite  number  of  queer  little  creatures, 
called  by  the  peasants  "  cavallucci  "  [mantis].  I  found 
these  to  be  of  two  sorts ;  some  were  green  with  two  white 
parallel  lines  running  the  length  of  the  body,  and  the 
others  were  rusty  red,  like  the  stalks  of  broom;  both 
kinds  have  little  horns,  with  many  articulations.  They 
move  slowly  and  solemnly.  They  have  six  legs,  and 
every  leg  has  three  joints;  the  two  forelegs  arise  just 
under  the  part  to  which  the  head  is  attached.  The  head 
is  very  small,  less  than  a  grain  of  wheat;  the  eyes  are 
hard  and  upturned,  and  smaller  than  a  poppy-seed,  and 
are  red.  All  the  space  between  the  last  pair  of  legs  and 
the  tip  of  the  tail  is  composed  and  marked  by  ten  rings, 
incisions,  or  knots;  and  from  the  last  of  these  knots, 
two  very  fine  spurs  protruded.  The  whole  body  is  not 
longer  than  the  width  of  five  fingers,  and  is  of  the  same 
size  from  head  to  tail;  though  some  are  larger  in  the 


86  GENERATION  OF  INSECTS 

abdomen,  these  are  always  females,  and  are  large-bellied 
in  proportion  to  the  number  of  eggs  they  carry.  The 
males,  as  well  as  the  females,  cast  their  skin  whole,  like 
snakes,  spiders,  and  other  insects,  the  skin  being  nothing 
more  than  a  fine  white  tunic  shaped  like  the  body.  When 
these  little  animals  were  brought  to  me  I  was  so  fortu- 
nate as  to  have  with  me  Signor  Nicholas  Steno,  of  Den- 
mark, a  famous  anatomist,  as  you  know,  and  a  man  of 
gracious  and  amiable  manners,  who  is  being  royally  en- 
tertained at  this  Court  by  His  Highness,  the  Grand  Duke. 
It  occurred  to  both  of  us  to  examine  the  entrails  and  the 
internal  structure  of  these  little  creatures  as  far  as  their 
minuteness  would  allow.  We  saw  that  a  canal,  starting 
from  the  mouth  and  extending  through  the  body  to  an 
aperture  near  the  last  joint  of  the  tail,  performs  the 
functions  of  the  oesophagus,  stomach,  and  intestine ;  and 
around  this  little  canal  we  found  a  confused  mass  of 
many  and  divers  filaments  that  are,  perhaps,  veins  and 
arteries.  From  the  middle  of  the  body  to  the  end  of 
the  tail  we  saw  a  large  number  of  eggs,  bound  together 
and  enclosed  in  a  sac  hardly  discernible  on  account  of  its 
thinness.  These  eggs  were  not  larger  than  millet  grains, 
and  some  were  soft  and  tender;  others  were  hard.  The 
soft  ones  seemed  yellowish  and  almost  transparent;  but 
the  hard  ones,  though  yellow  inside,  had  a  black  shell; 
and  taking  them  all  together,  black  and  yellow,  in  a 
single  animal  we  counted  up  to  seventy.  While  we  were 
thus  engaged  we  observed  that  notwithstanding  the  fact 
that  we  had  torn  the  entrails  out  of  some  of  these  ani- 
mals, they  continued  to  live  and  to  move  in  the  same  way 
as  do  disembowelled  reptiles.  Whereupon  we  cut  off  the 
heads  of  others,  and  the  head  lived  for  a  short  time  with- 
out the  body ;  but  the  headless  body  was  extremely  lively 


GRAFTING  EXPERIMENTS '  87 

and  groped  about  as  if  in  full  possession  of  its  parts. 
Then,  just  for  a  joke,  and  to  amuse  the  company  at  the 
Villa,  we  resolved  to  graft  the  head  on  the  body  again, 
which  we  succeeded  in  doing  with  the  same  ease  as  the 
enchanter,  Orrilo,  who  put  his  dismembered  body  to- 
gether, and  of  whom  the  epic  poet  of  Ferrara  thus  sings : 

"  Oft  times  asunder  his  stout  limbs  they  hewed, 
Nor  could  they  thus  succeed  the  man  to  kill, 
For  hand  or  leg  cut  off,  with  ready  skill. 
The  bold  enchanter,  in  its  place,  renewed. 
His  head  does  Grifon  cleave,  now,  to  the  chin. 
Now  Aquilante's  sword  sinks  to  his  chest; 
He  laughs  at  this  blow  as  at  all  the  rest. 
In  helpless  rage  they  curse  this  Satan's  kin. 
Hast  seen  the  slippery  silver  break  and  fall. 
Called  mercury  by  some  old  alchemist? 
How  fast  it  runs  in  many  a  shining  ball, 
Then  joins  in  one,  and  not  a  drop  is  miss'd ! 
Thus  Orrilo  does  seek  his  severed  head, 
Nor  till  he  finds  it,  leaves  off  stumbling  round; 
Then  seizing  it  by  the  long  locks  of  red, 
Or  by  the  nose,  straight  on  his  neck  'tis  bound. 
Now  Grifon  hurls  him,  with  a  mighty  hand, 
Into  the  stream,  but  this  does  nought  avail ; 
Swimming  below,  without  an  ache  or  ail, 
Orrilo  crosses  to  the  other  strand." 

Thus  our  little  animals,  with  their  grafted  heads,  lived, 
not  only  all  that  day,  but  for  five  continuous  days,  to  the 
great  surprise  of  all  who  were  not  in  the  secret.  And  in 
that  state  they  not  only  dropped  their  excrement,  but 
even  laid  their  eggs.  Hence,  an  overhasty  writer  would 
have  had  many  eye-witnesses  to  vouch  for  the  truth  of 
this  experiment,  but  in  asserting  the  restoration  of  the 
heads  as  genuine,  he  would  be  writing  sheer  nonsense, 
for  the  heads  adhered  to  the  trunks  by  means  of  a  green> 


88 


GENERATION  OF  INSECTS 


INSECTS  IN  DECAYED  PLANTS  89 

viscous  fluid,  that  oozed  from  the  bodies,  and  on  drying, 
caused  the  parts  to  join  firmly  together;  but  though  the 
bodies  lived,  the  heads  gave  no  sign  of  life;  the  trunks, 
with  or  without  the  heads,  continued  to  live  for  five  days. 
In  case  you  should  have  the  curiosity  to  see  how  these 
little  creatures  look,  without  seeking  them  in  Kircher  or 
Johnston,  I  send  them  to  you,  here  enclosed,  drawn  from 
life,  together  with  a  drawing  of  one  of  their  eggs,  en- 
larged by  means  of  a  very  fine  microscope.  You  will  no- 
tice that  one  end  is  oval  and  the  other  has  a  raised  border, 
which  resembles  one  of  those  divided,  wooden  eggs, 
that  we  use  for  boxes,  and  that  screw  together  in  the 
middle. 

I  have  gone  from  one  subject  to  another,  uncon- 
sciously, and  must  return  to  my  previous  remarks  about 
the  insects  which  appear  to  take  origin  in  rotten  plants ; 
and  I  assure  you  that  I  have  seen  worms  occur  in  all 
kinds  of  vegetation.  Hence,  it  is  not  strange  that  Pliny 
and  Dioscorides  should  have  vaunted  the  marvelous  dis- 
covery that  macerated  sweet  basil,  when  exposed  to  the 
sun,  breeds  worms.  From  worms  bred  in  decayed  plants 
I  have  seen  the  common  fly  hatch  out,  and  sometimes  a 
gnat.  But  often  from  a  single  plant  there  would  arise 
many  generations  of  small,  winged  animals,  so  minute 
that  Tertullian  had  good  reason  to  call  them:  "unius 
puncti  animalia."  I  recall  that,  on  hyssop  alone,  on  lav- 
ender and  St.  John's  wort,  besides  flies  and  gnats,  eight 
or  more  different  generations  of  midges  were  born.  I 
also  found  some  worms  on  parsley  similar  to  those  that 
change  to  flies,  but  they  were  all  hairy,  and  forming  a 
circle  with  their  bodies,  would  frequently  spring  about. 
I  was  unfortunate  in  not  observing  their  subsequent 
transformations,  as  they  all  died  before  forming  them- 


90  GENERATION  OF  INSECTS 

selves  into  eggs   [pupae],  owing,  perhaps,  to  the  chilly 
season,  at  the  end  of  November. 

Hear  now  what  Pliny  writes  in  the  twenty-first  book 
of  his  "  Natural  History  "  :  "  Another  wonderful  thing 
occurs  in  the  Isle  of  Candia ;  here  is  Mt.  Carina,  which  is 
nine  miles  in  circumference,  and  flies  are  never  found  in 
this  district.  The  honey  made  there  is  never  troubled  by 
flies,  and  is  for  this  reason  in  great  demand  for  medicinal 
purposes.'*  Zese  relates  the  same  thing  about  Attic 
honey,  and  gives  the  reason  that  Attica  has  great  quanti- 
ties of  thyme,  the  strong  odor  of  which  is  very  disagree- 
able to  flies.  M.  Glica,  in  his  Greek  Annals,  is  of  the 
same  opinion,  but  I  have  seen  flies  lay  their  eggs,  or  their 
worms,  in  thyme,  and  have  seen  the  young  flies  hatch 
out  of  them;  and  these  flies  would  not  only  greedily  eat 
honey  thinned  with  a  decoction  of  thyme,  but  would  also 
swallow  an  electuary  composed  of  honey  and  leaves  of 
thyme.  Perhaps  that  story  may  have  been  true  in  Pliny's 
time  and  on  Mt.  Carina,  but  to-day,  in  Tuscany,  it  must 
be  classed  among  fables.  Therefore,  in  order  to  termi- 
nate as  soon  as  possible  this  long  and  tedious  letter,  I 
will  say  again  that  as  all  dead  flesh,  fish,  plants  and  fruits 
form  a  good  breeding  place  for  flies  and  other  winged 
animals,  Hkewise  all  kinds  of  fungi  are  suitable  for  this 
purpose.  I  speak,  however,  of  fungi  that  have  been 
picked,  therefore  dead,  so  to  say,  and  decayed ;  for  those 
rooted  in  the  ground  and  on  trees,  living,  that  is,  pro- 
duce another  kind  of  worms,  differing  in  every  respect 
from  the  worms,  issue  of  flies ;  the  worms  coming  from 
fungi  do  not  crawl  along,  but  walk  on  their  feet  like 
silk-worms,  and  have  a  short,  blunt  head,  not  sharp  and 
long,  as  in  the  other  case.  These  worms,  then,  on  at- 
taining full  growth,  escape  from  their  birthplace  in  the 


TWO  METHODS  OF  GENERATION  gi 

fungus,  and  instead  of  changing  into  eggs  [pupae],  they 
build  around  themselves  a  cocoon  of  silk,  in  which  they 
remain  enclosed  a  certain  number  of  days,  when  there 
issues  from  each  cocoon  an  insect  that  is  occasionally  a 
mosquito,  sometimes  a  little  black  fly  with  four  wings, 
and  again  a  similar  fly  with  an  elongated  abdomen,  like 
a  tail. 

Now,  whatever  may  be  the  efficient  cause  that  pro- 
duces these  worms  in  live  fungus,  I,  for  my  part,  believe 
it  to  be  the  same  that  creates  them  in  living  plants  and 
fruits,  about  which  philosophers  hold  most  varied  opin- 
ions. Fortunio  Liceto,  in  his  book  on  the  spontaneous 
generation  of  living  things,  being  convinced  that  the  vege- 
tative soul,  more  ignoble  than  the  other,  cannot  produce 
the  sentient  soul,  believes  that  the  generation  of  worms  is 
due  to  the  nourishment  that  plants  take  from  the  ground, 
in  which,  he  says,  there  are  many  particles  of  the  sen- 
tient soul  communicated  to  it  by  the  putrefaction 
of  animal  bodies,  or  by  their  excrement;  he  further 
adds  that  from  all  bodies,  living  or  dead,  many  atoms 
or  corpuscles,  pregnant  with  the  sensitive  principle,  are 
given  off,  fly  about  in  the  air,  and  attach  themselves  to 
the  bark  of  trees,  plants,  and  to  their  leaves  and  fruits, 
and  subsequently  cause  the  origin  of  worms. 

Pietro  Gassendi  thinks  that  worms  breed  in  the  pulp 
of  fruits  owing  to  the  insemination  of  the  flowers  by 
flies,  bees,  mosquitoes,  etc.,  their  seeds  afterwards  de- 
veloping with  the  fruit,  become  worms.  I  could  adduce 
many  other  opinions,  but  they  are  all  similar  to  those 
enumerated  at  the  very  beginning  of  this  letter,  hence 
I  deem  it  opportune  to  omit  them;  but  if  I  must  disclose 
my  real  feeling  in  the  matter,  I  would  state  my  belief 
that  fruits,  vegetables,  trees  and  leaves  become  wormy 


92  GENERATION  OF  INSECTS 

in  two  ways.  One  way  is  that  the  worms  come  in  from 
outside,  and,  seeking  food,  gnaw  a  path  to  the  very  heart 
of  the  fruit  and  the  wood.  The  other  way,  which  I 
esteem  worthy  of  credence,  is  to  be  found  in  the  pecuHar 
potency  of  that  soul  or  principle  which  creates  the  flowers 
and  fruits  of  living  plants,  and  is  the  same  that  produces 
the  worms  of  these  plants.  Who  knows  ?  Perhaps  many 
of  the  fruits  of  trees  are  produced  with  a  secondary, 
rather  than  a  primary  purpose,  not  as  pre-eminent  in 
themselves,  but  as  objects  of  utility,  destined  as  a  matrix 
for  the  generation  of  these  worms,  which  remain  in  them 
for  a  determined  length  of  time,  and  thence  come  forth 
to  enjoy  the  sunshine. 

I  think  that  my  idea  will  not  seem  paradoxical  to  you, 
if  you  consider  the  great  variety  of  growths,  such  as 
glands,  galls,  knobs,  warts,  etc.,  produced  by  oaks,  holm 
oaks,  live  oaks,  and  other  acorn-bearing  trees.  In  the 
hairy  tufts  of  the  oak,  and  in  the  woody  tufts  of  the  ilex, 
and  in  the  galls  of  the  holm  oak  leaf,  it  is  manifest  that 
the  first  and  principal  intention  of  Nature  is  to  create 
therein  a  winged  animal,  for  there  is  an  tgg  in  the  in- 
terior of  the  gall,  and  this  egg  enlarges  and  matures  in 
proportion  to  the  development  of  the  gall,  and  finally 
gives  birth  to  the  worm,  which,  when  the  gall  has  reached 
maturity,  becomes  a  fly,  that  breaking  the  egg  and  com- 
mencing to  gnaw  the  gall,  makes  a  narrow  and  always 
round  road  from  the  center  to  the  circumference,  and 
abandoning  its  native  prison,  escapes  and  flies  boldly 
away  in  search  of  food. 

I  confess  to  you  frankly  that  before  making  these  ex- 
periments in  the  generation  of  insects  I  believed,  or 
rather  suspected,  that  galls  were  originated  by  the  fly, 
which,  in  the  Spring,  makes  a  small  slit  in  the  young 


GALLS  93 

twigs  of  the  oak  and  hides  one  of  her  eggs  in  the  open- 
ing :  the  gall  arising  thence ;  and  I  thought  that  all  galls, 
glands,  excrescences,  etc.,  were  never  seen  except  on  those 
branches  wherein  the  flies  had  deposited  their  eggs;  the 
galls  themselves  being  a  disease  caused  in  the  oaks  by 
the  fly's  sting,  in  the  same  manner  that  we  see  swellings 
arise  in  the  bodies  of  animals  after  they  have  been  stung 
by  similar  insects.  I  was  also  in  doubt  whether  the  galls 
arose  first,  and  the  flies,  on  coming  afterwards,  deposited 
in  them  some  kind  of  seminal  fluid  that,  pregnant  with 
procreative  power,  penetrated  to  the  most  remote  parts, 
and  fertilizing  them,  produced  the  worm.  But  I  re- 
flected that  there  are  many  kinds  of  fruits  and  vege- 
tables, which,  though  protected  by  their  rinds  or  pods, 
still  are  wormy;  and  I  observed,  also,  that  all  ex- 
crescences constantly  arise  in  a  certain  part  of  the 
branches,  and  always  in  young  ones,  appearing  always 
in  the  veined  parts,  and  never  on  the  smooth  surface, 
and  invariably  on  the  side  of  the  leaf  turned  to  the 
ground,  and  not  on  the  side  looking  skyward;  having 
also  taken  into  consideration  that,  when  the  leaves  of 
trees  on  which  grow  vesicles  or  pouch-like  swellings  full 
of  worms  first  bud  out,  they  are  even  then  covered  with 
these  growths,  as  can  easily  be  seen,  though  they  are 
very  minute;  these  vesicles  grow  with  the  growth  of  the 
leaves,  as  anyone  can  prove  to  his  satisfaction  by  ob- 
serving the  excrescences  on  the  leaves  of  the  elm,  the 
wild  plum,  the  ilex,  and  the  lentisk.  For  further  ex- 
ample, the  holm  oak  produces  some  bunches  of  flowers 
from  which  arise  the  same  number  of  red  berries,  each 
of  which  engenders  three  or  four  worms,  enclosed  in  a 
separate  cell.  The  same  tree  produces  another  bunch  of 
flowers,  from  which  arise  several  greenish-yellow  calices. 


94  GENERATION  OF  INSECTS 

having  a  woody  base  and  soft  rim ;  all  these  calices  make 
their  worms,  which  come  out  in  the  shape  of  winged 
animals.  Hence,  I  have  changed  my  opinion,  and  I  think 
it  probable  that  the  generation  of  worms  in  trees  does  not 
occur  fortuitously,  nor  does  it  proceed  from  the  eggs 
deposited  by  flies,  especially  as  every  gall  or  growth  has 
its  own  peculiar  kind  of  worm,  gnat,  or  fly,  which  never 
varies.  It  is  wonderful  with  what  consummate  skill  Na- 
ture forms  the  egg  and  prepares  a  place  for  it ;  admirable 
is  the  industry  and  patience  with  which  she  surrounds  it 
in  a  network  of  fibres  and  filaments,  connecting  it  with 
the  gall,  like  so  many  veins  or  arteries,  which  furnish 
the  necessary  supply  for  the  formation  of  the  egg  and 
the  worm,  and  the  indispensable  nourishment  of  both. 
Though  there  are  different  kinds  of  galls  which  produce 
not  only  one,  but  many  worms,  still  Nature  knows  where 
they  are  and  provides  accordingly,  as  she  does  in  the  case 
of  prolific  animals,  which  give  birth  to  numerous  young 
at  the  same  time.  It  is  also  to  be  noted  that  the  worm 
of  the  gall  receives  a  certain  vital  stimulus  from  the  oak, 
for  if  such  a  growth  should  be  pulled  as  soon  as  it  ap- 
pears on  the  tree,  and  when  the  eye  cannot  perceive  any 
sign  of  an  egg,  this  gall  will  not  produce  a  worm,  nor 
yet  a  fly.  If  the  gall  is  plucked  at  a  later  stage,  when  it 
is  larger,  and  the  first  beginnings  of  the  newly-formed 
egg  can  be  seen,  and  the  taste  is  bitter,  things  will  go 
badly,  and  the  worm  will  not  reach  maturity;  but  if  the 
worm  does  turn  out  well,  it  is  because  he  has  enjoyed  a 
full  term  of  development  that  is  invariable;  though  it  is 
true  that  different  kinds  of  galls  have  different  times  of 
maturity;  in  some  the  insects  are  ready  for  flight  in  the 
Spring,  others  in  Summer,  Fall,  or  at  the  beginning  of 


GALLS  95 

Winter,  but  certain  others  prefer  to  wait  over  a  year  or 
two  in  their  cells. 

It  would  be  superfluous  to  make  any  further  remarks 
on  this  subject,  as  some  parts  are  not  entirely  new  to 
you,  such  as  my  experiments  made  at  Artiminio  when 
the  Court  stayed  there  last  year  to  enjoy  the  delightful 
sports  of  the  chase.  So  I  will  keep  silence  in  good  faith, 
begging  the  continuation  of  your  interest  in  another 
work  which  I  am  preparing  to  publish,  i.  e.,  a  history  of 
divers  fruits  and  animals  generated  by  oaks  and  other 
trees.  I  firmly  believe  that  I  shall  soon  be  able  to  satisfy 
the  curiosity  of  investigators  of  natural  phenomena,  be- 
ing favored  by  the  royal  generosity  of  my  Lord,  the 
Serene  Grand  Duke,  by  which  means  I  have  already  been 
able  to  obtain  many  illustrations  for  my  work  from  the 
skillful  brush  of  Signor  F.  Pizzichi. 

Before  returning  to  my  argument,  I  cannot  refrain 
from  saying  that  I  do  not  consider  it  a  great  sin  against 
philosophy  to  maintain  that  the  worms  of  plants  are 
created  by  the  same  natural  principle  that  prcxiuces  the 
fruits  of  the  plants;  and  although  in  some  schools  it  is 
held  as  an  axiom  that  the  lower  cannot  produce  the 
higher,  I  think  this  absurd,  for  it  seems  to  me  that  the 
fact  alone  of  flies  and  gnats  being  bred  in  galls  is  suffi- 
cient to  remove  all  doubt.  Besides,  "  low  "  and  "  high  " 
are  unknown  terms  to  Nature,  invented  to  suit  the  be- 
liefs of  this  or  that  sect,  according  to  the  needs  of  the 
case.  But  even  if  it  were  true,  as  the  scholastics  noisily 
assert,  that  the  lower  cannot  produce  the  higher,  I  do  not, 
for  my  part,  see  what  there  is  degrading  or  paradoxical 
in  the  assertion  that  plants,  in  addition  to  their  vegeta- 
tive existence,  possess  a  sensitive  power  to  which  this 


96  GENERATION  OF  INSECTS 

is  subordinate,  and  which  enables  them  to  produce  animal 
life.  Democritus,  who,  according  to  Petronius  Arbiter, 
"  omnium  herbarum  succos  expressit,  et,  ne  lapidum  vir- 
gultorumque  vis  lateret,  aetatem  inter  experimenta  con- 
sumpsit,"  did  not  disdain  to  concede  sentient  powers  to 
plants.  Pythagoras  and  Plato  were  of  the  same  opinion, 
as  were  also  Anaxagoras  and  Empedocles,  if  we  are  to 
believe  Aristotle's  report  in  the  first  book  on  plants.  But 
the  recreant  Manicheans  impiously  went  further,  as  St. 
Augustine  tells  us,  maintaining  that  plants  possess  a 
soul;  hence  it  was  a  crime  to  pull  fruits  or  flowers,  or 
to  tear  off  their  leaves  and  branches,  or  uproot  them. 
Plotinus  was  more  moderate,  for  in  his  writings,  though 
admitting  that  plants  have  the  sense  of  feeling,  he  de- 
scribes it  as  being  of  a  dull,  latent  form  as  in  the  case  of 
oysters,  sponges,  and  similar  animals,  that  are  called 
"  plant-animals  "  by  the  schools.  I  might  cite  T.  Cam- 
panella  and  many  other  moderns  in  favor  of  this  opinion. 
But  I  shall  not  bring  in  proof  Pliny's  account,  that 
Pythagoras  commanded  his  followers  to  abstain  from 
beans,  because  the  souls  of  the  dead  took  refuge  in  them, 
nor  shall  I  tell  you  about  the  fabulous  power  ascribed 
to  these  vegetables  when  macerated  and  exposed  to  the 
sun,  which  according  to  the  Chaldean  philosopher, 
Zareta,  then  give  forth  an  odor  similar  to  that  of  human 
semen,  or  if  the  bean-flowers  be  buried  in  a  vase  under- 
ground, they  assume  the  appearance  of  a  child's  head. 
I  shall  not  quote  here  the  precise  words  of  the  Greek 
text,  because  if  you  have  the  curiosity  to  know  further, 
you  can  find  them  in  commentaries  on  L.  Diogenes, 
written  by  our  mutual  friend,  the  academician,  Egidio 
Menagio. 

As  further  proof  of  the  sensibility  of  plants,  it  will  be 


SENSIBILITY  OF  PLANTS  97 

hardly  necessary  to  recall  to  your  mind  the  allusions  to 
it  by  many  poets.  You  remember  the  bushes  of  Thrace, 
animated  by  the  spirit  of  dead  Polydorus,  the  Gardens 
of  Alcina,  mentioned  by  Ariosto,  and  the  enchanted  for- 
ests created  by  Boiardo  and  Berni.  At  first,  these  would 
appear  to  be  bizarre  fantasies,  invented  by  poets  solely  to 
amuse  the  public  and  to  perplex  the  ignorant : 

"  But  ye,  whose  minds  are  clear  and  of  free  range, 
Seek  for  the  doctrine,  that  perchance  is  hid 
Under  the  veil  of  verses  passing  strange." 

Hear  now  Berni : 

"All  precious  things  and  things  of  beauty,  all 
Those  of  sweet  savor,  fine  and  delicate. 
Uncovered  in  the  hand  should  ne'er  at  all 
Be  borne  abroad,  lest,  through  some  evil  fate. 
Such  choice  things  unto  filthy  pigs  might  fall. 
Learn  then  how  Nature  with  covers  ornate 
Her  divers  products  wisely  does  provide: 
Tliorns,  scales,  shells,  pods,  and  rugged  bark  or  hide. 
Against  the  power  of  sky,  of  bird  and  beast. 
She  also  hides  her  gold  far  under  ground. 
With  pearls  and  jewels  rare,  that  men,  at  least, 
May  not  her  secrets  e'er  disclose  unbound. 
How  foolish  seekers  are,  who  gaily  feast 
Upon  their  treasure  opened  on  the  ground; 
They  seem  to  call  on  robbers  and  the  Devil 
To  spoil  them  of  their  goods  and  do  them  evil. 
For  it  would  also  seem  that  Justice  wills 
(Giving  a  meed  of  good  to  them  that  strive), 
That  he,  who  labors  and  much  promise  fills. 
Should  be  a  man  of  worth,  no  drone  i'  the  hive. 
As  with  deft  hand  a  spoon  of  salt  she  spills. 
The  clever  house-wife  daily  does  contrive 
To  give  to  viands  a  still  finer  savor. 
Though  even  in  themselves,  they  lacked  not  flavor. 


98  GENERATION  OF  INSECTS 

But  when,  at  eve,  the  Odyssey  you  read 

And  learn  of  fearful  wars  you  can't  abide, 

Where  some  fair  god  is  wounded  in  the  head, 

Or  lovely  goddess  —  don't  be  horrified; 

For  Homer  did  not  mean  just  what  he  said; 

The  good  man  often  to  the  public  lied, 

To  misle  fools,  who,  even  with  a  glass. 

Can  hardly  tell  a  horse  from  a  dull  ass. 

Hence,  for  fair  Reason's  sake,  do  not  stop  short 

At  what  you  first  perceive,  but  pass  along. 

Under  the  hull  there's  stuff  of  different  sort : 

To  judge  a  thing  by  the  outside  is  wrong. 

By  Jupiter !     You'll  never  come  to  port. 

If  you  give  ear  to  every  tale  and  song. 

Therefore,  I  pray,  take  up  the  hoe  of  mind. 

Dig  hard,  and  sweat  —  something,  mayhap,  you'll  find." 

But,  who  knows,  perhaps  Virgil,  Dante,  and  the  other 
Tuscan  poets,  combined  truth  with  fable  in  alluding  to 
the  sensitiveness  of  plants.  I  know  very  well  that  there 
is  no  conclusive  proof  on  either  side  of  the  question,  but 
it  is  true  that  plants  consume  food,  grow,  and  produce 
seed  and  fruit,  like  animals.  They  eagerly  seek  the  sun 
and  fresh  air ;  they  avoid  unhealthy  shade,  twisting  them- 
selves aside  to  escape  it,  and  perhaps,  if  they  had  legs, 
and  were  not  so  deeply  rooted  in  the  ground,  they  might 
flee  from  attack,  or,  possessing  the  proper  organs,  they 
might  complain  and  break  into  lamentations  on  being 
injured. 

I  remember,  in  connection  with  this,  that  being  in 
Leghorn,  in  the  month  of  March,  I  saw  a  sea-fruit, 
round  like  an  apple,  that  had  taken  root  in  the  mud  be- 
tween the  cracks  of  a  rock.  This  fruit  resembled  an 
orange  in  size  and  shape,  and  was  of  the  color  of  pig 
fungi,  but  is  called  sea-fungus  by  the  fishermen.  Hav- 
ing  gathered   it,    and   wishing   to   examine   its   internal 


FEELING  AND  MOTION  99 

Structure,  I  began  to  prick  it  with  a  knife,  and  to  cut 
it  open,  when  I  saw  that  it  moved  and  was  sensitive  to 
the  touch,  as  it  shrank  together,  and  folded  itself  up  at 
every  prick  and  puncture ;  yet  in  its  internal  cavity,  whose 
walls  were  milky  white,  there  was  nothing  but  clear  water 
of  a  salty  taste,  and  some  white  filaments,  that  stretched 
irregularly  from  wall  to  wall.  And  do  not  sponges, 
which  many  learned  men  class  among  plants,  also  move 
and  shrink  when  attacked? 

In  cases  of  paralysis,  it  sometimes  happens  that  the 
sense  of  feeling  will  disappear  in  a  limb,  though  the 
power  of  motion  remain,  and  inversely,  there  will  be  a 
loss  of  motive  power  without  any  damage  to  the  acute- 
ness  of  feeling.  Now,  who  could  tell,  in  this  second  in- 
stance, that  the  paralyzed  and  motionless  limb  had  any 
feeling  if  the  patient  had  neither  mouth  nor  voice  with 
which  to  state  the  fact  and  complain  of  the  punctures  and 
lacerations  made  by  the  surgeon  to  restore  his  health? 
Again,  who  would  ever  believe,  on  seeing  the  free  move- 
ments of  another  limb,  that  there  was  no  feeling  in  it, 
if  the  sick  person  gave  no  sign?  Hence  motion,  wher- 
ever occurring  is  not  a  proof  of  feeling,  as  many  insist. 
Let  every  one  think  as  he  likes,  but  in  view  of  my  experi- 
ments, I  am  inclined  to  believe  that  the  generation  of 
worms  in  live  fruits,  plants,  and  trees  is  not  accidental, 
but  invariably  of  the  same  nature,  and  that  all  that  class 
of  worms  is  afterwards  changed  into  winged  animals 
according  to  the  different  species.  And  here  I  cannot 
refrain  from  describing  the  birth  and  transformation 
of  one  or  two  kinds,  which  may  further  elucidate  my 
theory. 

Cherries  of  all  kinds  grow  wormy  on  the  trees,  and 
each  cherry  has  always  one  worm;  in  a  single  cherry  I 


lOO  GENERATION  OF  INSECTS 

have  never  found  two.  The  worm  is  white,  without 
legs,  and  is  conical  in  shape,  like  those  produced  by  flies, 
which  I  described  in  the  beginning  of  this  letter ;  as  long 
as  it  remains  in  the  worm  stage,  it  is  solely  occupied  with 
feeding  and  growing,  but  does  not  make  any  abdominal 
secretions ;  when  it  has  reached  a  certain  size,  it  leaves  the 
cherry  in  which  it  was  born,  and  seeks  a  place  to  settle 
down,  and  here,  little  by  little,  it  shrinks,  hardens  and  is 
changed  into  a  small,  milky  white  egg  [pupa]  from 
which  nothing  hatches  for  a  year,  when,  on  the  arrival 
of  Summer,  a  small  fly  escapes  from  it,  which  is  black 
and  hairy ;  the  hairs  on  the  head  and  back,  though  rarer, 
are  longer  than  those  on  the  belly;  on  the  back  there  is 
a  half-circle  of  a  gold  color,  and  the  head  is  striped  with 
yellow  also,  from  which  proceeds  a  similar  large  streak 
of  color,  that  covers  a  large  part  of  the  space  between 
the  eyes;  the  wings  are  white  and  covered  with  gray  or 
black  spots,  so  beautifully  arranged  that  they  resemble 
falcon  feathers;  there  are  six  legs,  also  black,  hairy, 
and  touched  with  gold  at  the  joints.  You  will  be  able 
to  have  a  better  idea  of  it  from  the  accompanying  draw- 
ing, in  which  the  worm  is  shown  together  with  the 
chrysalis  into  which  it  is  changed  and  the  fly,  that 
hatches  from  it;  these  appear  in  natural  size  and  also  on 
a  larger  scale,  as  viewed  through  a  microscope  of  one 
lens. 

Very  different  from  the  cherry  worms,  are  those 
which  are  found  in  green  filberts,  for  these  are  shaped 
like  a  half  cylinder  and  composed  of  white  semicircles; 
the  head  is  auburn  and  shiny;  they  do  not  move  quickly, 
and  have  six  very  small  legs,  placed  in  three  rows  near 
the  head.  I  have  never  been  able  to  observe  the  trans- 
formation of  these  worms  into  winged  animals;  hence 


CHERRY  WORMS 


lOI 


it  may  be  that  they  Hve  and  die  merely  worms.  I  have 
oft^n  shut  up  some  of  this  kind  for  a  long  time  without 
?oS  Ind  certain  ones  kept  alive  from  July  to  November. 
Other  worms,  not  dissimilar,  but  larger  red  and  hairy 
found  in  red  beets  and  leeks,  also  maintain  life  when 
nlsed  in  vessels  for  a  long  time,  nor  are  they  ever 


changed  into  animals  having  wings.     It   s  tl^r^fore  n 
easy  to  determine  whether  the  worms  of  the  filbert  are 
ge/erated  by  direct  procreation  of  the  tree,  or  whe the 
they  have  come  in  from  outside;  in  view  of  the  fact  that 
*  other  plants  engender,  themselves  the  worms  >twou^d 
seem  probable  that  the  filbert  should  do  likewise,  on  the 


I02  GENERATION  OF  INSECTS 

other  hand,  the  argument  that  the  worms  enter  from 
without,  is  not  to  be  waved  aside,  for  it  may  be  observed 
that  all  the  wormy  filberts,  from  which  the  worm  has 
not  already  escaped,  have  a  small  hard  projection  on  the 
shell,  that  is  perhaps  the  scar  of  the  aperture  made  by  the 
worm  when  it  was  of  small  size,  and  working  its  way 
through  the  soft  shell  of  the  nut,  penetrated  to  its  in- 
ternal cavity;  the  aperture,  after  the  shell  grows  and 
hardens,  closes,  so  that  the  worm,  having  grown,  must 
make  another  and  larger  hole  when  it  wishes  to  escape, 
which  is  indeed  found  in  all  filberts  abandoned  by  the 
worm.  I  am  therefore  in  doubt  what  to  believe,  and 
cannot  come  to  a  decision,  although  on  the  authority  of 
a  very  learned  philosopher,  I  should  be  inclined  to  think 
that  the  worms  of  filberts  come  from  outside.  This  phi- 
losopher is  the  famous  Joachin  Jung,  of  Liibeck,  who  re- 
fers to  this  subject  in  his  Memoranda  on  Physics,  that 
have  been  collected  and  printed  with  notes  by  Martin 
Vogel,  of  Hamburg,  a  writer  of  great  reputation,  and  a 
friend  of  mine. 

The  worms  of  the  plum  are  similar  to  those  of  the  fil- 
bert, but  they  move  more  briskly  and  with  greater  speed. 
They  stay  within  the  plum,  where  they  are  born,  feeding 
on  the  pulp  and  excreting,  until  they  are  perfectly  grown, 
when  they  abandon  the  fruit,  and  every  worm  builds 
a  small  white  cocoon  of  silk,  from  which  it  subsequently 
issues  in  the  form  of  a  little  gray  butterfly  having  black 
spots  on  the  tips  of  its  wings.  The  worms  of  the  peach 
and  pear  are  of  the  same  kind  as  those  of  the  plum,  and 
make  cocoons  from  which  butterflies  emerge. 

Perhaps  the  question  may  arise  in  your  mind:  are  all 
kinds  of  butterflies  generated  by  trees,  or  do  they  come 
from  the  parent  through  the  stages  of  egg  and  worm? 


CATERPILLARS  103 

The  writers  on  this  subject  disagree,  so  I  will  briefly  tell 
you  what  I  think  about  the  matter,  without  reciting  the 
opinions  of  others.  The  males  unite  with  the  females, 
and  their  fertilized  eggs  are  laid  in  great  numbers ;  from 
these  eggs  worms  hatch,  that  we  call  caterpillars,  and 
in  Latin  "  erucae."  These  caterpillars  feed  on  the  leaves 
of  trees  and  plants  up  to  a  certain  time.  In  the  mean- 
time they  frequently  become  torpid  and  cast  their  skins. 
But  when  they  have  finished  growing,  some  of  them 
weave  a  silk  cocoon  about  their  bodies,  others  do  not 
make  a  cocoon,  but  shrink  up,  harden  themselves  into 
a  chrysalis,  and  during  this  process  they  emit  two  or 
three  silk  filaments,  with  which  they  securely  attach  them- 
selves to  a  tree-trunk  or  stone;  others  of  a  different 
kind,  remain  unattached  and  float  in  the  air.  Finally 
the  butterflies  escape  from  the  cocoons  as  from  a  tomb, 
every  kind  having  its  fixed  period  of  maturity:  some 
come  out  after  a  few  days,  others  delay  for  weeks,  still 
others  for  months ;  and  the  caterpillars  of  the  third  kind, 
after  forming  a  cocoon  towards  the  end  of  Spring,  do 
not  appear  as  butterflies  until  the  following  Spring.  A 
certain  kind  of  fly  also  proceeds  from  a  chrysalis. 

Do  not  marvel  at  all  these  strange  births  and  trans- 
formations, for  we  ourselves,  are  nothing  more  than 
caterpillars  and  worms;  hence  the  divine  poet  gracefully 
said  of  us : 

"  Perceive  ye  not  that  ye  are  merely  worms. 
Born  to  create  the  angelic  butterfly." 

As  I  greatly  desire  to  demonstrate  to  )^ou  the  truth  of 
the  foregoing  statements,  I  have  pleasure  in  relating  here 
a  few  experiments  out  of  many  that  I  have  made  with 
caterpillars  and  butterflies. 


I04  GENERATION  OF  INSECTS 

On  the  fifth  of  June,  on  my  way  to  the  Villa  of  Poggio 
Imperiale,  I  saw  a  great  many  caterpillars  crawling  about 
on  the  holm  oaks,  which  border  the  road.  Some  of  these 
would  descend  by  means  of  silky  threads  and  on  reaching 
the  ground,  quickly  pull  themselves  up  again  by  the 
thread.  Having  ordered  a  large  quantity  to  be  gathered, 
I  noticed  that  they  were  all  covered  with  long  hair,  some 
being  black,  and  others  red;  they  were  all  spotted  on  the 
back  with  fourteen  dots.  I  put  them  in  special  boxes, 
where  they  lived  for  several  days  on  the  oak  leaves,  then, 
having  divested  themselves  of  their  hairy  tunic,  it  seemed 
as  though  they  were  about  to  prepare  a  cocoon,  but  either 
from  lack  of  material,  or,  as  I  believe,  because  it  was  their 
habit,  they  did  not  finish  the  cocoon,  but  inside  the  net- 
work of  filaments,  already  begun,  they  changed  into 
chrysalides,  that  were  first  reddish,  then  blackish  and 
shaped  like  a  cone,  on  the  base  of  which  a  few  hairs  re- 
mained. On  the  26th  of  June  there  issued  from  them 
some  butterflies,  formed  like  those  that  come  from  the 
silk  cocoons,  with  the  difference  that  the  last  are  white, 
and  the  former  of  pale  brown  with  black  tracings  and  two 
long  antenn3e  on  the  head,  and  a  black  silk  tassle  on  the 
end  of  the  belly ;  but  on  the  twenty-eighth  day  the  other 
chrysalides  opened  and  let  out  smaller  butterflies,  that 
were  entirely  white;  two  of  these  having  united,  the 
female  laid  a  great  many  eggs,  small  and  yellow,  which 
produced  a  like  number  of  very  small  caterpillars  in  the 
following  May. 

On  the  5th  of  July,  I  found  a  very  large  caterpillar  on 
a  plant  of  nightshade.  As  soon  as  I  had  put  it  in  an  en- 
closed place,  it  began  to  gnaw  the  leaves  of  the  plant  that 
I  gave  it;  and  on  the  seventh  day  of  the  same  month  it 
shed  its  skin,  and  remained  in  the  shape  of  a  red  chrysalis, 


BUTTERFLIES  IO5 

which  grew  hourly  darker  and  finally  blackish;  from  it, 
on  August  second,  there  came  out  an  immense  butterfly, 
which,  on  being  irritated,  squeaked  like  a  bat.  It  was 
of  gold  color  and  had  black  wings,  back,  and  belly.  Its 
head  was  all  black,  and  from  it  protruded  two  black 
crests ;  the  eyes  were  brown  and  the  black  proboscis  was 
cartilaginous,  and  rolled  up  in  front  of  the  mouth  in  many 
rings,  as  is  the  case  with  all  other  butterflies;  the  six  legs 
in  the  first  section,  or  shin,  attached  to  the  thorax,  were 
all  hairy  and  of  dirty  gold  color ;  the  other  sections  were 
purple ;  at  the  end  of  every  leg  there  was  a  nail,  claw,  or 
hook,  which  also  appeared  in  all  the  articulations  of  the 
legs.     It  lived  only  six  days. 

On  the  twelfth  of  July,  an  oak  branch  was  brought  to 
me,  on  two  leaves  of  which  were  spread  in  good  order 
more  than  thirty  caterpillars  covered  with  white  short 
hairs,  and  spotted  all  over  the  body  with  divers  colors; 
the  head  was  brown  and  shiny,  and  crossed  by  the  letter 
Y  in  yellow.  All  these  caterpillars  remained  motionless 
and  slept  peacefully.  Then,  having  placed  them  in  a 
large  box,  they  shed  skins,  awoke,  and  immediately  began 
to  devour  the  oak  leaves ;  and  they  continued  to  feed  on 
these  until  the  22nd  day  of  the  same  month,  when,  having 
settled  down  in  regular  order  in  a  corner  of  the  box,  they 
again  went  to  sleep  and  slept  for  two  whole  days,  where- 
upon having  shed  their  skins  again,  and  having  aroused 
themselves,  being  now  much  larger  and  more  hairy,  they 
fell  to  eating  with  great  voracity  and  held  their  own, 
until  the  first  of  August,  on  which  day  they  suddenly 
left  off  eating  and  became  stupid,  torpid,  and  weak ;  they 
appeared  to  have  dwindled  in  size;  all  their  hairs  had 
dropped  off,  and  they  scarcely  moved  even  when  touched ; 
to  sum  up,  they  seemed  to  be  depressed  or  sick,   re- 


I06  GENERATION  OF  INSECTS 

sembling  those  silkworms  that  sicken  and  almost  spoil 
before  they  make  the  cocoon  and  are  vulgarly  called 
"cows."  In  this  state  they  remained  vmtil  the  night  of 
the  fourth  of  August,  when  six  of  these  caterpillars, 
having  shed  their  skin  for  the  third  time,  changed  into 
chrysalides  of  a  blackish  color,  resembling  so  many 
babies  in  swaddling  clothes.  I  had  occasion  on  the  fol- 
lowing morning  to  see  the  way  in  which  these  caterpillars 
transformed  themselves;  the  external  skin  opens  at  the 
back  near  the  head,  separating  from  it  and  cleaving  into 
two  parts,  and  from  the  cleft  the  chrysalis  begins 
to  come  out,  writhing  constantly,  twisting,  and  contorting 
itself,  until  it  has  pushed  all  the  skin  down  to  the  end 
of  its  tail;  in  the  meanwhile  the  head  grows  noticeably 
larger,  and  the  tail  becomes  thinner,  so  much  so  that 
when  the  process  of  transformation  is  completed,  the 
chrysalis  has  taken  on  the  shape  of  a  cone,  is  soft  to  the 
touch  and  of  a  green  color.  But  the  green  color,  be- 
ginning from  the  end  of  the  tail,  changes  over  the  whole 
body,  little  by  little,  and  with  this  change  of  color  the 
skin  hardens;  the  neck  is  the  last  part  to  change,  but 
wdien  it  has  turned  red,  then  all  the  rest  of  the  chrysalis 
has  become  black  and  has  entirely  hardened.  This  process 
is  begun  and  ended  in  scarcely  more  than  half  an  hour,  as 
I  have  had  ample  opportunity  to  observe  on  many  occa- 
sions. When  all  the  caterpillars  w^ere  changed  into  chrys- 
alides, which  was  on  August  sixth,  they  retained 
this  shape  until  the  following  Spring,  and  then  near  the 
end  of  April,  the  butterflies  were  born :  they  were  all  of 
the  same  kind,  but  did  not  appear  at  the  same  time,  as  the 
caterpillars  had  taken  on  the  chrysalis  stage  at  different 
times.  Many  of  these  butterflies,  soon  after  birth,  laid 
their  eggs  to  the  number  of  thirty  or   forty  at  most. 


BUTTERFLIES  107 

These  were  of  a  faded  sky  blue  color,  with  a  small  black 
spot  in  the  center ;  but  as  they  had  not  been  fertilized  by 
males,  they  did  not  hatch  anything  at  all. 

In  September,  at  Poggio  Imperiale,  I  ordered  a  large 
quantity  of  greenish  yellow  caterpillars  to  be  gathered; 
they  were  feeding  on  cabbage-stalks.  I  put  them  in 
boxes,  giving  them  the  same  food,  i.e.,  cabbage.  After 
four  days,  they  all  climbed  to  the  lids  of  the  boxes,  and 
fixed  themselves  there  motionless ;  during  this  time  some 
had  laid  minute  eggs,  wrapped  in  yellow  silk.  After  re- 
maining quiet  for  three  days,  they  shed,  not  all,  but  that 
part  of  the  skin  which  covers  the  head ;  then  slowly  they 
began  to  change  shape  and  the  skin  commenced  to 
harden;  they  remained  firmly  attached  to  the  boxes  by 
means  of  silken  threads  issuing  from  the  tail  and  sup- 
porting different  parts  of  the  body.  In  this  guise  they 
remained  all  winter,  but  towards  the  month  of  March, 
many  became  dry  and  ceased  to  move  when  touched, 
others  remained  alive,  with  the  power  of  partial  motion 
and  these,  abandoning  their  shells  that  still  held  to  the 
boxlids,  escaped  in  the  shape  of  pale,  greenish-yellow 
butterflies,  having  two  round  black  spots  on  the  upper 
wings  and  two  yellow  horns  on  the  head.  Being  led  by 
curiosity  to  open  some  of  those  chrysalides  that  had  be- 
come dry,  and  had  ceased  moving  in  March,  I  found  that 
the  shell  was  empty,  excepting  in  the  part  corresponding 
to  the  chest,  where  I  discovered  a  reddish  pur- 
ple Qgg,  full  of  matter  like  milk  or  white  of  egg.  On 
May  nth,  from  all  these  eggs  there  hatched  flies  of  the 
kind  that  ordinarily  inhabit  houses.  These  were  at  first 
heavy,  dull  and  misshapen,  like  those,  described  at  the 
beginning  of  this  letter,  and  which  originated  from 
worms  bred  in  meats.     In  the  meanwhile  minute  eggs, 


I08  GENERATION  OF  INSECTS 

laid  by  the  caterpillars  in  September,  hatched  out  very 
small,  black  gnats,  having  two  long,  black  antennae  on 
the  head. 

I  tried  a  great  many  other  experiments,  and  made  many 
observations,  but  owing  to  carelessness,  some  pages,  on 
which  I  had  inscribed  them  were  mislaid;  hence  not 
wishing  to  trust  to  my  memory,  I  shall  pass  on  and  tell 
you  that  it  is  possible  that  there  is  some  kind  of  tree, 
which  can  engender  caterpillars,  undergoing  the  usual 
transformation  from  chrysalis  to  butterfly.  I  do  not  af- 
firm this,  neither  do  I  deny  it,  and  in  order  that  every  one 
may  believe  as  he  chooses,  I  will  continue  my  report.  In 
the  same  year,  at  the  beginning  of  May,  I  noticed  a  great 
many  berry-like  growths,  or  little  green  balls  on  the  rough 
side  of  the  leaves  of  the  osier.  These  were  larger  than 
a  cherry  stone,  and  towards  the  end  of  May  became  red, 
sprinkled  with  white;  they  were  but  lightly  attached  to 
the  leaf  and  were  yellow  inside  the  large  cavity,  in  which 
a  caterpillar  was  always  found,  that  was  very  slim  and 
white,  with  a  brown  head,  and  was  intent  on  feeding 
and  on  excreting.  From  the  beginning  of  June  to  that 
of  October,  I  continued  my  investigations  to  ascertain 
whether  the  caterpillars  come  out  of  the  balls  and  are 
subsequently  transformed  into  butterflies,  but  I  never 
had  the  good  fortune  to  find  a  single  one  with  a  hole  in 
it.  I  was  not  able  to  make  any  discovery  with  some 
that  I  enclosed  in  jars,  for  after  ten  or  twelve  days,  I 
always  found  the  caterpillars  dead  in  the  hollow  of  the 
leaf-ball.  There  is  another  kind  of  osier,  that  does  not 
produce  these  red  balls  in  the  leaves,  but  has  instead 
warts  or  knots  on  its  branches,  in  which  caterpillars, 
similar  to  those  mentioned  above,  are  bred.  I  was 
equally  unable  to  find  out  the  ultimate  transformation  of 


WILLOW  GALLS  109 

these.  On  May  29th,  some  branches  of  willow  were 
brought  to  me,  on  the  leaves  of  which  were  small  tumors 
or  welts  of  green  color,  that  were  beginning  to  redden. 
The  welts  were  long  and  smooth  like  beans;  they  were 
not  placed  like  the  osier  balls  on  the  side  of  the  leaf 
turned  towards  the  ground,  and  therefore  easily  dis- 
placed, but  arise  on  both  sides  of  the  leaf  that  envelops 
them,  are  situated  near  the  large  central  vein  or 
nerve,  and  are  found  to  the  number  of  two  and  some- 
times three  on  a  leaf.  I  observed  several  and  found 
that  they  contained  a  white  caterpillar  like  the  one  found 
in  the  two  species  of  osier,  and  I  observed  also,  that 
many  of  these  welts  had  been  pierced,  and  in  their  cav- 
ities there  only  remained  the  excrement  of  the  cater- 
pillar, which  had  already  escaped;  whereupon  I  became 
hopeful  of  seeing  the  transformation  but  in  vain;  for  al- 
though I  carefully  kept  my  leaves  enclosed  in  boxes,  the 
caterpillars  would  never  come  out,  and  after  a  few  days, 
I  invariably  found  that  they  were  dead.  As  you  may 
possibly  be  curious  to  see  how  the  plants  look  that  bear 
the  caterpillars,  and  of  which  generation  the  herbalists 
have  not  made  mention,  as  far  as  I  know;  I  send  you 
drawings  of  them  herewith,  calling  your  attention  to  the 
fact,  that  the  smaller  drawing  of  the  caterpillar  is  its 
natural  size,  and  the  larger,  its  appearance  under  a 
microscope  of  ordinary  power. 

I  do  not  know  of  any  other  caterpillars  produced  by 
trees,  but  Father  Kircher  repeatedly  states,  in  the  twelfth 
book  of  the  "  Subterranean  World,"  that  the  mulberry 
tree  produces  the  silkworm,  on  being  impregnated  with 
the  seed  of  any  chance  animal,  which  penetrates  the  sub- 
stance and  the  juices  of  the  tree.  In  order  to  ascertain 
the  truth  of  this  statement,  I  not  only  studied  the  trees 


no 


GENERATION  OF  INSECTS 


WILLOW  GALLS 


III 


112 


GENERATION  OF  INSECTS 


SILKWORMS  AND  CABBAGE  BUTTERFLIES       II3 

around  Florence  with  great  care,  but  also  those  of  man}^ 
other  Tuscan  cities,  but  I  was  never  able  to  see  any  sign 
of  such  propagation. 

Aristotle  asserts  that  cabbages  produce  caterpillars 
daily,  but  I  have  not  been  able  to  witness  this  remarkable 
reproduction,  though  I  have  seen  many  eggs  laid  by 
butterflies  on  the  cabbage-stalks  and  neighboring  grasses ; 
these  eggs  developed  subsequently  into  caterpillars  and 
butterflies. 

Whoever  has  observed  trees  and  plants  will  have  often 
found  similar  eggs  in  the  cracks  of  the  bark,  and  I  re- 
member, that  at  the  beginning  of  May,  I  found  a  great 
many  tiny,  yellow  eggs  on  the  leaves  of  the  elder  tree. 
I  took  pleasure  in  observing  what  would  hatch  out  of 
them,  and  in  a  few  days,  I  saw  an  equal  number  of  very 
minute  worms  come  out  of  them,  which  I  immediately 
supplied  with  elder  leaves,  that  they  greedily  devoured. 
They  continued  to  grow  and  became  a  yellow  color  with 
many  reddish  spots ;  the  tail  ended  in  crescent  shape,  and 
the  head  was  very  small  and  sharp,  and  when  they 
moved,  they  pushed  out  ridge-like  protuberances,  that 
served  the  purpose  of  legs.  The  greater  part  of  these 
worms  ceased  from  motion  and  left  off  eating  on  the 
26th  of  May,  without,  however  changing  their  shape  or 
color;  but  on  the  first  of  June,  six  of  the  said  worms 
shrunk  together  and  rolled  themselves  into  balls,  look- 
ing like  eggs  humped  in  the  middle  and  pointed  at  the 
ends ;  they  were  of  rust  color.  From  one  of  these  balls, 
on  the  1 2th  of  June,  a  fly  escaped,  not  much  larger  than 
the  common  fly,  with  two  cartilaginous  wings,  white  and 
longer  than  the  body;  with  six  yellow  legs,  and  two 
short  horns  on  the  head,  that  was  rust  colored.  The 
back  was  of  a  lighter  color  with  a  large  yellow  spot. 


114 


GENERATION  OF  INSECTS 


The  rest  of  the  body  was  yellow  crossed  with  lateral 
black  stripes.  As  soon  as  the  fly  hatched,  it  began  to 
excrete  a  kind  of  white  dung.  It  lived  only  five  days. 
The  other  five  eggs  hatched  seven  days  after  the  first 
and  there  came  out  from  them  as  many  flies,  very  different 


from  the  one  which  had  come  out  from  the  first  egg,  al- 
though they  were  of  the  same  color,  in  as  much  as  these 
five  were  long  and  slim  with  their  wings  very  much 
shorter  than  the  body.  These  wings  were  not  two,  but 
four.     They  had  six  legs,  two  of  which  were  very  much 


SILKWORMS  115 

longer  than  the  other  four.  From  the  heads  came  out 
two  very  long  pointed  antennae,  composed  of  many  and 
many  knots.  These  flies,  like  the  first,  as  soon  as  they 
were  born,  emitted  a  white  substance,  and  lived  four  days. 
I  observed,  however,  that  when  these  worms  found  on 
this  plant  transform  themselves,  contracted  in  an  egg 
[pupa],  the  egg  becomes  smaller  than  the  worm  and 
when  from  the  egg  the  fly  comes  out,  it  is  very  much 
bigger  than  the  egg,  to  such  a  point  that  it  seems  impossi- 
ble that  it  can  have  got  into  it.  So  one  can  believe  that 
it  was  very  much  crowded  in  it,  and  cramped.  Because 
my  brain  gives  me  little  help  in  describing  exactly  these 
small  animals  I  send  them  to  you  drawn,  and  in  their 
own  and  natural  size,  and  enlarged  also  by  an  ordinary 
microscope  of  those  of  only  one  glass. 

But  as  I  have  not  been  able  to  observe,  as  stated,  that 
the  mulberry  tree  engenders  silkworms,  still  less  can  I 
expect  to  see  them  breed  in  the  decayed  flesh  of  a  mule, 
fed  for  twenty  days  on  mulberry  leaves.  This  fabulous 
belief  has  been  elegantly  described  by  the  distinguished 
poet,  Girolamo  Vida,  who  sings  in  imitation  of  Virgil : 

Quod  si  spes  generis  defecerit  omnis  ubique, 
Seminaque  aruerint  lovis  implacabile  ira; 
Sicut,  teneri  reparantur  caede  iuvenci/'  etc. 

I  do  not  know  what  to  say  about  this,  but  I  do  know, 
by  experiment,  that  the  flesh  of  a  kid,  which  had  been 
fed  on  mulberry  leaves  alone,  for  twenty  days,  did  not 
produce  anything  but  worms,  that  were  transformed  into 
gnats.  I  know  also  that  worms  breed  in  rotten  mul- 
berries, but  always  on  condition  that  insemination  has 
taken  place  previously,  otherwise,  as  before  stated,  noth- 
ing will  be  produced  in  plants,  carrion,  or  any  other  life- 


ii6 


GENERATION  OF  INSECTS 


less  thing.  On  the  other  hand,  if  the  thing  is  alive,  it 
may  produce  a  worm  or  so,  as  in  the  case  of  cherries, 
pears,  and  plums;  in  oak  glands,  in  galls  and  welts  of 
osiers  and  ilexes  worms  arise,  which  are  transformed  into 
butterflies,  flies,  and  similar  winged  animals. 

In  this  manner,  I  am  inclined  to  believe,  tapeworms 
and  other  worms  arise,  which  are  found  in  the  intestines 
and  other  parts  of  the  human  body,  also  in  the  gall  and 
the  liver  of  sheep;  and  likewise  those  other  disgusting 


little  worms  found  in  the  head  of  deer  and  sheep.  As  it 
may  be  a  new  thing  to  some  persons,  that  worms  are 
found  in  the  liver  of  sheep  and  in  the  head  of  sheep  and 
deer,  I  willingly  undertake  to  briefly  tell  you  what  I 
have  observed,  and  herewith  send  you  drawings  of  both 
kinds  of  worms,  of  the  largest  size  to  be  found. 

Liver-worms  of  sheep  are  shaped  like  a  pumpkin-seed, 
or  more  exactly,  like  a  small,  narrow  myrtle  leaf  with 
part  of  the  stem  attached;  they  are  milky  white,  with 
many  fine  ramifications  of  veins  or  canals.  The  mouth, 
or  whatever  the  opening  may  be  called,  is  round  and 
placed  in  the  middle  of  the  belly,  not  far  from  the  part 


WORMS  IN  DEERS'  HEADS  117 

that    resembles    the    stem    of    the    myrtle-leaf.     These 
worms  are  often  found  in  the  gall  bladder  and  not  only 
live  and  swim  about  in  the  gall,  but  also  inhabit  all  parts 
of  the  liver  excepting  the  arteries,  in  which  I  have  never 
found  any.     I  think,  however,  that  they  are  born  in  the 
gall  bladder  and  make  their  way  through  the  bile  duct  to 
the  blood  vessels;  then  if  they  multiply  excessively,  they 
eat  into  the  inner  substance  of  the  liver,  and  make  cav- 
ities in  it,  which  fill  up  with  blood  mixed  with  bile ;  this 
stagnates,  thickens,  and  becomes  of  a  rusty  color  mixed 
with  green,  ugly  and  disgusting  to  the  sight  and  very 
bitter  to  the  taste;  so  that  anyone,  who  saw  this  process, 
would  never  care  to  eat  liver  again;  though  it  must  be 
said  that  butchers  cleanse  the  meat  of  all  this  dirt  before 
placing  it  on  sale. 

Aristotle,  the  great  and  wise  philosopher,  in  chapter 
fifteenth  of  the  second  book  of  the  ''  History  of  Animals," 
describes  the  worms  of  the  deer's  head  in  these  words : 
"  All  deer  have  live  worms  in  the  head,  which  are  born 
under  the  tongue,  in  a  certain  cavity  near  that  vertebra, 
by  which  the  head  is  attached  to  the  neck.   ^  They  are 
larger  than  the  largest  worm,  that  originates  in  carrion, 
and  they  number  at  most  twenty."     Impelled  by  curi- 
osity, I  made  many  investigations  with  old  and  young 
deer,  and  found  worms  in  almost  all  cases.     On  the  27th 
of  February,  out  of  ten  deers'  heads  opened  for  my  ex- 
amination, nine  had  worms  in  them,  only  a  single  one 
being  free  from  this  pest.     Aristotle  compares  them  in 
size  to  the  worms  usually  found  in  decayed  flesh. 

"  Because  he's  Aristotle,  it  implies 
That  he  must  be  believed  e'en  though  he  lies." 

But  these  worms,  of  the  deers'  heads,  seemed  to  me 
incomparably  larger,  and  not  at  all  like  the  others  in 


Il8  GENERATION  OF  INSECTS 

shape;  those  that  infest  the  deer  are  formed  like  a  half 
cylinder,  are  flat  underneath  and  rounded  above,  of  white 
color,  but  marked  with  many  hairy  semicircular  rings,  in 
which  the  hairs  are  rust  colored.  They  have  two  very 
small  white  horns  on  the  head,  which  they  extend  and 
draw  in  at  will  as  snails  do.  Under  these  horns  are 
two  claws  or  hooks,  black,  hard  and  very  sharp;  it  would 
appear  that  they  use  these  hooks  to  crawl  along,  hold- 
ing on  by  them,  and  dragging  the  body  after.  The  end 
of  the  body,  whence  the  excrements  are  discharged,  is 
crossed  by  a  duct,  which  is  indicated  by  two  black,  semi- 
circular spots.  The  number  of  these  worms  is  not  in- 
variable, though  Aristotle  has  limited  it  to  twenty; 
nevertheless  I  have  counted  as  many  as  thirty-nine  in  a 
single  head,  but  never  less  than  twenty. 

Very  similar  in  shape  to  these  worms  are  those  found 
in  the  heads  of  sheep;  but  they  are  smaller,  less  bold, 
and  less  hardy,  and  are  only  marked  with  transverse 
stripes,  which  are  very  black  and  stand  out  vividly  from 
the  white  body.  Only  the  large  adult  worms  are  thus 
striped ;  the  small  or  young  ones  are  all  white.  The  two 
black  spots  like  half  moons,  seen  near  the  excreting  duct 
of  the  worms  of  the  deer's  head,  are  perfect  circles  in 
those  of  the  sheep.  These  worms  inhabit  certain  cavities 
in  the  frontal  bones,  where  the  horns  are  set  in.  I  have 
found  them  in  the  nasal  passages  and  in  the  cavity  at 
the  base  of  the  horns.  Hence  Caporali's  agreeable 
verses,  in  the  life  of  Maecenas,  wherein  he  alludes  to  the 
nature  of  love,  are  correctly  stated: 

Some  say  that  Cupid,  God  of  all  the  Loves, 
Is  part  a  child  in  form  and  part  a  bird. 
And  like  a  falcon  fierce  feeds  on  the  heart. 
Still  others  say,  as  I  have  often  heard, 


LICE  119 

That  He,  whose  wounds  do  sting,  and  burn  and  smart, 
Is  but  a  worm,  like  that  of  the  sheep's  head. 
Which  underneath  the  curving  horn  is  bred, 
And  deeply  gnaws  the  tissue  of  the  brain; 
TTius  does  Love  madden  with  excess  of  pain." 

Shepherds  say  that,  when  at  certain  times  sheep  become 
frantic,  as  if  stung  by  hornets,  their  excitement  is  due  to 
unusual  activity  on  the  part  of  the  worms,  infesting  the 
head.  They  are  not  so  numerous  as  those  of  the  deer, 
and  seldom  exceed  tw^elve  or  fifteen  at  the  most.  And 
here  please  remember  that  I  limit  my  statements  to  those 
things,  that  I  have  seen  with  my  own  eyes,  and  make  no 
affirmations  nor  denials  concerning  anything  else. 

That  same  vital  force,  that  produces  the  worms  of 
which  I  have  been  speaking  is  the  possible  cause  of  those 
other  abominable  and  odious  creatures  called  "  t^^etpcs  " 
by  the  Greeks,  and  which  infest  the  external  parts  of 
men,  quadrupeds  and  birds;  but,  if  I  must  express  my 
thought  freely,  I  will  say  that  I  am  more  inclined  to 
believe  with  the  learned  Johann  Sperling,  that  they 
originate  from  the  eggs  of  the  females,  fertilized  by 
coition.  And  though  Aristotle,  followed  by  most  mod- 
erns, gave  out  that  those  eggs,  or  nits  as  they  are  called, 
never  produce  any  sort  of  animal,  he  most  certainly 
erred,  for  they  multiply  ad  infinitum,  and  it  seems  use- 
less to  prove  such  an  obvious  fact.  The  hair  of  quad- 
rupeds, and  the  plumage  of  birds,  are  frequently  found 
to  be  full  of  those  nits,  which,  though  so  minute  that 
one  needs  good  eyes  to  discover  them,  by  the  aid  of  the 
microscope  they  can  be  seen  very  well,  and  the  full  eggs 
be  distinguished  from  those  that  have  hatched.  Any- 
one inclined  to  dispute  this  fact,  and  to  cry  out  that  there 
was  some  distortion,  produced  by  the  microscope,  can 


120  GENERATION  OF  INSECTS 

find  satisfactory  proof  in  the  eggs  attached  to  the  feathers 
of  the  royal  eagle,  the  kestrel,  and  the  cow-bird,  which 
is  also  a  bird  of  prey;  these  eggs  are  much  larger  than 
a  grain  of  millet,  hence  the  naked  eye  can  discern  them 
and  even  see  the  well-formed  lice  inside,  as  I  have  fre- 
quently done,  thus  learning  what  a  weak  foundation  sus- 
tains the  statement  of  Aristotle,  and  with  what  slight 
effort  it  may  be  overthrown. 

It  might  perhaps  be  affirmed,  without  doing  injury  to 
the  truth,  that  all  kinds  of  living  creatures  are  exposed 
to  this  noisome  pest,  and  as  for  Pliny,  who  wished  to 
exempt  asses  and  sheep  from  it,  I  can  excuse  him,  for 
he  relied  on  the  report  of  another  person,  that  is,  he 
believed  in  the  statement  of  Aristotle,  in  the  "  History  of 
Animals,"  which  statement  was  confirmed  many  centuries 
later  by  Thomas  Moufet,  in  his  praiseworthy  "  Theatrum 
Insectorum,"  in  which,  not  wishing  to  refute  the  sayings 
of  that  profound  philosopher,  and  racking  his  brains  for 
an  evasion  of  his  dictum,  he  wrote  that  the  ass  does  not 
become  lousy  because  of  his  natural  disinclination  for 
exercise,  owing  to  which  he  is  rarely  in  a  sweat.  After- 
wards, it  occurred  to  Moufet  that  the  above  reason  was 
frivolous  and  of  little  weight,  so  he  retreats  to  the  last 
refuge  of  logic,,  namely,  antipathy.  In  spite  of  all  this 
conjecture,  it  is  a  fact  that  the  ass  is  subject  to  lice,  and 
I  have  reproduced  these  pests  in  the  following  pages, 
together  with  those  infesting  the  camel.  The  most  ig- 
norant shepherd  knows  that  sheep  are  likewise  troubled 
with  this  vermin,  and  the  Greek,  Didymus,  speaks  plainly 
on  the  subject  in  book  eighteenth  of  his  "  Country  Life." 
And  since  his  time,  Jacob  Alfiruzabadi  names  these 
plagues  in  his  great  Arabic  Dictionary,  which  was  called 
by  the  Egyptian  title  "  Alcamus,"  that  means  Ocean. 


PARASITES  OF  MARINE  ANIMALS  121 

The  above  mentioned  Moufet  reports  that  even  beetles 
are  tormented  by  just  such  ugly  little  creatures,  and, 
though  I  have  not  had  occasion  to  verify  this  by  observa- 
tion, I  am  persuaded  that  it  is  true,  as  I,  together  with 
many  others  can  bear  eye-witness  that  even  ants  are  not 
exempt;  and  that  every  kind  of  ant  has  its  special  va- 
riety; but  it  is  necessary  to  have  sharp  eyes,  armed  with 
a  fine  microscope  to  discover  the  lice,  for  they  are  so 
minute  as  to  be  almost  invisible,  and  one  might  be 
tempted  to  class  them  with  atoms.  The  vermin  of 
winged  ants  are  shaped  like  the  hen's  tick,  which  may  be 
seen  drawn  on  plate  2,  and  those  of  wingless  ants  are 
similar  to  the  ticks  infesting  the  turtle,  which  also  may 
be  seen  on  the  second  plate. 

Writers  in  natural  history  make  an  assertion,  con- 
firmed by  all  fishermen,  that  fish  are  also  molested  by 
various  kinds  of  insects,  among  which  the  best  known 
are  the  flea,  the  louse,  and  the  sea-bug  (cimex  marinus). 
Aristotle  wrote  of  this  in  connection  with  dolphins  and 
tun-fish;  others  have  affirmed  the  same  in  the  case  of 
salmon  and  sword-fish.  Pliny  speaks  of  it  in  a  general 
way,  saying :  "  Nothing  exists  on  the  earth  which  has 
not  its  counterpart  in  the  sea.  Even  those  little  beasts 
can  be  found  there  which  infest  the  inns  in  summer,  and 
hop  about  with  annoying  celerity,  and  also  those,  that 
hide  in  the  hair.  When  the  hook  is  drawn  from  the 
water,  they  are  often  on  it;  and  these,  they  say,  are  the 
pests  which  at  night  disturb  the  sleep  of  fish  in  the  sea." 
In  order  that  you  may  more  easily  give  your  adhesion 
to  the  authoritative  opinions  of  these  approved  writers, 
I  will  not  omit  to  tell  you  that,  in  the  month  of  March, 
as  I  was  seeking  sea-urchins,  on  the  Melloria  reef,  I  saw 
some  little  animals  caught  in  the  bristles  of  numerous 


122 


GENERATION  OF  INSECTS 


sea-urchins,  which  were  of  the  same  color  as  cray-fish 
and  were  similar  in  size  and  shape  to  '^  porcellini,"  though 
they  had  no  horns,  but  two  very  small  black  eyes  and 
sixty  slim  legs  situated  around  the  edge  of  their  shell; 
and  I  hold  that  Aristotle  had  them  in  mind,  when  he 
wrote  chapter  31st  of  book  5th  of  his  most  useful  "  His- 


tory  of  Animals."  Several  days  later  I  found,  in  the  joints 
of  the  sea-locust's  shell,  another  insect,  called  by  fishermen 
a  sea-scorpion.  I  dare  not  say  whether  this  was 
due  to  accident,  or  was  of  usual  occurrence;  in  either 
case  I  am  inclined  to  subscribe  to  the  dictum  of  Aristotle, 
who  asserts  that  aquatic  insects  do  not  breed  on  the  ex- 
ternal parts  of  fish,  but  arise  in  the  slime,  which  is,  in 
my  opinion,  the  nest  in  which  the  eggs  of  insects  are 
deposited  and  hatched. 


BIRD  LICE  123 

Through  the  princely  generosity  of  His  Serene  High- 
ness, my  Lord,  the  Grand  Duke,  I  obtained  a  seal,  last 
winter,  which  lived  out  of  water  four  whole  weeks  with- 
out food,  and  would  have  lived  much  longer,  if  it  had 
not  been  killed  for  the  use  of  the  Pisan  anatomical 
theatre.  During  the  time  that  I  kept  it,  I  tried  many 
times  to  ascertain  if  there  were  any  parasites  hidden  in 
its  thick,  soft  fur,  but  I  found  nothing  of  the  kind.  On 
the  other  hand,  all  birds  that  dive  for  prey  under  water 
and  haunt  the  swamps  and  pools,  have  great  quantities 
of  lice,  that  live  in  their  feathers  all  the  year  round. 

As  I  have  again  mentioned  the  subject  of  lice,  it  will 
not  be  inappropriate  to  speak  more  in  detail  of  what  I 
have  found  out  concerning  them  by  means  of  many 
experiments.  Lice  are  found  on  all  birds,  and  each  kind 
of  bird  has  its  own  particular  species.  I  found  three 
kinds  of  lice  on  falcons  and  on  guinea-fowl;  four  on 
wild  duck,  two  on  the  swan,  the  royal  wild  goose,  the 
kestrel  and  the  plover.  It  is  however  true,  that  some 
birds  have  similar,  nay  even  the  same  kinds  of  lice,  for 
the  royal  eagle  has  large  ones  such  as  are  found  on  the 
kestrel,  shown  on  plate  13.  The  cow-bird  has  some  simi- 
lar in  shape,  not  in  color  to  those  of  the  crow,  which 
are  represented  on  plate  16,  and  the  eagle  has  others 
like  the  oval  ones  of  the  falcon.  A  kind  of  lice  found 
on  the  bustard,  resembles  greatly  the  long-bodied  ones 
of  the  falcon,  plate  i.  The  woodpecker  has  the  same 
kind  as  the  starling,  plate  2.  The  lice  in  the  feathers  of  the 
crane  are  all  white,  plate  3,  with  curious  black  tracings  like 
arabesques.  The  same  kind,  to  a  hair,  are  found  in  some 
birds,  kept  in  the  Boboli  Gardens,  and  lately  brought  from 
Africa,  where  they  are  called  '*  Bukottaia  ''  by  the  Arabs ; 
some  consider  them  to  be  another  kind  of  crane,  because 


124  GENERATION  OF  INSECTS 

they  greatly  resemble  the  common  crane  in  shape  and 
color,  though  smaller  and  more  slender,  having  besides 
two  long  white  tufts  on  the  head,  which  makes  me  think 
that  they  belong  to  the  species  of  Balearic  cranes. 

All  the  foreign  birds,  kept  in  the  above  mentioned 
gardens,  have  been  examined  by  my  order;  but  at  no 
time  were  any  lice  found  on  ostriches;  a  stork  also  was 
exempt,  but  that  may  have  been  mere  chance,  as  there 
was  only  one  stork,  but  there  were  twelve  ostriches, 
which  had  lately  come  from  Barbary.  The  size  of  the 
lice  does  not  correspond  to  the  size  of  the  bird,  as  large 
birds  have  both  large  and  small  lice,  and  likewise  small 
birds  have  large  lice,  as  I  recall  having  found  lice  in 
blackbirds,  which  were  not  inferior  in  size  to  those  of 
the  stork. 

Now  when  the  lice  are  observed  from  above,  the 
mouth  is  not  seen,  but  when  they  are  turned  over  it 
appears  plainly,  situated  on  the  part  of  the  head,  turned 
to  the  ground;  it  is  fashioned  like  a  pair  of  pincers, 
similar  to  those  arming  the  mouth  of  the  wood-worm. 
If  you  will  take  the  trouble  to  look  at  plate  8,  you  will 
see  this  portrayed  in  the  engraving  of  the  swan's  louse. 
The  different  kinds  of  lice  are  indeed  so  varied  and  so 
peculiar,  that  instead  of  making  a  tedious  enumeration 
of  them,  I  have  preferred  to  show  you  some  drawings 
of  them,  made  at  my  request  by  Sig.  F.  Pizzichi,  which 
I  subsequently  had  engraved  in  the  best  manner  possible 
and  consistent  with  the  brief  time  at  my  disposal.  As  re- 
gards the  color  of  lice,  it  is  very  similar  to  that  of  the 
bird's  feathers,  which  they  inhabit;  but  experience  has 
taught  me  and  I  firmly  believe,  that  when  the  lice  hatch 
from  the  nits  they  are  all  white,  but  afterwards  with 
growth  they  slowly  become  colored,  retaining  however 


EXPLANATION  OF  PLATES  12$ 

always  their  transparency,  so  that  when  viewed  through 
the  microscope,  and  enlarged  thereby,  it  is  easy  to  see 
the  movements  of  their  viscera  and  the  liquids  contained 
therein.  In  order  that  you  may  surmise  the  real  pro- 
portions of  these  little  animals,  I  will  not  omit  to  say 
that  in  drawing  them  the  same  microscope  was  always 
used;  it  is  of  three  lenses  and  was  made  in  Rome  with 
great  skill  and  accuracy  by  Eustachio  Divini. 

With  the  aid  of  this  single  microscope,  three  kinds  of 
winged  ants  are  reproduced  in  the  following  plates,  also 
the  grain  weevil,  the  worm  that  eats  into  candied  fruits 
and  spice,  the  bug  which  explores  the  head  and  back 
of  man;  and  that  other  kind  that  lurks  in  the  hairs  of 
the  loin ;  the  louse  of  the  ass,  of  the  camel,  and  that  of  a 
certain  sheep  from  Tripoli.  There  is  also  a  drawing  of 
the  tick  of  the  wild  goat,  and  likewise  one  found  in  the 
tiger.  The  lion's  tick  has  the  same  shape  as  that  of  the 
tiger,  but  it  is  different  in  size  and  in  color;  the  lion's 
tick  is  much  larger  and  is  of  a  light  yellow  color  except 
in  a  part  of  the  back,  where  is  seen  a  splotch  of  dark 
tawny  color.  The  tick  found  on  the  tiger  is  entirely 
of  tawny  color.  I  have  had  search  made  for  lice  on 
tigers,  but  these  animals  were  apparently  not  infested 
by  them,  and  the  same  can  be  said  of  all  the  leopards, 
lions,  bears,  wildcats,  ichneumons,  and  other  beasts, 
which  according  to  ancient  and  royal  custom,  are  main- 
tained in  the  menageries  of  His  Highness,  the  Grand 
Duke.  I  do  not  deny  that  they  may  be  subject  to  ver- 
min, but  I  simply  affirm  that  the  animals  at  present  in 
the  menageries  are  free  from  them,  or  else  it  may  be 
that  sufficient  care  was  not  exercised  in  looking  for 
them,  as  meddling  with  lions  and  tigers  is  a  business 
that  few  care  to  undertake. 


126  GENERATION  OF  INSECTS 

When  I  took  up  my  pen  I  had  in  mind  to  write  you 
a  suitable  letter,  but  having  exceeded  by  far  its  limits, 
I  know  not  how  it  has  happened  that  I  have  almost 
wTitten  a  book,  and  in  a  rather  dry  style  devoid  of 
grace.  Hence  I  can  with  reason  be  blamed  and  cannot 
offer  any  defence,  but  I  would  not  like  to  be  censured  for 
having  given  my  opinion  too  frankly  about  certain  state- 
ments of  the  most  famous  masters  of  this  and  past  cen- 
turies; for  every  one  is  free  to  hold  the  opinion  that  he 
chooses,  and  I  do  not  think  that  I  have  said  anything 
prejudicial  to  the  esteem  and  reverence  which  I  bear 
them.  On  the  contrary  he,  who  is  no  tyrant,  should  not 
despise  the  liberty  of  procedure  that  obtains  in  the  Re- 
public of  Philosophy,  whose  only  aim  is  the  search  for 
truth,  which,  as  Seneca  said :  "  Omnibus  patet,  nondum 
est  occupata;  qui  ante  nos  fuerunt,  non  Domini,  sed 
Duces  sunt;  multum  ex  ilia  etiam  futuris  relictum  est.'' 
I  endeavor  to  gather  up  a  small  portion  of  this  great 
remainder,  and  my  only  regret  is  that  I  am  unable  with 
my  weak  powers  to  produce  results  corresponding  to 
the  great  opportunities  granted  me  by  the  princely 
beneficence  of  my  sole  Lord,  the  Serene  Grand  Duke. 
But  it  may  come  to  pass,  or  at  least  I  hope  so,  that  some 
day  with  increased  knowledge  and  renewed  strength,  I 
may  be  capable  of  presenting  to  so  grand  a  Patron 
something  not  entirely  unworthy  of  his  royal  great- 
ness. In  the  meanwhile,  be  assured  that  this  letter  or 
book,  as  you  please  to  call  it,  has  come  to  you  not  for 
praise  but  for  correction,  which  I  heartily  beg  you  to 
give;  being  well  aware  that, 

"  My  name  unto  the  world  is  little  known." 


PLATES 


127 


&:*  POLLIMI  DEIX'    ASTORE    ^ 


128 


GENERATION  OF  INSECTS 


POLUMO  DEL  PICCIOMGROSSO 


PLATES 


129 


TAV3 


130 


GENERATION  OF  INSECTS 


PQLLINf  DELIA   FOlAQA 
no. I    m^^     TMTf. 


PLATES 


131 


ROLLING  DELLA  GARZ^ 


13^ 


GENERATION  OF  INSECTS 


PLATES 


133 


TAV7. 


134 


GENERATION  OF  INSECTS 


TAV^^ 


PLATES 


135 


136 


GENERATION  OF  INSECTS 


TAV:  10 


PLATES 


137 


TAy^  II 


138 


GENERATION  OF  INSECTS 


;5jAAo|^^^5^^^.a^  TfiW-  10. 


PLATES 


139 


I40 


GENERATION  OF  INSECTS 


PLATES 


141 


TAV  I^ 


14' 


GENERATION  OF  INSECTS 


TAV.  16' 


PLATES 


143 


TAYP 


144 


GENERATION  OF  INSECTS 


PIDOCCHIO  ORDIHAR/o 
TAV  /8 


PLATES 


145 


GENERATION  OF  INSECTS 


PLATES 


147 


148 


GENERATION  OF  INSECTS 


T  AV  nsh 


PLATES 


149 


TAV     2/3 


ISO 


GENERATION  OF  INSECTS 


TAVa4 


PLATES 


151 


152 


GENERATION  OF  INSECTS 


PLATES 


153 


154 


GENERATION  OF  INSECTS 


'Formica  J  cHiAiyfc^Rcc^ 


PLATES 


155 


INDEX' 


^lianus,  48,  65,  ^7 

Air  admitted  to  flask  containing 

meat,  36 
Aldrovandi,  Ulysse,  43,  57,  65 
Alfiruzabadi,   Jacob,   names   lice 

in  the  Alcamus,  120 
Anaxagoras,  96 
Anaximander,  23 
Anima,  91 
Anima  mundi,  24^ 
Antigonus  Carystius,  38 
Ants,  parasites  of,  121 
Archelaus  the  Athenian,  22,  42 
Aristotle  stated  that  nits  do  not 

produce  animals,  lice,  119 
Aristotle,  5,  46,  69,  113 
Ascidian,  98 
Atoms,  25,  91 

Barbary  scorpions,  57 

Bark,  eggs  on,  113 

Bartholin,  Thomas,  43,  51 

Bees,  38-47,  49 

Beetles,  50 

Bellini,  7 

Berni,  poem  by,  97-98 

Bible,  references  to  bees  ex- 
plained, 44-45 

Bibliography,   13  ,     ,       . 

Biogenesis,  ii,  26-27;  dead  ani- 
mal and  vegetable  matter  a 
breeding  place  for  flies,  90 

Bird  lice,  123 ;  see  plates 

Borelli,  7,  9 

Bruno,  5 


Butterflies,  of  plum,  peach,  and 
pear,  102  coition  observed, 
103;  life  history.  103;  of 
holm  oak,  104;  of  night- 
shade, 104-105;  of  oak,  105- 
107;  Ecdysis  observed,  106; 
eggs  laid,  106;  unfertilized 
eggs  do  not  hatch,  107;  of 
cabbage,  107-108 

Cabbage  butterfly,   107-108;  life 

history  observed,  113 
Campanella,  5 
Cannibalism  of  animals,  67 
Caporali's  verses  on  the  life  oi 

Maecenas,  118 
Cardano,  Jerome,  43,  50 
Carrion  flies.  27 
Caterpillars,  103-108 
Celsus,  38 

Cherry  worm,  99-100,  lOl 
Cheese,    old    views    concerning 

worms   in,   -JZ',   experiments 

with,  74-75 
Chrysalis,  106 
Clematis,  85 
Closed  flasks,  experiments  with, 

Cocoons,   103-100 
Coition  of  flies,  74 
Columella,  38,  39,  46  ^ 

Cosimo  III,  Grand  Duke  of  Tus- 
cany, 6 
Crabs,  36 
Crescenzi,  Pietro,  43,  47 


1  Page  numbers  in  italics  indicate  the  position  of  illustrations.  Most  of  the 
illustrations  are  reduced  to  about  two-thirds  the  size  of  the  original  engrav- 
ings. Plate  15  is  the  same  size.  Plates  20-22  and  25-28  arc  reduced  to  about 
three-fourths,  and  Plates  13.  z^*  and  29,  to  about  one  half. 


158 


INDEX 


Dante,  20,  47 

Dati,  C,  7 

Dead  animals  do  not  produce 
worms,  38 

Decayed  plants,  insects  in,  89 

Democritus,  23,  96 

Descartes,  0 

Didymus,  46;  in  "  Country-Life," 
speaks  of  lice,  120 

Digby,  Sir  Kenelm,  36 

Digestion,  Tz 

Dioscorides,  89 

Divini,  Eustachio,  maker  of  mi- 
croscopes, 125 

Dung,  breeding  place  of  flies 
and  gnats,  not  bees,  43 

Earth  mother,  21-24 
Ecdysis,  of  caterpillar,  106 
Eggs,  of  carrion  flies,  31 
Eggs  laid  by  butterflies,   113;  on 
cabbage  stalks,  in  the  cracks 
of  bark,  on  elder  tree 
Elder,    caterpillars  *  on,    parasit- 
ized, 113-115 
Empedocles,  22,  96 
Epicurus,  22 
Evolution,  early  theories  of,  21- 

24 
Experimental  method,  20-21 
Experiments:   Carrion  flies,  2^  \ 
with  closed  flasks,  33;  meat 
under  ground,  34;  with  dead 
flies,  34;  meat  in  gauze  cov- 
ered   flask,    36-37;    on    the 
origin     of     scorpions,     51 ; 
toads    proved    not    to    arise 
from    putrefying    duck,    64; 
effect  of  oil  on  maggots,  65 ; 
drowning     of     flies,     65-66; 
with     cheese,     74-75;     with 
melon    and   pumpkin,    76 
Explanation  of  plates,   125 

Fabri,  Honore,  ZJ,  44,  78 

Feeling  and  motion,  99 

Filbert  worm,   loo-ioi 

Filicaja,  6 

Fiorentino,  40 

Flies,  27;  viviparous,  37;  ova- 
ries, 38;  bred  in  tun-fish,  66; 
breed    in    dung,    43 ;    cheese 


flies,  74-75;  coition  ob- 
served,  74 

Folli,  Francesco,  inventor  of 
hygrometer,  43 

Frogs,  77-80;  sudden  appearance 
after  rain  explained,  80 

Fruits,   secondary  purpose,   92 

Fungi,  worms  in  living  fungi,  90 

Galen,  26,  39,  57 

Galileo,  5,  9 

Gall,  insects,  109-/ jo,  hi;  wil- 
low   galls,    112;    Kircher 

Galls,  70,  92-95;  peculiar  insects, 
94 ;  differ  in  times  of  matur- 
ity, 94 

Gassendi,  Pierre,  42,  T^^  9i 

Generative  principle,  'J2>i  91,  92 

Gnats  parasitic  on  carrion  fly 
larvae,  32 

Gnats,  breed  in  dung,  43 

Gottigniez,  7 

Grembs,  Francis,  43 

Hair     snakes     produced     from 

women's   hair,   according   to 

Avicenna,  64 
Harvey,  W.,  9;  all  living  things 

born  from  seed,  24-25 
Heart  of  snake,  81 
Heterogenesis    in    living    plants, 

91-92,  116;  tapeworms,  bot- 
flies,  116 
Homer,  2iZ 
Hornets,    eat    meat,    47 ;    poison 

not  dependent  on  food,  48; 

feed  on   bees  and  flies,  49; 

originate    in    flesh    of    dead 

horses,   according   to   Virgil 

and  Ovid,  50 
Houillier,  Jacques,  52 

Ichneumon-fly,  iid 

Insects,  23;  killed  by  oil,  65: 
when  really  drowned  can 
not  be  revived,  66 ;  in  de- 
cayed plants,  89 

Isopod?   (Arcturus?),  122 

Jesuits,  5 
Johnston,  John,  43 

Kepler,  5 
Kiranis,  64 


INDEX 


159 


Kircher,  Athanasius,  7,  34,  43, 
64,  81 ;  experiment  on  frogs, 
78-79 

Lactantius,  21 

Liceto,  Fortunio,  43,  52,  91 

Lifeless  bodies  incapable  of  pro- 
ducing anything  without  in- 
semination, 115 

Low  and  high,  terms  unknown 
to  Nature,  95 

Magalotti,  7 

Maggots  hatched  from  eggs,  31 

Maggots,  38 

Magone,  38 

Malice  never  found  in  animals 
not  endowed  with  speech. 
48 

Manicheans,  96 

Mantis,  88,  89;  two  color-va- 
rieties, 85;  external  struc- 
ture, 85;  ecdysis,  86;  inter- 
nal structure,  86;  eggs,  86, 
88,  89;  grafting  experiment, 

87 
Marchetti,  7 

Marine  animals,  parasites,  121 
Mattiuoli,  52,  70 
Melon,  76 
Menagio,  49 
Menzini,  6 
Metamorphosis,  106 
Moufet,  Thomas,  43,  44,  47,  68, 

71 ;   reports  on  parasites  of 

beetles,    121 ;   Theatrum   In- 

sectarum,   120 

Nicander,  42 

Oeffer,  Wolfgang,  52 

Olimpiodorus,  50 

Origen,  42 

Oro,  50 

Osier,  berry-like  growths,  108 

Ovaries  of  flies,  38 

Ovid,  39,  42,  50,  51,  77 

Paracelsus,  36 

Paralysis,  99 

Parasites,  116',  liver  fluke;  bot- 
flies, 117,  118;  Aristotle  de- 


scribes worms  in  deer's 
head,  117;  of  caterpillars, 
113-115;  of  maggots,  32 

Pizzichi,  F.,  124;  drawings  of 
lice 

Peach,  worm  in,  102 

Pear,  worm  in,  102 

Philas  of  Tarsus,  42 

Philo  the  Jew,  42 

Philosophy,  126;  only  aim  of 
philosophy  is  the  search  for 
truth,  126;  Seneca,  126 

Philes,  Manuel,  46 

Philetas  of  Cos,  41 

Pisida,  George,  36,  42 

Plant-animals,  96,  98-99 

Plates,  lice  of  the  falcon,  127; 
louse  of  the  large  pigeon, 
turtle-dove,  louse  or  mite, 
hen-louse,  or  mite,  louse  of 
starling,  128 ;  louse  of  the 
crane,  129;  lice  of  the  moor- 
hen, figures,  I,  2,  3,  130; 
louse  of  the  white-heron, 
egret,  131 ;  louse  of  the 
black-heron,  132;  louse  of 
the  spoon-bill,  133;  louse  of 
swan,  head  of  swan-louse 
under  view,  134;  louse  of 
wild-duck,  louse  of  sea-gull, 
mite  of  the  swan,  135;  lice 
of  the  wild-goose,  136;  lice 
of  the  plover,  137 ;  louse  of 
the  kestrel,  139;  louse  of 
the  peacock,  140;  louse  of 
white  peacock,  141 ;  louse  of 
the  crow,  louse  of  the 
capon,  142 ;  louse  of  the 
white  starling,  worm  found 
in  citron  and  spice,  143; 
common  louse,  144;  crab- 
louse,  tick  of  wild-goat,  145  ; 
louse  of  camel,  146 ;  louse 
of  the  ass,  147;  louse  of 
African  sheep,  louse  of 
Guinea-hen,  148;  deer  lice, 
149;  tick  of  the  tiger,  150; 
grain  weevil,  151;  ant,  152; 
ant,  2,  153;  ant,  3;  shaggy. 
154;   mosquito,    155 

Plato,  96 

Pliny,  18,  38,  46,  47,  50,  51,  52. 
69,  65,  7^,  77,  90 


i6o 


INDEX 


Pliny  exempts  asses  and   sheep 

from  lice,  120 
Plotinus,  96 
Plum,  worm  in,  102 
Plutarch,  42 

Porta,  Battista,  50,  52,  64 
Purpose,  92 
Putrefaction,  91 
Pythagorus,  96 
Pumpkin,  76 
Pupae,  28 


Redi,  R,  life  of,  5-8;  significance 
of  his  work,  8-1 1;  bibliog- 
raphy, 13;  belief  in  biogen- 
esis, 26-27 

Rucellai,  Giovanni,  poem  on 
bees,  40-41 


Sachs,  Philip  James,  51 

Saint  Jerome,  57 

Scaliger,  2>7 

Scorpions,  dy,  myths  concerning 
spontaneous  generation  of, 
51-53  ;  this  theory  disproved, 
53 ;  sexual  differences,  53 ; 
habits  of  young,  54;  position 
of  young  in  oviduct,  54; 
abundance  in  Italy,  55;  Ital- 
ian species  compared  with 
forms  from  Egypt  and 
Tunis,  55-57;  weight,  55; 
aperture  of  sting,  58 ;  poison, 
its  effects,  58-62;  flies  breed 
in  dead  scorpions,  64 

Segneri,  7 

Seneca,  quotation,  126 

Senses,  their  use  as  a  guide  to 
reason,  19 

Sensibility  of  plants,  96-98 

Servius  the  grammarian,  50 

Silkworms,  115;  Vida's  origin  of 
same  in  decayed  flesh  of 
mule,  115  ^ 

Snakes,  27,  49;  belief  in  creation 
from  rotten  matter  utterly 
false,  64 ;  heart  has  one  ven- 
tricle, 81 

Soul,  as  generative  principle,  91, 
92 

Sperlmg,  Johann,  37,  43,  65,  119 


Spiders,  ability  to  withstand 
starvation,  66;  eggs,  67,  69; 
young,  67;  ecdysis,  68;  nest, 
69;  thread,  69;  do  not  live 
in  galls,  70;  web,  71-72 

Sponges,  plant-animals,  96 ; 
movement,  99 

Spontaneous  generation,  9,  91 

Spontaneous  generation,  early 
belief  in,  21 ;  flesh  does  not 
become  wormy  of  itself,  72; 
does  not  occur  in  protected 
fruits  and  vegetables,  75 ; 
does  not  occur  in  dead  ani- 
mals, 38;  in  dead  flesh  de- 
nied, 64 

Stoics,  theory  of  origin  of  man, 
2,2 

Sweet  basil,  belief  that  scorpions 
are  produced  by  it  disproved, 
52 

Tachinid  fly,  114 

Tadpoles,  79 

Tertullian,  57 

Theophrastus,  48 

Toads,  64;  appearance  during  a 
shower,  explained,  80 

Tumors  on  plants,  81,  85,  82-84 
(see  also  Galls) 

Tun-fish,  65 

Turtles,  method  of  laying  eggs, 
78 

Uterus,  use  of  the  term,  69 

Vallisneri,  10 

Varini,  5 

Varro,  26,  38,  39,  46,  50 

Vida,  Girolamo,  115 

Virgil,  39,  42 

Vital  stimulus,  94 

Voss,   Gerard,  43 

Wasps  eat  meat,  47;  poison  not 
dependent  on  food,  48;  at- 
tack bees  and  flies,  49;  feed 
on  fruit  and  flowers,  49; 
originate  in  flesh  of  dead 
horses,  according  to  Varro,. 
50 

Whitethorn,  85 

World  soul,  24 

Zoophytes,  96,  98-99
