The Legend of Aleister Crowley (P. R. Stephensen and Israel Regardie, 1930; public domain)
===============================================================================
The contemporary defense of Crowley against the press vilification campaign — the primary document of the 1930s battle over his reputation, by his future secretary. Source: Internet Archive.

THE LEGEND
of
ALEISTER
CROWLEY

A Study of The Facts
b

y
P. R. Stephensen

THE LEGEND OF
ALEISTER CROWLEY

THE LEGEND OF

ALEISTER
CROWLEY

Being a Study of the Documentary
Evidence Relating to a Cam-
paign of Personal Vilification
Unparalleled in Literary
History.

By P. R. STEPHENSEN

LONDON 1930
MANDRAKE PRESS LTD.
41 Museon STREET

“Tt is a hydra-headed monster, this London Opinion, but
we should not be surprised at all to see an almost unpatalleled
event, namely, every one of those hydra-heads moving with
a. single purpose, and thar the, denunciation, of Mr. Aleister
Crowley and all his works. This would be a remarkable
achievement for a young gentleman who only left Cambridge
Suites few years ago. ft requires a certain amonat of serious
purpose to stir Public Opinion into active opposition, and
the only question is, has Mr. Crowley a serious e? Te
is still an open question whether be wil excite that life-giving
animosity on the part of Public Opinion which is only accorde
to the most dangerous thiakers.”

(FroarNce Fann, in the New Age, 1907.)

“ We crave for poetry in England, but we do not like poets
unless they ace exceedingly conventional, when we can laureate
them; because in the national search for what is called character
Es E we Seale fet ow bal we ered hin
Every jel re ley, yet lj we treated him |
Byron is not allowed to rest in Poets Comer. We have
treated Swinburne as if he were Crippen. A ad we have treated
‘Mr, Aleister Crowley in much the same way, Yet Mr. Crowle}
is one of our few real poets. He has written things whic
will never die. The real trouble about Mr. Crowley is that
he is a true poet—he cannot compromise., The persecution of
silly and unkind men has wounded him. Tt is for literary
men to come forward and stand by him.”

(English Review, 1912.)

* — "This man Crowley is one of the most sinister figures of
Me ereader of obscene paces Versuch à be inel
d e . Yet such is his int

taliment and mental hecinaton that he is able to secure
reputable publishers for his works and attract to him men and

women of means and position.”
(Sunday Express, 1923.)
** England's worst man.” (obn Bail, May, 1929.)

CONTENTS

CHAPTER
1,—Tue Man Caowrev

IL—Eartx Perso, 1896-1907
IIL.“ Equinox” Perron, 1908-1914
IV.—Tue War

‘V.—AFTER THE WAR

PAGE

33
6;
103

126

CHAPTER ONE
THE MAN CROWLEY

Artister CrowLeY is a man, Many people would
add, * What a man!" in tones cither of extreme
approval or, more usually, of extreme disapproval.
Tam sncions to m Eee ugar cannot
properly dispute wi le who say he is more
Tab a inan- one of the hierarchy of Those. Neither
can I dispute on their own grounds with people who
say he is something less than a man—a demon (to put
it mildly) in human guise. Being no occultist, I am
not able to settle such magical disputations. One
of the strongest points in. Crowley's favour is that he
is undoubtedly a maa.

Moreover, he is an interesting man, an extraordinary
man; and, further, he is a dangerously good poet
both in his poetry and in his life. Nothing much i;
known publicly about cither of these activities. There
is a great deal of dirty rumour, I am satisfied, after
investigation, that rumour has lied, as usual; but
more disgracefully and filthily than usual about
this man.

For thirty years a certain spattering of mud has been
thrown at him, and in recent years a complete
descended. Throwing mud at Aleister Crowley is
quite a recognised branch of sport. What makes it
easier is that he makes no to dodge the muck.
He seems to think it cannot him, that this muck,
and these throwers of muck, are transient phenomena,
unreal stuff, of no ascertainable cosmic significance.

p

19 THE LEGEND OF ALEISTER CROWLEY

Ifa journalist writes three columns of abuse identifying
him with Jack the Ripper, Crowley seems to take the
attitude that nobody of intelligence will believe such
arrant nonsense—and the others do not matter. It is
possible that Crowley underestimates the amount of
unintelligence in the world. He is a literary man of
outstanding ability, yet he has never properly defended
himself against scurtilous attacks from journalists like
ma Douglas and Horatio Bottomley. Is this

use he believes they are not worth serious notice ?

H so, he is loftily ignori the fact tha a great deal,
avery great deal, of the guttermad thrown, bas stuck.
Members of the “general public” who otherwise
appear quite intelligent are definitely uneasy when

ister Crowley is mentioned; think “there must
be something in it all”; prefer to rely upon black
tumour and blackguardly journalism for information
about him; prefer to be “on the safe side” and to
have nothing to do with Aleister Crowley. It is
difficult to draw such people out in discussion, They
don’t yah E daci Cs br Mr.
are prejudiced, definitely iced, against Aleister
Crowley. Fie'is anathems and tabu,

ware ‘Who and what is Aleister Crowley that he
should be the original of a lej of infamy without
parallel in the modem world? ‘That is the question
which this little study sets out to investi; rowley
is a strong poet, and strong poets ate often unpopular,
Byron ‘was unpopular, very, He still is unpopular.
That morbid and quixotic inkslinger, James Douglas,
pied only recently, with horror, to the " obese "

Wyron.

Probably Byron could have given James Douglas
at least a half-way start in a swimming race across the
Hellespont—club foot, alleged obesity, and all: most
probably he could even have allowed James Douglas

THE MAN CROWLEY n

the use of a dinghy! And the same ink-slinging
athlete has described Aleister Crowley as degenerate
and vicious—Crowley who has climbed more moun-
tains than Douglas has written articles: mountains
even steeper than the epithets permissible ia a Sunday
newspaper article; and not so easy...

In estimating motives for the attacks on Crowley's
reputation, it is helpful always to remember that he is
a poet, a successful poct; that is, a poet who bas
tackled his poetical job successfully. ` The rancour
of minor poets, frustrated poets, like James Douglas,
is always formidable when exercised against a successful
poet. It is straining the probable too far, however,
to attribute all the of Aleister Crowley to the
rancorous envy of his poetic rivals. The attack
has been too vicious, even for that. We must look
elsewhere, too.

‘The patriot Bottomley bas been associated with
James Douglas in the formulation of the legend, or
its crudest elements, in its most popular and sensa-
tional form. What shall be ead of poot Bottomley?
Crowley would probably say: "He has suffered
enough; he has had time to think it over "—yet it
will be necessary to consider Bottomley, and Jobn Bull,
no less than James Douglas and the Suriday Express as
muck-thtowers in chief against the Aunt Sally under
investigation.

For ‘many years Crowley has lived abroad, One
would have thought that sleeping dogs would be let
lie; but no. Jobs Bal as recently as May, 1929,
described Crowley as ^ England's worst man,” and
warned him not to come to On arriving
in London, Crowley dined pleasantly with one of the
Scotland Yard chiefs, and that was that.

‘The publishers of his autobiography, now in the
Press, have had some fun, Weird customers have

12 THE LEGEND OF ALEISTER CROWLEY

walked into their offices, uttering cryptic warnings,
and have vanished, leaving no traces of identity, One
of them said, “Always cross your fingers when you
speak to Aleister Crowley.” His own fingers were
crossed all the time he was in the office. He said:
“That man is superhuman; he can read thoughts ;
he knows what we are thinking now.” Questioned,
the weird visitor would say no more, but merely
withdrew, his fingers still crossed, moaning hollowly :
y Remember, remember |” like the ghost of Hamlet's
ther.

Many other kind friends “seriously warned” the

wublishers, and meant well. In discussion, most of
them were amazed to learn that Crowley was actually
living in England, going about his business as a
normal man of letters, correcting proofs, and other-
wise seeing his books through the press. They were
ander thé impresion, vaguely, that he would be
arrested if he set foot on these shores! Informed
that Crowley has never been charped with any
criminal offence in all his adventurous life, some
replied: “Ah, that shows how clever he is 1”

he legend persists
Many bookseller refused absolutely to send out
prospectuses ot to handle the autobiography, even if
Mey received onders for i. A typie objection,
uttered even without an inspection of the book, was :
“We don’t want any of that love cult stuf here!”
Practically all warned the publishers, in a genuinely
friendly way, to be careful, very careful, in all dealings
with Aleister Crowley.

More definitely. A. stranger walked into one of
the bookshops which displayed an advertisement for
for the book. The stranger was curiously interested
in the name Aleister Crowley, and asked the book-
seller many questions. He then told the following

THE MAN CROWLEY 1

amazing story: His daughter, at a convent school in
France, had been specially warned in lectures by a
visiting priest not to read any book by Aleister
Crowley. This had had the usual cffect leaving
the school she had tried to eat, or at least to gaze
upon, the fruit so specifically forbidden. She had

stered her father to try and obtain some of Crowley's
Books for her to read Í

Examples could be continued. I have quoted
enough to show the wide persistence of the legend,
even to the present day. vety existence of such
a romantic oral tradition in this allegedly prosaic
twentieth century, and while the original of the legend
is still alive, is a matter of some importance at least
for comparative theology ; and on these grounds an
inquiry should be made into its origin and develop-
ment. Otherwise posterity, through its professors
of modernism, will decide that Crowley was a Solar
Myth. ‘That is why I insist at the outset that he is
a man; in which case the existence of the legend
becomes even more interesting. If the legend is true,
i iy ti if he has killed and eaten only
the Himalayas, for example, instead of

i
the evo allege sit willbe my painful dut to bring
him to justice, poet or no poet, if I can, lest he eat me.
But if the legend is not true, by any chance, justice
should equally be done.

I

It is axiomatic that Aleister Crowley is a man, and
an nonni man. I think, moreover, that he is
a genius. His detractors might qualify this by saying,
an wil genius, This does not seem to me to make him
less interesting as the subject of this inquiry, nor will

14 THE LEGEND OF ALEISTER CROWLEY

it make him less interesting to posterity. “Evil”
seems to be a question-begging epithet to apply to
genius. An alternative explanation is that he is
possessed by a genius, This seems to me to involve an
‘occult or magical is which I cannot, in my
ignorance, argue. It is essential to the legend,
however, that he is or has a genius, No ordinary
man could be the hero of such fables, Continued
‘unpopularity for thirty years is not easy for a literary
man to achieve. Yee Ceowley has achieved it—has
even consolidated his position! Bernard Shaw, once
the xed terror of maiden ladies in Suburbia, has
become a patriarchal, almost a saintly figure. Perhaps
he will be buried in Westminster Abbey, like Thomas
Hardy, that other Grand Old Man, one of whose
earlier books was named by critics "Jude the
Obscene.” Ramsay Mi execrated conscien-
scious objector during the war, has become Prime
Minister, no less, Other reversals of first impressions
continue to prove the transitoriness of opinion.
German generals and U-boat commanders are publicly
welcomed to England. Aleister Crowley is not
welcomed. Darwin, Huxley, Bradlaugh, and all the
“atheists” are of blessed memory nowadays; but
Crowley is hated and feared. Crowley is a “bad”

man.

Times arc changing. A new and eager tion
is alleged to be resurgent after the CS, horror.
"This generation suspects many of the traditions of its
forbears. The Victorian , even the Edwardian
Age, is not known at first hand to this generation.
Mr. Gladstone is almost a myth, All the old fogies,
and all the old bogies, are dying. The new and
resurgent generation is amused at old-fashioned
prejudices and beliefs: is rather incredulous about
the pre-war days—cannot visualise them at all. But

THE MAN CROWLEY 1

the old fogies still cling to their old bogies. Aleister
Crowley isa bad man. You must cross your fingers
when you speak to Aleister Crowley. He eats babies.
... He worships the Devil... .He is an evil
genius.

Bele , as I suy >, to the post-war generation,
I take the view that Al this Sngererossing fod sinister
whispering about a perfectly good poet, interfering
with the appreciation of his poetry, is disgraceful anc
ought to br stopped. If he isa crimin | hang him
or put him. ia gaol, and be done with it, If he is not
a criminal, let his innocence be established, somehow,
so that his fl may be read without irrelevant
prejudice. If he is a religious teacher, or a religious
maniac, for that matter, or a philosopher, or merely a
pero, thinker, hear what he has to say, at least,

fore getting the jim-jams about "black magic.”
If he has attacked Christianity, that’s no novelty!
Jf his views upon sex are not those of St. Paul, no
more are the views of many a divorce-court judge.
Even if his poetry is erotic, blasphemous, indecent,
obscene, corrupt, perverted, pagan, decadent, sensual,
and what-not—is it good lytic? That is the question.

Posterity may regard Aleister Crowley as a great
poet, or as a great, perhaps an epochal, religious
teacher. I don’t know, and don't care, what posterity
thinks. But it is a reproach to this generation, this
“emancipated” generation, that any literary man,
merely because his thought is unusual, should be
branded as infamous by dirty little inkslingers,
propping up a pre-war bogey without troubling to
inquire what damage they may do.

Ít is no use letting indignation goo too far once
this protest has been made. People of any integrity
will realise that the Legend of Aleister Crowley has
developed almost beyond a joke. I set myself the

16 THE LEGEND OF ALEISTER CROWLEY

task of explaining precisely how the legend has arisen,
in the hope that some sane appreciation of the man’s
work and genius may be possible. ‘The documents
appended, taken from what must be the silliest collec
tion of press-cuttings in existence, are intended to
show the part played by a section of the Press in
fostering the calumny. I have gone through that
collection—it is far from complete—in a detached
endeavour to trace the legend’s growth. Fortunately,
space has necessitated many omissions, but enough
are reproduced to show how a fantastic slander can
tow. The position as I write is that in Fleet Street,
the younger generation of News Editors actually
believes the legend which two or three of its pre-
decessors created and knew to be false.

I am far from exonerating Crowley himself, A
quite extraordinary simplicity in his nature has led
him systematically to invite hostility from almost
every quarter, as I shall show. But in common
justice he must be exonerated from the literal abomi-
nations with which he has been charged, not in the.
Law Courts, but in other buildings situated in Fleet
Street. It is all very well to say that he should sue
for libel to vindicate himself. Newspaper proprietors
ate invariably millionaires. Justice is free to all—
who can pay for it. Crowley estimates that it would
e him at least. £s,c00 and probably {10,00 t0 fight
libel actions properly against the ne ers
have defamed his, He would then have to certainty
of getting a verdict, owing to the fantastic nature
of the allegations made, tbe difficulty o£ disprovin
them because some considerable time has elapsed
since the worst “exposures” were made, and the
general unsavouriness, to a poct, of engaging in
endless legal squabbles. It is really up to the news-
paper proptictors, who will be specially asked to read

THE MAN CROWLEY 17

this book, to make the amende honorable now, however
late, if they are persuaded that they have piled on the
infamy too thick. OF course this is a forlorn hope,
but you never can tell. I pass to a consideration of
the actual legend in its historical development, not
sparing to ‘lame Crowley, where Crowley is really
to blame.

m

He is one of our greatest humorists, but his humour
is, on the whole, unkind in its effect.
‘The most hapless victim of Crowley's practical
joking has invariably been Crowley himself, ‘That is,
e has been the butt of his own practical jokes.
Anyone familiar with his poetry will recognise that
clement of perversity, that subtle sense of fun, which
causes him to laugh at himself in the midst of the
most “serious” passages. This is maddening to
sentimentalists, who were just beginning to settle
down to enjoy the beauty of his thought.

“O Frarer Perpunano, how unworthy ate these
sentiments |”

“D'ye want a clip on the jaw?”

Interpolations of this kind spoil his poetry, no less
than his philosophical utterances, for many simple-
minded readers. If W. B. Yeats had finished his
LAKE IsLE OF ĪNNISFREE with a couplet similar in
sentiment to the shove Pe would have achieved the
devastating effect which Crowley’s perverse humour
has upon its readers. The Gaii, is by no means
unfi. Crowleys lyric powers are ceitainly not
inferior to those of Yeats, his mystical thought is

»

18 THE LEGEND OF ALEISTER CROWLEY

superior. But Yeats entirely lacks Crowley’s power
of self-devastation.

No writer alive is so devastating to himself, and
consequently to his readers, as Aleister Crowley. If
T went more deeply into this it would be to show its
origin in the Oriental religions which Crowley has
so intensively studied—the religious aim, for example,
of achieving deep self knowledge by a breaking dows
of the normal intellectual self-consciousness, This
inquiry would lead away from the purposes of the
present study. All that need be summarised is that
the fact of Crowley’s perverse bumour has annoyed
many people, who could not see the point. His
tendency to laugh unkindly at everthing and any-
body, sacred and profane, including himself, has been
one of the biggest contributory factors to the growth
and persistence of his legend. In his search for
ultimate values, for the truth beyond appearance, he
has attacked anything and everybody too savagely.
He has held nothing "sacred? merely because it
appeared sacred, Piece by piece he has alienated that
vague mass of dogma called Public Opinion, and
outraged it, He has attacked, with his devastating

umour, precisely those people who have no sense o
humour ia heit doctrines. =.

Asa Rationalist, he has attacked Christianity, particu-
Jarising the most logical sects, the Plymouth Brethren,
and the Roman Catholics, with a vicious severity,
but, on the other hand, as a mystic he has equally
attscked the Rationalists for their lack of imagination
Both sides detest him equally, therefore, He has
hit them both on the solar plexus.

With accurate blows on the vitals he has ako
enraged every possible of vested interests in
the ©" occule” world, " particularly ‘Theosophists,
Spiritualists, Freemasons, and “Rosicrucians.” His

THE MAN CROWLEY 19

“Qubalistic” knowledge and his leamedness in
every branch of occult science has made him the most
formidable foe of hugger-mugger and pretentiousness
in magical affairs, All the little mystics have reason
to be terrified of him and his “exposures” of their
camouflages. These groups, quite numerous and
socially powerful, or at any rate noisy, are mainh
responsible, I deduce, for the legend that he is a devil-
worshipper and a practitioner of “black” magic.
is attacks would not have mattered had he been as
illiterate and as lacking in literary grace and logical
clarity as most of his opponents. But his excellent
polemical style, the depth and breadth of his learning,
the vehemence of his wit, the passionate sincerity
underlying his onslaughts, have evidently been too
much to be rebutted by the fair means of equivalent
polemics. Capitulation or anonymous and vindictive
slander were the only alternatives. The Legend
rev.
S'NOt content, however, with infuriating such
specialised if powerful elements, Crowley proceeded
to exercise his battering ram against every concept
held cardinally by the whole Christian community :
in particular by the guardians of their tradition in
England, the suburbanites, the middle-class, the
bourgeoisie—the “Philistines.” Much of his be-
haviour in baiting the Philistines was, in my opinion,
sheer foolishness and romantic posturing, and ought
to be condemned as such, but without fingers crossed,
He left Cambridge at the end of the "5o's with a
fortune of £40,000 to bura, and came to London.
There he played the fool, admittedly, as anyone else
might have done in that time, place, and circumstance.
His poetry was “outrageous” in the manner of
Swinburne, Baudelaire, and the Yellow Book. One of
his earliest works was a poetic reply to Krafft-Ebing !

20 THE LEGEND OF ALEISTER CROWLEY

He caused his books to be printed privately with
all the unction of fine 3 and binding, at
the Chiswick Press under Jacobi. Then ips
foolishly) he sent them out to the Press for review.
He lived as “Count Svareff” in a fat in Chancery
Lane, which he fitted up as a magical temple. He
bought a Scottish estate at Boleskine, Inverness, and
appeared at the Café Royal in full aphernalia ofa

cottish chieftain, as the “ Laird o Boleskine ”
(sensation).

Women who remember those merry days still
testify that Aleister Crowley looked enormously
impressive in kilts. His legs were splendidly beautiful,

robably on account of his constant mountaineering.
Fre climbed the soft chalk of Beachy Head to the
complete astonishment of the natives, no less than
of experienced climbers. He began making records
in Cumberland, in Wales, and on the Alps. A
sinister interpretation was placed even upon these
feats of agility and daring. Aleister Crowley was
climbing unclimbable places. Obviously by super-
natural aid. Inevitably he came to loggerheads with
respectability as personified in the Alpine Club, and
began exposing its members as incompetent and even
as untruthful braggarts. Another hostile group!
Bot merely in passing.

When the police in Patis refused to allow Epstein's
monument to Oscar Wilde to be unveiled, use
genitals were sculped thereon, Crowley unveiled the
Statue by a stratagem “in the interests of art.” A
metal butterfly was affixed to the offending parts on
the statue. Crowley removed the butterfly and
wore it as a cod-piece over evening dress, triumphantly
marching into the Café Royal (great sensation).

‘The legend grew. One would say that he was
asking for notoriety, and he got it. I can think of a

THE MAN CROWLEY a

simpler explanation—merely in his poetic exuberance,
in the fact that he really thought an artistic purpose
would be served by shocking the suburbs, and in
the fact that he really did not care what people thought
of him, because he had enough money to be indifferent
to any hostile opinion or criticism.

‘An injunction was taken out against him to prevent
him from publishing alleged secrets of the Rosicrucians
in his incredible periodical, Tux Equtvox. He
appealed and won the appeal. ‘The “secrets” were
published. Resentment grew.

He gave a series of public performances of “The
Rites of Eleusis” in the Caxton Hall. This brought
a storm of newspaper criticism, though the perform-
ances were admitted to have been dignified in con-
ception and execution. The legend was well away.

irom time to time he '* mysteriously ” disappeared ;

to reappear eventually in bis old bamos, looking
years younger, refreshed in body and mind, ever more
sardonic, witty, vituperative, and “wicked.” On
such disappearances he would walk across the Sahara,
climb the Himalayas, live as a Yogi in Ceylon, walk
across China, explore Mexican volcanoes, or dally in
Honolulu, Such voyages are unusual, but hardly
sinister, disippearances of x man from London. Yet,
they, too, helped the legend along on its by now
loping’ way. It was said, by jaded Londoners,
that Aleister Crowley had succcoted in prepating the
Elixir of Life; which alone could account for his
crpetual freshness and physical vitality. It was
Tice said chat he Knew how to turn base metals into
gold, which alone could accoun nm Bis wealth, as
evidenced by his sumptuously produced books, his
love of good food, and his travellings. Alternately,
to explain his renewals of vitality, it was suggested
that he practised physical vampirism. ‘The suggestions

22 THE LEGEND OF ALEISTER CROWLEY

as to the origin of his wealth crystallized into the
rumour that he obtained money from wealthy women
by blackmail, intimidation, and worse.

‘This kind of slander invariably betrays the voice of
envy and fear. As already explained the professional
thaumaturges had every reason to envy Aleister
Crowley's learning, and to fear his fearlessness. There
was really no other possible attack upon him than the
attack of malicious slander. In addition to the
thaumaturgic fears, one can imagine the positive
dismay of poetry reviewers, most of them, no doubt,
struggling minor poets earning an odd’ guinea by
book reviewing, on being confronted with the suc-
cession, apparently endless, of Crowley’s sumptuous
masterpieces! One can imagine also the rage of
pasty and besotted “Bohemians” when Crowley
tumed up periodically, soaked in sunlight, his muscles
tightened by exercise and abstinence, o be-dazzle
their mistresses with his physical and mental charms.
I repeat, in the literary underworld of London, there
was no other available weapon against Crowley than
envious, malicious slander. Unwittingly, he asked
for trouble, and he got it. There was many a snake
lying in the grass.

I have said that many of his actions during that
Edwardian age were gratuitously foolish, that there
was a lot of ninetyish romantic bravado about his
whole attitude, and his pranks. Already the reaction
against Queen Victoria and what she symbolised was
an established convention in advanced literary circles.
Crowley, in his hot youth, went one better and made
the antipathy personal to the Queen. In language
which by many would be considered offensive, he
described her as a fat Genman hausfran ; and, declaring
all the Hanoverians to be usurpers, he joined the
Carlist conspirators, was knighted by Don Carlos,

THE MAN CROWLEY 3

and declared that—under the Salic Law—all Victorian
knighthoods were invalid. This seems to me to
have been quite a notable short cut to unpopularity in
respectable English quarters, and to have been quite
the wrong thing to do if his ambition was to become
an idol of the middle classes. But perhaps that was
not his ambition! ‘The fact remains that in many
ways he has only himself to blame for carrying out
escapades susceptible of being developed into a.
legend of his villainy. "The bourgeois are fair game.
‘You can insult some of the people some of the timc,
but there's a limit, He wrote a (probably harmless)
lampoon on Queen Alexandra, printed in Paris. The
whole edition was seized and destroyed by Customs
officials. Lèse majesté became incorporated in the
legend. This episode again, seems to me to have
been more senseless than sinister.

IV

Despite all the "ninetyish and Edwardian pranks just
described, it could not have been said at the outbreak
of the war Aleister Crowley was completely condemned
by solid English opinion, whether popular in the
widest sense or averagely literate, He had created a
stir in professional literary and occult circles, but
he had committed no widely significant public outrage.
During and immediately after the war he proceeded
to make good this omission. He laid himself open
to three indictments, admirable for the purpose of
journalistic villifications on the million circulation
scale, These three indictments were: that he was a
pro-German, that he was a drug addict and trafficker,
and that he conducted “an abode of love” with
white slave implications. In each instance Crowley

24 THE LEGEND OF ALEISTER CROWLEY

himself provided just the necessary point of departure
for thest canards in their egregious flights.

One stands aghast at the colossal intransigeance,
the complete disregard of possible results, the per-
sistent schoolboyish perverseness which could have
led him to declare himself pro-German and pro-Irish
during the war. I doubt if he will ever be forgiven
by the English for this prank, though Bernard Shaw
and Ramsay MacDonald and Bertrand Russell and
Lytton Strachey have been forgiven, For as usual,
Crowley took no middle course, Being by nature an
active man, he could not assume the passive rôle of
conscientious objector whea the other howling dem-
agogues took control of England, usurping sanity,

hen super-patsots began blackguarding the “ kul-
tur” of Wagner, Beethoven, and Nietzsche; when
they howled of “atrocities” and “scraps of
papery” and stampeded the English nation into

ysteria for military purposcs, he was indignant
beyond words, as all better-class Englishmen were,
Like the Old High Tory he is at heart, he romantically
had thought that the war would be a clean wind to
England. He thought the war would be conducted,
ftom the English side at least, in a gentlemanly
fashion, A victory for England by these means, he
thought, was certain, owing to moral superiority.
But when Bottomley, Lloyd George, Northcliffe and
Co. took command Crowley came to the conclusion
that the ideals of England, as thus formulated, ought
not to triumph, In high dudgeon he travelled to
America, went in a motor boat to the Statue of
Liberty, and proclaimed the Irish Republic!

No doubt after that he felt better.

The New York Times made a three-columa story
of the escapade, and Crowley found himself popular
with the pro-German (Irish and German) elements

THE MAN CROWLEY E

in New York journalism. They asked him to
contribute articles to their papers, The Fatherland and
The International. Willingly, Crowley complied, He
is nothing if not thorough”

Now here comes the almost incredible perverseness.
Landed through his impetuousness in this compromised
Position he proceeded to pull the leg of the serious-
minded Germans as thoroughly as he had ever pulled
any legs in his life! In order to parallel and parody
the mad-dog British journalism, which was howlin,
for the suppression of Santa Claus (the Germany,
Crowley wrote a ponderous article solemnly affirming
that the Kaiser was Parsifal in quest of the moders
Holy Graal. This article, in all its stark irony and
humour is reprinted in the present volume at page 115.

Where the joke becomes a tragedy, is that a book-
seller in England was sent to gaol for three months
for selling the magazine contalting chis very article,
and that the houses of Crowley's friends in London
were searched for evidences of similar treason, This
deplorable incident merely increased Crowley's pres-
tige ‘with the pro-German elements in New York,

je became persona grata with them, and before long
he was writing practically the whole of The International
under a dozen different names, as in the metry old
days of Tux Equinox in London. It cannot be said
that The International under his guidance was an
effective political instrument. The war seems to
have steadied him. He tool himself more seriously
as a Magus, and an ethical teacher. He used his
position as dictator of The International, not so much
to write political articles in favour of Germany, as to
expound the Law of Thelema, both explicitly and in
a number of positively brilliant short stories. Even
his political editorials were ethical in import. One
of these, “ Humanity First,” here reprinted (p. 111),

26 THE LEGEND OF ALEISTER CROWLEY

shows fairly adequately the tendencies of his “ pro-
German” activities in New York.

T do not ask here that he be “forgiven” for his
attitude daring the war, Readers, may form their
own opinion, but the question should be decided on
knowledge, not on hearsay.

"The war steadied Crowley, to some extent—as who
did it not? Even in the days of Te Equixox he
had been inclined to consider himself sufficiently
gifted to become a religious teacher of mankind.
7 The Rites of Eleusis ” (performed in London in 1912)
had been a serious attempt to formulate a natural-
istic religion, which was at the same time ceremonial ;
a religion to satisfy man’s craving for beauty without
straining his historical and scientific credulity. Durin
Wie Gv ears ln America he seems to ave worked
out a little more fully the ethical implications of such
a teligion; though in this respect also his activity
was not so much a new departure as an intensification
of eatlier thinking on the subject. When he came
back to Europe in 1919 and lived in a villa which he
called “The Abbey of Thelema” at Cefalù in Sicily,
he seriously believed that the World War had signalised
the breakdown of Christian civilisation, and that his
was the tremendously responsible part of teaching an
ethical code of the New Eon. It has already been
remarked that Crowley never takes a middle course 1

Tt is not my task here to expound the Law of
Thelema, even if I understood it properly; but the
main principle is perfectly simple in formulation—
that each Individual should ascertain his True Will
and do it. The new religion urges that “ Every man
and every woman is a star,” i.e. a unit of cosmic
significance and autonomy. The implications are as
manifold as there are individuals in the Universe.
Do Wmar Tuou Wirz—a command from Gods to

THE MAN CROWLEY 27

manis the s of the Law which is to replace
the Tuy Witt Be Doxe—an entreaty from men to
God—of earlier religions.

What matters for our present purposes is that
Crowley, becoming convinced in Tineri of the
necessity of teaching this Law to Mankind, and
passionately believing that his work would be of

permanent value and importance to mankind, pro-
ceeded to live at Cefalù in accordance with Thelemite
principles.

There is nothing particularly nefarious in this
decision. I should have said he has as much right to
establish a cloistered religious fraternity as, for
example, the Roman Catholics. Religion, like every
other form of human activity, cannot but be improved
by etimental work. The first difficulty was that,

rowley’s religion being naturalistic, he welcomed
devotees of both sexes to his Abbey—whereas other
religious institutions segregate the sexes. It was thus
that he laid himself open to the ridiculous charge of
establishing a “ love cult” or a “ free love” colony.
‘Women, it should be noted, including Mary Magdalene,
formed part of the entourage of an earlier Master,
whose word was “ God is Love.” But this does not
seem to have given rise to any pemicious “love
cult” legend. ‘When the Sunday Express came to
vilify him for writing the Drary or A DruG Frenp
a morbid interest was suddenly taken in the probable
sexual “ goings-on” at Cefalü by critics who seemed
to consider it abominable à priori for man and women
to consort in worship; critics who nevertheless
apparently see no, grounds for morbid conjecture
about the sexual life in onanistic monasteries and
convents—or in thousands of other villas in Italy and
on the Riviera!

He was “hard-up” at this time. His fortune was

28 THE LEGEND OF ALEISTER CROWLEY

now exhausted. Even had he wished to swank in
London, as in the dear days , he no longer
had the means, in ready cash at least. (So much, by
the way, for the legend of German gold—though that
allegation, like its modern counterpart in Russian
gold—is ‘a bogy which barely raises a smile, even,
nowadays.) It was with the intention of earning
what is commonly called an honest living by the pen
that he came to London in 1922 and contracted to
write the Dian or a Druc Frenn.

I meation the fact of his privation at this time
because there is a moral in it somewhere. It is not
that pride goeth before a fall, as the vindictive might
suppose; Or that a young man with £40,000 should
invest in Consols and never touch the principal,
instead of spending his capital exploring far countries,
performing elaborate magical rituals, dining and
wining well, and printing fine editions of his
poetry. The is, look out for the worst
attacks from your enemies, It was at this moment
that all the steady resentment against Aleister
Crowley, a thunderstorm that had been brewing
in literaty and occult coteries in London for many

‘eats, burst with the violence of a typhoon upon

im.

Two incidents brought matters to a head—the
publication of Tae Diary or A Davc Frenp, and
the unfortunate death of Raoul Loveday at Cefalù.
James Douglas and the editor of Jobn Ball per-
ceived in these events their opportunity for an
orgy of that sensational vituperative journalism of
which they are probably the world’s champions.
Nothing like the vindictiveness of these attacks upon.
Crowley has ever been known in the history of
English journalism. If only as a record of this phase
of literature in the 2oth century, the extracts from

THE MAN CROWLEY 29

these articles quoted herein deserve preservation for
posterity in a form more permanent than on the
crumbling sawdust of the newspaper page.

What is so tragic about the episode is, that at the
outset of his first serious campaign to propagate an
ethical code, at the moment when he had, as it were,
steadied down to this serious purpose, when he had
no longer any desire or intention to shock the suburbs,
Aleister Crowley found himself presented to millions
of horrified readers as a creature of degradation and
villainy hitherto unexampled in the history of man-
kind! I find this tragic irony not without its perverse,
almost Crowleyan, humour. And I think also that
now, after more than seven years, the joke has gone
far enough. . . .

Tur Diary or A Dauc Frenn is a novel which was
written by Crowley in twenty-seven days in order to
taise money from the honest employments of his
literary talent. It is a novel, a work of fiction. It
paints with the skill of a masterly psychologist, with
toxicological learning not at all surprising in one
who had studied so thoroughly the. esoteric, and
with the descriptive power of a practised writer, all
the horrors and degradations of the vice of drog
takin, t that tine and now, a vice alleged to be

reyalent amongst the srupidly idle classes of bourgeois
society.” The book shows how the habit may be
cured by self-discipline and a training of the will
according to the principles of Thelema. It seems
evident on analysis that Crowley wished to take an
extreme example of moral disintegration in otder to
show the possibilities of Thelema.

The book was withdrawn after its third thousand
by Messrs. Collins, who ought to have known
better. They were helped to this decision by one
of the shrillest and most hysterical denunciations of a

4 THE LEGEND OF ALEISTER CROWLEY

book ever written, even by such a journalist as
James Douglas.

Tt is impossible to estimate how much underground
scurtility this incident has added to the Crowley
legend. If the book had not been withdrawn from
the market people would have been able to form
their own opinion of its merits. But as it happened,
the general public had to take for granted the denunci-
ations which alone they read, and to make horrified
conjectures themselves sto the nature of is conten
Tt was supposed, for example, bj je who co
not obtain the book, that Crowley himself was the
Drup Fiend, and, that this was his personal diary :
The legend even developed tothe our still current
that Crowley is the head of a secret and international
Order which controls the manufacture and sale of
illicit drugs throughout the world—that the “ Magical

rder of Initiates” was nothing else than a camou-
flaged drug-running society! Poor Crowley! Literally
poor Crowley, who had written that hasty novel in
order to make sure of his commissariat at Cefalà |: The.
tables were indeed turned at last upon that harum-
scarum of the pre-war days who published occult
“ secrets” in Ti EQUINOX.

Even in THe Dav Frenp incident, it will be
noted, I do not totally exonerate Aleister Crowley
from my principal indictment of him in these pages—
his innocence or carelessness of results which may,
follow from misinterpretation by his readers
whatever serious message his literary works contain ;
his over-estimation of the amount of critical intelli-
gence in the world. In my view the novel shows
all the defects of its hasty composition. It also shows
all the attractive qualities of poetic imagination,
Which are undeniably Crowley's. On balance, it is
a novel well worth reading. But at that time, and

THE MAN CROWLEY ar

in those circumstances, it was the worst possible
tactics, considered as propaganda for the Law of
‘Thelema. Ie is almost the blunder that he
could have made. It was literally a deliverance into
the hands of James Douglas. One would say almost
that he unconsciously wished to frustrate himself as
^ religious teacher of mankind: that his Yoga-
practice of literary self-annihilation had achieved its
apotheosis,

Tue Diary or a Drug Frexp was a colossal
mistake in judgment, I repeat, and he cannot be held
completely blameless, however much we sympathise
with him, for the’ distortions of Douglas and
Bottomley's successors which followed.

Quite otherwise is the sad incident of Raoul
Loveday's death at Cefalit, which occurred as a climax
of Crowleys own misfotunes, It should be fairly
obvious that, Crowley vas in no way responsible
directly or indirectly, for this tragedy. „Ïa her recently
published book the widow, Betty May Loveday,
declares that her husband died of enteric fever
following the drinking of unfiltered water, despite
the fact that Crowley had distinctly warned all the
members of the household against drinking such
water, She adds that Loveday had proper medical
supervision, and that everything possible was done
by Crowley in the circumstances. We must leave
it at that, How the Sunday Express and John Bull
made a sensational campaign against Crowley will be
shown in due course. Meanwhile it is enough to
remark that, when the day came that Joba Bull
could print a full page article about Aleister Crowley
under a headline, unprecedented in the history of
abuse, of “A Man We'd Like to Hang”; when
Crowley, who is, after all, human and a sensitive
creature, could find himself virtually accused of the

32 THE LEGEND OF ALEISTER CROWLEY

murder of one of his dearest and closest friends—
when this catastrophic slander could overwhelm a
fine poet and idealist at a time of deprivation and,
as it happened, illness, I insist emphatically that
the silly jokes of destiny had been caftied too far:
that the hitherto Span Ev harmless “Legend
of Aleister Crowley ” had developed in malice and
vindictiveness beyond the permissible limits of
decency and taste, even on the standards of the
crudest sensational journalism,

Join Bull subsequently apologised for insinuating
that Loveday had been a digas in the Abbey
o£ Cefalà. But that one small apology could never
overtake the great galloping defamations of Crowley
eda m logised. J;

e Express has never apologised. James
Douglas, thë protestant pope, is inklbte

In what follows I have tried to present the documents
pertaining to the “Legend” of Aleister Crowley in
Order that the reader may arrive at an informed
opinion as to its origin and development. He is a
man, and an interesting man. He is a poet, and an
interesting poet; and where so much subterranean
rumour is in circulation no harm can be done to
anybody guiltless by letting a little daylight into the
dark places.

Cuarrer Two
EARLY PERIOD, 1896-1907

Auessren Crow:ty was born in 1875, educated
privately, and at Malvern; and entered Trinity
College, Cambridge, in 1895. During his youth aod
adolescence his chief hobbies been. Jem
chemistry, mathematics and chess; his chief sport
had been rock climbing, in which he had already
attained a notable proficiency; and his chief anti-
pathies had been religion, as practised among the
strict Plymouth Brethren to which his family belonged,
and home life as personified in the bigotry and fanatic-
ally repressive Puritanism of his mother. It was his
mother who called him “The Beast 666,” a mystical
designation which he has not been averse from
accepting.

‘At Cambridge he read assiduously, but without
much relation to the prescribed courses, intending to
be entered for the Diplomatic Service. He seems to
have abandoned this career for a singularly undiplo-
matic life as poct, magician and explorer. While at
Cambridge his first poctical works ACELDAMA and
Wnrre SrAINs were published. These were followed
immediately by THE TALE oF ARCHAIS, SONGS OF
THE SPIRIT, and JEPHTHAH, all published in 1898,
at the end of which year he went down from
Cambridge.

Ten years after the publication of his first work,
he had issued no less than thirty volumes, mostly
of poetry, the full bibliography of which it is

3 c

34 THE LEGEND OF ALEISTER CROWLEY

impossible at this date to set in otder, as most were
issued privately in small editions. The publication
of his Couzecren Works in three volumes, 1905-6-7,
matks the end of his “Early Period,” as does the
appearance of a work in criticism and praise of his
poetry, entitled Tue SrAR iN THE West, by Captain
(now Col.) J. F. C. Fuller in 1907.

It was at the end of this period, and in appreciation
of Captain Fuller’s book, that Florence Farr Em
vas moved to utr the following strangely prophetic
words :

It is a bydra-headed monster, this London Opinion,
but we should not be suprised’ at all to sce an almost
uni event, namely, every one of those hydra-
heads moving with a sin , and that the denunei-
ation of Mr. Aleister Crowley and all his works.

‘Now this would be a remarkable achievement for a
young gentleman who only left Cambridge quite a few

Years ago. It a certain amount of serious purpose
to stir Public Opinion into active opposition, and the
‘only question is, bas Mz. Crowley a serious purpose? . ..
A nal j t is that the young man is a remarkable
Product of an unremarkable age». His, power of
E is extraordinary; his kite flies, but he never
fale to jerk ic back to eid with some touch of tidieule
or bathos which makes it still an open question whether
he will excite that life-giving animosity on the part of
Public Opinion which “is only accorded to the most
dangerous thinkers. (New Ag, 1907.)

In order to prove that Mrs. Emery’s astonishment
at Crowley at this date was not based merely upon
his literary fecundity, it is only necessary to add that
during this ten years, at intervals while engaged in
the composition of the thirty publications pre-
viously mentioned, he had made, amongst other
explorations, a trip entirely round the world (1900-02)
via New York, Mexico, San Francisco, Honolulu,
Japan, China and Ceylon; including in his itinerary

EARLY PERIOD, 1896-1907 5

an expedition of six months to the Himalayas with
the Chogo Ri (Kz) expedition of 1902, spending
sixty-five days on the Baltoro Glacier, and attaining
a height of 22,000 feet.

He had also studied and practised the Hindu
spiritual discipline of Yoga (Ceylon, 1901), bought
an estate in Scotland at Boleskine, Inverness, married
the sister of Gerald Kelly (1903), travelled to Cairo

1904), revisited Ceylon for bi shooting (1904),
e y E poe g (1904),

the expedition to Kangchenjunga (1905)
i reached a heit aba oximately 23,000 feet,
travelled down the Irra to Rangoon, walked

actoss China (1906) and visited Morocco with the
Earl of Tankerville (1907).

One from a short recital of these activities an
impression of the adventurous and energetic
of the man, who was truly “a remarkable product
of an unremarkable age.” His file of Press cuttings
for this period is self-evidently incomplete. His
early poetry seems to have had, at the hands of
reviewers, the usual pontifical reception which a
Tong poet has to ct. He came scarcely at all

fore the notice of that wider public interested in
the sensational Only once, in his skirmish with
G. K. Chesterton, was there anything like an attempt
at serious appreciation or controversy. The im-

ression which remains after going through these
Press criticisms of his early poetry, is that Crowley
was recognised to be a poet of distinction, whose
ideas nevertheless were possibly dangerous, though
the reviewers could not be sure. Even after thirty
volumes, though the reviewers had probably not
seen mote than a few of these, the Press, if not over-
sympathetic, was definitely not more hostile than is
a with poets. The fireworks were to come

ter,

36 THE LEGEND OF ALEISTER CROWLEY
UNDERGRADUATE VERSE (1896-7)

Wurre Sramss and ACELDAMA were not sent to
the Press for review. ‘The former, an undergraduate
“poetic reply to Krafft-Ebing,” was very privately
plated and circulated. One feview of A rra
remains on record, a copy having presumably made
its way into the editorial sanctums of the Can/ab.

Induced by we know not what course of reading, the
book is not one that can be recommended to the young,
for though its stanzas are sufficiently musical, there runs
through them a vein of scepticism and licentiousness
which requires to be troated with caution.

tis amusing to notice that this very first appearance
of Crowley as an object of criticism, even in the
undergraduate Press of his contemporaries at Cam-
bridge, contains a “warning” against him which
foreshadows the vulgar attacks of later years. The
Cambridge undergraduate journals, as it happens,
never sponsored Crowley very kindly. A short
time after going down he published IN RESIDENCE,
à collection oF undergriduste lyrics, which wis
received by the Granta with the following unkind
salutation :

Ob, Crowley, name for furore fume
(Do you pronounce it Croully ?)

Whate'er the worth of this your mirth
Tr reads a trifle foully.

Cast before swine thes pearls of thine,

O, great Aleister
“Granta” to-day, not strange to say,
Repudiates them wholly.

Tue Tare oF Arcuars (1898), another under-
graduate effort, was described in the Cambridge Review
as “spurious romanticised mythology”; though in
the Combridge Megerine an enthusiast declared’ that

EARLY PERIOD, 1896-1907 37

“the author holds the first place latter-day
poets.” Amusingly enough dle Ovid Mae va
father impressed by this idge poet, remarking
that “ his song runs clear and free from the pollution
of sensuality."() The literary papers in London had
little to say, as might be expected. The Academy
noted “a certain command of facile rhythm.” The
Saturday Review discovered a “pleasant vein of
fancy,” but thought the poem “utterly lacked origin

i^

Sonos oF THE Spur was more widely noticed.
The Manchester Guardian was quite sympathetic :

A little book of unusual quality. . . . We have read it
ih admiration for its intense spay, a5 wel as for
"ical superiority, and wit thy for its spon-
a rederion of eerain moods that Mr. Crowley
with an utterance at once mysterious and vivi
1 « « The verse is free from obvious artifice and eccentricity,
t'is fiery and clear-measured and easy of phrasing...»
The glowing imagery seizes and holds fast the vagueness
of shifting impressions,

The Atheneum was nasty :

Difficult to read, and where they touch definite things,
more sensual than’ sensuous. We cannot say that these
verses deserve to be read,

‘The Church Times, heedless of history’s censure for
encouraging one who was to become a formidable
antagonist, issued a benediction :

purs

Ambitious verse, which, if we are right in supposing it
to be the work of youth, enables us to predict t
work from Mr. Crowley when his philosophy of life has
been matured.

Even the Granta, under a stately moral reserve,
did not disdain to encourage the young poet:

38 THE LEGEND OF ALEISTER CROWLEY

Though we cannot identify ourselves with the sentiments
expres in’ fa pages, wo mus acknowledge that the
poems show very considerable literary merit.

And the Literary Gazette spoke with heavy common
sense:

There is too much of the cant of a contest between
earthly and heavenly love in his pages... . A book of
wandering cries such as this we cannot regard as of much
significance. . . . We would advise him to be Jess intro-
spective.

JEPHTHAH (1898)

At the end of 1898 JerirHan was published and
apparently sent out for review in the usual manner.
Tt was taken quite seriously as giving promise of
good things to come. The critics seem to have
enjoyed their opportunity to teach a young poet his
business, The following extracts are characteristic :
Church Times —
snNot mete immatcty, but absolute rawness; al the
DEC pie np eph
disciple of Swinburne. . . . Mr. Crowley takes himself too
seriously ; itis the manner of precocious youth. Heis not
competent to settle all human problems with a lyric. . . .

Vanity Fair i—

We cannot say that there is no promise i the book.
‘At present it is all a rushing and rioting of words with
the vicious scorn of all the world thatthe young love.
But age and experience may do much, and Mr. Crowley
may write good poetry some day... Bathos and
banality! but the writer may improve,

Manchester Guardian ;—
If Mr. Swinburne had never written, we should all be
hailing Mr, Aleister Crowley as a very great poet indeed.

EARLY PERIOD, 1896-1907 39

Jephuhah isa lngely conceived end finely eneouted piece
‘work which alone is enough to prove Mr. Crowiey's
independent claim to the name of poet, It will be easier
to judge his orbit when he gets a little further away from
the giant planet that bas dawn him.

The Scotsman —

Jt is a work of no small power, the choral lyrics reachi
lA poo mil pere te conl ini dig
rather obscure theology with which the piece as a whole
i clouded» Ther ae many fae sosacts aad pecs

t carry one on by t feeling
musial language... . The. thoughts worthy, never
deep or simple, and the verse turns out to be a sort of
serpentine with coloured lights of feeling thrown
on from the outside,

Literary World —
If at times wanting in taste, Mz. Crowley has at least

indubitable singing power, and mastery of form. We
look with interest for Bis test work.

Morning Post :—

Melodious and eloquent, but it does not bear analysis,
and it reads more like a parody than zeal poet.
‘We gather from intrinsic evidence that the author is 3
and when he has sown his literary wild oats he may possibly
become a great poet.
Aberdeen Journal —

He has caught the spirit in the style of Swinburne, and

in some respects the pupil is greater than his master. If
occasionally his meaning i ncomprehensie i ceraaly

E

capt i very li

the smooth, majestic flow of his rhythms. He has handled

E
anticipate r. Aleister Crowley will in no

tong time take his placas an Eoglit poct of acknowledged

eminence,

4o THE LEGEND OF ALEISTER CROWLEY

Other papers joined in deploring his youth, and,
at the sme time, encouraged is future.” ‘The
Birmingham Gazette sums up:

... From the power and eamestness of the book
before us, we are inclined to favour his chances of the future.

From Sydney, New South Wales, came an Anti-
podean echo:

The high level touched at times is not always maintained,
but some of the songs are classical in their mournful melody.
Mr. Crowley will be heard of mote favourably yet, if he will
but sen in that prancing Pegasus of his-—Sydny Morning

"The Pall Mall Gazette alone expressed a positive
desire for the noe a aise whip. n

Mer. Crowley takes himself very seriously; he believes
he has a mission, he thinks there is at least a probability
that his poetry will make a stir in the world and among
posterity. We wish we could think so too. . . „but we
Ere compelled to forego this pleasant prospect and to state
‘our opinion that this poer's estimate of his own powe
js not at all likely to be shared by a large number of his
fellow men. We gather that Mr. Crowley is a young
mn. - The sigas of youth are present throughout the
volume, ‘Theres the customary homage to Mr. Swinburne,
and (alas !) the usual failure to write in his manner without
adopting his mannerisms. . .. We do not wish to dwell
unfavourably upon youthful affectations, . . . We would
not have devoted so much space to Mr. Crowley had
not some of the press criticisms of his previous publication
shown us that a certain number of our contemporaries
were at one time disposed to encourage him to persist in
his metcical exercises. . . «

Most honest of all, pethaps, was the Jewish World :

We confess to having experienced the utmost difficulty
in determining the merit and ing of Mr, Crowley's
work. . . . His talent is undeniable, but wholly misused
in a vaia quest after the incomprehensible.

EARLY PERIOD, 1896-1927 a
THE MOTHER’S TRAGEDY (1901)

By the time these fatherly reviews had appeared,
Crowley was in far countries, thinking of many other

ings, from Mexican volcanoes to Himalayan ava-
lanches. Nevertheless, a privately printed edition of
a new poem, Tre MOTHER’s TRAGEDY, appeared in
1901, keeping interest awake in his absence. The
book was discussed with vigour in the coteries.
Again, Cambridge attacked him and Oxford defended
him:

Cambridge Review :—

Tavidious as it may seem to deal hardly with a privately
printed book, courteously sent for review, this volume
demands an emphatic protest from all lovers of literature
and decency. Dedicated by as much i

it never deviates for one moment from its appointed task,
If, however, to the clean-minded man the book is revolting,
to the artist it is a monstrosity. Such thoughts as may
Jurk between its covers are, fortunately, concealed in
such a maze of intricate verbiage, that it is only here and
there that we catch a glimpse of the horrors that lie behind.

Oxford Magazine :—
Mr. Crowley has a claim to recognition as a true poet.
Most men who have thought deeply on life's prol
recognise that the current religion of nearly all their fellow
men is an idle mockery. . . . Mr. Crowley seems to hold
that the world is reeking with rottenness—and he is, to
a great extent, sight... . These daring verses contain
a large share of clemental truth. But we live in a
hypocritical age, sad apparently the author of these ex
ordinary poets realises the face, for his volume is privately
inted. -. . Magnificent poems—pagan in their intensit
Ed vividaem o£ colouring. T
Probably the same Cambridge undergraduate, or
one of his friends, damned the book unequivocally in
the Atheneum :

42 THE LEGEND OF ALEISTER CROWLEY

Mr. Aleister Crowley is a kind of middle-class Swinburne
at second hand, the scholarship, without the
splendid phrase, without che ardour of beauty. He has
a certain rhythmical fluency, and in that statement all his
literary merits are summed up. f the reader can form a
conception of a wind-bag foaming at the mouth, he will

t some notion of “The Mother's Tragedy,” and other

(privately printed). Even this mixed metaphor
will not convey to him the morbid unpleasantness of Mr,
Crowley’s taste in subjects. “The Mother's Tragedy "
is a drama of incest, crudely and violently treated, Some
of the shorter poems are worse.

At the same time a rather kindly appreciation
occurred in the Academy:

Tt is not long since we reviewed a book by Mr. Aleister
Crowley, and mingled blame with praise, like ^ Crusty
Christopher.” So we must still do; for ^ The Mother's
Tragedy” treads too hard on the heels of his previous
Talimc for say modiükatoo of the qualities we then
noted. There is the old vigour and boldness, the sinewy
phrase that takes you sea throat (as it were) and throttles
the praise out of also it is unkempt, wild, shatter-
ing in form, "aneLilfl in. coherent expeestión, profuse in
avi ind ending co structions as of old. For
many of these poems there is no word but, powerful
t it is (we might almost say) the power of insanity, so

itle is it under the author's own control, so contorted
and spasmodic is it, proceeding by vehement leaps and

her of speech, abrop thick and struggling
ute Sian saopaie a or cally

merano. Often sdmible a fore lic, eal
often eras its choked and imperfect expression.
ial cane t; tis turbid with meaning, only
too turbid at times. Yet this is a fault on the right

side. We would rather wrestle with Mr. Crowley's
obscurity (and be is often densely, faulty obscure, through
gings LIA DUO ET CE)
‘vacuity of most minor verse,
‘The poem ony fo ma maifesty reveals is own efit, «
Yet its sheer makes way through’ the
ded weigh olio dee, ule i is hou gave
and di, "The poct slusys kacws what be is 28
though the reader may oken desperstely ‘wish chat

EARLY PERIOD, 1896-1907 a

did. . . . Mr, Crowley, we may add, frequently expresses
things with all his ising completeness, which
port (to out minds) bad better leave unerpressed.

THE SOUL OF OSIRIS (1901)

In 1901, too, Kegan Paul published Tre Sour or
Osiris. The usual contradictory reviews appeared.
One critic wrote :

The power... which is undeniable, cannot hide
from us either its extreme unpleasantness or the gratuitously
offensive treatment. . . . There is a wearisome occurrence.
of all the ugly machinery with which the fleshly school
Of poctey has made us too familiar,

‘A copy reached New York, causing an enthusiast
to remark, in the New York Nation:

The and volume and the passionate intensity
de ie tal duh. iod Ct mee
as are d ient richness and visionary jour
che frequent richness and visionary splendour of
the imagery and the aptness and the transfigucing power
of the rhythms.

and a discovery was made in Plymouth :

We are compelled to read even where the subject matter
fails to attract, and we venture to think that in Aleister
Crowley we have found a poet, whose genius has yet to
unfold... . (Western Morning’ News, Plymouth.)

G. K. Chesterton, himself beginning to sparkle at
that time, perceived an opportunity to exercise both
his own teligious peodclictons ani bis capacity for
merry paradox, in an important article in the Daily
News, which is quoted extensively hereunder, together
with a rly subsequently published by Crowley as a
note to THE SworD oF Sonc:

44 THE LEGEND OF ALEISTER CROWLEY
SOUL OF OSIRIS

Articl by G. K. Chesterton. Daily News,

Jure 18th, 1901.

,.To the side of a mind concerned with idle merriment

there is ce: a in Mr. "s
regii Potete M Cdi
uit, and Ra, and Shu, and Hormskhu. They do not

seem to the English mind to lend themselves to pious

exhilaration. Mg, Crowley says in the sme poem:

“The burden is too hard to beat 5
I took too adamant a cross;
‘This sackcloth rends my soul to wear
My self-denial is as dross.
O, Shu, that holdest up the sky,
‘Hold’ up thy servant, lest he’ die!”

We have all possible respect for Mr. Crowley’s religious
symbols and we do not objec 19 Bis calling unon Sha at
any hour of the night. Only it would be unreasonable
of him to complain {£ his religous exercises were generally
mistaken for an effort to drive away cats,

Moreover, the poets of Mr. Crowley's school have,
among all their mec, some genuine intellecnal danger
from d to import religious, ti n
in Goda. That al creeds are sigiiócant and all Gods
divine we willingly apre. But this is rather a reason
for being content with our own than for attempting to
steal er The affectation in man) tn
mystics of ig an Oriental civilisation and mode of
thought must cause much harmless merriment, among

Orientals. The notion that a turban and a few
‘vows will make an Englishman a Hindu is quite on a par
with the idea that a black hat and an Oxford degree will
make a Hindu an Englishman. We wonder whether
our Buddi have ever read a florid letter

in Baboo /e suspect that the sid type of
document, is in reality exceedingly like the philosophic
essays written by Englishmen about the splendouss of

Eastern thought. Sometimes European mystics deserve
something worse than mere laughter at the hands of
Orientals. If ever was person whom honest Hindus
‘would have been justified ia tearing to pieces it was Madame
Blavatsky.

EARLY PERIOD, 1896-1907 4

That our world-worn men of art should believe for a
moment that moral salvation is possible and supremely
rnt js an unmixed beneft .. . I£ Mr,
the new mystics think for one moment that an Egyptian
desert is more mystic than an English meadow, that a
eater ea rie Do
temple o is more supernatural than a Baptist
in Brixton, then they are sectarians. But Melo
is a strong and genuine poet, and we have little doubt
that he wil work op font his a ation of the Temple
of Osiris to that loftier and wider work of the human
imagination, the appreciation of the Brixton Chapel.
To this Crowley replied, in a note to “The Sword
of Song” —

T must take the opportunity to protest against the cbar
brought by Me. Chesterton sgainse the “wi
rie philosophical essays oa the of Eastern
thought.”

If he confines his strictures to the translators of that
well-known Eastern work the “Old Testament” I am
with him; any modern Biblical critic wi i
I mean. Te took a long time,
(and Tommy Atkin) to discover
fn aby eue sympathy and inclipenee
in any case sympathy and int
the most salient qualities in either soldi
But nothing is more absurd than to compare men like
Sir W. Jones, Sir R. Burton, Voa Hammer-Purgstall,
Sir E. Arnold, Prof. Max Muller, Me, Prof. Rhyas Davids,
lane and the rest ef cor illurdous Oentilsts to the

X and ignorant Hindus whose letters occasionally
eight the edens of be i imes, sach loners
being usually written ra few pice in
the dative bozaar. As t P Babus " (Babu, I may mention,
i te epiniens o cor “mise” aad Got the came of
a savage tı . Chesterton, from his Brixton Brahma-
Joka, ‘Sy look forth and see that the “Babu” cannot
understand Western ideas; but a distinguished civil
servant in the Madras Presidency, second wrangler in a
very good year, assured me that he had met a native whose
mathematical knowledge was superior to that of the averag
seniot wrangler, and t he had met several othess Who
approached that standard. His specific attack on Madame

vatsky is equally unjust, as many natives, not theoso-

46 THE LEGEND OF ALEISTER CROWLEY

Jhists, have to me of her io the highest terms,
* Honest Hindus” cannot be expected to think as Mr.
Chesterton deems likely, as he is unfortunately himself a
Western, and in the same quagmire of misapprehension
as Prof. Max Muller and the Rest. Madame Blavatsky’s
‘work was to remind the Hindus of the excellence of their
owa shastras, to show that some Westerns held identical
ideas, and thus to countermine the dishonest representations
ef the mkan Iam scons, well oaen ar a

jitter opponent of “Theosophy” to risk nothing in
making these remarks.

T trust that the sense of public duty which inspires
these strictures will not be taken as incompatible with
the gratitude I owe to him for his exceedingly kind and
dispassionate review of my “Soul of Osiris."

would counsel him, however, to leave alone the Brixton
Chapel, and to “work up from his appreciation of the
“Soul of Osiris’ to that lofier and wider work of the
human imagination, the appreciation of the Sporting Times !

‘Mr. Chesterton thinks it funny that I should call upon
“Shu.” Has he that the Christian God maj
be most suitably invoked by the name “ Yah”? T
be sorry if God were to mistake his us enthusiasms
for the derisive ribaldry of the London “ " Similar
remarks apply to “ El” and other Hebrai-christian deities,

TANNHAUSER (1902)

Crowley returned to Europe at the end of 1902,
satani with a number of works for publication.
He writen TANNHAUSER in Mexico, and had
sent it to Kegan Paul for publication. It appeared
before his rerum from the Himalayas, and seems to
have been altogether too much for the professional
literateurs. The following attempts at criticism are
typical :

Pall Mall Gazette -—

Such magnificence of paper, print, and margia, that
we trust we are right in esming that he is possessed of

EARLY PERIOD, 1896-1907 E]

material wealth even greater than the wealth of languages,

which he displays so profusely throughout the volume,
With all het teases he nevertheless falls to str ws

at all deeply.
Daily Chronicle :—

We are not sure that Me. Aleister Crowley treats life
as a sacrament, because we do not understand him.

AHAB

Nothing daunted, he proceeded to have Aras
printed in original Caxton type which gave the critics

a simple excuse to declare Ives puzzled
Manchester Guardian :-—
Mr. Aleister Crowley's rious work has been eccentric,

and at the best be has done more to provoke curiosity
than to give confidence. Now he chooses to handicap
himself by printing his poems in a type that must
inevitably impose restrictions upon many readers,
Glasgow Herald —

Mz. Aleister Crowley, not content with the usual risk
of the neplect that threatens minor poets, has bad his
Verse sct up in what is apparently fa black-letter,
thereby tempting the most conscientious reviewer to
take his volume as read.

THE STAR AND THE GARTER

Puzzlement increased with the publication in the
same year of THe STAR AND THE GARTER, a poem
which combines elements of the lampoon with pro-
found metaphysics and simple “naughtiness.” ‘The
rovincial Preis gave a naive expression to the general
rilderment :

4» THE LEGEND OF ALEISTER CROWLEY
‘Bath Chronicle :—
A peculiar dissertation on love.
Arbroath Herald —
So clever that one finds some of it utterly unintelligible,
Even when understanding lags behind we read with
pleasure.

ALICE, AN ADULTERY

"This book at least was more intelligible, In a
series of sonnets, the poet describes faithfully and
lyrically an adultery, in Honolulu, day by day, for
the fifty days it lasted. The final parting is described
as follows :

“ So the last kiss passed like a poison-pain,
Knowing we might not ever kiss again.
Mad tears fell : ‘Next year!” in cruel distress
We sobbed, and stretched our arms out, and despaired,
‘And—parted. Out the brute-side of truth ;
‘Thank God I've finished with that foolishness |"

The work was published by the Society for the
Propagation of ions Truth at Boleskine, Inver-
ness, which caused Glasgow Herald to remark :

We confess to being so dense as to miss the essentially
religious purpose of tbe book. ... But the of
many of the sonnets is undeniable.
art of these lyrics, for their tender am
but admiration. .. -

Pious horror smote some moralist writing for the
Daily News :

He has a good deal of talent of a weak, neurotic, lyrical
kind, but it is purely derivative... . For matter, the

EARLY PERIOD, 1896-1907 5

author has turned to some unsavoury reminiscences of a

chance acquaintance, reminiscences which plead to be

forgotten, and which none but the very shameless would

dare to put into print. . . . Most of the book is in need

of what a poet bas called “the purging fire.” One ot

two single lincs are good. One or two stanzas have a
less derivative prettiness, . ..

But in the English Review, then in its hey-day, some
lover of poetry was moved to the following careful
piece of criticism :

These love songs of his have a wonderful ardour, and
almost Sapphic fury. They fash and shine with i
that are like little streaks of fame. . . . The verse with
which the book opens has all the hard brilliance and the
lustre which are characteristic of the writers work. The
‘opening picture breaks on the senses like a shaft of sudden
sunshine. . . . Among many things that occur to one in
ring Ma: Crowley vere i their singular diseversne
from the things of the day, their entire lack of what is
called “The Modern Note” in poetry. We must think
that he deliberately shut his eyes to the writings of the
intimate, romantic, impressionist school, or else.
could so susceptible an artist have escaped its infection ?

Another thing that is apparent is the fitfulness of his
inspiration. A journey through the garden of the poet's
verses has all the excitement aad the drawbacks of making
one’s way by means of the illumination of lightning.
‘There is a lot of darkness to a small proportion of extreme
brilliance, though, perhaps, as with all rare and superfine
things this is necessarily the case.

For the rest: great metrical force, rhythms so violent
as almost sometimes to exhaust themselves, and, in some
of the later work, a curious employment in his philosophy
of paradox...

THE SWORD OF SONG

This book is the outstanding work of Crowley's
early period. Its outward appearance is startling.
Five hundred copies only were printed. The bool

>

jo THE LEGEND OF ALEISTER CROWLEY

Xarslrgequano priaisdinsodssdblaciiteonghonts
The binding was in navy blue, with a gold design on
the front, consisting of the number “666” thrice
repeated in the form of a square. On the back cover,
in gold, the name Aleister Crowley appears trans-
literated into Hebrew characters, arranged in the
form of a sare to add up to 666. The number of
pages excluding introduction was 194, of which 62
pages contain the poems Ascension DAY and PENTE-
Cosr, with headlines and marginal notes and occasional
single lines rubricated. The remainder of the book,
132 pages, consists of notes on the poems and
appendices, the latter mainly an exposition and
criticism of Buddhist hilosophy. It may be that
posterity will consider this book amongst the greatest
Of Crowley's works. His contemporaries certainly
had little or no opportunity of appreciating it, The
few copies printed, though issued at the incredibly
low price of ros., could scarcely have been other
than a slow leaven. However, a few copies reached
the Press. G. K. Chesterton again took up bis
controversy with Crowley, printing a three column
seview of the book in the Daily News under the title
Ma. Cuowrrr AND THE Creeps. To this Crowley
replied in a pamphlet entitled A Circo o Errant:

THE SWORD OF SONG

Daily News, Sept., 1904.

Mr. Aleister Crowley has always been,
a good poct; his “Soul of Osiris,” written during an
Egyptian mood, was beiter poetry than chis Browningesque
rhapsody in 4 Buddhist mood ; but this also, though very
affected, is very interesting. But the main fact al
is that it is the expression of a man who has really found
Buddhism more satisfactory than Christianity.

‘Mg. Crowley begins his poem, I believe, with an earnest
intention to explain the beauty of the Buddhist philosophy ;

in my opinion,

EARLY PERIOD, 1896-1907 s

he knows a great deal about it; he believes in it. But
as he went on writing, one thing became stronger and
Stronger in his soul che living batted of Christianity. «~
Me, Crowley has got something into his soul stronger
even than the beautiful passion of the man who believes
in Buddhism; he has the passion of the man who docs
not believe in Christianity. He adds one more testimony
to the endless series of testimonies to the fascination and
vitality of the faith. . . . A casual carpenter wanders about
a string of villages, and suddenly a horde of rich men
tnd sceptics and Saddducees and respectable persons rushed
at him and nailed him up like vermin; then people saw
that he was a god. He had proved that he was not a
common man, for he was murdered. And ever since his
greed bas proved that ir is not a common hypothesis, for
it is hat

Next week I hope to make a fuller study of Mr, Crowley's
interpretation of Buddhism, for I have not room for it in
this column today. G. K. CHESTERTON.

Crowley’s reply was as follows

Our Author's main argument for the Christian religion
is that it is hated. To bring me as a witness to this colossal
enthymeme he kas the sutlime coumge to etste chat my
“Sword of Song * begins with an effort to expound
Buddhism, but that my hatred of Christianity overcame
me as I went on, and that I end up literally raving. My
book is possibly difficult in many ways, but only Mr.
Chesterton we have tried to understand it by reading.
it backward.

lt is surely oie eire fact that, Lind the end
ag pages are almost exclusively occupied with an atta
on Cleistinity as bitter and violent as I can make the
remaining x61 are composed of ($) an attack on materi

i) an essay in metaphysics opposing Advaitism; ()
© that fo denare the edle alog berean 2
‘canonical Buddhist doctrine and that of Agaosti

gaostics.
None of these deal with Christianity at all, save for a chance.
and casual word. I look forward with pleasure to a new
History of England, in which it will be pointed out how
the warlike enthusiasm aroused by the expedition
led to the disastrous plunge into the Boer War; disastrous
because the separation of the Transvaal which resulted
therefrom left us so weak that we fell an easy prey to
William the Conqueror. . . .

42 THE LEGEND OF ALEISTER CROWLEY

But to the enthymeme itself. A word is enough to
expose it. Other things have been hated before and
since Christ lived,—if he lived. Slavery was hated. Does

Our Logician therefore the vitality of slavery?
Does the fact that a cobra is alive prove it to be
innocuous? . . «

With the reported murder of Jesus of Nazareth I am
not concemed. Surely Our Fid. Def. will find little
suppor in his chim on behalf of death.. We all die.

he two theres were “mailed up like vermin r on either
side of Christ by precisely the same people; are d
Gods? "To found a religion on the fac of death, murder
though it were, is bardly more than African fetichism,
Does death prove more than life? Will Mr. Chesterton
never be happy until he is hanged? . . . |

But he knows as well as I zm thete are chonsande
in this country who woul see him writhing in
eternal torrare — that physiological impossbility—for his
Word “a casual carpenter,” albeit he wrote it in reverence,
‘That is the kind of Christian I would hang. . . .

Pagicript-—On the appearance of his article “Mr.
Crowley and the Creeds" I signified my intention to
reply. It aborted his attack on me, and he has not since
been heard of.

In the midst of the words be was trying to sa),

Te e mida i Mm

He bas softly and. vanished avay —
I suppose I always was a bit of a Boojum!

It is worth recalling that only 500 copies of the
book were printed. Obviously the public could
form no firsthand opinion of the merits of the book.
People who managed to view a copy were perhaps
mor astonished by the extemal cocentriciies of the
work than by its undoubtedly serious religious import.
The poetry itself, to say the least, is spectacular.
Some of it was written on the Baltoro Glacier, while
Crowley was recovering from malatia()) at a height of
Over 22,00 fet. ln parts it is distinctly collo-
quial, eg.

EARLY PERIOD, 1896-1907 s5

“ No Yogi shot his Chandra so.
‘Will Christ return? What ho? What ho!”

Frequently the poet is baldly sceptical :

an iron word
I formulate my thought than I
Perceive the same to be absurd.”

At times the rhyming virtuosity is breath-taking,
Immured in his snow-covered tent, with a copy of
Browning’s Collected Works by his side, the poet
was able to amuse himself, between chess games, by
finding rhymes for such words as " refuge," " rever-
ence,” “country,” “virgin,” “courtesan,” “ Euri-
pides,” * Aristophanes," Zschylus," "t Aischulos,"
* Sophocles,” ** Aristobulos," “ Alcibiades,” “ for-
tress,” “unfashionable,” “sandwich,” “perorate,”
“silver,” “bishop” (eight rimes for this word),
“ Sidney ” (three rimes for this), “ maniac,” “ Levi-
ticus," ^ Cornelius," “ Abramelin,” “ Brahmacharya,”
“Kismet,” “ Winchester,” “ Christ Church,” “ Wor-
ship,” “ Chesterton,” “ Srotapatti,” “ Balliol,” ete.

‘Phe marginal notes are provocative :

“What is truth? said jesting Pilate: but Crowley waits
for an answer.”

Buddha rebukes Poet.

Poet defies his uncle.

Sporting offer!

‘Who pardons Judas?

Creator in Heaven suffers Hell's owing to
reproaches of bard. EIE

Jesus dismissed with a jest.
How clever I am!

Crowley dismissed with a jest.
Bard checkmates himself.

s« THE LEGEND OF ALEISTER CROIFLEY
Bard is pleased with himself.
Some poetry.
Pontius Pilate as a Surrey magistrate.
The footnotes are equally provocative, e.g.:

Eton—A school, noted for its breed of cads, The
Battle of Waterloo (1815) was won on its playing fields.

Christ Andi. —hod I tell you frankly that if he does
‘not come back by the time I have finished reading these
proofs, I shall give him up.

"The full title of the work is
Tue Sworp oF SONG
Called by Christians
THe Boor oF THE Beast

He refers in the text to those who, taking a hint
from his mother,

By all sorts of monkey tricks
Add up my name to six six six.

and, as one accepting destiny, he boasts

Ho, T adope the number., Look., ,
t the quaint this book
T will deserve i ET can:

Tr is the number of a Man.

It only remains to add that, at publication, copies
were sent to all living persons mentioned in the book,
accompanied by the following circular letter :

Leners and Telegams: Boirsrmws Fors i suficient

Bills, Wits, Summonses, etc.: Caup XI, Tre Barono
Gracen, BALTISTAN.

© Millionaire! My lord Marquis,
Me. Editor My lord Viscount,
Dear Mrs. Eddy, My lord Earl,

Your Holiness the Pope My lord,

EARLY PERIOD, 1896-1907 55

Your Imperial Majesty My lord Bishop
Your Majesty | f Reverend Sir,
Your Royal Highness ! EN

Dear Miss Corelli Fellow,

Your Serene Highness | Dog!

My lord Cardinal, Mr. Congressman,

My lord Archbishop, Mr. Senator,

‘My lord Duke, Mr. President,
Vor. the feminine of any of these), as shown by
underlining it,

Courtesy demands, in view of the

tribute to your

f

sack on Jour fa political

4
dmm
©)

a
epus od jong,
that T'ahould send you a ID. as 1 do herewith, to give

you an opporinty of, defending espe aginst my
monstrous assertions, thankin advertisement,
Orin short, replying as may Eas tect yon to a

the case,
Your humble, obedient servant,
‘Aumsren Ckowuty.

Probably no book of Crowley’s so completely
reveals the complexity and perverseness of his
character. A copy seems to have reached a con-
tributor to the Yorkshire Post, who commented :

Me. Crowley's poetry, if such it may be called, is not
fate, in its form. It ts more n
on e old Lee, ad sma tat
oo e all Lene, di tatur che
Sy essai ay, ph qiie oe,
is directly addressed, but even every serious-minded man
of any religion whatsoever. . . . And yet Mr.
Ek pere iei t I ghe form and tone of

6 THE LEGEND OF ALEISTER CROWLEY

Another contributor, to 57. James's Gazette, summed
up as follows :

‘A jumble of cheap profanity, with clever handling of
meo and thyme. Chretanhy wil surrive--bur the
authors reputation may not be so fortunate.

The rationalist Literary Guide adequately expressed
the bewilderment of all readers who were able to
obtain the book :

“The Sword of Song " is a masterpiece of learning and
sadre. In light and quaint or verse all philoso-
phical systems are dis dismissed.
part of the book, written in prose, deals with possible
means of research, so that we may progress from the
unsatisfactory state of the sceptic to a real knowledge,
founded on scientific method and basis, of the spiritual
facts of the Universe.

It is not easy to review Me. Crowley, One of the most
brilliant of contemporary writers. . » . Mr. Crowley's
short in particular reveal the possession of a
beautiful and genuine vein of poetry, which, like the
precious metals, is at times scarcely discernible among
the rugged quartz ia, which it is embedded. „With a
true poetic feeling allied to remarkable learning, and
Wich a pretty wit of his own, Me. Crowley is well equipped
for produciog a work of permanent value. . . . Good
work may be found in “The Sword of Song," but there
js even more which will arouse in the average reader (to
whom, however, Mr. Crowley obviously does not appeal)
no other feeling than one of sheer bewilderment, Some-
times an oasis of beauty will reveal the authors power
to charm, the good-humoured tism will tic d
fancy, the quaint allusiveness of the notes will raise the
eyelid of wonder. . . . With regard to the prose portions
of the volume, the essay on “Science and Buddhism ”
reveals some penetrating touches; but we have to confess
that the discourse on “ Ontology” baffles our compre-
hension. ‘The poetical epilogue is beautiful and con-

EARLY PERIOD, 1896-1997 5
WHY JESUS WEPT

Only 500 copies of this dramatic poem were printed.
The work was written in Ceylon, and is a satire on
English society, dedicated to Mr. G. K. Chesterton,
amongst others, including Christ and the poet’s
unborn child. Mr, Chesterton appears as a person
in the drama, as a deity presiding at a meeting of
Plymouth Brethren :

Above, with an olive branch in one hand and a copy of
the Daily News in the other, floats Me, G. K. Chesterton
in the ‘position Padmasana [ie "los" posiion, in
which Buddha is commonly represented às siti
Fiata, singing "Beneath he Com of Jens wih
"Voice, and attempting" God Save the Queen!” with the
other ia & fashion calculated to tura anj marine, if but be
be filed with honourable ambition to excel inthe traditional
exploits of his comps, green with envy.

When one of the Brethren mentions “ The Baptist
minister at Brixton” there is a stage direction (“ Mr.
Chesterton executes the cake walk”), Crowley thereby
accepting a challenge made to him by Chesterton in
the review of the Sout or Ostris.

Only one teview seems to have appeared of this
book, which is, by the way, far from blasphemous
in any intelligent sense of the term, and is really an.
expression, very vivid, of a poet’s sensitive hatred of
all the shams and cruelties of a prurient pseudo-
Christian society: summed up in the epilogue :

I say what I have seen ill-done
In honest clean lived Albion.

38 THE LEGEND OF ALEISTER CROWLEY

So much clean paper with such toil
By Kandy Lake in faz Ceylon.

ve my old pyjamas on
I sake my sols om Dean's dus:
And when $ mustah, yon si

vi Jou suppose
Bren T most H-1 hold ny o €
T know ni pea redd rl
Farewell, my decent minded friends!
T know arc lights from candle-ends.
Farewell! A sco

An honest love, a
Gan show Bin berue? words than this;
Nor will he come again to yours

While be knows champak stars from sewers,

The poem was too much even for the supposedly
“emancipated” Literary Guide which commented :

Te isa work which, as far as pious innocence is concerned,
should be kept strictly under lock and key... . The
E inglng of ribldr, indeencr, poetry and vit
could be perpetated by n9 oae but Mr Crowley; and
Certainly fo other author wouid issue, under his own
Samne, sach a rachleap violation, of epaveationaliies, , The
is s. Crowley's rampant vir not always
tale a commendable tuto, and many readers will regret
hat his genius has been given so loose a range,

OTHER EARLY WORKS

These included THe ArGonaurs (1904), ORACLES,
Orpxeus AND Rosa Munpt (1905), and GARGOYLES
(1906). he following reviews of the ARGONAUTS
will serve as summary of Press opinion of his work
at this period :

Literary World :—

We have read from the beginning to the end, sometimes
with amazement, sometimes with amusement, sometimes

EARLY PERIOD, 1896-1907 9

with admiration, We are puzzled to know how it comes
to pass that a writer capable of what is best in the
“ Argonauts” can possibly put into print what is worst.
+ +» Tt is a great pity that Mr. Aleister Crowley's muse is
50 capricious.

Manchester. Guardian :—

Beginning with a feeling of
vege into genuine interest. The admirable thing
is the author’s skill as 2 craftsman in verse. In blank verse
he shows an easy and assured grace of stjle, and the lyrical
portions are distinguished by exquisite metrical beauty.
+ « « In spite of his oddities, he possesses a real and rare
Poetical gift.

judice, we are soon

THE STAR IN THE WEST

Jo 9j Crowley was again in the Himalaya, on
the Kangchenjunge expedition. In 1906, he was
engaged in a wall across China, accompanied by his
wife and child; in 1907 he was sojourning among the
desert tribes of Morocco, with the Earl of Tankerville
as a companion, During these three years, his
Coutzcrep Works appeared in three india-paper
volumes, one each year. Simultaneously, an “ Essay
Competition ” was announced in a circular issued
the Society for the Propagation of Religious Troti
(Boleskine), headed as follows:

The Chance of the Year!
‘The Chance of the Century ! !
"The Chance of the Geologic Period! ! 1

The circular offered a prize of £100 for an essay
on the works of Aleister Crowley. The CorxrCrEb
Works were offered to bona fide competitors for the
sum of 5s. each volume, a bargain price indubitably.
Naturally the Press perceived + good opportunity for

6» THE LEGEND OF ALEISTER CROWLEY

sarcasm at the expense of the Society for the Pro-
pagation of Religious Truth” The Mencbster
‘rier :

‘This method of propagating minor poetry is not more
remackable than the pa ication of sich poetry by the
lociety.

Nevertheless, one notable competitor entered for,
and eventually ‘won, this strange competition— Capt.
J. F.C. Fuller of the Oxfordshire Light Infantry,
and now (1930) at the War Office. His winning
essay was published separately in 1907 under the
title of Tue Srax iw THE Wesr. To say the least,
it is as unusual a work of criticism as has ever been
written about any poet in any place or time. There
was no question of “damning with faint praise.”
‘The gallant Captain’s prose style thunders like a

regiment of cavalry in full charge :

Tr has taken 100,000,000 years to produce Aleister
Crowley. The world bas indeed laboured, and fus at
last brought forth a man. ... Crowley has twisted a
subtle cord, on which he has suspended the universe, and
winging it round has sent the whole fickle word conception
of these excogitating spiders into those realms which lie
behind Time and beyond Space. He stands on the virgin
rock of Pyrrhonic-Zoroastrianism, which unlike the Hindu
world-conception, stands on neither Elephant nor Tortoise,
but on the Absolute Zero of the metaphysical Qaba-
lists.

The question now is, what is Crowleyanity or Pyrrhonic-
Zoroastrianism? and the answer is as follows:

“Hosanna to the Son of David! Blessed is He that
cometh in the name ofthe Lord. Hosanna in the highest!”
For this day there has been born in Albion a greater than
David Hume, and a more illustrious than David Huime,
even had he been genuine.

‘od he shall be called “Immanuel,” that i “God with
us,” or being interpreted Aleister Crowley, the spiri
soa of Immanuel whose sumame was Cam] >

EARLY PERIOD, 1896-1907 6:
Again :

From the silver goblet of laughter, that leaden cup of
‘weeping, have the nations drunk the dregs of many Teas:
for the woman arrayed in purple and scarlet, and decked
with pearls and precious stones, hath made them drunk
‘on the golden cup of her abominations, on the wine of
her fornications, on the filthy philtses of her whoredoms ;
and they have become truculent, and boisterous, and mad ;
cloaking the silken nakedness of the day with their woollen
shroud of darkness, and seeking in the depths of night
the mysteries of everlasting light.

© Dweller in the Land of Uz, thou also shalt be made
drunken, but thy cup shall be hewn from the sapphire of
the heavens, and thy wine shall be crushed from the clusters
of innumerable stars; and thou shalt make thyself naked,
and thy white limbs shall be epashed with the, purple
foam of immortality. Thou shalt tear the jewelled tassels
from the purse of thy spendthrift Fancy, and shalt scatter
to the winds the gold and silver coins of thy thrifty
Imagination; aad the wine of thy Folly shalt thou shower

idst the braided locks of laughing comets, and the
glittering cup of thine Ilusions shalt thou hurl beyond
E confines of Space over the very rim

rime,

Thou O secker after Wisdom, and Virtue, and multiscient.
Truth, thou O wanderer in the groves of Eleusis, thou,
qe dn ii lak of he wine of Icy od hy erg

as a trit set ; and beryi, an
tmethytt fork a the cup of and of Heroes, and
of Gods. Then all the absint ness of thine heart
shall vanish midst the chaunting of souls lost in the ocean
of understanding for ever and everlasting.

After two more paragraphs in this vein, the chapter
from which this excerpt is taken ends as follows :

O wine of Iacchus, O wine, wine, wine.

Lam fjr from alleging that the whole of Captain
Fuller’s book sustains the thetoric of the excerpts
quoted. Most of his pages are concerned with what
might be called a straightforward account of Aleister

6: THE LEGEND OF ALEISTER CROWLEY

Crowley's poetic and philosophical achievements.
‘Tue Srar IN THE West will always be readable, if
only for the extensive quotations of lyrics
Crowley’s own works which glitter in its pages. The
philosophical exposition of “Crowleyanity” is
often pedantically elementary; and like most
expositions of a , philosophers thought, is not
at all to be preferred to the original it ex-
pounds,

At the same time, viewing Captain Fuller’s work
in retrospect, one cannot but feel that his reaction to
Crowley's poetry had been a most spontaneous and
passionately sincere gesture, which only a very gallant
man could have had the courage to make. Very few
military officers, one presumes, would have the
courage, greater than that required in “ Seeking the
bubble n even in the cannon's mouth," to
accept and acclaim publicly a poet such as Crowley
in terms such as those used by Captain J. F. C. Fuller.
THE Sran 1N THE West, over-enthusiastically written
as it was, Was a brave book. Deep had called to
deep. Two manly men, an explorer and a soldier,
were now conjoined in an effort to acclaim Ecstasy,
Dionysian ecstasy, as a poetic and human goal—for
the English! In a desert of stolidity, dullness, and

uritan timidity, this mountain torrent suddenly
egan thundering. However, the desert soaked up
the torrent, and remained a desert.

L repeat. In 1907 Aleister Crowley, with Captain
Faller as aide de camp, could have formulated a wa
out for the English from the complete moral, poetical,
and spiritual sloth into which the nation had de-

‘erated since the days of its high Elizabethan glory.

ft was Crowley who wrote :
We are the poets! We are the children of wood and
stream, of mist and mountain, of sunand wind! Weadore

EARLY PERIOD, 1896-1907 5

the moon and the stars, and go into the London streets
at midnight seeking Their kisses as our birthright. We
are the Greeks—and God grant ye all, my brothers, to
be as happy in your loves! and to us the rites of Eleusis
should open the door of Heaven, and we shall enter and
see God face to face.

. 8 8 * n

Under the stars I go forth, my brothers, and drink of
that lustral dew; I will return, my brothers, when I have
seen God face to face, and read within those eternal eyes
the secret that shall make you free.

"Then will I choose you and test you and instruct you
in the Mysteries of Eleusis, oh ye brave hearts, and cool
{Zes and trembling lips} Í will put a live coal upon youe
ips, and flowers upon your eyes, and a sword in
Jut has and e ho s we God de to

ace
‘Thus shall we give back its youth to the world, for like

tongues of triple fame we shall brood en the Great.

Deep—Hail unto the Lords of the Groves of Eleusis |

The “test” failed, or appeared to fail—for the
whole of history is not yet written. It is no matter
for surprise, now that the Victorian Age, and even
the Edwardian Age, is fading in the memory of the
Oldest Inhabitants; now that we are able to realise
what damage nineteenth century commercialism really
did to poetry, that Florence Fart could have expected
all the hydra-heads of Public Opinion to move with
the single purpose of denouncing Aleister Crowley
and all his works. He was indeed too remarkable
for that unremarkable age. Not a product of the
age, but potentially its scourge. Like Daniel, Captai

‘uller had seen mystically a Writing on the Wall;
but he could not make the English Belshazzars see
that vision.

‘A true commentary upon the relation of Aleister
Crowley as Poet to his public at his time is contained
in a naive criticism of THe Star in THE Wess, which
appeared in the Daily Chronicle in 1907 :

64 THE LEGEND OF ALEISTER CROWLEY

Here is a master voice in song, and none the less masterly
because of its being unknown. It bas rarely fallen to
the lot of a man to be the author of 32 books, ranging in
prices from two guineas to half a crown each, and to have
à book of 327 pages written about his work, and still be
án unknown voice in the land. ln this fact alone these is
a certain kind of distinction, the greatness that comes of
being gre. Such is Mr, Aleister Crowley.

Cuarrer II
THE “EQUINOX” PERIOD
1908-1914

Ir we remember that Aleister Crowley is a poet, both
in his work and in his life, and that his preoccupation
with “Magick” during’ the days of the famous
EQutnox was a fulfilment of his promise, previously
pated, to “ give back its youth to the world,” we
shall understand better what happened during his
“Equinox Period.” Until 1907, his bad
been mainly poetical, that is not /echnically concerned
with Magick as such. To this statement there are
of course exceptions. The GoErIA oF SOLOMON THE
Kine, definitely a technical treatise on Magick,
had been published as early as r904. Two years
earlier he had published an elucidation of the Tarot
entitled Asprostt Mact Hortus Rosarum. There
is also some technical exposition of Magick in THe
Sworp or Soxc. Nevertheless his numerous pub-
lications could be described more generally as poetry

than as Magick, if we are to separate the terms.
During the inox Period ” his predilection was
ind of practical

definitely for ick; perhaps as a
poetry. "Neat of is Britis during this period
show a preoccupation, much more marked than
previously, with what is loosely termed the '* occult."
‘The EQUINOX 3] in ten volumes, two a year,
at the vernal autumnal equinoxes, from 1909
to 1913. There has never been anything at
6s x

66 THE LEGEND OF ALEISTER CROWLEY

comparable to it in the history of English literary
journalism. “It may be hazatded roundly,” said

It. Harold Monto in the Poetry Review, “that the
whole of the Equinox is a creation of the amazing
Mr, Crowley. His antics are as wild as the devil’s,
he dances through its pages like a mad magician.
It is a sort of enchanted variety entertainment. I
cannot discover when it is not serious.”

This is a very fair statement of the reception which
might have been expected for the Equinox in
“cultured ” literary circles. There were, however,
other less disinterested parties for whom the Equinox
was little short of a nightmare. The professional
occultists were first startled, and then terrified by its
brilliancy, violence, aad ruthlessness in exposing their
inadequacies. Legal action was resorted to in order
to restrain it, if possible. This failing, a campaign
of unparalleled scurrility was initiated apropos
of ceremonial public performances of the “ Rites of
Eleusis.” Meanwhile, contemptuously ignoring dis-
tractions, “the amazing Mr. Crowley” continued to
bring out the Equinox, portly volume after portly
volume, all beautifully printed and bound in white
and gold, transcending any possible criticism, beyond
all normal categories, whether literary or occult.

KONX OM PAX

In the summer of 1908 Crowley went for a walk
across the wilder parts of Spain, accompanied by the
young poet Victor B. Neuburg. His physical energy
in all its abundance of virility seems to have positively
required these strenuous expressions. Nevertheless,
his publications were not in abeyance. In that same
year appeared Konx om Pax, a series of “Essays in

“ EQUINOX” PERIOD, 1908-1914 6

n ht," consist of a short story, a dramatic skit, a
ilosophie j^ and a collection of lyrics. “A
e e ie ls may be quoted:
St, Paul the Hill of Mars
“To o aded “Athenians ;
But I would rather talk to the stars
‘Than to empty headed Athenians.

a colt,
To ery a crusade with ^ Deus Vult "—
But yon won't get much of a good result

From empty headed Athenians.

Less concretely, the author forestalled possible
criticisms ;

The light wherein I write is not of reason it is aot

the darkness of untesson ; it is the L. V. X. of that which,
fast mastering and then taanscendin the reason, illumines
all the darkness caused by the ce of the opposite
waves of thought . ovetlesping their limitations,
Å thing is not necessarily A or not A. Teis absurd to

say of Virtue that itis Greea or not Green ; for virtue has
nothing to do with colour. It is one of the most
guggestive definitions of KONX—the LVX of the

‘of the Rosy Cross—that it transcends all these

its of opposites. Nor does this sound nonsen-
gis to those who are acquainted with that LVX, But to

those who do not, it must (I fear) remain as

ridiculous as spherical trigonometry to the inhabitants of

Despite this postulated transcendence of academic
logic, the book remains and will remain one of the
most “ readable ” of Crowley’s works. Five hundred
copies wete printed, and the book is utterly un-
obtainable nowadays, Apart from whatever may be
its setious purpose, it may be readily classified as a

icce of exquisite humorous literature, to say the
least. Even Join Bull enjoyed the jokes, not having,
apparently, at that time lost his sense of humour:

68 THE LEGEND OF ALEISTER CROWLEY
The author is evidently that rare combination of genius
zs bomo tnd. plore, I was moved to

so much laughter that I barely escaped a convulsion.

The Literary Guide, beginning, no doubt, to be
more aftaid of Crowley than of the legitimate an-
tagonists of the Rationalist Press Association, spoke
under a strange reserve :

Verbal fireworks. A wild and wasteful heterogeneous
collection of weird words... . Still, one cannot but
admire the author's ofimes skilful jugglery with words
and his kaleidoscopically changing humour, even though
one deplores his prodigality.

The Scotsman was disconcerted :

This disconcerting volume of nebulous disquisitions in
amorphous prose, relieved at intervals by verses which
are formally musical, but substantially inconsequential and
imme... A rambling miscellany which along with
much quizzing and much nonsense, vaguely reflects some
Of the idea o£ he day, Mor tolerable ia its verse
than in its prose, for a poct is not expected to be sensible,
Readers who are already acquainted with the writings of
Mr. Aleister Crowley need not be told that his imagination
dispors itself in a manner calculated to stun the middie
es.

A junior reporter on the Perthshire Courier grappled
in vain with the problem of Crowley, and justified his
opening description of the “ Athenians.”

What can one really say about a production such as
this? The first one is. to ask What
is it all about? Ar best it looks like one big sneer at the
Christian faith. There is a great deal that is undoubtedly
smart and clever, revealing at times real genius, but pre-
sented in such a chaotic mystic rigmarole that tbe reader
must needs stop his ears. . . . There is some marvellous
verse, but there is more in it to deplore than to admire,
We cannot conceive how a man with the culture of Mr.
Crowley could sit down and write and see put into print

“ EQUINOX” PERIOD, 1908-1914 $

of the stanzas, This shelf
some of the stanzas. “This is essentially a top shelf book,

LIBER 777

Qa s difficult bi see how Crowley could have had

is impressive Dictionary of Com-

tive Re per The Occult Review declared that

Feontains as auch information as many sa intelligent

reader at the Museum has been able to collect in

years. This book, too, is unobtainable nowadays,

and is much sou sht after by students of the “ Qabal-

istic” systems, ¢ work is thus described by the
writer in the Occult Review :

. This work has only to come under the notice of
the right people to be sure of a ready sale. Ia its author's
words, it represents “an attempt to systematize

the data of mysticism and the results of comparative
religion,” and so fc as any book can succeed in such an
attempt, this book E thats to say, it condenses
in some sixty pages as much information as many an
ilias reader at the Morem bus teca se io ele
The bool consists of a table of

‘The Cabalistic information is very full, and there are
tables of and Hindu deities, as well as of colours,
perfumes, plants, stones, and animals, ‘The information

i cy exceeds that to be
voted exclusively. to, those
be ir with

and ‘chssic texts.

credit alike to him and bis printer... Much that has
been jealously and foolishly kept secret in the past is here,

‘The Buddhist Review, however, did not take kindly
to the work :

70 THE LEGEND OF ALFISTER CROWLEY

No Buddhist would consider it worth while to pass

from the egstalline clearness of his own scligon vo this
wwolved obscurity. Some of the language is extremel
d guage

THE EQUINOX APPEARS

In the same year appeared the first two volumes
of Crowley’s prodigious periodical, of which Frank
Harris wrote in Vanity Fair :

‘Tux Equinox is permanent in its stately size and type,
continuous in its periodical character, permanent—in the
value of its contents,

‘The anti-thaumaturgic thaumaturges of the Ration-
alist Press Association were unequivocally hostile in
the Literary Guide :

Espensively printed lunacy, astrology, etc, in oriental-
ocidental jargon. T

The editor of Light, official Spicitualist organ, was
seriously perturbed, and feared the worst in a pon-
derous editorial :

A DIAKKA PUBLICATION

Jr easily takes rank as the most vigorous swearer and
blasphemous in modern literature. Moreover
its swearing and blasphemy are splendidly done, with
immense style and glorious colouring. Its contributors
certainly know how to write, ti occasionally they
femind one of certin efforts’ that have emanated,
lunatic asylums of imaginati
riotous language are by no means unknown, But
underneath all, there is a buge wealth of knowledge, a
few indications of serious. flow of occult
thought. Yet with all its “ illuminism ” it is so much of

“ EQUINOX” PERIOD, 1908-1914 n
4 socks tbt ve eve beiee we he gue cé Megha

- The Egino is pe is put forth with a certain
EATA in competence.
AIL we say i that they remind us and Jingles,
and occasionally of Colney Hatch. . . . The reference to
bitch muse end the chaodk mismie may possibly help to
explain the rumours of devil worship which were persistent
ot long ago. | Perhaps we have here the key to that

The point of view of the “man in the street,” or
in other words of the paragraphists of the daily papers,
was presented by, for example, the Morning :

A, mysterious publication called," The Equinoz/ the

offic onan eA”. ejut ire lel

ep eodd Tein a sort of thing no fellow
ede ichers vaguely out of the confusion
that it deals with such things as TED rim

and so on; but what the special line is, remains a baffling
. From frequent references to some peo people
called The Brothers of the A. A". one gather thet they
havea lot to do with this weird venture; buta grim perusal
of an article purporting to explain the Order.
‘one without any real clue as to their identity. True, the
Chief of the Brothers is definitely named, his name being
“V.V.V.V.V.” but ive V's, of even six V's, do not strike
one as being a name likely to be well known at any local
ue sgn Bet al kinds of eateruinmens in
a Equinox ya » Poetry a iow, but
it is uncomfortable reading ss. n

A
The second number contains the first instalment of

what was to become a sensational “exposure” of
the rituals of a quasisecret society known as the
Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn. The “ Neo-
hyte” ritual was published at great length, with
Eey-four diageama Htusteative of the myserica A
farther seies of “revelations ” was promised. Coa-
stemation overwhelmed the ‘membels of the Golden
wn.

|

71 THE LEGEND OF ALEISTER CROWLEY

Daring this yeas, it should be mentioned in passing,
Crowley undetock an expedition to the Sabati
accompanied by V. B. Neuburg. The latter, with
Captain Fuller, laa become intimately associated with
the detailed work of producing the Equivox.

MATHERS vs. CROWLEY

Equmox No. 3 was due to be published on March
21st, 1910. Ten days before this date Crowley was
served with a writ of summons, issued on behalf of
S. L. Mathers, which claimed an injunction.

Restraining the defendant, his servants, and agents
from printing, publishing, or causing to be printed or
Bibs in the third number of the book. or magazine

mown as the Equmox or otherwise disclosing any matter
relating to the secrets, forms, rituals, or transactions of
a certain order known as the Rosicrucian Order, of which
the plaintif was the Chief or Head. (Times Law Reports.)

On March 14th, Mathers obtained ex pare an interim
injunction to restsin Crowley, as proprietor ad

itor of the Equinox, from publishing the secret
rituals and ceremonies of the Rosictucian Order;
stating in his affidavit that he was the Chief or Head
of that Order, and. that the exclusive copytight of
the rituals, ceremonies, and manuscripts of the Order
were vested in him, he being founder and compiler
ofthem. The injunction was granted on March 18th.

On March 21st, the day of the equinox, Crowley
appealed before Lord Justice Walliams, Lord Justice

foulton, and Lord Justice Farwell. The Court
allowed his appeal, and the Equxox duly appeared at
the Equinox.

The case was widely reported in the Press as a
principal “news story.” There had been much

“ EQUINOX” PERIOD, 1598-1914 »

laughter in Court, particularly when the affidavit of
Mathers was read; and when counsel passed up to
their Lordships a copy of the Equrvox, drawing their
attention to the following paragraph (written by
Capt. Fuller) :
weed, the chime of his mind, locked in the
SB diadowy Sun Dad ‘be hisses boat S
the higher he bal qute (oy i of Fs prison, the
is 1
louder he howls for lbetty. «> is a plough
he wants more fields to till; ‘if a physi
to cure; if a priest, more souls to sive; if a soldier, more
Counties to conquer; if a lawyer, more wretches to

Counsel for Mathers urged at one point that irre-
arable injury would be done “because the cat will
out of the bag.” Lord Justice Williams remarked :

“a great deal of the cat came out of the bag in

September (laughter) Lord Justice Farwell added :

“And I think it is a dead cat (laughter).”

Together with full reports of the action, the Press
further “ revealed ” the secrets of the Rosicrucians,
copying them from the liberated Equmox. The
whole episode was a definite win for Crowley, and
one presumes that the frustrated Brethren of the
Golden Dawn gnashed their teeth impotently and
bided their time-

MORE BOOKS OF POETRY

The year 1910 was full of incident. In addition to
the publication of Nos. 3 and 4 of the Equinox,
Crowley arranged a series of ceremonial performances
of the Rites of Eleusis at Caxton Hall in October-
November. These were attacked in the sensational

74 THE LEGEND OF ALEISTER CROWLEY

Press in terms which led to the libel action of early
1911, which will be described later. Meanwhile, he
published three impressive and beautifully printed
Polumes of poetry, Tae WINGED BEETLE, AMBERGRIS,
and Tue BAGH-I-MUATTAR.

Of Tae Wixcep Brerze, an excited writer in the
Occult Review declaimed as follows :

In the face of the whole horde of reviewers, critics,
and in the face of the British public, I declare that Aleister
Crowley is among the first of living English poets. It
will not be many years before this fact is generally. is
and duly appreciated. . . . What is not least remarkable
is his amazing variety. « The range of his subjects is
almost infinite . . . bis poems are r e with the white
heat of ecstasy, the i desire of the Overman
towards his ultimate consummation, reunion with God.

AwmenGRIS was, on the whole, well reviewed, the
Nation paying him the compliment of passionate

sincerity :
Precisely what des of he professes, we
Se speci of pn he profes we
immense; it is the hir of his whole thought. To us,

its importance is simply, that it caris bim en ineo
excellent poetry. ... ` A very casual glance will convince
SNe Crowley ie as

anyone with understanding, eyes that

nately possessed by his theme as any poet has ever

VP PES esee a coorant achievement of
le poetry.

In a long critical article published in the Australian
pers, the poet and critic, A. G. Stephens, made a
\dsome tribute :

“EQUINOX” PERIOD, 1908-1914 5

2, All readers of verse now hat there i ea-postry and
tye poetry. Crowley makes both to

eg and © ea, Aire oper enun ts
ets si »

Euta coloured apes lic
His ski wich Ines and rhymes, words and panses is
more than craft.
While a writer in the English Review made an
interesting commentay
A certain perversenessor wifulnes is manifest in much
cri we Haas tae ronal ended, treated
to impertinence, and in some cases extravas prt
but no, one seems to bave given him that deadly kind of
appreciation which is the lazy critic’s he
tha there is nothing to criticae, Nobody la ced Kim him
a classical poet. .
Criticisms of the EQurNox at this period are as
might be expected :
The new number of “The: ‘continues to
ED E STET TT

mature of its conteats, and the unintellgibility of many of

its articles... ( Review
Here is the weirdest that one could well stumble

iualistic, sometimes neatly

sordid, soaring sometimes to the heights of genius, the
matter could not be reviewed in twenty times
the space that we can give it. ‘who are certain
of thei sni and che breadth ‘of thei geo
read this magazine aa

‘Theotophists will “Fil fod is

anyibag bat complimentary. . . . (Theenply ir mh
THE RITES OF ELEUSIS PERFORMED
As an Epilogue to his Correcren Works, 1907,

Crowley had written an essay, Exzusis, in which
occurs the following

16 THE LEGEND OF ALEISTER CROWLEY

‘We need not be surprised to sce as we do that religion
is dead in London; here it demands no greater sactifice
than that of an hour's leisure in the week, and even offers
to replace that with social consideration for the old, and
opportunities of flirtation for the young.

Again, in Onpxeus (1905), he had written the
rapturous Dionysian chant which begins :

I bring ye wine from above,
From the vat of the storied |
For every one of ye love,
‘And life for every one.

Ye shall dance on ill and level
Ye shall sing in hollows and height
In the festal mystical revel,

The rapturous

Bacchanal rite!

And the waters under the hill,
By the might of that which endures,
‘The holy heaven of will |

The essay Ereusrs is a passionate statement of the
necessity for revitalising religion :

Better gex fory shillings, or a month than live and die
as lived and died John Bright) om
Better be a Shaker, or a camp-meeting homunculus, or
2 Chatauqua gisl, or a Keswick week lunatic, or an Evan

even by the he used
sies
E it igion is you:

your soul.

‘But if you come back from the celebration of the
Eucharist and say, “Mr. Hogwash was very dull to-day,”
you will never get to heaven, where the good poets live,

“ EQUINOX” PERIOD, 1908-1914 n"

aod nobody else; nor to hell, whose inhabitants are
exclusively bad poets.

The essay concludes, as already quoted :
Then will I choose and test and ir
rg rp td tat yon

instruct you
in the mysteries of shall we give back
its youth to the world.

It was doubtless in continuance of this essentially
religious and true purpose that Crowley wrote, early
in 1910, an Invocation to Luna in the form of a
poetical ritual; and, further, performed the Invoca~
tion ceremonially, the violinist Leila Waddell and
Victor Neuberg assisting him. They had considerable
success, as is testified by the following description,
contributed to the Seth by Raymon Radcirte, a
financial journalist, quite sceptical of “ Magick” as
such, who was present on one occasion. It is neces-
sary to quote this article fully, in view of the attacks
upon Crowley which were to follow in other
quatters :

The Sketch, Anpuit 24, 1910.
A NEW RELIGION
‘A. certain number of literary know the name of
Aleister Crowley as a poet. A few regard him as a

magician, But a small and select circle revere him as
the hicrophant of a new religion. This creed Captain
Sir cas ook onthe sabes extending to 527 pages,
alls “ Crowleyanity.” I do not pretend to know wi

78 THE LEGEND OF ALEISTER CROWLEY

of ceremony, and Crowley, who is quite in earnest in his

endeavour €0 attain such unusual conditions of mind as

tre aed ceva, belies that the, gateway to Pes
be

en rough ‘Magic. He has
saronted himself with the magic of the Basta very seal
lng, ane sical oF whom hate ed
int men; whom have a

to explain the unexplainable,

He abandons these. They appeal only to the brain,
and once their jargon is mastered they lead nowhere;
least of all to 1 He goes back upon ceremony,
because he thinks that it helps the mind to get outs
itself. He declares that if you repeat an invocation
solemnly and aloud,“ some, preat sad
mysterious result” you ‘experience a sense

itua] communion.

interminable stairs. I was received by a gentleman robed
in white and carrying a dawn swo:

The room was dak; only a dull-red light shone upon
an altar. Various young men, picturesquely clad in rol
Of white, ted, or black, stood at different points round
the room, Some held swords. ‘The incense made a haze,
through which I saw a small white statue, illuminatad by
a tiny lamp hung bigh on the cornice,

‘A brother recited “the banishing ritual of the Penta-
gp” impressively and with due Gznestne Another

other was commanded to "purify the Temple with
water” This was done. we witnessed the
“Consecration of the Temple with Fire,” whereupon
Crowley, habited in black, and accompanied by the
brethren, led “the Mystic Ciccumambulation.” They
walked round the altar twice or thrice in a sort of religious
procession. Gradually, one by one, those of the company
‘who were mere onlookers were beckoned into the circle.
The Master of the Ceremonies then ordered a brother to
ade ue aeh erge golden bool flo sme
the room, each a some
plessant-smelling drink. We dank in turn. This over,

inyoked by the greater ritual of the He ram. More
Eloton. "Ales Crowley read us the Song of Orpheus
from the Argonauts,

“ EQUINOX” PERIOD, 1908-1914 D

Following upon this song we drank our third Libation,
and then the brothers led into the room a draped figure,
masked in that curious blue tint we mentally associated
with Hecate. ‘The lady, for it was a lady, was enthroned
on a sext high above Crowley himself. By this time
the ceremony had grown weird and impressive, and its
influence was increased when the poet recited in solema
and reverent voice Swinbumne’s glorious first chorus
D n Ma X that begs begins “ the hounds of
Spring.” Again a Libation; again an invocation to
‘Artemis. Aer further ceremonies, Frater Omnia Vincam
yas commanded to dance “the dance of Syrinx and Pan
in honour of our lady Artemis” A poet, whose
verse io ofen read, astonished me by a and
beau dance, which he continued until he fel exhausted

the middle of the room, where, by the way, he lay uat
the end Crowley thea made supplication tthe 8
in a beauuifl and unpublished poem. A dead silence
ensued, After a long pause, the igure enthroned took à
vi with passion and feeling, like
amser a ware thelled to our veiy bones Once
again the figure took the violin and played an Abend Lied
‘$0 beautifully, so gracefully, and with such intense
feeling that im ve deed” most of us experienced
that Bestasy which Crowiey so earnestly. seeks, Then
came 4. prolonged and intense cence, after which the
Master of the Ceremonies dismissed vs in these words:
“By the Power in me vested I declare the Temple

So ended a really beautiful ceremony—beautifully

tiklly carried out 1E there à any
higher form of artis

than great verse and
great music, T have yet to learn it, T do not pretend to
understand the ritual that runs like a thread of magic
through these meetings of tbe A". A.-. I do not even
know what the A. is, But I do know that the
whole ceremony was impressive, artistic, and produced
in those present such a feeling as Crowley must bave had
when he wrote:

So shalt thou Space, and lastly climb.
Aautby the golden ath the great have tod

y ve
‘Reach up io God. To

$o THE LEGEND OF ALEISTER CROWLEY
Encouraged by this preliminary success, Crowley

proceeded to construct a series of seven rituals for
invoking the following “planetary forces,”

I. Saturn.
IL Jupiter
II. Mars
IV. Sol
V. Venus
VI. Mercury

VII. Luna

The rituals were subsequently published in Equinox
No. 6. As read, they present an extremely vivid
poctic effect, organised as they are into the unity of
a cosmic drama in seven acts, which begins when
Man, unable to solve the riddle of existence, takes
counsel of Saturn, extreme old age, and only receives
after much trouble the despairing reply that there is
noGod. Jupiter, Mars, the Sun, Venus and Mercury
are in turn invoked, but all are found wanting, because
of their natures. At last the Virgin Moon appears,
Madonna-like, throned and crowned, welled’ and
silent. She is Isis and Mary, Istar and Bhavani,
Artemis and Diana, but she is still barren of hope
till the great God Pan, the principle of fecundity,
tears asunder the veil and reveals the hope of
humanity in the Crowned and Conquering Child of
the Future.

"Thus briefly described, it will be realised that the
Rituals as such are in conception in a
stupendous way, though on examination they bear
marks of having been somewhat hastily composed,
particularly the latter ones.

Nevertheless, Crowley, forgetting perhaps his earlier

“ EQUINOX” PERIOD, 1908-1914 s1

contempt for the “ empty-headed Athenians,” decided
to perform them publicly ; and proceeded indeed to
give a series of public performances of the Rites in
Caxton Hall. Tickets, limited to roo in number, were
issued at a price of £5 5s. for admission to the seven
performances.

‘As it happened, and it does not require much
imagination to understand how it happened, he was
due to provide the biggest public sensation of that
autumn “season” in London. Invitations, of course,
were issued to the Press (and to the Police). In
the result, long news stories were published with
photographs in most of the newspapers, describing
the Rites with no more than the usual des: ive
virtuosity of journalistic roundsmen and news editors
who are accustomed not to be surprised at any
occurrence provided it has a “story value”; as this
undoubtedly had.

THE LOOKING GLASS

A discreditable individual, however, who is proved
by his journalistic manner, exemplified hereunder, to
have been either insincere and consequently a black-
mailer or an unscrupulous citculation-getter; or
sincere and consequently a prurient vice-sniffer and
dolt, wormed his way into the ceremonies and abused
his journalistic prerogative by publishing the following
scurrilous report of the proceedings in his evanescent
weekly The Looking Glass :
The Looking Glass. October 29, 1910.
AN AMAZING SECT

‘The meeting or seance which we are about to descril
and oe PaE a mrt MADE a andel Eran
we gained admittance under an assumed name, was held

.

82 THE LEGEND OF ALEISTER CROWLEY

in a private room at Caxton Hall. . . . After a great deal
of mancuvring, we managed to secure a card of admission,
signed by the geat Crowley himself. . When all the
lect had been admitted the doors were shut, and the
light, which had always been exceedingly dim, was
completely extinguished, except for a slight flicker on the
“altar.” Then after a while more ghostly figures appeared
Qn the stage, and a person in a red hood, supported on
each side by a blue-chinned gentleman in a sort of turkish
bath costume, commenced to read some gibberish, to
which the attendants made responses at intervals,
More turkish bath attendants then appeared and executed
a kind of Morris dance round the stage. Then the gentle-
man in the red cloak made fervent appeals to the
of Heaven, and after a little while a not unprepossessi
lady appeated, informed them that she was the Mother of
Heaven, and ‘asked if she could do anything for them.
‘They beg her to summon the Master... . The Mother
of Heaven thereupon takes up her violin and plays not
the room & tgue plunged ia complete ices The
the room is a te darkness, The
plriog is cated oe a loud hammering, in which all
the robed figures on the stage join, and after a din suficient
to wake the Seven Sleepers the lights are turned up a
little and a figure appears from a recess and asks what
they want. ‘beseech him to let them know if there
is a God, as, if not, they will amuse themselves without
any feat of the consequences. The Master promises to
live the matter his best attention, and, after producing a
from the floor by the simple expedient of lifting a
trap door, he retires with the Mother of Heaven ‘for
mediation,” daring, which time darkness sgain intervened.
Aher a considerable interval be returns, flings asic
en

‘curtain on the stage, and declares that the space behind
it is empty, and that there is no God. He then exhorts

followers to do as they like and make the most of

lie. This is his doctine pamphmed. Following
this there is another period of darkness, during which the
‘Master recites—very effectively be it admitt jwinburne's
“Garden of ine.” After this there is more
meditation, followed by an imitation dervish dance by one
of the company. There is also at intervals a species of
Bacche revel by the ene conpany onthe age, ln which
an apparently very young ies part.

fe leave it to our readers .. . to say whether this is

“ EQUINOX” PERIOD, 1908-1914 5

not a blasphemous sect whose proceedings conceivably

lod themselves to immorality ‘of the most revolting

Remember the doctrine which we have. endet
tline—remember

produce what Crowley terms an “ ecstasy I cs
say if it is fiting and right tight that young gizls and married
women shoul to attend such performances
under the guise of a new religie

New religion indeed! It is as old as the hills, The
doctrines of unbridled lust and license ‘based on, the
assumption that there is no God and no hereafter have
been ‘preached from time immemorial,
hedonists and fanatics

those of several members of the sect.

A parenthetical testimony to the character of Mr,
de Wend Fenton, editor of The Looking Glass, a clue
to the sincerity of his virtuous indignation, a news
item from the Daily Mail of 1913, might well be
inserted here :

Mi, De Wend Fenton, Bdkor of the S parting Times
wis fined {ro and £s pr. costs at Mansion
Alderman Sir ‘on each of six summonses
dB ter la a doe vendiog Cough the post lndeceat
articles contained in the paper.

Such was the first of the Puritan hounds who
bayed in the Groves of Eleusis, upon the scent of
Aleister Crowley |

The following week, November sth, Horatio
Bottomley gave a full-page echo of De Wend Fenton’s
bellowing. The hunt was up! The tally-ho was
sounded by John Bull’s spouse, a “ woman-interest ”
Bottomley venture now defunct, entitled Joba and
Mary :

34 THE LEGEND OF ALEISTER CROWLEY

Speaking of John reminds me to warn all my women
and girl readers against a dangerous "new religion,"
somewhat on the Abod ‘of Love linesonly, if anything,
mote repulsive -which i being exploited bp the so-called

» Aleister Crowley. You wil "d al shove Weis

ursday's Jobe Bull—a lady member of its staff having,
I understand, managed to obtain admission *o one of
Crowley's seances—fortunately escaping with noth. g worse
than a kiss in the dark

The bellowing of Joly Bull vas as follows :

Jobn Ball. Nowmber 5, 1910.
IS A NEW SMYTH-PIGOTT AMONG US?

Mr. Aleister Crowley’s Blasphemous and
Prudent Propaganda.

A "new religion" is usually viewed with suspicion
in this country, but Mr. Crowley is just the person for
such an enterprise. He is a man of good birth and
education, with distinguished, almost pontifical, manners,
He has travelled over all the unusual parts of the world
and investigated fantastic things with zeal, if not with
pol as made. recul stud of al he

rental s a special s 1
endless literature of magic and mysticism. Though he
has never yet succeeded in catching the long ear of the
public, he has been a voluminous writer, and has published
‘works’ which fill many shelves. "Konx Om Pax” and
“977 have already been noticed in this journal. To the
uninitiated, they appear like the outpourings of an ex-
tremely clever lunatic, now solemnly revealing the secrets
of the ancients, now running off into the most delightly
monsense, now assuming thc rüle of the preacher, now
frankly pulling legs. His chief efforts have been concen-
trated upon the composition of really remarkable poetry.
His rhythm and metre and melody are often quite perfect,
and as a lord of language he runs Swinburne very close-
Often he goes very near to the borderland of insanity.

His work, however, is spoiled by the intrusion of l,
erotic, and ‘disgusting images and startling blasphemies,
which restrict his writing to private circulation, thous
it possesses an artistic enchantment quite spart from its
appeal to pruriency and debauchery.

“ EQUINOX” PERIOD, 1908-1914 85

His present “ mission was heralded in March of last

ir by 2 portly publication called the “Equinox.” The
Tic, evidently, is to attract the poblic to the teachi
of medizval alchemists or magicians. ‘The propa
consists in assembling a number of ladies and gentlemen
in a dark room, where poems are recited in sonorous
tones and a violin is played with considerable expression,
amid choking clouds of incense, varied by barbaric dances,
sensational interludes of melodrama, blasphemy and
erotic suggestion.

+ 8 8 t o n

Ovx Revassenrarrye’s Reronr.

By special favour, or good fortune, or both, I was able
to get free admission into the chamber of mysteries, which
others less fortunate than I could not enter without paying.
in advance à fee of £5... The room was in semi
darkness. . . . A large cushion was given me to sit on,
+ + + “The Master of the Temple” was at last aroused,

Oun REPRESENTATIVE EIBRACED.

He came forward, crouched behind the cauldron, and
tecited a most blood-curdling composition, filled wit
horrible allusions to “ the stony stare of dead men’s ey
etc, etc. After all, one couldn't blame him for getting
angry at being disturbed, I Howerer, suddenly
he liked what looked like atin of Nestle’ mill, and posing
the contents on the fame, extinguished the fre,
that “there is no God,” ‘that everybody was free to do
just as he or she liked, and left the audience in utter dark
Mess! Not the slightest ray of light entered the room,
and the atmosphere seemed heavier and more oppressive
than ever, "There was a sound as of people moving quietly
about, which added to the uncanniness. How long this
lasted I do not know, but all of a sudden an arm was placed
round my neck, and a moustache pressed to my check—
someone had kissed mel
eod rw irs. Ttg

Mystical figures were moving before me, and I watched,
macant 8 What weed piawe east There
was more violi a masie and spia e i the
misty, smol lue light... . 1, and was
heartily gl «ut ‘was all over.

36 THE LEGEND OF ALEISTER CROWLEY
JONES v. LOOKING GLASS

Naturally, Crowley took no notice of this sort of
thing. As stated, respectable journalism had
dealt fairly enough by him. The Bystander actually
commissioned him to write a series of articles in
exposition of his ideas. Crowley agreed and his
reasoned exposition was published, Meanwhile the
Looking Glass continued to publish attacks upon him,
assiduously digging up any facts in his life which
might be given an unpleasant interpretation, and
duly giving them that interpretation. Crowley, like
many another man, had been divorced. De Wend
Fenton played on this theme to its utmost, digging
up the law reports for material. ‘The worst he coul.
find, however, was that Crowley had committed
adultery, not ‘at all an unusual sin, in England,
particularly among respondents in divorce cases !

"The story must now return to the Brethren of the
Golden Dawa, gnashing their teeth impotently over
the publication of their rituals in the Equrvox and
the checkmate of McGregor Mathers in the Court of
Appeals.

Wend Fenton’s attack developed an entirely
new virility and venom :
Further information has reached us from an unimpeach-

able source as to ehe past record of this man, who dares
to put himself forward as a high priest... .

It is evident from what follows that the “un-
impeachable source” lay concealed among the “ Rosi-
crucians ” whose own doctrines were so respectfully
mirrored in the Looking Glass.

In 1898 Crowley became a member of the Rosicrucian
‘Order, a very ancient association, whose principal obj
is the study of the mystic phil shy of ancient religions,

“ EQUINOX” PERIOD, 1908-1914 37

apd which professes a vast, amount, of traditional lore on
u subjects, while requis its memi
due respect and honour for pe keener ii as well as good
moral character.

"There followed the passages upon which George
Cecil Jones subsequently based his action against
De Wend Fenton for libel.

Two of Crowley's friends and introducers are still
associated with him; one, the rascally sham Buddhist
monk Allan Bennett; the other a person of the name of
George Cecil Jones, who was for some time employed
at Basingstoke in metallurgy, but of late has had some sort
‘of small merchane’s business in the City. Crowley and
Bennett lived together, and there were rumours of
uamentonable immonlities which were carried on under
ir roof. © +

The reminder of the article was taken up with
scurrilous allegations, of which the following are
characteristic :

Soon after this Crowley began to shield himself under
different alis... . His aliases would grace an. Old
Bailey cima... 1a toco he began to show up in is
true colours. Being sent from Paris to London on certain
matters connected with the Order, he enormously exceeded
his instructions, and stole certain property, of the Order,
yhih be wok op MuR ts vo ine. His next
exploit was to steal the jewels of a lady, the wife of an

h oficer, as well as to extort money by threats.
She obtained a warrant for his arrest, but he fled the
country, having in the meantime obtained a considerable
amount from a well-known singer. .. . It only remains
for us to add tbat he was formally expelled from the
Rosicrucian Ordet as a man of evil character and acts. . . .

‘And, as a peroration, all the category of unmention-
able vice was alleged in that veiled language of
innuendo which only a coward knows how to use :

38 THE LEGEND OF ALEISTER CROWLEY

Many of his are of the most obscene and revolting
character. Other statements about him we refrain from
printing, as they are of too horrible a nature, but we think
Wwe have said enough to show that our previous attacks
on him and his orgies were more than j us

Crowley himself took no notice whatever of
De Wend Fenton or Horatio Bottomley. He was
not spiritually vulnerable to such venom and thought
that the obvious absurdity of such propaganda would
defeat its own ends without any active assistance from
him, He went on with the task of preparing the
vernal Equinox. George Cecil Jones, however,
issued a writ, and in due course the “ Rosicrucians ”
again had an opportunity to amuse the Courts of
Justice and the readers of newspapers.

A TRIAL FROM “ ALICE IN WONDERLAND ”

"The libel action, Jones vs. The Looking Glass, would
almost undoubtedly take first place among the comic
trials of English history. At one point the Judge
remarked :

This trial is getting very much like the trial in " Alice
in Wonderland (Laughter)

The evidence of both parties was continuously
punctured by laughter in Court. Crowley himself
‘was in Court throughout, enjoying the jokes to the
full, though neither side called him to give evidence
—an astonishing fact considering that, if anything,
his habits and istics were mainly in dispute :

The action was brought by Mr. George Cecil Jones, a
consulting chemist, against the publishers, editor and
printers of the known as ‘The Looking Glass, in
respect of certain statements connecting him with one

“ EQUINOX” PERIOD, 1998-1914 89

Crowley, who was alleged to be a person of dis
dulces Sho lide us be the founder.
of a sect styled “Tas Equinox.” (Times Law Reports.)

Portions of the evidence are transcribed below.
From the very beginning the atmosphere of a Gilbert
and Sullivan opera was indicated :

(Evidence of George Cecil Jones.)

Counsel: Were you never a member of the Rosicrucan

Order?

Counsel: Nav beco ber of
ve you never applied to become a member ol

the Roe One d

Witness: No; honestly I do not know except from havin;

ead the 17th century tract whether there's or was such

4 Society as the Rosicrucian Order.

Counsel: Have you ever heard of Volo Noscere?

Witness: Yes, quite well.

Mr. Justice Scruton: You both seem to know what you

axe talking about, but I do not. (idem)

(Evidence relating to the previous action, Mathers v. Crowley)

Counsel: Was the action brought against Me. Crowley
1o resin him from publishing the rina of the Order
in violation of his

nce? T never saw th statement of chim. T do not
know what the action was brought about.

Counsel: Was the complaint made against Me. Crowley
"hat he ves publishing the dtu el the Order?

Witness: No.

Mr. Justice Scrutton : Was it instructions as to the Devil,
or what?

Witness: Very neady.

Counsel: Tam not a member of the order.
(Dealing with Crawley s character.)
Crowley has not brought any action?

Counsel: Do not you say that Crowley is a gentleman of
unblemished character $

9» THE LEGEND OF ALEISTER CROWLEY

Witness: I have no season to suppose that his character
is a bit worse than yours.

Counsel: He is a man you would not hesitate to introduce
to your wife?

Witness: My wife knows him very well.

Counsel: You are still to the present day associated with
Crowley?

Witness: He is still a friend of mine.

Counsel: And an intimate friend of yours?

Witness: Yes; no particular significance attaches to the
word. I see him once in two months; we talk on the
telephone once a week; we are very friendly when we
mect; he comes to me with any difficulties that he has.

(Cross-exemined by Mr. De Wend Fenton.)

Q. Yon said that there was very little that was accurate

An Paull describe that hich
. Is u on which my name is
‘mentioned as the finest collection of lies you could
crowd on to one page.

Q. Do you not think it rather strange that Crowley has
‘never taken action against us?

A. T do think it very -

Q. I think you said that if Crowley was in the box he
"would probably admit he was not sane?

A. T think he probably bat I do not think for a
moment that you would get him certified.

(Evidence of Samsel Sydacy Liddell Macgregor’)
(Daily Telegraph Report.)

Called by the name of “ Macgregor,” the witness, after
taking the oath, asked whether his full name was desired.
Te having been intimated that it was desired witness
announced a long list of christian names, and the surname
of" Mater" Mathers,” he explained amidst laughter,
"dates from 1603 when the name of Macgregor was
suppressed.”

Counsel: ou commonly go under the name Macgregor?

Yes, from my great-great-grandíather, from wi
A have 3 anco Semish title. de Glenstrae?-— Y

e you known as Count. r rie? Yes,
DEI ae Raiena Ode go beck ro consdenble

antiquity 2—Yes.

“ EQUINOX” PERIOD, 1908-1914 91

Did it fall into abeyance and did you revive it?—Yes,
with two others.

Witness added that the plaintiff introduced Crowley
into the Rosicrucian Ordes. Crowley was subsequently
capelled. He bad knowa Crowley to go under sever
diferent pamer “Once” sid witness, he led

facgregor, and with hardly any knowledge of
the history of the name. (Laughter) Ee it even
fell me what line of Macgregor he came from.” (Much

Iughtes.)
(Mathers cross-examined)

Counsel: Is it not a fact that your name is Samuel Liddell
Mathers ?—Yes, or Macgregor Mathers.

Your original name was Samuel Liddell Mathers ?—

Did joa subse uend the name of Macgregor ?—
id you subsequently assume the name
‘The name of Macgregor dates from 1603.

Your name was Macgregor in 1603? (Much laughter.)
Yes; if you like to put it that way.

You have called yourself Count Macgregor of Gleastrae ?—

‘Oh yes.
You have also called yourself the Chevalier Macgregor ?—
No. You are confusing me with some of Crowley's

jes,

Have you ever suggested to ly that you had any
connection with King James {V of Scotland Even
Scotchman who dates from an ancient family must
have had some connection with King James IV.

Have you ever stated that King James IV of Scotland
never died ?—Yes ; that is a matter of common tradition
among all occult bodies.

Do you assert that James IV of Scotland is in existence
to-day ?—I refuse’ to answer your question,

And that his existence to-day is Tmbodied in yourself ?—
Certainly not. You are confusing me with Crowley's
aliases, (Laughter.)

You believe in the traditions?—That is my private

business.
His Lordship (to counsel): The “Flying Dutchman” is
nother i you want, to pusu the subject, (Laughter,
Witness: And, again, ^ Ti Wandering Jew Laughter.
Counsel: Have you any occupation #—That is as you
like to take it. For a man of no occupation I am
probably the most industrious man living. (Laughter)

$1 THE LEGEND OF ALEISTER CROWLEY
(Evidence of Dr. Berridge.)

Dr. Berridge sworn..

Mr. Justice Scrutton : ‘Please do not invent oaths of your
‘own. Parliament has framed the form of the oath
for you.

Witness: On one occasion when Crowley was over
here as an envoy on official matters concerning
Order, I had an inp of speaking alone with
him, and I said to fim: "Do you know what they
‘accuse you of? "—meaning the members of the Order.
Twill not express it too plainly as 1 sce there are ladies
jn the court.

Mr, Justice Scruton Any, ladies who may be in chi
court y are beyond any scruples of that sort.

Witness Well, T said" They accuse you of unnatural
vice,” and he made a very peculiar answer: he neither
admitted nor denied it.

(His Lordsbip's Summing np»)

His Lordship said that as regards some of the accusations
made against Crowley no evidence had been offered, but
jt bad been shown that be wrote, published, and advertised
literature of a most disgusting character. "The jury must
carefully consider how far what had been said identified
the plant with Crowley's ctaricter ‘and conduct, He
should leave them three questions :

T. Were the words and statements complained of
defamatory of the plaintiff?

2. If yes, were the statements of facts substantially true?

3. I£ yes, wete the comments founded on those state-
ments of facts fair?

“The jy answered all three questions in the afirmative,
and on those findings judgment was entered for the
defendants.

It will be noticed in connection with this weird
action that the statements in the Looking Glass rc-
ferring to George Cecil Jones were found to be
defamatory, and substantially true—but that the pub-
lication caused no damage to the plaintiff! This was
certainly a fitting conclusion to the “ Alice in Wonder-
land" trial. fact that Crowley was not called

“ EQUINOX” PERIOD, 1908-1914 »

upon to give evidence for either side, though he was
manifestly the in of the melodrama, is sufficiently
interesting as indicating the uneasiness which his
pesconliy ond inspire, both in friends and foes.

ne of Crowley's books, with passages underlined
in pencil, was passed up to the Judge and jury despite

rotests by counsel against its admissibility as evidence.
Fhe Judge himself frequently exp: a doubt as
to the admissibility of any evidence against Crowley,
in view of the fact that Crowley was not a party to
the case. There was a long legal argument on this
point, the Judge finally ruling in favour of some
evidence against Crowley with the remarks, “ this is
a very odd case, but I think it is admissible. . . . I
cannot say that no statement made by Crowley is in-
admissible.” Doubtless his Lordship’s bon mot about
the “Alice in Wonderland” trial was the brightest
possible description of the whole episode.

Again Crowley found himself featuring as the
"hero? of important news stories in the whole
popular Press of the land. ‘There can be no doubt
that it was this episode which first gave general
currency to the “legend” proper. It certainly laid
a solid and deep foundation for the edifice of slander
which was later to be erected in his name.

THE EQUINOX CONTINUES

Nos. 5 and 6 appeared, despite the distracting
incidents just related. Crowley was apparently quite
unaffected by proceedings which would have given
a lesser man more than sufficient preoccupation,
‘Two characteristic Press commentaries are appended

EQUINOX NO 5.
Far and away the best number that has hitherto appeared.

94 THE LEGEND OF ALEISTER CROWLEY

«, A baller by Aleister Crowley contains many passages
of extreme beauty and Ieonine vigor. . remark-
able article by Ananda Matteya. . . . A remarkable poem
called “ The Sabbath." . . . One of the most remarkable
and illuminating articles on the Qabalah. ... A magni-
ficent essay upon number. It is impossible to praise this
work of art too highly. . .. The amount of knowledge
and benefit to be obiained by the owner and diligent
student is almost infinite. . . . This book will be as the
Wine of Life to mystics, and to those who confident!

expect a revaluation of values in the history of the world.
(Occult Review.)

EQUINOX NO. 6.

Mr, Aleister Crowley among his multifarious activities,
finds time to contribute the major portion of the " Equinox *
(is he the editor?) and writes with equal facility in verse
and prose. . „ . His three Poems for Jane Chiron are of a
remarkable, if somewhat decadest, beauty. . . . Into the
“Rites of Bleusis ” Mr. Crowley has woven a number of
poems of great power. c ate worth the money.
PA cemasiable story by Mr. M. Nay... > Ti
Sigue vom... Exalen rudog. (Daily

fail

HAIL MARY!

It may be considered that Crowley really went too
far in submitting anonymously, about this time, a
volume of devotional verses to Burns & Oates, the.
Catholic publishers. The verses were hymns jn
prise of though the name Isis could as easily

we been substituted. Wilfred Meynell was quite

uileless, and published the book under the title of
fücwom. It was only when authorship of the
poems was attributed to a famous actress of
the time () that Crowley revealed his complicity, and
had the volume re-issued under his own name, wit
the title Ham Mary! (1912).

“ EQUINOX” PERIOD, 198-1914 »

The Catholic Press took the joke fairly well, all
things considered :

Here truly is a plenteous and varied feast for the lovers
of tuneful versel ` As far as we can gather from his other
works, the author is not a Catholic, perhaps not even,
strictly speaking, a Christian; but bere we have page
afier page of most exquisite praise of Her. . unl one
marvels at the poct’s fecundity of concept, imagery, and
fit expression, (Cathode Times)

Not without à certain lyrical sweetness. Devotion to
the Mother of God is the subject of all the poems, and it
seems odd coming from one who is understood to be a
worshipper at strange, exotic, and forbidden shrines,
But the artistic temperament is doubtlessly accountable, . . ,
(Cattolic Herald.)

Lascelles Abercrombie, writing in the Daily News,
seems to have been rather pained by the apparent
volte face

Mr. Aleister Crowley is a very interesting poet, not so
much for any great originality in his technique, as for the
passionate tenacity with which he holds to a mystical
creed, put forth in an elaborate and eclectic symbolism.
« .« He has not managed to hyma Mary in anything
like the strain of poetry which the worship of Hecate once
drew from him. Does this mean that, after all, Hecate
means more to him than Mary?

And in the English Review aj à commentary,
delightful to read after the sordidness of the Looking
Glass affair; delightful even to this day for its clean
statement of the real problem of Aleister Crowley—
a challenge to 1930 as much as it was a challenge
to 1912:

We crave for poetry in England, but we do not like
poets unless they are exceedingly conventional, when we
can laureate them, because in d recional search for what.
is called character we condemn des which are the
attributes of genus. Every school gil reads Shelley,

96 THE LEGEND OF ALEISTER CROWLEY

yet how badly we treated him! Byron is not allowed to
rest in Poets Corner. We have treated Swinburne as
if he were Cri And we have treated Mr. Aleister
Crowley in the same way. Yet Mr. Crowley is one
of our few real poets. He has written things in Axrsenonis
which will never die. Some years ago, a little book of
verse aj called AurnonA, which being anonymous
Vas arüibuted to an actress. Tt bore a strong religious
ote, an ecstatic sense, and it was at once recognized as
wine poetry. Now it has come forth again, retitled
lam, Mary, and signed Aleister Crowley. We hope it
will be widely read, and serve as an introduction to some
of Mr. ley’s other works of poetry. Particularly we
hope the Church will look at it. They will find a religious
sense that will astonish some of them. ‘The real trouble
about Mr. Crowley is this: he is a true poct--he cannot.
compromise. The persecution of silly and unkind men
has wounded him. It is for literary men now to come
forward and stand by him.

Literary men to coma forward and stand by him! Will
any eminent literary man of to-day join the undis-
tinguished compiler of the present book in asking
that Aleister Crowley should even now be judged as
a poet, for his poetry? Is there any (unmystical)
Brotherhood of the Pen? Historians of the future
may take an interest in the answer to this question.
T think that I am establishing in this compilation of
his Press-cuttings that Aleister Crowley has many
claims to be regarded as a distinguished poet. He
may also be a distinguished wag, or scallawag, or
harum-scarum, or whatnot; but he is a distinguished
poet, and the poet bas a tight to be heard, for his

Any offers?
TWO MORE BOOKS OF POETRY.

Besides Har. Marr! (and not to mention the
Equinox, Nos. 7 and 8) two more books of poetry by

“ EQUINOX” PERIOD, 1908-1914 s

Aleister Crowley were issued in 1912. These were
MORTADELLO and StR PALAMEDES THE SARACEN. It
is interesting to record the opinions of two “ men of
letters” of this period, Harold Monro and Gilbert
Cannan, who had appateatly decided to give Crowley
the serious coasidemtion lis growing schicvement
warranted.

Writing of Morrapeizo in the Poetry Review,
Gilbert Cannan found a stumbling-block :

Me. Crowley is an amazing creature, He refuses to be
taken’ seriously. His iesty, lecherous play he
calls a comedy. It is a riotous farce. Intoxication—of
blood, of words, of hysteria, of lust—takes the place of
imagination. The play is exciting, but most amusing
ín iis invecive. . . . Mr. Crowley has talent, scores of
talents, but, seemingly, no power to use, discipline, or
develop them. It would be splendid to take him seriously,
but then—one cannot. He has abundant humour—a
most necessary ingredient in a poet's composition—but
that, too, is untamed.

In the Poetry Review, also, Harold Monto reviewed
Sın PALAMEDzS, and confessed himself unable to
find a niche for its author: an honest, if quite
evasive, solution of the “serious” eriti’s prob-
lem :

Seriously speaking it is a religious poem, and a great
work of am. ‘Supedically speaking, it iS. the, master
limerick of a buffoor seriously speaking, it is the
epic of the eternal . Mr. y is extra-
ordinarily entertaining, and of course he is also much
‘more than entertaining. Sta Patasspes, though probably
sot is best wotk, should on no account be missed. Ie
is a work that superficial criticism might as easily compare.
to some of the productions of Byron, as overlook with
greet douby in act whether che question of in place
n literature is one to be decided by i
atal Dat any rate, will aot commit m to attempting
a decision.

c

98 THE LEGEND OF ALEISTER CROWLEY
END OF THE EQUINOX

In 1913 Crowley paid a visit to Moscow, nof to
see Lenin and Trotsky, or Gog and Magog’ of the
‘Apocalypse in order to bring about the millennium
as might be supposed by the credulous, but merely
in order to enjoy himself, by visiting a place some-
what unlike London. Nevertheless, he managed to
publish the last two volumes of the Equinox, thereby
completing ten volumes—or, more precisely, the ten
Parts of Volume One. He indicated that the Next
Volume would consist of “Ten Numbers of Silence,"
to balance all that speech: a commendable enough
decision which the actual coming of Armageddon, or
something very like it, in the Great War, made easily
possible of achievement.

He also published, and I do not pretend to under-
stand where he found the time and energy to do it,
two Books on Technical Magick, during this year—
the Boox or Lizs, and Boox Four.

'THE BOOK OF LIES

Every page of this book is lined with a heavy
black Border, ‘The fist page of “test” is an Ine
terrogation mark (“The Hunchback”), "he second
page is an Exclamation Mark (“The Soldier”). The

title of the work

THE BOOK OF LIES
which is also falsely called

BREAKS.
‘The Wanderings or Falsifcations of the One Thought
of

FmATER PERDURABO.
‘Which Thought is Itself Untrue.

“ EQUINOX” PERIOD, 1908-1914 5

Tt is a puzzling enough work to the layman, for
whom, however, I sume, it was not intended

rimarily. H. S. Redgrove expressed the following
Epinions of ie in the Ova? Renew *

Tam not at all sure what is the meaning (assuming
there to be one) of this fantastic book by Mr. Aleister
Grover Some of its chapters sem ente agaaa.

t in others I can discern something of a phil y
which is a negation of philosophy ; which regards thought
as the excrement of mind, reason as lishness. . . .
Certainly such philosophy as this is a lie, if that is the
meaning of the title.

But indeed, I am inclined to regard the book rather
as a fantastic aad elaborate joke; and I can imagine its
author laughing at the thought of its readers striving to
extract a profound meaning out of words which have no
meaning. Certainly, there ace times when Mz. Crowley
is very funny. . . . itis hard co resist laughing. . . . But
I do not think Mr, Crowley's humour is always in the
best taste, nor can I always see the point of his jokes,
and at times bis words and suggestions scem quite deli
ately and unnecessarily blaspi and objectionable.
1 regard sexual symbolism as a valid method of expression ;
bat] like it unperverted.

BOOK FOUR

‘This was, in its first part, a brilliant exposition of
Yoga, resulting from Ctowley's own researches and
experiences in the East, ‘The African Times found a
description which will bear repeating here

‘This exotic exudation of esoteric exegesis.
a phrase which we may perhaps accept, with all its
implications, as sammarhing, indeed, a geeat deal
of the writing of the whole Equixox period, however
much we may admire the clear poetry, the dazzlin,
humour, and the amazing versatility of that petiod,
considered in its purely literary aspects.

10 THE LEGEND OF ALEISTER CROWLEY
A CAMBRIDGE POET

At the end of 1913 an anthology was published
entitled Camre Poers, 1900-13. Crowley was
included in the Anthology, being given indeed quite
a considerable space, This looks, on the sustace,
like recognition. Unfortunately, however, the editors,
sharing perhaps the common failings of anthologists,
for it would not be charitable to attribute malice
to them, had made a collection almost of Crowley’s
worst poetry, his least personally distinctive verse.
The Manchester Guardian violently commented :

Far the worst lack in discretion of compilation is the
devotion of 20 pages to Mr. Aleister Crowley, whose over-
blown rhetoric is so well-known that it surely might have
been omitted altogether.

P More soothing is the naïveté of the Birmingham
"ost :

Fr Mt. Aléiner Crowley sange and mpi books
the editor has selected some 20 which we
have contemplated. with considerable akonishment, but
little admiration, although we recognise a Promethean
grandeur which elsewhere we seek vainly.

NINETEEN FOURTEEN

‘That “ Promethean Grandeur” had been Crowley’s
cardinal sin against his Age. We “seek it vainly
elsewhere,” not only in the pages of the Cambridge
anthology, but amongst all the joblot of poets of
that collapsed Edwardian age. The other poets,
without exception, were shirking their responsibilities
as Makers. Alone, amongst a crowd obsessed with
minutie, Aleister Crowley was attempting, and it
does not even matter if he failed, to formulate a poetic
consciousness of the human Universal. Poetry was

“ EQUINOX” PERIOD, 1908-1914 10r

petering out into triviality, indecd the whole Nation
was petering out spiritually ; and Crowley had the
courage to tackle his poet’s job of re-integration. He
will yet be honoured for this courage, even if his
achievement be condemned, He belonged to no
schools or coteries; he was romantic and wild and
boisterous when all others were becoming so ^re-
fined" that they almost vanished in transparency.
No onecould suggest seriously that poets like Dowson,
and Middleton, and Yeats, will ever be placed in the
great succession of English poets who worked cos-
mically—the major poets who worked widely on the
whole human canvas! Shakespeare, and Blake, and
Milton, and Shelley, and Swinburne with all their
faults; even Browning. After Swinburne and
Browning, is there one poet, to our day, who
has worked on that Grand Plan of poetry which
shirks nothing human ?

In scape, in cosmic self-definition, in the Grand
Manner unashamed—only Aleister Crowley |

For all his perverseness, for all his rocketin
violence, for all his downright folly, he is full c
meat and blood where his contemporaries are most
stuffed with straw—in the vitals.

Tleave the discussion at present with this dogmatic
statement, dogmatic because I cannot prove it, and
cannot expect readers to believe it, until the day,
which may never come in our lifetime, when his
CowprETE Wonxs are available to students possessed
Of some time-perspective of this Age. At present
there is no man living who possesses a complete
collection of the Works of Aleister Crowley. Not
even Crowley himself! Some editors of the future
will have a fine job—collecting those dozens and
dozens of exquisitely printed small editions in order
to establish definitive texts |

102 THE LEGEND OF ALEISTER CROWLEY

Separately, cach one of those books in turn has
astonished reviewers, sophisticated or simpletons, as
I have shown in the quotations. I think nobody
has had the chance to see his work as a whole.
do not pretend to have made more than a preliminary
survey myself, for the purposes of this study. But
that glimpse has been enough to establish my present
contention—that he has worked grandly as a poet,
has tackled the poetic synthesis heroically, while all
his contemporaries funked that synthesis, With this,
I leave opinion, and return to my job of collecting
documentary facts,

Cnarren IV
THE WAR
1914-19

Lon before the War, Crowley gave plenty of evidence
in his poetry of his contempt for pre-War England,
that is for the England of the victorious middle classes
in their apotheosis under Queen Victoria, Mr. Glad-
stone—and, in a word, petty commercialism rampant.
As carly as 1900 he had written in CARMEN SECULARE :
O England! England, mighty England, falls !
None shall lament her lamentable end !
‘The Voice of Justice thunders at ber walls.
She not hear. She shall not comprehend !
The nations kegp their mocking carnivals;
She hath not feft a friend |
in a voice which one cannot help likening to that
of an ancient Biblical het, wild from the desert,
thundering “Woe!” before the trembling court of
a potentate.

T cannot see that it is “ unpatriotic ” for a poet to
chasten his own people—it is rather a sign of the
poct’s deep love. The physician docs not hate his
Pincerous patient. issih did not hare the Jews.
Isaiah was a patriot. Crowley is a patriot and he
loves when he denounces. U; this be conceded as
possible, there can be no forgiveness for Crowley—
at any rate so long as the War's rancours last,

As a satirist, he was certainly strong meat. The
following verses, from Tr: Wortp’s TRAGEDY (1911)
ate characteristic :

103

104 THE LEGEND OF ALEISTER CROWLEY

And i£ I write for England, who will read?
As if, when moons of Ramazan recede,

Some fatuous angel-porter should deposit

His perfect wine within the privy closet!

** What do they know, who only England know 2"
Only what England paints its face to show.

Love mummied and rclbelled " chaste affection,"
And lust excused as “ natural selection,”

Caligula upbraids the cruel cabby,

And Nero birches choir-boys in the Abbey;
‘Semiramis sandpapered to a simper,

And Clytemnxstea whittled to a whimper!

The austerities of Loyola? to seck I

But — let us bave a “ self-denial week ” |

The rapturcs of Teresa are hysterie ;

Bor et s gigale at some fulsome cleric !

“ The age refines! You lag bchind," God knows !
Plus ça change, plus c'est la même chose,

To call forced labour slavery is rude,

7" Terminologic inexactitude,"

This from the masters of the winds and waves
Whose cotton-mills are crammed with British slaves |
Men pass their nights with German-Jewish whores,
Their days in keeping " aliens " from our shores.

They turn their eyes up at a Gautier's tale,

And run a maisonette in Maida Vale.

Your titles—oh! how proud you are to wear them?
— What about "homo quatuor literarum ? ”

The puissant all their time to vice devote ;

‘The impotent (contented) pay to gloat.

The B ih the starvit iden
Ta Piedily, dadir tan Adea n

Later (August 28th, 1914) he wrote an article
entitled "Tr& ViNDICATION Or NiErzsCHE, the tone
of which may be gauged from the following excerpts :

THE WAR 105

Entrenched in the mosass of bibliolatey, crouching in
the bastions of Fort Grundy, the old Guard of Victorianism
died and did not surrender. .. . We have had a credit
system which when analyzed meant that we were all pre-
tending to be sich, social system in which we all pretended
to be squires at the least. We had Dukes who never led,
Marquess with no marches to ward, Knights who could
barely sit a donkey; we called our slattern slaveys lady
helps, our prostitutes soiled doves, our grumbling mumbling

We had Progresed, Lady Pyima Noisete had

We loiset a
headache to the tane of a pamsgrsph 10 linea. Sandsugar
v. Sandsugar and Pintpot—4 column. A piddling little
quack doctor poisons his bitch of a wife and rans of with
his fool of a typist—the business of the world is suspended
until he is cinematographically hanged.

A prominent writer calls attention to himself by the
device of calling attention to the pangs of slaughtered oxen;
another affirms his brotherhood with the Chicago Pig.
Countless thousands turn Vegetarian, and then quarrel as.
to whether it is or is not Truc Vegetarianism to eat ¢
‘The war between the Frutaciant and the Nut faddsts
nearly came to à cross word! I knew a "man" who
refused to eat bread because it was a fermented drink! A
friend of mine knew an Anarchist who refused cocoa
because it excited his animal passions !

It was in this mood, therefore, that Crowley con-
fronted the War, welcomed the War, undoubtedly.
For an account of his movements and motives duri;
the War period, during practically the whole of
which he was in America, I must refer those interested
to that portion of his Autobiography, now in the
press, which deals with this period, under the title
of Tur Lasr SrRAW. I here reprint without further
comment a précis of that statement, prepared for the
Press by Crowley’s sectetary at the time when he was
“jin trouble” (i929) with the French authorities :

‘THE LAST STRAW

(précis)
The essence of my adventures during the late War

106 THE LEGEND OF ALEISTER CROWLEY

may be put in a nutshell. At the outbreak of the War
I was in Switzerland engaged in solitary climbs among
the Alps. On my return to England I was foiled in my
attempts to fight for my country, as I had been interrupted
in my efforts to climb the Alps’ by an attack of phlebitis
which kept me in bed for some six weeks, from the middle
of September to the end of October, 1914. I was warned
that the slightest movement might result in sudden death,
and advised, that even ‘upon recovery, I would never be
able, in all probability, to climb a mountain again. I had
the ‘strange idea—how strange to England in 1914 !—
that war Was a very serious matter, and that it was " my
country, ght or wrong.” | thought I bad idea and
virility, and that my country therefore needed me. This
event indicated my fatuity. At that time any man in
England who suggested the advisability of conscription
was the worst kind of traitor, Conscription was the ver

thing we were fighting against. From my sick bed,

dictated an article called “Thorough” in which I said:
“ Commandeer every man and every munition in the
country. This is not a continental quarrel—this is life
tnd. death for England. We don want debates in
Parliament or in Colney Hatch, We want a dictator.”
No editor would publish it.
When I left Switzerland on the outbreak of the War,
1 went to Paris, and was amazed at the sang froid of the
people. Going on to England, to ofer my services to
fhe authorities, T was disgusted, at the sharp, contrast
between the calm courage of the French and the hysterical
fear, culminating in the campaiga of hate, of my own
people. The German was now a monster like a bogy in
A nightmare, and it was useless to struggle against him.
‘At the same time he was a coward, without discipline,
courage, and morale—with a talent only for mpe, torture,
and thefi—a brute who did not dare to advance unless
behind a screen of Belgian nuns. I was then more con-
vinced that I was needed by my country, by England. In
my excitement, I had the hallucination that ind
needed men. l went here and there, trying to a
place to help. "What about me? i have some litle
reputation as a man of letters—a critic. It is true my
itis affected my left leg, but I am expert in cipher—
tead and write French as well as I write English, and
the world knows how well that is. I have a fait acquaint-
ance with a dozen other languages, including Hindustani.

THE WAR E

My leg wl keep me out of the war as effectively as Wilson
will keep America—is there nothing I an to serve
my country?” But from August to the end of October,
1914, I had tried every means to get the Government to
use me—without success.

T accepted an invitation to go to America, and there
chance showed me a way for which I was peculiarly fitted ;

a part by which I might conceivably play as important
3 partin the War as any maa living” "The price of this
success was moral courage to the Unie. 1 faut beggar
myself of funds, friends, and honour for the time being.

"While waiting in Ameren for certain of my tanusclpts
and books to arrive, I occupied myself in observing the
attitude of New Yorkers to the War. lt needed but 2
brief inquiry to see that the Americans meant to make
money out of the War by exporting food and munition
to the Allies. (How could they make money out of
Germany while the British Navy maintained an effective

lockade against the Central Powers?)

It was quite a little while before it dawned upon me
that we were going to have to depend upoa America for
these necessities ; that our industrialism had so sapped
the economy of our resources that civilization was going to
seek salvation at the hands of the barbarian. Ie is the old
old story being continually retold. This was the fatal
error, pregnant with the catastrophe which was death to
Greece and creeping panılysis to Rome. The same
delusion will. gangrene id within the lifetime of
most men of military age unless she will realize that gold is
dross; that her poets, her artists, and her scholars are her
very soul,

i one had asked the New Yorker: “What are you
going to do aboutit? What of ravished Belgium? What
Of violated treaties?” the answer would casually have
come: “Don’t be foolish | Safety frst is the rule here!
If you want to fight, go to Europe. If you want to talk
war, go to hell; this country is neutral.” This was the
‘business sort, the calculating cold-blooded person. Is not
the dollar God, and does not God fight for the general
‘who has the preponderance of ?

But amidst the bewilderment and conflict which reigned
all the while, there were a few generous people, those who
Were educated. They were rare ; but they were on our side.

E S

108

THE LEGEND OF ALEISTER CROWLEY

I did not care whether my country was right or wrong.
I could sce both sides. So finding myself temporarily
held up in New York, I bethought myself whether I could.
not by some means serve

‘Through certain accidents, needless to narrate here,
I met George Sylvester Viereck, a man of considerable
talent. He the world well, being undeceived by
the humbug of public men and the prostitute antics of
the Press; his point of view possessed the sanity which
came from the second-rater’s perception of the necessity
of compromise. He was a man of suave insinuatinj
manners and address, a man of considerable politica
experience and immense intellectual capacity. But
intelligence was not sufficiently subtle to comprehend this
moral paradox in myself. Iam English and I love England,
Yet I praised Germany—I sympathized with Germany—
1 justibed. Germany, and he etvoncously deduced that I
was pro-German, During one of his conversations, it
dawned upon me that here was the real headquarters of
the German propaganda, the publishers "atberland,

Í then looked for what Americans cul * The man higher
up.” I finally found such a candidate for the secret
direction ot t German propaganda in Professor Hugo
Münsterberg. As it happens, he was an old enemy of
mine, we having about philosophy and physics
He Was an ines poskire nun besaliy maner of fiet,

t ca a subtlety, and far more open
to new facts and theories than mos of his opponents
supposed. He knew ; he knew men, he
understood business. Hi ‘was immense, and
in his capacity o£ instructor at Harvard University, he had
acquired the habits ofa leader. So much I knew, and my
mind pictured a duel—thrilling and romantic.

But the facts were less enthralling. ‘The professor had
the great German gift of Being Always Right. ‘Thus my
task was much simplified, for I had merely to keep on
telling him how very right he was, and under this treat-
ment he soon ceased to gauge the temper of the community
correctly, and finally became violent and stupid.

‘My immediate problem, though, was to confiem Viereck
in bis conviction that I realy wes pro German. I found
im very sympathetic about Irish Independence; ar
there beng = number of families of my name, Crowley,
in America, who had come direct from Ireland, 1 billed
myself accordingly as the only and original Sina Feiner,

THE WAR 109

My trouble was that I knew but little (but dis is a minor
point in America) about the Irish question, but it was made
easier Viereck wanted to believe—and di after I wrote
some rancorous nonsense about Irish Independence.
Having thus established myself as an Irish Rebel, L went
aay and costed what T shoud et maf dof
soon concluded that the propaganda of Tv Fatheriand,
in which the German cause was presented with the utmost
clarity, logic, scholarship and moderation, was infernali
dangerous 1o the Allied Cause. I talked to my friends
about it. They thought lite of it at the time, and so I
was left to consummate my own plans, alonc--in sheer
Solitude, misunderstood 1
decided on a course of action, I would write for
The Fatherland." would work up Viereck gradually,
first with relatively reasonable atacks on Eüghnd io
abid extravagances which would achieve my “object
tine of revolting every comparare sane human being
on earth,
uA Perte Luiteis to be a Mano Was, cans
lated: atrocity nor merely into military necessity, but
actually iato moral uplift, and placed golden haloes Ga the
statue of Von efie. And one day, that of the
murder of Edith Cavell, f got drunk—drunk with sage
and indignation. I sr down and wrote an article. I
Pictured Von Bising as a modern Jesus Christa great-
Souled, simple-minded trusting Gelman, wick humanity
and the world at heart his hand, wich tears in
his eyes, saying " Nurse Cavell, | trust you" She reacts
as Judas, and I thereupon conclude by a display of rhetoric —
equalled only by the bare-faced gullibilty with which i
VUE mgl rhe de primal
to Hell by Luerezia Borgia and r ladies.
Tt made me weep for Germany to think that Viereck
actually published such hideous and transparent iron
without turning a hair. (America does not
irony and satire; sarcasm is absolutely wasted on its
cople.) But are there tears salt enough to weep for
gland, when one thinks that few or nonc of my cotta
men could read the bittemess, anger and heart bresk
Between the lines oF that comic, tavay of Biaspheny.
ireryhody assumed that rhe irritating and most ansparet
balderdash I wrote for The Fa must be the stark
treason which the Germans were stupid enough to think
ipwas. But my Germans were loud in their congratalations,

110 THE LEGEND OF ALEISTER CROWLEY

I advocated ia the style of a real German Professor the
(gh a ag tine showed) tat s¢ outragente 4 volcg
(rightly so, as time sl t so out a violation
fall law and human decency would be the LAST STRAW
and force America to come in on out side.

But with this “ success” there came a blow. A friend
from a certain British consulate turned dis tingly on me
atc redigi ando (bdo cine a sele
appointed task, for the sake of England) and growled:
“Y didn’t know you were a German.” I admit I was
downhearted! How could we hope to win the war if
Englishmen had got so hysterical as that?

* . * * *

The situation changed. When America entered the
War, the Department of Justice, having both brains and
and the audacity to use them, got busy. They swiftly
realized, as T had done before, that the intellectual of the
Vierck and Mistetberg type is infinitely more dangerous
than the clumsy kind wi up beidges in places that
don’t matter. ‘The Department used me to the full, and
1 did my bit.

n the upshot, at last I got money enough to settle my
affairs in New York, where I had been dodging starvation
for five years. That legend of my growing fat on German,
gold! I lost no time in coming home to England. M,
Conscience was clear. I had been loyal to England.
had suffered for her sake more than any man. Thad fought
the good fight, despising the shame, Starvation and
solitude of soul’ and body! But I was content. I care
nothing for public opinion ; nothing for fame or success.
My attitude is unaltered by time. I still think the English
pot as black as the German kettle, but I am still willing to
ie in defence of the pot !

Such is the ios own interpretation of actions
which, to saj least, risked a quite contrary inter-
presion. Certainly only Aleister Crowley, amongst
living men, could have been so quixotic in his defence
ofthe *pot" I can only assist readers to form
their own judgment by. reprinting two of his articles,
Humanrry First, which I take to be a sincere state-
ment of what he felt; and THE NEW PARSITAL,

THE WAR ut

which I take on its face value as being a magnificent
piece of leg-pulling :

HUMANITY FIRST
(Reprinted from The International, November, 1917.)

Te may be that one day the gold plate with its diamond
inscriptions may be stripped by some Vandal—Macaulay's
New Zealander or another—from my sarcophagus. lt
may be that centuries later still the learned archeologists of
some nation yet unguessed, excavating the ruins of
‘Westminster Abbey may find’ those bones and send them
to anatomists for examination.

The report of these anatomists may be something in
these terms : “ These are the bones ofa mammal, a primate,
homo sapiens. The skull i not progoathous this person
m ech a gdgnent I weise with plum 1

in such a judgment I acquiesce wit fe de
would be limitation to be decribed as “thi German,”
or “this Japanese.” Man is man, and in him burns the
mystic fame of Godhead. Ic is a blasphemy to discriminate
further, to antithesize the Russian against the Turk, in any
matter more serious than national belief, custom, or costume,
ivanced thinkers, all men who realize the divine

plan, desire and intend the solidarity of humanity; and
the patriot in the narrow aad infuriated sense of that word
isa traitor to the true interests of man. It may be necessary,
now and then, to defend one’s own section of mankind
from aggression; but even this should always be done
with the mental reservation: “May this war be the nurse
of a more solid peace; may this argument lead to a better
understanding ; may this division lead to a higher union | "

“A man’s worst enemics are those of his own house-
hold,” and the worst foes of any nation are its petty patriots.
“Patriotism is the last resort of a scoundrel.” The
deliberate antagonizing of nations is the foulest of crimes.
It is the Press of the warring nations that, by inflaming
the passions of the i t, has set Europe by the ears.
Had all men been educated and travelled, they would not
have listened to those harpy-shricks. Now the mischief
is done, and itis for us to repair it as best we may. This
must be our motto: “ Humanity First.”

All who generalize about nations: ^ Germans
are all murderers” —“ Frenchmen are all adulterers "—

112 THE LEGEND OF ALEISTER CROWLEY

TEsglsbenaseallssobe "n Rusane nelson
so on, must be silenced, All persons who cling to
petty interests and revenges must be silenced. We must
refuse to listen to any man who does not realize that
‘civilization itself is at stake, that even now Europe may be
so weakened that it may fall a prey to the forces of atavism,
that war may be followed by bankruptcy, revolution, and
famine, and that even within our own lifetime the Tower
of the Ages may be fallen into unrecognizable ruins.

‘We must refuse to listen to any man who has not
resolutely put away from him all limited interests, all
national passion, who cannot look upon wounded humanity
with the broad, clear gaze, passionless and yet compas-
sionate, of the surgeon, or who is not single-minded in
his determination to save the life at whatever cost of
‘mutilation to any particular limb.

‘We must listen most to the German who understands
that England is a great and progressivo and enlightened
nation, whose welfare is necessary to the health of Europe
and to the Frenchman who secs in Germany his own best
friend, the model of science, organization and foresight,
"which alone can build up the fallen temple anew. We
must listen to the Englishman who is willing to acquiesce
in, the Freedom of the Seas; and to rhe Russian who

owledges that it is time to put a term to the tyranny
and corruption of his rules, P een
ding Press oF every country, always keen, to
ther pennies from the of the unthinking and
Enknowiog multitude, wil call every such man a traitor,
wig ae anaes bendi ety gn catu vo ie
er, r it of any given country to the
Ciononwelith of the whole Wodd. Let us no more
consider men, but man. Let us remember who came
fom heaven aad was made desh among the Jews, not to
lead is own people to victory, not to accept that pasta
dominion of the earth, but to bring light and truth to all

Had the Saviour of Humanity dei
pies msi of diving out the Romans, be would
ve united his nation, but man would not have been
redeemed. Therefore his people called him traitor, and
betrayed him to their own oppressors.

‘Let those who are willing, as He was, to accept the
opprobrium, and, if need be, the Cross, come forward;
it them bear the Orifamme of the Sun for their banner,

THE WAR iu

for that the Sun Shineth alike upon all the nations of tbe

earth; and let them ever flash in the forefront of their

battle this one redeeming thought: ^ Humanity First,"
‘That thought has been the key in which these essays

have been written,
Auster Crowter.
es 8 8 ee n9
THE NEW PARSIFAL.

A Study of Wilhelm TI.
By Atztsrer Crowzey.
(Reprinted from “ The Open Court.”)

World-crises are always preceded by world-prophets.
‘The artist is the secret incarnation of the Zeitgeist; his
contemporaries always fll to recognize him even, as an
artist, unless he live long enough to impose his will upon
them, and so see the world swing slowly towards his sun.

Iam fortunate in that, young as I still am, I behold the
establishment of the moral principles for which I fought
even as a boy. T see the death agony of sham religion,
the destruction of that cave of petty tyrannies and narrow
ideals that the “ good” called the “home,” the general
recognition of what was then called degeneracy, but was
in trath moral courage asserting its divine destiny, as part
of the normal life of the best men. Hypocrisy is squirmin
stil bur such is the habit of shin tepals,” So, before Í
am forty, I find the world almost an ideal place to live in.
Being an optimist, I had hoped much; but this greatest
thing I had bay dard fo hope, the dissolution, of
Syphilization in universal war. ly in my prophet-
mood could I speak it aloud.

T feel that there is a certain historical importance in
making this claim, for the Celtic race, the holy clan that
Siny deserve tha qubea ha epo de butter o gc,
stantly u irp upon jer of green,
the symbol of poetic inspiration, and the older banner,
the sun blaze, which I bear on my own shield, token of
the fatherhood of Apollo.

For there were prophets in the shrine before me, and
it is of them I speak. The weapon of one was music,
of the other philosophy. And these two men understood
‘what was seething in Europe, were tora by the throes of

x

in THÉ LEGEND OF ALEISTER CROWLEY

the birth of this giant child of time, Horus, the God of
War. ‘And so secret and so awful was ths labor that 20
oet could join their godly company, else it may be t

VOS Tad bien seed Sed the chld stillborn. Een now
when he is come, he appears in so black a veil that men,
remembering the t of Khorassan, shudder and

pass on.

‘But after the rule of the prophet comes the rule of the
king. In the world-crisis which they foresee arises the
hero. And just as they are forced to prophesy against
their will, so often enough the hero is a man of peace.
Anyone who has studied the history of Napoleon with
Fiere rum UE qt
in hi i shallow forgets that at
that time, France, already selfmutlated and bleeding
"ror the revolution, was best by che armies of the world,
Na saved France from Bourbon sloth, stupidity
and selfishness in the hour of thc ruin they bad brought
about, His subsequent wars were the fruits of his past
victories. If you disturb equilibrium ever so little the
whole universe shakes. Io order to readjust the machinery
which has slipped a single cog, it may sometimes be
necessary to scrap the whole plant and rebuild it from new
material. It is. impossible to localize war, For the
moment the affair may be prevented from spreading, but
the force continues to operate invisibly.

So by the irony of the gods the warrior king is often a
man of peace. ‘The popular mind is unable to perceive
these subtleties, It tends to regard Julius Cesar as
warrior rather than as a legislator, and Mohammed to t
day is considered rather as the’ conqueror than as the
greatest author and lawgiver of the Christian era, the
fran who built up a civilization whose essential force
carried Europe through the dark ages, and prevented the
destruction of knowledge from being’ complete.

“Thus, it being necessary for the popular mind to interpret
‘the prophets in some concrete manner, the popular imagin-
‘ation seizes on some convenient figure and makes him a
hero. There he stands, in marble sometimes, more often
jin bronze, but always with the inscription “ Hail, Saviour
of the world” upon the pedestal.

‘The lavish gods have matched their prophets well with
their hero this time. Wilhelm II* has always been to a

ecb emgeable hat Fez Jof s ia quite well as the aged King.
eure

THE WAR nj

certain extent conscious of himself as an incarnation of
Lohengrin, Siegfried, Parsifal.

The last thing that Wagner wanted to draw was an
overman, Wagners intellect was socialistic. But the
prophet in him, as in every true artist, was aristocratic;

every time he drew, he drew a saviour. His hero was
not merch a king, but holy king, He was the custodian
Ea sacred treasure; he wielded magic weapons, and wore
armour consecrated and invulnerable.

Te was a great thing for Germany tbat she had an emperor
with the intelligence to perceive what these things meant,
And to realize himself as the Messiah of whom the prophet
Wagner spoke. This being so, be stepped readily and
naturally into the place, as on a wellrehearsed stage.
Already, before the war is ended, he is apparent even to
neutris and to enemies as the central figure of the drama,
IMS is Whe age cË fairy tales, The newspapers a

the age of fairy ers have
weaned us from the truth. So even the All-lies have con-
spired in stupid hate to endow the Kaiser with all the
qualities of a demigod. In truth, to his own soldiers he
appears, flashing hither and thither, like St. Michael, to
rally, t¢ encourage, to led forward ia the charge. Where
the fight is thickest, there is the emperor, pale and stern,
like Christ as he arose from Gethsemane and walked forth
to meet Fite, and to find triumph and immoral glory.
From front to front he sages, whirling aloft the conse-
crated sword of his fathers, He never spares himself;
he is a comrade to every soldier in the ranks.

There is something here to catch the imagin-
ation. To his very enemies he seems like Lucifer or
Attila, not wholly human. They endow him with the
‘magic gifts; he is reported simultaneously on every battle
front, as well as in a dozen of his castles. Even the Crown.
Prince is killed 2 hundred times and rises to renew the
combat, ever more glorious because more glittering as hie
breaks through the spider-web of myth whose gossamer
shrouds him as with the veil of a high priestess over the
silver armor of a kaight of the Graal.

There is so, such magic drapery about the Car, He
is in Petrograd, and goes to t now and again, a
mere king, hardly a warrior king, certainly not a sacred
king, and etl les a dem god, “But Wilkelm I is the

ius of his people. He has the quality that Castor and

'ollux had for Rome. He seems omniscient, omnipotent,

16 THE LEGEND OF ALEISTER CROWLEY

omnipresent, the very ange! of God, terrible and beautiful,
sent to save the Fat from ‘savage foes. Even if
he perish, he will not perish as a man. He will acquire
the radiance of Milton’s Satan, and go down the ages as
the hero of the great lost cause of humanity.

None will know the place of his burial. ends will

row up around him as they did for Christ, for Balder,
for Adonis, for Arthur, for Mohammed, for Napoleon.
“He d not really dead, he will come again to lend his
people to the final triumph,” will be the word in the mouth
OF every peasant, and a subconscious hope in the heart
of every noble. ‘The poct will know that this is mystically
true; for he knows that there is no death, that character
is more permanent than flesh and blood, that men are
in truth the incamation of some god. He knows that
the hero, compact of myth, is yet more real than the
historical figure of the man himself. Imagination holds
more truth than science; art is real, life is illusion, For
art holds the idea complete and pure, the divine though,
clothed, abour with beauty. Art, formulats delty: art
from the quarries of the amorphous carth, builds its
imperishable palace of white marble, or of onyx, porphyry
and malachite.

"Ave, Guglielme! Rex, imperator! Hail, Saviour of
the world, that clad in golden armor, with the helm of
holiness, wieldest the sword | Hail sovereign and saviour,
that healest all the disease of the ages, that hurlest back the
heathen from the sacred realm.

‘Welcome to the world that lay in anguish, hungering
for thy dawn, O sun of righteousness |The holy’ kings
of old salute thee; the prophets anoint thee with the oil
of benediction; they offer thee the crown of Europe.
The poets see thee, and know thee; their songs weave
silken veils about thine armor!

‘Ave, Guglielme, rex, imperator |

ACTIVITIES IN AMERICA

For the rest, Crowley in America continued to be
active physically and mentally, and to figure from
time to time sensationally in the Press, as might be
expected.

THE WAR E

Upon his arrival in December, 1914, he was “ in-
terviewed ” by the reporters, who naturally found
him good “copy,” as the following “story” from
the New York World exemplifies:

MASTER MAGICIAN REVEALS WEIRD
SUPERNATURAL RITES

Aleister Crowley, who recently arrived in New York,
is the strangest man I ever met. ‘fie isa man about whom:
men quarrel. Intensely magnetic, he attracts people or
menis hem with equi videns. Hie penondlky seems
to breed rumors. Everywhere they follow him.

One man to whom I spoke of him lauded Crowley as a
poet of rare delicacy, the author of "Hail Mary," a

land of verses in honour of the Mother of God.

‘nother alluded to him as an unspariog critic of American
Titerature, Another knew bim as the holder of some
world records for mountain-climbing. Still another
warned me against him asa thoroughly bad man,  Satanish
or, devilworshipper seeped in Black magic, the, bigh
priest of Beelzebub. An actor knew of him only as a
theatrical producer and as the designer of extraordinary
stage costumes., A publisher told me that Crowley was
an essayist and philosopher whose books, nearly all
privately printed, were masterpieces of "
‘Among his works is a voluminous treatise on the histor
and practices of magic, representing immense researc
and erudition—the authoritative book on the subject.
By others he was variously pictured to me as a big game
hunter, as a gambler, as an editor, as an explorer. je
said that he was a man of real attainments, others that he
wwas a faker, All agcccd that he was extraordinary. . .

While in America, he travelled extensively from
coast to const over that vast continent, visiting
Florida, New Orleans, Los Angeles, San Francisco
and the Middle West, travelling up the Hudson in a
canoe, living as a hetmit on Q:sopus Island—always
restless. In New York, he played a number of light-
heatted pranks, not the least being the “ Declaration

u8 THE LEGEND OF ALEISTER CROWLEY

of Tish Independence ” on July 3rd, 191s, which
he proclaimed at the foot of the Statue of Liberty
after throwing his " British passport" (an old en-
velope!) into the river harbour, and making the
following portentous specch :

I have not asked any great human audience to listen
to these words; I had rather address them to the uncon-

juerable ocean that surrounds the world, and to the free.
four winds of heaven. Facing the sunrise, I lift up my
hands and my soul herewith to this giant figure of Liberty,
the ethical counterpart of the Light, Life and Love which
are our spiritual heritage. In this symbolical and most
awful act of religion, I invoke the one true God of whom.
the Sun Himself is but a shadow that He may strengthen
me heart and hand to uphold that freedom for the land
‘of my sires, which I am come hither to proclaim,

In this dark moment, before the father orb of our
system kindles with his kiss the sca, I swear the great
oath of the Revolution.

I tear with my hands this token of slavery, this safe-
conduct from the enslver of my people (does so); I
renounce for ever all allegiance to every alien tyrant; T
swear to fight to the last drop of my blood co liberate
the men and women of Ireland; and I call upon the free
people of this country, on whose hospitable shores I
stand an exile, to give me countenance and assistance in
my task of breaking these bonds which they broke for
themselves 138 years Mo.

T proclaim the Irish Republic! T unfurl the Irish flag L
Eire go Bragh! God save Ireland 1

Another practical joke was “a publicity scheme ”
which Crowley's fertile brain evolved in order to sell
a book written by an acquaintance of his. He in-
serted about a hundred small advertisements in
provincial papers to the effect that a reward of
$10,000 would be paid [by the author} to anyone who
would recover for him, in its undamaged form, the
image of Kwannon which was stolen fora Son Yat
Sen at Shanghai on June 13th, 1904.

THE WAR n9

The result was that hundreds of reporters and
Press photographers, with amateur detectives, be-
sciged the amazed author's house; and at least 600
newspaper “stories,” many of them full-page, all
of them full of the wildest inventions and speculations,
appeared in the American Press, until Crowley,
thinking the joke had gone far enough, “blew the
paf" Even then, American reporters called on the
innocent Sun Yat Sen in far-away China, and asked
him for bis side of the story. The President told
them, with dignity, that he had lived a long while,
and heard a lot about the extravagance of newspapet
stories, but never in his life had he yt heard anything
so silly

At the time of Prohibition, Crowley gave in New
York a “ benzine jag” to which invitations in the
following form were issued :

JULY wr. JOYFUL CELEBRATION!

‘The Grand Master invites the representatives of the
Press, the Prohibition Movement, the Pulpit, Poetry, and
the Police to join in she inaugural festival of tie BENZINE

- o9 pm. 1. No. asblagton Square.
De uat av, love under wi. wes ien

One of the “ representatives of the Press” ended
his description of the ^ Jag " as follows :

Once out in Washington Square, the visitor took several
deep ento, caught bent fee walked stele
peth, thought, normally, and wondered, “ Where is that
po

Yet unquestionably, he had been under the influence
of the benzine because, for three hours, he bad been
glibly conversing on his “inner self” and a rare variety
Of subjects with which he had heretofore been slightly
acquainted. And furthermore he had made several warm
friendships under the power of the benzine.

no THE LEGEND OF ALEISTER CROVLEY

Here is the. ription for the “ benzine jag" which
doctors say & ot harmful if taken ia small pron
Misc an order can of benzine, take a dropper,

luy an ordinary can ine, take a
capsules, put twenty drops of ich pm
and then take as if it were a

Crowley also became a painter about this time,
and made a sensation in Greenwich Village by in-
serting the following advertisement in the daily Press :

WANTED

DWARFS, HUNCHBACKS, Tattooed Women, Has
son Fisher Girls, e of All Sorts, Coloured Women,
only if exceptionally ugly or deformed, to pose for artist.
As 6) Tea with Shoropeanhe Box JEn.

A reporter, visiting his studio, took back a beautiful
“story” to his editor

“I had never studied art and had never drawn or
weit src Ue When I tried to draw I

so interested io the work that I gave up the
editorship of the magazine and went in for art. What
you see around you is the result. What sort of an artist
am 17, Ob, 1 don't know just what to call myself. Te
say, of-hand, that I was an old master.

THE INTERNATIONAL

Crowley soon transformed this vaguely radical
pe Hecontributed occasional articles during 1916,

t in August, 1917, he took control of it entirely, and
wrote practically the whole of its contents, under
numerous aliases, just as he had done in the days of
the Equinox. From that time onwards, all vag
political theorisings aad ponderousness was banished

m its pages. Amongst other contributions by

THE WAR E

Crowley were two really notable seties of short
stories, Srwow Irr (detective), by “Edward Kelly”
and a collection of stories now called Goupen Twics
(from their thematic derivation in Sir J. G. Frazers
“The Golden Bough”), by “Mark Wells” and
others—all Aleister Crowley, of course. There was
also some “popular” exposition of Magick, some
poetry, and only occasionally any reference to the
Great War (e.g. Humantry First). In April, 1918,
the control of the journal passed out of Crowley’s
hands into those of one Lindsay M. Keasbey, formerly
a professor of Political Science at the University of
Texas. The magazine, therefore, became defunct.

THE “EQUINOX” AGAIN

Five years of silence having elapsed (the second
volume), Crowley now began to re-issue the Equixox
(“Vol. 3”) in the spring of 1918. The first number
appeared, quite up to the standard of the old English

lays. Number 2 of this volume, I understand, also
went to press for the autumn; but financial diffi-
culties prevented Crowley from bringing it out—
further significant commentary on the legend of
German gold. He therefore abandoned the idea of
proselytising any further in America,

In 1919 he returned to Europe.

CROWLEY AND AMERICA

Even before he first visited New York in 1900,
the poet had written an APPEAL TO THE AMERICAN

Rupusurc, very adolescent, Swinburnian, and sincere,
which was none the less a call for the unity of the

122 THE LEGEND OF ALEISTER CROWLEY

English-speaking peoples—amazingly ahead of its
fine. "The pocta ias published with a cover design
of crossed flags—the Union Jack and the Stars and
Stripes. Its style and sentiments may be appreciated
from the following excerpts :

Ti aera ie Apra lap the fertile land,
ere long blue ripples lap the fertile land,
Whose manif dominion, ike a stat,
Fixed by the iron hands and swords of war,

Now must for aye, a constellation, stand—
Thou new strong nation! as the eagle aspires

“ro match the sun's own fires,

Children of our land, heat the children of your sires,
‘The morning of deliverance is at hand ;

The world requickens, and all folk rejoice,
Seeing our ka toward your land,
‘And both catch hands, indissolubly grand
Ta the proud friendship of a better choice.
Your winds that wrought wild wreckage on our shore
Shall sink and be no more,
Or waft your barks, with wheat gold-laden, swiftly o'er.
DEE ee Se
‘Are not yout veins made purple with our blood,
"And our dominions touch they not afield ?
Pours not the sea its long exultant flood
On either’s coast? "The rose has one same bud
‘And the vine’s heart one purple pledge doth yield.
‘Are we not weary of the fangéd pen ?
Are we not friends, and men?
Let us look frankly face to face—and quarrel then |

There was much more in this vein (39 stanzas)
and I cannot help thinking that the poem is one of
the most significant Crowley documents which I have
examined in relation to that portion of his “legend”
which whispers “traitor!” [Unless it be that
Crowleyan suggestion published in the form of a
letter to the Observer, of 27th September, 1914, which
attracted some attention at the time

THE WAR n5

POETIC JUSTICE,
(Co the Editor of the Obserer)

Tate josie to Rheims i poesble. Te is well within the power
‘of modern builders to transplant thither Cologne Cathedral, stope bY
umbered, stone.” Let this be the symbol and monument of our
ietory- Yours faithfully,

(——

His APPEAL TO THE AMEarCAN Repustrc, with
minor alterations only, was reprinted in the English
Review in October, 1914—his prophetic insight, or

erhaps it should be called poetic statesmanship, of
een years earlier having then become more readily
applicable to current events.

Even then, his appeal for an alliance was not
relished by certain literary Englishmen, for example
by the critic in the Ne» Age, who wrote thus about
his poem as repriated :

‘One would suppose that that sordid continent has

. Crowley one of Swinburne’s idealized
lots. Did anyone ever hear such language as this
addressed to a continent of Yankees intent on capturing
German trade in South America while England holds up
German shipping at her own cost?

‘The prophet was certainly without honour in his
own land !

However, his lyrical affection for America was
tempered by an affectionate prerogative of criticism,
instanced by an article which appeared in the English
Review in November, 1915, entitled Ax IN AMERICA.
"The article attracted wide attention, both in England
and in America. It was severe. The followin
précis of it, which appeared in the Yorkshire Herald,
may serve to show its general import :

‘That remarkable young gentleman, Mc. Aleister Crowley,
says some bard things about Americs in the ~ English
Review.” He criticizes the art of the country with a pen

124 THE LEGEND OF ALEISTER CROWLEY

diet sur have lad in wil snes Bye chew i downs
fellow, gua loaded with pop-corn, an
Tnet m iie Bader than Moody and Sankey! “Of
the Channings, one need only rema thatthe uncle was 8

int and tl an ignoramus.” '"* there was
poseg Cne” Cornelius Matthews, who burst his
octie gun the frst time he fired it” -In painting, Me,

swley declares that Alex. Harrison painted two passable
pictures by accident, America has no music, and the
Dry American sculptor that he knows of is a Lithuanian
living in Paris. “The boasted scientific inventions of the
‘Americans do not exist. What they invent is ‘notions,’
based on the discovery of others. Edison is merely an
organizer and adapter of scientific brains.” But had you
heard of Aleister y?

The Times referred to the article as :
‘Aa entirely preposterous, but quite enjoyable, tirade.
The Northern Whig commented :

AAn article which should make him a target, not for
individuals, but for an outraged mation. Mr. Crowley
touches our transatlantic neighbours on their weakest
spot by, proclaiming that sheir boasted culture i a por
TP". His judgments certainly do not err on the side
leniency. ... One could understand American patriots
clamouring for President Wilson to suppress Mr. Crowley
Ais he has tried to suppress Gen. Huerta.

The Academy evoked memories of Wild West
films :

Aleister Crowley has an article on “Art in America”
which should set all Americans who own to pride of country
hot on his trail with loaded revolvers.

—while the New York Evening Post attempted to be
aristocraticaliy superior :

If America can be ridiculed for its average tourist, it
at least furnishes nothing quite so humorous as the type

THE WAR 135

‘of omniscience here illustrated... . The article reflects
the opinions of a considerable number of Englishmen,
especially of the so-called lower middle class,

It follows from this incident that Crowley, in
going to America to live during the War, un-

loubtedly a sincere enough desire to advocate a
union between England and America in the world
crisis; but it also follows that he was bound to
rub self-conscious Americans the wrong way, thinking
as he did that they were culturally backward.
would hazard the suggestion that, whereas his earlier
extensive travels in the Fast had isolated the poet
spiritually from the English quagmire, his war-time
sojourn and extensive travellings in the West did
something to make him realise that England, with
its traditions, after all, was at least not so detestable
as once he had thought. This is merely my surmise.
If he came back to England in 1919 in that spirit
he was rapidly to be disillusioned by the reception
which was awaiting him at the hands of James Douglas
and Bottomley’s successors, more barbarous and
hysterical than the wildest extravagances he might
have deplored in “uncultured” America,

CnarrER V
AFTER THE WAR

Tom question might well be asked, Why did James
Douglas and the Sunday Express and Bottomley's
successors on John Bull select Crowley as an object
oF their unrestrained and. indestbably slanderous
vituperation campaign against him was of a
severity unexampled in the history of English jour-
nalism in that a private individual was its butt.
During the War the Kaiser, and immediately after
the War, Lenin and Trotsky, were reviled and
execrated in terms of opprobrious hyperbole exceeding
the limits of sine imagination. But these were public
individuals, personifications of “Hunnishness” and
“Bolshevism,” and the propaganda attacks upon
them were part of a calculated policy. ‘They were
symbols, not persons. But Aleister Crowley was
attacked as a person, and not as the personification
of any poli or idea, |The technique of propaganda,
perfected against "* Hunnishness " and “ Bolshevism,”
Was now employed, holus-bolus, to discredit an
English man of letters.

s it fantastic to suggest the following possible
explanation of the campaign against Crowley ?—
That during the War Fleet Street had been trained,
especially by Northcliffe, in the technique of scientific
propaganda which may be defined as personal vitupera-
tion based on moral hortor; that after Versailles, it
was no longer necessary to vituperate the Kaiser, but
that Lenin and Trotsky were easily to hand as

126

AFTER THE WAR 27

substitutes, and that the vituperative weapon was
sharpened still further upon their bodies; but that
after the failure of Allied intervention in Russia, and
after the Triple Alliance strike of British workmen
(1921) against intervention in Russia, the “ Bolshevik
menace” propaganda began to lose its point; and
that nevertheless a whole generation af specialist
vituperative writers had to “carry on ” in Fleet Street
somehow.

‘We may presume, not only that the copywriters of
Fleet Street were trained in the School of Propagandist.
Abuse, but that their postulated millions of readers
had also become accustomed to expect this kind of
thing. Crowley came into the news opportunely for
journalists confronted with a dearth of “ horrors.”
The rusting weapons of vituperation were polished
and brought into play. Such is an hypothesis.

To the credit nevertheless of British journalism,
whatever excesses may have been committed during
the War and the Bolshevik revolution, only two
journals, the Suiday Express and John Bull, failed to
distinguish between vituperation of a public and a
private individual. Amongst all the newspapers and
journals in Fleet Street, omly these two attacked and
“exposed” Aleister Crowley. This fact is a tribute
to the decency and restraint of Fleet Street in general,
where the important power of publicity must be
constantly regarded as a power to be used with the
utmost discretion, particularly when the publicity
is to be adverse, and against a private individual.

Nevertheless, the two papers just mentioned as an
exception were “important” and widely circulated,
The attack which they launched was potentially and
actually quite different in effect from what had hitherto
been the worst newspaper defamation of Crowley—
the miserable Looking Glass afait of 1910. This

128 THE LEGEND OF ALEISTER CROWLEY

latter Crowley had ignored as being too trivial to
bother about, as indeed it was, had the line then
initiated by De Wend Fenton not been developed
by James Douglas and Jobn Ball within mote recent
memory. Then, he was unwilling to defend himself
by recourse to the processes of Law; even had he
won a libel action against the Looking Glass there
was more than a considerable doubt whether the com-
pany or its editor would have had the assets to pay
reasonable damages. Now, the wealth of the papers
defaming him was so colossal as to put it beyond the
Shadow of a doubt dut they would have been able
to pay substantial damages, if Crowley had secured a
verdict. But, by the same’ token, they would have
been able to command legal resources for their defence
immeasurably greater than anything Crowley would
have been able to command for their prosecution.
He was without money, he was sick, he was in a
foreign country. They launched theit attack in an
immunity from legal consequences quite as effective
as if they had attacking the Huns or the
Bolsheviks. By a curious irony, only two kinds of
newspapers can afford to defame an individual—
those with scarcely any assets, and those with enormous
reserves. Moreover, the safest way to libel an in-
dividual is to pile on the infamy so thick, to make the
allegations so fantastic and numerous, that they
become impossible to refute by the canons of common
sense which regulate trial by jury. Joby Bull, for
example, said that Crowley was a cannibal. How
could he prove to a British jury that he was not a
cannibal? Particularly when at the same time he was
accused of all kinds of “unmentionable” vice?
Even a stupid barrister would have no difficulty in

roving to a jury that Crowley is not a Christian.
Moreover, that he is actively opposed to the practice

AFTER THE WAR 129

and ethics of Christianity. There is enormous pre-
judice No. 1. After that, many jurymen would have
no difficulty in believing that he was a cannibal. And
Crowley had no possible means, in logic or in evidence,
of proving the contrary! Consider, too, the effect that
would be produced upon a jury of good men and
true who were asked to examine, in the course of a
tial, the writings of Aleister Crowley, which would
undoubtedly be admitted as evidence ! We have
seen how those works puzzled even sophisticated
critics. What effect would they have upon a jury
asked to examine marked passages? So much pre-
judice would be created by them that Crowley would.

ave the greatest difficulty in exonerating himself
from the grosser charges.

I go at some length into the psychology, as I
conceive it, of those who cond the campaign
against Crowley in order to answer the doubts of
many people, otherwise quite friendly to the poet,
who nevertheless ask insistently : Why did he not take
action? "The fact that Crowley is a literary man places
him in an abnormal category, because the writings
of a literary man are always admissible in evidence
of his character. Indeed, such is literature. Never-
theless there is an injustice in submitting a literary
man, through his works, to the ordeal of estimation
by a jury; however admirable in other respects the
jury system may be. A literary man, above all a
poet, seldom writes “down” to the appreciation of
average "good men and true.” Despite this, he
may bea great writer. So much is almost a Platitade,
yet I must insist upon its is asan tion
Bf Cowley's motives in aof defending himself at law
against the attacks which a in the Sunday

cpress and Jobn Bull.

‘The poet’s revenge upon his detractors is slow.

:

130 THE LEGEND OF ALEISTER CROWLEY

Byron was savagely attacked during his lifetime.
Who attacked him? Was it James Douglas in a
previous incarnation? Nobody knows. Ivventure to
suppose that long after the present James Douglas
is defunct and forgotten, some of the men and ideas
he has attacked will be living and remembered. If
only because he has attacked D. H. Lawrence and
Aleister Crowley, James Douglas will go to oblivion.
Such is the poct's revenge.

T select Douglas for this mention because it was
Douglas who initiated the attack upon Crowley with
a “review” of Tue Diary oF A DRUG Frenn,
written in that pious and shuddering idiom of his
which has nowadays become muore ferallat, and less
significant, than then it was. Jos Bul merely
followed a lead given by the Sunday Express, as
previously it had merely followed a lead given by the

woking Glass.

James Douglas called for the suppression of Tur
Diary or a Dauc Frenn in November, 1922. His
splash headline was “A Book for Burning.” His
copywriters made a sensational front-page "news ^
splash the following week, in order to bring extra
pressure upon the publishers, in the recognised
manner of the Fleet Street potentate at work “ getting
thingsdone.” This attack reached the utmost violence
of which vituperative journalism is capable. The
following Spring there was a continuation of the
“exposures” following the death of Raoul Loveday
at Cefalù. Then the “story ” fizzled.

And the damage had been done, though only the
notoriously silly Jon Ball kept the story going, or
even took any notice of the story, amongst all English.
journalism. I do not mean to pay James Douglas
a compliment when I say that he really showed some
power in his campaign against Aleister Crowley. At

AFTER THE WAR E

least partly because of the o Sunday Express alle sions

Crowley was “expelled” from Fascist Italy, and
ater from Fons s is a use of power, un-
doubtedly. It is also a superb example of the abuse
of power, abuse of the prerogative of defending

“public interest” which is supposed to be in the
hands of the Press. I have stated very plainly that
I think Crowley has often acted foolishly in the
course of his adventurous life. I cannot believe
that he has acted criminally. If he has acted
criminally, Scotland Yard should take action, now
that he is living in England, Will James Douglas
take this up again, and clear up the uncertainty one
way or another? 'He will not.

And if James Douglas and the Ss Express will
not now make the atempt to have Crowley pur in
prison, will they, on the other hand, retract, or do
anything to correct, misstatements made at that time
which are demonstrably false, and of which the
following is a typically pernicious example :

(Extract from article ented : “ Aleister Crowley's
ss in Sicily" November 264b, 1922.)

WOMEN VICTIMS

hree women he keeps there permanently for his orgies.

Allo m he brought fors Aer two or tice us
ago. ‘One is a French-American governess, one is an
-schoolmistress, and one a cinema actress from Los

Api he needs and fr
lever money, and cannot get it from
fresh victims, he sends them on the streets of Palermo
or Naples to earn it for him.

He served once a prison sentence in America for pro-
curing young girls for a similar purpose.

It will be observed that these statements accuse
Crowley, not only of being a criminal, but of being

13. THE LEGEND OF ALEISTER CROWLEY

a convicted felon. Three women who are identifiable
ate accused of having been prostitutes. It would be
supposed that no responsible editor would publish
such statements without being able fully to sub-
stantiate them.

What are the facts? How could such allegations
as these be refuted in a court of Law?

The onus of proof should be on the newspaper
making the allegation, It is unfair to ask an accused
person to establish a negative, particularly when the
allegation is preposterous. The definite statement
that Crowley has been in prison is, however, of
another order. It should be possible to give the
date and place, together with full particulars of the
charge, from official records.

Unless this can be done, the statement is a gross
and filthy lie and libel. I am assured that, not only
has Crowley never been in prison, but he has never
even been accused of any crime before any court in
any country of the world.

ven at this late date, will the Sunday Express either
prove or withdraw the allegation? I wonder! In
the meantime, may we not presume Crowley innocent
until he is proved otherwise before the proper
tribunal? Such is, of course, the cornerstone of
English judicial procedure. And if Crowley should
happen to be innocent, then what shall be said of the
editor of the Sunday Express? The whole matter
certainly needs investigation.

We must now pass, restraining nausea, to a con-
wen of the actual do in accordance with
the only certain procecure of redress at present open.

Before reprinting the article by James Douglas
which started the ^ mud-ball ^ rolling, an opinion as
to the Diary or 4 Dru Frenp might be formed from

AFTER THE WAR Bs

the three following reviews in representative papers.
‘These reviews are quoted in full :
The Times Literary Supplement. November 16, 1922,
Mz. Crowley has not the literary fascination of a
De Quincey or the power and stark realism of a Zola.
His most conspicuous gift is an effervescent imagination,
an exuberant diction; and in the rhapsodies, despairs, and
tegencration of Sir Peter and Lady Pendragon, ardent
devotees of cocaine and “heroin,” retailed in a * Paradiso”
(by Sie Peter), an Inferno (by his wife), and a " Purgatorio”
(by Sir Peter), we certainly do not reach, though he avers
it to be a “tme story,” any impression of a real human
experience. They roam about Paris and Europe, palpi-
tating at first with “internal ecstasy and the intoxicating
sense that the whole world admired and envied us.
They “had sprung in one leap to be coterminous with
the Universe,” and so on; then they sank into “ boundless
bliss” bat diftiog “ down the dark and sluggish river of
inertia towards the stagnant, stinking morass of insanity ” ;
and through the horrors of despair they each at Jast the
‘Abbey of Thelema, where diminution of doses and disser-
tations on life and its meanings, control of the will, and
the ‘credo? of a Gnostic and Catholic Church of Light,
Life, Love and Liberty give chem mastery of the will and
‘of degenerating emotion; and the belief that there is
nothing in nature, even drugs, which cannot be used for
‘our benefit. The’ book teems both with an immense
fertility of incidents and idea; and with an amazingly rich
crop of rhetoric. It is impossible to say thar at any moment
in the carer of Peter an his wife do we seem to be in
touch wie Iisa ria of ecstasies,
Se td abae al reaa a en

The Observer. December 10, 1922,
“I got another and put it mouth. He
wen $id sod aated me ty e li, od Deed opes
my jaws with his fin thumb.’ T struggled and
kicked and scratched, but he was too strong. He got
it out and put it in his own mouth. Then he hit me in
the face as I sat.” This extract is from the diary of a
ing woman who has the cocaine habit. As she starts
y chanting “O thou of sweet flowers, that art
wafted over blue fields of air! I adore thee, Évoel I

134 THE LEGEND OF ALEISTER CROWLEY

adore thee, LA.O.1" there seems a slight falling off in
her style—which only goes to bear out the argument of
the whole and to show that these good drugs, as masters,
do not exactly improve the manners, whatever they may
do as servants. Mr. Crowley suddenly leaves these
slightly disgusting surroundings, and removes his young
people toa wondrous place of treatment mainly by addresses
and incantation. He declares that the place exists on this
carnal globe, and is willing to act as intermediary should
any reader habitually bre t on heroin and desire to
return to bacon and eggs. There is a certain compelling
power about the descriptions of degradation, ‘They have
à truer ring than the ultra-fantastic. patches—although
these are credible enough as a rough translation into the
speech of every day from a Language only ‘heard, and
"indertood under “ightfal and inbuman, if ecstatic,
conditions.

The Daily Herald. November 15, 1922.

Drug-taking, to judge from The Diary of a Drag Fiend
(by Aer Gov. Collins. 7s. 6d) seems singalatly
uninteresting. But, then, I happen most emphatically to
dislike losing control over my mental faculties, and the
great attraction of drugs to be the creation in the
mind of a false sensation of wonderful power and pleasure
—until the virtue goes out of them and they produce no
effect whatever, save a restless craving, unless doses are
taken regularly.

‘The one excuse for writing such a book as this is that
it should hold out some hope to the victims of this vice;
and this Aleister Crowley does, describing the theories,
Tay of living, and scenery of a spot to which the hero-
yilin and heroine illines go, to be brought back to
sanity by the discovery of their true work in life.

Tt is nota pleasing book, but Mr. Crowley invites anyone
interested in the system of training he describes to com-
munieate with him. Doubtless there must be many victims,
and relatives of victims, of this and other crazes who will
accept his invitation.

Tt seems fairly obvious from these reviews that the
book was considered, at its face value, as being a
warming agsinst drugs, and an indication of the

AFTER THE WAR 15

methods of mental discipline by which the “habit”
could be overcome.

James Douglas, however, almost became delirious,
drugged himself with morbidity, when he read the
book. His “splash” was as follows :

A BOOK FOR BURNING

By James Douctas
(Sunday Express, November 19, 1922)

Some time ago, when our highbrows, or, as they area
pleased to call’ themselves, our intelligentsia, were all
Prasing James Joyce's“ Ulpses,” I ventured to pot i
in the pillory aš the pinnacle and apex of lubricity and
obscenity. But the praise of our highbrows has made it
possible for a respectable publisher to hurl ioto the British

ome anovel whieh is modelled upon that scabrous outra
There are two methods of deiling with pornographic
fiction. One is to ignorc it lest publicity should inflate its
sales. The other method is to raise public opinion so
cliecively thatthe book is either withdrawn from circula-
tion by the publisher or is confiscated by public authority.

The Liberty of Art

There is much to be said for the first method. No
critic ought to puff a vile book by advertising its vileness.
‘Moreover, no critic ought to narrow the liberty of literature
or fetter the art of the artist. If there be a doubt, freedom.
‘ought to be given the benefit. On the other hand, if
pornographic novels are ignored they tend to become
more pornographic. They quickly expand their licence.
The ccc upon young writers i injurious, for they are
tempted to mistake salacity for modernity, obscenity
dislag, indecency for independeace. Tb the art oF the
artist is doubly damaged. When the public revolt against
the revolting, all arusts are tarred with the same brush.
The liberty of art is unreasonably curtailed. The
pendulum ‘swings from the, extreme, of lisence, to

e extreme profession of letters
ER CETTE with moral
lepers.

16 THE LEGEND OF ALEISTER CROWLEY

Exstatie Eulogy
have therefore determined to adopt the second method,
and to do my best to secure the immediate extirpation of
"The Diary of a Drug Fiend” (Collins, 7/6 net) by
Aleister It is a novel describing the orgies of
Vice practis a group of moal degeneres who
stimulate their end by doses of cocaine and
heroin. Although there is an attempt to pretend that
the book is merely a study of the depravation caused by
cocaine, in reality it is an ecstatic eulogy of the drug and
of is eects upon the body and the mind. A cocaine
trafficker "welcome it «s a recruiting agent which
would bring him thousands of new victims...
Casing Blasphenties
‘The characters of the novel are repulsive. . . . The
gospel preached by, the book is this: ~ Bo wha bou wilt
Shall be the whole of the law.” ‘The obscenities are

flavoured with cunning blasphemics, . . «
"There is even a parody of the Cicod, At the baser
and more bestial horrors of the book it is impossible, even
if it were desirable, to hint.
Tt may be asked how such a book could secure a
bisher. Well, few publishers have tme to read the
ks which the h, and even their readers some-
times read them hastily. 1 imagine that this book secured
blication in the guise of an exposure of the evils wrought
br drugs. But its true character is stamped on it in spite
its ingenious use of innuendo and artifice. It is a book
that ought to be burned. Why lock up cocaine-
if we tolerate cocaine novels?

In order to second this virtuous attempt to secure
“the immediate extirpation” of the novel, the
Sunday Express followed up, a week later, with a
front page story, here reprinted im extenso +
Sunday Express. November 26, 1922.
COMPLETE EXPOSURE OF “ DRUG FIEND” AUTHOR

Brack Recor oF ALSTER CROWLEY
Preying on the Debased.
His Abbe;
Profiigacy and Vice in Sicily.

AFTER THE WAR 7

ession oka bosk, S The Dias of Drug Hemd, wet

n ofa book, " The Diary of a Dru ” written
Bye pe son called Aet Crow UE

is t he se and more bel horror of the book i

impossible to hint," wrote Mr. James. s.

‘The publishers state that it is their wee to push
the sales of this pernicious work.

"The “ Sunday ress” was determined that the public
should be protected, and made the fullest investigations
into the carcer of the author.

These investigations base produced the mast astounding
revelations,

The man Aleister Crowley is the organizer of
societies for pag cs.

He engaged in pro-German propaganda during the
war.

He published obscene attacks on the King.

He made a dramatic renunciation of his British
bicthright.

He proclaimed himself “King of Ireland.”

He stole money from a woman.

He now conducts an “ Abbey ” in Sicily.

He was in London a month ago, unknown to any
except his small circle of intimates,

‘This is the man whose latest work is a deliberate
symposium of obscenity, blasphemy, and indecency.

Man of Many Names
His picture was painted in 1911 by Augustus John, and
this year by Jacob Kramer. The latee picture ee
exhibition in’ London, entitled, " The Beast 666 "—which
is how the artist aw him, E
je “ Sunday Express” in reiterating its demand for
the withdrawal from circulation of this volume, feels
certain that these revelations will induce the publishers—a
firm of high repute—to reconsider their decision.
The ing is the full life history and record of this
sinister author» ana 2
leister—formerly Alisuir—Crowley was a notorious
character in Londoa before the war He had several
aliases which he used on various occasions, including
A. E. Crawley, Count von Zonaref, Alastair McGregor,
and Earl of Middlesex.
He was, according to his owa statement, born at

138 THE LEGEND OF ALEISTER CROWLEY

Leamington on October 12, 1875, and is reported to be
the son of a Kentish brewer. He is further stated to
have studied at Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1896.
“Ieis Worship”

Crowley is an author and journalist by profession, and
a poet, in spite of the morbidity and perversity of his work,
of undoubted lishment. His underground activities
are less avowable. He came under the notice of the police
in 196 when he stole £200 from a widow with whom he
‘cohabited; the woman, however, refused to prosecute.
‘Recording to his own statement, Crowley was exploring
in Kashmir in 1992 under the auspices of the Austrian
Government.

He reappeared in 1903, when he married at Strathpeffer
a young widow, Mrs, Skerrett, formerly Miss Rose Kelly ;
he rhen called himself McGregor of Boleskiae, After rhis
Crowley went to Paris, where he celebrated what he called
“Isis Worship.” His wife divorced him, and he sub-
sequently married a violinist named Leila Wade

whe uncleaner forms of occultism, pursued as a means

of making money, have been Crowley’ chief interest from
his early days, He has made various unsuccessful efforts
to get recognized by the English Freemasons. He organ-
ized an association known as the A.A. (Atlantean Adepts),
and later became a member of a Rosicrucian Society,
known as the O.T.O. (Ordo Templi Orientis).

His adepts begin every letter and conversation with
the greeting, “Do what thou wilt is the whole of the law ”
(evidently suggested by Rabelais’ “ Fay ce que voudrais "),

and end up is the law, Love under will
In 1910 Crowley was holding meetings at the Caxton
Hall to witness the performance of the “ Rites of Eleusis ” ;

he cultivated an immoral society for the worship of the
iod Pan ; and he organized every kind of evil rite including
ic ^ Cult o£ che Beetle" and the Black Mass.

A PRO-GERMAN—

The outbreak of the war put an end to Crowley's
activities in England. In November, 1914 Crowley went to
a e aro Gaman propagandi. He eed ie Ney

¢ s. He edited the New
rein i

York “ International, paper run
Means George Sivence Vice and Full

AFTER THE WAR 19

among other things, an obscene attack on the King and a
aloriütation of the Kaiser,

Crowley ran occultism as a side line, and seems to have
been known as the “ Purple Priest.” Later on he publicly

destroyed his British before the Statue of Liberty,
declared in favour of the Irish Republican cause, and
made a theatrical declaration of “war” on ind.

According to another version of this story, he proclaimed
himself at the same time “King of Ireland,”

AND REVOLUTIONARY

During his stay in America Crowley was associated with
a body known as the “Secret Revolutionary Committee ”
which was working for the establishment of the Irish
Republic. He is known also as the writer of a defeatist
manifesto circulated in France in 1915.

‘Crowley arrived in France at the beginning of 1920,
and subsequently went to Cefalà, Sicily. Here he was
head of a community of kindred spirits established a the
Villa Santa Barbara, renamed by them “Ad Spiritum
Sanctum.” Free sexual intercourse seems to have been
one of their tenets.

ms oors

Crowley came back to London this year and settled
himself in Chelsea. He goes about garbed usually in a
tartan kilt and wearing a black glengarry cap.

Crowley is the author of numerous books, both in
verse and prose. Some of these works have typical titles,
such as ““Alice—An Adultery,” “ Jezebel,” “The God
Hater,” “ Rosa Inferni.” Ar one time he was running a
iy ofan M UEM
adepts and embellished with cabalistic si hs
from the nude in very doubtful taste ocn

His portnit vas painted in 1911 by Augustus John.

‘This was not all by any means. There was another
full column and a half, including the allegations
about white slavery already quoted. Thete was a
story about his last visit" to London, including the
following “interview” with à woman, who lived
"jn a fashionable quarter " :

14 THE LEGEND OF ALEISTER CROWLEY

I thought that Crowley was simply expounding a theo
paltoni dur Cerler we sly expounding shop
Even now, I do not understand A bet
realized how’ objectionable they must be by a series
pictures he put up in his aT. Dope ly vile things,
depicting antique orgies and dre s. He gave
a couple of lectures ia my house, but I was out on both
occasions. He sent out his invitations in the name of
“The ‘Master Therion.”

T went away for a few days; the man’s presence made
my own home intolerable to me, In my absence he had
an intimation through some source that the police authorities
knew of his presence. He at once packed up and went.
I understand that he stayed for a few nights at a Turkish
bath establishment in West End before leaving the
country.

In a pause for breath before continuing to quote
this extravaganza, I hope I am correct in assuming
that a mere reprinting of the stuff, more than seven
years later, will reveal from internal evidence its
nonsensical, distorted and hysterical character, The
question arises, Did the journalist who wrote this
have his tongue in his cheek, or was he sincere and
à moron? T am inclined to deduce that he was
merely a clever journalist, extremely able to extract
the utmost possible sensation from a story. Given
the job of “writing up” Aleister Crowley in a
sensational manner, he carried out his instructions
ruthlessly, The morality of his procedure is another.
question, if we remember always that the whole
concoction was brewed about a private individual,
whose private life was “ investigated.” How many
of us could survive a similar investigation, carried
out by joumalists trained in denunciation and in
the colourful phrase? What would be the private
* sexual” record of most other poets and artists, not
to mention bankers and commercial travellers? "This
thought is worth beating in mind all the time as we

AFTER THE WAR p

go over the indictments against Crowley. He is an
exceptional man in many ways, his life has been more
full of colour than that of ‘most people. But if
any one of us more ordinary persons wrote a book to
which James Douglas took exception, and if the
Sunday Express decided to “expose” us (having first
made sure that we would be unwilling or unable to
sue)—then which of us would be beyond thc
reproach of the columnist? How many English
villas in Italy or on the Riviera could tell a tale!
It was Crowley’s predilection for teligious ceremonial
which gave the bright stunt writer his greatest
opportunity :

The story of the bestial orgies conducted by Aleister
Crowley in Sicily sounds like the ravings of a criminal
lunatic, made mad by his own depravity, and was related
yesterday to the “ Sunday Express” tative by a
Woman who has just ceturned from the place to London,

Fhe orgies are carried on as mys religious sts in an
old farmhouse near the village of Cefald, in Sicily. The
main room of the house is windowless, with a fia
stone floor, On the floor is painted a great orange cicle,
lined with low. Inside che circle are interlaced
black triangles, "The room is lighted by candles.

BURNT INCENSE

A tripod, upheld by three little fauns, burns
made of bent gout and honey. "In a cupboard
are heaps of little cakes, all made of goats’ blood, honey
and grain, some raw, and some baked. The maw ones,
gone bad, fil the room with thei stench,

Jn this room are carried on. unspeakable orgies, i
of description. Suffice it to say that they xe Borde
Beyond the misgivings of decent people,

How far is a devotee of one religion a credible
witness when he describes practices (which he has
not seen) of the heathen? The rabid Protestant
Evangelical believes that “ Maria Monk ” is a faithful

incense

142 THE LEGEND OF ALEISTER CROWLEY

description of the “ goings-on” in Roman Catholic
Convents !

But—after all—the attack was following up a
denunciation by Mr. James Douglas of a book.
And the title of the book was, Tre Drary or a Druc
Frenn. Consequently :

Many women come to Cefalù, all with money, for
whatever else Crowley may demand of them, money is
his primary need. It takes money to supply him with the
drugs he uses incessantly, the hashish, cocaine, heroin,
opium, morphine, every drug known from the Orient to
the Occident.

The theme seems to have wandered away from
literary criticism, However, this was rectified in the
conclusion of the article:

What is the literary record of this Mr. Crowley?

Mr. Aleister Crowley is the author ofa number of books,
most of them printed privately. His work, considered
as a whole, is a blend of blasphemy, fith, and nonsense.
‘The nonsense is favoured with mysticism. A very small
knowledge of pathology enables one to label him as a
well-known type.

‘As an example of his ideas, one may take the dedication
to “Why Jesus Wept”; “To any unborn child, who
may learn by the study of this drama to avoid the
and choose the evil, ie., as judged by Western or Christian
standards.”

REVOLTING POEMS

‘The numerous allusions to a kind of vague Buddhistic
mysticism are clothed in sensuality. Most of the poems
are pornographic, many of them revolting, and all of
them the product of a diseased mind and a debased
PE de middle of poem called “Al

d a “ Alice: an
Addlery" these appears MS sote: < The editor regres
that he is unable to publish this verse." The titles of his
books are, for the most part, either biblical or sexual:
Aene “ Jezebel,” “ Aceldama,” “'The Honourable
Adol wt

AFTER THE WAR 143

‘Through all his works runs a loathing of Christianity,
and he pays Mr. G. K. Chesterton the compliment of a
personal attack on him, as one of the ee of
that outworn creed.

‘He has written on ceremonial magic, and on the state
known as “ Ecstasy,” which relieves one from the dullness
and monotony of a normal life. “My mind is pregnant
with mad moons and suns,” he writes in one pl

All the time he is obsessed with sex and sexual images.

‘A large umber of his books axe printed privately—
some of them in Paris. They atc cither incomprehensible
‘or disgusting—genemlly both. His lan is the
language of a pervert and his ideas are negligible.

I think that is enough to show the quantity and
quality of the abuse with which these unscrupulous
journalists reviled the poet. There has never been
anything like it in literary history—probably because
there has never been anything in literary history like
modern sensational journalism. How would the
Sunday Express have "exposed" Byron? In what
terms would they have described “Don Juan,” and
with what phrases would they have gloated over his
amours? What would have been the results if the
private life of Shelley and Keats had been
into the front page of a Sunday newspaper specialising
in moral indignation and invective? Supposing a
James Douglas had attacked “Gulliver’s Travels ”
and the relations between Dean Swift and Esther
had been “exposed” in a front-page story on the
following Sunday !

We must not completely lose our heads, merely
because we happen to live in the twentieth century.
The treatment accorded to Crowley by his con-
temporaties may be of some use if it serves us as a
Waring against the dangers peculiar to the age in
which we live. Probably there will not be any more
unsupportably vile scurzility of this kind. Crowley
happened to be the first and worst victim of an abuse

14 THE LEGEND OF ALEISTER CROWLEY

of the power of publicity, so enormously inflated
during the War, and since the days of million-
circulations. If the Sanday Express had followed up
James Douglas’s attack upon “The Well of Loneli-
ness” with columas of violent personal abuse of
Miss Radclyffe Hall, public opinion would have been
revolted, not by the authoress, but by the newspaper.
Nowadays, the Sunday Express follows up James
Douglas much more carefully, and with much’ more
reserve. We can only assume that Crowley was
unfortunate in having been selected as the first and
last victim of a policy which is manifestly not allow-
able, even on canon of sensational journalism.
But what recourse has he? Will the Sunday Express,
even now, admit that it went too far in this instance ?
1 wonder.

“THE GIRL-WIFE”

Betty May is a charming little lady, very well
known in London artistic and “ Bohemian ” circles.
She has had an interesting life. In her Autobiograpay
recently published, she tells of her birth in Limehouse,
in sordidly picturesque surroundings, and of her
domicile, as a very small child, in’ sophisticated

aces such as a Thames barge. Growing up, she
[onged for “a bigger life” and left the East End
aad began to eum her living san artists model,
frequenting the happy-go-lucky Café Royal for many
yos before sad dug the War. At one time she
Went to Paris and joined a gang of Apaches, amongst
whom she was known as " Tiger Woman." Re-
turning to England, she was married twice, becoming
a widow and divorcee in turn. All this was l

tet the met Aleister Crowley. Her frst husband

AFTER THE WAR 15

was a drug addict, and Betty in due course also had
given herself up to the habit :

Even then I had been taking about one hundred grains—
ten is a fatal dose to an unaccustomed person—of cocaine

day, varied occasionally with injections of morphia,
and my mind and body ha already suffered the inevitable
effects. I was a victim to morbid suspicious mania, and
frequendly tried to commit suicide oa the most absurd
grounds.

(Troen Woman: My Story. By Betty May; Duck-

worth, 1929. Page 107.)

She promised her second husband that she would
“ give up taking drugs or spirits during his absence ”
(at the Front).

1 did not keep this promise. I could not. I used to
come across old friends of mine with whom I had gone
to dope parties, and gradually the temptation to enjoy
the excitement of drugs and the fact that I was lonely
became too much for me and I began to take to drugs
again, Roy returned one 2 to find me recovering
from a dope party, which bad lasted three. days and three
nights. He took of his Sam Browne belt and gave me
the severest beating with it I have ever had, which aroused
me from the cora into which I had fallen. Tr was .
T shudder even now when I think of it. (Idem, p. 115-4)

Later, she was divorced from this “ he-man ” and
in due course married Raoul Loveday, while the
latter was still an undergraduate at Oxford. Loveday
was interested in the occult. This interest had led
him to make friends with Aleister Crowley. It
should be evident from Betty’s own account that
she was very much a woman of the world, to put it
mildly, long before she bad ever met Crowley. I
am obliged to draw attention to this fact, not in
order to discredit Betty, who is a charming little lady
and deservedly popular in “ Bohemia” to this day,
but in order to enable the reader to understand the

146 THE LEGEND OF ALEISTER CROWLEY

reality underlying the subsequent campaipn against
Crowley which Boii play of Bety's south and
innocence, left alone with “The Beast” after her
husband's death at Cefalü. Betty, it will be gathered,
was and is well able to look ‘after herself in any
situation, however remarkable or tragic.

Loveday was anxious to study the Occult under
Crowley's tuition. He was prepared to act as
Crowley's secretary at Cefalù in order to carry out
this plan. In October, 1922, Crowley wrote to him
in the following terms :

1 will come pd.q. and bring Betty. 1
honesty ell you that the el de for your murice
is to get out of the sordid atmosphere of " Bohemian "
London. I was really disgusted the other night at the
Harlequin. Yoursongs wete good—but what an audience |
You are an Oxford man and you don't want your wife in a
corner throned on a pile of ordure.

t is ridiculous to knock people down for continuing
their old programme, When Betty married, a decent
man, she should have cut that crowd with a sharp knife,
‘Also, you should have seen to it that she did $0. . . .

Ecse me playing the Heavy Father; bur I ie you
both so much that I hate to think of the catastrophe which
T can sec just round the comer. You are both of you
accustomed to a certain amount of comfort and decency :
and—how does Keats begin Past IT of Lamia? At this
moment, under the influence of Love, Betty can break
with the gluey past. But you must give her a chance to
breathe fresh air, and live a clean life. Cefalù represents
that chance.

Does it surprise you that the notoriously wicked A.C.
should write thus? If so, you have not understood that
he is a man of brutal commonsense, and a loyal friend.
So corae sad Hive ia the open alr; amiid to best of
Nature. . . . Beak Street and Fitzroy Street are horrors
unthinkable even in Rome; and Rome is a cesspool com-
Pazed with Cefalù.

‘The society of Scholars, of free women, and of delightful
children will indeed be ‘2 great change for Betty; but
it is what she needs most. There is in her not only a

AFTER THE WAR 147

charming woman, but a good one; and she will devel
unsuspected glories, given a proper environment.
London she kas not one single decent influence, except
your own; and however deeply and truly she may love
you, she won't be able to resist la nostalgie de la boue"
forever... (from original letter in Crowley's files).

‘Accordingly, Loveday and Betty left London for
Cefalù in November, 1922, In February, 1923,
Raoul Loveday was dead. ed returned to London,
was interviewed by Sunday Express reporters, and
that. em paper again took up the attack upon Crowley,
running front-page principal “stunt” articles for
two weeks in succession, in the manner of the
previous attacks, but more

Before considering these, it will be well to examine
Betty May’s most recent account of her husband’s
death, printed in Trcer-Wowan (at page 185).
Whatever she may have told the reporters at the
time, or whatever the reporters may have reported
that she told them, this seems to be her considered
version of the facts :

When he got steadily worse and a doctor was
summoned I found out that he was suffering from enteric,
à not uncommon disease in those parts. It was then that
I remembered how he had almost certainly caught this
disease. One day the Mystic had told Raoul and me to

o off for an expedition together. He was in one of his
Kindiy moods and he said needed some relaxation.
He suggested that we should go to a marvellous monastery
about thirteen miles off, where the monks would entertain
us with food. But he warned us of one thing, which
was on no account to touch any water.

‘We were both delighted. We started off. It was one
of the most wor days I have seen. We went to
the monastery, where the monks gave us bread and soup
and showed Us all over it. On the way back the heat
‘was appalling. We were both so thirsty that we did not
know what to do. Suddenly we came to a mountain
spring, bubbling up out of the ground. It was an awful

148 THE LEGEND OF ALEISTER CROWLEY

temptation. I do not think that at that time either of us
realized how important it was not to touch the water.
Although the Mystic had done his best to impress on us
the dangers of drinking, the spriag looked so cool and
fresh and pure that Raoul could not esist. He kaele down
and drank, bur in spite of my thirst 1 managed to restrain
myself, though with great difficulty. I suppose I saved
my own life. Anyway, Iam certain that this is how Raoul
caught the disease, He was at once given the right treat-
men, bat no improvement was cHected, and he sank

There is no means of ascertaining whether the
details of this story are any more exact than the
details attributed to Betty by the Sunday Express
reporters who “interviewed ” her, What matters is
that Crowley is now completely absolved from the
damaging slander of having caused Loveday's death
directly or indirectly. Everything was above board,
even to proper medical supervision, and that's that.
Now to the muck-throwing in the Sunday Express :

The Sunday Express. February, 25, 1923.
NEW SINISTER RELATIONS OF ALEISTER CROWLEY,
"VARSITY LAD'S DEATH.
Ewricro ro “Aaser.”

Dreadful Ordeal of a Young Wife.
Crowley's Plans.

The revelation in the "Sunday Express" recently of
obscene orgies carried on by Aleister Crowley" The
Beast 666,” as he styles himself—in his “abbey ” at Cefalù,
Sicily, bave been followed bya sinisterand tragic happening’

Information has just reached this newspaper two
latest victims. One of them, a brilliant young English
o ag wes bemti girl prominent in Lond

His young wife, a beautiful gi ent lon

anintic deck, arrived in Londón tuo days ago in a state
of collapse. She is unable to give more than a hint of
the horrors from which she has escaped,

AFTER THE WAR 145

Worse Horrors Still

She said, however to a “Sunday Express” tative
yesterday that the story of Aleister y's sexual
debauches and drug orgies as published in this newspaper
far understates the real of the life in the “abbey ”
at Cefalù, where he keeps his women and practices his
black magic.

This young girl, whose name and that of her husband
the “Sunday Express » withholds in deference to the
parents’ sorrow, said that Crowley offered her husband a
secretarial post last autumn when in London. The Beast
is possessed of a persuasive smile and suave manners.
‘The young couple had no idea of the true character of the
place to which he was inviting them. As the offer seemed
to mean travel and congenial work the young husband—
4 boy of twenty-two—accepted it.

‘Once they were io Sicily, however, they found
had been traj an inferno, a maelstrom of filth
obscenity. "s purpose was to corrupt them both
to his own ends.

They resisted him and his women with all the strength
they could summon, The wife was forced to do the
cooking and kitchen work for the nine people in the

ouse,

Turned Out.

"Then suddenly the boy husband fell ill of enteritis, due
to the insanit lit there, and was too weak to
be removed. ‘The gitl-wife was left alone to fight the
Beast 666, Since she defied him in every way and managed
to keep herself clear of the bestialities of the house, he
turned her out one night. All that night she was unable
to return into the “abbey” on the hills above Cefalù to
n her dying husband. Two days later the boy was

c

The girl who had made so courageous a fight inst
the Beast who sought to destroy her was Plann by
the British Consul to return to England. Crowley was
obliged to let her go. But he made dire threats of
vengeance if she told what she knew.

‘She has not told anything mote than has already been
Fablsbed in this a but she is still in dany >-
the Beast. ie '* ” is putting th icts
MMC WES d

1jo THE LEGEND OF ALEISTER CROWLEY

Child Spectators

Tr is among the clean minded and inexperienced that he
secks his victims. This latest tragedy has brought to
light the fact that the Beast 666 has laid all plans for est
lishing a selon of Oxford youths at . There it
supposed he will initiate them into the obscene rites of his
‘own unspeakable brand of black magic.

Te is hoped that these latest plans may be frustrated.
But Crowley, in sending out his invitations to young
Osford men to come to là, knows how to them
enticingly, and leaves out any hint of the unspeakable
facts of his“ religion ” until such time as he has his victims
fi in his clutches.

c facts are too unutterably filthy to be detailed in
a newspaper, for they have to do with sexual orgies that
touch the lowest depth of depravity. The whole is mixed
upin a hocus-pocus of doubtful mysticism, of which Crowley
is “the Purple Priest.”

Children under ten, whom the Beast keepe at the “abbey,”
are made to witaess horrible sexual debauches unbelievably

thy incense is burned and cakes made of

goats ind honey are consumed in the windowless

room where the Beast conducts his rites. The rest of the

time he lies ia a room hung with obscene pictures

collected all over the world, stung himself with
rugs.

The Beast’s Hope
piece of information has just reached
” Crowley has outgrown the
jt Celi. He deii to emend acide,
the money to do so. He put the problem before
‘of the piri chat attend his magie shes,
‘Sue the ' Sunday Express " for £5,000 and build a new
‘abbey’ with the money ane a, command.

‘The Beast foresaw He could not risk
bringing suit himself, for all the statements made in the
newspaper were correct. I£ they had not been he would
have brought suit long ago. Yet the “spirit” was
insistent.

“£5,000 for a new abbey!”

So the Beast is sending one of his women to London
to see what she can do.

The “Sunday Express” promises Crowley that it

AFTER THE WAR 51

intends to pursue its investigations with the utmost ruth-
Icssness, and thar neat Sanday it will endeavour to supply
him with considerable further material on which to

any action which he may care to bring.

The worst paragraph in this “ ruthless” journal-
istic orgy, in my opinion, is the final sneer against
Crowley's inability to take legal action. Analysed,
of course, the sneer is no more than a boast of the
newspaper's wealth. The $4 «is knew very
well that Crowley was materially defenceless, at that
time, against slanderous attacks in London, however
false ; for he had actually written to Lord Beaverbrook
in those terms immediately after the Drue Frenn
*“ revelations.” In the same letter Crowley had asked
his Lordship for an independent inquiry into the
charges, in the interests of fair play. This letter was
never acknowledged. I take my facts from a little
brochure by one of Crowley’s friends, Norman
Mudd, M.A., which was circulated at the time.

There is no need to clog these pages with much
more of the filthy abuse Crowley, the journalistic
“ sensational orgy” which followed Raoul Loveday’s
death. It can easily be imagined from what has
already been quoted; or the reader may consult the
files of the Inday "Express if he enjoys orpiastic
journalism. I quote here merely the opening para-

raphs of the second of the interviews with Bey
Stay in order to show the tone of the whole :

Sunday Express. Mareb 4, 1923.
YOUNG WIFE'S STORY OF CROWLEY'S ABBEY.
Scenes or Honnor.
Daves, Macic, Axp Vix Practices.
Girl's Ordeal.
Saved by the Consul.

With a fall sense of the ibility involved, the
«Sunday Express” to-day publishes the story ofthe young

132 THE LEGEND OF ALEISTER CROWLEY

wife who has just returned from the “abbey ” of Aleister
Crowley in Sicily.

Slant scies ait gado. Fir ile ake of
a brilliant i te, For the sake of
the lad’s parents his bame was withheld, and is to-day,

Sinister Figure

This man Crowley is one of the most sinister fi
of modern times, He isa drug fend, an author of vile
books, the spreader of obscene practices. Yet such is his
intellectual attainment and mental fascination that he is
able to secure reputable publishers for his works and
attract to him men and women of means and position.

The young wife is known to the artistic world as
‘Betty. She matried her husband when he came down
from l.
Shortly after they met Crowley. Her husband, like
many, other undergraduates was interested in magic
Crowley fascinated him. He, ofred the young man

sition as private secretary at his “abbey.” The wife
Fought agaidst it, but finally accompanied her husband
there,

There were several more columns of nonsensical
“interview ” with Betty May, whose vivid imagina-
tion, conjoined with that of the reporters, touched up,
one presumes, by the editorial department, made a
pretty piece of balderdash,

Only Jobn Buil, silliest of English journals, continued
to exploit the canards in England. Readers would
not thank me for reprinting any of the Jobn Bull
articles in full. A few headlines and a few purple
patches from the numerous Joby Bal! articles will
suffice :

‘Tas Kine oF Dernaviry (March 10, 1923)
‘Tre Wicxnpest Man in THe Wontp (March 24, 1923)
Kino or Depravirr Anaives (April 14, 1923)
We Taar THE TEMPTRESS ‘April 28, 1923)
A CANNIBAL AT LARGE (April, 192;
‘A Max We'n Line 70 Hano (May, 1923)
A Human Beast RETURNS (August 30, 1924)

AFTER THE WAR 153

‘Two of this series of articles shatteringly asserted
that Crowley was actually in London, and clamoured
for his immediate arrest, though Crowley was still
abroad, all the time.

Jobn Bull was obviously merely embroidering the
“exposures” of the Sunday Express. A specimena
purple patch is as follows :

‘There are, however, other “ activities” at the Abbey
which admit of more detailed accusation. One of these
is the method employed by Crowley of paying his numerous
debts on the island, by sending out his women as “ host-
ages” to those who ate willing to accept this despicable
method of payment.

Another, which has popsany ted our in-
quiries, and is even calculated to bafle the faquiries which
have already been instituted by the Home Office and by
Scotland Yard, is Crowley's practice of getting certain
prominent and highly placed citizens of and Palermo
up to his '* Abbey,” where they are persuaded to take part
in the sexual orgies which follow drug ies, and which
even form Ending part in the Abbey's’ “religious
ceremonies.

We shall not hesitate to hand to the authorities the
names of some of these distinguished visitors, together
with further sworn testimony if, as we anticipate, a certain
official on the Island endeavours to stifle Government
investigations.

‘Suffice to E for the. moment, tut one of. Meer d
women in the “ Al ^ is sl ly expecting another
child to be born, the father of whic! ie nowa to be a
pereina banker in Palermo, who is a friend of the

sritish Consul.

We may mention that, up to the time of this article

joing to press, no death certificate has been received by

the tlacves of the young Oxfoed neateat enc he ee

‘such mysterious circumstances at the Abbey four weeks

ago, nor has any reply been received from the British

Goal at Palermo to the anxious inquiries made by the
young man’s mother and sister concerti his death. )
24,1925)

‘The “cannibal” incident is as follows :

154 THE LEGEND OF ALEISTER CROWLEY

“Possessed at one time of ample private means, he
penetrated into the recesses of Egypt, Algiers, Morocco,
ida, Burma, Siam, Mexico, Japan, and. Chin, the ast
Indies, even into the "Forbidden Country " of Thibet.
Concerning these travels and his various hunting expedi-
tions some amazing stories are told, which Crowley himself
is never tired of relating,

Oac of these is that leaving his camp in Kashmire one
morning, unattended even by natives, Crowley returned
with the statement that he had that morning killed two
tigers snglrbended one of which, by way of evidence, he
carried—or dragged—back with him to camp! The
natives of these parts of India visited by Crowley assert
that he really had the power of cowing and killing wild
Beasts by some magici mens

On one solitary mountain-climbing expedition it is
actually affirmed that running short of provisions, he
killed two of his native carriers, and ext them sp for food !
This incredible piece of cannibalism is cynically authenti-
cated by “The Beast” himself. . .

(April, 1923.)

"This kind of thing is bad enough, but the following
piece of simplicity would take some beating :

Gradually things began to leak out at Cefalù, and one
of the consequences was, after our articles had reached
Taly, a raid by the local police. The Abbey was searched

for opium and other drugs, but the search was unsuccessful.
Crowley was rather LJ He was able to point out
to his followers how easily he had duped the police, and

the seances were renewed with every circumstance of
blasphemous indecency. (May 19, 1923.)

The journalistic methods of Jobr Bull axe of course
sufficiently well known to be negligible in their
effect precisely because of such crudity of statement
as is exemplified in the foregoing extracts. It is
perhaps the best possible commentary upon the
Journalistic good taste of James Douglas, and à fortiori
Lord Beaverbrook, that only Jobn Ball saw anything
worthy of emulation in their slanders against the

AFTER THE WAR 155

poet. However, foreign papers cannot be expected
to make the appreciation of English journalistic
values which English readers habitually make. All
over the world the slanders against Crowley were
reprinted sensationally, A few specimen headlines
from American papers are here reproduced, taken in
each case from full-page articles, fantastically and
elaborately illustrated :

DRIVEN TO SUICIDE BY DEVIL WORSHIPPERS

Wicked Exploits of “The Ace of Spades,” a Secret
Organization, Which Preys Upon Superstitious
fomen and Blackmails Them or Frightens
Them to Death by Making Them
Believe That Satan Owns

SECRETS BEHIND THE SCENES AMONG THE
DEVIL-WORSHIPPERS
A Young English Bride Who Fled from the Sicilian
“Abbey ” ofthe Vicious New “Do, Whatever You Want ”
eligion, Reveals the Wicked Rituals Carried
‘On by Its “High Priest” and His
Worshippers.

THE ANGEL CHILD WHO “SAW HELL" AND
CAME BACK.
‘Heartfelt Confessions of the London Art Model Who Turned

Apache and Took to Drugs, and How a Genuine Vision
R “Her at the Brink,

What is perhaps more serious is that the “story ”
was also widely circulated in Continental papers,
including the Italian Press. Probably as a result,

Mussolini, who was at that time "war against
“Secret Societies,” decided to expal Crowley from
Italian territory. A petition was drawn up and signed
by all the leading inhabitants of Cefalù, who were

1,6 THE LEGEND OF ALEISTER CROWLEY

under no misapprehension with regard to Crowley,
who was indeed one of them and was universall
csteemed, Nevertheless he had to go; a fact which
caused the Sunday Express to gloat triumphantly, as
might be expected. He went to Tunis and continued
to write his magum opus—his Autobiography of
600,000 words—under a previously made contract
with his London publishers. After what had hap-
pened, however, the publishers were unwilling to
proceed. Crowley therefore went to Paris and
artanged for the printing of an imposing technical
work on “ Magick,” which he had been engaged in
writing for many years. While seeing this through
the press, he was suddenly visited by the French police,
who regarded with the utmost suspicion a coffee
machine in his possession, believing it to be either
an instrument for distilling drugs, or an anarchist
bomb, Though nothing more incriminating was
found against him, except the technical "crime"
that his identity card was out of date, Crowley was
refused permission to remain in France; and he is
now in England,

Here the story ends, so far as Lam concerned. I
have tried throughout to state the facts dispassionately.
There can scarcely be any denying that the calumny
of Crowley has gone too fat, How much Crowley
is himself responsible, I must leave it to the reader to.
judge; but I think there can be little doubt of the
injustice, and the positive indignity of allowing a
scurrilous attack to be made upon a private individual

| deprived of the opportunity to rebut allegations in
the same medium and with the same amount of space.
The ease against Lord Beaverbrook and James Douglas
was clearly enough stated in Mr. Norman Mudd’s
pamphlet. This pamphlet had a small private circu-
Ftion, and has done something to rehabilitate Crowley

AFTER THE PAR E

in the eyes of a few people who thought “there must
be something in it all” at the time of the wont
“exposures.” If the present work continues that
process of rehabilitation, it will not have been in
vain. A very few people will envy me the job I
set myself of “whitewashing” Aleister Crowley's
record. I do not look forward with any pleasure
myself to the possibility of being tarred with the
same brush because of the thankless task I have
undertaken. At the same time, there is a possibility
at least after the publication of this book, that in.
telligent people will form a truer estimate of the case
concerning an English man of letters whose literary
achievement is undeniable, whatever else may be
said or rumoured.

Works by Aleister
Crowley

MOONCHILD 7s. 6d.
THE STRATAGEM 3s. 6d.
GOLDEN TWIGS 6s.

THE CONFESSIONS OF
ALEISTER CROWLEY
in six vols. £2 2s. per vol.

published by
Mandrake Press Ltd.
41, Museum St.
London
